Class  /-^^-  ^    BookLO  C/^SL^L- 

_  K  •4- 


--"cSS^^-' ., 


.';l''y 


'"Ti!  J906^,.---" 


I.  E.  Rouse  Memorial  Library 
William  Carey  College 

Hatliesburg,  Mississippi 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Lyrasis  IVIembers  and  Sloan  Foundation 


http://www.archive.org/details/autobiographyofc04inspur 


THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


OF 


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON 


COMPILED  FROM 

HIS   DIARY,  LETTERS,  AND   RECORDS 


BY 

HIS  WIFE 

AND 

HIS  PRIVATE  SECRETARY 


'TV/,?  laiv  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth,  and  iniquity  was  not  found  in  his  lips ;  he  walked  with 
Me  in  peace  and  equity,  and  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity T — malachi  ii.  6 


VOL.  IV.     1 878-1 892 


CURTS  &  JENNINGS 

CINCINNATI        CHICAGO  ST.  LOUIS 

1900 


'^ 


N^7/7. 


CONTENTS    OF   VOL    IV. 


Chaptl.^ 

LXXXIII.  Father's  FuRLOUcn,  and  how  I  Shared  it... 

LXXXIV.  A  Double  Silver  Wedding 

LXXXV.  Enquirers  and  Converts  ... 

LXXXVI.  „  „  „  {Continued) 

LXXXVII.  "Westwood" 

LXXXVlil.  A  TvncAL  Week's  Work 
LXXXIX  „  „  „       (ContinuiHi) 

XC.  Letters  on   Private  and  Pubdic  Affairs,    1856 — 1890 
XCL  ,,  ,,  ..  ,>  >.  (Continued) 

XCIL  Mr.  Sturgeon's  Opinions  on  Subjects  of  General  Interest 

XCIIL  Appreciative  Correspondents,   1855 — 1890 

XCIV.  ,,  ,,  (Continued) 

XC^^.  In  the  Sunny  South      ...  - 

XCVI.  „  „  „  (Contimied)       

XCVII.  Unabated  Affection  between  Pastor  and  People 

XCVI II.  Jubilee  Joys 

XCIX.  The    "  Down-grade  "    Controversy,    from    Mr.    Spurgeon's 
Standpoint     ... 

C.  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  a  Literary  Man     ... 
CI         .,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ..      (Contimied) 

CII.       ,,  „  „  .,  „      (Concluded) 

CIII.  The  Growth  of  the  Institutions,    1878 — 1892 

CIV.  My   Last   Letters  from   Mentone 

CV.  The  Long  Illness 

CVI.  The  Last  Three   Months  at  Mentone  ;— and  Afterwards 
General  Index  to  Vols.   I. — IV. 


Page 
I 

15 
27 
37 
49 
63 
11 
93 
107 
121 

139 

169 
196 
214 

22  '\ 

^-n 

253 
265 

287 

305 
320 

353 
365 
379 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    VOL.    IV. 


Arbour  in  Dr.   Bennet's  Garden,   Mentone... 

Drawing  in  the   Net  at  Mentone 

An  Ancient  Olive  Tree,   Mentone 

Gorbio,  near  Mentone    ... 

Castle  and  Fountain  at  Roquebrune.  near  Mentone 

Dolce  Acqua,   Italy 

Palazzo  Orengo,    La  Mortola,   Italy... 

Entrance  to  Mr.    Hanbury's  Garden,    La  Mortola 

Mentone  Architecture  ... 

The  Tunnel  through  the   Red  Rocks,   Mentone  ... 

Silver  Wedding  Portraits 

"  Westwood  "  Gates,   Lodge,  and  Driv 

A  Peep  across  the  Lake 

The  Well  in  the  Garden 

Summerhouse,  and  Bowls  on  the  Law 

The  House  as  Viewed  from  the   Lawn 

The   Boat  on  the   Lake... 

The   Fernery 

"Punch"  and   "Gyp" 

C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  his  Private  Secretary  in  the  Study  at 

Ready  to  Start  for  the  Tabernacle 

The    Lower    Platform,   Metropolitan    Tabernacle,    Arran 

Prayer-meeting 
A   Favourite  Retreat     ... 
Out  of  the  World 

The   Right  Hon.  the   Earl  of  Shaftesbury,   k.g 
The   Library,   Regent's  Park  College 


GED 


Westwood 


"OR     THE 


ILLUSTRATIOXS    IN    VOL.    IV. 


Silhouettes  of  Celebrities 

A  Jubilee   Reverie  ... 

Entrance  to   Dr.   Bennet's  Garden,   Mentone 

U.S.S.   "Alabama"  in  Villefranche   Harbour 

The  Mentone  Group,   1880 

Saracenic  Tower  in  Dr.   Bennet's  Garden  ... 

Italian  Guard-house,  near  Mentone  ... 

The  Chalet  des  Rosiers  and  Cypress  Walk,  Mentone  .. 

A  Pretty  Peep,  Mentone 

The  Gorbio  Valley,  near  Mentone   ... 

The  Garden  of  Hotel  d' Italie,   Mentone  ... 

An  Olive  Garden  in  the  South  of  P"rance 

The  Casino  and  Gardens,  Monte  Carlo 

Laguet,  or  Laghetto,  near  Mentone 

In  the  Garden  of  Hotel  Beau  Rivage,  Mentone... 

In  the  Garden  of  Villa  les  Grottes,   Mentone    ... 

C.   H.  Spurgeon  at  Mentone,   1886     ... 

J.  W.   Harrald  at  Mentone,    1886 

"Dr.   Hanna's  Lions,"  Mentone 

Copy  of  Marble  Slab  and  Inscription  on  Jubilee  House 

Portrait  and  Autograph  of  Mrs.  C.   H.  Spurgeon 

Portrait  and  Autograph  of  C.   H.  Spurgeon 

Dr.  Gill's  Chair... 

The  C.   H.  Spurgeon  Memorial,  Stockwell  Orphanage  .. 

The  Study  at  "  Westwood  "  (second  view)  ... 

C.   H.  Spurgeon  in  his  Study  ... 

The   Library  at  "Westwood"  (second  view) 

Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund  Room  on   "  Packin'g-day  "     .. 

The  Empty  Chair  in  the  Small  Conservatory 

A  Corner  of  "The  Den."  Showing  some  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Puritans 

C.   H.  Spurgeon  and  the  Titles  of  some  of  his  Works,   1884  .. 

Bird's-eye  View  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage 


Page 
185 
189 
199 
198 
196 
201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
208 
21  I 
212 
213 
214 

220 
221 
222 
238 
244 

245 
262 
279 
287 
289 
290 

293 
294 

295 
307 
320 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    VOL.    IV. 


vu. 


'•The  Hawthorns,"  Clapham  Road     ... 

The  Boys'  Plav-hall,  Stockwell  Orphanage 

C.   H.  Spurgeon  and  Group  of  Orphan  Boys 

The  Four  Tutors  ok  the  Pastors'  College 

C.   H.  Spurgeon  and  Ministers  at  Coli  ege  Conference, 

Ships  in   Mentone   Harijour 

Palm  Trees  in  Garden  of  Hotel  Beau  Rivage,   Mentone 

Ventimiglia,   Italy 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  Favourite  Walk  at  Mentone 

The  Scotch   Presbyterian  Church,   Mentone 

C.   H.  Spurgeon  Preaching  in  the  Tabernacle,    1891 

C.   H.  Spurgeon's  Last  Words  at  the  Tabernacle,  June 

The  Surrey  Gardens  Memorial  Hall 

Miss  E.   H.  Thorne 

The  Sitting-room  at  Mentone... 

The  Sitting-room  at  Mentone  (second  view) 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  "Cosy  Corner"  at  Mentone 

The  Old  Town,   Mentone,   from  the  Breakwater 

The  Fountain  on  the  Turbie   Road,   near  Mentone 

View  from  the  Fountain  on  the  Turbie  Road 

Mr.   Spurgeon's   Bedroom  at  Mentone,  after  his   Rfmo\'al 

The  Funeral  Cortege  at  Mentone   Railway  Station 

The  Olive  Casket  under  the  Palm   Branches  in  the  Tai 

The  Olive  Casket  in  the  Tomb  at   Norwood   Cemetery 

C.   H.  Spurgeon's  Monument  at  Norwood  Cemetery 


Page 



322 

. 

326 

z-^-i 

Zl^ 

1888  ... 

zzz 

341 

344 

346 

•   350 

351 

355 

7.  I89I 

•   356 

357 

.   363 

. 

•   364 

•   366 

•   367 

•   368 

369 

37c 

•  11^- 

Zl  3 

bernacle 

374 

oil 

^       31^ 

C.    H.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 


CHAPTER    LXXXIIL 


Jfatljtt's  JfuiiDugij,  antr  jjoto  B  SljartiJ  it 

By  Pastor  Thomas  Spurgeon. 

The  text  which  for  years  has  been  our  consolation  is  that  wliich  saith,  "  I  liave  chosen  thee  in  the 
furnace  of  affliction."  Happy  enough  is  the  man  who  is  chosen  of  God ;  he  may  not  ask  a  question  as 
to  when  or  where.  Yet  we  could  wish  it  were  otherwise  in  our  case,  and  that  zi;al  and  fervour  were 
not  restrained  and  hampered  by  being  yoked  to  painful  infirmities  of  the  flesh.  We  could  do  more,  and 
we  think  we  may  add,  without  self-confidence,  we  would  do  more,  if  we  were  not  laid  prostrate  at  the 
very  moment  when  our  work  requires  our  presence.  However,  unto  the  Lord  be  the  arrangement  of 
our  health  or  disease,  our  life  or  our  death  ;  but  while  we  live,  we  will  leave  no  stone  unturned  for  the 
increase  of  His  glorious  Kingdom  in  the  earth.  Every  interval  of  relief  shall  be  laid  out  in  His  service. 
The  time  is  short,  it  must  therefore  be  spent  all  the  more  economically ;  the  work  is  great,  the  Lord 
must  be  trusted  the  more  simply. 

During  the  Pastor's  illness,  the  pulpit  at  the  Tabernacle  has  been  five  times  occupied  by  Mr. 
Thomas  Spurgeon,  and  once  by  Mr.  Charles;  and  it  has  been  a  delight  of  no  ordinary  kind  for  both  of 
the  sick  parents  to  hear  on  all  hands  the  highly-favourable  judgments  of  God's  people  as  to  the  present 
usefulness,  and  ultimate  eminence,  of  their  sons.  Godly  parents  should  be  encouraged  by  our 
experience  to  pray  for  and  expect  the  salvation  of  their  offspring.— C.  H.  S.,  in  "Notes"  in  "  The  S-toord 
and  the  Trowel"  before  leaving  for  the  furlough  described  in  this  chapter. 

Let  me  describe  certain  Baptists  in  this  hotel,     (i)   A  father  and  son;— the  father,  rather  lame; 
the  son,  very  attentive  to  the  father;   in  fact,  a  model;  father  improving  as  to  health,  but  nothing  to 
boast  of.     [These  were,  of  course,  the  dear  writer  himself  and  "Son  Tom." — S.  S.]     (2)   An  old  man- 
servant with   a   grey  beard, — an   odd   customer, 
commonly  called  "Old  George."   (3)  Mrs.  Godwin, 
^(^^  fe^/'-i;    —^''^  \  '       _■  '"-'^   i''  daughter  of  Dr.  Acworth,  of  Kawdon,  and  wife  to 

'"""  -^5  .'"i'-^r.^i'i*    ''  '  the  son  of  Dr.  Godwin,  of  the  same  place.     With 

her  are  two  daughters,  once  pupils  of  Miss  Drans- 
field,  excellent  ladies.  (4)  An  old  round-faced 
Dutchman,  a  Mennonite,  with  his  daughter, 
another  Mennonite  ;— haters  of  baby-baptism,  and 
very  glad  to  see  Mynheer  Spuurjeoon  !— C.  H.  S., 
in  letter  written  home  during  the  furlough. 


OTHER  WORSE,  RETURN,  was  the  sad, 
brief  message  that  hurried  me  home  from 
AustraHa  in  187S.  How  joyful  was  the 
discovery,  on  arriving  at  Plymouth,  that  the 
crisis    of    her    illness    was    past !      But,    alas ! 

ARBOUR   IN   DR.    BENNET'S   GARDEN,    MENTONE.  ^|^g  |      ^g^j.      f^^J^gj.     ^qqj^      fgU      gi^J-    .      ^^^      ^^\-^^^ 

■'vith    helping-    to    nurse    him    at    home,    and    attempting   to    take  his  place  at  the 

A  4 


2  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Tabernacle,  it  really  looked  as  if  it  was  on  his  account,  rather  than  on  mother's, 
that  Providence  had  led  me  back.  This  surmise  was  further  strengthened  when, 
much  to  my  surprise,  it  was  proposed  that  I  should  accompany  the  convalescent 
to  Mentone. 

It  might  be  thought  that  I  should  have  jumped  at  such  a  privilege  ;  but,  if  the 
truth  is  told,  I  must  admit  that  I  was  by  no  means  keen  on  going.  Perhaps  I  was  a 
little  weary  of  travelling  ;  may  be,  I  wanted  to  get  at  some  permanent  employment ; 
perchance,  I  was  loth  to  leave  my  mother,  still  so  sorely  sick.  I  fancy,  too,  that  I 
had  pardonable  fears  that  I  could  not  provide  for  my  father  such  companionship  as 
he  deserved  and  desired.  I  had  yet  to  learn  how  easy  it  was  to  please  him.  As  it 
happened,  I  had  not  been  a  week  with  him  ere  I  could  write,  "  What  a  good  father 
he  is,  to  be  sure  !  I  loved  him  much  although  away  from  him,  and  now  my  affection 
will  increase  by  being  with  him."  So,  indeed,  it  did.  Three  months  at  Mentone, 
under  the  varying  experiences  of  earnest  work  and  happy  recreation,  of  growing 
health  and  sad  relapse,  of  fair  and  stormy  weather,  gave  me  an  insight  into  his 
character  such  as  I  could  not  have  gained  in  any  other  way.  Many  a  time,  since 
then,  have  the  memories  of  that  sojourn  in  the  sunny  South,  with  the  dear  man  of 
God,  been  an  inspiration  to  me. 

I  am  not  sure  that,  after  the  lapse  of  twenty  years,  I  could  have  ventured  to 
recite  the  story  of  that  memorable  visit,  had  not  the  letters  that  I  wrote  home  been 
fortunately  preserved.  Dear  mother  has  treasured  them  all  these  years,  and  they 
have  greatly  refreshed  my  memory.  I  only  wish  I  had  written  more  than  these  thirty 
missives  ;  and  that,  in  them,  I  had  spoken  more  in  detail  of  the  sayings  and  doings 
of  my  beloved  parent  during  those  glad  and  golden  days.  Perhaps,  the  better  way 
is  to  rejoice  that  I  wrote  so  much.  We  were  supposed  to  take  it  in  turn  to 
correspond  with  home.  Father  called  my  part  of  the  work  my  book,  and  gave  me 
"  full  permission  to  write  fifty  thousand  sheets."  How  little  either  of  us  dreamed 
what  a  purpose  these  notes  would  eventually  serve  ! 

Of  our  journey  to  the  land  of  sunshine,  little  need  be  said.  The  dear  invalid 
began  to  improve  directly  we  started.  He  seemed  better  at  Folkestone,  and  better 
still  at  Paris,  Even  the  long  night-journey  to  Marseilles  did  not  unduly  tire  him. 
Ere  we  left  the  gay  capital,  "  we  had  knelt  in  prayer,  asking  for  peace  and  pleasure 
on  our  way  ;  and,  at  the  very  start,  we  had  an  answer  in  the  shape  of  a  pleasing 
interview  with  a  converted  Jew  who  was  acting  as  Cook's  agent.  He  spoke  very 
earnesdy  about  the  blessed  Book,  and  his  dear  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  On  the 
journey,  father  amused  us  for  some  time  with  arithmetical  puzzles,  in  which,  of 
course,  he  had  the  best  of  it."  The  night  was  bitterly  cold, — our  breath  froze  on  the 
carriage    windows, — yet    the    sick    preacher    took    no    harm.       "  Our    prayers    were 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3 

answered  most  g-raciously  ;  we  had  journeying  mercies  rich  and  rare."  I  should  have 
said  that  our  party  consisted  of  father  and  son,  IMr.  Joseph  Passmore, — that  kindest 
and  most  genial  of  travelling  companions, — and  "Old  George,"  or,  as  I  find  I  used 
to  style  him,  "  Father  Christmas." 

A  brief  halt  at  Marseilles  was  helpful,  but  the  rest  of  ihe  journey  proved  slow 
and  wearisome.  How  shall  I  speak  of  the  joy  with  which  the  Pastor  hailed  his 
chosen  resting-place  ?  What  though  the  weather  was  so  unfavourable,  for  a  while,, 
that  he  had  constantly  to  say,  "This  is  not  Mentone,"  the  very  sight  of  the  hills,  and 
the  olives,  and  the  sea,  revived  his  spirit.  He  knew  that,  when  the  sun  did  shine  on 
them,  they  would  be  surpassingly  lovely.  The  closing  days  of  January  were  "  as 
fine  as  fine  could  be,"  so,  though  the  limbs  were  not  yet  strong,  it  was  possible  to  get 
to  Dr.  Bennet's  garden,  or  to  watch  the  fishermen  draw  in  their  seine,  and  even  to 


DRAWING     IN     THE    NET    AT     MENTONE. 


saunter  up  one  or  other  of  the  charming  valleys.  But  progress  was  all  too  slow,  and 
an  alarming  relapse  supervened.  It  was  a  black  Thursday  when  I  had  to  send  word 
home,  "  Dear  father's  right  foot  is  wrong,  and  he  is  fearful  that  it  will  get  worse." 
On  the  first  of  March,  the  most  that  could  be  said  was,  "  Where  the  path  was  pretty 
level,  he  managed  well  enough  alone,  but  every  now  and  then  he  had  to  lean  upon 
my  shoulder."  There  was  gladder  tidings  a  week  later,  "All  is  full  of  mercy  with  us. 
Dear  father  still  continues  to  improve,  though  his  knees  are  certainly  not  hurrying  to 
fulness  of  strength."  However,  he  gradually  rallied.  Great  was  my  grief  that  the 
closing  week  was  stormy  and  dismal.  I  had  so  hoped  that  he  could  be  in  the  healing 
sunshine  "just  to  receive  the  finishing  touches."  On  the  fourth  of  April,  I  had  the 
joy  of  recording,  "  Father  pronounces  himself  better  than  ever  this  morning."  That 
was  the  last  bulletin. 


4  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

I  was  particularly  struck  with  the  welcome  accorded  by  all  to  the  great  preacher. 
It  was  hardly  the  sort  of  welcome  usual  in  such  cases.  There  was  no  undue 
familiarity  in  it,  but  it  was  hearty,  spontaneous,  and,  I  might  even  say,  affectionate. 
Everybody  was  delighted  to  see  him.  The  foreigners,  who  called  him  "  Meester 
Sparegen,"  vied  with  Englishmen  in  assuring  him  of  their  joy  at  his  return.  He  had 
a  genial  smile  and  a  cheery  word  for  all.  The  Hotel  de  la  Paix  was  still  more 
peaceful  when  he  became  its  guest.  Old  acquaintances,  and  ministers  of  the  gospel, 
had  a  specially  hearty  reception  from  him.  Even  the  clergyman,  who  claimed  to  be 
"  a  friend  of  more  than  twenty  years'  standing,  because,"  said  he,  "  I  have  been 
cribbing  from  you  all  that  time,"  was  favoured  with  quite  a  large  slice  of  attention. 
Most  to  his  mind,  however,  were  the  King's  three  mighty  men,  George  Miiller,  John 
Bost,  and  Hudson  Taylor.  In  the  company  of  these  kindred  spirits,  he  literally 
revelled.     Was  I  not  honoured  to  be  an  onlooker  ? 

Family  worship  was  a  delightful  item  of  each  day's  doings.  It  was,  of  course, 
usually  conducted  by  C.  H.  S.,  but  he  sometimes  asked  others  to  take  part.  His 
unstudied  comments,  and  his  marvellous  prayers,  were  an  inspiration  indeed.  I  did 
not  wonder  that  requests  were  received  for  a  share  in  this  privilege.  I  find,  in  my 
journal,  the  following  interesting  enury  for  March  3  : — "We  had  two  fresh  arrivals  to 
morning  prayers.  Strangers  to  father,  they  had  requested,  through  the  waiter, 
admission  to  our  worship,  so  a  stately  mother  and  a  tall  daughter  from  Belgrave 
Square  were  made  right  welcome." 

It  was  often  directly  after  breakfast  that  the  work  had  to  be  seen  to  ;  for  it  must 
be  known  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  holidays  were  by  no  means  altogether  devoted  to 
so-called  pleasure-taking.  He  lound  his  truest  delight  in  active  service.  Sometimes, 
if  the  truth  must  be  told,  it  appeared  to  all  of  us  that  he  rested  insufficiently.  There 
were  those  ceaseless  letters  ; — how  they  worried  me,  for  he  would  answer  them 
himself,  when  I  wanted  him  to  be  by  the  sea,  or  under  the  olives  !  How  he  loved 
the  olive  trees,  chiefly  because  they  told  him  of  his  Lord  and  of  Gethsemane  ! 

I  confess  that  I  begrudged  him  the  time  he  spent  in  corresponding  with  all  save 
dear  mother  and  the  Tabernacle  Church.  This  is  how  I  wrote  at  the  time 
concerning-  this  matter: — "As  to  his  other  letters,  I  wish  folk  would  not  bother 
him  with  nonsensical  epistles,  I  must  admit  that  it  does  not  seem  any  great 
labour  to  him  to  answer  them  ;  still,  the  time  would  be  far  better  spent  in  the 
sunshine  ;  but  what  can't  be  cured  must  be  endured."  I  think  I  understand 
better,  by  this  time,  why  he  answered  almost  everyone.  He  knew  so  well  the 
power  of  letter-writing.  He  knew  also  how  glad  the  recipients  would  be,  and 
what  life-long  friends  he  would  secure.  Quite  recently,  a  venerable  saint,  in  his 
eighty-ninth  year,  sent  me,  "just  to  look  at,"  a  letter  he  had  received  from  dear  father 


C.     H.     SrURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAniY. 


at   Mentone.      It  was   in   answer  to  a  message   of   gratitude  for  a  sermon  in    The 
Christian  Herald,  and  ran  like  this  : — 

"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  I  thank  you  for  your  word  of  good  cheer.      It  is  a  great  joy  to  be  the 

means  of  comfort  to  an  aged  beHever.     You  will  very  likely  get  home  before  I  shall, 

but  tell  them  I  am  coming  as  fast  as  the  gout  will  let  me.     The   Lord  will  not  leave 

you  now  that  hoary  hairs  have  come,  but  will  now  carry  you  in   His  bosom.      Peace 

be  unto  you  ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 
Who  can  tell  the  joy  that  brief,  bright,  brotherly  note  brought  the  octogenarian,  who, 
after  all,  was  not  the  first  to  "  eet  home  "  ? 


AN   ANCIENT   OLIVE  TREE,    MENTONE. 

But  there  was  other  work  to  be  done.  The  weekly  sermon  had  to  be  revised, 
and  the  magazine  edited.  Here  is  a  striking  holiday  item  : — "  He  is  very  busy  with 
the  magazine,  and  fears  he  cannot  write  to  you  to-day."  Moreover,  there  was 
generally  some  book  on  the  stocks,  and  since  he  who  would  write  books  must  read 
them, — a   maxim  which  obtained  even  with  so  original  a  thinker  as  he  was, — it  is 


6  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 

written  in  my  diary  : — "We  have  beguiled  many  of  our  hours  by  reading,  and  father 
has  been  culHng  flowers  of  thought  to  be  arranged  in  fragrant  nosegays  by-and-by." 
The  only  mishap  on  our  journey  to  Mentone  was  the  temporary  loss  of  a  bag  full  of 
books  ;  but  a  more  serious  loss  than  that  seemed  scarcely  possible  to  the  author  and 
devourer  of  books.  He  was  as  a  workman  bereft  of  his  tools.  He  was  in  terrible 
distress,  and  refused  to  be  comforted  till  the  satchel  was  forthcoming.  "  Great  was 
the  Pastor's  joy  on  finding  his  peculiar  treasure." 

With  very  special  delight  I  recall  the  fact  that  I,  too,  was  set  to  work,  and  that 
I  had  the  President  of  the  Pastors'  College  as  my  private  tutor.  Let  me  give  a  few 
quotations  which  will  sufficiently  indicate  the  curriculum  of  the  Mentone  branch  of 
that  Institution  : — "  I  read  Chapter  1.  of  a  French  history  from  which  father 
questioned  me  afterwards,  I  then  stuck  to  Hodge  till  dinner-time,  and  by  to-morrow 
I  hope  to  get  into  real  working  order.  It  is  very  good  of  dear  father  to  interest 
him.self  so  in  my  welfare.  I  shall  do  my  very  best  to  prevent  him  ever  regretting  it." 
"  Father  and  son  worked  at  history  and  Hodge.  The  driest  matter  btcrsts  into  a 
blaze  zvheji  C.  H.  S.  puts  some  of  his  fire  to  it."  "  Father  is  now  on  a  sofa,  at  an 
open  window,  inspecting  a  primer  of  political  economy,  prior  to  my  study  of  it.  I 
wonder  if  this  College  course  'extraordinary  will  admit  me  to  the  Conference  ;  I 
greatly  hope  so."  "  I  have  just  completed  an  examination  in  history,  and  am,  as 
usual,  top  of  the  class.  A  still  more  interesting  way  of  studying  French  history  was 
introduced  yesterday.  Father  borrowed  Carlyle's  French  Revolution,  and  read 
it  to  us!"  There  follows  a  hint  that  Mr.  Passmore  seemed  to  appreciate  this 
method  of  instruction  (even)  more  than  Hodge.  But,  oh,  it  was  glorious  to  hear 
C.  H.  Spurgeon  read  Carlyle  ! 

Every  day,  when  the  weather  favoured,  and  health  permitted,  we  had  an  outing 
of  some  sort.  It  often  consisted  only  of  a  drive  up  one  of  the  valleys,  and  a  stroll 
back  ;  but  we  generally  took  our  lunch,  and  "  Old  George  "  was  sorely  tried  because 
there  was  no  spot  sufficiently  level  for  his  cloth,  and  no  centre-piece  more  elegant 
than  an  orange  ;  but  these  were  trifies  which  oui"  sharpened  appetites  scorned. 
How  the  dear  Pastor  gloried  in  the  freedom  of  these  rambles  !  The  spring  flowers 
and  the  trap-door  spiders,  no  less  than  the  towering  hills  and  dashing  rills,  filled  his 
soul  with  prayer,  and  praise,  and  poetry.  The  prayer  and  praise  constantly  found 
expression,  and  once  at  least  the  poetry  overflowed.  "  We  lunched  beneath  the  fir 
trees.  Meanwhile,  the  birds  were  singing  to  us.  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  poetic 
fire  burst  forth,  and  C.  H.  S.  gave  vent  to  his  delight  in  extempore  rhyme.  It 
should  be  perhaps  explained  that  we  had  been  reading  Cowper  together  before  the 
meal." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


GORBIO,   NEAR   JIEKTONE. 


Five  times  we  went  up  the  Gorbio  valley,  and  declared  that  "fifty  times  would 


CASTLE  AND   FOUNTAIN   AT   ROQUEBRUNE,   NEAR   MENTONE. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


hardly  tire  us  of  the  lovely  place."  Longer,  but  scarcely  more  enjoyable  expeditions 
were  made  to  Bordighera, — "  the  place  where  the  sun  seems  always  shining  ; " — to 
Nice,  and  ^lonaco,  and  Roquebrune,  and  Ventimiglia,  and  Dolce  Acqua. 


pyngDt,  1S&4,  by  Harper  &  Brothert. 


DOLCE   ACQUA,    ITALY. 


Cap  Martin  was  a  favourite  spot.  As  soon  as  the  weather  cleared,  the  cheery 
voice  rang  out,  "Son  Tom,  I  propose  a  drive  to  Cap  Martin."  I  thereupon  heartily 
seconded  the  resolution,  and  the  friends  (for  others  had  joined  us  by  this  time,) 
carried  it  unanimously.  After  a  breezy  drive,  "  we  clambered  over  the  rocks,  and 
watched  the  pale  green  coursers  foam  toward  the  shore,  and  dash  themselves  in 
spray  about  us.  We  were  a  jolly  party  altogether,  and  who  will  say  that  dear  father 
was  not  the  jolliest  of  all  1 " 

Sometimes,  quite  an  excursion  party  was  organized,  "personally  conducted"  by 
C.  H.  S.  Thus  we  read,  in  the  chronicles  of  our  visit: — "We  had  a  splendid  trip, 
the  day  before  yesterday,  to  Ventimiglia, — a  whole   party  of  us,  in  two  carriages. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Father  was  guide,  of  course,  and  interested  us  greatly  with  his  graphic  descriptions 
of  the  amphitheatre  and  the  cathedral.  You  know  how  much  more  one  can  learn 
when  he  is  at  hand  to  pc'nt  it  out." 


PALAZZO   ORENGO,    LA    MORTOLA,    ITALY. 

I  am  tempted  to  quote  largely  from  the  report  of  a  visit  to  the  charming- 
residence  of  Mr.  Thomas  Hanbury.  As  it  was  fully  enjoyed  by  him  whose  time  of 
rest  I  am  endeavouring  to  picture,  I  cannot  pass  it  by  in  silence.  "  March  23,  '79. — 
The  morning  was  wet  and  cold  ;  but,  suddenly,  the  wind  changed,  and  the  sun  tried 
to  struggle  through  the  clouds.  We  were  wondering  if  we  might  hope  for  a  drive  in 
the  afternoon,  when  Mr.  H anbury's  carriage  was  announced  to  be  in  waiting  to 
convey  us  to  the  Palazzo  Orengo.  Mr.  H.  had  noticed  the  change  before  we  did, 
and  was  more  confident  of  favourable  weather  ;    so  he  kindly  sent  for  us,  with  a 


lO 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


promise  to  return  us  when  we  wished.  The  prospect  of  a  charming  ride,  and  a 
lovely  stroll  in  an  earthly  paradise,  (to  say  nothing  of  a  rechercM  lunch,)  was  eagerly 
jumped  at. 

"  From  the  magnificent  gateway  on  the  high  road,  we  walked  by  an  easy 
decline  toward  the  mansion.  At  every  turn, — nay,  at  every  step, — there  was  some- 
thing to  admire  and  marvel  at.      The  walks  are  spread  with  tiny  blue  beach  stones. 


ENTRANCE   TO    MR.    HANBURY  S   GARDEN,    LA   iMORTOLA. 


SO  that,  though  the  plants  and  shrubs  were  overflowing  with  crystal  tOKCns  of  the 
recent  rain,  we  went  over  the  garden  dryshod.  Mr.  H.  was  our  guide,  and 
descanted  concerning  aloes,  and  agaves,  and  eucalypti,  and  the  rare  and  curious 
plants  which  he  had  gathered  from  every  quarter.  I  saw  quite  a  number  ot  my 
Australian  friends, — she-oak,  wattle,  gum,  etc."  I  well  remember  that  dear  father 
was  specially  delighted  with  the  wonderful  show  of  anemones.  Thousands  of  these 
bright  flowers,  of  every  hue,  s.prang  from  the  fresh  green  grass, — a  fallen  rainbow, 
surely !     An  aloe,   too,   pleased   him   greatly.      Much   to   its   owner's   regret,   it  was 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


I  I 


beginning  to  flower.      It  was  the  finest  in  the  garden,  and  Mr.  H.  knew  only  too  well 
that  its  effort  still  further  to  beautify  itself  must  end  in  death. 

But  Dr.  Bennet's  garden  was  our  chief  resort, — "a  veritable  paradise  on  the 
side  of  a  rocky  steep."  How  many  times  it  was  visited,  I  cannot  tell.  It  was  near 
at  hand,  and  no  special  invitation  was  necessary.  Father  loved  to  look  on  the  town 
from  this  view-point,  and  desired  me  to  sketch  the  scene.*  It  was  not  the  first 
time  mv  pencil  had  been  at  his  service  ;  and  great  was  my  joy  to  transfer  to  my 
sketch-book  the  scenes  which  particularly  interested  him,  such  as  some  queer 
specimens  of  architecture  in  the  old  town,  the  tunnel-pierced  cliff  with  the   Italian 


MENTONE   ARCHITECTURE. 


*  This  view  is  not  reproduced  here,  as  an  illustration  of  "  Mentone,  as  seen  from  Dr.  Bennet's  garden,"  was  given  in 
Vol.  ni.,  but  the  other  scenes  mentioned  by  Pastor  Thomas  Spurgeon  have  been  prepared  from  his  sketches,  together  with 
the  illustration  at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter. 


12 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


"SsS^^a^M^^^sfiiK- 


THE  TUNNEL  THROUGH  THE  RED  ROCKS,  MENTONE. 


guard-house  on  its  brow,  the  ruined  castle  and  running  fountain  at  Roquebrune 
(see  page  7),  or  a  specially  gnarled  and  twisted  olive  tree  (see  page  5).  Never  had 
aspiring  artist  a  more  indulgent  patron. 


After  dinner,  there  was  generally  an  adjournment  to  the  smoking-room,  where 
father  chatted  freely  with  the  other  visitors  at  the  hotel,  who  were  by  no  means  loth 
to  exchange  sentiments  with  the  distinguished  preacher.  And  he  could  discourse  on 
almost  any  theme.  How  pleased  he  was  to  meet  an  aged  Mennonite  Baptist  there  ! 
An  Alsatian  baron,  who  had  translated  some  of  the  sermons,  and  had  come  all  the 
way  from  Cannes  to  see  him,  was  received,  one  evening,  with  due  ceremony,  in  his 
private  sitting-room. 

Will  anyone  be  surprised  to  hear  that,  on  one  occasion,  Mr.  Sp'urgeon  witnessed 
a  conjuring  performance  ?  "We  were  entertained  at  a  '  brillante  stance  de  viagie' 
given  by  '  Le  Professeur  PTCstidigitateur,  B.  Marchelli.'  The  performance  was  very 
good   for  that  of  a   strolling   conjuror.      Dear  father  seemed  to   enjoy   it  mightily, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


13 


especially  when  the  Professor  produced  a  turtle-dove  from  '  Old  George's  '  pocket  in 
first-rate  style."  Almost  every  evening-,  we  had  some  reading  of  a  light  description, — 
The  Ingoldsby  Legends  being  a  favourite  work.  It  was  my  privilege,  also,  to  add  to 
the  paternal  merriment  by  reading  certain  humorous  sketches  of  my  Australian 
experiences,  sometimes  amid  a  shower  of  newspapers  and  other  missiles. 

We  enjoyed  our  Sundays  thoroughly.  The  Presbyterian  Church  was  not  then 
built,  so  we  worshipped  in  a  room  of  Mrs.  Dudgeon's  villa.  Dr.  Hanna  and  others 
preached,  and  our  Pastor  was  often  an  interested  listener.  He  always  had  unstinted 
praise  for  a  sermon  which  exalted  Jesus,  and  proclaimed  His  dyino-  love.  "That 
was  a  very  sweet  sermon,"  he  used  to  say  when  such  a  discourse  had  been  delivered. 
How  delighted  he  was  to  hear  George  Muller  on  "  Patient  waiting  upon  God." 
Especially  did  he  rejoice  in  the  man  behind  the  message.  The  preacher  came  to 
our  communion  service,  and  closed  it  with  prayer.  I  remember  that,  after  asking 
great  things  for  my  beloved  parents,  he  prayed  very  earnestly  for  "the  dear  son  in 
Australia."  I  had  great  pleasure  in  informing  him  that  I  was  the  son  in  Australia  ; 
and  oh  !  how  warmly  did  he  grasp  my  hand, — the  dear  old  man  !  Little  did  we 
dream  then  that,  nine  years  after,  he  would  help  to  marry  me  in  New  Zealand. 

Perhaps  I  may  venture  to  add,  concerning  our  Sundays,  that  it  was  my  joyful 
privilege  to  conduct  several  services.  On  one  occasion,  the  Pastor  of  the  Metro- 
politan Tabernacle  occupied  a  seat  under  the  verandah.  I  told  him,  afterwards,  how 
fortunate  it  was  that  I  did  not  happen  to  address  "outsiders."  I  cannot  forget  the 
loving  encouragement  he  gave  me.  Not  less  did  I  prize  the  lenient  criticisms  and 
valuable  hints  as  to  style  and  delivery.  I  may  be  pardoned,  too,  for  treasuring  the 
memory  of  how,  during  this  happy  holiday,  he  conceived  the  idea  of  having  me  ever 
with  him,  and  of  instituting  a  Sunday  afternoon  service  that  I  might  conduct.  But 
the  Master  willed  it  otherwise. 

We  had  a  whole  day  with  George  Muller  in  Dr.  Bennet's  garden,  and  I  am  able 
to  copy  from  my  letter  of  the  following  date  this  striking  testimony  as  to  the 
advantage  of  such  fellowship  : — "  Dear  father  declares  himself  far  better  able  to 
'trust  and  not  be  afraid'  through  intercourse  with  Mr.  Muller."  The  stimulus  to 
faith  was  greatly  needed  then.  How  well  God  times  His  aid  !  In  the  same  epistle, 
after  recording  our  sorrow  at  mother's  continued  illness,  these  words  occur : — 
"Another  source  of  anxiety  is  the  lack  of  funds  for  the  Colportage  Association. 
This  matter  also  we  have  believingly  commended  to  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  will 
surely  not  let  His  servants  want.  Dear  father  has  been  in  many  straits  before,  and 
has  always  been  delivered.  In  this  trouble  also  the  Lord  will  befriend  him, — for 
what  is  ^700  to  Him  '^.  " 


14  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

For  Pastor  John  Bost,  director  of  the  Asylums  of  La  Force,  C.  H.  Spurgeon 
consented  to  preside  at  a  pubHc  meeting.  Besides  being  deeply  interested  in  his 
work  among  the  epileptics,  father  was  greatly  taken  with  the  man  himself.  The 
Encrlishman  and  the  Frenchman  had  somethino'  in  common,  for  Pastor  Bost  was 
brimful  of  humour,  and  withal  somewhat  stout.  He  himself  said,  "  Mr.  Mliller  is  a 
great  man,  John  Bost  is  a  big  man."  The  meeting  was  a  grand  success.  "  Both 
speakers  mingled  plenty  of  fun  with  their  addresses  ;  and  I,  for  one,  was  laughing 
and  crying  alternately  all  the  time.  '  The  dear  epileptics  '  were  most  effectively 
pleaded  for." 

This  sketch  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  Mentone  would  hardly  be  complete  if  it  did 
not  tell  how  amused  he  was  by  the  Carnival  procession.  I  call  to  mind  how 
interested  he  was  in  the  various  devices,  and  how  heartily  he  laughed  at  the 
grotesque  ones.  He  was  specially  pleased  with  a  company  mounted  upon  donkeys, 
and  representing  candlesticks.  The  men's  bodies  were  the  candles,  their  heads  the 
flames,  and  on  their  spears  they  held  extinguishers.  I  almost  wond«er  that  the  group 
did  not  figure  afterwards  in  Sej^)Hons  in  Candles. 

As  soon  as  a  measure  of  health  returned,  the  eager  worker  looked  longingly 
towards  home.  His  head  nurse  declared  that  he  was  not  fit  to  go  back,  but  the 
patient  was  impatient  to  be  in  harness  again.  Here  is  the  official  bulletin  for 
March  17  : — "  He  seems,  to  my  mind,  hardly  strong  enough  to  undertake  the 
thousand  duties  of  his  gigantic  work  ;  but  he  will  not  hear  of  staying  longer,  and  has 
already  engaged  a  sleeping-car."  Urgent  representations  from  the  Tabernacle,  that 
he  should  remain  away  till  thoroughly  restored,  came  to  hand  ;  but  an  extra  week 
was  all  that  the  combined  efforts  could  secure.  He  was  as  a  greyhound  in  the  leash 
till  he  was  back  at  his  post. 

And  what  a  home-coming  it  was  !  Nightingale  Lane  then  heard  sweeter  music 
than  ever  Philomel  produced, — the  music  of  loving  welcome  to  dear  ones  mingled 
with  fervent  gratitude  to  God.  And  when  the  blessed  ministry  at  the  Tabernacle 
was  resumed,  there  rose  to  Heaven  a  doxology,  loud  as  the  voice  of  many  waters, 
from  a  church  and  congregation  that  loved  their  Pastor  almost  as  well  as  he  loved 
them. 

What  a  welcome  he  must  have  had,  thirteen  years  later,  when  from  the  same 
sunny  land  he  went  home  to  God  1 


CHAPTER    LXXXIV. 


a   JBoubU   Silbcr   Simtbbtnni. 

It  was  right  and  seemly  that,  at  the  close  of  this  period  of  twenty-five  years,  some  testimonial 
should  be  offered  to  the  Pastor.  The  like  has  been  worthily  done  in  other  instances  ;  and  brethren  have 
accepted  a  sum  of  money,  which  they  well  deserved,  ard  which  theyhave  very  properly  laid  aside  as  a 
provision  for  their  families.  In  our  case,  it  did  not  appear  to  us  at  all  fitting  that  the  offering  should 
come  into  our  own  purse ;  our  conscience  and  heart  revolted  from  the  idea.  We  could,  without  sin,  have 
accepted  the  gift  for  our  own  need  ;  but  it  seemed  not  to  be  right.  We  have  been  so  much  more  in  the 
hands  of  God  than  most, — so  much  less  an  agent,  and  so  much  more  an  instrument,  that  we  could  not 
claim  a  grain  of  credit.  Moreover,  the  dear  and  honoured  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ,  who  have 
surrounded  us  these  many  years,  have  really  themselves  done  the  bulk  of  the  work ;  and  God  forbid  that 
we  should  monopolize  honour  which  belongs  to  all  the  saints  !  Let  the  offering  come,  by  all  means ;  but 
let  it  return  to  the  source  from  whence  it  came.  There  are  many  poor  in  the  church, — far  more  than 
friends  at  a  distance  would  imagine  ; — many  of  the  most  godly  poor,  "  widows  indeed,"  and  partakers  of 
the  poverty  of  Christ.  To  aid  the  church  in  its  holy  duty  of  remembering  the  poor,  which  is  the  nearest 
approach  to  remembering  Christ  Himself,  seemed  to  us  to  be  the  highest  use  of  money.  The  testimonial 
will,  therefore,  go  to  support  the  aged  sisters  in  the  Almshouses,  and  thus  it  will  actually  relieve  the 
funds  of  the  church  which  are  appropriated  to  the  weekly  relief  of  the  necessitous.  May  the  Lord 
Jesus  accept  this  cup  of  cold  water,  which  is  offered  in  His  Name !  We  see  the  Lord's  servants  fetching 
for  us  water  from  the  well  of  Bethlehem  which  is  by  the  gate ;  and  as  we  behold  tliem  cheerfully  and 
generously  setting  it  at  our  feet,  we  thank  them, — thank  them  with  tears  in  our  eyes, — but  we  feel  that 
we  must  not  drink  thereof;  it  must  be  poured  out  before  the  Lord.  So  let  it  be.  O  Lord,  accept  it! 
— C.  H.  S.,  in  ^'■The  Sword  and  the  T}Owcl,"  January,  1S79. 

FTER  the  furlough  described  in  the  previous  chapter,  the  first  great 
historical  event  was  the  celebration  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  pastoral 
silver  wedding, — the  commemoration  of  the  completion  of  the 
twenty-fifth  year  of  his  ministry  in  London.  It  was  felt,  by  many 
of  his  friends,  that  so  notable  a  period  of  Christian  service  should 
not  be  allowed  to  pass  without  due  recognition,  and  many  of  them 
desired  to  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  to  present  to  their  Pastor  a  testimonial 
of  their  loving  esteem.  As  soon  as  the  matter  was  mentioned  to  him,  he  resolutely 
refused  to  receive  any  personal  presentation  ;  but,  feeling  that  the  church's  gratitude 
to  God  for  all  the  blessing  vouchsafed  during  that  memorable  quarter  of  a  century 
ought  to  find  suitable  expression,  he  suggested  that  efforts  should  be  made  to  help 
the  one  portion  of  the  work  which  had  been  a  source  of  some  anxiety  to  him,  and 
might  be  more  so  in  the  future. 

At  the  annual  church-meeting,  in  January,  1878,  the  question  assumed  definite 
shape,  as  will  be  seen  from  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  account  of  the  proceedings  : — "'It 
was  proposed,  and  heartily  carried  by  all,  that  the  deacons  should  consider  how  best 
to  celebrate  the  Pastor's  silver  wedding  when  the  twenty-fifth  year  should  close,  if 
God  should  spare  the  senior  Pastor  to  that  time.  Mr.  Spurgeon  then  reminded  the 
church   that  its  heaviest  burden  was  the  Almshouses,  which,  having  been  scantily 


1 6  C.     H,     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

endowed  for  six  aged  sisters,  now  accommodated  seventeen,  and  made  a  heavy  drain 
on  the  communion  fund.  It  appeared,  from  the  balance-sheet,  that  the  alms  given 
away  to  the  poor  annually  exceeded  ^i,ooo;  and,  from  the  great  number  of  the 
poor  members,  it  had  been  needful  for  the  Pastor  to  find  ^120,  and  for  other  friends 
to  o-ive  privately  in  order  to  balance  the  account.  This  was  principally  due  to  the 
large  item  for  support  of  almswomen  ;  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  that,  if  friends  would 
make  an  effort  to  raise  about  ^5,000,  this  part  of  the  church  work  would  be  put 
into  proper  shape,  and  he  should  regard  it  as  a  fit  way  of  celebrating  the  anticipated 
event.  He  remarked  that  it  was  comparatively  easy  to  carry  the  load  noii),  but  that 
he  should  not  like  to  leave  such  a  heavy  burden  for  his  successor.  Should  he 
himself  be  suddenly  called  away,  the  church  might  find  it  no  great  cause  for  blessing 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  administration  if  it  found  that  houses  had  been  built  for  the  aged 
widows  to  starve  in,  but  that  their  daily  bread  had  been  forgotten.  He  considered 
that  the  good  ship  was  in  trim  condition  from  stem  to  stern  with  this  exception,  and 
he  would  like  to  see  the  matter  done,  and  done  well.  From  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
meetino-,  there  is  little  doubt  that,  by  many  hands,  the  needful  amount  will  be 
brought  in  on  or  before  January,  1879." 

By  that  date,  far  more  than  the  sum  mentioned  had  been  received.  About  half 
the  amount  was  realized  by  a  bazaar,  for  the  Pastor  had  not  then  seen,  as  he  did  in 
later  years,  the  evils  necessarily  associated  with  that  method  of  raising  money  for 
the  Lord's  cause.  The  presentation  had  to  be  postponed,  for  a  time,  as  Mr. 
Spuroeon  was  away  at  Mentone,  seeking  rest  and  restoration  ;  but,  at  last. 
May  20,  1879,  was  fixed  for  the  joyous  event.  It  was  preceded  by  special  sermons 
on  the  Sabbath,  in  the  course  of  which  the  following  historical  and  autobiographical 
references  were  made  by  the  preacher  : —  ■ 

"  Under  the  present  pastorate,  we  are  like  mariners  in  mid-ocean,  distant 
twenty-five  leagues,  or  rather  years,  from  the  place  of  our  departure,  and  making  all 
sail  for  the  further  shore.  As  to  any  service  we  may  expect  personally  to  render, 
we  are  certainly  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  if  not  near  to  their  end.  In  the  course  of 
nature,  we  could  not  expect  that  more  than  another  twenty-five  years  of  service 
could  be  compassed  by  us,  nor  are  we  so  foolish  as  to  reckon  even  upon  that  :  we 
have,  at  any  rate,  come  to  middle  life  in  our  church-relationship,  now  that  we 
celebrate  our  silver  wedding.  Brethren,  there  is  about  '  the  midst  of  the  years '  a 
certain  special  danger,  and  this  led  the  prophet,  as  it  shall  lead  us  at  this  time,  to 
pray,  in  the  words  which  I  have  selected  for  my  text,  '  O  Lord,  revive  Thy  work  in 
the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known.'  Youth  has  its  perils, 
but  these  are  past ;  age  has  its  infirmities,  but  these  we  have  not  yet  reached  ;  it  is 
ours  then  to  pray  against  the  dangers  which  are  present  with  us  '  in  the  midst  of  the 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  17 

years.'     The  middle  passage  of  life  with  us  as  individuals,  and  with  us  as  a  church, 
is  crowded  with  peculiar  perils. 

"There  is  a  certain  spur  and  stimulus  of  novelty  about  religious  movements 
which  in  a  few  years  is  worn  out.  I  well  recollect  when  we  were  called  '  a  nine  days' 
wonder,'  and  our  critics  prophesied  that  our  work  would  speedily  collapse.  Such 
excitement  had  been  seen  before,  and  had  passed  away  ;  and  this  would  be  one 
among  other  bubbles  of  the  hour.  The  nine  days  have  lasted  considerably  lono-  ; — 
may  nine  such  days  follow  them,  in  God's  infinite  mercy !  Now,  whatever 
detractors  might  say,  we  know  that  there  was  then  a  life,  an  energy,  a  freshness 
about  everything  which  was  done  by  us  as  a  church  which  we  could  hardly  expect 
to  continue  with  us  for  all  these  years.  From  an  admirable  fervour,  many  cool 
down  to  a  dangerous  chill.  This  is  to  be  bemoaned  where  it  has  occurred,  and  it  is 
to  be  feared  where  as  yet  it  has  not  happened,  for  such  is  the  natural  tendency  of 
things.  Beloved  brethren,  I  have  prayed  to  God  that,  when  what  is  called  the 
esp7dt  de  corps  is  gone  from  us,  the  Esprit  de  Dieu  may  still  abide  with  us  ;  that, 
when  the  spirit  which  grows  out  of  our  association  with  each  other  declines,  we  may 
be  sustained  by  the  Spirit  which  unites  us  all  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 

"  This  very  house  of  prayer  has  been  to  sdme  of  you  a  quiet  resting-place. 
You  have  been  more  at  home  here  than  when  you  have  been  at  home.  1  will 
be  bound  to  say  that  you  recollect  more  happy  times  that  you  have  had  here  than 
anywhere  else,  and  these  have  put  out  of  your  memory  the  sad  records  of  your 
hard  battling  in  the  world,  even  for  a  livelihood.  I  know  that  many  of  you  live 
by  your  Sabbaths.  You  step  over  the  intervening  space  from  Lord's-day  to  Lord's- 
day,  as  if  the  Lord  had  made  a  ladder  of  Sabbaths  for  you  to  climb  to  Heaven  by  ; 
and  you  have  been  fed,  as  well  as  rested,  in  God's  house.  I  know  you  have,  for  he 
who  deals  out  the  meat  has  had  his  own  portion  ;  and  when  he  is  fed,  he  knows  that 
others  have  like  appetites,  and  need  like  food,  and  know  when  they  get  it.  You 
have  clapped  your  hands  for  very  joy  when  redeeming  grace  and  dying  love  have 
been  the  theme,  and  infinite,  sovereign,  changeless  mercy  has  been  the  subject  of 
discourse. 

"Well  now,  by  every  happy  Sabbath  you  have  had,  my  brethren;  by  every 
holy  Monday  evening  prayer-meeting  ;  by  every  occasion  on  which  God  has  met 
with  you  in  any  of  the  rooms  of  this  building,  when  a  few  of  you,  at  early  mornino-, 
or  late  in  the  evening,  have  gathered  together  for  prayer  ;  by  every  time  in  which  the 
realization  of  Jesu's  love  has  charmed  your  soul  up  to  Heaven's  gate,  bless  and 
magnify  His  Name,  who  has  crowned  the  years  with  His  goodness.  There  had 
been  no  food  for  us  if  the  Lord  had  not  given  us  manna  from  Heaven.  There  had 
been  no  comfortable  rest  for  us  if  He  had  not  breathed  peace  upon  us.     There  had 

been  no  coming  in  of  new  converts,  nor  going  out  with  rapturous  joy  of  the  perfected 

B  4 


1 8  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

ones  up  to  the  seats  above,  if  the   Lord  had  not  been   with  us  ;  and,  therefore,  to 
Him  be  all  the  praise. 

"  I  do  not  suppose  that  any  strangers  here  will  understand  this  matter.  It  may 
even  be  that  they  will  judge  that  we  are  indulging  in  self-gratulation  under  a  thin 
disguise  ;  but  this  evil  we  must  endure  for  once.  You,  my  brothers  and  sisters,  who 
have  been  together  these  many  years,  comprehend  what  is  meant  ;  and  you  know 
that  it  is  not  within  the  compass  of  an  angel's  tongue  to  express  the  gratitude  which 
many  of  us  feel  who,  for  these  five-and-twenty  years,  have  been  banded  together  in 
closest  and  heartiest  Christian  brotherhood  in  the  service  of  our  Lord  and  Master. 
Strangers  cannot  guess  how  happy  has  been  our  fellowship,  or  how  true  our  love. 
Eternity  alone  shall  reveal  the  multitude  of  mercies  with  which  God  has  visited  us 
by  means  of  our  association  in  this  church  ;  it  is  to  some  of  us  friend,  nurse,  mother, 
home,  all  in  one.  During  all  these  years,  the  Lord  has  been  pleased,  in  infinite 
mercy,  to  prepare  men's  hearts  to  listen  to  the  Word.  It  was  not  possible,  they  said, 
that  great  places  could  be  filled  with  crowds  to  hear  the  old-fashioned  gospel.  The 
pulpit  had  lost  its  power, — so  unbelievers  told  us  ;  and  yet,  no  sooner  did  we  begin 
to  preach  in  simple  strains  the  gospel  of  Christ,  than  the  people  flew  as  a  cloud,  and 
as  doves  to  their  windows.  And  what  listening  there  was  at  New  Park  Street, 
where  we  scarcely  had  air  enough  to  breathe  !  And  when  we  got  into  the  larger 
place,  what  attention  was  manifest  !  What  power  seemed  to  go  with  every  word 
that  was  spoken  ;  I  say  it,  though  I  was  the  preacher  ;  for  it  was  not  I,  but  the 
grace  ot  God  which  was  with  me.  There  were,  stricken  down  among  us,  some 
of  the  most  unlikely  ones.  There  were  brought  into  the  church,  and  added  to  God's 
people,  some  of  those  who  had  wandered  far  away  from  the  path  of  truth  and 
righteousness  ;  and  these,  by  their  penitent  love,  quickened  our  life,  and  increased 
our  zeal.  The  Lord  gave  the  people  more  and  more  a  willingness  to  hear,  and 
there  was  no  pause  either  in  the  flowing  stream  of  hearers,  or  in  the  incoming  of 
converts.  The  Holy  Spirit  came  down  like  showers  which  saturate  the  soil  till  the 
clods  are  ready  for  the  breaking  ;  and  then  it  was  not  long  before,  on  the  right  and 
on  the  left,  we  heard  the  cry,  '  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  '  We  were  busy 
enough,  in  those  days,  in  seeing  converts  ;  and,  thank  God,  we  have  been  so  ever 
since.  We  had  some  among  us  who  gave  themselves  up  to  watch  for  the  souls  of 
men,  and  we  have  a  goodly  number  of  such  helpers  now,  perhaps  more  than  ever  we 
had  ;  and,  thank  God,  these  found  and  still  find  many  souls  to  watch  over.  Still  the 
arrows  fly,  and  still  the  smitten  cry  out  for  help,  and  ask  that  they  may  be  guided  to 
the  great  healing  Lord.  Blessed  be  God's  Name  for  this  !  He  went  with  us  all 
those  early  days,  and  gave  us  sheaves  even  at  the  first  sowing,  so  that  we  began 
with  mercy  ;  and  He  has  been  with  us  even  until  now,  till  our  life  has  become  one 
long  harvest-home. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  19 

"  I  am  bound  to  acknowledge,  with  deep  thankfulness,  that,  during  these 
twenty-five  years,  the  Word  has  been  given  me  to  speak  when  the  time  has  come 
for  preaching.  It  may  look  to  you  a  small  thing  that  I  should  be  able  to  come 
before  you  in  due  time  ;  but  it  will  not  seem  so  to  my  brethren  in  the  ministry  who 
recollect  that,  for  twenty-five  years,  my  sermons  have  been  printed  as  they  have 
been  delivered.  It  must  be  an  easy  thing  to  go  and  buy  discourses  at  si.xpence  or  a 
shilling  each,  ready  lithographed,  and  read  them  off,  as  hirelings  do  ;  but  to  speak 
your  heart  out  every  time,  and  yet  to  have  something  tresh  to  say  for  twenty-five 
years,  is  no  child's  play.  Who  shall  do  it  unless  he  cries  unto  God  for  help  ?  I 
read,  but  the  other  day,  a  newspaper  criticism  upon  myself,  in  which  the  writer 
expressed  his  wonder  that  a  man  should  keep  on  year  after  year  with  so  few  themes, 
and  such  a  narrow  groove  to  travel  in  ;  but,  my  brethren,  it  is  not  so,  our  themes  are 
infinite  for  number  and  fulness.  Every  text  of  Scripture  is  boundless  in  its  meaning  ; 
we  could  preach  from  the  Bible  throughout  eternity,  and  not  exhaust  it.  The  groove 
narrow  ?  The  thoughts  of  God  narrow  ?  The  Word  of  the  Lord  narrow  ?  They 
who  say  so  do  not  know  it,  for  His  commandment  is  exceeding  broad.  Had  we  to 
speak  of  politics  or  philosophy,  we  should  have  run  dry  long  ago  ;  but  when  we 
have  to  preach  the  Saviour's  everlasting  love,  the  theme  is  always  fresh,  always  new. 
The  incarnate  God,  the  atoning  blood,  the  risen  Lord,  the  coming  glory,  these  are 
subjects  which  defy  exhaustion.  W^hen  I  recollect  how,  as  a  boy,  I  stood  among 
you,  and  feebly  began  to  preach  Jesus  Christ,  and  how  these  twenty-five  years, 
without  dissension,  ay,  without  the  dream  of  dissension,  in  perfect  love  compacted 
as  one  man,  you  have  gone  on  from  one  work  of  God  to  another,  and  have  never 
halted,  hesitated,  or  drawn  back,  I  must  and  will  bless  and  magnify  Him  who  hath 
crowned  these  years  with  His  goodness. 

"  Now  I  come  to  my  closing  point.  It  is  this, — the  crowning  blessing  is 
confessed  to  be  of  God.  Some  churches  have  one  crown,  and  some  another  ;  our 
crown,  under  God,  has  been  this, — the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them, 
souls  are  saved,  and  Christ  is  glorified.  O  my  beloved  church,  hold  fast  that  thou 
hast,  that  no  man  take  this  crown  away  from  thee  !  As  for  me,  by  God's  help,  the 
first  and  last  thing  that  I  long  for  is  to  bring  men  to  Christ.  I  care  nothing  about 
fine  language,  or  about  the  pretty  speculations  of  prophecy,  or  a  hundred  dainty 
things  ;  but  to  break  the  heart  and  bind  it  up,  to  lay  hold  on  a  sheep  of  Christ  and 
bring  it  back  into  the  fold,  is  the  one  thing  I  would  live  for.  You  also  are  of  the 
same  mind,  are  you  not  ?  Well,  we  have  had  this  crowning  blessing  that,  as  nearly 
as  I  can  estimate,  since  I  came  amongst  you,  more  than  nine  thousand  persons  have 
joined  this  church.  If  they  were  all  alive  now,  or  all  with  us  now,  what  a 
company  they  would  be  !  I  find  that,  during  these  twenty-five  years,  there  have 
gone  from  us,  to  the  upper  realms,  about  eight  hundred  who  had  named  the  Name 


20  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

of  Jesus.  Professing  their  faith  in  Christ,  Hving  in  His  fear,  dying  in  the  faith,  they 
gave  us  no  cause  to  doubt  their  sincerity  ;  and,  therefore,  we  may  not  question  their 
eternal  safety.  Many  of  them  gave  us,  in  Hfe  and  in  death,  all  the  tokens  we  could 
ask  for  of  their  being  in  Christ ;  and,  therefore,  we  sorrow  not  as  those  that  are 
without  hope.  Why,  when  I  think  of  them, — many  of  them  my  sons  and  dauo-hters 
in  the  faith, — now  before  the  throne,  they  fill  me  with  solemn  exultation  !  Do  you 
not  see  them  in  their  white  robes  .-^  Eight  hundred  souls  redeemed  by  blood! 
These  are  only  those  whom  we  knew  of,  and  had  enrolled  on  our  church-books. 
How  many  more  there  may  have  been  converted,  who  never  joined  our  earthly 
fellowship,  but,  nevertheless,  have  gone  home,  I  cannot  tell.  There  probably  have 
been  more  than  those  whose  names  we  know,  if  we  consider  the  wide  area  over 
which  the  printed  sermons  circulate.  They  are  gathering  home  one  by  one,  but 
they  make  a  goodly  company.  Our  name  is  Gad,  for  *a  troop  cometh.'  Happy 
shall  we  be  to  overtake  those  who  have  outmarched  us,  and  entered  into  the 
Promised  Land  before  us.  Let  us  remember  them,  and  by  faith  join  our  hands  with 
theirs.  Flash  a  thought  to  unite  the  broken  family,  for  we  are  not  far  from  them, 
nor  are  they  far  from  us,  since  we  are  one  in  Christ." 

Monday  evening.  May  19,  was  mainly  devoted  to  praising  the  Lord  for  His 
goodness  to  both  Pastor  and  people  during  the  whole  period  of  their  union  ;  but, 
before  the  meeting  closed,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  an  address,  as  he  felt  that  there 
would  not  be  time,  the  following  evening,  for  him  to  say  all  that  he  wanted.  Among 
other  things,  he  said  : — "  I  have,  as  you  must  imagine,  felt  the  deepest  emotion,  at 
the  end  of  these  twenty-five  years  of  your  affectionate  co-operation  ;  and  especially 
an  emotion,  which  I  shall  not  attempt  to  express,  of  grateful  affection  to  you  all  for 
the  noble  testimonial  which  you  have  raised  to  commemorate  the  event.  I  felt  sure 
that  you  would  take  up  the  plan  of  providing  for  our  aged  sisters  as  soon  as  it 
was  proposed  to  you  by  the  deacons  ;  but  I  did  not  think  that  you  could  give 
me  such  a  testimonial  as  you  have  prepared.  The  net  sum  which  is  to  be 
handed  to  me  is,  I  am  informed,  ^6,238,  (afterwards  increased  to  ^6,476  9s.,)  the 
spontaneous  giving — the  universal  giving — the  delighted  giving  of  the  entire  church 
and  congregation.  Everyone  has  seemed  jealous  of  being  excluded  ;  so  all,  both 
rich  and  poor,  young  and  old,  have  pressed  forward  with  their  gifts.  I  certainly 
could  not  have  imagined  that  you  would  so  largely  exceed  the  amount  needed  for 
the  Almshouses  ;  and  yet,  when  I  remember  your  many  other  loving  and  generous 
acts,  I  cannot  be  surprised  at  anything.  It  is  just  like  you  ;  your  conduct  to  me  is 
all  of  a  piece,  and  may  God  bless  you  for  it  !  I  was  ill  all  the  while  you  were  doing 
this  great  deed  of  love,  and  I  could  not  rise  from  my  bed  ;  but,  each  day,  I  had 
tidings  of  some  sort  about  you,  and  your  words  and  acts  of  love  ;  and  I  hardly  knew 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2  1 

how  to  bear. it.  It  lifted  me  out  of  despondency,  but  it  cast  me  down  with  exceeding 
gratitude.  I  scarcely  like  to  speak  upon  the  subject,  because  it  has  been  a  rule  with 
me  not  to  take  a  text  which  I  could  not  hope  to  grasp.  Little  boats  are  safest  while 
they  keep  in  sight  of  shore.  This  subject  is  one  of  those  upon  which  the  more  said 
the  better,  and  yet  it  remains  better  than  all  that  can  be  said.  I  condense  my 
sermon  into  a  sentence,  and  that  sentence  is  a  prayer, — May  the  God,  whom  I  serve, 
bless  you  all  a  thousandfold  for  this  token  of  your  love  and  kindness  towards  me, 
which  I  know  you  have  rendered  for  Christ's  sake  !  " 

On  Tuesday  evening.  May  20,  the  Tabernacle  was  crowded  in  every  part  for 
the  meeting  at  which  the  testimonial  was  to  be  presented.  After  prayer  and  praise, 
Mr.  B.  VV.  Carr  read  along  but  interesting  historical  paper,  entitled,  "A  Grateful 
Retrospect,"  summarizing  the  church's  progress  during  Mr.  Spurgeon's  ministry  ; 
Dr.  Charles  Stanford  followed  with  a  choice  composition  upon  "  The  Baptist 
Churches,  twenty-five  years  ago  and  now  ;  "  a  few  brief  addresses  were  delivered  ; 
and  then,  as  a  pleasant  interlude  before  the  presentation  was  made  by  Mr.  W'illiam 
Olney,  the  Pastor  said  : — "  Before  we  go  to  the  business  of  the  evening,  we  will 
sing  our  Tabernacle  National  Anthem,   that  glorious  hymn, — 

"'Grace,  'tis  a  charming   sound,' — 

to  the  tune  '  Cranbrook ',  which  a  critic  has  called  'execrable.'  I  am  such  a  heretic 
as  to  like  '  Cranbrook '  ;  and  if  you  will  only  sing  it  as  we  generally  do,  we  will 
make  some  of  these  heathen  here  to-night  like  it.  The  way  of  singing  now  (con- 
tinued Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  affected  tones  to  imitate  the  parties  to  whom  he  alluded) 
is,  '  Let  us  sing  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God,  and  rattle  through  it  as  fast  as 
possible,  with,  never  a  fugue  or  a  repeat,  and  get  it  over  and  done,  for  we  are 
sick  to  death  of  it.'  In  truth,  I  think  some  of  the  much-admired  modern  tunes 
might  be  very  well  represented  under  the  following  story  : — '  I  hope  you  enjoyed 
our  music  this  morning,'  said  a  gentleman  of  the  High  Church  to  a  Presbyterian 
hiend  who  was  staying  with  him.  'Well,  I  cannot  say  that  I  admire  your  form 
of  service  at  all  ;  I  like  things  much  better  as  we  have  them  in  the  old  kirk.' 
'  No  .'*  But  you  are,  after  all,  a  gentleman  of  musical  taste  ;  did  you  not  very 
much  enjoy  that  introit?'  'I  really  don't  know  which  it  was.'  'But  you  must 
have  been  pleased  with  that  anthem,'  repeated  the  High  Churchman.  '  I  don't 
know,  I  can't  say  much  in  its  favour,'  was  the  reply.  'Well,  there  was  one  very 
remarkable  tune;  didn't  you  notice  it?'  'Oh!'  was  the  response,  'I  didn't  think 
much  of  it.'  'Well,  now,  I  am  very  sorry,  because  that  is  a  very  ancient  tune, 
used  by  the  early  Church  very  often  ;  indeed,  I  believe  it  was  sung  in  the 
catacombs.  I  have  even  heard  that  this  wonderful  piece  of  music  came  from 
the  Jews,   and  was  no  doubt  chanted  in  the  liturgical  service  of  the  Temple  ;  for 


22  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

vou  know  the  worship  of  the  ancient  Temple  was  Hturgical,  and  not  your  bare 
Presbyterian  form  at  all.  There  appears  to  be  scarcely  any  doubt  that  the  tune 
we  had  this  morning  was  originally  sung  by  David  himself  when  he  played  on 
his  harp.'  '  Dear  me,'  said  the  Presbyterian,  '  I  never  heard  that  before,  but  it 
throws  great  light  upon  Scripture.  I  never  could  make  out  why  Saul  threw  a 
ja\-elin  at  David  ;  but  if  that  was  the  tune  which  he  sang  when  he  played  his 
harp  before  the  king,  I  can  understand  Saul's  ferocity,  and  justify  it,  too.' 
'  Cranbrook '  is  not  the  tune  that  was  sung  by  David,  but  it  is  a  good  deal 
better  than  anything  David  ever  sang  ;  the  tune  is  more  musical,  and  the  hymn 
has  more  gospel   in   it  than   was   known   under  the  law." 

"  Grace,  'tis  a  charming  sound," 

was  then  sung,  to  the  tune  "Cranbrook",  as  only  a  Tabernacle  audience  of  six 
thousand  people  could  sing  it.  Then  followed  the  presentation  of  the  testimonial. 
The  principal  portions  ot  Mr.  Olney's  address,  and  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  reply, 
were  published  in  Vol.  II.,  Chapter  XLIV.,  and  therefore  need  not  be  repeated 
here  ;  but  the  record  of  that  memorable  meeting  may  be  closed  with  the  Pastor's 
allusions  to  his  people's  affection  and  his  own  resolve  : — "  I  can  only  use  over 
again  the  simile  I  have  employed  before.  In  the  crystallizing  of  sugar,  to  make 
sugar  candy,  strings  are  stretched  across  the  vessel  in  which  the  syrup  is  boiled  ; 
upon  these  strings,  the  sugar  crystallizes.  You  are  the  sugar ;  the  Divine  life 
supplies  the  fire  which  melts  your  hearts  ;  and  I  am  the  thread  around  which 
you  crystallize.  So  be  it  still  !  But  your  love  is  to  me  an  amazement ;  I  am 
the  most  astonished  person  among  you  ;  I  do  not  comprehend  it ;  it  seems  a 
romance  to  me.  What  I  have  done,  I  shall  do  still  ;  namely,  love  you  with  all 
my  heart,  and  love  my  Lord  as  His  grace  enables  me.  I  mean  to  go  on  preaching- 
Jesus,  and  His  gospel  ;  and  you  may  be  sure  that  I  shall  not  preach  anything 
else,  for  with  me  it  is  Christ  or  nothing.  I  am  sold  up,  and  my  stock-in-trade 
is  gone  if  Jesus  Christ  is  gone.      He  is  the  sum  of  my  ministry,   my  All-in-all." 

A  pleasing  sequel  to  the  presentation  was  thus  noted  at  the  time  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon  : — "  The  testimonial  which  celebrated  our  twenty-five  years  of  pastoral 
work  was  presented  on  Tuesday,  May  20,  and  there  and  then  dedicated  to  the  Lord. 
On  the  following  Thursday  evening,  we  commenced  a  new  period  in  our  church 
history  ;  and  it  is  a  singularly  pleasing  coincidence  that,  at  the  church-meeting  held 
on  that  evening,  no  less  than  thirty-seven  candidates  came  before  the  church,  and 
confessed  their  faith  in  Christ, — the  largest  number  that  we  have  ever  received  at 
one  church-meeting.  This  was  the  more  remarkable  as  it  happened  entirely  without 
arrangement  on  the  part  of  the  Pastor  or  anyone  else.  We  regard  it  as  'a  token  for 
good,'  and  look  for  'greater  things  than  these.'  " 


C.     H,     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHYo 


23 


SILVER     WEDDING     PORTRAITS. 


Only  a  brief  mention  of  our  personal  silver  wedding-  is  necessary.  There 
was  some  intention  of  holding-  a  special  meeting-  at  the  Tabernacle,  to  congratulate 
the  Pastor  and  his  wife,  on  Monday,  January  10,  iSSi, — two  days  after  the  actual 
date  ;  but,  unhappily,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  laid  aside  at  the  time,  so  that  idea 
had  to  be  abandoned,  although  we  were  both  very  sympathetically  remembered 
in  the  supplications  of  those  who  were  assembled,  that  evening,  in  the  much- 
loved  house  of  prayer.  Ultimately,  the  commemoration  took  the  form  of  a 
private  gathering"  of  friends,  at  "Westwood,"  on  Wednesday,  February  2.  It  was 
characteristic  of  my  beloved's  devotion  to  his  Lord's  service,  and  of  the  intimate 
union  existing  between  himself  and  his  church-officers,  that  such  an  event  in  our 
family  history  should  have  been  celebrated  in  connection  with  a  meeting-  oi'  the 
deacons  at  our  home.      I  might  not  have  remembered  that  circumstance  had   I   not 


24  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

been  favoured  with   the  loan  of  one  of  the  invitations  issued   by  the  dear  Pastor, 
a  facsimile  of   which   is   here   reproduced.       I   am  not  aware   that  he  ever  signed 


another  letter  with  our  united  initials,  and  the  date  on  which  this  one  was  written 
gives  it  now  a  specially  tender  interest.      I   have  no  very  vivid  recollections  gf  the 


c.    H.    spurgeon's  autobiography.  .  25 

evening's  proceedings  ;  but  I  know  that  Mr.  William  Olney  and  Mr.  Carr,  as  the 
spokesmen  on  behalf  of  their  brother-deacons,  made  most  sympathetic  references  to 
both  the  parents  and  their  twin-sons,  and  that,  after  the  interchange  of  many  cheering 
reminiscences,  and  a  time  of  holy  fellowship,  the  whole  household  joined  us  for 
family  worship,  which  was  conducted  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  with  his  usual  fervour  and 
Impressiveness. 

Among  my  dear  husband's  papers,  I  find  a  letter,  relating  to  this  happy  season, 
from  his  old  Cambridge  friend,  Mr.  J.  S.  Watts,  of  whom  frequent  mention  was  made 
in  Vol.  I.  of  the  Autobiography.  This  epistle  so  sweetly  links  the  beginning  of  our 
wedded  life  with  the  twenty-filth  anniversary  of  our  marriage,  that  it  appears  to  me 
to  deserve  a  place  in  this  chapter. 

"  Regent  Street, 

"Cambridge, 

"  January  8,  iSSi. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  My  mind  reverts  to  the  month  of  January,  twenty-five  years  ago,  when 
a  certain  newly-married  juvenile  Pastor  and  his  wiie  came  to  me  for  a  tew  days,  and 
solaced  themselves  in  their  mutual  love  for  each  other  at  my  house. 

"  Many  things  have  happened  since  that  time  ;  but  their  faithfulness  and  their 
affection  for  each  other  have  not  been  impaired  ;  and  now  that  they  are  about  to 
celebrate  their  silver  wedding,  I  ask  permission  to  remind  them  of  those  early  days, 
and  to  add  my  hearty  congratulations  at  this  auspicious  period, 

"  May  the  8th  of  January,  1881,  ring  in  a  strain  of  joyful  music  over  the  strings 
of  the  past,  assuring  them  that  'golden  days'  are  yet  to  come,  even  before  they 
'walk  the  golden  streets.'     So  prays, — 

"Their  old  friend  and  well-wisher, 

"J.    S.    Watts." 

Another  loving  letter,  written  at  that  period  by  Dr.  W.  Morley  Punshon,  is  also 

worthy  of  preservation  here  : — 

"  Tranby, 

"  Bri.xton  Rise,  S.W., 

"Jan.,  iSSi. 

"  My  Dear  Sir  and   Brother, 

"  The  papers  tell  us  that  the  8th  inst.  will  be  a  memorable  day  to  you  ; 

and,  amid  hosts  of  greeting  friends,  my  wife  and  I  (than  whom  you  have  none  truer, 

thouoh  our  love  can  rarely  exhibit  itself  but  in  wishful  thought  and  prayer,)  would 

fain  express  our  good  wishes  in  a  line. 


26  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  We  trust  there  is  good  foundation  for  the  rumour,  which  has  lately  reached 
us,  of  great  and  permanent  improvement  in  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  health  ;  and  we  pray 
that,  it  it  be  the  Lord's  will,  you  may  be  continued  to  each  other  in  happy  fellowship 
until  the  '  silvern  '  shall  have  become  '  golden  '  by  the  lapse  of  years. 

"Like  most  of  God's  anointed,  it  seems  as  if  you  are  to  be  'made  meet  by 
consecrated  pain.'  May  the  Refiner  sit  always  by  the  furnace  !  You  knozv  that  the 
fire  will  never  be  kindled  a  whit  too  fiercely,  nor  burn  a  moment  too  long. 

"There  are  many,  whom  you  know  not,  who  thank  God,  in  these  times  of 
rebuke,  for  your  fidelity  to  the  old  gospel,  and  who  watch  you  with  solicitude 
and  prayer. 

"Wishing,  for  Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  yourself,  happiness,  and  the  blessedness 
which  is  better, — the  Lord's  unutterable  peace,'  long  and  useful  lives,  and  the 
'  abundant   entrance '   at   last,    1    am,    in    my   wife's   name   and   my   own, 

"Yours  very  aftectionately, 

"W.      MORLEY     PUNSHON." 

"  Rev.  Chas.    H.   Spurgeon." 

Three  months  later,  when  Dr.  Punshon  was  "called  home,"  Mr.  Spurgeon 
gratefully  referred  to  this  letter,  and  sought  to  comfort  the  bereaved  family  in 
their  season  of  sorrow. 


CHAPTER    LXXXV. 


<Knqutitrs   mxti   Conbn;ts. 


There  are  gentlemen,  in  England,  who  can  afford  to  drive  a  coach  and  four  from  town  to  town 
and  carry  nobody,  performing  their  journeys  for  their  own  amusement ;  but  I  am  not  able  or  willing  to 
do  anything  of  that  kind.  Unless  I  can  have  my  coach  loaded  with  passengers  to  Heaven,  I  would 
sooner  it  was  never  started,  and  had  rather  that  my  team  stopped  in  the  stable.  We  must  carry  some 
souls  to  Heaven,  for  our  call  is  from  above  and  our  time  is  too  precious  to  throw  away  on  mere  pretence 
of  doing  good.  We  cannot  play  at  preaching  ;  we  preach  for  eternity.  We  cannot  feel  satisfied  merely 
to  deliver  sermons  to  senseless  throngs,  or  to  the  most  attentive  crowds.  Whatever  smiles  may  greet 
us  as  we  start,  and  whatever  salutation  may  welcome  us  at  our  close,  we  are  not  content  unless  Jesus 
works  salvation  by  us.  Our  desire  is  that  grace  should  be  magnified,  and  that  sinners  should  be  saved. 
They  used  to  jeer  at  the  Tabernacle  in  Moorfields,  and  the  one  in  Tottenham  Court  Road,  and  call  them 
Mr.  Whitefield's  soul-traps  ;— a  very  excellent  name  for  a  place  of  worship  ;  such  may  this  Tabernacle 
ever  be! — C.  H.  S.,  in  a  sermon  preached  August  19,  1877,  a  night  when  the  Tabernacle  was  free  to  all  comers, 
the  regular  congregation  having  vacated  their  seats. 

I  am  sure  that,  if  a  minister  wants  conversions,  he  must  identify  himself  with  his  people.  There 
are  persons,  nowadays,  who  make  a  difficulty  about  Moses  praying  for  Israel,  "  If  Thou  wilt  torgive  their 

sin ;   and  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written  ;"  and  they  raise 

questions  about  Paul  being  willing  to  be  separated  from  Christ  for  his  brethren,  his  kinsmen  according 
to  the  flesh.  Oh,  but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  matter  if  you  once  get  to  feel  such  an  intense  love  for 
the  souls  of  men  that  you  would,  as  it  were,  pawn  your  own  salvation,  and  count  it  Httle  if  you  might 
but  bring  the  people  to  the  .Saviour's  feet !  A  man  who  has  never  felt  that  willingness  does  not  yet 
know  the  true  throb  of  a  pastor's  heart ;  he  has  not  been  ordained  to  be  a  shepherd  if  he  would  not  lay 
down  his  life  for  the  flock,  if  it  were  necessary. — C.  H.  S.,  in  a  sermon  preached  at  the  Tabernacle, 
August  23,    1883. 

He  who  has  spoken  the  Word  with  power  to  the  heart  bears  to  him  who  has  heard  it  the  relation- 
ship of  a  father  to  a  son.  There  are  many,  in  this  place,  to  whom  I  stand  in  this  most  hallowed 
connection.  You  recognize  it,  I  know,  and  I  desire  to  express  my  intense  and  fervent  love  to  the  many 
of  you  who  have  been  born  unto  God  by  the  preaching  of  the  W^ord  here.  I  do  not  know  of  anything 
that  has  more  greatly  comforted  me,  during  the  last  week  or  two.  in  the  time  of  sharp  contention  tor  the 
faith,  than  the  reception  of  so  many  letters,  from  persons  of  whom  I  have  never  before  heard,  saying, 
"You  do  not  know  me,  but  you  are  my  spiritual  father;  and  now,  at  such  a  time  of  trial  as  this  is  to  you, 
I  must  write  and  send  you  a  word  of  good  cheer."  It  is  always  a  cause  of  thankfulness  to  me  when  my 
testimony  is  blessed  to  the  conversion  of  a  seeking  soul ;  but  when  I  think  of  the  hundreds,  and  the 
thousands, — ay,  I  am  not  exaggerating  when  I  say  thousands  of  converts, — whom  I  have  met  with  here 
on  earth,  and  the  many  more,  at  present  unknown  to  me,  whom  I  hope  to  meet  with  either  here  or  in 
Heaven,  I  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  I  will  rejoice ;  and  I  cannot  help  expressing  my  great  love  to  all  those 
who  have  been  brought  to  the  Saviour  by  the  words  which  I  have  preached  and  published,— C.  H.  S., 
in  a  sermon  delivered  at  the   Tabernacle,  November  6,   1887. 

N  one  of  the  sermons  preached  in  connection  with  his  pastoral 
silver  wedding,  Mr.  Spurgeon  called  attention  to  the  tact  that, 
during  his  twenty-five  years'  ministry  in  London,  more  than  nine 
thousand  persons  had  joined  the  church  ;  while,  probably,  an  equal 
or  still  larger  number  had  been  converted  through  hearing  or 
reading  his  sermons,  although  they  had  not  become  members  at 
the  Tabernacle.     The  previous  volumes  of  the  Autobiography  have  contained  many 


28  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

references  to  these  converts,  and  records  of  the  means  blessed  to  their  salvation  ; 
but  it  appears  necessary  to  devote  two  chapters  in  the  present  volume  to  the  same 
subject  in  ordei-  adequately  to  set  forth  this  most  important  part  of  the  dear  Pastor's 
service,  and  to  show  how  abundantly  the  favour  of  God  rested  upon  it  from  its 
commencement  to  its  close.  It  is  a  cause  for  devout  thankfulness  that,  in  a  great 
measure,  a  similar  blessing  still  accompanies  his  published  words,  both  in  our  own 
tongue,  and  in  many  of  the  languages  into  which  they  have  been  translated.  The 
first  part  of  the  following  narrative  is  given  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  words  ;  the 
latter  portion  consists  of  the  instances  of  usefulness  which  various  friends  have 
described  ;  and,  to  make  the  chapters  as  varied  and  as  complete  as  possible,  there 
are  included  in  them  several  specimens  of  the  beloved  soul-winner's  methods  of 
dealing  with  anxious  enquirers  and  sinners  seeking  the  Saviour.  The  cases  of 
blessing  here  recorded  are  selected  from  the  whole  of  his  London  ministry  ;  and 
are,  therefore,  all  the  more  representative  of  the  continued  usefulness  ot  his  work 
for  the  Lord  during  the  long  period  from  1853  to  1892. 

There  are  some  passages  of  Scripture  which  have  been  more  abundantly 
blessed  to  the  conversion  of  souls  than  others  have  ;  they  may  be  called  salvation 
texts.  We  may  not  be  able  to  discover  how  it  is,  or  why  it  is  ;  but,  certainly,  it  is 
the  fact  that  some  chosen  verses  have  been  more  used  of  God  than  any  others  in 
His  Word  to  bring  men  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  They  are  not  more  inspired  than 
other  parts  of  the  Bible  ;  but  I  suppose  they  are  more  noticeable,  from  their 
position,  or  from  their  peculiar  phraseology  they  are  more  adapted  to  catch  the  eye 
of  the  reader,  and  are  more  suitable  to  a  widely  prevailing  spiritual  condition.  All 
the  stars  in  the  heavens  shine  very  brightly,  but  only  a  few  catch  the  eye  of  the 
mariner,  and  direct  his  course  ;  the  reason  is  this,  that  those  few  stars,  from  their 
peculiar  grouping,  are  more  readily  distinguished,  and  the  eye  easily  fixes  upon 
them.  So  I  suppose  it  is  with  those  passages  of  God's  Word  which  especially 
attract  attention,  and  direct  the  sinner  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  One  of  the  chief  of 
those  texts  is  Isaiah  xliii.  25  :  "  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  trans- 
gressions for  Mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins."  I  have  proved  it  to 
be  a  most  useful  one  ;  for,  out  of  the  thousands  of  persons  who  have  come  to  me  to 
narrate  their  conversion  and  religious  experience,  I  have  found  a  very  large 
proportion  who  have  traced  the  Divine  change  which  has  been  wrought  in  their 
hearts  to  the  hearing  of  this  precious  declaration  of  sovereign  mercy,  and  the 
application  of  it  with  power  to  their  souls  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Some  who  come  to  see  me,  with  the  view  of  joining  the  church,  cannot  say 
much,  and  they  think  that  I  shall  be  very  dissatisfied  with  them  because  they  make 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  29 

a  great  muddle  of  their  narrative  ;  but  the  people  with  whom  I  am  least  satisfied  are 
those  who  reel  off  their  yarn  by  the  yard  ;  they  have  it  all  ready  to  repeat,  and 
everything  is  arranged  as  prettily  as  possible.  As  I  listen  to  it,  I  know  that 
someone  has  told  them  what  to  say,  and  they  have  learned  it  all  lor  me  to  hear. 
I  like  far  better  the  testimony  that  I  have  to  pick  out  in  little  bits,  but  which  I 
know  comes  fresh  from  the  heart  of  the  trembling  convert.  Sometimes,  it  costs 
the  poor  soul  a  tear  or  a  real  good  cry,  and  I  have  to  go  round  about  in  all  manner 
of  ways  to  get  hold  of  the  story  at  all  ;  but  that  shows  that  it  is  true,  and  that  the  man 
never  borrowed  it.  I  like  to  hear  the  experience  of  a  believer,  when  he  comes 
straight  out  of  the  world,  and  out  of  the  ways  of  sin,  to  confess  his  faith  in  Christ. 
He  does  not  know  anything  about  the  terms  that  Christian  people  use,  he  has  not 
learned  our  phrases  ;  and  it  is  a  great  delight  to  hear  it  all  fresh  and  new.  Yet  it  is 
always  the  same  story  in  all  the  essential  parts  of  it.  However  strangely  he  may 
narrate  it.  It  tallies  with  that  of  others  in  the  main  points.  Take  the  experience  of 
a  Christian  man  who  has  been  brought  up  in  the  sanctuary  from  his  childhood,  and 
extract  the  pith  and  marrow  of  it.  Now  take  the  experience  of  a  man  who  has  been 
a  horse-raeer,  a  drunkard,  a  swearer,  but  who  has  been  truly  converted,  and  extract 
the  essence  of  that.  Talk  to  a  peer  of  the  realm  who  has  become  an  heir  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  take  the  substance  of  his  experience.  Now  speak  to  a 
chimney-sweep  who  has  been  brought  to  the  Lord,  and  get  the  gist  of  his 
experience  ;  put  them  all  side  by  side,  and  you  will  not  know  one  from  the  other. 
There  are  always  the  same  essential  marks, — death,  birth,  life,  food, — Christ  in  the 
death,  the  birth,  the  life,  the  food, — repentance,  faith,  joy,-  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  But  it  is  very  sweet  to  hear  the  story  told  in  the  many  difterent  ways  in  which 
the  converts  tell  it.  The  true  child  of  grace  is  ever  the  same  in  heart,  although  the 
outward  appearance  may  continually  vary. 

Among  the  many  thousands  of  souls  who  have  been  brought  to  know  the  Lord 
under  my  instrumentality,  I  have  often  noticed  that  a  considerable  proportion  of 
these,  and  of  the  best  members  of  our  church,  too,  were  won  to  the  Saviour,  not  by 
legal  terrors,  but  by  gentler  means.  Sitting,  on  one  occasion,  to  see  enquirers,  I 
should  think  that  there  were  as  many  as  twelve  out  of  the  twenty-three  whose 
convictions  of  sin  were  not  distinctly  marked  with  the  terrors  of  the  law.  I  asked  an 
excellent  young  woman,  "  What  was  the  first  thought  that  set  you  really  seeking  the 
Saviour?  '•'  "  Oh,  sir  !  "  she  replied,  "  it  was  Christ's  lovely  character  that  first  made 
me  long  to  be  His  disciple.  I  saw  how  kind,  how  good,  how  disinterested,  how 
self-sacrificing  He  was,  and  that  made  me  feel  how  difterent  I  was.  I  thought,  'Oh  ! 
I  am  not  like  Jesus  !'  and  that  sent  me  to  my  room,  and  I  began  to  pray,  and  so  I 
came  to  trust  in   Him."     "  The   first   religious  impression  I  ever  had,"  said  another, 


30  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  that  set  me  seekino-  the  Saviour,  was  this  ;  a  young  companion  of  mine  fell  into  sin, 
and  I  knew  that  I  was  likely  to  do  the  same  if  I  was  not  kept  by  someone  stronger 
than  m)self  I  therefore  sought  the  Lord,  not  so  much  at  first  on  account  of 
past  transgression,  but  because  I  was  afraid  of  some  great  future  sin.  God  visited 
me,  and  I  then  felt  conviction  of  sin,  and  was  brought  to  Christ?."  Singularly 
enough,  too,  I  have  met  with  scores  of  persons  who  have  trusted  in  Christ,  and  then 
have  mourned  their  sins  more  afterwards  than  they  did  before  they  believed.  Their 
convictions  have  been  more  terrible  after  they  have  known  their  interest  in  Christ 
than  they  were  at  first.  They  have  seen  the  enormity  of  the  evil  alter  they  have 
escaped  from  it ;  they  have  been  plucked  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  their  feet  set 
upon  the  rock  ;  and  then,  afterwards,  they  have  seen  more  fully  the  depth  of  that 
horrible  pit  out  of  which  they  have  been  snatched.  It  is  not  true  that  all  who  are 
saved  suffer  such  convictions  and  terrors  as  some  of  us  had  to  endure  ;  there  are  very 
many  who  are  drawn  with  the  cords  of  a  man  and  the  bands  of  love.  There  are 
some  who,  like  Lydia,  have  their  hearts  opened,  not  by  the  crowbar  of  conviction, 
but  by  the  picklock  of  Divine  grace.  Sweetly  drawn,  almost  silently  enchanted  by 
the  loveliness  of  Jesus,  they  say,  "  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  Thee." 

A  young  woman  came  to  me,  one  day,  after  a  service,  to  ask  me  whether  I 
really  meant  what  I  said  when  I  declared  that  he  that  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  was 
saved  there  and  then.  "Yes,"  I  replied  ;  and  I  gave  her  the  Scriptural  warrant  for 
the  statement.  "  Why  ! "  she  exclaimed^  "  my  grandfather  told  me  that,  when 
he  found  religion,  it  took  him  six  months,  and  they  had  nearly  to  put  him  into  a 
lunatic  asylum,  he  was  in  such  a  dreadful  state  of  mind."  "  Well,  well,"  I  answered, 
"  that  sometimes  happens  ;  but  that  distress  of  his  did  not  save  him.  That  was 
simply  his  conscience  and  Satan  together  keeping  him  away  from  Christ.  When  he 
was  saved,  it  was  not  by  his  deep  feelings  ;  it  was  by  his  believing  in  Jesus  Christ." 
I  then  went  on  to  set  the  Saviour  before  her  as  our  sole  ground  ot  hope  in 
opposition  to  inward  feelings.  "  I  see  it,"  she  said  ;  and  I  rejoiced  as  I  noticed  the 
bright  light  that  passed  over  her  face,  a  flash  of  heavenly  sunshine  which  I  have 
often  seen  on  the  countenances  of  those  who  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  when 
peace  fills  the  soul  even  to  the  brim,  and  lights  up  the  countenance  with  a  minor 
transfiguration.  Scores  of  times,  when  I  have  been  talking  with  those  who  have 
been  utterly  bowed  down  beneath  sin's  burden,  they  have  looked  as  though  they 
were  qualifying  for  an  asylum  through  inward  grief;  but  as  soon  as  they  have 
caught  this  thought,  "  Christ  stood  as  the  Substitute  for  me  ;  and  if  I  trust  in  Him,  I 
have  the  proof  that  He  did  so,  and  I  am  clear,"  their  faces  have  been  lit  up  as  with 
the  very  glory  of  Heaven. 

Some  persons  have  come  to  me  for  spiritual  guidance  because  they  have  been 
misled  by  others.      One  lady,  who  called  upon  me,  said  that  she  had  not  heard  me- 


C.     I-I.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3 1 

preach,  but  she  had  been  reading-  my  sermons,  and  God  had  been  pleased  to  bless 
them  to  her,  not  only  to  her  conviction,  but  to  her  conversion.  She  went  to 
the  clergyman  of  the  parish,  full  of  joy  at  having  found  the  Saviour,  and  began  to 
tell  him  of  her  gladness,  and  how  she  rejoiced  that  all  her  sins  were  blotted  out. 
He  stopped  her,  and  said,  "  My  good  woman,  that  is  all  a  delusion  ;  you  have 
no  right  to  believe  that  your  sins  are  pardoned,  till  you  have  led  several  years  of 
piety  and  devotion."  She  went  away  sad,  and  she  came  to  ask  me  if  what  the 
clergyman   said   was    true  ;   and    when    I    quoted    that    verse, — 

"  The  moment  a  sinner  believes, 
And  trusts  in  his  crucified  God, 
His  pardon  at  once  he  receives. 
Redemption  in  full  through  His  blood  ;" — 

"Oh!"  she  said,  "I  see  it  clearly  now;"  and  when  I  went  on  to  tell  her  that 
many,  who  had  believed  in  Christ,  had  been  black  sinners  one  moment,  and 
white  as  snow  the  next,  by  casting  themselves  simply  on  Christ,  they  had  instantly 
found  peace,  she  could  not  but  take  to  her  heart  the  precious  promises  of  Christ, 
and,  believing  in  Jesus,  being  justified  by  faith,  she  had  the  peace  of  God  that 
passeth   all   understanding,   and  she  went   away  rejoicing   in   Jesus. 

I  was  going  to  preach  in  the  country,  on  one  occasion  ;  and  before  I  went, 
I  received  a  letter  from  a  young  man  who  wrote  : — "  Dear  Sir, — When  you  come 
to  this  town,  do  preach  a  sermon  that  will  fit  me  ;  for  I  have  heard  it  said  that  we 
must  all  think  ourselves  to  be  the  wickedest  people  in  the  world,  or  else  we 
cannot  be  saved.  I  try  to  think  so,  but  I  cannot,  because  I  have  not  been  the 
wickedest.  I  want  to  be  saved,  but  I  do  not  know  how  to  repent  enough."  Of 
course,  I  told  him  that  God  does  not  require  every  man  to  think  himself  the 
wickedest  in  the  world,  because  that  would  sometimes  be  to  think  a  falsehood, 
for  there  are  some  men  who  are  not  so  sinful  as  others  are.  What  God  requires, 
is,  that  a  man  should  say,  "  I  know  more  of  myself  than  I  do  of  other  people  ; 
and  from  what  I  see  of  myself,  not  merely  of  my  actions,  but  of  my  heart,  I  do 
think  there  can  be  few  worse  than  I  am.  They  may  be  more  wicked  openly  • 
but,  then,  I  have  had  more  light,  more  privileges,  more  opportunities,  more 
warnings,  and  therefore  I  am,  in  my  own  opinion  at  least,  more  guilty  than  they 
are."  Some  friends  have  really  made  an  obstacle  out  of  the  very  thing  for 
which  they  ought  to  have  been  most  grateful.  An  excellent  and  amiable  young 
woman,  when  converted  to  God,  said  to  me,  "You  know,  sir,  I  used  almost  to 
wish  that  I  was  one  of  those  very  bad  sinners  whom  you  so  often  invited  to  come 
to  Jesus,  because  I  thought  then  I  should  feel  my  need  more ;  that  was  my 
difficulty,  I  could  not  feel  my  need  of  Christ."  It  is  a  pity  that  any  should 
make  a  hindrance  of  this  matter  ;  yet  they  do,  and  others  make  a  difficulty  for  the 
opposite  reason  ;  they  say,  "  Oh  !  we  could  trust  Christ  if  we  had  been  kept  from  sin." 


32  C.     H.     SPUKGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

The  fact  is,  that  unbeHeving  souls  will  not  trust  Christ  whichever  way  they  have 
lived  ;  for,  from  some  quarter  or  other,  they  will  find  cause  for  doubting ;  but, 
when  the  Lord  the  Spirit  gives  them  faith,  big  sinners  will  trust  Christ  quite  as 
readily  as  those  who  have  not  been  great  offenders  openly  ;  and  those  who  have 
been  preserved  frorn  open  sin  will  trust  Him  as  joyfully  as  the  vilest  transgressors. 

We  have  had,  in  the  Tabernacle,  many  very  remarkable  instances  of  how  God 
does  still  bless  the  outcasts  and  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  There  was  a  man,  known 
in  the  village  where  he  lived  by  the  name  of  Satan,  because  of  his  being  so 
thoroughly  depraved.  He  was  a  sailor,  and  as  another  seaman  in  that  place  had  been 
the  means  of  the  conversion  of  all  the  sailors  in  a  vessel  belonging  to  the  port,  this 
man  desired  to  sail  with  him  to  try  and  beat  his  religion  out  of  him.  He  did  his 
best, — or  rather,  his  worst, — but  he  signally  failed  ;  and  when  the  ship  came  to 
London,  the  Christian  man  asked  the  ungodly  one  whether  he  would  come  to 
the  Tabernacle.  He  did  not  mind  coming  to  hear  me,  for,  as  it  happened,  I  was 
brought  up  near  the  place  where  he  lived.  This  "Satan"  came,  on  the  Lord's-day 
morning  when  the  text  was  upon  soul-murder;  and,  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  gracious 
application  of  the  Word  to  his  heart,  he  sat,  and  sobbed,  and  cried  under  the 
sermon  at  such  a  rate  that  he  could  only  say,  "  People  are  noticing  me,  I  had 
better  go  out ; "  but  his  companion  would  not  let  him  go  Out ;  and,  from  that  day 
forth,  he  became  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesu.s,  and  he  is  living  and  walking  in 
the  truth,  an  earnest  believer,  singularly  clear  in  his  doctrinal  knowledge,  and  doing- 
all  that  he  can  for  the  spread  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ. 

On  another  occasion,  on  a  Lord's-day  morning,  I  preached  upon  the  words 
of  the  leper,  who  said  to  Jesus,  "  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt.  Thou  canst  make  me  clean." 
On  the  following  Thursday  morning,  I  received  this  letter  : — "  Dear  Sir,- — I  feel 
so  happy  to  tell  you  that  the  Lord  has  pardoned  a  poor  outcast  of  society.  I  got 
into  your  place,  in  a  crowd,  hoping  nobody  would  see  me.  1  had  been  out  all 
night,  and  was  miserable.  While  you  were  preaching  about  the  leper,  my  whole 
life  of  sin  rose  up  before  me.  I  saw  myself  worse  than  the  leper,  cast  away  by 
everybody ;  there  is  not  a  sin  I  was  not  guilty  of.  As  you  went  on,  I  looked 
straight  away  to  Jesus.  A  gracious  answer  came,  '  Thy  sins,  which  are  many,  are 
forgiven.'  I  never  heard  any  more  of  your  sermon,  I  felt  such  joy  to  think  that 
Jesus  died  even  for  a  poor  harlot.  Long  ere  you  get  this  letter,  I  trust  to  be  on 
the  way  to  my  dear  home  I  ran  away  from.  Do  please  pray  for  me  that  I  may 
be  kept  by  God's  almighty  power.  I  can  never  thank  you  enough  for  bringing 
me  to  Jesus."  If  it  had  not  been  for  that -sentence  about  going  home,  I  might 
have  had  some  doubt  concerning  her  conversion  ;  but  when  a  fallen  girl  goes  home 
to  her  father  and  mother,  it  is  a  sure  case.  This  letter  gave  me  great  joy  ;  to  see 
souls  saved,   is   Heaven  to  me. 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  T,;^ 

Not  only  has  there  been  a  great  variety  in  the  converts  during  my  ministry,  but 
the  means  blessed  to  their  conversion  have  been  very  varied/"'  One  brother,  when  he 
came  to  join  the  church,  told  us  that,  as  an  ungodly  stranger,  he  was  going  into 
Exeter  Hall  just  as  I  gave  out  Charles  Wesley's  hymn,  beginning — 

"  Jesu,  lover  of  my  soul." 

He  said  to  himself,  "  Does  Jesus  really  love  me  ?  Then,  why  should  I  live  in 
enmity  to  Him  ?  "  There  and  then,  he  turned  unto  the  Lord  ;  and,  not  long  after, 
he  came  boldly  out,  and  confessed  his  faith  in  Christ,  and  sought  to  do  all  he  could 
to  lead  others  to  the  Saviour. 

I  remember  one  friend  coming  to  me,  and  saying,  very  earnestly,  "  I  should 
like,  sir,  to  take  a  seat  in  the  Tabernacle."  I  answered,  "  Well,  do  so,  by  all  manner 
of  means  ;  I  am  very  glad  when  people  do  so."  "  But,"  said  he,  "  I  may  not  come 
up  to  what  you  expect  of  me,  for  I  have  heard  that,  if  I  take  a  sitting  here,  you  will 
expect  me  to  be  converted,  and  I  cannot  guarantee  that."  "  No,"  I  replied,  "  I  do 
not  want  you  to  guarantee  it  ;  I  do  not  mean  the  word  expect  in  that  sense  at  all  ; 
but  I  do  hope  that  it  will  be  so."  "  Oh  !  "  exclaimed  he,  "  and  so  do  I  ;  I  am  going 
to  take  a  sitting  with  that  very  view."  And  it  was  so  ;  of  course,  it  was  so.  When 
the  man  wished  it,  God  accepted  the  wish,  and  heard  the  prayer,  and  he  was  brought 
to  Christ,  and  joined  the  church. 

One  brother,  when  he  was  giving  his  testimony  before  being  baptized,  said  : — 
"The  first  time  I  came  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  the  Tabernacle,  if  you  had  asked 
me  about  myself,  I  should  have  told  you  that  I  was  as  religious  a  man  as  ever  lived 
in  Newington,  and  as  good  a  man,  certainly,  as  ever  formed  part  of  any  congre- 
gation ;  but  all  this  was  reversed  when  I  heard  the  gospel  that  day.  I  came  out  of 
the  building  with  every  feather  plucked  out  of  me.  I  felt  myself  the  most  wretched 
sinner  who  could  be  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  I  said,  '  I  will  never  go  to  hear 
that  man  again,  for  he  has  altogether  spoiled  me.'  But  that  was  the  best  thing  which 
could  have  happened  to  me  ;  I  was  made  to  look  away  from  myself,  and  all  that  I 
could  do,  to  God,  'and  to  His  omnipotent  grace,  and  to  understand  that  I  must  pass 
under  my  Creator's  hand  again,  or  I  could  never  se?i  His  face  with  joy.  I  learned 
to  loathe  my  own  righteousness  as  filthy  rags,  fit  only  for  the  fire,  and  then  I  sought 
to  be  robed  in  the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ." 

Another  man,  who  came  to  join  with  us  in  church-fellowship,  owed  his  con- 
version, indirectly,  to  a  Jew.      He  was  on  an  omnibus  going  by  the  Tabernacle,  one 


*  Among  the  interesting  instances  of  blessing  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  himself  record,  was  the  following,  which  was 
reported  by  a  friend  : — "  Mr.  Spurgeon  went  to  preach  at  a  prominent  chapel,  and,  after  taking  tea  at  the  deacon's  house,  he 
walked  down  to  the  place  of  worship  under  the  guidance  of  the  son  of  the  household.  '  Do  you  love  my  Master  ?  '  was  the 
question  which,  in  his  clear,  manly  way,  the  Pastor  put  to  his  young  companion.  Before  replying,  he  stopped  in  the  street, 
and,  looking  his  questioner  straight  in  the  face,  said,  '  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  have  walked  down  to  this  chapel  with  the  ministers  for 
several  years,  and  not  one  of  them  ever  asked  me  such  a  question  before.'  That  faithful  word  was  the  beginning  of  a  new 
life;    and,  seeking  God,  he  found  pardon  and  peace  through  Christ." 

c  4 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Sunday,  and  a  crowd  was  standing-  outside,  as  usual,  waiting  for  the  doors  to  be 
opened.  The  person  sitting  next  to  him  was  a  well-known  Jew.  "Ah!"  said  the 
man,  "that  humbug  always  attracts  the  people."  The  Jew  turned  round  to  him,  and 
enquired,  "Would  not  you  like  to  see  such  a  crowd  as  that  round  your  shop?  I 
should  welcome  them  at  my  place  of  business.  I  have  ridden  past  here  these 
twenty-eight  years,  and  have  always  seen  just  such  a  crowd  as  that  waiting  to  get  in. 
Now,  if  your  shop  had  been  crowded  thus  for  twenty-eight  years,  and  anybody  said 
that  you  did  not  sell  a  good  article,  what  would  you  reply  ?  You  would  probably 
answer  that  those  people  were  good  judges,  and  that,  if  you  had  not  supplied  goods 
that  were  satisfactory,  they  would  not  have  kept  on  coming.  Now,  I  am  a  Jew,  yet 
I  am  inclined  to  go  in,  and  listen  to  what  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  to -say,  because  I  see 
these  crowds  of  people  going  to  hear  him."  The  man  who  had  at  first  made  the 
offensive  remark  was  greatly  impressed  by  his  companion's  observation,  -and  in 
telling  us  how  it  affected  him,  he  said,  "  I  discovered  that  I  had  been  buying  the 
wrong  article,  and  I  thought  the  Jew  had  spoken  very  sensibly,  so  I  resolved  to  go, 
and  see  and  hear  for  myself."  He  came,  examined  the  article  that  was  offered  for 
sale,  and  bought  it  on  the  gospel  terms,  "without  money  and  without  price." 

One  Sabbath  evening,  while  preaching  in  the  Tabernacle,  I  felt  moved  to  say  : — 
"  Dear  mother,  if  you  have  never  talked  with  your  daughter  about  her  soul,  do  it 
this  very  night.  '  But,'  you  reply,  '  when  I  get  home,  she  will  be  in  bed.'  If  so,  then 
wake  her  up,  but  do  talk  and  pray  with  her  to-night  ;  and  then  let  her  fall  asleep 
again  ;  begin  at  once  this  holy  service  if  you  have  neglected  it  until  now."  One 
good  woman,  who  was  present,  went  straight  home,  and  did  exactly  what  I  had  said  ; 
she  woke  her  daughter  up,  and  began  speaking  to  her  about  the  Saviour.  The  dear 
girl  said,  "  Oh,  mother !  I  am  glad  you  have  spoken  to  me  about  Jesus  ;  for 
months,  I  have  been  wishing  you  would  do  so."  It  was  not  long  before  the 
mother  brought  her  daughter  to  see  me  about  joining  the  church,  and  then  told  me 
how  the  blessing  had  come  to  her. 

On  various  occasions,  the  Lord  has  set  His  seal  upon  a  very  simple  request  that 
I  made  to  my  congregation.  I  asked  those  who  were  present,  after  they  reached  . 
their  homes,  to  spend  a  litde  time  quiedy  and  alone,  and  then,  when  they  had 
honestly  considered  their  condition  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  take  a  pencil  and  paper, 
and  to  write  one  of  two  words.  If  they  felt  that  they  were  not  believers  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  I  asked  them  to  write  the  word  Condemned ;  but  if  they  were  trusting 
to  Him  alone  for  salvation,  to  put  on  the  paper  the  word  Forgiven.  Several  friends 
were  brought  to  decision  for  Christ  in  that  way  ;  amongst  them  was  one  young  man 
who,  at  first,  wrote  the  word  Condemned ;  but,  as  he  looked  at  it,  his  tears  began  to 
flow,  and  his  heart  began  to  break  ;  and,  before  long,  he  fled  to  Christ,  put  the  paper 
in  the  fire,  took  another  piece,  wrote  on  it  the  word  Forgiven,  and  soon  came  to  tell 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  35 

me  the  good  news,  and  to  ask  that  he  might  be  admitted  to  church-fellowship.  In 
another  case,  a  man  went  home,  and  told  his  wife  that  he  was  o-oino-  to  write  the 
word  Condemned ;  she  pleaded  with  him  in  vain,  for  he  took  the  pencil,  and  was 
just  about  to  make  the  letter  C  ;  but  his  little  daughter,  a  Christian  girl,  cauoht  hold 
of  his  hand,  and  said,  "No,  father,  you  shall  not  write  it;"  and  by  the  united 
entreaties  of  his  wife  and  child,  the  man  was  brought  to  the  Saviour,  and  afterwards 
became  a  member  with  them  at  the  Tabernacle. 

My  experience  goes  to  show  that  there  have  been  persons  converted  to  God  by 
doctrines  that  some  might  have  thought  altogether  unlikely  to  produce  that  result. 
1  have  known  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  to  bring  sinners  to  Christ  ;  I  have 
heard  of  scores  brought  to  the  Saviour  by  a  discourse  upon  election, — the  very  sort  of 
people  who,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  would  never  have  been  reached  if  that  truth  had  not 
happened  to  be  an  angular  doctrine  that  just  struck  their  heart  in  the  right  place, 
and  fitted  into  the  crevices  of  their  nature.  I  have  often  preached  a  terrible  sermon 
upon  the  law,  and  afterwards  found  that  sinners  had  been  comforted  by  it.  God 
frequently  blesses  the  Word  in  the  very  opposite  manner  to  that  In  which  I  thought 
it  would  be  blessed,  and  He  brings  very,  very  many,  to  know  their  state  by  nature 
by  doctrines  which  I  should  have  thought  would  rather  have  comforted  believers 
than  awakened  the  unconverted.  I  am  constantly  driven  back  to  the  oreat  founda- 
tion truth  of  Divine  Sovereignty,  and  am  made  to  realize  that,  In  grace  as  well  as  In 
providence, — 

"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way. 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

I  was  talking,  one  day,  with  an  aged  minister  ;  and  I  noticed  that  he  put  his  hand 
into  his  waistcoat  pocket,  and  brought  out  a  letter  that  was  well-nigh  worn  to  pieces. 
As  he  unfolded  It,  he  exclaimed,  "God  Almighty  bless  you,  sir!  God  Almicrhty 
bless  you,  sir!  "  I  said,  "Thank  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  that  blessing,  but  what  makes 
you  give  it  to  me?"  The  good  man  replied,  "  I  had  a  son,  who  I  thought  would 
be  the  stay  of  my  old  age  ;  but  he  disgraced  himself,  and  ran  away  from  home, 
and  I  could  not  tell  where  he  had  gone,  only  that  he  said  he  was  goino-  to  America." 
When  the  minister  had  told  me  so  much  of  his  story,  he  bade  me  read  the  letter 
which  ran  thus: — "Dear  Father, — I  am  here  in  x"\,merlca  :  I  have  found  a  situation, 
and  God  has  prospered  me.  I  write  to  ask  your  forgiveness  for  the  many  wronos 
that  I  have  done  you,  and  the  grief  I  have  caused  you  ;  and  to  tell  vou  that 
blessed  be  God,  I  have  found  the  Saviour.  I  have  joined  the  church  here,  and 
hope  to  spend  my  life  in  the  Redeemer's  service.  This  great  change  happened 
thus.  I  did  not  sail  for  America  on  the  day  I  expected  to  start ;  and,  havino-  a 
leisure  hour,    I   went  down  to  the   Tabernacle  to   see   what  It  was  like,  and  there 


36  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

God  met  with  me.  In  his  sermon,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  '  Perhaps  there  is  a  runaway 
son  here.  The  Lord  call  him  by  His  grace!'  And  He  did  call  me."  "Now," 
said  the  minister,  as  he  folded  up  the  letter,  and  put  it  into  his  pocket  again,  "  this 
son  of  mine  is  dead,  and  he  has  gone  to  Heaven  ;  and  I  love  you,  and  shall 
continue  to  do  so  as  long  as  I  live,  because  you  were  the  means  of  bringing  him 
to  Christ."  It  is  very  difficult  to  say  which  ot  us  was  the  more  happy  as  we  rejoiced 
together  over  the  wanderer  who  had  thus  been  brought  to  the  Lord. 

On  another  occasion,  a  lad,  who  was  just  going  to  sea,  came  to  the  Tabernacle, 
and  was  converted  ;  and,  a  few  hours  after,  was  in  Heaven.  He  wrote  to  tell  his 
parents  that  he  had  found  the  Saviour  ;  and,  just  as  they  were  reading  his  letter, 
they  received  news  that  the  vessel  in  which  he  sailed  had  been  in  collision,  and 
that  he   was  drowned. 

Two  enquiring  ones  came  to  me  in  my  vestry.  They  had  been  hearing  the 
gospel  from  me  for  only  a  short  season,  but  they  had  been  deeply  impressed  by 
it.  They  expressed  their  regret  that  they  were  about  to  remove  far  away,  but 
they  added  their  gratitude  that  they  had  heard  me  at  all.  I  was  cheered  by  their 
kind  thanks,  but  felt  anxious  that  a  more  effectual  M'ork  should  be  wrought  in  them, 
and  therefore  I  asked  them,  "  Have  you  in  very  deed  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  ?  Are  you  saved  ? "  One  of  them  replied,  "  I  have  been  trying  hard  to 
believe."  I  have  often  heard  this  statement,  but  I  will  never  let  it  go  by  me 
unchallenged.  "No,"  I  said,  "that  will  not  do.  Did  you  ever  tell  your  father 
that  you  tried  to  believe  him  ? "  After  I  had  dwelt  awhile  upon  the  matter,  they 
admitted  that  such  language  would  have  been  'an  insult  to  their  father.  I  then 
set  the  gospel  very  plainly  before  them  in  as  simple  language  as  I  could,  and  I 
beo-aed  them  to  believe  Jesus,  who  is  more  worthy  of  faith  than  the  best  of  fathers. 
One  of  them  replied,  "  I  cannot  realize  it ;  I  cannot  realize  that  I  am  saved."  Then 
I  went  on  to  say,  "God  bears  testimony  to  His  Son,  that  whosoever  trusts  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  saved.  Will  you  make  Him  a  liar  now,  or  will  you  believe 
His  Word?"  While  I  thus  spoke,  one  of  them  started  as  if  astonished,  and 
she  startled  us  all  as  she  cried,  "Oh,  sir,  I  see  it  all  ;  I  am  saved  !  Do  bless  Jesus 
for  me  ;  He  has  shown  me  the  way,  and  He  has  saved  me.  I  see  it  all."  The 
esteemed  sister  who  had  brought  these  friends  to  me  knelt  down  with  them  while, 
with  all  our  hearts,  we  blessed  and  magnified  the  Lord  for  a  soul  bi-ought  into 
the  light.  The  other  young  woman,  however,  could  not  see  the  gospel  as  her 
companion  had  done,  though  I  feel  sure  she  will  do  so  ;  but  it  seemed  strange  that, 
both  hearing  the  same  words,  one  should  come  out  into  clear  light,  and  the  other 
should   remain   in  the  o'loom. 


CHAPTER    LXXXVI. 


dfnquims   anb   Conbtrts  (Continued). 


if,|iHEN  talking  with  anxious  enquirers,  I  am  often  amazed  at  the 
ingenuity  with  which  they  resist  the  entrance  of  the  truth  into 
their  hearts.  I  do  not  think  I  have  ever  been  so  much  astonished 
at  the  invention  of  locomotive  engines,  electric  telegraphs,  or  any 
other  feats  of  human  mechanisnii,  as  I  ha\-e  been  at  the  marvellous 
aptitude  of  simple  people  in  finding  out  reasons  why  they  should 
not  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  After  I  have  proved  to  them  to  a 
demonstration  that  it  is  the  most  reasonable  and  fitting  thing  in  the  world  tor 
them  to  trust  themselves  with  Christ,  they  ask,  "How  is  this  to  be  done?"  or, 
"  How  is  that  to  be  accomplished?"  and  they  argue,  first  one  way,  and  then  another, 
all  against  their  own  best  interests.  Often,  I  go  patiently  through  the  whole  process 
again  and  again  ;  and  even  when  that  has  been  done,  there  comes  another  objection. 
I  have  tracked  these  people  to  their  holes  as  diligendy  as  if  I  had  been  a  fox-hunter, 
and  I  have  tried  to  unearth  them  from  their  hiding-places  ;  but  I  find  that  they  can 
often  burrow  faster  than  I  can  follow  them.  Oh,  the  "  ifs  "  and  "  buts  "  they  put; 
the  "perhaps,"  and  "  peradventure,"  and  "  I  don't  feel  this,"  and  "  I  don't  feel  that"! 
Oh,  that  wicked  questioning  of  Christ !  While  talking  with  them,  endeavouring  to 
comfort  them,  and  I  hope  not  unsuccessfully,  I  am  often  led  to  realize  more  deeply 
than  before,  in  my  own  mind,  what  an  awful  crime  it  is  to  doubt  God,  to  doubt 
Him  who  speaks  from  above,  to  doubt  Him  who  hung  bleeding  on  the  tree. 


Sitting,  one  day,  to  see  enquirers,  a  young  Dutchman  came  into  the  room.  He 
had  crossed  from  Flushing,  and  desired  to  tell  me  his  difficulties  of  soul.  He  began, 
"  Sir,  I  cannot  trust  in  Christ."  My  answer  was,  "Why  not?  What  has  He  done 
that  you  should  speak  so  ill  of  Him  ?  I  have  trusted  everything  in  His  hands,  and 
I  believe  Him  to  be  quite  trustworthy.     What  do  you  know  against  His  character?" 

"  Indeed,  sir,  I  know  nothing  against  Him,  and  I  am  ashamed  that  I  have  so 
spoken,  for  I  believe  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  worthy  of  all  confidence.  That  was  not 
what  I  meant.      May  I  trust  Him  to  save  me?" 

"  Of  course  you  may,  for  you  are  commanded  to  do  so  by  the  gospel,  which 
says,  '  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.'  You  are  warned 
against  not  believing  by  the  words,  '  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned.'  " 


38  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  I  may,  then,  trust  Christ ;  but  does  He  promise  to  save  all  who  trust  Him  ?  " 

"Certainly.  I  have  already  quoted  to  you  the  promise  of  the  gospel.  It  is 
also  written,  '  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved.'  If 
Jesus  does  not  save  you  upon  your  trusting  Him,  you  will  be  the  first  He  ever 
cast  out." 

"  Ah,  sir,  I  see  it !  Why  did  I  not  see  it  before  ?  I  trust,  and  Jesus  saves  me. 
I  am  well  repaid  for  coming  from  Flushing." 

I  prayed  with  him,  and  he  went  his  way  trembling  for  joy. 

A  lady  came  to  me,  alter  a  service  in  the  Tabernacle,  and  asked  me  to  pray 
for  her.  She  had  been  before  to  speak  to  me  about  her  soul,  so  I  said  to  her,  on 
the  second  occasion,  "  I  told  you  very  plainly  the  way  of  salvation,  namely,  that 
you  are  to  trust  yourself  in  Christ's  hands,  relying  on  His  atoning  sacrifice.  Have 
you  done  that?"  She  answered,  "No,"  and  then  asked  me  whether  I  would  pray 
for  her.  I  said,  "  No,  certainly  I  will  not."  She  looked  at  me  with  astonishment, 
and  again  asked,  "Will  you  not  pray  for  me?"  "No,"  I  replied,  "I  have  nothing 
for  which  to  pray  for  you.  1  have  set  the  way  of  salvation  before  you  so  simply 
that,  if  you  will  not  walk  in  it,  you  will  be  lost ;  but  if  you  trust  Christ  now,  you 
will  be  saved.  I  have  nothing  further  to  say  to  you  ;  but,  in  God's  Name,  to  set 
before  you  life  or  death."  Still  she  pleaded,  "  Do  pray  for  me ! "  "  No,"  I 
answered,  "would  you  have  me  ask  God  to  shape  His  gospel  so  as  to  let  you 
in  as  an  exception?  I  do  not  see  why  He  should.  His  plan  of  salvation  is  the 
only  one  that  ever  has  been  or  ever  will  be  of  any  avail ;  and  if  you  will  not  trust 
to  it,  I  am  not  going  to  ask  God  anything,  for  I  do  not  see  what  else  is  wanted 
from  Him.  I  put  this  question  plainly  to  you,  'Will  you  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?'"  I  certainly  was  somewhat  surprised  when  the  sister  said,  very 
deliberately,  "If  it  be  so,  then,  that  salvation  will  come  to  me  by  believing,  I 
do  believe  what  the  Script\ire  says  concerning  Christ ;  and,  moreover,  I  feel  that  I 
can  trust  myself  with  Him,  because  He  is  God,  and  He  has  offered  a  sufficient 
sacrifice  for  my  sins;  and  I  do  trust  myself  to  Him  just  now;  and  I  feel  such  a 
strange  peace  stealing  over  me  at  this  very  moment.  I  have  trusted  Him,  and  I  am 
certain  that  I  am  saved;"  and,  in  an  instant,  she  said  to  me,  "Good  evening,  sir; 
there  are  other  people  waiting  to  see  you,"  and  away  she  went,  like  a  common-sense 
woman  as  she  was  ;  and  she  has  often  told  me,  since,  how  glad  she  was  that  I 
refused  to  pray  for  her,  and  so  brought  her  to  the  decision  to  trust  Christ  tor  herself, 
and  thus  to  receive  the  assurance  of  her  salvation. 

There  is  a  great  contrast  between  the  way  in  which  different  converts  begin 
their    new    life.      I    have    sometimes    thouoht    that,    if  a   man   does   not    become   a 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  39 

high-class  Christian  during-  the  first  three  months  after  his  conversion,  he  probably 
never  will.  I  have  noticed  some  people  who  have  commenced  their  Christian  career 
in  a  very  feeble  fashion.  I  hope  they  so  began  that  they  were  really  saved  ;  but, 
still,  they  started  doubting  and  fearing,  and  they  kept  on  in  the  same  style  till  they 
went  to  Heaven.  "Ah,  sir!"  said  one  to  me  once,  "'either  all  the  world  has 
altered,  or  else  I  have,  for  people  I  once  delighted  in  I  am  now  afraid  of.  The 
things  that  once  made  me  glad  now  make  me  unhappy,  and  those  that  I  thouoht 
melancholy  are  now  the  very  things  in  which  I  find  my  highest  joy."  I  am  always 
thankful  when  our  friends  get  a  very  decided  conversion,  because,  though  I  am  not 
going  to  say  a  word  against  those  who  come  to  Christ  very  gradually,  yet  their 
experience  is  rather  cloudy.  No  doubt  they  are  just  as  safe  as  others,  but  they  lack 
a  good  deal  of  comfort  afterwards  ;  and,  sometimes,  persons  who  are  very  readily 
converted,  and  who  have  no  very  deep  sense  of  sin,  are  more  apt  to  play  with  evil 
than  others  are  who  have  had  a  clearer  sight  of  its  enormity.  Some  beoin  by 
serving  the  Lord  stingily,  not  giving  Him  their  whole  hearts  ;  or  they  commence 
coldly,  and  so  they  n>.;ver  get  hot  with  zeal  all  their  lives.  I  am  glad  when  a  youncr 
convert  is  red-hot,  or  even  white-hot ;  I  like  to  see  him  too  full  of  zeal,  if  that  is 
possible  ;  because,  when  he  cools  down,  he  will  come  just  to  the  right  temperature 
if  he  is  too  hot  at  first  :  but,  if  he  is  cool  at  the  beginning,  what  will  he  come  to 
by-and-by?  There  are  no  labourers  for  the  Master  who  are  so  useful  as  those 
who  begin  to  serve  Him  while  they  are  young.  Sometimes.  God  converts  men 
in  middle  life,  or  even  in  old  age,  and  uses  them  in  His  service  ;  but,  still,  1 
venture  to  assert  that  Church  history  will  show  that  the  most  useful  servants  of 
Christ  were  those  who  were  caught  early,  and  who  from  their  youth  up  bore 
testimony  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus.  In  the  case  of  some  old  people,  who  have 
been  professors  of  religion  for  years,  but  who  have  done  next  to  nothinor  for 
Christ,  I  find  it  very  difificult  ever  to  stir  them  up  at  all  When  I  do  cret  a 
saddle  on  them,  they  are  very  restive  creatures,  like  a  horse  that  has  never  been 
broken  in  ;  but  if  I  break  then>  in  while  they  are  colts,  they  get  used  to  their 
work,  it  becomes  a  delight  to  them,  and  thev  would  not  be  happy  unless  they  had 
something  to  do  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  1  remember  having  a  considerable  share 
ot  sneers,  and  rebuke-s  not  a  few,  from  some  who  thought  themselves  very  wise  men, 
because  I  began  preaching  at  the  age  of  sixteen.  I  was  recommended  to  tarry  at 
Jericho  till  my  beard  had  grown,  and  a  great  many  other  pieces  of  advice  were  oiven 
to  me  ;  but  I  have  never  regretted  that  I  was  a  "  boy-preacher  "  of  the  Word  ;  and  if 
I  could  have  my  time  over  again,  I  would  like  to  do  just  the  same  as  I  did  then. 

I   have  been  delighted   as   I   have  noticed  the  earnest  efforts  of  many   of  my 
church-members  in  seeking  to  bring  sinners  to  the  Tabernacle  to  hear  the  gospel. 


40  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Two  of  our  brethren,  both  working-men, — one  of  whom  has  been  a  famous  runner, 
and  who  has  won  prizes  in  many  running-matches, — are  accustomed,  as  they  say,  to 
hunt  in  couples  for  souls.  Their  usual  method  is  for  one  to  go  on  one  side  of  the 
street,  and  his  friend  on  the  other,  on  the  Lord's-day  morning,  in  those  parts  of 
London  where  Sabbath  trading  is  carried  on  to  the  greatest  extent.  One  morning, 
one  of  them  was  giving  a  tract  to  a  person  as  the  other  was  crossing  over  to  join 
him.  to  communicate  with  him  on  some  subject.  As  the  second  friend  met  the  man 
who  had  received  the  tract,  he  heard  him  say.  with  an  oath,  "What  is  the  use  of 
giving  me  this  tract  .^  I  shall  be  in  hell  in  an  hour  !  "  He  said  to  his  fellow- 
labourer,  on  reaching  him,  "Did  you  hear  what  that  man  said?"  .  "No,"  he 
answered,  "I  did  not  notice  ;  what  was  it  ?  "  "He  appeared  very  wild,  and  talked 
of  being  in  hell  in  an  hour  ;  he  is  either  insane,  or  he  is  intending  to  commit 
suicide."  "  Do  you  think  so  ?  Then  we  will  be  after  him."  They  followed  him,  and 
the  second  one,  on  coming  up  to  the  man,  said  to  him,  "What  did  \ou  say  when  you 
took  that  tract?"  "That's  no  concern  of  yours,"  he  answered,  "mind  your  own 
business."  "Oh  !  "  was  the  reply,  "  but  it  is  my  business,  for,  if  I  heard  aright,  you 
said  that  you  would  be  in  hell  in  an  hour."  "Yes,  I  did  say  so  ;  this  world  is  worse 
than  hell,  and  I'll  be  out  of  it  in  an  hour."  "  No,  you  won't,"  said  our  friend,  "  for  I 
mean  to  stick  by  you  ;  and  I  won't  leave  you  for  an  hour,  go  where  you  maw" 

The  poor  creature  then  succumbed,  and  the  godly  men  took  him  into  a  coftee- 
shop,  and  gave  him  a  good  breakfast.  The  man  felt  less  like  committing  suicide 
after  that  meal.  Our  friends  knew  that  the  best  gospel  sermon  would  not  be  likely 
to  benefit  a  man  who  was  starving  :  he  had  tasted  nothing  for  three  days,  and  had 
walked  the  streets  all  the  night.  Hence,  our  brethren  wisely  felt  that  they  must  first 
feed  his  hungry  body:  and  after  that,  they  brought  him  to  the  Tabernacle.  When 
the  service  was  over,  their  poor  patient  looked  a  little  more  hopeful,  and  the  soul- 
doctors  thought  it  best  to  repeat  the  dose  of  solid  nutriment.  They  took  him 
to  a  house  where  they  were  accustomed  to  dine,  in  a  humble  way,  and  he  shared 
their  meal.  He  went  to  one  of  the  Bible-classes  in  the  afternoon  ;  and,  in  the 
evening,  they  brought  him  again  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  it  pleased  God  to  touch  the 
poor  man's  heart,  and  bring  him  to  a  knowledge  of  himself  and  his  Saviour.  Then 
he  became  communicative,  and  it  appeared  that  he  had  left  his  wife  for  four  or  five 
months,  and  had  been  living  a  life  of  dissipation,  sin,  and  poverty.  He  gave  the 
name  and  address  of  his  wife,  in  the  North  of  England  ;  she  was  written  to,  and  his 
fare  was  paid  home  ;  and,  after  he  had  gone  back,  a  letter  came  from  the  good 
woman,  saying  that  she  had  been  a  member  with  the  Wesleyan  Methodists,  and  had 
been  long  praying  for  her  husband,  who  had  been  an  awful  reprobate,  and  had  at  last 
run  away  from  home.  Then  she  thought  it  was  all  over  with  him  ;  but  God  'had 
designs  of  love  towards  him,  and  now  he  had  sat  down  at  the  Lord's  table  with  her. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  4I 

She  did  not  know  what  to  say,  her  heart  was  so  full  of  (gratitude  to  God,  and  to  the 
dear  friends  who  had  been  the  means  (jf  brin^ino-  her  husband  to  the  Saviour. 

At  another  time,  a  man  came  to  join  the  church  ;  and,  according  to  our  usual 
custom,  he  was  asked  how  he  had  become  converted,  when  he  told  us  the  following" 
story.  He  said  : — "  I  was  employed  in  driving  a  horse  and  van  ;  I  never  thought  of 
going  to  any  place  of  worship,  and  I  do  not  think  anybody  ever  said  a  word  to  me 
about  God  or  Christ  until  one  day  when  I  was  crossing  over  London  Bridge  when, 
suddenly,  a  man  jumped  up,  and  climbed  into  the  back  of  my  cart.  I  took  my  whip 
to  lash  him  oft,  but  he  said,  '  Hold  hard,  mate,  I've  got  a  message  for  you.'  This  was 
a  very  curious  thing  to  me,  and  I  asked,  '  What  is  it  ? '  'I  will  tell  you,  but  I  may 
as  well  sit  in  front.'  So  he  sat  down  beside  me.  Then  I  asked  him,  'What  is  your 
messaoe  ?  '  '  It  is  a  messaoe  front  God  to  vour  soul.'  I  cursed  and  swore  at  him  ; 
but  that  made  no  difference  to  him.  He  said,  'You  are  the  very  man  I  was  after. 
I  knew  you  were  a  swearing  man,  tor  it  was  that  tirst  attracted  my  attention  to  you, 
and  I  am  sure  my  message  is  for  you.'  I  said  to  him  then,  '  What  have  you  to  say  ? 
Come,  cut  it  short.'  He  did  cut  it  short,  and  he  put  it  pretty  straight,  too.  He  told 
me  what  would  become  of  my  soul  if  I  died  a  swearer,  and  he  talked  to  me  about 
the  world  to  come.  Then  he  told  me  that  there  was  a  Saviour  tor  sinners,  and  that, 
if  I  trusted  Him,  I  should  be  saved.  Before  he  left  me,  he  made  me  promise  that  I 
would  go  to  hear  you,  sir.  .So  I  promised,  and  as  I  always  boasted  that  I  kept 
my  word,  I  came  to  hear  you,  though  I  was  precious  sorry  that  I  had  pre)mised 
to  do  so.  I  never  got  up  so  early  on  a  Sunday  morning  betore  ;  and  when  the  man 
saw  me  at  the  gate,  he  took  me  in,  and  gave  me  his  seat,  and  stood  himselt  all  the 
service,  which  I  thought  was  very  kind  on  his  part.  After  the  sermon,  he  asked  me, 
'Did  you  like  it?'  I  replied,  'No,  I  did  not;  that  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that 
I  care,  about  ;  I  don't  believe  in  religion,'  'Ah  !  but  you  will,'  the  man  said  ;  and  he 
and  I  parted  company  at  the  gate,  and  I  hoped  I  should  never  meet  him  again. 

"  I  did  not  see  him  for  some  weeks  ;  but,  one  day,  as  I  was  walking  down  the 
Blacktriars  Road,  I  saw  him  coming  along,  so  I  slipped  round  the  first  corner,  and 
began  to  run  to  avoid  him  ;  but,  soon,  I  heard  somebody  running  alter  me,  and  he 
came  up  to  me,  and  said,  '  Well,  mate,  how  are  you  ? '  '  All  right.'  '  Are  you  going 
on  any  better  ?  '  he  asked.  I  did  not  give  him  any  answer,  and  then  he  told  me 
that  he  had  made  up  his  mind  that  I  should  be  a  Christian  one  day,  and  that  he 
never  meant  to  let  me  alone  till  that  came  to  pass.  I  believe  he  would  have  gone 
into  my  house  with  me  ;  but,  as  my  wife  and  I  were  Ibnd  of  drink,  there  was  only  a 
little  furniture  in  it,  and  I  did  not  wish  him  to  come  in,  and  see  the  miserable  place, 
so,  to  get  rid  of  him,  I  proposed  to  go  and  hear  Mr.  .Spurgeon  on  the  next  Sunday. 
I  kept  my  promise  ;  and,  now,  I   am  happy  to  say  that  I  do  not  need  anybod)-  to 


42  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

induce  me  to  go  to  the  Tabernacle.  I  have  been  here  six  months,  I  have  found  the 
Saviour  for  m)seU",  and  I  have  got  four  of  our  men  to  come  down  to  hear  the  gospel 
with  me." 

Perhaps,  next  to  the  joy  of  actual  conversions,  the  rescue  of  those  who  have 
long  been  in  dense  spiritual  darkness  has  given  me  the  greatest  delight.  Many  of 
God's  people  are  perplexed  with  questions  concerning  their  interest  in  Christ,  or  they 
are  afflicted  with  deep  depression  of  spirit  out  of  which  only  the  Lord  Himself  can 
lift  them  up.  I  have  tried,  upon  some  of  the  sorely-troubled  ones,  all  the  promises 
of  the  Bible  which  1  could  remember.  I  have  reminded  them  of  the  person  of 
Christ,  and  of  His  consequent  power  ;  of  the  sufferings  ot  Christ,  and  of  His  conse- 
quent ability  to  cleanse  from  sin  ;  but  I  have  many  times  had  this  answer  given 
to  me,  "  When  God  shutteth  up,  who  can  deliver.^"  and  I  have  been  very  often  made 
to  feel  that,  as  Pastor,  /  could  not  quench  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one  for 
other  people,  and  that  I  could  not  break  in  pieces  the  sword  of  the  enemy,  for 
others,  or  even  for  myself  Yet  I  have  been  very  happy  when  the  Lord  has  enabled 
me  to  be  the  means  of  cheering  any  desponding  or  even  despairing  soul.  One  day, 
as  1  came  out  of  the  pulpit,  there  met  me  a  brother-minister,  and  he  said,  "Sir,  I 
cannot  tell  you  all  the  particulars  now,  but  I  will  write  to-morrow  ;  my  wife  is  set  at 
liberty."  Afterwards,  he  wrote  to  tell  me  how  she  had  been  in  despair,  and  what 
sorrow  she  had  suffered,  and  what  a  grief  it  had  been  to  him  ;  but  while  I  preached 
upon  the  words,  "  Cast  not  away  therefore  your  confidence,  which  hath  great 
recompence  of  reward,"  she  was  brought  out  of  bondage.  Oh,  how  I  praised  and 
blessed  God,  and  thought  that  I  would  like  to  preach  day  and  night  if  I  might  but 
be  the  channel  of  such  blessing"  again  and  again  ! 

Another  case  which  I  remember  was  that  of  a  man  of  excellent  character,  well 
beloved  by  his  family,  and  esteemed  by  his  neighbours,  who  was  for  twenty  years 
enveloped  in  unutterable  gloom.  He  ceased  to  attend  the  house  of  God,  because  he 
said  it  was  of  no  use  ;  and  although  always  ready  to  help  in  every  good  work,  yet  he 
had  an  abiding  conviction  upon  him  that,  personally,  he  had  no  part  nor  lot  in  the 
matter,  and  never  could  have.  The  more  anyone  talked  to  him  about  the  things  of 
God,  the  worse  he  became  ;  even  prayer  seemed  but  to  excite  him  to  more  fearful 
despondency.  In  the  providence  of  God,  I  was  called  to  preach  the  Word  in  his 
neighbourhood  ;  he  was  induced  to  attend,  and,  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  blessing  on  the 
sermon,  he  obtained  a  joyful  liberty.  After  twenty  years  of  anguish  and  unrest,  he 
ended  his  weary  roamings  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  to  the  amazement  of  his  neigh- 
bours, the  joy  of  his  household,  and  the  glory  of  God.  Nor  did  his  peace  of  mind 
subside ;  for,  until  the  Lord  gave  him  a  happy  admission  into  eternal  rest,  he 
remained  a  vigorous  believer,  trusting  and  not  being  afraid. 


C.     II.     SPURGEOW  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  43 

Probably  the  most  notable  instance  of  the  uplifting-  of  a  soul  from  the  deepest 
despair  was  the  one  which  was  thus  related  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  at  a  Monday  evening 
prayer-meeting  ac  the  Tabernacle,  as  an  illustration  of  the  personal  preparation 
which  a  soul-winner  may  have  to  go  through  before  the  Lord  uses  him  to  certain 
individuals  : — 

Some  years  ago,  I  was  the  subject  of  fearful  depression  of  spirit.  Various 
troublous  events  had  happened  to  me  ;  I  was  also  unwell,  and  my  heart  sank  within 
me.  Out  of  the  depths  I  was  forced  to  cry  unto  the  Lord.  Just  before  I  went  away 
to  Mentone  for  rest,  I  suffered  greatly  in  body,  but  far  more  in  soul,  for  my  spirit 
was  overwhelmeci.  Under  this  pressure,  I  preached  a  sermon  from  the  words, 
"My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  I  was  as  much  qualified  to 
preach  from  that  te.xt  as  ever  I  expect  to  be  ;  indeed,  I  hope  that  few  of  my 
brethren  could  have  entered  so  deeply  into  those  heart-breaking  words.  I  felt  to 
the  full  of  my  measure  the  horror  of  a  soul  forsaken  of  God.  Now,  that  was  not 
a  desirable  experience,  I  tremble  at  the  bare  idea  of  passing  again  through  that 
eclipse  of  soul  ;  I  pray  that  I  may  never  suffer  in  that  fashion  again  unless  the  same 
result  should  hang  upon  it. 

That  night,  after  the  service,  there  came  into  my  vestry  a  man  who  was  as  nearly 
insane  as  he  could  be  to  be  out  of  an  as\lum.  His  eyes  seemed  ready  to  start  from 
his  head,  and  he  said  that  he  should  utterly  have  despaired  if  he  had  not  heard  that 
discourse,  which  had  made  him  feel  that  there  was  one  man  alive  who  understood  his 
feelings,  and  could  describe  his  experience.  I  talked  with  him,  and  tried  to  encourage 
him,  and  asked  him  to  come  again  on  the  Monday  night,  when  I  should  have 
a  little  more  time  to  speak  with  him.  I  saw  the  brother  again,  and  I  told  him  that  I 
thought  he  was  a  hopeful  patient,  and  1  was  glad  that  the  word  had  been  so  suited 
to  his  case.  Apparently,  he  put  aside  the  comfort  which  I  presented  for  his 
acceptance,  and  yet  I  had  the  consciousness  upon  me  that  the  precious  truth  which 
he  had  heard  was  at  work  upon  his  mind,  and  that  the  storm  of  his  soul  would  soon 
subside  into  a  deep  calm. 

Now  hear  the  sequel.  Last  night,  of  all  the  times  in  the  year,  when,  strange  to 
say,  I  was  preaching  from  the  words,  "  The  Almighty  hath  vexed  my  soul,"  after  the 
service,  in  walked  this  self-same  brother  who  had  called  on  me  five  years  before. 
This  time,  he  looked  as  different  as  noonday  from  midnight,  or  as  life  from  death. 
I  said  to  him,  "  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  for  I  have  often  thought  about  you,  and 
wondered  whether  you  were  brought  into  perfect  peace."  I  told  you  that  I  went 
to  Mentone,  and  my  patient  also  went  into  the  country,  so  that  we  had  not  met  for 
five  years.  To  my  enquiries,  this  brother  replied,  "Yes,  you  said  I  was  a  hopeful 
patient,  and  I  am  sure  you  will  be  glad  to  know  that  I  have  walked  in  the  sunlight 
from  that  day  till  now.      Everything  is  changed  and  altered  with  me."     Dear  friends, 


44  '  C.     H.   SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

as  soon  as  I  saw  my  poor  despairing  patient  the  first  time,  I  blessed  God  that  my 
fearful  experience  had  prepared  me  to  sympathize  with  him  and  guide  him  ;  but  last 
night,  when  I  saw  him  perlectly  restored,  my  heart  overflowed  with  gratitude  to  God 
tor  my  former  sorrowful  feelings.  I  would  go  into  the  deeps  a  hundred  times  to 
cheer  a  downcast  spirit :  it  is  good  for  me  to  have  been  afflicted  that  I  might  know 
how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  one  that  is  weary. 

Many  remarkable  instances  of  blessing  upon  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  were 
never  reported  to  him  while  he  was  here.  The  following  pleasing  testimony  came 
to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  on  the  first  anniversary  of  his  home-going  : — 

"  More  than  thirty-nine  years  ago,"  the  writer  said,  "  when  he  was  a  youth  of 
nineteen,  and  I  a  child  of  ten,  I  heard  him  preach  a  never-to-be-forgotten  sermon, 
which  was  like  an  echo  upon  earth  of  the  '  new  song'  in  Heaven.  I  was  in  great 
distress  of  soul  at  the  time,  and  had  just  given  myself  up  as  a  hopeless  backslider, 
when  he  came  to  our  little  chapel,  and  preached  this  lovely  sermon.  The  te.xt  was, 
'And  they  sang  a  new  song.'  Vividh^  as  though  it  only  happened  yesterday,  do  I 
recall  every  part  of  that  service,  and  the  heavenly  smile  lighting  up  his  dear  young 
face,  as,  looking  round  into  our  pew,  he  seemed  to  single  me  out,  and  said,  '  Have 
yoti  learned  the  key-note  of  that  new  song  .-^  I'll  tell  you  in  a  whisper  what  it  is,  'tis 
Jesus  !  only  Jesus.'  And  then  he  went  on  ringing  '  those  charming  bells'  of  'free 
grace  and  dying  love'  till  my  poor  heart  was  lifted  up  into  joy,  and  peace,  and  full 
assurance,  which,  through  all  the  ups  and  downs  of  thirty-nine  years  of  spiritual  life, 
I  have  never  quite  lost.  From  that  day,  till  the  hour  he  left  this  world  for  his  native 
Land,  it  has  been  my  joy  to  watch,  with  the  profoundest  sympathy  and  love,  his 
wonderful  and  beautiful  life, — to  weep  over  his  sorrows,  to  rejoice  in  his  joys,  and  to 
pray  for  him  in  all  the  trials  he  endured  with  such  Christlike  gentleness  and  patience. 
None  have  greater  reason  than  1  to  say,  tVom  the  very  heart,  '  Bless  God  for  dear 
Mr.  Spurgeon  ! '  The  weekl\-  sermon  is,  next  to  the  Word  of  God,  my  meat  and  my 
drink  ;  each  one  seems  more  precious  than  the  last.  I  have  given  away  as  many  as 
I  could  ;  and  one,  entitled,  '  Christ's  Hospital,'  (No.  2,260,)  is  such  an  exquisite 
jewel,  such  a  gem  of  the  first  water,  that  I  should  like  to  place  it  in  the  hands  of 
every  human  being  on  the  globe. 

"  I  have  often  wished  to  tell  your  dear  one  all  this  ;  but  now,  in  your  dark  days, 
I  feel  I  must  tfell  you.      Mav  '  the  consolations  of  God  '  indeed  abound  towards  you  !  " 

Pastor  E.  A.  Tydeman,  one  of  "  our  own  men,"  thus  relates  how  a  sermon  by 
Mr,  Spurgeon  was  the  means  of  preserving  from  suicide  one  who  had  long  been  in 
terrible  distress  of  mind  : — "  Some  years  ago,  in  a  village  on  the  South  Coast,  I  met 
an  elderly  man,  who  gave  me  the  following  account  of  the  only   time  he  ever  heard 


C.     IT.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  45 

our  dear  President.  He  said  :  — '  It  was  in  the  year  1861,  and  I  was  in  great  anxiety. 
My  business  was  failing,  we  had  trouble  in  the  family,  and,  worse  than  all,  I  had 
allowed  my  triads  to  estrange  my  heart  from  God.  I  had  from  childhood  been  an 
attendant  upon  the  means  of  grace,  and  for  many  years  I  was  a  member  of  a  Baptist 
church  ;  but  I  had  gradually  become  a  "  backslider  in  heart,"  and  now,  when  these 
outward  troubles  came  upon  me,  it  appeared  to  me  that  the  Lord  had  cast  me  away 
from  His  presence,  and  taken  His  Holy  Spirit  from  me,  till  I  said,  with  Israel's 
first  king,  "God  is  departed  from  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more."  My  wife — a 
godly  woman, — did  her  best  to  rouse  me  from  my  despondency,  but  to  no  purpose  ; 
and  I  went  from  bad  to  worse,  forsaking  the  house  of  God,  and  the  companionship 
of  His  people,  till  I  seemed  to  have  lost  all  hope,  and  almost  all  desire  for  the 
knowledge  of  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  Then  I  seemed  to  hear  the  evil  one  say, 
"  Curse  God,  and  die."  Yes,  what  better  course  could  I  take  ?  If  I  must  be 
damned,  why  not  meet  my  fate  at  once  ?  I  went  down  to  the  shore,  for  I  lived  not 
far  from  the  sea  ;  but  the  thought  that  my  body  would  probably  be  washed  up  where 
I  was  so  well  known,  deterred  me. 

"'Then  came  the  suggestion,  why  not  go  to  London,  where  I  should  be  a 
stranger,  and  end  my  life  there  ?  So,  going  home, — it  was  a  Saturday,  and  the 
week's  work  was  done, — I  got  ready  for  the  journey,  and  telling  my  wife  that  I  should 
not  be  home  till  Monday,  I  took  train  and  went  to  town  ;  and,  all  that  evening,  I 
wandered  from  street  to  street  in  utter  wretchedness,  and  when  it  was  dark,  I  went 
down  to  the  riverside  ;  but,  at  every  available  spot,  I  found  someone  standing  about, 
who  seemed  to  be  watching  me,  so  I  gave  up  the  idea  tor  that  night.  I  found  a 
lodging  somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kennington  Lane,  intending  to  carry 
out  my  purpose  on  the  Sunday,  when  the  wharves  and  lanes  would  be  more  lonely. 
It  was  long  before  I  could  sleep,  and  I  was  late  in  rising  the  next  morning.  After  I 
had  eaten  my  breakfast,  I  went  out,  and  asking  the  way  to  London  Bridge,  turned 
my  steps  in  that  direction,  the  load  at  my  heart  heavier  than  ever,  yet  with  no 
relenting  in  my  determination  to  end  my  wretched  life.  Wandering  disconsolately 
along,  I  came  to  a  spot  where  a  crowd  was  waiting,  outside  a  large  building,  which  I 
must  have  passed  the  night  before  without  noticing  it.  I  found,  on  enquiry,  that  the 
place  was  none  other  than  "  Spurgeon's  Tabernacle," — as  my  informant  styled  it. 
Scarcely  realizing  what  I  did,  I  joined  the  people  waiting  on  the  steps,  and,  when  the 
doors  were  opened,  found  myself  hurried  forward  by  the  press,  till  I  had  reached  the 
uppermost  landing.  Once  fairly  inside,  it  seemed  as  though  every  seat  was 
occupied  ;  but,  after  a  while,  I  secured  a  place  at  the  back  of  a  recess  in  the  top 
gallery. 

"  'There  was  a  hush  as  the  minister  came  to  the  front  of  the  platform,  and  said, 
"  Let  us  pray,"  but  the  prayer  did  not  touch  me,  for  he  was  evidendy  on  the  mount 


46  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

with  God,  and  I  was  in  the  deeps  of  despair.  After  the  prayer,  a  hymn  was  sung  ; 
but,'  though  all  around  me  were  singing,  I  could  not ;  and  I  remained  in  the  same 
state  all  through  the  reading,  the  singing,  and  the  prayer  which  followed,  for  my 
heart  was  still  unmoved,  unless  it  was  to  a  deeper  depth  of  darkness.  Then  came 
the  text.  Psalm  xxxv.  3  ;  and  if  I  live  to  be  a  hundred  years  old,  I  shall  never  forget 
the  thrill  which  passed  through  me  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  read  these  words,  "Say  unto 
my  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation,"  and  then,  coming  forward  to  the  front  rail,  he  looked 
up  at  me,  and  said,  "  Say  unto  Jiiy  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation,"  and  if  ever  God's  voice 
was  heard  on  earth  by  human  ear,  it  was  heard  by  me  that  morning.  The  first 
time,  for  many  a  weary  week,  a  gleam  of  hope  came  to  my  soul,  and  I  sat  and  drank 
in  the  message,  as  a  thirsty  pilgrim  in  a  desert  land  might  drink  at  Elim.  As  the 
sermon  ad\^anced,  and  various  phases  of  soul-conflict  were  depicted,  I  trembled  with 
emotion,  till  I  could  sit  no  longer  ;  it  was  fortunate  that  I  was  in  front  of  no  one,  for 
there  I  stood  during  the  rest  of  the  service,  with  eyes  intent,  and,  for  aught  I  know, 
with  mouth  wide  open,  too  ;  and  when  once,  during  the  sermon,  the  preacher  looked 
up  at  me,  and  spoke  of  one  "  standing  far  away  in  the  gallery,"  *  I  thought  that  I 
must  have,  shouted.  Long  before  the  close  of  the  discourse,  my  handkerchief  was 
wet  with  tears,  but  they  were  tears  of  joy  ;  and  when  the  end  came,  I  made  straight 
for  the  door,  saying  to  those  before  me,  "  Let  me  out.  or  I  shall  knock  somebody 
down  !  "  "  Are  you  out  of  your  mind  }  "  said  one.  "  No,  thank  God  !  '  I  answered, 
"  not  out  of  it,  but  in  it  for  the  first  time  for  many  a  long  day  ;  "  and  so  I  passed  out 
into  the  street,  and  for  hours,  oblivious  of  everyone  and  everythmg  around  me,  I 
wandered  up  and  down  with  a  heart  as  full  of  joy  and  praise  as  it  could  hold  ;  and 
from  then  till  now,  I  have  never  lost  the  assurance  that  God  is  my  salvation.'  " 

Another  of  "  our  own  men,"  Pastor  W.  E.  Rice,  reports  the  following- 
remarkable  case  of  conversion,  which  was  related  to  him  by  a  Congregational 
minister  in  Australia :— "  Some  years  ago,  a  father,  living  in  a  country  town, 
apprenticed  his  son  to  a  London  silversmith.  For  a  time,  all  seemed  to  be  going 
well  :  but,  one  day,  he  received  a  letter  to  say  that  the  lad  had  robbed  his  master. 
With  a  sad  heart,  he  hastened  to  town  only  to  find,  alas  !  that  it  was  but  too  true. 
The  indentures  were  cancelled,  and  the  boy  left  his  situation  in  disgrace.  As  the 
father  and  son  were  walking  through  the  crowded  streets  of  the  City,  the  lad 
suddenly  darted  away,  and  disappeared.  The  police  searched  for  him  in  vam,  and 
the  poor  man  had  to  return  alone  to  tell  the  sad  news  to  his  broken-hearted  wife. 

"Years  passed,  and  nothing  was  heard  of  the  prodigal  son,  One  Sabbath 
evening,  the  parents  stayed  home  from  the  service  ;  and,  while  sitting  quiedy  reading 


*  In  the  published  sermon,  No.  384,  this   expression  appears :—"  Though  you  are  standing  far  away  in  the  gallery,  you, 
say,   '  Ah  !    that  is  my  character.'  " 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  47 

God's  Word,  they  were  unusually  constrained  to  pray  for  their  lost  boy  ;  and  they 
knelt  down  together,  and  asked  that  he  might  be  arrested  in  his  sinful  career,  and 
brought  back  to  the  old  home.  Presently,  the  servant  came  back  from  the  service 
she  had  attended,  and  her  master  enquired  as  to  the  sermon  she  had  heard. 
'  Oh,  sir  ! '  she  said,  '  I  have  not  heard  a  word  of  the  sermon  ;  I  could  do  nothing  but 
pray  for  Master  Harry.' 

"That  night,  some  men  M'ere  passing  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  on  their 
way  to  break  into  the  shop  ot  a  certain  silversmith  in  London,  when  one  said  to 
another,  '  Harry,  just  run  up  the  steps,  and  see  the  time.'  He  did  so,  opened  the 
door,  and  stood  in  the  aisle.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  preaching  about  the  dying  thief; 
and,  seeming  to  point  direct  at  Harry,  said,  in  those  ringing,  well-remembered  tones, 
'If  there  is  a  thief  here  to-night,  Jesus  Christ  can  save  him.''  The  arrow  hit  the 
mark.  Harry  went  back  to  his  garret  to  pray  ;  and,  in  a  week's  time,  there  was  a 
knock  at  the  door  of  the  old  home  in  that  country  town.  The  father  opened  it, 
stood  face  to  tace  with  his  long-lost  son  :  and  then  followed  the  old  story  of  the 
prodigal's  return, — tears,  confession,  forgiveness,  welcome,  restoration,  joy." 

Mr.  Cheyne  Brady  has  thus  recorded  the  means  used  by  God  for  the  conviction 
and  conversion  of  a  man  who  had  previously  lived  a  terribly  dissolute  life  : — "After 
some  years  spent  in  the  service  of  sin,  he  set  his  heart  on  a  change  of  residence. 
A  house  likely  to  suit  him  being  pointed  out,  he  went  to  the  proprietor,  and  asked 
for  the  key.  The  landlord  offered  to  accompany  him,  and  show  him  the  house  :  but 
he  declined,  saying  he  preferred  going  over  it  by  himself  Having  examined  the 
lower  part  of  the  dwelling,  he  proceeded  upstairs,  and  ascended  to  the  attic.  As  he 
entered,  he  saw  something  scratched  on  the  wind<^w-pane,  and  approached  nearer 
in  order  to  read  it.     These  words,  traced  with  a  diamond,  met  his  gaze  : — 

" '  Prepare    to    Meet    tiiv    God.' 

"  He  staggered,  and,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  he  trembled  before  his  Maker. 
The  Spirit  of;  God  met  him  there  alone.  He  stood  riveted  to  the  spot ;  and,  in  the 
agony  of  his  soul,  he  cried  out,  '  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  !  Lord,  save  me  ! '  At 
length,  he  got  out  of  the  house  ;  but  the  solemn  message  followed  him,  '  Prepare 
to  meet  thy  God.'  He  lost  all  pleasure  in  his  fox-hunting,  and  became  utterly 
miserable.  He  tried  to  drown  serious  thought  amongst  his  evil  companions,  but 
those  warning  words  haunted  him  wherever  he  went. 

"  Several  days  passed  thus,  when  his  eye  caught  a  notice  that,  in  a  certain 
village,  sixteen  miles  off,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  to  preach  that  evening.  He  said  to 
himself,  '  Pll  eo  and  hear  that  man.'  He  ordered  his  horse,  and  rode  the  sixteen 
miles,  that  he  might  listen  to  something  which,  perchance,  would  give  his  wounded 
spirit  relief.     The  text  was,  '  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 


48  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

and  I  will  give  you  rest ; '  and,  in  the  course  of  the  sermon,  Mr.  Spurgeon  made  an 
earnest  personal  appeal,  which  was  blessed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  conscience- 
stricken  sinner,  who,  there  and  then,  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  left  the  chapel 
a  new  man  in  Christ." 

Rev.  D.  A.  Doudney,  Hatford  Rectory,  Faringdon,  has  recalled  a  remarkable 
incident,  which  was  related  to  him  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — "  He  told  me  that,  many 
years  ago,  a  well-dressed  man,  with  a  very  proud  and  conceited  manner,  came  to  see 
him  in  his  vestry  with  a  view  to  joining  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle.  The  man 
said,  '  I  purpose  giving  seven  thousand  pounds  to  any  object  connected  with  your 
congregation,  or  in  which  you  are  interested,  but  it  is  on  the  condition  that  you  accept 
me  as  one  of  your  members.'  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  him  that  he  could  not  receive  him 
into  the  church  unless  he  felt  sure  that  he  was  a  converted  man,  and  he  asked  him 
several  searching  questions.  To  all  these  enquiries,  the  man  gave  very  unsatisfactory 
replies ;  and,  consequently,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  that,  although  he  was  extremely 
sorry,  he  could  not  see  his  way  to  accept  him  whilst  he  was  in  his  present  spiritual 
state.  The  man  was  astounded.  '  What  !  '  he  exclaimed,  '  do  you  mean  to  tell  me 
that  you  will  not  receive  me  with  seven  thousand  pounds, — seven  thousand  pounds?' 
'  No,'  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  '  nor  if  you  oflered  me  se\'enty  times  seven  thousand 
pounds.'     The  man  went  away  in  a  rage. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  me  that,  just  then,  money  was  greatly  needed  in  connection 
with  some  of  his  undertakings,  and  seven  thousand  pounds  would  have  been  a  most 
welcome  gift  ;  but  he  clearly  felt  that  his  visitor  was  not  in  a  satisfactory  spiritual 
condition,  and  that,  therefore,  he  could  not  conscientiously  accept  him.  Shortly 
afterwards,  the  man  was  admitted  into  another  congregation,  the  minister  of  which 
was  not  so  scrupulous  ;  but,  some  years  later,  the  same  individual  came  again  into 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  vestry,  and  it  was  at  once  evident  that  he  was  greatly  altered.  No 
self-conceit  was  apparent  in  him  then,  but  deep  humility.  He  did  not  allude  to  a 
gift  of  seven  thousand  pounds,  or.  indeed,  to  any  gift;  but.  after  asking  Mr. 
Spurgeon  whether  he  remembered  him  and  his  rejection,  he  said  that  he  had  reason 
to  thank  God,  with  all  his  heart,  for  the  treatment  he  then  received,  because  it  was 
the  means  of  leading  him  to  look  within,  to  consider  what  his  state  was  before  God, 
to  discover  his  many  deficiencies  ;  and,  eventually,  it  resulted  in  his  being  enabled  to 
rejoice  that  he  had  been  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  A  few  questions  and 
answers  confirmed  his  statement,  and  then  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  the  pleasure  of 
willingly  accepting  him.  He  was  for  some  years  a  useful  member  of  the  church  at 
the  Tabernacle  ;  and,  at  length,  he  passed  away  in  the  full  faith  of  the  gospel." 


CHAPTER    LXXXVII. 


''OTcstoooi:i;' 


We  have  often  been  advised  to  rise  from  Nightingale  Lane  to  higher  ground,  to  escape  a  portion 
of  the  fogs  and  damps  which  hang  almost  always  over  our  smoky  city.  In  the  good  providence  of  God, 
we  have  been  led  to  do  so,  and  we  are  now  upon  the  Southern  heights.  We  did  not  seek  out  the  place, 
but  it  came  into  our  hands  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  and  we  were  bound  to  accept  it.  We  have  left 
the  room  which  has  been  so  long  our  study,  and  the  delightful  garden  where  we  were  wont  to  walk  and 
meditate.  Not  without  many  a  regret  have  we  transferred  our  nest  from  our  dear  old  home  to  the  Hill 
of  Beulah. 

What  a  type  of  our  departure  out  of  this  world  is  a  removal  from  an  abode  in  which  we  have  lived 
tor  years!  Many  thoughts  have  thronged  our  mind  while  we  have  been  on  the  wing  from  the  spot 
where  we  have  dwelt  tor  more  than  twenty  years.— C.  H.  S.,  in  "Spm-geons  Illustrated  Almanack" 
for  i8Sl. 

iONCERNING  the  removal  from  "Helensburgh  House"  to  "West- 
wood,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  often  said: — "I  did  not  arrange  it  myself; 
the  Lord  just  put  a  spade  underneath  me,  and  transplanted  me  to 
Norwood."  The  change  came  to  pass  in  the  following  way.  In 
the  year  1880,  a  great  trouble  arose  through  what  was  intended 
to  be  only  a  joy  and  a  help.  Mrs.  Tyson,  who  had  long  been  a 
generous  donor  to  all  the  Tabernacle  Institutions,  made  a  will  by  which  she  meant 
to  leave  to  the  College  and  Orphanage  the  greater  part  of  her  estate,  subject  to  the 
payment  of  certain  annuities  to  a  number  of  aged  pensioners  upon  her  bounty.  The 
kind  testatrix  appointed,  as  her  executors,  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  a  clerical  friend, 
explaining  that  she  did  so  on  purpose  to  ensure  that  there  should  be  no  question 
about  the  carrying  out  of  her  intentions  ;  but,  unhappily,  the  bequests  included  her 
real  as  well  as  personal  property,  and  therefore  came  within  the  scope  of  the  Law 
of  Mortmain.  The  whole  affair  was  complicated  in  so  many  ways  that  the 
executors  Avere  obliged  to  arrange  with  the  Trustees  of  the  College  and  Orphanage 
to  institute  a  friendly  suit  in  the  Court  of  Chancery  in  order  to  have  an  authoritative 
decision  upon  the  points  about  which  there  was  uncertainty.  This  involved  a  heavy 
addition  to  the  dear  Pastor's  work,  and  necessitated  many  journeys  to  "  White 
Lodge,"  Biggin  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  where  Mrs.  Tyson  had  lived. 

After  the  executors  had  paid  one  of  their  periodical  visits,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
suggested  that,  before  returning  home,  they  should  drive  as  far  as  the  front  of  the 
Crystal  Palace.  Proceeding  along  Beulah  Hill,  the  notice  of  a  house  and  estate  for 
sale  caught  his  eye  as  he  passed  a  gateway  which  was  afterwards  to  become  very 
familiar  to  him.  He  had  long  felt  the  need  of  removing  to  higher  ground,  and  to  a 
more  secluded  spot  than  the  once  rural  Nightingale  Lane  had  become,  and  he  had 

D  4 


50 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 


been  makino;  enquiries  in  various  directions  ;  but,  so  far,  he  had  not  heard  of  any 
place  which  was  sufficiently  near  the  Tabernacle,  and,  at  the  same  time,  fairly  clear 
of  the  smoke  and  fog  of  London.  On  reaching  the  Palace,  the  return  journey  was 
commenced;  and,  soon,  the  carriage  was  back  in  Beulah  Hill,  and  nearing  the  gate 
where  the  board  had  been  seen.  Bidding  the  coachman  stop,  the  Pastor  asked  his 
secretary  to  find  out  what  the  notice  said.  It  appeared  that  cards  to  view  the 
property  were  required  ;  but,  on  asking  at  the  house,  permission  was  at  once  given 
for  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  see  all  he  wished,  and  then,  for  the  first  time,  he  passed  down 
the  drive,  and  beheld  his  future  home. 


"WESrWOOD"   GATES,   LODGE,  AND   DRIVE. 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  5 1 

As  soon  as  he  caught  sight  of  "  Westvvood,"  he  exclaimed,  "Oh,  that  place  is 
far  too  grand  for  me  !  "  and,  after  a  very  brief  inspection,  he  left  without  having 
any  anticipation  of  becoming  its  owner.  So  completely  did  he  give  up  all 
thought  of  living  there,  that  he  did  not  even  send  anyone  to  the  sale  ;  but,  a  few 
days  afterwards,  he  received  a  note  telling  him  that  the  reserve  price  had  not  been 
reached,  and  asking  if  he  would  make  an  offer  for  the  estate.  Then  came  what 
Mr.  Spurgeon  always  regarded  as  the  providential  interposition  of  God  in  the  matter. 
That  very  day,  the  builder,  whom  he  always  employed  for  all  work  needed  at 
"  Helensburgh  House,"  called  to  enquire  if  he  wanted  to  sell  his  home  ;  because,  if 
so,  one  of  his  neighbours  wished  to  buy  it  as  a  residence  for  his  son-in-law  who  was 
returning  from  abroad.  The  Pastor  then  mentioned  the  house  he  had  seen  at 
Norwood,  and  added,  "If  I  could  get  for  this  place  anything  like  what  is  needed  to 
purchase  the  other,  I  should  be  glad  to  make  the  e.xchange."  A  consultation  was 
held  as  to  the  price  to  be  asked,  a  sum  was  stated,  and  duly  reported  to  the 
neighbour,  who  at  once  said,  "  I  should  not  think  of  offering  Mr.  Spurgeon  any  less, 
for  I  am  sure  he  would  only  fi.x  a  fair  value  ;  I  will  give  you  a  deposit  to  seal  the 
bargain."  The  builder  soon  returned  with  the  message  and  cheque  ;  but  Mr. 
Spurgeon  said,  "  I  must  wait  to  see  if  I  can  buy  '  Westwood,'  or  I  shall  be  out  of 
house  and  home."  He  drove  again  to  Beulah  Hill,  found  that  he  could,  without 
difficulty,  meet  the  difference  in  the  price  of  the  two  places,  and,  within  a  few  hours, 
the  old  home  was  sold,  and  the  new  one  secured,  as  he  always  believed,  by  Divine 
arrangement. 

The  incoming  residents  at  "  Helensburgh  House "  desired  to  have  some 
permanent  memorial  of  their  predecessor's  occupancy  of  the  house,  so  Mr.  Spurgeon 
wrote  the  following  inscription,  and  had  it  engraved,  and  fixed  underneath  the  large 
painted  window  at  the  end  of  the  study  : — 

"Farewell,  fair  room,  I  leave  thee  to  a  friend: 
Peace  dwell  with  him  and  all  his  kin! 
May  angels  evermore  th.e  house  defend ! 
Their  Lord  hath  often  been  within." 

In  August,  the  removal  took  place,  and  in  the  next  number  of  The  Sword  and 
the  Trowel,  the  Editor  wrote: — "Simple  as  the  matter  of  change  of  residence  may 
be,  it  has  sufficed  to  create  all  sorts  of  stories,  among  which  is  the  statement  that 
'Mr.  Spurgeoiis  people  have  given  him  a  house.'  My  ever-generous  friends  would 
give  me  whatever  was  needful  ;  but,  as  I  had  only  to  sell  one  house  and  buy 
another,  there  was  no  necessity  for  their  doing  so.  Having  once  accepted  a  noble 
presentation  from  them,  and  having  there  and  then  handed  it  over  to  the  Alms- 
houses, it  would  by  no  means  be  according-  to  my  mind  to  receive  a  second  public 
testimonial.  One  friend  who  heard  of  my  change  of  residence  right  generously  sent 
help   towards   the   expense   of  removal  ;    but,    beyond   this,    it   is   entirely   my   own 


52 


C.     H.   SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 


concern,  and  a  matter  about  which  I  should  have  said  nothing  if  it  had  not  been  for 
this  gossip." 

Though  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  described  "  Westwood  "  as  being  far  too  grand  for 
him,  he  was  very  vexed  when  an  American  visitor  pubHshed  a  grossly-exaggerated 
account  of  "  its  park,  and  meadows,  and  lakes,  and  streams,  and  statuary,  and  stables," 
which  were  supposed  to  rival  those  of  the  Queen  at  Windsor  Castle!  It  would  be 
difticult  to  find  the  "park",  for  the  whole  estate  comprised  less  than  nine  acres, — 
three  of  which  were  leasehold  ; — and  the  numerous  "lakes  and  streams"  which  the 
imaginative  D.D.  fancied  that  he  saw,  were  all  contained  in  the  modest  piece  of 
water  across  which  the  prettiest  view  of  the  house  can  be  obtained. 


A  PEEP  ACROSS  THE   LAKE. 


H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


53 


Mr.  Spurgeon  hoped  that  one  effect  of  his  removal  to  "  Westwood  "  would  be 
that  he  might  enjoy  better  health  than  he  had  at  Clapham  ;  he  even  cherished  the 
notion  that  the  change  would  be  so  beneficial  that  he  would  not  need  to  go  to  Mentone 
in  the  winter.  But  overwork  exacted  the  same  penalties  in  the  new  home  as  in  the 
old  one.  For  a  time,  the  hydropathic  appliances  at  the  Beulah  Spa  seemed  to 
afford  relief;  but,  by-and-by,  they  also  failed,  and  the  Pastor,  in  his  own  expressive 
way,  said  that  he  had  resolved  to  go  to  Heaven  as  the  Israelites  crossed  the  Jordan, 
dryshod.  The  friendly  connection  with  the  hydropathic  establishment  was,  however, 
still  maintained,  for  its  proprietor  was  permitted  to  have  a  pipe  running  from  his 
house  to  the  well  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  garden,  so  that  any  of  the  guests  who  desired 


THE   WELL   IN   THE   GARDEN. 


to  drink  the  Beulah  Spa  water  might  have  a  supply  of  it.  The  prospectus,  issued 
at  the  time  that  "Westwood"  was  offered  for  sale,  contained  a  very  elaborate 
description  of  the  virtues  of  the  water,  and  its  medicinal  value  as  compared  with 
that  of  other  springs  in  England  and  on  the  Continent ;  but  Mr.  Spurgeon  never 
concerned  himself  much  about  it,  though  he  occasionally  drank  it  himself,  and  gave 
others  the  opportunity  of  following  his  example. 

Apart  from  its  private  uses,  perhaps  "  Westwood  "  was  never  more  thoroughly 
utilized  than  on  the  occasions  when  tutors  and  students  gathered  there,  to  spend  a 
long  and  delightful  day  with  their  beloved    President.*     The  rosary  was  the  usual 

*  This  happy  custom  has  been  continued  annually  by  Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 


54 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


place  of  meeting-  ;  and  here,  after  partaking  of  refreshments,  a  brief  devotional 
service  was  held,  followed  by  the  introduction  of  the  new  students.  The  name  of 
;nearly  every  one  of  them,  or  something  about  his  previous  calling,  or  the  place  from 
.which  he  had  come,  furnished  material  for  that  ready  wit  with  which  Mr.  Spurgeon 
brightened  all  parts  of  his  service  ;  and  the  freshmen  were  always  warned  that  the 
festive  proceedings  of  the  opening  day  were  not  to  be  regarded  as  representative 
of  the  rest  of  their  College  career,  which  must  be  one  of  real  hard  work,  so 
that  they  might  derive  all  possible  benefit  from  the  season  of  preparation  for  the 
ministrv. 


SUMMERHOUSE,    AN'D    BOWLS   "N 


As  the  brethren  dispersed  to  their  various  forms  of  recreation,  a  number  of  them 
always  chose  the  Puritan  game  of  bowls  ;  and  in  the  summerhouse  overlooking  the 
lawn,  the  President  and  tutors  watched  them,  and,  at  the  same  time,  talked  over  any 
matters  on  which  they  might  need  to  consult.  Thus,  on  one  occasion,  a  brother 
was  called  from  his  plav  to  receive  a  commission  to. go  to  the  Falkland  Islands; 
another  was  summoned  to  eo   to  the  mission-field  ;   while  to  others  was  entrusted 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


55 


the  honour  of  reviving  some  decaying  church  in  an   English  village,  or  starting   a 
new  one  amidst  the  dense  population  of  London  or  some  provincial  town. 


4 

F^W 

j,..v*?wf"*    ^-V 

->■' 

"         1 

^^*>.  J^jfl^** 

-fS 

9 

H             -^HnHHI 

i-  —  -■  "^JH 

^^91 

^m^^^^^mi 

m 

^K't  '■ 

^I^H 

!           ••     ^ 

^HHHHHH| 

■1 

^^B 

k 

■ 

1 

?> 

,J 

THE   HOUSE   AS   VIEWED    FROM   THE    LAWN. 


The  top  of  the  round  tower,  visible  from  the  lawn,  is  the  place  from  which  a 
wide  extent  of  country  can  be  seen  ;  and  many  of  the  students,  in  days  past,  sought 
and  secured  permission  to  "view  the  landscape  o'er."  The  grand  stand  at  Epsom 
is  plainly  discernible  from  the  grounds  ;  but,  from  the  greater  height,  the  tower  on 
Leith  Hill,  and,  in  a  peculiarly  favourable  state  of  the  atmosphere,  Windsor  Castle 
also,  can  be  descried. 

The  steps  leading  down  to  the  lawn  often  formed  a  convenient  rallying-point 
for  the  evening  meeting,  though  sometimes  the  brethren  were  grouped  around 
the  upper  summerhouse.  Far  away  across  Thornton  Heath  rolled  the  great  volume 
of  sound  as  the  male  choir  of  eighty  to  a  hundred  voices  sang  the  sweet  songs  of 
Zion,  of  which  the  College  anthem — "  Hallelujah  for  the  Cross  !  " — was  certain  to  be 
one.  The  words  spoken  by  the  Pres'ident,  at  those  gatherings,  are  gratefully 
remembered  by  brethren  now  labouring  for  the  Lord  in  various  parts  of  the  world. 


56 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


During  the  day,  informal  meetings  were  held  under  "  The  Question  Oak," 
which  gained  that  name  because,  beneath  its  widely-spreading  branches,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  allowed  the  students  to  put  to  him  any  enquiry  that  they  pleased,  and  he 
answered  them  all  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  and  often  interspersed  his  replies 
with  the  narration  of  striking  incidents  in  his  own  experience,  such  as  those  recorded 
in  Vol.  III.,  pages  192 — 6. 

The  lake  is  not  likely  to  be  forgotten  by  some  of  the  Pastors'  College  brethren 
who  are  now  in  the  ministry.  On  the  first  visit  of  the  students  to  "  Westwood,"  the 
President  told  them  to  go  wherever  they  pleased,  and  to  explore  the  whole  place. 
It  was  not  very  long  before  some  of  them  discovered   that  there  was  a   boat    on 


THE   BOAT   ON  THE   LAKE. 


the  lake,  and  not  many  minutes  more  before  the  boat  and  all  its  crew  had  gone  down 
into  the  mud  ! 

Happily,    the    coachman's    cottage    was    close    by,    so    it    became    a    place    of 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiograpiiy.  57 

refuge  for  the  shipwrecked  collegians,  who  received  the  sympathetic  attentions  of 
their  brethren  while  their  garments  were  being  restored  to  a  wearable  condition  ; 
and  they  were  themselves  temporarily  clothed  from  the  wardrobe  of  Mr.  Spurgeon 
and  the  coachman.  As  the  students  were  not  so  stout  as  the  former,  nor  so  tall  as 
the  latter,  they  were  not  very  comfortable  in  their  borrowed  raiment  ;  but,  later  in 
the  day,  they  appeared  in  their  proper  garb,  and  the  President  then  turned  the 
adventure  to  practical  account  by  warning  them  to  keep  clear  of  the  muddy  waters 
of  doubt,  and  not  to  trust  themselves  off  tcTra  firma  unless  they  were  sure  of  the 
trustworthiness  of  their  boat  and  the  skill  of  the  oarsman. 

In  addition  to  the  students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  many  other  visitors  have, 
from  time  to  time,  been  welcomed  at  "Westwood."  On  one  occasion,  a  party  of 
.American  friends,  who  had  been  worshipping  at  the  Tabernacle  on  the  Sabbath, 
asked  Mr.  Thomas  Cook,  of  Leicester,  by  whom  they  were  being  "  personally 
conducted  "  through  London,  to  seek  permission  for  them  to  see  the  preacher  at  his 
home.  This  was  readily  accorded  ;  and  one  of  their  number.  Dr.  J.  G.  Walker, 
wrote,  after  Mr.  Spurgeon's  home-going,  a  long  and  interesting  account  of  their 
reception.  The  following  extract  will  convey  a  good  idea  of  the  impressions  made 
upon  the  Transatlantic  visitors  that  day,  and  also  on  many  others  who,  at  different 
times,  saw  the  dear  Pastor  in  his  own  house  and  garden  :-^ 

"Turning  into  the  open  gateway,  a  short  drive  along  the  thickly-shaded 
carriage-way  brings  us  to  the  house  itself,  now  and  ever  to  be  known  by  the  familiar 
name  of  'Westwood.'  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  at  the  carriage  before  we  alight,  and  gives 
us  such  a  cordial  greeting  that  we  immediately  feel  at  home  ourselves.  We  spend  a 
few  moments,  in  the  rosary,  in  further  social  intercourse.  Then,  with  cheerful, 
though  somewhat  laboured,  steps,  our  genial  host  leads  us  along  the  grass-bordered 
walks  around  the  house,  down  a  winding  pathway  sheltered  by  overhanging  trees, 
over  a  little  rustic  bridge,  and  along  the  edge  of  a  miniature  lake  ;  then  out  upon  a 
sloping  stretch  of  open  ground,  from  the  summit  of  which  the  '  Westwood  '  dwelling- 
sends  down  its  sunny  glances,  and  beyond  which  the  widening  expanse  of  a 
picturesque  English  landscape  suggests  to  heart  and  voice  alike  the  familiar 
melody  'Sweet  Beulah  Land.' 

"At  every  step,  we  find  ourselves  drawn  closer  and  closer  to  the  man  himself, 
as,  with  unaffected  simplicity,  and  with  easy,  brilliant,  entertaining  conversation,  he 
makes  the  moments  pass  too  quickly  by.  Recalling  these  glimpses  of  the  social 
and  domestic  life  of  the  great  preacher,  leads  me  to  indicate  a  few  of  the  impressions 
that  are  most  tenderly  cherished.  I  was  especially  struck  with  his  love  of  nature. 
He  lived  in  loving  acquaintance  with  his  beautiful  surroundings.  He  seemed  to  be 
on  terms  of  closest  intimacy  with   every  leaf,  and  plant,   and  flower  ;  and,  without 


58  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

question,  this  may  very  largely  account  for  his  own  marked  naturalness  in  speech 
and  movement,  both  in  the  pulpit  and  out  of  it.  Like  the  leaves,  and  plants,  and 
flowers,  he  loved  to  be  just  what  God  made  him.  > 

"  '  Come  into  my  picture  gallery,'  said  he,  '  and  let  me  show  you  some  pictures 
painted  by  God  Himself.'  Again  we  found  ourselves  at  the  entrance  to  the  rosary, 
where  our  attention  was  directed  to  certain  openings  which  had  been  made  in  the 
dense  foliage.  Placing  us  in  the  proper  positions  before  these  open  spaces,  he 
invited  us  to  look  through  them  ;  and,  as  we  did  so,  we  found  ourselves  gazing  upon 
natural  pictures  that  were  all  the  more  beautiful  because  they  enabled  us,  as  well 
as  the  owner  of  the  gallery,  to  'look  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God.'  In  all 
these  methods  of  expression,  there  was  not  the  least  show  of  affectation,  or  any 
assumption  of  sanctimoniousness.  The  entire  conduct  and  conversation  of  the 
man,  both  in  his  private  walks  and  public  ways,  breathed  out  the  fervour  and  the 
frankness  of  a  soul  who  knows  and  loves  God,  and  who  lives  and  communes  with 
his  Saviour." 

A  visitor  at  "  VVestwood,"  who  professed  to  have  come  from  the  United  States, 
was 'received  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  with  considerable  cordiality  because  he  announced 
himself  as  "Captain  Beecher, .  the  son  of  Henry  Ward  Beecher."  He  was 
conducted  through  the  grounds,  and  had  the  special  attractions  of  the  place  pointed 
out  to  him  ;  ■  and  he,  on  his  part,  managed  very  well  to  sustain  the  7'o/e  he  had 
assumed  until,  just  before  leaving,  he  said,  "Oh,  Mr.  Spurgeon!  excuse  me  for 
making  such  a  request,  but  could  you  change  a  cheque  for  me  ?  Unfortunately,  I 
waited  until  after  the  bank  was  closed,  and  I  want  some  money  very  particularly 
to-night."  The  dear  Pastor's  suspicions  were  at  once  aroused,  and  he  said,  with 
pardonable  severity,  "I  do  not  think  you  ought  to  make  such  a  request  to  me.  If 
you  are  really  Mr.  Beecher's  son,  you  must  be  able,  through  the  American  consul, 
or  some  friend,  to  get  your  cheque  cashed,  without  coming  to  a  complete  stranger  ;  " 
and,  foiled  in  his  attempt,  the  young-  man  departed.  A  few  days  afterwards,  a 
gentleman  was  murdered  in  a  carriage  on  the  Brighton  railway  ;  and  when  the 
portrait  of  the  criminal,  Lefroy,  was  published  in  the  papers,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
immediately  recognized  the  features  of  his  recent  visitor,  though  he  never  under- 
stood the  reason  for  the  man's  strange  call  at  "  Westwood." 

One  place  to  which  "  Westwood "  visitors  were  sure  to  be  taken  was  the 
fernery  ;  and  among  the  many  treasures  to  which  their  attention  was  directed,  the 
mother-fern  was  never  forgotten,  and  most  of  them  received  from  the  dear  owner,  as 
living  mementos  of  their  visit,  some  of  the  baby-ferns  growing  on  the  parent-plant. 
At  one  of  the  Tabernacle  prayer-meetings,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  an  address  upon  the 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


59 


mother-fern,  in  which  he  urged  his  hearers  to  seek  to  be  spiritually  what  it  was 
naturally,  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  be  the  means  of  reproducing  themselves  in 
their  converts,  in  whom  the  same  blessed  process  might  be  repeated  by  the  eftectual 
working  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 


THE   FERNERY. 


At  one  time,  bees  were  kept  at  "  Westwood,"  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  intensely 
interested  in  watching  them  whenever  he  had  a  few  minutes  to  spare,  or  any 
visitors  who  could  explain  their  various  movements.  The  scientific  lecturer  at 
the  Pastors'  College,  at  that  period,  was  Professor  Frank  Cheshire, — a.  great 
authority  on  bees  and  bee-culture  ;  and  he  was  delighted  to  place  his  wide 
knowledge  of  the  subject  at  the  dear  President's  disposal.  One  day,  he  brought 
with  him  a  Ligurian  queen,  which  he  had  procured  on  purpose  to  add  to  the  value 
of  the  Pastor's  busy  bees,  and  he  was  delighted  to  see  how  quickly  her  majesty 
made  herself  at  home  among  her  English  subjects. 

After  a  while,  Mr.  Spurgeon  noticed  that  the  little  creatures  appeared  to  have 
to  fly  so  far  afield,  to  "gather  honey  all  the  day,"  that  they  seemed  quite  tired  out 


6o         "  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

when  they  reached  the  hives,  or  fell  exhausted  before  they  could  get  back  to  their 
homes.  There  was  also  much  difficulty  in  keeping  them  alive  through  the  winter  ; 
so  he,  reluctantly,  parted  with  them.  Before  he  did  so,  however,  he  had  one 
experience,  connected  with  them,  which  he  never  forgot.  On  a  calm  summer's 
evenincr,  he  was  standing  to  watch  them,  when,  without  giving  him  any  warning, 
hundreds  of  them  settled  on  his  clothes,  and  began  crawling  all  over  him.  He 
rushed  upstairs,  stripped  off  all  his  garments,  threw  them  quickly  out  of  the 
bedroom  window,  and,  marvellous  to  relate,  he  escaped  without  a  single  sting. 

One  Monday  morning,  not  long  after  removing  to  "  Westwood,"  the  whole 
household  was  in  a  state  of  consternation  because  there  had  been  a  burglary  during 
the  night.  On  the  Sabbath  evening,  a  service  had  been  h-eld  in  the  study,  and  a 
small  window  had  been  opened  for  ventilation.  It  was  not  noticed  at  the  time  for 
lockino-  up,  so  it  remained  open,  and  made  it  a  comparatively  easy  matter  for  a  thief 
to  enter.  He  did  not  get  much  for  his  pains,  and  his  principal  plunder  almost  led  to 
his  arrest.  Mr.  John  B.  Gough  had  given  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  a  valuable  stick  as  a 
token  of  his  affection  ;  this  was  amongst  the  burglar's  booty,  and,  after  hammering 
out  of  shape  the  gold  with  which  it  was  adorned,  he  offered  it  for  sale  at  a 
pawnbroker's  in  the  Borough.  It  was  possible  still  to  read  the  name,  C.  H. 
Spuro-eon,  in  the  precious  metal,  so  an  assistant  was  despatched  for  the  police  ; 
but,  before  they  arrived,  the  man  decamped,  and  was  not  seen  again. 

Annoying  as  the  incident  was,  the  Pastor  always  said  that  he  was  decidedly  a 
o-ainer  by  the  transaction.  With  the  amount  he  received  for  the  battered  gold,  he 
bought  some  books  which  were  of  more  use  to  him  than  the  handsome  stick  would 
ever  have  been.  Then  the  Trustees  of  the  Orphanage  felt  that,  as  he  was  the 
Treasurer  of  the  various  Institutions,  and  often  had  money,  and  documents  of  value, 
belonging  to  them,  in  his  possession,  he  ought  to  have  a  safe  in  which  to  keep  them, 
so  they  presented  one  to  him.  The  burglar  had  thrown  down,  in  the  study,  a 
number  of  lighted  matches,  and  the-  loose  papers  in  various  parts  of  the  room  were 
set  on  fire,  so  that  a  great  conflagration  might  easily  have  resulted,  if  the  Lord  had 
not  graciously  prevented  such  a  calamity.  Thankfulness  for  this  providential  escape 
was  followed  by  the  recollection  that,  since  the  transfer  of  the  property  from  the 
former  owner,  the  premises  had  not  been  insured,  so  that  the  loss,  in  case  of  fire, 
would  have  been  serious.  That  neglect  was  speedily  remedied  ;  and,  by  means  of 
electric  bells,  and  other  arrangements,  special  protection  was  provided  for  the  future. 

News  of  the  burglary  was  published,  in  various  papers,  with  considerable 
exaggeration  ;  and,  perhaps  as  the  result  of  the  publicity  thus  given,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
received  a  letter,  purporting  to  have  been  written  by  the  thief;  and  it  bore  so  many 
marks  of  being  a  genuine  epistle  that  it  was  really  believed  that  it  came  from  the 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRArHY.  '  6l 

man  himself.  Among  other  things,  he  said  that  he  didn't  know  it  was  "the 
hortiings'  Spurgin  "  who  hved  there,  for  he  would  not  have  robbed  him,  and  he  put 
the  very  pertinent  question,  "  Why  don't  you  shut  your  windows  and  keep  a  dog?" 
From  that  time,  dates  the  entry  to  "  Westwood  "  of  "Punch" — the  pug  concerning 
whom  his  master  testified  that  he  knew  more  than  any  dog  ever  ought  to  know  ! 


"punch"  and   "gyp." 

One  Thursday  evening,  when  preaching  at  the  Tabernacle,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
introduced  his  canine  friend  into  the  sermon,  and  turned  to  good  account  his 
pugnacious  propensities  : — "  I  think  that  I  have  heard  preachers  who  have  seemed 
to  me  to  bring  out  a  doctrine  on  purpose  to  fight  over  it.  I  hcive  a  dog,  that  has  a 
rug  in  which  he  sleeps  ;  and  when  I  go  home  to-night,  he  will  bring  it  out,  and 
shake  it  before  me, — -not  that  he  particularly  cares  for  his  rug,  bnX.  because  he  knows 
that  I  shall  say,  '  I'll  have  it,'  and  then  he  will  bark  at  me,  and  in  his  language  say, 
'  No,  you  won't.'  There  are  some  people  who  fetch  out  the  doctrines  of  grace  just 
in  that  way.  I  can  see  them  trotting  along  with  the  doctrine  of  election  just  in 
order  that  some  Arminian  brother  may  dispute  with  them  about  it,  and  that  then 
they  may  bark  at  him.      Do  not  act  so,  beloved." 

In  many  of  his  letters  from  Mentone,  Mr.  Spurgeon  mentioned  his  dog  ;  a  few 
extracts  will  show  how  fond  he  was  of  the  intelligent  creature  : — ■"  I  wonder  whether 
Punchie  thinks  of  his  master.  When  we  drove  from  the  station  here,  a  certain 
doggie  barked  at  the  horses  in  true  Punchistic  style,  and  reminded  me  of  my  old 
friend.  .  .  .  Punchie  sending  me  his  love  pleased  me  very  much.  Poor  doggie, 
pat  him  for  me,  and  give  him  a  tit-bit  for  my  sake.  ...  I  dreamed  of  old  Punch  ; 
I  hope  the  poor  dog  is  better.  .  .  .  Kind  memories  to  all,  including  Punch, 
How  is  he  getting  on  '^  I  rejoice  that  his  lite  is  prolonged,  and  hope  he  will  live  til! 
my  return.  May  his  afflictions  be  a  blessing  to  him  in  the  sweetening  of  his 
temper!  .   .  .  Tell  Punchie,  '  Master  is  coming  !' " 

"  Punchie,"  on  his  part,  was  very  much  attached  to  his  dear  owner,  except  wher? 


62  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  the  gout,  and  then  the  old  dog  would  not  go  near  the  poor 
sufferer.  The  faithful  friend  in  the  time  of  affliction  was  "Punch's"  son,  "Gyp." 
He  was  not  as  wise  as  his  father  ;  indeed,  he  was  often  called  a  stupid  creature,  and 
his  master  made  a  telling  illustration  out  of  his  folly  in  barking  at  thunder.  The 
paragraph  may  fittingly  end  the  present  chapter,  for  it  shows  how  Mr.  Spurgeon 
employed  in  his  Lord's  service  even  the  slightest  incidents  that  occurred  in  his 
own  home. 

On  that  occasion,  he  wrote  : — "  The  first  time  our  young  dog  heard  the 
thurider,  it  startled  him.  He  leaped  up,  gazed  around  in  anger,  and  then  began  to 
bark  at  the  disturber  of  his  peace.  When  the  next  crash  came,  he  grew  furious, 
and  flew  round  the  room,  seeking  to  tear  in  pieces  the  intruder  who  dared  thus  to 
defy  him.  It  was  an  odd  scene.  The  yelping  of  a  dog  pitted  against  the  artillery 
of  heaven  !  Poor  foolish  creature,  to  think  that  his  bark  could  silence  the  thunder- 
clap, or  intimidate  the  tempest!  What  was  he  like?  His  imitators  are  not  far  to 
seek.  Among  us,  at  this  particular  juncture,  there  are  men  of  an  exceedingly 
doggish  breed,  who  go  about  howling  at  their  Maker.  They  endeavour  to  bark 
the  Almighty  out  of  existence,  to  silence  the  voice  of  His  gospel,  and  to  let  Him 
know  that  their  rest  is  not  to  be  disturbed  by  His  warnings.  We  need  not  par- 
ticularize ;  the  creatures  are  often  heard,  and  are  very  fond  of  public  note,  even 
when  it  takes  an  unfriendly  form.  Let  them  alone.  They  present  a  pitiful  spectacle. 
We  could  smile  at  them  if  we  did  not  feel  much  more  compelled  to  weep.  The 
elements  of  a  tragedy  are  wrapt  up  in  this  comedy.  To-day,  they  defy  their  Maker  ; 
but,  to-morrow,  they  may  be  crushed  beneath  His  righteous  indignation.  At  any 
rate,  the  idea  of  fearing  them  must  never  occur  to  us  ;  their  loudest  noise  is  vocalized 
folly  ;  their  malice  is  impotent,  their  fury  is  mere  fume.  '  He  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  shall  laugh  :  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision,'" 


CHAPTER     LXXXVIII. 


a  €vm\  WittKs  mo± 

Preaching  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  the  text,  "Jesus  therefore,  being  wearied  with  His  journey,  sat 
thus  on  the  well,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  said; — "It  seems  rather  singular,  but  it  is  worthy  of  notice,  tliat  our 
Lord  appears  to  have  been  more  tired  than  His  disciples  were,  for  they  had  gone  away  into  the  city  to 
buy  meat ;  I  suppose  that  He  might  have  gone  with  them  if  He  had  not  been  more  fatigued  than  they 
were.  He  was  quite  worn  out,  and  thoroughly  spent;  and  so,  while  they  went  into  Sychar  to  purchase 
provisions,  He  sat  down  on  the  well.  I  take  it  that,  in  all  probability,  the  reason  is  this,— He  had 
mental  weariness  associated  with  His  bodily  fatigue ;  and  when  the  two  things  come  together,  they 
make  a  man  wearied  indeed.  I  know  that  there  are  some  who  fancy  that,  to  think  and  to  care  for 
others,  to  preach  and  to  teach,  is  not  much  of  work.  Well,  my  dear  brother,  I  can  assure  you  that  you 
may  keep  on  working  much  longer  with  your  arm  than  you  can  with  your  brain;  and  I  am  speaking 
from  experience  when  1  say  that  careful  thought,  and  great  anxiety  to  do  good,  bring  much-  wear  and 
tear  with  them  to  a  man's  whole  constitution.  And  if  the  life  is  taken  out  of  anyone  in  two  ways  at 
once, — -by  fatigue  of  body,  and  by  fatigue  of  mind,  too, — then  you  will  see  that  such  a  man  will  necessarily 
be  the  first  to  give  way. 

"But  my  Lord,  though  He  is  very  weary,  has  at  last  spied  out  the  person  for  whom  He  is  waiting 
and  watching.  Here  she  comes ;  and  now  His  heart  seems  to  beat  more  quickly.  His  eye  is  brighter 
than  usual,  He  is  not  half  so  fatigued  as  He  was.  You  may  have  seen  the  faint  and  tired  hunter  suddenly 
grow  strong  when,  at  last,  he  spies  on  the  crag  the  chamois  he  lias  come  to  seek  ;  or  the  fisherman 
standing  wearily  in  the  stream,  holding  his  rod,  and  ready  to  go  home  to  his  long-needed  meal,  but,  at 
last,  the  salmon  begins  to  pull  away  at  his  line,  now  how  strong  a  man  he  is !  He  will  go  on  for  an  hour 
at  that  work,  and  he  will  not  want  to  eat  or  drink.  The  whole  of  his  being  is  in  the  fishing.  So  was  it 
w'ith  my  blessed  Master.  That  woman  was  coming,  and  Christ  was  'all  there,'  as  we  say.  He  was 
ready  to  speak  the  right  word, — a  word  in  season  to  one  who  was  weary, — to  speak  the  word  of 
admonition,  or  of  comfort,  or  of  invitation;  and  He  is  'all  here'  at  this  moment.  I  thought,  when  I 
stood  here  to-night  to  speak  to  you,  '  I  am  constantly  coming  to  the  Tabernacle  to  talk  to  this  great 
throng,' and  something  seemed  to  say  to  me,  'You  ought  to  be  glad  to  have  such  an  opportunity.'  I 
thought,  '  Y'es,  and  I  am  glad ;  and  I  will  at  my  very  best  preach  Christ  to  them  as  long  as  this  tongue 
can  move,  for  it  is  a  delightful  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  tell  men  about  my  Master's  pardoning  love.' 
But,  oh,  if  He  were  here  in  bodily  presence,  He  would  do  it  so  much  better  than  any  of  us  can,  for  His 
heart  is  so  much  more  full  of  love  than  our  poor  hearts  are ! " 

ANY  people  have  wondered  how  it  was  possible  for  Mr.  Spurgeon 
to  do  all  the  work  that  he  was  able  to  perform,  for  so  many  years, 
with  such  happy  results.  He  had  efficient  helpers  in  various 
departments  of  his  service,  and  he  was  always  ready  to  render  to 
them  their  full  meed  of  praise.  Yet,  with  all  the  assistance  upon 
which  he  could  rely,  there  still  remained  for  the  chief  worker  a 
vast  amount  of  toil  which  he  could  not  delegate  to  anyone.  He  was  a  splendid 
organizer,  and  he  could  find  employment  suited  to  the  capacity  of  many  individuals 
with  greatly  varied  qualifications  ;  and  vvhile  he  could  keep  them  all  busily  occupied, 
he  was  himself  so  quick  in  all  his  labour  that  he  would  probably  do  single-haiided 
as  much  as  all  of  them  combined  could  accomplish. 

The  following  description  of  a  typical  week's  work  will  afford  at  least  a  glimpse 
of  the  way  in  which  the  dear   Pastor  spent  a  considerable  portion  of  his  time,  and 


6_|.  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

it  will  also  indicate  some  of  the  methods  adopted  by  him  in  discharging  the  heavy 
responsibilities  which  devolved  upon  him.  In  such  an  active  and  far-reaching  life 
as  his  was,  no  one  Week  in  the  year  could  be  quite  like  the  rest,  nor  indeed  did  the 
occupations  of  any  two  days  exactly  resemble  one  another ;  but  the  particulars 
here  given  will  supply  all  that  needs  to  be  known  about  a  fairly  representative 
week's  work. 

The  week  must  consist  of  seven  days,  for  the  Day  of  Rest  was,  in  many 
respects,  the  beloved  preacher's  busiest  time  ;  and,  although  he  often  tried  hard 
to  get  a  Sabbath  for  himself  on  the  Wednesday,  the  ever-increasing  and  not  always 
reasonable  requests  for  services,  all  over  the  kingdom,  frequently  encroached  upon 
the  brief  period  of  relaxation  to  which  he  was  rightfully  entitled,  and  which  the 
claims  of  health  imperatively  demanded.  He  was,  perhaps,  all  the  more  willing  to 
take  a  loner  holiday  in  the  winter  because  he  had  toiled  so  strenuously  and  almost 
continuously  through  all  the  other  months  of  the  year ;  though  it  must  also  be 
recorded  that,  during  his  seasons  of  rest,  he  probably  did  as  much  as  most  men  do 
when  in  full  work.  The  sermon  had  to  be  issued  every  week,  and  the  magazine 
every  month,  material  for  the  Almanacks  had  to  be  arranged,  there  were  always  some 
new  books  in  course  of  preparation,  many  letters  followed  the  absent  minister  wherever 
he  mioht  ^o,  and  the  care  of  his  own  church  and  many  others,  and  the  many  forms 
of  holy  service  in  which  he  was  interested,  left  all  too  little  leisure  for  the  weary 
brain  and  the  oft-suffering  body.  But  if  his  holiday  was  a  time  of  toil,  what  must 
have  been  the  pressure  when,  for  weeks  and  months  at  a  stretch,  it  was  almost 
literally  "  all  work  and  no  play  "  .'' 

In  describing  a  typical  week's  work,  a  beginning  can  most  appropriately  be  made 
with  an  account  of  the  preparation  for  the  hallowed  engagements  of  the  Sabbath. 
Up  to  six  o'clock,  every  Saturday  evening,  visitors  were  welcomed  at  "  Westwood," 
the  dear  master  doing  the  honours  of  the  garden  in  such  a  way  that  many,  with 
whom  he  thus  walked  and  talked,  treasure  the  memory  of  their  visit  as  a  very 
precious  thing.  At  the  tea-table,  the  conversation  was  bright,  witty,  and  always 
interesting  ;  and  after  the  meal  was  over,  an  adjournment  was  made  to  the  study  for 
family  worship,  and  it  was  at  these  seasons  that  my  beloved's  prayers  were  remarkable 
for  their  tender  childlikeness,  their  spiritual  pathos,  and  their  intense  devotion. 
He  seemed  to  come  as  near  to  God  as  a  litde  child  to  a  loving  father,  and  we  were 
often  moved  to  tears  as  he  talked  thus  face  to  face  with  his  Lord.  At  six  o'clock, 
every  visitor  left,  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  often  playfully  say,  "  Now,  dear  friends,  I 
must  bid  you  '  Good-bye,'  and  turn  you  out  of  this  study  ;  you  know  what  a  number 
of  chickens  I  have  to  scratch  for,  and  I  want  to  give  them  a  good  meal  to-morrow." 
So,  with  a  hearty  "  God  bless  you  !  "  he  shook  hands  with  them,  and  shut  himself  in 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPH\.  65 

to  companionship  with  his  God.  Th-e  inmates  of  the  house  went  quietly  about  their 
several  duties,  and  a  holy  silence  seemed  to  brood  over  the  place.  What  familiar 
intercourse  with  the  Saviour  he  so  greatly  loved,  was  then  vouchsafed  to  him,  we  can 
never  know,  for,  even  while  I  write,  I  hear  a  whisper,  "The  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  No  human  ear  ever  heard  the  mighty  pleadings  with 
God,  for  himself,  and  his  people,  which  rose  from  his  study  on  those  solemn 
evenings  ;  no  mortal  eyes  ever  beheld  him  as  he'  wrestled  with  the  Angel  of  the 
covenant  until  he  prevailed,  and  came  back  from  his  brook  Jabbok  with  the  message 
he  was  to  deliver  in  his  Master's  Name.  His  grandest  and  most  fruitful  sermons 
were  those  which  cost  him  most  soul-travail  and  spiritual  anguish  ; — not  in  their 
preparation  or  arrangement,  but  in  his  own  overwhelming  sense  of  accountability  to 
God  for  the  souls  to  whom  he  had  to  preach  the  gospel  of  salvation  by  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ.  Though  he  had  the  gift  of  utterance  above  many,  preaching  was  to 
him  no  lip^ht  or  tritlinor  task;  his  whole  .  heart  was  absorbed  in  it,  all  his  spiritual 
force  was  engaged  in  it,  all  the  intellectual  power,  with  which  God  had  so  richly 
endowed  him,  was  pressed  into  this  glorious  service,  and  then  laid  humbly  and 
thankfully  at  the  feet  of  his  Lord  and  Saviour,  to  be  used  and  blessed  by  Him 
according  to  His  gracious  will  and  purpose. 

Sometimes,  but  not  often,  he  would  leave  the  study  for  a  few  moments,  to  seek 
me,  and  say,  with  a  troubled  tone  in  his  dear  voice,  "  Wifey,  what  shall  I  do.'*  God 
has  not  given  me  my  text  yet."  I  would  comfort  him  as  well  as  I  could  ;  and,  after 
a  little  talk,  he  would  return  to  his  work,  and  wait  and  watch  for  the  Word  to  be 
given.  It  was,  to  me,  a  cause  for  peculiar  thankfulness  when  I  was  able  to 
suggest  to  him  a  passage  from  which  he  could  preach  ;  and,  afterwards,  in  referring 
to  the  sermon,  he  seemed  so  pleased  to  say,  "You  gave  me  that  text."' 

Many  years  ago,  on  a  Friday  evening  in  Conference  week,  a  number  of  the 
ministers  met  at  "  Westwood,"  as  was  usual  with  them,  to  talk  over  the  doings  of 
the  past  days,  and  to  enjoy  a  chat  with  the  President  in  his  own  home.  During  the 
evening,  it  was  suggested  that  each  one  should  explain  his  method  of  procedure  in 
the  most  important  matter  of  sermon-making  ;  and  the  idea  found  great  favour  with 
the  little  company.  Many  of  the  brethren  responded,  and  told,  more  or  less  inter- 
estingly, their  manner  of  preparation  ;  but  it  was  evident  that  all  awaited  with 
impatience  the  moment  when  "the  dear  Governor"  should  speak,  and  reveal  to  them 
the  secrets  of  his  Saturday  nights'  work.  Very  eager  were  the  faces  turned  to  him 
as  he  sat,  blissfully  happy  in  his  easy  chair,  the  strain  of  the  week  over,  and  in  full 
enjoyment  of  the  free  and  holy  fellowship  which  obtained  on  such  occasions.  I 
cannot  recall  his  very  words,  but  the  purport  of  them  was  something  like  this  : — 
"  Brethren,  it  is  not  easy  for  me  to  tell  you  precisely  how  I  make  my  sermons.     All 


66 


H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


throuo-h  the  week  I  am  on  the  look-out  for  material  that  I  can  use  on  the  Sabbath  ; 
but  the  actual  work  of  arranging  it,  is,  necessarily,  left  until  Saturday  evening,  for 
every  other  moment  is  fully  occupied  in  the  Lord's  service.  I  have  often  said  that 
mv  crreatest  difficulty  is  to  fix  my  mind  upon  the  particular  texts  which  are  to  be  the 
subjects  of  discourse  on  the  following  day  *  ;  or,  to  speak  more  correcdy,  to 
know  what  topics  the  Holy  Spirit  would  have  me  bring  before  the  congregation. 
As  soon  as  any  passage  of  Scripture  really  grips  my  heart  and  soul,  I  concentrate 
my  whole  attention  upon  it,  look  at  the  precise  meaning  ot  the  original,  closely 
examine  the  context  so  as  to  see  the  special  aspect  of  the  text  in  its  surroundings, 
and  roughly  jot  down  all  the  thoughts  that  occur  to  me  concerning  the  subject, 
leaving  to  a  later  period  the  orderly  marshalling  of  them  for  presentation  to  my 
hearers. 

"  When   I   have   reached  this  point,   I   am  often  stopped  by  an  obstacle  which 
is  only  a  trouble  to  those  of  us  whose  sermons  are  regularly  printed.      I  turn  to  my 


>^/ 


^^      ^^J~^   ^^If 


■^y 


'f^^r  rU^.tt^l   ,     /^^y       • 


c^ 


■^c*^ -iJ'^-C- 


^;^^^^     /cf-^ 


ex-/  je~-<KC^ 


FACSIMILE   OF   INSCRIPTION   IN   MR.   SPURGEON'S  STUDY   BIBLE. 

own  Bible,  which  contains  a  complete  record  of  all  my  published  discourses  ;  and. 


*  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  referred  to  this  matter  at  length,  in  Vol.  I.,  pages  206  and  207. 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


67 


68       .  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

looking  at  those  I  have  preached  upon  the  text,  I  find,  perhaps,  that  the  general  run 
of  thought  is  so  similar  to  that  which  I  have  marked  out,  that  I  have  to  abandon 
the  subject,  and  seek  another.  Happily,  a  text  of  Scripture  is  like  a  diamond  with 
many  facets,  which  sparkles  and  flashes  whichever  way  it  is  held,  so  that,  although  I 
may  have,  already  printed,  several  sermons  upon  a  particular  passage,  there  is  still  a 
fresh  setting  possible  for  the  priceless  gem,  and  I  can  go  forward  with  m.y  work.  I 
like  next  to  see  what  others  have  to  say  about  my  text ;  and,  as  a  rule,  my 
experience  is  that,  if  its  teaching  is  perfectly  plain,  the  commentators,  to  a  man, 
explain  it  at  great  length,  whereas,  with  equal  unanimity,  they  studiously  avoid  or 
evade  the  verses  which  Peter  might  have  described  as  '  things  hard  to  be  under- 
stood.' I  am  very  much  obliged  to  them  for  leaving  me  so  many  nuts  to  crack  ;  but 
I  should  have  been  just  as  grateful  if  they  had  made  more  use  of  their  own 
theological  teeth  or  nut-crackers.  However,  among  the  many  who  have  written 
upon  the  Word,  I  generally  find  some  who  can  at  least  help  to  throw  a  side  light 
upon  it ;  and  when  I  have  arrived  at  that  part  of  my  preparation,  I  am  glad  to  call 
my  dear  wife  to  my  assistance.  She  reads  to  me  until  I  get  a  clear  idea  of  the 
whole  subject ;  and,  gradually,  I  am  guided  to  the  best  form  of  outline,  which  I  copy 
out,  on  a  half-sheet  of  notepaper,  for  use  in  the  pulpit.  This  relates  only  to  the 
morning  sermon  ;  for  the  evening,  I  am  usually  content  if  I  can  decide  upon  the 
text,  and  have  a  general  notion  of  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  it,  leaving  to 
the  Lord's-day  afternoon  the  final  arrangement  of  divisions,  sub-diA-isions,  and 
illustrations." 

This  is,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  the  dear  preacher's  own  explanation  of  his 
mode  of  preparing  his  discourses  ;  and  when  I  have  called  my  readers'  attention  to 
the  accompanying  facsimile  of  the  rough  notes  and  jottings  made  by  him  on  one 
of  those  memorable  Saturday  evenings,  I  may  resume  my  own  portion  of  the  narra- 
tive. "Will  you  come  and  help  me  to-night,  wifey  ?  "  he  would  say,  as  if  I  were 
doing  him  a  favour,  thouoh  the  service  was  one  which  an  ano-el  mio-ht  have  coveted. 
I  always  found,  when  I  went  into  the  study,  an  easy  chair  drawn  up  to  the  table,  by 
his  side,  and  a  big  heap  of  books  piled  one  upon  the  other,  and  opened  at  the  place 
where  he  desired  me  to  read.  With  those  old  volumes  around  him,  he  was  like  a 
honey-bee  amid  the  flowers  ;  he  seemed  to  know  how  to  extract  and  carry  oft  the 
sweet  spoils  from  the  most  unpromising-looking  tome  among  them..  His  ac- 
quaintance with  them  was  so  familiar  and  complete,  that  he  could  at  once  place  his 
hand  on  any  author  who  had  written  upon  the  portion  of  Scripture  which  was 
engaging  his  attention  ;  and  I  was,  in  this  pleasant  fashion,  introduced  to  many  of  the 
Puritan  and  other  divines  whom,  otherwise,  I  might  not  have  known.  These  seasons 
were  of  such  special  delight  to  me  that  I  gave  a  brief  account  of  them  in  my  book, 


C.     H.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  69 


^ct€\. 


v^„-t<-?-^     fCC'iLiy^S-^     iJXl<^    f^L^,^-»-r^^      U-^ <iCc,</  A-  , 


^^<^-. 


.'?r: 


jpTr-i*^<-'«-*- 


^:?W   />in  "^T^ 


FACSIMILE   CF    MR.    SPURGEO.n'S   NOTES    IN    PREPARING    A   SERMON    ON    LUKE    II.    lO— 12. 


70  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Ten  Years  of  My  Life  ;  and,  as  the  description  then  came  fresh  from  my  heart,  and 
warm  with  the  joy  of  sacred  fellowship,  I  prefer  to  transcribe  it  here,  rather  than 
trust  to  my  memory  for  details  : — 

"  For  some  time,  it  has  been  the  dear  Pastor's  custom,  as  soon  as  the  text  for 
the  Lord's-day  morning  service  has  been  given  him  by  the  Master,  to  call  me  into 
the  study,  and  permit  me  to  read  the  various  Commentaries  on  the  subject-matter  in 
hand.  Never  was  occupation  more  delightful,  instructive,  and  spiritually  helpful  ; 
my  heart  has  burned  within  me,  as  the  meaning  of  some  passage  of  God's  Word  has 
been  opened  up,  and  the  hidden  stores  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  have  been 
revealed  ;  or  when  the  marrow  and  fatness  of  a  precious  promise  or  doctrine  have 
been  spread  like  a  dainty  banquet  before  my  longing  eyes.  Shall  I  ever  forget 
those  solemn  evenings  when  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  were  the  theme  of 
tearful  meditation  ;— when,  with  'love  and  grief  our  hearts  dividing,'  we  followed 
Him  throughout  the  night  on  which  He  was  betrayed,  weeping,  like  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem,  and  saying,  'There  was  never  sorrow  like  unto  His  sorrow  ;' — or  the 
more  rapturous  time  when  the  topic  for  the  morrow  was  to  be,  '  the  exceeding  riches 
of  His  grace,'  and-,jwe  were  fairly  bewildered  by  the  inexhaustible  treasures  of  love 
and  mercy  to  be  found  in  that  fair  '  land  of  Havilah.  where  there  is  gold  '  ?  Gracious 
hours  are  those  thus  spent,  and  unspeakably  precious  to  my  soul  ;  for,  while  the 
servant  of  the  Lord  is  reaping  the  corn  of  the  Kingdom  for  the  longing  multitude 
who  expect  to  be  fed  by  his  hand,  I  can  glean  between  the  sheaves,  and  gather  the 
'  handfuls  of  purpose  '  which  are  let  fall  so  lovingly. 

"  There  come  delightful  pauses  in  my  reading,  when  the  book  is  laid  down,  and 
I  listen  to  the  dear  voice  of  my  beloved  as  he  explains  what  I  cannot  understand,  or 
unfolds  meanings  which  I  fail  to  see,  often  condensing  into  a  few  clear,  choice 
sentences  whole  pages  of  those  discursive  old  divines  in  whom  he  delights,  and 
pressing  from  the  gathered  thoughts  all  the  richest  nectar  of  their  hidden  sweetness. 
Thus,  a  poor  prisoner  hd^s  the  first  sip  of  the  'wines  on  the  lees,  well-refined,' — the 
first  morsel  from  the  loaves  with  which  the  thousands  are  to  be  fed  and  refreshed  on 
the  morrow.  How  shall  I  sufficiently  thank  God  for  this  drink  of  the  brook  by  the 
way,  this  '  holy  place  '  within  my  home  where  the  Lord  deigns  to  meet  with  me,  and 
draw  out  my  heart  in  adoration  and  worship  ?  " 

Lord's-day  morning. — Mr.  Spurgeon  always  set  a  good  example  to  his  people 
by  being  early  at  the  sanctuary.  He  usually  reached  the  Tabernacle  at  least  half  an 
hour  before  the  time  for  commencing  the  service.  During  that  interval,  he  attended 
to  any  matters  that  were  of  special  urgency,  selected  the  hymns  that  were  to  be  sung, 
and  arranged  with  the  precentor  the  tunes  best  adapted  to  them  ;  and  the  remaining 
minutes  were  spent  in  prayer  with  all  the  deacons  and  elders  who  were  not  already 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  7 1 

on  duty  elsewhere.  The  dear  preacher  himself  greatly  valued  that  season  of 
devotion,  and  his  sermons  contain  many  references  to  the  petitions  presented  by  the 
brethren  in  his  vestry  before  joining  in  the  public  worship  of  the  great  congregation. 
During  the  thirty  years  that  he  preached  in  the  beautiful  building  he  had  so  largely 
helped  to  erect,  there  was  practically  no  difference  in  the  size  of  his  audience,  for  the 
Tabernacle  was  always  crowded,  though  sometimes  the  number  of  friends  unable 
to  gain  admission,  when  the  outer  gates  were  closed,  was  larger  than  on  other 
occasions.  Punctually  at  eleven  o'clock,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  seen  descending  the 
steps  leading  to  the  platform,  followed  by  the  long  train  of  office-bearers,  and,  after 
a  brief  pause  for  silent  supplication,  the  service  began.  There  is  no  necessity  to 
describe  in  detail  even  one  of  those  memorable  assemblies.  In  the  course  of  his 
long  ministry,  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  persons,  from  all  parts  of  the  globe, 
heard  him  proclaim  that  gospel  which  became  to  multitudes  of  them  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation  ;  while,  happily,  by  means  of  the  printed  sermons,  the  messages 
he  delivered  continue  to  reach  an  ever-widening  circle  of  read^-rs,  not  only  in  our 
own  land  and  language,  but  in  other  climes  and  in  the  man)  strange  tongues  into 
which  the  precious  discourses  have  been  and  still  are  being  translated. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  often  said  that  the  pulpit  was  his  throne,  and  that, 
when  preaching,  he  envied  no  monarch  in  all  the  world,  nor  felt  the  slightest  desire 
to  exchange  places  with  any  man  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  Yet  was  there,  even 
to  him,  an  inner  shrine — the  very  holy  of  holies, — which  was  more  sacred  still. 
Many  times  he  has  testified  that,  when  leading  the  great  congregation  in  prayer,  he 
has  been  so  rapt  in  adoration,  and  so  completely  absorbed  in  the  supplication  or 
thanksgiving  he  has  been  presenting,  that  he  has  quite  forgotten  all  his 
surroundings,  and  has  felt  even  a  measure  ot  regret,  upon  closing  his  petition,  and 
opening  his  eyes,  to  find  that  he  was  still  in  the  fiesh,  in  the  company  of  men  of  like 
passions  with  himself,  instead  of  being  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  Most  High, 
sharing  in  the  higher  worship  of  the  holy  angels  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect.  Mr.  D.  L.  Moody  must  have  been  very  deeply  in  sympathy  with  Mr. 
Spurgeon  upon  this  matter,  for  he  declared  that,  greatly  as  he  had  been  blessed 
every  time  he  heard  the  Pastor  preach,  he  had  been  even  more  impressed  as  he  had 
heard  him  pray.     Other  notable  servants  of  Christ  have  borne  a  similar  testimony. 

The  service  being  ended,; — if  it  was  the  second  Sabbath  in  the  month,  the 
Pastor  joined  the  large  company  of  communicants  who  usually  filled  the  spacious 
lecture-hall  ;  and  there,  around  the  table  of  their  Lord,  another  half-hour  of 
hallowed  Christian  fellowship  was  enjoyed,  completing  and  consummating  the 
blessing  received  in  the  public  assembly.  To  many  of  the  most  earnest  workers 
of  the  Tabernacle   Church,   the  morning  was  the  only  time  when  they  could  meet 


72  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

with  their  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ  in  their  own  house  of  prayer  ;  for  the  after- 
noon and  evening-  were  devoted  to  Sunday-school  and  mission  work,  open-air 
preaching,  or  the  many  forms  of  Christian  service  in  which  they  were  engaged. 
The  Pastor  constantly  referred  to  this  happy  arrangement  ;  and  urged  others  of  the 
members  to  adopt  the  same  method  of  both  getting  good  and  doing  good,  as  it  would 
help  to  develop  their  own  gifts  and  graces,  and  it  would  also  make  the  more  room  . 
for  the  unconverted  who  desired  to  come  to  hear  the  Word  at  night. 

Each  Sabbath,  except  the  second,  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  supper  was 
observed  at  the  close  of  the  evening  service, — the  first  Lord's-day  evening  in  each 
month  being  the  time  for  the  great  communion  in  the  Tabernacle,  when  the  area  and 
the  larger  part  of  the  first  gallery  were  reserved  for  communicants,  and  many 
hundreds  of  spectators  were  able  to  remain  in  other  parts  of  the  building.  It  was  a 
most  impressive  scene, — sublime  in  its  simplicity, — and  those  who  have  ever  taken 
part  in  it  can  never  forget  it.  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  long  held  and  taught  that  the 
apostolic  precedents  all  appeared  to  indicate  that  the  celebration  of  the  sacred  supper 
should  take  place  each  Lord's-day,  and,  therefore,  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  he 
always  attended  the  communion  every  Sabbath  if  it  was  possible,  and  he  often  bore 
his  willing  witness  that  the  frequent  participation  in  the  holy  feast  increased  rather 
than  diminished  its  value  as  a  constant  reminder  of  Him  who  said  to  His  disciples, 
"  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me." 

On  every  Sabbath  morning  in  the  month,  except  the  second,  there  was  usually 
a  long  procession  of  friends  from  the  country,  or  from  foreign  lands,  waiting  tor  just 
a  shake  of  the  hand  and  a  hearty  greeting  from  the  Pastor  ;  and  it  was  interesting  to 
notice  how  quickly  he  recognized  those  whom  he  had  seen  before,  even  if  years  had 
elapsed  since  they  last  met.  All  through  the  summer  season,  some  hundreds  of 
visitors  from  the  United  States  helped,  at  each  service,  to  swell  the  contingents  trom 
other  parts  ;  and  most  of  them  afterwards  sought  to  secure  a  personal  interview  with 
the  great  preacher  to  whom  they  had  been  listening.  Among  them  were  usually 
some  of  the  most  noted  of  the  American  ministers  of  various  denominations,  to  whom 
a  hearty  invitation  was  given  to  take  part  in  the  evening  service,  or  the  prayer- 
meeting  the  next  night.  Mr.  Spurgeon  loved  to  quote  what  one  of  these  brethren 
said  to  him: — "Well,  Brother  Spurgeon,  I  was  here  tea  years  ago,  and  heard  you 
preach,  and  I  find  that  you  have  not  altered  your  doctrine  in  the  least.  You  stand 
to-day  exacdy  where  you  stood  then."  "Yes,"  replied  the  Pastor,  "  and  if  you  come 
again  in  another  ten  years,  you  will,  by  the  grace  of  God,  find  me  still  preaching  the 
very  same  gospel,  unless  the  Lord  has,  in  the  meantime,  called  me  home."  Among 
the  very  special  friends,  from  across  the  Atlantic,  were  such  divines  as  Dr.  John 
Hall,   Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor,   Dr.  Cuyler,   Dr.  Armitage,  Dr.  MacArthur,   Dr.   Lorimer, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  J  T, 

and  Dr.  H.  L.  Wayland  ;  and  they  were  sure  to  be  invited  to  call,  during  the 
week,  at  the  Pastor's  home,  and  some  of  them  had  the  still  grreater  delieht  of 
spending  a  quiet  day  with  him  in  the  country,  when  that  rare  privilege  was  possible. 
Others,  at  mutually-convenient  times,  visited  the  Orphanage,  and  the  rest  of  the 
Institutions,  under  his  guidance,  and  thus  they  heard  from  his  own  lips  the  charming 
story  of  how  the  Lord  had  led  him  and  blessed  him  in  connection  with  all  the 
different  branches  of  his  service. 

The  informal  reception  being  over  at  last,  the  Pastor  was  able  to  leave, — unless, 
as  not  seldom  happened,  some  poor  trembling  soul  was  waiting  in  the  hope  of  having 
a  word  or  two  of  cheer  and  direction  from  him,  or  one  of  the  earnest  workers, 
always  on  the  watch  'for  anxious  enquirers,  came  forward,  with  radiant  face,  bringing 
one  or  another  who  had  sought  and  found  the  Saviour  either  during  or  since  the 
service.  While  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  residing  at  "  Helensburgh  House,"  he  was  able  to 
return  home  to  dinner  on  the  Lord's-day  ;  but,  after  removing  to  "  Westwood,"  he 
soon  found  that  the  distance  was  too  great,  so  he  remained  for  the  afternoon  within 
easy  reach  of  the  Tabernacle,  with  friends  who  were  only  too  glad  to  minister  in  any 
way  to  the  comfort  and  refreshing  of  the  one  who  had  been  so  greatly  blessed  to 
them.  Sometimes,  there  was  a  sick  member  whom  the  Pastor  felt  that  he  must  visit 
after  dinner  ;  otherwise,  he  had  an  hour  or  so  of  rest  and  Christian  conversation 
before  retiring,  at  about  four  o'clock,  for  the  preparation  of  his  evening  discourse. 
Some,  who  were  very  little  children  then,  can  probably  remember  the  injunction 
given  to  them  on  such  occasions,  "You  must  be  very  quiet,  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  is 
getting  his  sermon."  Ere  he  was  summoned  to  tea.  as  a  rule,  the  brief  notes  which 
he  was  going  to  use  in  the  pulpit  were  duly  arranged.  The  evening  sermon  was 
usually  shorter  than  the  one  delivered  in  the  morning,  and  somewhat  more 
evangelistic,  in  order  to  be  specially  adapted  to  the  larger  number  of  casual 
worshippers  who  might  then  be  present.  Yet,  often,  that  order  was  changed  ;  and 
the  morning  discourse  more  nearly  resembled  an  earnest  evangelist's  address,  while 
the  sermon  in  the  evening  was  a  closely-reasoned  exposition  of  the  doctrines  ot 
grace,  which  again  and  again  led  to  the  conversion  of  more  sinners  than  did  some  ot 
the  appeals  directly  addressed  to  them,  and  which  seemed  as  if  they  must  reach  the 
hearers'  hearts. 

For  some  years,  once  a  quarter,  the  Tabernacle  was  thrown  open,  on  the  Lord's- 
day  evening,  to  anybody  who  liked  to  come,  the  members  of  the  church  and 
congregation  being  asked  to  stay  away  for  that  night.  It  is  not  many  preachers  who 
could  make  such  an  experiment,  but  it  was  crowned  with  abundant  success  from  the 
first.  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  afterwards,  that  his  regular  hearers  had  so  loyally 
complied  with  his  request  that  they  should  worship  elsewhere  for  that  one  occasion^ 


74  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

that,  in  addition  to  the  seat-stewards  and  other  workers  who  were  present,  he 
could  not  recognize  half-a-dozen  persons  in  the  whole  assembly  of  five  or  six 
thousand  people.  The  discourses  delivered  to  such  a  promiscuous  audience 
were,  naturally,  evangelistic,  and  many  were  brought  to  the  Lord  through  these 
special  services. 

Before  the  evening  worship,  on  ordinary  Sabbaths,  the  Pastor  often  saw  an 
enquirer,  or  a  candidate  for  church-fellowship,  who  found  it  difficult  to  get  to  the 
Tabernacle  during  the  week  ;  and,  after  preaching,  except  on  communion  nights, 
however  weary  he  might  be,  he  was  never  too  tired  to  point  a  poor  sinner  to  the 
Saviour,  and  to  act  the  part  of  the  true  shepherd  of  souls  to  those  who  were  seeking 
entrance  into  the  fold.  By  the  time  he  reached  his  home,  he  had  certainly  "earned 
a  night's  repose  ;  "  yet  his  day's  labour  was  not  always  finished  even  then  ;  for,  if  he 
was  going  to  preach,  a  long  way  in  the  country,  on  the  morrow,  he  was  obliged  to 
start  at  once  revising  the  report  of  the  discourse  which  he  had  delivered  in  the 
morning.  That,  however,  was  quite  an  exceptional  arrangement;  and,  as  a  general 
rule,  his  first  work,  every  Monday,  was  the  revision  of  the  Lord's-day  morning's 
sermon. 

This  was  always  a  labour  of  love,  yet  it  was  a  labour  ;  and  it  is  not  surprising 
that,  during  a  very  severe  illness,  when  his  friends  induced  him  to  see  an  eminent 
phy3ician,  the  doctor  urged  and  almost  ordered  him  to  abandon  this  heavy  task  so 
soon  after  the  great  strain  of  the  Sabbath  services.  But  the  Pastor  knew  that, 
to  delay  the  publication  even  for  a  week,  would  materially  aftect  the  circulation  ;  and 
he  also  said  that,  if  he  was  to  continue  his  eifts  to  the  Lord's  cause  on  the  scale 
to  which  he  had  been  accustomed,  he  must  keep  all  his  literary  work  up  to  the 
highest  mark,  and  he  could  not  bear  the  thought  of  lessening  the  help  that  he  saw 
to  be  required  in  so  many  different  directions.  He  used  also  playfully  to  say  that 
the  earth  itself  would  cease  to  revolve  if  the  sermon  did  not  come  out  every 
Thursday  morning  ;  and,  in  advising  the  students  occasionally  to  follow  his  early 
example,  and  to  write  out  their  discourses  in  full, — but  not  to  read  or  recite  them, — 
he  told  them  that  the  revision  of  his  sermons  for  the  press  gave  him  all  the  benefits 
that  other  preachers  might  derive  from  writing  theirs. 

As  soon  as  the  messenger  brought  the  reporter's  manuscript,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
glanced  at  the  number  of  folios, — to  see  whether  the  discourse  was  longer  or  shorter 
than  usual,  so  that  he  might  judge  whether  he  had  to  lengthen  or  to  reduce  it 
in  order  that  it  might,  when  printed,  fill  the  requisite  space, — twelve  octavo  pages  ; — 
and  at  once  began  revising  it.  T\\q.  facsimile,  on  the  opposite  page,  will  show  how 
carefully  and  thoroughly  this  part  of  his  work  was  done  ;  it  will  also  have,  to  many 
readers,  a  peculiarly  pathetic  interest  from  the  fact  that  it  formed  part  of  the  last 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


75 


LA 
0  .^ 


/- 


:^     ,v>^ 


z  ^^^  -^  ^  c^ 


-6' 


..>c<^ 


DC^/-W^    u-^-tXj 


^-^ 


/£>_ 


-^- 


^/     W:^^      ^•v^^^^.^-^^^j?  ^        .yLLeA. jc <?y^^^^o^ 

HuLyw      ---{^^^y^-i.      ,JL<L^  ^aA^    ^^JU^^     N-    ^^e-tJi^ 

(See  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No,  2, 241,. page  57.) 
FACSIMILE  OF   MR.   SPURGEONS   REVISION    OF   SERMON    MANUSCRIPT. 


76  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

sermon  he  ever  corrected,  and  that,  while  writing-  in  it  about  the  glories  of  Heaven, 
he  was  describing  what  he  was  himself  to  witness  on  the  very  day  that  the  discourse 
was  to  be  read, — the  never-to-be-forgotten  January  31,  1892. 

After  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  made  the  alterations  which  he  deemed  advisable,  Mr. 
Keys,  who  sat  on  his  left-hand  in  the  study,  was  entrusted  with  the  duty  of  verifying 
quotations,  and  seeing  that  the  punctuation  and  other  minor  matters  were  all  in 
order.  Then,  when  about  a  third  of  the  manuscript  was  ready,  the'  messenger 
started  off  with  it  to  the  printers,  returning  for  a  second  supply,  and  sometimes  even 
for  a  third  if  the  work  of  revision  was  at  all  delayed, 

(As  this  chapter  mentions  the  reporting  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons,  it  may  be  of 
interest  to  insert  what  Mr.  T.  A.  Reed  said  of  him  in  his  lecture  on  "  Speaking  and 
Speakers  from  a  Shorthand  Writer's  Point  of  View:" — "When  a  speaker  has  a 
distinct  articulation  combined  with  a  clear  strong  voice,  the  reporter  who  has  to 
follow  him  is  in  Elysium  ; — that  is,  if  the  utterance  is  not  too  rapid,  or  the  style  of 
composition  too  difficult.  The  combination,  however,  is  rare.  It  has  a  very  striking 
example  in  Mr.  Spurgeon,  who,  without  apparent  effort,  makes  himself  distinctly 
heard  at  the  farthest  end  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  To  a  clear,  ringing, 
musical  voice,  he  adds  an  almost  perfect  articulation.  Canon  Liddon  is  another 
illustration  of  the  kind  of  elocution  I  have  been  speaking  of.  Preaching  under  the 
dome  of  St.  Paul's,  his  voice,  clear  and  rich,  penetrates  the  most  distant  aisles  of  the 
great  cathedral,  where  the  tones  ot  an  ordinary  speaker  would  die  away  unheard, 
save  as  faint  reverberations.  Canon  Farrar  also  has  an  excellent  voice,  but  it  is 
not  so  melodious  as  either  Mr.  Spurgeon's  or  Canon  Liddon's.   .   .   . 

"The  average  rate  of  public  speaking  is  about  120  words  a  minute.  Some 
speakers  vary  greatly  in  their  speech,  not  only  on  different  occasions,  but  in  the 
course  of  the  same  speech.  I  have,  tor  example,  a  memorandum  of  a  sermon  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  showing  that,  during  the  first  ten  minutes,  he  spoke  at  the  rate  of 
123  words  a  minute  ;  the  second  ten  minutes,  132  ;  the  third  ten  minutes,  128  ;  the 
fourth  ten  minutes,  155  ;  and  the  remaining  nine  minutes,  162  ;  giving  an  average  of 
about  140  words  a  minute.  Another  sermon  shows  an  average  of  125  words  a 
minute, — namely,  the  first  ten  minutes,  119;  the  second  ten  minutes,  118;  the  third 
ten  minutes,  139  ;  and  the  remaining  sixteen  minutes,  126.  Taking  the  average  of  a 
number  of  sermons,  his  rate  may  be  reckoned  to  be  nearly  140  words  a  minute.") 


CHAPTER     LXXXIX, 


a     CgpiCHl     Wind's     WinXk    (Continued). 

HERE  was  a  little  breathing-space  for  the  busy  toiler  after  the  boy 
was  sent  away  with  the  first  portion  of  the  sermon  manuscript  ;  but, 
usually,  other  work  at  once  claimed  the  Pastor's  attention.  On  his 
right-hand,  as  represented  in  the  view  here  given,  his  private 
secretary,  Mr.  J.  W.  Harrald,  had  been  busy  opening  the  morning's 
letters,  and  arranging  those  that  required  immediate  answers.  It 
there  were  any  that  he  knew  would  be  specially  cheering,  they  were  always  placed 


C.    H.    SPURGEON    AND    HIS  PRIVATE   SECRETARY   IN    THE   STUDV  AT    "WESTWOOD.' 


yS  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

where  they  would  at  once  catch  the  eye  of  "the  dear  Governor.  '  This  was  always 
the  case  with  large  and  unexpected  donations  for  the  Lord's  work  under  his  care, — 
such  as  a  cheque  for  /500,  which  came  as  a  substantial  token  of  a  father's  gratitude 
for  Mr.  Spurgeon's  efforts  to  be  the  means  of  blessing  to  the  gentleman's  son 
at  Mentone.  Sometimes,  there  were  anonymous  letters, — complaining,  or  abusive, 
or  even  blasphemous, — and  it  was  with  peculiar  satisfaction  that  they  were  prevented 
from  ever  wounding  the  beloved  servant  of  the  Lord  for  whom  they  were  intended 
by  those  who  wrote  them.  The  Pastor  occasionally  dictated  replies  to  a  few  of  the 
letters  before  continuing  his  sermon-revising  ;  but,  more  often,  with  his  own  hand,, 
he  wrote  the  answers  in  full,  for  he  never  spared  himself  if  he  could  give  greater 
pleasure  to  others.  In  later  years,  as  the  number  of  donors  to  the  various 
Institutions  increased  so  rapidly,  he  was  obliged  to  have  a  set  of  receipts  litho- 
o-raphed  in  facsimile;  but,  even  when  using  these,  he  added  a  few  words  which 
crready  enhanced  their  value  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  received  them.  He  found 
it  necessary  also  to  have  a  considerable  variety  of  lithographed  letters  prepared,, 
ready  to  send  to  applicants  for  admission  to  the  College  and  Orphanage,  or  persons, 
seekino-  situations,  asking  him  to  read  manuscripts,  or  to  write  the  Prefaces  for  new 
books,  or  to  do  any  of  the  thousand  and  one  things  by  which  so  many  people  sought 
to  steal  away  his  precious  moments,  and  at  the  same  time  to  augment  the  revenue 
of  the  Post  Office. 

It  was  usually  far  into  the  afternoon  before  the  last  folio  of  the  sermon  was 
reached,  and  the  messenger  was  able  to  start  with  it  to  the  printing-office.  Then 
there  were  more  letters  to  be  answered,  possibly  books  to  be  reviewed,  magazine 
proofs  to  be  read,  or  other  literary  work  to  be  advanced  to  the  next  stage  ;  and  it 
was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  even  a  few  minutes  could  be  secured  for  a  quiet 
walk  in  the  lovely  garden  that,  all  day  long,  seemed  to  be  inviting  the  ceaseless 
worker  to  come  and  admire  its  many  charms.  He  could  hear  the  voice  of  duty 
callino-  him  in  another  direction,  and  soon  it  was  time  to  get  ready  to  start  for  the 
Tabernacle. 

The  clock  in  the  illustration  opposite  shows  that,  when  the  photograph  was 
taken,  the  Pastor  had  arranged  to  be  at  Newington  at  half-past  five,  either  meeting 
the  elders,  and  considering  with  them  the  very  important  matters  relating,  to  the 
church's  spiritual  state  which  specially  came  under  their  notice,  or  presiding  at  the 
first  part  of  a  church-meeting,  which  often  lasted  throughout  the  whole  evening, 
and  was  mainly  occupied  with  the  delightful  business  of  receiving  new  members. 
As  seven  o'clock  approached,  he  left  the  meeting  in  the  charge  of  his  brother,  or 
one  of  the  deacons  or  elders,  that  he  might  be  at  liberty  to  begin  the  prayer- 
meeting  at  the  appointed  hour.  Sometimes,  if  he  had  engagements  which  would 
prevent  him  from  being  at  the  Tabernacle  on  Tuesday  or  Wednesday,  he  would  get 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


79 


his  sermon-revision  completed  before,  dinner,  and,  directly  afterwards,  go  up  to  see 
enquirers  and  candidates, — a  congenial  but  exhausting  form  of  service  which  often 
continued  right  up  to  the  hour  ot  prayer. 


READY    TO    START     FOR    THE    TABERNACLE. 


On  certain  special  Mondays  in  the  year,  the  annual  meetings  of  some  of  the 
smaller  Societies  were  held,  and  on  those  occasions  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  at  the 
lecture-hall  in  time  to  give  out  the  "grace  before  tea."  His  presence  was  greatly 
prized  by  the  earnest  and  energetic  sisters  who  carried  on  the  various  works  ot 
charity  and  beneficence  ;  and  they  were  much  encouraged  by  his  hearty  words  of 
cheer,  and  by  the  financial  help  which  always  accompanied  them.  It  was  really 
surprising  to  notice,  year  after  year,  how  much  he  varied  his  addresses  at  these 
gatherings,  for  the  audience  mainly  consisted  of  the  same  persons  each  time.  The 
three  principal  Societies  were  the  Poor  Ministers'  Clothing  Society,  the  Ladies' 
Maternal  Society,  and  the  Ladies'  Benevolent  Society, — or,  as  they  were  sometimes 
humorously  described,  the  big  box  Society,  the  little  box  Society,  and  the  Christmas 


So 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


box  Society,  only  that  the  bounty  of  the  third  was  bestowed  all  the  year  round,  as 
well  as  at  Christmas  time,  when  there  was  an  extra  manifestation  of  generosity. 
The  clear  Pastor  found  a  constant  theme  for  merriment  in  the  Reports  presented  at 
these  meetings.  At  one  time,  the  ladies  recorded  that  so  many  "  cases  "  had  been 
relieved  ;  and  when  he  pointed  out  objections  to  that  term,  they  substituted 
"objects"  with  no  better  success;  but  the  climax  was  reached  when  it  was 
announced. that  so  many  "sheets,  blankets,  pillow-cases,  and  othei^  garments"  had 
been  given  away  during  the  year !  Such  harmless  fun  brightened  up  the 
proceedings  that  might  otherwise  have  become  monotonous,  and  it  was  perhaps 
indulged  in  on  purpose  to  show  the  good  sisters  how  to  associate  as  much  cheerful- 
ness as  possible  with  work  that  must  often  have  sorely  depressed  their  spirits  as  they 
heard  of  the  poverty  among  ministers  of  the  gospel  and  other  tried  children  of  God. 


THE    LOWER    PLATFORM     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    ARRANGED    I-OR    THE   PRAYER-MEETING. 


A  little  before  seven  o'clock,  the  happy  season  of  talk  was  brought  to  a  close,  a 
brief  prayer  for  a  blessing  on  the  work  and  workers  followed,  and  then  the  whole 
company  ascended  to  the  Tabernacle  for  the  prayer-meetmg.      All  who  are  tamiliar 


c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiography.  '    8 1 

with  Mr.  Spurgeon's  writings,  know  that  he  regarded  the  prayer-meeting  as  the 
thermometer  of  the  church  ;  and,  judging  by  that  test,  the  spiritual  temperature  of  the 
large  community  under  his  charge  stood  very  high.  Not  that  he  could  ever  induce 
all  the  members  to  be  regularly  present  on  the  Monday  night ;  but,  for  many  years, 
the  numbers  attending  filled  a  large  portion  of  the  area  and  first  gallery,  and  the 
world-wide  testimony  was  that  the  meeting  was  altogether  unique,  the  only  one  that 
at  all  approached  it  being  Pastor  Archibald  G.  Brown's  Saturday  night  prayer- 
meeting  at' the  East  London  Tabernacle.  Nor  was  it  remarkable  simply  for  its  size, 
but  the  whole  spirit  of  the  gathering  made  it  a  source  of  peculiar  helpfulness  to  all 
who  were  in  constant  attendance,  while  occasional  visitors  carried  away  with  them 
even  to  distant  lands  influences  and  impulses  which  they  never  wished  to  lose  or  to 
forget.  Many  years  ago,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave,  in  The  Szvord  and  the  Trowel, 
detailed  reports  of  these  hallowed  evenings,  in  the  hope  that  the  record  might  be 
useful  in  awakening  new  interest  in  what  he  always  regarded  as  the  most  important 
meeting  of  the  week.  He  often  said  that  it  was  not  surprising  if  churches  did 
not  prosper,  when  they  regarded  the  prayer-meeting  as  of  so  little  value  that  one 
evening  in  the  week  was  made  to  suffice  for  a  feeble  combination  of  service  and 
prayer-meeting. 

The  gatherings  at  the  Tabernacle  on  Monday  nights  were  constantly  varied. 
Usually,  some  of  "  our  own  men  "  labouring  in  the  country  or  abroad  were  present, 
and  took  part,  while  missionaries  going  out  to  China,  or  North  Africa,  or  other  parts 
■of  the  foreign  field,  or  returning  home -on  furlough,  helped  to  add  to  the  spiritual 
profit  of  the  proceedings.  The  Pastor  always  gave  one  or  more  brief  addresses, 
and  never  allowed  the  interest  to  flag;  and,  all  too  soon,  half-past  eight  arrived,  and 
the  meeting  had  to  be  concluded,  for  many  of  the  workers  had  other  prayer- 
meetings  or  services  following  closely  upon  that  one.  '  -     ' 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  day's  work  was  not  yet  complete,  for  various  visitors  were 
waiting  for  an  interview  ;  and,  with  them,  some  candidates  or  enquirers  needed  and 
secured  a  few  precious  minutes, — the  conversation  and  prayer  at  such  times  being 
something  to  be  remembered  with  gratitude  as  long  as  they  lived.  On  some 
Monday  nights,  an  extra  service  was  squeezed  in  ;  and,  leaving  the  Tabernacle  a 
little  before  eight  o'clock,  the  Pastor  preached  at  Christ  Church,  Upton  Chapel, 
Walworth  Road  Chapel,  or  some  other  neighbouring  place  of  worship  ;  or  spoke  at 
some  special  local  gathering,  such  as  a  meeting  at  the  Newington  Vestry  Hall  on 
behalf  of  the  Hospital  Sunday  Fund.  When,  at  last,  he  was  really  en  route  for 
home,  his  first  question  was, — "  Has  the  sermon  come?"  and  the  second, — "What 
is  the  length  of  it?"  If  the  reply  was,  "Just  right,"  it  was  joyfully  received,  for  the 
labour  of  adding  or  cutting  out  any  made  the  task  of  revising  the  proof  still  more 
arduous  ;  and,  if  a  distant  preaching  engagement  had  to  be  fulfilled  the  next  day, 

F  6 


82  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

the  revision  was  obliged  to  be  completed  that  night,  or  very  early  in  the  morning. 
On  one  occasion,  when  the  London  Baptist  Association  Committee  met  at  "West- 
wood  "  for  breakfast  and  business,  it  transpired  that  their  host  had  taken  time  by 
the  forelock,  and  begun  his  day's  work  at  four  o'clock. 

Ordinarily,  the  correction  of  the  proof  of  the  sermon  was  completed  by  about 
eleven  o'clock  on  Tuesday  morning,  leaving  a  couple  of  hours  for  replying  to  letters, 
and  attending  to  the  most  pressing  literary  work.  When  there  were  only  four 
Thursdays  in  the  month,  an  extra  sermon  was  required  to  make  the  usual  number 
for  the  monthly  part,  and  that  entailed  heavy  labour.  The  discourses  available  for 
this  purpose  were  the  shorter  ones  delivered  on  the  Sabbath  and  Thursday 
evenings ;  and,  as  a  rule, '  two  or  three  pages  had  to  be  added  to  them.  The 
facsimile  on  the  opposite  page  is  a  good  example  of  the  method  adopted  in 
lengthening  the  sermon  which  had  been  set  up  from  the  reporter's  transcript, 
unrevised,  and  it  is  specially  suitable  to  the  present  volume  as  it  contains  a  striking 
passage  in  the  dear  preacher's  autobiography. 

Tuesday  afternoon,  with  rare  excep-tions,  was  devoted  to  the  truly  pastoral  and 
important  work  of  seeing  candidates  and  enquirers  at  the  T^ibernacle  ;  and  in  no 
part  of  his  service  was  Mr.  Spurgeon  more  happy  and  more  completely  at  home. 
On  reaching  his  vestry,  at  three  o'clock,  he  always  found  some  of  his  elders  already 
at  their  post ;  and  usually  they  had,  by  that  time,  conversed  with  the  first  arrivals, 
and  given  them  the  cards  which  were  to  introduce  them  to  the  Pastor.  If*  he 
was  satisfied  with  the  person's  own  testimony,  he  put  the  name  of  the  friend 
upon  the  list  of  those  to  be  proposed  for  church-fellowship,  and  indicated  the 
elder  or  deacon  to  be  appointed  as  visitor,  to  make  the  necessary  enquiries  before 
the  applicant  could  be  admitted  to  baptism  and  membership.  In  the  course  of 
three  or  four  hours,  twenty,  thirty,  or  even  forty  individuals  were  thus  seen  ;  and 
anyone  who  has  had  much  experience  in  such  service  knows  how  exhausting  it 
is.  Sometimes,  the  number  was  smaller,  or  it  was  made  up  with  those  who 
came  about  other  matters.  These  were  seen  by  Mr.  Harrald,  or  the  elders  ;  and 
interviews  with  the  Pastor  were  arranged  if  they  were  deemed  advisable.  At  five 
o'clock,  a  brief  interval  was  secured  for  tea  ;  and,  during  that  half-hour,  the  Pastor 
compared  notes  with  his  helpers  concerning  those  with  whom  he  had  conversed, 
and  related  specially  interesting  incidents  which  some  of  the  candidates  had 
described  to  him.  Then  he  returned  to  the  happy  task,  and  kept  on  as  long 
as  any  were  waiting  ;  and,  often,  as  the  crowning  of  his  day's  labour,  he  went 
down  to  the  lecture-hall,  to  preside  at  the  annual  meeting  of  one  or  other  of  the 
Tabernacle    Societies,    such   as    the    Sunday-school,    the    Almshouses    Day-schools> 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


83 


,1/  Ji 


~ti&^  ffisLj^ 


Td  of  Uie  Lord  'j 


TP  no  ttoHere.     They/carried  a  burden.     Ttoee 
uamej^  tho   Lojd  aai^enl   t&e«^_dare  no^ 


L^ 


prophets  of  old  \ 

ho^fifeiti  speak  in  Q^r ^^   — -    ^...^^ 

with  their ^©#ic      They  havo  a  burden  to  f!arq[^— "  The  rrurden  < 
.e  word-ef^tfie  Lord,"     I  am   often  astounded  at  liie^TTfty^an^whjch 
ho  profess  t©'oe  the  servants  of  Qod  make  U^ht  of  ^eir  wortr- 
I  tead   of  oft©'*lio  said,  "  I  got  on  very  weU  for  a  year  or  two  in  my 
pulpit,  for  my  great,  uncle  had  left  me  a  large  store  of  majiuscripts, 
rV&a-d  ^0ffi."     The   Lord  have  mercy  on  h-ia   g^^ty  soul'  <  Aiiother^ 
to  get  on  well  with  his  preaching_becau8e  he  .piiys  so^uch,  a 
to  4fik_bookseller,    and  is^upplied ~wTtt>QH?gula]k/nanuscnpt     V  tn  f^^^ 

i   /I  have  seen  the  things/     What   must   God",  fhinlr  of  sit&h       \  '^ 

-us  these  'f     Sat^n  the  old  umes,  those  whom  Ood  sent  didnotX    •J'-  . 

rrow  their  messages      They  had  their  message  dirtwtly    from  God      \'^,^  /  jt^^-"    d^-—-*  A*— ^ 

himself,  and  that  message  was  weighty— so  weighty  that  they  called        y^  ^--^^.^^^   ^rCl^  -C    < «5^^ 

it  "  the  burden  of  the   Lord  "     He  that  does  not  find  hie  ministry  a        ]^\/^         /_-,v3/^  ^   ^-^--'^L. 
'borden  now  wiU  hnd  it  a  burden  hereafter  which  will  sink  him  lower        *^      yl  "^ *       -^-•s-.^^^-'^  ^ ^  y^  ^ 

than  the  lowest  hell.     A   ministry  that   uever    burdens  the  heartland        ^^ 
the  conscience  in  this  Ufe.will   be  like  a  millstone  about  1 
5n  the  world  to  come      Thi/  servants  of  God  mean  busine 

not  talk  for  talkmg's  sake,     Thev  are  not  sent  into  the  world  to~tickie  .,^  ^    /^  ».«--.^ 
men's  ear«.  nor  to- -ffi:alre  a  display   Of  eiocution^  *^  They   have  a  some-      "^  ^  '  /   /  /■_     ^^ 

•  thing  to  say  l^  - -t-sses  upon  ihem^l^they  must  sayit.     They  lawwi^-    ^  ^*  ^J\ ^*y  «^yi— -^^^-y/ 

,-Airlnward  hre,  and  the»  must  g**4rvent  \ 
the  Lord  IS  as  tire  -lo^pir  booes,  consuming  1 
tht  servants  of  God,     The  servants  of  God 
J»«gi^th» hunlpntorf  t.hn  1  inwiy^ | 

something  t 

It  13    not   froth   itiid 

and    pretty  things, 

'  iL  ever  th?re 

the 


n^Qk 
*vj^ey  d(K 
Id  toTickie/^ - 


,.£^  rt**.^^^  ' 


/L^^ 


y 


L^, 


>^ 


th. 

_     -  -~y     ^ -^   .,^    ^rtiage,  _ 

^Tid  QT&wry,  and  all  thati^^&ere  is^weigKt" 
'   were  men  m  this  world  whc   ought   to  speak 
men  U»^  speak  tor  Gody  j^fttklT  there  ly  nothmg 
aay,>hen  <>od  never  cOuimiSbioned  tjiro^     If  thf 
— *y'ea,  if  their  measagf  be  not  of  th^-tfr&t  a,n' 
whv>N,La^tttfi    nam  I     nf  <  Iwii^  a*"  "fl^py    profe^ 


ruLmflrrUy  a 
that ijic-  bo2>*HW'"^tHe  burde 
Jt-tfiV^^u  ni/(  let  me  be 


'*erv 
burd 


Qts,    yho.are. 


pijTtajice/? 
last  impuH^nce,-V^^. 
D  th 
■^urTtKe  true  fservant  of  (iod  has  no  light  W' 
ne  that   baaanah^g  to  L-arry,  but  hi 
f  the  word  of  the  Li^d   '      " 
nderstood  at  thp  beginning      God's 
with    his  word,  ^cheHru^Uy    carry 

t  for  all  the^  world. ~"-Sometim 
ght,-to 
el-ves, 

could    gTViJ_ 

thi8^-dp>^V"But~lireDTfEjnt   of  Jonah,   and   what  happ 
--when  he  ran  awaj-to-T-atatu^ ,  and/whales  ur*:'  scarcer  now  than-tfeo3L__4 
were  then,  and  1  do  oot  aoeni.  inclinedTo~rinrth»t~piak-._  *^  1  stick  to  ^ 

my  business,  and   keep  to  the  message  of^Twrd  ;   fur  one  might  not  +»«-. 
brought  to  land  quite  so  safely  as  the  runaway  prophet  was^  God's 
servants  would   d»t  nothing  else   but   bear  this  bucd+Ha,   even-  li   they- 
o»tt4^  make  a  change   «,  Remember  hojv  Wtlham  Carey,   speaking 
oneybf  his  sons  says^.^^-Eoor^P^sTias  drivelled  into  an  ambassado 
"  missiouar}'    once,    and    he    was   emphjy^d    b/  the    British 

Government  afi  an  :inihaaHaHorv*^lnvt.  i  >   wlirii    his  father  thought^ 


I    .        U*  Ij        -"-^"^^^.j-^^^  •<?  *^'^  ytKl^  know%  we  get  tempted,  when   thingb  do  nut  go  n 

k^  '  J  ^  Ll^'^'f^ ^^t^^  '  l^^^^y  ^^i"  iV     ^^«Q   &QViH5  of  you   do   not   behave   youn 

L^.ul'^         -^v-r-'^^,  ^^tiuj4a-ggL5  little  out  of  order,  I  sav  to  myself,  "1  wish-I 


M^' 


■_   J-^t^a    «•*-*'*•*— -y^ 


^  : 


promotion^    "-gsof-  Felix   has    drivelled 
It   would  be  a  drivelhng  down,    indeed,   from   bearing  the   burden  of 
the  Lord,    if    one  were  to  woa?  a  crowu,  nr  jEiia  fimt  in^a  oongtc  »l 

The  burden  which  the  true  preachffl-  of  God  pearsja  for  God,  and 
Christ's  behali,  and  for  the  aTiilt  of  otkeri.  He  lias  a  natural 
instinct  which  makes  him  care  for  the  souls  of  others,  and  his  anxiety 
18  that  none  should  penah|''~fciEe~^tbe  Christ  who  longed  to  save,  mo 
does  the  true  Maiachi,  or  meBsenger  of  God,  go  forth  with  tlus  as  tua 
happy,  joyful,  cheerfully-borne  burden/^fetyet,  «pk_a  burden.  i< 
i  that  I  .10)  ^oiug  to  speak  to-night.     Thwrw  nifty- tj>* 


uTT 


I'irtig  "lit  --f  Th^  t    "  'tKe  burden  of  the 'word  of  tho.^ 

hy  iBjt  a  burde^':'     Well,  iirst.^^tCArsE  fT  is  the  Wori? 

hat  w^^feach  is  only  of  man,  we  may  preaeh-as-iie 

nt* "burden  •  it^  but  if  this  Book   be  inspired— a 

^nJy  Godj-'ifJesus  Christ  be  God  incarnate,  if  there  be 

his  precious   blood — 'then  there  is  a  great 


t  ik^     wvA-u       >i-i«_^      fj*^.^„ 


-jff^' 


-■  4^ 


i-'^^dLa-t^ 


x^refch.  '  Xt  hence  "becomes  a  bupdoo  \.if^nm.r^__^_  — 


Aid,  first,  If  becumea  a  burden  in  tlio  receptionont:  f— <l«-iiQl 
think  that  ajry  man  mma^^I  ever  preach  the  gospel  anght  until  he  haa 
had  It  bpr^  into  hw  own  dOuU  "  You  cannot  preach  conviction  of  sin 


FACSIMILE   OF  CORRECTED   PROOF  OF   LENGTHE^NED  SERMON. 


(No.  2,114,  pages  613 — 15.) 


84  '  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

the  Evangelists'  Association,  the  Country  Mission,  the  Loan  Tract  Society,  or 
the  Spurg-eon's  Sermons'  Tract  Society.  He  frequently  said  that  the  number 
of  Institutions,  Societies,  Missions,  and  Sunday-schools  connected  with  the 
Tabernacle  was  so  large  that  it  would  have  been  possible  to  arrang-e  for  an 
anniversary  of  one  of  them  every  week  in  the  year  !  The  secretaries  or  leaders 
of  many  of  these  works  always  secured  his  presence  and  help  at  their  meeting's, 
if  possible  ;  and  he  used  to  describe  the  lecture-hall  as  his  happy  hunting-ground 
where  he  found  recruits  for  the  College.  Among  the  most  successful  ministers 
.and  missionaries,  at  home  and  abroad  at  the  present  time,  are  several  who 
tremblingly  spoke  before  him,  for  the  first  time,  at  these  week-night  gatherings. 
Some  of  them  might  scarcely  recognize  themselves  by  the  description  the  beloved 
President  gave  of  them  then,  as  he  pictured  the  "fledglings,  with  their  callow  wings, 
trying  to  soar  away  to  the  empyrean,  but  falling  down  flop  into  the  arena  !  " 

Sometimes,  instead' of  meeting  with  a  few  hundreds  of  friends  in  the  lecture- 
hall,  the  Pastor  presided  over  many  thousands  in  the  Tabernacle.  One  such 
gathering  took  place  on  the  night  when  the  Jubilee  Singers  sang,  and,  by  that 
one  effort,  the  sum  of  ^220  was  added  to  the  funds  of  the  Fisk  University ; 
another  notable  meeting  was  held  when  our  own  black  brethren,  Johnson  and 
Richardson,  and  their  wives,  had  their  farewell  before  proceeding  to  Africa,  "  the 
land  of  their  fathers  ; " — and  an  equally  memorable  occasion  was  the  evening 
when  Mr.  John  B.  Cough  gave  one  of  his  marvellous  oratorical  displays  on 
behalf  of  the  Pastors'  College,  and,  in  recognition  of  his  kindness,  the  Pastor 
presented  to  him  a  complete  set  of  his  sermons.  At  other  times,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  not  the  chairman  of  the  meeting  ;  but  he  helped  to  contribute  to  the  success 
of  the  proceedings  by  delivering  an  earnest  address  in  aid  of  the  Primitive 
Methodist  Missionary  Society,  the  Liberation  Society,  or  some  other  great 
public  movement  for  which  the  Tabernacle  had  been  lent,  and  for  which  his 
personal  advocacy  was  also  desired. 

Wednesday  was  the  only  possible  time  available  as  a  mid-week  Sabbath  ;  and 
whenever  it  could  be  secured  for  rest,  its  benefits  were  immediately  manifest. 
Each  year,  on  his  return  from  Mentone,  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  his  secretary  to  keep 
his  diary  clear  of  all  engagements  on  that  day ;  but,  alas !  soon  one,  and  then 
another,  and  yet  others,  had  to  be  given  up  in  response  to  the  importunate  appeals 
to  which  the  self-sacrificing  preacher  had  not  the  heart  to  say,  "  No,"  although 
he  knew  that  the  inevitable  result  would  be  a  breakdown  in  health,  and  the 
cancelline  for  a  time  of  all  arrangements  for  extra  services.  Then,  when  he 
appeared  to  have  recovered,  the  same  process  would  be  repeated,  with  an  exactly 
similar  sequel  ;    but   the   requests   for   sermons,    speeches,    and    lectures  poured  in 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  85 

upon  him  even  during  his  worst  illnesses,  and  it  always  pained  him  when  he  felt 
that  he  must  refuse  them. 

But  there  were  some  red-letter  days  when,  with  a  cong-enial  companion,  he 
would  go  off  for  a  long  drive  into  the  country,  as  described  in  Vol,  III.,  Chapter 
LXXVI.  Yet,  even  then,  before  he  started  in  the  morning,  or  after  he  returned 
at  night,  he  often  accomplished  what  most  other  people  would  have  considered 
enough  for  a  hard  day's  work.  When  there  were  only  two  or  three  hours  available 
for  a  drive,  a  favourite  route  was  over  the  Shirley  Hills,  and  through  Addington 
Park.  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  kindly  sent,  each  year,  a  card  giving  the 
right  of  free  passage  through  his  spacious  grounds,  and  he,  on  several  occasions, 
expressed  his  wish  to  have  the  pleasure  of  entertaining  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  Addington. 
On  the  acceptance  of  one  invitation  to  lunch.  Dr.  Benson  greeted  his  guest  very 
heartily,  and,  pointing  to  his  butler  and  footman,  said,  "  There  are  two  members 
of  your  congregation,  Mr.  Spurgeon.  When  I  am  in  residence  at  Lambeth,  they 
always  go  to  the  Tabernacle.  I  don't  blame  them,  for  I  would  do  the  same 
myself  if  I  had  the  chance.  When  your  coachman  gets  round  to  the  st-ables, 
he  will  recognize  another  Tabernacle  attendant ;  and  I  can  truly  say  that  they 
are  all  a  credit  to  the  instruction  they  receive  from  you."  This  testimony  was 
very  pleasing  to  the  dear  Pastor,  and  he  was  further  cheered  by  hearing  of  others 
on  the  estate  who  were  readers  of  his  sermons.  The  two  preachers  spent  a  very 
enjoyable  time  together  ;  and,  later  on,  during  Mr.  Spurgeon's  long  illness,  one 
of  the  letters  which  gave  him  great  comfort  was  written  by  the  Primate.  In  his 
friendly  intercourse  with  the  Tabernacle  Pastor,  Dr.  Benson  followed  in  the 
footsteps  of  one  of  his  own  predecessors,  for,  during  the  time  that  the  bill  for 
the  abolition  of  church  rates  was  before  Parliament,  Archbishop  Tait  frequently 
consulted  Mr.  Spurgeon  upon  several  of  the  details  of  the  measure. 

Sometimes,  instead  of  going  through  Addington  Park,  Mr.  Spurgeon  paid 
a  visit  to  the  Bishop  of  Rochester  at  Selsdon  Park.  A  very  intimate  friendship 
existed  between  Bishop  Thorold  and  the  Pastor,  and  they  enjoyed  many  happy 
hours  together  in  the  Selsdon  home  and  garden.  Usually,  each  year,  as  the 
time  approached  for  the  preparation  of  the  addresses  to  be  delivered  in  connection 
with  his  episcopal  visitation,  the  Bishop  invited  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  spend  a  long 
quiet  day  with  him  in  prayer  and  conversation  upon  such  matters  as  would  help 
to  put  him  in  a  right  state  of  heart  for  the  responsible  task  before  him.  On  several 
occasions,  he  also  visited  his  friend  at  "  Westwood  ;  "  and  the  season  of  spiritual 
fellowship  in  the  study  must  have  been  mutually  profitable,  for,  when  it  was  over, 
and  the  visitor  was  gone,  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  remarked,  "  Oh,  we  have  had 
such  a  delightful  time  of  talk  and  prayer  together  !  "  During  the  Pastor's  great 
illness,  the   Bishop  called  more  than  once  to  express  his  deep  personal  sympathy 


86  c.    II.    sturgeon's   autobiography. 

with  the  beloved  sufferer,  and  his  wife;  and  he  wrote  or  sent  many  times  to  make 

tender,  loving  enquiries  concerning  the  invalid. 

One  letter  of  Bishop  Thorold's,  relating  to   Mr.  Spurgeon's  visit  to  him,  has  a 

very  special  interest  now  that  both  of  them   have  entered  into   "the  glory."     When 

the   Pastor  published    Tlie  Chtc  of  the  Maze,  he  sent  a  copy  to  his  friend,  who  at 

once  wrote  : — 

"  Selsdon   Park, 

"  Croydon, 

"Aug..   31,    1885. 

"  My  Dear  Mr.   Spurgeon, 

"Your  remarkable  book  has  reached  me,  with  its  affectionate  inscription, 

which  I  prize  even  more. 

"  Perhaps,  some  day,  in-  the  City  of  our  King,  we  may  look  back  at  our  stroll 

under  the  Selsdon  elms,  and  our  prayer  in  the  little  chapel,  and  feel  them  to  have 

been  an  earnest  of  the  glory  at  hand. 

"  Ever  your  brother  in  Jesus  Christ, 

"A.    W.     ROFFEN." 

Thursday  morning  was  principally  devoted  to  letter-writing  and  literary  work  in 
general.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  position  naturally  brought  him  into  correspondence  with 
vast  numbers  of  people  all  over  the  world  ;  and  he  willingly  wrote  those  thousands 
of  letters  which  are  now  of  almost  priceless  value  to  their  possessors.  Yet  he  often 
felt  that  he  could  have  employed  his  time  to  far  better  purpose.  Again  and  again, 
he  sorrowfully  said,  "  I  am  only  a  poor  clerk,  driving  the  pen  hour  alter  hour  ;  here 
is  another  whole  morning  gone,  and  nothing  done  but  letters,  letters,  letters!" 
When  reminded  of  the  joy  and  comfort  he  was  ministering  to  so  many  troubled 
hearts  by  that  very  drudgery,  he  agreed  that  it  was  work  for  the  Lord  as  trul}^  as 
the  preaching  in  which  he  so  much  more  delighted.  Still,  we  often  felt  that  quite  an 
unnecessary  addition  to  his  already  too-heavy  load  was  made  by  the  thoughtless  and 
often  frivolous  communications  to  which  he  was  expected  personally  to  reply.  Per- 
haps someone  says,  "  Then  he  should  not  have  replied  to  them."  Yes,  probably  any- 
body but  C.  H.  Spurgeon  would  have  thrown  many  of  them,  unanswered,  into  the 
waste-paper  basket  ;  but  his  kind  heart  prompted  him  ever  to  minister  to  the 
pleasure  and  protit  of  other  people,  whatever  the  cost  to  himself  might  be.  Yet 
even  he  sometimes  mildly  protested  against  the  unreasonableness  of  his  corre- 
spondents, as  the  accompanying  paragraph  testifies  : — 

"  No  sooner  was  it  known  that  I  was  going  to  Scotland  for  rest,  than  I  received 
requests  for  sermons,  not  only  from  a  large  number  of  Scotch  towns,  and  from 
places  on  each  of  the  three  lines  of  railway,  but  I   was  entreated  just  to  make  a  few 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


87 


hours'  stay,  and  preach  in  North  Wales,  as  also  on  the  Cumberland  coast,  which,  as 
everybody  knows,  are  both  on  the  road  to  Scotland  it  you  choose  to  make  them  so  ! 
How  many  pence  I  have  been  fined,  in  the  Ibrm  of  postage  for  replies  to  these 
insanely  kind  demands,  I  will  not  calculate  ;  but  it  is  rather  too  absurd.  I  am  told, 
over  and  over  again,  that  I  could  stop  two  hours,  and  go  on  by  the  next  train  ;  and 
this  being  done  at  a  dozen  places,  when  should  I  reach  Scotland.'*  This,  too,  when 
a  man  is  out  lor  a  holiday  ! 

"Alas!  the  holiday  itself  had  to  be  postponed  for  a  while,  through  continued 
ill-health.  Now,  it  may  seem  a  very  simple  thing  to  write  to  these  good  people, 
and  say,  'No;'  but  it  is  not  so.  It  pains  me  to  refuse  an)'one  ;  and  to  decline  to 
preach  is  so  contrary  to  all  my  heart's  promptings,  that  I  had  rather  be  flogged 
than  feel  compelled  to  do  it." 


A    FAVOURITE    RETREAT. 


If  Mr.  Spurgeon's  correspondence  was  not  quite  as  burdensome  as  usual,  or  if 
he  had  literary  work  that  had  to  be  done, — when  the  weather  permitted,  he  liked  to 
retire  to  this  favourite  retreat,  where  the  hours  fled  all  too  swiftlv  as  he  wrote  his 


88  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

comment  on  the  Psalms,  or  some  of  the  other  books  that  now  remain  as  permanent 
memorials  of  his  studious  and  industrious  life. 

After  dinner,  the  Pastor's  definite  preparation  for  the  evening  service  began, 
though  the  subject  had  probably  been,  as  he  often  said,  "simmering"  in  his  mind  all 
the  morning.  The  Saturday  evening  process  was  to  a  great  extent  repeated,  but 
one  of  his  secretaries  had  the  privilege  of  looking  up  anything  that  might  help  him 
to  get  the  true  meaning  of  his  text.  His  private  study,  commonly  called  "the  den," 
became,  on  such  occasions,  his  place  lor  secret  retirement  and  prayer  ;  and  very 
joyously  he  generally  came  forth,  carrying  in  his  hand  his  brief  pulpit-notes ; 
though,  at  other  times,  the  message  he  was  to  deliver  only  came  to  him  just,  in  time. 

For  many  years,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had,  on  Thursday  evening,  in  the  Tabernacle 
lecture-hall,  from  six  o'clock  till  nearly  seven,  what  he  termed  "The  Pastor's 
prayer-meeting."  This  was  an  extra  gathering,  specially  convened  for  the  purpose 
of  pleading  for  a  blessing  upon  the  Word  he  was  about  to  preach  ;  and  most 
refreshing  and  helpful  it  always  proved  both  to  himself  and  the  people.  From 
the  New  Park  Street  days,  he  had  made  little  or  no  difference  between  the  services 
on  the  Lord's-day  and  on  week-nights  ;  and,  throughout  the  whole  course  of  his 
ministry,  the  Thursday  evening  worship  afforded  an  opportunity  for  the  attendance 
of  many  Christian  workers  of  all  denominations,  who  were  not  able  to  be  present 
on  the  Sabbath  ;  and,  among  them,  were  numerous  Church  of  England  clergymen 
and  Nonconformist  ministers.  At  the  close,  several  of  these  hearers  desired  a  few 
minutes'  conversation  with  the  preacher,  so  that  it  was  late  before  he  could  get 
away  ;  and  then,  though  not  weary  of  his  work,  he  was  certainly  weary  in  it. 

On  Friday  morning,  the  usual  routine  of  answering  correspondence  had,  to 
some  extent,  to  give  way  to  the  President's  more  urgent  work  of  preparation  for 
his  talk  to  the  students  of  the  College.  He  regarded  this  part  of  his  service  as 
so  important  that  he  devoted  all  his  powers  of  heart  and  mind  to  it,  and  it  was 
indeed  a  rich  store  of  mental  and  spiritual  instruction  that  he  carried  up,  each  week, 
to  his  "school  of  the  prophets."  Hundreds  of  "our  own  men"  have  testified  that, 
greatly  as  they  profited  by  the  rest  of  their  College  curriculum,  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
Friday  afternoon  class  was  tar  beyond  everything  else  in  its  abiding  influence  upon 
their  life  and  ministry.  With  such  a  responsive  and  appreciative  audience,  he  was 
at  his  very  best ;  and  both  students  and  ministers  have  often  declared  that,  not 
even  in  his  most  brilliant  pulpit  utterances,  has  he  ever  excelled,  or  even  equalled, 
what  it  was  their  delight  to  hear  from  his  lips  in  those  never-to-be-forgotten  days. 
From  three  till  about  five  o'clock,  there  was  a  continuous  stream  of  wit  and  wisdom, 
counsel  and  warning,    exhortation  and  doctrine,    all  converging  to  the  one  end   of 


c.    H.    spurgeon's.  autobiography.  89 

helping  the  men  before  him  to  become  good  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ.  Then, 
when  the  class  was  dismissed,  another  hour,  or  more,  was  unorudoinoly  devoted 
to  interviews  with  any  of  the  brethren  who  desired  personally  to  consult  the 
President ;  and  that  this  privilege  was  highly  prized  was  very  evident  from  the 
way  in  which  it  was  exercised. 

Now  and  then,  the  Friday  afternoon  was  made  even  more  memorable  by  a 
special  sermon  to  the  students,  at  the  close  of  which  the  Lord's  supper  was  observed, 
the  whole  service  being  peculiarly  helpful  to  the  spiritual  life  of  the  brethren.  On 
other  occasions,  students  from  Harley  House,  or  Regent's  Park,  or  Cheshunt 
College  paid  a  fraternal  visit  to  Newington  ;  and,  in  due  course,  the  Pastors'  College 
men  returned  the  visit.  At  such  times,  Presidents,  tutors,  and  students  vied  with 
one  another  in  making  their  guests  feel  at  home,  and  in  conveying  to  them  all 
possible  pleasure  and  profit. 

Perhaps,  between  six  and  seven  o'clock,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  free  to  s'tart  for 
home  ;  but,  more  likely,  there  was  another  anniversary  meeting — possibly,  of  the 
Evening  Classes  connected  with  the  College, — at  which  he  had  promised  to  preside  ; 
or  there  was  some  mission-hall,  at  which  he  had  engaged  to  preach  or  speak  ;  or 
there  was  a  sick  or  dying  member  of  the  church  to  whom  he  had  sent  word 
that  he  would  call  on  his  way  back  from  the  College.  It  was  utterly  impossible 
for  him  to  make  any  systematic  pastoral  visitation  of  his  great  flock  ; — that  work 
was  undertaken  by  the  elders  ; — but  he  found  many  opportunities  of  visiting  his 
members  ;  and  his  sermons  contain  frequent  references  to  the  triumphant  death- 
bed scenes  that  he  had  witnessed.  He  could  not  often  conduct  funeral  services, 
yet  there  were  some  cases  in  which  he  felt  bound  to  make  an  exception  to  his 
usual  rule,  as  he  did  also  in  the  matter  of  weddings.  The  Sword  and  the  Trozuel''^ 
has  recorded  typical  instances  of  how  thoroughly,  on  such  occasions,  he  sorrowed 
with  those  who  wept,  and  rejoiced  with  those  who  were  full  of  happiness.  xA.dd 
to  all  this,  the  constant  interruptions  from  callers,  and  the  many  minor  worries 
to  which  every  public  man  is  subject,  and  readers  may  well  wonder  when 
Mr.  Spurgeon  could  find  time  for  reading,  and  study,  and  all  the  work  he 
constantly  accomplished !  If  they  had  known  how  much  he  was  continually 
doing,  they  might  have  marvelled  even  more  than  they  did.  Surely,  there  never 
was  a  busier  life  than  his  ;  not  an  atom  more  of  sacred  service  could  have  been 
crowded  into  it. 

Saturday  morning  was  the  time  for  the  Pastor  and  his  private  secretary  to  clear 
off,  as  far  as  possible,  any  arrears  of  work  that  had  been  accumulating  durino-  the 

*  See  the  Volume  for  1S94,  page  109,  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  a  Funeral ;  "  and  page  157,  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  a  Wedding." 


90  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

week.  The  huge  pile  of  letters  was  again  attacked  ;  various  financial  matters  were 
settled,  and  cheques  despatched  to  chapel-building  ministers  or  those  engaged  in 
pioneer  and  mission  work,  or  needing  some  special  assistance  in  their  labour  for  the 
Lord.  The  secretary  also  then  reported  the  result  of  interviews  with  students,  and 
various  officials  and  workers  in  connection  with  the  different  Institutions,  and 
received  instructions  as  to  the  replies  to  be  given  to  their  requests,  or  with  regard  to 
various  matters  tending  to  the  general  efficiency  of  the  whole  work.  It  was  usual, 
often,  on  that  morning,  for  the  President  to  see  some  of  the  applicants  for  admission 
to  the  College,  or  to  examine  the  papers  of  others,  and  to  dictate  the  letters 
conveying  his  decision,  or  making  further  enquiries  if  there  was  a  doubt  eithfer  with 
regard  to  acceptance  or  rejection.  Brethren  just  leaving  for  the  foreign  mission  field, 
or  some  other  distant  sphere  of  service,  were  glad  of  the  opportunity  of  a  personal 
farewell,  and  of  the  tender,  touching  prayer,  and  tokens  of  practical  sympathy,  with 
which  they  were  speeded  on  their  way.  Then  there  were  magazine  articles  to  be 
written  or  revised,  Almanacks  to  be  prepared,  books  to  be  read  and  reviewed,  or  sent 
to  some  of  the  brethren  who  helped  (and  still  help)  in  that  department  of  The 
Sword  and  the  Trowel;  and,  by  the  time  the  gong  sounded'  for  dinner,  the  Pastor 
was  often  heard  to  say,  "Well,  we  have  got  through  a  good  morning's  work,  even  if 
there  is  not  much  to  show  for  it." 

The  greater  part  of  the  afternoon  was  spent  in  the  garden,  if  the  weather  was 
favourable  ;  and  one  of  the  few  luxuries  the  dear  master  of  "  Westwood  "  enjoyed 
was  to  stroll  down  to  the  most  secluded  portion  of  the  grounds,  and  to  rest  awhile  in 
the  summerhouse,  to  which  he  gave  the  singularly  appropriate  title,  "Out  of  the 
world."  Here,  with  his  wife,  or  some  choice  friend,  the  precious  minutes  quickly 
passed  ;  and,  by-and-by,  other  visitors  arrived,  for  a  cheery  chat,  and  a  peep  at  the 
numerous  interesting  things  that  were  to  be  seen.  It  is  needless  to  give  the  names 
of  the  many  who  shared  in  the  delights  of  those  happy  afternoons  ;  most  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  special  ministerial  and  other  friends  and  acquaintances  were  included 
amonost  them.  One  visitor  who  was  always  welcome  was  the  good  Earl  of  Shaftes- 
bury. His  life  also  was  a  very  busy  one,  so  he  could  not  often  come  ;  but,  every 
now  and  then,  when  he  was  more  than  usually  depressed  and  troubled  by  the  aspect 
of  affairs,  religiously  and  socially,  he  found  it  a  relief  to  have  a  talk  with  his  Baptist 
friend,  who  largely  shared  his  views  concerning  the  state  of  the  Church  in  general, 
but  who  also  saw  some  signs  of  better  and  brighter  days  which  the  venerable  noble- 
man had  not  perceived.  The  peer  and  the  Pastor  had  such  stores  of  good  stories 
to  tell,  that  the  time  rapidly  and  pleasantly  passed,  and  they  parted  with  the  hope  of 
meeting  again  on  earth,  and  with  the  brighter  hope  of  the  reunion  in  Heaven,  where 
there  would  be  no  parting  for  ever. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


91 


^     _      ,    ....                                  ''      ,.'        ,..-.."         '[ ■        "      " 

"' ~"          

^//^  ^^-„^^. 


On  several  occasions,  after  the  Earl  had  paid  a  visit  to  "  Westwood,"  Mr. 
Spurgeon  instructed  his  secretary  to  insert  in  the  scrapbook,  then  being  compiled, 
a  photograph  or  engraving  of  his  lordship,  and  he  himself  briefly  recorded  the  tact 
that  his  venerable  friend  had  again  been  to  see  him.  The  following  page  contains  a 
reproduction  of  one  of  the  best  of  these  portraits, — taken  by  Messrs.  Russell  and  Co. 
when  the  Earl  attained  his  eightieth  year, — with  -^  facsi})nle  of  the  inscription  written 
on  the  back  of  it.  On  his  part,  Earl  Shaftesbury  preserved,  in  his  diary  and  letters, 
many  records  of  those  enjoyable  Saturday  afternoons.  The  following  entry  in  his 
diary  probably  refers  to  the  very  visit  mentioned  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — "July  10,  1881. 
— Drove  to  'Westwood'  to  see  my  friend  Spurgeon.  He  is  well,  thank  God,  and 
admirably  lodged.  His  place  is  lovely.  His  wife's  health,  too,  is  improved  by 
change  of  residence.  It  is  pleasant  and  encouraging  to  visit  such  men,  and  find 
them  still  full  of  perseverance,  faith,  and  joy  in  the  service  of  our  blessed  Lord." 


THE    RT.    HON.    THE   EARL   OF   SHAFTESBURY,    K.G. 


i^it't-^pC.      <^-^-e.-^xiJ\.i-^  Ce.^^p^      <it^       -i-cj^CC   ^x-tJ^-t/^^ 


(^^■€-^:^,/U}->'.^L^e^ 


///y 


7    ,  ^ 


CHAPTER    XC. 


Mttx%  on  l^xiMt  anb  l^iMt  affairs,  1856— 189D. 

In  reviewing  the  Letters  of  William  Cowper,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — "  We  cannot  write  letters  now- 
adays, but  must  be  content  to  send  mere  notes  and  memoranda.  When  letters  were  reasonably  few, 
and  cost  a  shilling  each,  men  had  the  time  to  write  well,  and  thought  it  worth  their  while  to  do  so. 
Now  that  the  penny  post  is  a  public  man's  sorest  trial,  the  shorter  we  can  make  our  epistles,  the  better. 
How  we  wish  some  of  our  correspondents  would  believe  this,  especially  those  young  ladies  who  cross 
their  letters !  We  never  waste  a  moment  in  trying  to  read  what  people  think  to  be  unworthy  of  a  fresh 
sheet  of  paper  ;  crossed  letters  make  us  cross,  and  we  drop  them  into  the  waste-paper  basket.  By  the 
way,  what  right  has  a  man  to  expect  an  answer  to  a  letter  if  he  does  not  enclose  a  stamp?  It  is  a  dead 
robbery  to  make  some  of  us  spend  scores  of  pounds  in  a  year  on  postage." 

HE  preceding  chapter  contains  so  many  references  to  Mr. 
-  Spurgeon's  correspondence  that  it  may  appropriately  be  followed 
by  some  specimens  of  the  letters  which  he  wrote  at  various  periods 
during-  his  long  ministry.  Many  have  already  been  published  in 
the  previous  volumes  of  this  work,  where  they  seemed  needful  to 
the  consecutiveness  of  the  narrative,  and  others  must  be  reserved 
for  later  portions  of  this  volume.  The  present  selection  is  intended  to  give  some 
idea  of  the  extent  and  variety  of  the  subjects  upon  which  the  beloved  Pastor's 
correspondents  wrote  to  him,  and  of  the  replies  which  he  sent  to  their  communica- 
tions. Some  of  the  letters  have  already  appeared  in  print ;  but  most  ot  them  have 
been  copied  from  the  originals  which  have  been  kindly  forwarded  by  their  possessors 
specially  with  a  view  to  their  inclusion  in  the  Autobiography,  while  others  are 
reproduced  from  the  copies  of  replies  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  himself  preserved. 
In  classifying  the  correspondence,  a  beginning  is  made  with — 

Letters  to  Personal  Friends. 

A  gentleman  in  Glasgow  greatly  values  the  original  of  this  note,  which  was 
written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  the  day  following  that  on  which  he  had  preached  at  the 
Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  for  the  first  time  after  the  great  catastrophe  ;  it  was 
addressed  to  Rev.  John  Anderson,  of  Helensburgh,  who  had  sent  a  generous 
contribution  to  the  Tabernacle  Building  Fund  from  himself  and  his  friends  : — 

"  3,  Bengal  Place, 

"  New  Kent  Road, 

"  Monday,  24th  Nov.  (1856.) 
"  My  Very  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  have  received  your  munificent  donation,  and  return  you  very  hearty 
thanks,  and  beg  you  to  express  my  gratitude  to  all  those  who  have  contributed. 


94  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Yesterday,  the  Lord  was  with  me  mightily  ;  not  a  dog  moved  his  tono-ue. 
But,  oh,  the  griefs  I  have  endured  !  God  has  borne  me  up,  or  I  had  been  over- 
whelmed. 

"  How  hell  has  howled,  but  how  Heaven  will  triumph  !  How  is  the  work  in 
Helensburgh  }     I  hope  the  shout  of  a  King"  is  with  you. 

"  Dear  wife  and  I  very  often  talk  of  our  dear  Anderson.  You  are  very  near  to 
our  hearts. 

"  Our  boys  are  well,  so  is  '  beloved  Apphia.'  Give  our  kind  regards  to  all 
friends,  and  accept  our  true  love  yourself. 

"  I  am, 

"  Yours  ever, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

The  following  note,  and  reply,  will  serve  as  specimens  of  the  correspondence 
between  Mr.  Ruskin  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  the  days  long  past : — 

"  Denmark  Hill, 

"  Camberwell, 

"  25th  Nov.,  1862. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  want  a  chat  with  you.  Is  it  possible  to  get  it, — quiedy, — and  how, 
and  where,  and  when  .'*  I'll  come  to  you, — or  you  shall  come  here, — or  whatever 
you  like.  I  am  in  England  only  for  ten  days, — being  too  much  disgusted  with  your 
goings  on — yours  as  much  as  everybody  else's — to  be  able  to  exist  among  you  any 
longer.  But  I  want  to  say  '  Good-bye  '  before  going  to  my  den  in  the  Alps, 
"  Ever  with  sincerest  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"  Affectionately  yours. 

"  J.  Ruskin." 

"  Clapham, 

"Nov.  26,  1862. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Ruskin, 

"  I  thought  you  had  cast  me  off  ;  but  I  perceive  that  you  let  me  alone 
when  all  is  right,  and  only  look  me  up  when  you  are  getting  disgusted  with  me. 
May  that  disgust  increase  if  it  shall  bring  me  oftener  into  your  company  ! 

"  I  shall  be  delighted  to  see  you  to-morrow,  here,  at  any  time  from  10  to  12  if 
this  will  suit  you. 

"  I  wish  /  had  a  den  in  the  Alps  to  go  to  ;  but  it  is  ot  no  use  for  me  to  grow 
surly,  for  I  am  compelled  to  live  amongst  you  sinners,  and  however  disgusted  I  may 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  95 

get   with   you   all,  I  must  put  up  with  you,  for  neither  Nature  nor  Providence  will 
afford  a  den  for  me. 

"  Yours  ever  most  truly  and  affectionately, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Nothing-  ever  gave  Mr.  Spurgeon  greater  delight  than  the  glad  tidings  that  his 
message  had  been  blessed  to  the  salvation  of  souls,  or  the  strengthening  of  saints. 
To  a  friend  in  Dublin,  who  sent  him  such  good  news,  he  replied  on  February  i8, 
iS6S  :— 

"  It  cheers  me  very  greatly  to  know  that  my  sermons  are  the  food  of  any  of 
God's  people.  For  such  a  joy,  I  would  cheerfully  have  suffered  much  ;  and,  lo  !  it 
comes  without  it.  I  can  bear  my  willing  testimony  to  the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord. 
My  sermons  are  a  great  drain  upon  me  mentally,  but  still  the  springs  are  not  dried. 
In  times  of  great  exhaustion,  fresh  streams  bubble  up.  In  pecuniary  matters,  we 
are  often  tried  ;  but  never  come  to  want,  and  we  never  shall  while  Jehovah  lives." 

Just  at  that  time,  the  Pastor  had  the  further  trial  of  the  very  serious  illness  of 
Mrs.  Spurgeon.  In  answer  to  a  letter  informing  him  that  a  special  prayer-meeting 
had  been  held  at  the  Baptist  Chapel,  Thetford,  to  plead  for  her  recovery,  he  wrote  : — 

"  Clapham, 

"Feb.  29,  1868. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Welton, 

"Thanks  a  thousand  times!  Prayers  are  enriching  things;  you  make 
me  wealthy.      May  you  and  your  people  long  enjoy  prosperity  ! 

"  Yours  ever  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

To  an  afflicted  lady  in  Bristol,  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  revealed  an  interesting 
circumstance  in  connection  with  the  origin  of  his  sermon  entitled  "  Faith's 
Ultimatum  "  : — 

**  Nia-htinofale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"July  23,  1S75. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"Your  kind  oift  has  been  unacknowledged  because  I  wanted  to  write  to 
you  myself,  and  my  hand  has  been  bad  with  rheumatic  gout  so  as  to  make  me  quite 
an  invalid  these  last  two  weeks,  and  keeping  me  from  my  preaching  most  of  the 
time.      I   thank  you  most  heartily,  and  the  more  because  of  your  very  kind  words. 


96  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

May  you  have  daily  strength  for  your  great  affliction,  and  may  your  heart  exult  more 
and  more  in  the  Lord  !     Pray  for  my  poor  wife,  who  suffers  ever. 

"  I  think  my  sermon  upon  'Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him,'  will 
be  to  your  mind.      It  was  squeezed  out  of  me  by  great  pain. 

"  Yours  in  much  sympathy, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

When    arrangements    were    being    made    for   the    sale   of  the   old   Devonshire 

Square  Chapel,  which  was  so  close  to   Petticoat   Lane  that  "  Babel-like  sounds,   and 

perfumes   not   at  all   ambrosial,  mingled  with   the   worship,   and  even  other   things 

appeared  on  the  scene,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — - 

"  Clapham, 

"Jan.  8. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  congratulate  you  on  the  prospect  of  an  emigration  from  the  worse  than 
Egypt  of  Devonshire  Square.  Whatever  your  chapel  may  have  been  in  ages  past,  it 
has  become  of  late  atmospherically  and  entomologically  horrible  ;  the  din  outside,  on 
the  Lord's-day,  in  which  Jews  and  Gentiles  emulate  each  other  in  row-making,  fits 
your  house  to  be  a  den  in  Babylon  rather  than  a  temple  upon  Zion.  That  a  church 
and  congregation  should  have  gathered  so  long,  in  such  a  spot,  is  a  miracle  of  grace 
on  God's  part,  and  of  inertness  on  the  part  of  man.  May  you  get  away  from  the 
rags  and  the  racket,  and  may  you  and  your  friends  enjoy  prosperity  abundantly  1 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

The    following    note    was    written    to    the    late     Henry    Richard,    Esq.,    M.P., 
secretary  of  the   Peace   Society,  in  reply  to  an   invitation  to  speak   at   the   annual 

meeting  of  that  body  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"April  24. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  really   cannot  do  more.      I    am  sick   and  sorry   and  jaded.      Let  me 

alone.      'A  merciful  man,  etc., .'     I  would  be  -sX  peace. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

In  December,  1879,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  very  ill  at  Mentone,  he  was  greatly 
cheered    by    the    receipt   of  a  cablegram,    from   the    New  York    Baptist   Ministers' 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  97 

Conference,  containing  the  following  message  : — "  Prayers.  Sympathy.  2  Corin- 
thians i.  2,  7.  Potter,  Secretary."  The  telegram  was  followed  by  a  long  loving 
letter  ;  but,  before  it  arrived,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  already  replied  thus  : — 

"  To  Rev.  D.  C.  Potter, 

"  Secretary,  New  York  Baptist  Ministers'  Conference, 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  thank  the  Conference  very  heartily  and  humbly.  I  am  honoured  by 
such  a  kind  deed,  and  I  am  not  the  less  comforted.  What  greater  joy  can  I  have 
from  my  fellow-men  than  to  be  remembered  by  them  in  the  hour  of  afifliction 
with  prayers  and  sympathies?  God  bless  you,  my  brethren,  and  reward  you  a 
thousandfold  for  this  loving  remembrance  of  one  who  has  no  other  right  to  it  but 
that  which  arises  out  of  oneness  of  heart  in  our  one  Lord,  one  faith,  and  one 
baptism  !  By  such  brotherly  kindness,  may  all  American  and  English  baptized 
churches  be  welded  into  a  more  complete  unity,  so  that  fraternal  love  may  abound  ! 
May  the  Lord  bless  and  prosper  you  among  the  nation  to  which  you  belong,  and 
may  the  truth  more  and  more  abundantly  prevail  with  you  and  with  us !  I 
am  recovering  slowly  from  a  very  severe  illness,  and  your  telegram  has  acted  both  as 
a  tonic  and  as  a  cordial  to  me.     Again  I  thank  you  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart. 

"  Yours  most  gratefully, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

On  April   5,    1881,   the  annual   butchers'   festival  was  held  at   the  Tabernacle. 

Mr.   Spurgeon    was    unable    to    be    present,  but    he    wrote    the    following  letter  to 

Mr.  Henry  Varley,  to  be  read  at  the  meeting  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"April  5,  1881. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  A  month  ago  I  was  just  recovering,  and  I  took  five  ser\-ices  in  the 
week  with  great  delight.  The  immediate  result  was  another  illness.  This  time  I 
am  weaker,  and  I  have  the  same  work  before  me.  The  friends  beg  me  not  to 
attempt  so  much,  and  my  own  judgment  tells  me  that  they  are  right.  I  must 
therefore  be  away  from  the  butchers'  festival,  though  with  great  regret.  I  never 
promised  to  be  there.  Someone  did  for  me,  and  I  don't  believe  in  those  proxy 
promises.  You  are  a  host  in  yourself.  Tell  the  true  blues  to  be  true  blue,  and 
follow  the  best  of  leaders, — namely,  the  Lord  Jesus.  May  they  all  be  pure  and 
upright,  so  as  to  be  Christians  indeed  !  They  will  do  well  to  be  moderate  in  all 
things  ;  better  if  they  become  total  abstainers  from  strong  drink  ;  and  best  of  all  if 
they  have  new  hearts  and  are  believers  in  Jesus.  I  am  sure  we  shall  always  be  glad 
to  find  house-room  for  them  so  long  as  you  and  the  master-butchers  find  the  solids 

G4 


98  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography, 

for  filling  up  the  empties.  I  wish  every  man  would  get  a  day's  march  nearer 
Heaven  on  this  occasion.  May  God's  blessing  be  with  you  and  all  your  hearers  this 
night  ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

After  Rev.  Joseph  Cook,  of  Boston,  U.S.A.,  had  been  lecturing  in  the  United 
Kingdom  tor  about  six  months,  qu'^:stions  were  raised  in  various  quarters  concerning 
his  orthodoxy.  The  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  was  one  of  those  who  were  in  doubt  with 
regard  to  his  theological  teaching,  but  Mr.  Spurgeon  very  earnestly  pleaded  the 
cause  of  the  eminent  lecturer  from  across  the  Atlantic.  The  following  is  one  of  two 
letters  which  he  wrote  to  the  venerable  Earl  upon  this  matter  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  Beulah  Hill, 

"  Upper  Norwood, 

"May  II,  1881.  ' 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  agree  with  you  in  heart,  and  soul,  and  faith  ;  and  so  also  does  Joseph 

Cook.     His  expressions  may  not  be  clear,  but  his  meaning  is  identical  with  our  own. 

There   is,   however,  little  hope  of  my  leading  you  to  think  so,  now  that  Mr. 

has  cast  his  lurid  light  upon  the  lecturer's  words  ;  and  therefore  I  will  not  enter  into 

a  discussion. 

"Your  action  is  wise,  namely,  to  refrain  from  endorsing  that  which  you  do  not 
approve  of.  But,  I  pray  you,  believe  that,  as  I  know  Mr.  Cook,  and  am  as  sure  of 
his  orthodoxy  as  I  am  ot  my  own,  I  cannot  desert  him,  or, retract  the  commendations 
which  I  am  sure  that  he  deserves  ;  but  I  am  none  the  less  one  with  you.  If  you 
would  only  see  Mr.  Cook,  you  would  form  a  different  estimate  of  him  ;  but,  anyhow, 
I  shall  not  love  or  admire  you  one  atom  the  less  whatever  you  do. 

"  I  am,  perhaps,  more  lenient  than  you  are  because  I  never  was  able  to  be  quite 
so  guarded  a  speaker  as  you  are.  I  think  no  man  speaks  so  much  as  you  do  with 
so  few  blunders,  but  impetuous  people  get  into  muddles.  I  quite  agree  with 
Mr.  Foster's  estimate  of  you  as  certain  to  have  been  Premier  had  you  been 
ambitious  in  that  direction,  for  you  very  seldom  allow  your  speech  to  get  cloudy,  or 
to  run  over  to  the  other  side  when  emphasizing  this  ; — but  pray  do  not  expect  such 
accuracy  of  us  all. 

"  Here  is  a  man  who,  with  tears,  denies  the  slightest  complicity  with 
heterodoxy,  and  says  that  he  lives  and  feeds  on  the  old-fashioned  truth  so  dear 
to  us  ; — well, — I  believe  what  he  says,  and  wish  that  half  the  '  orthodox '  were 
as  orthodox  as  he  is. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  99 

"  The  Lord  ever  bless  and  sustain  you,  my  dear  friend,  and  spare  you  to 
us  many  years  to  come  !  I  wish,  when  these  meetings  are  over,  you  would  come 
and  see — 

"  Your  Lordship's  most  hearty  friend, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

To  this  letter,  Lord  Shaftesbury  replied  as  follows  : — 

"  24,  Grosvenor  Square,  W.,  \ 

"May  14,  ]88i. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  If  Joseph    Cook   stands   high    in  your  esteem,   it  is,    I  am  confident, 

because   you  decidedly,   and  conscientiously  believe  that  he  holds,  in  all  truth  and 

earnestness,    the    great    vital    doctrines   of   the    Christian    Faith, — those    doctrines 

indispensably  necessary  to  salvation,  and  which  have  been  the  life  and  rule  of  your 

ministerial  services.      In  these  have  been  your  joy,  and  your  strength.     Signal  as  are 

the  talents  that  God  has  bestowed  upon  you,  they  would,  without  preaching  Christ 

in  all   His  majestic  simplicity,  have  availed  you  nothing  to  comfort  and  instruct  the 

hearts  of  thousands. 

"  Such  being  the  case,  who  would  expect  you  to  recede,  by  one  hair's  breadth, 
unless  you  carried  your  convictions  with  you?     Certainly  not  I. 

"  I  am  deeply  gratified  by  your  kind  letter,  and  all  its  candid  and  friendly 
expressions.  You  must  not  admit  any  abatement  of  your  regard  and  love  for  me. 
Mine  towards  you  can  never  be  lessened,  while  you  stand  up  so  vigorously,  so 
devotedly,  so  exclusively  for  our  blessed  Lord. 

"  Ever  yours  most  truly, 

"  Shaftesbury." 
"  P.S. — I  will  pay  you  a  visit  as  soon  as  possible." 

Mr.  Cook  was  intensely  grateful  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  his  powerful  advocacy, 
even  if  it  did  not  convince  the  venerable  Earl.  It  is  somewhat  singular  that,  just  as 
this  chapter  is  being  compiled,  it  is  reported  that,  in  answer  to  a  statement  that 
Mr.  (now  Dr.)  Joseph  Cook  had  joined  the  Spiritualists,  he  wrote,  "  Spiritualism  is 
Potiphar's  wife  ;  my  name  is  Joseph."  His  reply  seems  to  indicate  that  efforts  had 
been  made  to  entangle  him,  but  that  he  had  resisted  them  as  successfully  as  his 
ancient  namesake  repelled  his  tempter. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  always  on  very  friendly  terms  with  his  neighbour,  Rev. 
Burman  Cassin,  M.A.,  rector  of  St.  George-the-Martyr,  Southwark.  On  the  twenty- 
fifth  anniversary  of  Mr.  Cassin's  ordination,  a  testimonial  was  presented  to  him  ; 
and  the  Pastor,  although  away  from  home,  wrote  concerning  it : — 


lOO  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Mentone, 

"Dec.  17,  1883. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Olney, 

"  I  had  no  idea  that  the  presentation  to  the  Rev.  Burman  Cassin  was 
coming  off  so  soon.  Had  I  been  at  home,  I  was  to  have  attended  the  meeting,  for 
he  is  a  brother  for  whom  my  heart  always  has  a  warm  place.  I  wish  him  every 
blessinof,  and,  above  all  things,  abundant  grace  to  win  multitudes  of  souls  for  Christ 
out  of  his  immense  parish.  His  true  piety,  his  loving  manners,  and  his  catholic 
spirit,  make  me  esteem  him  most  highly.  Had  I  been  able  to  attend,  I  should  have 
added  ^5  to  the  testimonial,  as  a  very  inadequate  but  very  honest  token  of  my 
affection  for  him.  As  I  am  so  far  away,  please  be  my  substitute,  and  give  the 
amount  on  my  behalf     You  can  trust  me  till  I  return. 

"  Yours  ever  heartily, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon.'' 

The  following  letter  greatly  interested  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — 

"Christ  Church  Vicarage, 

"  Rotherhithe, 

"August  16,  1884. 

"  Mr.  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  have,  for  many  years,  been  an  admiring  reader  of  your  sermons,  and 
have  often  felt  that  I  would  write  and  tell  you  how  useful  I  have  found  them 
personally  and  ministerially.  I  am  specially  urged  to  write  to-day  for  the  following 
reason.  My  mother,  a  clergyman's  widow,  died  on  May  19,  this  year,  at  Boston, 
Lincolnshire,  aged  87.  She  used  to  take  your  sermons  weekly,  read  them  carefully, 
have  them  bound  handsomely  at  the  end  of  the  year,  and  present  the  bound  volume 
to  me,  year  by  year,  on  my  birthday,  Aug.  16. 

"The  Vol.  for  1883 — her  last  gift — was  ready  bound,  and  /have  to-day  written 

my  name   in  it,  as  she  cannot.      Praying  that  the   Lord   may  give  you  health  and 

strength,   continued   usefulness,    and   increasing  holiness,  and   asking   your  pardon, 

if  intrusive, 

"  Yours  very  sincerely, 

"  H.    C.     MiTCHINSON, 

"Vicar  of  Christ  Church,  Rotherhithe." 

To  this  letter,  Mr.  Spurgeon  replied  thus  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"Aug,  19,  1884. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  enabled  to  give  seed  to  the  sower.     The 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  lOI 

Lord  accept  my  thanks  for  many  such  sweet  messages  as  yours  to  cheer  me  !     The 
Lord  also  be  with  you  in  all  your  ministry,  and  give  you  an  abundant  harvest ! 

"  I  congratulate  you  upon  having  a  mother  in  Heaven.  Mine  .still  lingers  in 
much  suffering  ;  yours  is  promoted  to  felicity.  We  will  follow  on.  I  have  paused 
to  pray  for  you.      Please  do  the  like  for  me,  tor  I  need  it  every  day. 

"  Yours  most  heartily, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

Several  letters  of  condolence  are  given  in  the  latter  part  of  the  next  chapter, 
so  one  of  congratulation  may  be  inserted  here.  The  following  cheery  note  was 
sent  to  Rev.  E.  W.  Matthews,  secretary  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Sailors'  Society, 
in  May,  1885,  in  reply  to  a  communication  from  him  announcing  the  arrival  of  a 
little  daughter,  and  sending  contributions  tor  the  Orphanage  from  all  his  children  : — 

"  Dear  Friend, 

"  Matthews  are  so  good  that  there  can  hardly  be  too  many  of  them  if 
they  all  turn  out  to  be  evangelists.  God  bless  the  parents  more  and  more,  and 
cause  the  children  to  be  real  blessings  to  them  in  later  years  !  That  you  should  bid 
your  children  send  me  a  crown  each,  suggests  that  I  hold  a  fourfold  monarchy  in 
your  esteem  ;  but,  alas  !  I  need  a  Priest  and  a  King  more  than  ever.  I  rejoice  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  is  growing  more  precious  to  me  in  that  capacity.  May  these  four 
Matthews  all  be  crowned  with  lovingkindness  and  tender  mercies  ! 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

For  many  years,  on  his  summer  visits  to  Scotland,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  the  guest 
of  Mr.  James  Duncan,  at  "  Benmore,"  the  beautiful  mansion  depicted  in  Vol.  III., 
page  362.  The  following  letter  was  written  to  Mr.  Duncan's  sister,  in  reply  to  one 
from  her,  mentioning  various  places  and  persons  known  to  the  Pastor,  and  saying  that, 
as  she  had  heard  that  he  was  overworking  himself,  she  advised  him  to  study  what 
the  sixth  commandment  required,  "  all  lawful  endeavours  to  preserve  our  own  life  ": — 

"  Westvvood, 

"Aug.  26,  1SS5. 
"  Dear  Mrs.  Moubray, 

"  I  heartily  thank  you  for  the  proverbs,  some  of  which   I   have  used.      I 

think  I  am  well  acquainted  with  the  book  you  have  culled  from  ;   indeed,  I  would  go 

far  to  see  a  proverb-book  which  I  do  not  know. 

"  Happy  woman  to  be  sailing  over  the  fair  seas,  and  gazing  upon  those  glorious 

hills  !      I  tind  abundance  to  do  all  day,  and  every  day  ;  but,  as  the  Lord  blesses  the 

work,  I  am  not  able  to  weary  of  it. 


I02  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  I  saw  Mr.  Duncan  on  Sunday,  much  to  my  joy.  He  is,  indeed,  a  kind  and 
tender  friend,  and  his  sister  is  lil>:e  unto  him.      God  bless  both  ! 

"  I  trust  Mr.  McKercher  will  get  better,  and  be  restored  to  you.  Truly  good 
men  are  scarcer  than  they  used  to  be.  The  world  has  gone  after  the  idols  of 
modern  thought,  and  those  of  us  who  do  not  thus  wander  are  esteemed  to  be  '  old 

fogies.' 

"  A  woman  rose  in  the  Tabernacle,  last  Sunday,  just  as  I  entered,  and  began  to 
talk  about  the  sixth  commandment  !  Of  course,  I  pricked  up  my  ears,  and  wondered 
whether  it  was  a  lady  from  Strone  House  !  She  did  not  get  far  before  the  attendants 
carried  her  off.  I  have  not  asked  her  name,  but  it  looks  very  suspicious.  Were 
you  up  in  London  last  Sunday  ? 

"  I  am  studying  that  commandment,  and  I  begin  to  think  that  I  must  work 
much  harder,  for  fear  somebody  should  be  killed,  spiritually,  by  my  failure  to  preach 
in  season  and  out  of  season. 

"  My  very  kindest  regards  and  heartiest  thanks  to  you. 

"  Yours  ever  gratefully, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Correspondents  often  asked  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  tell  them  the  meaning  of  difficult 
passages  of  Scripture.  In  reply  to  the  enquiry  of  a  generous  helper,  in  Scodand, 
concerning  Hebrews  vi.  4 — 6,  the  Pastor  wrote  :— 

"  Westwood, 

"March  15,  1887. 

"  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  have  always  taught  that,  if  the  Divine  life  could  entirely  die  out,  there 
would  be  no  second  quickening.  We  can  be  born  again,  but  not  again  and  again. 
If  the  salt  could  lose  its  savour,  it  would  be  a  hopeless  case.  From  which  I  argue 
that,  as  no  believer  in  Christ  is  in  a  hopeless  case,  no  man  has  utterly  lost  the  life  of 
God  alter  once  receiving  it. 

"  The  wilful  return  to  sin  would  be  fatal. 

"In  each  passage  quoted,  the  evil  supposed  is  also  denied.  (See  Hebrews  vi.  9, 
and  X.  39.) 

One  great  means  of  securing  final  perseverance  is  the  knowledge  that  we 
cannot  go  in  and  out  of  Christ  at  pleasure  ;  if  we  could  utterly  quit  Him,  there 
could  be  no  possibility  of  renewal.  (Hebrews  vi.  4.)  Therefore  we  are  bound  to 
hold  on  even  to  the  end. 

"  My  wonder  is  how,  in  the  teeth  of  these  texts,  Arminians  believe  that  men  can 
lose  the  Divine  life  and  receive  it  again.  No  words  can  be  clearer  than  those  which 
describe  this  as  'impossible.' 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  IO3 

"  I   have  sent  a  catalogue  with  sermons  marked  which  may  help  you.     Write 
me  whenever  you  like,  only  excuse  me  if  I  am  brief. 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

For  several  years,    Mr.    Spurgeon  preached   the  anniversary  sermon   at  Christ 

Church,  Westminster  Bridge  Road,  more  than  once  going  there  for  the  purpose  after 

conducting  his  own   Monday  evening  prayer-meeting.       In  1888,  he  was  too  unwell 

to  0-0,   so   he  wrote  the  following  letter  to   Mr.   Newman  Hall,  who  read  it  at  the 

public  meeting  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"July  4,  1888. 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  have  only  just  heard  that  to-day  is  your  anniversary.  I  congratulate 
you,  and  I  pray  that  you  may  have  a  right  good  day.  If  I  had  been  well  enough,  I 
would  have  accepted  your  invitation,  you  may  be  quite  sure.  I  thank  you  and  your 
friends  for  many  kindnesses  received  by  way  of  help  in  my  hour  of  sickness.  The 
Lord  bless  yoii  who  preached,  and  the  people  who  spared  you  !  In  these  days, 
we  are  two  of  the  old  school.  Our  experience  has  taught  us  that,  both  for 
conversion  and  edification,  the  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified  is  all-sufficient.  A 
childlike  faith  in  the  atoning  sacrifice  is  the  foundation  for  the  purest  and  noblest  of 
characters.  As  the  hammer  comes  down  on  the  anvil  ever  with  the  same  ring,  so 
will  we  preach  Christ,  Christ,  Christ,  and  nothing  else  but  Christ. 

"  Our  friends  leave  us  for  the  suburbs,  but  I  trust  the  Lord  will  raise  up  around 
us  another  generation  of  faithful  men.  God  bless  those  attached  brethren  who  stick 
to  us,  and  bear  the  brunt  of  the  battle  with  us  !  I  feel  a  deep  gratitude  to  all  such, 
both  at  the  Tabernacle  and  at  Christ  Church.  To  you  I  desire  continued  health  and 
joyous  communion  with  God. 

"Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Dr.    H.    L.  Wayland,   of  Philadelphia,    was   frequently   in   correspondence   with 

Mr.  and   Mrs.  Spurgeon.      On  more  than  one  occasion,  he  sent  contributions  for  the 

Lord's  work  under  their  care.       In  reply  to  one  of  these  communications,  the  Pastor 

wrote  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  June,  1889. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

Your  letter  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  has  greatly  cheered  her.   .   .   .   She  is  to 


I04  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

write  to  the  kind  donor  of  the  draft,  and  I  am  to  thank  you.  Wisdom  ordains 
division  of  labour.  My  dear  wife  does  not  improve  in  health.  I  don't  think  she 
could  improve  in  any  other  way. 

"  I  hold  on,  and  stand  fast.  Despite  what  your  correspondents  may  tell  you,  I 
know  of  a  surety  that  there  is  an  awful  twist  in  the  thoughts  of  the  many,  and  error 
bears  the  bell.      Yet  I  am  not  doubtful  of  the  ultimate  result. 

"  I  see  that  the  Lord  loves  you  and  yours  greatly,  for  He  tries  you.  These  are 
His  love-tokens.      I  have  many,  and  I  prize  them.     Your  love  is  sweet  to  me. 

"  Yours  most  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

In  August,  1S89,  Mr.  S.  G.  Richardson,  the  Sheffield  Master  Cuder-elect,  sent 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  through  a  mutual  friend,  a  very  cordial  invitation  to  attend  his 
banquet.     This  elicited  the  following  answer  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"August  23,  1889. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  You  are  most  kind,  and  so  is  the  Master  Cutler,  but  I  am  so  taken  up 
with  work  that  I  must  not  leave  home.  I  rejoice  in  the  kindness  and  courtesy  of 
Mr.  Richardson,  and  I  beg  you  to  thank  him  heartily.  Really,  I  am  not  a  man  for  a 
feast,  even  if  I  could  come.  Our  Lord  Mayor  pressed  me  to  meet  the  Archbishops 
and  Bi-shops  at  a  banquet,  but  I  could  not  bring  my  soul  to  it, — I  mean,  the  banquet. 
I  had  no  objection  to  the  Bishops.  Last  week,  I  had  tea  at  the  Archbishop's,  and 
luncheon  with  the  Bishop  of  Rochester  ;  but  the  banquet  was  out  of  my  line.  I  am 
best  at  work, — my  own  work.      Still,  God  bless  you,  and  the  Master  Cutler,  and  all 

the  good  folk ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

The  invitation  to  tea  at  the  Archbishop's  was  written  by  Mrs.  Benson,  and  was 
as  follows  : — 

"Addington  Park, 

"Croydon, 

"Aug.  10,  '89. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"We  have  just  come  back  to  Addington,  where  we  shall  be  for  a  few 
days  before  going  abroad  ;  and  I  am  writing  to  claim  your  kind  promise  to  come  and 
see  us  here.  Might  we  hope  that  you  will  come  to  afternoon  tea  on  Thursday  next 
at  5  o'clock?     It  will  be  a  great  pleasure  to  see  you.      I  fear  Mrs.  Spurgeon  is  not 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I05 

Strong  enough  for  so  long  a  drive  ;  otherwise,  it  would  have  given  us  great  pleasure 

if  she  would  accompany  you. 

"  Believe  me, 

"  My  dear  sir, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  Mary  Benson." 
"The  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

The  day  mentioned  not  being  convenient  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  because  of  the 
Tabernacle  service,  another  afternoon  was  fixed,  and  that  happened  to  be  in  the 
same  week  in  which  he  had  promised  to  take  luncheon  with  the  Bishop  of  Rochester, 
who  wrote,  a  few  days  afterwards  : — 

"  Selsdon  Park, 

"  Croydon, 

"  August  23,  1889. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  thank  you  exceedingly  for  your  valued  gift.  The  Salt-cclla7's  shall 
have  an  opportunity  of  sparkling  in  my  sermons,  and  I  shall  begin  to  read  The 
Cheque  Book  of  the.  Bank  of  Faith  to-day. 

"You  may  like  to  see  a  very  friendly  though  not  a  gushing  criticism  on  your 
sermons  in  The  Gziai'dian  of  last  Wednesday, — the  leading  High  Church  journal. 

"We  all  have  a  most  charming  impression  of  your  visit.  Next  time  you  come, 
I  shall  try  to  pick  your  brains  about  preaching. 

"  Most  truly  yours, 

"A.    W.     ROFFEN." 

The  following  letter — the  last  one  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  his  old  friend, 
Mr.  J.  S.  Watts,  of  Cambridge,  has  a  specially  pathetic  interest  now  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  May  29,  1S90. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  How  are  you  ?     I  am  myself  below  par  in  health  ;  but  exceeding  full  of 

the  Lord's  goodness.      I  have  seen  sixty-nine  candidates  for  church-fellowship  this 

month.      Long  hours  It  has  cost  me  to  converse  with  the  many,   and  select  these  ; 

but    it    is    glorious    harvest  work.      Everything    prospers   more   and   more.      But    I 

get  faint  at  times  in  body.      I   must  rest  more.      On  June    19,   I   shall  be  fifty-six, 

and  my  years  have  been  such  as  produce  great  wear  and  tear.      Yet  I  shall  soon 

pick  up  again. 

"  I  shall  send  you  my  College  Reports  for  the  last  two  years,  that  you  may  see 

how,    in   temporal   supplies,    we  know    no    lack.      My   liberation   from    questionable 


io6  c.    u.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

associations  has  brought  around  me  a  host  of  the  Lord's  own  who  have  a  like 
love  to  His  inspired  Word  and  immutable  truth.  Divinely  has  He  sustained  me, 
and  He  ivill.      Peace  be  unto  you  ! 

"  Yours  ever  lovingly, 

"  C.    H.    Spurgeon." 

One  of  the  many  loving  notes  preserved  by  a  former  member  of  the  Tabernacle 
Church  is  interesting  because  of  the  Biblical  names  borne  by  himself  and  several  of 
his  relatives  who  are  mentioned  in  it : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  Aug.  30,  1890. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Keevil, 

"What  a  patriarchal  family  you  are!  Here  is  Joshua  sending  me  a 
letter  from  Noah,  containing  news  about  Enoch,  and  Job  and  his  girls  !  It  makes 
me  feel  proud  to  be  in  such  ancient  company.      God  bless  you  all  ! 

"  I  will  send  Noah  a  receipt.  Like  his  namesake,  he  seems  to  have  had  enough 
rain.  Well,  we  shall  get  home.  You  are  a  good  soul.  May  the  Lord  give  you  the 
double  portion,  as  he  did  Job  I 

"  Yours  heartily  ever, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

While  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  ill  at  Mentone,  in  December,  1S90,  he  received  a 
letter  from  his  old  and  faithful  friend,  Dr.  D.  A.  Doudney,  Editor  of  The  Gospel 
Magazine,  who  said  : — "  I  had  such  a  spirit  of  holy  wrestling  at  the  footstool  of 
mercy,  on  your  behalf,  in  the  wakefulness  of  the  past  night,  that  I  could  but  cherish 
the  hope  that  the  Lord  was  giving  you  relief"      In  reply,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — 

'*  Mentone, 

"  Dec.  5,  '90. 
"Venerated  Friend, 

"  It  made  my  heart  leap  for  joy  when  I  read  in  your  note  that  you  had 
liberty  in  prayer  for  me.  I  am  recovering.  I  can  hold  the  pen,  as  you  see.  My 
hand  was  puffed  up,  and,  in  consequence,  like  all  puffed  up  things,  useless  ;  but 
it  is  coming  to  its  true  form,  and  I  am  rallying  from  the  weakness  which  follows 
great  pain. 

"Of  a  surety,  it  is  well.  I  praise  God  with  all  my  heart  for  the  furnace,  the 
hammer,  and  the  file.  May  He  bless  to  you  the  infirmities  of  years,  and  carry  you 
ever  in  His  bosom  ! 

"  Your  loving,  grateful  friend, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER    XCT. 


Ittttxs  m  Ipri&att  aiib  ^Public  Mm%  {Continued}. 

Letters  Concerning   Legacies. 

HE  following  letter,  relating"  to  an  estate  of  the  value  of  ^5,000, 
may  be  inserted  as  a  specimen  of  many  which  Mr.  Spurgcon  had 
to  write,  on  other  occasions,  with  reference  to  financial  matters 
about  which  he  ought  never  to  have  been  troubled.  In  several 
instances,  when  money  was  bequeathed  to  him  which  he  thought 
should  have  gone  to  the  relatives  of  the  testator  or  testatrix,  he 
paid  it  over  to  them  without  the  least  hesitation,  and  it  often  grieved  him  that  he 
could  not  do  the  same  with  legacies,  left  to  his  Institutions,  which  ought  to  have 
been  given  to  needy  relations.  In  the  case  here  referred  to,  he  had  simply  to 
refuse  what  he  regarded  as  an  unjust  and  unreasonable  demand  : — 

"  Clapham, 

"  June  13,  1868. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"Although   Mr. 's    will    certainly    makes    me   his   residuary  legatee 

absolutely,  he  gave  the  solicitor  to  understand  that  he  left  the  money  to  me  because 
he  was  sure  I  should  not  appropriate  it  to  myself,  but  would  use  it  for  religious  and 
charitable  purposes.  This  request  he  also  wrote  me,  and  it  was  sent  by  his  solicitor. 
The  Law  of  Mortmain  prevented  him  from  leaving  his  money  as  he  desired,  there- 
fore he  put  it  in  my  hands,  very  much  to  my  discomfort.  I  shall  not,  on  any 
account,  accept  a  farthing  for  myself  from  this  estate,  but  carry  out  the  testator's 
known  wish. 

"  I  do  not  consider  this  to  be  any  barrier  to  my  making  awards  to  claimants 
who  may  have  moral  claims  of  a  sound  character  against  the  estate,  for  it  is  not  to 
my  mind  to  give  to  religion  or  charity  till  justice  has  been  done.  Hence  I  have,  to 
the  best  of  my  judgment,  with  the  kind  advice  of  the  executors,  met  each  claim,  not 
only  of  a  legal,  but  of  a  moral  kind,  and  there  is  now  no  balance  remaining  to  be 
disposed  of,  or  so  small  as  to  be  not  worth  mentioning.  There  will  be  no  more 
funds  available  during  the  existence  of  two  lives  ;  and,  consequently,  the  claims  of 

Mr. and  others  must  wait,  even  if  they  can  be  attended  to  at  any  time. 

"The  executors  do  not  believe  in  the  claims  of  Mr. ;  but  they,  as  gentlemen, 

would   advise   me   with    impartiality,   and   if  you   convince  them,  you  convince   me  ; 


io8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

only  I  cannot  be  expected  to  disburse  money  which  I  have  not  received,  from  an 
estate  with  which  personally  I  have  no  profitable  connection,  left  by  an  utter 
stranger. 

"  I  see  no  grounds  for  your  severe  language  towards  me  ;  and  as  for  vour  threat 
to  publish  the  matter  abroad,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  neither  court  nor  fear 
publicity  in  any  of  my  actions  ;  and,  in  this  case,  if  the  simple  truth  be  published,  it 
will  little  concern  me  what  the  public  think  of  my  proceeding.  I  am  the  gainer  of 
much  trouble  and  annoyance  by  this  unhappy  legacy,  and  nothing  more. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeox." 

"  P.S. — Please  send  future  letters  on  this  business  to  the  executors." 

One  of  many  letters,  which  had  to  be  written  at  a  later  period  with  reference  to 
great  fortunes  said  to  have  been  left  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  may  also  be  given  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  March  26,  18S4. 
*'  Dear  Sir, 

"  In  speaking  of  a  supposed  large  fortune  left  to  me,  you  very  wisely  say, 

'If  it  is  so  !'     Several  times,  such  rumours  have  gone  abroad  ; — much  smoke  from  a 

very  small  fire.      In  the  present  case,  there  may  be  something  ;   'but  how  little  none 

can   tell'      This  rumour  brings   to   me   begging   letters  and  requests   of  the   most 

amazing  kind  ;  and,   in  a  measure,  stops  supplies  for  my  many  enterprises,  and  so 

causes    me    much    trouble.       Please,    therefore,    say  in  your  paper    that    the    laro-e 

fortune  is  a  myth.     With  many  thanks  for  your  kind  remarks, 

"  I   am, 

"  Yours  in  much  weakness, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


Correspondence  re  Lectures  and  Sermons  in  the  United  States. 

In  the  year  1873,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  addressing  his  church  and  congregation, 
made  the  following  reference  to  a  proposal  which  he  had  received  : — 

"  I  had  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  well  known  in  America,  giving  me  the  offer 
of  25,000  dollars  for  twenty-five  lectures.  On  these  terms,  the  twenty-five  nights 
would  give  me  ^5,000,  and  in  a  hundred  nights  I  should  have  ^'20,000.  Besides 
this,  I  should  be  allowed  to  lecture  for  as  many  more  nights  as  I  chose,  so  that  I 
might,  in  the  course  of  a  year,  be  worth  ^40,000,  and  no  doubt  the  persons  who 
undertook  the  arrangement  would  earn  ten  times  that  amount.  What  do  you 
suppose  was  my  answer  to  this  offer  ?     I  wrote,  '  If  you  were  to  multiply  it  a  hundred 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


109 


times,  and  again  a  hundred  times,  I  should  feel  it  as  easy  to  decline  as  I  do  now, 
when  I  say  that  I  cannot  cross  the  ocean  to  lecture  upon  any  subject  whatever.  I 
am  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  and  never  lectured  for  money,  and  do  not  intend  to  do 
so  now.' " 

Although  the  refusal  was  so  emphatic,  other  offers  continued  to  come.  In  1876, 
a  paragraph  appeared  in  some  American  papers  stating  that  "  The  Rev.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  writes  that  he  will  visit  the  United  States  in  the  autumn."  This  elicited 
the  following  letter  : — 

"Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A., 

"Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "June  22,  1876. 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  Is  the  above  paragraph  true  ?     We  have  tried  so  long,  and  so  hard,  for 

so  many  years,  to  secure  you,  that  we  thought  it  impossible,  and  long  since  gave 

up   all  hope.     We    are    agents   (exclusive    agents)   for   all   the   leading  lecturers   in 

the  country,   and   do    nine-tenths   of   the  lecture   business  of  America,  and  we  are 

responsible  for  what  we  offer.     We  will  give    you  a  thousand  dollars   in  gold  for 

every  lecture  you  will  deliver  in  America,  and  pay  all  your  expenses  to  and   from 

your  home,  and  place  you  under  the  most  popular  auspices  in  this  country.     Will 

you  come  ? 

"  Yours  truly, 

"The  Redpath  Lyceum  Bureau." 

To  this  communication,  Mr.  Spurgeon  replied  : — 

"  Clapham, 

"  London, 

"July  6,  1876. 
"  Gentlemen, 

"  I  cannot  imagine  how  such  a  paragraph  should  appear  in  your  papers, 

except  by  deliberate  invention  of  a  hard-up  Editor,   for  I    never  had  any  idea  of 

leaving  home  for  America  for  some  time  to  come.     As   I   said  to  you  before,  if  I 

could  come,  I  am  not  a  lecturer,  nor  would  I  receive  money  for  preaching. 

"Yours  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

In  1878,  two  other  invitations  came,  the  first  of  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  answered 
thus  : — "  I  have  not  the  slightest  idea  of  visiting  America.  If  ever  I  should  do  so, 
I  could  not  preach  or  lecture  for  money.  Excellent  as  your  services  doubtless  are 
to  those  who  need  them,  they  could  not  possibly  be  needed  by  me.      I  should  regard 


IIO  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

it  as  an  utter  prostitution  of  any  gifts  I  possess  if  I  were,  as  a  servant  of  God,  to  use 
them  to  make  money  for  myself  in  the  way  in  which  lecturers  very  properly  do." 

The  reply  to  the  second  request  was  :^"  I  am  not  open  to  any  engagement 
either  to  lecture  or  to  preach  in  America.  I  could  not  consider  your  offer  for  a 
single  moment.  I  have  on  several  occasions  given  a  positive  refusal,  and  can  only 
repeat  it  in  the  plainest  terms.      I  am  not  to  be  hired  for  any  money." 

Another  effort  was  made  in  1879,  when  Major  Pond  was  in  England  with 
Dr.  Talmage,  and  the  former  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  asking  for  an  interview,  and 
saying,  among  other  things  : — "  I  want  to  see  the  man  to  whom  I  would  pay  the 
compliment  to  offer  fifty  thousand  dollars  for  speaking  fifty  nights  in  my  country,  and 
to  my  countrymen."     To  this  note,  Mr.  Spurgeon  replied  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 
"  Balham, 

"  Surrey, 

"  June  6,  1S79. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  am  not  at  all  afraid  of  anything  you  could  say  by  way  of  tempting  me 
to  preach  or  lecture  for  money,  for  the  whole  of  the  United  States  in  bullion  would 
not  lead  me  to  deliver  one  such  lecture.  It  would  only  waste  your  time  and  mine 
for  you  to  see  me,  though  I  feel  sure  that  you  are  one  of  the  pleasantest  men  upon 
the  earth.  Your  good-natured  pertinacity  is  so  admirable  that  I  trust  you  will  not 
waste  it  upon  an  impossible  object  ;  but  be  content  to  have  my  acknowledgment 
that,  if  success  could  have  been  achieved,  you  would  have  achieved  it. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

In  1S83,  a  syndicate  in  the  United  States,  without  even  asking  for  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
opinion  or  consent,  arranged  for  the  transmission,  by  telegraph,  of  his  Lord's-day 
morning  sermons,  and  their  publication  on  the  following  day,  in  a  number  of  papers 
in  Boston,  Chicago,  Cincinnati,  Philadelphia,  and  St.  Louis,  having  an  aggregate 
circulation  of  a  million  copies.  The  experiment  was  doomed  to  be  a  failure,  for  the 
instructions  to  the  English  agents  were  : — "  Cable  Spurgeon's  Sunday  morning 
sermons,  omitting  the  little  words.''  The  attempt  to  insert  those  words  in  the  report- 
received  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  produced  such  a  strange  result  that 
Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  on  the  first  copy  he  received  : — "  Sermon  a  hash,  but  pretty 
well  considering  the  hurry  and  double  transmission  to  New  York,  and  then  to 
Cincinnati."  In  reply  to  a  complaint  that  the  arrangement  involved  a  great  increase 
in  Sabbath  labour,  the  Pastor  wrote  : — 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I  I  I 

"  Westwood, 

"June  8,  1 883. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  It  is  true  that  my  Sunday  morning  sermons  are  taken  by  the  United 
States  Press  Association,  and  are  cabled  so  as  to  appear  in  the  papers  on  Monday 
morning.  So  far  as  this  occasions  Sunday  work,  I  regret  it  ;  but  I  have  no  more 
to  do  with  it  than  you  have.  I  have  never  been  in  any  way  consulted  in  the  matter, 
and  so  I  have  not  entered  into  any  enquiry  as  to  the  labour  involved. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Only  a  few  weeks  elapsed  before  the  Pastor  was  able  to  write  in  The  bivord 
and  the  T^-owel : — "  The  sermons  were  not  long  telegraphed  to  America,  so  that  our 
friends  who  feared  that  the  Sabbath  would  be  desecrated  may  feel  their  minds 
relieved.  We  are  not  sorry  ;  for  the  sermons  which  we  saw  in  the  American  papers 
may  have  been  ours,  but  they  were  so  battered  and  disfigured  that  we  would  not 
have  owned  them.  In  the  process  of  transmission,  the  eggs  were  broken,  and  the 
very  life  of  them  was  crushed.  We  much  prefer  to  revise  and  publish  for  ourselves  ; 
and  as  these  forms  of  publication"are  permanent,  their  usefulness  becomes  in  the 
long  run  greater  than  would  come  of  a  wide  scattering  of  faulty  reports." 

Four  years  later,  another  attempt  was  made  to  arrange  for  the  early  publication, 

on  an  extensive  scale,  of  summaries  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  ;    but  this  also  failed. 

He  was  unable  even  to  entertain  the  proposal  made  to  him  in  the  following  letter, 

for  he  never  knew  "ten  days  in  advance"  what  the  subject  of  his  discourse   would 

be  ;    otherwise,  in  this  case,  there  might  not  have  been  the  same  objection  as  on 

the  former  occasion  as  the  effort  need  not  have  involved   any  increase  of  Sunday 

labour  : — 

"  New  York  Syndicate  Bureau, 

"  No.  I,  William  Street, 

"  New  York, 

"  Sept.  20,  1887. 
"  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon, 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  W^e  have  arrangements  about  perfected  by  which  we  are   to  publish, 

every  Monday  morning,   in  all  the   large   cities   of  this  country,   a  synopsis  of  the 

sermons  of  six  of  the  leading  clergymen  here.     The  idea  is,  to  get  advance  notes  of 

the  sermons  (about  ten  days  in  advance),  and  send  them  out  to   our  syndicate  ol 

newspapers.      It  is  necessary  to  get  the  matter  so  far  in  advance  as  we  have  to  reach 

San  Francisco.     Those  we  intend  publishing  are.  Rev.  Phillips  Brooks,  of  Boston  ; 


112  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Dr.  lohn  Hall.  New  York  ;  Dr.  Talmage,  Brooklyn  ;  Cardinal  Gibbons,  Baltimore  ; 
Rev.  John  P.  Newman,  Washington  ;  and  the  Most  Rev.  Archbishop  Ryan, 
Philadelphia. 

"  While  negotiations  have  been  going  on,  we  have  received  numerous  requests 
from  our  subscribing  Editors  for  a  weekly  synopsis  of  your  sermon,  and  thinking 
that  there  might  be  an  inducement  in  having  your  congregation  increased  into  the 
millions,  with  the  corresponding  increase  in  the  beneficial  influence  of  your  sermons, 
we  have  thought  it  wise  to  approach  you  on  the  subject. 

"  Could  you  not  cable,  at  our  expense,  about  ten  days  in  advance,  the  ideas  of 
vour  sermon  each  week  ?  The  e.xact  phraseology  is  not  necessary,  as  the  ideas  are 
all  that  are  wanted.      Cable,  say  250  to  300  words.       For  this  courtesy,  we  would  be 

pleased  to  forward,  each  week,  our  cheque  at  the  rate  of a  year.      If  you  think 

favourably  of  the  matter,  kindly  cable  the  one  word  '  Yes '  to  our  registered  address, 
*  Exactness,  New  York,'  and  we  will  write  you  in  regard  to  any  detail  that  may  be 
necessary.      Hoping  that  you  will  render  a  favourable  decision, 

"  We  are, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  Chas.  R.  Brown,  Editor." 

Any  friends  from  the  United  States,  who  had  ever  worshipped  at  the  Metro- 
politan Tabernacle,  and  who  saw,  in  The  Neiv  York  Herald,  January  9,  1888,  the  report 
of  the  service  in  that  building  the  day  before,  must  have  been  somewhat  surprised 
at  what  they  read.  In  the  course  of  a  long  cablegram  purporting  to  have  been 
received  from  the  Heralifs  London  bureau,  the  correspondent  said  : — "There  were 
fully  five  thousand  in  the  audience  to  greet  the  Tabernacle  orator  on  his  return  from 
Mentone.  He  looked  remarkably  better  than  when  I  interviewed  him  two  months 
ago  for  the  Herald  on  his  departure.  AfUr  a  gra^td  voluntary  from  the  organ, 
during  which  the  congregation  silently  studied  the  countenance  of  the  great  Baptist 
preacher,  he  and  the  audience  standing,  they  sang  Psalm  103,  best  known  in  music 
as  '  Benedice  anima  mea.'  Then  an  assistant  read  the  second  chapter  of  the  first 
Epistle  of  John,  first  giving  the  revisers'  head-notes  summarizing  the  contents  of  the 
chapter.  After  the  choir,  zvhich  is  of  high  repute,,  had  sung  a  hymn  in  which  there 
zvas  a  charming  contralto  solo,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  from  the  text : — '  It  ye  abide 
in  Me,  and  My  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you.' — John  xv.  7." 

The  words  printed  in  italics  indicate  some  of  the  inaccuracies  in  these  few 
sentences.  As  there  was  no  "organ"  or  "choir"  at  the  Tabernacle,  so  there  was 
neither  "  voluntary  "  nor  "  contralto  solo."  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  read  and 
expounded  John  xv.  i — 8,  and  also  i  John  ii.,  so  his  "assistant"  had  no  opportunity 


C.     11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  II3 

of  "giving  the  revisers'  head-notes."  The  text  was  stated  correctly,  so  the 
references  to  it,  and  to  one  of  the  chapters  which  were  read,  must  have  been 
telegraphed,  with  the  number  of  the  Psalm  sung  ;  but  the  descriptive  matter  in 
the  "cablegram  "  must  have  been  inserted  by  someone  who  knew  nothing  about  the 
mode  of  worship  adopted  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  however  familiar  he  might 
be  with  the  practices  prevailing  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic. 


Consolatory    Letters. 
Mr.    Spurgeon    was    a    true   comforter  of   the    suffering    and    sorrowing  ;    his 
frequent  personal  afflictions,  added  to  his   own  sympathetic  disposition,  made  him 
"a  succourer  of  many."     This  cheering  and  helpful  note  was  written  to  a  lady  who 

had  told  him  of  her  many  trials  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  March  9,  '81. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  You  seem   to  me  to  be   in  the  night  school, — by  no  means  pleasant 

lessons,  few  holidays,  and  no  cakes  and  sugar-sticks  ; — but  a  wise  Teacher,  and  a 

guarantee  of  becoming  a  well-trained  disciple  in  clue  time.       This  is  much   better 

than  to  be  pampered  with  joyous  excitements,  and  to  be  thereby  really  weakened  in 

faith.       How  could    you    honour   Christ,    by   trusting   Him   as    He    is    revealed    in 

Scripture,  if  you  were  always  having   new  revelations  over  and  above  His  Word  ? 

Too  much  sight  renders  faith  impossible.     A  certain  measure  of  darkness  is  needful 

for  the  full  exercise  of  faith.     Be  of  good  comfort  ;  for   He  who  has  redeemed  you 

will   not  lose   that   which   has  cost    Him   so   much.      I    hope   you    will    yet   recover 

strength.      Why,  you  are   only  a  young  girl  yet  at  thirty-seven  !      But   I   know  how 

the   spirits   sink,  and   one   feels   as  old   as    Methuselah.       The    Lord   be   ever  your 

Comforter  ! 

"  Yours,  with  much  to  do, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

One  of  Mr.    Spurgeon's   dearest   and  most   intimate  friends   was   Mr.   William 

Higgs,  the  builder  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  a  deacon  of  the  church  worshipping  there. 

The   following  extracts   from  letters   to   Mrs.    Higgs,    when  her   dear  husband  was 

"  called  home,"  will  show  how  fully  the  Pastor  sympathized  with  her  and  the  whole 

of  the  bereaved  family  : — ■ 

"Westwood, 

"  January  3,  1883. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  How  I  wish  that  I  could  come  and  join  you  in  your  grief,   even  if  I 

H  4 


114  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

could  not  give  you  comfort  !  But  I  am  too  lame  to  move.  Ah,  me  !  what  a  blow ! 
We  were  all  afraid  of  it,  but  did  not  think  it  would  come  just  now.  Doubtless  it  is 
best  as  it  is  ;  but  it  is  a  sharp  gash  in  the  heart.  He  was  a  dear  soul  to  us  all,  but 
specially  to  you.  I  beg  the  Lord  to  bear  you  up  under  this  the  heaviest  of  all  trials. 
,  .  .  All  is  well  with  him.  There  is  our  comfort.  His  pains  and  wearinesses 
are  over,  and  he  rests.  I  will  come  as  soon  as  I  can  travel,  but  this  swollen  right 
foot  holds  me  like  a  fetter  of  iron. 

"  Loving  sympathy  to  every  one  of  you.      God  bless  you  ! 

"  Yours  ever  heartily, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

"  Westwood, 

"  January  6,  1883. 
"  Dear  Mrs.  Higgs, 

"L and   G have  now   told  me  all  about  our  dear  one's  death. 

The  Lord  has  dealt  well  with  him.  I  wonder  how  he  lived  so  long  to  cheer  us  all  : 
and  I  feel  relieved  that  he  lived  no  longer,  for  it  would  have  been  great  anguish  to 
him.  He  has  gone  at  the  right  time.  The  Lord  will  be  your  comfort  and  help.  I 
meant  to  go  to  you  this  morning,  but  I  found  my  foot  would  not  let  me  go  up 
and  down  steps.  It  is  a  double  pain  to  be  kept  from  you  and  your  sorrowing 
family.  .  .   .  We  shall  all  meet  again.  .   .  .   Let  us  bless  God.     Can  we  ^. 

"  Your  loving  friend, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

When  Pastor  T.  W.  Medhurst  lost  a  daughter,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  to  him  : — 

"Westwood, 

"  May  24,  1884. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  May  you  be  sustained  under  your  heavy  trial !  Now  that  you  and 
your  dear  companion  are  most  fully  realizing  the  void  which  is  made  in  your 
household,  may  you  find  living  consolations  flowing  into  your  hearts !  '  It  is 
well,'  and  faith  knows  it  is  so ;  and  worships  the  Lord  from  under  the  cloud. 
How  time  has  flown  !  It  seems  but  the  other  day  that  you  were  married  ;  and 
now  you  are  an  old  father,  bereaved  of  a  daughter.  Dear  Caleb  Higgs,  too, 
is  gone  home  long  ago. 

"  We   shall   meet   above    before   long.     Till   then,    in   our    Lord's   business   we 

will  find  solace,  and  in   Himself  delight. 

"  Yours  ever  heartily, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  II5 

The  following  letter  was  written  to  an  Oxfordshire  clergyman,  with  whom 
Mr.  Spurgeon  had  long  been  in  close  personal  friendship  ;  he  was  always  deeply 
interested  in  the  open-air  services  under  the  oaks  on  Mr.  Abraham's  farm  (see 
Vol.  III.,  page  365),  and  induced  all  whom  he  could  influence  to  be  present: — 

"  West  wood, 

"June    12,    1884. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"I  casually  heard   from   Mr.   Abraham   that  you   were  ill,  but   I  had  no> 

idea  that  it  was  a  serious  matter  ;  but   Mr.   Rochfort  has   kindly  given  me  further 

news.      I    feel   very   sad   about   It,    but    I    am   sure   you   do   not.     The   loss  will  be 

ours,  and   Heaven  and  you  will  gain. 

"  Dear  loving  brother,  you  have  nothing  now  to  do  but  to  go  home  ;  and 
what  a  home  !  You  will  be  quite  at  home  where  all  is  love,  for  you  have  lived 
in  that  blessed  element,  and  are  filled  with  it.  I  shall  soon  come  hobbling  after 
you,  and  shall  find  you  out.  We  are  bound  to  gravitate  to  each  other  whether 
here  or  in  glory.     We  love  the  same  Lord,  and  the  same  blessed  truth. 

"  Mav  the  everlastino-  arms  be  underneath  vou  !  I  breathe  for  vou  a  lovine, 
tender  prayer, — '  Lord,  comfort  Thy  dear  servant,  and  when  he  departs,  may  it  be 
across  a  dried-up  river  into  the  land  of  living  fountains  ! ' 

"  I  am  fifty  next  Thursday,  and  you  are  near  your  Jubilee.  In  this  we  are 
alike;  but  Jesus  is  the  highest  joy.  Into  the  Father's  hands  I  commit  you,  'until 
the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away.' 

"Your  loving  brother, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon.' 

The  good  man  did  not  linger  long,  and  in  the  August  number  of  The  Sword 
and  the  Tj'owel  Mr.  Spurgeon  inserted  the  following  note  : — -"  Our  dear  brother. 
Rev.  Thomas  Curme,  vicar  of  Sandford,  Oxon.,  has  passed  to  his  reward.  He 
was  a  sweet  Christian,  of  calm  and  serene  spirit,  full  of  love  and  humility,  yet  firm 
as  a  rock  in  the  doctrine  of  grace.  When  the  denouncer  of  Baptismal  Regeneration 
was  shunned  by  many  of  the  clergy,  one  of  his  brethren  asked  Mr.  Curme,  '  How 
can  you  spend  so  much  time  in  company  with  Spurgeon  .-^ '  His  gentle  answer 
was,  '  It  is  more  wonderful  that  he  should  associate  with  me  than  that  I  should 
meet  with  him.'  His  love  to  us  was  wonderful,  and  constituted  one  of  the  joys 
of  our  life.  He  was  beloved  of  all  who  knew  him,  and  we  were  one  with  him  in 
the  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.      He  passed  away  full  of  years,  ripe  for  his  rest." 

When  the  mother  of  one  of  "our  own  men"  was  "called  home"  just  after  her 
son's  recognition  service  at  Luton,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  to  him  from  Mentone  : — 


Il6  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Feltham, 

"It  is  a  great  sorrow  to  lose  such  a  mother,  but  also  a  great  joy  to 
know  it  is  well  with  her.  She  could  not  have  passed  away  under  happier  circum- 
stances. She  must  have  been  glad  to  see  her  son  so  happily  settled,  and  then 
gladder  still  to  be  with  her  Lord  for  ever.  No  lingering  sickness,  no  fierce  pain  ; 
but  gentle  dismission,  and  instant  admission  into  the  glory.  I  envy  her  as  much  as 
I  dare.     The  Lord  be  with  you  and  your  beloved,  and  comfort  you  to  the  full ! 

"  Your  sympathizing  friend, 

"  C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

The   "grandmother"  so    tenderly   mentioned    in    the    following    letter   was,    of 

course,    the    Mrs.    Bartlett    who   so    long    conducted    the  large    Bible-class    at    the 

Tabernacle  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Dec.  14,  '87. 

"  Dear  Mr.   Bartlett, 

"  I  sorrow  with  you  over  the  departure  of  your  little  Lillie  ;  but  you 
will  feel  that  there  is  honey  with  the  gall.  She  was  a  dear  child,  ready  to  take 
her  place  with  the  shining  ones.  Grandmother  will  receive  her  as  a  messenger 
from   you. 

"  May  peace  and  consolation  flow  into  the  heart  of  yourself  and  wife  !      I   send 

you  a  little  cheque  to  ease  the  expense.      1   cannot  ease   your  pain  ;    but  there  is 

'  another  Comforter '  who   can  and  will  do  so.      Receive  my  hearty  sympathy.     We 

are  all  going  the  same  way.     The    little   one   has   outrun   us  ;  we   shall   catch   her 

up  soon. 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon. 

When  the  wife   of  Dr.    S.    O.    Habershon    was  "  called  home,"  Mr.  Spurgeon 
wrote  to  Miss  Ada  R.  Habershon  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"April  30,  1889. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  heard  with  deep  regret  of  your  dear  father's  loss, — which  is  your 
mother's  gain.  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  beloved  man  is  not  well.  It  is  a  crushing 
stroke,  and  he  has  a  tender  heart.  The  Lord  Himself  sustain  him  !  The  Holy 
Ghost  Himself  has  undertaken  the  office  of  Comforter  because  there  is  such  need  of 
comfort  in  the  tried  family,  and  because  it  is  such  work  as  only  God  can  do 
effectually.      I  commend  you  to  the  '  other  Comforter.'      I   could  not  expect  to  see 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  '  II7 

you  at  the  College  supper,  but  it  is  very  kind  of  you  to  write  me.  You  cheer  me 
much  by  the  reminder  of  the  use  of  The  Cheque  Book  to  the  dying  one.  God  be 
praised  ! 

"  1  may  send  you  my  Christian  love  in  this  hour  of  sorrow,  for  I  feel  great 
sympathy  with  you  and  your  father,  and  a  hallowed  oneness  of  heart  with  you  in  the 
faith  of  our  Lord,  and  in  service  for  His  Name.  May  a  sweet  hush  fall  on  your 
hearts  ! 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Miss  Habershon  thus  explains  the  allusion  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  volume,  The 
Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith  : — "  My  dear  mother  read  it  daily  ;  and,  during 
her  last  illness,  it  was  read  to  her  as  long  as  she  could  bear  it.  The  last  portion 
my  dear  father  read  to  her  was  on  April  8,— she  fell  asleep  on  the  13th, — and  the 
words  were  singularly  appropriate  : — '  If  there  is  no  more  work  for  you  to  do  for 
your  Master,  it  cannot  distress  you  that  He  is  about  to  take  you  home.'" 

A  few  months  later,  Dr.  Habershon  also  received  the  summons,  "  Come  up 
higher."  During  his  last  illness,  his  daughter  wrote  to  inform  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  he 
replied  as  follows  : — 

"  West  wood, 

"  Aug.   3,  1889. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  You  are  now  tried  indeed,  but  all-sufficient  grace  will  bear  you  throuo-h. 

I  desire  my  tenderest  love  to  your  suffering  father.      If  he  is   now  going   home,  I 

congratulate  him  upon  the  vision  which  will  soon  burst  upon  him.     If  he  tarries  with 

us  a  little  longer,  it  will  be  profitable  for  you.      We  have  not  the  pain  of  choice.      It 

is  a  great  mercy  that  we  are  not  placed  in  the  perplexing  dilemma  of  choosing  either 

for  ourselves  or  others,  whether  we  live  or   die.      I   pray  for  you  both.      May   you 

maintain  the  peace  which  now  rules  you,  and  find  it  even  brightening  into  joy  in  the 

Lord's  will  !     Jesus  said  to  the  women  at  the  sepulchre,  'All  hail.'     All  is  well. 

"  Yours  most  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
Mr.   Spurgeon's    presence    and    address    at    the  funeral   greatly  comforted   the 
mourners  ;  and  in  thanking  him.  Miss   Habershon  consulted  him  with  regard  to  the 
future,  and  received  the  following  reply  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"Sept.  6,  1889. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  It  would  seem  to  be  wise  advice  which  would  lead  your  brother  to  take 

your  father's   house.      Iii  the   profession,  a  measure  o{ pi-estige  is  valuable,  and  this 


iiS  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 


e  CL^ 


.^.^  .^.^  .^c,,.^^  /^    .^^^L.-^  '^/f^^  ,;   ^ 


COPY   OF   FACSIMILE   LETTER   ALTERED    BY   MR.    SPURGEON. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 


119 


.xj^l^^^    9^.^J!j:d  ^  Av.->-«.    <=-^—  '^^^^  p,^  (^  la^^-^^^  . 

^J^o^  /ti:^  A*-  £^  ^«-^  ^^^^-^^^^ ;  <<ze^>4---/- 

''U,x-.^t~^     /A*—     A>      tC"  ,      'i''^^     A--^    ,^^    yy^   ^^.OL      cf-u.*^. 


4</  «.-<7 


TO   MAKE  IT  SUITABLE   FOR   A   MOTHERLESS  GIRL. 


I20  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

hangs  even  about  the  abode  of  a  distinguished  man  when  the  name  is  the  same. 
You  and  your  sister  will  be  rightly  led,  for  you  look  up  ;  and  there  is  a  finger  which 
never  misleads. 

"  It  was  a  great  solace  to  be  able  to  do  anything  to  comfort  your  heart.  Your 
thanks  are  far  more  than  I  deserve  ;  but  I  did  honestly  endeavour  to  bear  a 
testimony  which  I  pray  our  Lord  to  impress  on  some  for  whom  we  felt  anxious. 

"  In  these  crises  of  life,  the  power  to  sit  still  is  greater  than  that  of  activity — 

which  frets  into  restlessness.      I   commend   you   to  the  Good    Shepherd.       HE   will 

direct  your  path. 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


This  chapter  may  be  appropriately  closed  with  a  brief  mention  of  the  manner 
in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  voluntarily  increased  his  correspondence  to  a  very  consider- 
able extent,  and  thereby  became  the  means  of  untold  blessing  to  many  of  those  to 
whom  he  wrote.  At  one  of  the  meetings  during  the  College  Conference  of  1890,  a 
very  touching  prayer  was  presented  by  Dr.  Usher,  who  pleaded  with  great  earnest- 
ness for  the  salvation  of  the  children  of  the  brethren.  The  beloved  President  was 
much  moved  by  the  pe.xtion,  and  the  hearty  response  which  it  evoked  ;  and  he  at 
once  offered  to  write  to  all  the  ministers'  sons  and  daughters  whose  fathers  intimated 
their  wish  for  him  to  do  so  by  sending  to  him  their  children's  names  and  ages.  Two 
letters  were  written  and  lithographed, — one  for  the  older  boys  and  girls,  the  other 
for  the  little  ones, — the  name  and  date  being,  in  every  instance,  filled  in  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  In  this  way,  many  hundreds  of  young  folk,  at  home  and 
abroad,  received  a  direct  communication  from  the  dear  Pastor,  and  he  had  the  joy  of 
reading  a  large  number  of  replies  testifying  to  the  fact  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had 
richly  blessed  the  effort  to  the  salvation  of  the  youthful  recipients. 

Thoughtful  and  kind  as  the  whole  arrangem.ent  was,  there  remained  a  finishing 
touch  which  no  one  could  give  so  lovingly  as  our  Mr,  Great-heart.  The  litho- 
graphed letter  to  the  elder  children  contained  references  to  "  father  and  mother  " 
which  made  it  scarcely  suitable  for  the  "  mitherless  bairns"  whose  fathers  desired 
them  to  have  a  share  in  the  favour  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Spurgeon.  The  facsimile, 
on  pages  118  and  119,  will  show  how  lovingly  he  read  it  through,  and  made  the 
necessary  alterations  to  adapt  it  to  the  dear  girl  who  received  it  ;  and  he  did  this  on 
June  19,  his  own  birthday,  when  he  was  overwhelmed  with  contributions  for  the 
Orphanage,  which  all  had  to  be  acknowledged  before  he  went  up  to  the  Festival 
at  Stockwell,  at  which  he  was  expected  to  make  several  speeches.  Surely,  even  he 
could  hardly  have  given  a  more  convincing  proof  of  his  delight  in  imparting  pleasure 
to  others  whatever  mi^ht  be  the  cost  to  himself. 


CHAPTER    XCII. 


Ml'  SptirscDu's  ©pinions  on  Sxibjccts  of  (l^tncral  Inttrtst. 


HILE  the  many  hundreds  of  letters  and  notes  written  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon  were  being  examined  with  a  view  to  the  selection  ot 
those  inserted  in  the  preceding  chapters,  it  was  found  that,  in  several 
of  them,  he  had  given  expression  to  his  opinions  upon  subjects 
of  permanent  public  interest.  It  was  decided,  therefore,  that  a 
number  oi  his  epistles  concerning  religious,  political,  and  social 
matters  should  be  collected  in  a  separate  chapter,  in  order  that  those  who  desire  to 
know  what  he  said  upon  these  topics  may  be  able  to  refer  to  them.  The  letters  are, 
as  far  as  possible,  arranged  in  chronological  order,  with  sub-titles  to  increase  the 
facility  of  reference  to  them. 

Infant  Salvation. 
Among  the  many  falsehoods   which,  at   different   times,   were   told   concerning 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  one  which  he  naturally  repelled  with  the  utmost  indignation  was  the 
statement  that  he  once  declared  that  "  there  are  in   hell  infants  a  span   long."     In 
reply  to  a  correspondent  who  asked  if  he  had  ever  said  this,  he  wrote  : — 

"  Newington,  S.E., 

"June   12,    1869. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  have  never,   at  any  time  in  my  life,  said,  believed,  or  imagined  that 

any  infant,  under  any  circumstances,  would  be  cast  into  hell.     I  have  always  believed 

in    the    salvation    of  all   infants,   and    I    intensely    detest    the    opinions     which    your 

opponent  dared  to  attribute  to  me.       I  do  not  believe  that,  on  this   earth,  there  is  a 

single  professing  Christian  holding  the  damnation  of  infants  ;  or,  if  there  be,  he  must 

be  insane,  or  utterly  ignorant  of  Christianity.       I  am  obliged  by  this  opportunity  of 

denying  the  calumny,  although   the  author   of  it   will    probably  find  no  difficulty  in 

inventing  some  other  fiction  to  be  affirmed  as  unblushingly  as  the  present  one.       He 

who  doubts  God's  Word  is  naturally  much  at  home  in  slandering  the  Lord's  ser\'ants. 

"Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Sturgeon." 

The  question  of  the  salvation  of  infants  is  also  referred  to  in  the  following  note, 
which  was  written  to  a  minister,  whose  infant  child  had  died,  and  to  whose  wife  a 


122  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Christadelphian  had  expressed  the   idea   that  children  dying  at  that   age  have  no 
existence  after  death  : — 

"  Clapham, 

"  June  8,  1872. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"I  am  just  leaving  home,  and  can  only  write  and  say, — May  th^  Comforter 
fulfil  His  Divine  office  in  your  hearts  !  The  child  is  with  Jesus.  David  did  not 
think  his  babe  annihilated  when  he  said,  '  I  shall  go  to  him.'  Away  with  these 
foolish  dreams  !     The  Lord  be  with  you  ! 

"  Yours  in  sympathy, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Romanism  in  the   Church  of  England. 

When  Mr.  Mackey,  the  Protestant  lecturer,  was  put  in  prison,  Mr.  C.  N. 
Newdegate,  M  P.,  called  upon  Mr.  Spurgeon,  to  discuss  the  various  aspects  of  the 
question,  and  the  anti-Romish  agitation  in  general.  After  he  reached  his  home,  he 
wrote  to  the  Pastor  as  follows  : — 

"  3,  Arlington   Street, 

"  Piccadilly, 

"  Sept.  24,  1871. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  shall  consider  our  conversation  as  confidential,  as  I  am  sure  you  will, 

since  I   mentioned  individuals  and    their   conversations,  which   I    have  no   right   to 

publish.     You  will,  I  am  sure,  understand  this. 

"  Yours  very  sincerely, 

"C.  N.  Newdegate." 
To  this  note,  Mr.  Spurgeon  replied  thus  : — 

"  Clapham, 

"  Sept.  26. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  Rely   upon   me.     As   far  as    I   am  concerned,  I  do  not  object  to  your 

repeating  any  remarks  of  mine,  but  I  quite  see    the  propriety  of  your  request,   and 

will  readily  comply  with  it.     The   imprisonment   of  Mr.    Mackey  appears  to   be   a 

breach  of  all  equity.      If  law  permits  it,  law  itself  is  bad.      To  check  the  power  of  the 

Papacy,  and  put  down  its  errors,  is  a  work  worthy  of  the  efforts  of  the  best  of  men. 

May  you  have    success    in    your    labours !      So    long,   however,    as    the    Episcopal 

denomination  remains  Popish  and  patronized,  your  efforts  wUl  be  stultified. 

"  Some  years  ago  (such  things  are  rare  with  us),  I  lost  a  member  of  my  church, 


c.    H.    sturgeon's   autobiography.  123 

who  is  now  a  Romanist.  How  was  he  seduced  ?  Not  by  Dr.  Manning  or 
St.  George's  Cathedral,  but  by  Mr.  Mackonochie  and  St.  Alban's.  I  have  more  to 
fear  from  your  Church  than  from  the  Pope's  hirehngs,  for  it  uses  its  Evangehcal 
clergy  as  the  first  lure  to  godly  people,  then  its  semi-Ritualists,  then  its  full-blown 
Papists,  and  so  on,  till  men  are  conducted  down  to  the  pit  of  Popery. 

"  Besides,  your  Church  claims  a  pre-eminence  I  cannot  concede  to  it,  curses  me 
roundly  in  its  canons,  denies  my  call  to  the  ministry,  shuts  the  worthiest  ot  my 
brethren  out  of  its  pulpits,  and,  to  crown  all,  compels  me  to  pay  tithes  and  support 
an  establishment  which  I  abhor.  Yet  I  love  the  true  Protestants  in  your  Church 
most  heartily,  though  smarting  daily  under  grievous  wrongs,  in  the  infliction  of 
which  they  -axq.  pat'ticipes  criniinis. 

"  Christian  charity  finds  it  hard  to  live  where  it  is  demanded  on  the  one  side, 
but  cannot  be  returned  on  the  other.  While  the  existence  of  Protestant  Dissenters 
is  ignored  by  the  Church,  as  such,  and  is  treated  as  a  crime  in  her  canons,  it  is  only 
a  miracle  of  grace  which  enables  a  Nonconformist  to  have  fellowship  with  any 
member  of  the  dominant  sect.  I  pray  God  to  remove  this  monstrous  barrier  in  the 
way  of  union,  and  to  unite  all  our  hearts  in  His  fear. 

"  I  am  glad  to  have  seen  you   and  am, 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Bell-ringing  at   Newington. 

At  various  times,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  obliged  to  write  to  the  Newington  clergy 
concerning  the  bell -ringing  during  services  at  the   Tabernacle.       The  following  was 

one  of  these  communications  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"July  4. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  beg  to  call  your  attention  to  the  great  disturbance  caused  by  the 
ringing  of  a  bell,  at  St.  Gabriel's  Church,  while  the  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle 
is  engaged  in  prayer.  I  reminded  your  predecessor  that  no  right  of  bell-ringing 
belongs  to  any  but  a  parish  church,  and  informed  him  that  I  really  must  appeal  to 
the  law  to  stop  the  needless  nuisance.  He  very  kindly  reduced  the  evil  to  the 
minimum,  and  I  no  longer  objected.  I  am  sure  it  is  far  from  me  to  wish  to  interfere 
with  the  peculiar  habits  of  my  neighbours  ;  but  when  many  hundreds  of  persons, 
met  to  worship  God,  are  disturbed  by  the  clanging  of  a  loud  bell,  it  compels  me  to 
complain.  The  hours  when  we  are  at  worship  are  at  11  and  6.30  on  Sunday, 
and  from  7  to  8.30  p.m.  on  Monday  and  Thursday. 


124  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"Wishing  to  be  upon  good  terms  with  all  in  the  parish,  I  trust  that  you  will 
not  allow  the  bell-ringer  to  disturb  us  further,  but  will  substitute  a  few  strokes  for 
the  many  which  are  now  given. 

"  I  am, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeok." 

Canon  Palmer,  to  whom  the  above  letter  was  addressed,  was  one  of  the 
speakers  at  the  memorial  service  for  Christian  workers  held  in  connection  with 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  funeral,  and,  after  reading  the  note,  he  said  : — 

"  I  have  no  copy  of  my  answer,  but  I  think  I  can  remember  its  effect 
tolerably  well.  It  was  that  I  did  not  know  what  the  law  might  order,  but  I  was 
quite  sure  what  the  gospel  required.  It  required  that  my  neighbours  should  not 
be  unnecessarily  troubled,  and  I  would  ofive  orders,  at  once,  that  the  bell-ringfinof 
should  be  confined  to  a  few  strokes,  and  I  had  no  doubt  that  the  bell-ringer  would 
be  very  much  obliged  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  mitigating  his  labours  in  that  extremely 
hot  weather.      He  wrote  me  again,  immediately  : — 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  am  exceedingly  obliged  by  your  prompt  and  Christian  reply.  I  felt 
it  needful  to  make  my  protest  against  the  bell-ringing  somewhat  strong,  that  I  might 
not  appear  to  be  asking  a  favour  merely,  but  claiming  a  right  not  to  be  disturbed. 
Otherwise,  the  lapse  of  years  gives  right  to  a  custom  against  which  no  protest 
is  entered.  This,  and  no  unfriendliness  to  you,  prompted  what  you  considered  to 
be  a  threat.  I  can  only  hope  that  future  correspondence  may  be,  on  my  part,  on  a 
more  pleasant  subject,  and,  on  your  part,  may  be  in  the  same  generous  tone. 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Annipiilationism. 

During    the    whole    of    Mr.    Spurgeon's    ministry,    comparatively    few    of    the 

members   of  his   church   embraced   erroneous    opinions  ;    but    when   they  did,   they 

usually  resigned  their  membership,  and  united  with  those  who  held  similar  views 

to  those  which  they  had  adopted.     There  was  at  least  one  individual  who  did  not 

conform  to  this  rule  ;    and,   concerning  him,   the    Pastor    wrote   as  follows  to   Rev. 

Samuel  Minton  : — 

"  Clapham, 

"July  20. 
"  Sir, 

"  I  am  sorry  that  Mr.  — —  stultifies  his  own  convictions,  and  distresses 


c,    H.    spurc;eon's   autobiography.  125 

others,  by  remaining  with  a  church  whose  testimony  is  diametrically  opposed  to 
his  opinions.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  Christian  man  is  bound  to  unite  with  a  church 
where  he  may  consistently  hold  and  promulgate  his  views  ;  but  he  has  no  excuse 
if  he  remains  with  a  people  to  whom  his  views  are  obnoxious,  and  where  his 
agitation  of  his  opinions  tends  to  create  strife  and  division.  We,  as  a  church  at 
the  Tabernacle,  cultivate  fellowship  with  all  the  churches  of  our  Lord,  although 
differing  in  many  respects  from  some  of  them  ;  but,  within  our  own  membership, 
we  have  a  basis  of  agreement  in  doctrine  and  practice,  and  where  a  member  differs 
from  it,  it  is  his  duty  to  remove  to  some  other  community  where  his  views  are  held, 
or  else  he  must  expect  us  to  withdraw  from  him.      I  have  taken   no   further  action 

in  the  case  of  Mr. than  to  request  him  to  find  a  more  congenial  fellowship  ; 

but  if  he  does  not  do  so,  our  discipline  must  take  its  usual  course.  No  honest 
man  can  be  a  member  of  the  church  meeting  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  hold  annihila- 
tionist  views,  for  now  and  in  all  time  past  we  have  borne  testimony  to  the  generally- 
received  doctrine. 

"Yours  truly, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

Voting  "as  unto  the  Lord." 
During  the  General  Election  of  1880,  a  gentleman  having  written  to  express 
his  deep  regret  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  "should  have  descended  from  his  high  and  lofty 
position  as  a  servant  of  God,  and  preacher  of  the  everlasting  gospel,  into  the  defiled 
arena  of  party  politics,"  the  Pastor  replied  to  him  : — 

"  Niohtino-ale  Lane, 

"  Balham,  Surrey, 

"  Mar.  22,  1S80. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"Your  letter  amuses  me,  because  you  are  so  evidently  a  rank  Tory, 
and  so  hearty  in  your  political  convictions  that,  in  spite  of  your  religious  scruples, 
you  must  needs  interfere  in  politics,  and  write  to  me.  If  there  is  anything  defiling 
in  it,  you  are  certainly  over  head  and  ears. 

"  However,  dear  sir,  I  thank  you  for  your  kindness  in  wishing  to  put  me  right, 
and  I  can  assure  you  that  I  vote  as  devoutly  as  I  pray,  and  feel  it  to  be  a  part  of 
my  love  to  God  and  to  my  neighbour  to  try  to  turn  out  the  Government  whom 
your  letter  would  lead  me  to  let  alone. 

"  You  are  as  wrong  as  wrong  can  be  in  your  notion  ;  but,  as  it  keeps  you  from 
voting,  I  shall  not  try  to  convert  you,  for  I  am  morally  certain  you  would  vote  for 
the  Tory  candidate. 

"  In    things    Divine,   we   are   probably   at    one  ;    and    you    shall    abstain    from 


126  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

voting-  as  zuito  the  Lord,  and  I   will  vote  as  tmto  the  Lord,  and  we  will  both  give 
Him  thanks. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

Yet,  staunch  Liberal  and  ardent  admirer  of  Mr.  Gladstone  as  he  was,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  by  no  means  a  blind  follower  of  any  earthly  leader.  He  protested 
very  emphatically  against  the  appointment  of  the  Marquis  of  Ripon  as  Viceroy  of 
India,  and  he  wrote  thus,  concerning  that  and  other  political  questions,  in  reply  to 
a  letter  from  his  old  Cambridge  friend,  Mr.  J.  S.  Watts  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  June  19,  '80. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  Like  yourself,  I  go  in  for  religious  equality,  but  I  like  things  done 
legally,  and  not  in  Mr.  Gladstone's  occasionally  despotic  way, — by  Royal  Warrant, 
or  by  his  own  will.  Alter  the  Act  of  Settlement  if  the  nation  chooses,  but  do  not 
contravene  it.  Moreover,  I  should  not  allow  a  Mormonite  to  be  Judge  in  the 
Divorce  Court,  nor  a  Quaker  to  be  Commissioner  of  Oaths,  nor  an  atheist  to  be 
Chaplain  to  the  House  of  Commons  ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  I  would  not  have  a 
Roman  Catholic,  sworn  to  allegiance  to  the  Pope,  to  be  Viceroy  of  India.  Mr- 
Gladstone  said  this  himself  when  writing  about  the  Vatican  ;  but  the  way  in  which 
he  eats  his  words,  and  puts  on  a  new  forni  so  soon  as  he  is  in  power,  does  not 
increase  my  esteem  for  him. 

"  I  belong  to  the  party  which  knows  no  party.  To  cheapen  beer,  to  confirm 
the  opium  curse,  to  keep  in  office  the  shedders  of  blood,  and  to  put  Papists  to  the 
front,  are  things  I  never  expected  from  Mr.  Gladstone  ;  but  '  cursed  be  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  man.'     Yet  I  am  a  Gladstonite  despite  all  this. 

"  To  turn  to  a  better  subject, — the  Girls'  Orphanage  is  outdoing  all  that  went 
before.  Love-letters  pour  in  to-day.  Am  I  not  happy  .^  I  believe  I  have  ^7,000 
out  of  ^T  1,000.  It  comes  leaping  over  mountains  and  hills.  The  Lord  is  a 
glorious  Helper.      Oh,  for  more  faith  in  Him  ! 

"  Yours  ever  most  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

In  order  to  keep  together  the  letters  relating  to  Mr.  Gladstone,  another  of  later 
date  is  inserted  here  : — 

Home  Rule. 

It  is  well  known  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  agree  with  Mr.  Gladstone's  Home 
Rule  proposals,  and  that  many  of  his  own  most  ardent  admirers  differed  from  him 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  12/ 

upon  that  matter.  Among-  others,  Pastor  T.  W.  Medhurst  supported  the  Liberal 
leader,  and,  in  consequence,  some  of  the'  Portsmouth  papers  represented  him  as 
having-  spoken  unkindly  of  his  beloved  President.  He  therefore  wrote  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  who  sent  the  following  reply  : — 

"  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  did  not  think  your  language,  as  reported,  to  be  disrespectful,  nor 
even  dreamed  that  you  would  be  unkind.  Speak  as  strongly  as  ever  you  like,  and  I 
shall  not  be  aggrieved.  You  are  as  free  as  I  am  ;  and  1  am  free,  and  mean  to  be. 
If  others  think  the  bill  wise  and  good,  I  hope  they  will  do  their  best  to  carry  it. 
I  believe  it  to  be  a  fatal  stab  at  our  common  country,  and  I  am  bound  to  oppose  it. 
I  am  as  good  a  Liberal  as  any  man  living,  and  my  loving  admiration  of  Mr. 
Gladstone  is  the  same  as  ever,  hearty  and  deep  ;  but  this  bill  I  conceive  to  be  a 
very  serious  error.  I  claim  to  be  under  no  man's  dictation,  and  to  dictate  to  no 
man.  Do  not  fear  to  speak  through  any  shrinking  on  my  account.  Both  sides 
ought  to  be  heard.  I  shall  love  you  none  the  less,  but  all  the  more,  for  being- 
plain-spoken. 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Registrars  .\t  Nonconformist  Weddings. 
The  following  letter  is  of  special  interest  now  that  the  proposal  referred  to  in 
it  has  been  embodied  in  an  Act  of  Parliament  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"April  9,  1 88 1. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  regard  marriage  as  a  civil  contract,  which  ought  to  be  made  before  a 
magistrate  or  a  registrar.  I  should  be  glad  to  be  rid  of  marrying  and  burying 
altogether  as  religious  matters,  save  only  where  there  is  a  sincere  desire  for  the 
Divine  blessing  or  consolation.  In  these  cases,  let  the  minister  hold  a  service  at  the 
house  or  the  meeting-house  ;  but  do  not  make  him  a  State  official  to  register 
marriages,  and  to  be  held  responsible  for  all  the  intricacies  of  marriage  law. 

"  I   hope  Mr.   Briggs'  proposal  will  never  pass,   or  anything  like  it.      If  it  did, 
I    could  only  refuse  to    marry    anybody,    for    I    will    not    become    a    registrar.       I' 
altogether  agree  with  the  reported  action   of  the   Liberation  Society,  and  wish  for 
the  time  when  all  marriages  shall  be  at  the  registrar's  office,  and  then  the  godly  can 
have  such  religious  service  afterwards  as  they  wish. 

"  Yours  ever  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


125  c.    h.    spurgeon  s    autobiography. 

Vivisection.  ' 
At  a  meeting-,  held  at  West   Norwood,  under  the  auspices  of  the   London  Anti- 
vivisection  Society,  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  read  : — 

"Westwood, 

"July  25,  1881. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I    am   unable   to   attend  your  garden  meeting.      I   wish  evermore   the 

utmost  success  to  all  protests  against  the  inhuman  practice  of  vivisection.      It  does 

not  bear  to  be  thought  of.      How  it   must  excite  the  righteous  indignation  of  the 

all-merciful  Creator  !      It  is  singularly  sad  that  there  should  need  to  be  an  agitation 

on  such  a  question  ;  for  one  would  think  that  the  least-enlightened  conscience  would 

perceive  the  evil  of  such  cruelty,  and  that  the   most-hardened  heart  would  retain 

sufficient  humanity  to  revolt  against  it. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Persecution  of  Jews  in  Russia. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  unable  to  be  present  at  the  meeting  held  at  the  Mansion 
House,  on  February  i,  1882,  to  protest  against  the  persecution  of  the  Jews  in 
Russia,  but  the  following  letter  from  him  was  read  by  the  Lord  Mayor  : — 

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  am  quite  precluded  by  prior  engagements  irom  being  at  the 
Mansion  House  to  speak  against  the  outrages  committed  upon  the  Jews.  I  am, 
however,  relieved  by  the  belief  that  the  heart  of  England  is  one  in  a  strong  feeling 
of  indignation  at  the  inhuman  conduct  of  certain  savages  in  Russia.  Every  man 
and  woman  among  us  feels  eloquently  on  behalf  of  our  fellow-men  who  are  subjected 
to  plunder  and  death,  and  still  more  for  our  sisters,  to  whom  even  worse  treatment 
has  been  meted  out.  Thence  you  have  the  less  need  of  speeches  and  orations.  As 
a  Christian,  I  feel  that  the  name  of  our  Redeemer  is  dishonoured  by  such  conduct  on 
the  part  of  His  professed  followers.  As  a  Nonconformist  and  a  Liberal,  believing 
in  the  equal  rights  of  all  men  to  live  in  freedom  and  safety,  I  must  protest  against  a 
state  of  things  in  which  the  Jew  is  made  an  outlaw.  Lastly,  as  a  man,  I  would 
mourn  in  my  inmost  soul  that  any  beings  in  human  form  should  be  capable  of  such 
crimes  as  those  which  have  made  Russia  red  with  Israelitish  blood.  But  what  need 
even  of  these  few  sentences  ?  The  oppressed  are  sure  of  advocates  wherever 
Englishmen  assemble." 

Gospel  Temperance. 
On  March    15,    1882,   Mr.   Spurgeon  wrote  the  letter  on   the   following   page, 
to  be  read  at  the  meeting  to  which  it  refers  : — 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 29 

"  Dear  Friends, 

"  I  am  exceedingly  sorry  to  be  absent  from  this  first  meeting  to  form  the 
Tabernacle  Total  Abstinence  Society.  The  worst  of  it  is,  that  my  head  is  so  out 
of  order  that  I  cannot  even  dictate  a  proper  letter.  I  can  only  say,  '  Try  and  do  all 
the  better  because  I  am  away.'  If  the  leader  is  shot  down,  and  his  legs  are  broken, 
the  soldiers  must  give  an  extra  hurrah,  and  rush  on  the  enemy,  I  sincerely  believe 
that,  next  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  the  most  necessary  thing  to  be  done  in 
England  is  to  induce  our  people  to  become  total  abstainers.  I  hope  this  Society 
will  do  something  when  it  is  started.  I  don't  want  you  to  wear  a  lot  of  peacocks' 
feathers  and  putty  medals,  nor  to  be  always  trying  to  convert  the  moderate  drinkers, 
but  to  go  in  for  winning  the  real  drunkards,  and  bringing  the  poor  enslaved 
creatures  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  who  can  give  them  liberty.  1  wish  I  could  say  ever 
so  many  good  things,  but  I  cannot,  and  so  will  remain, 

"  Yours  teetotally, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
When  the  second  anniversary  of   the   Society  was   celebrated,    Mr.    Spurgeon 
was  aofain  ill,  but  he  wrote  this  letter  to  be  read  at  the  meeting  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"March  19,  1884. 
"  Dear  Friends, 

"  I  have  just  been  saying  that  I  should  like  to  be  as  strong  as  a  lion  ; 
but  it  has  been  suggested  to  me  that,  then,  I  might  not  be  so  strong  as  I  am  now. 
I  ani  sorry  that  I  happen  to  be  weak  when  the  battle  is  against  strong  drink.  May 
the  speakers  to-night  make  Up  for  my  enforced  absence  by  speaking  twice  as  well  as 
possible  !  The  theme  should  fire  them.  '  I  hope  they  will  be  full  of  spirit  against 
evil  spirits,  stout  against  stout,  and  hale  against  ale.  Let  the  desolate  homes,  the 
swollen  rates,  the  crowded  goals,  the  untimely  graves,  and  the  terrible  destruction  of 
souls,  all  wrought  by  drunkenness,  inspire  you  with  fervour  for  the  cause  of 
temperance.  Thank  God  for  what  has  been  accomplished  ;  your  year's  labour  has 
not  been  in  vain  in  the  Lord  ;  but  let  this  nerve  you  for  larger  endeavours.  The 
drink  must  be  dried  up, — fountain,  stream,  and  pool  ;  this  river  of  death  must  cease 
to  flow  through  our  land.  God's  grace  will  help  us.  His  pity  for  sinners  will  move 
Him  to  aid  every  loving  effort  for  the  salvation  of  the  fallen. 

"  I  pray  for  a  sevenfold  blessing  upon  the  year  to  come.  If  I  cannot  speak  to 
men,  I  can  speak  with  God  for  them,  and  I  will  do  so.  May  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
inspire  us  with  a  deeper  love  to  perishing  sinners  !     With  my  hearty  love, 

"  I  am.  Brother  Blues, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon." 
■"  .  14 


130  c.    h.  spurgeon  s    autobiography. 

Pigeon-shooting. 

In  a  letter  to  Mr.  J.  T.  Markley,  of  Eastbourne,  dated  April,  1882,  with  reference 
to  his  suo-o-estions  in  the  public  prints  in  favour  of  the  substitution  of  artificial  for 
live  birds  at  shooting  contests,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — "  My  judgment  is  heartily 
with  you  as  to  the  brutality  of  pigeon-shooting  matches.  I  cannot  make  out  how 
people,  who  are  in  other  matters  kind  and  gentle,  can  frequent  these  butcheries.  I 
am  still  very  unwell,  and  hardly  like  to  think  of  the  woes  of  this  creation.  I  cannot 
just  now  do  or  say  anything  worth  doing  or  saying,  sO  I  must  leave  the  cause  of  the 
dumb  in  the  hands  of  such  good  pleaders  as  yourself" 

Disestablishment. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  promised  to  be  present,  if  possible,  at  the  Liberation  Society's 

meeting  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  May  3,  1882  ;   but,   in  consequence  of  ill-health,  he 

was  not  able  to  be  there,  so  he  sent  the  following  letter  to  Mr.  J.  Carvell  Williams, 

who  read  it  at  the  meeting  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"May  3,  1882. 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  had  always  intended  to  speak  to-night  if  strength  were  given  to  me, 
and  I  am  greatly  disappointed  that  I  am  obliged  to  be  absent.  I  feel  that  this 
question  of  liberating  the  bride  of  Christ  from  her  dishonourable  association  with 
the  State  arrows  upon  me  in  importance  the  more  I  love  the  Lord  Jesus.  I  see  the 
political  evil  of  the  situation,  but  the  religious  criminality  is  that  which  most 
oppresses  me. 

"  Here  is  a  Church  of  Christ  which  surrenders  itself  to  the  State.  Its  Bishops 
are  appointed  by  the  rules  of  a  worldly  kingdom  ;  and  as  for  itself,  it  cannot 
wear  a  ribbon,  or  leave  it  off,  without  Caesar's  permission.  It  is  a  mercy  that  some 
few  of  her  sons  find  this  fetter  too  galling.  The  mystery  is  that  they  should  continue 
to  wear  it  when  the  door  to  Christian  liberty  is  open.  I  long  to  see  the  piety  of 
Episcopalians  so  elevated  that  they  will  hate  the  present  infamous  alliance,  with  all 
its  hard  bondage.  Failing  this,  may  the  eyes  of  statesmen  be  opened  that  they  may 
cease  to  intermeddle  in  a  sphere  in  which  they  have  no  vocation  !  For  members  of 
our  legislature,  as  for  us  all,  it  is  a  task  difficult  enough  to  enter  the  strait  gate  each 
one  for  himself;  and  it  is  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness  for  these  gentlemen  to 
attempt  to  legislate  for  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  who  asks  for  no  help  from  them. 
More  strength  to  the  arm  of  those  true  friends  of  the  Church  of  England  who 
would  establish  her  by  Disestablishment,  and  enrich  her  by  Disendowment ! 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon.' 


c.    li.    spurgeon  s   autobiography.  i31 

Close-communion. 
In  the  Richmond  {U.S.A.)  Christian  Advocate,  May  17,  1883,  there  appeared 
what  the  Editor  called  "a  clever,  chatty  letter"  by  Mr.  Richard  Ferguson,  who 
represented  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  saying  that  "  he  would  rather  be  a  cannibal  than  a 
close-communion  Baptist."  This  statement  was  reported  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  he 
thereupon  wrote : — 

"  London, 

"  June  20,  1885.- 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  speaking  disrespectfully  of  strict-communion 
Baptists,  for  I  have  a  full  conviction  of  their  conscientiousness.  As  to  saying  that 
I  would  sooner  be  a  cannibal  than  a  close-communion  Baptist,  I  never  thought  so, 
and  certainly  never  said  so.  I  have  not  the  slightest  wish  to  be  one  or  the  other  ; 
but  I  rejoice  in  being  a  loving  brother  to  the  latter. 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

At  various  times,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  asked  about  the  genuineness  of  expressions 
'with  reference  to  close-communion  which  were  attributed  to  him  ;  another  of  his 
replies  may  suffice  to  show  the  general  tenor  of  his  letters  upon  this  question.  An 
American  Presbyterian  paper  stated,  "on  the  authority  of  a  sainted  gentleman,"  that 
Mr.  Spurgeon  had  said,  "  I  hate  a  close-communion  Baptist  as  I  hate  the  devil." 
When  this  paragraph  was  brought  under  Mr.  Spurgeon's  notice,  he  wrote  : — 

"  London, 

"March  26,  1884. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"I  do  not  know  who  'the  sainted  gentleman'  may  be,  but  he  did  not 
speak  the  truth  if  he  reported  me  as  saying  that  I  hated  a  close-communion  Baptist 
as  I  hate  the  devil.  I  never  even  thought  of  such  a  thing,  and  assuredly  it  is  not 
and  never  was  true  of  me.  The  '  saint '  must  have  dreamed  it,  or  have  mistaken 
the  person. 

"The  most  unaccountable  statements  are  made  by  men  of  known  integrity, 
and  they  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  misunderstanding  or  forgetfulness.  I  know 
my  own  mind  and  views,  and  I  can  say,  without  reserve,  that  the  expression  could 
not  have  been  used  by  me.  As  compared  with  the  bulk  of  English  Baptists,  I  am 
a  strict-communionist  myself,  as  my  church-fellowship  is  strictly  of  the  baptized. 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 
"  Rev.  A.  S.  Patton." 


132  c.    h.    spurgeon  s   autobiography. 

Franchise  Reform. 

In  reply  to  an  invitation  to  speak  at  the  Reform  Demonstration,  in  Hyde  Park, 
on  Julv  21,  1884,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  :— "  I  heartily  approve  of  the  measure  for 
oivins"  the  franchise  to  our  country  brethren,  and  I  much  recrret  that  the  Lords 
should  stand  in  the  way  of  it.  It  must  come  as  surely  as  time  revolves,  and  no  hurt 
can  come  of  it  unless  it  be  from  the  friction  occasioned  by  the  opposition  to  it.  I 
am  not  able  to  attend  meetings  to  urge  on  political  reforms  ;  but  whenever  topics 
which  touch  upon  the  rights  of  men,  righteousness,  peace,  and  so  on,  come  in  my 
way,  I  endeavour  to  speak  as  emphatically  as  I  can  on  the  right  side.  It  is  part  of 
mv  religion  to  desire  justice  and  freedom  for  all." 

Anglo-Israelism. 
Mr.  Spuroeon's  opinions  on  this  subject  were  expressed  in  the  following  note 
to  a  gentleman  who  was  devoting  his  attention  to  the  work  of  answering  the  argu- 
ments brought  forward  in  support  of  the  idea  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  Sept.  27,  1884. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  wish  you  every  success  in  your  warfare  against  this  silly  craze.  I 
was  at  one  time  rather  amused  with  the  delusion,  as  a  freak  of  human  folly;  but  it 
evidentlv  has  its  moral  and  spiritual  bearings,  and  must  therefore  be  met  and 
exposed.  I  have  not  time  for  this  contest,  and  therefore  I  am  the  more  pleased  to 
see  others  in  the  field. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

Open-air    Baptisms. 
A    newspaper    correspondence    having    arisen    concerning    the    proceedings    in 
connection  with   open-air    baptisms    at    Sheepwash,    in   Devonshire,    Pastor  W.   T. 
Soper,  one  of  "our  own  men,"  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  concerning  the  matter,  and 
his  letter  elicited  the  following  reply  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"May  13,  1885. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Soper, 

"  I  was  not  present  at  Sheepwash  ;  and,  consequently,  can  form  no 
opinion  as  to  the  behaviour  of  the  villagers  after  "the  baptism  was  over ;  but  I 
remember  that  the  same  tnings  were  said,  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  of  our  public 
baptisms  in  Cambridgeshire,  and  I  daresay  there  is  as  much  truth  in  the  representa- 
tions now  made  as  in  those  of  the  older  time. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 33 

"Those  who  did  not  wish  to  see  so  much  of  baptism  imagined  evils  which 
existed  mainly  in  their  fears. 

"  Baptism  in  the  open  river  is  so  Scriptural,  and,  withal,  such  a  public  testimony, 
that  I  hope  our  friends  will  never  abandon  it.  The  reproach  is  to  be  bravely  borne  ; 
for,  if  you  hide  away  in  the  meeting-house,  it  will  follow  you  there.  We  are  most 
numerous  where  the  orchnance  is  most  known.  Next  to  the  Word  of  God,  a 
baptizing  service  is  the  best  argument  tor  baptism. 

"  Whenever  numbers  ot  people  come  together,  whether  for  trade,  politics,  or 
religion,  there  will  always  be  loose  persons  to  dishonour  the  occasion  ;  but  we  are 
not  therefore  to  abstain  from  such  gatherings.     Such  an  inference  would  be  absurd. 

"  God  bless  and  prosper  you  ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

Evolution. 
In   reply  to   an   enquiry  with   regard   to   the   evolution   theory,    Mr.   Spurgeon 

wrote  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"Feb.  8,  1887. 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"Thanks  for  your  most  excellent  and  courteous  letter.  I  have  read  a 
good  deal  on  the  subject,  and  have  never  yet  seen  a  fact,  or  the  tail  of  a  fact,  which 
indicated  the  rise  of  one  species  oi  animal  into  another.  The  theory  has  been  laid 
down,  and  facts  fished  up  to  support  it.  I  believe  it  to  be  a  monstrous  error  in 
philosophy,  which  will  be  a  theme  tor  ridicule  before  another  twenty  years. 

"In  theology,  its  influence  would  be  deadly  ;  and  this  is  all  I  care  about.  On 
the  scientific  matter,  you  do  well  to  use  your  own  judgment. 

"  The  Lord  bless  you,  and  lead  you  into  His  truth  more  and  more  ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
At  one  of  the  memorable  gatherings  under  "  The  Question  Oak,"  a  student 
asked  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "Are  we  justified  in  receiving  Mr. '  Darwin's  or  any  other 
theory  of  evolution  ?  "  The  President's  answer  was  : — "  My  reply  to  that  enquiry  can 
best  take  the  form  of  another  question, — Does  Revelation  teach  us  evolution  .-^  It 
never  has  struck  me,  and  it  does  not  strike  now,  that  the  theory  of  evolution  can, 
by  any  process  of  argument,  be  reconciled  with  the  inspired  record  of  the  Creation. 
You  remember  how  it  is  distinctly  stated,  again  and  again,  that  the  Lord  made  each 
creature  '  after  his  kind.'  So  we  read,  'And  God  created  great  whales,  and  every 
living  creature  that  moveth,  which  the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly,  after  their 


134  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

kind,  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good.'  And 
again,  '  And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  hving  creature  after  his  kind, 
cattle,  and  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind  :  and  it  was  so. 
And  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind,  and  cattle  after  their  kind,  and 
every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth  after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  that  it  was 
good.'  Besides,  brethren,  I  would  remind  you  that,  after  all  these  years  in  which  so 
many  people  have  been  hunting  up  and  down  the  world  for  '  the  missing  link ' 
between  animals  and  men,  among  all  the  monkeys  that  the  wise  men  have  examined, 
they  have  never  discovered  one  who  has  rubbed  his  tail  off,  and  ascended  in  the 
scale  of  creation  so  far  as  to  take  his  place  as  the  equal  of  our  brothers  and  sisters  of 
the  great  family  of  mankind.  Mr.  Darwin  has  never  been  able  to  find  the  germs  of 
an  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  in  the  body  of  a  tom  cat  or  a  billy  goat,  and  I  venture 
to  prophesy  that  he  will  never  accomplish  such  a  feat  as  that.  There  are  abundant 
evidences  that  one  creature  inclines  towards  another  in  certain  respects,  for  all  are 
bound  together  in  a  wondrous  way  which  indicates  that  they  are  all  the  product  of 
God's  creative  will  ;  but  what  the  advocates  of  evolution  appear  to  forget  is,  that 
there  is  nowhere  to  be  discovered  an  actual  chain  of  growth  from  one  creature  to 
another, — there  are  breaks  here  and  there,  and  so  many  missing  links  that  the 
chain  cannot  be  made  complete.  There  are,  naturally  enough,  many  resemblances 
between  them,  because  they  have  all  been  wrought  by  the  one  great  master-mind  of 
God,  yet  each  one  has  its  own  peculiarities.  The  Books  of  Scripture  are  many,  yet 
the  Book,  the  Bible,  is  one  ;  the  waves  of  the  sea  are  many,  yet  the  sea  is  one  ;  and 
the  creatures  that  the  Lord  has  made  are  many,  yet  the  Creation  is  one.  Look  at 
the  union  between  the  animal  and  the  bird  in  the  bat  or  in  the  flying  squirrel  ; 
think  ot  the  resemblance  between  a  bird  and  a  fish  in  the  flying  fish  ;  yet,  nobody, 
surely,  would  venture  to  tell  you  that  a  fish  ever  grew  into  a  bird,  or  that  a  bat  ever 
became  a  butterfly  or  an  eagle.  No  ;  they  do  not  get  out  of  their  own  spheres. 
All  the  evolutionists  in  the  world  cannot  '  improve  '  a  mouse  so  that  it  will  develop 
into  a  cat,  or  evolve  a  golden  eagle  out  of  a  barn-door  fowl.  Even  where  one 
species  very  closely  resembles  another,  there  is  a  speciality  about  each  which 
distinguishes  it  from  all  others. 

"  I  do  not  know,  and  I  do  not  say,  that  a  person  cannot  believe  in  Revelation 
and  in  evolution,  too,  lor  a  man  may  believe  that  which  is  infinitely  wise  and  also 
that  which  is  only  asinine.  In  this  evil  age,  there  is  apparently  nothing  that  a  man 
cannot  believe  ;  he  can  believe,  ex  aniino,  the  whole  Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of 
England  !  It  is  pretty  much  the  same  with  other  matters  ;  and,  after  all,  the 
greatest  discoveries  made  by  man  must  be  quite  babyish  to  the  infinite  mind  of  God. 
He  has  told  us  all  that  we  need  to  know  in  order  that  we  may  become  like  Himself, 
but  He  never  meant  us  to  know  all  that  He  knows." 


c.    h.    spurgeon  s    auto.biograpiiy.  .         1 35 

Arbitration. 
When  the  proposed  Treaty  of  Arbitration  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
United  States  was  under  consideration  in  the  year  1887,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote,  in 
reply  to  a  request  for  his  opinion  with  regard  to  it : — "  Concerning  the  substitution 
of  arbitration  for  war,  there  can  surely  be  no  question  among"  Christian  men.  I 
rejoice  that  the  two  great  Protestant  nations  should  seek  to  lead  the  way  in  making 
permanent  arrangements  for  the  future  settlement  of  differences  in  a  reasonable 
manner.  May  they  succeed  so  admirably  as  to  induce  others  to  follow  their 
excellent  example  !  It  is  surely  time  that  we  reasoned  like  men  instead  of  killing 
like  tigers." 

UnFERMENTED    COMiMUNION    WiNE. 

A  question  having  been  raised,  in  The  Christian  Coiiinionzvea/th,  as  to  the  wine 

used   at   the   communion  services   at  the   Metropolitan   Tabernacle,    Mr.   Spurgeon 

wrote  to  the  Editor  as  follows  : — 

"  West  wood, 

"June  20,  1887. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  We  use  Frank  Wright's  unfermented  wine  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  have 

never  used  any  other  unfermented  wine.      I  am  given  to  understand  that  some  of 

the    so-called    unfermented  wine  has   in  it  a  considerable  amount  of  alcohol  ;    but 

Mr.  Wright's  is  the   pure  juice  of  the  grape.     One  person  advertized  his  wine  as 

used  at  the  Tabernacle  though  we  had  never  used  it  even  on  one  occasion.      So  far 

as  we  are  concerned,  we  use  no  wine  but  that  produced  by  Messrs.   Frank  Wright, 

Mundy,  and  Co. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

Grocers'  Licences. 
In  June,  1887,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  an  address  in  connection  with  the  Tabernacle 
Total  Abstinence  Society,  in  the  course  of  which  he  said  : — "  I  could  tell  some 
dreadful  stories  of  respectable  Christian  men,  whom  I  know,  who  come  home  from 
business  with  heavy  hearts  because  they  do  not  know  whether  or  not  their  wives 
will  be  drunk.  They  have  prayed  with  them,  they  have  wept  with  them,  they  have 
forgiven  them  many  times,  and  yet  the  grocer's  shop  has  been  too  much  for  them. 
Do  not  talk  about  the  public-house.  That  thing  is  straight  and  above-board, — that 
much  I  will  say  for  it, — but  the  grocer's  shop  is  the  place  that  ruins  an  immense 
number  of  women.  They  can  get  the  drink  there,  and  put  it  down  under  the  name 
of  something  else  ;  and  I  believe  there  never  was  a  worse  move  for  the  temperance 


136  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

of  this  nation  than  that  which  made  it  easy  to  buy  drink  at  grocers'  shops.  I  have 
not  known  a  grocer  who  has  not  been  deteriorated  by  the  sale  of  it.  I  do  not  say 
they  have  become  bad  men,  but  they  have  not  become  better  men." 

The  soHcitor  to  the  Off-Hcences  Association  wrote  to  Mr.  .Spurgeon,  challeno-ino- 
some  of  his  statements,  and  referring  to  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  House 
of  Lords  upon  the  matter  ;  the  following  reply  was  sent  to  him  : — 

"  VVestwood, 

"June  30,  1887. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  thank  you  for  your  letter.      I  am  always  ready  to  hear  the  other  side, 

and  especially  when  the  pleading  is  so  temperate  in  spirit.      I  do  not  intend  to  enter 

into  controversy,  but  my  opinion  has  not  been  arrived  at  without  observation.     I 

believe   myselt   to   be   much   better   able   to   form   an   opinion   than   those   who   are 

engaged  in  the  trade.      Facts  well  known  to  us  as  ministers   cannot   be  divulo-ed. 

The  ease  with  which  drink  can  be  obtained  at  respectable  shops,  I  believe  to  be  a 

peculiarly  evil  form  of  temptation  ;  but  to  publish  the  facts  which  prove  it  would  be 

as  painful  as  it  would  be  easy. 

"A  Committee  of  the   House  of  Lords  can  prove  nothing;  the  witnesses  are 

silenced  by  a  delicacy  which  their  position  demands. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

The  Theatre. 

An  actress  in  America,  replying  to  some  ministerial  criticisms  upon  the  influence 
of  the  stage  upon  religion  and  morals,  made  the  following  statement  to  an  inter- 
viewer : — "Among  the  best  friends  I  have  ever  had,  have  been  such  eminent  divines 
as  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  Dr.  Chapin,  Dr.  Talmage,  Dr.  Swing,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and 
others ;  and  I  am  sure  that  none  of  these  thought  that  my  profession,  riohtly 
followed,  carries  with  it  any  danger  to  good  morals  or  religion." 

The  minister  who  had  been  in  controversy  with  the  lady  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
enquiring  as  to  the  truth  of  this  statement,  and  he  replied  thus  : — 

"  London, 

"  January  24,  1S88. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  So   far  as    I    can   charge   my  memory,   I   have   never  before   heard  of 

Miss .      I   am  decidedly  of  the  opinion  that  the  stage  is  the  enemy  of  'good 

morals  and  religion.'     It  has  not  improved  this  lady's  truthfulness  if  she  mentioned 


C.      H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I  37 

me  as  enrolled  among  her  friends.      She  may  be  a  very  excellent  person,  but  I  know 
nothing  of  her. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeox." 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  opinions  concerning  professing  Christians  going  to  the  theatre 
are  well  known.  Perhaps  his  most  notable  utterance  upon  that  subject  was  evoked 
by  the  attendance  of  a  large  number  of  clerg)men  and  ministers  at  a  special 
performance  in  the  Shaftesbury  Theatre.  Shortly  afterwards,  in  a  sermon  at  the 
Tabernacle,  he  said: — "The  Christian  Chmxh  of  the  present  day  has  played  the 
harlot  beyond  any  church  in  any  other  day.  There  are  no  amusements  too  vile  for 
her.  Her  pastors  have  filled  a  theatre  of  late  ;  and,  by  their  applause,  have  set 
their  mark  of  approval  upon  the  labours  of  play-actors.  To  this  point  have  we 
come  at  last,  a  degradation  which  was  never  reached  even  in  Rome's  darkest  hour  ; 
— and  if  you  do  not  love  Christ  enough  to  be  indignant  about  it,  the  Lord  have 
mercy  upon  you  !  " 

Brethren  and  Brethrenism. 

In  May,  1890,  a  correspondent  wrote  to  ask  Mr.  Spurgeon  some  questions 
concerninof  Brethren  and  Brethrenism,  and  at  the  same  time  mentioned  the  followino- 
incident  in  connection  with  one  of  the  Pastor's  sermons  : — 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"This  may  interest  you.  My  father-in-law,  twenty-five  years  ago,  lived 
in  London,  and  on  one  occasion  went  to  hear  you  preach.  Your  text  was  Nathan's 
words  to  David,  'Thou  art  the  man!'  He  had  been  exercised  as  to  doing  some 
little  preaching  ;  and  as  you  proceeded  with  your  sermon,  he  thought,  '  Well,  there 
is  nothing  for  me  here.'  You  went  on,  however,  to  picture  the  Plague  of  London, 
and  asked,  'What  would  you  think  of  a  man  who,  during  the  time  of  the  Plague,  had 
a  specific  for  it,  but  kept  it  in  his  pocket?'  Then,  after  a  pause,  and  with  out- 
stretched finger,  you  called  out,  'Thou  art  the  man  !  '  This  went  right  home  to  my 
father-in-law's  heart,  and  he  thought,  '  That's  for  me  !  I've.heard  enough  ! '  From  that 
time  he  began  to  preach,  and  has  continued  to  do  so  ever  since,  the  result  being 
blessing  to  many  souls,  and  much  glory  to  the  Name  of  Jesus.  His  thought  was 
that  he  had  the  specific  for  the  plague  of  sin  in  his  pocket,  but  that  he  was  failing  to 
administer  it  ;  and  one  of  his  favourite  illustrations  of  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel 
messaoe  is  the  story  of  your  own  conversion,  under  the  local  preacher's  sermon 
upon  the  text,  '  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,'  which  story  I  once  came  across 
in  my  reading,  and  showed  to  him." 


138  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

In  reply  to  the  foregoing  letter,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — 

"  Westwood, 

"  May  9,  i! 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  changed  my  opinion  as  to  Brethren-?^;;/ ;  but 
with  many  Brethren  I  have  always  been  on  most  brotherly  terms.  I  don't  think  I 
am  bound  to  answer  your  questions  about  individuals.  I  believe  that  I  was  loved  by 
C.  S.,  and  that  Mr.  Kelly  regards  me  in  the  kindest  manner  ;  and  I  return  the  like 
to  the  memory  of  the  first,  and  to  the  other  who  survives.  I  am,  perhaps,  better 
able  to  sympathize  with  their  separateness  nozv  than  aforetime  ;  but  their  ideas  of 
the  ministry  I  do  not  accept. 

"The  sermon  you  mention  was  not  printed.  J  rejoice  that  your  father-in-law 
was  set  working  through  hearing  it  ;  and  I  pray  that  we  may,  each  one  in  his 
appointed  way,  hold  and  spread  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  who  cometh 

quickly. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

Funeral  Reform. 
Mr.    Spurgeon   wrote   the    following    letter    to   the    honorary    secretary  of  the 
Church  of  England  Burial,  Funeral,  and  Mourning  Reform  Association  : — 

•  "  Westwood, 

"  Sept.  1 1,  1890. 

"  Dear  Sir,  ■ 

"  I  hardly  think  it  can  be  necessary  to  say  that  the  expending  of  money 

on  mere  show  at  funerals  is  absurd,  unthrifty,  and  even  cruel.      I  hope  the  common 

sense    of   the   people   will    soon    destroy    customs    which    oppress    the    widow    and 

fatherless  by  demanding  of  them  an    expenditure  which  they   cannot    afford.     To 

bedeck  a  corpse  with  vain  trappings,  is  a  grim  unsuitabihty.     Something  has  been 

done  in  the  rio-ht  direction,  but  I  fear  your  Society  has  yet  to  battle  with  prejudices 

which  are  hard  to  overcome  ;    and  when  these  are  conquered,   there  will  speedily 

spring  up  another  host  of  extravagances.      I  wish  you  good  success  in  a  reform  so 

evidently  demanded. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER    XCIIL 


apprtctati&c  Cormponknts,  18554890. 

LTHOUGH  Mr.  Spurgeon  often  found  certain  portions  of  his 
correspondence  very  burdensome,  it  was  by  no  means  all  of  thai 
character,  and  it  was  frequently  the  medium  by  which  he  was 
greatly  cheered  and  encouraged.  For  many  years,  not  a  week, 
passed,  and  scarcely  a  day,  without  tidings  reaching  him  that  his 
sermons  or  other  printed  works  had  been  blessed  to  the  salvation 
of  sinners  and  the  edification  and  strengthening  of  believers  ;  and  he  was  also 
constantly  reminded,  from  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  that  prayer  for  yet  larger 
blessing  was  continually  being  presented  on  his  behalf.  This  assurance  was  most 
gratefully  received  by  him,  and  on  many  occasions  he  was  quite  bowed  down  under 
the  weight  of  loving  sympathy  thus  sent  to  him  from  far  and  near.  A  selection  of 
these  letters  was  given  in  Vol.  III.,  in  the  chapter  entitled  "  Blessing  on  the  Printed 
Sermons  ;  "  so  communications  oi  that  special  character  are  not  inserted  in  the 
following  pages. 

Among  the  thousands  of  letters  which  have  had  to  b^  read  in  order  to  decide 
which  should  be  used,  there  are  very  many  that,  for  various  reasons,  cannot  be 
included  in  this  work.  Some  are  private  documents,  never  intended  to  be  published  ; 
and,  of  these,  a  considerable  number  came  from  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  most  of  them  were  written  concerning  individuals  who  had 
formerly  been  Baptists,  and  who  were  seeking  admission  into  the  Establishment,  or 
they  related  to  ex-clergymen  who  were  wishing  to  enter  the  Baptist  ministry.  While 
some  of  each  class  appeared  to  be  acting  conscientiously  in  the  steps  they  were 
taking,  the  history  of  others  proved  that  they  were  mere  adventurers,  equally 
worthless  to  either  Church  or  Dissent. 

Some  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  correspondents  completely  changed  the  tone  of  their 
letters  in  consequence  of  his  earnest  contention  for  the  faith  ;  but,  instead  of  giving 
specimens  of  the  two  kinds  of  epistles,  they  are  omitted  altogether.  Contro\ersial 
matters  have  been,  to  a  large  extent,  excluded  ;  otherwise,  a  chapter  or  two  might 
have  been  devoted  to  the  correspondence  which,  at  various  times,  caused  con- 
siderable excitement,  if  nothing  more.  The  details  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  career  were 
so  constantly   proclaimed,   with    more   or   less    accuracy,    to   the    whole  world,   that 


I40 


C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


there  is  the  less  need,   in  this   work,  to  refer  to  certain    topics  which  are  already 
matters  of  public  knowledge. 

The  letters  to  and  from  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  have  been  sufficient  to  fill  several 
volumes  the  size  of  the  present  one,  and  readers  will  hardly  need  the  assurance  that 
it  has  been  no  light  task  to  select  those  which  would  be  fairly  representative  of 
the  Pastor's  busy  life.  Among  the  numerous  interesting  communications  which  he 
preserved,  but  which  are  not  included  in  this  work,  are  very  hearty  invitations  to  visit 
Victoria,  and  Canada,  and  South  Africa, — at  least  partly  for  rest  ;  and  earnest 
requests  to  him  to  take  part  in  various  Conferences  of  Baptists  or  other  bodies  of 
believers  in  Sweden,  Norway,  Holland,  Switzerland,  and  India;  all  of  Vv'hich  had  to 
be  declined  with  regret.  Space  could  not  be  spared  for  two  lengthy  letters  from 
Dr.  R.  W.  Dale,  of  Birmingham,  and  Dr.  Leonard  Bacon,  of  New  Haven,  Con- 
necticut, making  preliminary  enquiries  as  to  the  possibility  of  Mr.  Spurgeon 
delivering  the  Lyman  Beecher  lectures  at  Yale  College  ;  nor  was  there  room  for  the 
long  explanatory  epistle  in  which  Dr.  J.  H.  Vincent,  of  Plainfield,  New  Jersey,  very 
earnestly  entreated  the  Pastor  to  accept  the  office  of  "  Dean  of  the  Department  of 
Biblical  Theology  to  the  Chautauqua  School."  In  these  cases  also,  only  a  negative 
reply  could  be  returned. 

Applications  for  articles  in  American  and  other  religious  and  secular  papers  and 
magazines  were  constandy  being  received  ;  they  often  contained  the  offer  of  an 
honorarium,  or  a  draft  for  the  amount  which  the  Editors  judged  to  be  adequate  ;  but, 
almost  invariably,  they  had  to  be  refused,  because  Mr.  Spurgeon's  literary  labours 
demanded  every  spare  moment  which  he  could  devote  to  them.  Most  of  the 
requests  for  interviews  met  with  a  similar  fate,  though  exceptions  were  occasionally 
made,  and  the  publication  of  the  conversations  which  then  took  place  usually 
involved  further  heavy  additions  to  the  Pastor's  correspondence. 

For  the  purpose  of  making  some  sort  of  classification,  "  Letters  from  Ministerial 
Brethren  "  are  inserted  first.  These  will  show  how  widespread  and  intense  was  the 
esteem  in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  held  by  ministers  of  the  gospel,  both  in  the 
Church  of  England  and  among  the  various  Nonconformist  denominations.  They 
will  also  help  to  cast  side  lights  upon  the  Pastor's  character  and  work,  and  so  further 
reveal  their  far-reaching  influence  and  usefulness.  "  Letters  from  American  and 
Canadian  Friends  "  seemed  to  be  sufficiendy  numerous  and  important  to  be  placed 
in  a  section  by  themselves.  "Miscellaneous  Letters"  could  scarcely  be  classified, 
so  they  are  simply  arranged  in  chronological  order.  The  illustrations,  on  pages  185 
and  189,  are  specimens  of  the  many  instances  in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon's  portrait 
appeared  with  those  of  the  principal  representative  men  of  the  day. 


c.    h.    spurgeon  s    autobiography.  i4i 

Letters  from  Ministerial  Brethren 
cannot  be  better  commenced  than  by  the  insertion  of  a  loving  epistle,  written  by 
Dr.  Alexander  Fletcher,  before  Mr.  Spurgeon's  marriage.  He  added  this  postscript, 
and  sent  it  on  to  the  lady  mentioned  in  it,  who  has  carefully  treasured  it  until  the 
present  time  : — "  Sweet  love,  will  this  please  you  '^  Yes,  it  will.  Every  blessino-  on 
you!— C.  H.  S." 

"  Cromer, 

"  Norfolk, 

"  Nov.  16,  1855. 
"  Dear  Young  Brother, 

"What  a  delightful,  exciting,  encouraging  meeting  we  had  last  Th-ursday 

week  in  your  hallowed  sanctuary  !     The  smile  of  God  abundantly  rested  upon  us. 

It  was  a  little  Heaven  below.      Truly,  it  zvas  good  to  be  there  ! 

"  I  am  looking  forward,  with  great  interest,  to  the  evening  when  we  hope  you 
will  preach  in  Finsbury  Chapel.  When  we  travelled  together  from  Writtle,  I 
mentioned  the  evening  of  the  first  day  of  the  New  Year,  namely,  Tuesdav, 
January  i.  If  nothing  comes  in  the  way,  I  anticipate  an  august  assembly,  God's 
gracious  presence,  and  much  good.  Due  notice  will  be  given,  and  we  hope  to 
witness  a  gathering  and  showers  of  blessing  never  to  be  forgotten.  Favour  me  with 
a  few  lines.      I  return  home  to-morrow. 

"  I  need  not  say  how  much  I  was  pleased  with  a  certain  lady,  to  whom  you 
kindly  introduced  me.  I  hope,  like  yourself,  she  will  acknowledge  me  as  her  father. 
She  is  everything  I  could  wish.  May  your  fellowship  on  earth  be  of  long  diwation, 
and  be  the  sweet  prelude  of  your  eternal  fellowship  beyond  the  skies  !     Amen  ! 

"Always  yours  affectionately, 
"Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  .  "  i\LEXR.   Fletcher." 

In  those  early  days,  Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  preserve  so  many  of  the  letters  he 

received  as  he  did  in  later  years,  so  there  is  a  long  interval  between  the  one  printed 

above  and  the  following.      It  appears  that  the  Pastor,  and  his  friend.  Rev.   Samuel 

Martin,   of  Westminster  Chapel,    had    both    been   blessed    to    a    certain    individual 

concerning  whom  a  correspondent  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon.      He  passed  on  the  oood 

news  to  Mr.  Martin,  who  wrote  in  reply  : — 

"19,  Belgrave  Road, 

"  Belgravia,  S.W., 

"  Dec.  17,  1870. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"Your  welcome  letter,  and  the  letter  of  your  friend,  are  in  my  hand.      I 

thank  you  for  your  own  loving  epistle,  and   I  thank  you  also  for  permitting  me  to 


142  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

read  the  other  letter,  and  for  thus  making  me  a  sharer  of  your  joy.  What  is  our 
hope,  and  joy,  and  crown  of  rejoicing,  if  not  found  in  such  facts  as  that  which 
'  \Y.  J.  S/  narrates  ?    Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ! 

"  Whenever  you  feel  moved  to  cast  your  net  in  our  waters,  know  and  remember 
that  our  ship,  or  shore,  or  whatever  may  be  needful  to  carry  out  the  figure  perfectly, 
is  at  your  service.     A  prayerful  and  praiseful  welcome  will  always  be  given  you. 

"  I  have  requested  one  of  my  deacons  to  leave  at  your  door  a  volume  which  I 
beg  you  to  accept. 

"As  you  read  this,  ask  our  Heavenly  Father  to  give  me  back  my  power  of 
voice,  if  it  be  His  will,  that  I  may  continue  to  preach  His  Son,  Christ  Jesus,  with 
whom  I  feel  more  closely  united  by  means  of  every  affliction  which  I  suffer. 

"  What  a  large  letter  I  have  inflicted  upon  you  !  Forgive  the  infliction.  The 
Lord  keep  you  ! 

"Always  yours, 

"Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  "Samuel   Martin." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  very  grieved  whenever  illness  prevented  him  from  fulfilling 
his  engagements  to  preach  at  the  Tabernacle  or  elsewhere.  On  one  such  occasion, 
he  received  from  Mr.  Chown  the  following  loving  brotherly  letter  : — 

"  24,  Marlborough  Hill, 

"St.  John's  Wood,  N.W., 

"  May  10,  1876. 
"  My  Very  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  received  your  secretary's  letter,  last  night,  announcing  your  inability 
to  be  with  us  on  the  23rd  inst.  It  will  be  a  great  disappointment  to  our  friends,  but 
we  will  turn  our  anticipations  into  sympathy  and  prayer.  May  He,  whose  love  and 
wisdom  have  permitted  the  stroke,  give  the  blessing  proportioned  to  the  blow  !  As 
the  chastening  hand  is  laid  upon  you,  may  the  supporting  arm  be  underneath  and 
round  about  you  !  Many  have  never  felt  the  Lord  so  near  and  precious  as  in  the 
furnace  ;  may  this  be  your  happy  lot,  and  the  flames  be  powerless  except  to  keep  off 
the  enemy,  and  burn  off  all  bonds  !  There  are  times  when  our  very  tears  become 
wellsprings  of  peace  and  comfort  ;  may  it  be  thus,  beloved  friend,  with  yours  !  We 
are  all  with  you  in  spirit.      May  God  bless  you  ! 

"  Forgive  this  line  or  two  before  leaving  for  Montacute,  where  two  services 
await  me  to-day.     Again,  and  evermore,  the  Lord  bless  you  ! 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 
"Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  '  "J.   P.   Chown." 

When  the  Princess  Alice  steamer  sank  In  the  Thames,  on  September  3,  1878, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 43 

and  hundreds  of  lives   were   lost,    Mr.   Spurgeon   preached   two   sermons  upon  the 
calamity.     The  following  letter  refers  to  the  one  entitled  "  Divine.  Interpositions  "  :— 

"Camden  House,  Dulvvich,  S.E., 

"  Sept.  26,  1878. 
"  Reverend  and  Dear  Sir, 

"  This  is  not  the  first  time  that  we  have  exchanged  friendly  greetings. 
I  am  now  moved  to  write  to  you  to  ask  if  your  sermon  on  the  Thames  collision,  as 
reported  in  The  Daily  Neivs  of  the  9th  inst.,  is  published  in  extenso  ;  if  so,  where 
can  I  get  it  ?  I  am  quoting,  of  course  with  approval,  a  passage  from  it  in  my  next 
Sunday's  sermon,  and  would  like  to  have  your  exact  words,  if  possible. 

"  One  sentence,  however,  of  your  discourse  leads  me  to  offer  for  your  kind 
acceptance  my  last  new  volume  on  The  Mystery  of  Pain,  Death,  and  Sin.  You  are 
reported  to  have  said  : — '  I  do  not  attempt  to  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men,  but  I 
believe  they  are  all  for  the  best.'  Well,  I,  too.  devoutly  believe  they  are  all  for  the 
best,  but  I  have  attempted  to  justify  them. 

"  If  you  read  my  book,  you  must  not  mind  a  page  here  and  there  sadly  jarring 
on  your  own  feelings  ;  but  bravely  read  straight  on,  and  it  is  possible  you  may  find 
much  to  cheer  and  strengthen  your  belief  in  God's  great  and  unfaltering  goodness. 

"  I  sympathized  with  you  very  much  in  your  late  illness,  and  am  very  glad  you 
are  at  work  again,  and  hope  many  years  of  noble  activity  are  still  before  you. 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Most  sincerely  yours^ 

"Charles  Voysey." 

In  Vol.  II.,  Chapter  L.,  mention  was  made  of  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons 

which   Dr.   Livingstone  had   carried  with  him   through  a  great   part  of   the  African 

Continent.       The    following    letter,    from    Dr.    W.    Garden    Blaikie,   tells   how    the 

discourse  ultimately  came  into  the  Pastor's  possession  : — 

"  9,  Palmerston  Road, 

"  Edinburgh, 

"April  22,  1879. 
"  Dear  Mr.   Spurgeon, 

"  I  hope  the  publishers  of  The  Catholic  Presbyterian  send  it  to  you,  as 

I  requested  them  to  do.      I   am    Editor,   and   wish   to  be  even  more   Catholic   than 

Presbyterian.      I  have  a  proposal  to  make,  and  hope  you  will  excuse  me.       Without 

introduction,  it  is  this.     The  first  vol.  of  the  Life  of  Dr.  Diiff  W\\\  be  out  next  month. 

I  am  going  to  ask  you  to  write  for  the  said   Catholic  Presbyterian  a  notice  thereof; 

particulars  not  needed, — but  just  yoitr  viezv  of  such  a  man  as   Duff,  and  of  foreign 

mission  work.      I  would  get  you  an  early  copy,  you  would  run  over  it  at  a  sitting, 


144  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

you  would  write  your  first  thoughts  as  they  came,  you  would,  in  our  Journal,  secure 
thousands  of  readers  not  without  influence,  you  would  exemplify  and  promote  union, 
and  I  think,  with  God's  blessing,  you  would  give  a  real  impulse  to  foreign  missions. 
In  the  first  number  of  the  Journal,  I  had  a  noble  paper,  by  David  Livingstone,  on 
'  Missionary  Sacrifices.'  I  wish  now  to  follow  it  up  with  a  word  from  you.  Do 
not  deny  this,  if  you  can  grant  my  request.  I  am  trying,  with  all  my  might,  to 
combine  and  impel  Christian  effort  in  the  wisest  ways  of  working  for  our  Lord. 

"  Apropos  of  Livingstone,  I  may  tell  you  that  I  am  doing  something  about  a 
'  Life  '  intended  to  bring  out  the  more  spiritual,  missionary,  and  domestic  qualities 
of  the  man.  I  had  in  my  hands,  the  other  day,  one  of  your  sermons, — very  yellow, — 
it  lay  embedded  in  one  of  his  journals,  had  probably  been  all  over  Africa,  and 
had,  in  Livingstone's  neat  hand,  the  simple  words  written,  'Very  good. — D.  L.' 
Would  you  like  it  .'^ 

"  If  you  do  not  take  to  the  idea  of  Duff  (although  it  is  the  best  I  can  think  of), 
tell  me,  please,  if  any  other  presents  itself.  Your  views  of  our  Church  organization 
generally  would  be  very  valuable.      With  great  respect, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  G.  Blaikie." 

At  Mr.  Spurgeon's  pastoral  silver  wedding,  the  celebration  of  which  was 
delayed  through  his  long  and  serious  illness,  he  was  very  strongly  urged  to  abstain, 
as  far  as  possible,  at  least  for  a  year,  from  all  services  away  from  the  Tabernacle. 
One  of  the  ministerial  brethren,  who  took  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings  on  that 
memorable  occasion,  was  Dr.  Charles  Stanford,  and  it  happened  that  the  Pastor  was 
under  promise  to  preach  for  him  at  Denmark  Place  Chapel,  Camberwell,  a  few 
days  later.  Mr.  Spurgeon  thought  it  was  extremely  kind  on  his  friend's  part 
voluntarily  to  release  him  from  the  engagement  ;  and  the  way  in  which  he  did  so 
added  to  the  value  of  the  action,  which  was  probably  unique  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
history  ;  lor  people  were  always  so  anxious  to  obtain  his  help,  whatever  the  cost  to 
him  might  be,  that  we  are  not  aware  that  anyone  else  ever  wrote  to  him  another 
such  letter  as  this  : — 

"  8,  North  Terrace, 

"  Camberwell, 

"  May  22,  1879. 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  Delighted  and  most  grateful  as  I  should  have  been  to  have  your  service 
in  average  circumstances,  my  judgment  has  always  been  against  allowing  you  to 
come  on  the  28th.  I  only  stated  the  case,  and  accepted  your  generous  offer  because 
my  folk  were  so  anxious  that  I  should  do  so. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I45 

"Although  the  bills  are  out,  I  have  ordered  slips,  with  'Postponed,'  printed  in 
red  letters,  to  be  pasted  over  them.  It  is  entirely  viy  act  and  deed,  not  yours  ;  and 
if  any  remarks  are  made,  they  will  be  made  about  me.  It  is  not  likely  that  / 
should  be  a  party  to  risk  doing-  yoti,  harm  !  Now  this  will  be  a  conspicuous  fact, 
which  can  easily  be  quoted,  and  which  will,  I  hope,  make  you  able  to  decline  all 
applications  from  outside  the  Tabernacle  for  the  next  twelve  months. 

"  May   God  bless  and  prosper  you  richly,  still  more  and  more,  in  all  manner 

of  ways  ! 

"  Affectionately  yours, 

"  Charles  Stanford." 
In  a  later  letter,  Dr.  Stanford  wrote  : — "  Purely  out  of  love  to  you,  and  at  a 
great  loss  and  self-denial  to  myself,  have  I  resigned  the  privilege  of  your  sermon 
for  us  to-morrow  night.  I  hardly  recollect  anything  that  has  cost  me  so  much,  or 
that  I  have  been  so  very,  very  sorry  to  give  up.  When  I  saw  how  far  from  perfect 
recovery  you  are,  and  how  miraculous  your  home  work  is,  I  felt  shocked  with  a  fear 
that  I  had  selfishly  taken  advantage  of  your  generosity  in  allowing-  you  to  preach 
for  me,  especially  at  the  beginning  of  your  new  campaign,  so  setting  an  e.xample, 
and  more  especially  as,  in  the  circumstances,  it  looked  as  if  I  had  some  idea  of  a 
quid  pro  quo  !  I  have,  however,  taken  care  to  make  public  the  fact  that  it  is  all  my 
own  doing,  and  that  you  were  ready  to  come  to  us. 

"  An  engagement  in  a  little  place  takes  up  as  much  time  as  in  a  greater 
building,  and  if  you  had  preached  for  us,  no  doubt  you  would  have  been  pestered 
by  many  simikir  applications,  which,  if  you  had  even  partially  accepted,  might  have 
worn  away  your  working  power,  all  of  which  is  wanted  for  your  own  enormous 
apparatus  of  service." 

Mr.  Spurgeon,  on  his  part,  did  all  he  could  to  compensate  for  the  disappoint- 
ment by  sending  a  contribution  for  the  fund  in  aid  of  which  he  was  to  have 
preached,  and  also  by  presenting  some  of  his  books  to  Dr.  Stanford,  who  wrote,  in 
acknowledgment : — 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  You  stun  me.  I  can  only  say,  in  a  short  sum  total, — thank  you  !  Our 
school  people  are  also  much  surprised  and  obliged  by  the  ten  pounds.  .  .  .  Your 
sermons  always  quicken  me,  because  they  are  so  full  of  God's  truth,  put  in  your 
own  way,  and  are  so  all-alive.  Nothing  ought  to  have  the  very  soul  and  essence  of 
a  man  in  it  so  much  as  a  volume  of  his  sermons  ;  that  is  another  reason  why  I  am 
glad  to  have  some  of  yours.  I  have  had  many  sheaves  of  them,  but  they  are  all 
about  in  the  world  now,  and  many  have  been  preached  from  church  pulpits  by  old 
friends.  I  have  looked  into  The  Treasury,  just  to  see  its  plan,  and  form  some  idea 
•of  its  materials,  and  I  am  sure  it  is  a  mine.     As  to  the  sermons,   I  pray  that  they 

K  4 


146  C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

may  help  me  to  a  knowledge  of  the  secret  I  so  long  to  find  out.  I  want  to  win 
souls,  and  if  it  please  God,  to  win  them  now.  I  think  your  list  of  subjects  would 
alone  help  me.  You  remind  me  in  your  titles  of  old  Thomas  Adams.  I  have 
nearly  4,000  books  ;  but,  till  yours  came,  I  think  not  twenty- five  volumes  of  modern 
sermons  were  in  my  library. 

"  Affectionately  yours, 

"Charles  Stanford." 

The  following  letter  from  Dr.  \V.  Morley  Punshon  is  interesting  as  showing 
how  such  an  eloquent  preacher  and  lecturer  shrank  from  occupying  the  pulpit  at  the 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  although  deeply  attached  to  the  Pastor.  He  did,  however, 
preach  there  during  the  time  when  the  Wesleyans  were  making  a  special  effort  to 
clear  off  the  debts  from  their  chapels,  and  the  building  was  lent  to  them. 

"  Tranby, 

"  Brixton  Rise,  S.W., 

"  Oct.  3,  1879. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  My  only  reason  for  declining  the  great  honour  conveyed  to  me  by 
Mr.  Higgs  is  really  my  physical  inefficiency.  I  eschew  all  large  places,  even  in  my 
own  denomination,  of  set  purpose.  I  cannot  bear  the  excitement  ;  and  the  three 
months'  anticipation  of  a  service  in  the  Tabernacle  would  make  me  thoroughly  ill. 

"  I  would  do  much,  both  to  further  your  holiday,  which  I  trust  may  tend  to 
lengthen  a  life  so  precious  to  all  of  us  who  love  the  Lord, — and  to  manifest  the 
Catholicity,  nay,  the  oneness  of  our  spirit  in  Christ  ;  but  pray  excuse  me  in  this. 

"  With  much  esteem, 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Yours  very  sincerely, 

"W.  MoRLEY  Punshon." 

The  following  letter,  from  Dr.  Culross,  needs  no  explanation: — 

"  22,  Lynedoch  Street, 

"  Glasgow, 

"18  June,  1880. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Either  you  have  received,  or  you  will  immediately  receive,  a  letter  from 
D.  Anderson,  Esq.,  of  Kingillie,  near  Nairn,  and  another  from  Mr.  Lee,  Free 
Church  minister  there,  aiming  to  secure  a  conditional  promise  from  you  to  preach  in 
Nairn,  next  year,  in  connection  with  their  new  place  of  worship.  I  have  great 
pleasure  in  seconding  their  application.     They  would  endeavour  to  make  your  visit 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  1 47 

as  agreeable  as  possible  ;  and,  if  you  could  spare  the  time,  a  week  or  ten  days  spent 
there  might  invigorate  you  greatly  in  health.  Knowing  Mr.  Anderson,  I  am 
confident  he  would  lay  himself  out  for  this  purpose.  Your  sermons  are  circulated  in 
great  numbers  throughout  the  surrounding  district,  and  a  visit  from  you  would  be 
welcomed  by  thousands.  I  do  not  think  you  have  ever  preached  within  many  miles 
of  the  place. 

"  If  it  were  not  that  I  think  a  visit  to  Nairn  might  refresh  and  strengthen  you,  I 
would  not  write  as  I  do  ;  but  it  would  be  a  very  different  thing  from  coming  to> 
Glasgow.  We  remember  your  visit  here  with  gratitude.  A  young  man,  who 
unexpectedly  was  idle  on  the  afternoon  you  preached,  and  who  '  accidentally  '  was 
offered  a  ticket  by  a  friend  who  was  prevented  from  attending,  went  out  of  curiosity 
to  hear  you,  and  was  led  to  the  Saviour.  I  have  since  baptized  him,  and  received 
him  into  church-fellowship.  Doubtless  there  are  many  similar  cases  of  which  we  do 
not  know.      I  trust  you  are  again  restored  after  your  recent  attack. 

"With  much  esteem, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  James  Culross." 

Dr.  Henry  AUon  wrote  this  hearty  and  cheering  letter  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  in 
reply  to  an  invitation  to  speak  at  the  Orphanage  Festival  : — 

"  lo,  St.  Mary's  Road, 

"  Canonbury,  N., 

"May  31,  1881. 
"My  Dear  John  Ploughman, 

"You  do  not  say  at  what  hour  your  meeting  is, — whether  at  the  first 
watch,  or  the  second  watch,  or  at  cockcrowing, — not  the  last,  I  hope.  I  have 
promised  the  Lord  Mayor  and  my  wife, — who  is  only  a  woman,  though  a  good  one, 
— to  dine  at  the  Mansion  House  at  half-past  six,  on  June  22.  Now,  if  your  meeting 
is  in  the  afternoon, — -as  I  think  it  sometimes  is, — I  shall  deem  it  a  privilege  to  be  at 
it,  and  with  you. 

"  I  can  scarcely  admit  to  myself  that  your  kind  and  valuable  service  to  us, 
at  the  opening  of  our  new  building,  enhances  the  feeling  of  obligation  to  serve  you, 
or  do  anything  you  may  think  proper  to  ask.  Your  great  service  to  the  Master, — 
your  simple  and  unimpaired  fidelity  to  Him,  to  His  truth,  and  to  your  brethren, — 
lay  us  all  under  obligations  to  help  you  in  every  way  that  is  possible. 

"  One  could  not  say  this  to  a  young  man  ;  but  the  years  have  gone  by  when 
it  can  do  any  injury  to  say  it,  or  anything  but  good,  to  you.  For  my  part,  I  am  very 
covetous  of  the  real  love  and  esteem  of  my  brethren.  I  think  it  makes  me  tender 
and  humble  more  than  anything,  save  the  '  Well  done  '  of  the   Master.      Sometimes 


148  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

we  see  men  injured  by  a  great  success,  such  as  your  ministry  has  been  ;    but  God 

has  mercifully  kept  you  from  this,  and  I  think  all  your  brethren  feel   that  every  year 

has  wrought  an  added  sanctity  and  grace,  so  that  their  love  abounds  yet  more  and 

more  to  you.     There  is  no  service,  in  my  power,  that  you  can  ask,  that  I  shall  not  feel 

it  a  great  gratification  to  give.      I  want  to  take  your  Sunday  service  some  day  when 

you  afe  unable  to  preach. 

"  Cordially  yours, 

"  Henry  Allon." 

Dr.  Allon's  wish  to  take  a  service  at  the  Tabernacle  was  duly  realized,  and 
when  he  had  been  once,  he  had  to  go  again,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  on  more  than  one 
occasion  preached  for  him  at  Islington. 

Another  of  the  speakers,  invited  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  the  Orphanage  Festival 
of  1 88 1,  wrote  to  him  thus  heartily  accepting  the  invitation: — 

"  II,  Clarendon  Villas, 

"  Barry  Road, 

"  Peckham  Rye,  S.E., 

"June  6,   1881. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  am  greatly  astonished  that  you  should  be  aware  of  my  existence  ; 
and  as  to  the  idea  of  your  catching  any  flame  from  me, — I  am  irresistibly  reminded 
of  the  words,  '  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  Thee,  and  comest  Thou  to  me  ? ' 
Would  to  God  that  /  could  catch  something  of  that  flame  which  has  kindled  so 
many  hearts  ! 

"  I  have  an  engagement  on  the  22nd  inst.,  but  I  must  manage  to  make 
some  arrangement  by  which  I  can  have  the  happiness  of  accepting  your  kind 
invitation  to   Stockwell. 

"As  you  are  good  enough  to  send  me  some  advertisements  of  your  invaluable 
publications,  the  principle  of  Reciprocity  (now  so  strangely  popular)  requires  that 
I  should  send  you  the  only  advertisements  I  have  in  hand  just  now.  Of  course, 
I  do  not  expect  that  one,  so  overwhelmed  as  you  are  with  gigantic  labours,  can 
pay  us  a  visit."* 

"With  most  earnest  prayers  that  God  may  grant  you  health  and  vigour,  and 
may  make    you,   for    many  years    to    come,   a    yet  more  abundant  blessing  to    the 

Universal  Church, 

"  I   am,  dear  sir, 

"Yours  most  sincerely, 

"  Hugh  Price  Hughes." 

*  Mr  Spurgeon  did  pay  his  Weslej-an  friend  a  visit  at  the  opening  of  the  West  London  Mission,  when  he  preached  a  sermon 
which  is  remembered  by  many,  with  gratitude,  to  this  day. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 49 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  very  g-ratified  by  the  receipt  of  the  following  letter  from 
one  of  the  fathers  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  : — 

"St.   Bernard's  Crescent, 

"  Edinburgh, 

"June  20,   1881. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"I  am  a  'retired'  minister.  In  June,  182 1  (60  years  ago),  I  began 
my  ministerial  work.  In  August,  1876,  I  ceased  to  be  in  charge  of  a  congre- 
gation. I  then  became  colleague  and  minister  emeritus  of  the  Free  North  Church, 
Stirling.  I  am  the  oldest  minister,  in  point  of  ordination,  in  the  Free  Church 
of  Scotland.  I  am  the  oldest  surviving  ex-Moderator  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  the   Free  Church. 

"As  to  my  relation  to  yourself,  I  have  read,  I  think,  everything  you  have 
published,  down  to  your  latest  sermon  and  the  latest  number  of  The  Szvord  and 
the  Trowel.  I  love  your  writings  for  their  true  Puritan  ring,  for  their  soundness, 
their  liveliness,  and  thoroughly  Evangelical  character.  I  do  what  I  can  to  com- 
mend you  and  your  great  work,  believing  that,  in  doing  so,  I  am  serving  our 
Lord.  I  am  not  a  Baptist  (I  have  written  a  little  on  the  other  side  in  my  day), 
but  I  am  a  lover  of  all  who  love  the  Lord.  On  this  ground,  I  claim  you  as  a 
brother  ;  and  I  will  ever  pray  that  the  Master  may  more  and  more  honour  you 
by  making  you  an  instrument  of  good. 

"With  Christian  affection,  and  sincere  goodwill,   I   remain, 

"  Very  faithfully  yours, 

"Alex.   Beith,  aged  ^t^." 

For  several  years,  when  arrangements  for  the  autumnal  session  of  the  Baptist 
Union  were  being  made,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  asked,  both  by  the  local  friends, 
and  by  the  secretary  of  the  Union,  to  preach  in  connection  with  the  week's 
proceedings.  He  fully  appreciated  the  honour  thus  conferred  upon  him  ;  he  also 
felt  the  responsibility  of  addressing  the  assembled  representatives  of  the  denomi- 
nation, and  the  hundreds  or  thousands  of  other  persons  who  constituted  his 
congregation  on  those  occasions  ;  and  the  messages  he  then  delivered  in  various 
parts  of  the  kingdom  were  among  the  most  powerful  utterances  that  ever  fell 
from  his  lips.  Yet,  long  before  he  was  compelled  to  withdraw  from  the  Union 
for  reasons  stated  in  a  later  chapter,  he  strongly  urged  the  responsible  officials 
to  ask  someone  else  to  take  the  position  which  had  so  often  been  occupied  by 
him.  It  was  in  reply  to  one  of  his  letters,  to  this  effect,  that  the  loving  epistle, 
printed  on  the  following  page,  was  penned  by  Rev.  W.  Sampson,  who  was  then 
secretary  of  the  Union. 


150  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Baptist  Union, 

"  19,   Castle  Street, 

"  Holborn,   E.G., 

"May  24,    1881. 

''  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  To  say  all  that  I  should  like  to  say,  and,  indeed,  what  merely  ought 
to  be  said,  would  sound  so  much  like  flattery, — which  you  would  be  as  sorry  to 
read  as  I  should  be  to  write, — that  I  scarcely  know  how  to  reply  to  yours  of  the 
20th  inst.  The  fact  is,  your  position  is  unique.  We  all  acknowledge  and  rejoice 
in  it,  and  are  thankful  to  our  Father  in  Heaven  that  He  has  raised  up  such  an 
one  as  you   are  amongst   us.     That  is  simply  a  fact  to   be   recognized. 

"  How  you  have  stood  the  work,  and  borne  what  everyone  must  feel  to  be 
far  more  difficult  than  the  work,  the  temptation  that  a  position  like  yours  involves, 
has  always  been  to  me  a  wonder.  God's  grace  has  indeed  been  magnified  in 
you.     To    Him  be   all   the   praise. 

"You  say,  'Do  you,  yourself,  think  it  right  that  one  man  should  so  per- 
petually have  the  honour  of  preaching  to  the  Union?'  My  only  reply  is, — 
Were  you  other  than  you  are,  you  would  not  have  been  so  asked  ;  being  what  you 
are,  we  all  feel  grateful  to  God  when  He  helps  you  to  speak  to  us.  Depend 
upon  it,  as  long  as  God  gives  you  strength,  the  people  will  feel  these  great 
gatherings  incomplete  without  you.  But  the  tax  on  your  strength  I  feel  to  be 
so  great  that,  after  what  you  have  said,  I  dare  not  say  another  word.  I  wish 
I  could  have  held  out  some  ray  of  hope  to  the  friends  at  Portsmouth.  Any 
inconvenience  that  I  might  be  put  to  in  the  event  of  your  being  unable  to 
attend,  when  the  time  came,  is  not  to  be  thought  of  When  we  feared,  last  autumn, 
that  you  might  not  be  able  to  be  with  U3,  I  wrote  to  Stowell  Brown,  asking  him  if 
he  would  come  prepared  to  speak, — and  willing  to  speak  or  be  silent,  as  you  were 
able  or  not.  By  return  of  post,  came  back  the  kindest  letter  consenting  most 
gladly.  Any  of  your  brethren  would  do  the  same  for  you,  such  is  the  position  you 
have  secured  in  their  esteem  and  love. 

"  May  the  Lord's  richest  blessing  be  with  you  and  yours  ! 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Yours  most  sincerely, 

"  Wm.  Sampson." 

1 88 1  was  the  year  in  which  the  Baptist  Union  autumnal  session  was  held  at 
Portsmouth  and  Southampton,  and  the  local  committees  in  both  places  so  energeti- 
cally supported  Mr.  Sampson's  plea  that,  ultimately,  Mr.  Spurgeon  promised  to 
preach  in  each  of  the  towns.  On  October  26  and  27,  he  was  graciously  helped  to 
fulfil  the  engagements,  and  none  who  were  present  are  likely  to  forget  the  discourses 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


151 


he    then    delivered.     At    Southampton,    Mr.    Spurgeon    was    the    guest    of    Canon 

VVilberforce,  and  he  and  many  other  Church  of  England  dignitaries  were  present  at 

the  service,  and  they  also  privately  enjoyed  much  true  Christian  communion  with 

the   Pastor,   though  part  of  the   time  they  devoted  to  a  very  vigorous   controversy 

upon  Baptismal  Regeneration,  in  which  Lord  Radstock  proved  himself  to  be  a  most 

doughty  champion  on   the   Evangelical   side.       Early   in    1882,    Canon  Wilberforce 

asked  for  tickets  of  admission  to  the  Tabernacle,  and,  shortly  afterwards,  wrote  to 

Mr.  Spurgeon  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Deanery, 

''  Southampton, 

"Feb.  24,  1882. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  Don't  get  canonical  ;  I  would  not  have  you  anything  but  what 
you   are  !  ! 

"We  were  prevented,  at  the  last  moment,  from  enjoying  the  privilege  of  the 
Tabernacle  service  ;  but  sent  some  friends,  who  very  greatly  appreciated  it. 

"Will  you  come  and  see  us  one  day  again  .''  Would  it  be  possible  for  you  to 
run  down  on  Monday,  March  6,  and  read  the  Bible  to  us  at  our  quiet  home  Bible- 
reading.''  How  delighted  we  should  be,  and  we  would  take  such  care  of  you  for 
the  night  ;  or,  if  absolutely  necessary,  you  could  return  to  London  the  same  evenincr, 
though  this  would  be  most  disappointing  to  us.  Do  come  ;  it  will  be  no  exertion  to 
you,  as  there  will  not  be  above  twenty  persons,  and  you  can  help  us,  and  speak  to 
us  of  Him  who  has  so  blessedly  used  you.  My  wife  sends  her  most  kind  reo-ards, 
and  begs  you  to  come. 

"  Ever  most  sincerely  yours, 

"  Basil  Wilberforce." 

When  arrangements  were  being  made  for  the  Baptist  Union  autumnal  session 
to  be  held  in  Liverpool,  in  1SS2,  Rev.  Hugh  Stovvell  Brown  wrote: — 

"29,  Falkner  Square, 

"  Liverpool, 

"June  12,  '82. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"In  the  name  of  our  churches  here,  I  write  to  entreat  the  favour  of 
your  being  with  us  to  preach  at  the  autumnal  meetings  of  the  Baptist  Union  to  be 
held  in  Liverpool  in  the  first  week  of  October.  Hoping  you  are  well,  I  am,  with 
best  wishes,  and  with  the  very  earnest  desire  that  you  will  comply  with  our  request, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  H.  Stowell  Brown." 


152  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  once  more  stated  the  various  reasons  why  he  should  not  always 
be  the  preacher  on  these  special  occasions,  and,  in  reply,  Mr.  Brown  wrote  : — 

"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"We  are  all  as  desirous  as  ever  that  you  should  preach  at  the 
autumnal  meeting.  I  fully  appreciate  your  hesitancy  to  take  so  prominent  a  place, 
and  to  do  so  arduous  a  work,  year  after  year  ;  but  no  one  else  can  do  it,  and  upon 
your  advent  very  much  depends.  I  hope  that,  should  you  come,  we  can  make  a 
handsome  collection  for  your  Orphanage.  I  say  this,  not  as  a  bribe, — for  your 
resources  for  the  needs  of  your  Orphanage  are  in  far  better  hands  than  ours,  and 
the  Lord  will  not  suffer  them  to  fail  ; — but  I  say  it  as  expressive  of  the  love  in  which 
we  hold  you,  and  of  our  wish  to  do  what  we  think  would  be  gratifying  to  you. 

"  I  must  now  leave  the  decision  to  your  own  judgment,  earnestly  hoping  that 
you  will  come,  yet  very  unwilling  to  impose  upon  you  a  work  which,  for  various 
reasons,  must  be  a  heavy  addition  to  your  many  other  burdens. 

"Yours  faithfully, 

"  H.  Stowell  Brown." 

Again,  and  for  the  last  time,  Mr.  Spurgeon  yielded  to  the  entreaties  of  his 
brethren  ;  the  service  was  another  truly  memorable  one,  and  the  net  proceeds  for  the 
Orphanage  amounted  to  ;^i3i    5s.  6d. 

Rev.  Robert  Taylor,  the  Presbyterian  minister  of  Upper  Norwood,  was  one  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  very  special  personal  friends.  He  lived  so  close  to  "  Westwood " 
that  he  did  not  often  write  to  the  Pastor,  but  one  of  his  letters  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon 
has  been  preserved  ;  it  was  written  shortly  after  he  had  taken  part  in  the  Annual 
Festival  at  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,  June  21,  1882  : — 

"  Birchwood, 

"  Beulah  Hill, 

"  Thursday  morning. 
"  Dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  take  the  liberty  of  sending,  with  this.  The  Outlook,  of  this  week, 
which  has  a  little  article  which  I  wrote  on  the  Orphanage  Fete.  I  don't  send  it 
because  it  deserves  your  attention,  or  is  worthy  of  the  subject ;  but  just  as  the  heart 
tribute  of  a  neighbour  who  greatly  admires  and  loves  your  distinguished  husband, 
and  who  highly  prizes  the  privilege  which  you  and  he,  in  your  great  kindness,  allow 
him  of  sometimes  visiting  'Westwood.' 

"  With  affectionate  greeting  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  remain, 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"  Very  faithfully  yours, 

"  Robert  Taylor." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  155 

In  the  autumn  of  1882,  when  arranging  the  suppHes  for  the  Tabernacle  pulpit 
during  his  absence  at  Mentone,  Mr.  Spurgeon  sought  to  secure  the  services  of 
Rev.  Charles  Garrett,  of  Liverpool.  Though  this  proved  to  be  impossible,  the 
Pastor  was  greatly  cheered  by  the  receipt  of  the  following  reply  from  his  eminent 
Wesleyan  friend  : — 

"  Leeds, 

"Oct.  10,  1882. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Many  thanks  for  your  welcome  letter,  and  its  kind  enclosure.  I  shall 
treasure  both  while  I  live.  The  fact  is,  I  have  long  been  about  the  most  devoted 
admirer  that  you  have.  I  have  thanked  God  for  giving  you  to  the  Church,  over 
and  over  again  ;  and  I  always  say  that  the  whole  Church  ought  to  pray  that  God 
may  preserve  and  help  you.      Hence  you  may  imagine  how  I  prize  your  kind  gift. 

"As  to  occupying  the  pulpit  for  you,  I  would  do  anything  in  my  power  to 
relieve  you  from  either  work  or  anxiety  ;  but  this  year  I  am  very  heavily  taxed. 
Everybody  wants  me,  and  all  seem  to  think  that,  as  I  am  President,  they  have  a 
claim  to  me.  I  am  here  at  our  Foreign  Missionary  meetings,  and  then  I  go  for  a 
series  of  meetings  in  Scotland. 

"Have  you  ever  preached  on  the  Witness  of  the  Spirit?  If  not,  /  zuisk  yoic 
would.  It  is  a  subject  on  which  many  are  greatly  perplexed.  Send  it  to  me  whea 
it  is  published.     God  bless  and  keep  you  ! 

"  Yours  truly, 

"Charles  Garrett." 

The  following  letter  is  a  specimen  of  the  correspondence  between  Mr.  Spurgeon: 
and  Canon  Harford,  when  the  latter  was  one  of  the  Canons  Residentiary  at  West- 
minster Abbey  ;  he  had  met  the  Pastor  some  time  before,  and  had  promised  him 
a  medallion  executed  by  himself : —  ,         . 

"  Dean's  Yard, 

"Westminster, 
'  "March  6,  1883. 

"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  But  for  an  inhuman  amount  of  work  which  has  kept  me  chained  to 
this  Abbey  Rock  of  Westminster,  I  should  be  prevented  by  shame  from  writing 
this  letter,  for  the  litde  medallion  of  the  Good  Shepherd  has  been  waiting  more 
than  a  year  in  the  hope  of  being  sent  to  you  !  My  young  page-boy,  who  will  take 
it  to  '  Westwood  '  this  morning,  knows  how  earnestly  I  have  been  hoping  to  find 
a  free  day,  in  which  I  could  carry  it  to  you  myself,  and  how,  day  after  day,  I  have 
been  hampered  with  things  immediately  around  me.     An  hour  ago,  all  was  arranged. 


154  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

for  our  joint  pilgrimage  to-day,  but  the  receipt  of  the  enclosed  note  from  an  excellent 
Christian  woman  (who,  for  some  months  past,  has  been  anxious  about  the  health 
of  her  old  mother  to  whom  she  has  for  years  devoted — ^I  ought  to  say,  sacrificed 
herself)  tells  me  that,  whilst  inclination  would  carry  me  off  to  your  beautiful  Beulah, 
duty  directs  me  to  go  at  once  to  Bond  Street. 

"You  must,  assuredly,  have  written  some  little  book,  or  pamphlet,  confirming 
tiie  hope  and  comforting  the  heart  of  a  believer  at  such  a  moment  ;  and  if  you  would 
kindly  give  me  the  name  of  it,  or  the  numbers  or  texts  of  any  of  your  beautiful 
sermons  wherein  you  have  dwelt  upon  the  life  of  the  world  to  come,  I  shall  feel 
greatly  obliged,  and  will  get  them  from  Paternoster  Row  this  afternoon.  Your 
sojourn  on  the  Mediterranean  shore  has,  I  trust,  inspired  you  with  new  poetry  as 
well  as  a  fresh  stock  of  health. 

"  Praying  that  you  may  long  be  preserved  to  benefit  and  delight  the  world, 
I  remain,  always, 

"  Revered  and  loved  Pastor, 

"  Your  sincere  admirer  and  fellow-labourer, 

"  Frederick  K.    Harford." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  sent  two  sermons  which  he  hoped  might  prove  suitable  ;  one  of 
them  was  the  discourse  delivered  shortly  after  his  return  from  Mentone,  and 
entitled,  "  Supposing  Him  to  be  the  Gardener."  It  is  one  of  the  choicest  of  his 
sermons,  and  has  been  greatly  blessed  to  mourners  and  others  who  have  read  it. 
Canon  Harford's  second  letter  shows  how  highly  he  prized  it  : — 

"  Dean's  Yard, 

"Westminster, 

"March  7,  1S83. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  But  little  did  I  guess,  on  entering  my  house  last  night  at  10.30,  that 
such  a  rare  and  precious  feast  was  prepared  for  me.  Both  of  those  sermons  are 
valuable  treasures,  but  the  inspired  dream  at  Mentone  is  one  that  exceeds  in  7cse- 
fuhiess  as  well  as  in  superb  cleverness  all  the  memorable  sermons  I  have  read  from 
English  or  from  American  sources  during  the  last  twenty-five  years.  I  ha\-e 
ordered  fifty  copies  to-day,  purposing  to  send  the  first  to  the  poor  mourner  whom 
your  message  is  certain  to  comfort,  and  another  to  your  genuine  admirer,  Louisa, 
Lady  Ashburton.  Some  shall  go  to  France,  where  I  hope  a  translation  will  be 
made  into  the  language  of  the  country  ;  and  some  will  go  to  certain  weak  brethren 
whom  I  have  been  lately  called  to  '  work  at '  and  endeavour  to  draw  away  from 
Agnosticism  and  so-called  Spiritualism. 

"  I  rejoice  to  think  that  you  like  the  general  tone  of  the  Good  Shepherd 
medallion.     There  is  a  proper  angle  of  light  for  it,  which,  as  you  have  discovered, 


C.     11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  155 

ought  to  come  rather  from  above  than  from  below,  and  as  you  so  temptingly  mention 
Saturday,  and  3  p.m.,  as  your  g"eneral  free  day  and  free  hour,  I  will  arrange  (d.v.)  to 
run  down  to  '  Westwood,'  on  Saturday  next,  by  a  train  which  will  arrive  soon 
after  3,  in  order  to  enjoy  a  half-hour's  refreshing"  converse  with  the  master-poet  and 
philosopher  whose  genius  has  been  such  a  joy  and  benefit  to  England. 

"  I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you  how  one  of  the  most  excellent  women  I  ever 
knew — and  whose  loss  I  shall  ever  mourn, — always  read  your  sermons  from  the 
year  1856,  when  I  was  ordained  at  Croydon,  until  the  year  1868,  when  she  was 
taken  away.  Meanwhile,  before  setting"  out  for  a  round  of  work  chiefly  connected 
with  some  thirty  letters  received  this  morning  from  India,  I  send  off  this  scribble 
as  a  token  of  affectionate  homage  from — 

"  Yours  ever  most  joyfully  and  loyally, 

"  Frederick  K.   Harford." 

About  a  fortnight  later.  Canon  VVilberforce  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — 

"  The  Deanery, 

"Southampton, 

"  March  20,  1883. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"You  MUST — imagine  my  saying  must  to  an  Archbishop  like  you  !    but 

you  nuist  come,  if  only  for  ten  minutes,  to  the  Anti-opium   meeting  in  Exeter  Hall 

on  May  2.      I  know  you  have  a  horrid  '  Liberation  '  meeting  at  the  Tabernacle  that 

night.     Come  and  say  a  word  about  liberation  from  the  dominion   of  a  drug ;   or 

expect  me  at  the  Teibcrnacle  with  an  amendment  tied  up  in  blue  ribbon  ! 

"  Seriously,   in   order  that   this  meeting  shall    be   a  success,   your   presence   is 

essential,  and  mine  comparatively  immaterial.     With  most  kind  remembrances, 

"  I  am,  affectionately  yours, 

"  Basil  VVilberforce." 

The  following  letter  shows  that  a  Nonconformist  friend  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
in  quite  a  different  strain,  concerning  the  same  Liberation  meeting  : — 

"  8,  Russell  Road, 

"  Kensington,  W., 

"April  25,  1883. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  heard  to-day,  with  deep  regret,  from  Newman  Hall,  that  you  are 
again  in  great  suffering.  I  was  intending  to  write  and  ask  if  you  meant  to  dine  at 
Mr.  Allcroft's,  on  Wednesday  next,  after  the  Bible  Society  meeting,  at  which  you 
and  I  both  have  to  speak.      I  was  going  to  say  that,  although  I  wanted  to  attend  the 


156 


H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 


Liberation  Society  meeting  in  the  evening,  yet,  if  you  had  decided  to  dine  with  the 
Primate  of  all  England,  I  would  go,  too,  just  to  guard  your  Nonconformity  from  the 
perversive  suasions  of  an  Archbishop  and  a  Bishop.  Imagine  their  success, — 
brinoincr  you  over  to  Mother  Church, — surpliced  choirs,  processions,  and  incense  in 
the  Tabernacle,  and  yourself  invested  with  cope  and  chasuble  !  !  To  avert  such  a 
catastrophe,  I  thought  that  I  had  better  go  with  you  !  ! 

"  But  I  am  afraid,  from  what  I  hear,  that  you  will  not  be  strong  enough  even  to 
speak  at  Exeter  Hall,  to  say  nothing  of  the  dinner  afterwards,  so  I  shall  go  to  the 
Liberation  Society  meeting. 

"  But,  dear  friend,  I  am  half  afraid  that  this  nonsense  is  like  vinegar  upon  nitre 
to  you  if  you  are  suffering  so  much.  You  have  one  cause  for  great  thankfulness, 
viz.,  that  you,  in  your  gout,  do  more  good  than  we  ordinary  creatures  can  do  in  our 
very  best  health.  May  you  find  the  old  promise  to  Israel  fulfilled  in  your  experience, 
'  I  will  allure  her,  and  bring  her  into  the  wilderness,  and  speak  comfortably  unto  her.' 

"  Ever  your  faithful  friend, 

"  COLMER  B.   SVMES." 

In  another  letter  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  Mr.  Colmer  Symes  wrote  : — "  I  am  person- 
ally greatly  indebted  to  you,  and  I  specially  want  to  thank  you  for  all  the  comfort 
and  help  which  you  have  given  to  my  late  beloved  mother  during  the  last  fifteen 
years  of  her  suffering,  helpless  life  at  Torquay.  Although  she  never  saw  or  heard 
you,  she  always  used  to  call  you  her  minister.  May  God  still  continue  to  you  the 
grace  of  a  simple,  consecrated  purpose,  and  the  gifts  of  such  a  manifold  ministry  !  " 

The  following  letter  from  Dr.  J.  Guinness  Rogers  shows  what  he  felt  con- 
cerning   the    enormous    strain     involved    in     Mr.    Spurgeon's     preaching     at    the 

Tabernacle  for  so  many  years  : — 

"  I,  Princes  Gardens, 

"  Clapham  Common,  S.W., 

"July  14,  1SS3. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  have  been  longing  to  get  across  to  see  you  to-day,  but  am  bafifled  in 
my  endeavours,  and  so  write  a  line  to  say  how  pleased  I  am  to  see  that  you  have  so 
far  recovered  from  the  attack  of  last  Sunday.  ' 

"It  was  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to  help  you,  and  so  I  faced  any  dissatisfaction 
with  my  absence  from  my  own  pulpit,  which  Mr.  Charlesworth  occupied  very 
efficiently.  However,  all  Christian  people  have  such  sympathy  with  you  that  I  have 
no  doubt  I  shall  be  forgiven  even  by  those  most  disposed  to  complain  if  they  do  not 
see  their  own  pastor.  Your  great  congregation  is  an  inspiration,  but  it  is  also  an 
overwhelming    responsibility.       I    do  not    wonder    that    continuous    labour    in    the 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I57 

Tabernacle  tells  on  you,  and  in  ways  you  may  not  suspect.  I  do  not  envy  the  man 
who  can  preach  there  without  having  his  whole  nature  strained  to  the  utmost  ;  and 
that  means  nervous  exhaustion,  of  all  others  the  most  difficult  to  contend  against. 

"  May  the  Lord  spare  you  many  years  to  do  a  work  to  which  not  one  in  ten 
thousand  would  be  equal ! 

"  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"J.  Guinness  Rogers." 

In  the  "  Westwood  "  chapter,  mention  is  made  of  the  Saturday  afternoon 
visitors  to  the  Pastor  at  his  home.  One  friend  who  was  always  welcome  was 
Mr.  John  M.  Cook,  a  near  neighbour  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's,  who  constantly  urged  the 
Pastor  to  allow  him  the  pleasure  of  "  personally  conducting  "  him  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon 
(or  his  secretary)  up  the  Nile,  free  of  expense,  just  as  his  father,  Mr.  Thomas  Cook, 
had  desired  the  privilege  of  being  Mr.  Spurgeon's  guide  through  the  Holy  Land.  It 
never  seemed  possible  to  arrange  for  either  trip,  so  both  father  and  son  had  to  be 
content  with  an  occasional  call  at  "  Westwood,"  sometimes  accompanied  by  special 
friends  whose  acquaintance  the  Pastor  might  wish  to  make.  The  following  letter 
explains  the  circumstances  under  which  a  meeting  was  arranged  between  Mr. 
Spurgeon  and  Dr.  VVelldon,  the  present  Bishop  of  Calcutta  : — 

"  Ludgate  Circus, 

"  Oct.  30,  1883. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  Last  night,  I  was  dining  at  Dulwich,  with  Mr.  VVelldon,  the  newly- 
appointed  head-master  of  Dulwich  College.  I  met,  at  his  table,  my  old  friend, 
ex- Judge  Saunders,  from  India,  who,  in  conversation,  told  me  that  he  had  the 
pleasure  ot  introducing  to  you  at  the  Tabernacle  an  Indian  Nawab,  who  was 
travelling  under  our  arrangements,  and  that  the  Nawab  stayed  through  one  of  your 
services.  Mr.  Welldon  spoke  out  very  strongly  in  praise  of  your  work,  stated  that 
he  had  been  at  the  Tabernacle  several  times  to  hear  you,  and  longed  very  much  for 
an  introduction  to  you.  I  took  upon  myself  to  say  that  there  was  nothing  easier,  and 
that  I  was  quite  sure  you  would  be  glad  to  see  him.  Judge  Saunders  then 
suggested  that  I  should  arrange  to  have  the  pleasure  of  introducing  Mr.  Welldon  to 
you.  I  explained  that  Saturday  was  your  general  day  for  receiving  friends,  and  that 
next  Saturday  would  be  the  only  one  on  which  I  shall  be  at  home  until  near 
Christmas.  I  shall  be  obliged  by  a  line  from  you  saying  whether  it  will  be  quite 
convenient  for  you  to  see  these  gentlemen  any  time  after  3  o'clock  next  Saturday 
afternoon.     With  kind  regards, 

"  Yours  sincerely, 

"John  M.  Cook." 


158  c.    n.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

The  appointment  was  confirmed,  and  duly  kept,  and  so  began  a  peculiarly- 
intimate  friendship.  Mr.  Welldon,  in  the  course  of  the  interview,  told  Mr.  Spurgeon 
how  greatly  his  grandmother  prized  the  sermons,  so  the  Pastor  wrote  a  note  to  her, 
and  sent  it  to  her  grandson,  who  then  gave  the  following  additional  particulars 
concerning  her  : — 

"  Dulwich  College,  S.E., 

"Nov.  5,  1883. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I    am    deeply    grateful    for    your    kind    thought    of  my    grandmother. 

Nothing,  I  think,  could  cheer  her  so  much  in  her  last  days  as  this  word  from  you. 

It  will  perhaps  be  a  little  interesting  to  you  to  know  that,  some  years  ago,  when   I 

was   about   to   live  in   Germany,  she  put   into  my  hands   several   volumes   of  your 

sermons,  and  made  me  promise  to  read  one   every  Sunday  morning   until   I    came 

home,  as  she  thought,  poor  dear  !  that  Senior  Classics  were  sure  to  be  sceptical,  and 

ever  since  then  I  have  been  a  student  of  your  writings,  so  that  I  suppose  there  are 

few  members  of  the  English  Church  who  know  them  better,  or  owe  more  to  them 

than  I  do. 

"  I  shall,  be  at  home  on  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday  in  the  present  week, 

and  shall  be  delighted  if  you  can   come   then,    or  at   any  other  time,  and  see   the 

College. 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Ever  faithfully  yours, 

"J.  E.  C.  Welldon." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  early  foretold  the  elevation  of  his  friend  to  the  episcopate,  and 
playfully  expressed  the  hope  that,  when  Mr.  Welldon  became  a  Bishop,  he  would 
not  forsake  his  Baptist  brother.  But  when  the  expected  promotion  came,  he  had 
himself  been  "promoted  to  glory." 

Singularly  enough,  the  very  day  that  Mr.  John  M.  Cook's  letter  reached 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  he  received  this  note  from  another  neighbour.  Dr.  William  Wright, 
Editorial  Superintendent  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  : — 

"  The  Avenue, 

"  Beulah  Hill, 

"  Upper  Norwood, 

"Oct.  30,  1S83. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Sir  William    Muir    and    his    daughters  expressed  a  strong  wish,   last 

night,   to  see   you.     They   are  residing    for   a   few   weeks    on   Beulah   Hill.      I    am 

exceedingly  unwilling   to  bore  you,   but   I    promised,   if  an  opportunity  offered,    to 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


159 


introduce  them  to  you.  Sir  William's  wish  to  see  you  is  no  vain  curiosity,  and 
I  think  you  receive  visitors  on  Saturdays.  As  you  know  everything-,  you  know  the 
excellent  work  Sir  William  did  in  India  in  putting  down  infanticide,  and  especially  as 
a  Christian  student  of  Islamic  literature. 

"  If  you  could  see  us  next  Saturday,  or  the  following,  I  should  take  it  as  a  oreat 
favour.     With  kindest  regards  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  Wm.  Wright." 

Possibly,  because  arrangements  had  been  made  for  the  other  visitors  to  call 
that  week,  Dr.  Wright's  party  was  asked  to  come  on  the  following  Saturday,  and  he 
therefore  wrote,  on  November  9: — "  I  hope  to  call  to-morrow,  about  three  o'clock, 
with  Sir  William  Muir,  Lady  Muir,  and  perhaps  their  daughters  and  my  wife. 
I  hope  you  will  not  consider  our  visit  a  visitation." 

Having  once  found  his  way  to  "  Westwood,  '  Dr.  Wright  often  came  ;  and,  as 
the  result,  he  was  able  to  write  the  remarkable  testimony  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  literary 
ability  which  is  given  in  a  later  chapter.  He  was  "called  home"  while  the  present 
volume  was  being  compiled  ;  and  only  a  few  days  before  he  received  the  Master's 
message,  "  Come  up  higher,"  he  was  noticed  to  be  standing  at  the  oate  of 
"Westwood,"  and  gazing  with  peculiar  wistfulness  down  the  drive  which  he  had  so 
many  times  traversed  on  those  memorable  Saturday  afternoons  that  he  had  spent 
with  his  friend  in  the  garden,  or  among  the  books  which  they  both  so  greatly 
loved. 

This  chatty  note  from  a  very  venerable  clergyman  is  interesting  because  of  his 
reminiscences  of  the  young  Pastor  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  and  some  of  his 
clerical  critics  ;  the  service  at  Finsbury  Chapel,  mentioned  by  the  writer,  is  probably 
the  one  to  which  Dr.  Fletcher  was  looking  forward  when  he  wrote  the  letter  on 
page   141 :— 

"  62,  Torrington  Square,  W.C., 

"Feb.  22,  1884. 
"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  Blessed  as  you  are,  in  common  with  all  believers,  with  Divine  teachincr, 

and  with  good  temper  (which  all  saints  are  not),  I  hope  you  will  pardon  me,  who 

preached  the  gospel  before  you  were  born,  if  I   ask  you,  in  one  of  your  valuable 

sermons,  to  say  something  about  Shakespeare, — perhaps  the  greatest  genius  in  his 

way,  who  ever  lived, — but,  certainly,  a  deadly  enemy  to  gospel  truth.      His  plays  are 

getting  more  and  more  popular.      It  is  sad  to  see  that  even  good  men  are  praising 

him  in  the  pulpit.     You  have  talent  and  taste  enough  to  appreciate  his  wonderful 

power,  and  have  some  gifts  in  common  with  him  ;    but,   of  course,  you  know  that 


l6o  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

reading  his  plays,  and,  much  more,  attending  public  performances  of  them,  can  but 
pollute  the  minds  of  such  as  do  so. 

"  In  a  pastorate  of  half  a  century,  I  have  thought  it  wise  to  consider  suggestions 
made  to  me  (even  anonymously),  though  I  do  not  always  agree  with  them. 

"  I  often  hear  you,  ahvays  with  pleasure.  I  hope,  too,  with  profit.  I  have  for 
years  given  away  your  sound  and  Scriptural  sermons  every  week  ;  and  I  tell  you, 
what  I  have  told  scores  and  scores  of  folk,  that  you  are  doing  more  good  than  any 
man  in  England  except  Lord  Shaftesbury. 

"I  said  to  two  clerical  brethren  (both  since  Bishops),  in  1855  (I  think),  'I  am 
going  to  hear  young  Spurgeon  to-night.'  One  of  them  said,  'What!  that  mounte- 
bank ? '  I  heard  you  in  Finsbury  Chapel.  Before  you  had  got  half  through  your 
prayer,  I  said  to  myself,  '  This  lad  is  no  mountebank.'  I  heard  your  sermon,  not 
agreeing  with  a/l  of  it,  but  I  said,  next  day,  when  I  saw  my  brethren  at  a  large 
clerical  meeting,  '  Spurgeon  is  no  mountebank  ;  I  wish  I  could  preach  half  as  well, 
and  I  wish  as  much  for  most  of  my  brethren.'  They  were  both  very  popular 
men  ;  one  is  sleeping  in  Jesus,  the  other  is  one  of  our  few  Evangelical  Bishops,  and 
a  dear  friend. 

"  I  never  pass  a  week  without  hearing  of  the  good  your  sermons  are  doing.     A 

dear  old  friend  of  mine  told  me,  the  other  day,  that  his  pious  aunt  (aged  90)  said 

she  '  lived  upon  those  blessed  sermons.'     One  of  my  working  people  said  to  me, 

yesterday,  '  I  like  that  Spurgeon,  I  can  nnderstand  him.'     This  is  one  of  your  best 

features  ;  you  are  always  intelligible  ; — let  me  add,  always  good-tempered  ;  and,  best 

of  all,  always  Scriptural. 

"Yours  affectionately, 

"R.    W.     DiBDIN." 

This  note  came  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  March,  1884,  from  Mrs.  Weitbrecht : — 

"  My  son-in-law.  Professor  Christlieb,  of  Bonn,  is  coming  to  England  to  hear 
and  see  Mr.  Moody.  He  is  trying  to  form  an  evangelistic  centre  at  Bonn,  to 
prepare  evangelists  to  go  through  Germany,  to  proclaim  Christ  and  His  salvation. 

"  Professor  Christlieb  enquires  of  me  if  he  can  also  see  his  brother  Spurgeon, 
and  I  have  ventured  to  tell  him  that  I  will  write  and  ask  you,  and  have  added  that  I 
hoped,  if  your  state  of  health  permitted,  you  would  spare  him  an  hour  of  your 
time.  Christlieb  ('  Chrisfs  love')  is  full  of  fire,  zeal,  and  Christian  love.  He  has 
often  been  fed  by  you,  dear  sir,  and  has  fed  others,  through  your  sermons,  though 
he  is  no  common  preacher  himself.  I  am  sure  you  will  give  him  a  shake  of  the 
hand,  if  possible.  His  time  is  very  short.  He  brings  his  eldest  son  with  him  ; 
he,  like  your  sons,  but  younger,  is  a  preacher  of  the  gospel." 

When  the  appointment  was  made.  Dr.  Christlieb  wrote  : — "  It  is  so  kind  of  you 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


I6l 


to  give  me  a  few  minutes  next  Wednesday  at  1 1  o'clock.  Having  to  write  a  history 
of  preaching  in  ah  ages  and  Churches,  I  want  to  put  some  questions  to  you  on 
books  written  on  eminent  Baptist  preachers." 

Dr.    Angus   sent   to    Mr.    Spurgeon   the  accompanying  view  of  the   Hbrary  of 
Regent's  Park  College,  with  the  following  note  : — 


THE    LIBRARY,    REGENTS   PARK  COLLEGE. 


,       •  "C.  R.  R, 

"  Dec.  3,  1884. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"I    hope   you   are  not   ashamed  ot  your   company;    as   I    am  sure   they 

are    not    of  you.       Marshman,    Carey,    Ward,    Fuller,    and    Booth    are    over    you  ; 

Kinghorn  is  opposite, — a  blessed  fellowship. 

"  Ask  Mrs.  Spurgeon  if  she  can  find  you  :  with  all  sympathy  and  regard, 

"Yours  very  truly, 

"Joseph  Angus." 

For  a  time,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  Mr.  Lewis,  of  W^estbourne  Grove  Chapel,  were 

L4 


i62  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

joint-editors  of  I'he  Baptist  Magazine,  and  they  were  always  very  intimate  and 
devoted  personal  friends.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  last  letter  received  by  the 
Pastor  from  Mr.  Lewis  : — 

■'  Victoria  Street, 

"  St.  Albans, 

"Nov.  3,  1884. 
"  My  Very  Dear  Friend, 

"  I  cannot  sufficiently  thank  you  for  the  loving  words  you  sent  me  on 

Saturday  ;    and,  best   of  all,  for   the   assurance   of  your   prayers.      I  am   in   a   sorry 

plight,  so  far  as  the  poor  frame  is  concerned  ;  but  blessed  with  much  peace. 

"  I  need  hardly  tell  you  that  I  have  no  complacency  in  anything  I  have  done. 
The  faculty  of  introspection  is  wonderfully  quickened  in  such  circumstances  as 
mine  ;  but  'grace  reigns.'  I  only  deplore  that  every  pulse  of  mine  has  not  beaten 
in  accord  with  the  Saviour's  will,  and  every  breath  exhaled  for  His  glory.  May  He 
continue  to  honour  and  bless  and  comfort  you  ! 

"With  pleasant  memories  of  past  associations, — au  rev  oh' !     Pray  for  me  still  ! 

"Yours  lovingly, 

"  W.  G.   Lewis." 

When  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  arranging  for  the  supplies  at  the  Tabernacle,  during 
his  holiday  in  the  early  part  of  1885,  he  wrote  to  ask  Rev.  Mark  Guy  Pearse  to  be 
one  of  the  preachers.      In  reply,  he  received  the  following  loving  letter  :— 

"  Grosvenor  Villa, 

"  Southfield  Road, 

"Gotham, 

"  Bristol, 

"Dec.  26,  1884. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  shall  count  it  an  honour  and  a  great  pleasure  to  serve  you.  On 
Feb.  15,  I  have  promised  to  preach  the  Sunday-school  sermons  for  our  people  here, 
and  cannot  put  them  off;  but  I  can  give  you  Feb.  i.  This  is  the  only  day  I  can 
conveniently  find  in  Feb.  ;  but  I  can  offer  you  either  March  8,  15,  or  22. 

"  I  should  much  like  to  comply  with  your  request  without  any  of  these 
ungracious  buts  and  ifs.  You  have  made  me  your  debtor  long  since.  There  is  no 
man  living  to  whom  I  am  more  indebted.  God  bless  you,  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and 
yours,  yet  more  and  more  ! 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Always  heartily  yours, 

"  M.  Guy  Pearse." 


c.    H.    sturgeon's   autobiography.  163 

After  the  Pastor's  home-going,  Mr.  Pearse  related  this  touching  incident  con- 
cerning Mr.  Spurgeon  and  himseH",  and  thus  explained  the  indebtedness  mentioned 
in  his  letter  : — 

"  Some  years  ago,  I  sat  with  him  on  the  platform  at  the  Tabernacle ;  and, 
in  an  interval  during  the  meeting,  I  whispered  to  him,  '  When  I  was  a  young 
fellow  in  London,  I  used  to  sit  right  over  there,  and  hear  you  preach,  and  you  will 
never  know  how  much  good  you  did  me.'  I  cannot  forget  the  bright  light  that 
came  into  his  face  as  he  turned  to  me,  and  said,  'You  did?'  'Yes,'  I  replied,  'and' 
I  am  so  glad  to  have  this  chance  of  telling  you  of  it.  You  used  to  wind  me  up  like 
an  eight-day  clock  ;  I  was  bound  to  go  right  for  a  week  after  hearing  you.'  He  put 
out  his  hand,  and  took  mine  in  it,  and  the  tears  brimmed  to  his  eyes  as  he  said, 
'  God  blesg  you  !      I  never  knew  that.'  " 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  letter  on  page  130,  concerning  Disestablishment,  will  give  some 

idea  of  the   nature  of  his    reply    to    the    following    communication    from    Principal 

Rainy  : — ■ 

"  Edinburgh, 

"May  18,  1885. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

.     "  We  are  going  to  have  a  public  Conference  on  Disestablishment  on  the 

evening  of  Thursday   next.      It   is    the    opening   day    of  our    Assembly;    but    this 

Conference  is  not  exclusively  Free  Church.      It  is  called  by  a  District  Association 

which  looks  at  the  question  fully  as  much  on  the  religious  as  on  the  political  side. 

"Could  you  send  a  letter,  however  brief,  to  be  read  at  the  meeting?  It  would 
help  us  much, — especially  with  those  good  people  who  are  afraid  of  moving  anything 
that  exists. 

"  I  was  glad  to  get  hold  of  a  good  report  of  your  recent  speech  on  the  subject. 
If  we  should  feel  drawn  to  make  a  tract  of  it,  would  you  license  the  theft? 

"  One  does  not  want  to  spend  too  much  time  on  these  movements,  yet  they  are 
apt  to  usurp  a  great  deal.  But  we  have  other  work  in  hand  as  well.  There  has 
been  a  good  deal  of  promising  religious  impression  over  the  country,  and  especially 
in  our  University.  Even  this,  however,  seems  to  share  a  little  in  the  strancre 
tendency  of  our  day  to  cut  loose  from  definite  Theology. 

"  Yours  ever  truly, 

"  Robert  Rainy." 

Even  such  a  simple  matter  as  an  application  for  tickets  for  a  Tabernacle  service 
gave  Rev.  Henry  Simon,  of  Westminster  Chapel,  the  opportunity  of  writing  the 
brotherly  epistle  printed  on  the  next  page. 


i64  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  Mervan  House, 

"  Brixton,  S.W., 

"May  28,  1885. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  have  a  missionary  friend,  from  Peking,  who  is  very  anxious  to  sit  at 
the  royal  repast  which  will  be  spread  at  the  Tabernacle  next  Sunday  night.  Being 
rather  overgrown,  as  heights  go,  he  does  not  care  for  the  abundant  entrance  at  the 
Iront  doors,  but  would,  for  once,  like  to  enter  with  the  elect  saints  to  whom  a  less 
abundant  entrance  is  granted.  He  looked  in  such  a  way  that  I  said  I  would  try  to 
get  him  a  ticket,  but  where  to  apply  I  do  not  know  except  it  be  at  headquarters. 

"  I  should  have  been  glad  of  this,  or  any  other  excuse,  for  calling  on  you, 
having  a  very  pleasant  and  vivid  recollection  of  a  walk  and  talk  with  you  in  your 
garden  some  years  ago  ;  but  I  have  conscience  enough  left  to  be  satisfied  to  look  at 
you  in  the  far  distance,  and  to  thank  God  that  you  are  strong  enough  again  to  speak 
to  the  great  congregation.     With  Christian  love, 

"  I  am,  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"Yours  in  the  best  of  bonds, 

"  Henry  Simon." 

While    staying    at    Mr.    Duncan's,    at    "  BenmorS,"   in    the    summer    ot    1885, 

Mr.  Spurgeon  received  the  following  intimation  concerning  a  notable  sermon  which 

he  had  delivered  not  long  before  ;  he  gladly  gave  the  desired  permission  : — 

"  19,  Ardbeg  Road, 

"  Rothesay, 

"30th  July,  1885. 
"  My  Dear  Rev.  Sir, 

"  For    many    years,    I    have    perused    your  weekly   sermons   with   great 

benefit  to  body  and  soul.      I  now  trouble  you  to  say  that  I  purpose  delivering  your 

admirable    discourse    on    '  Coming    Judgment    of  the   Secrets  of   Men,'  with   your 

permission,  in  the  oldest  Episcopal  Church  in  Scotland.     If  you  veto  this,  I  will  hold 

fire.     I  mean  to  give  it  verbatim  ;  the  only  lack  will  be  the  voice  of  the  living  author. 

"  Were  it  in  my  power,  you  should  have  the  first  vacant  mitre  in  honour  and 

appreciation  of  your  singular  gifts.      Pardon  this  obtrusion  on  the  rest  which  you  so 

much  need  for  your  unwearied  tax  of  strength,  and  believe  me  to  be, 

"Yours  most  truly  in  Christ, 

"J.  F.  S.  Gordon,  D.D., 
"  St.  Andrew's  Episcopal  Church,  Glasgow." 

In   1886,   Mr.   Spurgeon  preached,  in  Great  Queen  Street  Chapel,  the  annual 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  "165 

sermon  for  the  Wesleyan  Missionary  Society.  It  was  one  of  the  most  remar_.able 
discourses  that  he  ever  delivered,  and  it  has  been  rendered  specially  memorable 
because  of  the  large  number  of  missionaries  who  have  gone  out  to  the  foreign  field  in 
response  to  the  powerful  pleas  he  then  urged  upon  all  professing  Christians.  The 
text  was  Matthew  xxviii.  18 — 20,  and  the  title,  "Our  Omnipotent  Leader."  This 
letter,  from  a  Wesleyan  minister  in  Paris,  expresses  what  many  felt  concerning  it : — 

"  II,  Avenue  Flachat, 

"  Asnieres, 
"Seine, 

"  France, 

"  June  17,  1886. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  purpose  taking  you  for  the  subject  of  my  monthly  lecture  at  the 
'Salle  des  Conferences,'  Boulevard  des  Capucines.  I  feel  that  I  cannot  take  this 
liberty  with  your  name,  person,  and  ministry,  without  at  least  informing  you  of  what 
I  purpose  doing.  You  will  understand  at  once  that  my  object  is  to  speak  of  Christ 
to  a  Parisian  audience  that  will  be  attracted  by  the  subject  of  the  lecture. 

"  Wesley  says,  in  his  '  Notes  to  a  Helper,'  that  a  Methodist  preacher  must  have 
all  his  wits  about  him.  Methodist  preachers  have  not  the  monopoly  of  shrewdness  ; 
but  I  venture  to  think  that,  if  I  am  equal  to  the  occasion,  I  shall  have  followed  out 
Mr.  Wesley's  injunction. 

"  I  thanked  you,  from  a  very  full  heart,  in  the  vestry  of  Great  Queen  Street 
Chapel,  for  your  sermon  on  behalf  of  our  Missionary  Society  ;  I  thanked  you  for  it 
in  Exeter  Hall,  and  it  would  have  done  your  heart  good  to  have  heard  the  response 
of  our  people  to  what  I  said  ;  and  now  I  seize  this  opportunity  of  thanking  you 
again.  I  shall  never  have  done  thanking  you  for  words  of  cheer  that  have  helped 
me  in  the  fight.  I  feel  more  than  thankful  ;  I  am  grateful.  Precious  spices 
become  incense  when  set  on  fire  ;   so  thanks,  kindled  by  love,  become  gratitude. 

"  May   I   ask    you    to    present    my    most    respectful    salutations    to    dear    Mrs. 

Spurgeon  ? 

"  Thankfully  and  sincerely  yours, 

"  D.    A.    DE    MOUILPIED." 

Such  letters  as  the  following  always  gave  Mr.  Spurgeon  real  pleasure  : — 

'  Chaplain's  House, 

"  Tower  of  London, 

"  20th  January,  1S88. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  May  I   ask  you  to   be   so   kind   as   to   let   me  have   two   seats   in  the 


l66  C.     H,     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Metropolitan  Tabernacle  on  Sunday  evening  next,  for  myself  and  sister?  It  is  a 
o-ood  many  years  since  I  was  there, — at  one  time  regularly,  with  my  mother,  whom 
you  well  knew.  Although  now  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  and 
therefore  quite  out  of  sympathy  with  your  views  of  that  body,  I  must  express,  what 
I  have  always  felt,  the  deepest  respect  for  your  transparent  sincerity,  and  a  hearty 
admiration  of  your  splendid  God-given  powers  of  clear  convicting  and  also 
comforting  gospel  preaching.  I  am  what  would  be  termed  a  High  Churchman  ; 
but,  believe  me,  I  am  not  alone  in,  above  all,  loving  and  uttering  God's  simple 
c^ospel,  only  believing  in  ceremony  and  externals  as  relative  goods,  means  to  an  end. 
"  I  have  often,  as  a  boy,  shaken  you  by  the  hand,  and  should  feel  honoured  by 
a  chance  of  meeting  you  again.  May  God  preserve  you  many  years,  though  you 
rhetorically  tear  my  Church  to  ribbons  ! 

"  Ever  yours  faithfully, 

"  E.  C.  Aylwin  Foster." 

On  March  6,  1888,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  at  Wimbledon;  and,  the  following 
morning,  he  received  this  loving  letter  from  Rev.  E.  \V.  Moore,  M.A.,  the  vicar  of 
Emmanuel  Church  : — 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  At  the  risk  of  being  troublesome,  I  must  write  just  a  few  lines  to  thank 
you  for  the  faithful  testimony  to  a  faithful  Christ  you  gave  us  this  afternoon.  I 
hastened  back  to  the  vestry  (after  seeing  a  friend — Mrs.  Seton-Karr,  sister  to  your 
friend  the  late  Mrs.  Dudgeon,  of  Mentone,  out  of  the  crowd,)  to  have  the  pleasure  of 
a  shake  of  the  hand,  but  you  had  gone.  I  should  have  liked  to  tell  you,  though  you 
need  no  telling  from  me,  how  great  and  general  is  the  sympathy  felt  for  you  here  as 
everywhere  by  all  who  cleave  to  Christ  the  Head,  for  your  brave  and  fearless  stand 
for  our  Lord  and  Master.  Thank  you  for  preaching  to-day  a  risen,  glorious, 
triumphant,  unchangeable  Saviour.  He  is  the  same  as  ever.  He  still  baptizes  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire  ;  and  if  He  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? 

"  Thank  you  for  all  the  help  you  have  often  given  me  by  the  printed  page.  If 
it  can  be  said  of  any  man  that  he  does  not  know  what  a  great  work  he  is  doing,  it 
may  be  said  in  a  special  sense  of  yourself  You  will  never  know  here  how 
many  souls  you  have  gathered,  and  how  many  preachers  you  have  strengthened. 
God  bless  and  preserve  you  to  us  all  for  many  years  ! 

"  Affectionately  yours, 

"  E.  W.  Moore." 

The  following  note,  from  a  clergyiTian  of  quite  another  school,  was  received  in 
August,  1888:— 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 67 

"  Queen's  House, 

"  Cheyne  Walk, 

"  Chelsea. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  and  two  of  my  children  hope  for  the  privilege  of  hearing  you  next 
Sunday  night,  if  there  is  any  chance  of  getting  seats.  It  is  very  seldom,  in  London, 
I  am  out  of  my  own  pulpit  ;  and  when  I  am,  I  do  not  like  to  miss  the  opportunity  of 
hearing  the  greatest  living  preacher. 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"H.   R.   Haweis." 

This  letter  was  written   by   one   of   the    Evangelical   clergymen  who  resented 

Mr.    Spurgeon's   "  Baptismal    Regeneration  "   sermon,   but   who   afterwards  became 

one  of  the  Pastor's  heartiest  admirers  ;    the  receipt  of  the  letter  gave  great  joy  to 

Mr.  Spurgeon  : — 

"  Christ  Church  Vicarage, 

"  Worthing, 

"  27th  Feb.,  1890. 
"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  I  don't  know  how  it  is,  but  I  feel  prompted  to  ask  your  acceptance  of 
the  enclosed  New  Year  address,  which,  I  rather  think,  will  find  an  echo  in  your 
own  heart. 

"  I  remember  once,  when  I  was  in  Southwark,  feeling  constrained  to  differ  from 
you  as  to  the  interpretation  of  our  Baptismal  Services.  Since  that  time,  the 
progress  of  error  in  the  Church  visible  has  been  so  alarming  and  continuous,  that 
all  who  really  love  the  Truth  seem  to  be  under  a  very  special  obligation  to  manifest 
substantial  and  brotherly  unity  ;  and  I  cannot  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  saying 
how  much  I  thank  God  for  the  firmness  and  consistency  with  which  you  have 
maintained  and  propagated  the  precious  doctrines  of  the  grace  of  God  in  a 
Rationalistic  and  Ritualistic  age. 

"  Believe  me, 

,  ■  '•  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"  Francis  Cruse." 

When  Mr.  Spurgeon  learned  that  the  Jews  of  the  present  day  substitute  a  dry 
shank-bone. tor  the  Paschal  lamb,  he  was  so  struck  with  the  spiritual  significance  of 
the  fact,  that  he  delivered  a  discourse  upon  the  subject,  and  entitled  it,  "  The  Shank- 
bone  Sermon  ;  or.  True  Believers  and  their  Helpers."  On  the  following  page  is 
one  of  the  many  letters  he  received  concerning  it. 


i68  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  164,  Richmond  Road, 

"Dalston,  N.E., 

"54/90. 
"  Dear  Mr   Spurgeon, 

"  I  enclose  a  cutting  from  to-day's  Star,  which  corroborates  in  a  remark- 
able manner  the  '  shank-bone '  illustration  you  so  happily  used  at  Victoria  Park  the 
other  day.  It  is  indeed  a  pity  that  Jews  and  half-Christians  are  content  with  a  bone 
when  they  are  offered  the  Lamb. 

"You  are  making  a  noble  stand  for  the  truth,  and  there  are  thousands  of 
ministers  and  others  who  heartily  and  daily  say,  '  God  bless  Mr.  Spurgeon  ! ' 

"  Personally,  I  may  say  that  I  owe  you  more  than  I  can  ever  tell.  If  you 
only  knew  half,  yo7i  would  never  sit  'under  the  juniper  tree,'  for  your  life  and 
words  are  an  inspii-ation  to  the  faithful  in  every  land. 

"Wishing  you  continued   Divine  favours,    I   remain, 

"Yours  very  heartily, 

"W.  Justin  Evans." 

These  appreciative  letters  from  ministerial  brethren  may  be  fidy  closed  with 
the  following  fraternal  epistle  from  Prebendary  Stephenson  : — 

"  Lympsham  Manor, 

"Weston-super-Mare, 

"July  8,  1S90. 
"  My  Dear  Brother  Spurgeon, 

"  I  quite  agree  with  you  that  occasional  pain  and  sickness  are  good  for 
us  preachers  of  Christ's  gospel.  I  thought  sympathetically  of  you,  yesterday,  when 
I  ached  all  over,  after  four  services  on  the  Lord's-day  before. 

"  My  heart  has  been  drawn  towards  you  in  admiring  love  for  many  years,  and 
never  more  so  than  when  I  heard  you  on  the  Bible  Society  platform  last  May,  when 
you  gave  abundant  evidence  that  the  bough,  pruned  by  the  hand  of  'the  Husband- 
man,' had  not  been  '  purged  in  vain.' 

"We  may  not  belong  to  the  same  regiment  of  the  great  army,  but  our  Captain 
is  the  same  !  Go  on,  my  beloved  brother,  as  you  have  done  for  so  many  years 
past,  to  proclaim  the  magnificent  glory  of  grace,  and  thus  to  gather  trophies  for 
the  cross.  '  Tabernacles  '  shift  and  vanish,  but  '  Temples  not  mc.d^  with  hands  '  are 
'eternal  in  the  Heavens  ' ! 

"God  bless  you,  mine  honoured  friend  !     This  is  Cardiplionia,  from — 
"  Your  loving  brother  and  servant  in  Christ, 

"J.   H.  Stephenson, 
"  Treasurer  of  Wells  Cathedral." 


CHAPTER    XCIV. 


N  accordance  with  the  intimation  in  the  introduction  to  the  previous 
chapter,  the  second  sub-division  of  communications  from  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  correspondents  is  to  consist  of — 

Letters  from  American  and  Canadian  Friends. 
Of  these,  the  first  in  order  of  time  are  those  written  by  Mr.  D.  L. 
Moody,  and  they  may  fidy  begin  the  series  because  of  the  mutual  esteem  and  love 
which  he  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  cherished  for  each  other.      In  reply  to  a  letter  from  the 
Pastor,  inviting  him  to  preach  at  the  Tabernacle,  Mr.  Moody  wrote  : — 

"  12,  Lynedoch  Place. 

"  Glasgow, 

"  March  17,  '74- 
"  Dear  Spurgeon, 

"  Many  thanks  for  your  kind  note.  I  am  in  hopes  that  you  will  be  led 
by  the  Spirit  to  preach  to  young  men  on  Sunday  next.  Enclosed  I  send  you  a 
circular  that  a  minister  here  is  sending  out  in  the  hope  that  it  will  stir  up  some 
interest  in  Britain. 

"  In  regard  to  my  coming  to  your  Tabernacle,  I  consider  it  a  great  honour  to 
be  invited  ;  and,  in  fact,  I  should  consider  it  an  honour  to  black  your  boots  ;  but  to 
preach  to  your  people  would  be  out  of  the  question.  If  they  will  not  turn  to  God 
under  your  preaching,   '  neither  will  they  be  persuaded,  though   one  rose  from  the 

dead.' 

"  Yours,  with  much  love, 

"  D.  L.  Moody." 

The  following  year,  Mr.  Spurgeon  helped  Mr.  Moody  in  his  London  mission  ; 
this  grateful  epistle  shows  how  highly  his  services  were  appreciated  : — 

"  17,  Highbury  Crescent, 

"  Islington, 

"  May  8,  '75. 
"  Dear  Spurgeon, 

"  Ten  thousand  thanks  for  your  help  last  night.  You  gave  us  a  great 
lift.      I  wish  you  would  give  us  every  night  you  can  for  the  next  sixty  days.      There 


I^O  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

are  so  few  men  who  can  draw  on  a  week-night,  and  I  want  to  keep  up  the  meetings 

in  the  East  End  and  West  at  the  same  time  ;  it  is  hard  on  me  to  have  to  speak 

twice  the  same  evening,  and  yet  I  shall  have  to  do  it  next  week,  for   I   cannot  get 

anyone  for  the  West  End.      Do  all  you  can  for  the  work,  and  we  shall  see  blessed 

results. 

"  Yours  in  haste, 

"  D.  L.  Moody." 

Another  letter,  written  some  years  later,  shows  that,  while  Mr.  Moody  still  held 
Mr.  Spurgeon  in  just  as  high  esteem  as  before,  he  consented  to  preach  at  the 
Tabernacle  one  Sabbath  during  the  Pastor's  absence  at  Mentone : — 

"  Newcastle, 

"Oct.  II,  '8i. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"Yours  of  the  9th  is  to  hand,  and  in  reply  let  me  say  that  I  am  thankful 
for  your  very  kind  note.  It  quite  touched  my  heart.  I  have  for  years  thought 
more  of  you  than  of  any  other  man  preaching  the  gospel  on  this  earth  ;  and,  to  tell 
you  the  truth,  I  shrink  from  standing  in  your  place.  I  do  not  know  of  a  church  in 
all  the  land  that  I  shrink  from  as  I  do  from  yours  ; — not  but  what  your  people  are 
in  sympathy  with  the  gospel  that  I  try  to  preach,  but  you  can  do  it  so  much  better 
than  I  can. 

"  I  thank  you  for  inviting  me,  and  (d.v.)  I  will  be  with  your  good  people 
Nov.  20.  Will  you  want  Mr.  Sankey,  or  will  your  own  precentor  have  charge? 
Either  will  suit  me. 

"  Remember  me  to  your  good  wife,  and  accept  of  my  thanks  for  your  letter  of 

cheer. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  D.  L.  Moody." 

One  of  the  many  letters  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  received  from  Mr.  Moody's 
singing  companion  will  show  in  what  loving  esteem  he  held  the  Pastor  : — 

"  Gwydyr  House, 

"  Brixton  Rise,  S.W., 

"  Nov.  8,  '86. 
"  '  Dearly  Beloved,' 

"  Many  thanks  for  the  precious  Word  you  gave  us  yesterday."*  It  was 
indeed  most  refreshing  to  my  soul. 

"  Is  it  not  a  beautiful  thought  that  our  Lord's  disciples  always  called  Him,  or 
spoke  of  Him,  as  the  Son  of  God,  while  He  was  down  here  on  earth,  and  that  He 

*  The  subject  of  the  sermon  was  "  Our  Ascended  Lord;"  it  evidently  suggested  the  remarks  in  Mr.  Sankey 's  letter. 


C.     M.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I71 

always  spoke  of  Himself  as  the  Son  of  man  ;  but  that,  when  He  went  up  to  Heaven, 
John  saw  Him  there,  and  then  spoke  of  Him,  or  called  Him,  the  Son  of  Man? 
John,  no  doubt,  wanted  to  hold  on  to  Him,  even  as  a  brother. 

"  I  will  try  to  see  you  again  at  the  Tabernacle  before  I  sail  on  the  i8th  ;  I 
love  you  very  much.     God  bless  you  and  yours  ! 

"  Ira  D.   Sankey." 

Another  very  dear  friend  from  the  United  States  was  Mr.  John  B.  Gough,  who 
lectured  at  the  Tabernacle  several  times  during  his  stay  in  England  in  1879.  By 
his  own  request,  his  last  lecture  on  that  tour  was  given  in  aid  of  the  Pastors' 
College.  In  writing  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  concerning  the  subject  of  his  discourse,  and 
the  arrangements  in  connection  with  it,  Mr.  Gough  also  made  this  special  reference 
to  the  visit  he  had  recendy  paid  to  the  Pastor  at  Nightingale  Lane  : — 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  My  hands  are  very  tender,  through  rheumatism,  so  that  I  write  with 
difficulty,  but  I  very  much  wish  to  send  a  line  or  two  to  you.  I  am  very  glad  that 
my  last  lecture  in  London  is  to  be  under  your  direction.  .  .  . 

"  I  have  purposed  writing  to  you  to  express  our  delight  at  meeting  you  and 
Mrs.  Spurgeon  at  your  own  home,  but  have  been  prevented  hitherto.  We  shall  not 
forget  that  visit  ;  it  did  us  both  good  like  a  medicine.  It  is  very  refreshing  to  meet 
a  man  who  knows  what  he  believes,  and  speaks  it,  and  lives  it.  And  we  have  often 
spoken  of  you,  and  dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  from  whom  we  learned  lessons  of  patience, 
trust,  and  faith,  that  we  hope  we  shall  never  unlearn  ;  but  if  I  should  tell  you  how 
fully  you  captured  our  hearts,  and  how  sincerely  we  love  you  both,  it  might  appear 
unseemly.  Yet  it  would  be  the  expression  of  thousands  of  hearts  that  beat  with 
gratitude  and  affection  for  you  and  yours.  I  would  like  to  speak  to  you  of  your 
sermon  on  '  Forgiveness,'  but  your  time  is  precious.  May  God  bless  you  more  and 
more  abundantly  !     Give  our  kindest  regards  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  your  sons. 

"Trusting  to  meet  you,   and  to    hear  you,   on   my  next   Sabbath   in   London, 

September  28th, 

.  •'  I  am, 

"  Most  truly  yours, 

"  John  B.  Gough." 

Dr.  H.  L.  Wayland,  of  Philadelphia,  was  another  of  the  Pastor's  very  intimate 
friends.  During  his  visit  to  England,  in  1881,  they  spent  much  time  together;  and, 
on  his  return  home,  he  wrote  a  long  letter,  a  portion  of  which  is  printed  on  the 
next  page. 


172  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  1420,  Chestnut  Street, 

"  Philadelphia, 

"July  19,  iSSi. 
"  ]\Iy  Dear  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"  (or  will  you  not  allow  me  to  say,) 

"  My  Very  Dear  Friends, 
"  You  hardly  need  to  be  reminded  of  the  vivid  manner  in  which  you,  and  the 
Tabernacle,  and  your  charming"  home,  live  in  my  memory.  1  have  taken  the  liberty 
to  send  to  you  some  numbers  of  our  paper  in  which  I  have  endeavoured,  for  the 
pleasure  of  our  readers  as  well  as  for  my  own  relief,  to  express  some  of  the 
impressions  made  on  me  while  on  the  other  side  ;  but  it  is  slow  work,  it  takes  two 
or  three  weeks  to  record  what  I  saw  in  a  few  days. 

"  My  visit  to  England  has  made  everything  in  English  history,  both  past  and 
recent,  unspeakably  more  real  to  me.  When  now  I  read  of  the  Parliament  and 
Mr.  Gladstone,  or  of  the  Tabernacle  and  its  Pastor,  or  when  I  read  one  of  the 
Tabernacle  sermons,  all  is  living  before  me.  I  wonder  what  is  that  peculiar  quality 
of  some  voices  that  makes  them  apparently  audible  to  us  long  after  we  have  heard 
them  with  the  outer  ear. 

"I  do  not  forget  how  busy  you  both  are  ;  but  I  venture  on  the  remark  that  a 
line,  however  brief,  would  confer  sincere  pleasure  on  your  American  cousin  and 
brother.  I  trust  that  it  will  please  the  dear  Lord  to  spare  you  both  until  we  meet 
again  ;  and  that  you  may  continue  to  live  in  your  two  noble  sons  ;  and  not  less  that 
the  Pastor  and  President  may  live  long  in  successive  generations  of  pupils  ;  and  that 
the  angel  of  the  Book  P'und  may  be  permitted  for  many  years  to  diffuse  light  and 
happiness,  not  only  in  her  own  home,  but  in  many  homes  where  there  is  little  light 
save  that  which  she  sheds.  I  can  only  hope  that  you,  my  dear  friends,  remember 
your  visitor  with  a  tithe  of  the  interest  and  pleasure  with  which  he  recalls  both 
of  you. 

•'  Most  truly  and  affectionately  your  friend  and  brother, 

"  H.  L.  Wavland." 

Dr.  T.  L.  Cuyler,  of  Brooklyn,  always  tried  to  spend  an  afternoon  at 
"Westwood"  whenever  he  was  in  London.  One  of  his  many  loving  letters  will 
prove  how  he  prized  the  privilege  : — 

''2>?>7,  Strand, 

"  London, 

"July  25,  1881. 
"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  I  cannot  refrain  from  telling  you  that,  among  all  the  enjoyments  of  my 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  '  IJT^ 

five  months'  tour,  nothing  has  given  me  such  so/id  satisfaction  as  my  visit  to  your 
beautiful  home  on  Saturday  last.  The  sweet  savour  of  that  visit  will  abide  with  me 
for  many  days. 

"  It  was  a  renewed  joy  to  me  to  grasp  again  the  hand  of  the  minister  of  Christ 
who  has  been  permitted,  by  tongue  and  pen,  to  proclaim  the  Word  of  life  to  more 
souls  than  any  man  since  the  days  of  the  apostles. 

"  Please  to  present  my  cordial  regards  to  your  beloved  '  Help'  (who  '  answereth 
to  you  again,' — but  only  in  love). 

"  I  write  this  at  the  National  Temperance  League  office,  whither  all  my  letters 
are  sent. 

"  With  grateful  affection, 

"  Yours  to  the  core, 

"Theodore  L.  Cuyler." 

The  writer  of  the  following  grateful  letter  was  a  very  special  Canadian  friend, 

who  was  baptized  at  the  Tabernacle  : — 

"  Montreal, 

"  14th  Oct.,  1881. 
"  Beloved  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  A  feeling  of  incredulity  took  possession  of  me  when  I  opened  and  read 

your   note.      I   thought  it  simply  impossible  that  it  could  be  from  your  very  own 

pen.     What  a  man  you  are  !      I  thought  George  Miiller  wonderful  when  I  came  in 

contact  with  him  ;  but,  really,  the  riches  of  God's  grace,  and  the  boundless  capacity 

of  these  poor  human  souls  and  hearts  when  filled  with   His  grace,  are,  if  possible, 

still  more  magnified  in  you  than  in  him.      It  was  a  little  thing  to  do, — writino-  me 

that  note, — but  it  has  indeed  interested  and  made  glad  a  number  of  people  who 

daily    bear  .you    up    before    the    Lord,    and    whose   hearts   go   out   to   you   in   love 

exceedingly. 

"  On  Saturday,  a  gentleman  from  Edinburgh,  who  had  been  travelling  in  our 

'great  lone  land,'  as  it  is  called,  Manitoba,  and  who  had  to  spend  the  Sabbath  with 

us  in  Montreal,  came  to  see  the  Y.M.C.A.      'Where  can  I  get  some  reading  matter 

for  to-morrow  ^ '  he  asked  of  me  ;   and  I   enquired  of  him,   '  What  kind  would  you 

like?'     'If  there  is  any  place  where  Spurgeon's  sermons  are  sold,  I  prefer  them  to 

anything   else,'  was  his  reply  ;    so  he  was  informed  where  he  could  get  them,  and 

then  I   added,   'I   have  had  a  letter  from  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  this  week.'     'You 

mean  from  his  secretary.'     '  No,  I  mean  from  himself     '  Do  let  me  see  it ;'  so  he 

read  it,  and  then  he  said,  as  he  returned  the  letter,  '  That  man  is  a  marvel.      I  have 

got   a  wrinkle  from  that  little  note  ;    do  you  notice  that  he  says,  "  I  pray  for  you 

at  this  moment"  ?      That  is  something  worth  remembering, — "at  this  moment  of 


174  C-     ^-     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

writing-,  while  you  are  before  my  mind,  I  pause  and  pray  for  you."  That  is 
capital  ;  I  won't  forget  it.'  I  could  give  you  other  incidents  to  prove  that  your  tiny 
note  was  like  a  beam  of  sunlight  shot  athwart  tried  and  weary  hearts,  because  of  the 
love  they  bear  you  for  the  Master's  sake. 

"  Oh,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  that  little  word  of  yours,  '  I  am  feeling  rather  low,'  struck 
a  chord  which  still  vibrates  in  my  spirit.  It  was  to  me  like  reading  the  42nd  Psalm. 
I  imagine  that  there  is  nothing  connected  with  your  ministry  to  the  saint  that 
comes  home  more  tenderly  to  tried  and  stricken  souls  than  just  what  you  there 
express,  '  I  am  feeling  low.'  The  great  preacher,  the  author  of  T/ie  Treasury 
of  David,  the — but  I  need  not  go  on, — this  man  sometimes,  ay,  often,  'feels  low,' 
just  as  they  do.  '  In  all  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted  ;'  this  is  what  draws  hearts 
to  Jesus  ;  and  the  principle,  I  take  it,  is  just  the  same  when  the  friends  and 
intimates  of  Jesus  '  feel  low.'  The  fellow-feeling,  thus  begotten,  makes  many 
wondrous  kind. 

"  I  recently  published  some  '  incidents  '  connected  with  visitation  at  the  hospital. 
A  gendeman  came  in,  and  asked  me  how  much  it  cost  me  to  do  so.  "$io,'  I  said. 
'  Well,  here  is  a  $10  bill  ;  print  some  more,  I  like  "  facts  "  ;  theories  don't  go  down 
with  me.'     So  I  have  printed  another  leaflet,  which  I  enclose  herewith. 

"  Now  unto    Him    who   can    do    exceeding    abundantly    above  all  we   ask   or 

think,  be  glory  ;  and  may  we  share  m  the  glory  even  though  it  brings  us  low  !      I 

salute  you  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  in  the  Lord  (Rom.  xvi.  12),  and  remain,  through  the 

blood  which  cleanseth, 

"  Your  friend  in  Jesus, 

"John  Louson." 

The  leaflet  enclosed  by  Mr.  Louson  contained,  among  other  interesting  matter, 
"  A  Touching  Story,"  in  which  there  was  the  following  reference  to  Mr.  Spurgeon 
and  his  sermons  : — 

*'  Some  months  ago,  a  young  Scotchman  was  admitted  to  the  hospital.  He  was 
suffering  from  an  internal  disease  which  baffled  the  skill  of  the  doctors  ;  it  was  akin 
to  consumption,  but  without  its  distressing  symptoms,  yet  under  it  the  physical 
frame  wasted  away.  It  was  difficult  for  the  patient  to  realize  that  he  was  slowly  but 
surely  dying  ;  indeed,  he  utterly  refused  to  believe  it,  even  when  doctors  and  nurses 
had  given  up  all  hope.  It  was  a  delight  and  privilege  to  visit  and  converse  with 
him,  for  he  was  Christ's,  and  Christ  was  his  ;  and,  though  reticent  and  reserved  to 
an  almost  painful  degree,  yet  salvation  through  faith  in  the  Crucified  was  the  theme 
he  most  of  all  loved  to  talk  about ;  and,  next  to  that,  the  scenery,  mountains,  rocks, 
sunset,  and  storms  of  the  beloved  Isle  of  Skye,  where  he  was  born  and  brought  up. 
The  one  and  only  matter  of  reading,  next  to  the  Bible,  was  Charles  H.  Spurgeon's 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  175 

sermons  ;  of  these  he  never  tired.  Biographies  of  eminent  Scotchmen,  Hke  Norman 
Macleod,  or  WilHam  Arnot,  were  taken  to  him  ;  but,  as  he  put  them  aside,  he  would 
say,  '  Spurgeon  is  always  the  same,  but  always  satisfying,  for  he  makes  you  forget 
himself  as  he  holds  up  Him  who  is  "  fairer  than  the  children  of  men  "  '  (Ps.  xlv.  2)." 

The  following  letter  is  interesting  from  the  information  it  conveys  concerning 
the  first  publication  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermon  volumes  and  other  works  in  the 
United  States  : — 

"  8,  Murray  Street, 

"  New  York, 

"Dec.  19,  1882. 

"  My  Dear  Bro.  Spurgeon, 

"The  present  seems  a  fitting  time  for  me  to  drop  you  a  line,  after  a  long 
and  successful  career  as  the  publisher  of  your  books  in  America,  and  I  may  add,  as 
the  introducer  of  your  sermons  in  book  form  to  American  readers. 

"At  first,  it  required  very  special  attention  on  our  part  to  bring  them  success- 
fully before  American  readers  ;  but,  after  a  while,  the  tide  turned  in  favour  of  your 
books.  We  made  them  well  known  in  every  State  in  our  Union.  We  had  several 
valuable  friends  ;  the  late  President  Wayland,  of  Brown  University,  gave  us 
important  aid  by  letters  that  we  published  ;  so  did  the  late  Dr.  Alexander,  who 
had  been  to  London,  and  seen  you,  and  heard  you  preach  often  with  great 
satisfaction.  He  called  at  our  office,  and  made  himself  known  in  person.  I  had 
long  known  him,  by  reputation,  as  a  very  able  and  distinguished  divine  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church.  He  had  noticed  that  some  of  our  large  daily  newspapers 
were  attacking  you  very  fiercely,  so  he  came  in  to  urge  us  to  persevere  with  the 
sermons.  He  said,  '  Do  not  be  discouraged  by  the  unfavourable  criticisms  of  the 
press.  I  have  seen  and  heard  Mr.  Spurgeon  ;  he  is  a  real  diamond  that  will  shine 
brighter  and  brighter  as  the  years  go  by.  You  can  use  my  name  in  any  way  that 
will  help  you  in  the  battle.'  We  thought  it  was  very  kind  of  him  to  say  and  do 
what  he  did,  for  he  was  a  good  man,  with  very  great  influence,  and  he  proved  a 
real  help  to  us. 

"On  the  other  hand,  we  had  some  discouraging  words.  Rev.  Dr.  Kendrick, 
the  Greek  Professor  in  the  Rochester  University,  with  which  I  was  connected  as 
one  of  the  Board  of  Trustees,  wrote  me  : — '  Well,  Sheldon,  I  am  surprised  that  you 
should  lower  the  standard  of  your  publishing  house  by  issuing  the  sermons  of  that 
green  London  preacher.'  I  can  well  afford  to  quote  his  early  remarks,  for  he  lived 
to  write  and  frequently  to  tell  me,  in  a  very  flattering  way,  how  much  wiser  I  was 
in  discerning  the  signs  of  promise  than  he  had  been  ;  and  he  has  often  spoken  of 
you  in  the  most  complimentary  manner. 


176  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  I  only  allude  to  these  incidents  of  the  past  as  pleasant  events  attending  a 
great  and  prosperous  enterprise." 

(The  writer  of  the  letter  explained  that  "  the  Spurgeon  books  "  had  been  passed 
over  to  Messrs.  Carter  Brothers,  that  he  had  sent  to  the  Pastor  a  complete  set  of 
the  American  edition  of  his  publications,  and  he  concluded  his  letter  as  follows  : — ) 

"And  now,  my  respected  brother,  in  taking  leave  of  you   as   your  publisher, 

permit  me  to  congratulate  you  upon  the  really  great  success  that  has  attended  the 

enterprise.     Very  few  English  authors  have  had  such  prosperity  ;   I    do  not   think 

that  any  preacher  and  author  of  religious  books  has  even  begun  to  come  up  to  you. 

I  hear,  with  great  pleasure,  of  the  blessing  resting  upon  your  home  work,  so  large 

and  so  grand  in  all  its  proportions.     We  feel  all  of  a  publisher's  pride  in  our  popular 

and  good  author,  and  shall  follow  you  with  our  loving  thought  to  the  end  of  your 

good  work. 

"  Yours  most  truly, 

"  Smith  Sheldon." 

The    writer  of  the   following  note   was   the    well-known    anti-slavery  lecturer, 

Frederick  Douglass  : — 

"The  Cross, 

"St.  Neots, 

"  Hunts., 

"July  6,  1887. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  While  crossing  the  Atlantic,  last  September,  and  looking  out  upon  its 
proud  dashing  billows  and  their  varied  torms,  and  thinking  of  the  diversity  in  the 
human  family,  I  remarked  that  '  we  are  many  as  the  waves,  but  we  are  one  as 
the  sea.'  I  had  never  heard  this  simile  before,  and  thought  it  was  original  with  me  ; 
but,  while  reading  your  sermon,  published  on  the  30th  June,  I  noticed  that  you  said, 
speaking  of  the  one  hundred  and  nineteenth  Psalm,  '  Its  expressions  are  many  as 
the  waves,  but  its  testimony  is  one  as  the  sea.'  I  am  led  to  ask, — Is  this  a 
coincidence  ;  or  have  I,  unconsciously,  borrowed  from  you,  or  have  you  borrowed 
this  formula  from  me  } 

"Through  the  kindness  of  a  friend,  I  had  the  privilege  of  listening  to  you  a  few 
Sundays  ago.  It  was  the  realization  of  an  ardent  desire  born  of  reading  some 
of  your  sermons  in  America,  and  of  what  was  said  to  me  of  you  by  my  friend.  Dr. 
H.  L.  Wayland,  a  gentleman  to  whom  I  have  been  much  indebted  for  friendly 
sympathy  and  advice  while  battling  with  slavery  and  prejudice  in  America. 

"  Very  truly  yours, 

"  Frederic^  Douglass." 


C,     ir.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  X'JJ 

In  May,  1888,  at  the  funeral  of  his  mother,  Mr.  Spurgeon  took  a  chill,  which 
resulted  in  his  being  laid  aside  for  three  weeks.  On  Lord's-day  morning,  June  17, 
when  many  of  the  delegates  to  the  Exeter  Hall  Conference  on  Foreign  Missions 
were  present  at  the  Tabernacle,  the  P^istor  was  again  able  to  preach,  although  he 
was  obliged,  through  great  weakness,  to  sit  during  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
sermon.  Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon,  of  Boston,  took  part  in  the  service  ;  and  he  had  also 
consented  to  preach  if  Mr.  Spurgeon  continued  too  ill  to  do  so.  This  arrangement 
explains  the  allusion,  in  the  following  letter,  to  the  "great  deliverance"  experienced 
by  Dr.  Gordon  himself: — 

"  Charing  Cross  Motel, 

"  London, 

"June  19,  1888. 

"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  I  sincerely  trust  that  you  were  in  no  wise  injured  by  your  effort  on 
Lord's-day  morning.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Lord's  help  given  to  you  then  was 
the  most  powerful  commentary  on  your  text,  '  Let  Him  deliver  him  now.'  Be 
assured  that  I  also  experienced  a  great  deliverance,  for  there  were  hundreds  of 
visitors, — our  whole  Missionary  Conference,  indeed, — who  had  come  to  hear  you, 
and  I  can  conceive  of  no  embarrassment  greater  than  that  of  having  to  preach  to 
such  a  disappointed  congregation  as  it  must  have  been  in  your  absence. 

"  I  pray  that  God  will  graciously  restore  you  to  full  health,  and  cause  your  bow 
to  abide  in  strength  even  when  you  are  'sorely  grieved  and  shot  at  by  the  archers.' 
I  greatly  desire,  with  Mrs.  Gordon,  to  call  on  you  for  a  few  moments  at  your  home.' 
I  should  be  thankful  to  know  when  we  can  see  you.  If  you  are  too  ill  to  desire 
callers,  please  do  not  tor  a  moment  think  of  my  request,  and  I  shall  entirely  under- 
stand the  reason. 

"  Sincerely  yours, 

"A.  J.  Gordon." 

The  following  letter  appears  to  be  the  earliest  from  Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson  which 
Mr.  Spurgeon  preserved  : — ■ 

"  2320,  Spruce  Street, 

"  Philadelphia, 

"Nov.  25,  1888. 
"  My  Best-beloved, 

"If  there  is  any  man  on  the  earth  I  love  better  than  you,  I  wish 
you  could  point  him  out.  And,  as  a  little  thankoffering  to  God  for  a  personal 
acquaintance,  I  send  you  by  my  publishers — all  bills  paid,  inclusive  of  expressao-e, — 
fifty    copies    of    Evangelistic    Work    for    your    Pastors'    College,    with    my    lovino- 

M  4 


17S  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

greetings.  I  am  very  sorry  that  your  gout  is  more  troublesome.  How  I  wish  and 
pray  that  the  Lord  may  keep  you  yet  a  score  of  years  busy  with  Szuord  and  Troivel, 
piercing  to  the  backbone  the  foes  of  our  Lord  and  His  Crown  and  Covenant,  and 
building  up  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  !  Be  thou  very  strong  and  courageous,  my 
brother  ;  there  shall  no  man  be  able  to  stand  before  thee.  There  is  a  fearful 
apostasy  from  the  truth, — second  probation, — partial  inspiration, — Ritualism, — the 
'  Nehushtan  and  Ephodism  '  of  old  times  are  back  among  us.  How  little  Evan- 
gelical preaching  !  Conversion  a  lost  art ; — worldliness  so  pervading  the  church 
that  the  membership  is  now  divisible  into  worldly  holy  and  wholly  worldly, — and 
ministers  into  attitudinarians,  latitudinarians,  and  platitudinarians. 

"Give  my  love  to  dear  Mrs.  S.     With  many  prayers  for  you  all.      I  hope  to  see 
you  again  in  the  flesh  ;  but,  whether  or  not,  I  expect  to  spend  eternity  with  you  in 

His  presence. 

"  As  always  yours, 

"Arthur  T.  Pierson." 


Miscellaneous  Letters. 
Among  the  communications  from  non-ministerial  friends,  specially  treasured  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  was  the  following  letter  from  Miss  Florence  Nightingale  : — 

"  35,  South  Street, 

"  Park  Lane,  W., 

"June  30,  1876. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  Nurse  Masters,  of  our  training  school  at  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  and 
who  is  one  of  a  reinforcement  of  nurses  whom  we  are  sending  out  to  join  our 
nursing  staff  at  the  Montreal  Hospital,  was  recently  admitted  by  you  to  baptism 
and  communion.      She  spoke  of  it  to  me  with  deep  earnestness. 

"It  occurred  to  me  that  you  might,  among  the  young  women  of  your  flock, 
know  some,  sound  in  body  and  mind,  who  would  like  to  be  trained  for  a  hospital 
nursiniz  life,  which  has  now  sufficient  reward,  both  in  the  Q-ood  to  be  done  and 
in  the  maintenance  to  be  earned,  to  be  attractive  to  suitable  candidates.  The 
harvest  is  ready,  but  the  labourers  still  are  few. 

"  I  write  under  the  severe  pressure  of  business,  and  ever-increasing  illness, 
which  has  kept  me  a  prisoner  to  my  room  for  years,  so  you  will  excuse  a  briet  letter. 
I  have  heard  that  you  are  yourself  frequently  afflicted.  May  I  express  my  deep 
regret  at  your  suffering,  and  my  earnest  hope  that  your  life  may  long  be  spared  .'* 

"  May  God  be  with  us  all  ! 

"Florence  Nightingale." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  179 

Earl  Shaftesbury's  correspondence  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  so  constant,  and  so 
voluminous,  that  a  whole  chapter  might  have  been  filled  with  it  if  space  could 
have  been  spared.  This  brief  note  will  indicate  the  usual  character  of  the  Earl's 
letters,  and  it  will  also  show  the  esteem  in  which  he  held  the  Pastor,  not  only  at 
the  time  it  was  written,  but  right  to  the  end  of  his  life  : — 

"  St.  Giles's  House,  "^ 

"  Cranborne, 

"  Salisbury, 

"Oct.  20,  1876. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"The  books  have  arrived  in  safety;  and  to  the  inscription  which  you, 

yourself,  have  written, — I  value  it  highly, — I  shall  add  my  own, — a  prayer  that  my 

descendants  will  cherish   the   volumes  as  the  gift   of  a  man   whom  their  ancestor 

honoured   and   loved   as   a   private  friend,   but  far  more   as   a  powerful,  bold,   true, 

single-hearted  servant  of  our  most  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour. 

"  God  be  with  you  and  yours  for  ever  and  ever  ! 

"Shaftesbury." 

From  the  same  address,  on  Nov.  30,  1883,  the  Earl  sent  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  a 
copy  of  The  Psalms,  with  Scripture  IllustratioHS,  accompanied  by  the  following 
letter  : — 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"God  be  with  you  to  Mentone,  at  Mentone,  and  back  again,  and  may 
He  give  you  all  the  health  you  seek  for  His  service  ! 

"Well  may  you  be  'weary,  and  worn,  and  sad.'  The  open,  avowed,  boasted, 
modern  infidelity  is  terrible,  but  the  almost  universality  of  the  Laodicean  spirit  is 
still  worse.  You  will  come  back  and  find  that  socialism,  contemptuous  unbelief,  and 
an  utter  disregard  of  anything  but  that  which  tends  to  make  this  world  the  '  be-all  ' 
and  the  'end-all'  of  our  existence,  have  attained  vastly  increased  proportions  during 
your  absence. 

"There  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  preach  'Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified,'  with 
perpetual  exhortation  to  His  people  to  pray  for  His  speedy  return.  Such  a 
preaching  of  Christ  has  been  your  main  strength  May  God  keep  you  in  that 
frame  of  mind  ! 

"  Put,  I  request  you,  the  little  book  I  now  send  you,  in  your  pocket. 

"Yours  very  truly, 

"Shaftesbury." 

"  P.S. — I  shall  distribute  largely  your  volume,  Floivcrs  from  a  Puritans 
Garden." 


I  So  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Admiral  Sir  W.  King  Hall  was  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  most  ardent  admirers. 
Many  of  his  letters  were  preserved,  and  all  of  them  bore  testimony  to  the  blessing 
he  had  received  through  reading  the  Pastor's  writings.  One  of  the  earliest  in  the 
series  was  the  following,  written  on  Mr.  Spurgeon's  forty-fourth  birthday  : — 

"  Admiralty  House, 

"  Sheerness, 

"June  19,  '78. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  May  God  spare  you  to  work  in   His  vineyard  with  health  and  energy 

many  more  years  !      Each   day  I  find,  from  your  Moi'ning  and  Evening  Readings, 

encouragement,    comfort,    hope,    and    proofs    of    our    Saviour's    love.      I    ask    your 

acceptance  of  my  photograph,  and  beg  yours  in  return.      Be  assured  that,  though 

my  profession   is  one  of  arms,  for  the  defence  of  our   glorious  land  of  liberty,  my 

principles  are  as  peaceful  as  those  held  by  any  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends. 

"With  kindest  regards,  and  best  wishes  for  your  family, 

"  I  remain, 

"  Your  sincere  friend, 

"  W.  King  Hall." 

"  If  you  want  a  breath  of  sea  air  at  any  time,  come  and  stay  with  me.  A  day 
or  two's  notice  will  suffice." 

Another  sailor  friend,  John  Macgregor,  Esq.,  who  was  captain  and  crew  of  the 
canoe  Rob  Roy,  and  also  honorary  secretary  of  the  Open  Air  Mission,  wrote  as 
follows  in  one  of  his  many  letters  to  the  Pastor  : — 

"  7,  Vanbrugh  Park  East, 

"  Blackheath, 

"  Aug.  24,  '78. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  promised  to  tell  you  that  a  word  of  yours  would  be  golden  on  Oct.  28, 
when  our  open-air  preachers  assemble.  You  will  see  that  some  of  us  propose  to 
meet  on  Monday.  That,  however,  is  for  garden  and  green  fields  ;  the  other  meeting 
must  be  under  a  root. 

"As  for  myself,  I  am  in  the  furnace  of  domestic  affliction;  but  the  Refiner 
is  looking  on. 

"The  stucco  pilasters  on  the  edifice  of  one's  life  are  cracked  and  shaken  off 
but  the  rock  they  rested  on  is  found  sure,  even  in  an  earthquake. 

"  Who  would  hke  to  choose  his  trial  }  Even  David,  when  forced  to  do  so, 
chose  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  and  are  we  not  there  already  } 

"  I  needed  much  affliction,  as  I  had  none  at  all  of  it ;    and  that  is  not   healthy. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  l8l 

But  God  makes  me  wonder  why  the  blow  is  sent  to  my  dear  wife,  unless  it  is  that  I 
feel  it  the  more,  and  she  suffers  the  less,  than  if  it  had  been  personally  mine. 

"  Yours  ever, 

"J.  Macgregor." 

At  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  Festival,  in  June,  1S79,  Sir  Charles  Reed 
presided.  In  reply  to  Mr,  Spurgeon's  letter  inviting  him  to  occupy  that  position, 
he  wrote  : — "  I  am  very  full  of  work  ;  but,  in  common  with  all  London,  I  feel  so 
grateful  for  your  personal  piety,  and  your  personal  efforts,  that  I  cannot  say  '  Nay.' 
How  honoured  I  feel  to  be  stitched  up  in  a  brown  cover  with  such  a  '  man  of  mark' 
as  C.  H.  S.  !  "  The  allusion  was  to  the  current  issue  of  Men  of  Mark,  in  which 
Mr.  Spurgeon  and  Sir  Charles  were  included. 

Later    in    the   year,   when  the   Pastor  was    ill    at    Mentone,    he    received    this 

sorrowful  letter  from  his  friend  : — 

"  Hotel  Fleuri, 

"  Cannes, 

"  Dec.  18,  1879. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  have  been  trying  to  make  my  way  over  to  see  you  ;  but  my  doctor 
has  laid  such  restrictions  upon  me,  that  my  only  available  time  (10  to  4)  does  not 
permit  of  so  great  a  journey.  I  want,  however,  to  have  an  assurance  that  you  are 
better  ;  for,  in  a  French  paper,  I  saw  a  poor  account  of  your  health. 

"A  winter  away  from  home  is  a  new  experience  to  me,  and  an  idle  winter  is  by 
no  means  easy  to  endure.  However,  I  am  trying  to  obey  the  voice  which  says,  '  Be 
still  ; '  and  if  the  Lord  wills,  I  hope  for  another  decade  of  work  in  the  field  in  which 
He  has  permitted  me,  thus  far,  to  labour. 

"  I   suppose  you  do  not  preach  at  all   at   Mentone  ;    that  is,   from   the  pulpit. 

You  do,   I  know,  by  your  pen  ;  and  if,  at  this  Christmas  time,  you  feel  prompted  to 

comfort  a  stricken  heart,  let  me  be  the  object  of  your  philanthropy.     On  the  19th  of 

June,  I  was  with  you  ;  on  the  8th  of  July,  we  lost  our  dear  son,  and  we  have  never 

yet  recovered  his  body.     This  stroke  broke  down  our  health    and  drove   us  from 

home. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  Charles  Reed." 

Sir  Charles  Reed's  hope  that  he  might  be  spared  to  labour  for  another  ten  years 
was  not  realized,  for  he  was  called  to  higher  service  in  les«  than  sixteen  months  from 
that  time.  The  brief  note  from  him,  printed  on  the  next  page,  bears  in  one 
corner  this  inscription: — "Delivered  to  me  after  the  decease  of  the  writer,  April  8, 
1881. — C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


1 82  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  House  of  Commons. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Could  you  receive  a  father  and  son,  on  Bible  Society  business,  if  they 

called  on  you  on  Tuesday  next  at  about  noon?     My  son,  who  is  the  secretary  of  the 

Society,   thinks  that,  as  a  vice-president,   I   could  aid  him   in   an  application   he  is 

commissioned  to  make. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  Charles  Reed." 

The  following  letters  came  from  the  widow  of  General  Havelock  ;  the  son 
referred  to  in  them  was  himself  a  personal  friend  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's,  and  was  the 
chairman  at  the  first  public  meeting  held  in  the  Tabernacle  :■ — 

"  14,  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  \V., 

"  October  7,  1881. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon^ 

"You  may  not  have  heard  how  very  ill  my  beloved  son.  Sir  Henry,  has 

been.      He  is   suffering   from    congestion  of  the   brain,    brought  on  by   over- work, 

exposure,  and  fatigue.     We  are  most  thankful  to  say  that  the  doctors  report  that  the 

worst  seems  past,  though  it  will  probably  be  a  long  time  before  he  can  be  well  again. 

"  His  sister  and   I   will  feel   very  thankful   if  you   will   remember   him  in  your 

public   and    private    prayers.      His   life   has    ever    been    devoted    to    doing    acts    of 

kindness  for  others  ;  and  you  know  how  precious  he  is  to  us  all.     We  should  like 

him  to  be  prayed  for,  every  Simday,  for  some  time  to  come.     We  know  that  his 

father's  God  is  very  near  him  now  in  this  deep  trouble. 

"With  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  I  am, 

"  Very  sincerely  yours, 

"  H.  S.  Havelock." 

Sir   Henry's  recovery  was  much  more  rapid  than  his  mother  had  anticipated  ; 
and  on  October  22,  Lady  Havelock  was  able  to  write  : — 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  shall  feel  glad  if  you  will  tell  your  dear  people  that  God  has  been 
pleased  to  hear  our  prayers,  and  has  once  more  restored  my  dear  son.  Sir  Henry, 
I  will  not  say  quite  to  his  usual  strength,  but  so  far  towards  it  as  to  give  us  great 
hopes  that,  with  care  and  rest  for  some  weeks,  he  may  be  better  than  ever  before. 
Will  you  give  thanks  for  us,  as  a  family,  at  your  public  se^^vice  to-morrow,  and  pray 
that  a  larger  blessing  than  ever  may  rest  upon  us,  and  bring  us  all  nearer  to  Him  to 
whom  we  owe  so  much  ? 

"  With  our  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  I  am, 

"  Sincerely  yours, 

"  Hannah  S.   Havelock." 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  183 

Many  letters  passed  between  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Mr.  Spurgeon,— "  the  two 
prime  ministers,"  as  they  were  often  called.  Again  and  again,  the  Premier  invited 
his  Nonconformist  friend  to  meet  a  congenial  company  at  breakfast  or  dinner  in 
Downing  Street  ;  but  there  was  always  some  obstacle  in  the  way,  and  pressure 
of  work  or  illness  prevented  Mr.  Spurgeon  from  accepting  a  very  cordial  invitation 
to  stay  at  Hawarden  Castle.  Whenever  the  newspapers  contained  an  intimation 
that  the  Pastor  was  laid  aside,  a  special  messenger  from  the  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury  was  sent  with  a  letter  of  sympathy  or  kind  enquiries  for  the  sufferer. 

Mr.  Gladstone  had  long  wished  to  attend  a  service  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  the 
following  letters  show  how  the  wish  at  last  assumed  a  definite  shape,  and  was 
carried  into  effect : — - 

"  10,  Downing  Street, 

"Whitehall, 

"  24  August,  1881. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  thank  you  very  much  for  your  kind  note  and  your  good  words.  My 
years  make  it  a  great  object  of  desire  to  be  relieved  from  my  present  work  ;  but 
I  must  be  patient  yet  a  little  while,  and  must  hope  that  I  may  not  be  utterly  spoiled 
by  the  undeserved  kindness  heaped  on  me  from  so  many  quarters,  and  by  com- 
mendations entirely  beyond  my  deserts. 

"  I  hope  the  autumn  will  afford  me  an  opportunity  of  profiting  by  your  kind 
offer  to  meet  my  wishes  respecting  the  service  at  the  Tabernacle. 

"  I  remain, 

"  My  dear  sir, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 
"Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  "  W.  E.  Gladstone." 

"  Hawarden  Castle, 

Chester, 

"Jan.  3,  '82. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"Some  time  ago,  you   were  good   enough   to   promise   me   a   safe   seat 

at  one  of  your  services  :  and  if  it  consist  with  your  convenience  to  do  me  this  favour 

on  Sunday  evening  next,  when  I    expect  to  be  in  London,    I  shall  hope  to  present 

myself  at  the  exact  time  and  place  which  you  may  kindly  name.      Should  you  desire 

to  postpone  your  compliance  with  my  request,  I  shall  hope  for  another  opportunity 

of  preferring  it  three  or  four  Sundays  hence.      I  remain, 

"  My  dear  sir, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  "  W.  E.  Gladstone." 


184  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

On  the  evening  of  January  8,  the  Premier  and  his  eldest  son  attended  the 
Tabernacle,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  from  Mark  v.  30,  31.  The  Editors  and 
correspondents  of  various  newspapers  referred  at  length  to  the  incident,  and  some 
of  the  comments  were  anything  but  kind  or  even  courteous.  A  few  days  later, 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  sending  the  volume  of  views  of  "  Westwood  "  to  Mr.  Gladstone, 
expressed  his  regret  at  the  tone  of  some  of  the  articles  ;  and,  in  reply,  he  received 
photographs  of  Hawarden  Castle  and  the  Premier  in  his  study,,  with  this  letter  : — - 

"  Hawarden  Castle, 

"  Chester, 

"  Jan.  16,  '82. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  was  not  at  all  surprised  at  what  happened,  and  had  not  the  smallest 
disposition  or  cause  to  suspect  you.  My  life  is  passed  in  a  glass  bee-hive :  with  this 
particularity,  that  I  fear  many  see  in  it  what  is  not  there,  by  which  I  am  unjustly  a 
gainer. 

"  I  thank  you  very  much  for  the  interesting  book  of  photographs  which  you 
have  been  so  good  as  to  send,  with  an  inscription  I  am  very  far  from  deserving.  I 
wish  I  had  a  better  return  to  make  than  the  enclosed  ;  but  these  are  the  best  I  can 
lay  my  hands  on. 

"  When  you  were  so  good  as  to  see  me  before  and  after  your  service,  I  felt 
ashamed  of  speaking  to  you  lest  I  should  increase  your  fatigue,  but  before  very  long 
I  hope  to  find  a  better  opportunity.      In  the  meantime,  I  remain, 

"  With  sincere  respect, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  W.  E.  Gladstone." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was,  as  the  writer  of  this  letter  anticipated,  much  gratified  at  the 
information  it  contained  : — 

"  13,  St.  George's  Terrace, 

"Gloucester  Road,  S.W., 

"  March  23,  1882. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  think  it  will  be  gratifying  to  you  to  know  that,  at  St.  Stephen's 
Church,  Gloucester  Road  (which  is  generally  supposed  to  be  what  is  termed  '  very 
high '),  each  Thursday  afternoon  during  Lent  there  have  been  devotional  readings, 
consistmg  of  extracts  from  the  works  of  various  living  divines. 

"The  readmg,  this  afternoon,  was  from  a  sermon  preached  by  you,  fourteen  or 
fifteen  years  ago,  from  the  text,  '  What  if  thy  father  answer  thee  roughly  ? '  The 
greater  part  of  the  discourse  was  read  from  the  pulpit  by  the  junior  curate. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


i«5 


LORD  TENNYSON. 


EARL  OF  BEACONSFIELD. 


THOMAS  CARLYLE. 


Silhouettes   of   Celebrities. 

(Published   in    The   Boy's   Own   Paper,   October  g,    1880.) 


1 86  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"It  was  very  pleasing-  to  me  to  observe  such  an  exercise  of  liberty,  in  the 
Church  of  England,  as  to  place  your  views  before  the  congregation  for  their 
acceptance  and  meditation,  and  I  feel  that  you  will  be  pleased  by  my  making  you 
acquainted  with  the  fact.      Trusting  your  health  is  now  much  improved, 

"  I  remain, 

"  Yours  obediently, 

"  Alfred  Williams." 

Out  of  a  very  large  number  of  letters  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  from  Lord  Radstock, 

the  following"  has  been  selected  because   of  the   special   object   with  which   it  was 

written  : — 

"  St.  Petersburg, 

"ii/4/'82. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  The  Baptists  in  South  Russia,  who  are,  I  believe,  nearly  all  close- 
communionists,  are  to  have  a  great  Conference  in  May  as  to  whether  they  should  not 
open  their  doors  to  the  Lord  s  children  in  general.  It  is  deeply  important  that  they 
should  decide  aright.  There  .are  many  thousands  of  Christians  in  South  Russia 
among  the  Molokans  and  Stundists,  and  it  is  most  desirable,  on  all  accounts,  that 
they  should  be  as  united  as  possible.  Will  you  write  a  letter  to  them,  addressed  to 
Pastor  Liebig,  Odessa,  •encouraging  them  to  take  the  true  ground  of  union  in 
the  Lord's  Name,  at  any  rate  as  regards  receiving  Christians  at  the  Lord's  table  .'* 

"  Here,  we  are  going  on  quietly,  in  spite  of  difficulties.  You  would  be 
rejoiced  at  the  faith  and  love  shown  by  some  in  the  highest  class  here.  Continue 
in  prayer  for  this  land,  with  thanksgiving.  The  fields  are  white  unto  the  harvest, 
but  the  labourers  are  so  few  and  shackled  ;  — yet  '  He  must  reign.' 

"  Ever  yours  in  the  Lord, 

"  Radstock." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  often  asked  to  address  special  classes  of  hearers.  The 
following    letter   relates   to   the   invitation   given    to   him   to   speak   to   the    London 

medical  students  : — 

"45,  Inverness  Terrace, 

"  Hyde  Park,  W., 

"  Sept.  24,  'S^. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  Although   I   am  not  known  to  you,   you  may  probably  remember   my 

name  in  connection  with    Leamington,  where  my  father,   Mr.  Thorne,  at  the  Bank, 

once  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  you  as  his  guest. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY.  1 87 

"  My  object  in  now  writing  is  to  express  the  great  gratification  which  I  feel,  as 
President  of  the  Medical  Prayer  Union  for  1883-4,  t'^^t  you  have  expressed  your 
willingness  to  say  a  few  words  to  the  students  at  the  annual  meeting  on  Friday, 
26th  of  October.  I  do  sincerely  pray  that  your  health  may  enable  you  to  come;  and, 
in  the  meantime,  I  may  assure  you  that  the  occasion  will  be  worthy  of  your 
presence,  for  it  is  one  when  many  a  young  man  may  decide  whether  he  will 
commence  his  career  as  a  disciple  of  Christ  or  not.  An  appeal  from  you  will,  under 
God's  guidance,  materially  influence  some  in  their  decision. 

"  Again  hoping  that  we  may  see  you  on  the  occasion  in  question, 

'  I  am, 

"  Sincerely  yours, 

"  R.  Thorne  Thorne." 

The  meeting  was  held,  in  due  course,  at  the  Lower  Exeter  Hall,  and  proved  to 
be  a  most  profitable  one.  A  somewhat  similar  "gathering  was  the  one  held  at  the 
Egyptian  Hall  of  the  Mansion  House,  under  the  presidency  of  the  Lord  Mayor,  on 
September  28,  1885,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  addressed  the  members  of  the  London 
Banks'  Prayer  Union,  taking  for  his  subject  the  words,  "Seek  ye  first  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  and  His  righteousness;  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you." 
The  address  was  worthy  of  the  notable  audience  assembled  to  listen  to  it,  and  it  was 
afterwards  published  under  the  title,  "  First  Things  First." 

Mr.  T.  A.  Denny  did  not  often  write  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  but  saw  him  at  the 
Tabernacle  or  at  "  Westwood  "  as  frequently  as  he  could.  This  characteristic  note 
will  show  the  esteem  in  which  he  held  the  Pastor  : — 

"7,  Connaught  Place,  W., 

"  Feb.  14,  1884. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  How  exceedingly  kind  of  you  to  send  me  that  beautiful  book.  The 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  and  its  Institutions  ;  but  greatly  more  I  value  the 
inscription,  of  which  I  feel  myself  all  unworthy,  but  not  the  less  proud. 

"  How  I   should  like,  by-and-by,  to  walk  up  and  down  the  streets  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  arm-in-arm  between  you  and  dear  Moody! 
"With  affectionate  regards, 

"  I  am, 

"  Yours  ever  sincerely, 

"  T.  A.   Denny." 

Mr.  Thomas  Blake,  M.P.,  was  another  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's,  who 


1 88  C.     H.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

attended  the  Tabernacle  services  whenever  it  was  possible.  On  Lord's-day 
morning,  June  12,  1SS7,  he  was  present,  and  listened  to  the  Pastor's  sermon  from 
Deut.  XXX.  II — 14,  which  was  afterwards  published  under  the  title,  "Plain  Gospel 
for  Plain  People."     The  same  night,  he  wrote  the  following- letter  : — 

"  Reform  Club, 

"  Pall  Mall,  S.W., 

"June  12,  '87,  9.30  p.m. 
"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  Let  me  thank  you  for  your  golden  pot  of  manna  this  morning,  sweeter 
than  honey  and  the  honeycomb.  I  feast  upon  it  weekly,  all  the  year  round  ;  but 
it  is,  if  possible,  more  delicious  when  it  enters  the  mind  and  heart  by  way  of 
'  Ear-gate '  than  by  way  of  '  Eye-gate.' 

"  I  asked  a  number  of  members  of  Parliament,  present  yesterday  at  Portsmouth, 
to  come  to  the  Tabernacle  this  morning.  One  I  brought.  He  was  much  impressed, 
and  I  pray  that  our  God  may  make  your  sermon  to  be  the  message  of  life  to  him 
and  to  many  others.   ... 

"In  a  few  weeks,  I  intend  to  resign  my  seat  in  Parliament, — one  procured 
without  paid  agency  of  any  kind,  and  which  I  might  hold  as  long  as.  life  and  health 
permitted.  It  deprives  me  of  higher  service,  and  work  I  love  more.  This  is  my 
only  reason  for  giving  it  up.  With  the  night  and  day  work  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  all  my  '  Lord's-days  '  are  required  for  rest.     This  must  not  longer  be. 

"  With  much  love,  believe  me, 

"Always  truly  yours, 

-     "Thos.  Blake." 

The  members  of  Parliament,  mentioned  in  Mr.  Blake's  letter,  had  gone  to 
Portsmouth  to  witness  the  naval  demonstration  in  connection  with  the  Queen's 
Jubilee.  About  that  period,  The  ]]liitehalL  Review  published  the  "Jubilee 
Reverie  "  reproduced  on  the  opposite  page.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  portrait — not  a  very 
good  one, — is  at  the  top,  on  the  right  hand,  facing  Archbishop  Benson's. 

The  latter  part  of  this  letter  from  Mr.  (now.  Sir)  George  Williams  refers  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  engagement  to  speak,  in  Exeter  Hall,  at  the  forty-fifth  annual 
meeting  of  the  Central  Y.M.C.A.,  on  Friday  evening,  May  24,  1889  : — 

"71,  St.  Paul's  Church  Yard, 

"  London, 

"May  23rd,  1889. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"Thank  you  very  much  for  so  kindly  sending  for  my  acceptance   the 


1 89 


A    JUBILEE    REVERIE. 


190  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Out  lilies  of  the  Lorifs  TFoi'/c  in  connection  zvith  the  Pastors  College.  It  is  not 
necessary  for  me  to  repeat  iny  assurances  of  prayerful  sympathy  and  interest,  for 
vou  know  you  have  these  ; — but  if  my  hopes  for  your  usefulness,  and  the  spiritual 
success  of  your  manifold  labours,  are  fulfilled,  your  joy  will  indeed  be  full. 

"We  are  anticipating,  with  supreme  pleasure,  seeing-  you  to-morrow  evening, 
and  are  praying"  that  the  Master  Himself  may  give  you  some  special  word,  that  may 
be  productive  ot  abundant  spiritual  fruitfulness. 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Yours  ever  truly, 

"George  Williams." 

That  prayer  was  abundantly  answered,  and  the  Lord's  help  to  His  servant  was 
so  graciously  manifested  that  the  address  proved  to  be  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  most 
memorable  utterances. 

This  note,  from  smother  of  the  Pastor's  special  friends,  gives  just  an  indication 

of  its  power  and  usefulness  : — 

"  Beckenham, 

"  May  25th,  1S89. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"Thanks  be  unto  God  on  your  behalf!     You  were  wondrously  helped 

last  night.     The   Lord  stood  by  you,  and  strengthened  you.     Your  words  were  wise 

and  right  words  ;  and  they  will  live,  and  be  wafted  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

"The   kind   and   loving   sympathy,    with   which   you   were   received,    was    very 

cheering  and  helpful.     God  bless  you  to-morrow,  and  all  days  ! 

"Yours  very  truly, 

"  Samuel  Thompson." 

Probably  Mr.  Spurgeon  never  addressed  any  great  public  gathering  under 
such  painful  conditions  as  when  he  spoke,  in  the  Albert  Hall,  on  June  11,  1S90, 
at  the  annual  meeting  of  Dr.  Barnardo's  Homes.  He  was  very  ill  at  the  time  ; 
in  fact,  he  ought  to  have  been  in  bed  rather  than  on  the  platform  ;  and  the 
sight  of  the  cripples  and  other  waifs  and  strays  so  affected  his  sympathetic  heart 
that  he  was  utterly  broken  clown,  and  felt  more  inclined  to  weep  than  to  speak  ; 
yet  he  did  plead  powerfully  for  the  poor  children,  and  perhaps  his  words  had  all 
the  greater  weight  because  many  in  the  audience  could  tell  at  least  something  of 
the  suffering  he  was  himself  enduring.  On  his  return  home,  he  was  completely 
exhausted.  Dr.  Barnardo's  letter  shows  how  grateful  he  was  for  the  Pastor's  aid 
under  such  trying  circumstances,  and  it  also  indicates  his  natural  anxiety  as  to 
the  consequences  of  the  service  thus  rendered  to  him  : — 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  191 

"  Scepney  Causeway, 

"  London,  E., 

"  I  2th  June,   1890. 

"  Dear  Mrs.   Spurgeon, 

"  I  write  to  yoii,  rather  than  to  your  dear  husband,  for  I  cannot  but 
fear  that  his  presence  and  the  exertion  made  at  our  meeting,  last  night,  may  have 
resulted  unfavourably  to  him  ;  and  I  would  not  add  another  single  straw  to  the 
burden  of  pain  and  weariness  which,   it  may  be,  he   is  suffering  from  to-day. 

"  Nevertheless,  I  dare  not  leave  this  letter  unwritten,  and  so  consider  it 
wisest  and  best  to  write  to  you,  to  tell  you  how  deeply,  how  unutterably  grateful 
I  am  to  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  his  presence,  for  his  weighty,  loving,  gracious, 
wise  words,  and  for  the  tender  sympathy  he  showed  to  and  for  my  bairns.  I 
never  can  forget  the  debt  he  has  placed  me  under.  All  I  can  now  say  is  this, 
that  I  do,  from  the  depths  of  my  heart,  thank  him.  While  he  spoke,  I  could 
but  afresh  thank  God  and  take  courage.  No  words,  uttered  last  night,  fell  on 
my  own  spirit  so  like  water  upon  the  thirsty  ground  as  did  those  of  dear  Mr. 
Spurgeon.  I  was  cheered,  helped,  encouraged,  lifted  up,  soothed,  and  comforted. 
I  could  but  say,  from  my  heart  of  he-arts,  a  hundred  times,  '  God  bless  hwi  f '  and 
now  I  say  it  to  your  ears,  which  I  am  sure  will  not  be  unwilling  to  hear 
that  prayer,  even  from  one  so  unworthy  as  I  am,  for  him  you  love  so  well.  The 
sight  of  the  dear  servant  of  the  Lord  there,  last  night,  in  all  his  obvious, 
manifest  weakness,  was  in  itself  a  sermon,  even  if  no  words  had  been  uttered 
by  him. 

"  But  I  must  not  go  on  ;  this  much  only  I  will  say.  First,  he  must  never 
again  talk  of  being  in  my  debt.  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  paid  that  debt,  it  it 
ever  existed,  over  and  over  again.  Second,  I  must  be  careful  never  again,  under 
any  circumstances,  to  ask  at  his  hands  so  great  a  service  as  he  rendered  us 
last  night, — unless  in  the  years  (bright  and  happy,  which  I  hope  are)  still  in 
store  for  him,  God,  in  His  goodness,  may  give  him  back  so  large  a  share  of  health 
and  strength  that  he  may  be  rather  pleased  to  come  to  us  than  otherwise.  If 
such  an  hour  arrives,  then  indeed  I  may  break  the  pledge  I  now  give  ;  but, 
otherwise,  I  will  not  dare  again  to  overtax,  as  we  did  last  night,  the  loving, 
tender  heart  and  weary,  weakened  body  of  your  dear  husband. 

"And  lastly,  let  me  add  this,  that  anything  I  can  do  now,  or  at  any  time, 
anything  that  lies  in  my  poor  power,  that  my  children,  my  assistants,  or  any  ot 
us  can  do  for  Mr.  Spurgeon,  or  his  work,  or  for  anyone  dear  to  him,  I  will  count 
it  a  privilege  and  an  honour  to  do  ;  and  I  can  but  hope  that  the  time  may  soon  come 
when  Mr.  Spurgeon  will  feel  the  necessity  for  putting  this  sincerely  offered  pledge 
to  the  test. 


192  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  I  do  earnestly  hope  you  are  yourself  sustained  in  fair  health,  and  in  great 
peace  and  comtort  of  mind.  As  we  could  not  hope  to  see  you  at  our  meeting,  last 
night,  I  may  venture  to  enclose  you,  as  a  souvenir  of  the  occasion,  two  of  the 
programmes  then  in  use.  They  may  help,  perhaps,  to  bring  before  you  a  little 
of  what  those  who  were  there  saw  ;  and  I  know  it  is  possible  they  may  excite  in  you 
some  prayerful  thought  for  the  thousands  of  young  folk  under  my  care. 
"  Believe  me  to  be, 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"Gratefully  and  faithfully  yours, 

"  Thos.   J.   Barnardo." 

One  of  the  letters  written  to  cheer  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  that  season  of  suffering 
came  from  Bishop  Richardson,  of  the  Reformed  Episcopal  Church,  and  was  as 
follows  : — 

"  27,  Belgrave  Road, 

"  St.  John's  Wood, 

"  14  June,  1890. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"I   see  that,   at  Dr.    Barnardo's  meeting,  you   said  you  were  'as  ill   as 

possible.'     God  bless  you  !     You   have   probably  done  more   good   than   any  man 

of  your  generation,  and  it  has  pleased  the  Master  to  keep  you  humble.     You  will 

be  ivell,  some  day.     We  love  the  same  dear  Master,  and  will  say  'Welcome'  to  one 

another  where  no  one  feels  'as  ill  as  he  can  be.' 

"  Your  faithful  friend, 

"  Alfred  S.  Richardson,  Bishop." 

Only  a  few  days  after  that  great  meeting  at  the  Albert  Hall,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
at  the  Mildmay  Conference  Hall,  and  there  delivered  another  of  his  most  memorable 
addresses.  The  subject  of  it  was,  "  Christ  our  Leader  in  Darkness  "  ;  and  it  has 
been  exceedingly  helpful  to  the  children  of  God  who,  for  various  reasons,  have  been 
caused  to  walk  in  the  dark.  He  was  still  so  far  from  well  that  there  was  great 
uncertainty  as  to  whether  he  would  be  able  to  be  present ;  and  in  reply  to  a  note 
Irom  him,  to  that  effect,  Colonel  Morton  wrote  : — 

"Conference  Hall, 

"  Mildmay  Park, 

"  London  N., 

"17  June,  1890. 
*'  Dear  and  Honoured  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I    may    safely  say   that    all    Mildmay   deeply    regrets,    with    me,    your 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  193 

present  indisposition  ;  and  we,  in  the  office  here,  commenced  this  day's  work  by- 
praying  for  you,  and  by  asking-  God  to  glorify  Himself  at  the  coming  Conference, 
either  by  your  presence  or  your  absence ; — in  either  case,  giving  you  a  rich 
blessing. 

"Should  we  not  be  permitted  to  have  you  with  us,  Dr.  Andrew  Bonar  would 
be  the  first  speaker,  and  your  place  would  be  taken  by  Mr.  Frank  White.  He  has 
consented  to  be  your  '  reserve '  in  case  of  need,  and  I  have  to-day  forwarded  your 
letter  to  him  for  perusal.  So  please  do  not  feel  under  the  slightest  restraint,  or 
be  careful  or  anxious  at  the  possibility  of  disappointing  us  at  the  Conference.  If  we 
cannot  get  plums,  we  must  be  thankful  and  grateful  for  good  sound  bread  ! 

"  Allow  me,  very  late  in  the  day,  to  thank  you  for  the  numberless  times  you 
have  refreshed,  and  strengthened,  and  comforted  us  soldiers,  who,  often  in  India  and 
other  countries,  on  the  line  of  march,  hundreds  of  miles  from  any  place  of  worship, 
or  means  of  grace  (in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word),  have  met  under  trees,  some 
little  distance  from  camp,  and  have,  after  prayer  and  hymns,  introduced  you  as  our 
preacher.  We  had  a  large  Bible-class  in  my  regiment,  in  those  days,  and  many 
a  blessing  has  been  entreated  upon  you  by  those  dear  fellows. 

"Your  sermon,  'In  the  Garden  with  Him,'  was  my  companion,  quite  lately, 
when  going  up  Monte  Pelegrino,  near  Palermo,  en  route  from  Malta  to  England. 
In  what  stray  corners  of  the  wide  world,  where  soldiers  and  sailors  are,  do  you  not 
come,  and  bring  messages  of  God's  love  and  truth  ? 

"  I  have  long  wished  to  thank  you,  as  hundreds  of  others  would  wish  to  do  ; 
and  here  is  my  opportunity.      May  God  increasingly  bless  you  ! 

"  Very  sincerely  yours, 

"  R.  Morton,  Colonel." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  received  many  letters  in  German  ;  they  were  all  passed  on  to  a 
lady  who  was  a  member  of  the  Tabernacle  Church,  and  who  translated  a  great 
number  of  the  Pastor's  sermons  and  other  works  into  that  language.  One  of 
them  contained  some  information  which  greatly  interested  him.  The  translator 
wrote  : — "  This  letter  is  from  a  German  Baptist  colporteur  in  Wurtemberg.  He 
says  that  he  has  sold  many  of  your  books,  which  have  been  a  blessing  to  him 
and  to  many  other  readers  of  them.  .  .  .  The  Empress  of  Germany  has  bought 
from  him  your  Deiv  Pearls  and  Gold  Bearns  [Morning  by  Morning  and  Evening  by 
Evening  in  the  German  translation),  and  John  Ploughman  s  Talk.  I  wonder  how 
she  likes  John  Ploiighman.  I  believe,  very  well,  because  of  the  contrast  it  affords 
from  the  language  of  her  courtiers." 

Not  only  did  Mr.  Spurgeon  have  a  large  number  of  communications  written  in 
other  foreign  languages,  but,  at  various  times,  he  received  numerous  letters  which  he 

N  4 


194  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

regarded  as  literary  curiosities.  Many,  which  were  supposed  to  be  in  EngHsh, 
were  veritable  hieroglyphs,  most  difficult  to  decipher,  though  the  meaning  of  them 
was  generally  made  out  somehow  or  other,  and  answers  despatched  to  those  from 
whom  they  came. 

The  three  following  epistles  were  carefully  preserved  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in 
the  envelope  in  which  one  of  them  came,  which  was  addressed  thus  (intended  for 
Nightingale  Lane,  Clapham)  : — 

Rev  C  Sh   Spurgeon  ' 

Eglelane  claping 
road 

London. 

They  are  here  reproduced,  verbatim  et  literatim,  with  the  exception  of  the 
names  and  addresses  of  the  writers,  or  anything  which  might  give  a  clue  to  their 
identification  : — 

"Sir 

"  VViw  You  Obige  me  by  Forewarding  6  pennyworth  of  your  poterites 
as  I  am  a  yong  Man  a  lite  Complection  Brown  hare  neither  tall  nor  peturcular  short 
Will  you  please  to  send  me  some  of  the  Likensse  of  the  yong  woman  as  I  have  got 
to  Marry  and  When  I  have  got  to  see  and  Marry  her  Foreward  as  quick  as  Posable 
I  have  got  Dark  Blue  eyes  age  is  about  29  to  thirty  on  the  first  day  of  december 
Bornd  about  one  oclock  in  the  Mornino-. 


"  Rite  as  soon  as  you  Can." 

"  Mas  Spurgeon 

"  My  age  is  20  yers  old. 

"  Dea  sir  as  a  young  Man  trusting  in  a  risinang  Severe  converter  by  his 

Quiking  power  and  being  Baptised  by  The  Reb , Chapel  — ~  and  as 

i  have  ben  working  for  the  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ  for  tow  yers  and  is  for  yers 
since  i  was  converted  and  as  i  Am  a  homless  child  and  a  orpent  as  it  is  11  yers  since 
my  Father  and  Mother  died  and  3  broters  and  a  sister  therefor  i  was  left  frindless 
and  homeless  therefore  i  had  to  botle  on  my  seife  but  it  has  put  me  throu  dep 
exprence  but  God  has  blist  me  abundantly  fore  it  makes  me  wep  when  i  think  of  his 
godness  to  me  therefore  i  would  weish  to  be  a  servent  for  the  Lord  if  it  is  the  mana 
of  him  and  if  i  am  wone  of  his  eleked  chilain  to  serve  him  at  hom  or  abrod 

"  Plese  Sir  retern  a  nancer  as  i  would  like  to  get  mor  lering  your  plesur  i  wil 

aad  no  more 

"  but  ramain  your 

"  abudent  Servent 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


195 


The  words  italicized  in  the  following  letter  were  underlined  by  Mr.  Spurgeon 
in  the  original  : — 

"Mr.  Spurgeon, 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  take  the  liberty  in  writeing  to  you  ;  knowing  you  are  one  in  pro- 
claiming God  work  in  Jesus:  I  have  sent  you  a  book  I  have  rote  out  my  silf: 
It  is  fully  my  own  thoughts.  Took  from  the  bible  :  /  am  happy  to  say  I  had  a 
Born  again  about  three  years  ago.  It  zvas  very  deep  in  deed.  I  have  allways  been 
one  to  believe  in  God  :  But  about  3  or  4  years  ago  I  had  thoughts  that  there 
must  be  some  thing  in  that  being  born  again.  .S^^  /  prayed  very  heartly  to  God 
for  a  born  again  :  But  it  did  not  come  by  the  first  prayer  or  the  next  and  I 
allmost  thonght  it  zvas  no  zLse  praying:  Bztt  I  prayed  on  and  it  came  at  last: 
and  I  saw  afterwards  :  It  was  the  best  time  it  could  of  come  :  as  my  thoughts 
at  that  time  was  more  free  to  receive  it  :  at  that  time  I  new  not  any  thino- 
in  the  true  light  of  the  work  of  Jesus  : 

"  God  has  blessed  me  very  much  in  giving  me  enlightment  on  his  great 
work  as  Jesus  :  It  has  been  my  very  life  sinch  that  Born  again  in  procliming 
the  work  of  Jesus  :  I  could  bring  forword  hundreds  to  show  how  I  love  to 
show  God's  love  and  mercy  to  man.  And  I  am  happy  to  say  I  have  seen  the 
true  born  again  Though  a  few  words  I  have  spoken  :  I  have  a  very  good 
character  as  a  hard  working  man  :  my  wage  is  two  and  twenty  shillings  a  week. 
But  I  should  very  much  like  to  have  my  full  time  :  In  procliming  the  work  of 
Jesus :  as  Scripture  reader.  Or  some  thing  like.  My  age  'i^^s-  ^  ^^^i  married 
and   have   three  children. 

"  Dear  Sir  I  thought  as  you  was  so  will  known,  you  would  be  the  best  one 
to  write  to.  I  have  sent  you  the  character  I  had  for  the  situation  I  am  still 
in  :  Dear  Sir  /  should  be  very  please  if  you  zvould  have  the  zvords  in  the  book 
printed :     But  if  you  zvould  kindly  send  the  Book  back  and  the  character 

"  Yours  truly 


ENTl-LANXE  TO   DR.   BENNET'S  GARDEN,    MENTONE. 


CHAPTER     XCV. 


Kit  tijt  Sunnu  Soutlj. 


I  do  not  think  any  human  being  upon  earth  ever  felt  so  much  repose  of  soul  and  body  as  I  do. 
Many  years  of  toil  are  all  rewarded  Ijy  this  blessed  rest,  which  only  seems  too  good  to  be  true.  I  have 
no  task  work,  and  do  more  voluntarily,  as  a  recreation,  than  I  have  often  done  of  obligation.  No  idle 
tongues  disturb  me,  or  cares  molest  me.  The  burden  is  taken  from  the  shoulder,  and  the  bit  from 
between  the  jaws.  If  anything  can  make  me  young  and  strong  again,  this  will.  It  is  rest  of  a  sort 
which  I  never  knew  before  in  all  its  forms;  for,  at  other  times,  pain,  or  dulness,  or  too  much  company, 
has  made  it  less  enjoyable.  I  rest  on  the  wing,  as  the  swallow  is  said  to  do.— C.  H.  S.,  in  letter  from 
Mentone,  written  in  1882. 

Up  in  Dr.  Benuet's  garden,  when  Harrald  read  me  the  following  lines,  I  adopted  them 
as  my  own  : — 

"  O  days  of  heaven,  and  nights  of  equal  praise. 
Serene  and  peaceful  as  those  heavenly  days, 
When  souls  drawn  upward  in  communion  sweet 
Enjoy  the  stillness  of  some  close  retreat, 
Discourse  as  if  released,  and  safe  at  home. 
Of  dangers  past,  and  wonders  yet  to  come. 
And  spread  the  sacred  treasures  of  the  breast 
Upon  the  lap  of  covenanted  rest." 

]T  would  have  been  easy  to  fill  a  volume  with  the  account  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  experiences  in  the  sunny  South,  but  the  many  other 
interesting-  portions  of  his  wondrously  full  life  make  it  needful  to 
condense  into  two  chapters  the  record  of  about  twenty  annual 
visits  to  the  Riviera.  He  was  fairly  familiar  with  most  of  the 
favourite  resorts  on  that  part  of  the  Mediterranean  shore,  and  he 
occasionally  made  a  short  stay  at  one  or  other  of  them  ;  but  Mentone  was  the  place 
he  loved  beyond  all  the  rest.  Sometimes,  after  going  elsewhere  for  a  chanoe  of 
scene,  a  few  days  sufficed  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  beauties  and  charms  of  the  new 
region,  and  then  he  would  say,  "  I  think  we  will  hasten  on  to  Mentone."  On 
settling  down  in  his  old  quarters,  he  generally  exclaimed,  with  a  sigh  of  relief,  "  Ah  ! 
now  1  feel  at  home." 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  first  visit  to  the  Riviera  was  made  before  the  railway  had  been 
completed  along  the  coast  ;  and  he  used  often  to  describe  to  his  travellino- 
companions,  in  later  days,  the  delights  of  driving-  from  Marseilles  to  Genoa,  and  so 
bemg  able  to  see,  under  the  most  favourable  conditions,  some  ot  the  loveliest  views 
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  On  that  journey,  one  incident  occurred  which  was  quite 
unique  in  the  Pastor's  experience.  While  staying  for  a  few  days  at  Nice,  he  received 
a  letter  from  the  captain  of  the  Alabama,  an  American  man-of  war  lying  in  the 
harbour  of  Villefranche,  inviting  him  to  pay  a  visit  to  that  vessel.     On  acceptino-  the 


1 98 


C.     H,     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOCxRAPHY, 


invitation,  a  very  pleasant  time  was  spent  on  board,  and  then  the  captain  asked 
Mr.  Spurgeon  to  come  another  day,  and  preach  to  his  officers  and  men,  and  to  those 
of  a  second  man-of-war  which  was  stationed  not  far  off.  Though  the  preacher  was 
out  for  a  hohday,  he  gladly  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  of  conducting  the 
service  desired  ;  and  after  it  was  over,  he  chatted  for  some  time  with  a  number  of  his 
sailor  hearers.  Amongst  them,  he  found  one  who,  when  a  boy,  had  been  in 
Newington  Sunday-school,  and  whose  uncle  was  a  member  at  the  Tabernacle,  and 
another  who,  as  a  lad,  ran  away  from  his  home  at  Dulwich.  Several  different 
nationalities  were  represented,  and  a  good  many  Roman  Catholics  were  there  ;  but 
all  seemed  exceedingly  pleased  to  listen  to  the  gospel  message,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon 
said  that  he  did  not  know  that  he  had  ever  enjoyed  preaching  more  than  he  did  on 
that  occasion,  and  that  he  should,  ever  afterwards,  reckon  himself  an  honorary 
chaplain  of  the  United  States  Navv. 


U.  S.  S.     ALABAMA    IN     VILLEFRANCHE    HARBOUR. 


Tidings  of  the  service  at  Villefranche  probably  reached  other  American  vessels, 
for,  several  years  later,  when  the  U.  S.  S.  Trenion,  the  flagship  of  the  European 
squadron,  was  at  Gravesend,  the  chaplain  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon: — "Could  it  be 
possible  for  you,  amid  your  abundant  labours,  to  come  down  some  day,  and  address 
our  officers  and  men,  it  would  be  esteemed  a  great  favour,  and  I  know  it  would  be 
the  means  of  doing-  incalculable  good.  All  through  the  cruise,  it  has  been  mv  desire 
that  the  ship  might  go  to  some  port  in  your  vicinity,  hoping  thereby  that  you  might 
oblige  us  with  a  visit."  The  Pastor  was  unable  to  accede  to  the  request  so  kindly 
conveyed,  but  he  fully  appreciated  the  honour,  and  perhaps  all  the  more  because  he 
was  never  invited  to  preach  on  board  a  British  man-of-war. 

One  of  the  travelling   companions  on   the   first   visit  to  the    Riviera    was    the 


C.      H.      SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOG  RArilY. 


199 


Pastor's  friend,  deacon,  and  publisher,  Mr.  Joseph  Passmore  ;  and  he  was  usually 
a  member  of  the  litde  company  who  gathered  at  Mentone  year  by  year ; 
though,  latterly,  his  partner,  Mr.  James  Alabaster,  had  the  joy  of  taking  his 
turn   at  holiday-making    with  the   author   whose  works  he   had  so  long  published. 


THE    MENTONE    GROUP,    IJ 


In  1879,  Mr.  Harrald  went  for  the  first  time;  and,  from  that  year,  until  the 
never-to-be-forgotten  last  visit  of  1891 — 2,  he  was  only  absent  twice,  when  his 
services  seemed  more  urgently  required  at  home.  The  accompanying  reproduc- 
tion of  a  photograph  taken  at  Mentone,  in  1880,  contains  the  portraits  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  Mr.  Passmore,  Mr.  Harrald,  "Old  George,"  and  "  Father  Abraham," 


200  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

whom  the  Pastor  always  called  his  Oxfordshire  deacon.  Beside  Mr.  Passmore. 
the  Tabernacle  deacons  who  stayed  at  Mentone  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  were 
Mr.  W.  Hio-gs,  senr.,  Mr.  T.  Greenwood,  Mr.  C.  F.  Allison,  Mr.  W.  Higgs,  and 
Mr.   F.  Thompson. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  otten  quoted  one  ot  "Father  Abraham's"  sayings,  "I  don't 
believe  any  other  three  men  in  Mentone  have  done  as  much  work  as  we  three 
have  done  to-day."  The  speaker's  share  of  the  work  consisted  in  sitting  quite 
still,  and  reading  the  newspaper  or  one  of  the  many  interesting  books  which 
always  formed  part  of  the  Pastor's  travelling  equipment. 

It  has  been  already  intimated  that  the  season  of  rest  was  by  no  means  a 
time  of  idleness ;  some  friends  even  hinted  that  there  was  too  much  labour, 
and  too  little  relaxation.  The  quotations  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  chapter 
give  the  chief  worker's  own  view  of  the  matter  in  1882  ;  and  a  few  more 
extracts  from  his  letters  of  the  same  period  will  furnish  details  of  the  manner 
in  which  some  of  his  days  of  holiday  were  pleasantly  and  profitably  spent : — 

"  I  went  up  to  Dr.  Bennet's  garden  at  1 1  o'clock,  and  remained  there  alone 
with  Harrald  till  3.30.  He  read  to  me,  and  then  I  dictated  to  him,  changing 
to  a  talk,  a  walk,  a  pun,  some  fun,  aad  then  reading  and  speechifying  again, 
the  electric  shorthand  botding  all  up  for  future  use.  I  did  enjoy  it,  though  the 
mistral  blew  savagely.  We  were  in  a  corner  of  the  kiosque,  out  of  all  the  wind, 
and  yet  in  the  open  air,  with  mountains,  and  sea,  and  garden  all  around.  No 
one  disturbed  us  ;   it  was  the  beau  ideal  of  an  artistic  author's  studio." 

"  Harrald  read  to  me,  yesterday.  The  Life  of  CromweI/,~grd.nd,  soul- 
inspiring.  How  the  man  trusted  in  the  Lord!  How  sweet  is  the  life  of  faith, 
and  how  splendid  are  its  triumphs  !  I  would  live  equally  above  joys  and  sorrows, 
and  find  my  all  in  the  Lord  Himself" 

"  It  came  on  to  blow,  so  Harrald  and  I  resorted  to  Dr.  Bennet's  garden  from 
10  to  3,  having  a  grand  read  all  alone  till  about  2  o'clock,  and  then  admitting  the 
other  friends  to  be  silent  disciples  among  us.  I  gathered  sheaves  of  texts  for 
sermons,  and  a  few  subjects  for  articles,  and  had  a  very  happy  day.  The  wind 
blew  in  hurricanes,  but  we  sat  with  a  wall  at  our  backs,  and  the  sun  shining  upon 
our  faces.  Trees  were  bending  in  the  gale,  and  the  swift  ships  were  flying  across 
the  main  ;  but  we  had  a  hiding-place  from  the  wind,  and  sat  therein  with  comfort." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  never  saw  cyclamen  growing  anywhere  without  recalling  an 
amusing  incident  which  happened  in  Dr.  Bennet's  garden  at  the  time  when  visitors 
were  freely  welcomed  there  in  the  morning.  The  Pastor  and  his  secretary  had 
found  a  sheltered  spot  where  they  were  completely  hidden  from  view,  and  during 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


20I 


one  of  the  pauses  in  the  reading  or  dictating,  they  were  greatly  interested  in  hearing 
a  young  lady,  quite  near  them,  exclaim,  in  unmistakable  Transatlantic  tones,  "  O 
mother,  du  come  here  !  There  are  some  lovely  sickly  men  (cyclamen)  just  here.  I 
du  love  sickly  men  ! "  Perhaps  the  speaker  would  not  have  been  quite  so 
enthusiastic  if  she  had  been  aware  of  the  proximity  of  the  English  listeners  who 
mischievously  gave  to  her  words  a  meaning  she  never  intended  them  to  convey. 


SARACENIC  TOWER  IN  DR.  BENNET  S  GARDEN. 


When  Dr.  Bennet  restored  the  Saracenic  tower  here  represented,  he  placed  it 
at  the  disposal  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  who  at  once  availed  himself  of  such  a  delightful 
retreat.  Perched  up  so  high  above  the  sea,  the  view  all  around  was  indescribably 
lovely,  while,  by  turning  the  key  in  the  lock,  absolute  immunity  from  intruders  was 
secured  ;  and,  as  the  result,  some  of  the  brightest  of  the  articles  in  The  Sword  and 


202 


C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


the  Troivel  were  here  written  or  dictated,  and  some  of  the  choicest  sermons  in 
The  j\lct]-opolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit  were  here  composed,  at  least  in  outhne. 
Only  a  short  distance  away  from  this  tower,  and  perched  on  the  very  edge  of  the 
cliff  overhanging  the  sea,  stands  the  Italian  guard-house  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  had 


ITALIAN   GUARD-HOUSE,   NEAR   RIENTONE. 


to  pass  every  time  he  went  to  see  his  friend,  Mr.  Thomas  Hanbury,  at  the  Palazzo 
Orengo,  La  Mortola.  The  Pastor  often  told  the  story  of  an  incident  that  happened 
within  this  building.  In  the  days  when  the  phylloxera  was  committing  such  deadly 
havoc  among  the  vines  of  France  and  Italy,  the  two  countries  tried  to  prevent  its 
further  spread  by  forbidding  the  transport  of  fruit,  flowers,  shrubs,  etc.,  from  one 
land  to  the  other.  It  was  a  foolish  and  useless  regulation,  for  the  phylloxera  was 
already  in  possession  of  both  sides  of  the  frontier  ;  and  it  led  to  many  amusing 
scenes.  One  day,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  going,  with  a  party  of  friends,  for  a  picnic  ; 
and,  amongst  the  articles  under  his  charge,  were  a  couple  of  oranges.  He  under- 
stood sufficient  Italian  to  comprehend  that  the  fruit  could  not  be  allowed  to  pass  ; 
but  his  ready  wit  suggested  the  best  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  so  he  walked  into  the 
soldiers'  room,  peeled  the  oranges,  carefully  putting  all  the  peel  into  the  fire,  and  ate  , 
them,  to  the  great  amusement  of  the  defenders  of  the  crown  rights  of  the  King  of 
Italy  !  As  the  story  has  been  published  in  various  papers  and  books,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
is  represented  as  having  "  stepped  back,  five  or  six  paces,  into  France,"  in  order  to 
defy  the  Italian  guards  ;  whereas,  at  the  time,  he  was  probably  one  or  two  hundred 
yards  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Republic. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


20- 


Dr.  Bennet's  garden  was  not  the  only  open-air  study  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  at 
Mentone.       In    the    accompanying   illustration,   it   is   easy   to  pick    out    the  line    of 


THE    CHALET    DES    HOSIERS   AND   CYPRESS   WALK,    MENTONE. 


cypresses  running  through  the  dense  masses  ot  olive  trees  at  the  back  of  the  Chalet 
des  Rosiers,  the  Swiss  villa  where  Queen  Victoria  stayed  when  at  Mentone.  That 
cypress  walk  led  up  to  one  of  the  numerous  quiet  nooks  where  the  Pastor  and  his 
secretary  spent  many  a  delightful  day.  They  started  from  the  hotel  soon  after  the 
little  company  of  friends,  who  had  gathered  for  morning  prayer,  had  dispersed,  and 
if  the  weather  was  favourable  for  a  long  stay  out  of  doors,  they  carried  the  materials 
for  a  light  lunch  with  them,  a  waterproof  rug  to  spread  on  the  ground  to  ward  off 
rheumatism, — and  some  books,  of  course,  generally  including  a  volume  of  Brooks,  or 
Manton,  or  some  other  Puritan  divine,  with  a  biography  or  something  that  would 
make  a  variety  in  the  reading.  The  reader  had  to  pause,  every  now  and  then,  to  jot 
down  texts  that  struck  the  attentive  listener  as  being  suggestive,  or  to  preserve,  by 
means  of  phonography,  any  happy  and  helpful  thoughts  that  might  be  of  service  in 
after  days.  Sometimes,  the  dictation  would  only  be  sufficient  for  a  paragraph  or 
two,  and  then  the  reading  would  be  resumed  ;  on  other  occasions,  a  whole  article  for 
the  magazine  would  be  ready  for  transcription  before  the  return  journey  to  the  hotel. 


204 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 


A  large  part  of  The  Clue  of  the  Maze,  and  several  of  the  Ilhistratioiis  and 
JMcditations,  or,  F/ozvers  from  a  Puritaiis  Garden,  were  thus  written  at  another 
retired  spot  not  far  from  the  cypress  walk.  A  good  idea  of  the  kind  of  place 
that  was  usually  selected  tor  this  purpose  can  be  conveyed  by  the  view  that  one  of 
the  Pastor's  friends  took  for  him,  and  most  appropriately  entitled  "A  Pretty  Peep." 


iSlHEHHB^/ '"^ 

IMMHWyWMHMKfr;  -' 

''  ■^^^I^^^^Sk 

kiu^uHHS^HlBi^^, 

'  ■'''  '-  ■^''    '•  ^^SSKL 

■pjfflBWfcBgp^^l^S^''-' 

■     '''"■^'  '^gwl 

Hi^P'^Sv^' 

'"'^■^^^1^^ 

j^^B^^flHRf^^      .    ;^p-^    *^^ 

->.  s^- '  >'''^3H 

H^^^BH^^r^'     ^-''' 

"f  s^p  -^  ^Bi 

l^^H^^^S^*-^ 

-   "  ^      ^  a^S 

M  «m| 

WgKSm^ 

M 

^.  J 

«»»«^^_ 

^^r'            >»h 

^^^^^^^^^^H^£k'^  ''^  <-  'f  y 

H 

H^jfj 

Pfl 

^^nlH 

"*  Jl 

I^9^HBl||{  ^^  s^H^H 

I^^^I^B^^'^. . 

__J 

i^HI 

A     PRETTY     PEEP,     MENTONE. 


Occasionally,  the  time  devoted  to  reading  in  the  open  air  was  spent  in  one  of 
the  many  lovely  valleys  by  which  Mentone  is  surrounded.  Mr.  Spurgeon  never 
forgot  one  experience  which  he  had  in  the  portion  of  the  Gorbio  valley  represented 
in  the  illustration  on  the  opposite  page,  and  concerning  which  he  wrote  : — 

"  In  this  valley  I  have  spent  many  a  happy  day,  just  climbing  to  any  terrace  I 
preferred,  and  sitting  down  to  read.  I  once  left  Manton  .on  Psalm  CXIX.  by  the 
roadside,  and  before  the  next  morning  it  was  returned  to  me.  Here,  too,  on 
Christmas-day,  1879,  I  learned  what  it  is  to  'Walk  in  the  Light.'  I  had  been  ill  with 
gout  ;  and,  on  recovering,  arranged  to  drive  up  this  valley  as  far  as  the  road  would 
serve,  and  then  send  away  the  carriage,  walk  further  on,  have  our  lunch,  and,  in  the 
afternoon,  walk  gently  back  to  the  spot  where  we  left  the  conveyance,  the  man 
having  orders  to  be  there  again  by  three.  Alas  !  I  had  forgotten  that,  as  far  as  the 
upper  portion  of  the  valley   is   concerned,    the   sun    was    gone   soon   after   twelve  ! 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


20: 


I  found  myself  in  the  shade  before  lunch  was  over,  and  shade  meant  sharp  frost ;  for, 
wherever  the  sun  had  not  shone,  the  earth  was  frozen  hard  as  a  rock.  To  be  caught 
in  this  cold,  would  mean  a  long  illness  for  me  ;  so,  leaning  on  the  shoulder  of  my 
faithful  secretary,  I  set  forth  to  hobble  down  the  valley.  The  sun  shone  on  me,  and 
I  could  just  move  fast  enough  to  keep  his  bright  disc  above  the  top  of  the  hill.  He 
seemed  to  be  rolling  downward  along  the  gradually  descending  ridge,  like  a  great 
wheel  of  fire  ;  and  I,  painfully  and  laboriously  stumbling  along,  still  remained  in  his 
light.  Of  course,  it  was  not  the  time  for  our  jehu  to  be  at  the  appointed  spot  ;  so, 
with  many  a  groan,  I  had  to  stagger  on  until  a  stray  conveyance  came  in  our 
direction.  Out  of  the  sunshine,  all  is  winter  :  in  the  sunlight  alone  is  summer.  Oh, 
that  spiritually  I  could  always  walk  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance  as  that  day 
I  managed  to  keep  in  the  sun's  rays  ! 

"  '  Like  Enoch,  let  me  walk  with  God, 

And  thus  walk  out  my  day  ; 

Attended  still  with  heavenly  light, 

Upon  the  King's  highway.'  " 


THE  GORBIO  VALLEY,  NEAR  MENTONE. 


The  Gorbio  valley  was  one  of  the  special  haunts  of  the  trap-door  spiders  until 
visitors  so  ruthlessly  destroyed  their  wonderful  underground  homes.  Concerning 
these  and  other  curious  creatures,  the  Pastor  wrote  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  : — "  How 
I  wish  you  could  be  here  to  see  the  spiders'  trap-doors  !  There  are  thousands 
of  them  here,  and  the  harvesting  ants  also,  though  the  wise  men  declared  that 
Solomon  was  mistaken  when  he  said,  'They  prepare  their  meat  in  the  summer.'  I 
shall  send  you  a  book  about  them  all."     When  the  volume  arrived,   it  proved  to 


206 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


be  Harvesting  Ants  and   Trap-door  Spiders,   by  J.   Traherne  Moggridge,   F.L.S. 
and  it  contained  such  a  choice  inscription  that  it  is  here  reproduced  \\\  facsimile  : — 


• 

0                                                                                                                                                                                      $ 

» 

» 

Jt.^   f<J^  Lt.^C«^^i^  'p"'**^  .^--to-.-^ 

» 

« 

• 

• 

One  of  the  charms  of  Mentone  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  the  fact  that  he  could 
constantly  see  there  illustrations  of  Biblical  scenes  and  manners  and  customs.  He 
frequently  said  he  had  no  desire  to  visit  Palestine  in  its  present  forlorn  condition,  for 
he  had  before  his  eyes,  in  the  Riviera,  an  almost  e.xact  representation  of  the  Holy 
Land  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  our  Lord.  He  was  gready  interested  in  an  article, 
written  by  Dr.  Hugh  Macmillan,  upon  this  subject,  in  which  that  devoted  student  of 
nature  traced  many  minute  resemblances  between  the  climate,  the  conformation 
of  the  country,  the  fauna  and  Mora,  and  the  habits  of  the  people  in  the  South  of 
France  of  to-day,  and  those  of  the  East  in  the  time  when  Jesus  of  Nazareth  trod 
"those  holy  fields."  In  several  of  his  Sabbath  afternoon  communion  addresses, 
the  Pastor  alluded  to  the  many  things  that  continually  reminded  him  of 
"  Immanuel's  land,"  while  the  olive  trees  were  a  never-failing  source  of  interest 
and  illustration.  One  of  the  works,  with  which  he  had  made  very  considerable 
progress,  was  intended  to  be,  if  possible,  an  explanation  ol  all  the  Scriptural 
references  to  the  olive. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  often  remarked  that  there  were  many  Biblical  allusions  which 
could  not  be  understood  apart  from  their  Oriental  associations  ;  and,  as  an  instance, 
he  said  that  some  people  had  failed  altogether  to  catch  the  meaning  of  Isaiah  Ivii.  20, 
"The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest,  whose  waters  cast  up 
mire  and  dirt."  Those  who  have  affirmed  that  the  sea  never  can  rest  have  not  seen 
the  Mediterranean  in  its  most  placid  mood,  when  for  days  or  even  weeks  at  a  time 
there  is  scarcely  a  rippie  upon  its  surface.  During  that  calm  period,  all  sorts  of 
refuse  accumulate  along  the  shore  ;  and  then,  when  the  time  of  tempest  comes, 
anyone  who  walks  by  the  side  of  the  agitated  waters  can  see  that  they  do  "cast  up 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAI'llY.  207 

mire  and  dirt."  Usually,  during  the  Pastor's  stay  at  Mentone,  there  was  at  least 
one  great  storm,  either  far  out  at  sea,  or  near  at  hand.  In  1882,  in  one  of  his 
letters  home,  he  wrote  the  following  graphic  description  of  the  scene  he  had  just 
witnessed  : — 

"  This  afternoon,  I  have  been  out  to  watch  the  sea.  There  was  a  storm  last 
night,  and  the  sea  cannot  forgive  the  rude  winds,  so  it  is  avenging  its  wrongs  upon 
the  shore.  The  sun  shone  at  3  o  clock,  and  there  was  no  wind  here  ;  but  away 
over  the  waters  hung  an  awful  cloud,  and  to  our  left  a  rainbow  adorned  another 
frowning  mass  of  blackness.  Though  much  mud  was  under  foot,  ail  the  world 
turned  out  to  watch  the  hungry  billows  rush  upon  the  beach.  In  one  place,  they 
rolled  against  the  esplanade,  and  then  rose,  like  the  waterworks  at  Versailles,  high 
into  the  air,  over  the  walk,  and  across  the  road,  making  people  run  and  dodge,  and 
leaving  thousands  of  pebbles  on  the  pavement.  In  another  place,  the  sea  removed 
all  the  foreshore,  undermined  the  walls,  carried  them  away,  and  then  assailed  the 
broad  path,  which  it  destroyed  in  mouihfuls,  much  as  a  rustic  eats  bread-and-butter  ! 
Here  and  there,  it  took  away  the  curb  ;  I  saw  some  twelve  feet  of  it  go,  and  then  it 
attacked  the  road.  It  was  amusing  to  see  the  people  move  as  a  specially  big  wave 
dashed  up.  The  lamp-posts  were  going  when  I  came  in,  and  an  erection  of  solid 
stone,  used  as  the  site  of  a  pump,  was  on  the  move.  Numbers  ot  people  were 
around  this  as  I  came  in  at  sundown  ;  it  was  undermined,  and  a  chasm  was  opening 
between  it  and  the  road.  Men  were  getting  up  the  gas  pipes,  or  digging  into  the 
road  to  cut  the  gas  off.  I  should  not  wonder  if  the  road  is  partly  gone  by  the 
morning.  Though  splashed  with  mud,  I  could  not  resist  the  delight  of  seeing  the 
huge  waves,  and  the  sea  birds  flashing  among  them  like  soft  lightnings.  The  deep 
sigh,  the  stern  howl,  the  solemn  hush,  the  booming  roar,  and  the  hollow  mutter  of 
the  ocean  were  terrible  and  grand  to  me.  Then  the  rosy  haze  of  the  far-ascending 
spray,  and  the  imperial  purple  and  azure  of  the  more-distant  part  oi  the  waters, 
together  with  the  snow-white  manes  of  certain  breakers  on  a  line  of  rock,  made  up  a 
spectacle  never  to  be  forgotten.  Far  away,  in  the  East,  I  saw  just  a  lew  yards  of 
rainbow  standing  on  the  sea.  It  seemed  like  a  Pharos  glimmering  there,  or  a  ship 
in  gala  array,  dressed  out  with  the  flags  of  all  nations.  O  my  God,  how  glorious 
art  Thou  i  I  love  Thee  the  better  for  being  so  great,  so  terrible,  so  good,  so  true. 
'  This  God  is  our  God,  for  ever  and  ever.-'  " 

Another  phenomenon  was  thus  described  in  a  letter  of  the  same  period  : — ■ 
"About  six  in  the  evening,  we  were  all  called  out  into  the  road  to  see  a  s^uperb 
Aurora  Borealis, — a  sight  that  is  very  rarely  seen  here.  Natives  say  that  it  is  twelve 
years  since  the  last  appearance,  and  that  it  means  a  cold  winter  which  will  drive 
people  to  Mentone.  Our  mountains  are  to  the  North,  and  yet,  above  their  tops, 
we  saw  the  red  glare  of  this  wonderful  visitant.      '  Castellar  is  on  fire,'  said  an  old 


20S 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


lady,  as  if  the  conflagration  of  a  million  such  hamlets  could  cause  the  faintest 
approximation  to  the  Aurora,  which  looked  like  the  first  sight  of  a  world  on  fire,  or 
the  blaze  of  the  day  of  doom." 


Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  at  Mentone  so  many  years  that  he  had  watched  its 
growth  from  little  more  than  a  village  to  a  town  of  considerable  size.  He  had 
so  thoroughly  explored  it  that  he  knew  every  nook  and  cranny,  and  there  was 
not  a  walk  or  drive  in  the  neighbourhood  with  which  he  was  not  perfectly  familiar. 
His  articles,  in  The  Szvord  and  the  Trowel,  on  the  journey  from  "  Westwood  "  to 
Mentone,  and  the  drives  around  his  winter  resort,  have  been  most  useful  to  later 
travellers,  and  far  more  interesting  than  ordinary  guide-books.  Many  of  the  villas 
and  hotels  were  associated  with  visits  to  invalids  or  other  friends,  and  some  were  the 
scenes  of  notable  incidents  which  could  not  easily  be  forgotten. 


IHE    GARDEN    UF   HOTEL   D  ITALIE,    MENTONE. 


At  the  Hotel  d'ltalie,  the  Pastor  called  to  see  John  Bright,  who  was  just  then 
in  anything  but  a  bright  frame  of  mind.  He  was  in  a  very  uncomfortable  room, 
and  was  full  of  complaints  of  the  variations  in  temperature  in  the  sunshine  and  in 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  209 

the  shade.  His  visitor  tried  to  give  him  a  description  of  Mentone  as  he  had 
known  it  for  many  years,  but  the  great  tribune  of  the  people  seemed  only  anxious 
to  get  away  to  more  congenial  quarters.  The  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  was  another 
of  the  notable  Mentone  visitors  whom  the  Pastor  tried  to  cheer  when  he  was 
depressed  about  the  state  of  religious  and  social  affairs  in  England  and  on 
the  Continent. 

One  morning,  among  the  little  company  gathered  for  family  prayer,  Mr.  T.  A. 
Denny  unexpectedly  put  in  an  appearance.  In  explanation  of  his  sudden  arrival, 
he  said,  "  I  felt  down  in  the  dumps,  so  I  thought  I  would  just  run  over  to  my  friend 
Spurgeon  for  a  few  days,  for  it  always  does  me  good  to  see  and  hear  him."  His 
presence  was  equally  welcome  to  the  Pastor,  and  they  drove  together  to  some  of  the 
most  charming  places  in  the  district. 

The  genial  Sir  Wilfrid  Lawson  scarcely  needed  anyone  to  raise  his  spirits,  for 
he  was  in  one  of  his  merriest  moods  when  he  met  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  the  hotel  door, 
and  the  half-hour  they  spent  together  was  indeed  a  lively  time.  The  Right  Hon. 
G.  J.  Shaw-Lefevre  was  another  politician  whom  the  Pastor  met  at  Mentone.  The 
subject  of  Home  Rule  was  just  then  coming  to  the  front,  and  the  Liberal  states- 
man heard  that  day  what  Mr.  Spurgeon  thought  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  plans ; 
the  time  came  when  the  opinions  then  expressed  privately  were  published  broad- 
cast throughout  the  United  Kingdom,  and  materially  contributed  to  the  great 
leader's  defeat. 

In  the  earlier  years  of  visiting  Mentone,  'he  Pastor  stayed  at  the  Hotel  des 
Anglais  ;  and  he  used  often  to  say  that  he  never  passed  that  spot  without  looking  at 
a  certain  room,  and  thanking  God  for  the  merciful  deliverance  which  he  there 
experienced.  One  day,  he  was  lying  in  that  room,  very  ill  ;  but  he  had  insisted 
upon  the  friends  who  were  with  him  going  out  for  a  little  exercise.  Scarcely  had 
they  left,  when  a  madman,  who  had  eluded  the  vigilance  of  his  keepers,  rushed  in, 
and  said,  "  I  want  you  to  save  my  soul."  With  great  presence  of  mind,  the  dear 
sufferer  bade  the  poor  fellow  kneel  down  by  the  side  of  the  bed,  and  prayed  for  him 
as  best  he  could  under  the  circumstances.  Mr.  Spurgeon  then  told  him  to  go  away, 
and  return  in  half  an  hour.  Providentially,  he  obeyed  ;  and,  as  soon  as  he  was  gone, 
the  doctor  and  servants  were  summoned,  but  they  were  not  able  to  overtake  the 
madman  before  he  had  stabbed  someone  in  the  street ;  and,  only  a  very  few  days 
later,  he  met  with  a  terribly  tragic  end. 

In  the  garden  of  the  same  hotel,  the  Pastor  once  had  an  unusual  and  amusing 
experience.  A  poor  organ-grinder  was  working  away  at  his  instrument  ;  but, 
evidently,  was  evoking  more  sound  than  sympathy.  Mr.  Spurgeon,  moved  with 
pity  at  his  want  of  success,  took  his  place,  and  ground  out  the  tunes  while  the  man 

04 


2IO  C.     H.     srURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

busily  occupied  himself  in  picking  up  the  coins  thrown  by  the  numerous  company 
that  soon  gathered  at  the  windows  and  on  the  balconies  to  see  and  hear  Mr, 
Spurgeon  play  the  organ  !  When  he  left  off,  other  guests  also  had  a  turn  at  the 
machine  ;  and,  although  they  were  not  so  successful  as  the  first  amateur  player  had 
been,  when  the  organ-man  departed,  he  carried  away  a  heavier  purse  and  a  happier 
heart  than  he  usually  took  home. 

It  was  while  staying  at  the  Hotel  des  Anglais  that  the  Pastor  adopted  a  very 
original  method  of  vindicating  one  of  the  two  Christian  ordinances  which  were 
always  very  dear  to  him.  At  a  social  gathering,  at  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  a  large 
number  of  friends  were  present,  Mr.  Edward  Jenkins,  M.P.,  the  author  of  Giiixs  Baby, 
persistently  ridiculed  believers'  baptism.  It  was  a  matter  of  surprise  to  many  that  he 
did  not  at  once  get  the  answer  that  he  might  have  been  sure  he  would  receive  sooner 
or  later.  The  party  broke  up,  however,  without  anything  having  been  said  by  the 
Pastor  upon  the  question,  but  it  was  arranged  that,  the  next  day,  all  of  them  should 
visit  Ventimiglia.  On  reaching  the  cathedral,  Mr.  Spurgeon  led  the  way  to 
the  baptistery  in  the  crypt  ;  and  when  all  the  company  had  gathered  round  the 
old  man  who  was  explaining  the  objects  of  interest,  the  Pastor  said  to  his  anti- 
immersionist  friend,  "  Mr.  Jenkins,  you  understand  Italian  better  than  we  do,  will 
you  kindly  interpret  for  us  what  the  guide  is  saying  ? "  Thus  fairly  trapped,  the 
assailant  of  the  previous  evening  began,  "  This  is  an  ancient  baptistery.  He  says 
that,  in  the  early  Christian  Church,  baptism  was  always  administered  by  immersion." 
The  crypt  at  once  rang  with  laughter,  in  which  the  interpreter  joined  as  heartily 
as  anyone,  admitting  that  he  had  been  as  neatly  "  sold  "  as  a  man  well  could  be.  He 
was  not  the  only  one  who  learnt  that  the  combatant  who  crossed  swords  with  our 
Mr.  Great-heart  might  not  find  the  conflict  to  his  permanent  advantage. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  never  able  to  accept  the  invitation  of  Mr.  Hanbury,  who 
wished  him  to  stay  at  the  Palazzo  Orengo  ;  but,  on  two  occasions,  he  was  the  guest,  for 
a  week  or  two,  of  Mrs.  Dudgeon  at  the  Villa  les  Grottes.  He  had  frequently  spent 
a  day  there,  or  gone  to  a  drawing-room  meeting  in  aid  of  one  or  other  of  the  many 
religious  and  benevolent  works  in  which  that  good  lady  was  interested,  or,  in  the 
evening,  had  met,  at  her  house,  a  number  of  friends,  belonging  to  so  many  different 
denominations,  that  it  seemed  like  a  gathering  under  the  auspices  of  the  Evangelical 
Alliance.  On  one  of  these  occasions,  there  were  so  many  Church  of  England 
canons  in  the  company,  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  humorously  said  that  they  might  form  a 
park  of  artillery.  After  a  season  of  general  conversation,  the  whole  company 
usually  settled  down  to  listen  to  the  story  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,  or  remarkable 
instances  of  answers  to  prayer,  or  a  few  words  of  loving  gospel  talk,  closing  with 
earnest  supplication  for  a  blessing  to  rest  upon  all  present. 


II.     SI'URGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


21  I 


When  the  weather  permitted,  Mrs.  Dudgeon  liked  to  arrange  for  a  picnic,  at 
which  other  friends  could  have  the  opportunity  of  meeting  her  honoured  guest ;  she 
related  to  him,  with  great  glee,  the  remark  of  a  Mentonese  woman  concerning  one 
of  those  outings  : — "  I  can't  make  out  you  English  people  at  all  ;  you  have  nice 
hotels  and  houses  where  you  can  have  your  meals  in  comfort,  and  yet  you  go  and 
eat  your  dinner  in  a  ditch  !"  The  "ditch  "  was,  of  course,  a  dry  one  ;  and,  usually, 
an  olive  garden  was  the  scene  of  the  al  jrcsco  repast. 


AN   OLIVE  GARDEN    IN   THE   SOUTH    OF    FRANCE. 


A  favourite  resort  for  these  picnic  parties  was  Beaulieu,  rightly  named 
"beautiful  place."  The  route  to  it  led  directly  through  Monte  Carlo,  and  the 
Pastor  was  always  glad  when  that  part  of  the  road  was  passed  ;  he  said  that  the 
whole  region  seemed  to  smell  of  brimstone  !  On  one  of  his  early  visits  to  the 
Riviera,  he  had  gone  in  to  see  the  gamblers  in  the  Casino  ;  but,  in  all  later  years, 
he  avoided  even  the  gardens  surrounding  the  building  where  so  many  had  been 
ruined  both  for  time  and  eternity,  and  he  did  not  like  any  of  those  who  were  staying 
with  him  to  go  merely  to  .look  at  the  players.  He  used  to  tell  them  what  was  said 
once  to  a  friend  of  his,  who  was  walking  in  the  gardens,  and  who,  when  he  met  the 
manager,  began  to  apologize  for  his  presence  there  as  he  never  went  to  the  tables. 


21 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


"  My  dear  sir,"  replied  Monsieur ,  "you  are  heartily  welcome  to  come  at  any 

time,  e\'en  though  you  do  not  play  ;  you  are  one  of  our  best  friends,  for  you  and 
others  like  you  help  to  make  our  place  respectable."  As  the  one  to  whom  these 
words  were  addressed  had  an  utter  horror  of  supporting  gambling  in  any  way,  he 
took  care  never  again  to  be  seen  anywhere  near  the  gardens. 


THE  CASINO  AND  GARDENS,  MONTE  CARLO. 


Almost  every  year,  while  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  at  Mentone,  he  heard  of  many 
cases  ol  suicide  as  the  result  of  the  gambling  at  Monte  Carlo,  and  in  various  ways 
he  discovered  that  the  ruin  wrought  by  the  Casino  was  far  greater  than  was  known 
to  the  public  in  England.  On  various  occasions,  he  published  some  of  this 
information,  in  the  hope  of  aiding  the  movement  for  the  abolition  of  the  evil.  One 
of  those  papers,  entitled  "The  Serpent  in  Paradise,"  was  reprinted,  and  had  a  large 
circulation  ;  but,  alas  !  the  gaming  still  continues,  and  the  annual  roll  of  victims 
appears  to  be  as  long  and  as  terrible  as  ever. 


One  delightful  excursion  was  arranged  to  Laguet,  or  Laghetto,  the  charming 
valley  which  has  been,  at  times,  the  resort  of  almost  numberless  pilgrims,  who 
have   gone  there   to  obtain   the  supposed   mediation  of  the   large  wax   doll   which 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


13 


probably  is  still  preserved  in  the  chapel  attached  to  the  monastery.     A  drive  out 
to  that  lovely  spot,  with  a  mid-day  rest  for  the  horses,  and  an  open-air  meal  for  the 


LAGUET,  OR  LAGHETTO,  NEAR  MENTONE. 

travellers,  was  always  regardegl  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  one  of  the  greatest  enjoyments 
of  his  sojourn  in  the  sunny  South.  But  it  was  only  possible  in  the  finest  weather, 
and  when  the  days  were  long  enough  to  permit  the  return  journey  to  be  completed 
before  sunset ;  otherwise,  a  chill  and  a  painful  illness  would  most  likely  follow,  as 
there  was  so  great  a  fall  in  the  temperature  the  instant  the  sun  disappeared  for 
the  nio-ht. 


IN  THE   GARDEN   OF   HOTEL   BEAU   RIVAGE,   MENTONE. 


CHAPTER    XCVI 


3n  tl)t  Simng  Soutlj  (Continncd). 


IN     rilK   GARDEN    OF   VILLA   LES   GROTTES,    JIENTONE. 

N  one  of  the  visits  to  Mrs.  Dudgeon  at  the  Villa  les  Grottes,  the 
Pastor  and  his  secretary  were  photographed  in  her  garden  by 
her  nephew,  Mr.  H.  W.  Seton-Karr.  The  above  reproduction 
gives  a  sHght  idea  of  the  view  to  be  seen  from  one  of  the  upper 
terraces  ;  the  high  hills  in  the  distance  are  beyond  the  Italian 
frontier. 
For  several  years,  Mr.  Spurgeon  stayed  at  the  Hotel  Beau  Rivage.  As  he 
generally  had  several  companions,  or  friends  who  wished  to  be  near  him,  his  party 
usually  occupied  a  considerable  portion  of  the  small  building,  and  the  general 
arrangements  were  as  homelike  as  possible,  even  to  the  ringing  of  a  bell  when  it 
was  time  for  family  prayer.  Not  only  were  there  guests  in  the  house  who  desired  to 
be  present,  but  many  came  from  other  hotels  and  villas  in  the  neighbourhood,  and 


2l6  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAniY. 

felt  well  rewarded  by  die  brief  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  prayer  which 
followed  it.  Those  of  the  company  who  were  members  of  any  Christian  church 
asked  permission  to  attend  the  Lord's-day  afternoon  communion  service,  and  it 
frequently  happened  that  the  large  sitting-room  was  quite  full,  and  the  folding  doors 
had  to  be  thrown  back,  so  that  some  communicants  might  be  in  the  room  adjoining. 
On  the  Sabbath  morning,  the  Pastor  usually  worshipped  with  the  Presbyterian 
friends  at  the  Villa  les  Grottes  ;  occasionally  giving  an  address  before  the  observance 
of  the  Lord's  supper,  and  sometimes  taking  the  whole  service.  Although  away  for 
rest,  an  opportunity  was  generally  made  for  him  to  preach,  at  least  once  during  the 
season,  at  the  French  Protestant  Church,  when  a  very  substantial  sum  was  collected 
for  the  poor  of  Mentone.  He  also  took  part  in  the  united  prayer-meetings  in  the 
first  week  of  the  year,  and  sometimes  spoke  upon  the  topic  selected  for  the  occasion. 

It  is  scarcely  possible  to  tell  how  many  people  were  blessed  under  the  semi- 
private  ministry  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  able  to  exercise  during  his  holiday.  He 
used,  at  times,  to  feel  that  the  burden  became  almost  too  great  to  be  borne,  for  it 
seemed  as  if  all  who  were  suffering  from  depression  of  spirit,  whether  living  in 
Mentone,  Nice,  Cannes,  Bordic'liera,  or  San  Remo,  found  him  out,  and  sought  the 
relief  which  his  sympathetic  heart  was  ever  ready  to  bestow.  In  one  case,  a  poor 
soul,  greatly  in  need  of  comfort,  was  marvellously  helped  by  a  brief  conversation  with 
him.  The  Pastor  himself  thus  related  the  story,  when  preaching  in  the  Tabernacle, 
in  June,    1883  : — 

"  Some  years  ago,  I  was  away  in  the  South  of  France  ;  I  had  been  very  ill  there, 
and  was  sitting  in  my  room  alone,  for  my  friends  had  all  gone  down  to  the  mid-day 
meal.  All  at  once  it  struck  me  that  I  had  something  to  do  out  of  doors  ;  I  did  not 
know  what  it  was,  but  I  walked  out,  and  sat  down  on  a  seat.  There  came  and  sat 
next  to  me  on  the  seat  a  poor,  pale,  emaciated  woman  in  the  last  stage  of 
consumption  ;  and  looking  at  me,  she  said,  '  O  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  have  read  your 
sermons  for  years,  and  I  have  learned  to  trust  the  Saviour  !  I  know  I  cannot  live 
long,  but  I  am  very  sad  as  I  think  of  it,  for  I  am  so  afraid  to  die.'  Then  I  knew 
why  I  had  gone  out  there,  and  I  began  to  try  to  cheer  her.  I  found  that  it  was  very 
hard  work.  After  a  little  conversation,  I  said  to  her,  '  Then  you  would  like  to  go  to 
Heaven,  but  not  to  die  ?'  '  Yes,  just  so,'  she  answered.  '  Well,  how  do  you  wish  to 
go  there  ?  Would  you  like  to  ascend  in  a  chariot  of  fire  ? '  That  method  had  not 
occurred  to  her,  but  she  answered,  'Yes,  oh,  yes!'  'Well,'  I  said,  'suppose  there 
should  be,  just  round  this  corner,  horses  all  on  fire,  and  a  blazing  chariot  waiting 
there  to  take  you  up  to  Heaven;  do  you  feel  ready  to  step  into  such  a  chariot?' 
She  looked  up  at  me,  and  she  said,  '  No,  I  should  be  afraid  to  do  that.'  'Ah  ! '  I  said, 
'  and  so  should  I  ;  I  should  tremble  a  great  deal  more  at  getting  into  a  chariot  of  fire 


C.     II.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2  1/ 

than  I  should  at  dyuio-.  I  am  not  fond  of  being  behind  fiery  horses,  I  would  rather 
be  excused  from  taking  such  a  ride  as  that.'  Then  I  said  to  her,  '  Let  me  tell  you 
what  will  probably  happen  to  you  ;  you  will  most  likely  go  to  bed  some  night,  and 
you  will  wake  up  in  Heaven.'  That  is  just  what  did  occur  not  long  after  ;  her 
husband  wrote  to  tell  me  that,  after  our  conversation,  she  had  never  had  any  more 
trouble  about  dying  ;  she  felt  that  it  was  the  easiest  way  into  Heaven,  after  all,  and 
far  better  than  going  there  in  a  whirlwind  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  and 
she  gave  herself  up  for  her  Heavenly  Father  to  take  her  home  in  His  own  way  ;  and 
so  she  passed  away,  as  I  expected,  in  her  sleep." 

The  testimony  of  one  American  minister  is  probably  typical  of  that  of  many 
others  who  came  under  Mr.  Spurgeon's  influence  at  Mentone.  In  one  of  his  letters 
to  The  Chicago  Standard,  Rev.  W.  H.  Geistweit  wrote: — "It  has  been  said 
that,  to  know  a  man,  you  must  live  with  him.  For  two  months,  every  morning, 
I  found  myself  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sitting-room,  facing  the  sea,  with  the  friends  who 
had  gathered  there  for  the  reading  of  the  Word  and  prayer.  To  me,  it  is  far 
sweeter  to  receill  those  little  meetings  than  to  think  of  him  merely  as  the  great 
preacher  of  the  Tabernacle.  Multitudes  heard  him  there  while  but  few  had  the 
peculiar  privilege  accorded  to  me.  His  solicitude  for  others  constantly  shone  out. 
An  incident  In  illustration  of  this  fact  will  never  be  forgotten  by  me.  Fie  had  been 
very  ill  for  a  week,  during  which  time,  although  I  went  daily  to  his  hotel,  he  did  not 
leave  his  bed,  and  could  not  be  seen.  His  suffering  was  exeruciating.  A  little  later, 
I  was  walking  in  the  street,  one  morning,  when  he  spied  me  from  his  carriage.  He 
hailed  me,  and  when  I  approached  him,  he  held  out  his  left  hand,  and  said  cheerily, 
'  Oh,  you  are  worth  five  shillings  a  pound  more  than  when  I  saw  you  last  ! '  And 
letting  his  voice  fall  to  a  tone  of  deep  earnestness,  he  added,  '  Spend  it  ah  foi^ 
the  Lord.' " 

A  gentleman,  who  was  staying  in  the  hotel  at  Mentone,  where  the  Pastor  spent 
the  winter  of  1883,  wrote: — -"As  an  instance  of  the  rapidity  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
preparation,  the  following  incident  may  be  given.  There  came  to  him,  from  London, 
a  large  parcel  of  Christmas  and  New  Year's  cards.  These  were  shown  to  some  of 
the  residents  at  the  hotel,  and  a  lady  of  our  party  was  requested  to  choose  one 
from  them.  The  card  she  selected  was  a  Scriptural  one  ;  it  was  headed,  '  The 
New  Year's  Guest,'  and  in  harmony  with  the  idea  of  hospitality,  two  texts  were 
linked  together  :  '  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  Me  in  ; '  and  '  As  many  as  received 
Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  His  Name.'  The  card  was  taken  away  by  the  lady  ;  but,  on  the  following  Lord's- 
day,    after    lunch,    Mr.    Spurgeon    requested    that    it    might    be    lent   to    him  for    a 


2i8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

short  time.  The  same  afternoon,  a  service  was  held  in  his  private  room,  and  he 
then  gave  a  most  beautiful  and  impressive  address  upon  the  texts  on  the  card.  The 
sermonette  was  printed  in  The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit  shortly  after  that 
date,  and  has  always  seemed  to  me  a  wonderful  illustration  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  great 
power.  Later  in  the  day,  he  showed  me  the  notes  he  had  made  in  the  half-hour 
which  elapsed  between  the  time  the  card  came  into  his  possession  and  the  service 
at  which  the  address  was  delivered  ;  and  these,  written  on  a  half-sheet  of  notepaper, 
consisted  of  the  two  main  divisions,  each  one  with  several  sub-divisions,  exactly 
as  tliey  appear  in  the  printed  address." 

(Just  as  this  chapter  was  being  compiled,  one  of  "our  own  men,"  Pastor  W.  J. 
Tomkins,  thus  reported  a  far  more  remarkable  instance  ot  the  rapidity  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  preparation  : — "One  Thursday  evening,  during  the  time  I  was  a  student 
in  the  College,  the  dear  President  had  been  preaching  in  the  West  of  England, ^ — at 
Bristol,  I  think, — and  by  some  cause  was  delayed  on  his  way  back  to  London.  At 
the  commencement  of  the  service,  Mr.  James  Spurgeon  announced  that  he  had 
received  a  telegram  from  his  brother,  mentioning  the  delay,  and  stating  that  he 
would  arrive  in  time  to  preach.  During  the  reading  of  the  lesson,  which  was  the 
I  St  chapter  of  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy,  the  great  preacher  entered,  to  the 
intense  delight  of  the  large  congregation  present.  Mr.  James  Spurgeon  was  giving 
an  exposition  of  the  chapter  when  his  brother,  who  had  quietly  taken  a  seat  behind 
him,  intimated  his  presence  by  gently  pulling  his  coat-tail.  The  reading  was  soon 
finished,  prayer  was  offered,  and  a  hymn  sung,  and  the  text  was  announced : 
'  Wherefore  I  put  thee  in  remembrance  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in 
thee  by  the  putting  on  of  my  hands.'  After  an  interesting  and  instructive  intro- 
duction, the  Pastor  proceeded  to  deliver  a  most  orderly  and  helpful  discourse,  which 
seemed  to  bear  the  marks  of  careful  preparation,  and  it  was  with  astonishment  we 
heard  him  say,  in  the  College  the  next  day,  that  the  whole  sermon  of  the  previous 
evening  Jl ashed  ac7^oss  his  mind  while  sitting  upon  the  platform  during  the  reading 
of  the  chapter  by  his  brother T) 

Occasionally,  Mr.  Spurgeon  sent  home  the  outline  which  he  had  used  at  the 
Sabbath  afternoon  communion,  with  some  account  of  the  service.  The  facsimile 
on  the  opposite  page  relates  to  the  address  upon  the  words,  "  Thou  hast  visited 
me  in  the  night,"  which  was  published  in  The  Sivord  and  the  Troxvel  for  December, 
1886,  under  the  title,  "  Mysterious  Visits."  It  contained  quite  a  number  of  auto- 
biographical allusions,  such  as  the  following  ; — "  I  hope  that  you  and  I  have  had 
many  visits  from  our  Lord.  Some  of  us  have  had  them,  especially  in  the  night, 
vv^hen  we  have  been  compelled  to  count  the  sleepless  hours.      '  Heaven's  gate  opens 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  219 

when  this  world's  is  shut.'  The  night  is  still;  everybody  is  away;  work  is  done; 
care  is  forgotten;  and  then  the  Lord  Himself  draws  near.  Possibly  there  may  be 
pain  to  be  endured,  the  head  may  be  aching,  and  the  heart  may  be  throbbing  ;  but  if 
Jesus  comes  to  visit  us,  our  bed  of  languishing  becomes  a  throne  of  glory.  Though 
it  is  true  that  '  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep,'  yet,  at  such  times,  He  gives  them 
something  better  than  sleep,  namely.  His  own  presence,  and  the  fulness  of  joy  which 
comes  with  it.  By  night,  upon  our  bed,  we  have  seen  the  unseen.  I  have  tried 
sometimes  not  to  sleep  under  an  excess  of  joy,  when  the  company  of  Christ  has  been 
sweetly  mine." 

The  closing  paragraph  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon 
made  use  of  the  scenes  around  him  to  impress  his  message  upon  his  hearers  : — 

"Go  forth,  beloved,  and  talk  with  Jesus  on  the  beach,  for  He  oft  resorted  to  the 
sea-shore.  Commune  with  Him  amid  the  olive  groves  so  dear  to  Him  in  many  a 
night  of  wrestling  prayer.  If  ever  there  was  a  country  in  which  men  should  see 
traces  of  Jesus,  next  to  the  Holy  Land,  this  Riviera  is  the  favoured  spot.  It  is  a 
land  of  \ines,  and  figs,  and  olives,  and  palms  ;  I  have  called  it  '  Thy  land,  O 
Immanuel'  While  in  this  Mentone,  I  often  ftmcy  that  I  am  looking  out  upon  the 
Lake  of  Gennesaret,  or  walking  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  or  peering  into 
the  mysterious  gloom  of  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane.  The  narrow  streets  of  the  old 
town  are  such  as  Jesus  traversed,  these  villages  are  such  as  He  inhabited.  Have 
your  hearts  right  with  Him,  and  He  will  visit  you  often,  until  every  day  you  shall 
walk  with  God,  as  Enoch  did,  and  so  turn  week-days  into  Sabbaths,  meals  into 
sacraments,  homes  into  temples,  and  earth  into  Heaven.      So  be  it  with  us  !    Amen." 


'J^^lxr^  -O.S  eCe.O'dL  , 

2l  .  V^. 


J-r^  Che.  ■m^nir  , 


220 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


The  atmosphere  at  Mentone  was  so  favourable  for  photographers'  work  that 
many  portraits  of  the  Pastor  were  taken  during  his  sojourns  in  the  sunny  South. 
One  ot  the  very  best  is  here  reproduced. 


C,   H.   SPURGEON  AT   MENTONE,    l8S6. 

At  the  same  time  and  place,  the  portrait  of  his  private  secretary,  reproduced  on 
the  opposite  page,  was  also  taken. 

Some  good  people  were  evidently  under  the  impression  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
stay  in  the  Riviera  afforded  him  the  opportunity  of  doing  literary  work  for  which  he 
had  not  the  leisure  while  at  home.  On  October  3,  1887,  he  gave  an  address,  at  the 
Tabernacle,  to  the  members  and  friends  of  the  Open  Air  Mission,  upon  "Winning 


H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Souls  for  Christ."  Shortly  afterwards,  he  received  a  letter  from  the  secretary, 
Mr.  Gawin  Kirkham,  thanking  him  for  the  address,  and  adding  : — "  Naturally,  we 
are  asked,  on  every  hand,    '  Will    it    be    published  ? '      We   say,   '  Yes,  please  God, 


J.   W.   HARRALD  AT  MENTONE,    1 5 


in  due  time.'     So,  when  you  have  time   to   revise  it  in  the  sunny  South,   we  shall 
rejoice  to  receive  it." 

The  address  was  duly  revised,  and  published,  and  its  influence  for  good 
continues  even  to  this  day.  The  Pastor's  experience  on  that  occasion  was  not  at 
all  unusual ;  for,  very  often,  after  he  had  preached  or  spoken  on  behalf  of  one  or 
other  of  the  Societies  for  which  his  help  was  constantly  being  asked,  the  sermon  or 


222 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


address  was  sent  to  him,  with  a  request  for  its  revision.  In  such  a  busy  Hie  as  his, 
it  was  not  easy  to  crowd  in  both  the  pubhc  testimony  and  the  private  toil  which  so 
frequently  followed  ;  yet,  when  it  was  possible,  he  gladly  rendered  the  desired  service 
in  both  its  forms. 

The  sunshine  and  clear  air  at  Mentone  helped  to  increase  the  natural 
buoyancy  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  spirits,  and  so  provided  a  large  supply  ot  pure  fun  for 
all  who  were  there  with  him.  Walking  by  the  sea-shore,  at  a  time  when  the 
Mediterranean  was  raging  furiously,  he  asked,  "What  are  the  wild  waves  saying?' 
and  then  gave  his  own  witty  answer  to  the  question,   "  Let  us  (s)pray  !  " 

On  the  sad  occasion  when  he  fell  down  a  marble  staircase,  he  did  not  at  first 
realize  how  seriously  he  had  been  hurt ;  and  having  turned  a  double  somersault, 
in  the  course  of  which  some  money  fell  from  his  pocket  into  his  Wellington 
boots,  and  having  also  lost  a  tooth,  or  teeth,  in  his  descent,  he  humorously  described 
the  whole  transaction  as   "  painless  dentistry,  with  money  to  boot !  " 


DR.     H  anna's     lions,"     MENTONE. 


One  of  the  most  amusing  incidents  at  Mentone  was  associated  with  the  lions 
represented  in  the  above  illustration.  When  Dr.  William  Hanna  was  driving  past 
these    gates,    Mr.    Spurgeon    most    seriously    assured    him    that,    neither    our    own 


C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  223 

Zoological  Gardens,  nor  the  Jardin  d Acclimatation  at  Paris,  possessed  a  specimen 
of  the  species  of  lion  to  which  these  belonged,  and  the  worthy  doctor  accepted 
the  information  with  the  utmost  gravity  ;  and  it  was  not  until  he  awoke,  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  that  he  saw  the  meaning  of  his  genial  companion's  playful 
remark.  The  next  day,  when  they  met,  the  conversation  naturally  turned  upon 
the  necessity  of  a  surgical  operation  in  order  to  get  an  Englishman's  joke  into  a 
Scotchman's  head. 

One  evening,  before  tabic  d'hote,  it  was  noticed  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  very 
busily  writing  something  in  which  he  appeared  to  be  deeply  interested.  After  dinner, 
he  went  upstairs  before  the  rest  of  the  company  ;  and  when  they  arrived,  he  said  he 
wanted  to  read  to  them  a  poem  he  had  written,  which  was  as  follows  : — 

"  Joseph  Harrald." 

"  Poor  old  Spurgeon  we  must  urge  on, 
Not  so  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
Before  the  sun  he  s  up,  Hke  fun, 
Ere  the  lark  has  carolled. 

"  When  worthy  Stead  has  fired  his  lead, 
Not  so  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
Sparkling  wit  is  in  his  head. 
His  puns  are  double-barrelled. 

"  Each  other  wight  is  wearied  quite, 
Not  so  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
'  On  he  works  from  morn  to  night  ; 

Beats  poor  Douglas  Jerrold. 

'We  appear  in  seedy  gear,  * 

Not  so  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
In  his  glory  he'll  appear, 
As  Templars  are  apparelled. 

"Wine's  good  drink,  as  others  think. 
Not  so  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
Truest  blue,  he'll  never  shrink  : 
Let  his  brow  be  laurelled. 

"When  late  he  reads,  sleep  he  needs, 
Even  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
Gapes  with  mouth,  with  which  he  feeds. 
With  which  he  never  quarrelled. 

"  Too  familiar  we,  forget  that  he. 
Is  the  Reverend  Joseph  Harrald  ; 
From  Geneva  he  ;  his  theology 
Is  Calvinized  and  Farelled.'' 

"Worthy  Stead"  was  not  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead,  but  one  of  "our  own  men"  who 
was  then  at  Mentone.  The  Times  of  one  day  arrived  the  following  evening ; 
and  it  was  not  simply  weariness,  but  dislike  of  the  politics  of  the  leading- 
journal,  especially  in  its  attacks  on  Mr.  Gladstone,  that  made  the  "late"  reader 
feel  the  need  of  sleep.     And,  finally,  "  Joseph  Harrald  "  had  just  as  hearty  a  hatred 


224  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

of  the  title  "  Reverend"  as  ever  was  felt  by  his  beloved  Pastor  and  President,  who, 
in  this  amusing  fashion,  exercised  no  little  ingenuity  in  seeking  to  give  pleasure  to 
his  private  secretary  and  those  dear  to  him. 

On  another  occasion,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  at  Mentone  v/hat  he  called  "A  War- 
Song."  He  included  it  in  the  programme  of  the  following  College  Conference  ;  ana 
few  who  were  then  present  are  likely  to  forget  the  impression  produced  when,  first, 
the  hundreds  of  ministers  and  students,  and,  afterwards,  the  thousands  gathered  at 
the  great  public  meeting  in  the  Tabernacle,  sang  this  soul-stirring  hymn  : — 

"  Forth  to  the  battle  rides  our  King, 
He  chmbs  His  conquering  car; 
He  fits  His  arrows  to  the  string, 
And  hurls  His  bolts  afar. 

"  Convictions  pierce  the  stoutest  hearts, 
They  smart,  Ihey  bleed,  they  die  ; 
Slain  by  Immanuel's  well-aimed  darts. 
In  helpless  heaps  they  lie. 

"  Behold,  He  bares  his  two-edged  sword, 
And  deals  almighty  blows; 
His  all-revealing,  killing  Word 
'Twixt  joints  and  marrow  goes. 

''Who  can  resist  Hipi  in  the  fight? 
He  cuts  through  coats  of  mail ; 
Before  the  terror  of  His  might 
The  hearts  of  rebels  fail. 

"Anon,  arrayed  in  robes  of  grace, 
He  rides  the  trampled  plain. 
With  pity  beaming  in  His  face, 
And  mercy  in  His  train. 

"  Mighty  to  save  He  now  appears, 
IVIighty  to  raise  the  dead, 
IMighty  to  stanch  the  bleeding  wound. 
And  lift  the  fallen  head. 

"Victor  alike  in  love  and  arms. 
Myriads  around  Him  bend  ; 
Each  captive  owns  His  matchless  charms, 
Each  foe  becomes  His  friend. 

"  They  crown  Him  on  the  battle-field, 
They  press  to  kiss  His  feet ; 
Their  hands,  their  hearts,  their  all  they  yield: 
His  conquest  is  complete. 

"None  love  Him  more  than  those  He  slew; 
His  love  their  hate  has  slain  ; 
Henceforth  their  souls  are  all  on  fire 
To  spread  His  gentle  reign." 


CHAPTER    XCVir 


[nabatcb  affection  bttiuctit  ^mtnx  aitir  J^coplt. 


ANY  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  letters,  published,  in  previous  chapters, 
.  answer  to  his  own  description  of  the  brief  "notes"  which  had 
to  be  hurriedly  penned  amid  the  heavy  pressure  of  almost  incessant 
toil.  Yet  he  wrote  other  letters  ;  and,  amongst  the  choicest  of 
them,  were  those  addressed  to  the  officers  and  members  of  the 
church  at  the  Tabernacle.  Many  of  these  have  never  been 
published,  although  carefully  preserved  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  convey  a  true 
idea  of  the  Pastor's  correspondence  without  including  at  least  a  few  specimens  of 
his  later  epistles  to  the  beloved  brethren  and  sisters  committed  to  his  charge. 
In  writing  to  them,  he  often  seemed  to  pour  out  his  very  soul  in  his  pleading  with 
them  to  be  consistent,  prayerful.  Christian  men  and  women,  earnestly  labouring 
for  the  good  of  the  people  amongst  whom  their  lot  was  cast. 

The  following  selection  comprises  the  letters  written  during  one  sojourn  in 
the  sunny  South,  although,  in  order  to  make  the  set  complete,  it  is  necessary  to 
insert  the  last  communication  from  the  Pastor's  sick-room  before  he  was  able  to 
start  for  his  needed  and  deserved  holiday  : — 


"  Dearly-beloved  Friends, 

"  I  am  right  glad  that  those  who  filled  my  place,  last  Sabbath,  were 
so  graciously  enabled  to  feed  your  souls.  It  matters  little  who  distributes  the  bread 
so  long  as  it  comes  fresh  from  Jesu's  hand.  I  join  you  in  earnest  prayer  that 
the  brethren,  who  have  so  kindly  come  to  my  relief  to-day,  may  have  equally 
adequate  assistance  from  our  Lord  and  His  Spirit.  I  thank  them,  but  I  also 
envy  them  ;  and  would  gladly  pay  a  king's  ransom,  if  I  had  it,  for  the  privilege 
of  preaching  this  Sabbath.  My  envy  condenses  into  a  prayer  that  all  my  Lord's 
ambassadors  may  have  good  speed  this  day,  that  so  His  Kingdom  of  peace  may 
mightily  grow  in  the  land. 

"  After  enduring  much  in-tense  pain,  I  am  now  recovering,  and,  like  a  little 
child,  am  learning  to  stand,  and  to  totter  from  chair  to  chair.  The  trial  is  hot, 
but  it  does  not  last  long  ;  and  there  is  herein  much  cause  for  gratitude.  My  last 
two  attacks  have  been  of  this  character.      It  may  be  the  will  of  God  that  I  should 

P4 


226  C.     H.     sturgeon's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

ha\'e  many  more  of  these  singular  seizures  ;  and,  if  so,  I  hope  you  will  have 
patience  with  mc\  I  ha\'e  done  all  as  to  diet,  abstinence  froni  stimulants,  and 
so  on,  which  could  be  done  ;  and,  as  the  complaint  still  continues,  the  cause 
must  be  elsewhere.  We  call  the  evil  '  gout '  for  want  of  a  better  word,  but  it 
differs  widely  from  the  disorder  which  usually  goes  under  that  name. 

"On  the  last  two  occasions  when  I  bioke  down,  I  had  an  unusual  pressure 
of  work  upon  me.  My  service  among  you  is  so  arduous  that  I  can  just  keep 
on,  at  a  medium  pace,  if  I  have  nothing  extra  to  do  ;  but  any  additional  labour 
overthrows  me.  If  I  were  an  iron  man,  you  should  have  my  whole  strength 
till  the  last  particle  had  been  worn  away  ;  but  as  I  am  only  flesh  ahd  blood,  you 
must  take  from  me  what  I  can  give,  and  look  for  no  more.  May  that  service 
which  I  can  render  be  accepted  of  the  Lord  ! 

"  I  now  commend  you,  dear  friends,  to  the  Lord's  keeping.  Nothing  will 
cheer  me  so  much  as  to  hear  that  God  is  among  you  ;  and  I  shall  judge  of  this 
by  iuipoi  tiUiate  praye7'-iucetings,  the  good  works  of  the  church  systematically  and 
liberally  sustained,  and  converts  coming  forward  to  confess  their  faith  in  Christ. 
This  last  token  of  fclessing  I  look  for  and  long  for  every  week.  '  Who  is  on  the  Lord's 
si'de  ?''  Wounded  on  the  battle-field,  I  raise  myself  on  my  arm,  and  cry  to  those 
around  me,  and  urge  them  to  espouse  my  Master's  cause,  for  if  we  were  wounded 
or  dead  lor  His  sake,  all  would  be  gain.  By  the  splendour  of  redeeming  love, 
I  charge  each  believer  to  confess  his  Lord,  and  live  wholly  to  Him. 

"Yours  for  Christ's  sake, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Not  very  long  after  this  letter  was  written*  the  Pastor  was  able  to  start  for  the 
South  of  France.  On  the  way  to  Mentone,  he  made  a  short  stay  at  Cannes,  and 
from  there  wrote,  on  January  31  : — 

"To  my  Beloved  Church  and  Congregation, 
"  Dear  Friends, 

"The  journey  here  is  long  for  one  who  is  in  weak  health,  and  I  have 
had  but  a  few  days  of  rest,  but  already  I  feel  myself  improving.  The  Master's 
service  among  you  has  been  very  delightful  to  me ;  but  it  has  grown  to  such 
pioportions  that  I  have  felt  the  burden  of  it  weighing  very  heavily  upon  my  heart, 
and  I  have  suffered  more  depression  of  spirit,  and  weariness  of  mind,  than  I  could 
well  express.  Rest  I  could  not  find  at  home,  where  every  hour  has  its  cares  ;  but 
here,  I  cease  altogether  from  these  things,  and  the  mind  becomes  like  an  unstrung 
bow,  and  so  regains  its  elasticity. 

"  I  wish  I  could  work  on  among  you  continually,  and  never  even  pause  ;  but 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  227 

many  infirmities  show  that  this  cannot  be.      Pray,  therefore,  that  this  needful  break 
in  my  work  may  strengthen  me  for  a  long  spring  and  summer  campaign. 

"  Nothing  can  so  cheer  me  as  to  know  that  all  of  you  are  living  for  Jesus,  and 
living  like  Him.  Our  church  has  produced  great  workers  in  the  past,  and  I  hope 
the  sacred  enthusiasm  which  they  manifested  will  never  burn  low  among  us.  Jesus 
is  worth  being  served  with  our  best ;  yea,  with  our  all,  and  that  in  an  intense  and 
all-consuming  manner.  May  our  young  men  and  women  love  the  Lord  much,  and 
win  others  to  Him  by  their  zeal  for  God  ;  and  may  our  elder  brethren,  and  the 
matrons  among  us,  prove  ever  the  pillars  ot  the  church  in  their  holy  conversation 
and  devout  godliness  ! 

''Maintain  the  prayer-meetings  at  blood-heat.  See  well  to  the  Sunday-schools, 
and  all  the  Bible-classes,  and  other  labours  for  Christ.  Let  nothing  flao-  of  prayer, 
service,  or  offering.  We  have  a  great  trust  ;  may  the  Lord  make  us  faithful  to  it ! 
My  love  is  with  you  all,  and  my  prayers  for  your  welfare. 

"Oh,  that  you  who  are  still  unsaved  may  be  led  to  Jesus  through  those  who 
supply  my  lack  of  service  !  Peace  be  with  the  Co-pastor,  deacons,  and  elders,  and 
with  you  all  ! 

"  From  your  loving  but  unworthy  Pastor, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 
\\\  his  humility,  he  called  himself  unworthy,  but  no  one  else  would  have  used 
such  an  epithet  concerning  him.      Never,  surely,  was  there  a  more  worthy  as  well  as 
loving  under-shepherd  of  the  flock. 

The  next  epistle  shows  that  he  had  reached  his  destination  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Wednesday  evening. 

"To  my  Dear  Friends  at  the  Tabernacle, 

'•  It  is  only  a  few  days  since  I  wrote  to  you,  and  therefore  I  have 
nothing  fresh  to  report,  except  that,  each  day,  I  feel  the  need  and  the  value  of  the 
rest  which  I  am  beginning  to  enjoy.  I  have  only  arrived  here  this  afternoon  ;  but 
the  warm  sunshine  and  the  clear  atmosphere  make  me  feel  as  if  I  had  reached 
another  world,  and  tend"  gready  to  revive  my  weary  mind. 

"  It  would  be  well  it  I  could  write  without  mentioning  myself,  and  for  your 
edification  only.  Forgive  the  need  which  there  is  of  alluding  to  my  health  ;  it 
would  best  please  me  if  I  could  work  right  on,  and  never  have  the  wretched  item  of 
self  to  mention.  My  mind  runs  much  upon  the  work  at  home, — the  services,  the 
College,  the  Orphanage,  the  Colportage,  the  Sabbath-school,  the  coming  special 
meetings,  and  so  on.  I  picture  all  things  in  my  mind's  eye,  and  wonder  how  all  are 
going  on;  then  I  pray,  and  leave  the  whole  with  '  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep: 


228  C.     H.     SrURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  My  brother  and  all  the  officers  will  watch  for  the  good  of  the  church  ;  and  the 
more  spiritual  and  full-grown  among  you  will  also  care  for  the  state  of  the  work  ; 
and  so  the  Lord  will  use  your  instrumentality  for  His  glory.  We  are  set  for  a  sign 
and  token  of  the  power  of  the  old-fashioned  gospel,  and  we  are  bound  to  prove  to 
all  around,  not  only  that  the  truth  can  gather,  but  that  it  can  hold.  It  will  not  only 
forcibly  draw  men  together,  but  it  will  bind  them  together ;  and  that,  too,  not 
through  some  favoured  preacher,  but  by  Its  own  intrnisic  force.  This  assertion 
needs  proof,  and  you  will  prove  it. 

"  May  God,  the  Eternal  Spirit,  abide  over  you  all,  beloved,  and  cause  you  to  be 
strong  by  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  One  !  May  the  poor  be  comforted,  the  sick 
supported,  the  warriors  be  strengthened,  and  the  labourers  be  sustained !  My 
hearty  love  is  ever  with  you. 

"  'There  my  best  friends,  my  kindred,  (hvell, 
There  God  my  Saviour  icigns. 

"  Yours  in  Christ  Jesus, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 
"  Keep  up  the  prayer-meetimcs." 

The  following  week,  this  letter  was  written  . — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Feb.  7: 

"  My  Beloved  Friends, 

"  After  enjoying  a  few  restful  nights  and  quiet  days,  I  feel  myself  coming 
round  again,  and  my  heart  is  full  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  to  our  gracious  God. 
Your  prayers  have  been  incessant,  and  have  prevailed  ;  and  I  am  very  grateful 
to  you  all.  As  long  as  I  am  able,  it  will  be  my  joy  to  be  of  service  to  you  ;  an-d 
m.y  only  grief  has  been  that  sickness  has  weakened  my  powers,  and  rendered 
me  less  able  to  discharge  my  happy  duties  among  you.  The  post  I  occupy  needs  a 
man  at  his  best,  and  I  have  of  late  been  very  much  the  reverse.  However,  we  know 
who  It  is  that  gueth  power  to  the  faint,  and  so  we  trust  that  feeble  efforts  have 
not  been  ineftectual. 

"  I  shall  be  doubly  indebted  to  the  goodness  of  our  Lord  If  the  remainder 
of  my  rest  shall  confirm  the  beneficial  work  which  has  commenced.  The  further 
repose  will,  I  hope,  make  me  stronger  for  the  tuture. 

"  I  have  not  yet  heard  tidings  of  the  special  services,  but  I  hope  that  every 
member  is  at  work  to  make  them  a  success.  Pray  about  them,  speak  about 
them,  attend  them,  assist  in  them,  brmg  others  to  them.  Our  two  evangelists 
are  the  right  instruments,  but  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  needed  to  work  by  them. 
Call  upon   Him.  whose  hand  it  is,   and  He  will  work  according  to  His  own  good 


c.    H.    si'Urgeon's   autobiograthy.  229 

pleasure.  The  times  are  such  that  churches  holduig  the  old  truths  must  be 
active  and  energetic,  that  the  power  of  the  gospel  may  be  manifest  to  all.  We 
need  to  uplift  a  banner  because  of  the  truth.  So  numerous  a  church  as  ours 
may  accomplish  great  things,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  only  we  are 
once  in  downright  earnest.  Playing  at  religion  is  wretched  ;  it  must  be  everything 
to  us,  or  it  will  be  nothing. 

"  Peace  be  with  you  all,  and  abounding  love  ! 

"  Your  hearty  friend, 

"C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

There  is  a    gap   in   the    correspondence   here  ;  for,    even  on   the   sunny  shore 

of   the    Mediterranean,    the    Pastor's    constitutional    enemy    found    him    out,    and 

inflicted    fresh    suffering    upon    him.       After    an    interval    of   three   weeks,    he   was 

able  to  write  as  follows  : — 

"  Mcntone, 

"  Feb.  28. 

"  Beloved  Friends, 

"  I  rejoice  that  the  time  of  my  return  to  you  is  now  a  matter  of  a 
few  days,  and  that  I  have  every  prospect,  if  the  Lord  will,  of  returning  with 
health  established  and  mind  rested.  Perhaps  never  befo-re  have  I  been  brought 
so  low  in  spirit,  and  assuredly  never  more  graciously  restored.  May  the  Lord 
sanctify  both  the  trial  and  the  recovery,  so  that  I  may  be  a  fitter  instrument 
in  His  hand  to  promote  His  glory  and  your  highest  good  ! 

"  The  last  fortnight  of  additional  rest  was  wisely  ordained  by  a  higher  hand 
than  that  of  the  good  deacons,  who  suggested  it  to  me  ;  for,  without  it,  I  should 
not  have  had  space  to  pass  through  an  attack  of  pain  which  has  just  swept  over 
me,  and  left  me  improved  by  its  violence.  The  last  few  days  will,  I  feel,  be 
the  best  of  the  whole,  when  I  shall  not  have  to  be  thoughtful  of  recovery,  but 
aliogether  restful. 

"  Good  news  from  the  Tabernacle  continues  to  be  as  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty 
soul.  You  have  had  great  times  of  refreshing  ;  may  their  inllucnce  abide  with 
you  !  We  must  not  go  to  sleep  on  my  return,  nor  at  any  other  time  ;  but  steadily 
labour  on,  and  watch  for  souls.  Spurts  are  very  helpful  ;  but  to  keep  up  the 
pace  at  ,a  high  regular  figure,  is  the  most  important  thing.  Even  an  invalid 
can  make  a  gieat  exertion  when  some  remarkable  occasion  excites  him  to  do  so; 
but  constant,  unwearied  effort  belongs  only  to  those  who  have  stamina  and  inward 
force.  May  our  whole  church  piove  itself  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  vand  in  the 
power  of  His  might,  by  unceasingly  carrying  on  its  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  ! 

"In  these   days,  we   arc  regarded  as   Puritanical  and  old-fashioned  ;  and  this 


230  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

description,  I  trust,  we  shall  never  be  ashamed  of,  but  wear  it  as  an  ornament.  The 
Did  orthodox  faith  is  to  us  no  outworn  creed  of  past  ages,  but  a  thing  of  power, 
a  joy  for  ever.  In  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  who  by  that  faith  is  honoured,  we 
press  forward  to  proclaim  again  and  again  the  doctrines  of  the  grace  of  God, 
the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  the  Divine  Substitute,  and  the  power  of  the 
Eternal  Spirit ;  and  we  feel  assured  that,  whoever  may  oppose,  the  omnipotent 
gospel  will  prevail. 

"The  multitudes  are  hungering  for  that  old-fashioned  bread  whereon  their 
fathers  fed,  and  too  many  preachers  now  give  them  newly-carved  stones,  and  bid 
them  admire  the  skill  of  the  modern  sculptors.  We  mean  to  keep  to  the  distribution 
of  bread,  and  the  stone-cutters  will  meet  with  no  competition  from  us  in  their 
favourite  amusement.  But,  brethren,  only  a  living  church — holy,  prayerful,  active, 
• — can  make  the  old  truth  victorious.  Linked  with  a  mass  of  mere  profession, 
it  will  perform  no  exploits.  To  you  and  to  me  there  is  a  growing  call  for 
greater  spirituality,  and  more  Divine  power,  for  the  work  before  us  increases  in 
difficulty. 

"  The  Lord  be  with  you   all,  and  with  your  Pastor,  deacons,  and  elders  !     So 

prays — 

"  Yours  lovingly, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

The  officers  and  members  of  the  church  took  many  opportunities  of  assuring 
the  Pastor  of  their  unwavering  attachment  and  unabated  affection.  His  seasons  of 
sickness  afforded  occasions  for  the  expression  of  special  sympathy  and  love.  The 
following  letter,  written  by  Mr.  B.  Wildon  Carr,  and  adopted  at  a  full  meeting 
of  the  church  at  the  close  of  the  service  on  a  Lord's-day  evening,  is  a  sample 
of  the  communications  that  helped  to  cheer  Mr.  Spurgeon  when  laid  aside  from 
active  labour  for  the  Lord  : — 

"  Very  dear  and  highly-esteemed   Pastor, 

"  Meeting  around  the  communion  table  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  we  are  all  of  us,  this  night,  sad  and  sorrowful  because  of  your 
illness  ;  and  one  impulse  fills  every  heart,  we  are  unanimous  in  the  desire  to 
offer  you  some  expression  of  our  heartfelt  sympathy. 

°  "We  had  hoped  that,  after  a  few  days'  rest,  you  would  have  been  relieved 
of  the  bodily  pain,  the  physical  weakness,  and  the  mental  depression  with  which 
it  has  pleased  our  Heavenly  Father  to  visit  you.  The  Lord  has  done  it.  We 
accept  the  affliction,  as  you  do,  from  the  hand  of  God.  But  we  cannot  help 
comparing  you  to  a  warrior  wounded  in  action,  or  to  a  physician  prostrated  with 
(jxertions  to    prescribe  for   patients    that   importune    him    on  every  side.      For    the 


C.     H.     SrURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  23I 

work  of  Christ,  you  have  been  nig-h   unto  death,  not  regarding  your  Hfe,  to  supply 
a  lack  of  service  toward  us. 

"We  cannot    forget   that  this   visitation  came    upon    you   immediately   after    a 

season  of  heavy  labour,  remarkable  energy,  and  (as  we  cannot  doubt)  of  heavenly 

'joy  in  the  service  of  Christ,   of   this  church,   and  of  other  churches.      It  seems  to 

us  meet,  therefore,  that  we   should  attribute  the  cause  of  it  to  a  natural  infirmity 

of  the  flesh,  and  not  in  any  wise  to  the  severity  of  the  Lord's  chastening. 

"  Beloved  Pastor,  we  remember,  with  tender  gratitude,  how  generously  you 
have  always  associated  us  with  you  in  all  the  success  and  prosperity  that,  through 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  have  attended  your  ministry.  We  never  could 
doubt  your  sincerity,  in  offering  the  praise  to  God,  when  we  witnessed  your 
humility  in  imparting  so  much  of  the  credit  (entirely  due  to  yourself)  to  the 
unworthy  brethren  and  sisters  who  watch  and  pray  with  you,  while  we  account 
it  a  high  privilege  to  follow  our   Lord  and   Master,  as  you  lead  our  forces. 

"With  the  affection  we  bear  you,  we  can  truly  say  that  we  should  account  it 
a  happiness  to  bear  your  sufferings  amongst  us  ;  some  of  us  would  gladly  take 
them  all,  if  we  could  thereby  relieve  you  of  the  heavy  cross  that  bows  you 
down.  As  we  sit  before  the  Lord,  we  think  of  you,  as  the  people  said  to 
David,  'Thou  art  worth  ten  thousand  of  us.'  Kindly  accept,  then,  our  united 
expression  of  love  in  Christ  Jesus,  tendered  to  you  in  a  solemn  hour.  It  may 
be  superfluous  to  you,  but  it  is  refreshing  to  us  to  get  an  opportunity  of 
communicating  with  you  in  your  sick  chamber. 

"  May  the  Lord  look  tenderly  upon  you  in  your  affliction  !  May  He 
graciously  remember  your  work  and  labour  of  love,  in  that  you  have  ministered 
to  the  saints,  and  do  minister!  May  He  be  very  attentive  to  our  prayers  and 
intercessions  on  your  behalf,  that  you  may  be  restored  to  us,  not  in  weakness 
and  decrepitude,  but  in  the  fulness  of  vigour,  with  your  youth  renewed  like  the 
eagle's, — and  that  right  early  !  " 

(Signed,  on  behalf  of  the  church,  by  fifteen  deacons  and  elders.) 

It  is  significant  that  only  two  of  the  church-officers  whose  signatures  were 
appended  to   the  letter — one   deacon  and   one  elder — still   survive. 

The  following  extracts  from  a  letter,  written  by  Mr.  Carr  to  his  absent 
Pastor  at  Mentone,  will  still  further  indicate  the  loving  relationship  which  existed 
between   Mr.  Spurgeon  and  those  who  laboured  with   him  in  the  gospel  : — 

"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  cannot  doubt  that  you  receive,  through  one  and  another,  full 
accounts  of  all  matters  that  relate  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  the  Institutions  connected 
with  it,  m  which  many  brethren  feel  the  high  honour  of  being  associated  with  you. 


232  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

We  are  continually  hearing-  of  letters  you  have  sent  in  reply  to  those  that  have  been 
written  to  you. 

"  I  often  think  that,  if  you  could  hear  In  what  manner  you  are  spoken  of, 
and  in  what  love  and  tender  regard  you  are  held  by  your  church-officers,  you 
would  blush  a  little.  And,  then,  if  you  heard  the  members  of  the  church  ask  after 
your  health,  and  say  how  sorry  they  were  that  you  purposed  coming  home  so 
soon,  and  how  sincerely  they  wished  you  would  stay  till  these  biting  winds  had 
ceased  to  blow,  you  would  be  jealous  of  yourself  with  a  jealousy  that  might  be  very 
justifiable.  If  you  were  to  hear  what  the  outside  public  are  constantly  saying  of 
you,  you  might  be  astonished,  but  you  would  be  gratified,  for,  very  ob\iously, 
there  are  thousands,  who  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  look  upon  you  as 
one  of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived,  and  one  who  is  doing  great  good  to  his  fellows. 

"  Your  long  affliction,  and  your  tedious  banishment,  have  already  borne  some 
peaceable  fruits.  The  stable  character  of  your  work  has  been  proved.  Had  the 
church  been  built  on  the  basis  of  your  popularity  as  a  preacher,  the  congregations 
would  not  have  been  so  well  kept  up  in  your  absence  ;  but,  so  far  from  that  being 
the  case,  the  prayer-meetings  and  the  weekly  communion  services  are  well  attended,  - 
even  when  the  severe  weather,  had  you  been  here,  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
account  for  some  deficiencies.  This  has  been  no  ordinary  winter.  Your  brother 
was  saying,  the  other  day,  that,  although  we  have  not  yet  completed  the  first 
qjuxrter  of  the  year,  the  deaths  have  already  exceeded  the  average  for  the  half- 
year.  That  may  not  be  so  gloomy  as  it  sounds.  The  depression  in  the  temperature 
has  possibly  hastened  the  exit  of  some  whose  constitutions  would  not  have  held 
out  for  the  year,  and  so  the  average,  of  which  he  speaks,  may  tell  no  more  than 
its  usual  tale  when  the  next  annual  meeting  comes  round.  If,  then,  the  number 
of  your  twinges  and  groans  has  been  reduced  by  the  retreat  to  a  more  sheltered 
locality,  let  us  be  thankful,  and  hope  for  you  a  full  community  on  your  return. 

"What  a  nice  deacons'  meeting  we  had  on  Friday!  There  was  a  lull  muster 
of  brethren  ;  not  one  was  absent,  but  the  one  to  whom  we  all  look  as  Pastor, 
President,  father,  and  friend.  And  yet,  to  the  imagination  of  each  one,  he  was 
present.  No  matter  was  broached  without  a  distinct  intimation,  on  the  part  of 
every  one,  to  consult  his  wishes.  This  was  the  rallying-point  of  harmonious 
thought  and  feeling  that  became  almost  pathetic  as  the  meeting  proceeded.  The 
secretary  will  have  his  work  cut  out  if  he  tries  to  make  the  minutes  reflect  the 
business  of  the  evening.  I  will  not  attempt  it.  From  resolutions  we  abstained  ; 
and  the  recommendations  were  left  to  our  chairman,  the  Co-pastor,  to  formulate, 
and  forward  for  your  approval." 

On   May   10,    1881,    Mr.  William  Olney  wrote  to  his  suffering   Pastor  a  letter 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  233 

of  loving  sympathy,  in  which  he  gave  a  cheering  account  of  the  progress  of 
various  portions  of  the  work  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  then  added: — "You  will, 
I  am  sure,  excuse  me  for  writing  rather  a  long  letter  to  you  to-day,  as  it  is  my 
sixtieth  birthday.  I  want  to  tell  you  how  thankful  I  am  that  my  lot  has  been 
cast,  in  the  good  providence  of  God,  under  your  ministry,  and  how  grateful  I  am 
to  you  for  the  many  years  of  blessing  and  instruction  I  have  spent  sitting  at 
your  feet.  I  have  had  great  pleasure,  for  many  years,  in  daily  commending  you 
to  God,  and  in  doing  what  I  can  to  assist  you  in  your  earnest  efforts  for  God's 
glory  and  the  good  of  souls  ;  but  I  fear  I  have  done  but  little.  Oh,  that  it 
were  more  !  Words  cannot  express  the  debt  of  love  I  owe  to  you  ;  and  you 
must  kindly  excuse  my  infirmity  in  not  being  able  to  show  it  better  in  deeds  than 
I  have  done." 

To  the  end  of  his  life,  Mr.  William  Olney's  loving  esteem  for  his  Pastor 
remained  unchanged  ;  and  when  he  was  "called  home,"  he  was  sorely  missed. 

The  year  which  was  to  witness  the  joyful  celebration  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Jubilee 
opened  for  him  under  trying  circumstances.  He  was  away  at  Mentone,  very  ill  ; 
yet  the  following  letter  seems  to  have  caught  some  of  the  brightness  of  the  sunny 
land  where  it  was  penned  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Jan.  10,  1884. 

"  Dear  Friends, 

"  I  am  altogether  stranded.  I  am  not  able  to  leave  my  bed,  or  to  find 
much  rest  upon  it.  The  pains  of  rheumatism,  lumbago,  and  sciatica,  mingled 
together,  are  exceedingly  sharp.  If  I  happen  to  turn  a  little  to  the  right  hand  or  to 
the  left,  [  am  soon  aware  that  I  am  dwelling  in  a  body  capable  of  the  most  acute 
suffering. 

"  However,  I  am  as  happy  and  cheerful  as  a  man  can  be.  I  feel  it  such  a  great 
relief  that  I  am  not  yet  robbing  the  Lord  of  my  work,  tor  my  holiday  has  not  quite 
run  out.  A  man  has  a  right  to  have  the  rheumatism  if  he  likes  when  his  time  is  his 
own.  The  worst  of  it  is,  that  I  am  afraid  I  shall  have  to  intrude  into  my  Master's 
domains,  and  draw  again  upon  your  patience.  Unless  I  get  better  very  soon,  I 
cannot  get  home  in  due  time  ;  and  I  am  very  much  afraid  that,  it  I  did  return 
at  the  date  arranged,  I  should  be  of  no  use  to  you,  for  I  should  be  sure  to  be 
laid  aside. 

"The  deacons  have  written  me  a  letter,  in  which  they  unanimously  recommend 
me  to  take  two  more  Sundays,  so  that  I  may  get  well,  and  not  return  to  you  an 
invalid.  I  wrote  to  them  saying  that  I  thought  I  must  take  a  week  ;  but  as  I  do  not 
get  a  bit  better,  but  am  rather  worse,  I  am  afraid  I  shall  have  to  miake  it  a  fortnight. 


234  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHT. 

as  they  proposed.  Most  men  find  that  they  go  right  when  they  obey  their  wives  ; 
and  as  my  wife  and  my  deacons  are  agreed  on  this  matter,  1  am  afraid  I  should  go 
doubly  wrong  if  I  ran  contrary  to  them.  I  hope  you  will  all  believe  that,  if  the 
soldier  could  stand,  he  would  march  ;  and  if  your  servant  were  able,  he  would  work  ; 
but  when  a  man  is  broken  in  two  by  the  hammer  of  pain,  he  must  wait  till  he  gets 
spliced  again. 

"  May  the  best  of  blessings  continue  to  rest  upon  you  !  May  those  who  supply 
my  place  be  very  graciously  helped  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ! 

"Yours,  with  all  my  heart, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

The  Pastor  often  referred,  as  he  did  in  this  letter,  to  his  "ricrht"  to  be  ill  durino- 
his  holiday  ;  but  the  next  communication  from  his  church-officers  shows  that  their 
regrets  on  account  of  his  sufferings,  at  such  times,  were  intensified  by  the  knowledge 
that,  instead  of  joyously  resting  and  being  refreshed,  he  was  enduring  painful 
afflictions. 

In  January,  1885,  instead  of  being  in  the  sunny  South,  as  he  had  hoped 
to  be,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  still  at  home,  too  ill  to  travel.  At  a  special  church- 
meeting,  held  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  January  12,  it  was  unanimously  and  heartily 
resolved  that  the  following  letter  should  be  forwarded  to  "  Westwood  "  : — 

"  Dear  Pastor, 

"  We  have  heard,  with  profoinid  grief,  that  you  have  been  unable  to  go 
out  on  your  proposed  visit  to  Mentone  in  consequence  of  severe  and  painful  illness 
during  the  past  week.  Our  sincere  sympathy  is  rather  increased  than  lessened 
by  the  reflection  that  this  season  of  affliction  has  not  been  borrowed  from  your 
time  of  service  for  the  church,  but  from  the  period  of  recreation  to  which  you 
have  a  perfect  right  as  well  as  a  hearty  welcome. 

"While  devoutly  recognizing  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  this  and  in  all  other 
dispensations  of  His  providence,  we  feel  that  it  cannot  be  irreverent  to  seek 
some  clear  interpretation  of  the  will  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  Can  we  be  mistaken 
in  supposing  diat  the  lesson  to  us  and  to  yourself  is  transparent  ?  Your  arduous 
labours,  and  your  incessant  anxieties,  so  far  exceed  the  average  strength  of  your 
constitution,  that  there  is  an  imperative  demand  for  you  to  take  longer  and  more 
frequent  occasions  of  retirement,  and  to  take  them,  not  when  you  have  used 
up   '  the  last  ounce  of  your  strength,'  but  when  you  are  in  unimpaired  vigour. 

"  Under  present  circumstances,  we  earnestly  entreat  you  to  consecrate  at  least 
three  months  to  entire  relaxation   from  the  duties  of  your  sacred  office  ;    and  if  it 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  '  235 

seem  good  to  you,  let  the  appointment  of  supplies  for  your  pulpit  be  left  to  the 
Co-pastor  and  the  deacons,  subject  always  to  their  accepting  any  suggestion  of 
yours,  and  their  communicating  to  you  every  arrangement  of  theirs,  as  is  their 
habitual  wont. 

"And  accept,  herewith,  our  assurance,  as  a  church,  that  we  will  all  unite 
in  a  strong  determination  to  support  the  good  work  of  the  Tabernacle  by  constant 
attendance,  both  on  Sundays  and  week-evenings,  and  by  offering  our  full  contri- 
butions to  the  support  of  the  various  institutions  of  the  church. 

"  With  sincere  affection,   and  unceasing  prayers  for  your  recovery, 
"  We  are,   dear  Pastor, 

"  Yours  ever  lovingly," 

(Signed  by  the  church-officers.) 

On  his  recovery,  the  Pastor  left  for  Mentone,  and  he  was  therefore  absent  at 
the  time  of  the  annual  church-meeting  ;  but  he  wrote  the  following  letter  to  be 
read  to  the  members  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  February  9,  1885. 
"To  the  Church  in  the  Tabernacle,     ■ 

"  Beloved  in  the  Lord, 

"  I  salute  you  all  right  heartily.  I  regret  that  an  annual  church-meeting 
should  be  held  without  me  ;  but  I  know  that  all  things  will  be  done  rightly,  for  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  among  you. 

"  I  write  only  to  send  my  love,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  am  greatly  profiting  by 
the  rest  which  has  been  given  me.  I  am  weak  indeed,  but  I  feel  much  more  myself 
again.  I  have  learned,  by  experience,  that  I  must  go  away  in  November  each  year, 
or  else  I  shall  be  at  home  ill.  If  the  Lord  will  help  me  through  the  other  months 
of  the  year,  I  might  rest  in  November  and  December  with  a  clear  economy  of  time. 
I  want  to  do  the  most  possible  ;  and,  on  looking  over  the  past,  this  appears  to  be 
the  wisest  way. 

"The  other  matter  is, — the  elders  propose  special  services,  and  my  whole 
heart  says  'Yes.'  If  the  church  takes  it  up,  the  result  will  be,  with  the  Divine 
blessing,  a  great  ingathering.  Mem.bers  canvassing  from  door  to  door,  and  leaving 
a  sermon,  might  do  much  good.  I  will  subscribe  ^5  towards  a  fund  for  sermons, 
suitably  selected,  to  be  given  away.  The  chief  point  is,  to  get  the  people  in,  not  by 
bribing  them  with  tea,  etc.,  but  by  fair  persuasion.      Oh,  for  a  great  blessing  ! 

"  I  feel  grieved  to  be  out  of  the  running,  but  I  cannot  help  it.  I  can  pray,  and 
I  do.  Rally  round  your  leaders.  Pray  with  double  earnestness.  Be  instant  in 
season  and  out  of  season.     Attempt  great  things,  and  expect  great  things. 


236  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  IVIay  the  Lord  bless,  guide,  comfort,  strengthen  and  uphold  the  Co-pastor, 
deacons,  elders,  and  every  one  of  you,  for  Jesus'  sake  ! 

"  Yours  in  hearty  affection, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

"  I  hope  you  will  re-elect  the  treasurer  and  all  the  elders  ;  they  cannot  be 
improved  upon." 

On  the  proposition  of  Mr.  William  Olney,  the  following  congratulatory  reso- 
lution was  sent  to  the  Pastor  : — 

"  Resolved  that,  in  review  of  the  past  year,  we  congratulate  our  dear  Pastor 
on  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord  which  has  been  with  him,  and  with  us.  Three 
circumstances,  each  of  double  significance,  have  distinguished  this  year  from  other 
years  in  our  history. 

"The  first  is,  that,  while  an  unusually  bright  summer  diminished  the  attendance 
of  our  church-members,  an  extraordinary  influx  of  rural  visitors  to  the  '  Healtheries 
Exhibition '  secured  the  crowding  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  to  its  utmost 
capacity. 

"The  second  is,  that,  although  Mr.  Spurgeon's  severe  indisposition,  in  the 
autumn,  deprived  us  of  his  services  on  many  successive  Lord's-days,  his  son 
Thomas,  home  from  New  Zealand,  most  acceptably  supplied  the  pulpit  in  his 
absence. 

"The  third  is,  that,  notwithstanding  a  long  death-roll,  our  band  of  deacons 
remains  unbroken  ;  and  only  one  of  our  beloved  elders,  a  brother  ripe  in  years  as 
well  as  in  grace,  has  been  taken  from  among  us. 

"  To  these  reasons  for  heartfelt  gratitude,  we  must  add  a  fourth,  which  we 
record  with  unmlngled  satisfaction.  It  is  that  another  volume  of  our  dear  Pastor's 
sermons  has  been  placed  on  our  bookshelves,  fully  equal  in  freshness  and  force,  in 
unction  and  usefulness,  to  any  of  the  twenty-nine  volumes  that  preceded  it." 

The  following  chapter  will  prove  that  the  church-officers  and  members  showed 
their  sympathy  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  not  only  by  loving  letters  and  cordial  resolutions, 
but  also  by  practical  and  substantial  tokens  of  their  aft'ection  and  esteem. 


CHAPTER    XCVIII. 


3abiltt  3013S. 


The  river  of  our  peace  at  certain  seasons  overflows  its  banks  ;  and,  at  times,  the  believer's 
joy  is  exceeding  great.  Even  princes,  who  fare  sumptuously  every  day,  have  their  special  banquets  ; 
and  this  Jubilee  of  my  life  is  a  true  Jubilee  of  joy,  not  only  to  myself,  but  to  every  member  of  my 
family. —C.  H.  S.,  in  sermon  preached  at  the   Tabej-nacte  in  celebration  of  the  completion  of  his  fiftieth  year. 


UNE  19,  1884,  was  one  of  the  red-letter  days  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
history,  for  he  then  completed  the  fiftieth  year  of  his  life.  At  the 
annual  church-meeting-,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,  on  February  13, 
the  following  resolution  was  unanimously  and  enthusiastically 
passed  : — "That  the  church  gratefully  recognizes  the  goodness 
of  Almighty  God  in  sparing  to  it,  and  to  the  Christian  Church 
at  large,  the  invaluable  life  of  our  beloved  Pastor,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  ;  and  that, 
in  order  worthily  to  celebrate  his  Jubilee,  a  suitable  memorial  be  raised,  and 
presented  to  him  ;  and  that  it  be  an  instruction  to  the  deacons  to  take  this 
matter  vigorously  in  hand,   and  to  carry  it  forward  as  they  may  deem  best." 

The  deacons,  having  received  that  instruction  from  their  fellow-members,  lost 
no  time  a  considering  the  best  method  of  carrying  it  into  effect  ;  indeed,  they 
were  the  first  to  suggest  that  such  a  notable  period  in  the  Pastor's  life  must 
not  be  allowed  to  pass  without  due  recognition  ;  and,  with  their  usual  generosity, 
they  headed  "  the  list  of  love  "  which  was  immediately  commenced.  They  had, 
at  first,  just  the  same  difficulty  as  when  they  were  arranging  for  the  pastoral 
silver  wedding  testimonial,  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  again  insisted  that,  whatever  amount 
was  raised  should  be  devoted  to  the  Lord's  work,  and  not  be  for  his  own  personal 
benefit.  No  doubt  this  restriction  somewhat  reduced  the  total  sum  ultimately 
reached,  for  many  generous  helpers  said  that,  as  the  Pastor  gave  away  the  whole 
of  the  ^6,500  presented  to  him  in  1879,  and  as  they  were  constantly  contributing 
to  the  various  Institutions  under  his  charge,  they  wished,  on  this  occasion,  to  give 
him  substantial  tokens  of  their  ever-growing  love  and  esteem  for  himself.  It 
will  be  seen,  from  his  address  acknowledging  the  testimonial,  that  he  consented, 
under  the  urgent  entreaties  of  the  donors,  to  take  some  portion  of  the  amount 
for  himself;  but,  even  then,  he  simply  took  it  that  he  might  give  it  away,  again  ; 
and  the  only  way  in  which  a  few  very  special  friends  could  make  sure  of  his 
reception  of  their  gifts  was  to  send  something  direct  to  him  for  ornament  or  use 
in  his  home. 


2.:i8 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


On  May  6,  a  few  friends  met  the  deacons,  to  hear  how  the  matter  was 
progressing,  to  make  further  contributions  to  the  fund,  and  to  consult  as  to  the  final 
arrangements  with  regard  to  its  presentation.  Up  to  that  night,  about  ^i,ooo  had 
been  received  or  promised, — just  the  amount  which  it  was  estimated  would  be 
required  to  pay  for  the  Jubilee  House,  at  the  back  of  the  Tabernacle,  which  was 
then  being  erected  as  a  permanent  memorial  of  the  Pastor's  fiftieth  year.  On  the 
side  of  that  building  is  a  marble  slab,  which  is  here  reproduced. 


JUNE    19Tf.   1884. 


WITH     GRATITUDE    AND    GLADNESS 
THIS   HOUSE   WAS    ERECTED    TO   COMMEMORATE 

C.   H    SPURGEON, 

PASTOR  OF  THE  CHURCH  AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE. 


Eo  tl)E  ILorti  be  glorn  for  all  tljc  faork 
to!jic[)  ?^:  fjas  toroiigljt  among  Ijis  pcaplc. 

"Thou  HAST  THRUST  SORE  AT  METHATI  MIGHT  FALL: 

but  the  lord  helped  me. 
The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  song, 

AND  is   become  MY  SALVATION. 

The  voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  is  in  the 

tabernacles  of  the  righteous. 

The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth  valiantly: 

The  right  hand  of  the  Lord 

is   exalted  : 

The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth  valiantly. 

I  shall  not  die,  but  live, 

and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord. 

The  Lord  hath  chastened  me  sore, 

BUT  He  hath  not  given  me  over  unto  death." 

PSALM    CXVIII.    13—18. 


COPY   OF    MARBLE  SLAB  AND   INSCRIPTION   ON  JUBILEE   HOUSE. 


Concerning  this  inscription,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote: — "The  somewhat  lengthy 
quotation  from  the  Psalm  is  an  accurate  photograph  of  the  Pastor's  personal 
experience,  and  of  the  triumphs  of  the  Lord  in  the  adjoining  Tabernacle.  Power 
has  been  seen  in  weakness,  healing  by  sickness,  and  joy  through  sorrow."  Mr. 
Spurgeon  preached  upon  the  various  verses  here  engraved,  and  he  intended  to 
make  a  book  of  these  sermons,  and  of  personal  memories  of  the  Lord's  goodness  ; 
but    the   work   of   revising   the   discourses   was,   through    illness    and    the    pressure 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRATHY.  239 

of  Other  service,  so  long  delayed,  that  the  publication  ot  the  proposed  volume 
had  to  be  abandoned.  The  manuscripts  were,  however,  carefully  preserved  for 
future  use  in  The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit.  A  very  pathetic  interest  now 
attaches  to  the  sermon  issued  for  reading-  on  January  3,  1892,  for  it  was  the 
first  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  able  to  prepare  for  the  press  after  his  long 
illness,  and  the  last  but  one  that  he  ever  revised.  The  other  three  sermons, 
preached  from  the  texts  on  the  Jubilee  House,  were  published,  in  due  course,  in 
October,  1897,  ^"*^  the  four  together  form  a  choice  memorial  of  a  notable  period 
in  the  great  preacher's  life. 

As  the  date  of  the  celebration  of  the  Jubilee  approached,  many  references 
to  it  appeared  in  the  religious  and  secular  newspapers,  the  most  noteworthy  being 
the  articles  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  of  June  18  and  19,  1884.  They  were  the 
result  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  compliance  with  the  request  contained  in  the  following 
letter  from  the  Editor,  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead  : — 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"You  are,  I  am  aware,  one  of  the  busiest  men  in  London.  But  I 
venture  to  ask  you  to  spare  me  a  morsel  of  your  leisure  to  have  a  talk  over 
things  in  view  of  your  approaching  Jubilee, — your  long  and  successful  labours  in 
London,  and  the  general  result  .at  which  you  have  arrived  after  going  through  it 
all.  That,  of  course,  for  the  paper  and  the  public.  Besides  this,  I  should  be 
very  glad  to  have  an  opportunity  personally  of  placing  myself  in  immediate  com- 
munication with  one  who  has  been  such  a  power  for  good  in  London  and  throughout 
the  world.  I  also  am  very  busy,  but  any  day  after  1 2  I  am  at  your  service  if 
you  can  spare  me  time  for  an  interview.      I  ha\e  the  honour  to  be, 

"Your  obedient  servant, 

"  W.  T.  Stead." 

The  report  of  the  interview  contained  allusions  to  many  subjects  either  of 
passing  or  permanent  interest.  The  whole  conversation  was,  more  or  less,  of  an 
autobiographical  character,  the  opening  paragraphs  dealing  with  the  subject  of 
religious  endowments.      Mr.  Stead  wrote  : — 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  one  of  the  most  genial  of  hosts,  and  in  the  course  of  a 
couple  of  hours  spent  in  strolling  about  his  well-wooded  grounds,  or  in  gossiping 
in  his  library,  his  visitor  was  able  to  gather  his  views  concerning  a  great  number 
of  the  questions  of  the  day.  He  found  Mr.  Spurgeon,  as  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at,  a  strong  believer  in  the  one-man  power.  'Wherever  anything  is  to  be  done,' 
said  he,  '  either  in  the  Church  or  the  world,  you  may  depend  upon  it,  it  is  done 
by  one  man.  The  whole  history  of  the  Church,  from  the  earliest  ages,  teaches 
the  same  lesson.     A  Moses,  a  Gideon,  an  Isaiah,  and  a  Paul  are  from  time  to  time 


240 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


raised  up  to  do  an  appointed  work  ;  and  when  they  pass  away,  their  work  appears 
to  cease.  Nor  is  it  given  to  everyone,  as  it  was  to  Moses,  to  see  the  Joshua  who 
is  destined  to  carry  on  his  work  to  completion.  God  can  raise  up  a  successor  to 
each  man,  but  the  man  himself  is  not  to  worry  about  that  matter,  or  he  may  do 
harm.  Hence  I  am  against  all  endowments  for  religion  ;  it  is  better  to  spend  the 
money  for  immediate  needs.  I  am  not  even  in  favour  of  endowing  my  own  College. 
Someone  made  me  an  ofler,  the  other  day,  to  found  a  scholarship  in  connection  with 
it,  but  I  declined  it.  Why  should  I  gather  money,  which  would  remain  after  I  am 
gone,  to  uphold  teaching  of  which  I  might  entirely  disapprove  ?  No !  let  each 
generation  provide  for  its  own  wants.  Let  my  successor,  if  I  have  one  in  the 
College,  do  as  I  have  done,  and  secure  the  funds  which  he  needs  for  his  own 
teaching.  I  wish  there  were  no  religious  endowments  of  any  shape  or  kind  among 
Dissenters  or  Churchmen,  for  I  never  yet  knew  a  chapel,  possessing  an  endowment, 
which  did  not  find  that,  instead  of  its  being  a  blessing,  it  was  a  curse.  One  great 
object  of  every  religious  teacher  should  be  to  prevent  the  creation  of  external 
appliances  to  make  his  teaching  appear  to  live  when  it  is  dead.  If  there  were  no 
endowments,  an  error  would  soon  burst  up,  whereas  an  artificial  vitality  is  imparted 
to  it  by  bolstering  it  up  with  endowments.' 

"'Then  you  have  faith  for  yourself,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  but  none  for  your 
successor?'  queried  the  visitor. 

"'A  man  does  very  well,'  was  the  reply,  'who  has  faith  for  himself;  but  how 
can  he  undertake  to  have  faith  for  another  ?  I  am  no  believer  In  sponsorship. 
Wlio  knows  where  my  successor  may  be?  He  may  be  in  America,  or  in  Australia, 
or  I  know  not  where.  As  for  the  Tabernacle,  the  man  who  occupies  my  place, 
when  I  pass  away,  will  have  to  depend  upon  his  own  resources,  upon  the  support 
of  his  people,  and  the  grace  of  God,  as  I  have  done  ;  and  if  he  cannot  do  that, 
let  him  come  to  the  ground,  for  he  will  not  be  the  fitting  man  for  the  post.'  " 

One  other  paragraph  may  be  quoted,  pardy  because  of  the  reference  made  to  it 
by  Dr.  Peter  Bayne  : — 

''  '  In  theology,'  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  '  I  stand  where  I  did  when  I  began 
preaching,  and  I  stand  almost  alone.  If  I  ever  did  such  a  thing,  I  could  preach 
my  earliest  sermons  now  without  change  so  far  as  the  essential  doctrines  are 
concerned.  I  stand  almost  exacdy  where  Calvin  stood  In  his  maturer  years  ; — ■ 
not  where  he  stood  In  his  Instiiut'es,  which  he  wrote  when  quite  a  young  man, 
but  in  his  later  works  ;  that  position  is  taken  by  few.  Even  those  who  occupy 
Baptist  pulpits  do  not  preach  exacdy  the  same  truths  that  I  preach.  They  see 
things  differently  ;  and,  of  course,  they  preach  In  their  own  way.  Although  few 
will  deny  the  wonderful  power  of  the  truth  as  It  has  been  preached  at  the 
Tabernacle,   It   is  not  according   to   their  method  ;  yet  it   is   the  Calvinistic  way  of 


c.    h:   spurgeon's   autobiography.  241 

looking  at  things  which  causes  my  sermons  to  have  such  acceptance  in  Scotland, 
in  Holland,  and  even  in  the  Transvaal,  where  a  recent  traveller  expressed  his 
astonishment  at  finding  translations  of  them  lying  beside  the  family  Bible  in  a 
great  many  of  the  farmsteads  of  the  country.  I  am  aware  that  my  preaching 
repels  many ;  that  I  cannot  help.  If,  for  instance,  a  man  does  not  believe  in 
the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  he  may  come  and  hear  me  once  ;  and  if  he  comes 
no  more,  that  is  his  responsibility,  and  not  mine.  My  doctrine  has  no  attraction 
for  that  man  ;   but  I  cannot  change  my  doctrine  to  suit  him.'  " 

Shortly  after  the  publication  of  the  second  article  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette, 
the  following  letter  reached  the  Pastor  : — 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"It  is  within  the  range  of  possibility  that,  in  your  collection  of  old 
lumber,  you  have  some  scrap  of  mine  which  had  its  place  among  those  '  paper 
bullets  of  the  brain '  whose  impact  did  you,  it  seems,  no  harm.  My  present 
notions  about  you  are  contained  in  the  enclosed  article,  which  you  may  have  seen 
in  Thursday's  Christian    World.     The  writing  of  it  gave  me  unfeigned  pleasure. 

"  I  have,  for  many  months,  been  working  strenuously  at  the  original  sources 
for  a  Life  of  Luther  ;  and  being  thus  led  to  visit  one  of  the  grand  fountains  of 
Evangelical  inspiration,  I  have  felt  my  own  early  Evangelicalism  plunged,  as  it 
were,  in  a  bath  of  life.  But  I  do  not  think  that  I  have  eve'r  wavered  in  my 
conviction  that,  for  man  and  for  nations  of  men,  the  hope  of  salvation  is  renewal 
in  the  life  of  Christ.  Yours  has  been  a  glorious  privilege, — to  preach  Christ,  with 
Divine  recognition  so  decisive,   for  nearly  forty  years. 

"  What  you  said  about  Calvin  to  the  Pall  Mall  interviewer  interests  me 
much.  Since  making  a  careful  examination  of  his  theology  and  life,  I  have 
transcendently  honoured  that  man.  But  I  measure  him  chiefly  by  the  Institutes ; 
and  am  very  curious  to  know  how  you  would  define  his  later  and  '  maturer ' 
position.  Do  not  put  pen  to  paper  on  the  subject  ;  but  if  you  have  published 
your  view  in  sermon  or  book,  I  should  be  much  obliged  by  being  told  how  I 
can  obtain  it.      Perhaps  one  of  your  secretaries  would  send  me  the  necessary  word. 

"  I  know  you  are  too  magnanimous  to  retain  the  least  little  particle  of 
grudge  against  me,  and  you  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  have  no  more  sincere  admirer 
or  affectionate  well-wisher  than   I. 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  Peter  Bayne." 


The  actual  celebration  of  the  Jubilee  commenced  on  Wednesday,  June  18,  i; 
when    the    Pastor  sat    in    his   vestry,   from    twelve   to    five    o'clock,    to    receive    the 
congratulations  of  friends,  and  contributions  to  be  passed  on  to   the  treasurers  of 

Q4 


242  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

the  testimonial  fund.  Then,  several  hundreds  of  the  church-members  were  enter- 
tained at  tea  in  the  rooms  under  the  Tabernacle,  and  afterwards  the  great 
sanctuary  was  crowded  with  an  enthusiastic  audience.  Such  vast  numbers  of 
people  were  anxious  to  be  present,  that  two  evenings  had  to  be  set  apart  for 
the  meetings  ;  and,  even  then,  hundreds  of  applicants  for  tickets  had  to  be  refused, 
for  so  many  applied  that,  if  the  building  had  been  twice  as  large,  there  would 
have  been  no  difficulty  in  filling  it  on  both  nights. 

Little  did  the  cheering  thousands  know  of  the  Intense  anxiety  that  was  felt 
by  a  few  of  the  Tabernacle  officials,  and  other  friends  who  shared  with  them  a 
terrible  secret.  Just  at  that  time,  in  various  quarters  of  London,  there  had  been 
threats  of  desperate  deeds  by  Fenians,  or  those  in  sympathy  with  them  ;  and  an 
intimation,  which  the  police  authorities  dared  not  disregard,  had  been  given  that 
the  Tabernacle  was  to  be  blown  up  on  the  night  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Jubilee.  It 
seemed  scarcely  possible  that  such  a  diabolical  scheme  of  wholesale  destruction 
of  human  life  could  have  been  devised  ;  but  every  precaution  was  taken  to  prevent 
it  becoming  an  awful  reality.  There  probably  had  never  been  so  many  detectives 
and  policemen  in  the  building  before  ;  and  when  the  proceedings  on  the  second 
night  were  over,  and  the  delighted  audience  had  dispersed,  there  were  private 
but  grateful  thanksgivings  that  all  had  gone  off  without  even  a  note  of  alarm  ; 
yet,  for  a  considerable  period  afterwards,  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  have  a 
special  watch  kept  in  case  any  attempt  of  the  kind  indicated  might  be  made. 
With  thoughtful  and  tender  solicitude,  all  knowledge  of  the  threatened  explosion 
was  kept  from  the  Pastor  ;  and  it  was  only  when  he  was  in  the  carriage,  on  his 
way  home,  that  Mrs.  Spurgeo'n  told  him  the  alarming  news  which  had  occupied 
her  thoughts  during  the  evening,  and  together  they  gave  thanks  that  the  evil 
had  been  averted. 

The  Wednesday  evening  meeting  was  specially  intended  for  the  members  of 
the  church  and  congregation,  and  representatives  of  the  many  missions,  schools, 
and  agencies  connected  with  the  Tabernacle.  The  number  of  these  various  forms 
of  work  for  the  Lord  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  the  list  of  them  occupied 
more  than  half  a  page  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,  while  nearly  as  large  a 
space  was  required  for  the  names  of  the  various  religious  societies,  at  home  and 
abroad,  from  which  addresses  of  congratulation  had  been  received. 

The  Pastor  presided,  and  it  was  to  him  a  source  of  intense  thankfulness  that 
Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  able  to  be  present  on  both  the  evenings,  to  share  with  him 
the  joys  of  the  Jubilee,  after  so  many  years'  enforced  absence  from  the  Tabernacle 
through  severe  illness.  The  keynote  of  the  whole  of  the  gatherings  was  struck, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  meeting,  by  the  Pastor's  opening  sentences  : — "  1  do 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


243 


not  think  anybody  imagines  that  I  ought  to  speak  at  any  great  length  to-night, 
but  I  should  like  to  say  very  much  in  very  little.  I  feel  overwhelmed  with  oratitude 
to  you,  dear  friends,  and  because  of  you,  to  God.  After  the  kind  words  which  many 
of  you  have  spoken  to  me,  I  have  much  to  do  not  to  cry  ;  indeed,  I  have  had  a  little 
distillation  of  the  eyes  quietly,  and  I  feel  very  much  like  weeping  now,  at  the 
remembrance  of  all  the  good  and  gracious  things  that  have  been  said  to  me  this 
day.  But  let  me  say  this  tor  my  speech  :  the  blessing-  which  I  have  had  here,  for 
many  years,  must  be  entirely  attributed  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  to  the  workino- 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit  among  us.  Let  that  stand  as  a  matter,  not  only  taken  for 
granted,  but  as  a  fact  distinctly  recognized  among  us.  I  hope,  brethren,  that  none 
of  you  will  say  that  I  have  kept  back  the  glorious  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  have 
tried  to  remind  you  of  it,  whenever  I  have  read  a  chapter,  by  praying  that  God  the 
Holy  Spirit  would  open  that  chapter  to  our  minds.  I  hope  I  have  ne\-er  preached 
without  an  entire  dependence  on  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  reliance  upon  prayer  has 
been  very  conspicuous  ;  at  least,  I  think  so.  We  have  not  begun,  we  have  not 
continued,  we  have  not  ended  anything  without  prayer.  We  have  been  pluno-ed 
into  it  up  to  the  hilt.  We  have  not  prayed  as  we  should  ;  but,  still,  we  have 
so  prayed  as  to  prevail  ;  and  we  wish  It  to  be  on  record  that  we  owe  our  success, 
as  a  church,  to  the  work  ot  the  Holy  Spirit,  principally  throuo-h  Its  leadino-  us 
to  pray.  Neither,  as  a  church,  have  we  been  without  a  full  conviction  that,  if 
we  are  honest  In  our  asking,  we  must  be  earnest  in  acting.  It  is  no  use  askino- 
God  to  give  us  a  blessing  If  we  do  not  mean  it ;  and  If  we  mean  It,  we  shall 
use  all  the  means  appointed  tor  the  gaining  of  that  boon  ;  and  that  we  have  done. 
One  of  my  first  duties,  to-night,  will  be  to  remind  this  audience  that  it  very 
largely  consists  of  representatives  from  the  various  Institutions.  A  partial  list 
will  be  read  to  you  ;  but,  Incomplete  as  it  I?,  It  Is  a  long  one  ;  and  though  one  or 
two  of  the  Institutions  represented  ma\^  be  small  ones,  yet  many  of  them  are  so 
large  that  they  might  have  constituted  public  societies  having  annual  meetlno-s  at 
Exeter  Hall  ;  and  these  things  have  sprung  out  ol  this  church  through  that  same 
Holy  Spirit  who  set  us  praying  and  set  us  working. 

"  Next  to  that,  It  behoves  me  to  say  that  I  owe  the  prosperitv  I  have  had  in 
preaching  the  gospel  to  the  gospel  which  I  have  preached.  I  wish  everybody 
thought  as  much,  but  there  are  some  who  will  have  it  that  there  is  somethino-  very 
particular  and  special  about  the  preacher.  Well,  I  believe  that  there  mav  be 
something  peculiar  about  the  man,  something  odd,  perhaps.  He  cannot  help  that, 
but  he  begs  to  say  there  is  nothing  about  him  that  can  possibly  account  tor  the  o-reat 
and  long-continued  success  attending  his  labours.  Our  American  friends  are 
generally  very  'cute  judges,  and  I  have  a  good  many  times  read  their  opinion  of  me, 
and  they  say  over  and  over  again,  '  Well,  he  is  no  orator.     We  have  scores  of  better 


244 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


— ■ -t i — — : r^ 

fi 

^ 

1 

Kn         , 

vfs^^^,^ 

W       ,si^ 

m 

ft 

mSliIISSIp 

!- 

■ 

§>t 

k            It 

1^    , 

'ttwiinnin.i 

■'■   ^   ■-■   \  ■ 

'                      "'           ^P^. 

\ 

V,, 

■^^^^p^^H| 

^ 

^^JH 

"■^<'<''^ 

^w-.  -         ■:  l^f^a:^  ■ 

..„, 

w.sC*' 

'■      ;.: '  ■    "^-- 

J'f^-' 

Bi^/     vl^^S 

'V9«N!n^^ 

^^HHI^jf  1 '  ^P^ 

-^/j   ■4:J>'""m 

-■^.■.•^.v 

;X,j#^* 

; 

/W   /udA4yuA«r     kHoU 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


245 


246  C.     H.     SPURGEOn's     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

preachers  in  America  than  Mr.  Spurgeon,  but  it  is  evident  that  he  preaches  the 
gospel  as  certain  of  our  celebrated  men  do  not  preach  it.'  I  so  preach  the  gospel 
that  people  coming  to  hear  it  are  impressed  by  it,  and  rejoice  to  rally  to  the  standard. 
I  have  tried,  and  I  think  successfully,  to  saturate  our  clear  friends  with  the  doctrines 
of  grace.  I  defy  the  devil  himself  ever  to  get  that  truth  out  of  you  if  God  the 
Holy  Spirit  once  puts  it  into  you.  That  grand  doctrine  of  substitution,  which  is  at 
"the  root  of  every  other, — you  have  heard  it  over  and  over  and  over  and  over  again, 
and  you  have  taken  a  sure  grip  of  it.  Never  let  it  go.  And  I  say  to  all  preachers 
who  fail  in  this  matter,  that  I  wish  they  would  preach  more  of  Christ,  and  try  to 
preach  more  plainly.  Death  to  fine  preaching  !  There  is  no  good  in  it.  All  the 
glory  of  words  and  the  wisdom  of  men  will  certainly  come  to  nought  ;  but  the 
simple  testimony  of  the  goodwill  of  God  to  men,  and  of  His  sovereign  choice  of 
His  own  people,  will  stand  the  test,  not  only  of  the  few  years  during  which  I  have 
preached  it,  but  of  all  the  ages  of  this  world  till  Christ  shall  come.  I  thank  you, 
dear  friends,  for  all  your  love  and  your  kindness  to  me,  but  I  do  attribute  even  that, 
in  great  measure,  to  the  fact  that  you  have  been  fed  with  the  pure  gospel  of  the 
grace  ot  God.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  dry,  dead  doctrine  of  some  men  could  ever 
have  evoked  such  sympathy  in  people's  hearts  as  my  gospel  has  aroused  in  yours. 
I  cannot  see  any  reason  in  myself  why  you  should  love  me.  I  confess  that  I  would 
not  go  across  the  street  to  hear  mvself  preach  ;  but  I  dare  not  say  more  upon  that 
matter,  because  my  wife  is  here.  It  is  the  only  point  upon  which  we  decidedly 
differ  ;  I  differ  in  toto  from  her  estimate  of  me,  and  from  your  estimate  of  me,  too  ; 
but  yet  I  do  not  wish  you  to  alter  it." 

Mr.  B.  \V.  Carr  read  the  congratulatory  address  which  was  published  at  the 
time  in  The  Sivord  and  the  Troivel,  but  for  which  space  cannot  be  spared  here  ;  the 
Pastor's  father,  brother,  and  son  Charles  briefly  spoke  ;  Pastor  Archibald  G.  Brown 
and  Mr.  H.  H.  Driver  represented  the  past  and  present  students  of  the  College  ; 
Mr.  S.  R.  Pearce  was  the  speaker  on  behalf  of  the  Sunday-school  ;  Mr.  VV.  J. 
Orsman  and  Mr.  W.  Olney  were  the  representatives  of  the  missions  which  had 
grown  out  of  the  church's  work  ;  and  Pastor  W.  L.  Lang,  F. R.G.S.,  presented 
an  address  from  the  Baptist  ministers  of  France  ;  but,  remembering  the  world- 
wide influence  of  the  American  evangelist,  Mr.  D.  L.  Moody,  probably  the  most 
important  utterance,  that  night,  was  the  testimony  he  gave  to  the  blessing  he  had 
derived  from  the   Pastor's  printed  and  spoken  messages  : — ■ 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  said,  to-night,  that  he  has  felt  like  weeping.  I  have 
tried  to  keep  back  the  tears,  but  I  have  not  succeeded  very  well.  I  remember, 
seventeen  years  ago,  coming  into  this  building  a  perfect  stranger.  Twenty-five 
years  ago,   after    I    was  converted,   I   began  to   read  of  a  young  man   preaching  in 


c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiograpi'iy.  247 

London  with  great  power,  and  a  desire  seized  me  to  hear  him,  never  expecting 
that,  some  day,  I  should  myself  be  a  preacher.  Everything  I  could  get  hold  of 
in  print  that  he  ever  said,  I  read.  I  knew  very  litde  about  religious  things  when 
I  was  converted.  I  did  not  have  what  he  has  had, — a  praying  father.  My  father 
died  before  I  was  four  years  old.  I  was  thinking  of  that,  to-night,  as  I  saw  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  venerable  father  here  by  his  side.  He  has  the  advantage  of  me  in 
that  respect,  and  he  perhaps  got  an  earlier  start  than  he  would  have  got  if  he 
had  not  had  that  praying  father.  His  mother  I  have  not  met;  but  most  good 
men  have  praying  mothers, — God  bless  them!  In  1867,  I  made  my  way  across 
the  sea  ;  and  if  ever  there  was  a  sea-sick  man  for  fourteen  days,  I  was  that  one. 
The  first  place  to  which  I  came  was  this  building.  I  was  told  that  I  could  not 
get  in  without  a  ticket,  but  I  made  up  my  mind  to  get  in  somehow,  and  I  succeeded. 
I  well  remember  seating  myself  in  this  gallery.  I  recollect  the  very  seat,  and 
I  should  like  to  take  it  back  to  America  with  me.  x'\s  your  dear  Pastor  walked 
down  to  the  platform,  my  eyes  just  feasted  upon  him,  and  my  heart's  desire  for 
years  was  at  last  accomplished.  It  happened  to  be  the  year  he  preached  in  the 
Agricultural  Hall.  I  followed  him  up  there,  and  he  sent  me  back  to  America 
a  better  man.  Then  I  began  to  try  and  preach  myself,  though  at  the  time  I  little 
thought  I  should  ever  be  able  to  do  so.  While  I  was  here,  I  followed  Mr. 
Spurgeon  everywhere  ;  and  when,  at  home,  people  asked  if  I  had  gone  to  this 
and  that  cathedral,  I  had  to  say  '  No,'  and  confess  I  was  ignorant  of  them  ;  but 
I  could  tell  them  something  about  the  meetings  addressed  by  Mr.  Spurgeon.  In 
1S72,  I  thought  I  would  come  over  again  to  learn  a  little  more,  and  I  found  my 
way  back  to  this  gallery.  1  have  been  here  a  great  many  times  since,  and  I  never 
come  into  the  building-  without  Qettinor  a  blessing  to  my  soul.  I  think  I  have  had 
as  great  a  one  here  to-night  as  at  any  other  time  I  have  been  in  this  Tabernacle. 
When  I  look  down  on  these  orphan  boys,  when  I  think  of  the  600  servants  of 
God  who  have  gone  out  from  the  College  to  preach  the  gospel,  of  the  1,500  or 
2,000  sermons  from  this  pulpit  that  are  in  print,  and  of  the  multitude  of  books 
that  have  come  from  the  Pastor's  pen,  (Scripture  says,  '  Of  making  many  books 
there  is  no  end,'  and  in  his  case  it  is  indeed  true,)  I  would  fain  enlarge  upon  all 
these  good  works,  but  the  clock  shows  me  that,  if  I  do,  I  shall  not  get  to  my  other 
meeting  in  time.  But  let  me  just  say  this,  if  God  can  use  Mr.  Spurgeon,  why 
should  He  not  use  the  rest  of  us,  and  why  should  we  not  all  just  lay  ourselves 
at  the  Master's  feet,  and  say  to  Him,  'Send  me,  use  me'?  It  is  not  Mr.  Spurgeon 
who  does  the  work,  after  all  ;  it  is  God.  He  is  as  weak  as  any  other  man  apart 
from  his  Lord.  Moses  was  nothing,  but  Moses'  God  was  almighty.  Samson  was 
nothing  when  he  lost  his  strength  ;  but  when  it  came  back  to  him,  then  he  was 
a  mighty  man  ;  and  so,   dear  friends,    be-ar   in   mind   that,   if  we  can  just  link  our 


248  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography, 

weakness  to  God's  strength,  we  can  go  forth,  and  be  a  blessing  in  the  world.  Now, 
there  are  others  to  speak,  and  I  have  also  to  hasten  away  to  another  meeting, 
but  I  want  to  say  to  you,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  'God  bless  you  !  I  know  that  you  love 
me,  but  I  assure  you  that  I  love  you  a  thousand  times  more  than  you  can  ever  love 
me,  because  you  have  been  such  a  blessing  to  me,  while  I  have  been  a  very  little 
blessing  to  you.  I  have  read  your  sermons  for  twenty-five  years.  You  are  never 
going  to  die.  John  Wesley  lives  more  to-day  than  when  he  was  in  the  flesh  ; 
Whitefield  lives  more  to-day  than  when  he  was  on  this  earth  ;  John  Knox  lives 
more  to-day  than  at  any  other  period  of  his  life  ;  and  Martin  Luther,  who  has  been 
gone  over  three  hundred  years,  still  lives.'  Bear  in  mind,  friends,  that  our  dear 
brother  is  to  live  for  ever.  We  may  never  meet  together  again  in  the  flesh  ;  but,  by 
the  blessing  of  God,  I  will  meet  you  up  yonder." 

On  Thursday  evening,  June  19,  the  Tabernacle  was  packed  to  its  utmost 
capacity,  while  crowds  in  vain  sought  admission.  The  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  K.G., 
presided,  and  delivered  a  notable  testimony  to  the  Pastor's  faithfulness  from  the  first 
days  of  his  ministry  until  that  hour  ;  addresses  were  also  given  by  the  Revs.  Canon 
Wilberforce,  J.  P.  Chown,  O.  P.  Giff'ord  (Boston,  U.S.A.),  Newman  Hall,  LL.B., 
W.  Williams  (Upton  Chapel),  and  Joseph  Parker,  D.D.,  and  Sir  William  McArthur, 
M.P.  ;  the  Jubilee  address  was  again  read  by  Mr.  Carr,  and  the  treasurers  of  the 
testimonial  fund  presented  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  a  cheque  for  ^4,500,  "  free  from  any 
condition,  and  to  remain  absolutely  at  his  disposal."      In  reply,  the  Pastor  said  : — 

"The  affectionate  words  to  which  I  have  listened  have  sunk  into  my  heart.  I 
can  take  a  very  great  deal  of  encouragement  without  being  lifted  up  even  to  the 
ordinary  level,  and  all  I  have  received  will  operate  upon  me  more  afterwards  than 
just  now.  But  I  am  sure  that  the  kindly  pressure  of  the  hand,  and  the  way  in  which 
friends,  one  after  another,  have  told  me  that  I  led  them  to  the  Saviour,  or  that  I 
comforted  them  in  the  time  of  trouble,  have  been  a  very  great  joy  to  me.  To  God 
be  all  the  praise  ;  to  me  it  is  an  overwhelming  honour  to  be  His  servant.  Had 
there  been  no  money  whatever  accompanying  this  celebration,  I  should  have  been  as 
well  pleased  as  I  am  now  ;  for  I  never  proposed  a  gift,  and  I  never  thought  of  it. 
I  did  suggest  that  there  should  be  some  money  gathered  on  account  of  the  building 
of  the  house  at  the  back,  which  is  for  the  use  of  this  church  ;  I  thought  that  a  very 
right  and  proper  object. 

"  You  will  remember  that,  some  years  ago,  you  were  so  good  as  to  give  me 
nearly  ^6,500  as  a  testimonial  ;  and  I  went  away,  that  night,  with  a  very  light  heart, 
because  1  had  handed  the  whole  amount  over  to  you  for  the  Almshouses  and  some 
other  works.  That  is  exactly  what  I  proposed  to  do  to-night ; — just  the  same  thing 
over  again,  only  that  I   am  not  permitted  to   do  it.     A  very  large  number  ot  the 


C,     H.     SrURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  249 

donors  said  that  they  would  not  give  anything-  if  my  Jubilee  day  was  made  a  pretext 
for  assisting  the  societies.  They  put  it  as  strongly  as  that  ;  they  had  contributed 
the  time  before  with  the  view  of  giving  something  to  me,  and  they  would  not  give  a 
second  time  unless  it  was  for  my  personal  benefit.  At  the  start,  in  addition  to  paying 
for  the  Jubilee  House,  I  proposed  four  objects  to  be  helped,  and  I  asked  the  donors 
to  allot  their  money  to  one  or  other  of  those  four  as  they  pleased.  In  pursuance 
of  that  request,  there  has  been  an  allotment  made.  Judge  how  very  litde  that 
idea  seemed  to  take  with  our  friends  !  Having  it  before  them,  and  having  it  pressed 
upon  them  by  myself,  they  have  allotted  £81  9s.  6d.  to  the  Almshouses,  ^31  to  the 
Colportage,  ^74  to  the  Orphanage,  and  ^43  to  my  son's  Tabernacle  at  Auckland  ; 
and  there  is  a  pound  or  two — perhaps  three — allotted  to  societies,  that  is  all  ;  and  all 
the  rest  is  evidently  le-ft,  by  the  will  of  the  friends,  totally  free.  Well,  it  must  be  so, 
and  I  accept  the  money  for  myself  so  far  as  that  is  the  expressed  desire  ;  only  I  do 
not  know  how  I  can  better  have  it  than  by  being  allowed  to  give  it  away.  What  I 
have  is  best  enjoyed  by  myself  personally  when  I  can  use  it  in  some  way  or  other  for 
the  advantage  of  the  work  of  God.  I  cannot  be  debarred  from  this  gratification.  I 
will  go  the  length  of  saying  that  I  will  take  some  portion  of  this  for  myself.  But,  first, 
of  all,  there  will  be  ^1,000  needed  to  pay  for  the  house,  and  furniture,  and  all  sorts 
of  things.  Then  I  want  to  give  something  to  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  which  helps 
many  ot  our  poor  friends.  Some  years  ago,  my  dear  brother,  Mr.  Higgs,  at  my 
request,  paid  the  usual  amount,  and  became  one  of  the  governors  of  the  hospital. 
He  is  gone,  and  I  want  to  be  a  governor  in  succession  to  him, — not  that  I  have  any 
interest  to  serve  there  except  that  of  the  sick  poor.  Then  I  want  to  give  to  the 
church  ^200,  to  make  up  what  is  given  to  the  Almshouses  to  ;^200,  and  also  to  give 
to  the  deacons  ^100,  which  they  may  keep  to  lend  to  persons  who  can  use  a  loan 
^well.  We  have  no  money  to  lend,  and  I  am  the  party  who  has  to  lend  to  every- 
body. I  do  not  go  in  for  large  loans  ;  but  I  speculate  in  sewing  machines,  and 
mangles,  and  some  other  things  of  that  sort.  I  should  have  a  considerable  number 
if  I  ever  had  them  back  again,  but  that  does  not  generally  happen  ;  so  I  want  other 
persons  to  look  after  the  things  that  are  lent,  and  get  the  money  back  again,  and  I 
think  that  would  be  very  useful.  I  want,  also,  to  give  to  the  Baptist  Fund  for  the 
relief  of  poor  ministers,  ^50,  on  the  behalf  of  my  son  Charles,  to  make  him  a 
member  of  it.  I  should  like  to  give  ^100  to  the  fund  for  augmenting  the  salaries  of 
our  poor  brethren.  I  should  like  to  make  up  the  amount  for  Colportage  work  to 
^200.  I  should  like  to  give  ^250  to  the  Tabernacle  at  Auckland.  I  should  like  to 
give  at  least  ^100  to  my  wife's  Book  Fund  for  poor  rriinisters. 

"  I  have  a  little  list  here  ;  but  if  I  were  to  read  any  more,  friends  might  object 
that  I  was  doing  contrary  to  their  wish.  I  must  try  and  avoid  all  opposition  to  the 
donors,  and  yet  help  my  work  and  other  work.      I  am  called  upon  so  much  to  help 


■2^0  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the  building  of  chapels  and  such  like  things,  that  I  am  kept  perpetually  very  poor  ; — 
not  that  I  want  anything.  I  have  all  things.  I  do  not  need  this  money  ;  but,  still, 
there  has  been  a  time  when  we  expended  all  that  we  had,  and  we  had  nothing  laid  by 
whatsoever.  But  if  anybody  supposes  that  I  have  a  very  large  sum  of  money  laid 
by,  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  let  him  make  a  bid  for  it.  I  think  it  is  highly  probable 
that  I  should  be  a  great  gainer  by  the  offer,  even  it  it  were  a  reasonable  one.  I  had 
a  huoe  fortune  left  me,  as  you  know,  some  time  ago, — in  the  moon.  It  was  in  the 
papers  everywhere  ;  that  is  where  it  was.  When  the  papers  hand  it  over,  I  shall  be 
crlad.  It  has  ever  been  the  case  with  me  that,  whenever  I  have  had  help  given  me, 
there  have  been  calls  at  once  more  than  equal  to  it.  On  the  last  occasion  when  I 
received  a  testimonial  from  you,  I  was  greatly  amused  at  the  shoal  of  applicants  who 
wrote  to  me  for  the  money.  Though  the  papers  stated  that  I  gave  it  all  back  again, 
these  people  applied  for  it  all  the  same.  One  person  wrote  wanting  help  for  her 
husband,  that  he  might  pay  his  debts  on  his  farm,  amounting  to  some  ^500,  because 
it  was  clear  to  her  mind  that  I  had  such  a  lot  of  money  that  I  did  not  want  any  more, 
or  else  I  should  not  have  given  back  the  testimonial.  I  could  not  see  how,  after  I 
had  handed  over  the  money,  I  could  still  give  it  to  somebody  else.  I  beg  to  give 
notice  that  it  will  be  useless  to  write  to  me  lor  this  money,  because  I  shall 
be  able  to  appropriate  it  without  the  assistance  of  friends.  There  are  so  many 
Institutions  here,  and  so  much  work  to  be  done,  that,  whatever  comes  to  me,  the 
first  thing  I  begin  to  think  of  is,  not  'What  shall  I  do  with  it?'  but  'In  which 
direction  do  I  need  it  most  .'* '  Our  friend  spoke  the  honest  truth  when  he  said, 
'  Money  is  just  what  the  Pastor  does  want.'  I  am  the  pipe  through  which  the 
money  runs.  It  runs  in  at  one  end,  and  it  runs  out  at  the  other  with  extreme 
rapidity  ;  and  you  may  see  daily  what  good  it  does.  If  you  ever  wish  to  see,  go  to 
the  Colleo-e  ;  00  to  the  Almshouses  ;  go  to  the  Orphanage  ;  go  and  see  what  God 
has  done  through  your  liberality. 

"  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver  or  gold.  I  have  desired  nothing  at  your 
hands,  but  that  you  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  ser\'e  Him  with  all  your 
mio'ht.  But  I  have  coveted,  and  I  do  still  covet  to  have  a  generous  people 
about  me,  because  I  am  sure  that  it  is  to  God's  glory  and  to  your  own  advantage 
to  be  liberal  to  His  cause.  Poor  men  should  give  that  they  may  not  be  always 
poor.  Rich  men  should  give  that  they  may  not  become  poor.  These  are  selfish 
motives  ;  but,  still,  they  are  worthy  to  be  mentioned.  '  There  is  that  scattereth, 
and  yet  increaseth  ;  and  there  is  that  withholdeth  more  than  is  meet,  but  it  tendeth 
to  poverty.'  As  a  general  rule,  he  that  keeps  his  substance  will  not  find  it  multiply 
under  his  hands  ;  but  he  that  gives  shall  find  that  it  is  given  back  to  him,  '  good 
measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken  together,  and  running  over.'  Besides,  I 
do   not  think  much   of  giving  when   I   have  plenty  to  give  with  ;    I   like   it  better 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAl'IiY. 


251 


wnen  I  can  pinch  myself.  If  you  pinch  yourself,  there  is  a  sweetness  about 
giving  to  the  Lord.  What  you  do  not  want,  you  can  dispense  with,  and  exhibit 
small  love  ;  but  when  you  come  to  what  )'ou  do  want,  and  give  that  to  the  Lord, 
then  there  comes  to  your  own  heart  the  comfortable  assurance  that  you  are  really 
doing  it  unto  the  Lord,  because  of  the  needs  of  His  cause. 

"  Now  I  thank  everybody  who  has  gi\en  a  hundred  pounds,  and  everybody 
who  has  given  a  penny.  God  bless  you,  and  return  it  to  you  in  every  wav  ! 
One  of  our  brethren  told  you,  the  other  night,  what  once  happened  to  me.  I 
had  been  preaching  in  a  country  place,  and  a  good  woman  gave  me  five  shillinos. 
I  said  to  her,  'Well,  my  dear  friend,  I  do  not  want  your  money.'  She  said,  '  But 
you  must  take  it  ;  I  give  it  to  you  because  I  got  good  from  you.'  I  said,  'Shall 
I  give  it  to  the  College  ? '  She  answered,  '  I  don't  care  about  the  Colleoe  ;  I 
care  about  you.'  'Then  I  will  give  it  to  the  Orphanage.'  'No,'  she  said, 
'you  take  it  yourself  I  said,  '  You  need  it  more  than  I  do.'  She  replied,  '  Now,  do 
you  think  that  your  Lord  and  Master  would  have  talked  like  that  to  the 
woman  who  came  and  broke  the  alabaster  box  over  Him  ^  I  do  not  think  He 
would.'  She  added,  '  I  know  you  do  not  mean  to  be  unkind  ;  I  worked  extra 
to  earn  it,  and  I  give  it  to  you.'  I  told  her  that  she  owed  me  nothing,  and 
that  woman  owed  the  Lord  everything,  and  asked,  'What  am  I  to  do  with  it?' 
She  said,  '  Buy  anything  you  like  with  it  ;  I  do  not  care  what.  Only,  mind, 
you  must  have  it  lor  yourself"  I  mention  the  incident  because  it  is  much  in 
that  spirit  that  the  friends  have  given  this  noble  testimonial. 

"  The  Lord  bless  you  !  The  Lord  bless  you  !  The  Lord  bless  you,  yet 
more  and  more,   you  and  your  children  !  " 

Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  many  letters  gratefully  acknowledging  the  resolutions 
of  congratulation  which  he  received  in  connection  with  his  Jubilee.  One  of  the 
replies  to  friends  at  home,  and  another  to  those  abroad,  may  be  given  as  specimens 
of  the  thankful  epistles  then  written  ;  the  first  was  addressed  to  the  Western 
Baptist  Association  : — 

"  Dear  Friends, 

"  1  feel  greatly  comforted  and  humbled  by  receiving  your  most  loving 
resolution.  It  is  sweet  to  live  in  the  affection  of  so  many  brethren,  but  it 
involves  a  great  responsibility.  I  join  with  you  in  praising  God  for  His  special 
goodness  to  me  ;  and  implore  for  you  and  all  your  churches  renewed  blessings 
of  a  like  character.  The  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  is  dear  to  us,  and  we  do 
not  doubt  that  the  Lord  will  bless  its  publication  in  e\-ery  place.  Every  year 
binds  us  more  fast  to  the  eternal  verities,  and  to  Him  in  whom  they  centre. 
Let  us  be  of  good  courage,  and  play  the  man  for  our  Lord  and   His  Word. 


252  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  With  all   my  heart   I    thank  you,   and   return   the   affection    which   suggested 

your  considerate  action. 

•'  Your  brother  in  our   Lord  Jesus, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

The  Philadelphia  Conference  of  Baptist  ministers  sent  a  loving  resolution 
of  congratulation.      The  following  reply  was  written  to  the  secretary: — 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  beg  you  to  thank  all  the  brethren  on  my  behalf  I  am  deeply 
affected  by  your  brotherly  love.  One  touch  of  grace  has,  in  a  truer  sense  than  a 
touch  of  nature,  made  us  all  akin.  I  rejoice  every  day  in  the  prosperity  of  the 
Church  of  God  in  the  United  States.  Your  nation  is  but  in  its  youth,  and  you  are 
educating  it  for  a  high  career  ;  ours  is  old,  and  slow  to  learn,  and  we  are  with  much 
difficulty  lighting  its  candle,  lending  it  spectacles,  and  opening  the  Bible  before  it. 
We  cannot  expect  to  teach  Mr.  Bull  quite  so  readily  as  you  teach  Master  Jonathan. 
We  will,  however,  do  our  best  ;  and  you  will  pray  for  us,  and  God  will  bless  us. 

"  I  feel  as  if  I  was  even  now  squeezing  the  hand  of  each  minister,  and  receiving 
a  return  grip.     Take  it  as  done.      Thank  you  !     God  bless  you  ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

A  Spurgeon  Jubilee  Albimt  was  issued  by  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster  in 
connection  with  the  Pastor's  completion  of  his  fiftieth  year  ;  he  sent  a  copy  of  it  to 
Lord  Shaftesbury,  who  replied  as  follows  : — 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"Your  Jubilee  Albitvi  reached  me  some  time  ago.  I  am  deeply  obliged 
to  you  for  it,  and  still  more  for  the  touching  and  affectionate  words  you  have 
inscribed  on  the  fly-leaf 

"  My  daughter  is  writing  for  me,  l^ecause  I  am  still  lying  at  full  length  in  my 
bed,  where  I  have  been  since  Saturday  last.  I  am  now,  thank  God,  a  great  deal 
better,  but  the  attack  has  been  very  serious.  I  have  been  longing  to  come  and  see 
you,  but  both  in  the  number  and  the  importance  of  engagements  I  ha\'e  had  more 
than  usual  pressure  this  year  ;  and  now,  you  see,  I  have  lost  a  whole  week  by  this 
last  attack. 

"Still,  I  shall  hope  to  see  you  again  before  I  die.  May  our  Lord  ever  be  with 
you,  and  bless  you  !     You  know  how  truly  I  love  and  respect  you. 

"  Yours  very  affectionately, 

"  Shaftesbury." 


CHAPTER    XCIX. 


€\]t  "lotoit^grabe"  Contro&ersu,  from  JKr.  Spurgtou's  Standpoint. 

Controversy  is  never  a  very  happy  element  for  the  child  of  God:  he  would  far  rather  be  in  com- 
munion with  his  Lord  than  be  engaged  in  defending  the  faith,  or  in  attacking  error.  But  the  soldier  ot 
Christ  knows  no  choice  in  his  Master's  commands.  He  may  feel  it  to  be  better  for  him  to  lie  upon  the 
bed  of  rest  than  to  stand  covered  with  the  sweat  and  dust  of  battle ;  but,  as  a  soldier,  he  has  learned  to 
obey,  and  the  rule  of  his  obedience  is  not  his  personal  comfort,  but  his  Lord's  absolute  command.  The 
servant  of  God  must  endeavour  to  maintain  all  the  truth  which  his  Master  has  revealed  to  him,  because, 
as  a  Christian  soldier,  this  is  part  of  his  duty.  But  while  he  does  so,  he  accords  to  others  the  liberty 
which  he  himself  enjoys. — C.  H.  S.,  in  address  at  the  Tabernacle,  i86l. 

A  Christian  minister  must  expect  to  lose  his  repute  among  men ;  he  must  be  willing  to  suffer 
every  reproach  for  Christ's  sake;  but,  then,  he  may  rest  assured  that  he  will  never  lose  his  real  honour 
if  it  be  risked  for  the  truth's  sake,  and  placed  in  the  Redeemer's  hand.  The  day  shall  declare  the 
excellence  of  the  upright,  for  it  will  reveal  all  that  was  hidden,  and  bring  to  the  light  that  which  was 
concealed.  There  will  be  a  resurrection  of  characters  as  well  as  of  persons.  Every  reputation  that  has 
been  obscured  by  clouds  of  reproach,  for  Christ's  sake,  shall  be  rendered  glorious  when  the  righteous 
shall  "  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  Kingdom  of  their  Father." — C.  H.  S. 

lust  now,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  betrayed  by  not  a  few  of  His  professed  ministers.  He  is  being 
crucified  afresh  in  the  perpetual  attacks  of  scepticism  against  His  blessed  gospel ;  and  it  may  be  that 
things  will  wax  worse  and  worse.  This  is  not  the  first  occasion  when  it  has  been  so,  for,  at  various 
times  in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  God,  His  enemies  have  exulted,  and  cried  out  that  the  gospel  of 
past  ages  was  exploded,  and  might  be  reckoned  as  dead  and  buried.  For  one,  I  mean  to  sit  over  against 
the  very  sepulchre  of  truth.  I  am  a  disciple  of  the  old-fashioned  doctrine  as  much  when  it  is  covered 
with  obloquy  and  rebuke  as  when  it  shall  again  display  its  power,  as  it  surely  shall.  Sceptics  may  seem 
to  take  the  truth,  and  bind  it,  and  scourge  it,  and  crucify  it,  and  say  that  it  is  dead  ;  and  they  may 
endeavour  to  bury  it  in  scorn,  but  the  Lord  has  many  a  Joseph  and  a  Nicodemus  who  will  see  that  all 
due  honour  is  done  even  to  the  body  of  truth,  and  will  wrap  the  despised  creed  in  sweet  spices,  and 
hide  it  away  in  their  hearts.  They  may,  perhaps,  be  half  afraid  that  it  is  really  dead,  as  the  wise  men 
assert ;  yet  it  is  precious  to  their  souls,  and  they  will  come  forth  right  gladly  to  espouse  its  cause,  and 
to  confess  that  they  are  its  disciples.  We  will  sit  down  in  sorrow,  but  not  in  despair;  and  watch  until 
the  stone  is  rolled  away,  and  Christ  in  His  truth  shall  live  again,  and  be  openly  triumphant.  We  shall 
see  a  Divine  interposition,  and  shall  cease  to  fear;  while  they  who  stand  armed  to  pre\-ent  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  grand  old  doctrine  shall  quake  and  become  as  dead  men,  because  the  gospel's  everlasting 
life  has  been  vindicated,  and  they  are  made  to  quail  before  the  brightness  of  its  glory. — C.  H.  S.,  in 
sermon  at  the  Tubejnacle,  1878. 

I  protest  that,  if  all  the  sages  of  the  world  were  to  utter  one  thundering  sarcasm,  if  they  con- 
centrated all  their  scorn  into  one  universal  sneer  of  contempt,  I  do  not  think  it  would  now  affect  me  the 
turn  of  a  hair,  so  sure  am  I  that  my  Lord  will  justify  my  confidence. — C.  H.  S.,  in  sermon  at  the  Taber- 
nacle, 1878. 

A  man  may  sometimes  seem  self-assertive  when,  really,  he  has  so  completely  lost  himself  in 
God  that  he  does  not  care  what  people  think  about  him,— whether  they  regard  him  as  an  egotist  or 
not.  Some  men  appear  to  be  modest  because  they  are  proud,  while  others  seem  to  be  proud  because 
they  have  sunk  themselves,  and  only  speak  so  boldly  because  they  have  their  Master's  authority  at 
the  back  of  their  words. — C.  H.  S.,  in  exposition  of  i  Kings  xvii.  i. 

As  the  Roman  sentinel  in  Pompeii  stood  to  his  post  even  when  the  city  was  destroyed,  so  do 
I  stand  to  the  truth  of  the  atonement  though  the  Church  is  being  buried  beneath  the  boiling  mud- 
showers  of  modern  heresy. — C.  H.  S.,  in  sermon  at  the  Tabernacle,  1887. 


254 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


I  might  not  have  had  such  an  intense  loathing  of  the  new  theology  if  I  had  not  seen  so  much 
of  its  evil  effects.  I  could  tell  you  of  a  preacher  of  unbelief,  whom  I  have  seen,  in  my  own  vestry, 
utterly  broken  down,  driven  almost  to  despair,  and  having  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  his  foot  until  he 
came  back  to  simple  trust  in  the  atoning  sacrifice.  If  he  were  speaking  to  you,  he  would  say, 
"Cling  to  your  faith,  brethren;  if  you  once  throw  away  your  shield,  you  will  lay  yourself  open  to 
imminent  dangers  and  countless  wounds ;  for  nothing  can  protect  you  but  the  shield  of  faith," — 
C.  H.  S.,  in  address  at  College  Conference,  1 89 1. 

I  am  well  content  to  go  shares  with  those  who  have  gone  before  me  to  the  skies.  Some  of 
them,  as  they  burned  to  death  for  Christ's  sake,  cried  aloud,  "  Christ  is  all. '  I  am  quite  willing  to 
take  my  part  with  the  apostles  whom  the  wise  men  of  to-day  count  to  be  fools;  and  with  those 
still  greater  fools,  as  many  consider  the  Reformers  who  brought  back  into  the  light  the  great 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.,  I  am  satisfied  to  tread  the  path  my  sires  have  trod;  I  have  an 
illustrious  pedigree  in  the  skies,  and  I  will  not  snap  that  chain  which  links  me  with  those  who 
have  entered  the  glory-land.  This  faith  saved  them  in  the  time  of  poverty,  and  persecution,  and 
martyrdom,  and  death  :  and  it  will  save  me.  At  any  rate.  I  would  sooner  risk  my  soul  on  all  the 
difficulties  of  the  old  theology,  so  long  tried  and  proved,  than  on  all  the  beauties  of  the  novel 
doctrine  taught  by  so  many  nowadays,  I  believe  we  are  all  of  one  mind  upon  this  matter,  and 
some  of  us  may  live  to  see  great  alterations  concerning  the  present  popular  teaching.  We  may 
learn  a  lesson  from  what  happened  in  the  last  century  ;  the  style  of  much  of  the  preaching  was 
such  as  tended  to  the  emptying  of  chapels,  and  the  multiplication  of  spiders.  Nonconformity 
gradually  drifted  away  towards  Unitarianism,  and  true  religion  would  have  become  almost  extinct 
in  England  if  the  Lord  had  not  raised  up  those  two  believing  men,  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  ai;d 
others  likeminded,  who  were  a  great  power  for  good  in  the  land.  And  I  believe  the  Lord  has 
raised  us  up,  together  with  many  others  who  hold  the  same  faith,  that  we  may  fight  this  battle, 
and  win  the  victory,  to  the  glory  of  His  holy  Name. 

Whenever  I  have  found  myself  represented  as  a  fool  because  I  cfing  so  tenaciously  to  the 
old  faith,  I  have  thought  to  myself,  "What  man,  by  proclaiming  any  new  doctrine,  has  been  able 
to  draw  such  congregations  as  have  filled  the  Tabernacle  for  the  last  quarter  of  a  century  simply 
to  listen  to  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified?"  We  do  not  set  up  to  be  anything 
great  in  ourselves;  but  we  do  claim  to  be  servants  of  the  great  God,  believers  in  the  great  Saviour, 
proclaimers  of  His  great  salvation,  and,  God  helping  us,  we  shall  keep  on  c-jing  this  till  we  die; 
and  then,  unto  principalities  and  powers  in  the  Heavenly  places,  we  will  make  known  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God, — C,  H,  S.,  in  address  to  students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  1885. 


R.  SPURGEON'S  Standard  Life  could  not  be  complete  without 
a'  reference  to  that  most  sorrowful  but  important  episode, — The 
"Down-grade"  Controversy; — yet  how  shall  I  dare  to  touch  the 
strings  of  that  rifted  lute  }  The  lightest  and  most  skilful  fingers 
could  scarcely  draw  harmony  from  it  now,  and  I  would  fain  not 
be  expected  to  awaken  any  of  its  discords.  Oh,  for  the  guiding" 
Hand  to  be  laid  on  heart  and  brain  and  pen,  that  gently  and  tenderly,  albeit 
truthfully,  the  outlines  of  the  sad  story  may  be  given  ! 

There  are  many  dear  and  able  friends  who  could  write  the  full  history  of 
the  Controversy  ;  but,  after  much  thought  and  prayer,  I  have  been  led  to  allow 
the  shadow  of  the  past  to  rest  upon  it  in  a  measure,  and  to  conceal,  under  a 
generous  silence,  most'  of  the  documentary  and  other  evidence  which  could  be 
produced  to  prove  the  perfect  uprightness,  veracity,  and  fidelity  of  my  dear  husband 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  solemn  protest  which  culminated  in  the  "vote  of 
censure "  by  the  Council  of  the  Baptist  Union  !  Therefore,  in  accordance  with 
the  autobiographical  character  of  this  record,  the  Controversy  is  sketched  from 
Mr.    Spurgeon's  own  point  of  view  ; — he  tells   the  story  in  his   own  way,   so   that 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


255 


only  as  much  as  he   cnose   to  make  known  of  the  deepest  grief  of  his   noble  life 
is  chronicled  in  these  pages. 

For  the  information  of  readers  of  the  Autobiography,  who  are  unacquainted 
with  my  beloved's  articles  upon  "The  Down-grade,"  I  thought  it  miciht  be  well 
to  include  in  this  chapter  a  condensation,  or  summary  of  them  ;  but,  on  readinc*" 
them  with  that  object  in  view,  I  find  it  impossible  to  strike  out  a  single  word 
of  his  protest.  It  is  equally  impossible  to  transfer  it  all  to  this  work,  so  the  only 
course  open  to  me  is  to  omit  it  altogether,  and  to  leave  the  testimony  still  to  speak 
for  itself  from  the  pages  of  The  Szvord  and  the  Trotvel.  From  August,  1887, 
cO  February,  1892,  scarcely  any  number  of  the  magazine  appeared  without  some 
reference  to  the  Controversy  and  its  various  issues.  The  most  pathetic  "Note" 
of  all  was  written  within  a  few  days  of  my  dear  husband's  home-going,  for  in  it 
he  revealed  the  fact,  already  known  to  all  who  were  nearest  and  dearest  to  him, 
that  his  tight  for  the  faith  had  cost  him  his  life.  Yet  he  never  regretted  the  step 
he  had  taken  ;  for,  throughout  the  whole  affair,  he  felt  such  a  Divine  compulsion 
as  Luther  realized  when  he  said,    "  I  can  do  no  other." 

So  far  as  the  Baptist  Union  was  concerned,  little  was  accomplished  bv 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  witness-bearing  and  withdrawal.  The  compromise  at  the  City 
Temple,  in  April,  1888,  confirmed  the  position  of  the  modern-thought  men  in  the 
Union,  and  made  "the  vote  of  censure"  the  act  of  the  whole  assembly  with  the 
exception  of  the  noble  seven  who  voted  against  it.  But,  in  other  respects,  I 
have  had  abundant  proofs  that  the  protest  was  not  in  vain.  Many,  who  were 
far  gone  on  "the  Down-grade,"  were  stopped  in  their  perilous  descent,  and,  by 
God's  grace,  were  brought  back  to  the  Up-line  ;  others,  who  were  unconsciously 
slipping,  were  made  to  stand  firmly  upon  the  Rock  ;  while,  at  least  for  a  time, 
in  all  the  churches.  Evangelical  doctrines  were  preached  with  a  clearness  and 
emphasis  which  "had  long -been  lacking. 

The  ultimate  results  of  the  whole  matter  must  be  left  in  the  hands  of  Him 
who  never  makes  a  mistake,  and  who  will,  in  His  own  right  way,  vindicate  His 
obedient  and  faithful  servant  from  the   "  censure "  so  unjustly  passed  upon  him. 

Not  long  after  Mr.  Spurgeon's  withdrawal  from  the  Baptist  Union,  he  went 
to  the  South  of  France  for  much-needed  rest  ;  and  the  letters  he  there  wrote, 
during  that  time  of  suffering  and  reproach,  contained  many  allusions  to  the 
painful  subject.  Naturally,  those  written  to  me  referred  to  the  more  personal 
and  private  aspects  of  the  Controversy,   as  the  following  extracts  will  show  : — 

"  I    was    greatly    surprised  at  the    note    from (one  of   '  our    own    men  '"), 


oc6  c,    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

but  when  we  are  in  a  battle,  we  must  expect  calamities.  It  is  a  serious  matter 
to  know  Junv  to  act  ;  but  one  thing  is  plain  enough,  I  must  go  on  clearing  myself 
of  union  with  those  who  belong  to  the  broad  school.  I  felt  so  well,  this  afternoon, 
when  sitting  under  the  palms,  and  as  happy  as  a  birdie  beneath  the  blue  sky. 
Then  came  the  letter,  just  to  sober  me,  and  drive  me  from  the  sunshine  to  my 
Lord,  who  is  the  Sun  itself  I  can  bear  anything  for  Jesus  while  His  everlasting 
arms  are  underneath  me.  The  hills  around  Hyeres  are  called  'the  mountains  of 
paradise,'  but  the  serpent  comes  even  here.  Ah,  well  !  the  Serpent-Killer  is  with 
us,  and  He  will  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself  I  am  sorry  that  the  evil  flood 
should  carry  away  one  of  my  men  ;  but  the  wonder  is,  that  more  have  not 
o-one.  It  shows  how  much  more  evil  was  abroad  than  I  dreamed  of  I  have 
done  mv  duty,  even  if  all  men  forsake  me.  Those  who  write  in  The  Freeman 
and  The  Christian  World  show  how  everything  I  do  can  be  misconstrued.  Never- 
theless, I  know  what  I  have  done,  and  why  I  did  it  ;  and  the  Lord  will  bear 
me  throuoh.  In  Him  I  rest,  and  I  am  in  no  haste  to  answer  opponents,  nor 
even  to  think  about  them  in  a  depressing  way.  What  a  providence  that  I  am 
here,  out  of  call !  Luther  was  best  at  the  Wartburg,  was  he  not  ?  I  did  not 
plan  this,   nor  plan  anything. 

"  What  a  farce  about  my  seeing  these  brethren,  privately,  according  to 
Matt,  xviii.  15!  Why,  I  saw  the  Secretary  and  the  President  again  and  again; 
and  then  I  printed  my  plaint,  and  only  left  the  Union  when  nothing  could  be 
done.  Now,  something  will  be  done.  Not  until  I  took  the  decided  step  could 
I  effect  anything.  Luther  was  very  wrong  to  nail  up  his  theses  on  the  church 
door  ;  he  should  have  seen  the  Pope,  and  prayed  with  him  !  Do  not  let  these 
things  distress  you,  for  my  sake.  The  Lord  will  give  both  of  us  the  heroic  spirit 
and  we  shall  neither  fear  men,   nor  become  ungenerous  toward  them." 

"Canon  Sidebotham  called  yesterday  to  assure  me  of  the  sympathy  of  all 
Ckristian  Churchmen,  and  his  belief  that  my  stand  for  truth  will  help  all  believers. 
He  told  me  that  he  meets  with  amazing  scepticism  among  young  men  whom  he 
has  been  called  to  visit  in  sickness,  and  he  believes  there  is  an  epidemic  of  it 
everywhere.  He  says  the  antidote  was  needed,  and  came  just  at  the  right  time. 
So  may  God  grant ! 

"How  I  do  delight  in  the  Lord!  I  am  now  consciously  nearer  to  Him  than 
ever  before,  and  I  revel  in  a  sense  of  blessedness.  I  am  delivered  from  all  fear 
of  failing  in  this  battle  ;  and  the  Lord,  whom  I  sought  to  honour,  bows  me  low 
at  His  feet  in  gratitude  for  His  tender  mercies.  We  are  safe  in  His  hands. 
This  is  where  I  love  to  feel  that  I  am,  and  that  you  are,  and  the  dear  boys, 
and   the   Church,    and  the  College,  and   '  the   Down-grade,'  and  all  !" 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  257 

"  I  trust  I  may  be  made  stronger  for  the  stern  task  which  awaits  me  ;  but 
T  try  not  even  to  think  of  that,  but  just  to  abandon  myself  to  a  bath  of  rest. 
This,  I  trust,  is  the  wisest  course  ;  and  yet  I  keep  on  longing-  to  be  doing  some 
good,  or  bearing  some  fruit  unto  the  Lord.  Litde  occasions  for  this  do  occur, 
and   I   am  eager   to   use   them   aright. 

"Yesterday  was  eventful.  First  came  a  telegram,  saying  that  there  had  been 
a  hot  discussion,  and  that  my  brother  had  left  the  Council  meeting  in  indignation 
because  my  veracity  had  been  impugned.  Just  as  I  was  going  to  rest  came  another 
telegram  : — 'Council  has  appointed  Culross,  McLaren,  Clifford,  and  myself  to  confer 
with  you  at  Mentone,  without  delay,  to  deliberate  with  you  how  the  unity  of  our 
denomination  in  truth,  and  love,  and  good  works  may  be  maintained.  When  can 
we  see  you  ?  Letter  sent.  Booth.'  Think  of  four  doctors  of  divinity  coming  all 
this  way  to  see  me  !  I  was  in  great  perplexity,  and  knew  not  what  to  reply:  I 
don't  quite  see  what  it  all  means.  I  lay  awake  till  one  o'clock,  and  then  got  a 
pencil,  and  wrote  out  a  telegran> : — 'Cannot  reply  without  further  information. 
Respectfully  request  deputation  to  await  my  return.  Tone  of  discussion  suggests 
caution.  Will  write.'  Afterwards,  I  wrote  a  letter.  BrieHy,  I  urge  them  not  to 
come  so  far  ; — it  would  be  four  to  one,  and  I  should  be  at  the  disadvantage  of  having 
been  the  cause  of  great  expense.  If  they  really  mean  brotherly  conference,  I  will 
see  them  when  I  return,  right  gladly  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  I  find  there  is  any  use  in  it. 
Now  I  shall  need  wisdom.  I  do  not  fear  four  doctors,  but  I  think  it  a  very  wise 
move  on  their  part.  If  it  means  that  they  will  surrender,  it  is  well  ;  but  if  it 
is  meant  to  fix  on  me  the  odium  of  being  implacable,  it  is  another  matter.  In 
any  case,  the  Lord  will  prepare  me  for  all  that  is  to  happen.  It  is  of  His  mercy 
that  I  am  here,  or  I  should  not  be  able  to  bear  it  all  ;  but  being  quiet,  and  rested, 
and  not  worried  by  personal  assaults,  I  can  look  round  the  question  calmly. 

"The  four  doctors  are  not  coming.  Very  likely  my  brother  will  call  to  tell  you 
about  the  affray.  He  was  justly  wroth,  and  describes  the  Council  meeting  as 
'horrible.'  For  Dr.  Booth  to  say  I  never  complained,  is  amazing.  God  knows 
all  about  it,  and  He  will  see  me  righted.  I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  England 
in  the  words  of  Jer.  xv.  19,  20."  That  passage  was  so  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  case,  that  many  friends  afterwards  sent  it  to  my  beloved,  who 
was  greatly  comforted  by  the  reassuring  message  which  was  thus  repeatedly 
conveyed  to  him. 

During  that  visit  to  Mentone,  an  incident  occurred,  to  which  Mr.  Spurgeon 
often  gratefully  referred  as  a  remarkable  token  of  the  Lord's  approval  of  his  protest 
against  false  doctrine  and  worldliness.  Before  I  give  extracts  from  his  letters 
concerning  it,  a  brief  explanation  is  necessary.      For  many  years  before  this  eventful 

R  4 


2^8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

period  of  my  dear  husband's  life,  he  had  been  most  generously  aided  in  all  his 
beneficent  plans  and  purposes  by  a  friend  to  whom  God  had  given  abundance  of 
this  world's  wealth.  These  supplies  came  with  loving  freeness,  and  invariable 
reoularity  ;  and  more  than  a  mere  hint  was  given  that  they  might  be  depended 
on  while  the  donor  had  it  in  his  power  to  be  thus  royally  open-handed  However, 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  attitude  in  the  "Down-grade"  Controversy  alienated  the  heart 
of  this  friend,  and  caused  him  to  withdraw  altogether  the  splendid  help  which  had, 
for  so  long  a  period,  exempted  my  beloved  from  much  financial  anxiety. 

The  letter,  announcing  this  failure  of  friendship  and  sympathy,  arrived  during 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  absence  at  Mentone,  and  it  therefore  became  my  duty  to  open  and 
read  it.  Then  followed  one  of  those  hallowed  enlargements  of  heart  which  leave 
their  mark  for  ever  on  the  life  of  the  person  experiencing  them.  At  once,  I  took 
the  letter,  and  spread  it  before  the  Lord,  pleading,  as  Hezekiah  did,  that  He 
would  "hear  and  see"  the  words  written  therein;  and  He  gave  me  so  strong  a 
confidence  in  His  overruling  and  delivering  power  that,  as  I  knelt  in  His  presence, 
and  told  Him  how  completely  I  trusted  Him  on  my  husband's  behalf,  the  words 
of  petition  ceased  from  my  lip?,  and  I  absolutely  la2t.ghed  aloud,  so  little  did 
I  fear  what  man  could  do,  and  so  blessedly  reliant  did  He  make  me  on  His  own 
love  and  omnipotence  ! 

In  this  exultant  frame  of  mind,  I  wrote  to  Mentone,  making  light  of  the 
trouble,  and  endeavouring  to  parry  the  blow  which  I  knew  must  sorely  wound 
the  sensitive  heart  of  my  beloved.  I  told  him,  too,  how  the  Lord  had  "made 
me  to  laugh"  as  I  was  laying  the  matter  before  Him,  and  had  filled  me  with 
rio-hteous  scorn  and  indignation  at  the  means  used  to  dishearten  him  in  his  sublime 
stand  for  the  truths  of  the  old  gospel.  So,  as  far  as  I  was  able,  being  absent 
from  him,  I  comforted  and  upheld  my  much-tried  spouse.  In  less  time  than  I 
had  thought  possible,  I  received  this  telegram  :— "  I  laugh  with  you.  The  Lord 
will  not  fail  us,  nor  forsake  us  ; " — and,  by  the  next  post,  there  came  a  letter 
recording  the  dear  writer's  unswerving  faith  in  the  God,  whose  he  was,  and  whom 
■  he  served,  and  to  whom  he  left  all  the  issues  of  that  painful  trial.  The  following 
extract  will  indicate  the  spirit  in  which  he  wrote  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Nov.  i8,  1887. 

"You  are  as  an  angel  of  God  unto  me.  When  I  began  to  read  your  letter,  I 
trembled,  for  I  could  not  tell  what  was  coming  ;  but  wnen  I  finished  it,  I  could 
laugh  with  you.  Bravest  of  women,  strong  in  faith,  you  have  ministered  unto  me 
indeed  and  of  a  truth.     God  bless  thee  out  of  the  seventh  heavens  ! 

"I  do  not  know  that  I  have  ever  before  really  suffered  any  loss  for  Christ's 
sake;    I  feel  decorated   and  elevated   by  this  honour.      His  yoke  is  easy,  and   His 


c.    II.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  259 

burden  is  light.  But  our  friend  uses  a  queer  sort  of  argument  !  I  am  to  be  set 
right ; — therefore,  stop  the  supplies  to  God's  work  !  The  fire  must  be  put  out ; — 
whip  the  child  !  I  do  not  see  the  connection  between  the  end  desired  and  the  means 
used.  Your  loving  sympathy  has  fully  repaid  me  already.  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
who  has  dealt  bountifully  with  me  hitherto.     All  that  I  possess  belongs  to  Him. 

"  '  Tliere,  take  an  inventory  of  all  I  have, 
To  the  last  penny;   'tis  the  King's.'" 

While  this  correspondence  was  passing  to  and  fro,  the  Lord  was  working  on 
behalf  of  His  dear  servant  in  a  wonderful  way.  Writing  to  one  of  his  deacons,. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  said  : — "  I  have  had  .a  very  remarkable  deliverance  out  of  a  pecuniary 
difficulty  inflicted  upon  me  in  consequence  of  the  '  Down-grade'  Controversy.  It  is 
as  nearly  a  miracle  as  anything  I  ever  heard  of  The  living  God  guards  me  on 
every  side,  and  covers  my  head.      To  Him  be  praise  !  " 

A  lady  from  the  Antipodes,  who  was  staying  in  London,  afterwards  related 
that,  during  the  time  under  consideration,  she  felt  an  overpowering  impression  that 
she  must  go  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  the  South  of  France,  and  carry  him  some  financial 
help  to  meet  a  special  emergency.  She  said  that,  on  other  occasions,  when  similar 
intimations  had  come  to  her,  she  had  obeyed  her  Lord's  commands,  and  in  each 
instance  had  found  that  she  had  been  infallibly  guided  by  Him,  so  she  at  once  made 
arrangements  for  the  thousand  miles'  journey.  The  amount  she  was  to  give  was  not 
at  first  revealed  to  her,  nor  did  she  know  exactly  where  she  was  to  go,  as  it  had  been 
announced  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  be  moving  from  place  to  place.  However,  the 
Lord,  who  had  entrusted  her  with  the  commission,  directed  her  to  Mentone  ;  and, 
on  her  arrival  there,  she  was  further  guided  to  the  Hotel  Beau  Rivage.  What 
happened  there,  my  beloved  thus  records  :— 

"An  awe  is  upon  me  as  I  write  to  you,  for  I  feel  the  Lord  to  be  so  near.  On 
Tuesday  evening,  there  came  to  this  hotel  three  ladies  who  asked  if  Mr.  Spurgeon 
were  here,  and  left  cards.     The  next  morning,  they  were  at  our  family  worship  ;  and, 

to-day,  Mrs.  R gave  me  the  enclosed  letter,  and  cheque  for  ^^  100  !      I  told  her 

of  my  trouble  afterwards,  I  had  not  mentioned  it  before,  and  I  read  to  her  a  few 
sentences  of  your  dear  letter.  'There,'  she  said,  'that  is  the  Lord's  reason  for 
moving  me  to  give  it  to  you  ;  let  it  go  to  make  up  the  lack  for  the  next  six  months.' 
I  worshipped  the  Lord  with  a  thrilling  joy.  She  added,  '  I  do  not  doubt  but  that 
the  Lord  will  see  you  right  through  the  difficulty.'  I  believe  so,  too,  and  that  all  the 
help  will  come  from  someone  who  does  not  know  of  my  special  need,  so  that  it  will 
be  the  more  conspicuously  '  of  the  Lord.'     The  money  will  be  surer  from  Him  than 

from  Mr. ,  although  he  promised  it  for  life.      It  may  be  very  childish  of  me,  but 

I  could  not  help  sending  you  the  very  cheque  and  letter,  that  you  may  see  with  your 


26o  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

eyes  what  the  Lord  sent  me.  How  this  lady  came  to  know  my  hotel,  I  cannot 
imagine,  but  Mr.  Harrald  says  that  He  who  sent  her  knew  where  I  was. 

"  Our  College  men  have  met,  with  grand  result ;  the  only  dissentient  being  one 
who  is,  practically,  out  of  the  ministry.  Yesterday,  I  went  to  see  an  afflicted 
gentleman,*  whose  deceased  wife  was  Miss  Havergal's  sister.  His  doctor  met  me, 
just  now,  and  told  me  that  I  had  done  his  patient  great  good,  I  was,  however,  the 
greater  gainer,  for  he  read  me  three  letters  from  his  son,  a  clergyman  in  Islington,  in 
which  he  told  his  father  to  be  sure  to  meet  me,  and  wrote  very  many  kind  things, 
which  I  am  not  egotistical  enough  to  repeat ;  but  he  said  that  all  who  loved  the 
Lord,  whom  he  knew,  were  bearing  me  up  on  their  hearts.  Truly,  I  am  delivered 
from  all  fear  of  failing  in  this  battle,  which  is  the  Lord's,  not  mine.  I  feel  as  if 
I  must  not  write  about  anything  else  upon  these  two  sheets.  '  Holiness  unto  the 
Lord,'  is  written  on  them  ;  and  the  domestic  matters  must  go  on  another  sheet  of 
paper.  Oh,  how  I  praise  the  Lord  for  yoti  !  You  are  dear  to  me,  as  a  woman  and 
a  wife,  beyond  all  expression  ;  but  now,  more  fully  than  ever,  we  wear  the  yoke  of 
Christ  together,  and  mutually  bear  the  double  burden  of  service  and  suffering  for 
Him." 

Less  than  a  week  after  the  above  letter  was  received,  my  husband  wrote  as 
follows  : — "  Prepare  for  further  rejoicing.  We  had  been  out  driving  all  day,  and 
when  I  came  in,  I  found  your  dear  letter,  and  saw  you  sitting  '  in  Expectation 
Corner,'  zvith  the  door  open.  Please  receive  the  fresh  token  which  the  Lord  has 
sent  in   the   form   of  a  second   ,;^ioo!      Letter  and   cheque   enclosed.     What  hath 

God  wrought !      I  never  gave  Mrs.  R a  shadow  of  a  hint.      I  never  thought  she 

would  do  more.  Why  should  she  ?  But,  as  you  say,  '  the  living  God  does  deliver 
His  children.'  How  I  praise  Him  !  Or,  rather,  how  I  do  wish  I  could  praise  Him, 
but  I  feel  as  if  my  gratitude  was  cold  and  superficial  when  contrasted  'with  His 
great  goodness  !      Blessed  be  His  Name  for  ever! 

"What  a  dear  soul  you  are!  How  I  love  you!  Our  inward  and  spiritual 
union  has  come  out  in  this  trial  and  deliverance.  We  will  record  all  this  to  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  our  God.  The  weather  here  is  rather  of  Heaven  than  of  earth  ; 
warm,  clear,  bright,  and  yet  life-giving  and  refreshing.  The  toothache  touches  me 
every  now  and  then  ;  but,  moderated  by  interludes  of  ease,  I  hardly  ought  to 
mention  it,  my  mercies  are  so  great.  What  are  pains  when  God  is  so  near  ^ 
This  one  theme  is  so  predominant  in  my  soul,  that  I  cannot  write  about  anything 
else.     The  Lord  liveth,  and  blessed  be  my  Rock  ! 

*  After  Mr.  Spurgeon's  return  from  Mentone,  he  wrote  to  this  friend,  concerning  the  Controversy : — "  I  have  had  to  lean 
on  the  bare  arm  of  God.  It  is  a  grand  sensation.  An  arm  of  flesh  loses  all  charms  after  we  have  once  leaned  on  the 
greater  power.  What  a  Lord  we  serve !  True  indeed  is  His  Word,  and  it  is  profitable  to  be  made  to  prove  its  truth  in  storm 
and  wreck.  What  folly  it  seems  to  try  to  explain  it  away!  Its  keenest  edge  wounds  nothing  but  that  which  is  false  and  foul. 
I  would  sooner  be  slain  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord  than  live  by  the  lie  of  the  devil." 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  261 

"  Send  cheque  to  Bank.  Sing  the  Doxology.  Keep  all  my  love,  and  rest 
under  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  our  God." 

After  the  letters  to  myself,  probably  those  written  to  the  friends  at  the 
Tabernacle  expressed  most  fully  what  was  in  the  dear  Pastor's  heart.  Shortly 
after  he  reached  the  South  of  France,  he  wrote  thus  to  them  : — 

"  I  wish  to  thank  you  all  most  heartily  for  your  constancy  of  love  during  four- 
and-thirty  years  of  fellowship.  We  have  been  many  in  number,  but  only  one  in 
heart,  all  through  these  years.  Specially  is  this  true  in  the  present  hour  of 
controversy,  for  my  heartiest  sympathizers  are  in  my  own  church.  Several  enthu- 
siastic ones  proposed  a  general  meeting  of  church-members,  to  express  their  fervent 
agreement  with  their  Pastor;  but  the  ever-faithful  deacons  and  elders  had  taken 
time  by  the  forelock,  and  presented  to  me  a  letter  signed  by  them  all  as  repre- 
senting their  brethren  and  sisters.  Such  unity  comes  from  the  grace  of  God, 
proves  that  His  blessing  is  now  with  us,  and  prophesies  future  happiness.  What 
can  I  do  but  thank  you  all,  love  you  in  return,  labour  for  you  as  long  as  strength 
remains,  and  pray  for  you  till  I  die  '^  The  infinite  blessing  of  the  Eternal  God  be 
with  you  for  ever  !  " 

In  reply  to  the  letter  from  the  church-officers,  and  to  a  further  communication 
sent  'by  them,  the  Pastor  wrote  : — ■ 

"  Mentone, 

"Nov.  27,  1887. 
.  "To  the  Co-Pastor  and  the  Deacons, 

"  My  Own  Dear  Brethren, 

"  I  am  touched  by  your  loving  letter.  It  is  just  like  you  ;  but  it  is  so 
tenderly,  so  considerately  done,  that  it  has  a  peculiar  sweetness  about  it.  May  the 
Lord  deal  with  each  one  of  you  as  you  have  dealt  towards  me,  even  in  tender  love 
and  true  faithfulness  ! 

"  The  more  you  know  of  this  Controversy,  the  more  will  your  judgments,  as 
well  as  your  hearts,  go  with  me.  It  is  not  possible  for  me  to  communicate  to 
anyone  all  that  has  passed  under  my  knowledge  ;  but  I  have  had  abundant  reason 
for  every  step  I  have  taken,  as  the  day  of  days  will  reveal.  All  over  the  \-arious 
churches  there  is  the  same  evil,  in  all  denominations  in  measure  ;  and  trom  believers, 
in  all  quarters,  comes  the  same  thankful  expression  of  delight  that  the  schemes . 
of  errorists  have  been  defeated  by  pouring  light  upon  them. 

"  I  cannot,  at  this  present,  tell  you  what  spite  has  been  used  against  me,  or 
you  would  wonder  indeed  ;  but  the  love  of  God  first,  and  your  love  next,  are  my 
comfort  and  stay.  We  may,  perhaps,  be  made  to  feel  some  of  the  brunt  of  the 
battle  in  our  various  funds  ;   but  the   Lord   liveth.      My  eminent   predecessor.    Dr. 


262  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Gill,  was  told,  by  a  certain  member  of  his  congregation  who  ought  to  have  known 
better,  that,  if  he  published  his  book,  The  Cause  of  God  and  Truth,  he  would  lose 
some  of  his  best  friends,  and  that  his  income  would  fall  ofif.  The  doctor  said,  '  I 
can  afford  to  be  poor,  but  I  cannot  aftord  to  injure  my  conscience  ;'  and  he  has  left 
his  mantle  as  well  as  his  chair  in  our  vestry. 


DR.    GILLS   CH.AIR. 


"  I  should  like  to  see  you  all  walk  in  here,  and  to  hear  your  loving  voices  in 
prayer,  tor  I  feel  knit  to  you  all  more  and  more. 

"  Yours  for  ever, 

"  C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

Among  the  letters  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  at  that  period,  is  one  that  is  of 
special  and  permanent  importance,  first,  because  it  was  the  reply  to  a  kind  com- 
munication from  Dr.  Culross,  the  President  of  the  Baptist  Union  ;  and,  next,  because 
it  sets  forth  so  clearly  the  reason  for  Mr.  Spurgeon's  protest  and  action  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Nov.  26,  1887. 
"  My   Dear   Dr.   Culross, 

"  I  think  it  most  kind  of  you  to  write  me.  Your  brethren  have  usually 
fired  at  me  through  the  newspapers  their  loving  appeals  and  advices.  Of  this 
I  do  not  complain  ;  but,  assuredly,  yours  is  a  way  which  commands  an  answer. 
Letters  to  the  papers  are  literature,  and  may  or  may  not  be  worth  one's  notice  ; 
yours  is  a  letter  sent   to   me,   and    I    will   at  least  heartily  thank  you   for   it. 

"  Do  I  need  to  say  that,  with  you,  and  such  brethren  as  Dr.  McLaren, 
Mr.  Aklis,  and  Dr.  Angus,  I  have  no  sort  of  disagreement,  except  that  you  stay 
in  the   Union  and    I   am   out  of  it  '^.      We  shall,  according  to  our   light,   labour  for 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  263 

the   same   cause.       We  are  all   Christians  and    Baptists,    and  can  find    many  ways 
of  co-operation. 

"  The  '  Metropolitan  men  '  in  London  request  the  Union  to  devise  some 
way  by  which  I,  with  others,  can  return  to  it.  This  is  very  right  from  their 
point  of  view,  but  I  wish  you  to  understand,  as  President  of  the  Union,  that 
the  request  is  not  mine.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  do  what  I  am  sure  you  cannot 
do.  If  I  had  thought  that  you  could  have  done  anything  which  would  enable 
me  to   return    if  I   retired,    I   should  have  asked  you  to  do  it  before  retirino-. 

"So  long  as  an  Association  without  a  creed  has  no  aliens  in  it,  nobody  can 
wish  for  a  creed  formally,  for  the  spirit  is  there  ;  but  at  a  time  when  '  strano-e 
children '  have  entered,  what  is  to  be  done  .'*  Whatever  may  theoretically  be  in  your 
power,  you  practically  have  no  power  whatever.  You  will  go  on  as  you  are  ; 
and,  unless  God's  grace  calls  back  the  wanderers,  their  numbers  will  increase, 
and  their  courage  will  cause  them  to  speak  out  more  plainl)',  to  the  sorrow  of 
the  faithful  ones  who  shielded  them   in  patient  hope  of  better  things. 

"  I  have  followed  out  our  Lord's  mind  as  to  private  remonstrance  by  seeing- 
Presidents  and  Secretary  on  former  occasions,  and  I  have  written  my  remonstrances 
again  and  again  without  avail.  I  had  no  course  but  to  withdraw.  Surel)-,  no 
sane  person  thinks  that  I  should  have  made  a  tour  to  deal  with  the  individual 
errorists.  I  have  no  jurisdiction  over  them,  and  should  have  been  regarded  as 
offensively  intrusive  if  I  had  gone  to  them  ;  and  justly  so.  My  question  is  with 
the   Union,  and  with  that  alone.      I   have  dealt  with  it  all  along. 

"  Your  very  clear  declaration,  that  the  Union  could  not  have  a  creed,  or,  as 
I  read  it,  could  not  declare  its  doctrinal  views  otherwise  than  by  practising  baptism 
and  the  Lord's  supper,  closes  the  door  finally  against  me.  Neither  do  I  knock 
at  that  door,  nor  wish  for  another  door  to  be  made.  The  good  men  who  formed 
the  Union,  I  fancy,  had  no  idea  that  it  would  become  what  it  now  is,  or  they 
would  have  fashioned  it  otherwise.  It  has,  by  its  centralization  and  absorption  of 
various  Societies,  become  far  other  than  at  the  first.  This  is  a  good  thing,  but 
it  involves  a  strain  on  the  frail  fabric  which  it  is  ill  adapted  to  bear.  So  I  think  ; 
but  time   will  be  the  best  proof  of  that. 

"  I  wish  I  could  have  worked  with  you  in  this  particular  way  ;  but,  as  I 
cannot,  we  are  not  therefore  deprived  of  a  thousand  other  ways  of  fellowship. 
You  feel  union  of  heart  with  men  who  publicly  preach  Universal  Restitution  : 
I  do  not.  I  mean,  you  feel  enough  fellowship  to  remain  in  the  Union  with  them  : 
/  do  not.  It  is  the  same  with  other  errors.  Still,  I  am  in  fellowship  with  yoii, 
— Union  or  no  Union.  It  I  think  you  wrong  in  your  course, — as  I  surely  do, — 
I   will  tell   you  so  in  the  same  spirit  as  that  in  which  you  have  written  to  me. 

"  From  the  Council  of  the   Union  I  cannot  look  for  anything   which  I  should 


264  C-     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

care   to   consider   as  the  voice  of  the    Union.       It  is   too   largely   committed   to   a 
latitudinarian  policy  beforehand,  and   I  have  no  question  to  refer  to  it. 

"  I  am  happily  free  from  all  responsibility  for  its  actions,  and  all  allegiance  to 
Its  sovereignty. 

"  Very  heartily  yours, 

"  C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

I  have  received,  from  many  friends,  copies  of  my  dear  husband's  letters 
written  during  this  trying  period  ;  but  I  do  not  think  any  good  purpose  can  be 
served  by  the  publication  of  more  than  I  have  here  given.  Those  who  sympathized 
with  him  in  his  protest  need  nothing  to  convince  them  of  the  need  and  the  wisdom 
of  his  action  ;  while  those  who  were  opposed  to  him  would  probably  remain  in 
the  same  mind,  whatever  might  be  said,  so  there  the  matter  must  rest  as  far  as 
I   am  concerned. 


CHAPTER    C. 


:.  5|jurgt0u  as  a  ItttravD  Jlan. 


God  gave  Elijah  forty  days'  meat  at  one  meal :  do  you,  dear  friends,  ever  get  such  meals  as  that? 
I  do  when  I  read  certain  books  ; — not  modern-thought  books.  Give  me  no  such  fare  as  that,— a  grain 
of  meal  to  a  gallon  of  water  ;  but  let  me  have  one  of  the  good  solid  Puritan  volumes  that  are  so  little 
prized  nowadays,  and  my  soul  can  feed  upon  such  blessed  food  as  that,  and  be  satisfied  with  it.— 
C.  H.  S.,  in  sermon  preached  at  the  Tabernacle,  y-une  24,  1883. 

If  you  can  read  a  tainted  book  that  denies  the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  and  attacks  the  truth 
of  God,  and  if  you  derive  any  profit  from  it,  you  must  be  a  very  different  being  from  myself.  I  have  to 
read  such  books,  I  must  read  them  sometimes  to  know  what  is  said  by  the  enemies  of  the  gospel,  that 
I  may  defend  the  faith,  and  help  the  weaklings  of  the  flock  ;  but  it  is  a  sorry  business.  When  those 
who  are  qualified  to  do  so  are  reading  these  heretical  works,  if  they  are  doing  it  really  in  the  fear  of 
God  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men,  they  remind  me  of  Sir  James  Simpson  and  the  two  other  doctors 
when  they  discovered  the  medical  and  surgical  value  of  chloroform.  They  sat  at  the  table,  and 
scarcely  knew  what  was  going  to  happen  ;  but  they  took  a  dose  each,  risking  their  lives  by  so  doing  ; 
and  when  they  came  back  to  consciousness,  they  had  certainly  made  a  great  discovery. — C.  H.  S  ,  ht 
sermon  pnaclied  at  tlie  Taheniacle,  October  2'^,  1885. 

The  world  gets  more  civilized; — so  I  am  told,  though,  when  I  read  the  newspapers,  I  am  not 
quite  sure  that  it  is  so.  The  world  gets  more  intelligent ; — so  I  am  told,  though,  when  I  read  the 
magazines,--!  mean  the  high-class  quarterlies, — I  am  not  certain  that  it  is  so,  for,  in  that  direction, 
the  ignorance  appears  to  me  to  become  greater  every  day,  I  mean,  the  ignorance  among  the  learned 
and  scientific  men,  who  seem  to  me,  in  their  discoveries,  continualljf  to  wander  further  and  further,  not 
only  from  that  which  is  revealed  and  infallible,  but  also  from  that  which  is  rational  and  truthful. — 
C.  H.  S.,  in  Sermon  pleached  at  the  Tabernacle,  May  28,  1882. 

What  a  storehouse  the  Bible  is,  since  a  man  may  continue  to  preach  from  it  for  years,  and  still  find 
that  there  is  more  to  preach  from  than  when  he  began  to  discourse  upon  it!  What  pyramids  of  books 
have  been  written  upon  the  Bible,  and  yet  we  who  are  students  find  no  portion  over-expounded,  but 
large  parts  which  are  scarcely  touched!  If  you  take  Darling's  CyclopirJia,  and  look  at  a  text  which  one 
divine  has  preached  upon,  you  will  see  that  dozens  have  done  the  same  ;  but  there  are  hundreds  of 
texts  which  remain  like  virgin  summits,  whereon  the  foot  of  preacher  has  never  stood.  I  might 
almost  say  that  the  major  part  of  the  Word  of  God  is  in  that  condition  ;  it  is  still  an  Eldorado 
unexplored,  a  land  whose  dust  is  gold.— C.  H   S.,  in  speech  a   a  Bible  Society  meeting,  1882. 


10  life  of  Mr.  Spurg-eon  would  be  complete  unless  it  contained  all 
available  information  concerning  the  books  he  read,  or  wrote,  or 
owned.  All  who  ha\-e  been  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  from 
his  childhood,  or  in  later  years,  have  testified  to  the  omnivorous 
character  of  his  reading.  In  the  earlier  part  of  the  present  work 
(Vol  I.,  Chapter  III.),  he  has  himself  recorded  the  delight  with 
which,  while  he  was  but  a  little  lad,  he  revelled  in  the  study  of  such  works  as 
Foxes  Book  of  Martyrs,  Bunyan's  Pilgriiii  s  Progress,  and  the  huge  folios  of 
Puritanic  theology  which  he  had  discovered  in  the  windowless  room  in  the  upper 
portion  of  the  old  Stambourne  Manse.     The  boy  and  the  books  were  inseparable 


266  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

companions  ;  and  when  he  returned  from  Stambourne  to  Colchester,  and  afterwards 
went  to  his  uncle's  school  at  Maidstone,  the  same  experience  was  repeated.  Even 
as  a  youth,  he  intermeddled  with  all  knowledge,  and  so  began  to  accumulate  those 
treasures  of  literary  lore  which  have  led  many  to  describe  his  wisdom  as  ency- 
clopaedic. His  essay,  entitled  Popery  Unmasked,  written  when  he  was  only 
fifteen  years  of  age,  affords  abundant  proof  of  the  wide  extent  of  his  reading  at 
that  early  period  of  his  history  ;  and  he  often  mentioned,  with  much  merriment, 
the  curious  arrangement  that  .had  to  be  made  in  connection  with  the  school-boy 
debates  in  which  he  took  part.  He  kn.ew  so  much  more  than  the  rest  of  the 
pupils  upon  almost  all  the  subjects  which  they  wished  to  discuss,  that  he  was 
too  formidable  an  antagonist  for  any  of  them  to  overthrow  ;  and,  consequently, 
the  only  way  in  which  he  could  fairly  compete  with  his  young  companions  was 
to  allow  him  to  speak  on  both  sides  of  the  question  under  consideration  !  It 
must  have  both  amused  and  amazed  his  fellow-scholars  to  hear  him  refute  his 
own  arguments,  which,  when  he  had  first  uttered  them,  they  had  thought  to 
be  unanswerable  ! 

When  he  advanced  from  the  position  of  scholar  to  that  of  teacher,  he  gladly 
availed  himself  of  the  increased  opportunities  of  reading  and  learning  everything 
that  might  be  turned  to  good  account  in  his  future  career  ;  and  when  he  had 
become  a  follower  of  Christ,  and  an  earnest  worker  for  his  Lord,  he  spent  all 
that  he  could  honestly  afford  in  the  purchase  of  the  classical  and  theological  books 
which  were  likely  to  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  him.  His  letters  at  that 
period,  as  given  in  the  first  volume  of  this  work,  contained  frequent  mention 
of  those  volumes  ;  and  his  tutor  and  friend,  Mr.  Leeding,  confirmed  his  own 
testimony  as  to  the  diligence  with  which  he  was  mastering  their  contents.  One 
of  his  favourite  subjects  of  study,  at  that  time,  was  natural  history  ;  and  some 
of  his  pupils  have  acknowledged,  even  since  his  home-going,  how  intensely 
interesting  and  instructive  were  the  lessons  and  lectures  he  gave  them  upon  that 
topic  ;  and  all  the  while  he  was,  perhaps  unconsciously,  laying  up  useful  and 
telling  illustrations  which  were  to  be  of  service  to  himself  and  his  hearers 
throughout  his  long  ministry. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  often  refer  to  his  own  literary  acquirements,  as  he 
preferred  to  let  the  work  he  had  accomplished  speak  for  him  ;  and  he  could 
afford  to  ignore  the  unfounded  assumptions  of  his  critics  with  regard  to  his 
supposed  ignorance.  Very  occasionally,  possibly  when  there  had  been  some 
unusually  virulent  attack  upon  him  which  he  thought  should  not  pass  unnoticed, 
he  would  briefly  mention  the  matter  to  some  of  the  choice  friends  by  whom  he 
was   surrounded,  and   prove   the   utter  .groundlessness  of  his  assailants'  statements. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  267 

At  the  close  of  one  of  the  annual  College  Conferences,  there  occurred  an  incident 
of  this  kind,  which  is,  to  this  day,  remembered  with  delight  by  many  who  wer.e 
present.  One  ot  the  brethren  who  was  there  has  recorded  his  reminiscences  of  the 
occasion  ;  he  writes  : — "  It  was  after  the  dinner  on  the  Friday,  when  we  had 
been  cheerino-  the  beloved  President  with  such  cheers  as  we  shall  never  give  to 
any  man  again  ;  I  think  they  must  have  touched  his  loving  heart,  for  he  left 
his  place  at  the  table,  stepped  forward  among  the  flowers  that  decorated  the 
platform,  and  talked  to  us  in  a  homely,  confidential  way.  I  cannot  recall  his 
exact  words,  but  I  know  that  he  told  us  how  welcome  we  were  to  all  the 
privileges  ot  the  Conference,  and  I  remember  that  he  had  a  special  message  of 
sympathy  for  those  ot  us  who  came  from  the  smaller  churches.  Then  he  went 
on  to  speak  of  himself.  He  related  how,  even  as  a  school-boy,  he  had  made 
such  progress  with  his  mathematical  studies  that  he  had  been  able  to  calculate 
the  tables  which  he  believed  were  still  used  in  a  certain  Life  Insurance  office 
in  London.  I  distinctly  recollect  that  he  also  said  he  could  easil\'  have  taken  a 
degree  at  Cambridge  if  the  University  had  been  open  to  Nonconformists, ^  and 
he  referred  to  the  knowledge  of  Greek  and  Latin  which  he  possessed  at  that 
time,  adding,  in  his  own  inimitable  way,  that,  since  then,  he  had  also  learned  at 
least  some  Hebrew,  and  a  fczu  other  things  !  He  urged  the  brethren  to  be 
diligent  students,  to  read  all  books  that  would  help  them  to  understand  the 
Scriptures  ;  but,  above  all,  to  study  the  Word  itself,  in  the  original  languages 
if  possible,  and  to  saturate  themselves  with  what  he  termed  Bibline,  the  very 
essence  of  The  Book.  I  always  knew  that  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  great  scholar 
as  well  as  a  great  preacher,  but  it  was  delightful  to  have  the  fact  confirmed 
from  his  own  lips  ;  yet  he  concluded  by  saying,  'Still,  brethren,  like  the  aposde 
Paul,  I  am  become  a  fool  in  glorying.'  But  our  renewed  cheers  must  have 
assured  him  of  our  delight  in  listening  to  what  he  had  told  us,  and  he  said  that 
he  had  been  driven  to  speak  by  what  others  had  been  saying,  and  tor  the 
honour  ot  the  College  of  which  he  was  President.  The  address  was  evidently 
quite  unpremeditated  ;  it  seemed  to  be  the  overflowing  ot  his  heart  to  those  who, 
he  knew,  were  not  only  in  perfect  sympathy  with  him,  but  regarded  him  with 
the  deepest  reverence,   esteem,   and   love." 

Although  Mr.  Spurgeon  so  seldom  referred  to  his  own  attainments  and  qualifi- 
cations for  his  great  life-work,  yet  frequently,  in  depicting  some  ot  the  Lord's  most 
useful  and  successful  servants,  he  drew  likenesses  of  them  which  might  admirably 
serve  for  full-length  portraits  of  himself.  F"or  instance,  preaching  upon  John  the 
Baptist's  words,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease,"  the  Pastor  said  : — "  Oh, 
how  grandly  he  witnessed  tor  Christ  by  sinking  himself  until  he  was  lost  in  his  Lord 


268  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

and  Master  !  And,  my  brother,  it  must  be  the  same  with  you  ;  if  you  would  be  a 
true  witness  for  Christ,  you  must  say  that  which  glorifies  Him,  even  though  it 
dishonours  yourself  Perhaps  there  is  a  very  learned  man  sitting  over  yonder,  and 
the  temptation  to  the  preacher  is  to  say  something  that  shall  make  him  feel  that  the 
minister  to  whom  he  is  listening  is  not  so  ignorant  as  some  people  suppose  ;  but 
if  there  is  an  unlearned,  simple  sinner  anywhere  in  the  place,  the  preacher's  business 
is  just  to  chop  his  words  down  to  that  poor  man's  condition,  and  let  the  learned 
hearer  receive  the  same  message  if  he  will.  Luther  said,  '  When  I  am  preaching,  I 
see  Dr.  Jonas  sitting  there,  and  QEcolampadius,  and  Melancthon,  and  I  say  to 
myself,  "Those  learned  doctors  know  enough  already;  so  I  need  not  trouble  about 
them.  I  shall  fire  at  the  poor  people  in  the  aisles."'  That  is  the  way  Luther 
preached,  and  God  richly  blessed  his  ministry  because  he  did  it.  Though  he  was  a 
truly  learned  man,  he  was  willing  to  be  reckoned  as  knowing  nothing  at  all  if  by 
that  means  he  could  the  better  serve  his  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ." 

On  another  occasion,  in  a  sermon  at  the  Tabernacle,  his  reference  to  John 
Bunyan  was  equally  applicable  to  his  own  writings  and  words  : — "  Oh,  that  you  and 
I  might  get  into  the  very  heart  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  get  that  Word  into  our- 
selves !  As  I  have  seen  the  silkworm  eat  into  the  leaf,  and  consume  It,  so  ought 
we  to  do  with  the  Word  of  the  Lord  ; — not  crawl  over  its  surface,  but  eat  right 
into  it  till  we  have  taken  it  into  our  inmost  parts.  It  is  idle  merely  to  let  the  eye 
glance  over  the  words,  or  to  recollect  the  poetical  expressions,  or  the  historic  facts  ; 
but  it  is  blessed  to  eat  into  the  very  soul  of  the  Bible  until,  at  last,  you  come  to  talk 

.  in  Scriptural  language,  and  your  very  style  is  fashioned  upon  Scripture  models,  and, 
what  is  better  still,  your  spirit  is  flavoured  with  the  words  of  the  Lord.  I  would 
quote  John   Bunyan  as  an   instance   of  what    I    mean.      Read  anything  of  his,   and 

■you  will  see  that  it  is  almost  like  reading  the  Bible  itself  He  had  studied  our 
Authorized  Version,  which  will  never  be  bettered,  as  I  judge,  till  Christ  shall  come  ; 
he  had  read  it  till  his  whole  being  was  saturated  with  Scripture  ;  and,  though  his 
writings  are  charmingly  full  of  poetry,  yet  he  cannot  give  us  his  Pilgrims  Progress — 
that  sweetest  of  all  prose  poems, — without  continually  making  us  feel  and  say,  '  Why, 
this  man  is  a  living  Bible  !  '  Prick  him  anywhere  ;  and  you  will  find  that  his  blood 
is  Bibline,  the  very  essence  of  the  Bible  flows  from  him.  He  cannot  speak  without 
quoting  a  text,  for  his  soul  is  full  of  the  W^ord  of  God." 

In  the  compilation  of  the  illustrative  extracts  for  The  Treasury  of  David,  it  was 
from  lack  of  time  rather  than  from  personal  Inability  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  glad  to 
avail  himself  of  the  assistance  of  a  few  friends,  whose  help  he  gratefully  acknow- 
ledged in  the  Prefaces  to  the  various  volumes  as  they  were  issued.  One  of  these 
references   will    serve   as   a   specimen   of  the   whole,  and   at   the   same  time   it   will 


c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiography.  269 

indicate  to  careful  readers  the  heavy  labour  which  had  been  undertaken,  and  the 
conscientiousness  with  which  it  was  being  performed.  In  the  Introduction  to 
Vol.  III.,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote; — "'Art. is  long,  and  life  is  short,'  hence  I  found 
myself  unequal  to  the  unaided  accomplishment  of  my  task,  and  I  have  had  to  call  in 
the  aid  of  my  excellent  friend,  Mr.  Gracey,  the  accomplished  classical  tutor  of  the 
Pastors'  College,  to  assist  me  in  the  w^ork  of  winnowing  the  enormous  heaps  of  Latin 
comments.  Huge  folios,  full  of  dreary  word-spinning,  yield  here  and  there  some 
little  material  for  thought  ;  and  this,  I  trust,  will  be  valuable  enough  to  my  readers 
to  repay  my  coadjutor  and  myself  for  our  pains.  For  the  selection  of  extracts,  I 
alone  am  responsible  ;  for  the  accuracy  of  the  translations,  we  are  jointly  account- 
able. The  reader  will  note  that,  not  without  much  expense  of  money,  as  well  as 
toil,  he  has  here  furnished  to  his  hand  the  pith  of  V^enema,  Le  Blanc,  Lorinus, 
Gerhohus,  Musculus,  Martin  Geier,  Mollerus,  and  Simon  de  Muis  ;  with  occasional 
notes  from  Vitringa,  Jansenius,  Savonarola,  Vatablus,  Turrecremata,  Marloratus, 
Palanterius,  Theodoret,  and  others,  as  they  were  judged  worthy  of  insertion.  I  can 
truly  say  that  I  have  never  tlinched  from  a  difficult)',  or  spared  exertion,  in  order  to 
make  the  work  as  complete  as  it  lay  in  my  power  to  render  it,  either  by  my  own 
endeavours  or  the  help  of  others." 

Perhaps,  among  all  Mr.  Spurgeon's  published  works,  the  one  that  gives  the 
best  idea  of  his  familiarity  with  the  whole  range  of  expository  literature,  is  his 
unpretentious  half-crown  volume.  Issued  under  the  unattractive  title.  Commenting 
and  Coninientaries.  The  book  has  long  since  been  accepted  as  a  most  reliable 
standard  of  appeal,  and  its  commendations  and  valuations  are  frequently  quoted 
in  catalogues  of  theological  works.  The  purpose  of  the  volume,  and  the  labour 
necessary  for  its  completion,  are  thus  described  by  its  author  : — 

"  Divines  who  have  studied  the  Scriptures  have  left  us  great  stores  of  holy 
thought  which  we  do  well  to  use.  Their  expositions  can  never  be  a  substitute 
for  our  own  meditations  ;  but,  as  water  poured  down  a  dry  pump  often  starts  it 
working  to  bring  up  water  of  its  own,  so  suggestive  reading  sets  the  mind  in 
motion  on  its  own  account.  Here,  however,  is  the  difficulty.  Students  do  not 
find  it  easy  to  choose  which  works  to  buy,  and  their  slender  stores  are  often  wasted 
on  books  of  a  comparatively  worthless  kind.  If  I  can  save  a  poor  man  from 
spending  his  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  or,  by  directing  a  brother  to  a 
good  book,  may  enable  him  to  dig  deeper  into  the  mines  of  truth,  I  shall  be  well 
repaid.  For  this  purpose  I  have  tolled,  and  read  much,  and  passed  under  review 
some  three  or  four  thousand  volumes.  From  these  I  have  compiled  my  catalogue, 
rejecting  many,  yet  making  a  very  varied  selection.  Though  I  have  carefully  used 
such  judgment  as  I  possess,   I  have  doubtless  made  many  errors  ;   I  shall  certainly 


2/0  C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

find  very  few  who  will  agree  with  all  my  criticisms,  and  some  persons  may  be  angry 
at  my  remarks.  I  have,  however,  done  my  best,  and,  with  as  much  impartiality  as 
I  can  command,  I  have  nothing  extenuated  nor  set  down  aught  in  malice.  He  who 
finds  fault  will  do  well  to  execute  the  work  in  better  style  ;  only  let  him  remember 
that  he  will  have  my  heifer  to  plough  with,  and  therefore  ought  in  all  reason  to 
excel  me.  I  have  used  a  degree  of  pleasantry  in  my  remarks  on  the  Commentaries, 
for  a  catalogue  is  a  dry  affair,  and,  as  much  for  my  own  sake  as  for  that  of  my 
readers,  I  have  indulged  the  mirthful  vein  here  and  there.  For  this,  I  hope  I  shall 
escape  censure,  even  if  I  do  not  win  commendation.  Few  can  conceive  the  amount 
of  toil  which  this  compilation  has  involved,  both  to  myself  and  my  industrious 
amanuensis,  Mr.  J.  L.  Keys.  In  almost  every  case,  the  books  have  been  actually 
examined  by  myself,  and  my  opinion,  whatever  it  may  be  worth,  is  an  original  one. 
A  complete  list  of  all  comments  has  not  been  attempted.  Numbers  of  volumes 
have  been  left  out  because  they  were  not  easily  obtainable,  or  were  judged  to  be 
worthless,  although  some  of  both  these  classes  have  been  admitted  as  specimens,  or 
as  warnings.  Latin  authors  are  not  Inserted,  because  few  can  procure  them,  and 
fewer  still  can  read  them  with  ease.  We  are  not,  however,  ignorant  of  their  value. 
The  writers  on  the  Prophetical  Books  have  completely  mastered  us ;  and,  after 
almost  completing  a  full  list,  we  could  not  in  our  conscience  believe  that  a  tithe  of 
them  would  yield  to  the  student  anything  but  bewilderment,  and  therefore  we 
reduced  the  number  to  small  dimensions.  We  reverence  the  teaching-  of  the 
prophets,  and  the  Apocalypse  ;  but  for  many  of  the  professed  expounders  of  those 
inspired  Books,  we  entertain  another  feeling." 

Some  of  the  readers  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  and  other  works,  noticing  how 
seldom  he  inserted  classical  quotations,  or  referred  to  the  languages  in  which  the 
Scriptures  were  written,  may  have  imagined  that  he  was  not  acquainted  with  those 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  The  real  reason  for  the  omission  can  be 
gathered  from  his  warning  words  to  his  students  in  his  lecture  on  "  Commenting"  : — 
''Avoid  all  pedantry.  A  pedant,  who  is  continually  quoting  Ambrose  and  Jerome, 
Piscator  and  CEcolampadius,  in  order  to  show  what  a  copious  reader  he  has  been,  is 
usually  a  dealer  in  small  wares,  and  quotes  only  what  others  have  quoted  before 
him  ;  but  he  who  can  give  you  the  result  and  outcome  of  very  extensive  reading, 
without  sounding  a  trumpet  before  him,  is  the  really  learned  man.  As  a  general 
rule,  it  may  be  observed  that  those  gentlemen  who  know  the  least  Greek  are  the 
most  sure  to  air  their  rags  of  learning  in  the  pulpit  ,  they  miss  no  chance  of  saying, 
'The  Greek  Is  so-and-so.'  It  makes  a  man  an  Inch  and  a-half  taller,  by  a  foolometer, 
if  he  constantly  lets  fall  bits  of  Greek  and  Hebrew,  and  even  tells  the  people  the 
tense  of  the  verb  and  the  case  of  the  noun,  as  I  have  known  some  do.     Those  who 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY.  2/1 

have  no  learning  usually  make  a  point  of  displaying  the  pegs  on  which  learning 
ought  to  hang.  Brethren,  the  whole  process  of  interpretation  is  to  be  carried  on  in 
your  study  ;  you  are  not  to  show  your  congregation  the  process,  but  to  give  them 
the  result ;  like  a  good  cook,  who  would  never  think  of  bringing  up  dishes,  and  pans, 
and  rolling-pin,  and  spice-box  into  the  dining-room,  but  without  ostentation  sends 
up  the  feast." 

In  the  volume  of  lectures  to  students,  on  The  Art  of  ///iistration,  the  President 
incidentally  indicated  his  wide  acquaintance  with  all  kinds  of  literature  from  which 
anecdotes,  illustrations,  emblems,  metaphors,  and  similes  might  be  culled.  The 
following  extract  shows  how  Mr.  Spurgeon  turned  an  illustration  used  by  Henry 
Ward  Beecher  to  quite  a  different  purpose  from  the  one  intended  by  the  eminent 
American  preacher  : — 

"When  a  critical  adversary  attacks  our  metaphors,  he  generally  makes  short 
work  of  them.  To  friendly  minds,  images  are  arguments  ;  but  to  opponents,  they 
are  opportunities  for  attack  ;  the  enemy  climbs  up  by  the  window.  Comparisons 
are  swords  with  two  edges,  which  cut  both  ways  ;  and,  frequently,  what  seems 
a  sharp  and  telling  illustration  may  be  wittily  turned  against  you,  so  as  to  cause 
a  laugh  at  your  expense  ;  therefore,  do  not  rely  upon  your  metaphors  and  parables. 
Even  a  second-rate  man  may  defend  himself  from  a  superior  mind  if  he  can 
dexterously  turn  his  assailant's  gun  upon  himself  Here  is  an  instance  which 
concerns  myself,  and  I  give  it  for  that  reason,  since  these  lectures  have  all  along 
been  autobiographical.  It  is  a  cutting  from  one  of  our  religious  papers  : — '  Mr. 
Beecher  has  been  neatly  tripped  up  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel.  In  his 
Lectures  on  Preaching,  he  asserts  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  succeeded  "  in  spite 
of  his  Calvinism;"  adciing  the  remark  that  "the  camel  does  not  travel  any 
better,  nor  is  it  any  more  useful,  because  of  the  hump  on  its  back."  The 
illustration  is  not  a  felicitous  one,  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  retorts  : — "  Naturalists 
assure  us  that  the  camel's  hump  is  of  great  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  Arabs, 
who  judge  of  the  condition  of  their  beasts  by  the  size,  shape,  and  firmness  of 
their  humps.  The  camel  feeds  upon  his  hump  when  he  traverses  the  wilderness, 
so  that  in  proportion  as  the  animal  travels  over  the  sandy  wastes,  and  suffers 
from  privation  and  fatigue,  the  mass  diminishes  ;  and  he  is  not  fit  for  a  long- 
journey  till  the  hump  has  regained  its  usual  proportions.  Calvinism,  then,  is 
the  spiritual  meat  which  enables  a  man  to  labour  on  in  the  ways  of  Christian 
service  ;  and,  though  ridiculed  as  a  hump  by  those  who  are  only  lookers-on, 
those  who  traverse  the  weary  paths  of  a  wilderness  experience  know  too  well 
its  value  to  be  willing  to  part  with  it,  even  if  a  Beecher's  splendid  talents  could 
be  sfiven  in  exchang-e."'  " 


1']'. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


The  twenty-eight  volumes  of  The  Szvord  and  the  Trotvel,  from  1865  to  1892, 
contain  notices  of  many  thousands  of  books  that  the  beloved  Editor  either  read 
throuoh,  or  examined  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  write  reviews  of  them.  He  also 
read  many  that  he  did  not  review,  for  he  was  well  aware  that  an  unfavourable 
notice  in  his  magazine  would  help  to  advertize  erroneous  teaching,  and  he  thought 
the  wiser  course  was  to  ignore  such  works  altogether.  His  usual  method  of 
dealing  with  a  thoroughly  bad  book, — either  morally  or  doctrinally, — was  to  tear 
it  into  litde  pieces  too  small  to  do  harm  to  anyone,  or  to  commit  it  bodily  to 
the  flames.  This  was  the  sentence  executed  upon  many  volumes  that  cast  doubt 
upon  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord,  the  efficacy  of  His  atoning  sacrifice,  or  the 
inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  though  some  works  of  that  kind  were  allowed  to 
remain  as  evidences  of  the  character  of  the  writings  of  some  of  the  religious 
leaders  of  the  day.  In  one  notable  instance,  a  volume  by  a  very  prominent  Baptist 
minister — with  whom  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  personally  friendly,  but  from  whom  he 
was  widely  separated  theologically,— was  adversely  criticised  with  considerable 
severity.  Before  publishing  the  notice,  the  Editor  sent  a  proof  of  it  to  the 
author  of  the  book,  and  then,  at  his  urgent  request,  omitted  it  from  the  magazine. 
On  the  other  hand,  publishers  and  writers  have  frequently  testified  that  a  com- 
mendation in  The  Szvord  and  the  Troivel  has  been  the  means  of  selling  a  whole 
edition,  or  of  materially  helping  to  ensure  the  success  of  their  works,  while  all 
who  are  well  acquainted  with  the  magazine  are  fully  aware  of  the  unique  character 
of  the   Editor's   "  Notices  of  Books." 

Even  on  his  holiday  trips  to  Mentone,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  always  well  supplied 
with  material  for  reading,  for  not  only  did  he  take  large  quantities  of  books  with  him, 
but  many  others  were  sent  out  to  him  during  the  time  of  his  enforced  absence 
from  home.  He  generally  took  care,  in  making  his  selection  for  this  purpose, 
to  include  some  biographies,  and  one  or  two  of  his  favourite  Puritans,  such  as 
Manton  or  Brooks. 

On  one  occasion,  there  seemed  to  be  some  little  likelihood  of  his  literary 
luggage  being  confiscated  by  the  French  officials.  It  may  be  that  they  were 
specially  suspicious,  at  that  time,  because  the  ex-Empress  Eugenie  had  crossed 
the  Channel  by  the  same  steamer,  and  they  could  not  tell  how  much  Imperialistic 
literature  was  being  smuggled  into  the  Republic.  Although  they  could  find 
nothing  of  a  contraband  nature,  they  carefully  examined  several  volumes  of  the 
dear  Pastor's  own  works  which  were  intended  as  presents  for  friends,  and  others 
which  had  been  sent  to  him  for  review  ;  but,  finding  nothing  to  which  they 
could  object,  they  at  last  appended  the  mystic  mark  which  gave  free  admission 
to  all  that  the  huge  portmanteau  contained. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  273 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  very  quick  reader,  but  the  rapidity  of  his  glance  at  the 
page  did  not  interfere  with  the  completeness  of  his  acquaintance  with  its  contents. 
He  could  read  from  cover  to  cover  of  a  large  octavo  or  folio  volume  in  the  course  of 
a  very  short  space  of  time,  and  he  would  thus  become  perfectly  familiar  with  all  that 
it  contained.  Dr.  William  Wright,  the  late  Editorial  Superintendent  of  the  British 
and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  gave  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  combination  of  speed 
and  accuracy,  as  well  as  a  notable  testimony  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  literary  ability,  in 
the  reminiscences  which  he  wrote  for  The  British  Weekly  in  February,  1892.  In 
the  course  of  a  lengthy  article,  Dr.  Wright  said  : — "  Mr.  Spurgeon  visited  Belfast  in 
1858.  I  was  then  preparing  to  enter  College,  with  a  hankering  after  the  Indian 
Civil  Service.  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  in  Dr.  Cooke's  church.  He  singled  me 
out, — as  I  thought, — and  spoke  to  me  as  if  no  one  else  was  present.  There  was  no 
thrumming  of  theology,  and  no  pious  posing  ;  but  a  clear,  direct,  hot,  living,  personal 
appeal  that  dare  not  be  resisted.  .  .  .  Fifteen  years  later,  I  went  to  the  Taber- 
nacle, on  my  way  home  from  Damascus.  The  same  straightforward  Englishman 
was  preaching  the  same  straightforward  gospel  in  all  its  fulness,  and  without  any 
apology  for  its  severity.  After  the  service,  I  walked  into  the  vestry  without  being 
announced.  He  had  not  seen  me  for  ten  years,  but  he  recognized  me  in  the  crowd 
without  a  moment's  hesitation.  He  ran  over  a  list  of  the  books  on  Syria  and 
Palestine,  stating  the  merits  of  each,  and  ended  by  saying,  '  I  suppose  Thomson's 
The  Land  and  the  Book  is  still  the  best  on  the  manners  and  customs.'  He  had  the 
whole  literature  of  the  Holy  Land  at  his  finger-ends. 

"  When  I  came  to  be  Mr.  Spurgeon's  near  neighbour,  I  found  that  his 
knowledge  of  all  literature  was  wonderful.  His  power  of  reading  was  perhaps 
never  equalled.  He  would  sit  down  to  five  or  six  large  books,  and  master  them  at 
one  sitting.  He  sat  with  his  left  hand  flat  on  the  page  at  the  left  side  of  the  book, 
and  pushing  his  right  hand  up  the  page  on  the  right  side  until  the  page  projected  a 
little,  he  turned  it  over  with  his  finger,  and  proceeded  to  the  next  page.  He  took 
in  the  contents  almost  at  a  glance,  reading  by  sentences  as  others  read  by  words, 
and  his  memory  never  failed  him  as  to  what  he  read.  He  made  a  point  of  reading- 
half-a-dozen  of  the  hardest  books  every  week,  as  he  wished  to  rub  his  mind  up 
against  the  strongest  minds  ;  and  there  was  no  skipping.  I  several  times  had  an 
opportunity  of  testing  the  thoroughness  of  his  reading,  and  I  never  found  him 
at  fault. 

"  Drummond's  Natnral  Laiu  in  the  Spiritual  JVorld  reached  him  and  me  about 
the  same  time.  I  called  on  Mr.  Spurgeon  when  he  was  fresh  from  a  perusal  of  the 
book.  It  was  then  unknown  to  fame,  and  he  had  read  it  with  five  or  six  other 
books.  At  tea,  we  were  speaking  of  the  freshness  of  the  illustrations,  and  the 
peculiarity  of  the  doctrines   taught,  when  a  third  party  challenged  Mr.  Spurgeon's 

S4 


274  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

recollection  of  certain  points.  Mr.  Spuro-eon  thereupon  quoted  a  whole  page  to 
show  that  Drummoncl  spoke  of  the  natural  and  spiritual  laws  being  identical,  and 
another  important  page  to  show  how  the  book  erred  by  defect.  On  my  return  home, 
I  looked  over  the  passages  quoted,  and  I  believe  he  scarcely  missed  a  word  in  the 
repetition.  His  power  of  swift  and  effective  reading  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  his 
many  talents.   .   .   . 

'•  I  was  at  first  surprised  to  find  Mr.  Spurgeon  consulting  both  the  Hebrew  and 
Greek  texts.  '  They  say,'  said  he,  '  that  I  am  ignorant  and  unlearned.  Well,  let 
them  say  it  ;  and  in  everything,  by  my  ignorance,  and  by  my  knowledge,  let  God 
be  glorified.' 

"  His  exegesis  was  seldom  wrong.  He  spared  no  pains  to  be  sure  of  the  exact 
meaning  of  his  text.  On  one  occasion,  he  was  going  to  preach  on  the  subject  of 
the  olive  tree;  and  he  sent  his  secretary  to  the  keeper  of  the  Natural  History 
Department  of  the  British  Museum,  with  a  series  of  questions  regarding  the 
peculiarities  of  the  tree.  Mr.  Carruthers,  the  keeper,  was  so  much  interested  in 
the  enquiry  that  he  wrote  out  several  pages  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  ;  but  when  the 
sermon  came  to  be  preached,  the  information  had  been  passed  through  the  crucible 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  mind,  and  came  forth  in  a  few  Bunyanesque  sentences.  .  .  . 
Sometimes,  when  I  left  him  on  Saturday  evening,  he  did  not  know  either  of  his 
texts  for  Sunday.  But  he  had  a  well-stored  mind  ;  and  when  he  saw  his  lines  of 
thought,  a  few  catchwords  on  a  half-sheet  of  notepaper  sufficed.  Before  we  parted, 
he  used  to  offer  up  a  short  prayer  which  was  an  inspiration  to  both  of  us. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  a  marvellous  combination  of  gifts  which  contributed  to  his 
greatness.  A  voice  that  you  heard  with  pleasure,  and  could  not  help  hearing.  A 
mind  that  absorbed  all  knowledge — whether  from  books  or  nature — that  came 
within  its  range.  An  eye  that  took  in  a  wide  angle,  and  saw  everything  within 
view.  A  memory  that  he  treated  with  confidence,  and  that  never  disappointed  him. 
A  great  heart,  on  fire  with  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  souls.  And  then  he 
showed  a  practical  comnion  sense  in  doing  things,  both  sacred  and  secular,  and  a 
singleness  of  aim,  joined  with  transparent  honesty,  that  ensured  the  confidence  of  all 
who  knew  him.     You  could  not  help  loving  him  if  you  came  within  his  spell." 

On  two  occasions.  Dr.  J.  Stanford  Holme  wrote,  specially  for  Transatlantic 
readers,  articles  upon  Mr.  Spurgeon's  printed  sermons  and  other  works,  in  which  he 
endeavoured  to  trace  some  of  the  sources  of  the  preacher's  literary  and  spiritual 
power.  The  first  critique  was  published  in  the  American  edition  of  The  Christian 
Herald,  in  January,  1879.      In  that  paper.  Dr.  Stanford  Holme  wrote: — 

"  It  is  a  fact  worthy  of  especial  notice  that  the  sermons  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  have 
had   a  circulation    in    this   country  entirely   without    precedent.     Of  the  American 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  275 

edition  of  his  sermons,  there  have  been  sold  not  less  than  500,000  volumes.  And 
when,  to  this  vast  number,  we  add  the  almost  innumerable  republications  of  single 
sermons  in  the  transient  periodicals  of  the  day,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  no  other 
preacher  has  had  so  extensive  a  hearing-  in  America  as  Charles  H.  Spurgeon. 

"  Many  of  the  causes  of  the  wonderful  popularity  of  this  distinguished  preacher 
are  not  difficult  to  discover.  In  freshness  and  vigour  of  thought,  in  simplicity  and 
purity  of  language,  in  grasp  of  gospel  truth,  and  in  tact  and  force  in  its  presentation, 
he  is  perhaps  without  a  peer  in  the  pulpit. 

"When,  in  early  life,  Mr.  Spurgeon  commenced  his  ministrations  in  the  New 
Park  Street  Chapel,  in  London,  he  quickly  filled  the  old  house  to  overflowing. 
Soon,  he  attracted  the  attention  of  all  England.  But  he  was  regarded  by  many  as 
a  brilliant  meteor  that  would  soon  fade  away.  Yet  Mr.  Spurgeon  is,  to-day,  a  vastly 
more  efificient  and  even  a  more  brilliant  preacher  than  he  was  twenty  years  ago. 
He  continues  to  grow  in  brilliancy  as  well  as  in  efficiency  year  by  year.  No  one 
can  yet  point  to  the  slightest  indication  of  exhaustion  in  either  his  faculties  or  his 
resources. 

"This,  doubtless,  is  attributable,  in  a  measure,  to  his  industry  and  well-directed 
application,  as  well  as  to  natural  ability  and  great  personal  piety.  But  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  peculiar  views  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  his  manner  of  preparation  for 
the  pulpit,  also  tend  in  no  small  degree  to  secure  the  hiexhajistible  variety  which  so 
strikingly  characterizes  his  sermons.  It  is  not  his  manner  to  spin  his  web  out  of 
himself.  The  resources  from  which  he  draws  are  not  measured  by  the  strength  and 
the  store  of  his  own  faculties,  but  rather  by  the  infinite  fulness  of  the  Divine  Word. 
He  never  preaches  from  a  topic.  He  always  has  a  text.  His  text  is  not  a  mere 
motto,  but  iu  it  he  finds  his  sermon.  He  uses  his  text  with  as  much  apparent  reverence 
and  appreciation  as  if  those  few  words  were  the  only  words  that  God  had  ever 
spoken.  The  text  is  the  germ  which  furnishes  the  life,  the  spirit,  and  the  substance 
of  the  discourse.  Every  sermon  has  the  peculiar  flavour,  and  fragrance,  and  colour 
of  the  Divine  seed-truth  of  which  it  is  the  growth.  Thus,  as  the  Bible  is  a  store- 
house of  seed-truths,  inexhaustible  and  of  infinite  variety,  so  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons 
are  never  alike.  Every  seed  yields  its  fruit  after  its  kind.  If  he  brings  you  up 
again  and  again  to  the  same  old  truths,  it  is  always  on  a  different  side,  or  in  a  new 
lieht,  or  with  new  surroundings. 

"A  very  strong  confirmation  of  this  view  has  been  afforded  to  the  author  in  the 
preparation,  of  an  edition  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  works.  In  making  up  the  index  of 
subjects,  it  was  necessary  to  go  carefully  through  the  entire  fourteen  volumes,  page 
by  page,  and  to  note  the  different  topics  discussed,  and  then  to  arrange  them  in 
alphabetical  order.  When  this  work  was  finished,  such  was  the  wonderful  variety 
of  subject,  of  thought,  and  of  illustration,  that,  in  many  thousands  of  references,  no 


276  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

two  subjects,  or  thoughts,  or  illustrations,  were  found  exactly  to  correspond.  The 
preacher  is  discussing  essentially  the  same  familiar  truths  over  and  over  again.  He 
is  presenting  the  same  great  Saviour  to  lost  sinners,  with  what  might  seem  slavish 
fidelity  to  the  spirit  and  even  to  the  letter  of  the  written  Word.  And  yet  his  setting 
forth  of  truth,  his  shades  of  thought,  and  his  modes  of  illustration,  always  arrange 
themselves  in  new  forms  and  colours  with  well-nigh  the  endless  variety  of  the 
combinations  and  tints  of  the  clouds  at  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

"It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  sermons  so  varied,  fresh,  and  Evangelical, 
should  have  so  large  "a  circulation  in  this  country,  nor  that  a  newspaper,  one  of 
the  special  attractions  of  which  is  the  weekly  sermon  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  should 
have  the  reception  which  is  already  accorded  to  The  Christian  Herald." 

Dr.  Stanford  Holme's  second  article  was  published  in  The  New  York 
Honiiletic  Monthly,  February,  1S82.  An  extract  from  it  will  show  in  what  esteem 
Mr.   Spurgeon's  luagnuni  opus  was  held  by  the  writer  : — 

"  It  is  with  no  little  satisfaction  that  I  have  seen  the  announcement  of  an 
American  edition  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Treasury  of  David.  It  is  not  only  a  most 
valuable  Commentary  on  the  Psalms  for  general  use,  but  I  regard  it  as  the 
most   important  homiletic   work  of  the   age. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  a  good  Hebrew  scholar.  He  is  a  man  of  deep  practical 
piety.  He  has  a  fine  poetic  taste,  a  wonderful  insight  into  the  depths  of  the 
human  heart,  and  a  quaintness  of  expression,  and  a  vigour  and  vivacity  of  style, 
that  have  the  effect  of  genuine   wit  in  giving  point  and  life  to  his  expressions. 

"  These,  it  will  be  acknowledged,  form  a  rare  combination  of  qualifications 
for  an  expositor  of  the  Book  of  Psalms.  But,  to  these,  Mr.  Spurgeon  adds  two 
other  especial  qualifications  for  the  work,  still  more  rare  and  valuable.  His 
appreciation  of  and  reverence  for  the  inspired  Word  are  among  the  most 
characteristic  and  rerharkable  features  of  the  man.  The  Word  of  God  is  to 
him  a  thing  of  life  and  power,  '  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword.'  He 
sees  God  in  the  very  words  of  the  Bible.  Like  the  bush  on  Horeb,  a  chapter, 
or  a  single  verse,  at  times,  glows  with  celestial  splendour,  and,  to  use  his  own 
words,  '  Hundreds  of  times  have  I  as  surely  felt  the  presence  of  God,  in  the 
page  of  Scripture,  as  ever  Elijah  did  when  he  heard  the  Lord  speaking  in  a 
still  small  voice.'  He  seems  never  to  be  satisfied,  in  his  study  of  the  Scriptures, 
till  every  single  verse  is  thus  verified  by  the  Spirit,  and  becomes  to  him  a  living 
word. 

"Another  special  qualification  ot  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  this  work,  not  less 
important  and  extraordinary,  is  a  desire  that  knows  no  bounds — a  passion — to 
help    others    preach    that    gospel    of    which    he    himself    would    seem    to    be    the 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  277 

greatest  living  herald.  When  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  who  was  regarded  as  the 
greatest  painter  of  his  time,  scraped  off  the  paint  from  some  of  the  works  of 
Titian  and  Da  Vinci,  in  order  that  he  might  find  out  the  secret  of  their  wonderful 
skill  in  the  mixing  and  blending  of  colours,  he  refused  to  make  known  his 
discoveries  to  his  pupils.  As  far  as  he  could,  he  threw  down  the  ladder  by 
which  he  had  himself  attained  to  greatness.  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  a  man  of  another 
spirit.  Himself  one  of  the  greatest  of  living  preachers,  and  excelled  by  few  of 
former  ages,  he  does  all  he  can  to  reveal  the  secrets  of  his  power  to  the  world, 
and,  if  possible,  to  make  others  greater  than  himself  ;  and  that  which,  in  our 
estimation,  makes  The  Treasury  of  David  of  such  value  to  a  minister  is,  that  its 
spirit  and  peculiar  construction  introduce  us,  as  witnesses,  into  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
workshop,  and  enable  us  to  see  more  clearly  his  method  and  manner  of 
preparation  for  the  pulpit  than  we  can  in  his  printed  discourses,  or  even  in 
his  lectures  to  his  students.  Here  we  may  examine  sermons  in  all  stages  of 
development, — here  we  may  learn  how  sermons  grow.  Indeed,  a  careful  study 
of  The  Treasury  of  David  reveals  the  whole  secret  of  the  strength  of  this  Samson 
of  the  pulpit.  The  work  might  with  propriety  be  called  The  Treasttry  of  David, 
and  the  Arcamun  of  SptirgeonT 

Many  other  tributes  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  literary  ability  and  achievements  have 
been  borne,  both  during  his  lifetime  and  since  his  home-going.  One  of  the  most 
representative  and  comprehensive  of  these  testimonies  was  given  by  Dr.  James 
Stalker  at  the  unveiling  of  the  C.  H.  Spurgeon  Memorial,  at  the  Stockwell 
Orphanage,  on  June  20,  1894.  After  speaking  of  the  loving  esteem  in  which,  in 
common  with  the  great  bulk  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  he  held  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
Dr.   Stalker  said  : — 

"  Perhaps  you  will  allow  me  to  say  a  word  or  two  about  his  power  as  a  writer, — 
his  power  to  express  himself  in  writing.  In  this  democratic  age,  when  sympathy 
with  the  masses  is  on  everyone's  lips,  it  often  seems  to  me  wonderful  that  the  power 
of  communicating  with  the  multitude  is  so  rare.  We  have  scores  of  ministers  who 
are  ambitious  of  writing  for  the  world  of  the  cultivated  ;  but  a  book  frankly  and 
successfully  addressing  the  average  man,  in  language  which  he  can  understand,  is 
one  of  the  rarest  products  of  the  press.  It  really  requires  very  exceptional  power. 
It  requires  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  knowledge  of  life.  It  requires 
common  sense  ;  it  requires  wit  and  humour  ;  and  it  requires  command  of  simple  and 
powerful  Saxon. 

"Whatever  the  requirements  may  be,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  them  in  an 
unexampled  degree.  To  find  his  match  in  this  respect,  you  have,  I  think,  in 
England,  to  go  back  to  John  Bunyan.      Luther  is  the  unapproachable  master  in  this 


278  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

department,  and  I  am  not  surprised  to  see  so  many  pictures  of  Luther,  on  the  walls 
to-day,  collected  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  because  there  is  the  closest  resemblance  between 
the  two  men.  It  is  wonderful,  in  Luther's  life,  to  find  how  he  cultivated  this  power. 
When  he  was  at  the  height  of  his  fame,  we  find  him  writing  to  Nuremberg,  that  he 
might  have  sent  to  him  all  the  chap-books,  songs,  and  children's  stories  that  could 
be  found,  that  he  might  exercise  himself  in  simplicity  of  expression."^'  He  said 
himself  that  he  watched  the  peasant  in  the  field,  the  mother  in  the  home,  and  the 
boys  on  the  street,  that  he  might  learn  to  speak  and  to  write.  He  translated  ^sop's 
Fables,  and  made  a  large  collection  of  popular  proverbs  with  his  own  hands.  This 
reminds  us  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  who  did  the  same  thing  on  a  still  larger  scale  in  his 
excellent  books  called  The  Salt-cellars.  And  I  am  not  surprised  that  Mr.  Thomas 
Spurgeon  referred  to  John  Ploughmaiis  Talk,  because,  in  my  opinion,  that  is  a 
collection  of  wit  and  wisdom  that  is  certain  of  immortality  among  the  popular 
classics  of  England.  But  it  was  into  the  sermons  that,  year  after  year,  he  poured 
without  stint  all  the  resources  of  his  genius,  and  these  fitted  the  mind  and  the  heart 
of  the  multitude  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  as  no  writings  of  our  day  have  even 
approached  doing. 

"  But  I  should  like  to  be  allowed  to  say  that,  while  he  thus  addressed  himself  so 
frankly  to  the  common  men,  he  had  far  more  learning  than  was  generally  understood. 
I  do  not  know  whether  he  often  refused  the  degree  which  you.  Dr.  Spurgeon,  so 
much  adorn.  I  suppose  he  did  ;  but  I  am  sure  of  this,— that  he  earned  the  degree 
of  a  doctor  of  divinity  over  and  over  again.  For  many  years,  it  has  been  my  wont, 
week  after  week,  every  season,  to  read  over  his  Commentary  on  the  Psalms  along 
with  the  best  and  most  learned  Commentaries  in  existence  on  this  subject.  That  is 
the  best  test,  and  the  severest  test,  to  which  a  minister  can  put  the  writings  of  any 
author,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  stands  the  test  well.  Not  only  do  you  everywhere  feel 
the  presence  of  a  vigorous  and  vigilant  mind,  and  a  heart  in  thorough  sympathy  with 
the  spirit  of  the  Psalms,  but  I  wish  to  say  that  I  have  often  been  perfectly  astonished 
to  observe  how,  without  any  parade  of  learning,  he  shows  himself  to  be  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  results  of  the  most  advanced  scholarship  ;  and  the  truth  is,  that 
there  is  scarcely  a  point  in  the  Psalms  of  real  importance, — scarcely  a  point  upon 
which  scholarship  can  give  us  anything  of  real  importance, — as  to  which  there  are 
not  sufficient  hints  to  the  intelligent  reader  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  work." 

To  give  anything  like  an  approximate  idea  of  the  extent  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
reading  during  his  thirty-eight  years'  ministry  in  London,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
make  a  list  of  nearly  all  the  principal  theological  and  biographical  works  published 

*  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  adopted  a  very  similar  method  of  perfecting  his  acquaintance  with  the  language 
and  literature  of  the  peasants  of  England. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's    AUTOBIOGRArilV. 


279 


2So  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

during  that  period,  and  to  add  to  it  a  large  portion  of  the  other  standard  literature 
of  the  present  and  previous  centuries,  and  almost  the  whole  of  the  volumes  issued 
by  the  great  divines  of  the  Puritan  period.  The  number  and  value  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  own  copies  of  the  writings  of  those  masters  of  theology  are  probably 
unique  for  a  private  library,  and  he  was  always  on  the  look-out  for  any  that  he 
did  not  possess,  so  that  he  might  make  his  collection  as  complete  as  possible. 
Booksellers'  catalogues,  in  which  they  were  mentioned,  were  always  examined 
quickly  ;  and  an  order  for  the  missing  volumes  that  might  be  on  sale  was  at  once 
sent,  or,  more  probably,  a  messenger  was  despatched  to  make  sure  of  getting  them. 
This  promptness  on  the  Pastor's  part  enabled  him  often  to  secure  treasures  which 
other  collectors  would  have  been  glad  to  obtain.  In  some  instances,  they  en- 
deavoured to  persuade  him  to  relinquish  his  bargain  in  their  favour  ;  one  gentleman 
induced  Dr.  McLaren  to  write  this  letter,  on  his  behalf,  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — 

"  Manchester, 

a  ^      ^      'Q  _ 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"A  friend  of  mine  is  very  wishful  to  get  a  book,  which  you  unwittingly 
took  out  of  his  mouth  from  some  catalogue.  I  enclose  copy  of  title.  The  reason 
for  his  special  desire  to  get  it  is  that  he  is  descended  from  the  Fleetwoods  to  whom, 
it  is  dedicated,  and  that,  somehow  or  other,  it  proves  some  point  of  family  history  in 
which  he  and  his  people  are  much  interested.  If  you  would  allow  him  to  purchase 
it  of  you  at  its  value,  whatever  that  may  be,  he  would  be  very  much  obliged,  and 
would  undertake  that,  if  ever  he  heard  of  another  copy,  you  should  have  it  with 
many  thanks.  Seeing  his  anxiety  to  have  the  book,  I  offered  to  ask  you  if  you 
would  part  with  it. 

"  I  hope  you  are  able  for  your  work,  and  are  walking  in  the  light.  It  is  sorely 
shadowed  for  me,  and  it  is  hard  to  sing  or  even  to  say  in  a  darkened  cage. 

"  I  am, 

"  My  dear  friend, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"Alexr.  McLaren." 

The  following  is  the  title  of  the  volume,  which  was  dedicated  to  Sir  William 
Tleetwood,  Sir  George  Fleetwood,  and  "  Lord  Fleetwood,  Lieutenant  General  of 
the  whole  army  in  England  and  Scotland "  when  Oliver  Cromwell  was  Lord 
Protector  : — 

Old  Jacob's  Altar  ncivly  repaired;  or,  the  Saint's  Triangle  of  Dangers,  De- 
liverances, and  Duties,  personal,  and  Ahitional,  practically  improved  in  many 
Particiilars,  seasonable  and  experimental.  Being  the  Ansioer  of  his  own  Heart  to 
God,  for  eminent  Preservations ;  humbly  recommended,    by   ivay  of  Teaching,   7inta 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autoriography.  281 

all ;  and,  as  a  special  Renieinbrancev  to  the  Ransomed  of  the  Lord,  to  azvakcn  in 
them  a  sense  of  rich  mercy ;  that  they  may  sing  the  song  of  Moses  for  temporal, 
and  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  for  spiritual  Deliverances  ;  and,  to  provoke  them  to  Love, 
and  good  works  ;  By  Nataneel  Whiting,  Mr  of  Arts,  and  Minister  of  the  Gospel, 
at  Aldwinckle.  London  :  Printed  by  R.  T.  for  A^athaneel  Ekins,  and  are  to  be 
sold  at  his  Shop,  at  the  Signe  of  the  Gunne,  in  S.  Pauls  Church-yard,  i6^g. 

Mr.  Spurg'eon  explained  to  Dr.  McLaren  his  reasons  for  wishing  to  retain 
the  volume,  and  received,  in  reply,  a  post  card  bearing  this  message  confirming 
his  own  decision  : — "  I  would  not  part  with  it  either,  if  I  were  in  your  place. — 
A.  McLaren." 

The  next  year,  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  Dr.  Angus  saw,  in  a  catalogue,  the  particulars 
concerning  a  second-hand  volume  which  each  of  them  desired  to  possess.  An 
exact  copy  of  the  entry  will  show  the  kind  of  book  for  which  the  Pastor  was 
always  on  the  look-out : — 

"  1040— Turner  (J.)  Choice  Experiences  of  the  kind  dealings  of  God  before,  in,  and  after  Conversions,  laid 
down  in  Six  General  Heads,  together  with  some  brief  Observations  upon  the  same,  etc.,  1653.— Allen 
(W.,  General  in  Ireland)  Captive  taken  from  the  strong  ;  or  a  true  relation  of  the  gratious  release  of 
Deborah  Huish  from  the  Power  of  the  Tempter,  etc.,  1658.— The  Just  Man's  Defence,  or  the  Roj-al 
Conquest  ;  being  the  declaration  of  the  judgment  of  James  Arminius  of  I.eyden,  concerning  the  principall 
points  of  Religion  before  the  States  of  Holland  and  Westfriezland,  translated  by  Tobias  Conyers, 
of  Peter  House,  Cambriage,  1657. — Faith  and  Practice  of  Thirty  Congregations,  gathered  according  to  the 
Primitive  Pattern,  etc.,   1651  — etc.,  in  i  thick  vol,  sm.  8vo,  old  binding,  i6s." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  secured  the  volume  ;  and  Dr.  Angus,  on  finding  this  out, 
wrote  to  him  as  follows  : — 

"  College,   Regent's  Park, 

"  March   22,    18S6, 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  You  and  I  are  often  of  a  mind  :  and  very  pleasant  it  is.  But  now 
■and  then  it  works  inconvenience.  You  ordered,  on  Saturday,  a  book  in  Bull  and 
Auvache's  list,  which  I  ordered  on  Saturday,  too  ;  but  I  was  behind  you  ; — 
Turner's  Choice  Experiences,  etc.  Do  you  want  them  all?  I  especially  want 
(i)  Faith  and  Practice  of  Thirty  Congregations ;  and  (2)  Turner,  for  the  sake 
of  what  I  expect  is  there, — Spilsberie's  recommendations. 

"  If  you  do  not  want  both  these,  I  will  take  one  or  both  ;  and  will  leave 
you  'The  Captive'  and  'The  Judgment  of  Arminius,'  which  last  ought  to  have 
some  value,  though  not  quite  sound,  I  suspect.  I  will  take  what  you  can  spare, 
and  give  you  what  you  ask  for  them.  If  you  wish  to  keep  them  all,  I  will  not 
grumble,  as  it  is  all   'in  the  family. '     Witli  all  best  wishes, 

"Yours  very  truly, 

"J.  Angus." 


282  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

In  this  instance,  it  appears  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  up  his  purchase,  as 
Dr.  Angus  was  so  anxious  to  obtain  some  of  the  treatises  bound  up  in  the  one 
volume,   and   it  seemed  a   pity  to  separate   them. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  not  only  possessed  a  large  number  of  volumes  by  Puritan  writers, 
but  he  was  fully  conversant  with  their  contents  ;  and,  from  the  earliest  days  of  the 
Pastors'  College,  he  sought  to  interest  his  students  in  them.  He  also  helped  them  to 
purchase  considerable  quantities  of  the  new  editions  issued  by  Mr.  Nichol,  Messrs. 
Nisbet  and  Co.,  and  other  publishers.  In  later  years,  the  President  prepared  a 
series  of  lectures  on  several  of  the  principal  Puritan  divines,  and  delivered  them  at 
the  College,  accompanying  the  sketches  of  their  lives  with  extracts  from  their  works, 
thus  enabling  the  brethren  to  become  acquainted  with  his  opinions  of  their  com- 
parative merits,  and  of  the  characteristics  of  their  style.  The  lectures  have  not  yet 
been  published  ;  but  just  a  hint  as  to  the  labour  involved  in  compiling  them,  and 
some  idea  of  the  way  in  which  the  writers  were  compared  and  contrasted,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  Preface  to  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  smaller  volumes.  Illustrations 
and  Meditations  ;  or,  Flowers  from  a  Puritan  s  Garden  ;  Distilled  and  Dispensed  by 
C.  H.  Spurgeon  ;  in  which  he  wrote  : — 

"While  commenting  upon  the  one  hundred  and  nineteenth  Psalm,  I  was 
brought  into  most  intimate  communion  with  Thomas  Manton,  who  has  discoursed 
upon  that  marvellous  portion  of  Scripture  with  great  fulness  and  power.  I  have  come 
to  know  him  so  well  that  I  could  pick  him  out  from  among  a  thousand  divines  if  he 
were  again  to  put  on  his  portly  form,  and  display  among  modern  men  that  coun- 
tenance wherein  was  'a  great  mixture  of  majesty  and  meekness.'  His  works  occupy 
twenty-two  volumes  in  the  modern  reprint ; — a  mighty  mountain  of  sound  theology. 
They  mostly  consist  of  sermons  ;  but  what  sermons  !  They  are  not  so  sparkling  as 
those  of  Henry  Smith,  nor  so  profound  as  those  of  Owen,  nor  so  rhetorical  as  those 
of  Howe,  nor  so  pithy  as  those  of  Watson,  nor  so  fascinating  as  those  of  Brooks  ; 
and  yet  they  are  second  to  none  of  these.  For  solid,  sensible  instruction,  forcibly 
delivered,  they  cannot  be  surpassed.  Manton  is  not  brilliant,  but  he  is  always  clear  ; 
he  is  not  oratorical,  but  he  is  powerful  ;  he  is  not  striking,  but  he  is  deep.  There 
is  not  a  poor  discourse  in  the  whole  collection  ;  they  are  evenly  good,  constantly 
excellent.  Ministers  who  do  not  know  Manton  need  not  wonder  if  they  are 
themselves  unknown. 

"  Inasmuch  as  Manton  used  but  iQ.\N  fia"ures  and  illustrations,  it  came  into  my 
head  to  note  them  all,  for  I  felt  sure  that  they  would  be  very  natural  and  forcible.  I 
thought  it  worth  while  to  go  through  volume  after  volume,  and  mark  the  metaphors  ; 
and  then  I  resolved  to  complete  the  task  by  culling  the  best  figures  out  of  the  whole 
of  Manton's   works.     Thus    my   communing  with    the    great    Puritan    ends    in   my 


C.     H.     SPURGEOn's     AUTOBIOGRAriiY.  283 

clearing-  his  house  of  all  his  pictures,  and  hanging  them  up  in  new  frames  of  my 
own.  As  I  leave  his  right  to  them  unquestioned  and  unconcealed,  I  do  not  rob  him  ; 
the  rather,  I  increase  his  influence  by  giving  him  another  opportunity  of  speaking 
for  his  Lord  and  Master.  One  kind  of  work  leads  on  to  another,  and  labour  is 
lightened  by  being  diversified  ;  had  it  not  been  for  The  Treasiiry  of  David,  I  might 
not  have  been  found  spending  so  much  time  among  the  metaphors  of  Manton." 

To  successive  generations  of  students.  Mr.  Spurgeon  read  Dr.  James  Hamilton's 
four  volumes  of  Christian  Classics.  It  was  a  treat  to  the  brethren  to  hear 
such  a  work  read  by  one  who  could  so  thoroughly  appreciate  it,  but  they 
probably  enjoyed  even  more  the  comments  and  criticisms  upon  the  various  writers 
and  their  works  with  which  the  readings  were  interspersed.  It  was  rarely  indeed 
that  the  President  found  any  mention  of  an  author  with  whose  writings  he  was  not 
thoroughly  familiar.  He  also  constantly  gave  the  students  helpful  hints,  garnered 
from  his  own  experience,  with  regard  to  the  books  likely  to  be  most  useful  to  them, 
both  during  their  College  course  and  afterwards  when  setded  in  the  ministry  or 
in  the  foreign  mission  field.  The  informal  gatherings  under  "The  Question  Oak" 
at  "  Westwood "  afforded  many  opportunities  for  the  brethren  to  ascertain  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  opinions  upon  literary  matters  in  general,  and  especially  to  learn  from 
him  all  that  they  could  concerning  the  books  which  most  affected  them  as  theological 
students.  One  of  the  questions  put  to  the  President  was,  "  Should  novel-reading 
be  indulged  in  by  ministers.'^"  His  reply  was: — "That  depends  upon  what  you 
mean  by  a  novel.  The  Pilgrinis  Progress  and  many  of  the  best  books  we  have  are 
novels,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  not  actual  records  of  fact,  though  they  are 
absolutely  true  to  Christian  experience.  Then,  again,  there  are  such  works  as 
Sir  Walter  Scott's  ;  many  of  them  are  founded  on  fact,  and  are  well  worth  reading 
as  a  picture  of  the  people  and  places  he  so  ably  describes,  as  well  as  for  the  style  of 
his  writing.  Their  value  lies  largely  in  their  historical  truth.  Some  of  Charles 
Dickens'  works  are  worth  reading,  although  he  has  given  gross  caricatures  of  the 
religious  life  of  his  times.  As  for  the  general  run  of  novels  now  being  issued  in 
such  shoals,  you  will  probably  be  wise  to  leave  them  alone  ;  i^^N  of  them  would  be 
likely  to  do  you  any  good,  and  many  of  them  are  morally  tainted,  or  worse.'' 

At  one  of  the  meetings  under  the  oak,  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  the  students  that  he 
had  read  Bunyan's  Pilgrim  s  Progress  at  least  a  hundred  times,  and  that,  as  a  kind 
of  mental  relaxation,  he  had  constantly  returned  to  the  study  of  various  branches  of 
natural  history,  and,  for  a  change,  he  had  turned  his  attention  to  astronomy,  botany, 
and  other  sciences.  In  his  published  lecture  on  "Astronomy  as  a  Source  of 
Illustration,"  he  showed  the  brethren  how  all  the  sciences  could  be  utilized  as 
illustrations  of  Christian  life  and  work.      He  also  said  that  he  always  liked  to  have  a 


284  c.    H.    spurgeon's  autobiography. 

few  o-Qod  biographies  handy,  so  that  he  could  turn  to  the  record  of  what  the  Lord 
had  enabled  His  servants  to  do  in  the  past.  His  own  collection  of  the  "  Lives"  of 
notable  individuals  was  a  very  extensive  one,  and  in  conversation  with  him  it  was 
soon  evident  that  he  was  fully  aware  of  the  main  facts  in  the  careers  of  almost  all  of 
them.  Indeed,  it  was  impossible  to  mention  anyone  who  had  been  eminently  useful, 
or  notorious,  in  the  world,  and  to  find  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  ignorant  of  the  man 
or  woman  referred  to  ;  in  most  instances,  he  had  made  himself  more  completely 
acquainted  with  their  histories  by  giving  lectures  upon  them  to  his  congregation  or 
students,  or  by  writing  summaries  of  their  biographies  for  the  benefit  of  the  readers 
of  his  magazine. 

Pastor  W.  Williams  has  preserved,  in  his  Personal  Reminiscences  of  Charles 
Haddon  Spnrgeon,  the  following  jottings  concerning  his  beloved  President's  allusions 
to  literary  matters,  which  will  serve  as  specimens  of  the  remarks  that  Mr.  Spurgeon 
frequently  made  when  conversing  with  his  friends  : — "  '  What  books  are  you  reading 
now?'  he  asked  me,  one  day.  '  Carlyle's  French  Revolution i  I  answered.  '  V'ery 
good  ;  it  is  a  fine  work,  full  of  nervous,  bracing  thought  and  stirring  facts  ;  but  1 
think  it  cannot  be  appreciated  at  its  true  worth  unless  simpler  histories  of  France 
have  been  read  before  beginning  it.  I  would  not  advise  anyone  to  take  Carlyle  as  a 
first  study.  Scott's  Life  of  Napoleon  is  a  good  history.  That  first  Napoleon  was  a 
really  great  man.  He  had  a  mind,  and  no  mistake  ;  his  successors  have  been 
insignificant  in  comparison.'  'You  like  ^os^^i^?,  Johnson,  sir,  of  course.'  'Oh, 
yes  !  that  is  the  biography  ;  it  stands  unrivalled,  and  probably  ever  will  ;  and  I  think 
Lockhart's  Life  of  Scott  and  Mrs.  Oliphant's  Life  of  Edivard  Irving  come  next. 
.  .  .  You've  not  read  Pickwick,  Williams?'  'No,  I  have  not  yet.'  'Oh,  dear!  I 
was  going  to  say  I  wish  I  had  not,  for  I  should  like  once  more^  to  enjoy  it  as  I  did 
at  the  first  reading.     You  have  a  treat  in  store.     The  humour  of  it  is  about  perfect.' 

"  The  Story  of  the  Nations  series  greatly  interested  him.  He  read  Egypt 
through  at  least  three  times,  and  eagerly  took  up  the  others  as  they  came  out.  It 
was  exceedingly  entertaining  and  instructive  to  hear  him  talk  about  the  people  and 
countries  with  which  the  volumes  deal.  .  .  .  We  had  several  talks,  on  different 
occasions,  about  Shakespeare.  He  had  read  all  his  plays,  and  some  of  them 
many  times.  .  .  .  Saturdays  at  '  Westwood  '  gave  me  an  education  in  the  matter 
of  many  choice  books,  and  I  seldom  came  away  without  one  or  two.  But  it  was  a 
greater  treat  still  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  read  some  charming  poem  or 
instructive  chapter.  I  remember,  when  Miss  Havergal's  po&ms,  Under  the  Surface, 
were  issued,  how  he  revelled  in  them.  The  one  entitled  '  From  Glory  unto  Glory' 
he  read  one  evening  '  over  the  tea-cups.'  His  eyes  sparkled  with  delight,  and  filled 
with  tears  of  joy,  as  he  reached  the  third  and  fourth  stanzas  of  that  magnificent 
sono-.' 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  285 

On  several  occasions,  Mr.  Spurgeon  found  himself  in  the  company  of  a  number 
of  High  Church  clergymen,  and  they  were  always  greatly  surprised  to  find  that  the 
Baptist  minister  was  far  more  familiar  with  the  works  on  their  side  of  the  con- 
troversy than  they  themselves  were.  They  also  discovered  that,  while  he  spoke 
heartily  in  commendation  of  all  that  appeared  to  him  to  be  Scriptural  in  the 
writings  of  Dr.  Pusey,  Dr.  Neale,  Dr.  Littledale,  Isaac  Williams,  and  other  divines 
of  their  school  of  thought,  he  was  able  to  give  good  reasons  for  not  accepting  their 
sacramentarian  and  sacerdotal  theories.  The  same  characteristic  is  very  manifest 
in  his  remarks  upon  the  Ritualistic  works  referred  to  in  his  Commenting  and 
Conimcutaries.  Space  can  only  be  spared  for  one  fairly  representative  instance, — 
Dr.  John  Mason  Neale's  Sermons  on  the  Canticles,  Preached  in  a  Religio^ts  Hoit-se, 
— upon  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  comments  : — 

"  By  that  highest  of  High  Churchmen,  Dr.  Neale.  These  sermons  smell  of 
Popery,  yet  the  savour  of  our  Lord's  good  ointment  cannot  be  hid.  Our 
Protestantism  is  not  of  so  questionable  a  character  that  we  are  afraid  to  do 
justice  to  Papists  and  Anglicans,  and  therefore  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that 
many  a  devout  thought  has  come  to  us  while  reading  these  '  Sermons  by  a  Priest 
of  the  Church  of  England.'  " 

Other  people  beside  theologians  often  noticed  the  extensive  and  varied 
knowledge  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  possessed.  On  one  of  his  visits  to  Mentone, 
he  was  in  company  with  an  eminent  medical  man,  and,  after .  a  while,  the 
conversation  drifted  round  to  anatomy,  physiology,  various  diseases  to  which 
flesh  is  heir,  and  the  different  modes  of  treatment  adopted  for  their  remo^:^al. 
The  doctor  was  quite  astonished  at  the  completeness  of  his  companion's 
acquaintance  with  every  part  of  the  subject,  and  he  afterwards  said  : — "  Mr. 
Spurgeon  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  men  I  ever  met.  He  seems  to-'  know 
as  much  about  the  human  body  as  any  medical  man  might  have  done  ;  he  would 
have  made  a  splendid  physician." 

Ariiong  the  Pastor's  hearers  at  the  Tabernacle,  or  in  various  seaport  towns, 
many  sailors  have  often  been  fOuncF,  listening  with  intense  eagerness  ;  and  the 
men  of  the  sea  have  often  testified  that  they  have  never  known  him  make  a 
mistake  in  his  nautical  allusions  ;  and,  only  recently,  Rev.  James  Neil,  M.A., 
who  spent  twenty  years  in  Palestine,  has  borne  similar  witness  to  the  accuracy 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  descriptions  of  Biblical  manners  and  customs,  thereby  confirming 
the  verdict  by  Dr.  Wright,  mentioned  in  a  previous  part  of  the  present  chapter. 

Many  of  ''John  Ploughman's"  readers  have  wondered  that  he  could  tell  them 
so  much  about  how   "  to    plough    and    sow,    and    reap    and    mow."       Part   ot    that 


286  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

familiarity  with  farming  affairs,  no  doubt,  dated  back  to  his  early  visits  to  Stam- 
bourne,  and  his  walks  among  the  furrows  by  the  side  of  the  godly  plough man^ 
Will  Richardson  ;  and  part  must  be  attributed  to  his  constant  preaching  in  different 
parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  to  the  opportunities  thus  afforded  of  obtaining  further 
information  concerning  agricultural  pursuits  ;  but  extensive  reading  also  added 
to  the  effectiveness  of  his  references  to  such  matters.  Pastor  Charles  Spurgeon 
related,  in  the  previous  volume  of  this  work,  the  testimony  of  a  farmer  who  said 
that  the  Pastor  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  knew  far  more  about  sheep  than 
he  did,  though  he  had  been  keeping  them  all  his  life  !  The  explanation  of  that 
fact  can  probably  be  found  in  the  President's  observation  to  his  students  that,  at 
one  time,  he  had  made  a  special  study  of  sheep  and  their  habits.  The  librar)'' 
at  "  Westwood  "  still  contains  the  volume  to  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  then  referred, — 
an  antiquated  folio,  entitled  A  System  of  Sheep-gT-azing  and  Management,  as 
Practised  in  Roniney  Marsh,  by  Daniel  Price  (Richard  Phillips,  Blackfriars). 
Singularly  enough,  at  a  later  period,  the  Pastor's  attention  was,  through  someone's 
mistake,  again  attracted  to  the  same  subject.  He  had  written  for  a  number  of 
books  on  quite  a  different  theme  ;  but,  in  some  unaccountable  way,  there  came, 
in  the  place  of  one  of  them,  a  large  octavo  volume,  entitled  Sheep,  their  Breeds, 
Management,  and  Diseases,  by  William  Youatt  (Simpkin,  Marshall,  and  Co.). 
Mr.  Spurgeon  was  amused  at  the  blunder,  but  he  kept  the  book,  which  still 
retains  traces   of  having  been  carefully  examined  and  used  by  him. 

At  another  time,  he  had  collected  all  the  old  herbals  he  could  buy,  and  he 
had  found  much  of  interest  and  instruction  in  them.  Topography  was  also  one 
of  the  side  subjects  to  which  he  devoted  a  portion  of  his  scanty  leisure  ;  and,  in 
the  course  of  his  researches  upon  this  subject,  he  was  brought  into  association 
with  lovers  of  antiquarian  and  topographical  lore  in  various  parts  of  the  country  ; 
and  by  their  kind  assistance  he  was  able  to  make  further  welcome  additions  to 
his  already  well-stored  library.  If  he  was  going  to  preach  in  a  district  that  was 
new  to  him,  he  usually  tried  to  find  out  everything  of  interest  in  its  history, 
surroundings,  manufactures,  or  products  ;  and  these  would,  in  due  course,  guide 
him  in  his  local  allusions  and  illustrations,  and  materially  help  to  impress  his 
message  upon  his  hearers'  minds  and  hearts.  Everything  was  made  subservient  to 
the  one  great  object  he  had  before  him,  the  glory  of  God  in  the  salvation  ol 
sinners  and  the  extension  of  the   Redeemer's   Kinodom. 


CHAPTER    CI. 


Mx.  Spurgtou  as  a  litcrarg  Jlan  (Con^mnea). 


THE    STUDY    AT    "  WESTWOOD  "    (SECOND   VIEW). 

'T  the  time  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  home-going,  he  possessed  at  least 
12,000  volumes.  The  number  would  have  been  far  larger  if  he 
had  not  given  so  generously  to  the  libraries  of  the  Pastors' 
College  and  of  many  of  the  ministers  trained  within  its  walls, 
and  if  he  had  not  also,  from  his  abundant  stores,  so  freely 
enriched  other  friends.  His  books  almost  filled  the  shelves  of 
two   large    rooms, — the    study  and    the   library  ;    one    smaller    room, — "the    den"; 


288  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

and  the  vestibule  adjoining  the  study.  There  are  even  more  volumes  at 
"  Westwood "  to-day  than  there  were  in  1S92  ;  for,  while  all  that  belonged  to 
the  beloved  owner  remain  just  as  he  left  them,  many  newly-published  works 
have  been  added  to  his  collection.  He  knew  the  proper  place  and  at  least  the 
principal  contents  of  nearly  every  book  in  his  possession  ;  he  could  have  fetched 
almost  any  one  of  them  in  the  dark,  and  if  any  had  been  taken  away  by  a 
dishonest  visitor,  he  would  speedily  have  missed  them.  Probably,  a  great  many 
of  his  precious  treasures  did  become  permanently  lost  to  him  through  being  lent, 
for  all  who  borrowed  from  him  were  not  as  particular  in  returning  other  people's 
property  as  he  himself  was.     Addressing  his  students,  on  one  occasion,  he  said  : — 

"  I  lately  met  with  a  statement,  by  a  clergyman,  which  has  very  much  raised 
my  opinion  of  human  nature  ;  for  he  declares  that  he  has  a  personal  acquaintance 
with  three  gentlemen  who  have  actually  returned  borrowed  umbrellas  !  I  am 
sorry  to  say  that  he  moves  in  a  more  favoured  circle  than  I  do,  for  I  have 
personal  acquaintance  with  several  young  men  who  have  borrowed  books,  and 
never  returned  them.  The  other  day,  a  certain  minister,  who  had  lent  me  five 
volumes,  which  I  have  used  for  two  years  or  more,  wrote  to  me  a  note  to  request 
the  return  of  three  of  them.  To  his  surprise,  he  had  them  back  by  the  next 
Parcels'  Delivery,  and  with  them  two  others  which  he  had  forgotten.  I  had 
caretully  kept  a  list  of  books  borrowed,  and,  therefore,  could  make  a  complete 
return  to  the  owner.  I  am  sure  he  did  not  expect  their  prompt  arrival,  for  he 
wrote  me  a  letter  of  mingled  astonishment  and  gratitude  ;  and  when  I  visit 
his  study  again,  I  feel  sure  I  shall  be  welcome  to  another  loan.  You  know  the 
rhyme  which  has  been  written  in  many  a  man's  book, — 

"  'If  thou  art  bcJrrovved  by  a  friend, 

Right  welcome  shall  he  be 
To  read,  to  study,  not  to  lend, 

But  to  return  to  me. 
Not  that  imparted  knowledge  doth 

Diminish  learning's  store  ; 
But  books,  I  find,  when  once  they're  lent, 

Return  to  me  no  more.' 

"  Sir  Walter  Scott  used  to  say  that  his  friends  might  be  indifferent  accountants, 
but  he  was  sure  they  were  good  '  book-keepers.'  " 

If  Mr.  Spurgeon  could  return  to  his  study,  he  would  have  no  difficulty  in 
finding  his  books,  for  they  are  still  .arranged  according  to  the  method  he  long  ago 
adopted.  Beginning  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  cupboard  in  the  centre  of  the 
illustration  on  the  previous  page,  the  volumes  commence  with  Commentaries  on 
Genesis,  and  continue  in  consecutive  order,  through  the  whole  of  the  long  side 
of  the   room,   to   the  end  of  Revelation.     Then   follow   Cyclopeedias  of  anecdotes, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 


289 


illustrations,  and  emblems,  with  dictionaries  and  other  works  of  reference  indis- 
pensable to  a  literary  man.  These  books  fill  up  half  the  end  of  the  study  shown 
in  the  illustration  on  page  77.  Then,  on  the  other  side  of  the  doorway  leading 
into  "  the  den,"  and  partly  hidden  by  the  revolving  bookcase,  is  a  choicely-bound 
set  of  the  Pastor's  sermons.  These  formed  part  of  the  background  of  one  of 
the  latest  and  best  of  his  photographs  that  was  ever  taken,  and  which  is  here 
leoroduced. 


C.     H.    SPURGEON     IN     HIS    STUDY. 


On  the  shelves  above  and  below  Mr.  Spurgeon's  volumes  of  sermons,  is  a 
large  assortment  of  theological  works,  sufficiently  numerous  to  overflow  to  the 
revolving  bookcase,   which  also    contains   biographies  and    miscellaneous  literature 

T  4 


290 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


for  general  reading.  At  the  opposite  end  of  the  room,  on  the  left-hand  side  of 
the  cupboard  shown  in  the  illustration  on  page  287,  are  more  theological  works, 
somewhat  less  modern  than  those  mentioned  on  the  previous  page. 


THE    LIBRARY    AT    "  WESTWOOD  "    (SECOND    VIEW). 

Several  thousands  of  the  books  that  belonged  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  occupied  the 
spacious  shelves  in  the  library  here  represented.  In  Vol.  II.,  page  182,  one 
view  of  this  room  was  given  ;  by  comparing  it  with  the  above  illustration,  the 
whole  can  be  seen.  The  volumes  here  preserved,  like  those  in  the  study,  are 
also  arranged  in  sections.  Beginning  at  the  side  nearest  the  windows,  one  whole 
bay  is  filled  with  works  on  natural  history  and  the  sciences  ;  the  next  is  devoted 
to  records  of  missions,  travels,  and  adventures  ;  then  follow  biographies,  which 
require  almost  the  whole  of  the  space  in  the  two  wide  sets  of  shelves,  the 
remainder  being  allotted  to  books  on  Bible  lands.  The  shelves  visible  on  the 
left-hand  side  of  the  picture  in  Vol.  II.  are  filled  with  poetry  and  the  hymnals 
used  in  the  compilation  of  Our  Own  Hymn  Book,  with  later  additions,  and  some 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  29I 

sermonic  and  other  literature  not  usually  needed  in  the  study.  Beyond  the 
doorway,  bound  volumes  of  periodicals,  both  for  juveniles  and  adults,  and  more 
general  literature,  with  a  large  store  of  books  of  proverbs  and  anecdotes,  need 
several  sets  of  shelves  ;  next  follow  historical  and  denominational  works,  the 
topographical  books  described  on  page  286  ;  a  great  number  of  old  lolios,  mostly 
the  writings  of  Latin  authors  ;  and  last,  but  certainly  not  least,  more  than  a  whole 
bay  is  required  for  the  American  and  other  reprints  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons 
and  other  works,  and  the  translations  of  them  into  various  foreign  languages. 
He  was  never  able  to  procure  anything  like  a  complete  set  of  his  writings  as 
reproduced  in  other  tongues,  and  the  number  of  translations  has  been  greatly 
increased  since  his  home-going;  but  those  now  at  "  Westwood  "  include  Arabic, 
Armenian,  Bengali,  Bulgarian,  Castilian  (for  the  Argentine  Republic),  Chinese, 
Congo,  Czech,  Danish,  Dutch,  Esthonian,  French,  Gaelic,  German,  Hindi, 
Hungarian,  Italian,  Japanese,  Kaffir,  Karen,  Lettish,  Maori,  Norwegian.  Polish, 
Russian,  Servian,  Spanish,  Swedish,  Syriac,  Tamil,  Telugu,  Urdu,  Welsh,  with 
sermons  in  Moon's  and  Braille  type  for  the  blind,  making,  with  the  dear  preacher's 
mother-tongue,  nearly  forty  languages  in  which  he  continues,  from  the  printed 
page,  to  proclaim  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  The  text  most  commonly 
used  concerning  him  is,  "  He  being  dead  yet  speaketh."  Dr.  Newman  Hall, 
referring  recently  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  gave  a  new  rendering  to  that  passage  : — 
"  Then,   as  he  yet  speaketh,   he  is  not  dead."     Verily,   it  is  so. 

The  foregoing  account  of  the  arrangement  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  books  is 
necessarily  incomplete,  and  many  hundreds  of  his  highly-valued  volumes  may 
thus  have  escaped  classification  ;  but  it  gives  a  general  idea  of  the  books  he 
owned,  and  loved,  and  used,  and  with  which  he  was  so  well  acquainted  that  he 
was  prepared  to  discuss  their  contents  with  any  visitor  who  called  to  see  him. 

On  removing  to  "Westwood,"  and  fitting  up  with  oak  bookshelves  two  sides 
of  the  room  used  by  the  former  occupants  of  the  house  as  a  drawing-room,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  found  that  the  space  at  his  disposal  proved  too  large  even  for  the 
thousands  of  books  which  had  overtaxed  the  accommodation  at  "  Helensburgh 
House."  The  Pastor  therefore  purchased  many  works  which  he  had  long  desired 
to  possess,  and  added  them  to  his  previous  store  ;  and,  as  he  had  still  to  say, 
"Yet  there  is  room,"  he  hit  upon  an  ingenious  expedient  for  temporarily  filling 
the  empty  shelves  at  the  top  of  the  library  and  study.  He  had  a  number  of 
dummy  volumes  made  by  his  bookbinder,  and  had  some  of  them  lettered  to 
correspond  with  the  sets  of  books  already  in  his  possession,  such  as  Carlyles 
Works,  Macaiday  s  Works,  Alisons  History  of  Eiirope,  Humes  History  of  England 


292  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

The  Hoinilist,  etc.  In  other  cases,  the  titles  were  reversed;  as,  for  instance, /(^(^ 
on  Caryl,  made  to  stand  not  far  from  Caryl  on  Job.  The  lettering  of  some  of 
the  large  sets  of  dummies  was  amusing.  Anyone  who  handled  the  volumes  entided 
Wretched  Scandals,  by  the  Talkers  Sisters,  would  find  that  there  was  nothing 
in  them  !  Similar  sets  bore  the  titles,  Mischief  by  Boys,  Windows  Ventilated  by 
Stone,  Gunpoivder  Magazine  by  Plunistead,  and  Padlock  on  the  Understanding.  But 
it  was  upon  the  names  of  the  single  volumes  that  the  Pastor  exercised  the  greatest 
ingenuity.  He  often  referred  to  the  meaning  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Christian  name, 
Susannah,  a  lily,  and  associated  It  with  Shushan,  so  it  was  not  surprising  that  one 
of  the  titles  he  used  was  Lilies  of  Shnshan,  while  the  name  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's 
companion  suggested  Thorn  on  Roses.  The  Pastor's  two  secretaries  were 
represented  by  the  volumes  entitled  Mysteiaes  Opened  by  J.  L.  Keys,  and  The 
Character  of  IVilliani  the  Conqueror,  by  Harrald.  The  tutors  and  students  of 
the  Pastors'  College  were  represented  by  the  following  and  other  tides : — Joseph, 
Samnel,  and  Abraham,  corrected  by  G.  Rogers  ;  Sublime  and  Beatitiful,  by 
D.  Gracey  ;  Goodly  Pearls,  by  Marchant  ;  Eastward  Ho  !  by  A.  G.  Brown ; 
Cziff  on  the  Head ;  Knell  on  Death  ;  Carter  on  the  Road ;  Cricket  on  the  Green, 
by  Batts  ;  Over  the  Stream,  by  Bridge  ;  Hook  and  I  ;  Tydeman  on  Cleanliness  ; 
Hammer  and  Jongs,  by  Smith  ;  Aches  und  Pains,  by  Feltham  (felt  'em)  ;  Country 
Retreats,  by  Greenwood  ;  Grindery  in  all  its  Branches,  by  Miller ;  Do  it  Again, 
by  Dunnett  (done  it)  ;  Starling,  Sivijt,  Finch,  and  another  Bird ;  and  Flight  on 
the   Wings  of  a  Dove. 

The  international  or  political  allusions  included  Bull  on  Bragging,  ^caA  Jonathan 
on  Exaggeration  (placed  side  by  side)  ;  Bulls,  by  Patrick  ;  The  Art  of  Wasting 
Time,  by  an  Irish  Member  ;  The  Elevation  of  Parliament,  by  Gu,ido  Faux  ;  and 
Benjamin  Disraeli  on  Honesty.  The  temperance  titles  were.  Rags  and  Ruin,  by  a 
Brewer  ;  Brains  Addled  by  John  Barleycorn  ;  and  Madness,  by  L.  L.  Whiskey  ;  while 
among  the  amusing  descriptions  might  have  been  found  Purchase  of  Land,  by 
L.  S.  D.  ;  Hints  on  Honey  Pots,  iy  A.  B.  ;  The  Composition  of  Milk,  by  a  Dealer ; 
Weaver  s  Meditations  among  the  Looms  ;  Gilpin  on  Riding  Horses  ;  Absalom  on  the 
MtUe ;  Balaam  on  the  Donkey  ;  Tick  on  Sheep  ;  Skid  on  the  Ulieel  ;  Cat  on  Hot 
Bricks  ;  Pancakes  on  Shrove  Tuesday  ;  Pilgrim's  Progress  hindered  by  a  Bimyan 
(bufiion)  ;  Lectures  to  my  Servants,  by  a  Shjxw ;  and  Sticking  tip  for  Ones  Self 
by  a  Pole. 

Before  very  long,  the  number  of  books  increased  at  such  a  rapid  rate  that, 
instead  of  dummies  being  required  to  fill  vacant  shelves,  real  and  substantial 
volumes  were  standing  or  lying  about,  in  various  directions,  because  there  was 
no    proper    place  available    for    them.      It    was    then    decided    that    Mr.    Spurgeon 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


293 


must  have  the  use  of  the  bookshelves  in  the  vestibule  between  the  hall  and 
the  study,  which  up  to  that  time  had  been  employed  as  the  depot  and  packing- 
room  for  the  works  distributed  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund. 
The    accompanying    illustration,    which    shows  only   about  a   quarter  of  the   space 


MRS.  SPURGEON  S  BOOK  FUND  ROOM  ON  "  PACKING-DAY. 


available  for  books,  gives  a  good  idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  vestibule  on 
"  packing-day."  At  the  time  the  photograph  was  taken,  there  were  between 
twenty  and  thirty  Book  Fund  grants  arranged  ready  to  be  made  up  into  separate 
parcels,   and  despatched  to   ministers   in  all  parts  of  the   United   Kingdom.      The 


294 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


nearness  of  this  set  of  shelves  to  the  study  made  it  a  very  valuable  annexe,  and 
a  room  in  another  part  of  the  house  was  adapted  and  fitted  up  for  the  use  of  the 
Manager  of  the   Book  Fund  and  her  helpers. 

Still  later,  a  greater  alteration  was  made,  by  which  additional  accommodation 
was  provided  for  the  ever-multiplying  books.  During  Mr.  Spurgeon's  absence 
at  Mentone,  one  winter,  a  new  room  was  built,  connecting  the  study  with  the 
small  conservatory,  where  he  liked  to  sit  for  a  few  minutes,  in  the  chair  here 
represented,  admiring  the  choice  flowers,  watching   the   fishes    and  grasses   in   the 


THE    EMPTY   CHAIR   IN   THE   SMALL   CONSERVATORY. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


295 


miniature  aquarium,  and  reading  or  meditating-  upon  the  theme  of  some  anticipated 
address  or  sermon.  One  result  of  the  altered  arrangements  was  that,  in  wet 
weather,  the  Pastor  could  have  a  continuous  walk,  under  shelter,  from  the  fernery 
at  one  side  of  the  house  to  the  greenhouses  at  the  other  end.  By  steadily 
tramping  the  whole  distance,  backwards  and  forwards,  several  times,  a  very  fair 
amount  of  exercise  could  be  obtained  when  it  was  not  possible  to  be  out  of  doors. 
It  had  also  long  been  felt  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  needed  another  and  more  private 
study,  into  which  he  could  retire  for  devotion  and  pulpit  preparation,  or  for 
interviews  with  special  visitors.      This  room  was  always   called   "  the  den,"  though 


A  COE.N'ER  OF   "THE   DEN,"   SHOWING   SOME    OF   MR.   SPUR&EON  S    PURITANS. 


296  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

it  was  a  very  different  kind  of  place  from  Bunyan's  apartment  in  the  Bedford 
prison  to  which  the  immortal  dreamer  gave  that  name.  In  this  favoured  spot, 
the  works  of  the  Puritan  divines  were  lovingly  arranged  by  the  one  who  always 
repudiated  the  title  many  times  accorded  to  him, —  Ultiimis  Piiritanorum,  the 
last  of  the  Puritans, — for  he  believed  that  he  had  helped  to  train  hundreds  of 
men  who  would  continue  the  Puritanical  succession  after  he  was  gone  from  their 
midst,  and  he  also  knew  that  there  were,  in  other  denominations  and  other  lands, 
multitudes  of  believers  in  the  truths  which  the  Puritans  taught,  and  for  which 
many  of  them  suffered  even  unto  death. 

The  empty  chair,  in  the  corner  of  "the  den,"  is  the  one  in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon 
used  to  sit  at  the  head  of  the  study  table.  After  he  was  "called  home,"  it  was  put 
away  so  that  no  one  else  should  occupy  it.  In  addition  to  the  Puritans,  "the  den" 
contains  a  large  quantity  of  homiletical,  exegetical,  and  proverbial  literature,  with  a 
number  of  miscellaneous  volumes  for  general  reading.  The  new  room  was  a  great 
boon  to  the  busy  Pastor,  and  many  a  powerful  sermon  for  the  congregation  at  the 
Tabernacle,  or  weighty  address  for  the  students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  or  bright 
article  for  The  Sivord  and  the  Trowel,  first  saw  the  light  in  the  quiet  seclusion  of 
"  the  den." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  never  cared  to  buy  a  book  simply  because  it  was  rare,  unless  it 
was  one  of  the  Puritans  that  he  needed  for  his  collection.  He  valued  literary  works 
for  their  usefulness,  not  simply  for  their  market  price  ;  yet  he  possessed  a  great 
many  volumes,  bearing  their  authors'  autograph  inscriptions,  which  he  highly 
prized  ;  and,  among  them,  some  of  Mr.  Ruskin's  were  always  accorded  a  prominent 
position  as  reminders  of  the  early  and  cordial  friendship  which  existed  between  him 
and  the  Pastor.  Sir  A.  H.  Layard,  Dr.  Livingstone,  M.  Paul  B.  Du  Chaillu,  Mr. 
C.  W.  M.  van  de  Velde,  Dr.  W.  M.  Thomson,  Dr.  William  Wright,  Dr.  Lansdell, 
Mr.  John  MacGregor  ("Rob  Roy"),  and  many  other  travellers  are  represented  at 
"  Westwood  "  by  their  works  duly  inscribed,  or  by  letters  from  them  fastened  in  their 
books.  It  was  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  few  "hobbies"  to  have  the  photographs  and 
autographs  of  all  authors,  as  far  as  he  could,  with  portions  of  the  manuscripts  of  their 
works,  or  other  specimens  of  their  handwriting,  inserted  in  one  or  more  of  their 
volumes,  thus  materially  increasing  their  value,  at  least  in  his  estimation.  Perhaps 
it  was  this  fancy  which  made  him  so  freely  give  his  own  signature  to  other  collectors 
of  autographs,  even  if  they  did  not  always  enclose  stamps  with  their  applications  ; 
and  the  same  reason  may  also  have  prompted  him  to  write  in  the  many  hundreds  of 
books  that  he  gave  to  his  friends,  who  now  prize  them  all  the  more  because  of 
the  tender  and  loving  inscriptions  with  which  he  enhanced  the  intrinsic  worth  of 
his  Pfifts. 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  297- 

One  of  his  letters  shows  that,  in  his  anxiety  to  secure  the  signature  of  a  friend 
whose  writings   he  valued,    he  unintentionally   wrote   a   second   time   to   the  same 

individual  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"  May  1 1. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I   have  to  apologize  for  having  troubled  you  twice  about  so  small   a 

matter  as  your  autograph  ;  but  the  fact  is,  I  did  not  recognize  Dr.  David  Brown,  of 

Duncan  s  Memoir  as  the  David  Brown  of  the  Conuncntary.      Pray  excuse  me. 

"  I  am  getting  to  fear  and  tremble  about  the   Browns.     You  must  know  that 

the  President  and  Vice-President  of  our  Baptist   Union  are  both   Browns,  and  that 

the  chairman  of  our  London  Association  is  also  a  Brown.      Browns  to  the  rioht  of  us. 

Browns  to  the  left  of  us,  etc.     God  bless  them  all ! 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

The  following  genial  note,  from  Sir  Emilius  Bayley,  was  written  in  reply  to  a 
request  for  his  photograph  and  autograph  to  be  inserted  in  his  book,  Deep  unto- 
Deep  :— 

"  14,  Hyde  Park  Street,  W., 

"May  29,  1878. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Thanks  for  your  very  kind  reply  to  my  letter,  and  also  for  the  photo- 
graph you  were  so  good  as  to  send  me. 

"  I  should  have  sent  an  earlier  acknowledgment,  but  I  had  to  get  the 
enclosed  portrait  taken,  and  some  little  delay  ensued.  I  very  readily  fall  in  with  a 
'  whim  '  which  is  so  flattering  to  your  friends. 

"  May  our  gracious  Father  bless  your  labours  very  abundantly  ! 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"  Emilius  Bayley." 

In  reply  to  a  letter  from  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  Dr.  Andrew  A.  Bonar,  asking  for 
his  portrait  and  autograph  to  insert  in  his  Coinnicntary  on  the  Book  of  Leviticus, 
the  beloved  author  sent  his  photograph,  and  the  following  characteristic  note  : — 

"  Dear  Brother, 

"  I   cannot  refuse  what  you  are   so   kind   as   to   ask.       But   if  you   had 
only  waited  a  little  while,  it  would  have  been  really  worth  having, — for  '  we  shall 


2gS  c.    II.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

be   LIKE    Him'   (i    John  iii.    2).       iNIeantlme,    the    enclosed   may   hint    to   you   that 
sometimes  you  should  pray   for  me. 

"Yours,   with   all   brotherly  love, 

"  Andrew  A.   Bonar." 

The  same  writer's  volume,  Christ  and  His  Church  in  the  Book  of  Psalms, 
contains  the  inscription: — "This  book  was  given  to  me  by  my  dear  friend, 
I\Ir.  Bonar,  and  the  corrections  are  made  by  his  own  hand. — C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
Dr.  Horatius  Bonar's  volume,  Earth's  Morning :  or.  Thoughts  on  Genesis,  is  thus 
commended: — ''A  deeply  thoughtful   and  thought-creating-  book." 

In  Ihie  Book  of  Psalms ;  a  Ah'iu  Translation,  tvith  Introductions  and  Notes, 
Explanatory  and  Critical,  by  J.  J.  Stewart  Perowne,  B.D.,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote: — 
"  For  a  modern  book,  this  has  become  very  rare.  It  is  most  accurate  and  valuable." 
The  volume  also  contains  a  letter  from  the  author  (now  the  Bishop  of  Worcester), 
written  while  he  was  Dean  of  Peterborough,  in  which  he  said  : — "  I  thank  you 
heartily  lor  your  kind  words  about  my  book  on  the  Psalms.  I  am  the  more 
sensible  of  your  approbation,  because  you  have  yourself  conferred  so  inestimable 
a  boon  upon  the  Church  by  the  publication  of  your  Treas^iry  of  David.  There 
is  no  book  like  it  as  an  aid  to  devout  meditation  on  one  of  the  most  precious 
portions  of  God's  Word.  I  hope  some  day  you  will  visit  Peterborough.  It  would 
be  a  pleasure  to  me  to  show  you  our  beautiful  cathedral." 

The  volume  of  Expository  Thoughts  on  the  Gospels,  by  the  present  Bishop 
of  Liverpool  (Dr.  J.  C.  Ryle),  contains  his  portrait,  and  a  letter  which  he  wrote 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  1S75,  when  he  was  vicar  of  Stradbroke,  in  which  he  said  : — • 
"You  want  no  praise  of  man,  and  you  know  its  worthlessness.  But  I  must  tell 
you  how  much  I  like  your  Lectures  to  my  Students.  I  have  rarely  seen  so  many 
nails  hit  right  on  the  head.  I  should  like  to  give  a  copy  to  every  young  clergyman 
in  the  Church  of  England  !  I  hope  you  are  pretty  well.  I  have  had  much  illness 
in  the  last  four  years,  and  feel  nearer  home  than  I  ever  felt  before." 

Yet  he  has  been  spared  to  continue  his  faithful  testimony  for  nearly  another 
quarter  of  a  century;  and  only  towards  the  close  of  1S99  has  he  felt  compelled  to 
intimate  his  approaching  resignation  of  his  bishopric,  while  his  younger  friend, 
to  whom  he  wrote  so  heartily,  has  been  "  at  home  "  for  nearly  eight  years  ! 

Mr.  Spurgeon  desired  to  possess  a  specimen  of  the  manuscript  of  Dr.  Charles 
Hodge,  Professor  in  the  Theological  Seminary,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.  ; 
and,  in  reply  to  a  note  to  that  effect,  addressed  to  his  son,  Dr.  A.  A.  Hodge, 
the  latter  wrote  the  kind  letter  printed  on  the  opposite  page. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  299 

"  Princeton, 

"  New  Jersey, 

"  July  ist,  1879. 
"  Rev.  Charles  H.  Spurcreon, 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  thank  you  very  much  for  your  kind  note,  relating  to  the  Outlines, 
received  yesterday.  Your  many  friends,  on  this  side  of  the  ocean,  have  been 
anxious  about  your  health,  as  we  have  received  irregular,  and  imperfect,  and 
perhaps  irresponsible  reports  of  it  from  time  to  time.  I  sincerely  trust  that  it  is 
re-established  fundamentally  and  permanently.  Yet  I  am  sure  that  God  has  warned 
you,  as  the  trusted  steward  of  His  gifts,  not  to  work  so  hard  and  continuously. 

"  I  send  you,  herewith,  two  of  my  father's  papers,  prepared  for  the  Con- 
ferences held  by  the  Professors  and  students,  every  Sabbath  afternoon,  in  our 
Oratory.  Nelson,  of  Edinburgh,  has  just  published  a  volume  containing  249  of 
them.      These  I  send  you  are  originals  in  my  father's  handwriting. 

"  May  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Spirit,  bless  you  with  all  blessings  in 
Christ  Jesus  oiw  Lord  ! 

"  Give  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon. 

"  Yours  sincerely, 

"A.  A.   Hodge." 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  copy  of  Dr.  A.  A.  Hodge's  Outlines  of  Theology  contains 
his  autograph,  and  this  entry  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  handwriting: — "Autograph  written 
in  my  study,  Aug.  8,  1877. — C.  H.  S." 

Dr.  Fergus  Ferguson,  of  Glasgow,  in  thanking  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  the  notice 
oi\\\'~>  Life  of  Christ,  wrote,  in  1882: — "You  must  be  well-nigh  overwhelmed  with 
literary  work  alone, — not  to  speak  of  the  pastoral.  ...  I  cannot  close  this  letter, 
which  I  hope  you  will  not  think  intrusive,  without  venturing  to  express  my  high 
admiration  of  your  Christian  worth  and  character,  as  well  as  my  lofty  estimate  of  the 
position  which,  in  providence,  you  have  been  called  to  fill.  The  influence  you  wield, 
both  by  pulpit  and  press,  in  a  perhaps  unexampled  degree  in  the  annals  of  the 
Christian  ministry,  is  to  me  the  very  zenith  and  beau  ideal  of  what  human  influence 
should  be.  May  you  yet  be  long  spared  to  wield  such  influence !  God  has 
chastened  you  not  a  little  by  personal  and  domestic  affliction, — thus  putting  you 
into  the  highest  class  of  His  spiritual  seminary,  like  the  scholars  whom  Continental 
teachers  call  privatissinii, — those  to  whom  they  give  advanced  lessons  in  their 
own  dwellings." 

In   addition   to   the   letters,   manuscripts,  photographs,   and  autographs   of   the 


300  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

authors,  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  preserved  in  his  copies  of  their  works,  whenever 
he  could  obtain  them,  he  also  wrote  his  own  name  in  many  of  the  volumes,  with  an 
expression  of  his  opinion  of  their  contents.  There  are,  perhaps,  among  his  books, 
some  hundreds  of  these  inscriptions  ;  many  of  them  are  autobiographical,  and  for 
that  reason  deserve  a  place  in  the  present  work.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that, 
while  this  chapter  has  been  in  course  of  preparation,  the  compilers  have  met  with 
an  interesting  article  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  entitled  "Scrawls  on  Books,"  which 
shows  that  he  approved  of  the  custom  which  the  Pastor  so  extensively  observed. 
Among  other  things,  he  wrote  : — "  The  practice  of  scribbling  on  fly-leaves  and 
margins  has  many  enemies.  I  confess  that  I  am  not  among  these  purists.  I  like 
to  see  these  footprints  on  the  sands  of  literature,  left  by  dead  generations,  and  to 
learn  from  them  something  about  previous  owners  of  books,  if  it  be  but  their 
names.  .  .  .  We  should  all  write  our  names,  at  least  ;  no  more  of  us  may  ever 
reach  posterity.  .  .  .  As  a  rule,  tidy  and  self-respecting  people  do  not  even  write 
their  names  on  their  fly-leaves,  still  less  do  they  scribble  marginalia.  Collectors 
love  a  clean  book,  but  a  book  scrawled  on  may  have  other  merits.  Thackeray's 
countless  caricatures  add  a  delight  to  his  old  school-books  ;  the  comments  of  Scott 
are  always  to  the  purpose  ;  but  how  few  books  once  owned  by  great  authors  come 
into  the  general  market  !  Where  is  Dr.  Johnson's  library,  which  must  bear  traces 
of  his  buttered  toast  ?  Sir  Mark  Sykes  used  to  record  the  date  and  place  of 
purchase,  with  the  price, — an  excellent  habit.  These  things  are  more  personal  than 
book-plates,  which  may  be  and  are  detached  by  collectors,  and  pasted  into  volumes. 
The  selling  value  of  a  book  may  be  lowered  even  by  a  written  owner's  name  ;  but 
many  a  book,  otherwise  worthless,  is  redeemed  by  an  interesting  note.  Even  the 
uninteresting  notes  gradually  acquire  an  antiquarian  value,  if  contemporary  with  the 
author.  They  represent  the  mind  of  a  dead  age,  and  perhaps  the  common  scribbler 
is  not  unaware  of  this  ;  otherwise,  he  is  indeed  without  excuse.  For  the  great 
owners  of  the  past,  certainly,  we  regret  that  they  were  so  sparing  in  marginalia." 

The  first  volume  of  the  Autobiography  (page  254)  proves  that  Mr.  Spurgeon 
commenced,  quite  early  in  his  ministry,  the  practice  which  Mr.  Lang  commends, 
for  the  inscriptions  in  Dr.  Gill's  Commentary,  there  quoted,  date  back  to  1852.  In 
Martin  Luther's  Comjjientary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  is  written: — "This 
volume  is  one  of  my  earliest  friends ; — needs  no  letter  of  commendation. — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  1852." 

The  following  remarkable  commendation  is  inserted  on  the  fly-leaf  of  the  first 
volume  of  ^  Compleat  History  and  Mystery  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  logically 
discussed  and  theologically  improved,  by  Christopher  Ness  : — "  Reader, — Here  is 
something  worth  all  thy   time,   though  thou  read  it  all  day   long.     Give  eyes  and 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3OI 

heart  a  feast  here.  Here  is  goodly  word-painting  and  rich  heart-breathing. — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

The  third  volume  is  marked  "  much  valued  ; "  and  the  fourth  has  this  inscrip- 
tion : — "  I  reckon  these  four  volumes  to  be  worth  their  weight  in  gold.  They  may 
contain  some  eccentric  conceits,  but  these  are  as  the  dust  upon  a  palace.  I  doubt 
not  that  Matthew  Henry  borrowed  very  extensively  from  Ness,  and  certainly  showed 
his  wisdom  in  so  doing.  If  these  volumes  shall  become  the  property  of  another,  I 
charge  him  either  to  read  them  carefully  and  prayerfully,  or  else  to  give  or  lend  them 
to  some  godly  person  who  can  appreciate  them.  Such  a  treasure  should  be  out  at 
interest. — C.  H.  Spurgeon.     Nov.,  '58." 

In  1857,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  in  Matthew  Pool's  Annotations  : — "  Pool  is  a  most 
excellent  expositor."  Dr.  John  Mayer's  Commentarie  tipon  the  Ahtv  Testament 
bears  the  inscription  : — "  Mayer  is  one  of  my  greatest  favourites. — C.  H.  Spurgeon, 
1859."  The  same  author's  volume  on  the  Historical  Books  is  described  as  "excel- 
lent, full  of  research,  and  rare  learning." 

Two  volumes  of  Dr.  Adam  Clarke's  Coninientary  contain  lengthy  but  not 
commendatory  notes.  In  Vol.  I.,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote,  just  below  the  portrait  of 
the  commentator: — "who  discovered  that  an  ape,  and  not  a  serpent,  deceived 
Adam."  At  the  top  of  the  title-page  is  this  warning: — "Take  heed,  reader!  This 
is  dangerous  oround  for  those  who  are  not  ofrounded  and  settled."  Vol.  VI.  has 
this  inscription: — "Adam  Clarke  is  as  immortal  as  his  monkey,  and  other  errors; 
see  notes  on  Genesis.  He  is  always  to  be  read  with  caution,  for  his  sentiments  are, 
in  my  judgment,  most  unscriptural. — C.  H.  Spurgeon."  On  the  title-page,  after 
the  words,  "A  Commentary  and  Critical  Notes,"  there  is  added: — "Adapted  to 
blind  the  eye,  and  prevent  the  truth  in  Jesus  from  shining  upon  the  soul,"  by  Adam 
Clarke, — "  Arminian  twister  of  the  Word." 

By  way  of  contrast,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Dr.  Gill's  Exposition  of  Solomon  s 
^"c?/^  contains  Mr.  Spurgeon's  autograph,  and  the  following  note: — "This  priceless 
work  of  my  learned  predecessor  has  always  been  helpful  to  me."  In  different 
volumes  of  John  Trapp's  Annotations  tipon  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  wrote  : — Prized  for  its  quaintness  ;  "  "A  great  favourite  ;  "  "  Trapp  is  ever 
my  favourite,  1873."  -^  large  folio  edition  of  Ralph  Ersklne's  Works  has  two 
inscriptions: — "The  Rev.  Joseph  Irons,  the  gift  of  his  father;"  and  underneath, 
"Valued  all  the  more  by  me  as  having  been  the  property  of  Joseph  Irons. — C.  H. 
Spurgeon."  Bloomfield's  Greek  Testament,  zvith  English  Notes,  is  inscribed  : — "  I 
value  Bloomfield  exceedingly  :  I  can  always  make  more  out  of  him  than  out  of 
Alford. — C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Sep.,  1872." 


;o2 


c.    H.    sturgeon's   autobiography. 


The  copy  of  Cruden's  Coiicordancc,  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  used,  contains 
upon  its  riy-leaf  the  testimony  here  reproduced  \n  facsimile  : — 


-^ 


.C^jZ-x^       


0C^^^-^  ^-4-  ^  Z^^  w^o  -Z-^ 


i 


7/ 


Taking,  almost  at  random,  the  works  of  various  authors  who  wrote  on  separate 
Books  of  the  Bible,  the  following  inscriptions  will  serve  as  specimens  of  the 
comments,  favourable  and  otherwise,  inserted  in  them  : — 

In  Dr.  James  M orison's  Practical  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  according  to 
Matthew,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote : — "  Volume  greatly  valued  for  its  scholarship. 
Difficult  to  find  much  Morisonianism  here."  The  Geniii^s  of  the  Gospel,  by  Dr. 
David  Thomas,  contains  this  note: — "A  suggestive  volume,  but  rather  bombastic." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 


303 


On  the  title-page  of  the  same  writer's  work,  The  Book  of  Psalms  Exegetically  and 
Practically  Considered,  opposite  the  author's  name, —  David  Thomas,- — Mr.  Spuro-eon 
added  : — "  Not  David,  nor  Thomas.  David  scrabbHng,  Thomas  doubting."  The 
same  writer's  Honiiletic  Convnentary  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  contains  his 
photograph,  autograph,  and  the  following  remarks  : — "  Many  of  the  homiletic 
outlines  strike  me  as  'much  ado  about  nothing;'  still,  if  a  man  should  read  this 
work,  and  get  no  help  from  it,  it  would  be  his  own  fault. — C.  H.  Spurgeox,  1S74." 

Three  books  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  naturally  have  references  to  the 
writers'  doctrinal  views.  Of  Dr.  F.  A.  Philippi,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — "  Frequently 
goes  out  of  his  way  to  have  a  fling  at  what  he  thinks  to  be  Calvinism."  Rev. 
William  Tyson's  Expositoiy  Lectures  are  said  to  be  "  Excellent  for  an  Arminian. 
I  find  him  sweetly  Evangelical  in  many  places."  Dr.  David  Ritchie's  Lectures, 
Explanatory  and  Practical,  are  described  as  "  Unsound  in  many  respects.  Of  the 
Moderate  School,  I  should  judge." 

James  Fergusson's  Brief  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul  contains  the 
autograph  and  date,  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  1878;  and  this  note: — "A  volume  of  great 
worth.  Few  books  have  been  more  frequently  consulted  by  me. — C.  H.  S."  John 
Barlow  on  2  Timothy  I.  and  II.  is  thus  commended: — "Though  apparently 
unattractive,  this  book  will  richly  repay  a  careful  reader. — C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
Nicholas  Byfield,  on  /  Peter  /.,  //.,  aiid  HI,  is  wittily  criticised  : — "  Byfield  is 
discursive,  and  takes  in  every  by-field  which  he  had  better  have  passed  by.  Yet, 
in  his  Preface,  he  calls  this  an  abridgment !  I  am  glad  it  was  not  my  lot  to  hear 
him. — C.  H.  Spurgeon."  Nathanael  Hardy  on  The  First  Epistle  of  John,  is  said 
to  be  "a  rare  divine,  this  Hardy;  an  Episcopalian  Puritan." 

In  Frederick  Denison  Maurice's  Prophets  and  Kings  of  the  Old  Testament, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — "  Herein  we  find  a  great  deal  of  wild  doctrine,  but  yet 
there  is  thought  cf  no  mean  order.  We  can  wash  out  the  gold."  The  work 
of  a  writer  of  quite  another  stamp — Notes  on  the  Book  of  Genesis,  by  C.  H.  M., 
— is  thus  described: — "Good  in  its  line,  but  too  cramped.  There  is  also  error 
concealed  here  and  there."  Range's  Genesis  is  said  to  be  "  one  of  the  best  of  the 
series;"  but  his  Isaiah  is  characterized  as  "very  poor."  Dr.  Pusey  on  The  Minor 
Prophets  bears  the  unique  distinction  of  being  highly  commended  in  a  single 
word: — "Invaluable. — C.  H.  Spurgeon,  1878."  Sermons  on  Judges,  by  Richard 
Rogers,  contains  this  note  : — "C    H.  Spurgeon  much  prizes  this  book. — 1882." 

Among  other  brief  but  notable  notes  are  the  following  : — 
Durham's  Christ  Crucified: — "  Much  prized." 


304  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Practical  Reflections  on  Every  Verse  of  the  Holy  Gospels,  by  a  clergyman : — 

*'  Good,  simple,  marred." 

Poetical  Works  of  George  Herbert : — "  Much  valued  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Darling's  Cyclopcedia  Bibliographica  : — "  An  invaluable  tool." 

Joseph  Taylor's  volume,  Nahirales   C7iriosa: :    Cttriosities  in  Natttral  History, 

contains  the  warning,  "  Believe  not  too  readily. — C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

In    Whitefielci's  Sermons  is   the    autograph,   with   the    inscription    following: — 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  who  admires  Whitefield  as  chief  of  preachers." 

The  Sabbath  in  Puritan  Nezv  England,  by  Alice  Morse  Earle,  probably 
contains  the  last  inscription  written  by  the  Pastor,  and  a  very  expressive  one  it  is  :— 
"An  amusing  but  saddening  book.  The  seamy  side  of  New  England  religion 
exposed.  The  authoress  is  the  wife  of  that  Ham  of  whom  we  read  in  Genesis. — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Dec,  1891."  He  knew  that  there  was  a  "seamy  side"  even  to 
his  beloved  Puritanism  ;  but  he  felt  that  it  ought  not  to  be  thus  exposed  to  the 
public  gaze,  but  to  be  kindly  and  charitably  concealed. 


CHAPTER    CII. 


M^^  Sprttrgeoit  as  a  iittrarg  JHait  (Conc/^^dcc^j. 

OT  only  did  Mr.  Spurgeon,  to  the  end  of  his  life,  continue  to  read 
vast  numbers  of  the  works  written  by  ancient  and  modern  authors, 
but  he  also  kept  on  writing  books  for  other  people  to  read  ;  and 
when  he  was  "  called  home,"  he  had  so  many  in  course  of  pre- 
paration that  his  posthumous  works  already  form  quite  a  numerous 
company,  and  there  are  many  more  yet  to  be  published.     Whoever 

is  spared  to  see  a  complete  set  of  his  volumes  will  probably  find  that  they  will  then 

number  not  less  than. a  hundred  and  fifty. 


During  the  period  covered  by  the  present  portion  of  the  Standard  Life,  T/ie 
Treasury  of  David  was  completed,  and  the  regular  issue  of  The  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle  Pulpit,  The  Sivord  and  the  Trowel,  and  Spnrgeoiis  Illnstrated  [Book] 
Almanack,  ?iX\AJohn  Ploitghnians  (Sheet)  Almanack  was  continued,  as  indeed  they 
have  been  since  the  Pastor's  home-going.  Many  people  appear  to  have  thought 
that  it  was  hardly  possible  for  Mr.  Spurgeon,  with  the  almost  incessant  demands 
upon  his  time  and  strength,  to  devote  much  personal  attention  to  certain  portions  of 
his  literary  labours,  so  they  attributed  to  his  helpers  a  good  deal  of  the  toil  that 
devolved  upon  him.  One  person  was  credited  with  the  compilation  of  the  Book 
Almanack,  although  its  Editor  never  entrusted  it  to  anyone  but  himself  until  the 
year  of  his  long  illness  ;  and  on  one  occasion,  at  least,  he  felt  it  needful  to  remind 
his  readers  that  his  connection  with  The  Sivord  and  the  Trozvel  Avas  not  by  any 
means  a  merely  nominal  one,  but  was  very  real  and  practical.  In  his  "  Notes"  for 
April,  1885,  anticipating  his  return  from  Mentone,  he  wrote  : — 

"  A  kindly  reviewer  speaks  of  our  March  number  as  vivacious  and  crood, 
'  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the  Editor.'  The  fact  is,  that  the  Editor  is  never 
absent  from  the  magazine;  but  personally  reads  every  line  of  each  number.  Friends 
now  and  then  write,  blaming  some  supposed  subordinate,  if  their  tastes  are  not 
pleased  ;  but  the  Editor  hides  behind  nobody,  friends  must  please  blame  //////,  for  he 
is  personally  responsible.  Our  writers  are  able  men,  and  are  quite  able  to  fight 
their  own  battles,  should  battles  occur  ;  but  the  Editor  never  wishes  it  to  be 
imagined  that  he  merely  puts  his  name  on  the  cover  of  the  magazine,  and   leaves  it 

u  4 


306  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

to  be  produced  by  other  people.  No  ;  it  is  our  continual  endeavour  to  make  this 
serial  as  good  as  we  can  make  it,  and  we  would  do  better  if  we  could.  Notwith- 
standing illness,  or  absence  from  home,  we  have  never  been  obliged  to  delegate  our 
duties  to  anyone  else  ;  on  the  contrary,  we  have  given  all  the  more  time  to  this  work 
when  we  have  been  debarred  from  other  labours." 

Many  of  the  books  published  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  during  the  last  fourteen  years 
of  his  busy  life  were  briefly  mentioned  in  Vol.  III.,  Chapter  LXXIX.,  because  of 
their  connection  with  others  then  described,  or  they  have  been  already  referred 
to  in  previous  chapters  of  the  present  volume.  One  of  the  Pastor's  ardent 
admirers  made  an  artistic  arrangement  of  the  titles  of  many  of  the  works  which  had 
been  issued  up  to  the  time  of  his  Jubilee,  with  his  portrait  in  the  centre,  and 
allusions  to  the  three  spheres  of  his  pastoral  service,  and  the  chief  educational  and 
philanthropic  Institutions  with  which  his  name  is  inseparably  associated.  The 
design  is  reproduced  on  the  opposite  page,  where  it  can  be  seen  that  the  initials, 
C.  H.  S.,  are  ingeniously  introduced  into  the  closing  line  of  the  tribute  to  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  loving  and  sympathetic  service  and  world-wide  influence. 

Taking  the  later  books  in  chronological  order,  the  first  to  be  noted  is  The  Clue 
of  the  Maze,  a  Voice  Lifted  up  on  behalf  of  Honest  Faith.  The  Preface  describes 
its  autobiographical  character  : — "  How  I  have  personally  threaded  the  labyrinth  of 
life,  thus  far,  may  be  of  helpful  interest  to  some  other  soul  which  just  now  is  in  a 
maze."  The  sub-title  is  thus  explained: — "A  great  poet  let  fall  the  expression, 
'honest  doubt.'  How  greedily  it  was  clutched  at!  Modern  unbelief  is  so  short 
of  the  quality  that  it  seized  the  label,  and,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  it  has 
advertized  itself  as  honest  doubt.  It  was  in  dire  need  of  a  character.  Feeble  as 
our  voice  may  be,  we  lift  it  on  behalf  of  honest  faith."  The  book  was  first  issued 
in  a  bijou  edition,  suitable  for  carrying  in  the  waistcoat  pocket,  but  it  has  since  been 
reprinted  in  large  type,  to  correspond  with  other  shilling  books  by  Mr.  Spurgeon. 
He  was  greatly  gratified  as  he  heard,  from  time  to  time,  that  his  purpose  in  writing 
it  had  been  happily  fulfilled  ;  and  he  was  specially  cheered  by  the  testimony  of  a 
notable  literary  man  who  had  been,  through  reading  it,  lifted  up  from  blank 
atheism  to  saving  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  little  book  has  been  trans- 
lated into  several  foreign  languages. 

About  the  same  time  as  The  Chce  of  the  Maze  was  published,  the  Pastor  was 
busily  occupied  with  the  first  of  his  four  volumes,  entitled  My  Sermon-Notes.  They 
were  issued  in  response  to  an  oft-repeated  request  for  outlines  of  discourses  which 
might  be  helpful  to   "lay"  or  local  preachers  who  have    but    little    time   for   their 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 


307 


If 


;   v^ 


<lA  Truer  /leart  npcr  Beat ,  a  KinVllier  Rcina, 

'HS^e'eT'  TTiiriLstere^  unbo  anoMiers  need  : 
^JVtont^ue  M-Jiost  livinc; words, Ting'^ver every lanrL 
nVhilerVViaows,  Orj>r,ani!.Sh<'Hent«,Pr.enas:ci  lov 
~^ Orv   H envea  Spe e d  ! 


I 
I 


C.   H.  SPURGEON   AND  THE   TITLES  OF  SOME   OF  HIS  WORKS,    1S84. 


30S  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

pulpit  preparation,  or  who  find  a  difficulty  in  selecting  suitable  subjects  for  sermons 
and  addresses.  In  order  that  the  notes  mioht  be  of  still  greater  service  to  such 
brethren,  they  were  made  rather  more  ample  and  detailed  than  when  Mr.  Spurgeon 
himself  preached  from  them  ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  appropriate  extracts  and 
illustrations  were  added  to  them.  That  the  work  met  an  urgent  need,  was  speedily 
apparent ;  and  it  was  not  long  before  a  "  Note"  to  the  following  effect  appeared  in 
The  Sivord  and  the  Troivel : — 

"Our  first  half-crown  volume  of  outline  sermons  has  met  with  a  very  cordial 
reception,  the  first  edition  of  5,000  being  very  nearly  cleared  out,  though  only  so 
lately  presented  to  the  public.  Taking  this  as  a  token  for  good,  we  shall  soon  issue 
the  second  portion,  which  contains  our  notes  of  sermons  from  Ecclesiastes  to 
Malachi.  Brethren  whose  time  is  much  occupied  with  business  cares,  who  neverthe- 
less delight  to  preach  the  Word  of  God,  will  find  these  Sermon-Notes  to  be  a  great 
assistance.  With  that  view  we  have  prepared  them,  and  to  that  end  we  trust  that 
God  will  bless  them.  They  are  not  sufficiently  in  extenso  to  suit  the  idler,  and  yet 
we  trust  there  is  enough  of  them  to  aid  the  embarrassed  worker.  The  preparation 
of  this  volume  has  enabled  us  to  while  away  the  evenings  and  the  occasional  wet 
and  cloudy  days  of  our  rustication  at  Mentone.  As  its  fragmentary  nature  allowed 
us  to  take  it  up  and  lay  it  down  at  will,  it  was  just  the  sort  of  occupation  to  afford  us 
happy  recreation.  To  have  nothing  to  do,  is  bondage  ;  but  such  congenial  employ- 
ment as  this  has  aided  us  in  being  perfectly  at  ease." 

In  due  time,  the  whole  set  was  completed,  and  it  has  had  a  very  large  sale. 
Since  the  Pastor's  home-going,  another  volume  of  a  somewhat  sim.ilar  character  has 
been  published, — C.  H.  Spurgeons  Facsimile  Pulpit-Notes,  ivith  the  Sermons 
Pj^eached  from  them  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  The  book  originated  in 
rather  a  singular  way.  A  paragraph  appeared  in  various  newspapers,  announcing 
that  some  of  the  notes  used  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  while  preaching  at  the  Tabernacle, 
were  about  to  be  reproduced  in  facsimile,  and  the  writer  intimated  that  the  work 
would  be  certain  to  have  a  favourable  reception.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  up  to  that 
time,  no  such  arrangement  had  been  made  ;  but  the  idea  seemed  so  good,  and  the 
publicity  given  to  it  was  so  helpful,  that  a  dozen  suitable  outlines  were  selected,  and, 
with  the  discourses  delivered  from  them,  were  made  into  a  volume  which  at  once 
became  an  interesting  memento  of  the  "  promoted  "  preacher,  and  a  striking  illus- 
tration of  his  method  of  sermon  construction. 

The  book,  which  has  the  double  distinction  of  having  been  translated  into  more 
foreign  languages  and  of*  having  been  blessed  to  the  salvation  of  more  souls  than 
any  other  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  works,  is  the  shilling  volume  entitled  All  of  Grace. 
An  Earnest  Word  with  those  zuho  are  Seeking  Salvation  by  the  Lord  Jesiis  Christ. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  309 

Its  opening  sentences  are  : — "The  object  of  this  book  is  the  salvation  of  the  reader. 
He  who  spoke  and  wrote  it  will  be  greatly  disappointed  if  it  does  not  lead  many  to 
the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  sent  forth  in  childlike  dependence  upon  the  power  of  God  the 
Holy  Ghost,  to  use  it  in  the  conversion  of  millions,  if  so  He  pleases."  Almost  the 
last  paragraph  contains  these  words,  which  now  have  a  peculiar  pathos  attaching 
to  them  : — "  If  those  who  are  converted  become  winners  of  others,  who  knows  what 
may  spring  out  of  my  little  book  .^  Already  1  begin  praising  God  for  the  conversions 
which  He  will  work  by  it,  and  by  those  whom  it  leads  to  Jesus.  Probably  the 
larger  part  of  the  results  will  happen  when  my  right  hand,  which  is  now  leaving  its 
impress  on  the  page,  will  be  paralyzed  in  death.      Reader,  meet  me  in  Heaven  !  " 

One  of  the  many  instances  of  the  usefulness  of  the  little  volume,  of  which  the 
Pastor  knew  before  he  was  "  called  home,"  was  reported  to  him  in  the  following 
letter  from  a  doctor  who  was  a  member  of  the  Tabernacle  Church  : — 

"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  have  a  message  to  give  you,  and  will  do  it  as  briefly  as  I  can. 
"  For  many  years,  I  have  had  the  friendship  of  a  well-known  medical  man  in 
.      For  some  two  or  three  years,  he  has  suffered  from  diabetes  ;  but  he  h^s 


lived  just  the  same,  entirely  without  Christ.      Last  Christmas,  I  sent  him  a  copy  of 
All  of  Grace.     A  short  time  ago,   when   I   was  at  the  seaside,   I   received  a  letter 

from  a  friend  in  which  he  said,  '  I  believe  Dr. is  saved,'  .   .   .    '  the  teaching  has 

been  all  Mr.  Spurgeon's.'     This  I  was  delighted  to  hear. 

"Yesterday,  I  stood  by  his  side.  I  found  him  very  ill,  suffering  from  inflam- 
mation of  the  lungs,  consequent  on  the  diabetes.  He  took  my  hands,  and,  as  well 
as  he  could  between  his  tears,  and  the  shortness  of  breath,  told  me  that  he  was 
saved,  that  he  was  a  child  of  God,  that  his  sins  were  all  forgiven,  that  he  was  washed 
in  the  blood  of  his  Saviour,  and  clothed  in  the  robe  of  His  perfect  righteousness  ; 
and  recovering  his  breath,  he  said,  very  solemnly,  'Will  you  tell  Mr.  Spurgeon  that 
this  has  all  come,  in  God's  mercy  to  me  a  poor  sinner,  by  that  book,' — pointing 
to  All  of  Grace,  which  was  lying  open  on  his  bed, — '  will  you  let  him  know  what  a 
blessing  that  book  has  been  to  me  .'^ ' 

"  Dear  sir,  I  have  delivered  the  message.  I  know  you  will  be  pleased  to 
receive  it,  and  will  you  remember  my  dear  friend  in  prayer  ? 

"  Believe  me  to  be, 

"Yours  deeply-indebted. 


The  book  having  been  so  manifestly  owned  of  God,  Mr.  Spurgeon  prepared  a 
companion  volume, — According  to  Promise  ;  or,  the  Lords  Ulethod  of  Dealing  ivitli 
His  Chosen  People  ;  and,  some  time  later,  he  issued  Around  the  Wicket  Gate ;  or,  a 


3IO  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Fricndiv   Talk  ivith   Seekers    concerning  Faith   in   the   Lord  Jes2is   Christ,   both  of 
which  have  had  a  wide  circulation,  and  have  been  greatly  blessed. 

The  volume  which,  more  than  any  other  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  writings,  illustrates 
his  power  of  rapid  composition,  is  The  Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith.  It 
consists  of  366  Scripture  promises,  arranged  for  daily  use,  with  brief  experimental 
comments  suitable  for  reading  at  family  worship  or  as  a  help  to  private  devotion. 
During  the  Pastor's  stay  at  Mentone,  in  the  winter  of  1887 — 8,  there  was  one 
Monday  when  the  rain  poured  down  incessantly  in  such  tropical  fashion  that  he  was 
compelled  to  remain  indoors  all  day.  His  companions  were  not  aware  that  he  was 
contemplating  the  commencement  of  another  new  book,  but  they  noticed  how 
rapidly  he  was  covering  sheet  after  sheet  of  foreign  notepaper.  After  a  while,  he 
explained  that  he  had  begun  a  volume  of  daily  meditations  ;  and,  before  he  went  to 
bed,  that  night,  he  had  finished  the  portions  for  the  month  of  January,  and  handed 
them  to  Mr.  Passmore  to  send  off  to  London  for  the  printers.  They  were  so 
carefully  written  that  they  needed  but  little  correction  ;  and  anyone  who  has  the 
book,  and  examines  the  first  thirty-one  pages  in  it,  will  be  able  to  estimate  both  the 
quantity  and  the  quality  of  one  wet  day's  work  while  the  Pastor  was  supposed  to  be 
on  his  holiday  in  the  sunny  South. 

The  Cheque  Book  is,  to  a  large  extent,  a  record  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  experiences 
of  the  Lord's  faithfulness  during  the  "  Down-grade  "  Controversy.  Some  of  the  most 
striking  promises,  on  which  he  has  commented,  were  sent  to  him  by  friends,  who 
wished  to  uphold  and  encourage  him  in  that  season  of  sore  sorrow  and  travail,  and 
the  book  abounds  in  autobiographical  allusions.  In  the  Preface,  the  Pastor  wrote  : — 
"  To  the  cheering  Scriptures,  I  have  added  testimonies  of  my  own,  the  fruit  of  trial  and 
experience.  I  believe  all  the  promises  of  God,  but  many  of  them  I  have  personally 
tried  and  proved  ....  I  commenced  these  daily  portions  when  I  was  wading  in 
the  surf  of  controversy.  Since  then,  I  have  been  cast  into  'waters  to  swim  in,' 
which,  but  for  God's  upholding  hand,  would  have  proved  waters  to  drown  in.  ...  I 
do  not  mention  this  to  exact  sympathy,  but  simply  to  let  the  reader  see  that  I  am  no 
drv-land  sailor.  I  have  traversed  those  oceans  which  are  not  Pacific  full  many  a 
time:  I  know  the  roll  of  the  billows,  and  the  rush  ot  the  winds.  Never  were  the 
promises  of  Jehovah  so  precious  to  me  as  at  this  hour.  Some  of  them  I  never 
understood  till  now  ;  I  had  not  reached  the  date  at  which  they  matured,  for  I  was 
not  mvself  mature  enough  to  perceive  their  meaning.  How  much  more  wonderful 
is  the  Bible  to  me  now  than  it  was  a  few  months  ago  !  In  obeying  the  Lord,  and 
bearing  His  reproach  outside  the  camp,  I  have  not  received  new  promises;  but  the 
result  to  me  is  much  the  same  as  if  I  had  done  so,  for  the  old  ones  have  opened  up 
to  me  with  richer  stores." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3II 

Remembering-  the  origin  of  the  book,  it  is  noteworthy  that,  during  the  compi- 
lation of  the  present  volume,  a  testimony  to  its  helpfulness  in  times  of  trial  has  come 
from  Christians  in  South  Africa,  who  have  been  reading  the  Dutch  translation  of  it, 
and  so  have  been  comforted  during  their  recent  terrible  experiences.  Mr.  Spurgeon 
had  many  proofs  of  the  usefulness  of  the  volume  ;  one  that  interested  and  amused 
him  was  thus  related  by  Pastor  W.  Williams,  of  Upton  Chapel  : — 

"  Opposite  my  study-window  are  several  gardens,  affording  during  summertime 
a  pleasant  outlook  ;  but,  in  the  first  of  them,  there  zuas  tied  up,  until  recently,  a 
large  retriever  dog.  His  incessant  barking  made  study  and  thought  quite  out  of 
the  question.  I  let  his  owner  know  this  in  a  quiet  way  ;  but  still  the  dog  was  there. 
I  wondered  if  I  should  pray  about  the  matter  :  it  seemed  rather  comical  to  pray 
about  the  barking  of  a  dog  ;  besides,  I  could  not  bring  to  mind  a  promise  about 
such  a  thing  which  I  could  mention  in  prayer,  until  one  day  I  opened  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith,  at  page  157,  where  the  text  is, 
'  But  against  any  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue,'  the 
comment  on  which  begins,  'What!  has  God  power  over  the  tongues  of  dogs? 
Can  He  keep  curs  from  barking?  Yes,  it  is  even  so.'  I  was  startled,  for  no  dog 
ever  laid  hold  with  greater  tenacity  than  this  text  did  on  me.  There  and  then 
I  knelt  down,  and  asked  that  the  dog  might  be  removed.  The  dog  has 
gone,  and  the  owner,  too  ;  but  mark,  the  arrangements  to  go  were  made  by  the 
owner  just  about  the  time  that  the  prayer  was  offered  !      How  true  it  is  that — 

"'More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  this  world  dreams  of!'" 

Following  The  Cheque  Book,  Mr.  Spurgeon  published  two  volumes  of  quite  a 
different  character, —  The  Salt-cellars,  being  a  Collection  of  Proverbs,  together  zvith 
Homely  Notes  thereon.  For  nearly  twenty  years,  he  had  issued  John  Ploughman  s 
Almanack,  and  the  labour  involved  in  collecting  or  composing  so  many  thousands 
of  proverbs,  maxims,  and  mottoes,  seemed  to  justify  their  preservation  in  a  more 
permanent  form  than  the  annual  broadsheet  ensured.  Accordingly,  they  were 
arranged  alphabetically,  in  two  sections,  "  Proverbs  and  Quaint  Sayings,"  and 
"Sayings  of  a  more  Spiritual  Sort;"  and,  in  nearly  every  instance,  "Homely 
Notes"  were  added,  concerning  which  one  reviewer  wrote: — "The  proverbs  are 
excellent,  but  Mr.  Spurgeon's  comments  are  perfect." 

Each  of  the  volumes,  as  it  was  published,  received  a  most  hearty  welcome  both 
from  the  press  and  the  public,  and  their  contents  have  ever  since  been  frequently 
quoted  in  the  pulpit  and  on  the  platform.  Mr.  Spurgeon  sent  the  two  books  to 
Mr.  George  Augustus  Sala,  with  a  request  that  he  would  review  them  in  The 
Daily  Telegraph  if  he  judged  them  worthy  of  such  a  notice.  In  reply,  Mr.  Sala  wrote 
a  long  and  cordial  letter,  in  the  course  of  which  he  said  : — "Your  two  volumes  were 


312  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

such  pleasant  reading-  that  I  thought  the  best  way  to  meet  your  views  would  be 
to  make  The  Salt-cellars  the  text  for  a  leading  article,  which  I  now  have  much 
pleasure  in  sending  you.  Naturally,  I  was  struck  (and  amused)  by  the  maxim, 
'  Newspapers  are  the  Bibles  of  worldlings.'  That  is  exactly  so  ;  and  it  is  eminently 
fitting  that  it  should  be  so  ;  because,  to  a  journalist  who  is  aware  of  the  usefulness 
and  respects  the  dignity  of  his  calling,  the  press  is  a  pulpit  whence,  on  week-days, 
he  preaches  lay  sermons,  leaving  Sunday  to  you  and  your  brethren." 

Mr.  Sala  then  proceeded  to  give  quite  a  lengthy  dissertation  on  the  maxim 
which  had  so  greatly  interested  him,  but  it  need  not  be  quoted  here  from  his 
letter,  as  he  referred  to  it  again  in  his  article,  the  opening  and  closing  sentences  of 
which  were  as  follows  : — 

"  A  really  busy  man  has  usually  the  largest  amount  of  leisure  at  his  disposal, 
and  Mr.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  amidst  the  multifarious  labours  and  responsibilities  which 
de\'olve  on  him  as  Pastor  of  an  immense  congregation,  has  found  time  to  dig  and 
delve  very  deeply  indeed  in  that  richest  of  colloquial  mines, — the  treasury  of 
English  proverbs.  Under  the  title  of  The  Salt-cellars,  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  just  issued 
two  comely  and  handy  volumes,  which  will  derive  much  value,  not  only  from  the 
fact  that  the  work  is  one  presenting  evidence  of  indefatigable  industry  of  research 
and  considerable  acumen  in  selection,  but  also  from  the  circumstance  that  the 
compiler  has  graced  his  chosen  proverbs  with  a  running  commentary  of  what  he 
modestly  calls  'homely  notes.'  In  reality,  they  are  often  humorous  as  well  as 
homely,  and  are  always  replete  with  that  spirit  of  cheerful  piety,  quite  devoid  of 
cant  or  bigotry,  which  renders  Mr.  .Spurgeon's  utterances  always  acceptable  even 
to  those  who  differ  from  him  most  widely  in  dogma.  .   .   . 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  chosen  to  select,  as  a  proverb,  that  which  appears  to  us  to 
be  more  of  the  nature  of  a  pulpit  platitude,  '  Newspapers  are  the  Bibles  of 
worldlings  ;'  and  to  this  we  have  the  homely  note,  '  How  diligently  they  read  them  ! 
Here  they  find  their  law. and  profits,  their  judges  and  chronicles,  their  epistles  and 
revelations.'  The  newspapers,  however,  must  take  their  chance  of  being  abused, 
even  by  those  who  most  diligently  read  them.  Journalists  are  a  long-suffering  race, 
and  it  curiously  happens  that,  among  old  Howell's  proverbs,  collected  more  than 
two  centuries  since,  we  find  this  one,  '  A  diurnal-maker  is  the  sub-amner  to  a 
historian.'  We  have  no  quarrel,  therefore,  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  on  this  account. 
What  he  says  about  newspapers  has  long  since  been  said  at  the  Antipodes,  where 
the  vast  weekly  budgets  of  the  Sydney  and  Melbourne  journals  are  habitually 
called  'The  Bushman's  Bible,'  constituting,  as  they  do,  the  almost  exclusive  reading 
of  the  shepherds  and  stockriders  far  away  in  the  bush.  Altogether,  The  Salt- 
cellars may  be  welcomed  as  an  equally  entertaining  and  edifying  compilation  ;  and 
the  scheme,  as  well  as  the  actual  accomplishment  of  the  work,  is  alike  creditable  to 


C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTODIOGRAPHY.  313- 

the  heart  and  the  head  of  an  estimable  minister  of  religion  who  has  long  since  won 
the  rank  of  an  English  worthy." 

If  there  had  been  sufficient  space  available,  an  interesting  chapter  might  have 
been  compiled  concerning  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  a  Poet  and  Hymn-writer."  As  that 
is  not  possible,  the  specimens  of  his  poetry  included  in  the  present  and  the  previous 
volumes  of  this  work  will  convey  some  idea  of  his  gifts  in  that  direction  ;  and 
one  more  must  find  a  place  here,  partly  because  of  its  autobiographical  character, 
but  also  because  it  was  the  last  that  he  ever  wrote.  He  put  at  the  top  of  it,  as  the 
motto-text,  "I  will  make  the  dry  land  springs  of  water;"  and  as  the  title,  "The 
Drop  which  Grew  into  a  Torrent.     A  Personal  Experience." 

"  All  my  soul  was  dry  and  dead 
Till  I  learned  that  Jesus  bled  ; — 
Bled  and  suffer'd  in  my  place, 
Bearing  sin  in  matchless  grace. 

"Then  a  drop  of  Heavenly  love 
Fell  upon  me  from  above, 
And  by  secret,  mystic  art 
Reached  the  centre  of  my  heart. 

"Glad  the  story  I  recount, 
How  that  drop  became  a  fount. 
Bubbled  up  a  living  well. 
Made  my  heart  begin  to  swell. 

"  All  within  my  soul  was  praise. 
Praise  increasing  all  my  days ; 
Praise  which  could  not  silent  be : 
Floods  were  struggling  to  be  free. 

"More  and  more  the  waters  grew, 
Open  wide  the  flood-gates  flew, 
Leaping  forth  in  streams  of  song 
Flowed  my  happy  life  along. 

"Lo!  a  river  clear  and  sweet 
Laved  my  glad,  obedient  feet  I 
Soon  it  rose  up  to  my  knees. 
And  I  praised  and  prayed  with  ease. 

"Now  my  soul  in  praises  swims, 
Bathes  in  songs,  and  psalms,  and  hymns; 
Plunges  down  into  the  deeps. 
All  lier  powers  in  worship  steeps. 

"  Hallelujah  !  O  my  Lord, 
Torrents  from  my  soul  are  poured  ! 
I  am  carried  clean  away, 
Praising,  praising  all  the  day. 

"  In  an  ocean  of  delight. 
Praising  God  with  all  my  might, 
Self  is  drowned.     So  let  it  be  : 
Only  Christ  remains  to  me.'' 


314  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

The  hymn  was  written  in  the  early  part  of  the  year  1890,  and  was  inserted 
in  the  programme  used  at  the  next  College  Conference.  Those  who  were  present, 
on  that  occasion,  are  not  likely  to  forget  the  thrilling  effect  produced  when  the  five 
hundred  ministers  and  students  joined  in  singing  it  to  the  tune  "Nottingham."  At 
the  commencement,  all  sat  and  sang  ;  but  as  they  came  to  the  later  verses,  they  . 
spontaneously  rose,  the  time  was  quickened,  and  Mr.  Manton  Smith's  cornet  helped 
to  swell   the   volume   of  praise  expressed  by   the   writer. 

The  next  literary  work  was  one  of  the  smallest  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  many 
volumes,  yet  its  history  and  associations  place  it  among  the  most  notable  of  his 
publications.  At  the  College  Conference,  in  1891,  the  Presidential  Address  struck 
all  who  heard  it  as  being  a  peculiarly  timely  and  weighty  utterance  ;  and  some  who 
listened  to  it,  and  to  the  sermon  which  followed  it,  three  days  later,  afterwards  said 
that  they  had  a  kind  of  premonitory  conviction  that  their  beloved  President  would 
never  again  meet  the  members  and  associates  of  the  Pastors'  College  Evangelical 
Association  in  conference  on  earth  ;  and  so  it  proved  to  be. 

On  the  Monday  evening  of  that  memorable  week,  at  the  public  meeting  in 
Upton  Chapel,  Mr.  Spurgeon  took,  as  the  subject  of  his  address,  Ephesians  vi.  16  : 
"  Above  all,  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all  the 
fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."  This  proved  to  be  the  prelude  and  preparation  for  the 
martial  topic  on  which  he  intended  to  speak  the  next  morning,  and  which  he 
summarized  under  three  heads,  (i)  our  annoury,  the  Word  of  God  ;  {2)  our  army, 
the  Church  of  God  ;  and  (3)  our  strength,  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  was  a  fitting  climax 
to  the  long  series  of  Inaugural  Addresses,  which  were  always  reckoned,  by  those  who 
were  privileged  to  hear  them,  as  the  most  solemn  and  forceful  of  all  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
utterances.  It  was  rapturously  received  by  the  crowded  and  enthusiastic  assembly  ; 
and,  at  its  close,  such  urgent  requests  were  presented  for  its  publication  in  pamphlet 
form,  that  consent  was  at  once  given,  on  condition  that  the  brethren  would  help  to 
make  it  known  when  it  was  issued. 

During  the  week  following  the  Conference,  the  reporter's  transcript  was  revised, 
considerable  additions  being  made  to  the  manuscript,  and  it  was  promptly  published 
under  the  title.  The  Greatest  Fight  in  the  World.  It  immediately  attained  a  very 
wide  circulation  ;  it  was  reprinted  in  the  United  States,  translated  into  French  and 
German,  and  passed  through  several  large  editions.  Then,  after  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
home-going,  a  generous  gentleman,  who  had  been  with  him  on  the  platform  during 
its  delivery,  felt  that  one  of  the  best  ways  of  honouring  his  memory  was  to 
perpetuate  his  testimony,  and  therefore  arranged  that  a  copy  of  it,  bearing  the 
additional  title,  "  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Final  Manifesto,"  should  be  sent,  through  Mrs. 
Spurgeon's   Book   Fund,   to  every  clergynian  and   minister    of  every    denomination 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  315 

in  England.  In  this  way,  34,500  more  copies  were  circulated,  with  abundant 
evidence  that  the  Lord  had  owned  and  blessed  the  effort.  While  the  present 
volume  has  been  in  course  of  compilation,  The  Greatest  Fight  has  been  issued  by 
the  publishers,  in  cloth  covers,  to  make  it  uniform  with  the  Pastor's  other  shilling 
volumes,  so  its  witness  to  the  truth  will  still  be  continued,  though  several  years 
have  elapsed  since  its  soul-stirring  message  was  first  uttered. 

Another  small  volume,  which  has  very  tender  associations  connected  with  it,  is 
Jlleiuories  of  Staiiibounie.  It  was  commenced  before  Mr.  Spurgeon's  long  illness 
in  1 89 1,  and  it  was  completed  during  the  time  of  partial  restoration  which  was 
graciously  granted  to  him  later  in  that  year.  The  little  book  has  a  special  interest 
for  readers  of  this  work,  for  it  was  really  the  first  portion  of  C.  H.  Spargcon  s 
Autobiography,  telling  the  story  of  his  childhood  as  he  wished  it  to  go  forth  to  the 
public,  and  for  that  reason  it  was  largely  used  in  the  compilation  of  Vol.  I.  of  his 
Standard  Lite.  For  several  years,  the  Pastor  visited  Stambourne  and  its  neigh- 
bourhood, partly  because  of  his  early  recollections  of  his  grandfather's  country,  and 
partly  that  he  might  gather  up  all  available  material  concerning  some  of  the 
memorable  scenes  of  his  boyhood.  On  the  last  occasion,  he  took  with  him 
Mr.  T.  H.  Nash,  who  kindly  photographed  a  number  of  views  for  reproduction  in 
the  volume  then  being  written.  It  was  during  that  week  that  the  "  overpowering- 
headache  "  came  on,  of  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  afterwards  wrote,  adding,  "I  had  to 
hurry  home,  to  go  up  to  that  chamber  wherein,  for  three  months,  I  suffered  beyond 
measure,  and  was  often  between  the  jaws  of  death."  In  answer  to  the  almost 
universal  prayer  of  believers  in  all  lands,  he  was  raised  up  for  a  time,  and  had  the 
satisfaction  of  seeing  his  little  book  of  reminiscences  not  only  finished  and  pub- 
lished, but  also  widely  welcomed  and  greatly  enjoyed. 

But  there  was  another  volume,  in  progress  at  the  same  time,  which  was 
destined  to  have  a  still  more  pathetic  interest  attaching  to  it.  That  was  The  Gospel 
of  the  Kingdom  ;  a  Popular  Exposition  of  the  Gospel  according  to  Mattheiu,  con- 
cerning which  Mrs.  Spurgeon  wrote,  after  her  beloved's  promotion  to  glory: — "It 
stands  alone  in  its  sacred  and  sorrowful  significance.  It  is  the  tired  worker's  final 
labour  of  love  for  his  Lord.  It  is  the  last  sweet  song  from  lips  that  were  eA-er 
sounding  forth  the  praises  of  his  King.  It  is  the  dying  shout  of  victory  from  the 
standard-bearer,  who  bore  his  Captain's  colours  unflinchingly  through  the  thickest 
of  the  fight.  .  .  .  Much  of  the  later  portion  of  the  work  was  written  on  the  very 
borderland  of  Heaven,  amid  the  nearing  glories  of  the  unseen  world,  and  almost 
within  sight  of  the  Golden  Gates." 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  intention,  in  preparing  the  volume,  was  to  produce  a  devotional 


,i6 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Commentary,  specially  calling  attention  to  the  Kingship  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
which  is  the  prominent  feature  of  the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew.  He  proceeded 
with  the  work  very  leisurely,  and  a  great  part  of  it  was  written  during  his  winter 
sojourns  on  the  sunny  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  The  accompanying  facsimile'^ 
of  the  first  page  of  his  manuscript  will  show  the  method  he  adopted,  and  he  followed 
the  same  plan  as  long  as  he  was  enabled  to  continue  the  congenial  task. 


'iL^. 


cLjl- 


/.../,■  ^ 


THE  book  of  the  ge- 
neration of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  sou  of  Da- 
vid, the  son  of  Abra- 
ham. 


CL 


2  Abraham  begat  I- 
saac  ;  and  Isaac  begat 
Jacob ;  and  Jacob  be 
gat  Judas  and  his  bre- 
thren ; 


Thamar ;  and  Phares 
begat  Esrom  ;  and  Es- 
rom  begat  Aram  ; 


^ 


3     And   Judas   begat   li''^  OAx^^^  ^^  I  0^^..^^^^  >w-,^  i^  ^    /.;    (uuii  ft  ^  aj2/.  /  ^v^^':^  c  /  ''^^^^ 
Phares    and    Zara     of     U^^^r^  ,    TC^  ^-^  v-^  -.^  ^  .MJ^.^  /  a^^^^f^^  /  j-€i^ ^/^-^  Ju  ^^..^^  X<<-^ 


\ 


4  And  Aram  begat  A- 
minadab ;  and  Amin- 
adab  begat  Naasson ; 
and  Naasson  begat  Sal 
mon  ; 

5  And  Salmon  begat 
Booz  of  Rachab ;  and 
Booz  begat  Obed  of 
Ruth  ;  and  Obed  be 
gat  Jesse ; 

6.  And  Jesse  begat 
David  the  king ;  and 
David  the  king:  begat 
Solomon  of  her  thai 
had  been  the  wife  ov 
Urias ;  t/ 


7L. 


f-  %^^4. /  /   /._^  ^^^^^  / 


1^  -^it.  '■&~  /wS," 


tL^ 


,  iu<^ziy:  L<^  ^  5  "^^/^•-^  u  /  ^^,4^-utx:3  (TLcJ^^      &.~JC^ 


-1,     /  A  vi^yU^C^-^ru, 


L^.'^^^/'  ^^  / 


'^r-u(C  /«-6^L^v   / — >„«,v^*./^~  L^^j-e^    /'^^^     i^'><'^rLcJci~^''~    *-<-<^    o6vT-?   ^Lla.  ^^n^^    rKJ^I'  i.^^ 


FACSIMILE  OF   MR.   SPURGEON's   MANUSCRIPT   OF    "THE   GOSPEL  OF  THE   KINGDOM." 


Towards  the  latter  part  of  1891,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  sufficiently  restored 


*  In  the  manuscript,  Mr.  Spurgeon  made  use  of  the  following  abbreviations : — /  for  the,  t  for  that,  o  for  of,  h  for  have,  w  for 
with,  and  shd  for  should. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiography.  317 

to  be  able  to  travel  to  Mentone,  he  eagerly  resumed  his  delighttul  service  of 
expounding  the  first  Gospel,  and  he  wrote  some  portion  of  it,  day  by  day,  until 
he  was  finally  laid  aside.  To  the  last,  his  handwriting  was  as  clear,  and  distinct. 
and  firm  as  ever,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  the  rapidly  approaching  collapse  which 
was  to  send  such  a  thrill  of  sorrow  through  the  whole  of  Christendom.  Mentally 
and  spiritually,  the  work  was  equal  to  the  best  eftorts  of  his  brightest  years ; 
but  he  was  not  permitted  to  finish  it,  for  he  was  called  up  to  see  the  King  ot  whoni 
he  had  been  writing,  and  to  share  in  the  glories  of  the  Kingdom  of  which  he  had  so 
long  been  preaching  to  others. 

After  due  consideration,  it  was  resolved  that,  instead  of  leaving  his  last  literary 
work  to  stand  like  a  broken  column,  it  should  be  completed  as  nearly  as  possible 
in  the  way  he  would  himself  have  ended  it  had  he  been  spared  long  enough. 
He  had  so  often  expounded  the  closing  chapters  of  Matthew's  Gospel  that  there 
was  abundant  material  for  the  latter  portion  of  his  Commentary  to  be  compiled 
cntirclv  from  his  otvn  spoken  and  writteji  words.  This  delicate  duty  was  entrusted 
to  his  private  secretary.  When  the  volume  was  issued,  it  met  with  a  most  hearty 
reception,  and  it  has  continued  in  great  favour  ever  since.  The  Editor  of  T/ic 
British  Weekly  indirectly  paid  a  high  compliment  to  the  compiler  of  the  later 
chapters  when  he  said  that  there  should  have  been  some  indication  as  to  where 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  manuscript  ended.  Evidently,  "the  worker  in  mosaics'  had  so 
skilfully  joined  together  the  precious  treasures  committed  to  his  charge  that  even 
this  keen  critic  could  not  discover  any  break  in  the  connection. 

Another  literary  work,  upon  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  busily  occupied  when  the 
home-call  came  to  him  at  Mentone,  was  Messages  to  the  Jllu/titude,  the  eighth 
volume  in  "The  Preachers  of  the  Age"  series,  issued  by  Messrs.  Sampson  Low, 
Marston,  and  Co.  It  was  intended  to  set  forth  the  style  of  the  Pastor's  preaching  at 
various  periods  of  his  long  ministry  ;  and,  to  that  end,  the  sermons  selected  ranged 
from  one  delivered  in  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  in  1859,  to  another,  which  was 
almost  the  last  preached  in  the  Tabernacle,  in  1891.  The  revision  of  the  latter  part 
of  this  book  also  fell  to  Mr.  Harralds  share.  Although  ten  out  of  the  twelve 
discourses  contained  in  it  had  been  previously  published,  the  work  has  had  a  large 
sale  ;  and,  quite  recently,  a  popular  edidon  of  it  has  been  produced,  thereby  still 
further  increasing  its  sphere  of  usefulness. 

Many  other  volumes  had  been  either  commenced  or  planned  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  ; 
and  several  of  them  have  already  been  completed.  ,  The  first  of  these  was  The  Art 
of  I /lustration,  forming  the  third  series  of  Lecttires  to  my  Stndents,  and  containing 
exceedingly  valuable  information  concerning  the  use  of  illustrations  in  preaching, 


3i« 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


and  the  books  in  which  anecdotes,  illustrations,  fables,  emblems,  and  parables  are  to 
be  found. 

Next  followed  one  of  the  choicest  volumes  in  the  whole  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
^orks, — "  Till  He  Come."  Coinniunion  Meditations  and  Addresses.  It  consists 
very  largely  of  the  quiet,  homely  talks  of  the  Pastor  to  the  little  companies  of 
Christians  who  gathered  with  him  around  the  table  of  the  Lord  in  his  sitting-room 
at  Mentone  ;  but  it  also  includes  some  of  his  more  public  utterances  when  thousands 
of  believers  met  for  communion  in  the  Tabernacle.  The  value  of  the  ordinance,  and 
the  spiritual  benefit  to  be  derived  from  its  frequent  observance,  are  clearly  set  forth  ; 
and  it  seems  impossible  for  any  lover  of  the  Lord  to  read  the  book  without  being 
brouo-ht  into  still  closer  fellowship  with  the  Saviour,  and  a  deeper  appreciation  of 
the  great  atoning  sacrifice  symbolized  by  the  broken  bread  and  the  filled  cup.  The 
volume  has  proved  invaluable  as  an  aid  to  private  devotion,  and  as  a  guide  to  those 
who  are  called  to  preside  at  the  celebration  of  the  sacred  feast  of  love. 

Another  book,  which  Christian  workers  have  found  to  be  of  great  service  to 
them,  is  The  Soiil-winner ;  or,  Hozv  to  Lead  Sinners  to  the  Savioiir.  Containing 
several  lectures  to  the  students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  addresses  to  Sunday-school 
teachers  and  open-air  preachers,  and  sermons  upon  what  Mr.  Spurgeon  termed 
"  that  most  royal  employment, — soul-winning,'  it  must  greatly  help  those  w^ho 
desire  to  become  wise  in  winning  souls,  while  it  explains  some  of  the  secrets  of  the 
author's  own  power  as  one  of  the  greatest  soul-winners  who  ever  lived. 

These  posthumous  works  specially  deserve  mention  in  the  present  volume,  for 
all  of  them  are  largely  autobiographical,  and,  here  and  there,  extracts  from  them 
have  been  given  in  previous  pages  where  they  appeared  needful  for  the  complete- 
ness of  the  narrative.  All  of  them  have  been  extensively  sold,  and  highly  prized, 
perhaps  all  the  more  because  the  voice  that  uttered  so  much  of  their  contents  is  no 
longer  audible  here  below. 

Beside  the  new  works  published  since  Mr.  Spurgeon's  home-going,  there  have 
been  already  issued  no  less  than  eight  different  sets  of  his  sermons  : — The  Parables 
of  our  Lord ;  The  Miracles  (two  volumes)  ;  "  The  Most  Holy  Place" — (fifty-two 
discourses  on  the  Song  of  Solomon)  ; — The  Messiah,  onr  Lords  Names,  Titles,  and 
Attributes ;  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament ;  The  Everlasting  Gospel;  and  The 
Gospel  for  the  People.  Ten  smaller  volumes  contain  shorter  passages  from  his 
writings,  suitable  for  various  classes  of  readers  : — Teachings  of  Natiire  in  the 
Kingdom  of  Grace,  Words  of  Wisdom,  Words  of  Warning,  and  Words  of  Cheer  for 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  319 

Daily  Life,  Words  of  Counsel  for  Christimt  Workers,  Words  of  Advice  for  Seekers, 
"  ]]'e  Endeavour,''  ''  Come,  ye  Children,''  Gospel  Extracts  from  C  H.  Spnrgeon,  and 
Glorious  Themes  for  Saints  and  Sinners.  The  last-named  book  is  printed  in  very 
large  type  so  as  to  adapt  it  to  old  people  and  little  children.  Although  it  has  been 
only  recently  issued,  it  has  already  found  much  favour,  and  is  likely  to  be 
exceedingly  useful  in  making  known  the  essentials  of  the  faith  in  the  simplest 
and  plainest  language. 

It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  total  number  of  volumes  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
works  that  have  been  issued  in  this  country,  in  the  United  States,  and  in  many  other 
lands  in  which  they  have  been  translated  into  foreign  languages.  Many  millions  of 
copies  must  already  have  been  sold  ;  and,  although  it  is  now  eight  years  since 
he  was  "  called  home,"  there  is,  apparendy,  no  diminution  in  the  demand  for  them. 
Indeed,  the  many  new  works  from  his  lips  and  pen  published  since  his  promotion  to 
higher  service,  the  still  larger  number  of  reprints  or  extracts  from  his  writings,  and 
the  ever-increasing  circulation  of  his  sermons,  make  it  almost  certain  that  his 
publications  are  distributed  even  more  widely  now  than  they  were  during  his  life- 
time on  earth,  while  testimony  to  their  usefulness  is  constanUy  being  received  trom 
all  quarters  of  the  globe.  It  may,  therefore,  be  concluded  that,  great  as  was  his 
influence  in  the  pulpit,  his  power  through  the  press  is  not  a  whit  less  ;  and  there 
seems  to  be  no  valid  reason  why  his  testimony  to  the  truth  should  not  be  continued, 
by  means  of  the  printed  page,  until  the  Lord  Himself  returns. 


CHAPTER     cm. 


€l)t  (groWij  of  tijt  fastitutions,  1878—1892. 

College,  Orphanage,  Colportage  Association,  and  Society  of  Evangelists,  might  any  one  of 
them  be  regarded  as  works  of  Christian  inventiveness,  but  it  would  be  by  far  the  smaller  half  of 
the  truth  to  look  at  them  from  that  point  of  view.  These  enterprises  have  succeeded  each  other, 
by  a  natural  rule  and  order  of  Providence,  as  inevitably  as  the  links  of  a  chain  follow  one  another. 
We  have  heard  kind  friends  speak  of  "genius  for  organization"  and  "great  practical  common  sense" 
as  abiding  in  the  leader  of  these  various  works  for  the  Lord;  but,  indeed,  it  would  be  far  nearer 
the  truth  to  say  that  he  followed  with  implicit,  and  almost  blind,  confidence  what  he  took  to  be 
the  intimations  of  the  Divine  will,  and  hitherto  these  intimations  have  proved  to  be  what  he 
thought  them.  At  the  close  of  twenty-five  years,  we  see  a  vast  machinery  in  vigorous  operation, 
in  better  working  condition  than  ever  it  was  ;  and,  as  to  means  and  funds,  perfectly  equipped, 
although  it  has  no  other  resources  than  the  promise,  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need,  according 
to  His  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  Gratitude  bows  her  head,  and  sings  her  own  song  to  her 
Well-beloved,  to  whom  it  belongs.— C.  H.  S.,  in  Preface  to  "  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel"  volume  for  1878. 

HE  last  fourteen  years  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  earthly  life  proved  to  be  a 
very  prolific  period  both  for  the  Tabernacle  Church  and  the  various 
Institutions  connected  with  it.  Towards  the  close  of  his  address, 
at  the  meeting-  held  in  the  Tabernacle,  on  May  20,  1879,  in 
connection  with  the  celebration  of  his  pastoral  silver  wedding,  he 
said  : — 
"  Let  us  go  forward,  brethren,  let  us  go  forward.  We  have  made  a  very  fair 
beginning,  in  God's  strength,  and  to  Him  be  the  honour  of  it;  but  I  regard  to-nieht 
not  as  the  goal,  but  as  the  starting-place.  We  have  truly  laid  underground 
foundations  of  a  structure  which  now  we  trust  will  rise  into  open  day.  Here  is  one 
point  for  a  new  departure.  Listen  and  consider  it.  A  day  or  two  ago,  the  lady  who 
founded  the  Boys'  Orphanage  sent  me  ^50  for  the  Girls'  Orphanage.  I  wrote  to 
her  somewhat  to  this  effect  : — '  I  am  very  grateful  for  the  proposal ;  but  I  am  not 
very  well,  and  the  times  are  not  very  hopeful,  so  I  had  rather  not  begin  any  new  work 
just  yet.'  I  proposed  to  keep  the  ^50  in  case  we  did  build  an  Orphanage  for  girls  ; 
and  if  not,  to  hand  it  over  to  the  boys.  '  No,'  said  our  friend,  '  you  are  right  in  your 
judgment,  but  take  the  ^50  as  the  first  brick,  for  I  am  fully  assured  that  many  more 
bricks  will  shortly  be  added.'  Now  I  propose  that  ^50  of  the  testimonial  should  be 
placed  with  my  dear  friend's  ^50  that  we  may  found  the  Girls'  Orphanage  together. 
I  do  not  mean  to  press  this  new  enterprise  just  now  ;  but  only  to  moot  it,  and  see 
whereunto  this  thing  will  grow.  Other  eggs  will  come  to  the  nest-egg,  and  the  nest 
will  become  full,  and  then  we  shall  have  another  family  of  little  chicks.  I  feel  as 
though  I  was  laying  the  first  stone  of  the  Girls'  Orphanage,  and  you  were  all  saying, 

w  4 


322  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAril\ . 

'  Go  ahead.'  This  is  a  good  note  for  our  present  page  of  history,- — '  second  twenty- 
five  years  of  pastorate  commenced  by  the  inauguration  of  project  for  Girls' 
Orphanage.'  'What  next?'  says  somebody.  I  cannot  tell  you  what  I  may  suggest 
to  you  next ;  but,  you  see,  I  am  driven  to  this  Girls'  Orphanage.  I  have  this  ^50 
forced  upon  me,  and  I  cannot  get  rid  of  it ;  would  you  have  me  refuse  to  use  this 
money  for  poor  fatherless  girls  ?  No,  your  hearts  would  not  so  counsel  me. 
Thus,  of  my  own  free  will,  compelled  by  constraining  grace,  I  accept  a  further 
charge,  and  look  to  see  prayer  and  faith  open  a  new  chapter  of  marvels." 

One  friend,  who  heard  the  Pastor's  speech,  at  once  gave  him  ^50  for  the 
new  project,  and  other  contributions  speedily  followed.  Shortly  afterwards,. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote: — "At  the  very  time  at  which  we  began  to  move  in  this, 
matter,   it   pleased    God.    in    His    providence,    to    put    within   our   reach    the   house 


'  THE    HAWTHORNS,"   CLAPHAM    ROAD. 


and  grounds  known  as  'The  Hawthorns,'  at  which  we  had  looked  wistfully  for 
a  long  while.  A  few  years  ago,  this  house  was  to  be  sold,  and  the  Trustees 
of  the  Boys'  Orphanage  attempted  to  purchase  it  at  the  auction  ;  but  the  price 
was  run  up  to  several  hundreds  of  pounds  beyond  its  value.  On  June  6,  this 
house    was    again    offered    for    sale,    and    we    bought   it   for   the   exact    sum    which 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  323 

we  had  proposed  to  give  on  the  former  occasion.  There  is  only  one  paddock 
between  its  garden  and  the  Orphanage  grounds  ;  and,  by  the  goodness  of  God,  and 
the  kindness  of  its  owner,  we  hope  that  this  meadow  also  may  one  day  become  ours ; 
we  should  then  be  able  to  make  the  Orphanage  into  a  complete  square  by  erecting 
similar  buildings  to  those  which  are  there  already.  This  must  be  a  work  of  time, 
but  it  is  something  to  have  a  place  whereon  to  put  our  fulcrum,  and  apply  our  lever. 
We  believe  that  the  Lord  has  led  us  forth  by  a  right  way,  that  we  might  go  to  a 
city  of  habitation.  We  have  purchased  the  house  and  grounds  for  the  Girls' 
Orphanage,  but  we  have  only  about  .;^36o  in  hand  with  which  to  pay  for  it  ; 
and  we  are  specially  desirous  that,  when  the  time  shall  come  for  the  absolute 
payment  of  the  entire  sum,  we  may  be  able  to  count  out  the  whole  ^4,000.  That 
time  will  be  here  in  a  few  days,  but  time  is  not  an  object  with  the  Possessor  of 
Heaven  and  earth.  We  have  never  been  in  debt  yet,  nor  have  we  had  a  mortgage 
upon  any  of  our  buildings,  nor  have  we  even  borrowed  money  for  a  time,  but  we 
have  always  been  able  to  pay  as  we  have  gone  on.  Our  prayer  is,  that  we  may 
never  have  to  come  down  to  a  lower  platform,  and  commence  borrowing.  If  this 
land  had  not  been  put  up  to  auction  there  and  then,  we  should  have  waited  until  we 
had  received  the  purchase-price  from  our  great  Master's  stewards  ;  but,  as  the  site 
was  so  extremely  desirable,  and  as  the  purchase  had  to  be  made  at  once  or  not  at 
all,  we  thought  it  wise  to  secure  it.  We  cannot  think  that  we  erred  in  this  decision. 
None  of  our  beloved  counsellors  and  fellow-helpers  think  so,  but  one  and  all  advised 
the  step.  The  money  for  the  payment  must  come  from  «somewhere,  and  the 
questions  now  to  be  answered  are, — Where  is  the  money  ?  Who  has  charge  of  it  at 
present  ?  Who  feels  called  upon  to  send  it  ?  The  silver  and  the  gold  are  the 
Lord's,  and  He  has  but  to  incline  His  servants  to  apportion  some  of  their  Master's 
money  to  this  particular  work,  and  the  thing  will  be  done.  I.f  they  can  do  better 
with  their  substance,  by  all  means  let  them  do  so  ;  but  if  they  count  us  faithful,  we 
are  prepared  to  accept  this  further  trust,  and  do  our  best  with  it. 

"It  has  often  happened  that  we  have  been  unable  to  assist  widows  in 
necessitous  circumstances,  with  large  families,  because  there  did  not  happen  to  be 
a  boy  of  the  special  age  required  by  the  rules  of  our  Boys'  Orphanage.  There  were 
several  girls,  but  then  we  could  not  take  them  ;  and,  however  urgent  the  case, 
we  have  been  unable  to  relieve  very  deserving  mothers,  simply  because  their 
children  were  not  boys.     This  is  one  reason  why  we  need  a  Girls'  Orphanage. 

"  Here  is  a  grand  opportunity  for  Christian  people  with  means  to  take  their 
places  among  the  founders  of  this  new  Institution;  and  if  they  Judge  that  such 
a  work  will  be  good  and  useful,  we  hope  they  will,  without  fail_,  and  tvithout  delay, 
come  to  our  assistance  in  this  fresh  branch  of  service.  We  cannot  afford  to  lose 
a  single  penny  from  the  funds   for  the  boys,  but  this  work  for  the  girls  must  be 


324  C.     ir.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

something  extra  and  above.     You   helped  WiUy   and  Tommy  ;  will   you  not  help 
Mary  and  Maggie  ?  " 

The  scheme  quickly  secured  the  sympathy  of  the  Christian  public  ;  the  money 
for  the  purchase  of  "  The  Hawthorns  "  was  ready  by  the  date  on  which  it  was 
required,  and  the  first  family  of  girls  was  soon  installed  there.  It  was  found  that 
the  trust-deed  of  the  Orphanage  provided  for  the  reception  of  fatherless  children, 
without  specifying  either  sex,  so  no  alteration  was  needed  in  it ;  and  arrangements 
for  the  completion  of  the  Institution  were  made  in  due  time.  The  Pastor  and  his 
publishers  and  the  Trustees  nobly  led  the  way  with  generous  gifts,  many  thousands 
of  donors  followed  their  example,  and  thus,  block  by  block,  the  Orphanage  gradually 
attained  the  appearance  depicted  in  the  bird's-eye  view  on  page  320. 

It  is  not  possible  to  tell  all  the  blessing  that  the  Orphanage  has  already  been 

to   hundreds   of  bereaved  families  ;    and  its  beneficent  infiuence  is  still   continued. 

Up  to  the  time  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  home-going,   nearly  sixteen  hundred  boys  and 

girls  had  been  sheltered  within  its  walls.     They  have  often  expressed  their  gratitude 

for  all  that  has  been  done  for  them   in  the   Institution  ;   and  many  of  them  have, 

at  various   times,  given   practical   proofs   of  their  interest  in   the  happy  home  into 

which  they  were  received  in  the  hour  of  their  helpless  orphanhood.      One  instance 

of  this  is  described  in  the  following  letter,  the  receipt  of  which  gave  great  joy  to 

the  President : —    ' 

"  Stockwell  Orphanage, 

"  Clapham  Road, 

"  London,  S.W., 

"Feb.  14th,  1888. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  In  closing  the  list,  to-day,  for  March  SivoJ'd  and  Troivcl,  you  will,  1 
am  sure,  be  pleased  to  know  that  it  contains  donations  trom  'some  of  the  old  boys' 
(about  forty),  to  the  amount  of  /17  .  17.0.  Every  one,  in  forwarding  his  sub- 
scription, wishes  it  were  ten  times  or  a  hundred  times  as  much  ;  and  it  is 
accompanied  with  every  expression  of  gratitude  for  the  benefits  received  at  the 
Stockwell  Orphanage,  and  of  warmest  love  to  yourself,— the  earthly  father  to  this 
large  orphan  family  ;  and  they  all  pray  that  our  Heavenly  Father  may  spare  you,, 
for  many,  many  years,  to  lead  and  direct  this,  blessed  work  of  caring  for  the  widow 

and  the  fatherless. 

"  I  am, 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Ever  yours  sincerely, 

"  F.  G.   Ladds." 


C.     H.     sturgeon's     AUTOBIOGRArHV.  ,125 

A  letter  from  one  of  the  girls,  after  she  had  left  the  Orphanage,  will  show  that 
there  was  equal  gratitude  on  that  side  of  the  Institution  : — 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"You  must  excuse  the  liberty  I  am  taking  in  writing  to  you;  but  you 
will  not  mind  when  you  know  the  reason.  1  must,  first  of  all,  tell  you  that  I  am  one 
of  your  old  orphan  girls;  but  the  Lord  having  found  me,  and  made  me  His  child, 
before  I  left  the  Orphanage,  I  knew  it  would  cheer  your  heart  if  I  wrote  and  told 
you.  I  thought,  when  my  father  died,  I  could  never  have  another  to  equal  him  ;  but 
when  I  came  to  your  Orphanage,  I  discovered  my  mistake,  for  I  found  a  better  and 
truer  Father,  who  will  never  leave  me  nor  forsake  me,  and  to  whom  I  can  take  my 
every  trouble,  however  small  it  may  be.  It  seems  almost  too  good  to  be  true  that 
Jesus  was  really  crucified  to  save  me.  When  I  think  of  all  the  years  I  grieved  and 
pained  Him,  it  only  makes  me  want  to  try  and  please  Him  ever  so  much  more  for 
the  future. 

"  I  must  tell  you  that  I  was  in  the  Orphanage  seven  and  a-half  years,  and 
was  very  happy  indeed,  and  wish  myself  back  again.  Now  I  think  I  must  close, 
thanking  you  for  your  kindness  in  giving  us  such  a  beautiful  home  to  live  in.  It 
will  always  be  something  to  look  back  on  with  pleasure  for  the  rest  of  our  lives,  and 
for  which  we  can  never  thank  you  enough.  I  myself  hope  shortly  to  come  forward, 
and,  by  baptism,  publicly  let  the  world  know  that  I  have  accepted  Jesus  as  my 
Saviour;  or,  rather,  I  should  say,  that  He  lias  accepted  me  as  His  child. 

"  I  remain, 

"  One  of  your  old  orphan  girts, 


On  a  memorable  afternoon,  in  the  autumn  of  1890,  Mr.  Spurgeon  paid  a  visit 
to  the  Orphanage  under  circumstances  which  are  not  likely  to  be  forgotten  by  any 
who  were  then  present.  Almost  immediately  afterwards,  he  wrote  the  following 
account  of  the  "  happy  scene  in  a  storm,"  which  may  fitly  conclude  the  references  to 
the  Orphanage  in  his  Standard  Life,  for  it  shows  how,  right  to  the  last,  he  sought 
the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  children,  which  had  been  the  principal  aim  both  of 
Mrs.  Hillyard  and  himself  in  founding  the  Institution  : — 

"  I  went  to  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,  on  Tuesday,  September  23,  to  walk 
round  with  an  artist,  and  select  bits  for  his  pencil,  to  be  inserted  in  a  Christmas 
book  for  the  Institution.  We  had  not  gone  many  yards  before  it  began  to  rain. 
Umbrellas  were  forthcoming,  and  we  tried  to  continue  our  perambulation  of  the 
whole  square  of  the  boys'  and  girls'  houses  ;  but  the  rain  persisted  in  descending, 
and  speedily  increased  into  a  downpour.      Nothing  short  of  being  amphibious  would 


326 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


have  enabled  us  to  face  the  torrent.      There  was  no  other  course  but  to  turn  into  the 
play-hall,  where  the  boys  gave  tremendous  cheers  at  our  advent, — cheers  almost  as 


THE   boys'   play-hall,    STOCKWELL   ORPHANAGE. 

deafening  as  the  thunder  which  responded  to  them.  Go  out  we  could  not,  for  the 
shower  was  swollen  into  a  deluge,  so  I  resolved  to  turn  the  season  to  account.  A 
chair  was  forthcoming,  and  there  I  sat,  the  centre  of  a  dense  throng  of  juvenile 
humanity,  which  could  scarcely  be  kept  off  from  a  nearness  which  showed  the 
warmth  of  their  reception  of  their  friend.  Our  artist,  who,  standing  in  the  throng, 
made  a  hurried  sketch,  could  not  be  afforded  space  enough  to  put  in  the  hundreds 
of  boys. 

"  It  was  certainly  a  melting  moment  as  to  heat,  and  fresh  air  was  not  abundant ; 
but  anything  was  better  than  the  storm  outside.  Flash  after  flash  made  everybody 
feel  sober,  and  prompted  me  to  talk  with  the  boys  about  that  freedom  from  fear 
which  comes  through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  story  was  told  of  a  very  young 
believer,''*  who  was  in  his  uncle's  house,  one  night,  during  a  tremendous  tempest. 
The  older  folk  were  all  afraid  ;  but  he  had  really  trusted  himself  with  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  he  did  not  dare  to  fear.     The  baby  was  upstairs,  and  nobody  was  brave 

*"  This  was,  of  course ,  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  when  he  was  a  lad. 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


;27 


enough  to  fetch  it  down  because  of  a  big  window  on  the  stairs.  This  lad  went  up  to 
the  bedroom,  brought  the  baby  to  its  mother,  and  then  read  a  Psalm,  and  prayed 
with  his  relatives,  who  were  trembling  with  fear.  There  was  real  danger,  for  a  stack 
was  set  on  fire  a  short  distance  away  ;  but  the  youth  was  as  calm  as  on  a  summer's 
day  of  sunshine  not  because  he  was  naturally  brave,  but  because  he  truly  trusted  in 
the  Lord. 


1,1 


- 

1 ;- 

C.    H.    SPURGEON    AND   A   GROUP   OF    ORPHAN    BOYS. 


"While  I  was  thus  speaking,  the  darkness  increased,  and  the  storm  overhead 
seemed  brooding  over  us  with  black  wings.  It  was  growing  dark  before  its  hour. 
Most  appropriately,  one  of  the  boys  suggested  a  verse,  which  all  sang  sweetly  and 
reverently, — 

"  '  Abide  with  me  !  fast  falls  the  eventide  ; 

The  darkness  deepens  ;  Lord,  with  me  abide  ! 

When  other  helpers  fail,  and  comforts  fie 

Help  of  the  helpless,  O  abide  with  me  ! '       .... 

"  This  ended,  there  followed  a  word  about  the  ground  of  the  believer's  trust  : 
he  was  forgiven,  and  therefore  dreaded  no  condemnation  ;  he  was  in  his  Heavenly 
Father's  hand,  and  therefore  feared  no  evil.  If  we  were  at  enmity  against  God,  and 
had  all  our  sins  resting  upon  our  guilty  heads,  we  might  be  afraid  to  die  ;  yes,  and 
even  afraid  to  live;  but,  when  reconciled  to  Him  bv  the  death  of  His  Son,  we  said 


328  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

farewell  to  fear.  With  God  against  us,  we  are  iii  a  state  of  war  ;  but  with  God  for 
us,  we  dwell  in  perfect  peace.  Here  came  flashes  of  lightning  and  peals  of  thunder 
which  might  well  make  us  start  ;  but  no  one  was  afraid.  It  is  true  we  all  felt  awed, 
but  we  were  restful,  and  somehow  there  was  a  quiet  but  general  cry  for  'perfect 
peace.'  On  enquiring  what  this  meant,  I  was  answered  by  all  the  bovs  singino- 
right  joyfully, — 

"  '  Like  a  river  glorious  is  God's  perfect  peace, 
Over  all  victorious  in  its  bright  increase, 
Perfect,  yet  it  floweth  fuller  every  day  ; 
Perfect,  yet  it  groweth  deeper  all  the  way. 

Stayed  upon  Jehovah,  hearts  are  fully  blest, 
Finding,  as  He  promised,  perfect  peace  and  rest. 

"  '  Hidden  in  the  hollow  of  His  blessed  hand. 
Never  foe  can  follow,  never  traitor  stand  ; 
»  Not  a  surge  of  worry,  not  a  shade  of  care. 

Not  a  blast  of  hurry  touch  the  spirit  there. 

Stayed  upon  Jehovah,  hearts  are  fully  blest. 
Finding,  as  He  promised,  perfect  peace  and  rest. 

"  This  sung,  we  covered  our  faces  reverently,  and  the  boys  were  very  silent, 
while  I  lifted  up  my  voice  in  prayer.  Then  we  opened  our  eyes  again,  and  it  was 
very  dark,  as  if  night  had  come  before  its  time.  While  the  flames  of  fire  leaped  in 
through  the  windows  and  skylights,  the  noise  of  the  rain  upon  the  roof  and  the 
tremendous  thunder  scarcely  permitted  me  to  say  much  upon  Jesus  as  being  our 
peace,  through  His  bearing  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  Yet,  as  well  as 
I  could,  I  set  forth  the  cross  of  Christ  as  the  place  of  peace-making,  peace-speaking, 
and  peace-finding,  both  for  boys  and  men  ;  and  then  we  all  sang,  to  the  accom.pani- 
ment  of  the  storm-music, — 

" '  How  sweet  the  Name  of  Jesus  sounds 
In  a  believer's  ear! 
It  soothes  his  sorrows,  heals  his  wounds, 
And  drives  away  his  fear.' 

"  Never  did  the  power  of  that  Name  to  drive  away  fear  appear  more  sweetly. 
'J'o  me,  the  words  came  with  a  soothino-  cheerino-  force,  which  filled  me  with 
intense  delight ;  so  we  very  joyfully  and  peacefully  sang  the  third  verse, — 

" '  Dear  Name !   the  rock  on  which  I  build. 
My  shield  and  hiding-place ; 
My  never-failing  treasury,  fill'd 
With  boundless  stores  of  grace.' 

"Just  as  we  came  to  'my  Shield  and  hiding-place,'  there  was  a  peculiarly  blue 
flash,  with  a  sort  of  rifle-crack,  as  if  something  very  close  to  us  had  been  struck. 
The  boys  looked  at  one  another,  but  went  on,  in  subdued  tones,  singing  ot  the 
'boundless  stores  of  orrace.'  Teachers  and  others  were  mixed  with  the  little  army 
of  boys,  but  we  were  all  welded  together  in  common  emotion.  I  then  reminded 
them   that,    to  such  a   Protector,   we  must   give   our   heart's   love.       It  was  a  duty 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPIIV.  329 

to  love  one  so  good  as  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  even  more  a  delicdit  to  do  so,  since 
He  gave  Himself  for  us,  and,  by  bearing  our  punishment,  delivered  us  from  all 
harm.      As  if  by  instinct,   someone  led  off — 

"  '  My  Jesus,  I  love  Thee,  I  know  Thou  art  mine 
For  Thee  all  the  follies  of  sin  I  resign  ; 
My  gracious  Redeemer,  my  Saviour  art  Thou, 
If  ever  1  loved  Thee,  my  Jesus,  'tis  now.' 

"  Here  "was  a  good  opening  to  press  home  the  question, — 'Is  this  true  of  each  one 
of  you  ?  The  great  desire  of  all  who  conduct  the  Orphanage  is  to  lead  you  t<3 
take  Jesus  for  your  gracious  Redeemer,  that  so  you  may  love  Him.  Oh,  that 
you  loved  Him  nozu  /  It  may  be  that,  if  you  leave  us  unsaved,  the  Lord  will 
yet  bring  you  in  ;  but  it  would  be  far  better  that  you  should  go  out  from  us 
ready  for  the  battle  of  life,  and  covered  with  a  holy  armour,  so  that  you  might 
not  be  wounded  by  the  arrows  of  sin.'  Then  I  picked  out  Mr.  May,  who  is 
employed  at  the  Orphanage,  and  bade  him  tell  the  boys  about  himself.  May 
was  a  boy  with  us  at  the  Orphanage, — a  restless  spirit,  so  he  went  to  sea  ;  and, 
after  many  hardships  and  adventures,  he  was  converted  to  God  at  Malta,  and  then 
came  back  to  us,  and  we  found  him  a  post  at  his  own  school.  As  the  lads  knew 
the  most  of  his  story.  May  did  not  say  very  much  ;  and  what  he  did  say  was 
rather  overborne  by  the  rain  on  the  roof,  which  sounded  like  ten  thousand  drums. 
The  thunder  added  its  trumpet  voice,  and  only  allowed  us  pauses  of  silence.  I 
went  on  with  the  talk  till  there  came  a  burst  of  thunder  loud  and  long.  I  stopped, 
and  bade  the  children  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord.  We  all  hearkened  to  it  with 
awe  and  wonder.  Then  I  reminded  them  of  Psalm  .xxix  :  '  The  voice  of  the  Lord 
is  powerful  ;  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  full  of  majesty.  The  voice  of  the  Lord 
breaketh  the  cedars  ;  yea,  the  Lord  breaketh  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  The  Lord 
sitteth  upon  the  flood  ;  yea,  the  Lord  sitteth  King  for  ever.'  I  told  them  how  often 
1   had  sung  to  myself  Dr.  Watts's  verses, — 

"'The  God  that  rules  on  high, 

And  thunders  when  He  please, 
That  rides  upon  the  stormy  sky, 
And  manages  the  seas  ; 

"  '  This  awful  God  is  ours. 

Our  Father  and  our  love  ; 
lie  shall  send  down  His  heavenly  powers 
To  carry  us  above. 

"'There    shall  we  see  His  face, 
And  never,  never  sin  ; 
There  from  the  rivers  of  His  grace, 
Drink  endless  pleasures  in.' 

"As  they  did  not  know  the  old-fashioned  tune  '  Falcon  Street,'  to  which  I  had  been 


33*^  c.    H.    spuhgeon's   autobiography.  ' 

wont  to  sing  the  words,  we  kept  quiet  till,  suddenly,  there  came  another  roll  of 
drums  in  the  march  of  the  God  of  armies  ;  and  then,  as  an  act  of  worship,  we 
adoringly  sang  together,  with  full  force,  the  words  of  the  Doxology, — 

"  '  Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow, 
Praise  Him  all  creatures  here  below, 
Praise  Him  above,  ye  heavenly  host. 
Praise  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.' 

"  This  was  a  grand  climax.  The  heavens  themselves  seemed  to  think  so,  for  there 
were  no  more  thunder-claps  of  such  tremendous  force.  I  need  not  write  more. 
The  storm  abated.  I  hurried  off  to  see  enquirers  at  the  Tabernacle,  but  not  till 
one  and  another  had  said  to  me,  'The  boys  will  never  forget  this.  It  will  abide 
with  them  throughout  eternity.'     So  be  it,  for  Christ's  sake  !     Amen." 


Like  the  Orphanage,  the  Pastors'  College  made  great  advances  during  the 
fourteen  years  from  1878  to  1892.  Up  to  the  time  of  the  President's  home-going, 
nearly  nine  hundred  brethren  had  been  educated  in  the  Institution,  of  whom  a  large 
number  had  gone  to  the  foreign  mission  field  or  to  other  distant  spheres  of  service. 
The  statistical  account  for  the  year  189 1-2  showed  that,  in  the  churches  under  the 
charge  of  the  ministers  -who  furnished  the  figures  for  that  Annual  Report, — and  it 
was  never  possible  to  get  returns  from  anything  like  all  of  them, — nearly  100,000 
persons  had  been  baptized  -since  the  year  1865,  when  the  statistics  were  first 
collected  ;  and,  after  making  all  deductions,  there  had  been  a  clear  increase  of 
80,000  members.  Truly,  if  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  done  nothing  beyond  founding  and 
carrying  on  the  Pastors'  College,  it  would  have  been  a  noble  life-work  ;  yet  that  was 
only  one  of  his  many  forms  of  labour  for  the  Lord. 

The  four  tutors,  whose  portraits  appear  on  the  opposite  page,  were  in  charge 
of  the  College  classes  during  the  greater  part  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  presidency. 
"  Father  Rogers,"  who  was  spared  to  see  his  first  student  succeeded  by  more 
than  eight  hundred  others,  continued  to  hold  the  office  of  Principal  until  1881, 
and  he  afterwards  rendered  occasional  help  at  the  College  until  18S4,  when  he 
finally  retired.  Then,  after  spending  seven  restful  years  in  his  peaceful  home 
at  South  Norwood,  at  the  ripe  age  of  ninety-two,  he  entered  the  glory-land  only 
about  four  months  before  the  Pastor  and  President  with  whom  he  had  been  so 
long  and  so  happily  associated  in  the  important  work  of  training  men  for  the 
Christian  ministry.  Professor  Gracey  was  appointed  Principal  in  1881,  and  he 
faithfully  discharged  the  duties  of  that  responsible  posidon  until  he  also  was 
"called  home"  just  a  year  after  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Professor  Fergusson  remained 
at    his    post    until   the    end   of    1891,   when   increasing    infirmities    necessitated    hi;^ 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 


332 


o 

o 


H 


7i^2  C.      H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPIl V. 

retirement  ;  and  he  is  now  (in  1899,)  the  sole  survivor  of  the  early  tutorial  staff  of 
the  College.  Professor  Marchant,  who  had  himself  been  a  Pastors'  College  student, 
became  one  of  the  tutors  in  1881  ;  he  continued  in  that  post  until  1898,  and  only 
a  few  months  more  elapsed  before  he  also  received  the  home-call,  just  a  week 
or  two  after  the  sudden  summons  reached  Pastor  J.  A.  Spurgeon,  the  former 
Vice-President,  and  afterwards  the  President  of  the  Institution. 

One  of  the  most  important  events  in  the  latejr  history  of  the  College  was 
the  formation,  in  1888,  of  the  Pastors'  College  Evangelical  Association.  This 
was  one  of  the  direct  results  of  the  "Down-grade"  Controversy.  When  Mr. 
Spurgeon  found  how  many  of  his  own  former  students  had  accepted  various  forms 
of  modern-thought  teaching,  he  felt  compelled  to  withdraw  from  further  fellowship 
with  them  in  the  annual  Conferences,  at  which  they  were  practically  his  guests 
for  the  week.  The  only  method  of  attaining  that  end,  so  far  as  he  could  see,  was 
to  reorganize  the  Association,  and  to  define  more  clearly  the  doctrinal  basis,  which 
had  been  in  existence  from  its  commencement,  although  there  had  been  no  need 
to  call  attention  to  it  while  all  had  been  heartily  united  in  the  "  one  faith  "  as  well 
as  the  "one  Lord"  and  the  "one  baptism."  It  was  a  great  grief  to  the  President 
that  some  brethren,  who  were  firmly  attached  to  Evangelical  doctrine,  remained 
outside  the  new  fraternal  band  ;  but  the  gap  in  the  ranks,  which  was  caused  by 
their  absence,  was  quickly  filled  by  an  equal  number  of  ministers,  who,  though 
not  trained  in  the  Pastors'  College,  were  in  heart  and  soul  one  with  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
especially  in  his  great  protest  against  error  and  worldliness  in  the  Church.  A 
special  clause  was  inserted  in  the  constitution  of  the  reorganized  fraternity  by  which 
they  were  admitted,  as  associates,  to  share  the  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  members. 
Two  of  these  brethren— Pastors  Hugh  D.  Brown  and  R.  Shindler — are  in  the  group 
reproduced  on  the  opposite  page  from  a  photograph,  taken  at  the  Orphanage, 
on  the  Tuesday  afternoon  of  the  Conference  week  in  1888.  The  artist  desired 
to  secure  a  portrait  of  the  beloved  leader  who  had,  that  morning,  been  unanimously 
and  enthusiastically  elected  "Perpetual  President  of  the  Pastors'  College  Evangelical 
Association,"  although  he  always  insisted  upon  the  observance  of  what  all  regarded, 
in  his  case,  as  the  pure  formality  of  an  annual  election,  for  he  foresaw  that  a  time 
might  come  when  that  right  would  have  to  be  exercised  in  real  earnest, — and 
all  too  soon  it  happened  as  he  had  prophesied  He  was  in  one  of  his  happiest 
moods,  that  afternoon,  and  he  called  to  him  seven  brethren  who  were  near  him 
at  the  time,  and  then  told  the  photographer  to  take  them  all.  This  he  did,  with  the 
most  satisfactory  result,  as  the  illustration  clearly  shows. 

The    chapter    on    "Jubilee    Joys"    contains    a    reference    to    Mr.    Spurgeon's 


C.      II.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

C.    E.    SAWDAY.  R.    SHINDLER.  HUGH    D.    BROWN. 


FRANK    H.    WHITE.  W.    J.    MAYERS.  T.   W.    MEDHURST. 

C.   H.   Spurgeon  and  Ministers  at  College  Conference,   iS88. 


334  '    C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPIIV. 

objections  to  an  endowment  for  his  College  ;  but  he  was,  in  a  very  singular  way. 
and  quite  unintentionally,  the  means  of  providing  a  large  portion  of  the  funds 
for  its  maintenance  for  several  years  after  he  had  been  "  called  home."  The 
story  greatly  amused  him  when  he  heard  it  related  ;  it  was  to  this  effect.  The 
conductor  of  an  omnibus,  while  waiting  on  the  City  side  of  London  Bridge, 
endeavoured  to  attract  passengers  by  shouting"  out,  "  Over  the  water  to  Charlie  !  " 
A  gentleman  enquired  what  he  meant  by  this  unusual  cry,  and  he  explained  that 
the  'bus  was  going  over  the  Thames,  and  past  the  Tabernacle,  where  C.  H.  Spurgeon 
was  announced  to  preach.  It  happened  that  the  stranger  had  never  heard  the 
Pastor ;  indeed,  as  the  tale  is  told,  it  appears  that  he  was  not  in  the  habit  of 
attending  any  place  of  worship  ;  but  he  went  on  that  occasion,  and  for  the  rest 
of  his  life  he  was  a  diligent  reader  of  the  printed  sermons,  and  when  he  made 
his  will,  he  bequeathed  a  very  large  sum  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  the  Pastors'  College 
and  for  building  chapels  for  the  ministry  of  brethren  trained  in  that  Institution. 
The  Law  of  Mortmain  prevented  the  carrying  out  of  the  latter  part  of  his  bequest, 
and  a  long  Chancery  suit  reduced  the  residue  which  he  intended  for  the  College  ; 
but  several  thousands  of  pounds  were  received  from  his  estate  by  the  Trustees, 
who  were  thus  enabled  to  continue  the  President's  important  work  of  preparing 
preachers  of  the  Word  for  home  and  foreign  service. 

An  important  outgrowth  from  "  Mr.  Spurgeon's  First  Institution "  was  the 
Pastors'  College  Society  of  Evangelists.  The  students,  from  the  very  beginning, 
had  been  noted  both  for  the  Evangelical  doctrines  which  they  held  in  common 
with  their  beloved  President,  and  for  the  evangelistic  fervour  with  which  they 
proclaimed  those  truths.  Many  of  them  possessed  the  qualifications  for  the  offices 
of  pastor  and  evangelist  to  a  very  remarkable  degree,  and  contemporary  records 
abundantly  prove  how  greatly  the  Church  of 'Christ  in  general,  and  the  Baptist 
denomination  in  particular,  have  been  strengthened  and  increased  through  the 
labours  of  "our  own  men"  in  London,  throughout  the  British  Islands,  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  in  the  United  States,  in  most  if  not  all  of  our  numerous 
Colonies,  and  in  the  great  mission  field  at  large. 

Still,  Mr.  Spurgeon  long  felt  the  need  of  a  number  of  brethren,  specially  called 
and  fitted  to  ''do  the  work  of  an  evangelist ;  "  and  it  was  a  great  joy  to  him  as,  one 
alter  another,  suitable  men  came  forward,  and  offered  themselves  for  the  service  on 
which  his  heart  had  been  set.  Mr.  W.  Higgins,  now  pastor  at  VVymondham, 
Norfolk,  was  the  pioneer  of  this  new  movement ;  to  which  a  great  impetus  was 
given  by  the  appointment  of  Messrs.  A.  J.  Clarke  and  J.  Manton  Smith.  Then, 
when  the  temporary  failure  of  Mr.  Clarke's  health  made  it  advisable  for  him  to 
accept   an    invitation   to   Australia,    Mr.    VV.    Y.    Fullerton    took    his    place,    and   so 


C.      II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPIIV.  335 

commenced  that  happy  partnership  in  labour  for  the  Lord  which  has  made  the 
names  of  "  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  evangehsts,  Fullerton  and  Smith,"  famihar  as  household 
words  in  tens  of  thousands  of  homes  in  various  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom. 
Other  College  brethren,  who  have  been  more  or  less  closely  connected  with  the 
Society  of  Evangelists,  are  Messrs.  J.  Burnham,  E.  A.  Carter,  A.  A.  Harmer, 
J.  S.  Harrison,  J.  T.  Mateer,  and  F.  Russell.  The  "little  band  of  brothers" 
entirely  set  apart  for  evangelistic  work  has  been  decreased  by  Messrs.  Fullerton, 
Harmer,  and  Russell's  acceptance  of  pastorates  ;  but  some  compensation  for  their 
loss  has  resulted  from  Mr.  Carter's  generous  aid  and  self-sacrificing  devotion  to  the 
Pioneer  Mission,  by  which  the  number  of  earnest  evangelists,  seeking  to  serve  the 
Saviour,  has  been  largely  augmented.  It  should  also  be  mentioned  that,  long  before 
the  College  Society  of  Evangelists  was  organized,  there  had  existed  two  large 
and  useful  companies  of  so-called  "lay"  brethren, — the  Tabernacle  Evangelists' 
Association  and  Country  Mission, — under  the  leadership  of  devoted  elders  of  the 
Tabernacle  Church.  Many  of  the  students  first  began  to  speak  for  the  Lord  in 
connection  with  one  or  other  of  these  useful  agencies  ;  and,  during  their  College 
career,  they  continued,  by  this  means,  helping  in  the  evangelization  of  the 
metropolis,  and  its  suburbs,  and  the  towns  and  villages  in  the  adjacent  counties. 
The  total  result  of  these  many  forms  of  Christian  service,  only  eternity  can  reveal  ; 
but  it  is  already  known  that,  through  their  instrumentality,  multitudes  of  sinners 
have  been  led  to  repentance  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  many  new 
churches  have  been  formed,  which  are  now  self-supporting,  and,  in  their  turn, 
are  centres  of  evangelistic  effort  in  "  the  regions  beyond."  To  God  be  all 
the  glory. 

One  other  useful  branch  of  the  College  work,  in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  greatly 
rejoiced,  was  the  Pastors'  College  Missionary  Association.  Without  any  kind  of 
antagonism  to  existing  organizations,  when  sufficient  sums  were  placed  at  his 
disposal,  he  guaranteed  the  necessary  amount  for  the  support  of  Mr.  Patrick  and 
Dr.  Churcher  in  North  Africa  ;  and,  through  the  same  agency,  contributed  toward 
the  maintenance  of  Messrs.  Blamire  and  Wigstone  in  Spain.  He  hoped  that  the 
way  might  have  been  opened  for  sending  out  large  numbers  of  missionaries  to 
various  lands  that  are  still  destitute  of  gospel  light ;  but,  as  the  means  for  carrying 
out  this  purpose  did  not  reach  him,  he  was  glad  that  so  many  of  his  students  were 
enabled  to  go,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  the  American 
Baptist  Missionary  Union,  or  the  China  Inland  Mission,  to  the  different  portions 
of  the  foreign  field  to  which  they  believed  themselves  to  be  called  of  God.  They 
also  have  done  and  are  doing  a  work  which  "the  day  shall  declare." 


2,^6  C.     H.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Not  much  need  be  added  to  the  account  of  the  Colportage  Association  given 
in  the  previous  volume.  In  the  last  year  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  life,  96  colporteurs 
were  employed, — a  larger  number  than  in  any  previous  part  of  the  history  of  the 
work;  and  their  sales  amounted  to  ^11,255  os.  6d., — a  higher  total  than  they  had 
ever  before  reached.  During  1891,  they  had  sold  nearly  20,000  Bibles  and 
Testaments,  and  more -than  a  quarter  of  a  million  of  Scripture  texts  and  cards. 
The  total  of  their  sales,  from  the  commencement  of  the  Association  to  the  close 
of  1 89 1,  was  ^153,784  3s.  6d.  ;  and,  during  that  quarter  of  a  century,  they  had 
recorded  11,822,637  visits  to  families.  It  is  impossible  to  tabulate  the  blessing 
that  these  earnest  Christian  workers  have  taken  into  the  homes  of  the  people, 
or  that  they  have  been  the  means  of  conveying  by  the  services,  Sunday-schools, 
missions,  and  temperance  meetings  which  they  are  continually  conducting ;  for, 
happily,  this  work  is  still  being  carried  on,  though  with  a  smaller  number  of  agents, 
and  with  even  greater  anxieties  as  to  finances  than  Mr.  Spurgeon  experienced.  It 
was  always  a  marvel  to  him  that  the  Lord's  stewards  did  not  more  quickly  realize 
the  value  of  the  colporteurs'  labours,  and  more  generously  aid  this  Protestant, 
Evangelical,    Home   Mission  service. 


During  the  period  that  these  various  Institutions  were  growing  and  flourishing, 
the  Tabernacle  Church,  the  foster-mother  of  them  all,  was  prospering  beyond  all 
precedent.  At  the  time  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  home-call,  the  number  of  members  on 
the  church-roll  was  5,311;  and,  during  his  long  pastorate,  no  less  than  14,691 
persons  were  received  into  fellowship.  At  the  end  of  1891,  there  were  22  mission 
stations,  and  27  Sunday  and  Ragged  Schools,  with  612  teachers,  8,034  scholars, 
and  accommodation  for  3,840  worshippers  in  the  various  halls  used  for  public 
services.  Comparing  this  great  host  with  the  little  company  of  anxious  but  praying 
people  to  whom  "the  boy-preacher"  delivered  his  first  discourse,  in  New  Park 
Street  Chapel,  on  that  historic  morning,  in  De-cember,  1853,  one  can  only  say,  as 
he  said,  times  without  number,  when  speaking  of  the  blessing  which  the  Lord  had 
graciously  vouchsafed  to  his  ministry, — 

"What  hath  God  wrought!" 


CHAPTER    CIV 


fHB  last  letters  from  iHetttoite, 


By    Mrs.    C.    H.    Spurge 


EON. 


^,U.^p  VT 


-^-f-Cr^  <^-c     /-<■  ^:. 


;/    .,    i.~e^y  J^-^   — 


i^-t^^C^ 


/■t/e«,.A>»-      a  oa^    -ii  Oa 


■j^,^^  ->v^^  ^<:^c^  ^  ^•_:<ryk.^^  ^j-^^^ 

^^^  /;C_   o..^   .     ^c..___^         .   ■^  V — 

_^>y  cr-^-^j!^      ^-'-i_X>^  U       T^-v^ 


«-'  "  '•-'-^    ^C:!^     e_-^,^J     'QJC' 

^  .....^   -^^    ^yU  f) 


FACSIMILES    OF    POST   CARDS    FROM    ME.N'TONE. 

'HE  love-letters  of  twenty  blessed  years  have  been  reluctantly  lifted 
from  their  hiding-place,  and  re-read  with  unspeakable  love  and 
sorrow.  They  are  full  of  brightness,  and  the  fragrance  of  a  deep 
and  abiding  affection  ;  and  filled  with  e\'ery  detail  concerning-  my 
beloved  and  his  doings  which  could  be  precious  to  the  heart  of  a 
loving  wife.  But,  alas  !  each  year,  some  part  of  the  holiday  time  at 
Mentone  was  overshadowed  by  what  appeared  to  be  an  inevitable  illness,  when  the 

X4 


338  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

dear  preacher  was  laid  aside,  and  days  and  nights  of  wearisome  pain  were  appointed 
to  him.  He  had  always  worked  up  to  the  latest  moment,  and  to  the  utmost  point  of 
endurance,  so  it  was  not  surprising  that,  when  the  tension  was  relaxed,  nature 
revenged  herself  upon  the  weary  body  by  setting  every  nerve  on  fire,  and  loading 
every  vein  with  gout-poison,  to  act  as  fuel  to  the  consuming  flame.  "  I  ieel  as  it  I 
were  emerging  from  a  volcano,"  he  wrote,  at  the  beginning  of  a  convalescent  period  ; 
and  even  at  such  a  time  his  sense  of  humour  asserted  itself,  for  his  pen  had  sketched 
the  outlines  of  a  conical  hill,  out  of  the  crater  of  which  his  head  and  shoulders  were 
slowly  rising,  while  the  still-imprisoned  lower  limbs  set  forth  the  sad  truth  that  all 
was  not  yet  well  with  them. 

These  chronicles  would  scarcely  be  complete  without  some  further  particulars 
concerning  his  life  on  the  Riviera, — how  he  enjoyed  his  pleasures,  how  he  bore  his 
pains,  how  he  worked  when  God  gave  him  relief  from  sickness,  and  how,  always  and 
ever,  his  loving  heart  was  "at  home"  with  me.  He  kept  up  a  daily  correspondence 
with  unflagging  regularity  :  and  when  unable  to  use  his  •  pen,  through  severe 
suffering  or  weakness,  the  letter  came  as  usual,  either  dictated  by  him,  or  altogether 
written  by  his  devoted  secretary. 

I  have  selected,  as  the  material  for  this  chapter,  the  last  letters  which  were 
written  to  me  from  Mentone,  and  which  cover  a  period  of  nearly  three  months, 
for  he  left  London  on  November  11,  1890,  and  returned  February  5,  1891.  The 
next  time  he  visited  the  place  he  loved  so  well,  God  gratified  his  longing, — 
cherished  for  years, — to  have  me  with  him  ;  but,  alas !  "  I  went  out  full,  and 
the  Lord  brought  me  home  again  empty ; "  for,  after  enjoying  three  months  of 
exceeding  sweetness,  I  unexpectedly  found  that  I  had  gone  to  Mentone  to  see 
my  beloved  die  ! 

Passing  over  the  days  of  travel,  which  had  no  special  interest,  the  arrival  at 
Mentone  is  thus  recorded  on  a  post  c^d  ; — "  What  heavenly  sunshine  !  This  is  like 
another  world.  I  cannot  quite  believe  myself  to  be  on  the  same  planet.  God 
grant  that  this  may  set  me  all  right  !  Only  three  other  visitors  in  the  hotel, — three 
American  ladies, — room  for  you.  So  far,  we  have  had  royal  weather,  all  but  the 
Tuesday.  Now  the  sea  shines  like  a  mirror  before  us.  The  palms  in  front  of  the 
windows  are  as  still  as  in  the  Jubilee  above.  The  air  is  warm,  soft,  balmy.  We  are 
idle^ — writing,  reading,  dawdling.  Mentone  is  the  same  as  ever,  but  it  has  abolished 
its  own  time,  and  goes  by  Paris." 

This  bright  opening  of  the  holiday  was  quickly  overclouded,  for  the  next  day- 
came  the  sad  news  that  gout  had  fastened  upon  the  poor  patient's  right  hand  and 


c.    H.    sturgeon's   autobiograppiy.  339 

arm,  and  caused  him  weary  pain.  Yet  he  wrote: — "The  day  is  hke  one  in  Eden 
before  our  first  parents  fell.  When  my  head  is  better,  I  shall  enjoy  it.  I  have 
eaii  de  Cologne  dripped  on  to  my  hot  brain-box  ;  and,  as,  I  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  look  out  on  the  perfect  scene  before  me,  my  case  is  not  a  bad  one."  But,  alas  ! 
the  "case"  proved  to  be  very  serious,  and  a  painful  time  followed.  These  sudden 
attacks  of  the  virulent  enemy  were  greatly  distressing  and  discouraging  ;  one  day, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  would  be  in  apparent  health  and  good  spirits  ;  and  the  next,  his 
hand,  or  foot,  or  knee,  would  be  swollen  and  infiamed,  gout  would  have  developed, 
and  all  the  attendant  evils  of  fever,  unrest,  sleeplessness,  and  acute  suffering,  would 
manifest  themselves  with  more  or  less  severity. 

In  the  present  instance,  the  battle  raged  for  eight  days  with  much  fury,  and 
then  God  gave  victory  to  the  anxious  combatants,  and  partial  deliverance  to  the 
poor  prisoner.  My  daily  letters,  written  by  Mr.  Harrald,  during  this  period,  were 
very  tender  records  of  the  sick-room  experiences, — every  detail  told,  and  every 
possible  consolation  offered  ; — but  it  was  a  weary  season  of  suspense  for  the  lo\ing 
heart  a  thousand  miles  distant,  and  the  trial  of  absence  was  multiplied  tenfold  by  the 
distress  of  anxiety. 

In  the  first  letter  Mr.  H.  wrote,  he  said  : — "The  one  continual  cry  from  Mr, 
Spurgeon  is,  'I  wish  I  were  at  home!  I  must  get  home!'  Just  to  pacify  him,  I 
have  promised  to  enquire  about  the  through  trains  to  London  ;  but,  of  course,  it 
would  be  impossible  for  him  to  travel  in  his  present  condition.  Everyone  is  very 
kind,  sympathetic,  attentive,  and  ready  to  do  anything  that  can  be  done  to  relieve  or 
cheer  the  dear  sufferer.  I  have  just  asked  what  message  he  wishes  to  send  to  you. 
He  says,  'Give  her  my  love,  and  say  I  am  very  bad,  and  I  wish  I  were  at  home  for 
her  to  nurse  me  ;  but,  as  I  am  not,  I  shall  be  helped  through  somehow.'  " 

Curiously  enough.  The  Times  of  the  following  day  had  a  paragraph  to  the 
effect  that  "Mr.  Spurgeon  will  stay  at  Mentone  till  February;"  and  when  Mr. 
Harrald  read  this  aloud,  the  dear  patient  remarked,  "  1  have  not  said  so,  but  I  am 
afraid  I  shall  have  to  do  it ;  "  and  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled. 

After  eight  days  and  nights  of  alternate  progress  and  drawback,  there  came  to 
me  a  half-sheet  of  paper,  covered  with  extraordinary  hieroglyphic  characters,  at  first 
sight  almost  unreadable.  But  love  deciphered  them,  and  this  is  what  they  said  : — 
"  Beloved,  to  lose  right  hand,  is  to  be  dumb.  I  am  better,  except  at  night.  Could 
not  love  his  darling  more.  Wished  myself  at  home  when  pains  came  ;  but  when 
worst,  this  soft,  clear  air  helps  me.  It  is  as  Heaven's  gate.  All  is  well.  Thus  have 
I  stammered  a  line  or  two.  Not  quite  dumb,  bless  the  Lord  !  What  a  good  Lord 
He  is!      1  shall  yet  praise  Him.      Sleeplessness  cannot  so  embitter  the  night  as  to 


340  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

make  me  fear  when  He  is  near."     This  pathetic  little  note  is  signed,  "Your  own 
belo\'ed  Benjamite,^'  for  it  was  the  work  of  his  left  hand. 

I  think  the  effort  was  too  much  for  him,  for  two  more  letters  w-ere  written  by 
Mr.  H.  ;  but  a  tender  little  joke,  recorded  in  one  of  them,  showed  me  that  my 
beloved  was  on  the  road  to  recovery.  "Our  dear  Tirshatha,"  says  Mr.  H.,  "has 
been  greatly  pleased  with  your  letter  received  to-day  ;  your  exhilaration  appears 
to  have  favourably  affected  him.  He  says  that  he  hopes  the  time  will  speedily 
arrive  when  he  tvill  be  able  to  offer y on  his  hand  !'' 

After  this,  the  daily  correspondence  from  his  own  pen  is  resumed,  and  in  the 
first  letter  he  strikes  his  usual  key-note  of  praise  to  God  : — "  Bless  the  Lord  ! 
I  feel  lighter  and  better;  but  oh,  how  weak!  Happily,  having  nothing  to  do, 
it  does  not  matter.  I  have  nearly  lost  a  whole  month  of  life  since  I.  first  broke 
down,  but  the  Lord  will  restore  this  breach." 

The  next  day, — date  of  letter,  Dec.  i,  1890, — he  writes  to  his  "poor  lamb  in 
the  snow  "  to  tell  her  that  "  this  poor  sheep  cannot  get  its  forefoot  right  yet,  but  it  is 
far  better  than  it  was," — followed  by  the  quaint  petition,  "May  the  Good  Shepherd 
dio-  you  out  of  the  snow,  and  many  may  the  mangolds  and  the  swedes  be  which  He 
shall  lay  in  the  fold  for  His  half- frozen  sheep  !  " 

Our  Arctic  experiences  in  England  were  balanced  by  wintry  weather  on  the 
Riviera.  "We  have  had  two  gloriously. terrific  storms,"  he  says  ;  "the  sea  wrought, 
and  was  tempestuous  ;  it  flew  before  the  wind  like  glass  dust,  or  powdered  snow. 
The  tempest  howled,  yelled,  screamed,  and  shrieked.  The  heavens  seemed  on  fire, 
and  the  skies  reverberated  like  the  boom  of  gigantic  ketdedrums.  Hail  rattled 
down,  and  then  rain  poured.  It  was  a  time  of  clamours  and  confusions.  I  went 
to  bed  at  ten,  and  left  the  storm  to  itself;  and  I  woke  at  seven,  much  refreshed.  I 
ouo-ht  to  be  well,  but  I  am  not,  and  don't  know  why." 

Dec.  3,  1890. — "We  had  two  drives  yesterday,  and  saw  some  of  the  mischief 
vvrouo-ht  by  the  storm.  The  woodman.  Wind,  took  down  his  keenest  axe,  and 
went  straight  on  his  way,  hewing  out  a  clean  path  through  the  olives  and  the 
pines.  Here  he  rent  off  an  arm,  there  he  cut  oft  a  head,  and  yonder  he  tore  a  trunk 
asunder,  like  some  fierce  Assyrian  in  the  days  ere  pity  was  born.  The  poor 
cottaoers  were  gathering  the  olives  from  the  road,  trying  to  clear  oft'  the  broken 
bouo-hs  before  they  bore  down  other  trees,  and  putting  up  fences  which  the  storm 
had  levelled  with  the  ground.  They  looked  so  sad  as  they  saw  that  we 
commiserated  them.  To-day,  so  fair,  so  calm,  so  bright,  so  warm,  is  as  a  leaf  from 
the  evergreen  trees  of  Heaven.      Oh,  that  you  were  here  !  " 

For    the    next    four    days,    I    received    post    cards   only.     There   was   a  loving 


C.     H.     SPUROEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY, 


341 


arrang-ement  between  us  that  these  missives  should  be  used  when  we  were  busy, 
or  had  not  much  to  tell  ;  but  my  beloved  could  always  say  a  great  many  things 
on  these  little  messengers.  He  knew  how  to  condense  and  crystallize  his  thoughts, 
so  that  a  few  brief  choice  sentences  conveyed  volumes  of  tender  meaning.  I  have 
commenced  this  chapter  with  facsimiles  of  two  of  his  poetical  post  cards  of  earlier 
date  ;  here  are  two  specimens  belonging  to  the  period  of  which  1  am  writing  : — 

"  Men  tone, 

"Sunday,  Dec.  7,  '90. 
"  Mia  Carissima, 

"Your  praise  of  my  letters  prompts  me  to  write  more;  but  your  royal 
commands  restrict  me  to  a  card  ;  and  they  are  wise.  Much  love.  Parcel  has 
arrived, — all  that  I  want.  If  specially  good  books  come,  you  might  get  Mr.  Keys 
to  take  two  or  three  to  Cook's  office,  for  Haskoll  to  bring  to  me.  He  travels  every 
week  to  and  fro. 

"  It  was  wet  yesterday  ;  but  I  went  out  a  very  little  walk.  Mean  to  walk 
every  day,  but  find  my  feet  painful,  as  if  I  could  count  all  my  bones,  yet  I  am 
each  day  better.  To-day  is  dull,  and  by  no  means  tropical;  but,  oh,  so  quiet  1 
I   am   praying  that   the  'Report'  may  How  as  streams   in   the  desert.      In  our  port, 


SHIPS    IN    MENTONE    HARBOUR. 


some  vessels  have  all  sails  spread,  but  it  is  only  to  dry  them  ;  better  have  ever 
so  litde  a  bit  of  canvas  filled  with  the  breath  of  heaven.  I  feel  as  if  I  were 
drying  ;  may  you  have  the  breeze  !  " 


34-  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Mentone, 

"  Monday,  8/12/90. 
"  Out  of  that  obedience  which  has  so  long  been  habitual  to  me,  I  did  not  write 
this  morning  ;  but,  finding  that  there  is  an  evening  post,  my  rebellious  nature  seized 
the  occasion  to  indulge  itself.  To-day  I  dressed  myself  !  A  childish  glee  is  on  me 
as  I  record  the  fact.  To  have  the  use  of  one's  hands  again,  is  a  big  mercy.  We 
have  had  a  heavenly  day,  and  spent  the  morning  in  a  long  drive.  Afternoon,  I  went 
for  a  walk.  I  was  entreated  to  attend  laying  of  first  stone  in  Scotch  Church,  but  I 
would  not  yield.  H.  went,  and  it  was  cold  and  draughty, — enough  to  lay  me  up 
again.  Wisdom  did  me  a  good  turn  when  she  bade  me  walk  in  the  sun.  Mr.  A. 
has  sent  home  some  flowers  ;  he  despatched  some  rosebuds  to  you  from  me.  They 
will  be  perfumed  a  parfait  aniozir.  You  write  so  sweetly.  Yours  is  a  hand  which 
sets  to  music  all  it  writes  to  me.  God  bless  you  !  But  you  don't  say  how  you  are. 
If  you  do  not,  I  will  write  every  day.  We  have  fifteen  in  the  hotel  now.  I  have  not 
commenced  morning  prayer  with  them  yet,  but  think  of  doing  so  soon.  Remember 
me  to  T.  and  old  George." 

Such  postcards  were  as  good  as  letters,  and  I  could  have  been  well  content  had 
my  husband  sent  me  only  these  ;  but  he  was  lavish  in  his  love,  and  insisted  that  the 
letters  should  outnumber  the  smaller  missives.  I  had  long  protested,  and  sincerely, 
too,  against  what  I  ieared  was  a  tax  upon  his  precious  holiday  time  ;  but,  to  the 
end,  (for  these  are  his  very  last  letters  to  me,)  he  persevered  in  his  tender,  self- 
imposed  task  ;  and,  now,  the  memory  of  his  goodness  is  inexpressibly  precious. 

In  the  succeeding  communication,  there  is  a  reference  to  the  burning  question 
of  the  hour, — Home  Rule, — which  may  interest  readers  who  indulge  a  penchant 
for  politics  : — 

"We  have  had  two  of  the  loveliest  of  days;  and,  after  a  morning  drive,  I 
have  had  an  afternoon's  walk,  each  day  walking  just  a  little  more.  It  is  not  much 
now,  but  it  was  and  is  much  to  me.  The  Dr.  says  that,  in  the  heart-cure,  they  have 
a  zigzag  up  a  mountain,  and  the  patient  tries  a  turn  each  day  ;  and  when  he  can 
Malk  to  the  top  and  down,  he  goes  home.  My  little  perambulations  are  somewhat 
after  this  fashion.  This  place  Is  delicious.  It  is  just  8  a.m.,  and  I  have  both 
windows  open,  and  I  am  writing  to  the  low  soft  cadence  of  a  rippling  sea.  Oh,  that 
you  were  here  ! 

"  That  IrisJi  stev/ !  The  last  dose  was  well  peppered,  and  served  up  hot ! 
Perhaps  now  that  they  are  separated  they  will  get  together,  they  seem  to  have  been 
greatly  divided  while  they  were  united  !  Poor  G.O.M.  !  How  he  must  feel  the  insults 
of  those  for  whom  he  has  forfeited  everything  !     Yet  he  seems  to  hold  on  to   their 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  343 

scheme  though  he  knows  that  it  is  not  only  dangerous,  but  unattainable.  I  am  glad 
I  am  neither  of  Gladstone  nor  of  Parnell.  He  that  wades  not  up  to  the  ankles,  will 
not  go  in  up  to  the  loins."- 

Midwinter  in  England  brought  also  to  Mentone  some  cold,  wet  days,  and  these 
acted  on  the  Pastor's  sensitive  frame  as  the  atmosphere  operates  on  a  barometer. 
Dull  and  dreary  days  depressed  him  ;  but  when  they  came,  they  were  welcomed,  for 
he  would  then  turn  to  his  literary  work  with  redoubled  energy,  and  get  through  an 
amazing  quantity  of  it  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time  ;  but  he  revelled  in  the 
sunshine,  and  enjoyed  basking  in  its  warm  beams  ;  and  his  pity  for  those  who  had  to 
endure  the  severities  of  fog,  frost,  and  snow,  was  very  real  and  sincere. 

"  Poor  darling,"  he  wrote,  "to  be  so  cold.  The  Lord  will  soon  hear  prayer, 
and  send  the  soft  South  wind  upon  you,  and  then  I  also  shall  get  well,  and  go  out  for 
walks,  and  praise  His  Name.  I  wish  I  could  think  of  something  to  cast  a  gleam  of 
sunlight  over  '  Westwood.'  If  my  love  were  light,  you  would  live  in  the  sun.  I  shall 
send  some  roses  to-morrow,  and  they  will  prophesy  of  better  days."  Alas  !  the 
"  better  days  "  moved  very  tardily  towards  him  on  this  occasion  ;  and,  though  of 
course  we  did  not  know  it  at  the  time,  the  deadly  mischief,  which  afterwards  proved 
fatal,  had  already  begun  to  work  in  his  poor  body.  "  I  cannot  say  that  I  am  as  I 
should  like  to  be,"  he  writes  ;  "  two  cold,  windy  afternoons  have  kept  me  in,  and  so  I 
have  missed  my  walk  ;  and  my  hand,  inside,  is  white  and  chalky,  and  outside,  on  its 
back,  it  is  still  somewhat  swollen,  and  you  see  I  cannot  write  so  well.  To-day,  I 
have  been  for  a  drive,  but  it  was  rather  cold.  I  sleep  well,  take  physic  often,  and 
try  to  be  right,  and  am  really  much  better,  but  the  mischief  hangs  about  me." 
Undoubtedly  it  did,  and  this  was  "  the  beginning  of  the  end,"  though  our  eyes  were 
holden,  so  that  we  could  not  see  it. 

The  loving  ministries  of  his  Mentone  life  began  again,  however.  He  "went 
to  see  a  sick  Baroness,  and  prayed  with  her,  and  helped  her  to  feel  at  rest  through 
submission  to  our  Lord's  will  ;  "  and  the  morning  meetings  for  worship  were  recom- 
menced, the  conduct  of  which  gave  him  much  joy  and  encouragement,  with  results 
only  fully  known  in  Heaven. 

Next  morning,  the  aneroid  marks  a  higher  figure,  but  only  for  a  few  hours  : — 
"  This  has  been  so  far  a  lovely,  sunny,  warm  day,  and  we  have  been  out  for  a  long 
drive,  and  enjoyed  it  much.  Seen  the  mountains  of  Italy  covered  with  their  white 
millers'  hats  ;  and  fields  of  roses,  red,  white,  and  yellow  !  We  had  a  drink  of  very 
cold  water  from  the  fountain  which  gushes,  apparently,  from  the  heart  of  an  olive. 
(See  illustration  on  page  lo.)  Now  the  day  is  darkening  down  with  clouds,  and 
probably  a  cold  blast  will  come.      Yes,  the   angels  are  letting  loose  the  winds   from 


344  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  .. 

their  fists,  and  the  palm  trees  are  waving  their  fronds  in  token  of  victory  over  the  sun 


PALM   TREES   IN   GARDEN   OF  HOTEL   BEAU    RIVAGE,    MENTONE.     « 

which  has  retreated  behind  the  clouds.  These  palms  in  front  of  the  windows 
constantly  remind  me  of  the  words  in  the  Revelation,  '  with  palms  in  their  hands,'  for 
we  are  on  a  level  with  their  grand  fronds.  I  should  think  they  measure  ten  or 
twelve  feet  from  where  they  start.  They  are  magnificent  emblems  of  victory.  We 
shall  wave  better  than  these  when  we  are  with  the  Lord,  and  celebrate  His  triumph  !  " 

Day  after  day,  these  barometric  fluctuations  agitated  the  dear  patient,  and 
seemed  to  retard  his  recovery  ;  but  they  were  only  the  outward  indications  of  the 
deep-seated  internal  trouble.      It  is  wonderful  how  blind  we  were  ;  so  used,  I  expect. 


C.     H.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  345 

to  the  alternations  of  my  beloved's  condition,  and  so  happily  accustomed  to  see  his 
"  rare  power  of  recuperation,"  as  the  Dr.  called  it,  manifestinc^  itself  at  the  end  of  an 
illness,  that  we  had  learned  to  anticipate  complete  recovery  from  all  his  sicknesses. 
God  be  praised  for  the  merciful  veil  which  hides  the  future  from  our  eyes  ! 

"  Mentone, 

"  Dec.    18,   '90. 

"  Yesterday  morning  was  wet  and  cold,  and  we  rejoiced  in  the  fire  of  olive  logs. 
After  lunch,  the  clouds  were  gone,  the  winds  fell  asleep,  the  sun  in  beneficent 
splendour  gave  us  two  hours  of  summer,  during  which  your  Prince  Charlie  went 
forth  in  his  chariot,  and  was  so  pleased  with  the  light,  colour,  warmth,  and  tone 
of  everything,  that  he  felt  no  spot  or  time  could  ever  be  more  enjoyable  unless  his 
dear  consort  could  be  with  him.  I  want  someone  to  show  these  things  to, — and 
there  is  only  one  '  someone  '  who  would  fulfil  my  ideal. 

"  After  morning  prayer,  we  went  down  town  to  get  the  parcel  from  Cook's 
man.  All  right.  Books  well  selected.  Hearty  thanks.  The  tracts  from 
Drummond's  we  can  give  away.  We  sent  sermons  and  other  periodicals  to  a 
Shields  collier  which  has  been  in  this  port  with  coals.  After  getting  our  parcel, 
we  returned,  for  the  clouds  came  up  in  black  armies,  and  the  wind  rushed  forth.  It 
may  alter  again,  and  then  '  out  we  go  ;  '  but  nothing  seems  to  be  settled,  and  I 
suppose  the  weather  here  cannot  be  quiet,  while  it  is  so  terrible  with  you.  If  the 
Lord  will,  I  trust  the  worst  of  the  winter  will  soon  be  gone.  I  have  plenty  to  do,  so 
that  a  day  indoors  is  not  dull,  but  I  wish  I  could  get  my  walk.  This,  too,  may  come. 
I  have  one  finger  purple  and  swollen,  but  I  feel  so  greatly  better  that  I  could  clap 
my  hands  if  it  were  not  for  hurting  that  poor  weak  member." 

Till  Christmas-day,  the  letters  tell  of  cold  and  rain,  tornadoes  of  wind,  and  other 
evils,  with  occasional  glimpses  of  the  lovely  spring  weather  so  much  desired.  My 
husband  greatly  sympathized  with  us  in  our  endurance  of  the  very  severe  winter 
of  1890  ;  it  was  quite  touching  to  note  how  constandy  he  referred  to  it,  and  seemed 
almost  to  suffer  with  us  in  our  long  period  of  frost,  fog,  bitter  cold,  and  darkness. 
"  I  keep  on  praying  for  change  of  weather  for  you,  and  the  poor  and  sick,"  he 
writes  ;  "I  wish  I  could  send  you  a  brazier  of  the  coals  of  my  heart,  which 
have  a  most  vehement  flame." 

Oh,  how  true  this  was  !  God  had  made  him  a  real  philanthropist,  and  the  woes 
of  others  were  felt,  and  commiserated,  and  brought  before  the  Lord,  with  as  much 
earnestness  and  sincerity  as  though  they  had  been  his  own.  His  heart  was  so  bio-, 
it  had  room  for  others'  griefs  ;  and  it  was  so  full  of  love  and  pity,  that  he  had  always 
some  to  spare  for  those  who  needed  it. 


546 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 


A   carriacre  drive   to  Ventimiglia   gave  him   great   pleasure  just  at  this  time. 


\t.\ri.MIGLIA,    ITALY. 


From  a  certain  part  of  the  road,  the  Col  di  Tenda  and  a  considerable  portion  of 
the  Maritime  Alps  are  visible,  in  their  winter  dress  ot  snow  ;  and  visitors  from 
Mentone  are  fond  of  driving  there  to  see  a  picture  quite  unique  in  its  grouping, — 
a  foreground  of  roses,  and  palms,  and  tropical  vegetation  luxuriating  in  the 
sunshine, — on  the  one  side,  the  blue  waters  of  the  Mediterranean  rivalling  the 
brightness  of  the  sky  ;  on  the  other,  the  valley  of  the  Roya,  with  picturesque  hamlets 
on  both  banks  of  the  river,  and,  for  a  distant  background,  those  solemn  white 
Alps  proclaiming,  in  a  language  which  cannot  be  misunderstood,  the  greatness  and 
majesty  of  their  Maker. 


Christmas-day  was  grey  and  cold,  and  was  spent  in  work,  "digging  away 
at  books  and  letters."  Friends  had  lavished  upon  him  a  wealth  of  lovely  flowers, 
— roses,  carnations,  hyacinths,  tuberoses,  cyclamen, — in  vases  ;  and  a  pot  of  that 
sweetest  of  sweet  blossoms,  lily  of  the  valley  ;  but  he  could  scarcely  enjoy  them. 
All    night,  his  bones  had  "cried  and  groaned  "  with  rheumatism;    and  he  must,  I 


c     H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  347 

think,  for  the  first  time,  have  had  sonie  premonition  of  danger,  for  he  says,  "There 
is  some  deep-seated  gout  in  me." 

But  even  this  passes,  and  the  five  following  days  each  bring  a  bright,  cheerful 
little  post  card  to  reassure  and  comfort  me.  One,  written  on  Monday, 
December  29,  1890,  tells  of  "a  delightful  meeting,  last  night,  in  the  room  above 
ours.  Piano,  with  hymns  ad  lib.,  and  I  preiiched  from  Deut.  xxxii.  10,  glad  to 
review  the  goodness  of  Him  who  found,  led,  taught,  and  kept  me  ;  "  and  the  last 
of  the  five — ^on  December  31,  1890, — testifies  thus  graciously  to  the  goodness  and 
faithfulness  of  God  : — "  The  old  year  is  nearly  out, — a  good  old  year,  a  year  of 
lovingkindnesses  and  of  tender  mercies.  I  cannot  dismiss  it  with  a  complaint,  but  with 
thankfulness.  Oh,  for  more  holiness  for  myself  in  the  new  year,  and  more  health 
for  my  beloved  spouse  !  I  think  I  shall  get  home  for  February  i,  or  first  Sunday 
in  February,  for  I  now  feel  as  if  life  had  come  back  to  me  with  enjoyment,  and  a 
measure  of  sprighdy  thought,  for  which  I  would  praise  the  Lord  practically  by 
employing  it  in  His  service.  We  had  twenty-three  to  morning  prayer  to-day, — 
nearly  as  many  as  the  room  can  hold.  How  they  do  come  !  Wet  and  cold  do  not 
hinder,   and  they  are  so  grateful." 

"  New  Year's  Day,  fan.  i,  1891. 
"  A  happy  new  year  to  you,  my  sweetest  and  best  !  I  would  write  it  in  the 
biggest  of  capitals  if  that  would  show  how  happy  I  wish  the  year  to  be.  I  had 
a  praiseful  evening  yesterday,  blessing  God  for  the  old  year  ;  and  now,  this  morning, 
we  have  had  a  good  meeting.  We  sang  No.  ',042  in  Our  Oivn  Hymn  Book,  having 
made  copies  for  our  twenty-four  friends.  Then  I  read  and  expounded  Psalm  ciii., 
and  prayed.  There  were  flowers,  and  cards,  and  contributions  ;  and,  this  afternoon, 
we  are  going  to  give  our  landlord  and  h:s  wife  a  present,  for  the  house  is  not  full, 
and  the  keeping-  of  the  hotel  is  not  profitable.  So  there  will  be  joy  among  many 
as  we  meet  for  tea.  God  is  indeed  gracious  to  me,  for  I  feel  well,  and  I  turn 
my  face  homeward  in  desire.  I  have  been  for  a  drive  in  the  delicious  summer 
sunshine.  Oh,  that  you  had  been  at  my  side  !  I  have  just  read  your  sweet,  sweet 
letter.  You  best-beloved  of  my  heart,  how  I  wish  I  could  change  your  weather  ! 
I  can  only  pray ;  but  prayer  moves  the  hand  which  moves  winds  and  clouds. 
The  Lord  Himself  comfort  you,  and  bear  you  up  under  all  troubles,  and  make 
up  to  you,  by  His  own  presence,   the  absence  of  health,   warmth,  and  husband  !  " 

When  my  beloved  felt  fairly  well,  his  Sundays  at  Mentone  were  a  great  joy 
and  rest  to  him.  He  made  the  day  full  of  sweet,  devout  service,  and  still  sweeter 
communion  with  the  Lord  !  In  the  morning,  after  having  family  prayer,  he  would, 
perhaps,  go  to  the   Presbyterian  place  of  worship  in   Mrs.  Dudgeon's  garden  ;  and 


348  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

afterwards  write  to  me: — "Capital  sermon  from  Mr.  Somerville  on  Rev.  ii.  12,  17, 
splendidly  witnessing  against  the  'Down-grade.'"  In  the  afternoon,  there  would 
be  breaking  of  bread,  and  one  of  those  choice  little  addresses,  on  the  love  and  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  melted  all  hearts,  and  rekindled  the  latent  fires  of  devotion 
in  some  inconstant  breast ;  and  the  evening  would  be  spent  in  singing  God's  praises, 
and  listening-  to  a  brief  sermon  by  Mr.  Harrald,  or  someone  else  who  might  have 
a  message  to  deliver.  "  Quite  a  full  day,"  he  remarks,  after  one  of  these  occasions, 
"  but  it  seemed  very  short,  and  as  sweet  as  short.      Oh,  that  you  were  here  !  " 

The  holy,  happy  influence  of  these  Sabbaths  overflowed  into  the  days  of  the 
week,  which  to  my  beloved  were  as  much  "  Lord's-days  "  as  those  set  apart  bv  law 
and  gospel.  The  company  at  morning  worship  grew  larger  every  week,  the 
adjoining  room  had  to  be  thrown  open,  and  one  very  cold  day  he  wrote  : — "  I 
wondered  to  see  my  visitors  assemble  to  the  great  number  of  forty-one,  and  thev 
do  not  want  to  go  away  from  what  some  of  them  call  '  this  dear  room.'  Trulv,  the 
Lord  is  here,  and  His  Word  is  sweet  both  to  them  and  to  me,  as  we  read  it  morning 
by  morning.  What  a  text  is  Isaiah  Ixii.  7,  in  the  Revised  Version:  'Ye  that  are 
the  Lord's  remembrancers,  take  ye  no  rest,  and  give  Him  no  rest.'  Oh,  for  such 
importunate  prayers  for  His  Church  now  that  evil  times  have  come  !  " 

A  tender,  loving  birthday  letter,  which  set  all  the  joy-bells  in  my  heart  ringing, 
comes  next  in  order,  and  I  quote  a  tew  extracts  from  it  : — "  I  trust  this  will  reach 
you  on  your  own  dear  birthday.  Ten  thousand  benedictions  be  upon  you  !  .  .  . 
What  an  immeasurable  blessing  you  have  been  to  me,  and  are  still  !  Your  patience 
in  suffering,  and  diligence  in  service,  are  works  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  you,  for  which 
I  adore  His  Name.  Your  love  to  me  is  not  only  a  product  of  nature,  but  it  has 
been  so  sanctified  by  grace  that  it  has  become  a  spiritual  blessing  to  me.  May  you 
still  be  upheld  ;  and  if  you  may  not  be  kept  from  suffering,  may  you  be  preserved 
from  sinking !  .  .  .  My  love  to  you  grows,  and  yet  I  do  not  know  how  at  any 
time  it  could  have  been  greater.  I  am  thinking  which  I  shall  do, — drive  out,  and  send 
you  flowers,  or  walk,  and  get  Mr.  A.  to  send  them.  I  know  which  way  your  vote 
would  go,  and  I  shall  act  accordingly,  if  our  friend  will  undertake  the  commission. 
If  flowers  do  not  come,  please  know  that  it  was  in  my  heart  to  send  them," 

A  few  days  after,  a  reference  is  made  to  my  reply  in  these  words  : — "I  had 
your  letter,  last  night,  which  was  written  on  your  birthday.  I  am  so  glad  the 
flowers  reached  you,  and  made  you  glad.  There  is  .a  happy  tone  about  '  the  old 
woman's  '  letter  which  does  the  old  man  good.  God  bless  you,  darling,  and  delight 
your  heart  with  trucks  and  sacks  of  good  things  for  others  !  "  This  latter  sentence 
refers  to  the  generous  action  of  one  of  our  near  neighbours,  on  Beulah  Hill,  who, 
knowing  that  I  was  interesting  myself  for  the  poor  in  Thornton   Heath,  had  placed 


C.'    H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  349 

a  trucUload  of  coals  at  my  disposal  for  them.  The  long"  and  dreary  winter  had 
severely  tried  them,  and  we  opened  a  soup-kitchen  at  "Westwood,"  which 
ministered  daily  to  their  necessities.  My  beloved  felt  sorely  troubled  for  the 
distress  which  came  so  close  to  our  doors,  and  did  not  fail  to  take  his  share  in  the 
pitying'  help  rendered  to  those  who  could  not  help  themselves  during  the  time  of 
that  awful  frost.  "  I  am  so  glad  you  feed  the  poor,"  he  wrote  ;  "spend  ^lo  for  me. 
please  ;  don't  stint  anything".  As  I  look  at  the  pictures  in  The  GrapJiic,  my  spirits 
sink,  but  my  prayer  rises."  And  a  few  days  later  he  returns  to  the  same  subject : — 
"  I  pray  day  and  night  for  a  thaw  to  come,  and  end  this  great  distress  by  allowing 
the  people  to  work.      Do  spend  my  ^lo,  which  I  will  send  by  next  post." 

The  grey,  cold  days,  which  prevailed  at  Mentone  during"  the  early  part  of  the 
year  1891,  gave  the  dear  preacher  an  opportunity  for  working"  hard,  of  which  he 
willingly  availed  himself  He  heartily  enjoyed  the  pleasurable  leisure  of  drivino", 
which  seemed  to  soothe  his  brain,  and  refresh  both  body  and  spirit ;  but  he  was 
never  idle  ;  and,  after  returning-  from  his  excursions,  he  would  apply  himself  imme- 
diately to  the  work  in  hand,  and  his  busy  pen  would  fly  over  the  sheets  of  paper  with 
untiring'  energy.  The  secret  of  the  amazing  wealth  of  literary  labour,  which  he  left 
as  a  legacy  to  the  world,  lay  in  the  fact  that  he  was  constantly  gathering"  up  the 
seed-pearls  of  small  opportunities  while  never  neglecting  the  greater  occasions  of 
enrichment.  Receiving"  and  imparting,  gaining  that  he  might  give,  labouring"  not 
for  himselt  but  for  others,  the  redeemed  minutes  soon  multiplied  into  hours,  and  the 
hours  grew  into  days,  and  so  his  life,  like  a  fieJd  well-dressed  and  tended,  bore 
hundredfold  crops  to  the  praise  and  delight  of  the  Great  Husbandman. 

Sabbath,  Jan.  iS,  1891,  he  wrote: — "I  have  not  gone  to  service  this  morning, 
as  I  had  sermons  to  revise,  and  one  to  get  for  this  afternoon.  I  have  chosen 
Psalm  xxxii.  9,  and  want  to  show  the  joy  of  having  a  good  understanding  with  the 
Lord,  so  as  to  need  no  bit,  but  to  be  left  free  to  go  on  in  His  way  with  liberty. 
Two  things  are  to  be  dreaded, — Irreverent  familiarity  :  'lest  they  come  near  unto 
thee  ; '  (a. v.) — Disobedient  departure  :  '  else  they  will  not  come  near  unto  thee,  (r.v.) 
Are  not  the  two  renderings  curious  .■*  To  me,  they  set  forth  the  same  thing  in 
difi'erent  lights.  Note,  in  R.v.,  '  whose  trappings  must  be  bit  and  bridle,'  as  if 
even  these  were  made  ornamental,  and  our  inflictions  and  afilictions  became  our 
decorative  equipment, — yet  even  then  not  desirable.  Oh,  to  be  guided  by  the 
Lord's  eye  !  " 

Further  on,  I  am  told  that  he  had  "a  good  service  from  the  text  mentioned," 
and  then  that  he  had  been  able  to  revise  six  sermons  ready  for  printing  when  double 
numbers    were    wanted,    or    "to    be    used    it    I    should  be    ill."     Was   this   another 


350 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAl'HY. 


premonition  ?  If  it  were,  the  shadow  soon  passed,  for  the  next  letter  describes  a  visit 
to  BeauHeu, — "  a  lovely  drive,  in  the  warm  sunshine,  to  a  place  which  I  should  like 
to  stop  at  for  a  time  another  year,  if  it  please  God."  This  little  outing  must  have 
benefited  the  dear  patient,  for,  the  next  morning,  he  writes  : — "  I  am  working  with 
windows  wide  open  ;  and  when  I  have  done,  I  hope  to  take  my  long  walk  round  the 
red  rocks.  (See  illustration  on  page  12.)  I  forgot  to  tell  you  that,  on  Thursday, 
Mr.  Cheyne  Bradv  came  over  from  Cannes,  and  we  walked  out  a  mile  or  more,  and 


MR.    SPURGEON'S   favourite   WALK   AT    MEXTONE. 


talked,  and  prayed,  and  then  came  back.  He  returned  alone  because  he  had  to 
hurry  to  catch  a  train,  but  I  walked  both  ways  with  great  pleasure  ;  indeed,  it  was 
the  best  time  I  have  spent  since  I  came  here.  The  sun,  the  air,  the  sea,  all 
ministered  to  me  ;  and  I  ministered  to  the  Lord  in  grateful  praise." 


Mr.  Spurgeon  had  consented  to  open  the  new  Scotch  Church  on  Thursday, 
January  29,  1891  ;  but,  on  the  Wednesday,  while  out  walking,  a  sudden  seizure  of 
gout  in  both  hands  and  one  foot  threatened  to  lay  him  aside  once  more.  It  is  most 
touching  to  read  how  he  fought  the  disease  both  with  physic  and  by  dieting.      "  The 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


;5r 


enemy  is  going,"  he  writes;  "driven  out  by  medicine,  starved  out  by  oatmeal  and 
nothing  else  for  lunches  and  dinners."  He  took  the  service  at  the  Scotch  Church, 
though  so  utterly  unfit  for  it,  and  "  got  through  the  sermon  with  trembling  knees^ 
and  the  bell  gone  out  of  my  voice." 


THE    SCOTCH    PKLSBYILKIAN.    CHURCH,    MLMoNL. 


So  extremely  sensitive  as  my  beloved  was  to  any  degree  of  pain,  it  was  simply 
marvellous  how  he  overcame  this  weakness  of  body,  and  served  while  sufferino-, 
when  work  for  the  Master  called  forth  his  spiritual  energies.  Many  a  time,  at  the 
Tabernacle,  has  he  painfully  limped  into  his  pulpit,  leaning  heavily  on  his  stick,  and. 


352  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

unable  to  stand,  has  preached,  kneehng-  with  one  knee  on  a  chair  ;  but  even  then, 
the  astonished  congregation  has  seen  him,  warming  to  his  work,  and  inspired  by  his 
all-consuming  zeal,  push  the  chair  aside,  and,  grasping  the  rail  of  the  platform  with 
both  hands,  stand  there  for  the  rest  of  the  service,  apparently  forgetful  of  his 
boclilv  distress,  because  absorbed  by  his  passionate  desire  to  persuade  poor  sinner? 
to  come  to  Christ. 

But  this  is  a  digression.  We  must  return  to  Mentone  for  the  few  days  yet 
remaining. 

One  of  the  dear  preacher's  last  ministrations,  on  this  occasion,  was  to  hold  a 
funeral  service  over  the  body  of  the  Baroness  von  H.,  whom  he  had  so  often  visited 
and  comforted  in  her  last  sickness.  He  writes: — "There  was  a  great  blaze  of 
candles  on  both  sides  of  the  coffin,  and  palm  branches  and  white  flowers  upon  it. 
She  is  now  to  be  carried  to  Russia,  and  I  should  think  the  journey  will  occupy 
a  fortnight.  Why  can't  they  let  a  body  be  ^  I  would  prefer  to  be  buried  wherever 
I  might  die  ;  yet,  as  she  wished  to  lie  in  the  same  tomb  with  her  husband,  there  is 
an  argument  on  that  side  also." 

Now  the  record  draws  quickly  to  a  close.  It  had  been  a  time  of  strangely 
mingled  experiences  of  rest  and  rack,  of  cold  and  heat,  of  storm  and  sunshine, 
of  pain  and  pleasure  ; — but,  over  all,  the  peace  of  God  brooded  like  a  dove,  and 
the  home-coming  was  safe  and  happy  ;  not  even  a  shadow  of  the  dark  dispensation, 
which  fell  upon  us  in  June,  then  rested  on  our  spirits.  The  vejy  last  communication 
froni  Mentone  was  a  post  card,  which,  Irom  the  extracts  I  give,  will  be  seen  to  have 
been  written  in  quite  good  spirits,  and  suitably  closes  this  chapter  : — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Monday,  February  2,  '91. 
"  Mine  Own, 

"  I  telegraphed  you  to-day,  and  I  hope  your  anxiety  has  ceased.  There  ! 
at  this  moment,  a  mosquito  popped  on  my  nose,  and  Harrald  has  killed  him  !  So 
may  all  your  fears  end  !  I  am  very  much  better  ;  indeed,  well.  Archibald  Brown 
has  been  with  me  for  an  hour  ;  and  the  sight  of  him,  and  a  little  prayer  with 
him,  have  set  me  up.  I  rested  well  yesterday.  We  are  all  in  a  muddle  packing  ; 
H.,  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  almost  wants  to  pack  vie  up  !  I  am  writing  notes  of 
'  Good-bye  '  to  friends.  I  hope  soon  to  follow  where  this  card  is  going  ;  how 
delighted  I  am  with  the  prospect!  If  you  don't  hear  again,  do  not  wonder;  it 
anything  should  be  wrong,  I  will  wire  at  once.  1  am  already  with  you  in  spirit. 
My  heart  has  never  left  you.      Blessed  be  God  that  we  are  spared  to  each  other  !" 


CHAPTER    CV. 


^Ijt  ions  illness. 


"/  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction" — This  has  long  been  the  motto  fixed  before  our 
eye  upon  the  wall  of  our  bed-chamber,  and  in  many  ways  it  has  also  been  written  on  our  heart. 
It  is  no  mean  thing  to  be  chosen  of  God.  God's  choice  makes  chosen  men  choice  men.  .  .  .  We 
are  chosen,  not  in  the  palace,  but  in  the  furnace.  In  the  furnace,  beauty  is  marred,  fashion  is 
destroyed,  strength  is  melted,  glory  is  consumed ;  yet  here  eternal  love  reveals  its  secrets,  and 
declares  its  choice.  So  has  it  been  in  our  case.  .  .  .  Therefore,  if  to-day  the  furnace  be  heated 
seven  times  hotter,  we  will  not  dread  it,  for  the  glorious  Son  of  God  will  walk  with  us  amid  the 
glowing  coals.— C.  H.  S.,  in  "  The  Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith." 

H  E  first  Sabbath  after  his  return  from  the  sunny  South, — February  8, 
1 89 1, — the  Pastor  preached  at  the  Tabernacle  from  Isaiah  Ixii.  6,  7, 
using  both  the  Authorized  and  Revised  Versions,  as  he  had  done 
when  speaking  upon  that  passage  at  Mentone.  On  that  occasion, 
he  said  to  his  secretary,  "You  need  not  transcribe  your  report, 
for  I  expect  to  have  this  subject  again  when  I  get  home."  He  had 
been  specially  struck  with  the  Revisers'  rendering  of  the  text:  "Ye  that  are  the 
Lord's  remembrancers,  take  ye  no  rest,  and  give  Him  no  rest,  till  He  establish,  and 
till  He  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth."  The  sermon  was  intended  to  be  the 
key-note  of  the  year's  service  for  God ;  it  was  a  powerful  call  to  prayer  and 
testimony,  yet  probably  even  the  preacher  himself  did  not  then  fully  realize  how 
appropriate  was  his  message  in  preparing  the  people  for  that  long  season  of  almost 
ceaseless  intercession  while  he  was  enduring  the  heaviest  affliction  of  his  life,  and 
from  which  he  was  never  really  to  recover. 


Although  there  were  ominous  indications  that  his  health  was  by  no  means  all  that 
could  be  desired,  he  did  not  spare  himself,  but  laboured  with  the  utmost  earnestness 
and  zeal  to  extend  his  Master's  Kingdom.  A  brief  "  Note  "  in  The  Szvord  and  the 
Trowel  of  that  period  gives  just  a  glimpse  of  the  great  spiritual  prosperity  which  was 
being  enjoyed  only  a  little  while  before  the  starding  breakdown  which  proved  to  be 
"  the  beginning  of  the  end  "  : — "  The  month  of  March  has  been  a  memorable  one  for 
the  church  in  the  Tabernacle.  Pastor  C.  H.  S.  continued  to  see  persons  who  wished 
to  join  the  church,  and  out  of  these  he  had  eighty-four  to  propose  for  fellowship. 
How  much  of  joyous  labour  all  these  involved,  is  best  known  to  the  Pastor  and  the 
sympathizing  reapers  who  shared  his  delightful  toil.     To  God  alone  be  glory." 

Y4 


354  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

The  last  College  Conference,  at  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  present,  was  held 
from  Monday,  April  20,  to  Friday,  April  24.  In  the  May  number  of  The 
Sword  and  the  Troivel,  the  Editor  inserted  the  following  "Note"  concerning  the 
Sabbath  night  after  the  meetings  : — "  To  the  President,  the  week  of  Conference 
was  one  of  exhausting  delight.  Every  day,  everything  went  well.  .  .  .  Of 
course,  there  was  a  reaction  for  the  one  who  was  the  centre  of  all  this  ;  and, 
for  the  first  time  in  a  ministry  of  forty  years,  we  entered  the  pulpit  on  the  Sunday 
evening,  and  were  obliged  to  hurry  out  of  it  ;  for  a  low,  nervous  condition  shut  us  up. 
Happily,  Mr.  Stott  could  take  up  the  story  there  and  then  ;  and  he  did  so."  It  was 
very  remarkable  that,  in  his  letter,  written  to  Mr.  Stott,  four  months  previously, 
concerning  his  appointment  as  assistant-minister  for  the  year  1891,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
said  : — -"  It  would  be  a  great  relief  to  me  if  I  knew  that  someone  was  on  the  spot 
to  take  the  pulpit  should  I  suddenly  fail."  That  expression  almost  implies  a 
premonition  of  what  took  place  on  that  Sabbath  night,  April  26,  1891. 

This  unprecedented  experience  was  an  indication  of  a  very  serious  state  of  affairs; 
yet,  the  following  Lord's-day  morning.  May  3,  the  Pastor  was  in  his  pulpit  again  ; 
and  he  delivered  the  discourse  which  he  had  prepared  for  the  previous  week,  prefacing 
it  with  a  reference  to  the  "  overpowering  nervousness  "  which  had  then  oppressed 
him,  and  pointing  out  the  lessons  which  that  strange  occurrence  was  probably 
intended  to  teach  to  himself  and  his  hearers.  He  preached  again  at  night;  on  the 
following  afternoon,  he  was  at  the  Tabernacle,  seeing  enquirers  and  candidates  for 
church-fellowship  ;  and  in  the  evening,  he  presided  at  the  prayer-meeting.  In  the 
course  of  the  proceedings,  he  asked  for  earnest  supplication  on  behalf  of  the  special 
services  in  which  he  was  to  be  occupied  during  the  week.  These  comprised  the 
annual  sermon  to  Sunday-school  teachers,  at  Bloomsbury  Chapel,  on  the  Tuesday 
evening ;  a  sermon  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  the  Thursday  night,  in  aid  of  the  British 
and  Foreign  Sailors'  Society,  preceded  by  a  prayer-meeting  in  the  lecture-hall  ;  and 
two  meetings  at  Hendon,  on  the  Friday,  in  connection  with  the  "Fraternal"  of 
which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  member.  In  the  June  number  of  The  Sword  and  the 
Trowel,  the  Editor  gave  a  brief  account  of  all  these  gatherings,  and  some  others  that 
followed  shordy  afterwards  ;  and  his  "  Notes  "  indicate  that  the  long  illness  had 
commenced,  although  he  was  not  then  aware  of  its  serious  nature  or  its  probable 
duration.     The  concluding  paragraphs  were  as  follows  : — 

"  Friends  will  note  that  all  the  above  meetings  were  held  in  one  week,  which  also 
included  two  Sabbath  services  and  the  great  communion  at  the  Tabernacle,  beside 
all  the  regular  home-work,  correspondence,  etc.  In  addition,  the  Lord's-day 
morning  sermon  had  to  be  revised,  and  published  the  following  Thursday  ;  and  the 
sermons  to  Sunday-school  teachers  and  sailors  were  received  for  revision,  and  duly 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


355 


attended  to.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  the  worker  gets  weary,  and  has  to  beg  friends  not 
to  impose  further  burdens  on  one  who  is  already  terribly  overladen  ? 

"On  Friday  evening,  May  15,  Mr.  Spurgeon  spoke  at  the  Presbyterian 
missionary  meeting  at  Exeter  Hall.  It  was  a  time  of  peculiar  bodily  weakness,  and 
of  special  spiritual  strength,  God  bless  our  friends  who  so  kindly  received  the 
message  and  the  messenger  ! 

"On  Sunday  evening,  May  17,  Mr.  Spurgeon  could  not  preach  ;  and  on  the 
Monday,  the  doctor  found  him  laid  aside  with  congestion  of  the  lungs  and  other 
matters,  which  forbid  his  quitting  his  chamber  for  some  little  time  to  come.  '  My 
times  are  in  Thy  hand.'  We  would  always  be  preaching :  howbeit,  the  Lord 
thinketh  not  so." 

The  text  quoted  by  the  Pastor  was  the  subject  of  his  Sabbath  morning  sermon 


C.    H.    SPURGEON    PREACHING    IN    THE   TABERNACLE,    189I. 


on  May  17,  which  many  have  supposed  to  be  his  last  discourse  in  the  Tabernacle. 
It  was  not,  however,  for  there  was  one  more  message  which  he  was  to  be  permitted 


556 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


to  speak  to  the  great  congregation  before  that  "  long  silence  "  which  was  only 
temporarily  broken  at  Mentone  on  the  following  New  Year's  Eve.  On  Lord's-day 
morning,  June  7,  1891,  Mr.  Spurgeon  stood  for  the  last  time  on  that  platform  which, 
for  thirty  years,  had  been  his  pulpit  throne,  and  from  which  he  had  proclaimed  the 
gospel  to  at  least  twenty  millions  of  hearers,  while,  by  means  of  the  printed  page, 
he  had  been  brought  into  communication  with  a  far  greater  number  of  readers  in 
all  quarters  of  the  globe.  His  text,  on  that  ever-memorable  morning,  was 
I  Samuel  xxx.  21 — 25  ;  and  the  sermon  was  published,  as  No.  2,208  in  the  regular 
weekly  issue,  under  the  title,  "  The  Statute  of  David  for  the  Sharing  of  the  Spoil." 
The  whole  discourse  was  a  noble  conclusion  to  the  Pastor's  ministry  in  the  beautiful 
sanctuary  which  was  ever  to  him  what  Zion  was  to  the  Jews  ;  but  the  final  sentences 
were  so  noteworthy  that  they  are  inserted  here,  in  full,  to  correspond  with 
"  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  First  Words  at  the  Tabernacle,"  given  in  Vol.  III.,  page   i. 


l>5*flonis 


X^berneicle 


If  you  wear  the  live^  of  Christ,  you  will  find  Him  so  meek  and  lowly 
of  heart  that  you  will  find  rest  unto  your  souls.He  is  the  most  magnan- 
imous of  captains.  There  never  was  His  like  among  the  choicest  of  princes 
He  is  always  to  be  found  in  the  thickest  part  of  the  battle.  When  the  wind 
blows  cold  He  always  takes  the  bleoksideof  thehilljheheaviestend  of 
the  cross  lies  ever  on  His  shoulders.  If  He  bids  us  carry  a  burden. He 
carries  it  also. If  there  is  anything  that  is  gracious.  generou5,kird,cind 
tender.yea  lavish  and  superabundant  in  love.you  always  find  it  in  Him. 
His  service  is  life,  peacejqy.  Oh.thatyou  would  enter  on  it  at  once!  God 
help  you  to  enlist  under  the  banner  of  JesUS  CHRIST ! 

c.  H.  spurgeon's  last  words  at  the  tabernacle,  JUNE  7,  1891, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


;57 


On  the  followingr  morning,  Mr.  Spurgeon  went  into  the  country,  to  be  the 
guest  of  Mr.  Gurteen,  of  Haverhill,  in  order  that  he  might  again  visit  Stambourne 
and  its  neighbourhood,  that  his  photographer  friend  might  take  the  views  which 
he  wished  to  have  reproduced  for  his  little  volume.  Memories  of  Stamboitrne.  The 
gout-mischief  that  was  lurking  in  his  system,  with  the  deadly  effects  of  the 
mysterious  malady  so  strangely  misnamed  influenza,  combined  to  produce  such 
alarming  symptoms  thaf  he  had  to  hurry  home  on  the  Friday  ;  and  then,  for  three 
months,  he  was  completely  laid  aside. 

One  of  the  additional  trials  of  the  early  part  of  his  illness  was  the  fact  that  he 
was  unable  to  preach  or  speak  in  connection  with  the  opening  of  the  Surrey 
Gardens  Memorial   Hall,  which  had  been  erected   partly  with  the  view  of  providing 


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MEMORIAL  HALL. 


suitable  accommodation  for  the  workers  connected  with  the  Carter  Street  Sunday- 
school,  but  also  as  a  permanent  memorial  of  the  Pastor's  ministry  in  the  Surrey 
Gardens  Music  Hall.  On  October  20,  1890,  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  Mr.  S.  R.  Pearce  had 
laid  the  foundation  stones  of  the  new  building  ;  Mr.  W.  Higgs  had  erected  it  in  his 
usual  excellent  and  generous  fashion  ;  and,  in  the  meantime,  the  whole  of  the 
amount   required    to    pay   for    it   had    been    raised.        The    opening    services  were 


358  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

postponed  from  June  2  to  June  23,  in  the  hope  that  the  Pastor  might  be  sufficiently 
restored  to  take  part  in  them  ;  but,  by  that  time,  his  illness  had  assumed  so  serious 
a  form  that  the  hope  had  to  be  abandoned,  and  the  premises  had  to  be  set  apart 
for  the  Lord's  service  under  the  shadow  of  an  impending  calamity  which  threatened 
to  add  still  greater  solemnity  to  the  memorial  character  of  the  work. 

About  that  time,  Dr.  Kidd  was  called  in  to  consult  with  Dr.  Miller,  of  Upper 
Norwood,  who  had  been  in  attendance  upon  Mr.  Spurgeon  since  May  18,  and 
Dr.  Russell  Reynolds  was  also  consulted.  For  a  while,  all  that  medical  skill, 
patient  watching,  and  careful  nursing  could  do,  appeared  to  be  of  no  avail  ;  and, 
with  the  use  of  all  means  that  seemed  wise  and  right,  prayer  was  being  offered, 
unceasingly,  by  believers  all  over  the  world.  The  Tabernacle  Church,  beginning 
with  a  whole  day  of  intercession  for  the  suffering  Pastor,  continued  to  meet,  morning, 
noon,  and  night,  to  plead  for  his  recovery.  In  hundreds  and  perhaps  thousands 
of  Nonconformist  places  of  worship,  sympathetic  petitions  were  presented  on  his 
behalf, — the  Chief  Rabbi  being  a  conspicuous  representative  of  those  who  held 
very  different  views  from  Mr.  Spurgeon's,  but  who  remembered  him  at  the  throne 
of  grace  in  his  season  of  suffering.  Many  of  the  clergy  of  the  Established 
Church,  with  their  congregations,  were  equally  earnest  in  praying  for  him,  the 
ecclesiastical  dignitaries  officiating  at  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  and  Westminster  Abbey 
joining  with  the  Archbishops  and  many  of  the  Bishops  in  interceding  on  his  behalf. 

The  secular  and  religious  press  of  our  own  and  other  lands  devoted  much 
space  to  accounts  of  his  illness,  and  particulars  of  his  work, — not  always  accurate, 
though,  on  the  whole,  exceedingly  kind  and  appreciative.  Telegrams,  letters,  and 
resolutions  of  sympathy  poured  into  "  VVestwood "  in  a  continuous  stream,  while 
those  who  called  or  sent  to  enquire  for  the  beloved  sufferer  were  of  all  ranks,  from 
the  Prince  of  Wales  and  a  great  proportion  of  the  nobility  of  the  country  to  the 
poorest  of  the  poor.  A  volume  might  be  filled  with  the  letters  from  notable 
individuals  who  wrote,  during  that  trying  time,  (and  the  period  of  bereavement 
that  followed  it,)  either  to  the  Pastor  or  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  ;  but  space  can  only  be 
spared  here  for  just  a  small  selection  of  the  most  representative  communications. 
The  one  that  probably  had  the  most  tender  associations  connected  with  it  was  written 
by  Mr.  Gladstone,  who  had  recently  lost  his  eldest  son.  He  was  staying  with  his 
friend,   Mr,  Colmian,  from  whose   house  he  sent  the   following   touching  epistle  : — 

"  Corton, 

"  Lowestoft, 

"July  16,  1891.  , 
"  My  Dear  Madam, 

"In  my  own  home,  darkened  at  the  present  time,  I  have  read  with  sad 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  359 

*    interest  the  daily  accounts  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  illness  ;    and   I   cannot  help  conveying 

to  you  the  earnest  assurance  of  my  sympathy  with  you  and  with  him,  and  of  my 

cordial  admiration,   not  only  of  his  splendid  powers,   but  still  more  of  his  devoted 

and  unfailing  character.      May  I  humbly  commend  you  and  him,  in  all  contingencies, 

to  the  infinite  stores  of  the  Divine  love  and  mercy,  and  subscribe  myself, — 

"My  dear  madam, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  W.   E.  Gladstone." 
"  Mrs.  Spurgeon." 

In  reply,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  wrote  as  follows  : — 

"Westwood, 

"July  i8,  1891. 
"  Deg,r  Mr.  Gladstone, 

"Your  words   of  sympathy  have  a  special   significance  and   tenderness 

coming  from  one  who  has  just  passed  through  the  deep  waters  which  seem  now 

to  threaten  me.      I  thank  you  warmly  for  your  expression  of  regard  for  my  beloved 

husband,  and  with  all  my  heart  I   pray  that  the  consolations  of  God  may  abound 

towards  you  even  as  they  do  to  me.     Although  we  cannot  yet  consider  the  dear 

patient   out   of  danger,   the   doctors   have   to-day  issued  a  somewhat  more  hopeful 

bulletin.      I  feel  it  an  honour  to  be  allowed  to  say  that  I  shall  ever  be — 

"Your  grateful  friend, 

"  S.    Spurgeon.     (Mrs.  C.   H.)" 

Mr.  Gladstone's  letter  arrived  at  "Westwood"  just  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
enjoying  one  of  the  brief  intervals  between  the  long  periods  of  delirium  which 
were  so  painful  a  feature  of  his  illness.  He  was  delighted  to  hear  the  great 
statesman's  epistle  read,  and  said  that  he  should  like  to  add  a  few  words  to  his 
dear  wife's  grateful  acknowledgment  of  it.  Accordingly,  with  his  own  hand,  he 
wrote  this  postscript, — the  first  words  that  he  had  penned  for  weeks  : — ■ 

"  P.S. — Yours  is  a  word  of  love  such  as  those  only  write  who  have  been 
into  the  King's  country,  and  have  seen  much  of  His  face.  My  heart's  love  to 
you. — C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

The  following  letter  from  Earl  Fortescue  is  a  good  specimen  of  the  expressions 
of  sympathy  from  many  of  the  truly  noble  men  and  women  of  the  land  : — 

"  48,   Grosvenor   Gardens,   S.W., 

"July  18,  '9.1. 
"  Dear  Madam, 

"  I  had  hoped  to  have  called,  some  days  ago,  to  testify  my  deep  regret, 

on  both  public  and   private    grounds,   at    Mr.    Spurgeon's    serious    illness,    and    to 


360  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

express  my  sincere  sympathy  with   you    in   your  long  and  terrible    anxiety.       But 

I  found  I  unfortunately  could  not  manage  to  do  so. 

"  I  therefore  intrude  upon  you  with  this  line  instead,  which  requires  no  answer. 

I  will  just  add  that   I   am,   from    saddest    experience,  only  too    well    able    both    to 

appreciate  your  anxiety,    and  to    feel    for    you    under    the   severe  trial   with  which 

the   Almighty,   in    His   infinite   love   and  inscrutable   wisdom,   has  seen   fit   to   visit 

you  and  your  honoured  husband.      May  God,  as  He  alone  can,  support  and  cheer 

you  both,   whether    He,   in  answer    to    the   prayers    of  thousands,    shall   vouchsafe 

to  prolong  that  precious  life,  or  whether   He  shall  decide   to  call  up    His  faithful 

servant  to  rest  and  glory  ! 

"Yours  truly, 

"  Mrs.  Spurgeon."  "  Fortescue." 

Quite  a  number  of  letters  came  from  Bishops  of  the  Church  of  England  ;  two 
of  the  choicest  of  them  were  written  by  the  Bishops  of  Worcester  (Dr.  Perowne) 
and  Exeter  (Dr.  Bickersteth).     They  were  as  follows : — 

"  Hartlebury  Castle, 

"  Kidderminster, 

"  23  July,  1891. 
"  Dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon, 

"  May  I  ask  you  to  convey,  for  me,  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  if  he  is  able 
to  bear  it,  the  expression  of  my  heartfelt  sympathy  in  his  illness,  and  my  earnest 
prayers  that,  of  God's  great  mercy,  he  may  be  restored  to  health }  I  am  very 
thankful  to  see,  by  to-day's  bulletin,  that  there  is  some  slight  improvement.  God 
grant  that  it  may  continue  ! 

"  Permit  me  to  offer  to  you  also  the  assurance  of  my  respectful  sympathy  in 
the  long  and  anxious  watch  that  you  have  had  by  your  husband's  sick-bed.  I  do 
not  know  him  personally  ;  but  he  has  written  me  some  very  kind  letters,  and  all 
the  world  knows  him  by  his  work,  and  every  Christian  heart  must  feel  for  him, 
and  for  you,  and  his  family,  and  pray  for  his  recovery. 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"J.  J.  S.  Worcester." 

"  The  Palace, 

"  Exeter, 

"28  July,  1891. 
"  My  Dear  Madam, 

"  May  I  venture  to  assure  you  that  we  have  mingled  our  prayers  with 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  361 

those  of  countless  others  on  behalf  of  your  beloved  husband  in  this  time  of  need  ? 
My  wife  and  I  have  prayed  for  him  together,  and  also  with  our  children  and 
servants.  God  will  be  with  you  ;  and,  as  the  trial  of  your  faith  has  been  so  lono-, 
the  consolation  of  His  love  will  supply  all  your  wants,  and  breathe  the  peace 
of  God  into  your  heart  and  home. 

"  I  have  ventured  to  enclose  two  hymns,  one  of  which  your  husband  has 
so  kindly  spoken  of,  and  possibly  he  may  like  to  have  them  within  reach. 

"  Believe  me, 

"  Yours  in  true  sympathy, 
"  Mrs.  Spurgeon."  "  E.  H.  Exon." 

The  ^hymn  referred  to  was  Bishop  Bickersteth's  well-known  one,  "  Peace ! 
perfect  peace  !  "  on  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  spoken  when  visiting  a  sick  friend  at 
Mentone.  His  address  was  published  in  The  Sivord  and  the  Troivel  for  July, 
1 89 1,  just  at  the  most  critical  period  of  his  own  illness  ;  and  many  readers  were 
comforted  by  his  comment  on  the  lines — 

"Peace!  perfect  peace!  death  shadowing  us  and  ours? 
Jesus  has  vanquish'd  death  and  all  its  powers." 

Archbishop  and   Mrs.    Benson  called  or  sent  many    times  to  enquire  for  the 

suffering  Pastor.     The  following  letter  belongs  to  the  period  of  partial  convalescence 

when  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  able  to  drive  as  far  as  Addington  ;  but  it  seems  to  fit 

in  more  appropriately  after  the  Bishops'  epistles  :— 

"  Addington  Park, 

' '  Croydon, 

"  I  Oct.,  1891. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  I  was  surprised  and  delighted  to  see  your  handwriting,  and  to  see  it  so 

firm  and  clear.      I  only  lamented  that,  as  you  were  actually  here,  it  had  not  been  my 

good  fortune  to  see  you.      We  do  earnestly  hope  that  when  (and  may  it  soon  be  !) 

you  are  able  to  leave  your  carriage,  and  come  in,  you  will  do  so  ;  or,  in  the  middle 

of  your  ride,  let  us  bring  you  out  a  glass  of  wine  or  a  cup  of  tea. 

"  We  know  how  much  you  must  have   suffered,   and  we   have   watched  your 

retardations  and  advances  with  hearts  full  of  regard  and  hope.      It  has  been  oiven 

to  you,  not  only  to  labour  for  Christ,  and  to  bring  many  souls  within  the  knowledo-e 

and  feeling  of  the  Atonement ;  but — it  seems  to  follow  with  so  many  of  those  who 

have  come  nearest  to  Him  in  that  great  way,  to  be  drawn  into  closest  sympathy  with 

His   sufferings, — to   catch    the   reality  of   those  mysterious   words,    Ka\  avTavairX^pw  rk 

vaTepiJixara  rwv  dXv^ewy  rov  XptcTTov  ev  rp  aapKL  fiou.*     No  doubt  there   are   also   some  verses 

in  the  Psalms  which  you  can  now,  more  than  ever,  make  your  own. 

*  Colossians  i-  24 :  "  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  ot  Christ  in  my  flesh." 


362  c.    H.     spurgeon's   autobiography. 

■  I  do  greatly  rejoice  if,  according  to  your  own  kind  thought,  it  has  been 
possible  that  expressions  of  sympathy  have  been  unlocked  to  you.  But  you  may  be 
quite  sure  that  the  sympathy  was  most  genuine  in  all  who  have  shown  it.  They 
had  shown  it  to  their  Master,  long  before,  in  prayer  that  He  would  lay  His  hand  on 
y-ou  in  healing,  and  give  you  yet  time  for  garnering  for  Him. 

"We  join  in  sincerest  wishes  and  sympathies  for  Mrs.  Spurgeon  also.  Pray 
let  us  see  you  on  some  other  drive. 

"  Yours  most  sincerely  in  the  one  Lord, 

"  Edw.   Cantuar." 

"  P.S. — I  think  it  must  have  been  your  sick  handwriting  on  a  wrapper  of  The 
Greatest  Fight  before  I  went  away.      If  so,  thank  you  more  and  more." 

The  progress   towards    a    measure   of    recovery    may   be   briefly    traced.       On 
August  9,    the   following   letter,   the  first   written   by  the  Pastor's  own  hand    after 
his  long  illness,  was  read  to  the  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  was  received 
both  as  an  answer  to  prayer,  and  an  encouragement  to  continued  intercession  : — 
"  Dear  Brethren, 

"  The  Lord's  Name  be  praised  for  first  giving  and  then  hearing  the 
loving  prayers  of  His  people!  Through  these  prayers  my  life  is  prolonged.  I 
feel  greatly  humbled,  and  very  grateful,  at  being  the  object  of  so  great  a  love  and 
so  wonderful  an  outburst  of  prayer. 

"  I  have  not  strength  to  say  more.      Let  the  Name  of  the  Lord  be  glorified. 

"  Yours  most  heartily, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

Even  after  the  first  signs  of  improvement  were  manifest,  a  long  and  wearisome 
time  followed,  hopeful  advances  alternating  with  disappointing  relapses.  At  last,  the 
dear  patient  was  able  to  be  carried  downstairs,  and  to  be  wheeled  round  his  garden, 
where  the  fresh  air  seemed  to  work  wonders  for  him.  On  entering  his  study,  for  the 
first  time,  and  catching  sight  of  the  final  proofs  oi  John  Ploughman  s  Almanack  and 
Sp2trgeons  Illnstrated  Almanack,  and  then  asking  for  copies  of  the  recently-issued 
sermons  and  magazine,  he  exclaimed,  "  Why  !  you  have  carried  on  everything  just  as 
if  I  had  been  here."  Those  who  were  responsible  for  the  work  felt  that,  if  possible, 
nothing  must  be  allowed  to  suffer  during  his  absence  ;  and  it  was  a  great  joy  to 
them  to  find  how  highly  their  services  were  appreciated  by  the  Pastor.  It  was  also 
a  providential  arrangement  by  which  the  issue  of  the  various  works  was,  at  first, 
temporarily  undertaken  during  the  dear  author's  illness,  for  then,  when  it  became 
necessary  to  publish  them,  after  his  home-going,  his  helpers  had  only  to  continue 
the  plans  which  had  already  been  for  some  months  in  operation. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


As  the  autumn  advanced,  and  the  patient's  weakness  did  not  disappear,  it 
became  certain  that  he  must  go  to  Mentone  for  the  winter  if  he  could  journey  so  far. 
The  renewed  offer  of  Dr.  Pierson,  to  cross  the  Atlantic  if  he  could  be  of  any  service 
to  the  Pastor,  appeared  to  everyone  another  providential  arrangement  ;  and, 
ultimately,  it  was  settled  that  he  should  commence  his  service  at  the  Tabernacle  on 
Lord's-day,  October  25.  In  order  to  test  the  invalid's  power  to  travel,  .an 
experimental  visit  was  paid  to  Eastbourne  from  October  3  to  16.  This  proved  most 
satisfactory,  and  it  also  further  indicated  the  absolute  necessity  of  a  prolonged  rest  in 
the  sunny  South.  Accordingly,  on  Monday,  October  26,  Pastor  and  Mrs.  C.  H. 
Spurgeon,  Pastor  and  Mrs.  J.  A.  Spurgeon,  and  Mr.  Harrald  started  on  their 
thousand  miles'  journey.  They  were  accompanied  as  far  as  Calais  by  two  of  the 
Tabernacle  deacons,  Messrs.  Allison  and  Higgs.  It  was  stated  in  various 
newspapers  at  the  time  that  Baron  Rothschild  had  placed  his  saloon  carriage  at  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  disposal.  This  was  not  the  case,  for  Messrs.  Alabaster,  Passmore,  and 
Sons  and  Mr.  John  M.  Cook  most  generously  defrayed  the  cost  of  the  saloon  carriage 
from  Calais  to  Mentone,  and  so  enabled  the  whole  party  to  travel  in  ease  and  comfort, 
and  to  arrive  at  their  destination  on  Thursday,  October  29.  After  the  return  to 
England  of  Pastor  and  Mrs.   I.  A.  Spurgeon,  Miss  E.   H.  Thorne,  who  had  then 


MISS   E.    H.   THORNE. 


been  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  devoted  companion  and  friend, 
arrived.  Her  services  had  been  invaluable  throughout  the  whole  of  that  long  period, 
and  especially  during  the  trying  experiences  of  the  pa-st  summer  ;  and  her  presence 
at  Mentone  was  a  great  comfort  and  help,  particularly  in   the  last  anxious  days  and 


>64 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


nights  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  illness.  Blessed  with  good  health,  and  a  bright,  cheery 
spirit,  she  was  able  most  lovingly  and  loyally  to  minister  to  the  dear  sufferer  right  to 
the  end  of  his  earthly  life,  and  then  remained  to  share  the  sorrow  of  the  bereaved 
one  until  together  they  returned  to  "  VVestwood "  to  carry  on  the  many  forms  of 
Christian  service  still  associated  with  that  hallowed  home. 


THE    SITTING-ROOM    AT    WENTOiNE. 


CHAPTER    CVI. 


€\)t  Imt  Cljm  Jlontfjs  at  JSltntottt ;— anii  afttrfaarirs. 

"And  there  was  given  unto  them  a  short  time  before  they  went  forward." 

"  Upon  this  sunny  shore 
A  httle  space  for  rest.     The  care  and  sorrow, 

Sad  memory's  haunting  pain  that  would  not  cease, 
Are  left  behind.     It  is  not  yet  to-morrow. 

To-day  there  falls  the  dear  surprise  of  peace  ; 
The  sky  and  sea,  their  broad  wings  round  us  sweeping, 
Close  out  the  world,  and  hold  us  in  their  keeping. 
A  little  space  for  rest.    Ah  !  though  soon  o'er. 
How  precious  is  it  on  the  sunny  shore  ! 

"  Upon  this  sunny  shore 
A  little  space  for  love,  while  those,  our  dearest. 

Yet  linger  with  us  ere  they  take  their  flight 
To  that  far  world  which  now  doth  seem  the  nearest, 

So  deep  and  pure  this  sky's  down-bending  light. 
Slow,  one  by  one,  the  golden  hours  are  given, 
A  respite  ere  the  earthly  ties  are  riven. 
When  left  alone,  how,  'mid  our  tears,  we  store 
Each  breath  of  their  last  days  upon  this  shore  I 

"  Upon  this  sunny  shore 
A  little  space  to  wait  :  the  life-bowl  broken, 

The  silver  cord  unloosed,  the  mortal  name 
We  bore  upon  this  earth  by  God's  voice  spoken. 

While  at  the  sound  all  earthly  praise  or  blame. 
Our  joys  and  griefs,  alike  with  gentle  sweetness 
Fade  in  the  dawn  of  the  next  world's  completeness. 
The  hour  is  Thine,  dear  Lord  ;  we  ask  no  more, 
But  wait  Thy  summons  on  the  sunny  shore." — Author  unknown. 


T  was  a  tender  token  of  the  Lord's  lovingkindness  that  husband 
and  wife  were,  for  once,  permitted  to  travel  together  to  Mentone, 
and  to  spend  there  three  months  of  perfect  happiness  before  the 
sorrowful  separation  which  had  been  so  long  dreaded,  but  which 
came  at  last  almost  without  warning.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  oft-expressed 
longing,- — "  Oh,  that  my  dear  wifey  could  see  all  the  beauties  and 
glories  of  this  land  of  sunshine  and  flowers  !  " — was  at  length  realized  ;  and  he  had 
the  joy  of  pointing  out  to  her  the  many  scenes  with  which  he  had  been  familiar 
for  years,  but  which  became  doubly  precious  to  him  under  such  delightful 
circumstances.  The  rooms  in  the  Hotel  Beau  Rivage,  which  he  and  his  friends 
had  occupied  year  by  year,  soon  began  to  give  evidence  of  a  lady's  presence  in 
them.     A  very  special  adornment  was  commenced  for  the  large  sitting-room  which 


?66 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


had  become  a  peculiarly  hallowed  spot  to  all  the  members  of  the  Pastor's  Mentone 
circle  because  of  the  morning  gatherings  there  for  the  reading  ot  the  Word  and 
prayer,  and  the  still  more  sacred  Sabbath  afternoon  meetings  around  the  table  of 
the   Lord. 


THE  SITTING-ROOM   AT   MENTONE   (SECOND  VIEW). 

At  the  top  of  the  accompanying  illustration,  and  also  of  the  one  given  on 
page  364,  several  texts  of  Scripture  can  be  read.  They  form  part  of  the  series  of 
passages  which  Mrs.  Spurgeon  worked  upon  perforated  cards  as  a  grateful  memorial 
of  God's  goodness  in  taking  them  both  safely  to  the  sunny  South  after  all  their 
painful  experiences  in  England  during  the  preceding  summer  and  autumn.  In  the 
above  view  of  the  sitting-room,  the  partly-drawn  curtains  reveal  the  extra  space 
where  many  worshippers  and  communicants  assembled  when  the  first  room  was 
filled  with  the  earlier  comers.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  weakness  prevented  him  from 
resuming  those  much-prized  services,  during  his  last  sojourn  "  on  the  sunny 
shore,"    except    on    the    memorable    occasions    hereafter    mentioned  ;    but    he    lost 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Z^7 


no    time    in    beginning    such    literary   work    as    he    felt   able    to    accomplish.       He 
spent   many  hours   in    the    "cosy  corner"   here    represented,  and   was   not  willing 


MR.    SPURGEON  S     '•COSY   CORNER      AT   JIENTONE. 


to  admit  that  he  was  doing  too  much  for  an  invalid.  He  wrote  many  post 
cards  and  letters  while  sitting  at  that  table,  but  his  chief  employment  was  the 
continuation  of  his  Exposition  of  the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew,  to  which 
reference  has  been  made  in  Chapter  CH.  Some  articles  for  The  Sword  afid  the 
Trowel,  with  "  Notes  "  and  reviews  of  books,  also  came  from  his  busy  pen  ;  but 
he  expressly  said  that  he  only  occupied  the  editorial  chair  while  he  wrote  the 
Preface  to  the  magazine  volume  for  1891.  The  important  work  of  sermon-revision 
was  also  left  almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  those  upon  whom  it  had  devolved 
during  his  long  illness,  the  only  exceptions  being  the  two  notable  discourses, 
"Gratitude  for  Deliverance  from  the  Grave,"  and  "A  Stanza  of  Deliverance," 
intended  for  reading  on  the  first  and  last  Lord's-days  in  January,  1892. 

The  December  number  of  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  opened  with  an  article 
by  Mr.  Spurgeon  under  the  suggestive  title,  "  .'^  .'*  ?"     In  his  usual  graphic  fashion, 


368 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


he  described  his  own  physical  condition,  and  made  use  of  it  in  suggesting  enquiries 
concerning  his  readers'  spiritual  state.  In  that  paper,  he  referred  to  the  two  things 
which  were  characteristic  of  a  great  part  of  his  time  of  partial  convalescence,— the 
deceptive  appearance  of  a  return  to  health,  and  the  fact  that  the  deadly  disease  was 
still  firmly  entrenched  within  his  system,  and  ready  at  any  moment  to  end  his  earthly 
existence. 

One  great  help  to  him  was  the  bright  sunshine  in  which  he  was  able  to  spend 
so  much  of  his  time.  He  almost  lived  in  the  open  air,  usually  going  for  a  drive  in 
the  morning,  and  in  the  afternoon  having  a  ride  in  a  Bath  chair,  along  the 
Promenade  St.  Louis.  This  was  the  scene  of  the  walking  exercise  in  which  he 
engaged  so  perseveringly  in  the  winter  of  1 890-1,  and  of  which  he  wrote  in  the 
letters  mentioned  in  Chapter  CIV. 

A  favourite  route  for  a  short  drive  was,  around  the  Boulevard  Victoria,  and 
along  the  breakwater,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  admired  the  view  of  the  old  town 
across  the  harbour. 


THE   OLD   TOWN,    MENTONE,   AS   SEEN    FROM   THE   BREAKWATER. 

One  of  the  longest  and  latest  drives  that  the  Pastor  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  took 
together  was  mentioned  on  a  post  card,  written  to  Mr.  Passmore,  and  which  is 
reproduced  ii  facsimile  on  the  opposite  page,  with  a  view  of  the  fountain  to  which 
Mr.  Spurgeon  alluded. 


C.  H.  SPURGEON  S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


369 


THE  FOUNTAIN  ON  THE  TURBIE  ROAD,  NEAR  MENTONE. 


/u<.«-»*-^ 


tfk-'V-v^      ^. 


o^ 


r^' 


^  al 


/^    (Vv..,-:,-^-^ — '^oJ--.^   /■'--^    '^^■-'■CZa- 


t^^^ 


uA  ^ 


''^  Z(M-t<_-^    Jt^^j-jO,^    ^c-cr^;->-- <_V'  V 


X  n  *<^    ./--*^  *v^ 


/^.^— ^^-^ 


FACSIMILE    OF    POST   CARD   FROM    MR.   SPURGEON    TO    MR.    PASSMORE. 

The    "  telegram    of    sympathy    to    Sandringham "    related,    of   course,    to    the 
death    of   the    Duke    of    Clarence.      The    scene    upon    which   the   travellers   gazed 

z  4 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


as   they  started  on   their  return   journey  to    Mentone  is  depicted   in  the  following; 
illustration. 


VIEVV    FROM    THE    FOUNTAIN    ON   THE   TURBIE    ROAD. 


The  events  of  those  memorable  months  were  described  in  detail  in  Th:  Szvord 
and  the  Trowel  and  the  memorial  volume,  From  the  Pulpit  to  the  Palm  Branch, 
but  the  principal  incidents  can  only  be  briefly  outlined  here.  On  the  New  Year's 
Eve  and  the  following  morning,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave,  to  a  privileged  circle  of 
friends,  the  two  charming  addresses,  which  he  afterwards  revised  for  publication 
in  the  magazine,  under  the  title,  "  Breaking  the  Long  Silence." 

He  also  conducted  two  short  services  in  his  sitting-room,  on  January  lo 
and  17,  when  he  was  persuaded  not  to  attempt  to  give  a  new  address,  and  rather 
reluctantly  consented  to  read  portions  of  his  early  sermon  on  Psalm  Ixxiii.  28,  and 
his  Exposition  of  Matthew  xv.  21 — 28.  On  the  second  Sabbath  evening, — January  17, 
1892, — before  offering  the  closing  prayer  at  the  final  service  in  which  he  took  part 
on  earth,  he  gave  out  the  last  hymn  he  was  ever  to  announce  to  a  company  of 
worshippers  here  below.  If  he  could  have  foreseen  what  was  to  happen  only 
a  fortnight  later,  he  could  hardly  have  chosen  a  more  appropriate  farewell  than  the 
poem  founded  on  some  words  of  the  sainted  Samuel   Rutherford, — 

"  The  sands  of  time  are  sinking. 

The  dawn  of  Heaven  breaks, 
The  summer  morn  I've  sighed  for,— 

The  fair,  sweet  morn  awakes. 
Dark,  dark  hath  been  the  midnight, 

But  dayspring  is  at  hand, 
And  'glory,   glory  dwelleth 

In  Immanuel's  land.'" 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  37 1 

On  the  two  following  days,  the  wind  was  very  rough,  so  Mr.  Spurgeon  went 
only  for  short  drives  ;  but  on  Wednesday  morning,  he  was  able  to  go  as  far  as  the 
little  village  of  Monti.  In  the  afternoon,  signs  of  gout  appeared  in  his  right  hand  ; 
later  in  the  day,  other  serious  symptoms  were  manifest,  and  he  had  to  retire  to 
the  bed  from  which  he  never  again  rose.  Dr.  FitzHenry,  a  faithful  friend  as  well 
as  the  Pastor's  skilful  medical  adviser,  had  been  in  attendance  upon  him  from  the 
time  of  his  arrival  at  Mentone  ;  he  did  all  that  was  possible  to  relieve  his  pain, 
and  prolong  his  precious  life.  Miss  Thorne  undertook  the  onerous  duties  of  nifht 
nurse  in  addition  to  almost  continuous  help  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  durino-  the  day  ; 
Mr.  Allison,  Mr.  Harrald,  and  Pastor  G.  Samuel  rendered  all  the  aid  in  their 
power  ;  but  it  was  soon  evident  that  a  great  crisis  was  approaching,  though  there 
were  intervals  of  improvement  which  gave  ground  for  slight  hope.  Towards  the 
end  of  the  week,  the  Pastor  said  to  his  secretary,  "  My  work  is  done,"  and  spoke 
of  some  matters  in  a  way  that  indicated  his  own  conviction  that  he  was  not  ooincr 
to  recover. 

Tuesday,  January  26,  was  the  day  on  which  thankofferings  were  brought  to 
the  Tabernacle,  in  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  Pastor's  partial  restoration. 
By  that  time,  he  had  become  so  much  worse  that  he  was  for  a  long  while  only 
partly  conscious  ;  but  he  had  not  forgotten  the  special  character  of  the  day,  and' 
he  sent  a  telegram  which,  under  the  circumstances,  was  peculiarly  significant : — 
"  Self  and  wife,  £100,  hearty  thankoffering  towards  Tabernacle  General  Expenses. 
Love  to  all  friends''  That  was  his  last  generous  act,  and  his  last  message;  for, 
shortly  afterwards,  he  became  totally  unconscious,  and  remained  so  until  five 
minutes  past  eleven  on  the  Sabbath  night, — January  31,  1892, — when,  like  his 
namesake,  Mr.  Valiant-for-truth,  "he  passed  over,  and  all  the  trumpets  sounded 
for  him  on  the  other  side."  The  five  who  "  accompanied  him  to  the  riverside  " 
were  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  Miss  Thorne,  Mr.  Harrald,  Mr.  Allison,  and  Mr.  Samuel. 
When  all  was  over,  Mr.  H.  offered  prayer,  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  thanked  the  Lord 
for  the  precious  treasure  so  long  lent  to  her,  and  sought,  at  the  throne  of  grace, 
strength  and  guidance  for  all  the  future.  The  answer  to  part  of  her  supplication 
came  at  once,  for  she  was  able  to  send  to  "  Son  Tom  "  at  the  Antipodes  the  brief 
but  comforting  message,  "  Father  in   Heaven.      Mother  resioned." 

In  the  meantime,  the  news  was  being  flashed  all  over  the  world,  and  in  every 
quarter  of  the  globe  many  felt  a  sense  of  personal  loss  as  they  read  or  heard  it. 
The  telegraph  wires  at  Mentone  were  speedily  blocked  with  the  multitudes  of 
messages  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon, — the  Prmce  and  Princess  of  Wales  being  among  the 
first  to   "desire  to  express  their  deep  sympathy  with  her  in  her  great  sorrow." 

The  local  regulations  necessitated  the  removal  of  the  precious  body,  from  the 


!72 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAI'IIV 


hotel  to   the   cemetery,   within  twenty-four  hours,   and   then   the  bedroom  was   left 
as  it  appears  in  the  accompanyino-  illustration.      Mentone  being-  the  home  of  the 


MR.   SPURGEONS   BEDROOM   AT   MENTONE,    AFTER    HIS   REMOVAL 

flowers,  many  beautiful  wreaths  were  sent  by  friends  ;  but  Mrs.  Spurgeon  intimated 
her  preference  for  palm  branches  as  the  most  suitable  emblems  of  her  dear 
husband's  victorious  entrance  into  "  the  presence  of  the  King."  At  the  head  and 
foot  of  the  olive  casket,  were  plates  bearing  the  following  inscription  ; — 

In  ever-loving  memory  of 

Charles     Haddon    Spurgeon, 

Born  at   Kelvedon,   June   19,    1834  ; 

Fell  asleep  in  Jesus  at  Mentone,   January  31,    1892. 

"  /  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faiths 

In  the  early  years  of  his  visits  to  Wotton,  in  Surrey,  the  Pastor  had  always  said 
that   he   should   like   to   be  buried   in  the   churchyard   of  that  village.       Later,    he 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


0/  J 


expressed  the  wish  to  He  in  the  centre  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  grounds,  for  he 
thought  that  many  would  come  to  look  at  his  grave,  and  then  help  the  orphans  in 
whom  he  took  so  deep  an  interest ;  but  when  the  Electric  Railway  caused  such 
a  disturbance  to  the  Institution,  he  abandoned  that  idea.  At  one  time,  he  said 
he  would  like  to  be  buried  at  Mentone  ;  but,  after  he  had  attended  the  funeral  of  a 
friend  there,  he  gave  up  that  notion.  Last  of  all,  it  was  mentioned  that  he  had 
pointed  to  a  site  in  Norwood  cemetery, —  in  a  far  less  conspicuous  position  than  the 
one  ultimately  chosen, — and  ask-ed  that  it  might  be  reserved  for  him  ;  so  that,  in 
death,  as  in  life,  he  might  be  surrounded  by  his  church-officers  and  members,  many 
hundreds  of  whom  are  buried  there.  The  Tabernacle  deacons  sent  an  urgent 
request  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  asking  that  this  might  be  the  arrangement,  and 
generously  offering  to  defray  all  expenses,  and  the  matter  was  so  settled.  Before 
proceeding  to  the  railway  station,  a  touching  memorial  service  was  held  in  the 
Scotch  Church,  at  the  opening  of  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  preached  a  year  before. 
At  the  station,  a  photograph  of  the  cortege  was  taken,  and  it  is  reproduced  here. 


THE  FUNERAL  CORTEGE  AT  MENTONE  RAILWAY  STATION. 


■;-_l  C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

0/  ■+ 

The  memorial  and  funeral  services  at  the  Tabernacle,  from  February  7  to  11, 
were  probably  attended  by  not  less  than  a  hundred  thousand  people.  A  full  account 
of  the  proceedings  appears  in  the  volume,  From  the  Pulpit  to  the  Palm  Branch, 
but  many  volumes  would  be  required  to  describe  the  different  gatherings  held 
simultaneously,  or  on  the  following  Sabbath,  all  over  the  world.  Mrs.  Spurgeon's 
request  that  friends,  who  wished  to  send  wreaths,  would  instead  give  the  amount 
they  would  have  cost  to  the  Institutions  founded  by  her  dear  husband,  was  very 
generally  complied  with,  though  there  were  a  few  choice  floral  oflerings  of  love. 
Most  of  the  palm  branches,  which  surrounded  the  olive  casket,  were  cut  from  the 
very  trees  in  the  garden  of  the  Hotel  Beau  Rivage,  of  which  the  Pastor  wrote 
in  the  letter  which  appears  on  page  344. 


THE  OLIVE  CASKET  UNDER  THE  PALM  BRANCHES  IN  THE  TABERNACLE. 


The  Bible  on  the  top  of  the  casket  was  the  one  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  so  long  used 
in  the  Tabernacle.  It  was  opened  at  Isaiah  xlv.  22  :  "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  "— the  text  which,  on  January  6,  1850,  had  been 


C.     II.     SPURGEOf;  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  375 

tlessed  to  his  conversion.  The  volume  remained  in  that  position  all  the  way 
from  Newington  to  Norwood, — as  the  sword  of  the  warrior  accompanies  him  to 
the  grave.  Never  had  the  South  of  London  witnessed  such  a  procession  as, 
that  day,  slowly  mo\ed  from  the  Tabernacle  to  the  cemetery  ;  and  never  had 
such  crowds  assembled  along  that  route.  More  than  eighteen  years  before,  the 
Pastor  had  given  a  description  of  the  scene  ;  but  probably  even  he  had  no 
conception  of  the  throng  that  would  gather  to  do  honour  to  his  memory.      At  the 

close  of  his  sermon,   on    Lord's-day   evening,    December    27,    1874,   he   said: "In 

.a  little  while,  there  will  be  a  concourse  of  persons  in  the  streets.  Methinks  I 
hear  someone  enquiring,  '  What  are  all  these  people  waiting  for  }  '  '  Do  you  not 
know?  He  is  to  be  buried  to-day.'  'And  who  is  that  .-^ '  'It  is  Spuro-eon.' 
*  What !  the  man  that  preached  at  the  Tabernacle  ?  '  '  Yes  ;  he  is  to  be  buried 
to-day.'  That  will  happen  very  soon  ;  and  when  you  see  my  coffin  carried  to 
the  silent  grave,  I  should  like  every  one  of  you,  whether  converted  or  not,  to 
be  constrained  to  say,  '  He  did  earnestly  urge  us,  in  plain  and  simple  language, 
not  to  put  off  the  consideration  of  eternal  things.  He  did  entreat  us  to 
look  to  Christ.  Now  he  is  gone,  our  blood  is  not  at  his  door  if  we  perish.' 
God  grant  that  you  may  not  have  to  bear  the  bitter  reproach  of  your  own 
conscience!  But,  as  I  feel  'the  time  is  short,'  I  will  stir  you  up  so  lono-  as  I 
am  in  this  Tabernacle." 

Though  the  scene  along  the  route  was  striking,  that  presented  at  the  cemetery 
was,  in  some  respects,  even  more  so.  The  long  line  of  ministers,  and  students,  and 
■other  friends,  all  in  mourning  garb,  reaching  from  the  entrance  to  the  grave  itself,  was 
a  sight  that  could  never  be  forgotten  by  those  who  saw  it.  At  length,  the  vast 
throng  clustered  in  a  dense  mass  around  and  upon  the  slope  outside  the  cemetery 
chapel,  where  the  last  service  was  to  be  conducted.  The  principal  part  in  the  closino- 
ceremony  fell  to  the  share  of  Pastor  Archibald  G.  Brown,  and  nothing  could  have 
been  more  beautiful,  or  more  suitable,  than  his  solemn  and  touching  words.  They 
came  straight  from  his  heart  :  they  entered  thousands  of  other  hearts.  With  o-reat 
pathos  and  many  pauses,  he  said  : — 

"  Beloved  President,  Faithful  Pastor,  Prince  of  Preachers,  Brother  Beloved, 
Dear  Spurgeon, — -We  bid  thee  not  '  farewell,'  but  only  tor  a  little  while  'good-night.' 
Thou  shalt  rise  soon,  at  the  first  dawn  of  the  resurrection  day  of  the  redeemed.  Yet 
is  not  the  'good-night'  ours  to  bid,  but  thine.  It  is  we  who  linger  in  the 
darkness  ;  thou  art  in  God's  own  light.  Our  night,  too,  shall  soon  be  past,  and 
with  it  all  our  weeping.  Then,  with  thine,  our  songs  shall  greet  the  morning  of  a 
day  that  knows  no  cloud  nor  close,  for  there  is  no  night  there. 

"  Hard  Worker  in  the  field,  thy  toil  is  ended  !  Straight  has  been  the  furrow 
thou  hast  ploughed.      No   looking   back    has    marred    thy   course.      Harvests  have 


376  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

followed  thy  patient  sowing,  and  Heaven  is  already  rich  with  thine  ingathered 
sheaves,  and  shall  be  still  enriched  through  years  yet  lying  in  eternity. 

"  Champion  of  God,  thy  battle  long  and  nobly  fought  is  over  !  The  sword, 
which  clave  to  thine  hand,  has  dropped  at  last  ;  the  palm  branch  takes  its  place. 
No  longer  does  the  helmet  press  thy  brow,  oft  weary  with  its  surging  thoughts  of 
battle  ;  the  victor's  wreath  from  the  Great  Commander's  hand  has  already  proved 
thy  full  reward. 

"  Here,  for  a  litde  while,  shall  rest  thy  precious  dust.  Then  shall  thy  Well- 
beloved  come,  and  at  His  voice  thou  shalt  spring  from  thy  couch  of  earth,  fashioned 
like  unto  His  glorious  body.  Then  spirit,  soul,  and  body  shall  magnify  thy  Lord's 
redemption.  Until  then,  beloved,  sleep  !  We  praise  God  for  thee  ;  and,  by  the 
blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  we  hope  and  expect  to  praise  God  vjitli  thee. 
Amen." 

The  memorial  number  of  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  contained  the  following- 
paragraphs,  which  will  fitly  close  the  account  of  that  memorable  season  : — "While 
we  gathered  around  the  grave,  a  little  patch  of  blue  sky  appeared,  just  over  our 
heads,  as  if  to  remind  us  of  the  glory-land  above  ;  and  while  Mr.  Brown  was 
speaking,  a  dove  flew  from  the  direction  of  the  Tabernacle  towards  the  tomb,  and, 
wheeling  in  its  flight  over  the  crowd,  almost  seemed  to  pause.  In  ancient  days,  it 
would  have  been  an  augury  :  to  us,  it  spoke  only  peace.  As  the  service  proceeded, 
a  little  robin  poured  forth  its  liquid  note  all  the  while  from  a  neighbouring  tomb- 
stone ;  the  redbreast  made  appropriate  music,  fabled  as  it  was  to  have  had  its 
crimson  coat  ever  since  it  picked  a  thorn  from  the  Saviour's  bleeding  brow'.  \\  ell, 
we  do  not  believe  that ;  but  we  believe  what  we  sang  at  the  grave,  the  truth  that 
Mr.  Spurgeon  lived  to  preach,  and  died  to  defend, — 

"  '  Dear  dying  Lamb,  Thy  precious  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power, 
Till  all  the  ransomed  Church  of  God 
Be  saved  to  sin  no  more.' 

"  Many  remarked  that  the  whole  of  the  memorial  services,  unique  as  they  were,  were 
characterized  by  a  simplicity  and  heartiness  completely  in  harmony  with  the  entire  life 
of  the  beloved  Pastor  ;  and  it  was  most  significant  that,  when  the  olive  casket  was 
lowered  into  the  vault,  not  even  the  glorified  preacher's  name  was  visible  ; — it  was 
just  as  he  would  have  wished  it; — there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  but  the  text  at  the 
foot  of  the  coffin,  and  the  open  Bible.  Of  course,  the  Bible  was  not  buried  ;  it  is 
not  dead,  it  '  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever  ; '  and  who  knows  whether  it  may  not  prove, 
more  than  ever,  the  means  of  quickening  the  dead,  now  that  he,  who  loved  it  dearer 
than  his  life,  can  no  longer  proclaim  its  blessed  truths  with  the  living  voice  ?  God 
cjrant  it !  " 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  "i^"]"] 

After  the  sorrowing  crowd  had  dispersed,  the  accompanying  view  was  taken. 


■■  ■^^;^ ' '     -'^J  ■•?*'' 

Ji-^-                 "4:#»- 

""■f""—     '■/:;>:^.^"^v. 

THE   ULIVE   CASKET   IN    THE    lOMB   AT   NOKVVUOU   CEMETERY. 

On  the  day  that  the  Pastor  said  to  his  secretary,  at  Mentone,  "  My  work  is 
done,"  he  added,  with  very  pecuHar  emphasis,  "  Remember,  a  plain  slab,  with 
C.  H.  S.  on  it  ;  nothing  more."  The  allusion  evidently  was  to  a  gravestone,  and  it 
was  another  indication  of  his  humility.  Those  who  were,  at  that  time,  responsible 
for  the  arrangements  were  unwilling  to  carry  out  his  wish,  so  they  gave  instructions 
for  the  erection  of  the  monument  represented  on  the  next  page.     The  inscription  on 

AA  4 


37^ 


C.     H.     SPUKGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


C.    H.    SPUKGEONS   MONUMENT  AT   NORWOOD   CEMETERY. 


the  lower  part  is  copied  from  John  Ploughman s  Talk,  with  the  substitution  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  full  name  instead  of  "John  Ploughman."  On  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
upper  portion  is  the  verse  he  always  wrote  in  friends'  album.s,  when  they  asked  for 
his  autograph  and  a  quotation, — 


"  E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream 
Thy  flowing  wounds  supply, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 
And  shall  be  till  I  die;" — 

with  the  following  verse,  describing-  his  present  joyous  employment, — 

■'Then  in  a  nobler,  sweeter  song, 
111  sing  thy  power  to  save, 
When  this  poor  lisping,  stammering  tojigue 
Lies  silent  in  the  grave." 

Thus,  even  from  the  tomb,  he  continues  to  preach  the  gospel  he  loved  to  proclaim 
while  here, — the  gospel  of  salvation  by  grace,  through  faith  in  the  precious  blood  of 
Jesus, — the  gospel  that  tells  of  "redeeming  love"  and  Jesu's  "power  to  save."  Oh, 
that  those  who  refused  his  message  from  the  pulpit  might  accept  it  from  the  grave 
and  from  the  g-lorv  ! 


GENERAL   INDEX   TO   VOLS.    l-IV. 


M.B. — The  illustrations  in  the  Autobiography  are  not  mentioned  in  tliis  Index,  as  a  separate  list  of  them 

is  given  in  each  volume. 


Aberdeen,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  iii.  47 — 50 
Aberfeldy,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  24,   106,  107 
Abraham,  Mr.  Robert,  iii.  365;  iv.   115,  199,  200 
Addlestone,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  iii.  368,369 
Advertisements  in  Australian  newspapers,  C.  H.  Spur- 

geon's  sermons  prmted  as,  ii.   164;  iii.  324^328 
Agricultural  Hall.  C.   H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at  the, 

iii  30,  94—96  ;   iv.   247 
Alabaster,  Mr.  James,  ii.   168,  169,  172 — 174;  iii.  344; 

iv.   199.  342,  348 
Alabaster,  Passmore,  and  Sons,  Messrs.,  ii.  159,  168 — 

174;  iv.  363 
Albert  Hall,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  the,  iv.   192 
Aldis,  Rev.  John,  i.  275;  ii.   142;  iv.  262 
.Allison,  Deacon  C.  F.,  iv.  200,  350,  363,  371 
Allon,  Dr.  Henry,  ii.  261  ;  iv.  147 
Almshouses,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  i.  313;  ii-   126, 

127,  173;  ii-i.  253,308;  iv.  15,  16,  20,  51,  249,  250 
Alps,   The,   Holidays  among,   ii.   368 — 371,   374 — 376; 

iii.    97,   98,   101 — 111,    114;    Stor)-  of   accident   on 

glacier,  ii.  2 
Anderson,  Mr.  John  (Glasgow),  ii.   103,   106,   113,   131 
Anderson,    Rev.    John   (Helensburgh),    ii.    103,    114 — 

116;  iv.  93 
Angus.  Dr.  Josei>li,  i.  241—244,  315.  347;  ii.   173,  272, 

280;  iii.   135;  iv.    161,  262,  281,  282 
Antinomianism,  i.  131,  177.  178,  192,  258 — 261  ;  ii.  328 
Arminianism  and  Arminians,  i.  95,  124,  129,  168,  169, 

170,  17G,  177,  259,  270,  271;  ii.  105,  106,  150,  224, 

225,  328  ;  iv.   102,  301 
Arnold,  Matthew,  iii.  61 
.Auckland  Tabernacle,  iii.  323,  324;  iv.  249 
Augustine,  i.   167,   177;  ii.  87,  375 
Baifern,  Rev.  W.  Poole,  ii.   180,   187 
Panics,  Rev.  Charles  Waters,  ii.  35,  41,  262 
Baptism   and  Baptists,   i.    48 — 50,   69,    118 — 125,    129, 

131,  133— '35.    138.    147— 155>    ^11,   188,  288,  303; 

ii.  3,    9,    72,    117—120,    128—130,    144,    145,    153, 

i59,-i6o,_  247,   248,   270,   274,   277,   327,  328,  354. 

370;  iii.  i,  6,  7,  8 — 10,  16,  47,  66,  67,  82 — 87,  131, 

139,   ^62,   177,    178,  287—289,  318,  345,  352—355, 

3G7;  iv.   139,  210 
Baptis-t  Missionary  Society  (1858).  ii.  338;   (1S6S,)  iii. 

89,  90;  (1881  j  111.  346 


Baptist  Union  (1854),  ii.    118;  (1881,)  ii.  219,  iv.   150; 

(1882,)   IV.     151,     152;    (1887— S,)     iv.     254,     255, 

262—264 
Bartlett,  Mrs.,  and  her  son,  iii.  36 — 38,  114,  120,  251  ; 

iv.    116 
Ba.xter,   Richard,   and  his  works,   i.   68,   80,    104,   283; 

ii.  186,  264;  iii.  43 
Bennet,  Dr.  Henry,  and  his  Mentone  garden,  iii,  238, 

239;  iv.    1,  3,   II,   12,    196,   197,  200 — 203 
Benson,  Archbishop  and  Mrs.,  iv.   85,    104,    1S8,    189, 

361 
Berridge,  John,  i.  36,  192,  359,  368;  ii.  77 
Binney,  Dr.  Thomas,  ii.  87,  88,  94,  261 
Blaikie,  Dr.  W.  G.,  iii.  49;  iv.    143 
Blessing  on  the  printed  sermons  and  books,   ii.    153, 

155,  162—164;   iii-  323—337;   iv.   27,   28,   95,    139, 

156,  158,   160,  165,   173—175,   193,  246,  247,  309 
Blood,  Rev.  William,  ii.  344—351 

Bonar,  Dr.  Andrew  A.,  iv.   1Q3,  297 

Bonar,  Dr.  Horatius,  iii.  92  ;  iv.  298 

Boustead,  Mr.  E.,  iii.   162,  163 

"Boy-preacher,    The,"    i.     152,     199 — 251,    253 — 267, 

269 — 284;  ii.  5;  iii.  49;  iv.  41,  336 
Bradford,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  25,  82,   109 
Brady,  Mr.  Cheyne,  iv.  47,  350 
Bristol,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  i.  57,  72;  iii.  369 
Brock,   Dr.   \^'illiam,   ii.    272;   iii.    5,    16,    17,   85,    175/ 

287 
Brown,  Dr.  David,  iii.  49;  iv.  297 
Brown,  Mr.  Potto,  i.  269 — 271 
Brown,    Pastor   Archibald    G.,    iii.    130 — 134;    iv.    81, 

246,  352.  375'  ?>1^ 
Brown,  Pastor  Hugh  D.,  ii.  26;  iv.  332,  i^t, 
Brown,  Rev.  Hugh  Stowell,  iii.  8,  243;  iv.   150 — 152 
Brown,  Rev.  James  Baldwin,  ii.   260,   269 — 2S1 
Bullfinch,  The  piping,  and  the  opal  ring,  iii.  183 — 185 
Bunyan,  John,  and  his  works,  i.   23,  54,  86,    103,   154, 

168,  20S,  240,   257,  283,  359;   ii.   6,   51,   131,   264; 

iii.  7,  47,  321  ;  iv.   265,  268 
Burgoyne,  Sir  John  and  Lady,  iii.   11,  317,  318 
Caird,  Principal  John,  ii.   104,   115,  211 
Cairns,  Earl,  iii.  319 
Calvin,  John,  and  his  works,  i.    113,    167,  176;  ii.    11, 

87,  112,  226,  352,  371—375;  iv.  240,  241 


;8o 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    L — IV. 


Calvinism  and  Calvinists,  i.  54,  55,  93 — 95,  121,  123 — 
125,  130,  140,  144,  167— 17S,  20S,  270,  273,  275, 
306 — 310,  340,  342;  ii.  99,  105,  106,  116,  150,  225, 
229,  247,  24S,  255,  =67,  328;  iii.  I,  3,  6,  II,  136, 
137;  iv.   102,  271 

Cambridge,  i.  ^S,  129,  145,  185 — 197,  199,  202,  207, 
208,  209,  211,  241—245,  253,  270,  271,  297,  29S, 
316,341  ;  ii.  97,  100 

Campbell,  Dr.  John,  ii.  201 — 204,  245,  262,  268,  269 
33S.  35I-  352-  356—361  ;  iii-  8— II,  345 

Campbell,  Lord  Chief  Justice,  ii.  245 

Cantlow,  Rev.  W.  W.,  and  his  son,  i.   122,   135,   151  — 

153 
Carr,  Deacon  B.  W.,  i.  347;  ii.    123,  322;  iii.    19;  iv 

21,  25,  230—232,  246,  248 
Carter  Lane  Chapel,  i.  309,  311,  314.  347;  ii-  329 
Chaillu.  M.  Paul  B.  Du,  and  the  gorilla,  iii.   51 — 58; 

iv.  296 
Chalmers,  Dr.  Thomas,  ii.   73,  77,  254;  iii.  75 
Charlesworth,  Rev.  V.  J.,  iii.  177 — 179 
Cheddar,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  iii.  366,  367 
Cheltenham,  ii.  3  ;  iii.  24,  26,  370 
Christlieb,  Professor,  iv.   160 
Church  and  State,  ii.  360;  iii.  7,  86;  iv.   130 
Church    of    England,     Romanism     in    the,     ii.     369, 

370;  iii.  87,  161,  310,  368:   iv.   122,   123 
Colchester,  i.  8,  28,  31,  27,  44;  54)  ic)4;  I'lj  1S6,  211  ; 

ii.   17 
College  [See  Pastors'  College) 
College  course,   C.   H.   Spurgeon's  proposed,  i.   241  — 

24S,  341.  343 ;  iii-  - 

Collins,  Pastor  John.  iii.    13,  28,  2q 

Colportage  Association,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  ii. 
128.  223;  iii.  153,  160 — 166,  297,  308;  iv.  13, 
227,  249,  336 

"  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam,"  iii.  88 

Communion  services.  Tabernacle,  iii.  11,  20;  iv.  72, 
135.  230;  ^Nlentone.  iv.   216,  366 

Controversies  (See  C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  a  contro- 
versialist) 

Conversions,    Remarkaljle,    i.    363 — 365;    ii.    120,    159, 


220,    227, 


Ul.      ^2C  — 


J-3       JJ/ 


161 164,      2 

32-48 

Cook  at  Newmarket,  The  old,  i.  53 — 55 

Co<jk.  Deacon  Thomas,  ii.  316,  ^^2^,  331,  332;  iii.  31. 

35 
Cook,  Dr.  Joseph,  iv.  98,  09 

Cook.  Mr.  Thomas,  and  Mr.  J.  M.,  iv.   57,   157,  363 
Cowper.  William,  i.  158,  282;  ii.  153,  264;  iii.  327;  iv. 

6-  93 
"Cradled  in  the  Holy  Ghost,''  ii.    181 
Criticisms  (See  Slanders  and  criticisms) 
Cromwell,  (jliver,  iii.  46,  143,   189 
Cruden,  Alexander,  iii.  68  ;  iv.  302 
Crystal  Palace,   i.  368;  ii.  7,    13,  98,    107;  iii.   55;   iv. 

49,  50;  Fast-day  service  at  the,  ii.  239,  240,  255; 

iii.  79,  94 
Cuff,  Pastor  \\".,  iii.  347,  370,  371 
Cuyler,  Dr.  T.  L.,  iv.  72,  172 


Darwin,  Professor,  ii.  54;  iv.  133,  134 
D'Aubigne,  Dr.  Merle,  ii.  371 — 374;  iii.  76 — 78,  100 
Deacons,  i.  245,  255 — 25S  ;  ii.  3 — 5,  123 — 128,  307, 
322,  323,  357,  358;  iii.  5,  9,  15—23,  32—34,  38, 
'37—139.  150,  151-  172,  313,  340;  iv.  23—25,  230 
—236,  237,  23S,  373 
Death,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  definition  of,  iii.  195 
Deaths  of — Alabaster,  Mr.  James,  ii.  174;  Albany, 
The  Duke  of,  ii.  159;  Bartlett,  Mrs.,  iii.  251; 
Clarence,  The  Duke  of,  iv.  369;  Cubitt,  Professor 
W.,  iii.  139;  Gay,  Miss  Fanny,  iii.  253  ;  Gracey, 
Principal  David,  iii.  130;  iv.  330;  Habershon, 
Dr.  and  Mrs.,  iv.  116,  117;  Higgs,  Mr.  W.,  sen., 
iv.  113,  114;  Keys,  Mr.  J.  L.,  iii.  201;  Lovejoy, 
George,  iii.  202;  Olney,  Mr.  H.  P.,  iii.  251; 
Olney,  Mr.  Thomas,  sen.,  iii.  117;  Olney,  Mr. 
William  P.,  iv.  233;  Passmore,  'Sir.  Joseph,  sen., 
ii.  174;  Passmore,  Mrs.,  ii.  174;  Prince  Consort, 
The,  iii.  72 — 75  ;  Punshon,  Dr.  W.  Morley,  iv.  26  ; 
Rogers,  Principal  George,  iv.  330;  son  of  Dr. 
John  Campbell,  ii.  352;  Spurgeon,  C.  H.,  ii.  78, 

50,  103,  157;  iii.  45,  178,  201,  202;  iv.  5,  14,  163, 
371;  Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  grandson,  ii.  103;  iii. 
302;  Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  mother,  iv.  177;  Taber- 
nacle church-members,  iv.  19,  20;  Thorne,  Mr., 
iii.  201  ;  Wright,  Dr.  William,  iv.    159 

Disestablishment,  iii.  310,  359;  iv.   130,   163 
Doddridge,  Dr.,  and  his  works,  i.   104,    123,   150,    168, 

282  ;  ii.   153 
"Doth  Spurgeon  serve  God  for  nought?"  ii.   127 
Doudney,  Dr.  D.  A.,  i.  254;  iv.   106 
Doudney,  Rev.  D.  A.,  iii.  370;  iv.  48 
Dransfield,  Elder,  and  the  Misses,  iii.  31,  242;  iv.   i 
Drummond's   Natural  Law  in   the  Spiritual   Worh^ 

iv.  273 
Dudgeon,  Mrs.,  iv.    166,  210,  211,  215 
Dummy  volumes.  Titles  of,  iv.  291,  292 
Duncan,   Mr.    James,   and   "  Benmore,"   iii.   356,   357, 

362—364,  371.  372;  iv.   loi,  164 
Early  Closing  Association,   C.   H.   Spurgeon's  sermon 

for,  11.  336—338 
Ecclesiastical  Commissioners,  iii.   153 
Edinburgh,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  25,   100 — 11  i,  336 
Elders,   ii.   307,   357,  359;    iii.    5,   22—25,   32—34.   3^; 

iv.   82,  230,   231,  235,   236 
Eliot,  John,  i.  35 

Elven,  Rev.  Cornelius,  i.  249 — 251,  289 
Endowments,  ii.  127;  iv.  240,  233-  334 
Epsom,    C.    H.    Spurgeon    preaching  on    the    Grand 

Stand  at,  ii.  339 
Evangelical  Alliance,  iii.  86,  87 
Everett,  Professor  J.  D.,  i.  53 — 55,  251,  353;  ii.  66 
Exeter  Hall,   i.  36;   ii.   20,  21,   25,  31,  43,   44,  45,   47, 

51.  53.  55-  56.  59.  60,  64,  65,  67,  71,  75,  90—92, 
99,  109,  no,  119,  124,  161,  197 — 199,  203,  210, 
211,  252,  27S,  313,  322,  341;  iii.  2,  16,  30,  41, 
86,  299,  346;  iv.  23-  155.  iS7)  'S8;  licensed  for 
Dissenting  worship,  ii.  361 

Extempore  addresses,  i.  365 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    L- 


-IV. 


381 


Facsimiles  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  manuscripts,  i.  58, 
215,  217,  236,  237,  267;  ii.  7,  II,  27,  32,  156,  157, 
168,  170,  298,  299;  iii.  64,  65,  67,  72,  188,  344; 
iv.  24,  66,  67,  69,  75,  91,  206,  219,  316,  337,  369 

Fergusson,  Professor  A.,   ii.   297;   iii.    140,    141,   354; 

iv.  330.331 
Fletcher,   Dr.  Alexander,  i.   34;   ii.   28 — 32,    102,   204; 

iv.   141,  159 
From  t/ie  Ushers  Desk  to  the  Tabcritaclc  Pulpit,  ii.   219, 

255,258 
Frojii  the  Pulpit  to  the  Palm  Branch,  iv.  370,  374 
Fuller,  Andrew,  i.  131,  150,   152;  ii.  271,  273 
Fullerton,    W.    Y.,    Evangelist    and    Pastor,    iii.   356; 

iv.  334,  335 
Garfield,  President,  at  the  Tabernacle,  iii.  89 
Gill,  Dr.  John,  and  his  works,   i.    148,   254,  308,  310, 

341  ;  li.  72,  264,  329,  356,  359;  iii.   I  ;  iv.  262,  300, 

301  ;   Dr.   Gill's  chair,   iv.   262  ;  Dr.   Gill's   pulpit, 

ii.  357;  iii.  140 
Gladstone.    Rt.    Hon.    W.    E.,    ii.    238;    iii.    341 — 343. 

359;    IV.    126,    127,    183—185,    209,    223,    342,   343, 

358-  359 
Glasgow,  li.  23—25,   73,    103—108,    III  — 115,  336;   iii. 

5°'  '3I5  357 
"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,"  i.  34,  36,  37;   iii. 

3^7  \  IV.  35 
Gough,  Mr.  J.  B.,  ii.  243;  iv.  60,  84,  171 
Gould,  Mr.  George,  i.  299 
Gracey,  Principal  David,  iii.    130,  131,    139,   141,    140, 

354,  355;  iv-  269,  330,  331 
Grandpierre,  Dr.,  ii.  345,  348,  349 
Grant,   Mr.  James,   ii.   64 — 66,   71,   72,    117,   26c — 262, 

268,  269 
"Great-heart,  Mr.,"  ii.    131;  iii.   85;  iv.   120 
Greek,  the  Baptist's  language,  ii.  327 
Greenwich,  ii.  329;  iii.  294,  295,  297 
Greenwood,    Deacon    Thomas,    ii.    126,    128;    iii.    19; 

iv.  200 
Greville  Memoirs,  The,  ii.  245 

Hackney,  Open-air  services  at,  ii.  21,  92;  iii.  364 
Haddon,    The    origin    of     Mr.      Spurgeon's     second 

Christian  name,  i.  9 
Haddon  Hall,  Bermondsey,  i.    10 
Halifax,  C.  H.   Spurgeon  preaching  at,  ii.   218,  219 
Hall,  Dr.  Newman,  ii.  261;  iii.   177;  iv.   103,   155,  248 
Hall,   Rev.    Robert,   i.    187,    200;    ii.    72,    73,    77,  271, 

'^11,\  111-  7,  75 
Hamilton,  Dr.  James,  i.  2  ;  iv.  282 
Hanbur)',  Mr.  Thomas,  iv.  8- — 11,  202,  210 
Harrald,  J.  W.,  ii.   82;   iii.   179,  345,  371;   iv.   77,   78, 

82,    118 — 120,    197,    199,   200,    2zo,    221,    223,   339, 

340,  348,  352,  363,  371 
Hartley  Colliery  explosion,  iii.  75 
Harvesting  Ants  and  Trap-door  Spiders,  iv.  206 
Havelock,  Lady,  iv.   182;  Sir  Henry,  iii.   5;   iv.    182 
Haverhill,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  86;  iv.  357 
"  Helensburgh   House  "  and   garden,    i.    ^^'iy,   368 ;    ii. 

146,   282 — 289,    291 — 297;    iii.    181 — 202,   342;    iv. 

14,  49,  51,  73,  171,  194,  291 


Henry,  Matthew,  i.  250;  ii.   115,  146;  iii.  296 

Herbert,  George,  ii.  186,  263,  266;  iv.  304 

Higgs,  Mr.  W.,  sen.,  ii.  321,  358;  iii.  5,  14,  '9,  170, 
171,  182,  252;  iv.  113,  200,  249;  Higgs,  'Sir.  W., 
iii.    1S2;  iv.  200,  357,  363 

Hill,  Rev.  Rowland,  i.  34,  293,  359,  368  ;  ii.  68,  jj. 
104,  244  ;  iii.   10,  6i 

Hillyard,  Mrs.,  iii'.  167 — 172;  iv.  321,  325 

Hinton,  Rev.  J.  Howard,  i.   152;  ii.  269 — 273.  281 

Holland,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  in,  iii.  30,  81,  82 

Holme,  Dr.  J.  Stanford,  iv.  274 — 277 

Hood,  Rev.  E.  Paxton,  ii.  75 — 78 

Hosken,  Rev.  C.  H.,  ii.   145 

Huntington,  William,  i.  2,  3,  loi  ;  ii.  68 

Hyper-Calvinists,  i.  178,  256,  25S — 261,  310,  342; 
ii.  37—41.  53,  83—86,  150,  224,  225 

"  I'll  kill  old  Roads,"  i.  23 

Infant  sprinkling,  i.  26,  49,  50,  14S,  150,  154,  153  ; 
iii.  82—87,  345  •-  IV.   1 

Ireland,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in,  11.  335,  339—342 

Irons,  Rev.  Joseph,  ii.   154;  iii.  243;  iv.  301 

Isleham,  i.    135,    147,    151  — 154,  275 

James,  Rev.  John  Angell,  and  his  works,  i.  104,  208, 
209  ;  ii.  326 

Jay,  Rev.  William,  i.  208;  ii.  68,  77,  iio;  iii.  316 

"Job,"  ii.   19,  37—41 

Johnson,  Dr.  Samuel,  i.   iii  ;  ii.  249 

Johnson,  Mr.  Samuel,  iii.  25,  140 

Joynson,  Mr.  W.,  ii.  313,  317 

Keach,  Benjamin,  and  his  works,  i.  305  ;  ii.  159,  323. 
329,  356;  iii-  27,  28 

Keys,  J.  L.,  ii.  82,  83;  iii.  65,  200,  201;  iv.  76,  270, 
341 

Kintore,  The  Earl  of,  iii.  47 

Knill,  Rev.  Richard,  i.  6,  ;}^ — -38,  108,  231 

Knowles',  Sheridan,  prophecy,  i.  353 

Knox,  John,  i.   167;  ii.  77,   iii  ;  iii.  368;  iv.  248 

Ladds,  ^Ir.   F.  G.,  iii.    178;  iv.  324 

Lancashire  Famine  Fund,  iii.  79 

Lang,  Mr.  Andrew,  re  "  Scrawls  on  Books,"  iv.  300 

Latimer,  Bishop  Hugh,  ii.  77,  243,  24S 

Layard,  Sir  A.  H.,  iii.  51  ;  iv.  296 

Leeding,  Mr.  E.  S.,  i.  44,  45,  60,  133,  145,  1S6 — 197, 
209 — 211,  244,  266 

Letters, — {See  also,  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Letters  to  and 
from,)  Angus,  Dr.,  to  Mr.  J.  S.  Watts,  i.  243; 
Barnardo,  Dr.,  to  Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  iv.  191  ; 
Bishop  Bickersteth,  to  Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  iv. 
360;  Blondin,  to  M.  (hoax),  iii.  55;  Brown,  Rev. 
J.  Baldwin,  to  The  Freen,an,  Ti.  280;  Cuff,  Pastor 
W.,  to  ;\Irs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  iii.  370,  371  ;  Glad- 
stone, Rt.  Hon.  W.  E.,  to  Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon, 
iv.  358  ;  "  Habitans  in  sicco,"  to  The  Times,  ii. 
245,  247,  248;  "Job,"  ii.  37—41;  King,  Deacon, 
to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  father,  i.  245  ;  Knill,  Rev. 
Richard,  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  grandfather,  i.  35  ; 
Leeding,  Mr.  E.  S.,  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  father, 
i.  186,  209;  re  blessing  through  reading  All  of 
Grace,   iv.   309 ;    re  sermons  in  Australian   news- 


;S- 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    I. IV. 


i6, 


^   133- 


papers,  iii.  325—327;  Spurgeon,   Mrs.   C.    H.,  to 

-Mr.   Gladstone,  iv.  359;  Spurgeon,  Pastor  J.  A., 

to    the   Tabernacle    deacons    and   elders,-  iii.    34; 

S.  J.   C,  to  Mrs.   C.   H.   Spurgeon,  ii.   235—239; 

Tabernacle  deacons  and   elders,   to  Pastor  J.   A. 

Spurgeon,    iii.   32—34;    Taylor,    Rev.    Robert,    to 

Mrs.   C.  H.   Spurgeon,  IV.    152 
Lewis,  Mr.  Henry,  i.  44,  45,   1S6 
Lewis,  Rev.  W.  G.,  ii.  272;  iv.  161,   162 
Literary  curiosities,  ii.    164;  iv.    194,    195 
Liverpool,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  iv.  151,  152 
Livingstone,  Dr.  David,  ii.  214,  215;  iv.  143,  296 
London  Association  of  Baptist   Churches,   ii.    87—89, 

119;  London  Baptist  Association,  iii.  30 
London  Banks'  Prayer  Union,  iv.  187 
"Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,"   i.   60,  63,    103— 

106,   109;  iv.    137,  374 
Lovejoy,  George,  iii.  201,  202;  iv.  i,  3,  6,  199 
Low,   Deacon  James,    i.   345,   347^   35')   35^; 

323)  350;  iii-   16 

Luther,  Martin,  i.    113,  283,  361;  ii.   18,  77, 

134,  352,  364;   iii-  6,    137;   iv-    248,   255,  257,   268, 
278,  300 

Lynch,  Rev.  T.  T.,  ii.  260—269 

Maidstone,  i.  47 — 53,  186,  211 

Marchant,  Professor  F.   G.,  iv.  330,  331 

Martin,  Rev.  Samuel,  ii.  261  ;  iii.  283;  iv.   141 

Maurice,  Professor  F.  D.,  ii.  149,  271,  275,  281  ; 
iv.  303 

Maze  Pond  Chapel,  ii.  91,  142 

INIcKinney,  Pastor  W.  D.,  iii.  140,  313 

McLaren,  Dr.  Alexander,  iii.  66,  238;  iv.  257,  262, 
280,  281 

Medhurst,  Pastor  T.  W.,  ii.  141  — 152,  183-  343;  i"- 
85,  138,  348,  352,  353;  iv.   114,  127,  :i33 

Medical  Prayer  L'nion,  iv.   187 

Mentone,  i.  i;  ui.  116—124,  137,  179,  237,  238,  341, 
344,  350,  351  ;  iv.  1  —  14.  16.  53'  61,  84,  106,  115, 
116,  153,  154,  179-  '8')  196—224,  227—229,  231  — 
236,  256—264,  272,  294,  337— 353>  3(^3—373 

Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  The,  i.  59,  254,  304;  ii.  15. 
17,  34,  60,  82,  123—128,  173,  233,  238,  239,  293, 
304,  305,  30()—333'  335>  33^''  346-  347,  350,  353— 
362.  375,  376;  iii.  I,  2,  4—13,  15—38,  45,  47.  5'  — 
58,  61.  72—94,  113—125,  128,  130,  132,  136,  13S, 
152,  153,  159,  161,  167,  173,  191,  241—256,  295, 
296,  301,  303,  307,  308,  317—320,  322—324,  327, 
329,  330.  341,  342,  365;  iv-  2,  4,  13-  '4.  26,  30, 
32—48,  50,  61,  62,  70—74,  78—82,  84,  85,  102, 
105,  106,  112,  113,  123—125,  129,  130,  135,  137, 
144—146,  155—157)  162—166,  109— 173,  176,  177, 
182—184,  187,  188,  193,  224—236,  237—240,  242, 
2j6— 251,  253,  265,  268,  273,  309,  336,  351,  353— 
356,  358,  3^3,  374^  375 

Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  The,  A  million  contribu- 
tors to,  ii.  361  ;  architect  of,  ii.  319 — 321  ;  iii.  5; 
builder  of,  ii.  321,  358  ;  iii.  5  ;  iv.  113  ;  burning  of, 
ii.   321;   iii.    12,   153,  322;   church-books,    iii.    12; 


collections  and  contributions  per  C.  H.  Spur- 
geon, iii.  113;  cost  of,  iii.  12;  Country  Mission, 
iii.  24;  iv.  84,  335;  Evangelists'  Association,  iii. 
24;  iv.  84,  335;  first  meeting  in,  ii.  353 — 376; 
foundation  stone  laid,  ii.  322 — 330;  meaning  of 
the  name,  ii.  361;  "National  Anthem,"  iv.  21; 
open  to  all  comers,  iv.  73,  74;  opening  of,  iii.  1, 
2,  4 — 13,  16,  24,  27,  342,  344;  piety  and  unity  of 
church  at,  iii.  254 — 256 ;  prayer-meetings,  iv.  80, 
81;  site  for,  ii.  316,  331,  332;  iii.  13;  size  of.  iii. 
12;  smaller  Societies  at,  iv.  79,  80,  82,  84; 
Sunday-school,  iii.  152,  173;  iv.  82;  Sunday- 
schools,     Ragged  schools,     and    mission-stations, 

iv-  336 
Mildmay  Conferences,  iii.  86;  iv.  192,  193 

^lills.  Deacon  W.,  iii.   19 

Monaco  and  Monte  Carlo,  iii.  238;  iv.  8,  211,  212 

Moody,  Mr.  D.  L.,  iv.  71,  160,  169,  170,  187,  246 — 24S 

:\Iorley,  Mr.  Arthur,  i.  58,  59 

Morley,  Mr.  Samuel,  iii.  68,  6g,  325 

Miiller,  ;\Ir.   George,  ii.  319;   iii.    170,    173,   238,   239; 

iv.  4,  13,  14,  173 
Nature,  Worshipping  the  God  of,  ii.  266;  iii.   197 
Naunt        C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  iii.  370 
Ness,  r.stor  Thomas,  iii.  29,  30 
New  Kent  Road,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  first  home 

in,  i.  45  ;  ii.  181 — 192,  284 
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  i.  229,250,  254,  299,315 — 321, 

339)344—349'  351—353-358,  361—369;  ii- 3— 5-  9,- 
17,  20,  24,  28,  31,  32,  36.  42,  54,  56,  60,  63,  64,  66, 
67-  7'-  73^  81,  82,  87 — 89,  94,  98,  102,  116 — 124, 
141,  145,  147,  150-  '53-  •54,  158,  173-  184,  189,  191, 
197—199,  223,  224,  237,  253,  259,  260,  273,  304— 
309.  311— 319,  322—324,  329,  330,  336,  353,  356; 
iii.  II,  13,  14,  22,  28,  88,  243,  340,  346;  iv.  159, 
275,  336;   Sunday-school,  iii.  36 

Newmarket,  i.  53 — 55,  117 — 125,  129^144,  147,  148,. 
153,  182,  190 

Newton,  John,  i.   117;  170,  282 

Noel,  Hon.  and  Rev.  B.  W.,  iii.  86 

"  Not  more  than  others  I  deserve,"  ii.   190,  191 

"Oak.  The  Question,"  at  "  Westwood,"  ii.  290; 
iii.    192,    194—196;    iv.    56,    133,   283 

Olney,  Mr.  Henry  P.,  i.  346;  ii.  159;  iii.  249,  251;, 
Olney,  Mr.  John  T..  i.  346;  Olney,  Mr.  Thomas, 
sen.,  i.  299;  ii.  4 — 6,  82,  83,  198,  323;  iii.  15 — 18, 
172,  249;  Mrs.,  ii.  4,  St  iii-  i73;  Olney,  Mr. 
Thomas  H.,  ii.  126;  iii.  17,  18,  19,  36,  187,  251;. 
Olney,  Mr.  William  P.,  i.  346;  ii.  6,  123 — 125, 
128,  142,  199)  323;  iii-  19)  20,  31,  32,  35,  137, 
168,  249;  iv.  22,  25,  232,  233,  236;  Olney,  Mr. 
William,  iv.  246 

Orphanage,  The  Stockwell,  ii.  126,  12S,  173,  223; 
iii.  30,  33,  119,  139,  161,  i66 — 180,  242 — 244.  297, 
308;  iv.  49,60,  61,  ^3,  78,  120,  126,  152,  181,  210,. 
227,  249—251,  320-330 

Orsman,  Mr.  W.  J.,  iii.  69;  iv.  246 

"  Over  the  water  to  Charlie !  "  iv.  334 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    I.  —  IV. 


383, 


Paris,  ii.  176 — 180;  iii.  30,  115,  240;  C.  H.  Spurgeon 
preaching  in,  li.  344—351 

Passmoie,  Mr.  Joseph,  sen.,  i.  319,  320;  ii.  136, 
16S — 174,  362;  iii.  19,  98,  102,  108,  186,  1S7,  211, 
237,  344;  iv.  3,  6,  199,  368,  369;  Passmore,  Mr. 
Joseph,  ii.  173;  Passmore,  Mr.  James,  ii.  173 

Pastors'  College,  ii.  82,  92,  126,  128,  141  — 152,  173, 
189,  223,  297,  309,  310,  356;  lii.  4,  5.  30.  33'  53- 
57,  58,  62,  63,  83,  121,  125—159,  173,  175,  177, 
178—189,  192,  242,  249,  279,  281,  292—294,  297, 
298,  308,  313—315,  346,  34S— 351,  352—357,  371  ; 
iv.  6,  49,  53 — 57,  78,  84,  88,  89,  105,  120,  224, 
227,  246,  247,  249,  250,  251,  254,  256,  267,  2S2, 
283,  287,  314,  330 — 334;  Pastors'  College  Evan- 
gelical Association,  iii.  87;  iv.  332;  Pastors'  Col- 
lege Library,  ii.  146,  356;'  iii.  355,  356;  Pastors' 
College  Missionary  Association,  ii.  223  ;  iv.  335  ; 
Pastors'  College  Society  of  Evangelists,  ii,  223, 
308  ;  iv.  334 

Payne,  Deacon  W.,  iii.   ig,  287 

Pearce,  Deacon  S.  R.,  iii.   25  ;   iv.  246,  357 

Perfectionists,  i,  261 — 263 

Pets,  Sir  S.  Morton,  ii.  315,  322,  324 — 326,  329;  iii.  6 

"  Picking  the  angels'  pockets!  "  i.  265 

Pierson,  Dr.  A.  T.,  iv.  177,  363 

Pioneer  Mission,  The,  iv.  335 

"Ploughman,  John,"  ii.   175,  306;  iv.    147,  285,  378 

Pocock,  Mr.  W.  W. ,  ii.  319-^321  ;  iii.  5 

Portsmouth,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  219;  iv.   150 

Prayer,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  i.  77 — 79,  90 — 93,  115, 
118,  120,  124,  130,  13s,  139,  141—143,  163,  361; 
ii.  308,335;  iii.  168,  173 — 176,  246 — 248,  28"!,  319, 

329.'  347 
Preachers  and  Preaching,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  i.  71  — 

74,   90,    102 — 106,    108 — III,    115,   122,    123,    129 — 

145,  147,   162,   169;  ii.   165;  iii.  48 
Prevost-Paradol,   M. ,   ii.  349 
Primitive  Methodists,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  the,  i.    105 

—  Ill,   158  ;  iv.  84 
Providential  interpositions,   ii.   96,   97,    183,    184,   218, 

219,  236,  289,  290,  332,  233,  3b^)i   i'i-    168,    173— 

^77,.  183—185,  325—327)  329,  332;  iv.  42—48,  51, 

257—260,  322 
Puritanorum,  Ultinms,  iv.  296 
Puritans  and  their  works,   i.   23,  68,  80,    104,   177;   ii. 

19,  41,   55)  87,   149,    150,  158,    159,  225,  229,  257, 

264,  271,  273  ;  iii.  41,  61,  138,   147,   189,  190,  301  ;  iv. 

54,  146,  149,  203,  204,  265,  272,  280 — 283,  295,  296 
Radstock,  Lord,  iv.   151,    186 
Rainy,  Principal  Robert,  iv.   163 
Ramsgate,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  ii.  97 
Regent's  Park  College,  i.  241,  315;  iii.  135;  iv.   161 
Rice,  Pastor  W.  E.,  iv.  46,  47 
Richardson,  Will,  i.  290;  iii.  313;  iv.  286 
Rider,  Pastor  William,  i.  304;  iii.  27 
Rippon,   Dr.,   i.   254,   303,   311,   317,   341,  347;    ii.    72, 

126,   173,  323,  329,  357,   359;   iii.   3,9 
Robertson,  Rev.  F.  W.,  ii.    149 
Robinson,  Rev.  Robert,  i.  200;  ii.  yy 


Rogers,  Principal  George,  ii.  147,  148,  297,  356;  iii.  5,, 
57,  125,  128,  138,  159,  177,  352—355;  'V.  330,  J31 

Romanism,  i.  57—66;  ii.  362—365,  369,  370,  373,, 
375;  iii-  3j  203,  218—221,  236 

Ritchie,  Mr.  J.  Ewing  ("  Christo]5her  Crayon ''),  ii. 
253—255.  260 

Rothesay,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  iii.  371,  372 

Ruskin,  Mr.  John,  ii.  235,  288 — 290]  iii.  99,  194 — 
196;  iv.  94,  185,  296 

Sabbath,  Observance  of  the,  i.  70 

Sawday,  Pastor  C.  B.,  iii.   130,  134 — 136;  iv.  3:;3 

Scotland,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  in,  ii.  23 — 25. 
73,   103— 114,  335,  336;  lii.  30,  299,  371,  372 

Selway,  Professor  W.  R.,  iii.   140,   141,   148,   177,  276 

Shaftesbury,  The  Earl  of,  iii.  238,  319,  325  ;  iv.  90 — 
92,  98,  99,  179,  209,  248,  252 

Sherman,  Rev.  James,  ii.  92,  118 

Shindler,  Pastor  R.,  ii.  219,  255,  368;  iv.  332,  ^,7,7, 

Shoreditch,   C.   H.   Spurgeon  preaching  at,  11.    luo 

Short,  Pastor  A.   G.,  iii.  371 

Simpson,  Sir  James  Y.,  iii.  1S5 

Slanders  and  criticisms,  ii.  18,  19,  21.  ^2) — 'j'.  'oo. 
120 — 122,  155,  159,  196,  200,  202,  207 — 212,  227, 
=36.  253—255,  309,  310,  346—348;  iii.  10,  48,  49, 
56—58,  80,  335;   IV.    17 

Smith,  J.  Manton,  i.  29;  iv.  314,  334 

Smith,  Rev.  James,  i.  316,  347,  357;  ii.  3,  173;  iii.  24, 
26,  316 

Soul-winning,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  i.  230,  232;  ii.  131 
—  139 

Southampton,  ii.  219;  iii.  29,  270,  271  ;  iv.   150,   151 

Spurgeon,  C.  H.,  among  the  costermongers,  iii.  69, 
70;  and  a  cabman,  ii.  131  ;  and  a  coachman,  ii. 
133;  and  a  madman,  iii.  196;  iv.  2oq ;  and  a 
murderer,  iv.  58;  and  a  policeman,  ii.  iqi  ;  and 
a  poor  Frenchwoman,  ii.  284 — 286;  and  a  poor 
organ-grinder,  iv.  209;  and  a  stray  dog,  ii.  293; 
and  a  thief,  iii.  88,  89;  and  a  waterman,  ii.  131  ; 
and  an  agnostic,  iii.  360;  and  Canon  JeflFreys, 
i.  50;  and  College  applicants,  iii.  143—146;  and 
Dean  Stanley,  iii.  359;  and  "General"  Booth, 
iii.  341  ;  and  George  Tinworth,  iii.  360,  361  ;  and 
his  bees,  iv.  59,  60;  and  his  dogs,  iv.  60 — 62; 
and  hydropathy,  iv.  53  ;  and  politics,  iii.  341,  342  ; 
iv.  125—127,  130,  132,  209,  342,  343;  and  Rev. 
Mark  Guy  Pearse,  iv.  162,  163;  and  reporters, 
ii.  135  ;  iv.  76 ;  and  rosemary,  iii.  360 ;  and 
sailors,  ii.  341,  342;  and  the  butchers,  iv.  90  ;  and 
the  Jubilee  Singers,  iv.  84;  and  the  judges,  iii. 
351;  and  "the  Whitey-Brown  brotherhood,"  iii. 
132 

Spurgeon,  C.  H.,  as  a  controversialist,  re  Baptismal 
Regeneration,  iii.  82 — 87,  346;  iv.  115,  151,  107; 
re  Rev.  Baldwin  Brown,  ii.  270 — 28 1  ;  re  ■'  The 
Down-grade,"  ii.  259,  269,  270,  2S1  ;  iii.  86,  152, 
161  ;  iv.  27,  104,  167,  168,  253—264,  310,  332.  34'S; 
re  The  Rivulet,  ii.  262 — 26S  ;  as  a  father,  iii.  273 — 
285,287—304;  iv.  1  —  14  ;  as  a  grandfather,  ii.  103; 
iii.  302;  as  a  husband,  ii.  27,  175 — 193,  2^S3 — 286, 


584 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    I. 


-IV. 


291 — 299;  'iii.  184 — 189,  203 — 240,  257 — 272;  iv. 
337 — 352,  365,  366;  as  a  literary  man,  i.  52,  60, 
187,  188,  192,  204,  210;  iv.  159,  265 — 319;  as  a 
lover,  ii.  7 — 11,  13 — 21,  23 — 27;  r^s  a  Sunday- 
school  teacher,  i.  124,  134—138,  140 — 142,  144, 
181 — 183,  210;  iii.  49;  as  a  tract-distributor,  i. 
118,    121.    124,   129,   132,    135,    137,    138,    140,    141, 

144,  180,  181;  as  an  open-air  preacher,  ii.  21, 
92,  237,  343,  344,  363—372;   as  an  usher,   i.    54, 

145,  163,  253;  as  captain  of  the  ship,  iii.  21,  27; 
as  the  Delphic  oracle,  iii.  146;  at  a  Quakers' 
meeting,  iii.  271 

Spurgeon.  C.  H.,  founding  the  College,  ii.  141  — 150; 
Colportage  Association,  iii.  161  — 166;  Orphan- 
age, iii.  167 — 174;  in  the  Colosseum  at  Rome,  iii. 
214;  invited  to  New  Park  Street,  i.  344 — 352; 
killing  a  man  by  kindness,  iii.  192,  194;  listen- 
ing to  one  of  his  own  sermons,  iii.  337  ;  on  amuse- 
ments, iii.  40;  on  dancing,  iii.  39;  on  gambling 
and  games  of  chance,  or  skill,  ii.  367 — 369  ;  iii. 
39,  40,  238;  iv.  211,  212;  on  giving  advice,  iii.  40, 
41;  on  success  in  life,  iii.  47 — 50;  on  the  opium 
traffic,  iii.  44;  on  war,  iii.  43,  44;  preaching  in 
his  sleep,  ii.  1S9;  preaching  in  John  Calvin's 
pulpit,  ii.  372;  iii.  loo;  preaching  on  an  Ameri- 
can man-of-war,  iv.  197,  198;  preaching  thirteen 
times  a  week,  ii.  81  ;  preaching  till  he  was  fifty- 
seven,  ii.  103;  preaching  to  children,  ii.  91 — 93; 
refusing  _;{^7,ooo,  iv.  48 ;  sleeping  from  Wednes- 
day to  Friday,  ii.  240 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  addresses,  special,  iii.  66 — 71  ;  be- 
trothal, ii.  9;  birthday,  twenty-first,  ii.  159; 
thirty-seventh,  iii.  246;  thirty-ninth,  iii.  268; 
fortieth,  iii.  93,  94;  fiftieth,  iv.  115,  237 — 252; 
fifty-sixth,  iv.  105,  120;  brother  and  sisters,  i.  10, 
41,  118 — ^125,  130,  188 — 190,  194,  197;  iii.  19,  31  — 
30,  140,  141,  180,  194,  249;  iv.  218,  246;  child- 
hood and  youth,  i.  14 — 31,  ^;^ — 45,  47 — 55,  57 — 
115,  117— 125,  127—155,  157—166,  179—197;  ii. 
236,  317;  iii.  92;  iv.  265,  266,  326;  conversion, 
i.  97 — 115;  diary  (1850),  i.  127 — 146;  early  re- 
ligious experiences,  i.  67 — 115,  117 — 125,  127 — 
153,  157 — 166,  178;  essay  on  Popery,  i.  57 — 66; 
iv.  266;  father  and  mother,  i.  31,  40,  41,  48,  49, 
54.  59.  67—71,  95,  102,  109,  117— 125,  133,  135, 
143,  148,  151,  169,  186 — 192,  194,  196,  209,  228, 
242—249,  286,  340—343;  ii.  17,  26,  43,  44,  95, 
loS  ;  iii.  8;  iv.  246,  247;  grandfather  and  grand- 
mother, i.  15—31.  35—38.  43,  49,  77,  118,  119, 
124.  142,  144,  148,  160,  162,  189,  207,  211,  343; 
ii.  86,  94,  189;  uncles  and  aunts,  i.  10,  20,  23, 
25.  26,  29,   51,   190 — 193.  205,  211,  2S7 — 289,  291, 

349 
Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  first  convert,  i.  232;  first  and  last 
debt,  i.  --;  ii.  183,  184,  361;  iii.  1S3,  186;  first 
publications,  ii.  153,  154;  first  sermon,  i.  199 — 
203;  first  sermon  in  the  Tabernacle,  iii.  i,  5; 
first  sermon  outlines,  i.  213 — 226,  229,  230,  236, 
-37j  ^77 — 2S4,  296;  first  sermons  in  London,  i. 
321—337;  ii-   3 — 5;   first   speech,   i.  55;   first  visit 


to  Scotland,  ii.  23 — 25,  73,  103 — 114;  first  words 
in  the  Tabernacle,  iii.  i  ;  funeral  and  memorial 
services,  iv.  ;^y^ — 378;  generosity,  ii.  123 — 128; 
iii.  10,  176 — 179,  302;  iv.  371  ;  holidays,  i.  57 — 66; 
ii.  92,  93;  iii.  203 — 240,  257 — 272,  281  ;  iv.  86,  87, 
196 — 224;  home-going,  iv.  371;  humour,  i.  265; 
ii.  155,  170,  171,  172;  iii.  68,  69,  178,  187,  1S8; 
iii.  339 — 361;  iv.  101,  102,  222,  223;  illness,  last 
long,  iii.  186;  iv.  354 — 371;  Jubilee,  ii.  128;  iv. 
237 — 252;  Jubilee  Album,  iv.  252  ;  last  message, 
iv.  371;  last  service  in  the  Tabernacle,  iv.  356; 
last  services  at  Mentone,  iv.  370;  lectures,  iii.  39 
— 66;  library,  ii.  182,  183;  iv.  280 — 304;  mar- 
riage, ii.  28 — 32  ;  mid-week  Sabbath,  iv.  84,  85  ; 
missionary,  desire  to  be  a,  iii.  73  ;  monument  in 
Norwood  cemetery,  iv.  378  ;  pastoral  silver  wed- 
ding, ii.  123 — 12S;  iv.  15 — 22,  27,  144;  poetry,  i. 
219,  293,  294,  300;  ii.  298,  299;  iii.  110,  187;  iv. 
223,  224,  313;  punctuality,  iii.  340,  341,  342; 
salary  at  Waterbeach,  ii.  128;  salary  given  to  the 
Lord's  work,  ii.  125  ;  sermon  preparation,  i.  206 — • 
208,  217,  218;  iii.  42;  iv.  64 — 70,  88;  sermon  re- 
vision, iv.  74 — 76,  78,  79,  81,  82,  239,  367;  silver 
wedding,  23 — 26;  sons,  ii.  126,  1S2,  190,  191, 
193,  291,  295,  351,  352;  iii.  16,91,  192,  273—283, 
287 — 292,    324;    iv.     I  — 14.    236,    246,    249,    256 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  letters  concerning — Anglo-Israel- 
ism,  iv.  132;  Annihilationism,  iv.  124;  Arbitration 
versus  war,  iv.  135;  attending  banquets,  iv.  104; 
bell-ringing  at  Newington,  iv.  123,  124;  Breth- 
ren and  Brethrenism,  iv.  137,  138;  close-com- 
munion, iv.  131;  Disestablishment,  iv.  130;  Evo- 
lution, iv.  133  ;  Franchise  Reform,  iv.  132  ; 
Funeral  Reform,  iv.  13S  ;  Gospel  Temperance,  iv. 
12S,  129;  grocers'  licences,  iv.  135,  136;  Hebrews 
vi.  4 — 6,  iv.  102  ;  Home  Rule,  iv.  127  ;  infant  salva- 
tion, iv.  121,  122;  lectures  and  sermons  in  the 
United  States,  iv.  190 — in  ;  legacies,  iv.  107,  108; 
open-air  baptisms,  iv.  132  ;  persecution  of  Jews  in 
Russia,  iv.  128;  pigeon-shooting,  iv.  130;  regis- 
trars at  Nonconformist  weddings,  iv.  127;  Roman 
Catholic  Viceroy  of  India,  iv.  126;  Romanism  in 
the  Church  of  England,  iv.  122,  123;  the  theatre, 
iv.  136,  137  ;  unfermented  communion  wine,  iv. 
135;  Vivisection,  iv.  128;  voting  "as  unto  the 
Lord,"  iv.   125 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  letters  to — a  former  pupil,  i.  195  ; 
a  friend  in  Dublin,  iv.  95  ;  a  greatly-tried  lady, 
iv.  113;  a  motherless  girl,  iv.  118,  119;  an  afflicted 
lady  in  Bristol,  iv.  95  ;  an  octogenarian,  iv.  5  ; 
Anderson,  Rev.  John,  iv.  93;  Bartlett,  Mr.  E.  H., 
iv.  116;  Bartlett,  Mrs.,  iii.  114;  "Believers  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  re  Pastors'  College,  iii.  127 — 
129  ;  Bible-classes  at  Tabernacle,  iii.  1 19,  120,  251  ; 
Blood,  Rev.  William,  ii.  345  ;  Blunson,  The 
Misses,  i.  350 ;  boys  at  Stockwell  Orphanage,  iii. 
119;  Brown,  Dr.  David,  iv.  297;  Brown,  Pastor 
Archibald  G.,  iii.  133 — 134;  Culross,  Dr.,  iv.  262 
— 264;  Curme,  Rev.  Robert,  iv.  115;  Doudney, 
Dr.    D.   A.,    iv.    106;    Editor   of   The   Chelmsford 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    L 


-IV. 


385 


Chronicle,  ii.  52 ;  Editor  of  North  British  Daily 
Mail,  ii.  108;  Editor  of  The  Morning  Star,  ii. 
314;  Feltham,  Pastor  F.  J.,  iv.  116;  Gladstone, 
Rt.  Hon.  W.  E.,  iv.  359;  friends  in  Paris,  ii. 
351;  Habershon,  Miss  Ada  R.,  iv.  ii6 — 117, 
120;  Hall,  Dr.  Newman,  iv.  108;  Higgs,  Mrs. 
W.,  sen.,  iv.  113,  114;  his  father  and 
mother,  i.  59,  117 — 125,  188 — 192,  194,  196,  228, 
242,  340 — 342;  if.  44,  108;  his  sister  Louisa,  i. 
194;  "household  of  faith,  all  the,"  ii.  160;  Kee- 
vil,  Mr.  J.,  iv.  106;  Knill,  Rev.  Richard,  i.  37; 
Matthews,  Rev.  E.  W.,  iv.  101  ;  Medhurst,  Pastor 
T.  W.,  ii.  143,  144,  146;  iv.  114,  127;  ministers' 
children,  iv.  118 — 120;  Minton,  Rev.  Samuel,  iv. 
124;  Mitchinson,  Rev.  H.  C,  iv.  100;  members 
of  new  church  at  James'  Grove,  Peckham,  iii. 
254;  Moubray,  Mrs.,  iv.  101;  New  Park  Street 
Church,  i.  352;  ii.  160,  301 — 309;  New  Park 
Street  deacons,  i.  317,  347,  356;  New  York  Bap- 
tist Ministers'  Conference,  iv.  97  ;  Newdegate., 
Mr.  C.  N.,  M.P.,  iv.  122;  Olney,  iMr.  Thomas 
H.,  iii.  17,  18,  251  ;  Olney,  Mr.  William  P.,  iv. 
100;  Palmer,  Canon,  iv.  123,  124;  Passmore,  Mr. 
Joseph,  sen.,  i.  320;  ii.  136,  170,  171;  iv.  369; 
Passmore,  Mrs.,  ii.  171  ;  Pastors'  College  ministers 
and  students,  iii.  121,  155 — 159,  293;  Peto,  Sir 
Morton,  ii.  324  ;  Philadelphia  Conference  of  Bap- 
tist ministers,  iv.  252  ;  re  Lecture  on  the  gorilla, 
iii.  56 — 58;  Richard,  Henry,  Esq.,  M.P.,  iv.  96; 
Robins,  Mr.  E.  Cookworthy,  ii.  319;  Ruskin,  Mr. 
John,  iv.  94;  Sawday,  Mr.,  sen.,  iii.  134;  Shaftes- 
bury, The  Earl  of,  iv.  98 ;  Society  of 
Friends.  The,  iii.  71  ;  Spurgeon,  Mrs.  C.  H., 
ii.  17;  iii.  185 — 188,  203 — 240,  259 — 272;  iv.  197, 
200,  207,  256,  257,  258 — 261,  337 — 352;  Spurgeon, 
Pastor  Charles,  iii.  278,  2S1,  285,  287,  290,  291, 
294 — 300,  302  ;  The  Freeman  and  other  papers, 
re  "Rivulet"  Controversy,  ii.  270 — 272,276 — 280; 
Tabernacle  Church,  congregation,  and  deacons. 
The,  ii.  309;  iii.  122^124,  203,  243 — 247;  iv.  225- — 
230,  233 — 236,  261,  362;  Thompson,  Miss,  ii.  10, 
16 — 18,  23 — 27;  Varley,  Mr.  Henry,  iv.  97; 
Watts,  Mr.  J.  S.,  ii.  97 — 102,  105,  126;  Way- 
land,  Dr.  H.  L.,  iv.  103;  Walton,  Pastor  C,  iv. 
95;  Western  Baptist  Association,  iv.  251;  White, 
Pastor  Frank  H.,  iii.  132;  )'oung  people  at  the 
Tabernacle,  iii.  115 — 118 
Spurgeon,  C.  H.,  Letters  to,  from — A  German  col- 
porteur, iv.  193;  Allon,  Dr.  Henry,  iv.  147;  an 
old  orphan  girl,  iv.  325  ;  Angus,  Dr.  Joseph,  iv. 
161,  281  ;.  Bayley,  Sir  Emilius,  iv.  297;  Bayne, 
Dr.  Peter,  iv.  241  ;  Beith,  Dr.  Alexander,  iv.  149; 
Benson,  Archbishop,  iv.  361  ;  Blake,  Mr. 
Thomas,  M.P.,  iv.  187;  Brown,  Rev.  Hugh 
Stowell,  iv.  151,  152;  Chown,  Rev.  J.  P.,  iv.  142; 
Cruse,  Rev.  Francis,  iv.  167;  Culross,  Dr.  James, 
iv.  146;  Cutler,  Mr.  W.,  i.  345;  Cuyler,  Dr.  T. 
L.,  iv.  172;  Denny,  Mr.  T.  A.,  iv.  187;  Dibdin, 
Rev.   R.   W.,   iv.    159;   Douglass,    Mr.    Frederick, 


iv.  176;  Evans,  Rev.  W.  Justin,  iv.  168;  Fer- 
guson, Dr.  Fergus,  iv.  299;  Fletcher,  Dr.  Alex- 
ander, iv.  141;  Fortescue,  Earl,  iv.  359;  Foster, 
Rev.  E.  C.  A.,  iv.  166;  Garrett,  Rev.  Charles,  iv. 
153;  Gladstone,  Rt.  Hon,  W.  E.,  183,  184;  Gor- 
don, Dr.  A.  J.,  iv.  177;  Gordon,  Dr.  J.  F.  S.,  iv. 
164;  Gough,  Mr.  John  B.,  iv.  171;  his  grand- 
father, i.  287;  Hall,  Sir  W.  King,  iv.  i.So;  Har- 
ford, Canon,  iv.  153 — 155;  Havelock,  Lady,  iv. 
182,  Haweis,  Rev.  H.  R.,  iv.  167;  Hodge,  Dr. 
A.  A.,  iv.  299;  Hughes,  Rev.  Hugh  Price,  iv. 
148;  Ladds,  Mr.  F.  G.,  iv.  324;  Lewis,  Rev.  W. 
G.,  iv.  162;  Louson,  Mr.  John,  iv.  173;  Low,  Mr. 
James,  i.  351;  Macgregor,  Mr.  John,  iv.  180; 
Martin,  Rev.  Samuel,  iv.  r4i  ;  Medhurst,  Pastor 
T.  W.,  ii.  142;  Mitchinson,  Rev.  H.  C,  iv.  100; 
Moody,  Mr.  D.  L.,  iv.  169,  170;  Aloore,  Rev.  E. 
W.,  iv.  166;  Morton,  Colonel  R.,  iv.  193;  Mouil- 
pied.  Rev.  A.  de,  iv.  165;  New  York  Syndicate 
Bureau,  iv.  iii;  Newdegate,  ;Mr.  C.  N.,  ^LP., 
iv.  122;  Nightingale,  Miss  Florence,  iv.  178; 
Olney,  Mr.  J.  T.,  1.  346;  Olney,  Mr.  W.,  i.  346; 
Pearse,  Rev.  Mark  Guy,  iv.  162;  Perowne,  Bishop, 
IV.  298,  360;  Pierson,  Dr.  A.  T.,  iv.  177;  Pun- 
shon.  Dr.  W.  Morley,  iv.  25,  146;  Radstock, 
Lord,  iv.  186;  Rainy,  Principal  Robert,  iv.  163; 
re  blessing  on  the  printed  sermons,  ii.  162 — 164; 
111-  324.  3-5'  3-S-  331;  i^'-  -7;  '"''  sermons  in 
Australian  news]3apers,  iii.  324,  325  ;  Reed,  Sir 
Charles,  iv.  iSi,  182;  Richardson,  Bishop,  iv. 
192;  Rogers,  Dr.  J.  Guinness,  iv.  156;  Ruskin, 
Mr.  John,  iv.  94;  Ryle,  Bishop,  iv.  298;  Samj)- 
son.  Rev.  W.,  iv,  149;  Sankey,  Mr.  Ira  D.,  iv. 
170;  Shaftesbury,  The  Earl  of,  iv.  99,  179,  252; 
Sheldon,  Mr.  Smith,  iv.  175  ;  Simon,  Rev.  Henry, 
iv,  163,  164;  Smith,  Rev.  G.  {re  Essay  on 
Popery),  i,  58,  59;  Stanford,  Dr.  Charles,  iv. 
144—146;  Stead,  Mr.  W.  T.,  iv.  239;  Stephenson, 
Prebendary,  iv.  168;  Symes,  Rev.  Colmer  B., 
iv.  155,  156;  Tabernacle  deacons  and  elders,  iii. 
242;  IV.  230—233,  234;  The  Redpath  Lyceum 
Bureau,  iv.  109;  Thompson,  Miss,  ii.  18;  Thomp- 
son, Mr.  Samuel,  iv.  190;  Thorne,  Sir  R. 
Thome,  iv.  1S6;  Voysey,  Rev.  Charles,  iv.  143; 
Watts,  Mr.  J.  S.,  iv.  25;  Wayland,  Dr.  H.  L., 
iv.  172;  Weitbrecht,  Mrs.,  iv.  160;  Welldon, 
Bishop,  iv.  158;  Wilberforce,  Canon  Basil,  iv, 
151,  155;  Williams,  Mr.  Alfred,  iv.  1S4;  Wil- 
liams, Sir  George,  iv.  188,  190;  ^^■right,  Dr, 
William,  iv.  158,  159 
S]5urgeon's,  C.  H.,  Literary  Works,  i.  2,  57 — 66,  21^, 
214;  ii.  19,  27,  42,  92,  94,  135,  136,  153,  155— 
161,  166,  167,  171,  174,  196,  197,  199,  214-217, 
297,  306,  322,  334,  33S;  iii.  35,  41—45,  58—61,  62 
—65,   142,   165,  200,  253,  257,  263—269,  272,  276— 


27S3  305—307^  3"- 


;iQ, 


339-  3^3  ;  iv.  49-  86, 


105,  117,  146,  174,  170,  1S7,  103,  202,  204,  218, 
239,  26S-271,  276,  27S,  2S3,  285,  20S,  3'>5-3'9- 
353-  357'  3"-'  37'^ 


;86 


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    VOLS.    L 


-IV, 


Spurgeon,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  at  Brighton,  iii.  182,  184— 
187;  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  ii.  15;  iii. 
9,  II,  287;  iv.  242,  240;  m  Paris,  li.  174—180, 
350;  Introduction  to  C.  H.  S.'s  Diary,  i.  127— 
129;  "A  Traveller's  Letters  Home,"  iii.  203—. 
205  ;  "  A  Holiday  Drive  to  the  New  Forest,"  in. 
257 — 259;  "My  Last  Letters  from  Mentone,"  iv. 
337 — 35-  '  on  "  Love,  Courtship,  and  Marriage," 
i.  4;  ii.  I  —  II,  13 — 21,  23 — 32;  Saturday  nights  at 
"Westwood,"  iv.  64 — 70;  "the  Mother  of  the 
College,"  iii.  189;  "Wedded  Life,"  ii.  175— 193' 
283 — 286,  291 — 299 

Spurgeon's,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  Book  Fund,  iv.  249,  293; 
illnesses,  ii.  95;  iv.  i,  2,  13;  Ten  Years  of  my 
Life,  iv.  70;  Ten  Years  After!  ii.  187;  travels 
on  the  Continent,  iii.  97 — 112 

Spurgeon,  Charles,  i.  9;  iii.  192,  273 — 285,  287 — 304, 
306,  352;  iv.   I,  246,  249,  286 

"  Spurgeon  "  in  Chinese,  i.  9 

Spurgeon,  J.  A.,  i.  10,  41,  118 — 125,  130,  188 — 190, 
194,  197;  iii.  19,  31 — 36,  140,  141,  iSo,  194,  249;. 
iv.   218,   246,  278,  363 

Spurgeon,  Job,  i.   8 

Spurgeon,   Thomas,  i.  9;   iii.    192,    193,  324,  327;   iv. 
I  — 14,  236,  278,  371 

Stalker,  Dr.  James,  iv,  277,  278 

Stambourne,  i.  5,  6,  10,  13 — 31,  ^2) — 3'^-  43i  i44.  i?'^- 
287,  289 — 291;  ii.  94,  189,  236;  iii.  313;  iv.  205; 
ministers  at,  i.   19,  20,  24,  37,  290 

Stanford,  Dr.  Charles,  ii.  272;  iii.  339;  iv.  21,  144— 
146 

Steane,  Dr.  Edward,  ii.  272  ;  iii.   5 

Stinton,  Pastor  Benjamin,  i.  306;  iii.  27,  28 

Stockton,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  25,   109 

"Stories"  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  i.  368;  ii.  43 — 47,  53, 
57,  60,  84,   190,   191 

Stowmarket,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  iii.  371 

Surrey  Gardens  Memorial  Hall,  iv.  357;  Surrey  Gar- 
dens Music  Hall,  i.  36,  202  ;  ii.  2,3'  43-  56,  60,  81, 
124,  162,  198,  199,  201—239,  241—255,  288,  303, 
310,  313,  313,  315,  318,  322—324,  335,  338,  339, 
353;  iii.  2,  12,  16,  30,  39;  "Jews"  at  the,  ii.  237; 
Letter  concerning  services  at  the,  ii.  235 — 239; 
The  great  catastrophe  at  the,  ii.  191  —  1Q3,  195 — 
222,  242,  243,  303—305,  312;  iii.  3,  80,   101  ;  iv.  93 

Sutton,  Mr.,  of  Cottenham,  i.   271—4 

Swindell,  Mr.  John,  i.   54,    117—124 

Tait,  Archbishop,  iv.  85 

Tennyson,  Lord,  ii.  264;   iv.    1S5 

Teversham,  i.    199 — 202 

Text  L'nion,  The.  iii.  306 

Thompson.  Miss,  ii.  9,  17;  iv.  341  ;  her  baptism,  ii. 
9;  betrothal,  ii.  9;  marriage,  28 — 32 

Thompson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  R.  B.,  ii.  14,  15,  16,  17,  19,31 
Thorne,  Miss  E.  H.,  iii.  201  ;  iv.  363,  364,  371 
Thorold,  Bishop,  iii.  310;  iv.  85,  86,  104 
Tollesbury,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  at,  ii.  95 
Toplady,  Augustus,  i.  94,  168,  282  ;  ii.  264 
Translatirjn?  rif  C.   H.   Spurgeon's  sermons  and  other 


works,    ii.    92,   339,   342,   369;    iii.   313,    315,   324; 

iv.   193,  241,  291,  306,  308,  311,  314,  319 
Tring,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  82 — 86,  97 
Trowbridge,  C.   H.  Spurgeon  at,  ii.  93 
Tydeman,  Pastor  E.  A.,  iv.  44 — 46 
Tyson,  Mrs.,  iii.  172;  iv.  49 
United  States  and  Canada,  Sale  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's 

works  in  the,  ii.  164 — 166;  iii.   138,  313;  iv.   no — 

112,  175 
Usher,  Dr.  W.,  iii.  318;  iv.   120 
Vinter,  Mr.  James,  i.  200 
Wales,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaching  in,  ii.  93,  343,  344; 

iii.  30,  369 
W^alters_,  Rev.  William,  i.  316;  ii.   173 
Waterbeach,    i.   36,   38,    59,    188,   205,    213,    227 — 230, 

232—240,  241—250,  253—267,   270,   271,  284,  287, 

293 — 297,  316,  351;  ii.    128;  iii.   7;  backslider  at, 

i.    238;    deacons   at,    i.    245,   255 — 258;   hypocrites 

at,    i.    258 — 260;   miser   at,    i.    253;    salary   at,    ii. 

128  ;  virago  at,  i.  235 
Watts,  Mr.  J.  S.,  i.    190 — 192,  243;  ii.  97 — 102;  iv.  25 
Watts's,  Dr.,  Catechism,  i.  31  ;  Hymns,  i.  43,  275;  ii. 

§3'  '53'  196,  264,  376;  111.  319,  347;  iv.  329 
Wayland,  Dr.  H.  L.,  iv.   73,  103,   172,   176 
Welldon,   Bishop,   iv.    157,    158 
Wells,  Rev.  James,  ii.   19,  36 — 41,  56,  142 
Wesley,   Charles  and  John,   i.    176,   282,  365  ;   ii.   47, 

49,  51,  60,  91,  99;  iii.   10,  47,  61,  362,  367;  iv.  7,^, 

248 
Westminster  Assembly's  Confession,  ii.    150;   iii.  69 
"Westwood,"  ii.   182,  1S3,   193,  255,  2S9,  290;  iii.   102, 

192,    194—196,   306;    IV.    23,  49—62,   63—70,    73— 

79,    81—92,    152,     153,     155,     157—159,     184,     187, 

208,  234,  280-304,  343.  349.  364 
"  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "  i.  24 
"What  doest  thou  there,  Elijah?  '  i.   178 
White,   Edward,   Rev.,   iii.   283 
White,   Pastor  Frank   H.,   iii.    130 — 133,    157;   iv.    193, 

333 
White's,  Kirk,  Letters,  i.  117 
White's  Natural  History  of  Selhorne,   i.   44;   iii.   259, 

260 
Whitefield,   George,   i.    157,   176,  359,  365;    ii.   47,   49, 

51,   60,   66,  67,    72,   77,   78,   91,   99,    104,    105,    114, 

116,   142,   165,  203,  211,  243.  252,  253;  iii.    10,  45, 

367 ;   iv.    26,   248,  304 
"  Why  so  Popular?  "  ii.   78 
Wigney,  Mr.  Stephen,  iii.  91,   163 
Wilberforce,  Crnon    Basil,  iv.   151,  155,  248 
"Will  his  popularitt  last?"  ii.  60 
Williams,   Pastor  W.,    ii.    220;    iii.   356  v  iv.   24S,   284, 

311 
Wilson,  Pastor  J.  A.,  i.    152—154 
Windermere,  ii.  25,   loq 

Winsor,  Deacon  George,  ii.   193,  323;  iii.   137 
Wotton,  iii.  263,  300;   iv.  372 
Wright,  Dr.  William,  iv.   158,  159,  273,  274,  296 
Wycliffe,  iii.  367,  369 
Young's  Xip^ht  Thoughts,  ii.  2G3  " 


•    i 


fJfeU^ 


-«r     ■^-- 


«H 


