





ROGER 8, SPERLING — 





The Library © 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 

















: asa 3 
tel oy UF, 


Sagina aw. s. Mich. 


4 Boek No Ze Chosen epee 
6 Si Ae Bi atthe Nitin Ar Rt 








a 
Sal 
0 
{ 
<~ 
’ 
Ca 
Pea: 
a 
i 
5 
: 
am 
tales 











~ 








F.B.MEYER: 
S. 





BETHEL 
By 





BACK TO 








PASS IT ON 


Write below the names of friends, and let this 
book pass from one to another in the order written. 

















cs} 


S‘R4r, Meyer holds in his hand the key to his reader’s 
heart and conscience. He speaks to conscience with a 
hind of authority which it is not easy to analyze and yet 
harder to resist,’’—Tus INDEPENDENT. 


BY REV. F. B. MEYER 
The Heart of the Scriptures. Daily readings from 
each chapter ofthe Bible. Five small volumes. 16mo, 
cloth, $3.75. . 
Brste ” CHARACTERS. 1amo, cloth, each, $1.00. 
Paul Israel oshua eremiah 
John the Baptist ta vid Pechariah 
Abraham oses Elijah 
Tue Exposrror Series. 12mo,:cloth, each, $1.00 
Tried by Fire The Way into the Holiest 
Christ in Isaiah Love unto the Uttermost 
The J.ife and Light of Men 
Tue Bressep Lire Series. 18mo, cloth, each, 30c. 
Through Fire and Flood Christian Living 
The Glorious Lord The Shepherd Psalm 
Key Words of the Inner Life The Present Tenses of the 
Calvary to Pentecost Blessed Life 
The Future Tenses of the Blessed Life 
Sprrit-Fittep Lirg Series. 12mo, cloth, 30c., 
net; paper, 15¢c. 
Meet for the Master’s Use. ‘The Secret of Guidance 
A Castaway Light on Life’s Duties. 
Back to Bethel 
Cheer for Life’s Pilgrimage. 16mo, cloth, soc. 
Saved and Kept. 16mo, cloth, soc. 
Peace, Perfect Peace. 18mo, cloth, 25¢. 
The Bells of Is. Echoes from Early Pastorates. 
16mo, cloth, 75¢. 
Prayers for Heart and Home. 16mo, cloth, 75¢. 
Lovers Always. A Bridal Souvenir. 16mo,cloth,75c, 
Envelope Series of Booklets. 25 Titles, 20 per doz, 
%,*Any of the above volumes sent post free on receipt 


of price 


The Bible Institute Colportage Association 
828 La Salle Avenue, Chicago 





PUB ET HE E 


Separation from Sin, and 
Fellowship with God 


BY 


F. B. MEYER, B.A. 


AUTHOR 6I° 


*©O1L.D TESTAMENT HEROES,”’ ‘‘ MEET FOR 
THE MASTER’S USE,” ETC. 


CHICAGO 


The Bible Institute Colportage Association 
826 La Salle Avenue 








' A REQUEST 


Readers of the Colportage Library who find our 
books useful] in their work, helpful in their influence, and 
desirable for distribution, will confer a great favor by | 
mentioning them to their friends and others. There are 
multitudes of people ready to purchase, read, and give 
away volumes like this, when they learn of the Library 
and its contents. Our friends can thus give material aid 
in extending the work of preaching the Gospel in print. 

Many of these books have been the means, in God’s 
hand, of converting the sinner, reclaiming the backslider, 
and upbuilding the Christian. Your recommendation 
may result in the saving of souls, 

Printed lists, showing titles, authors and chapter- 
contents, mailed free upon application te THE BIBLE 
INSTITUTE COLPORTAGE ASSOCIATION, 828 La Salle Ave- 
nue, Chicago. 





CopyriesT, 1001 
by the 
Beste Inerirute CoLPortTa@e AgSOCTATSON 
Caicaao 


On Phy RA» 
Oy } 

















‘ Herr, usr slouge Glico, cmgemsd tur‘ Ce 
| woe fur awe frum Ieawen us bce meuctctlee 
oy, Ate wba. be wes. Wy, Mb rma, be 





/ 


| arene eorperaeim : aw 4 10, UTR & O 

| Syecom remain bin AGE VYlury Serunne., 
| q wz teas. Aut ) Wt Mar 6G 

| Qernasiniy Streewns, wie Wok tow Us 
; Area qu wath uo 4 amayz, be 

: Wadaiuw?, 2 UCT Une mor ad. be. 
| we ma, te ley f{ “= yan | {od 

| fiom burn rb, nyt abvarp need soy G 
Una g ben. Wham adkdurco oleluartas) 
Guuiy rey ban oc i Inti. Slats ang 
Hews Commi) & TG sfraume hee g “2 


Buy Spy f- fq Dueganr. 


is SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
2 A 876 AT CLAREMONT 


CONTENTS. 


Arise, Go Up To BETHEL - - - - - - - 2 © g 
THe Sone or THE Lorp BEGAN - - - - - - 46 
Ho.iness Unto THE Lorp - - - - - - = = = 30 
Tue TRINITY OF TEMPTATION - - - - = = = 40 
THE RuLE or Our THOUGHTS- - - - - - = = 53 
THE Stronc MAN ARMED- - - - - = = = © 65 
Gop’s RuppisH HEAP- - - - - - = = = - = 80 
Tue Hoty Spiririn Tuts DISPENSATION - - - 8&6 
Tue Grain or Mustart SEED- - - - - - = = 104 


Lire, A PoEM- - = = - = © = = = = = = TIS 





ARISE, GO UP TO BETHEL. 


You will find the verses from which I am to speak 
in Gen. 35: I: 
“And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, 
and dwell there, and make thee an altar unto God: 
Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that 
were with him, Put away the strange gods from 
_ among you, and be clean.” 
Bethel is not more than ten or fifteen hundred 
feet above the sea, a waste moorland, as we should 
say in our country, strewn with great boulders. 
The name means the House of God. How did it 
get that name? ; 
_ Thirty years before the words of my text were 
spoken, Jacob, fleeing from his father’s house to 
avoid the anger of Esau, came there on the first 
night of his absence from home. You must think 
of him as a pilgrim exile, with his staff in hand, 
- no escort, nothing of household gear, coming upon 
that moorland, making what bed he could upon 
the heather, and lying down to sleep, with the stars 
above him and the wild wind beating across the 
waste. His last vision was of those stones that lay 
strewn around him; and as he slept these were piled 
‘one upon the other until from his couch there arose 
the ladder up and down which the angels trooped, 

coming down to him in blessing and going up to 


7 


Se ara Bethel | 





God in prayer. There te heard the voice of God, 
and as the morning broke and the vision faded and 
the sunshine lighted up the world, he vowed that — 
from that moment God should be his God and he 

His faithful servant. 


I want to carry you back to days long gone by, it 


may be thirty years ago, when you left your father’s 


house in some country district as a young man or 
girl, and entered into some great city. Do you re- 
member your first night there, and the tiny bedroom 
in which you knelt to say your evening prayer, and 
felt so lonesome and solitary? As you remained in 
the attitude of devotion it seemed as though the God 
of your old father and mother came very near you 
and spoke to your heart, and you promised from 
that night to be His faithful servant, so that until 
you died He would always find you ready to do His 
will. I want to know whether those vows have been 
kept? Has not that angel vision faded from your 
eyes? Has not that ladder died back into the dark? 
Have you not forgotten, or at least evaded, your 
solemn covenant? 

That young woman got a situation. She soon 
found herself beloved by one who could make a 
home for her. She and he together have climbed 
the ladder of prosperitv, and she is now at the head 
of a beautiful home, and the ange? !adder that linked 
“er with God has faded away. She has drifted upon 


ae current of fashion and worldliness. She is 


further away from God tonight than she was that 


other night so long ago. 





\ 


Tos Ee 


Arise, Go Up to Bethl = = 8389. 


ue since i 
; nt ; 
: priee 


‘That young man has become one of your leading 


citizens. He is making money rapidly, but the 


- promises have died upon his lips, and he is now 


further away from the God of his father than on the 
night he commenced his lonely pilgrimage. 
I am perfectly sure that I am speaking to some 


~ Jacobs that need’to have the call of God addressed 


to them, saying, 
“Arise, go up to Bethel! Get away to the moor- 
land plain! Get back to where you were thirty 


_ years ago, and at the foot of God’s ladder of fellow- 


ship again covenant yourselves to Him, and dedi- 
cate your life to His service.” 


From Bethel Jacob traveled forth to Padan Aram 
where he met Rachel. She became his beautiful 
wife. He had loved her at first sight, and stayed 


in Padan Aram, serving seven years for Leah, seven 


years for Rachel and six years for his cattle and ~ 
flocks. But they were like a few days for the love 
he had for Rachel. Years afterwards he started to 
return to his’ father’s house, with a large and wealthy 
following. He had difficulty in getting away from 
Laban, and you remember how the angels of God 
escorted him, though he had proved himself unfit 
to receive their help. This man who had seen the 
angel vision stooped to do things while in Laban’s 
employ which were not worthy of a son of God. 
Just as you who professed so much have been doing 
things which would not stand the scrutiny of God’s 
angels, and of which one day you must give account 
at the jttagment seat. 


10 _ Back to Bethel 
sd WRESTLING AT JABBOK. 

However, God loved this man, and brought him 
down to Jabbok. I have been to Jabbok myself, not 
literally, but in spirit, for God cannot bear for us to 
live a low down life. Let us picture that scene! 

The stars shining above, the brook rushing down 
to the Jordan, the trees and shrubs overhanging it! 
Rachel the beloved, Leah and the children, the flocks 
and herds had all gone forward, and Jacob was left 
alone. And the angel of God met him. (Genesis 
32:24.) Too often that wonderful scene has been 
used as a symbol of wrestling prayer, but it is not 
meant to be taken only in that sense. It seems to me 
that it was not Jacob who wrestled with the angel, 
but the angel who wrestled with Jacob. It was as 
though God knew it was his only chance. He 
wanted to lift Jacob up to a new royal life, and so 
_He actually wrestled with him as though to compel 
him to yield to Him. Jacob was a proud man. He 
stood his ground and resisted the effort of the angel 
tohumble him. Hestruggled. He antagonized the 
angel of God’s love. It was only when the angel put 
forth his hand and touched the sinew of his thigh, 
which shriveled as a cord in the flame, and the man 
was no longer able to resist, that he cast his arms 
around the angel and said: 

“T yield, I yield! But I will not let thee go until 
thou bless me!” 

The angel blessed him, and said: “What is thy 
name?” 

He answered: “Jacob—supplanter, cheat, mean, 
crafty.” 


b] 


PG ol Gee, a A - & 4° = 


Arise, Go Up to Bethel - a 





The angel said, “No more Jacob, but Israel! God 
wants you to leave all that behind and step up into 
a royal life.” 


Did you ever have that experience in your life? 

I had it twenty years ago, and I think many an- 
other can point back to some secret hour when 
_God’s angel came to lift him back into princeliness, 
and make him the servant of God. Perhaps when 
your wife lay at the point of death the angel came, 

and you vowed if God would spare her to you you 
would live a worthy, godly life. You remember, 
woman, that time when your first babe was danger- 

FE ously ill. You sat at the bedside and lifted up your 
ig heart to God and said: “If thou wilt spare my 
child I will renounce my worldliness, my low living, 

and I will live a true Christian life.” That was 
your Jabbok, and you left it resolved that God and 

you would be forever in close and blessed fellowship. 


‘But what happened the next day? 

It seems too awful to tell, because it is so true 
not only of Jacob but of ourselves. Esau met him, 
and instead of trusting God, Jacob gave him a lame 
excuse why he could not go with him (Genesis 

33:13). As soon as Esau’s back was turned the 
crafty Jacob turned in the opposite direction and 
made fora fat valley and land of pasture where his 
cattle and sheep could get all they needed, whilst 
his sons and himself could do a big trade with the 
men of Shechem. We are told he pitched his tent 
toward Shechem, and worse than that, he bought a 


> 


« 








12 5 Back to Bethel a 


parcel of a field. He who had come of a pilgrim 
race, who ought to have trusted God and known 
that God would give him the whole land, became 
a freeholder and bought some real estate right 
over against Shechem, one of the worst cities of 
the country. For wealth and gain he threw himself 
and his wife and children into the closest possible 
contact with this city, and you will hear presently 
what came of it. 


RACHEL’S INFLUENCE. 


I always think that just here Rachel’s influence 
came in. I am not going to absolve man and say 
that he does not care for the world, but I am quite 
sure women often drive their husbands into expend- 
itures which they cannot afford, because they say: 

“We want to give our children a chance.” 

I always feel that Rachel’s influence there was 
baleful upon Jacob’s soul, and that she probably 
said: 

“Husband, don’t you think we ought to give our 
children some of the polish, some of the manners 
of our time? Don’t you think it would be wise for 
them to come into contact with other, people?” 

Don’t think that I am too hard on Rachel. Her 
own behavior is my justification. We know that 
when Laban came to Jacob and said somebody had 
stolen his household gods Jacob knew nothing 
about it, but as a matter of fact, Rachel had stolen 
them and hidden them with their goods. Rachel 
no doubt knew of God, yet she had these little gods 





‘out VA Ti >, & Pere padre So El ariel at YO Maan SPAN ee Ar ma _ be te 
WS OFT ea aes hy. ot a V i) a Y 1 , 
Er) ie i aa ON bie Cai ih Pee ie ce Rey 


- Arise, Go Up to. 5 Bethel : 13 





to hick oe gave flee worship; and I cannot but 
- feel that her influence was affected by the idolatry 
she was practising. ‘ 

I want to speak for a moment to women. I want 
to ask whether in God’s sight they are using for 
God that holy, religious influence which should per- 
vade the home and mold the husband and the chil- 
dren. I want to ask girls to begin their relations 
with men upon such a basis that their influence 
over them may always be for good. If only girls 
would build up sweet and noble lives and refuse to 
do things which God would not approve, they 
would surely have an influence over their brothers 
and future husbands in all after time. Pledge your- 


-self to God in all purity and chastity. Build up— 


in good works a life so full of the jewelry of heaven 
that men will be compelled to seek you for your 
intrinsic worth. If any woman has idols—the idol 
of morphine, of worldliness or any other idol— 
in God’s name put it away! Can you allow filthy 
_ novels to eat out the very core of your heart and 
blast the purity and virtue which are your chief 
graces? In the name of God, I ask you, whatever 
secret idols you are worshiping, that you tear them 
from their throne and open your heart to Jesus 
- Christ, so that you may have no influence for evil, 
but every influence for good. 

Rachel ought to have been Jacob’s good angel. 
She should have said: 


He tae 


hs 


“Husband, don’t go there! Remember the chil- | 


dren |” 
But they drifted together, and for four or five 


14 Back to Bethel — oh eee 


years they lived near that prosperous, idolatrous 
city. 


And what happened next? 

We are told in Genesis 34 that Dinah, Jacob’s 
only daughter, went out to see the daughters of 
the land. Poor child! She had been put in the 
way of temptation, and like a gnat she began to 
flit around the candle flame. It may be that home 
was irksome, it may be there was quarreling there 
among her brothers, it may be that she lacked ten- 
derness and sweetness from those who lived with 
her. So she took a step from which there was no 
stepping back. She lost her honor, and ultimately 
brought disgrace and shame upon her father’s home. 

Who was to blame for all that? Was not Jacob 
to blame for putting his children in that position? 

Listen, you men who are making money! There 
is a tendency on the part of the Christian man, 
when he begins to make money, to say: “I can now 
live in a larger house. I can go into better so- 
ciety.” Too often acting thus, you place your chil- 
dren under that influence which is to them what_ 
Shechem was to Jacob. What is the result? Your 
children at once begin to get worldly notions. They 
go into balls and dances and theaters. You ex- ~ 
pose your sons and daughters to companions who 
will lead them to perdition. I don’t say you ought 
to deny your children education or anything which 
makes life bright and happy for them, but I do say 
when you have given your family a house accord- 
ing to your means and provided for the education 


Arise, Go Up to Bethel — IS 


and pleasure and recreation of your children, you 
ought to look upon the increase of your prosperity 
as a talent from God. You should use anything 
_ that is over and above what is necessary for you 
and your family for the service of God, account- 
ing yourself His steward and entrusted with His 
goods. 


Six, seven years passed like that, and culminated 
in a tragedy that compelled Jacob to be gone. Oh, 
that I were eloquent! Oh, that I could paint for 
you where you are living! Oh, that I could com- 
pare the angel-haunted ladder of Bethel with 
Shechem! If I could make you see that contrast, 
you would not need an angel voice to say to you: 
“Arise, go back to Bethel,” but, making all haste, 
you would get back to the glorious heights where 
God meets the soul. 


BACK TO BETHEL. 


When God spoke to Jacob he turned to his house- 
hold and all that were with him, and said: 

“Put away the strange gods that are among you, 
and be clean, and change your garments; and let 
us arise and go up to Bethel.” 

I would touch the harp of memory, the mem- 
ory of those past days when you were near God. 
Won’t you return to Bethel, where the angels go 
and come? 

I remember once going to a meeting of the Sal- 
vation Army where they had advertised an exhibi- 
tion of idols. I expected to see idols from India 


- 


my 


nd aa See a 





16 Back to Bethel - 


; ; 
and Africa and the South Seas, but instead of that 
eight young men, at the appointed time, stepped to 
the rear of the platform and returned, each bear- 
ing a large piece of cardboard. One card was cov- 
ered with pipes and cigars and tobacco; another 
with sham jewelry, feathers, ribbons and things of 
that sort. There were eight cards, each covered 
with things that had been idols to some. 

A man sitting behind me pointed and said: “That 
was my pipe.” 

A woman said: “See my bow of ribbon?” | 

Those simple people felt that these things had 
become idols to them, and they had given them up. 

I am not here to say that tobacco or jewelry is 
your idol, because if I did, a great many who are 
not tempted in these directions would say, “He 
doesn’t mean me; I have no idol”; which would 
not be true. For a good many men the idol is 
money ; for many women it is their beauty, or their 
skill in music, or perhaps their beautiful homes. 
You may depend upon it that unless you have gone 
through the purging process everyone of you is 
tempted to have some secret throne upon which is 
your idol. The Greek word for “idol” means “ap- 
pearance.” It is something which you trust in 
more than God whom you cannot see. If there is 
anything of that sort in your life, I pray you put 
it away! 

But you ask, “How can you put these things 
away?” 

There is only one way. Take them as God’s 
gift. As soon as you begin to look upon them as 











AG + 


Arise, Go Up to Bethel ‘i 17 i 


Es righe His loan, the fear of their hurting you passes away, 





if they are legitimate. Test yourself and say: 
_ “Christ, from henceforth I treat this as Thy 
gift to me, to be used for Thee!” 

And, my friends, be clean! Clean in your heart, 
clean in what you see, clean in every word you 
speak, clean in every act, clean in the whole body! 
Never allow an expression which is capable of a 
double meaning. Never let a thought intrude which 
is not just what it should be. Don’t look at those 
unclean pictures. “Don’t read those unclean books. 

“Change your garments!” It may be you have 
dressed in polluted garments. I say to you, put off 
the old man and put on Jesus Christ, and say: 

“T am going to live henceforth as Jesus Christ 
would live were He in my place.” 

Jacob did it, and he went back to Bethel, and a 
wonderful thing happened. God said to him: “Your 
name shall no more be Jacob, but Israel.” Then 
He added, “I am God Almighty”—as much as to 
say, “Jacob, you sought Shechem because you 
thought you would do better, and now you stand 
alone and wonder what is going to happen next. 
I am going to be with you. I am God Almighty. 
I will meet all demands. I will stand sponsor for 
you. Reckon on me. I will see you through.” 

Now look to Jesus! Open your heart to Him. 
Give Him your whole nature. Don’t let there be 
any secrets. He will give you a new name. He 
will be to you God Almighty. He will make you 
fruitful and will multiply you. And may you and 
He live together in blessed fellowship until He 
makes up His jewels. 


THE SONG OF THE LORD BEGAN. 


2 Chronicles 29 :27. 


‘Abounding joy is the prime characteristic of our 
holy religion—joy unspeakable and full of glory. 
This is as natural to true religion as the bloom on 
a maiden’s face is to perfect health. You can’t 
create joy, but you can make the conditions from 
which it springs. 

If your life is joyless, it must be because of some 
sin. Find out, then, the reason why your harp 
hangs on the willow, and joy has died out of your 
life. Our Lord said: ‘These things have I spoken 
unto you that My joy might remain in you, and 
that your joy might be full” (John 15:11). If 
your joy is not full you have not entered into the 
heart of our Lord’s sermon about the vine and 
the branches. 

Paul said: “The fruit of the Spirit is joy” 
(Galatians 5:22). Now, fruit is natural. There 
is no effort about fruit. Indeed the effort of the 
bough is to repress the fruit which presses for- 
ward into expression, so that gardeners have to 
prune away excessive production. If the bough 
is properly connected to the trunk, it bears fruit; 
and if you are properly related to our Lord, joy 
will be as natural to you as singing to a bird. 


18 


i ae ll 


i 


,4 


The Song of the Lord Began 19 


Is your religion somber and dour? Is there no 
spring and elasticity about it? Do children find 
you out or shun you? When you enter society, 
does the laughter and merriment die? Are you 
an element of perfect gladness at a party? If not, 
there is something wrong in your inner life, which 
is choking the spring of joy. 

Some years ago my friend Dr. Handley Moule 
visited the excavations in the Forum at Rome. 
While there, as the rubbish was being cleared 
away, suddenly there gushed forth the waters of 
a spring that had been choked for centuries. Poor 
little spring! Longing to express itself and flash 
in the sunlight, but choked by the accumulations 
of the years! , 

So, if you are a Christian at all, there is a spring 
of joy in your soul which has been stopped and 
silenced. My-first mission is to put my hand on 
what is wrong. 


In order to help me lay hold of your conscience, 
turn to 2 Chronicles 29:27, where we are told: 

“When the burnt offering began, the song of the 
Lord began also.” 

The word “began” indicates that it had ceased. 
If you look into the preceding chapter you will 
find that for sixteen years the song of the Lord 
had never broken from Levite throats, had never 
floated through the temple courts. Those courts, 
intended by David to resound with the praises 
and worship of God, were still. In this they re- 





2077" . Back to Bethel : ne 
sembled your heart, for your heart was meant for ~ 


music. If it has ceased, it is probably from the 
same reason. 


THE CAUSE OF THE SILENCE. 


What had happened during those sixteen years? 

Turn to the twenty-eighth chapter, verses 24 
and 25. “Ahaz gathered together the vessels of 
the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of 
the house of God, and shut up the doors of the 
house of the Lord, and he made him altars in every 
corner of Jerusalem. And in every several city 
of Jerusalem he made high places to burn incense 
unto other gods, and provoked to anger the Lord 
God of his fathers.” 
_ King Ahaz was weary of the worship of God. 
So he put out the lights, he closed the doors, he 
took away the keys, he turned the Levites adrift. 
The sparrows made their homes, the birds of the 
air built their nests in the neglected courts of the 
temple. Neither Ahaz, nor the priests, nor the 
Levites frequented the holy place. 

Then came a change. The burnt offering began 
after sixteen years of discontinuance, and the song 
of the Lord broke into utterance once again. Heze- 
kiah became king, and “in the first month of his 
reign he opened the doors of the house of the Lord, 
and repaired them. And he brought in the priests 
and the Levites, and gathered them together into 
the east street, and said unto them, Hear me, ye 
Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the 
house of the Lord God of your fathers, and carry 





vane thy ene Lye tes 4 


The Song of the Lord Began yar 





a i forth the Blthinees out of the holy Pisce (verses 
P 3-5). 

“Carry, forth the filthiness,” that is what must 
first be done. It is the call of the apostle Paul: 
“Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the 

“flesh and spirit,” (2 Cor. 7:1). I have Yet to learn 

what the apostle quite meant by the distinction 
between filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit. 
Away back in the inner shrine of our spirit there 
must be filthiness. 

The priests and the Levites gathered at Heze- | 
kiah’s call. They “went into the inner part of the 
lhouse of the Lord, and brought out all the unclean- 
ness that they found,” (verse 16). ; 

What followed? They made a sin offering ; and 
sO sin was put away (verse 24). 


* OUR CHURCHES. 


Let us apply these truths first to our churches. 

You are eagerly desirous of a revival of undefiled 
religion, that your hearts and homes should be | 
full of praise to God. I call on the elders and 
deacons and leaders in our churches to come into 
the inner courts that they may be thoroughly 
cleansed from the filthiness that has accumulated 
there. Nobody brought it into the temple—it just 
accumulated. And the dust and filthiness of the 
world has accumulated in our souls, and you and I 
must deal with it. 

Some years ago I met a gray-haired minister wha 
told me the following story from his own life. 
Said he: 


22° Back tor been 


“T was brought up under Finney, and after my 
seminary course was sent to carry on a decayed 
work in a distant country district. There had been 
no revival, no stirring up of the Holy Ghost in 
those parts for years. I gathered some godly peo- 
ple in the vestry every Friday night to pray for a 
revival. We kept this up for fifteen months, but 
the heavens were as brass above us. 

“When fall came on, I set apart a day for united 
prayer. My heart rejoiced as I saw the farmers 
driving in with their families, until the school- 
house behind the chapel was filled. 

“I explained that we had'gathered to pray for a 
revival. After the opening hymns and prayers the 
meeting was thrown open. 

“The silence of death settled upon the audience. 
Every one waited. 

“Presently a leading old elder rose in a front 
seat, and said: 

““Pastor, I don’t think there is going to be a 
revival of the Holy Ghost here so long as Brother 
Jones and I don’t speak to each other.’ 

“He left his pew, walked down the aisle and 
found Brother Jones, and said: 

““Brother Jones, you and I have not spoken for 
five years. Let’s bury the hatchet. Here’s my 
hand! 

“The old man returned to his pew, and sat down. 
A sob broke from the audience, and then there was 
silence again. 

“Soon another elder rose, and said: 

“Pastor, I think there will be no revival here 


aaa 


Ato fn ER eae i eee rye , cae 
» The Song of the Lord Began 23 
while I say fair things to your face and mean things 
behind your back. I want you to forgive me.’ 
“We shook hands, and the audience relapsed into 
stillness again.” 
The minister told me that he then witnessed the 


strangest scene of his life. For ten minutes men 
and women crept noiselessly about the house, 


squaring old scores. And God began to visit them. 


The operatives in a factory nearby heard what 
was going on in the school-house, and at the lunch. 
hour they came over in such numbers that they 
were diverted into the church. The pastor preached 
to them the simple gospel, and within five minutes 
four of the ringleaders in sin in that community 
were crying to God for mercy. A revival broke 
out that swept to and fro over the district for 
three years. 

I told this story at Wandsworth, England, once. 
A few weeks later, when addressing a gathering of © 
ministers in London, I told it again, and a brother 
minister rose and said that after I had preached at 
Wandsworth, as he was going out, a man who owed 
him twenty-five dollars took his hand, and said: 

“Forgive my delay in settling that debt. You 
‘shall have the money tomorrow.” 

We must get back to first principles. We are 
sight with God in the exact proportion that we 
are right with the men and women around us. Let 
us test ourselves, not by what we are on Sundays 
at church, but by what we are to the man whom 
‘we like least. That is the true gauge. 


Ts there any unkind, jealous feeling between — 
‘eS s 


a’ 


wh 


baat Nese ena ‘Back to. Bethel me 


sor MY Pe 





- 


_ pastor and pastor? any irritation or tetivg be-_ 
cause of another’s success? 


Are you Christian people prepared to square up 
old scores? to give up things in business that you 
know are not perfectly consistent with Christ’s com- 
mands? 

If so, shake hands; write that letter; pay that 
money; have done with that source of irritation. 
Let the love of God be poured into your soul, and 
after that joy will come. 


THE INDIVIDUAL HEART. 


Let us now come to your own heart. Is any 
secret sin harbored there? Joy began in my life 
one solemn night when I knelt before Christ and 
had the holy light of His Spirit turned upon one 
thing in my heart that was filthy. It had accumu- 
lated there, and I hardly knew it. I had been 
living a very unsettled life for some time, when a 
young fellow came and spoke in my church, and 
led me to feel that he possessed a secret which I 
had not myself. The following morning, at 7 
o'clock, I found my way to the house where he 
was staying. 2 knew the house very well, and 
went up to the room which he was occupying. 
I said: 

“You will excuse my coming, won’t you? The 
fact is, I am very unhappy. I am a Christian min- 
ister, and people expect a great deal of me, but my 
heart is full of evil, and I cannot deal with it. Can 
you give me your secret ?”’ 

I could see by the candles that he had been up 
a long time, and in fact he told me he had been up 


ae ‘The Song of the Lord Began. : 25 : Mi 





since 4 o’clock. I asked him what he had been 
_, doing, and he said that the Lord had said, “If ye 
love Me keep My commandments,” and, said he: 
“I was just going over the commandments to | 
see if I have kept them.” : 
I told him I wanted to learn his secret, and he 
said: 

“There is nothing I have which you may not 
have.” 

“But how may I get right? I am a Christian, 
but how may I get entirely right?” 

“Have you ever given yourself entirely to 
Christ?” he asked. 

“Yes,” I replied, “in a general way I have.” 

“Tf you have not done so entirely, go alone and 
settle it.” 

That night I knelt by my bed, with the door of 
my room locked, and resolved that I would not 
sleep until I had settled the matter and surrendered 
everything to Jesus. It seemed as though Jesus 
was by my side, and as if I took from my pocket a 
large bunch of keys which I generally carry when 
I am at home. I took from that bunch one tiny 
key, which I kept, and then held to Jesus the bunch 
with the one missing, and said to Him: 

“Here are the keys of my life.” 

He looked at me sadly, and asked: 

“Are all there?” 

“All but one tiny one, to a small cupboard. It 
is so small that it cannot amount to anything.” 

He replied, “Child, if you cannot trust Me with 
everything, you cannot trust Me with anything.” 


26 Back to Bethel 


Satan whispered to me: “You cannot give up that. 


thing. Besides if you let Christ have His way, 
you don’t know what He will ask of you next. 
Don’t give it to Him!” 

Then the thought came to me oe my only child, 
who at that time was somewhat wayward. Sup- 
posing she were to come to me and say: “Father, 
I give my whole life up to you; you may choose 
anything you want for me,” I knew I would not, 
call her mother and say: “Now is our chance. 
What can we do to make her life miserable and 
unhappy?” I would say: 


“Wife, here is our chance. We will take away 


everything that hurts her, and we will make her 
life one long summer day.” 

Christ would not be harder on me than on my 
' child, and at last I said: 

“Lord, I cannot give the key, but I am willing 
to have you come and take it.” 

It was as I expected. I seemed to hold out my 
hand, and He came and opened the fingers and took 
the key from me. Then He went straight to that 
cupboard, unlocked and opened it, and saw there a 
thing that was terrible and hideous. He said: 


“This must go out. You must never go this way. 


again.” 
And the moment He took the thing from me, He 
took the desire for it out of my soul, and I began 


to hate it. Then I yielded myself absolutely to. 


Him, and said: 
“From this hight i want Thee to do as Thou 
wilt with my life.” 


‘ 





iy he Song of the Lord Began 27, 


‘The next morning I. wakened expecting a sort 
of hallelujah feeling, but I was as calm and quiet 
as I am now. I only had a delightful sense that I 
did belong to Jesus Christ, and a hundred times 
that day I said to myself: 

“I am His! I am absolutely His!” 

Have you some hidden cupboard in your soul in 
which you are harboring things whose miasma is 
killing your joy? Face your true condition. Too 
often we are like those who fear their lungs are 
diseased, and who dread examination by the stetho- 
scope and surgeon lest he should reveal the true 
condition. _We can make no headway until we 
are clean. Are you sure there is nothing in your 
heart you would not like Christ to deal with? Be- 
fore you can have God’s best, you must let Him 
search your soul, and show what the unclean thing _ 
-is which entered years ago and has choked your 
spiritual vitality ever since. 


THE SONG BEGAN. 


Now notice what happened next. Hezekiah had 
the altar ready. On one side were the priests with 
the whole burnt offering, which signified Christ’s 
entire consecration to God in His death, and also 
the entire consecration of believers to Christ in 
life. On the other side was the Levite choir in 
white vesture, and other Levites with cymbals and 
psalteries and harps. At a given signal the burnt 
offering was laid on the altar. I know not whether 
God sent fire from heaven, or the wood was ignited 
with sacred fire that had somehow been kept burn- 
ing all those years. But as the fire began the sweet 


& 


28 Back to Bethel 





ak 


voices of the choristers burst forth in song, and 
the music of the instruments was heard again. 

The very heavens must have stood still to listen. 
Angels must have come in troops to hear the music 
in that familiar place after sixteen years of silence. 

I found myself a few months ago in a bachelor’s 
house. Bachelors are often taciturn, gloomy, and 
wrapped up in themselves; but this one lived in a- 
beautiful house, and was one of the brightest men 
I ever met. 

When supper was finished, I said: 

“You seem very happy?” 

“Yes,” he replied, “‘I’ll tell you my story. Years 
ago I was making money, and chose this solitary 
life so as to be free from the anxieties of wife and 
children. But though I had all that the world. 
could give, I was not happy. 

“Then my brother died. He had no genius for 
business, and was always poor. He left a large 
family of children. I tried to provide for them, 
but finally had to import them all'into this house. | 
I thought the peace of my life had then gone out. 

“For the first week it was agony to see those 
children run all over the house. But then they got 
hold of me, and I began to like them. I sent them ~ 
to school, and have been both father and mother to 
them. Two of them are now married. I don’t believe 
there is a happier man on God’s earth than myself.” 

When the burnt offering began, the song began. 
A self-centered life is a miserable life. When that 
man began to sacrifice himself, happiness came into 
his life. 








[ee Pe eee), +) oa 29! "ie Fite) 


The Song of the Lord Began —_ 29 

And if, to live for another is sweet, if it is lovely 
for a woman to live for a paralyzed husband, and 
if there is a song forever on her lips because she 
is all in all to him, what must it be when you are 
all in all for Jesus? Wherefore I beseech you, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a 
living sacrifice—not a dead, but a ling sacrifice— 
holy, acceptable unto God; and be transformed by 
the renewing of your mind, that ye may know what 
is that good and acceptable and perfect will of 
Ged. 

How I fought God’s will! I thought it was 
hard, inexorable, terrible; but when a man presents 
himself to it, he finds it good, acceptable and per- 
fect. The thing you hate becomes your joy. As 
you look into Christ’s face, and say, ‘““Rabboni— 
Master,” easter joy springs in your soul. 

God help you to clear away all the filthiness, and 
yield yourself to Him. Whether you can sing or ~ 
not with the voice, the song of the Lord will begin — 


in your soul! 





HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD. 


Holiness stands for three things. First, separa- 
tion from sin and common use, as the one day 
among the days of the week, as the one mountain 
amidst the mountains of the world, and as the 
child Samuel amidst the boys and girls of his age— 
separate from sin and common use. 

Second, it means to be separated unto the service 
of God. That which is kept from sin is reserved 
for God’s most holy use, and that which is taken 
from common service is reserved utterly and abso- 
lutely for Him. Just as you would not permit the 
chalice and platten which are used for the com- 
munion service to be employed for the common 
meals of your own home, so that which is holy is 
reserved and set apart for sacred use. 

Third, while holiness means separation from and 
separation to, it also implies Godlikeness, because 
that which is reserved for God’s use takes on some- 
thing of God’s nature. Just as the silver plate at 
the Lord’s table reflects the light of the face of 
him who bears it, so that which is used by God 
tends to become like God. Never forget that holi- 
ness is not an attainment, but an attitude. It is 

the opening of the heart to the balmy air and sun- 


30 


ay bls Sgn A ee | 
hee Hare 


Holiness Unto the Lord ¥ CRE 


light of God’s nature, which, entering in, fill the 
spirit of man or woman. 


THE HIGH PRIEST'S FRONTLET. 


In Exodus 28:36, the high priest stands before — 
you vested in his full white robes, with breastplate 
of gold. On the frontlet of his forehead, the legend 
HOLINESS TO THE LORD is inscribed, so that 
wherever he goes to and fro, he bears upon his brow 

_ that sacred text. 

Suppose I should turn from him, and speaking to 
you say that I want from this evening until you 
meet Christ in glory that you should bear that. 
_frontlet upon your brow and have that holy legend 
inscribed upon you, it might be you would shrink 
back and say: 

“No, no, I will never be a hypocrite. I do trust 

in Christ and desire to be like Him. But I dare 
not arrogate to myself that sacred frontlet, that 
‘holy legend. I am not, HOLINESS TO THE 
LORD?’ 
_ Then, my friend, you are putting away from you 
the privilege of this dispensation, of which Zech- 
ariah says that in this age there shall be so much 
Holy Spirit given to the men and women who 
believe in Christ that HOLINESS TO THE LORD 
shall be engraved upon their heads, that the come- 
mon vessels in their homes shall have the same 
legend upon them, and be as holy as the vessels 
in the Lord’s house: 

“In that day shall there be upon the bells of the 

horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the 


Foes NCE Rr hs Fi nc Te, BORN CEL ORS Sd OTT Uy Ca nears” ead 
% F Fic; 1 %} 3 i elt i 
ek 


iB _. Back to Bethel 
pots in the Lord’s house shall be like the bowls 
before the altar.”—Zechariah 14:20. 

I remember so well spending some winter days 
in the city of Boston. I shall never forget the 
blue sky and the crisp white snow, the absence of 
the rumbling of wheels, and everywhere the sweet 
music of the sleigh bells. The bells of all our life, 
the dinner bell, the rising bell, the bell summoning 
_ us to our daily work, the telephone bell asking us 
to hold conversation with another—all the bells 
ringing in our lives are to have these words in- 
scribed, so that our whole life shall have this as 
its keynote. 

What I am going to say can be very well noe 
under three words—abolition, inclusion and eleva- 
~ tion. 

FIRST—ABOLITION. 


_I think Zechariah meant that in the age of the 
Holy Ghost in which we are living, there should 
be the abolition of the line between secular and 
sacred. So many people draw a line between these 
two. They say “business is business, and religion 
is religion,” “a place for everything, and everything 
in its place.” They live in two houses. Over their 
homes perhaps may be the words HOLINESS TO 
THE LORD, but they spend most of their time 
away from their homes, and they would hesitate 
to write those words over their pleasure resorts and 
places of business. Some people put on their re- 
jigion and put it off with their Sunday clothes. 
They wear it with difficulty. Oh, this terrible, ter- 
rible habit of Christian people in drawing such 





> ie et we Et sth ere Team ee eee Le. mare ike IN) Oe 
ys bay % Pa era bys a ue > A ‘i 


- Holiness Unto the Tete | 33 





a erent tines of demarcation, living in water-tight — 


compartments so that one is wholly religious and 
the other wholly secular. 

That cannot be right because of three things: 

First, Christianity is not @ creed, not a formula, 
not a ritual, but a life. 

If it is a life begun by the Holy Spirit, a real 
life, the germ of the Christ life planted in our 


spirits and to rise up in the majesty of Christ’s’ 


likeness, you cannot divest that life from ordinary 
existence. A flower’s life must always express 
itself in its fragrance and hue. A bird’s life must 
always express itself through its song, its nest 
building and its care for its young. An artist must 
always look at things artistically. And if a man 
is truly enjoying the life of God in his soul, that 
life must rise up in every word he speaks, in every 
look of his eyes, in every movement of his nature. 
I do not say that he will always be talking about 
God, but the divine life will express itself in his 
laughter and in every movement of his life. 

Then, secondly, we must remember that Chris- 
tianity is the recognition of Christ’s kingship. That 
is, the true Christian is the absolute property of 
Jesus Christ. 

I shall never forget when I saw a slave for the 
first time. It was in a street of Tangiers, Morocco. 
My companion pointed to a woman advancing 
toward us. She was barefooted, but laden with 
heavy gold ornaments. He said: 

“That’s a slave.” 

For the first time I was face to face with one 


34 Back to Bethel 


who had no property in her own nature, but whose 
every quality was owned by her master, She was 
absolutely his, everything about her and every fac-. 
ulty she possessed. I looked up to the sky and said: 
/ “Oh, God, I thank Thee that if she is a slave, 
I am one also.” 

My friend, have you ever looked into Christ’s 
face, and said, “Whose I am, and whom I serve! 
My Master, Jesus! Everything I have and every- 
thing I may acquire are all my Master’s.” If so, you 
cannot give Him part of your life and keep back 
the rest. Your whole life must be under the 
mastership of the sweetest Master and King. 

Third, Christianity is a testimony to the world, 
the confession of the mastership of the Lord. 

The world seldom comes into our churches. If 
it does not, therefore, see you living on Christian 
principles in your business-and pleasure and daily” 
life, your testimony to the world is at an end. There- 
fore, for the world’s sake, I protest against this divi- 
sion of the secular from the sacred. I ask that 
wherever we are, always and everywhere, we shall 
bear upon our faces and upon our bodies, upon all 
our pleasures and business, upon all the bells that 
ring in our lives, these words: “Sacred to Jesus”; 
that is, set apart for our blessed Master and Lord. 


INCLUSION. 

If that is true of you, I want you to take a step 
further that is a most important one, and that is 
expressed by the word “Inclusion.” 

Horses were forbidden the ancient Jew. A horse 
is no more harmful than a mule. God made it a 





- Holiness Unto ibeLord 2) an 


- most useful animal, but because of its association 
. with pride and show and wart, God tabooed it for 
. the Jews. But after centuries had passed and the 
people had been purified, elevated and taught, God 
said: 

“There is no reason why you should not have 
your horses now, but engrave upon their bells the 
words HOLINESS TO THE LORD.” 

The ancient hermit said he could have no wife or 
child. No woman’s hand might be laid on his sick 
brow with gentle caress. No children’s voices might 
ring in his home. He must dedicate himself to God, 
and deny himself the comforts of home. He put 
away horses. 

Then came the Puritans, who said, “I must have 
no work of art in my home, nothing that will excite 
amusement.” No horses, no horses. 

A young man once told me that since he had 
_ become consecrated he had given up manly games 
and his violin. If you cannot continue in such 
things because of evil associations, then give them 
up, not because they are wrong in themselves, but 
because of the associations. But if you can go into 
them and elevate your companions, if you can make 
them pay the price of your companionship—no 
swearing, no dirty talk, no gambling, do you not 
think it is a greater thing to join them, and as a 
grain of salt, as a beam of light, lift the whole of 
their conversation? Is not that what Zechariah 
meant when he said: 

“You may have your horses, but see to it that 


. 


ce | : Back to Bethel men 


RR Se te ne Ue Teen tes 





ven engrave upon their bells , HOLINESS TO 
‘THES LORD.” 

A young girl who wishes to consecrate her life 
to God, thinks she must give up her piano. But 
suppose she can use it to keep a brother at home 


nights instead of wandering off to his evil com- 


panions, isn’t that a higher use to put it to than 
to give it up absolutely? 

Keep the horses if you can, but write upon 
then HOLINESS TO THE LORD. ih 

But someone says, “Stop, sir. Don’t you think 
you are introducing a bad principle? Don’t you 
think a man might argue on your principle and say — 
that he is going to the dance, or the billiard hall, or 
theater, and lift them up for Christ?” 


GUIDING PRINCIPLES. 


In answer to that I would advise you to take 


these two texts as the guiding stars cf your life: 


I Cor. 6:12: “All things are lawful unto me, 


but all things are not expedient; all things are lawful 


for me, but I will not be brought under the power 
of any.” 

Then I Cor. 10:23: “All things are lawful for 
me, but all things are not expedient; all things are 
lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no 
man seek his own, but every man another’s good.” 

The first principle is this: “I will not be brought 
under the power of any.” Doesn’t that touch your 
cigar? JI am not now denouncing smoking, but are 
there not men listening to me who are absolutely 
under the power of the pipe? They cannot lay it 


Cdn oo 





i Holiness Unto the Lord 37 


_ down and pick it up as they please. They are really. 
under its mastery. It is the same with the use of 
a morphine and the like. And whenever you cannot 
lay a thing of that kind aside, are you not under its 
power? Ta, 

The other principle is equally true. “I will never 
do a thing which will hurt another.” That comes 
home, young man, to your treatment of women. 
Always make it easy for a girl to do right, never 
make it hard for her. 

_ As to the theater, doesn’t that law come in there, 
too? You cannot go there without making the 
theater possible for others. Even though you and 
I might go without harm, we are making it possible 
_ for others to go who have not such a level head as 
we have. Then, too, we always must think of the 

actors and actresses. I dare not make sweeping 

charges, but statements have been made to me, which © 
I can verify, which make me know that the theater 
is specially perilous to those whose profession it is. 
You say: “What about the dance?” | 
I do not think you can write HOLINESS TO 
THE LORD over the waltz. If girls only knew 
the thoughts which fill many men’s hearts when they 
dance, I do not believe that pure girls would expose 
themselves to the close embrace of the waltz. It 
is only because they do not think, and have not had 
a high standard put before them. If you are a true 
child of God and have “HOLINESS TO THE 


LORD” written upon you, you will be very careful, 
first, how you dress, and then how you dispose of 


38 Back to Bethel — : 
your body. Anyhow, you ought first ask the Holy, 
Spirit how you may treat His temple. 

But I come back to this. Everything which is 
right, human and holy may be given unto God. I 
try to make it a rule of my life to pass:no day in 
which I do not see one beautiful thing, read one 
beautiful thought, hear one sweet strain of music. — 
I try to cultivate my love for beautiful things, and 
I think I can do that for Jesus. 


ELEVATION, 


Let me close with a word about elevation. 

It is not a leveling-down policy, but a leveling 
up. It is not that the high priest should take off 
‘his holy plate and think no more of his Temple 
service than of harnessing his horse for a ride, but 
that he should mount his horse with the same sense 
of God as he bore with him unto the Holy Place. 

We need to strike the keynote, as a leader of 
music would if there were no organ, and everything 
will be accorded to that key. So Sunday strikes the 
keynote for the week, and your prayer time in the 
morning strikes the keynote for the day. 

But you ask, “How am I to get thus?” 

Look upon 


YOUR LIFE AS A CALLING OF GOD. 


There are three “callings” in First Corinthians. 
In 1 Cor. 1:1, called to be an apostle; in 1:2, called 
to be saints; in 7:20, called to be business men. 
A call to business life is as great a calling as to be 
a minister, but go to your life day by day for Jesus. 


mI sh 


Holiness Unto the Lord 39 





In Revelation we are told that no one could buy 
or sell that had not the mark of the beast on the 
hand or forehead (Rev. 13:16, 17). We are also 
told that the name of the Lamb shall be in the fore- 
heads of His servants (Rev. 22:4). Every one has 
the mark of the beast upon their foreheads, or 
the mark of Christ. We cannot see it, but the 
angels can; and on every brow in this audience 
there is inscribed in letters of light or letters of 
darkness, the words HOLINESS TO THE LORD 
or the mark of the beast. 

Let your life from this time forth be wholly for 
Jesus. He will not take anything from you that 
is for your good, but He will accept your whole 
being, and from this moment until you die it shall 
be your joy to live absolutely for Christ. 





THE TRINITY OF TEMPTATION. 


When the Lord Jesus received the filling of the 
Holy Spirit at His baptism, He was immediately 
led into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. 
The person who has been powerfully drawn toward 
God by the Holy Spirit will be, like the sweep of 
the pendulum, almost immediately exposed to strong 
temptation. 

It is almost necessary, I think, in order to root 
the tree deeper in the soil. When I was a boy my 
schoolmates would go often to a neighboring or- 
chard when the fruit was ripe. You could always 
tell when the fruit was ripe, because the boys made 
for it. As long as the fruit of your life is immature 
and sour, the devil will not trouble you much; but 
just so soon as your fruit is ready, you may expect 
all the devils of hell to try to steal it. It may be 
considered rather-an honor to have thieves break 
into your house, because it shows that you have a 
repute for having money—thieves never break into 
a poor man’s house. And if the devil comes about 
your house, it shows that you are becoming better 
off than you used to be. Count it all joy, there- 
fore, when you are tempted. 

Now in dealing with temptation we must remem- 
ber that a man may be tempted either of God (and 


4° 








: nay May bain” Were 


te The Trinity of Temptation ae ‘4I 





we generally use the word “tried” when we speak 
of this) or he may be tempted of Satan. In Heb. 
11:17 we are told that God did “tempt” or “try” 
Abraham. God tries us that we may rise; Satan. 
tries us that we may fall. God puts an occasion 
in our way to be a stepping stone up; Satan puts an 
occasion in our way to be a stumbling block, and ! 
cause us to fall. 

I am not now speaking about God’s side in trial, 
but about temptation to failure. 

I will take as my basic text a passage, which, if 
you understand, you will have the key to the mys- 
tery of the New Testament. It is found in Ephe- 
sians, the second chapter. In the first ten verses 
you have the seed plot of the main teachings of the 
Apostle Paul. 

He begins with our terrible state in sin through 
our connection with our first parent, Adam; for 
every one is connected with Adam in his sin. He 
says: “You hath He quickened who were dead in 
trespasses and sins.” ‘Then he speaks of the trinity | 
of evil. 

There are three trinities in the world: The trin- 
ity in unity above us, the Father, Son, and Spirit— 
one God; the trinity within us, spirit, soul and body 
_—one man; and the trinity beneath us, the world, 
the flesh and the devil. 

In Eph. 2:2, 3 you will find: “In time past ye 
walked according to the course of this world’— 
there is the world; “according to the prince of the 
- power of the air”—there is the devil; and “in the 


42 Back to Bethel 


lusts of our flesh”—there you have the flesh. These 
three are present in every temptation that comes to 
man. 


WHAT IS THE WORLD? 


What is the world? In I John 2:26 we are told ' 
what is in the world: “The lust of the flesh, the 
lust of the eyes and the pride of life.” These were 
the lines along which Christ’s three temptations 
came. These the apostle shows are im the world, 
but he does not give a definition of the world. 

The world really is the appearance or semblance 
of things, a mirage! The Hindoo philosophers 
call it maia—that which attracts, the glamour, the 
dream, that entices and puzzles the soul, promis- 
ing much, but always disappointing. Are you not 
conscious when you are tempted that there is al- 
ways a sort of bait held out to you of something 
you are to get, some pleasure or joy? As a mat- 
ter of fact, you never get lasting pleasure when you 
do yield to the temptation. It is simply a mirage. 

Just as the child blows soap bubbles, which are 
radiant with a thousand hues, but which, when 
touched, sink into drops of soapy water: so the 
worldly spirit is always grasping after the sem- 
blance of things, grasping at the unreal. 


WHAT IS THE FLESH? 


As for the flesh, there is no better definition than 
that given in Romans 7:18, where the apostle says, 

“In me, that is, in my flesh.” 

“Flesh” is “me-ism,” egotism. 

Sometimes in London, where they drop their h’s, 





aah. et chy | 


The Trinity of Temptation | 43. 


‘T tell la that if ie will drop the h and spell 
“flesh” backward, they will get the best definition 
I know of: “Self.” Whenever you; meet a man 
-who makes self the pivot of his life; pat man is 
living according to the flesh. 

What is the center letter of the word “sin”? “I”; 
and the center of egotism is “I.” The fall was 
the putting “I” as the center of life, and redemp- 
tion is putting man back to the center of love, 
which is “not I.’ God will finish: the work in 
your soul, when you live, yet not you, but Christ 
lives in you. When I was in Germany recently, 
they gave me a beautiful card on which two words 
were printed—“Ich” (I), and “Er? (He); and 
the “I” was crossed out by a stroke, leaving only 
“He.” Myself crossed out, Christ the only pivot 
pr center of my life. 

Self is the curse of our life before. ‘regeneration 
and after. Before conversion it is clothed i in rags; 
after conversion it becomes respectable and puts on 
a white dress; but the devil does not care whether 
it is clothed in one or the other, so long as we 
have it inside us, dominating us. 

The epistle to the Galatians is the great epistle | 
about the flesh, and how to deal with it. There we 
find two passages to which I call attention. 

One is Gal. 5:19, where the apostle enumerates 
the works of the unregenerate life: adultery, forni- 
cation, uncleanness, and so on. But if you turn to 
Gal. 3:3, you will find there were a number of peo- 
ple who began by trusting Jesus for justification, 
and then tried to perfect themselves by their own 





! Sigs KN a) F eed i Ca Olan Seer erg ry, bgt: “NER 
‘ t hy | ot 
< ny 


Ath t 


Res Ste » 
~ Back to 


ty meant 


‘ vs 


yee 
Aah 
dA 


44 Me 





efforts. They were perfectionist. So when I | 
hear people who talk about their goodness, who 
tell us they are perfect, they are revolving about 

the pivot of the self-life as much as those who are 
unregenerate, though probably they are not aware 

of it. 

I believe God will never be satisfied until we 
have been lifted clean off the “I’’ pivot and placed - 
upon the “Not I” pivot, until we no longer live for 
ourselves, but for Jesus Christ, who died for us. 
The temptation of Satan is to get us to live on the 
self-pivot, and in order to do that he holds before 
us the mirage of pleasure which will be ours if 
only we will make the self-life our objective. 


THE DEVIL. 


And now a word about the devil. 

The nearer you live to Christ, the more certain 
you are there is a personal devil. Those who say 
he is not a real person, not only go in the face of 
the New Testament, but show they do not know 
the reality of Jesus Christ. In London, when a © 
gang of thieves wants to get into a house with the 
most impunity, they advertise that they have left 
that section. So if the devil can get any one to be- 
lieve in his non-existence he is much more likely 
to achieve his designs. The devil does not trouble 
about those who are not specially spiritual. It is 
those who stand nearest to Christ who are most as- 
sailed. If you are a straggler on the edge of the 
battle you are likely enough to come off with a 
whole skin. The devil is evidently a real person, 


pass 


) The Trinity of Temptation 45 


because deans said, “The prince of this world com- 


é ‘eth and hath nothing i in Me.” Mark also II Cor. 


11:3: “But I fear, lest by any means, as the ser- 
pent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your 


“ minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that 


is in Christ”; and John 12:31: “Now is the judg- 
ment of this world; now shall the prince of this 
world be cast out”; and Rev. 20:2: “And he laid 
hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the 
devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years.” 

Of course, I do not think that the devil has the 
attributes of God. He does not trouble much 
about you and me, but reserves himself for Christ, 
Luther, Spurgeon, and men who are worth his 
steel; any little demon is strong enough to upset 


“you and me. If you say that the devil tempts every- 


body you make him omnipresent and omniscient, 
which are attributes of God alone. 

Our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but 
against principalities, against powers, against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world, against the 
hosts of spirits of wickedness in the heavenly 
places (Ephesians 6:12, revised version). I be- 
lieve that behind every brothel and saloon there is 
a demon, that over the darkness of every dark con- 
tinent, like China or Africa, and any stronghold of 
evil, there are myriads of demons, who have be- 
neath them principalities and powers. Compare 
Daniel Io. 

In one sentence our Saviour gave the history of 
Satan. He said: “He was a murderer from the 
beginning, and stood not in truth,” (John 8:44). 


46 Back to Bethel 

There you have his origin. Probably he was an 
archangel, and having been created in the truth, he 
did not remain in it, but, as Jude says, lost his first 
estate. Before Satan fell, long before this world | 
assumed its present shape, in the period between 
the first and second verses of Genesis 1, he was the 
vicegerent of God. Jesus Christ recognized that 
when He spoke of Satan as the prince of this world. 
When he was an unfallen archangel, I believe God 
made him the prince, perhaps of the sun and its 
attendant worlds. When he fell he dragged down 
with him other angels and this world, which has 
been groaning ever since. “For the creature was 
made subject to vanity, not of his own will, but by 
reason of him who subjected it, in hope that the 
creation should be delivered,” (Romans 8:20, 21). 
I believe that cyclones, devastating tidal waves, and 
a great deal that is so puzzling in the present world 
are the result of the reaction of that original fall 
of Satan, its vicegerent and prince. 

Now, why should Satan tempt man to fall? What 
was the reason for the fall on Satan’s side? 

In Genesis 1:26, “God said, let us make man in 
our image, after our likeness, and let him have 
dominion.” As soon as Satan heard that, it seems 
as though he thought to himself: 

“Have dominion! Man have dominion! It 
shall never be. I am lord here, fallen though I am. 
These are my palaces. my court, and man shall 
never rule over this world!” 

So he laid his plan to make man subject to him- 
self, and the whole gist of the fall is that Satan 





Test rinity of Temptation §-«-47_— 


should rule, should take from the brow of man the 
crown that the Creator put there. 

In the third chapter of Genesis you get the story 
of the fall. There was the tree which was pleasant 
to the eyes, and a thing to be desired to make man 
wise. In that you have the world—the appear- 
_ ance, the semblance, the beautiful mirage. Man 
- wants to be wise, to be as God. Next there was 
the devil speaking through the serpent. And you 
have the flesh in what Eve saw, in the 6th verse: 
“The woman saw that the tree was good for food.” 
The world, the flesh, and the devil! In that mo- 
ment Eve fell, Satan again became supreme. The 
threatened intrusion upon his dominion was brought 
_ to an end by man becoming his subject. 

When I was a young man I never could under- - 
stand why Milton made Paradise Regained turn 
upon the temptation of Christ. It always seemed to 
me that I should have made the regaining of Paradise 
turn upon Calvary. But he could not have done oth- 
erwise. When Satan had made man his subject, 
God’s plan seemed thwarted; but God, in the per- 
son of His Son, became man and encountered Sa- 
tan, not in the exercise of His Deity, but “He emp- 
tied Himself.” He temporarily laid aside the use 
and exercise of those divine attributes, by which 
He could stamp Satan under His foot, and entered 
the arena as a man. 

When the holy, blessed Christ met Satan in the 
wilderness, the first temptation was repeated, only 
the conditions were worse. It was not in a garden, 
but in a wilderness. Adam was tempted in his inno- 


PEIN 48 | Back to Bethel eae Ne 


* ii 


cence; Christ as the scion of a biased race. Again 
there was the question of food—not a tree with its 
luscious fruit, but stones of the desert and the 
hunger in our Saviour’s body. Satan said to Eve: 

“You have all you want to eat. Now take that 
fruit to make you wise.” 

But the tempter knew Christ had hunger, not for 
a luxury, but a necessity, and he said: 

“You have power. Use it. Feed yourself.” 

“No,” said Christ, “if I did I should have an ex- 
istence independent of God. I depend upon my 
Father, and when my Father sees I want food He 
will send it.” 

The moment Christ said that, He undid, as far 
as He was concerned, the coil the devil had woven 
around Adam and our race. 

Christ was also tempted by the world. There 
was the mirage, the semblance of the nations of the 
world, in a moment of time, and Satan said: 

“See how fair the empire is. You need not die, 
you need not bear the cross. All this is mine, and 
I can give it to you. Only worship me.” 

Christ knew that if He worshipped him the sem- 
blance of the empire of the world would have fallen 
to dust. It would not have been His. The devil 
had lied. Christ could not rule men unless He died 
for them. So Christ withstood the temptation of 
the world, and said: 

“No, Satan, I will not take it at that price, but 
I will get it nevertheless. I will not have it as your 
gift, but my Father’s; not by conquering, but by, 
dying a death of shame.” 








The ‘Trinity of Temptation = 49 
There are two mountains in our Saviour’s life, the 
mount of temptation and the mount of ascension. 
On the mount of temptation Christ saw the king- 
doms of the world, and the devil said: “I will give 
Thee these if Thou wilt worship me.” But the 
Lord refused and went down that mountain poor, 
lonely, to suffering and to death; but at last through 
the cross and the grave He came out on the other 
side more than a conqueror, and said: “All power 
is given to me in heaven and upon earth. Go and 
preach.” He refused the devil’s crown and got 
God’s crown; and one day we shall hear the an- 
them float over the redeemed world, “The king- 
doms of this world have become the kingdoms of 
our Lord, and of His Christ.” . 

But it would not help us if Jesus had done this for 
Himself only. We must remember that on the 
cross Jesus Christ became the representative man, 
and again He met the world, the flesh, and the 
devil in the hour of His weakness. 

If He could overcome them then, what can He not 
do now He is strong in resurrection glory? He 
said distinctly in John 14:30: “The prince of this 
world cometh, and hath nothing in me’’; and again, 
“T have overcome the world.” When our Saviour 
died He put his foot on the devil; He bruised the 
serpent’s head. When He rose as the representa- 
tive man He was raised above the power of the 
devil, and got back the dominion that God gave 
Adam, and Adam lost. We see not yet all things 
put under man, but we see Jesus crowned with 


50 ‘Back to Bethel 


glory and honor (Hebrews 2:8, 9). In the as- 
cended Lord, man rose above the devil and resumed 
the honor and glory, the power and authority, with 
which God had endowed him in the first moments 
of his creation. When Satan saw that God was 
lifting our race, in the person of a perfect man, to 
sit in glory, he knew that the work of six thou- 
sand years was in vain, and that in spite of every- 
thing God’s purpose would stand, that man should 
have dominion and power. 

Now, here are two men. On the one hand there 
is the first Adam. By the first birth you and I 
were born of him, and are all children of a fallen 
man. The devil knows that, and as long as you are 
living in the old Adam he feels free to do as he 
will with us, because he has already subdued the 
father, and he knows he can subdue the child. By 
the second birth we are born into the second Adam, 
the royal Christ, and stand in Him, and He has 
‘made us kings and priests. The pity is that men 
do not use their royalty! 

This is one of the most wonderful subjects that 
a man can present to his fellows,—the intention of 
God to give men royalty; the jealousy of the devil 
in trying to stop it. God refusing to have His 
plans frustrated, coming down as though the God- 
man should fight a battle with His right hand tied 
behind Him, and saying to Satan, “I will come 
down and overcome you with my left hand, with- 
out the use of my deity.” In the wilderness He 
evercame him. All through His life in His weak- 





The Trinity of Temptation. ‘Sr 


ness He met the devil and overcame him. On the 
cross He met him once more. Satan said to Him: 

“Spare Thyself.” 

But the Lord answered: “Never. I refuse to 
do as you tell me. I am going to do the Father’s 
will, and if My Father leads Me to bear the sin 
of the world, I will bear it, though it bring mid- 

night on My soul. I will do My Father’s will.” 

When we believe thus, and take our stand in the 
risen Lord, Satan is powerless. 

It happened in Switzerland once that two trav- 
elers went to explore an extremely difficult part of 
the Alps. They took three guides. When they 
reached a steep cliff of ice they roped themselves 
together, first a guide, then a traveler, then,a guide, 
then a traveler, and then a guide, and they began 
to climb up the cliff. As the first guide crawled | 
up he cut in the ice little rests for the feet of those 
who followed, and the whole five of them crept 
carefully and anxiously up the side of the cliff. 

When they were midway, the last man lost his 
footing. As he swayed to and fro he dislodged © 
the man above him. He tried to regain his footing, 
and could not, and pulled the third, and the third 
the fourth, and four of thent were swinging slowly 
to and fro over the precipice. 

When the first guide perceived what was hap- 
pening, he drove his ice-ax with all his might into 
the cliff above him, and held to it. As he stood 
firm, the man beneath had time to get his footing, 











THE RULE OF OUR THOUGHTS. 


I have explained that you might expect to be is 
~ tempted to the end of your life, that the nearer you 
live to God, the more you will be tempted. The 
presence of temptation in your life is not a proof 
of deterioration, but the contrary, for the more you 
know of God on the one hand the more you will 
know of Satan’s temptation, on the other hand. 

If you desire to be kept from yielding to tempta- 
tion, you must be very careful of your thoughts, 
and it is about the necessity of guarding your 
thoughts that I am going to speak now. 


KEEP THY HEART CLEAN. 


First, let us look at Prov. 4:23, where the wise 
man says: “Keep thy heart with all diligence, for 
out of it are the issues of life,” or as the revised 
version puts it: “Keep thy heart above all things 
that thou keepest.” 

You keep your wealth, you keep your home, you 
keep your health, you keep your character, but 
above all these things keep your heart. Why? Be- 
cause out of it are the issues of life. 

When Bunyan depicted the character of Ignor- 
ance, he made him say: 

“T think my heart is as good as anybody’s heart, 
and as for my thoughts, I take no notice of them.” 

$3 


54 Back to Bethel 


He shows at once that he does not know him- 
self, and that he is exposed to every temptation that 
crosses his path. If you have never before noticed 
your thoughts you will find before I am done that 

the first suggestion of wrong comes through thie 
doorway of the mind. 

Turn again to Prov. 23:7, and read: “As a man 
thinketh in his heart, so is he.” 

The thoughts lay down the tram lines upon which 
presently the tram car makes its way. Just as the 
tram car will pass up and down the rails in a great 
city, so does the act follow along the track of the 
thought. 

I know there are men who say, “I must not do 
that act, but I may indulge the thought of doing 
it.” There are those who dare not act impurely, 
but during the hours of darkness they allow their 
thoughts to wander where they will, and such men 
and women think they have escaped wrong; but let 
them understand that those thoughts are all noted 
by God, and they will have to account for them at 
the day of judgment. Let them also know that the 
thoughts they have entertained in their hearts will 
find an issue, and there will be some act in their. 
life, perhaps ten years hence, as a result of these 

unholy thoughts. Sometimes it seems rather ter- 
rible that a life should be blasted by one act, and 
you may be disposed to pity the man and say that 
it is hard for him to be judged and crippled for the 
rest of his life by the passionate act of a single mo- 
ment. But remember that an act is never alone. 
It really sums up trains of unholy thought in which 





A th ie Vi 


The Rule of Our Thoughts 55 


the man has been indulging, and therefore you do 
not judge him for the one act, but for the process 
of which it is the result. The tree was eaten through 
before it crashed to the ground in the storm. 


THE 'WICKEDNESS OF MAN, 


The Word of God tells us, in Gen. 6:5: “God 
saw. that the wickedness of man was very great in 
the earth, and that every imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was. only evil continually.” 
Away back in the days of Noah the trouble God 
had with man was in his thoughts. The whole 
trend of the Bible is to get our thinking right. 

As a contrast to that verse in Genesis, I quote 
Phil. 4:8: “Whatsoever things are true, honest, 
just, pure, lovely, and of good report, think on these 
things.” 

Up to the doorway of your heart are always com- 
ing hundreds and thousands of thoughts, and you 
must be careful to reject the evil ones and let into 
your soul only those that are of good report. If 
these are the tenants of the inner life, you need 
have no fear about your character. I am prepared 
to say that if you think right, you need not take 
much care about your life. ; 

- Butler in his Analogy says there are three steps 
in the formation of character—act, habit, character. 
The act makes the habit, the habit or the bundle 
of habits form the character. Thackeray amplified 
this saying thus: “Sow a thought, reap an act; 
sow an act, reap a habit; sow a habit, reap charac- 
ter ; sow character, reap destiny.” 


56 " ' Back to Bethel 


I illustrated this not long ago to an audience of 
children by showing a thread, and attached to it a 
piece of twine, then a rope, then a chain, and pad- 
lock. I tied the thread around a boy, and he broke 
it easily. But I gradually wound the twine and 
rope and chain about him to show the power of 
habit. The thread was the thought leading to the 
act, the rope was the habit, the chain was char- 
acter, ending in the padlock of destiny. 

Our Lord announces the same truth in Maik 
7:21: “For from within, out of the heart of meu, 
proceed evil thoughts.” Then He names some of 
the sins—adultery, fornication, murder, thefts, cov- 
etousness. They all begin in the evil thoughts. In 
Eph. 2:3 we are told: “Among whom also we all 
had our conversation in time past.in the lusts of the 
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the 
mind.” The Greek says “the desires of the flesh’ 
and the thoughts.” I want you to notice that, “ful- 
filling the desires of the flesh and the thoughts.” 
Desire is not in itself wrong. The affections and 
propensities of our nature are not wrong in them- 
selves. God gave these to us to pull along the 
chariots of our lives. He put within us all man- 
ner of appetites and propensities which are His own 
beautiful gifts. The wrong comes in in two ways: 
if we desire too much of the right thing, and if we 
desire gratification in a wrong way. Whenever 
desire oversteps the bounds, or seeks gratification 
in a wrong way, it becomes lust. 

You cannot help the bad thoughts coming. As 
one of the Puritans said: “You cannot help the 








ARERR erase UN MRS agate haat eck La Preto. na ” Gane 


‘The Rule of Our Thoughts 57 


_ birds flying over your head, but you can keep them — 
from building their nests in your hair.” Some are— 
part of us by heredity. Then the papers and books 
we read, the pictures which are exhibited in store 
windows and in art galleries, the conversations we 
overhear,—all around us there are many things ex- 
citing and appealing to us, and we are having un- 
holy desires constantly presented to our mind. But 
we must not fulfll them. We may have the temp- 
tations to lust presented to us, but there is a vast 
difference between that and having the lust grat- 
ified. The evil thought may come to your door 
and knock, and you may keep your door locked. 
You sin when you open your heart and let the 
thought in and gloat over it. Then desire becomes 
lust. 

In James 1:14, 15 we read: “Every man is - 
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, 
and enticed. ‘For when the lust hath conceived, it 
bringeth forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, 
bringeth forth death.” Let me illustrate by the use 
of botany. You know that flowers have their 
sex, and the bees gathering honey in one flower 
carry the pollen to another, and the result is flower 
and fruit. Precisely in the same way the heart of 
man is always open, and bees of all kinds seem to 
bring the pollen of unholy thoughts; when these are 
sown in the desires of our nature, there is at once 
the result of which St. James speaks. As soon as 
you allow the evil thought to mingle with your 
nature, it bringeth forth the act of sin, and sin,’ 
when it is finished, bringeth forth death. 


58 Back to Bethel 

I am not speaking now of the sinful state which 
we have inherited from Adam, but of the act of 
sin. Lust, when it hath conceived, bringeth forth 
this child of sin, and its grandchild, which is death. 
There you have the parent, child and grandchild. 

Now we may say that bad thoughts fly about like 
microbes. Our system of surgery has been entirely 
transformed in Great Britain by the recent discov- 
ery of the influence of microbes. We are now 
taught that the air is filled with microbes. The sur- 
geons always keep their instruments in a solution 
of carbolic acid, so that when an instrument makes 
an incision in the flesh it will not carry microbes 
with it. This is to prevent suppuration, which is 
only the multiplication of microbes in an open 
wound. . 

What microbes are to the body, bad thoughts are 
to the soul. As you have to use antiseptics to check 
microbes, so you must live in the Spirit, walk in the 
Spirit, who is the antiseptic to bad thoughts.. These 
thoughts come from Satan. “Lest Satan should 
get an advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of 
his devices,” (II Cor. 2:11). The Greek is, “We 
are not ignorant of his thoughts.” Satan is always 
starting evil thoughts. 

To use a simile that anybody can understand, 
the soul is like a castle with a great gateway. Many 
people leave the gateway of their soul open, so that 
every vagrant, truant evil thought may come pour- 
ing in and do as it likes. At the gateway of your 
soul there are many thoughts apparently innocent, 
but really great traitors. If you keep your gate- 





ra Tite Rule of Our Thoughts 59 


- way unguarded, unsentinelled, these thoughts pour 
in and out, backwards and forwards, and pres- 
ently blow up your whole soul with passion. 

Therefore, in dealing with our thoughts, two 
things are necessary: First, discernment; and sec- 
ond, keeping power. 

We read in Isaiah 28:5, 6: “In that day shall the 
Lord of hosts be for a spirit of judgment to him 
that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them 
that turn the battle to the gate.” The Lord of hosts 
shall be two things: first, a spirit of judgment, and 
secondly, strength. Are not these what we need? 


DISCERNMENT. 


First, we want to be able to sift out bad thoughts 
from good thoughts; to know the traitor, however 
well he is dressed, and keep him out. 

We need discernment. Why? Because “the god 
of this world hath blinded the minds,” that is, the 
thoughts, “of them that believe not,” that is, the 
unregenerate (II Cor. 4:4). Man is blind. He 
sits at the gateway of his soul, hearing the tread 
of many feet, but unable to discern the bad from 
the good; blind, so that all thoughts are much the 
same, and he lets them all in, to his own undoing. 

Next, we find the understanding darkened, being 
alienated from the life of God through ignorance 
(Eph. 4:18). It is twilight to the soul, and even 
though the man tries to see he cannot, because in the 
dim twilight bad thoughts and good thoughts come 
in alike, and he does not distinguish one from the 
other. I lived years of my life ignorant of the 
true nature of my thoughts, because I was blind 


60 | Wl Back to Bethel). 


and lived in twilight. Those who live near to God 
are keen to detect these thoughts. . 
_. The men of Israel once asked their fleeing foes 

to say “Shibboleth,” and they said “Sibboleth” 
-(Judges 12;6). They could not say “sh,” and Is-— 
rael caught them and slew the traitors. We need 

some test like that at the heart gate to catch the evil 

thoughts. If a thought cannot pronounce the name 

of Christ right, cast it out. Question it, “Can you 
say Jesus?” 

“He that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet .he 
himself is judged of no man,” or, as the revised 
version has it, “he who is spiritual discerneth all 
things” (I Cor. 2:15). I suppose one mark of the 
spiritual man is his quickness in discerning. For — 
my part, I used not to see sin until it was against my 
face, but now I can see it coming two or three fields 
away. You-get keener and subtler to discern. It 
_ is a mistake to wait until your enemy is face to face. 
Pray to be quick to discern. 

In Heb. 5:14 is a verse that has helped me much: 
“Even those who by reason of use have their senses 
exercised to discern both good and evil.” 

By reason of use you get keener. I go with the 
savage through the wilds, and notice that he looks 
at that bent twig, at that grass brushed down across 
the path. He starts and says: 

“A man has been along here.” 

I don’t see any trace, I can’t find any footmark; 
but in that snapped twig, in the impression on that 
grass the savage, by reason of use, has had his 
senses ‘exercised to discern where man has gone. 











Prema, 


The Rule of Our a Thoughts or : 


"Now, most of us never use our spiritual sense. 
God has given us a nose to smell with, eyes to see 
with, hands to feel with, a tongue to taste with, 
We are made in three parts—body, soul and spirit. 
The soul has senses equivalent to those of the body, — 
and the spirit behind that has a third set of senses 
which an unregenerate man has not commenced tq 
use. But if you are a spiritual man you will use 
these spiritual senses to discriminate the thoughts 
as they come to your heart. “By reason of use” 
you will have your senses exercised to discern both 
good and evil. 

I remember once going back from the United 
States across the ocean, and getting my lungs full 
of ozone. On reaching England I went to a wa- 
tering place to stay with some dear friends. They 
said: 

“Tsn’t this a lovely place?” 

I tried to think so, but as I went out on the door- 
step I detected a very noxious smell. I said: 

“T am very sorry, but I am not at all sure that 
this place is as healthy as you think it.” 

“Of course it is,” they said; “it is swept by the 
wind from the North Sea.” 

I inquired and found that within about a, mile 
of their house there was what is called a sewage 
farm, and a whiff from those fields neutralized all 
the benefit of the sea breezes. 

My friends asked how I came to be so keen of 
scent, and I replied: 

“Vou have come from London where you live 


A Ne | Re ge - AP ees 2. ae ee bay 
PREReNs oe a i PO Nae ae Rh eran 
7 § aa - 


62 Back to Bethel 


in a vitiated atmosphere, but I have come off the 
Atlantic and am used to pure air, so can detect a 
bad smell where you cannot.” 

If you live in the midst of bad people, bad books 
and bad things, you lose your power of detecting 
bad thoughts when they come teeming about you 
like microbes. But if every day you spend an hour 
on God’s mountains or upon the broad sea of the 
Bible, and get some of God’s ozone into you, you 
will be able to detect things which are wrong, 
which other people, even Christians, pass without 
seeing as wrong. 

You have heard me speak about bad pictures in 
stores or art galleries, bad novels and certain sorts 

of talk, and I can imagine a professed Christian lady 
saying as she passes out: 

“Well, I call that being too particular. Why is 
it that he lays such stress upon the matter?” 

She thinks I am drawing too fine a line. 

Possibly that lady has lived in the midst of tittle- 
tattle and small talk, until her senses have become 
perfectly vitiated, so that she has lost the power 
of discernment. But I dare not touch these things, 
because I am learning to know when evil is in the 
air, and by the grace of God my senses are becom- 
ing quicker to discern good and evil. 


KEEPING POWER. 


Suppose we see the importance of learning to 
discriminate between bad and good thoughts. But 
we find that sometimes for a whole day there will 
be knocking at the door of our heart, the gateway. 





The Rule of Our Thoughts 63 - 


of our soul, bad thoughts which we know to be 
bad. They gather into a perfect crowd. We some- 
how do not seem to have the power to keep them 
out, and they force in, though we hate them and 
loathe them, and would do almost anything to be 
quit of them; and presently lead us to commit an 
act of sin. Many a good man understands that. 

At this point let us turn to I Peter 4:19, where 
the apostle says: “Wherefore, let them that suffer — 
according to the will of God,” because they are true 
to God’s will, “commit the keeping of their soul to 
Him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.” 

“Commit.” That is the Greek word used by 
Christ on the cross when He said: “Father, into 
Thy hands I commend My spirit.” Just as Jesus 
commended His spirit to His Father, so do you, 
when you leave your room in the morning, com- 
mit the keeping of the gatewav of your soul to 
Him. 

“As to a faithful Creator.” Why call Him Cre- 
ator here? Why not Redeemer, or Saviour? Be- 
cause He made you; and is not the God who made 
you able to keep you? Is He who made you what 
you are, going to allow you unaided to drift before 
evil? He is a faithful Creator! He created you, 
and He is faithful to keep you, and He knows how 
to do it. The man who made the lock can eee 
it. Reckon on His faithfulness. 


THE PEACE OF GOD, 


I close with two texts that are like binary stars. 
Col. 3:15: “Let the peace of God rule,” and the 


tet Aa Back to Bethel 


eA eae 


Piel E fait ’ FA ‘ 


word means arbitrate. Leave it for the peace of 
God to say what you will or will not do. Group 
with that Phil. 4:7: “The peace of God shall keep.” 
The word there is sentinel. So that you have the 
peace of God ruling and sentinelling, keeping, gov- 
erning. Think of the peace of God, armed like 
an angel of light, marching to and fro outside your 
heart, just keeping it! 

I was talking one day to some people about emp- 
tying their hearts, and I illustrated by a glass of 
water. I can empty it either by pouring the water 
upon the floor, or by filling the glass with quick- 
silver, which is heavier than water. and by its 
weight will force the water out. The glass is just 
as empty of water when it is filled with quicksilver 
as if I simply poured the water out. It is impossi- 
ble to empty your heart by turning out the sin, but 
you may empty it by filling it with Jesus. Ask 
then the Holy Spirit to. prepossess and preoccupy 
you with the presence of Jesus, that the devil may 
have no foothold. 








THE STRONG MAN ARMED. 


Luke 11:21, 22: ‘When a strong man armed 
keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace. But 
when a stronger than he shall come upon him and 
overcome him, he taketh from him all his armor ~ 
wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils.” 

I want to tell you the story of a house of which 
J know something, for I have lived in one of the 
“same pattern for many years. It consists of three 
stories. It is of magnificent appearance. Some 
say it was built as the palace of a king, there is so 
much splendor and embellishment, though some of 
the rooms are tawdry now. 

The lower story is most occupied. There is at 


_ the far end the kitchen, in which the inmate spends 


a considerable amount of time. Next to that is the 
drinking saloon. Next to that the narcotic room, 
which is filled with drugs of one kind and another. 
Next to that the recreation or amusement room. 
Behind that is the sleeping room, and behind that 
again a room which is generally closed and blinded, 
because things are done there in secret of which, the 
apostle says, it is a shame even to speak. 

Above this is another tier of rooms. The first on 
the right is called the room of archives, for there 
sits a scribe, always at work recording the past. 
Next to that is the library, or thought room, but 
_ the books that line the shelves of that library are 
65 


Sg aii ompd 





eee "Back to Bethel 


rs 


mostly dummies. There is the outward appearance 
of a book, but within there is little or nothing but _ 
empty pages, or foolish or impure stories. Next — 
_ comes the imagination room, in which a painter is” 

always embellishing the walls with magnificent cre- 
ations of his fancy, but as quickly as they are fin- 
ished they are erased, and he begins his work again. 
Next to that is the room of friendship and love, 
which is surrounded by the portraits of men and 
women and little children. Beyond that the bullion 
room, where a machine is kept for turning out 
money day and night. 

I want for a moment to speak about the rooms 
on the third floor, which are not often used. The 
center one is magnificently appareled in satin and 
gold. It contains a throne, which I am afraid in 
many houses is covered with dust and stains. In- 
deed the whole room shows signs of neglect, and is | 
filled with dust and cobwebs. On one side is the 
hall of judgment, in which great decisions are made. 
On the other side is the hall of conscience, sur- 
rounded by mirrors and glasses, and in these a man 
may see himself reflected at any angle and on every 
side. At the far end there is a room called the room 
of hope, which looks over a river to a city far away, 
apparently in cloudland—a sort of observatory. On 
the other side is a chapel, a place prepared for wor- 
ship, for high and holy service. 

It is said that this house was built by a great 
king for his own residence, and indeed his mono- 
gram is still to be seen, though in many cases it has 
been sadly spoiled and worn. But his prime min- 











The Strong Man Armed 67 
‘ister. or one of his chief servants, naving a con- 
troversy with his master, threw off his authority, 
broke into this palace, and has appropriated it for 
himself. 


I need not tell you that I have been holding up a 
looking glass to yourself. You are the house, with 


the three stories of your nature, the lower one, the 


body; the one above that, the mind; and the one 
above that, the spirit. The body. which touches the 
world, the mind or soul in which you think and 
resolve, and the spirit, which in too many is utterly 
neglected and given over to vacancy. There is the 
throne room which is meant for God; judgment, 
where you should come to decisions in consonance 
with His will; conscience, where you should see 
and know yourself; and the chapel, where you 
should worship. But in how many cases that house 
of your nature, which was built for the home of 
your eternal God, that He might abide in your heart, 
has been wrested away from Him and handed over, ° 
_ to His enemy, the powerful Satan, whom our Lord 
describes in this passage as “the strong man armed.” 
- Yes, Satan is stronger than Adam in his inno- 
cence, than Moses in his meekness, than Job in his 
patience, than Peter in his courage and fervor. The 
strongest and fairest of the children of men have 
fallen before the masterfulness of Satan. 
I want to show you this palace in three aspects. 
' First, when it is in peace under its wrong owner. 
Then for a time he goes out and leaves it, but the 
true owner does not return. And third, the tri- 


68 - Back to Bethel 


umph of the true owner when he comes back and 
keeps it from all comers. 


IN PEACE. 


First, I have to speak to you of the stage when 
the strong man armed keeps his palace, and his 
goods are at peace. The palace is at peace. It 
seems as though the rose had climbed up and hid- 
den the walls beneath its rich and luxuriant foliage, 
and all over the palace, as over that in Tennyson’s 
poem, there is lethargy and sleep. The palace seems 
lulled in perfect repose. 

There are people here tonight who have been 
drawn here by their friends, and as they hear me 
preach about these things which touch God and 
eternity, as they hear my cry to repent and trust in 
Christ, they say: 

“Why bring these things under our notice? We 
are happy as a bird. We have no fear, though 
we have none of your religion. Why do you force 
it upon us? Why don’t you leave us still amid the 
charm of this enjoyment of life which steeps our 
hearts and souls?” 

Why? Because that spirit of calm is the worst 
trait in your history. 

There are two kinds of peace. There is the 
peace of Jesus sleeping in the boat, resting upon 
His Father’s care, and there is the peace of Jonah, 
sleeping in the hold of the ship while the storm is 
raging around him. There is the peace of Peter, 
who sleeps between two soldiers on the eve of his 
execution, and the sleep of Saul, when Abishai 


ease iets We Re A ee 
LS ERR aE es 





The Strong Man Armed 69 


stands over him with drawn spear. Your peace is 
__the peace of despair, the peace of death, the peace 
of ruin, the peace of the garrison sleeping at their 
: posts while the enemy is creeping up. It is the 
- peace of a mother and child sleeping in their home 
while a stream of oil fire is rolling down the street, 
which will presently involve them in ruin. 

“He keepeth his goods in peace.” His goods. 
He says of you, “That man is mine. I have him. 
I'll drag. him down to the place prepared for the 
devil and his angels.” He watches and keeps the 

palace day and night with untiring watchfulness. 
He holds you fast, and you are at peace. 

But he is armed with a lie! Your soul is hap- 
py because things are so bad. It is the worst sign. 

My child is ill; I call the doctor. He goes up 
stairs with the mother. When he comes down I 
say: 

“Well, doctor ?” 

“She’s very bad.” 

“Ts there any hope?” 

“Yes; one hope is that she suffers so. If the 
pain stops, telephone for me, and I'll come at once. 
It will show the worst symptom has set in.” 

An hour later my wife comes down stairs and 
says: 

“The worst is over.” 

“How do you know?” I ask. 

“Well, ten minutes ago the child ceased to suf- 
fer, and is now easy.” 

“Good God!” I say, “that is the worst symp- 
tom! Not to feel at all is the worst sign.” 


yo: 


OW eS Sak Ea Bhat Omega ke ren eae ry. Th Se SE oe ek ee Re Sete eS ee Od oe 
pt Yoel aerate a / Wea’ 3 eas Fe 


70 Pew ie Back to Bethel 





My friend, the worst thing about you is that you 
have ‘ceased to suffer. If only conscience pricked — 
you; if only sometimes you felt uneasy; if only © 
you started up at night and thought you would be 
lost ; if only there came a dread of sin and the judg- _ 
ment seat of God! Then there would be some hope | 
for you. But because you are past feeling, because 
God has given you up, you are of all men the most 
to be pitied. 

The strong man armed keeps his palace. When 
the babe stirs a bit because of the baying of those 
hounds, the strong man armed sits with his feet 
upon the cradle and keeps it rocking. When the 
soul stirs up and says, “Perhaps I willbe lost,” he 
says, “Hush; that man is an alarmist! There is no 
truth in that Bible. There is no heaven to seek, 
mo hell to dread. Think of your money and the 
things which come under the observation of your 
senses, but don’t worry about those things.” 

That’s the lullaby with which the strong man. 
hushes the soul back. Yet in spite of it, sometimes — 
the soul wakes up and says: 

“T am not satisfied. I am not at rest. Is there 
not a God, a future? and I am not prepared for it!” 

“Hush, hush,” says the strong man, and again 
administers an opiate. “Go to the theater, spend 
your life in pleasure, but get away from that 
thought.” 

IT am talking to men and women who are at 
peace, not because they are justified, not because 
they are washed in the blood of Christ, but because 
their conscience has been crushed under the devil’s 





CA get, SL ak les) ae eel ae 7 Oe ‘ rae. aa Ly 


~ UPR a ihc ST eres Bara) ey SM Say y 
Seas aed, rl aN ‘ v 
ar Ne ; 


Aaieaey "The Strong Man Armed ley 


foot until sensibility aoe gone out of it, mortifica- 
tion has set in. 


THE STRONG MAN GOES OUT. 


The second picture is a striking one. The Lord 


_ says that sometimes the strong man goes out. 


Mind you, he is not turned out, but he goes out. 
He goes out but Christ does not come in. 

You have seen men like that. They have re- 
formed, but are not regenerated. The devil has 
driven a man so far thai he is afraid he will wake up. 
‘The prodigal in a far country is beginning to get 
restive. The devil says: 

“Tf I don’t take care I will lose this man, so I will 
drop off for a time, and then I shall get him more 
safe than ever.” 

Perhaps some men to whom I am speaking have 
fished for salmon, and they know what I mean by 
playing with the fish. Sometimes you get a heavy 
fish. If you begin to pull it in, you will-lose it, and 
besides break your line. What do you do? You be- 


-gin to play with it. If it swims off, you let the line 


run out as fast as it will. When it gets tired, you 


‘again draw in the line. After three or four hours 


that salmon will be so tired you can do pretty nearly 
what you want with it, and land it with your net. 

That is how the evil one is dealing with some men. 
You don’t feel his pull just now, but he has not let 
go. He is giving you a breathing space, but he will 
draw you presently to his net. 

The man says he is going to turn over a new leaf. 
He “quits his meanness.” He gives up for a time his 
tyrannical behavior in his dealing with his farnils, 


72 Back to Bethel 
a 


and the wife blesses God that the unkind treatment 
has ceased. He no longer frequents the saloon. For 
a time he goes to church with his wife. When a re- 
vivalist comes along he is moved by what he hears, 
and at the end of the meeting he steps up, shakes 
hands, says he likes the sermon, and gives every sign 
that he has become a religious man. He goes regu- 
larly to church, and gives away a, portion of his in- 
come. As our Lord says, his house is empty, swept 
and garnished. All the worst evils are swept out of 
his life. He has a pledge-card nicely framed and 
hung on the wall. He buys a large Bible—too large 
to use, but good to look at. He invites the minister 
to tea. There is everything about that man to show 
that he has turned over a new leaf; but mind you, the 
only goodness which is going to stand in eternity is 
the goodness which he receives ready-made from _ 
the Son of God! Plenty of men sit stitching a robe 
of goodness which they hope will stand when they 
pass the judgment seat of God. But I want to tell 
you the only robe which will stand the scrutiny of 
the judgment throne is the one which Jesus Christ 
wove on the cross, and the one which He only gives 
when you are born again. If you have not got from 
Christ the robe of His righteousness, there is noth- 
ing that you can do for yourself which will be other 
than filthy rags when He comes in judgment. 

So here is the house. I think I see it before me 
now. Outwardly at least that man looks a clean 
man, and people say: 

“T warrant that man has made a change for the 
better. He looks a happier, better man.” 


GA ne tenn yt ato 


_ The Strong Man Armed 73 





_ Yes, he is, outwardly, but there is no indwelling 
Christ, hence the devil comes back. He looks in 
at the windows of the house. “Is Christ here?’ He 
cannot see any trace of Him. He shouts through 
the keyhole, “Is Christ here?” and there is no an- , 
swer, but the echo of his own voice. He goes 
around to the back door (for the devil is mortally 
afraid of Christ), and asks, “Is Christ here?” No. 
The house is empty. The only power in that man’s 
life is his own resolutions. The devil knows he 
can easily break them down; and he walks in, it 
may be after one month, or seven months, or seven 
years. Then he goes off and calls seven other dev- 
ils worse.than himself, and they enter in, and at 
the end that man’s state is worse than at the be- 
ginning. 

_ I stand here weighted with the burden of souls. 

In our churches we let people in too lightly. I 
lament to say that often too many have been ad- 
mitted to membership because they have turned over 
a new leaf, because they are respectable. We do 
not go into the matter to be quite certain and accu- 
rate that they are saved. So men become members, 
‘and even officers of our churches, who have never 
known what it was to be born again, and who have 
no Christ tenanting their souls. 

I would like to single out each person in this 
place and say: 

“Hast thou been born again? Hast thou re- 
ceived Jesus to dwell in thy, heart? Art thou be- 
lieving for salvation in the finished work of Christ? 
Hast thou learned thine own righteousness is noth- 


mA A Back to Bethel < is 


ing but filthy rags, and the only thing which can 
make the soul safe here and hereafter is Jesus? 
_ Jesus on the throne, Jesus in the heart, Jesus in the 
life—Jesus, the Saviour, the King, the Friend.” | 

If you do not know it, I beseech you, do not 
sleep tonight until you have built your house upon 
the rock which will stand forever. | 

You say, “How may I get right? How may I 
be born again?” I deeply sympathize with you in 
your desire to be certain. My mother was a lovely 
Christian, and I remember to have said my prayers 
at her knee from the very earliest dawn of my boy- 
hood. I suppose that for me the new birth was 
like the dawn of the morning; I never had any, 
marked experience that I could look back upon. 
When I was about 14 years of age a new minister 
came to our church and insisted very much on the 
necessity of the new birth. I was in trouble, be- 
cause I could not point to any time or place or 
cause. 

Then it was that I went to hear Mr. Spurgeon, 
and I heard him say that a man might not know 
his birthday, but be quite sure that he was living. 
That helped me, for I did not know my spiritual 
birthday, but I knew I was alive. 

It is not necessary that you should have any 
startling experience, but it is necessary that you 
should believe in Jesus Christ. 

Look at my hand. .f has two sides to it, the 
back towards the light Above us, and the palm to 
towards the floor. You cannot take that hand 
without taking both sides of it. So the act by 


/ 


SMUT ye Pe ae ohe TOE 
j cs 








pee ‘ ’ Nae valk i 


The Seeae | Man Nene 75 


which you became the child of God and are saved. 
has two names to it. Angels call it “being born 
again’; men call it “trusting Jesus.” If you trust 
Jesus you are born again, and if you are born 
again you will trust Jesus. You cannot tell which 
comes first any more than you can tell which spoke 
in a wheel moves first, for they move together. 

If right now you will look to Jesus Christ who 
died for you; or if you cannot see Him, you will 
look in the direction in which He stands and from 
which His voice comes; if you choose to believe; if 
you hand over your soul’s salvation for Him to see 
to for you, that’s saving faith. If you have that 
faith, whether you have any marked experience or 
not does not matter, but you are as much saved as 

the angels in heaven, 


THE STRONG MAN CAST OUT, 


Once more I want you to see this palace for the 
third time under new auspices. I hear marching 
music! I hear the voice of the angel escort! A 
stronger than the strong man is on His way. 
Stronger because He met Satan in the wilderness - 
and overcame him; stronger, because all through 
His life He met the demons and cast them out; 
stronger, because in the hour of His weakness on 
the cross, He took a man from the very jaws of 
hell and carried him to Paradise; stronger, because 
{He went up to heaven triumphant over the powers 
of hell. 

Jesus comes! He comes to you tonight and, 
mark, He comes to that door and summons you to 


& 


‘glee 


76 | Back to Bethel 


surrender. “Behold, I stand at the door and knock; 
if any man will open the door, I will come in.” The 
strong man is there and Christ is there. Tonight is 
going to decide your life. Satan is holding you; 
never before was he holding you so nervously and 
tenaciously as he is doing now. 

But he shall not permanently hold you against 
our Lord. I tell you, man, you are going to get 
free. Those oaths are coming out of your lips. 
Those dirty thoughts are going to cease out of your 
heart. You will never again want to go to that 
house of ill fame. You are going to be delivered ab- 
solutely, utterly from the passions which have held 
unholy riot in your soul. God knows the banquet-. 
ing room and worship hall have sometimes been 
filled with carousing scenes which made all heaven 
shudder. All that is to be ended now. I speak 
with prophetic voice. I hear Christ’s footfall as 
He comes to set you free, to cleanse and purify 
your soul, so you will hate the things which now 
you think you cannot live without, and will love 
the things which now you care nothing for. To- 
night you shall be translated out of the kingdom 
of darkness into the kingdom of God’s love. 

So Jesus Christ waits. But listen, He says, “He 
that is not with Me is against Me.” Satan is in 
occupation, and Jesus waits without. Jesus must 
have a sign from you that you want Him. That is 
all. He will do the fighting, the saving, but you 
must indicate that you desire Him. 

I was told the other day a very interesting thing 
about one of the ancestors of the family with whom 





The Strong Man Armed 77 
I was stopping. She was only in a swoon, but 
they thought she was dead, and-were preparing to 
carry her forth for interment. But one that was 
standing by saw the quivering of an eyelid. Imme- 
diately they removed her from the coffin, laid her 
upon the bed, and went to work to revive her, and 
presently she came back to consciousness, and lived 
for some ten years longer, a hearty, robust life. 
Saved by the quivering of an eye-lid, that showed 
she was not entirely gone! 

Oh, man, Jesus waits and Satan waits. This is 
the hour of your choice. Jesus only asks thee not 
to resist and refuse, but to choose; and though thy 
choice tonight be as slight as the quivering of an 
eye-lid, let Christ see it. Look to-Him! It is all He 
wants, and He will come into your heart. 

When Christ comes, and He comes now, He will 
drive before Him passion, and lust, and unclean 
desire. He will take away the love of drink, the love 
of sin. He will cleanse and keep your heart. Do 
not try to make the heart clean for Him. He was 
born in a stable, and He can make even a stable a 
palace. 

I close with a favorite story of mine. 

Augustine was swept as by a mighty current 
between two women, his mother, Monica, a saintly 
woman, and another woman, who had fascinated 
him: almost to damnation. His life hovered between 
these two just as your life hovers between Christ 
and Satan. Sometimes Monica attracted him heav- 
enward, and then the evil influence of this woman 
dragged him to the very pit of the abyss. The con- 


oy ae ened 


8 pose ty Back to Bethel i ; : ot ; 


flict was long and terrible and Augustine was like 
a chip upon the tide, swept backward and forward. 

One afternoon, he states in his memorable con- 
fessions, he and his friend were in the garden to-. 
gether, and he thought he heard voices as. of children 
calling over the garden wall, saying: 

“Take and read!” 

He thought it meant he was to take up the New 
Testament, which Monica had left on the garden 
seat. He picked it up and read in Romans, thirteenth 
chapter, about casting off the works of darkness and 
putting on the works of light. 

Instantly he arose. He had made his decision. 
He had counted the cost. He told his friend, and 
they went and told Monica, and Monica was glad. 

The next day he went down the main street of 
Carthage. As he did so, he met the woman who 
had been the fascination of his soul for evil. As he 
met her she said: 

“Augustine, it is I!” 

He said, “It is not I,” and passed her and was 
saved. He became, as you know, St. Augustine. 

I know in my soul that I am talking to Augustines 
here; men who know better, but are doing worse; 
men who have sweet wives and the memory of holy 
mothers, and when they go home and take their little 
children upon their knees, it is impossible to describe 
the rush of holy love that comes. I tell you, your 
heart is between Satan and Christ—Satan, who will 
ruin it, and Christ, who wants to inhabit it. This is 
the moment of your choice. If you will quit sin and 
give yourself to God you shall yet be “St. Augus- 








SARS Maer e ine UP Peewee anaiasf , Y 
i Ait i te Gen , K eh aaa 


OTe Strong Man Armed ih 79 


- tine,” the father of a multitude of children of God. 
There is a wonderful destiny awaiting you. You 
must call in Jesus Christ, and if you will, He 
will come in and keep you. 

When I was a pastor at Leicester, there was a_ 
strike. The work people smashed property and 
ruined homes in their riot. One day they threatened 
~ to come into a house which I knew, where there was 
a big brother riveting shoes in the attic upstairs, and 
a little fellow downstairs. The little fellow feared 
_ they were going to break the house open. He went 
to the stairs and called his big brother : 

“Tom, Tom, they are going to smash this door 
open! Make haste and come down.” 

He was a strong, well-built man, and he came 
down, put his big body against the door, and said: 

“Now, youngster, you go on with your game. 
All the rioters in Leicester can’t break this door 
open when brother Tom stands by it.” 

The devil often wants to come back to this house 
of mine, and I am afraid of him, but when he comes 
along and swears he will take me by force, I go to 
the foot of the ascension ladder, and I cry: © 

“Christ! Christ! Stronger than the strong man, 
make haste and come down. The devil is going 
to get me!” 

And He seems to come like the lightning flash, and 
puts Himself against the door of my heart, and all 
hell can’t break the door open! 


GOD’S RUBBISH HEAP. 


“Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! 
Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the 
earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, 
What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no 
hands ?”—Isaiah 45:9. 

The word “potsherd” arrests one. I have in my 
mind’s eye a garden I know full well, and at the 
end of it in a corner there is quite a heap of rubbish. 
There are the cinders from the fire by which the 
hothouse is warmed, and often remnants of de- 
cayed vegetable matter, and often pieces of broken 
pottery, or china. I can see a bit of broken flower | 
pot emerging from the dark cinders. That is a pots- 
herd, a sherd or shred of pottery which is useless. 
It is fit only to be thrown away. It is waste. 

And God says that those Israelites who com- 
plained about His delivering them by Cyrus were 
risking being thrown away upon His rubbish heap. 

Isaiah seems in fancy to have heard a potsherd 
talking to a potsherd, one piece of pottery antagon- 
izing another ; and he says it is better for a piece of 
pottery to argue with another piece than for either. 
of them to antagonize the potter. 

I am afraid lest some of you may be on God’s 
rubbish heap, and I forget everything else in my 
desire to save your life from being thrown aside as 
a waste, because if it is thrown aside as waste in 

80 


|  God’s Rubbish Heap 81 


this world there is the dread of the waste forever. 
I dare not hold out to people the hope of a second 
chance. The whole drift of the Bible is against it. 
What an awful thing it would be for a man to mis- 
lead his fellowmen, who would say to him one day, 
when he meets them coming back from the Judgment 
throne as waste product, 

“Why didn’t you tell us that destiny was ir- 
revocable?” 


JERUSALEM’S RUBBISH HEAP. 


“If thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better 
for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two 
hands to go into Gehenna, into the fire that never 
shall be quenched.” (Mark 9:43). Now, what was 
Gehenna? It isa Hebrew word, the Valley of Hin- 
nons. Just outside of Jerusalem there was a deep . 
ravine which had been used for idolatry, and the 
good king Josiah resolved that it should be used 
for a refuse heap of Jerusalem. They did not have 
the system of drainage that we have, but made use 
of fire, and for the most part they took their refuse 
out of Jerusalem, and trundled it over to the Valley 
of Gehenna, to the fires which were always kept 
burning. Gehenna was the rubbish heap of Jeru- 
salem, and Christ says that what Gehenna was to 
Jerusalem, another place is to the universe, and 
that the man who refused to lose hand or foot or 
eye that made him offend, was in danger of being 
flung away by God as a waste product. Notice the 
44th verse, ‘“Where the worm dieth not and the fire 
is not quenched.” That is God’s rubbish heap. 


82 | Back to Bethel 


I am told that you have in the mountains a num- 
ber of people who are contemptuously called “white 
trash.” I know there is a good deal of soul-trash 
about. Maybe if you don’t take care, you will be- 
come soul-trash, which God cannot do anything 
with, and will have to cast out, to be trodden under 
foot. 

God gives every man a chance. He gives him 
long enough to reveal himself. The prayer book 
says: “He hates nothing that He has made.” But 
after having given man, woman or child a chance 
of revealing their inner nature and making their 
final choice, God may be compelled to cast a certain 
number away, because they will not realize the pur- 
pose for which they were created. There is always 
waste going on. For every acorn that bears an 
oak are there hundreds of acorns that bear no seed 
that fructifies. Many professing Christians will 
never be counted worthy to obtain that world, but 
will force God to throw them aside. Darwin taught 
us that out of myriads born into the natural world, 
only a few survive—“the survival of the fittest.” 
Now in his sense the word “fit” meant the strong- 
est, the most vigorous; but in the Bible sense the 
word fit does not mean strong or intellectual, but 
a certain moral quality about which I wish ta 
speak now. 


WHAT IS THE ULTIMATE TEST? 

What is it that proves a man to be a waste prod- 
uct? What is the ultimate thing which compels 
God to fling a man or a woman away, like Judas, 
who went to his own place? 








- God’s Rubbish Heap = (gS 


Is it creed? Supposing a man holds an orthodox 

creed, does that prove that he will escape the rub- » 
bish heap? 

I don’t think so for a moment. It is not our in- 
tellectual standing or opinions which determine our 
destiny. I say deliberately to you who have been 
brought up in orthodox views, who attend an evan- 
gelical ministry, if that be all, the most orthodox 
creed on earth cannot save you from being flung 
away like a potsherd. 

Will one passionate sin fling a man on the rubbish 
heap? There are sins of passion and sins of will, 
and I think we ought to make a distinction. Dav- 
id’s sin with Uriah’s wife was one of passion, not 
of final choice, determination and purpose. He was 
overcome by a gust. Of course I believe that the 
tree had become somewhat rotten before the trial 
came, or it would not have gone down in the storm. 
But, evidently, from Christ’s treatment of Peter, 
and of the woman who washed His feet with tears, 
one momentary outbreak of passion, though it may 
injure a man as far as his fellow Christians are 
concerned, is not enough to determine his irrevoca- 
ble destiny if with bitter tears it is put away. 

Will the absence of religious emotion determine _ 
our destiny? ' 

There are men who are destitute of emotion. They 
don’t remember having wept a tear. Whenever peo- 
ple become full of excitement, they remain calm and 
‘cool, and rather despise those who are swept off 
their feet by storms of feeling. They have visited 
‘churches where a revival has been in full blast, and 


84 - Back to Bethel 


have come away feeling that it was the antipodes to 
anything they were conscious of. They are cool, 
calculating, resolute, determined men, and they are 
altogether destitute of emotion. 

I want to say to any man like that, that the ab- 
sence of emotion is not a crucial test of character. A 
man may be without emotion, and unable to appre- 
ciate some who are more inclined to be influenced by 
feeling and religious sentiment. But this is not 
sufficient to cast a man aside from God. 

What then? It is not creed, it is not one passion- 
ate sin, it is not, so far as I can see, emotional senti- 
ment that determines a man’s future—but every- 
thing depends upon the man’s will. 

You are not what you believe. You are not what 
you feel. You are not what you do in a single act. 
You are what you WILL. You cannot always control 
your emotion, but you can control your will; and 
if you are lost, it will not be because your creed is 
imperfect, or because you are devoid of emotion, but 
because your will and God’s will are in collision ; be- 
cause God wants one thing and you will not have it. 
He wants you to let Him have His will in you. It is 
not the willing of your will on God, but it is your 
being prepared to accept God’s will. Hence Jesus 
said, “How often would I’—and the Greek is a 
very strong word for the will—‘How often would I 
gather you as a hen gathers her chicks, but”— 
and the same Greek word is used again—‘“ye would 
not!” If any man is a lost soul, let him understand 
that it is because he said No to God. 


- God’s Rubbish Heap 85 


Why are you not a Christian? Why have you 
not accepted His mercy? You say: 

“T have my objections to Christianity. I am not 
quite sure that the Bible is true. I am inclined to ~ 
think there is a good deal in what Ingersoll used to 
say. I rather doubt the inspiration of the Bible. I 
have seen a good deal in church people that makes 
me think they are hypocrites.” 

Not one of these is the true reason why you are 
not a Christian. But God wants something from 
you that you won’t give, and it is your wILL that is 
at the root of your apparent infidelity. That is, 
there is some habit of your life to Which you cling. 
There is some way of making money which you 
don’t want to give up. Somewhere in your life 
there is something which has been fighting the will 
of God for years. The strength of your will is so 
strong in its antagonism to God, that if you don’t 
take care you will become a waste product, because 
God can do nothing for you. 

THE POTTER AND THE CLAY. 


The whole conception of that passage is in the 
potter. The potter is the same everywhere. He 
takes a piece of clay, and sits before his wheel with 
his foot upon the treadle, desiring to make a vessel 
for beauty or for use, for a palace or a kitchen. Here 
is the clay. The treadle causes the wheel to revolve 
horizontally. He takes the plastic clay, puts it on 
the wheel, and as it revolves, with his two hands he 
begins to make the vessel, shaping it upwards to the 
lip. But suddenly he comes upon a fault, a bubble, 
something gritty. He comes back and back to it, but 


86 Back to Bethel 

it won’t yield to his touch: He takes all the clay off, 
and kneads it again into a plastic lump. A second 
time he begins to build up his conception, and again 
comes to that flaw; and though he comes back to it 
two or three times, it won’t yield. . 

What is the man to do? I ask you what would 
you do? You are anxious to make something, but 
the clay won’t permit you to make it. You are will- 
ing with your skill and power to bring the clay to, 
the required shape, but there is something in it that 
resists you. You take other clay. Ah! this is better! 
And the first lot is cast away as useless. 

God called the Jews to be His chosen people and 
the missionaries of the world. But He had to put 
them aside and take the Gentiles instead. Similarly 
_ you may be on the very verge of missing the grand- 
est chance of being used for the divinest purposes, 
because you won’t yield yourselves to the will of 
God, but cling to your own. 

I took up a young fellow once and hoped to make 
aman of him, He bade fair to be a fine man. When 
he was about eighteen years he fell. I helped him 
to regain his feet, and said: 

“Young fellow, that is between God, you and me. 
I give you another chance.” 

He fell a second time, and again I picked him up. 
T hardly knew what to do about it. I had put money 
into his education, and it seemed a pity to lose him, 
so I said: 

“T will give you another chance.” 

He went on for a while, and then he fell a third 
time. I said: 





i iy nd eee tal Oa a , ar. 
Sipe s Daag dy ln a ’ 
i . 


Noes God’s Rubbish Heap 87 


“I must give you up. I don’t say I won't forgive 
you; of course I will; but I cannot afford to squan- 
der more of my time and strength on you.” 

Are you enjoying evil habits? Are any living in 
- sin? Are you refusing to confess your sin? God 
by His Spirit strives with you. He says, “Let the 
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man 
_ his thoughts.” In the night, when the house is still, 
He says, “Don’t do this evil thing that I hate.” 

You reply, “I must do it.” 

The voice of God says, “Let me mould you. Let 
me make you good. Give up your sin.” 

You say, “I can’t”; but you mean, “I won’t.” 

What are you going to do now? Heaven and hell 
are waiting to learn your decision. God wants to 
_ make a saint of you, the devil wants to ruin you, 
Woe to him that striveth with his Maker! Woe to 
the man who shoots arrows at the sun! Woe to the 
man who raises his voice against God! Woe to the 
man who frustrates and neutralizes God’s purpose! 

I see a pierced Hand reaching down and resting 
upon you. I hear a gentle Voice pleading. It seems 
as though the Spirit of God is bent on making one 
last effort to impress His will upon you, a will that 
means only your good. Up to this minute you have 
refused to take the impression. You say God is too 
hard on you, His dealings are unjust. That woman 
asks why she was married to a cruel husband; that 
man asks why God let him marry so vain a woman. 
Some boy asks why God let him be born into a fam- 
ily which opposes his being a Christian. In one form 
or another you fight against God. But yield, yield! 


Sees - Back to Bethel 


I don’t tell you to wait for feeling. I don’t ask you 
to feel resigned. You cannot begin by feelings. But 
I say, yield! choose! throw up your arms in sur- 
render, and say, 

“My God, have your way, and'do your will, I will 
say yes.” 

Towards the end of the Bible it says they shall 
say “Amen Hallelujah” (Revelation 19:4). You 
' may depend upon it, that this is in heaven. There 
are things in our life to which we can’t say “Halle- 
lujah” now, but we can say “Amen,” and keep on 
saying it. We get to the beginning of “Hallelujah” 
sometimes, but it is rare. Ah, we shall sing it out 
some day, “Amen! Hallelujah!’ Meanwhile let 
us learn to live always and everywhere saying 
Yes to God. Then, instead of being bits of broken 
' pottery we shall be vessels meet for the Master’s use, 
and prepared for every good work. 





THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THIS 
DISPENSATION. 


God made the world in ages. There was the age 
of creation; the age that culminated in the deluge; 
the age of Israel; and we are living in the age which 
_commenced-on the day of Pentecost, and will close 
with the second advent of our Lord. 

Just as Jesus was born on a definite day which we 
celebrate as Christmas day, and came into new rela- 
tions with the world which will never be dissolved, 
so also on the day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit 
came into new relations with men. 

Just as we date the chronology of the world from 
the advent of our Lord, so we should date the his- 
tory of the church from the advent of the Holy 
Spirit. 

Indeed, there is a precise parallel, which you will 
see ina moment. Our Lord was in the world before 
His birth, but at His birth He took a human body. 
The Holy Spirit was in the world before the day of 
Pentecost, but at Pentecost He took on a body. He 
is now tenanting that body, which is composed of all 
believers in every age and every clime. As Jesus 
Christ was literally in the world, so I believe the 
_ Holy Spirit is literally present in the church of 
Christ, and in every gathering of that church. I do 
not think you can locate the Spirit of God. Ido 
not think you can say there is more of Him here 

89 


é ; e ae ae 


‘ 90 | : Back to Bethel 


than there. I believe He is as much in this church 
today as in the upper room on the day of Pentecost, 
only our eyes are holden and we have lost the power 
to see Him. 

Our Lord distinctly ee in John 14:20: “In 
that day (the day of Pentecost), ye shall know that 
I am in My Father, and ye in Me, and I in you.” 
Three things are matters of common knowledge— 
that Jesus is God, that our standing is in Him, and 
that His life, begun in us now, is to have fruition in 
the future. In the present age the Holy Ghost re-_ 
veals Jesus, and Jesus reveals the Father, and I be- 
lieve there is a further stage in the Christian experi- 
ence in which the Father reveals Himself. Jesus in- 
dicates that at the day of Pentecost a new epoch be- 
gan. 

There are thousands of Christians living on this 
side of Pentecost, as if that great event had never 
occurred. They are living on the same plan as the 
early disciples before they were filled with the Holy 
Spirit. Historically and chronologically they are on 
this side, experimentally they are on the other side 
of Pentecost. : 

This wonderful age in which we live, therefore, 
‘is pre-eminently the age of the Holy Spirit. It is 
also the age of the formation of the church of 
Christ. It is the age in which the Spirit of God and 
the church bear a double witness to Christ. And the 
Spirit of God is leading the church out into mis- 
sions. 

I need spend no time in showing that the Spirit 
of God was at work all through the Old Testament. 





Ipeey es ARR es Da vy be n> Na M BA A: Np a gy ad 


0) Mrs Oa 
ee v4 Pia 
i 


The Holy Spirit in This Dispensation gt 


There are three departments in His work—His work 
in creation (Gen. 1:3); His: work in inspiration 
(II Pet. 1:21); and His work in quickening elect 
souls, as when He “clothed Himself with Gideon’ 
(Judges 6:34, R. V. margin), and moved in and 
through him to the accomplishment of His purposes. 

I asked a man once whether there was more elec- 
tricity in the world today, or in the time of Frederick 
the Great, or in the Garden of Eden. The man 
looked very wise, and said of course there was more 
today than ever before. I said to him: 

“There always was as much as there is now. The 
only difference is that certain persons have dis- 
covered the laws by which electricity can be applied.” 

Now I hope you will understand me when I say 
that is a precise illustration of what the blessed Jesus 
has done for us all. The Holy Spirit was in the 
world before the birth of Christ, but Christ, in His 
earthly life, revealed the laws of His operation, so 
that anybody and everybody in the true church may 
now avail himself of the power of the Holy Spirit, 
which previously was reserved for an Isaiah or a 
Daniel, or some other favored person. This was an- 
ticipated by Joel, who said that in the last days God 
would pour out His spirit upon all flesh. 

Perhaps you have been in Switzerland, and wit- 
nessed, what I have seen. I have gone out on the 
veranda of the hotel at 3 or 4 o’clock in the morning, 
and looked at the range of mountains that rose be- 
fore me. At first all is gray and damp and chilly. 
But as I look, it seems as if God’s angel has been 
stepping from one summit to another, lighting fires 


92 Back to Bethel 


all along his path. Beneath, the mist still hangs 
over the valley, the clouds roll and tumble in endless 
confusion. 

As I wait and watch, the sun rises. The mists roll 
up and disappear. By the time the sun reaches the 
meridian, his rays have poured into every nook and 
crevice in the valley. 

So I think the Holy Ghost before Pentecoet struck | 
with living flame only the great mountain peaks 
among men. That summit was Moses; that, Sam- 
son; that, David; that, Jeremiah. But at the day 
of Pentecost, He who had been given only to the 
spiritual aristocrats of the race, became the common » 
property of the democracy. “I will pour out of My 
spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daugh- 
ters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see 
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams; and 
on My servants and on My handmaidens I will pour 
out in those days of My Spirit” (Acts 2:17, 18), 


MEN SHOULD ACCEPT THIS POWER, 


What folly it would be for a man to say he was 
not going to avail himself of the uses of electricity, 
but would go on in the same old way of past centu- 
ries! But did you ever think, my friend, that if you 
are content to live your life without the power which 
is within your reach, and which God sent to enable 
you to live better, you are making the same mis- 
take? 

You say you want to live like Christ and follow 
in His steps, and yet you are refusing to make use 
of the power which He has supplied. You say you 


Pee OY ia ee 


pea 
Bs eat 


at hay SAT ta tn ALPE Ne rs Se a he re ad 
Hele, an an n 
‘ ar 


es 


The Holy Spirit in This Dispensation 93 


always thought the power of the Holy Ghost was 
a spasmodic thing that came where people could 
stand the strain of a whole night in prayer or some 
other emotional experience. You have thought that 
you must leave the baptism of the Holy Spirit for 
people who were differently constituted from your- 
self. I thought that once. But I found this text in 


~ Romans 8:2: “The law of the Spirit of Life.” We 


know enough about Edison to know that he is not 
a man who works himself up to a high pitch of ner- 
vous excitement before he completes a discovery. 
He simply obeys certain laws. The law of the 
Spirit of life is for anybody and everybody who 
will obey. If a man is clean and pure in heart 
and lives near God, he can always count on the oper- 
ation of the Spirit of God. In your home you touch © 
a spring or turn a key and the whole room is filled 
with light. Just as surely you can be filled with 
the light of the Spirit of life if you will obey the 
law. 


CHRIST'S BAPTISM. 


When our Saviour was on earth, He lived for © 


‘thirty years in Nazareth, and He was taught the 


laws of the Spirit. He waited until the. moment 
came for Him to be endued and anointed with the 
Spirit. He went to the Jordan and was baptized. 
In His baptism He identified Himself with the sins 
of man. He rose from the water as an obedient 
child of God, and the Holy Spirit descended in the 
form of a dove and rested upon Him. He went to 

the wilderness and was tempted. He came back, © 


OAR Back t to Bethel 


and stood in the synagogue, and mn - “The Spirit 
of the Lord is upon Me, and He hath anointed Me 
to preach.” The blessed Saviour would not begin 
to help a dying, broken-hearted world until He was 
sure He had the power of the Spirit of God. 

Before He left this world He said: “I will pray 
the Father and He will send you another Comforter.” 
When Jesus Christ received the Spirit, He re- 
ceived Him for His church, and for you and me. 

He gave Him to His church, to be its permanent 
possession during the present age; and He waits 'to 
give each individual member of that church his or 
her share in Pentecost, on the one condition of ap- 
plying for it by faith. As you took forgiveness 
from the hand of the dying Christ, take your share 
of the Pentecostal gift from the hand of the living 
Christ. 

Don’t think that blessed gift is only for elect men 
and for special work. I want you to understand the 
fullness of the Spirit is for every believer, to make 
you the men and women you want to be. The fail- 
ure of your life that you complain of is that you are 
trying to attain the ideal without the power which 
alone makes the ideal possible. 

The blessing of the day of Pentecost is always de- 
scribed as being “filled” with the Holy Spirit. God’s 
will for believers is that they should be filled, women 
as wellas men. As fullas the tree is of sap when it 
rises from the roots and fills the furthermost 
branches, so we are to be filled with the Spirit until 
Christian fruitfulness is as natural to us as the 
flower and fruit to the tree. We may be as full of 








SBM dt OME TP A ee 


t bars inet et HN a ‘O} Rs, ae : pam \ i esas ‘s 
_ The Holy Spirit in This Dispensation 95 _ 
the Spirit as the tree is of sap, as the body is of life, 
as the mind is full of thought, as the heart is full of 
love, as the cold, dull iron is filled with the white 
flame of the furnace. 

‘When we are living in the power of the Spirit our — 
old sins will have no part in us because we are filled 
with something better. This is the true idea of be- 
coming holy. 

Some people say that you must give up this and 
that and the other, until the soul is bewildered. Let 
the love of God.come in, let .the purity of Christ fill 
you, and then the evil thought, the unholy word ~ 
which have been the curse of your life, will naturally 
drop off. Just as the sap in the tree forces off the 
dead leaves in the spring, so if we are filled with the — 
Spirit of God, the things which have cursed our lives 
will drop off naturally. It is God’s ideal. 


REGENERATING AND FILLING. 


You have known the Holy Ghost regenerating and 
quickening and blessing you. But have you known 
Him infilling you with His mighty presence and 
power? 

I am prepared to admit that this should be the 
experience of the young convert, and might if he 
were properly instructed. 

I remember reading the story of a young fellow 
named Joseph, who belonged to one of your Ameri- 
can cities. He was of a wild and evil disposition, the 
trial and torment of the local ministers, who gave! 
orders that he must not be admitted to their churches 
on God’s day. A camp meeting was held near by. 


96 Back to Bethel r 

; 
The third day Joseph was powerfully convicted of 
sin, and went forward and knelt at the penitents’ 
form. An old lady, who was watching him, also 
_ went forward and knelt at his side. After several 
hours of agonizing prayer Joseph came into the full 
light of God. 

The lady asked him to call at her house on his 
way home that she might give him a tract called 
“Counsel to Young Converts.” By mistake, how- 
ever, she gave him a tract on the filling of the Holy 
Ghost. 

Joseph read it. He saw that the attitude of heart 
by which he received pardon was the attitude by 
which he could now receive all that Christ had fur- 
ther to bestow. He immediately entered into a joy- 
ous consciousness of.the risen Christ; because when 
the soul is filled with the Holy Ghost, it is con- 
scious, not of Him, but of Christ, whose face He re- 
veals, | 

If you, friend, are unsaved and unregenerate up 
to this moment, in the name of Jesus I bid you look 
to Him! Not to the cross, but to Him who hung 
there! Not to the grave, but to Him who passed 
through it, and rose again! Not to the Bible, but to 
Him of whom it testifies! Not to the Holy Spirit, 
but to Him whom He glorifies! The moment you 
do so in faith, you are saved! 

The Spirit of God came suddenly upon the church 
at Pentecost. He came suddenly upon the church 
at Samaria. He came suddenly upon Cornelius in 
Acts X. I believe, therefore, that the soul may 
suddenly receive and apprehend the great power of 





} 


The Hoty Spirit j in This Dispensation | 97 


the Holy Spirit. You can be filled a drop at a time, 
just as you can fill a well with water a drop at a 
time, or by turning a stream into it. 


FIVE, TESTS, 


There are just five tests by which you may know 
that you have received this infilling. Let me give 
them to you. 


A LIVING CHRIST. 


I. Is the Lord Jesus Christ a living reality to 
you? (John 16:13, 14.) How we you look at Jesus 
Christ? 

A great many Christians look at Christ away 
back on the cross nineteen hundred years ago, but 
they have no perception of Christ as a living pres- 
ence with them day by day. When a man is filled 
with the Holy Spirit he does not talk much about 
the Spirit, but about Christ, because the whole aim | 
of the Holy Spirit is to shed light upon Jesus. The 
people who talk about the Holy Ghost as if He 
were their Lord make a profound mistake. The 
Spirit does not glorify Himself or reveal Himself, 
but reveals Jesus; and hence the person who is most 
filled with the Spirit talks most about Jesus Christ 
as a living personality in his experience. 

A striking episode took place in the life of Dr. 
Dale, of Birmingham, England, one Eastertide. As 
he was preparing his Easter sermon, it seemed as 
if Jesus glided into his study. His presence was so 
manifest to his heart that he said: 

“Jesus is really alive! Jesus js really here! My 


people shall know that Jesus is really here!” 


PLR | 


; ven 


98 - Back to Bethel 


‘Ever sence then, at Carr’s Lane Chapel they sing 
an Easter hymn every Sabbath morning to remind | 
them that Christ is really present. 

Have you had an experience like that? Business 
man in your counting house, mother in your home, 
young man in your study, have you said to yourself: 
- “Jesus is here! Jesus is alive!” 

You may know it; and if you do not, you are not 
filled with the Holy Ghost. 

ASSURANCE, 
2. Have you assurance that you are a child of 
God? ; 

There are many in our churches who dare not say 
with Paul, “I KNow whom I have believed.” They 
are dishonoring God by not believing His Word. 
If you are filled with His Spirit, He will bear wit- 
ness with your spirit that you are a child of God 
(Romans 8:16). 

You may be a Christian without knowing it. Ii 
I save a person from drowning, the doctor may come 
and say, “Yes, that life is saved,” but the person may 
be unconscious of it for two hours or more. So you 
may be a Christian, and the consciousness of your 
salvation may not come for a day or a month or a 
year. But directly you receive the Spirit of God, 
you will know you are saved. Even though you 
have no emotional enjoyment, you know you are 
saved. There is a deeper consciousness which the 
presence or absence of emotion does not affect. 

When I come to my house at night, my little child 
comes running to meet me, knowing that I have 
candy for her in my pocket. To test her affection, I 





co 4 0 a Pe Px A OD Ps OY a: re f TF Mor oF, po") BP Ar Trees eee 
Oh eee Bk Ma Ws ary Ae SEO » \ 7 
be at nit ji. ag ve ea? J ‘ : 





<p ati Holy Spirit in This Dispensation 99 


_ leave off the candy and come without it. She meets 
me just the same, and I say: 

“My child, I have no candy for you.” 

She replies: “Father, I don’t come for the candy, I 
‘come for you.” 

I drop the candy to see if the child really cares for 
me, and so God drops the happy feelings to see if we 
really care for Him, for Himself. But apart from 
feelings, there is a clear consciousness of God as our 
Father, 

VICTORY OVER KNOWN SIN. 

3. Have you victory over known sin? (Galatians 
5:16-22.) ‘Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not 
fulfil the lust of the flesh.” 

I do not ask if you are sinless—you cannot be 
that in this life. A girl dusted a room in the early 
winter morning and did her best. At noon her mis- 
tress called her in and asked: 

“Did you dust this room today?” 

“Yes, ma’am.” 

“Well, look at all the dust!” 

“Well, ma’am, the light was dim this morning, 
and it looks different in the sunlight!” 

So Iam not asking if you are free from sin up to 
God’s standard, which includes sins of omission as 
well as sins of commission; but are you kept from 
known sin up to the light God has given you? If 
you are being constantly overcome you are not filled 
with the Spirit. 

The Holy Spirit is like an antiseptic to impure 
thoughts, and unclean desires, and things which are 
selfish and worldly and abominable. I wish you te 


100 - Back to Bethel 


understand that the Christian life does not consist in 
avoiding this or that, but in being so saturated with 
something better that you have no desire for these 
sinful things. Some have only enough religion to 
'make them miserable. The child which has had a 
good meal does not want the bones over which the 
dogs are fighting in the street. When you are per- 
fectly satisfied and filled, you are delivered from the 
opposite. If you are full of the Spirit, you are de- 
livered from the power of sin. You will be kept full 
of Jesus and holy desires, and the epidemic of sin 
will have no fascination over you. 

Christian man, you say you can’t do without 
whiskey? Young fellow, you say you can’t get rid of 
that bad habit? Young girl, you say you can’t get 
the better of jealousy and gossip? Tell me, would 
God give us an ideal and leave us to wallow in the 
marsh of our own helplessness and impurity? No! 
Jesus Christ is not a theory, but a living power in 
one’s life. You can be delivered from the claims of 
sin. 


POWER IN WITNESS-BEARING. 


4. Have you power in witness-bearing? (Acts 
1:8.) 

Can you speak to others for God? If you are with 
a man who swears, can you stop him? Do you feel 
it an effort or natural? If you feel it an effort, you 
have not got what I am talking about. If you have, 
you will find it natural and easy. 

I believe it is just the overflowing of our enee 


ge | Gee Bh we at ) £ 
© 





The Holy Spirit in This Dispensation tor 


_which does people good. The forced, mechanical 
effort of our mind does not amount to much. It is 
not difficult for the bird to sing, for the child to 
laugh, and it should not be difficult for you to speak 
for Jesus. If you are living in Christ, and Christ 
lives in you, the living waters ought to spring up 
and overflow. 


5. Have you the spirit of holy love (Acts 2:45- 
47)? This I need not dwell on. 
_ Is Jesus real to you? Have you assurance of son- 
ship? Do you have the victory over your flesh? Are 
you able to bear witness as the early disciples did? 
Are you filled with the spirit of love? If not, there 
are three steps necessary—confession, surrender and 
faith. 
CONFESSION. 


Before God can come into your soul there will 
have to be a setting right of things which are not as 
they should be. I have gone through it all myself. 
There were things in my heart years ago that choked 
out all of God’s fullness. As I knelt before God, 
there was one thing in my life about which God 
seemed to say: 

“As long as that thing is permitted in your life, I 
cannot give you the fulness of the Spirit’s indwell- 
ing.” 

It was an awful fight, because I liked it, and 
thought I could not live without it. But, do you 
know, as I look back at that thing now, I think what 
_a fool I was to nearly lose all for that which I now 


, vi aah 
| 4 y f 1 


TGS. se" 3 Back to Bethel 


bir aa hh eA ey yee 
y. j vy r 


hate; for the minute you give up a wrong thing, gow 


begin to hate it. 
Perhaps it is the habit af excessive e smoking which 
some of you men have. It may be some of you 


women use morphine. Perhaps in your business ” 


you are doing things which are not strictly right. 
If you are doing anything which your conscience 
condemns, you cannot have God’s best. If you can- 
not give it up yourself, then say to God: 


“Tam not willing to give it up, but I am willing to — 


be made willing.” 


SURRENDER. 


Then comes Surrender. You must be prepared 
to take the second step, and say: 

“T yield myself wholly to Thee, my Lord and 
Saviour. I place myself on the altar. I abandon 
myself entirely and absolutely to Thy will and ser- 
vice.” 


FAITH. 


Then follows Faith. Gal. 3:14 tells us that we 
may receive the promise of the Holy Spirit by faith, 
just as we receive forgiveness, or any other spiritual 
gift. You may not have the immediate gush of 
blessed emotion, but you must go on reckoning that 
you have received, because you have fulfilled God’s 
conditions. Dare to start on your way home, sure 
that you have received, if you have complied with 
God’s conditions. Then seek the filling again and 
again, whenever the power of the Spirit waxes low 
in your soul. 










BS ’ ny na iW 
reat obtained it when He as- 






F ioe not got it. 
a am willing to make any sacrifice Pole is” 





THE GRAIN OF MUSTARD SEED. 


There is nothing arbitrary or capricious in God’s 
dealings with the soul. If one man has more of 
God than another, it is simply because he has learned 
the holy art of taking more of God into his life. 
On the same stream one man may get more water 
power to drive his engine than another, not because 
there is any arbitrariness in the water, but because 


the one man has learned how to utilize the water 


power better than the other. The same mighty 
power of God is flowing by every one of us, and if 
you would have the most power in your own life and 
work, you have simply to comply most absolutely 
with the conditions on which God gives Himself to 
you. 

I am thankful to say that those conditions are not 
conditions of emotion, but that, irrespective of your 
emotional temperament, you may come into inti- 
mate and powerful relationship with the eternal God, 
who works according to law. All you have to do 
_is to bring yourself into such an attitude towards 
God that you may receive from Him everything 


that He has to give the human soul. Most men — 


think that they must receive God’s gifts through 
some man’s ministry. They are living on God at 
second—or third—hand. There is no reason why 
you should not live at first-hand. 


The Lord had said that His disciples must forgive 
seven times a day if necessary. The disciples re- 
104 





i 


The Grain of Mustard Seed 105 


plied: ‘You are expecting too much; but if it ought 
to be done you must give us much more faith.” 
Christ said: “You make a great mistake; you do 
not need more faith. Use the faith you have, though 
it be no larger than the smallest seed. If ye had 
faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto 
this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, 


- and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey 


you.” Luke 17:5, 6. 


It is not the quantity of faith, but the quality, 
_ which is important. A grain of mustard seed and a 
pellet of dust may appear at a distance to be much 
the same, but the difference between the two is im- 
mense, because the one has no life burning at the 
heart of it, whilst the other contains life as God has 
kindled it. The one thing that you need is to have 
faith, as small as you like, but faith which has in it 
the principle of life, namely, faith with God in it. 
That is enough to remove mountains of difficulty, 
and to uproot sycamine trees and plant them in the 
sea. That will be sufficient. 

The one thing that shows whether or not your 
faith is of the right quality is whether it is 
directed towards the right object, which is Jesus 
Christ. If your faith be infinitesimal, if it be full of 
changeful emotion, if it be groping in the dark, if it 
be unable to see closely the face of Christ, if for long 
months you have no conscious enjoyment of the 
presence of Christ, yet, if your faith is reaching out 
its trembling hands towards Christ, that movement 


106 : . Back to Bethel . es : ye AS 


proves your faith to be the faith that binds you to. 
Christ, and you are a child of God. 

' People say that it is presumptuous to say hee you 
are saved. But is it presumptuous to say that God 
is true? And if God says that the soul which be- 
lieves in Christ has eternal life, is it not presumptu- 
ous on your part to say that you have not, and refuse 
to say you have if you believe? That would make 
God a liar. If you want to affirm that God is true, 
then dare to say: 

“T am a sinful lost man by nature, but I simply 
trust in Jesus Christ. Therefore I dare to say that 
I have the eternal life that God has promised.” 

The object of faith, therefore, is not the Bible, but 
the Christ of whom the Bible speaks; not the creed, 
but the Christ of whom the creed is true; not the 
cross, but the Christ who died on it and lives for- 
evermore. 

If today, with much ignorance and imperfection, 
you are holding to the living Christ, the faith that 
you have towards Him will save you, and I would 
rather have a little faith in the right object than have 
any amount of faith in the wrong object. If aman 
holds with one hand a life buoy, it will save him; 
whereas he might hold a block of iron with both 
hands and he would drown. I have met a good 
many people in the world who talk about their 
great faith, and they have had great faith in their 
great faith; but it is a better thing to have a little 
faith in Christ than to have a great faith in your 
great faith. A great many are always looking at 
their faith until they can see nothing else, like a girl 








| T he Grain of Masard sea 107, 


Phe yea 
y 


in whee ae is first in Cae he is. Seas looking at 
_ her love and wondering whether it is good enough 


for her lover, and the more she thinks about it the 


less she thinks she has. The only way to make her 
_ love grow is not to think about it, but to think about 
the person she loves. The man who is always 
_ muffling up his throat will catch cold. The man who 


is always wondering whether he is ill or not will 
make himself ill. And the man who is always wor- 
rying about his faith wili have no faith left to worry. 


_about. The only hope for the soul is to look at 


Christ. 


But Christ says, Faith as a grain of mustard seed 
can move mountains and trees. What did He mean? 

The mustard seed grows to a height of some twen- 
ty feet, almost a tree. There lies the tiny seed, 
saying: 

“T cannot. I am sure I can never produce a 
growth of twenty feet.” 

Ah, wait! Thou wilt say something else presently. 
Away there is rich, deep soil saying to itself: 

“© that I had some means by which to give vent 
to my slumbering strength, but I have no oppor- 
tunity of pouring it forth.” 


Ah! if we could only bring these two together: 
this tiny seed that sighs its inability, and that soil 
that is conscious of all ability. If only that seed 


_ may abide in that soil, and that soil may pour itself 


through the tiny aperture of that seed, it will bear 


much fruit, it will realize its furthest possibilities. 


Your faith is like the tiny grain. You think you 


Va 


108 Backito Bethel 


will never be able to produce a holy and useful life. 
But the great God is there, nearer than words can 
tell, and if only your soul can come into living union 
with the eternal God, there is nothing that He will 
not be able to effect by your instrumentality. 


There are five processes. First, there must be 
contact; second, solitude; third, death; fourth, re- 
ception; and fifth, individuality. 

CONTACT. 


First, there must be contact. 

As long as that seed is isolated from the soil—in 
the barn, on the shelf, or in the sack—it abides by 
itself alone. Only when it is brought into contact 
with the soil can there be any fruit. And as long 
as your life is apart from God, as long as you are 
trying to justify yourself, to sanctify yourself, or to 
work for God, the true fruit of your life is impos- 
sible. 

I do not say you are not a good man, or that you 
are not trying to do good, but you have not learned 
yet that apart from God you can do nothing; that all 
the fussy activity of your life—running hither and 
thither, putting out startling advertisements of ser- 
mons, preaching brilliant essays, organizing your 
church—shuts God out and amounts to nothing. It 
fills the newspapers, it attracts the attention of men; 
but it is of wood, hay or stubble, for the only thing 
which is permanent in a man’s life is that of God 
which goes into it. As long as you are apart from 
God, though trying to serve God in a strange anom- 





iv Fs ‘ eal Venema Diab ; 
| He The Grain of Mustard Seed 109 


There must be more than ever contact between your 
soul and God—a perpetual and unbroken contact, 
the life hidden—hidden with Christ in God, as the 
seed is hidden in the soil. 

Get out of sight! This perpetual publicity, this 
living for the eye of man, this trying to please men, 
there is too much of you in it all. Be buried in the 
soil, and there will be some chance that you will do 
work which will live. 

SOLITUDE. 

Second, there must be solitude. The little seed 

falls in to the earth to be wholly isolated from its 
companions, lying there month after month be- 
neath the envelope of frost and snow. In silence 
and solitude it waits. 

This comes to a man very often in a sick chamber, 
or when people turn against him. How many a 
man or woman has felt this sense of loneliness with 
God! Sometimes the church has turned from its 
pastor, and acquaintance or friend has looked shyly 
upon the soul which has given itself up to God. 
The little seed drops alone into its tiny grave, and 
lies in contact with the soil; and so the soul full 
often, being stripped of every human help and com- 
fort, is brought face to face for the first time in its 
life with God in Christ, and the one deep thought of 
the soul is that henceforth God shall fill its vision, 
and be its Alpha and Omega. When God is all in 
all, there is the promise of marvelous results. 


DEATH. 


Third, there must be death. 
Every tree grows out of a grave, and every stalk 


110 Back to Bethel ahs 


of wheat springs from a grave. When you walk 
over the autumn fields you are walking over a grave- | 
yard.’ Beneath your feet hundreds of tiny grains 
lie entembed. It might seem as if the grain has 
sacrificed its power to bless men with bread by lying 
there in a lonely grave of isolation and seclusion, 
_ while the very heart of it is being torn out of it by 
the insidious work of death and corruption. Ah, 
that is so often the necessary step and condition of 
the coming harvest! Sometimes God takes a man 
into the chamber of death where he sees his little 
child or beloved wife fading from him. Sometimes 
He strips a man of his reliance upon his rhetorical 
eloquence, upon his brilliant gifts, or upon all those 
habits and associations and reinforcements in his 
own life upon which he had been accustomed to rely, 
and he has to die to all. 

The story is told of Tauler, the great preacher, 
that before the days of Luther he filled the cathedral 
at Strasburg with an enthusiastic audience. Across 
the hills there came Nicholas, a simple Swiss, who 
was deeply versed in the Word of God. He said 
to him: 

“T want to confess to you.” 

While listening to the confession of the peasant, 
Tauler found himself confessing—confessing that 
after all his life had been a failure. Through the 
peasant he heard the voice of God saying to him: 

“Tauler, great preacher, thou must die; thou must 
die before thou canst truly bear fruit.” 

He tore himself away and went alone for a year 
into his monastery cell, and there God stripped him 














nani 


a Ka ‘ ,) The Grain of yanerd) Seed IIt 


of his reliance upon his eloquence and brilliance, and 
upon his force and power as a man. 

At the end of twelve months he came out of that 
_ cell and stood again injhis pulpit. The church was 

crowded with the elite of the city. But half way 
through the sermon he broke utterly down, and the 
- congregation dispersed, saying: 

“Ah, our great preacher is spoiled.” 

A week after he began to speak to a few humble 
- people that gathered still in the church, and to pour 
out the sermons which are still blessing hundreds 
and thousands of readers. 

In the early part of our life we feel strong, and 
say that we will prevail by our thinking, our learn- 
ing, our eloquence, that we are going to carry the 
world before us; but there comes a time in life when 
we find that all that doesn’t really count, and we 
_ bow down before God, saying: “Lord God, I have 
done with it.” That moment we lay hold upon re- 
sources of divine power that begin to flood our lives. 
The minister may no longer produce brilliant ser- 
mons, but he gives messages—he no longer works 
for God, but God works through him. That is 
death to self. 


RECEPTIVITY. 


The fourth stage is very beautiful—receptivity. 

Away down in its little grave, as the spring comes, 
there is a gentle knock at the door of the little seed, 
which has torn its waterproof coat. It is the knock 
of Mother Nature, which is God. She says: 

“May I come in?” 

The seed, from within, cries: “I have nothing 


a 


112 Back to Bethel 


to give thee. I am broken, helpless, torn, and at the 
end of myself.” 

But Mother Nature says, “May I come in?” 

“Thou canst if thou wilt.” 

The door is opened, and Mother Nature pours a 
tiny, trickling stream of her wonderful energy into 
the perforated, lacerated, broken mustard seed; and 
the pulse of life is felt within, forcing down the 
rootlet into the soil, and forcing up a green spire 
which makes its way through the heavy clay that 
conceals it, until at last the little green shoot raises 
its head above the surface of the field, and looks 
around and says: 

“Perhaps I can after all! If Mother Nature goes 
on pouring her energy into me, there is nothing that 
I can’t do.” 

So the root gets deeper, and the spire grows 
higher. It is not the seed; it is Mother Nature in 
the seed. It is not you, but God in you. It is no 
longer the fussy, active, restless running hither and 
thither, imitating this man or that, and searching for 
all the brilliant things that other people have said 
and then linking them together into one patchwork 
and holding up before your people, like Joseph’s 
coat of many colors; but it is God who speaks 
through you. God is working in you to will and 
to do His good pleasure, and you working out all 
the good works that God works in, and energizing, 
according to the working of Him that energizeth 
within you mightily. 

If you apprehend it, this truth may revolutionize 
your life as it did mine; because there will never 





\ 
> 
1 


The Grain of Mustard Seed 113 


_ more be anything impossible to you. A mountain 


in front of you does not matter if God works through 
you ; it is moved into the sea. There is simply noth- 
ing impossible to the man who has learned the art 
of being a channel for God. 


INDIVIDUALITY. 


The fifth point is individuality. 

The mustard seed produces mustard growth; the 
grain of wheat, wheat growth; the acorn, oak 
growth. George Miller lets God into his soul, and 
Ashley Down is covered with orphan houses. Spur- 
geon lets God into his soul, and you have the Tab- 
ernacle, and volumes of sermons, and the orphan 
house, and Pastors’ College. Moody lets God into 
his soul, and Northfield and Chicago, books distrib- 
uted through the world, hundreds and thousands of 


souls won for God, are the result of a life that towers 


over the continents. 
CO-OPERATION WITH CHRIST. 


Did you ever notice that there is scarcely a miracle 
that Jesus did apart from somebody’s faith? Christ 
on earth always needed the seed of somebody’s faith 
through which to produce the growth of miracle. 
You think the eleventh of John is the story of the 
resurrection of Lazarus, but I am not sure. I think 
it is the story of the resurrection of Martha. The 


‘Lord Jesus comes to Bethany and finds Lazarus is 


dead. He must have sympathizing faith through 
which to work, as a pivot for Him to work on. The 
disciples are no good, they are too panic stricken. 
Vary is at home in the house. So He sets to work 


: 114 ane Back to Bethel _ | 


on Martha, and is going to discover her nature. 


Faith lives on promises, so Christ put in the promise: 

“Your brother shall rise again.” 

“Oh, yes,” says Martha, “of course he will rise 
at the last day!” 

That is what we are always doing—we think that 
wonderful things happen before we are born and 


after we are dead; that heaven touches the earth at | 


the horizon, but is so far above us where we stand. 
iBut Christ says to Martha: 

“Talk about the last day! Wait for the last day! 
I aM the resurrection !” 

Martha had to think about that for a time. 

After a while they got to the grave. Christ must 
' have sympathizing faith to work with, and so He 
said: 

“Martha, didn’t I tell you that ¢f you believed you 
would see the glory of God?” 

I suppose she answered Him with a gleam of re- 
turning faith, and as soon as He saw that He was 
able to use her, working with her as His collabora- 
tor, so to speak, and Lazarus came forth. 


Think no more about your faith, but about Christ. 
Be quiet before God. Open your whole soul to Him 
that He may sweep through your life, and work 
through you. Everything in life depends on wheth- 
er we work for God, or allow God to work through 
us. Yield then your members as instruments of 
righteousness unto God. Keep your will adjusted 
with God’s will, and your heart open to Him, and 
expect God to work through you for the removal 
of mountains or sycamine trees. 


anata in ees een 








LIFE A POEM. 


Man has but one life to live, and each must be 
desirous that that life should tell to the very utter- 
, most for God and for humanity. In Ephesians 
‘2:10 we find words which will help us as long as we 
live: . 

“We are His workmanship, created in Christ 
_ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before or- 
‘dained that we should walk in them.” 

The word “created” in the Greek is “poem.” We 
are God’s poems. I suppose that each life is a 
definite thought of God. He has incarnated one 
original idea in each of us. As no poet repeats 
himself, but puts a distinct thought in each ode or 
poem, so God never repeats Himself in any human 
life. He breaks the mold as soon as He com- 
pletes His work. Let us remember, therefore, to 
be original. I lost ten of the best years of my 
life by trying to imitate other people. Although 
we may all derive help from the study of biography | 
and from friendship, yet we must always be going 
back to God to know what He means for us, and 
then ask Him to work out in our lives His thought 
to the very highest possibility. 

Are you prepared to accept this, and to yield 
yourself to God day by day that He may accom- 
plish through you the full purpose of His will, and — 


115 


116 Back to Bethel 


give a listening world His poem of power or purity 
or love? 

This epistle to the Ephesians is the epistle of “In- 
ness.” That is, it is the epistle in which from first 
to last Paul uses the little preposition “in,” and tells 
us what we are in Christ Jesus. Just as this whole 
creation slept in the mind of God to be elaborated 
step by step to its consummation, so the whole’ 
church of Jesus Christ lay in the mind of God 
before the mountains were brought forth or ever 
He had formed the earth. And you and I were 
appointed to a definite place in that wonderful body. 
What that place was will not be made fully clear to 
us until we stand before God in the eternal light, 
but it is comforting to know that there was a 
definite place in the purpose of God for you and me. 

Doesn’t that give a new meaning and dignity to 
your life, that it is the working out of the concep- 
tion of God, and that every day you must try so 
to walk as to realize the purpose which was in the 
mind of God when He created you in Christ Jesus? 
As one looks out upon men and women and things, 
life seems so full of commonplaces and little anx- 
ieties, worries, troubles and misfortunes that one 
is apt to get into the way of supposing it does not 
matter very much how he lives. But if we remem- 
ber that there is an eternal purpose in Christ in 
our regeneration, we shall always try to act worth- 
ily of our high calling in Christ Jesus. 

The greatest thing you can do in this world is to 
live a saintly, holy, lovely life. All the small things 
of your life, the wotries, anxieties, the troubles, 


Life a Poem 117 


your location and environment, the lines you are 
compelled to follow—all these have been contrived 
by God to give you the best opportunity possible 
to become what He wants you to be. God could 

have made you anything He liked. He could have 
_ made that woman a queen; He could have made 
that man a millionaire or a prince. But out of all 
the myriad opportunities of this world God Almighty 
chose for you just that position in which you find 
yourself today because He knew that was the one 
place in which you could come nearest His ideal. 
It may be there is some awful sorrow in your life. 
It may be some one ‘is wearing you away by con- 
stant, tiresome worry and trial. But always bear 
in mind that nothing is so small as not to have 
been contrived by God to make you as much His 
ideal as it is possible. 

Now face your life. You have been fretting, 
murmuring, envying and longing to be free; over- 
looking the beautiful things because of two or three 
miserable ones. You have not heeded what would 
elevate and comfort you because you are so op- 
pressed with what hurts you. That is not the true 
way to live: but every day to learn your lesson, 
and every day to bring your will to the will of God, 
that your will and His may coincide. 


GOD'S PERMISSION. 
But some one says, “I am quite prepared to ad- 
mit that my present position is in general the re- 


sult of God’s choice, but not that the troubles and 
worries that come to my life from other people are 


118 Back to Bethel — ‘ E 


God’s choice. I draw a distinction between what 
God directly appoints and what comes to me, 
through the intervention of other men and women.” 

I used to make that distinction once, but could 
- find no rest while I did. Besides, I saw that you 
and I are enveloped in the care of God. Suppos- 
ing a man out yonder shoots a poisoned arrow at 
me, in some newspaper article, or caustic remark, 
and it comes winging its way toward me. God 
Almighty might ward that arrow off by the shield 
of His protection. But supposing He lowers the 
shield and lets it reach my heart, has it not become 
His will for me? I therefore go through the world 
daring to believe that not one thing, however mi- 
nute, occurs to me without being God’s chisel chip- 
ping away a little more of myself and producing a 
more perfect likeness to the conception which was 
in His mind for me. 


PARABLE OF THE BLACKBERRY BUSH. 


Last summer I was in Luther’s country, and I 
took a trip through the pine forests. I do love 
the pine forests of Germany, so absolutely quiet, 
with their colonnades of trees like the colonnades 
of a temple. About noon I was extremely tired 
and exhausted, and coming out from the forest to 
the fringe of it I found a blackberry bush full of 
the choicest, richest, most enjoyable blackberries— 
I think I never tasted blackberries that were so 
luscious. Within ten minutes I had rifled that 
bush of all its produce. I was quite ashamed of | 
myself, and said: ; 





‘ 4 


Life a Poem > F 19 


“"Y am sorry to have treated you in this way.” 


_ But the bush said: “You need not be sorry, I 


have been waiting for you to come for the last 
three or four months. I was created for this. It 
is very lonely here, and I have kept vigil all through 
the winter storms and the long, dark nights until 
the spring came, when I began to prepare this ban- 
quet for you. I have had such pride in getting 
ready the basket of fruit that you have enjoyed. | 
Now that you are satisfied, my year’s work has re- 
ceived its crown.” 

I thanked the bush, and said: “Good-by. If I 
come again next year will you have another feast 
ready for me?” ee 

“Yes,” said the bush. 

And I answered: “You remind me of many a 


lonely saint of God, who through the long months 


of pain and suffering is preparing a basket of fruit, 
of which, if no earthly saint partakes, the Master 
Himself will eat.” 

That is what I mean by being just where God 
wants us to be; willing to stay at the stake without 
being bound because God has put us there, to keep 
standing quietly at our post amid pain and suffer-' 
ing, preparing baskets of fruit of which Jesus and 
our fellow believers may partake. Providing the 
fruits of a holy life in this world is fulfilling 
Christ’s purpose for your life. 


WALK IN THEM. 


“Created in Jesus Christ, unto good works, which 
God before prepared THAT WE SHOULD WALK IN 
THEM.” You have not got to create your path, but 


120 — Filia oa ‘to Bethel 


to find it—not to cut your way through the tangled 
undergrowth, but to discover the path which your 
heavenly Father has prepared for you from the 
moment you first gave yourself to Jesus to the mo- 
ment when you will be welcomed home. Never 
forget that you have been created for a prepared 
path. God, who knew exactly what was in the path, 
created you for the path and the path for you, 
and your life is simply the discovery of God’s pre- 
pared path for that day. It may lie over green- 
sward or down the steep incline; it may be lonely 
and solitary or through the busy populace; but your 
path, beloved friend, has been prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world, by the wisdom 
and love of God. 


There are two things, therefore, which are neces- 
sary for all of us. The first is to know the path, 
and the second is strength to walk in it. I want 
to speak a little on those two. 


GUIDANCE. 


First, how may I know which is my prepared 
path, either for a day or for my life? 

Heb. viii, 11 gives you a never-to-be-forgotten 
challenge, which (in point of fact) is repeated four 
times in the Bible—and when the Bible says one 
thing four times you may depend upon it it is 
well worth your notice: “They shall not teach 
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, 
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me, 
from the least to the greatest.” Preceding the ac- 





Life a Poem 121 


count of the new covenant, you have God’s word to 
Moses: “‘See that thou make all things according 
to the pattern shown thee on the mount.” Be still 
before God. In that silence your own restlessness, 
_ your own energy, the activity of your flesh will die 
down. You will put aside a good deal of what 
you originate, and you will learn to see God’s plan 
and pattern, which will probably be a very different 
thing to that of your own invention. Be in prayer, 
open your heart to God, and presently the pattern 
of the tabernacle, with every letter and tassel and 
hanging, will appear before you, and then you will 
go down into the vales beneath to produce what 
God hath revealed. 

And remember when God commands He pro- 
vides the stuff. He never gave any plans to Mo- 
ses for which provision was not made. If Moses 
had put in one thing extra he would have had to 
have a collection for it; but as long as he worked on 
God’s pattern, God was responsible for the provision 
of the material. 

Let me just indicate how you may know the path 
of God’s will. 

When I was crossing the Irish channel one dark, 
starless night I stood on the deck by the captain 
and asked him: 

“How do you know Holyhead harbor on so dark 
a night as this?” 

He said: “You see those three lights? Those 
three must line up behind each other as one, and 
when we see them so united we know the exact po- 
sition of the harbor mouth.” 


, anes Hs ‘ 8 in 
122, Back to Bethel 

When we want to know God’s will there are 
three things which always concur—the inward im- 
pulse, the Word of God and the trend of circum- 
stances. God in the heart, impelling you forward; 
God in His Book, corroborating whatever He says 
in the heart; and God in circumstances, which are 
always indicative of His. will. Never start until 
these three things agree. 

You may have an inward impulse to be a min- 
ister, young man, but you have that invalid mother 
to support. Therefore the trend of circumstances 
and the inward impulse do not tally, and you must 
wait. If you do not know what to do next, stand 
still until you do. If God has not indicated the 
path beyond a certain point, remain quiet until He 
does. Throw the responsibility back on God. 

There is a remarkable illustration in Acts xii:12, 
of the way in which God leaves us to the action 
of our judgment, when our judgment is enough. 
Peter was in prison. He could not emerge, and 
the angel therefore came to him and led him out, 
the gate opening of its own accord. You will al- 
ways find that the gates will open of their own ac- 
cord if you are in the company of God’s angels. 

The angel then took Peter through two streets, 
because he was so dazed he thought he was dream- 
ing. But when the night air had revived him the 
angel left him. ‘And when he had considered the 
thing he came to the house” of John Mark. You 
see the angel was there when he was dazed, but 
when he woke up the angel said: spice 

“Now, Peter, you have your senses. You can 








‘Life a Poem : 123 


find your own way without me, and so I will leave © 
youn? fi ne 
God will lead you by your own judgment, and 
when judgment is enough, don’t expect a miracle, 
for God uses His miracles sparingly. 


GOD’S STUPID CHILDREN. 


The more stupid you are to understand the more 
you must rely on God. I think stupid people really 
get on the best with God if they are content to be 
stupid and ‘not seem wise. Thomas was so dull— 
he lived a week behind the other apostles; but you 
know how eager Jesus was to explain to Thomas 
the mystery of His resurrection, and came specially 
to help him. 

If I had in my family three or four children who © 
were really bright and one who was stupid and 
obtuse in his intellect, and I told the children that 
on a Saturday afternoon I would go with them 
to the woods to gather the spring flowers if they 
would meet me at a certain place—perhaps I might 
find the little fellow’s face still dull and cloudy 
because he could not understand my meaning. 
Would I let him miss the treat when he needed it 
so much more than the others? Am I going to 
punish him for his stupidity, which may in some 
part be attributable to me? No, I take him on my 
knee and explain it to him again. If still he does 
not understand, I say to him: 

“Wait right here, and after dinner I will take 
_ you with me.” 

So the stupid child gets more of my kind and 


124 Back to Bethel 


loving help than the others who have gone on and 
are ready to meet me at the appointed place. 

If you are one of God’s stupid children who can- 
not catch His meaning, stand still until God takes 
you by the hand and says: “Come along with Me.” 
God is bound to make you know. 

When you have asked God to guide your judg- 
ment, and have thought it well out and acted as 
you thought the wisest, seeking His will and moving 
forward, suppose you find yourself in some great 
difficulty? That does not prove that you have 
-made a mistake, or that you are not in God’s path. 
It simply proves that any other path would have 
been impassable. There is a way under the diffi- 
culty, or around or above it, and presently it will 


be made passable. Whenever you decide ona | 


course, trusting God and asking Him to block 
you if you are wrong, go on; for if it were not His 
path for you He would have told you. Dare to 
go on. 

KEEPING. 


When you know what your path is, you must ~ 


learn to appropriate the power which is within your 
reach to walk init. For these “good works” there is 
a sufficiency in Jesus Christ, in whom we were 
created. For every good work there is a counter- 
part of grace in Christ. The pain, the sorrow, the 
worry are all pre-determined, and the grace for 
them all is in Christ. And further, the special form 
of trial was intended to compel you to take from 


Christ what otherwise you would have missed. } 


4 





Life a Poem | 125 


Blind men were permitted to come to Christ to 
show that there was eye-salve in Him; deaf and — 
dumb men were permitted to come to elicit hearing 
and speech; dead men were brought to Christ for 
all the world to know the life that was in Christ. As 
I understand it, even sin can bring out qualities in 
God which otherwise would never have been real- 
ized. 

Up to now you have probably been looking at some 
trial in your life with a great deal of anxiety, and 
you have been trying to cope with it and have been 
mastered by it, perpetually beaten down to the 
ground. That is only because Jesus wants to show 
you what He can do. 

In Ireland a friend of mine once went to call on 
what we call a decayed Irish nobleman; that is, 
he had seen better days. He had a title, and was 
nominally the owner of a large tract of country. 
My friend passed in the gateway and proceeded up 
to the old ancestral house, but on reaching it he 
found there was only a housekeeper there. It was 
a lovely place, but she said that her master, the 
nobleman, might be found at the gate lodge which | 
he had passed. My friend found that he was 
stricken with a strange disease, which led him to 
think that he had no money at all, and in order to 
economize he deserted his magnificent home, which 
he could well keep up, and live in the lodge. 

It was a queer thing to do, wasn’t it? But it. 
is what you have been doing all your life. God 
meant you to live a royal life, and He put into 


eee Py 
Wi 


Bae ene Back to Bethel 


Jesus Christ everything to enable you to live that 
life. You have seen the plan, and you have not 
dared to realize it because you thought you had not 
capital enough, whereas in Jesus Christ God has 
put the fullness of His possession. “Blessed with all 
spiritual blessings in Christ,” Ephesians 1:3. “Is 
Him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bod- 
ily,” Colossians 2:9. “His divine power hath | 
given unto us all things,” 2 Peter 1:3. 

If ever God puts me forward to new responsi- 
bility I always go back to Him on an honorable 
understanding that He will give me more of His 
help. 

You probably understand intellectually what I 
am saying, but have you never learned the art of 
TAKING from Christ? If I were to say to you, 
“Stop praying; you have prayed enough; give up 
praying and take,’ would you understand what I 
meant? You have been praying to God as though 
you had to wring it from Him with the greatest 
difficulty. When you have prayed for a thing, 
take it! At the end of your prayer, stop still. and 
take! . 

“Believe that ye receive, and ye shall have” (Mark 
11:24). When you have definitely and reverently | 
believed on a promise go away and reckon that, 
whether you feel it or not, you have received. 

All these things will be taught you one by one if 
you will only present yourself to God. Give Him 
your mind, that He may think into you His thoughts. 
Give Him your heart, that no love may be there 


Life a Poem 127 


but His own and such love as He permits. Give 
Him your hands, your body, the whole of your 
life, that through it He may fulfill His own will. 
Then keep looking up to Him and receive from Him 
that which you need. 

_ That is, as far as I know, the secret of living 
' well. May God teach you further and help you 
to give up all to Him! 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 


AT CLAREMONT 
CALIFORNIA 


15 cents each 


Eight for $1.00, 


NUMERICAL CATALOGUE OF 


THE MOODY COLPORTAGE LIBRARY 


A series of books by well-known Christian authors, undenemi- 
national, thoroughly evangelical, for all classes of readers, in several 
languages. All uniform in size and style with this volume. 


Jl ef Grace, C. H. Spurgeon 
2 The Way to God. D. L. Moody 
3 e and Profit in Bible Study. D.L 


4 , Warfare and Victory. D. W. Whittle 
. BD. L. Moody 
Prevailing Prayer. D. L. Moody 
7 Pho fed of eis Scie authors 
38 Beorct Power. L. Moody 
9 To the Work. D L. Moody 
10 According to Promise. C. H. Spurgeon 
11 Bible Gharacters. D. L. Moody 
12 Gospel Pictures and Story Sermons. Whittle 
18 ‘And Peter,”’ J. W. Chapman 
14 Select Poems. 
16 $ on Life's Duties. F. B. Meyer 
16 Point and Pu: e in Story and Saying 
17 Selections fro’ jpurgeon 
18 The Good Shepherd. Life of Christ 
19 Good Tidings. Talmage and others 
20 Sovereign Grace. D. L. Moody 
*21 Select Sermons. D. L. Moody 
22 Fifty Temperance Tales 
23 Nobody Loves Me—A Story. Walton 
24 The Empty Tomb 
26 Sowing and Reaping. D. L. Moody 
28 Probable Sons—A Story. Amy LeFeuvre 
30 News. Robert Boyd 
82 The.Secret of Guidance. F. B. Meyer 
§ e Second Coming of Christ 
{185 Bible Berattelser for Barn 
36 Sunday Talks tothe Young. Josiah Mee 
88 Parables from Nature. Mre. Alfred Gatty 
40 The Power of a Surrendered Life, or Kadesh- 
Barnea. J. W. Chapman 
42, Whiter Than Snow and Little Dot.—Stories 
44 The Overcoming Life. D. L. Moody 
46 A Royal Exile. Talmage. 
48 The Prodigal 
49 Tho Spirit-Filled Life. John MacNeil 
50 Jessica’s First Prayer—A Story. Stretton 
51 A Castaway. F. B. Meyer 
52 Heaven on Earth, A.C, Dixon 
53 Select Northfield Sermons 
54 Absolute Surrender, Andrew Murray 
55 Possibilities. J.@.K. McClure 
56 Faith. Spurgeon, Moody and others 
57 Christie’s Old Organ—A Story. Walton 
58 Naaman the Syrian. A. B. Mackay 
59 The Lost Crown. J. W. Chapman 
60 Weighed and Wanting. Addresses on the 
Ten Commandments. D. L. Moody 
61 The Crew of the Dolphin—A Story. Stretton 
62 John Ploughman's Talk, Spurgeon 
63 Meet for the Master’s Use. F. B. Meyer 
64 Our Bible. C. Leach and R. A. Torrey 
65 Alonein London—A Story. Stretton 
66 Moody's Anecdotes 
67 Drummond’s Addresses 


69 Children of the Bible 

70 The Power of Pentecost. Thomas Waugh 

71 Men of the Bible. D. L. Moody 

72 A Peep Behind the Scenes. Walton 

73 The School of Obedience. Andrew Murray 

74 Home Duties. R. T. Cross 

75 Tales of Adventure from the Old Book. 
Thomas Champness 

76 Moody’s Stories 


471 ane True Estimate of Life. G@. Campbell f 


Morgan 


‘18 The Robber's Cave—A Story. A. L. 0. E. 


* 79 The Life of David. For Children 
80 John Ploughman’s Pietures. Spurgeon 
81 Thoughts for the Quiet Hour 
82 Mothers of the Bible. Chas. Leach 
83 The Shorter Life of D. L. Moody. 
P. D. Moody and A. P. Fitt. 
84 Ditto. Vol. IT , 
85 Revival of a Dead Church. L. G. Broughton § 
86 Moody’s Latest Sermons 
87 A Missionary Penny—A Story. L. C. W. : 
88 Calvary’sCross. Spurgeon, Whittle and others i 
§89 How to Pray. R. A. Torrey 
90 Little King Davie—A Story. Nellie Hellis 
91 Short Talks. TP. L. Moody 
92 The Great Appeal. McClure 
93 Pilgrim’s Progress. Bunyan 
94 Christie, the King’s Servant. Walton 
95 Our Lord’s Return, or What is*‘Marauatna’’? 
Gillings 
96 Kept for the Master’s Use. 
98 Back to Bethel. F. B. Meyer 
100 UpfromSin. Broughton 
101 Ten Commandments. Morgan 
102 baie Amusements and the Christian Life. 
inks 
104 Answers to Prayer, from George Muller’s 
Narratives 
105 The Way Home. D. L. Moody 
106 Life of William Carey. Mary E, Farwell 
107 Lifeof Alexander Duff. Elizabeth B.Vermilye 
168 Life of Adoniram Judson. Julia H. Johnston 
109 Life of David Livingstone. Mrs. J. H. Wor- 
cester, Jr. 
111 Life of Henry Martyn and Samuel Mills. 
Mrs. Sarah J. Rhea 
112 Life of Robert Moffat. M. L. Wilder = 
114 First Words to Young Christians, Robt, Boyd 
115 Rosa's Quest—A Story. Anna P. Wright 
116 Difficulties in the Bible. R. A. Torrey 
119 Practical and Perplexing Questions An- 
swered. R. A. Torrey 
120 Satan and the Saint. James M. Gray 


Vol, I. 


Havergal 


68 The Wirage of Life. Miller 


}| In Swedish only t Also in Swedish, German and Danish-Norwegian § Also in German 
*Also in Swedish and Danish-Norwegian 7 Also in Swedish, German, Spsnish and Bohemian 


“. (FURTHER NUMBERS. ANNOUNCED LATER) 








es foe series of books by well ennwe Christian ahs: indenaene 
national, thoroughly evangelical, for all classes of readers, in several 


jeneuaees 


“1 All of Grace. €. H. Spurgeon 
oe The Way to God. D. L. Moody 
_,® Pleasure and Profit in Bible Study. DL 
Moody. 
4 Life, Watfare and Victory. D. W. Whittle 
> Heaven. D. L. Moody f 
6 Prevailing Prayer. D. L. Moody 
7 The Way of Life. Various authors 
$8 Secret Power, D. L. Moody 
_.9 Tothe Work, BD. L. Moody 
10 According to Promise. C. Sy. Spurgeon 
11 Bible Characters. D. L. Moody 
12 Gospel Pictures and. Story Sermons. Whittle 
18 ‘‘And Peter.’” J. W. Chapman f 
~ 14 Select Poems. 
15 Light on Life’s Duties. F, B. Meyer 
16 Point and Purpose in Story and Saying 
17 Selections froin Spurgeon 
18 The Good Shepherd. Life of Christ 
19 Good Tidings, Talmage and others 
20 Sovereign Grace. D. L. Moody 
*21 Select Sermons. D. L. Moody 
22 Fifty Temperance Tales 
23 Nobody Loves Me—A Story. Walton 
24 The Empty Tomb 
26 Sowing and Reaping, D. L. Moody 
28 Probable Sons—A Story. Amy Leleuyre 
30 Good News. Robert Boyd 
22 The Secret of Guidance. F. B. Meyer 
84 The Second Coming of Christ 
|\35 Bible Berattelser for Barn 
36 Sunday Talks tothe Young. Josiah Mee 
38 Parables from Nature. Mrs. Alfred Gatty 
40 The Power of 2 Surrendered Life, or Kadesh- 
- Barnea. J. W. Chapman 
42 Whiter Than Snow and Little Dot.—Stories 
44 The Overcoming Life. D. L. Moody 
46 A Royal Exile. Talmage. 
48 The Prodigal 
49 The Spirit-Filled Life. John MacNeil 
50 Jessica's First Prayer—A Story. Stretton 
51 A Castaway. F. B. Meyer 
52 Heavenon Earth. A.C. Dixon 
53 Select Northfield Sermons 
54 Absolute Surrender, Andrew Murray 
55 Possibilities. J.G.K. McClure 
56 Faith. Spurgeon, Moody and others 
57 Christie’s Old Organ—A Story. Walton 
58 Naaman the Syrian. A. B. Mackay 
59 The Lost Crown. J. W. Chapman 
60 Weighed and Wanting. Addresses on the 
Ten Commandments. D. L. Moody 
61 The Crew of the Dolphin—A Story, Stretton 
62 John Ploughman’s Talk. Spurgeon 
_ 63 Meet for the Master’s Use. F. B Meyer 
64 Our Bible. C. Leach and R. A. Torrey 
65 Alone in London—A Story. Stretton 
66 Moody's Anecdotes 
67 Drummond's Addresses 


All uniform in size and style with this volume. > 


69 Children ofthe Bible 
70 The Power of Pentecost. Thomas Waugh 
.-71 Men of the Bible. D. L. Moody ~ 
72. A Peep Behind the Scenes. Walton 
73 The School of Obedience. AnereNe Murra; 
74 Home Duties. \R. T. Cross 
75 Tales of Adventure from the “Old Box 
Thomas Champness 3 
76 Moody's Stories 
77 The True Estimate of Life, G. “campbatt 
Morgan 
78 The Robber" s Cave—A Story. Ai L. 2Ox EB ; 
79 The Life of David. For Children 
80 John Ploughman's Pictures, SPUrEeon, 
81 Thoughts for the Quiet Hour 
82 Mothers of the Bible. Chas. Leach | 
83 The Shorter Life of D. L. Mooryss 
P. D. Moody and A, P. Pitt. ge 
84 Ditto. Vol. II 
85 Revival of a Dead Church. L. G. Broughton 
86 Moody’s Latest Sermons 
87 A Missionary Penny—A Story. ZT: €, We - 
88 Calvary’s Cross. Spurgeon, Whittle; ‘andothers. 
§89 How to Pray, R.A. Torrey ~ 
90 Little King Davie—A Story. Nellie Nellis 
91 Short Talks. D.L. Moody = 
92 The Great Appeal. McClure 
93 Pilgrim’s Progress. Bunyan 
94 Christie, the King’s Servant. Walton ‘ 
95 Our Lord’s Return, or What is"*Maranatha™"? 
Gillings 
96 Kept for the-Master's Use. 
98 Back to Bethel. 
100 Up from Sin 


Vol, Be 


Havergal ; eat 
F. B. Meyer . mS 
Broughton 

101 Ten Commandments. Morgan ~ 


* 102 Popular Amusements and the Christian. Life. i 


Sinks 
104 Answers to Prayer, from, George Muller" s 
Narratives é c 
105 The Way Home. D. Th Moody te 
106 Life of William Carey. Mary FE. Farwell 
107 Life of Alexander Duff. Elizabeth B- Vermilya 


108 Life of AdoniramJudson. Julia H. Johnston § 


109 Life of David Livingstone. 
cester, Jr. 

11 Life of Henry Martyn and Samuel Mills, 
Mrs. Sarah J. Rhea 

112 Life of Robert Moffat. M. L. Wilder 

114 First Words to Young Christians. Robt. Boyd 

115 Rosa's Quest—A Story. Anna P. Wright 

116 Difficulties in the Bible. R. A. Torrey 

119 Practical and Perplexing Questions Ane 
swered. R.A. Torrey ~— 

120 Satan and the Saint. James M. Gray ~ 


Mrs. J. H. Wor 


68 The Mirage of Life. Miller : 


} Also in Swedish, German and Danish-Norwegian — § Also in German. 
+ Also in Swedish, German, Spanish and Bohemian 


( (FURTHER NUMBERS ANNOUNCED LATER) 


|| In Swedich oniy 
*Alsoin Swedish and Danish-Norwegian 





eae 








V Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847-1929... 


Jel ... Back to Bethel: separation from sin, and fellowsh 
in God ... Chicago, The Bible institute colportage ass 
,1901, 


(3)-127 p. 17 cm. (The colportaxe library, v. 7, no. 98) 
Northfield extensivn lectures, 1901. 


1. Conversions I¢ Title. IIe Series: Northfield 
extension lectures, 1901, 


CCSC/je 
Library of Congress S Z (BV4921) 


@ 7 6 





