(i 


HH 
|| || | | Nil I 
i|| 


ill lI | 
| \\ 
ill Mh 


DEMCO NO, 38-298 


BAPTISTS | 
And Their Doctrines 


Sermons on Distinctive Baptist Principles 


BY 


B. H. CARROLL, D.D. 


PRESIDENT, SOUTHWESTERN BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY 


Compiled by 
J. B. CRANFILL, LL.D. 


BROADMAN PRESS 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 


Copyright, 1913, by 
_ FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


1000—8—45—7 


INTRODUCTION 


OINCIDENT with the publication of a new 
volume by Dr. B. H. Carroll entitled “ Evan- 
gelistic Sermons,” I am glad to present from 

the press of the same publishers the present work 
entitled, “ Baptists and Their Doctrines.” Although 
nearly two thousand years of Christian history has 
been chronicled since Jesus came, it still remains 
true in many quarters that Baptists are much mis- 
understood. In remote districts it is yet alleged 
by those ignorant of the Baptist position that we 
are ignorant, prejudiced, narrow and supersectarian. 

The exact reverse is true. The Baptist position 
is as broad as the New Testament. [I thank God 
that it is no broader. Rather than attempt to ad- 
just the New Testament to fit the people, it has been 
the aim and effort of Baptists in every age to adjust 
the people to fit the New Testament. In the opinion 
of many, the author, Dr. B. H. Carroll, has had 
few if any peers as an exponent of the Bible and 
its message. In the sermons contained in this vol- 
ume, he has set forth lucidly and lovingly those 
distinctive principles that have characterized and 
identified the Baptists from the time of Christ and 
his Apostles until now. 

It is a matter of regret that the limits of the 
present volume are not sufficient to enable us to 

3 


4 INTRODUCTION 


incorporate additional discussions on the great dis- 
tinctive doctrines that have ever been held by the 
Baptists. Enough is given to acquaint the general 
reader with what we believe, and to equip our own 
people with the highest and most luminous expres- 
sion of our principles that in recent years has been 
compiled. 

I believe that a wide circulation of this book will 
aid the cause of truth and righteousness. It is sent 
upon its mission of love with earnest prayers for 
all who shall read its pages. This work and its 
companion volume, ‘“‘ Evangelistic Sermons,” should 
go hand in hand. Each will fill its own place in 
our Christian literature, and no one can read either 
volume without finding much to interest and edify. 

J.-B: GRANFEIELE: 


DAtuas, TEXAs. 


CONTENTS 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES . 
EccLes1a— THE CHURCH : : : 
THE BApTIsts ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION—FIRST 
SERMON : : - . 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION—SECOND 
SERMON : ; : 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION—THIRD 
SERMON 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 
Tue RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT oF Gop. 
THE CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT . ° 


37 
63 


97 


113 


128 
145 
158 
171 


191 


I 
DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 


Preece Steer Oo yas ncedtul torte cr nto exhort you thet 
Pe ee ee for the fatth which was once delivered to 
HE distinctive principles of the Baptists are 
those doctrines or practices which distinguish 
us from other Christian denominations. It 
is held by some that no doctrine or practice should 
be classed as distinctive which has at any time been 
shared, in whole or in part, by any other denomina- 
tion. But this limited sense of the word distinctive 
is too narrow for ordinary speech or common sense. 
For example: The Greek church and the Baptists 
both practice immersion, but their doctrine of bap- 
tism is widely different from ours. Authority, sub- 
ject, and design all enter as much into the validity 
of this ordinance as the act itself. More than mere 
immersion is necessary to constitute New Testa- 
ment baptism. Again, the Congregationalists agree 
with Baptists in the form of church government, 
but their doctrine of the church is widely different 
from ours. Yet again, the statement of Chilling- 
worth, “ The Bible, and the Bible alone, the re- 
ligion of Protestants,” is widely different from the 
Baptist principle, “The New Testament, the only 
law of Christianity.” 


8 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Moreover, this entire subject has an historic as- 
pect, which may not be ignored. There has been 
great progress in Baptist principles since the Ref- 
ormation of the sixteenth century. Throughout 
the Protestant world there has been steady approxt- 
mation by nearly all other denominations to many 
Baptist principles, very materially narrowing the 
once broad margin dividing us from other people. 
So that the distinctive in history is much more 
marked than the distinctive of the present day. 
Notable among the Baptist doctrines towards which 
there has been this steady approximation are “ Free- 
dom of Conscience” and “ Separation of Church 
and State.” It is one of the best established facts 
of history that Protestants equally with Romanists 
once held to the unchristian and horrible maxim: 
“Whose is the government—his is the religion.”’ 
Geneva, Germany, Holland, Old England and New 
England shared it with Italy, Spain and France, 
as Baptists found to their cost. While, therefore, 
the more recent approximations towards our prin- 
ciples are warmly welcomed, and while the hope of 
still greater approximation is fondly cherished, we 
are not thereby estopped from entrance into the 
domain of history in discussing distinctive prin- 
ciples. 

Before coming to affirmative statements, allow 
me to clear away the brush obstructing a fair view 
by disclaiming as distinctive the only two doctrines 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 9 


which in the world’s estimation constitute ae sum 
of our distinctive princples: 


(1) Immersion is Baptism 


Immersion is not disclaimed as a Baptist doctrine, 
but it is disclaimed as a distinctive tenet. Think 
of it. For the first thirteen hundred years all 
Christendom held this belief. Even to-day other 
Christian denominations, aggregating nearly one 
hundred million people, believe and practice it as 
the only baptism. How, then, can it be our most 
distinguishing tenet? If, indeed, it be distinctive 
of our people, it is the least distinctive and the least 
‘important of all our principles. In this discussion 
it will not even be named as a distinctive principle. 


(2) Baptism is Essential to Salvation 


So far from being distinctive, this is not now 
and never has been a Baptist doctrine. More than 
all other people do they repudiate it. Indeed, on 
the contrary, the Baptists are the only people in 
the world who hold its exact opposite: Salvation 
is essential to baptism. 

On these premises and disclaimers we may now 
announce in order the distinctive Baptist principles: 


I. THE NEW TESTAMENT—THE LAW OF 
CHRISTIANITY 


Doubtless many of my fellow-Christians of other 
denominations may be disposed to smile at the an- 


to BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


nouncement of this as a distinctive Baptist principle. 
But let us not smile too soon. Patiently await the 
development of the thought. To expand the state- 
ment: All the New Testament is the Law of Chris- 
tianity. The New Testament is all the Law of 
Christianity. The New Testament will always be 
all the Law of Christianity. This does not deny 
-the inspiration or profit of the Old Testament, nor 
that the New is a development of the Old. It 
affirms, however, that the Old Testament, as a typ- 
ical, educational and transitory system, was fulfilled 
by Christ, and as a standard of law and way of 
life was nailed to the cross of Christ and so taken 
out of the way. The principle teaches that we 
should not go to the Old Testament to find Chris- 
tian law or Christian institutions. Not there do 
we find the true idea of the Christian church, or 
its members, or its ordinances, or its government, 
or its officers, or its sacrifices, or its worship, or 
its mission, or its ritual, or its priesthood. Now, 
when we consider the fact that the overwhelming 
majority of Christendom to-day, whether Greek, 
Romanist or Protestant, borrow from the Old Tes- 
tament so much of their doctrine of the church, in- 
cluding its members, officers, ritual ordinances, 
government, liturgy and mission, we may well call 
this a distinctive Baptist principle. This is not a 
question of what is the Bible. If it were, Baptists 
would not be distinguished from many Protestants 
in rejecting the apochryphal additions incorporated 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES. ‘11 


by Romanists in their Old Testament. Nor is it a 
stand with Chillingworth on the proposition, “‘ The 
Bible, and the Bible alone, the religion of Prot- 
estants.” If it were, Baptists would not be dis- 
tinguished from many Protestants in rejecting the 
equal authority of tradition as held by the Roman- 
ists. But when Baptists say that the New Testa- 
ment is the only law for Christian institutions they 
part company, if not theoretically at least practi- 
cally, with most of the Protestant world, as well 
as from the Greeks and Romanists. 

We believe that the church, with all that pertains 
to it, is strictly a New Testament institution. We 
do not deny that there was an Old Testament 
ecclesia, but do deny its identity with the New Tes- 
tament ecclesia. We do not deny the circumcision 
of infants under Old Testament law, but do deny 
their baptism under New Testament law. We do 
not deny that there were elders under the Mosaic 
economy, nor even deny the facts of uninspired his- 
tory concerning the elders of the Jewish synagogue. 
We simply claim that the New Testament alone 
must define the office and functions of the elder in 
the Christian church. Christ himself appointed its 
Apostles and its first seventy elders. We not only 
stand upon the New Testament alone in repelling 
Old Testament institutions, in repelling apocry- 
phal additions thereto, in repelling the historic syn- 
agogue of the inter-biblical period as the model of 
the church, but to repel the binding authority of 


12 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


post-apostolic history, whether embodied in the ht- 
erature of the ante-Nicene fathers or in the deci- 
sions of councils, from the council at Nice, A.D. 325, 
to the Vatican Council, a.p. 1870. We allow not 
Clement, Polycarp, Hippolytus, Ignatius, Irenzus, 
Justin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen, Jerome, Euse- 
bius, Augustine, Chrysostom, Erasmus, Luther, 
Zwingli, Calvin, Henry VIII., Knox or Wesley 
either to determine what is New Testament law 
or to make law for us. In determining the office 
and functions of a bishop, we consider neither the 
Septuagint episcopos, nor the Gentile episcopos, nor 
the developed episcopos of the early Christian 
centuries. 

We shut ourselves up to the New Testament 
teaching concerning the bishop. But recently the 
Christian world has been invited to unite on the 
historic episcopacy of the early Christian centuries. 
We made no response to this unscriptural invita- 
tion. Yet more recently, the eccentric, and I may 
add, the heretical, higher critic, Dr. Briggs, seeks, 
it seems, to unite the Christian world on the word 
katholtkos (universal) as applied to the church and 
as defined in these same early Christian centuries. 
We utterly disregard this invitation, not only be- 
cause his word katholikos is found nowhere in the 
Greek of either Old or New Testament, but be- 
cause the idea of catholicity must not be learned 
from post-apostolic fathers, but from the inspired 
New Testament, and because it was this word, 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 13 


katholikos, which led to the idea of the church as 
an organized general body having appellate juris- 
diction over the particular congregations, and led 
to the union of church and state under Constan- 
tine. We are willing enough to enter the domain 
of uninspired history as a matter of research, and 
ready enough to concede all its fairly established 
facts, whatever sound proof may show them to be, 
but we recognize as the only ground of union, now 
or hereafter, the impregnable rock of the New 
Testament. 

And mark you the first form of the expanded 
statement: All the New Testament is the law of 
Christianity. To apply this thought: One Chris- 
tian denomination, in determining the law of par- 
don, would shut us out of the four Gospel narra- 
tives up to the resurrection of Christ and shut us 
up to the latter half of the New Testament. Here 
we say, give us all the New Testament. The cases 
of forgiveness of sin, at the mouth and hand of our 
Lord himself, must be considered in determining 
the law of pardon. 

The New Testament is the law of Christianity. 
All the New Testament is the law of Christianity. 
The New Testament is all the law of Christianity. 
The New Testament always will be all the 
law of Christianity. Avaunt, ye types and shad- 
ows! Avaunt, Apocrypha! Avaunt, O Synagogue! 
Avaunt, Tradition, thou hoary-headed liar. Hush! 
Be still and listen! All through the Christian ages 


14 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


—from dark and noisome dungeons, from the lone 
wanderings of banishment and expatriation, from 
the roarings and sickening conflagrations of martyr 
fires—there comes a voice—shouted here, whispered 
there, sighed, sobbed, or gasped elsewhere—a Bap- 
tist voice, clearer than a silver trumpet and sweeter 
than the chime of bells, a voice that freights and 
glorifies the breeze or gale that bears it. O Earth, 
hearken to it: The New Testament is the law of 
Christianity! Let the disciples of Zoroaster, 
Brahma, Confucius, Zeno and Epicurus hear it. 
And when Mahomet comes with his Koran, or Joe 
Smith with his book of Mormon, or Swedenborg 
with his new revelations, or spirit-rappers, wizards, 
witches and necromancers with their impostures, 
confront each in turn with the all-sufficient revela- 
tion of this book, and when science—falsely so 
called (properly speculative philosophy )—would 
hold up the book as moribund, effete or obsolete, 
may that Baptist voice rebuke it. Christ himself 
set up his kingdom. Christ himself established his 
church. Christ himself gave us Christian law. 
And the men whom he inspired furnish us the 
only reliable record of these institutions. They had 
no successors in inspiration. The record is com- 
plete. Prophecy and vision have ceased. The 
canon of revelation and the period of legislation 
are closed. Let no man dare to add to it or take 
from it, or dilute it, or substitute for it. It is 
written. It is finished. 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 15 


II. INDIVIDUALITY 


This New Testament law of Christianity segre- 
gates the individual from his own family, from 
society with all its customs and requirements, from 
race and nationality, from caste, however exclusive, 
from all governmental control or intimidations, 
from all the bonds of friendship, though dear as 
the tie between David and Jonathan or Damon and 
Pythias, then isolates him from every external in- 
fluence, strips him of every artificial distinction aris- 
ing from wealth or poverty or social status, and 
then shuts him up in an exclusive circle alone with 
God, who is no respecter of persons, and there 
demands of his naked and solitary personality a 
voluntary surrender of his will to God’s will and 
an immediate response of obedience to all its de- 
mands. There are no sponsors, or proxies. En- 
‘forced or insincere obedience counts nothing at all. 
The sole responsibility of decision and action rests 
directly on the individual soul. Each one must give 
account of himself to God. This is the first prin- 
ciple of New Testament law—to bring each naked 
soul face to face with God. When that first Bap- 
tist voice broke the silence of four hundred years 
it startled the world with its appeal to individuality : 
“Think not to say within yourselves, we have 
Abraham to our father. Behold, the axe is laid at 
the root of the trees, and every tree that bringeth 
not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into 


16 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


the fire.’ Do thou repent. Do thou confess thy 
sins. Do thou be baptized. It was the first step 
of Christianity, and what a colossal stride! Family 
ties count nothing. Greek culture nothing. Roman 
citizenship nothing. Circumcision nothing. O soul, 
thou art alone before God! The multitude shall 
not swallow thee up. “If thou shalt be wise, 
thou shalt be wise for thyself; but if thou scornest, 
thou alone shalt bear it.” Family relationship in- 
truded upon our Lord’s busiest hour. “* Behold, 
thy mother and thy brothers seek thee.” Once be- 
fore he had said: “ Woman, what have I to do with 
thee?” and now like a flash of lightning comes his 
scathing reply: “ Who is my mother, and who are 
my brothers? Whosoever doeth the will of my 
heavenly Father, the same is my mother, my 
brother, my sister.” 

Another time it intruded upon him to call forth 
his crucial statement: “If any man hate not his 
father and mother and brother and sister he cannot 
be my disciple.” 

In his dying hour, on the way to the cross, he 
heard its voice once more: “ Blessed is the womb 
that bare thee and the paps which gave thee suck,”’ 
and once more he replied. “ Yea, rather blessed is 
she that doeth the will of God.” Superiority for 
the twelve over Paul was claimed because they had 
known the Lord in the flesh. But Paul rejoimed: 
“Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the 
flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES: 17 


flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no 
more.” 
How often in history has the question been pro- 
pounded by some wishing to shun personal respon- 
sibility! May I not refer this matter to the magis- 
trates? May I not consult the customs of my coun- 
try? May I not seek the guidance of my priest and 
put on him the responsibility of interpreting this 
book? Nay, verily. Do thou interpret. It is 
God’s letter to thy soul. Thy right of private 
judgment is the crown jewel of thy humanity. 
Sometimes even Baptists falter on this point. I 
have heard one of them excuse himself from an 
acknowledged duty of co-operation in missions, be- 
cause his church was opposed to the mission work. 
Not even thy church can absolve thee from indi- 
vidual duty. Churches are time organizations and 
are punished in time. They do not stand before the 
great white throne of judgment. But thy soul shall 
appear before the Judge. Well did our Lord know 
that there could be no evangelization of the world 
if ancestors, families, customs, government, com- 
merce and priests could stand between the indi- 
-vidual soul and God. Thy relation to God is para- 
mount. His law takes precedence of all and swal- 
lows up all. In giving emphasis to this doctrine 
of individuality our Baptist fathers have suffered 
martyrdom at the hands of the heathen, the Roman- 
ist, the Greek, and the Protestant alike. 


s 


18 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


III. FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE 


This follows from individual responsibility. If 
one be responsible for himself, there must be no re- 
straint or constraint of his conscience. Neither par- 
ent, nor government, nor church, may usurp the pre- 
rogative of God as Lord of the conscience. God 
himself does not coerce the will. His people are 
volunteers, not conscripts. As has been stated, the 
prevalent theory in the days of the Reformation 
was: “Whose is the government—his is the reli- 
gion.” Louis XIV. revoked the Edict of Nantes, 
signed by his grandfather, the great Henry of Na- 
varre. Calvin burned Servetus at the stake. Luther 
loosed all the hounds of persecution upon the Bap- 
tists in his day. Holland, the little republic that tore 
her lowlands from the ocean flood, and for eighty 

years, by pike and dike, repelled the Spaniard with 

his Inquisition, did herself destroy her greatest 
statesman, John of Barneveldt, and banish her | 
great historian Grotius for conscience’ sake. Henry 
VIII, in England, and his successors, delighted 
to persecute for conscience’ sake. John Knox, of 
Scotland, so tarnished his great name. The Con- 
gregationalists of New England and the Episco- 
palians of Virginia alike denied freedom of con- 
science to their fellowmen. There was not a gov- 
ernment in the world that allowed full liberty of 
conscience to all men until a Baptist established 
the colony of Rhode Island. - 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 19 


At a great dining in England John Bright asked 
a Baptist statesman beside him: “ What special con- 
tribution have your people made to the world?” 
“ Civil and religious liberty,” replied the statesman. 
“A great contribution,” replied John Bright. Ban- 
croft, in his history of America, declares: ‘“ Free- 
dom of conscience, unlimited freedom of mind, was 
from the first the trophy of the Baptists.” On 
November 5, 1658, these Baptists thus instructed 
their agent in England: “ Plead our case in such 
sort as we may not be compelled to exercise any 
civil power over men’s consciences; we do judge 
it no less than a point of absolute cruelty.” In 
their petition to Charles I]. they thus urged: “It 
is much in our hearts to hold forth a lively experi- 
ment, that a most flourishing civil state may stand, 
and best be maintained, with a full liberty of re- 
ligious concernments.” And so when their charter 
came it provided: “ No person within the said col- 
ony, at any time hereafter, shall be in any wise 
molested, punished, disquieted or called in ques- 
tion, for any difference in opinion in matters of 
religion; every person may at all times freely and 
fully enjoy his own judgment and conscience in 
matters of religious concernment.” And the char- 
ter of their great school, now Brown University, 
has a clause of equal import, a thing unknown at 
that time in the chartered schools of the whole 
world. 

Freedom of conscience in our day, especially in 


20° BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


this country, is a familiar thing. It was not so in 
earlier days. Pagan, Papist and Protestant ground 
liberty of conscience into powder under the iron 
heel of their despotisms. 


IV. SALVATION IS ESSENTIAL TO BAPTISM AND 
CHURCH MEMBERSHIP 


Here, if nowhere else, Baptists stand absolutely 
alone. The foot of no other denomination in Chris- 
tendom rests on this plank. Blood before water— 
the altar before the laver. This principle eliminates 
not only all infant baptism and membership, but 
locates the adult’s remission of sins in the fountain 
of blood instead of the fountain of water. When 
the author of the letter to the Hebrews declares: 
“It is not possible that the blood of bulls and 
goats should take away sins,’ he bases the impos- 
sibility on the lack of intrinsic merit. Following 
the precise idea Baptists declare: “ It is not possible 
that the water of baptism should take away sins.” 
There is no intrinsic merit in the water. The blood 
of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, alone can cleanse us 
from sin. True, the water of baptism and the wine 
of the Lord’s Supper may symbolically take away 
sins, but not in fact. “ Arise and be baptized and 
wash away thy sins.” “ This is my blood of the 
new testament, which is shed for many, for the 
remission of sins.’ Both declarations are beauti- 
ful and impressive figures of antecedent fact. 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 1 


A brother of another denomination once ob- 
jected: “You Baptists have no method of induc- 
tion into Christ. My people baptize a man into 
Christ.” The reply was two-fold: (1) It is not 
enough to get a man into Christ; you must also 
get Christ into him, as he says, “I in you and you 
in me.” If you insist that baptism really, and not 
figuratively, puts a man into Christ, how will you 
meet the Romanist on the other half of it, ‘‘ Eating 
the wafer of the Supper really puts Christ into the 
man. He eats the flesh of the real presence”? 
You must admit that the words are stronger for 
his induction than yours. 

(2) Baptists have a method of double induction: 
“We have access by faith into this grace wherein 
we stand.” Faith puts us into Christ. “It pleased 
God to reveal his Son in me.” “ Christ in you the 
hope of glory.” ‘Ye are manifestly declared to 
be an epistle of Christ, . . . written with the 
Spirit of the living God... in fleshly tables 
of the heart.” ‘God, who commanded the light 
to shine out of darkness, hath shined into our hearts, 
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory 
of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” Thus the 
Holy Spirit puts Christ in us. We get into him 
by faith. He gets into us by the Holy Spirit, thus 
fulfilling his words: “I in you and you in me.” 

This great, vital and fundamental Baptist prin- 
ciple, Salvation must precede ordinances, does, at 
one blow, smite and blast those two great enemies 


22 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


of religion, sacramentalism and sacerdotalism. [If 
ritualism saves, priests are a necessity. If my sal- 
vation is conditioned on the performance of a rite, 
then also it is conditioned on the act and will of a 
third party who administers the saving rite. The 
doctrine of salvation by rites is the hope of the 
priest who alone can administer the rite. This gives 
both importance and revenue to his office. He mul- 
tiplies the sacraments. “Two are too few. Let 
us have seven. The more, the better for us, and 
thus we will control our subjects not only from 
the cradle to the grave, but from conception in the 
womb to eternity.” 

Not only does our great principle destroy both 
sacramentalism and _ sacerdotalism, but it alone 
draws a line of cleavage between the church and 
the world. To perpetuate the baptism of the un- 
saved, whether infant or adult, tends to blot out 
from the earth the believer’s baptism which Christ 
appointed. It is a question of discipleship. John 
the Baptist made disciples before he baptized them. 
Jesus made disciples before he baptized them. 
(John 4:1.) John made disciples by leading them 
to repentance and faith. (Acts 19:4.) Jesus made 
disciples by repentance and faith. (Mark 1:15.) 
Jesus commanded: ‘Go ye therefore and disciple 
all nations, baptizing them (the discipled).’’ Draw 
a perpendicular line. On the right of it write the 
words, Believers in Christ, Lovers of ‘Christ. 
On the left of it write the words, Unbelievers in 


Dist (NET VE bAPTIS To PRINCIPLES — 23 


Christ, Haters of Christ. Now, from which side 
of that line will you take your candidates for bap- 
tism? Will you baptize the hating and the unbe- 
lieving? You dare not. If from the other side 
you take them, then already are they God’s chil- 
dren, for what saith the Scriptures: ‘“‘ Whosoever 
believeth has been born of God. Whosoever loveth 
is born of God.” 

Baptists do not bury the living sinner to kill him 
to sin. But they bury those already dead to sin. 
For devotion to this principle you may trace our 
people back by their track of blood, illumined by 
their fires of martyrdom. 


V<_THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH 


The church is not the expression of one idea, 
but of many. Only the most salient and distinctive 
ideas are here cited: 

(1) The church is a spiritual body. None but 
the regenerate should belong to it. It is not a 
savior, but the home of the saved. I once heard a 
preacher say: “Join the church if you have no 
more religion than a horse. Join the church to get 
religion.” When my own soul was concerned about 
salvation, a preacher urged me to partake of the 
Lord’s Supper in order that I might be converted 
thereby. 

(2) Separation of church and state. 

The state, a secular body for secular ends, can 


24 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


never be united to the church, a spiritual body for 
spiritual ends, without irreparable injury to both. 
United with the state, the church can never obey 
Christ: “‘ Be ye not unequally yoked with unbe- 
lievers. What part hath he that believeth with an 
infidel? Come out from among them and be ye 
separate.’ There cannot be union of church and 
state without persecution for conscience’ sake. 
There cannot be a pure and converted ministry 
when politicians appoint the preachers. There can- 
not be free speech by the church against national 
sins when the state holds the purse. See the awful 
consequences of Luther’s mistake on this point in 
Germany. There, to-day, the owner of all licensed 
sins, gambling houses, race tracks, saloons, houses 
of prostitution, must exhibit certificate of church 
membership. The blackest pages of American his- 
tory are those which record the evils of the 
union of church and state in Massachusetts, Con- 
necticut and Virginia. And in every one of them 
Baptists were persecuted unto blood, stripes, im- 
prisonment and confiscation of property. Massa- 
chusetts whipped Obadiah Holmes, imprisoned 
Clark and banished Roger Williams. At Ashfield, 
in Connecticut, our Baptist fathers had the choicest 
parts of their farms and gardens sold under the 
sheriff’s hammer to raise a fund for building a 
house of worship for another denomination and for 
the support of its preacher, who had virtually no 
congregation in that community. In Virginia, 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES: ‘25 


Craig, Lunsford, Waller and others were impris- 
oned. The products of Baptist farms were seized 
to support a cock-fighting, horse-racing, hard-drink- 
ing Episcopal ministry. 

In England and on the continent of Europe time 
would fail to tell the story of their wrongs, scourg- 
ings, cruel mockings, imprisonment and_ bloody 
death at the hands of the state church. In every 
age of the world they have testified for a free 
church in a free state. From its spiritual nature 
the church cannot rightfully become a_ political 
factor. Its members, indeed, as individuals and 
citizens merely, may align themselves at will with 
political parties according to each several judg- 
ment. On this very account the politician does not 
court the Baptist church. But any general organi- 
zation called the church that becomes a mighty polit- 
ical factor, controlling the vote of its members 
through its clergy, they will court. They censure 
that church only with bated breath and in confiden- 
tial whispers. They laud it from the housetops 
and often make occasion for public eulogiums. 

(3) The church is a particular congregation and 
not an organized denomination. 

This idea of the church is fundamental and vital 
and yet least of all understood by the rest of the 
world—even the religious world. Here, therefore, 
I would make everything clear and plain. With 
Greeks, Romanists, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, 
Methodists and many others the church is an organ- 


26 .BAPTISTS-AND “THEIR DOCTKINES 


ized denomination having appellate jurisdiction over 
its particular congregations. In history, the church 
as an organized general body, or denomination, has 
assumed the following forms: 

(a) Papistical or autocratic. 

It starts with the idea of an earthly head. This 
autocrat must be the successor of some apostle, 
himself a primate. Inspiration must rest upon him. 
All Christendom must be under him. Commenc- 
ing with the union of church and state under Con- 
stantine, the idea reached its final development in 
the Vatican Council, A.D. 1870, which declared the 
Pope infallible. 

(b) Prelatical or episcopal. 

That is, the church is a general body, governed 
by the bishops, bishop now having lost its New 
Testament meaning. 

(c) Presbyterian. 

That is, the church is a general body or organ- 
ized denomination, governed by its presbyters, 
through synods and general assemblies. 

In all of these the particular congregation is under 
the appellate jurisdiction of the higher power, the 
General Assembly for the Presbyterians, the Gen- 
eral Conference for the Methodists, the Bishops 
for the Church of England, the Pope for the Ro- 
manists. It follows that all these general organiza- 
tions must have a graded series of courts, ending 
with a supreme court whose decisions bind all the 
denomination. And of course these higher courts 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST; PRINCIPLES 27 


provide for regular trials, with all necessary forms 
of law. And also, of course, the sessions of -these 
high courts must last quite a long time in order to 
attend to all these trials. With all of them the 
church is an organized denomination having appel- 
late and final jurisdiction over all particular con- 
gregations. 

Now, in opposition to all these, the Baptists hold 
that the New Testament church is a particular con- 
gregation and not an organized denomination. Ac- 
cording to the New Testament: “In Christ, each 
several building, fitly framed together, groweth into 
a holy temple in the Lord.” Each congregation is 
a complete temple in itself, and has final jurisdic- 
tion over all its affairs. This is the church, to 
which grievances must be told, and whose decision 
is final. (Matt. 18: 15-18.) The most forceful 
and popular objection urged against this idea of 
the church is that it will be powerless to secure 
unity of faith, uniformity of discipline, and co-op- 
eration in general work among the churches. This 
objection comes from the viewpoint of human 
reason. And we frankly admit that whatever the- 
ory of the church fails necessarily and generally 
to secure these great ends discounts itself in prob- 
ability as scriptural in favor of any other theory 
which does secure these great ends, simply because 
we cannot conceive of God’s wisdom failing. On 
this account, once in the Northern States of our 
Union, and more recently in the Southern States, 


28 -BAPTISTS AND “THEIR DOCTRINES 


there have been tendencies among Baptists which 
if they had been successful and followed to their 
logical consequences would have resulted in this 
idea of the church: 

(d) A federation, like the United States. In 
this the representative system prevails. Each state 
selects its representatives, delegates powers to them, 
projects its sovereignty into the general body, and 
there merges it into a supreme government for 
national affairs. These mistaken brethren, North 
and South, started out with the contention that a 
Baptist general body, whether district association, 
state convention or national convention, must be 
composed of churches alone, represented by dele- 
gates having delegated powers. But a Baptist 
church cannot project or merge its sovereignty into 
a general body of any kind, nor delegate its powers. 
There is not and cannot be a Baptist federal body. 

Read again Dr. Wayland’s great book, ‘“ The 
Principles and Practices of the Baptists,’ and there 
see how the unscriptural idea perished before the 
wisdom of the brethren. As the good doctor says, 
“we now wonder that anybody ever supposed that 
there could be a representative Baptist general 
body.” In like manner, in the South, all attempts. 
to reduce our Southern Baptist Convention or state 
bodies to this basis have failed for similar good 
reasons. Our general bodies are purely voluntary, 
and composed of individuals, not churches. They 
are solely for counsel and co-operation. They can- 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES: (29 


not have trials, seeing they possess no ecclesiastical 
powers. Their sessions have no time for trials, last- 
ing only three or four days. In considering the 
one question of eligibility for membership in the 
body they must necessarily act in a summary way 
on account of time. Their declining to seat any 
man in no way affects his ecclesiastical status. To 
ask for regular trial before a Baptist general body, 
or to claim all the legal forms of procedure in 
regular courts, whether ecclesiastical or civil, is an 
absurdity on its face and betrays ignorance of fun- 
damental Baptist principles. 

It is just upon this point the world, with. its 
graded courts, and other denominations, with their 
graded courts and regular forms of trial, fail to 
understand Baptist principles. They look upon any 
decision of our general bodies touching membership 
as similar to the decision of their courts and marvel 
at our lack of regular forms of trial. The average 
man thinks of the Methodist Conference and of the 
Presbyterian Assemblies or of the courts of the 
country, in deciding upon the merits of a decision 
on membership by a Baptist general body, and won- 
ders why we do not observe the usual forms of 
regular courts. They fail to see that a Baptist 
general body, unlike a Methodist Conference or 
Presbyterian Assembly, is not and cannot be a court, 
because with Baptists the church is a particular 
congregation and not an organized denomination. 
The particular church is a court and does have its 


30 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


regular forms of trial. No Baptist general body 
could complete one trial, according to forms of 
law, in ten years, considering the time at its dis- 
posal and the multitude and magnitude of legitimate 
work that must be considered in its short sessions. 

The supreme question then arises, can we with 
our ideas of the church secure unity of the faith 
guard against hurtful schisms, bring about substan. 
tial uniformity of discipline, and, above all, secure 
co-operation in the great departments of work be- 
yond the ability of a single church, namely, mis- 
sions, education, religious literature and philan- 
thropy? 

It is simply stated as an historical fact, without 
argument here, that Baptists come nearer to uni- 
formity of faith and discipline and have fewer 
hurtful schisms than the denominations which seek 
to secure these results by their iron general or- 
ganizations. With history before us we are willing 
to compare results. As to the success of co-opera- 
tion by our simple methods, we may here in Texas 
point to a demonstration. Since our session in San 
Antonio in 1897, which eliminated non-codperation 
and obstruction, this State Convention has raised 
more than a million dollars in cash for education, 
missions, orphanage, church building and other de- 
partments of work. We can find no building that 
will hold our Convention when assembled. Spirit- 
ual power, mighty faith, melting prayer and mar- 
‘velous unanimity characterize our assemblies. 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES. — 31 


While the world stands this demonstration will 
avail for justification of our theory of the church. 

(4) The church is a pure democracy. 

Indeed, it is the only one in the world. There 
is no disbarment of franchise on account of race, 
education, wealth, age or sex. In Christ Jesus there 
is neither Jew nor Greek, barbarian, bond or free, 
man or woman or child. All its members are equal 
fellow-citizens, and the majority decides. It is of 
the people, for the people, by the people. This 
democracy receives and dismisses its members, 
chooses or deposes its own officers, and manages 
its own affairs. 

(5) lt is the supreme court in Christ's kingdom. 

All cases of discipline come before it, and its 
decisions are final and irreversible by any human 
power apart from itself. Of course, it is under 
law to Christ. It possesses judicial and executive 
but no legislative powers. Christ is the only law- 
maker and the New Testament is his law. Its 
judicial powers cover all cases of grievances and 
fellowship. It is Christ’s court. Our Lord fore- . 
saw the inadequacy of secular courts to adjudicate 
religious differences. The very atmosphere of sec- 
ular courts is adverse to the religious spirit. Our 
Lord himself was a victim before the courts of 
Pilate and Herod. He warned his people that, in 
every age, they would be dragged before these 
courts, and clearly foretold what they must expect 
at the bar of these tribunals. 


32 “BAPTISTS ANDTHE DOCTRINES 


One of the most impressive lessons of the New 
Testament is the recital of the trials of his ministers 
before them. Nearly every one of his apostles was 
put to a violent death by their decisions. Who has 
not thrilled at the story of Paul before the magis- 
trates at Philippi, before Gallio, Felix, Festus, 
Agrippa and Nero? Our Lord carefully provided 
for the settlement of religious differences before 
his own court. Hear the indignant protest of his 
apostle against the violators of his law in this re- 
spect: “ Dare any of you, having a matter against 
another, go to law before the unjust, and not be- 
fore the saints? Do ye not know that the saints 
shall judge the world? And if the world shall be 
judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the small- 
‘est matters? Know ye not that we shall judge 
angels? How much more things that pertain to 
this life! If then ye have judgment of things per- 
taining to this life, set them to judge who are at 
least esteemed in the church. I speak to your 
shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among 
your No, not one that shall be able to judge be- 
tween his brethren? But brother goeth to law 
with brother, and that before the unbelievers. Now 
therefore there is utterly a fault among you, be- 
cause ye go to law one with another. Why do ye 
not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather 
suffer yourselves to be defrauded?” 

(6) The officers of the church are bishops and 
deacons, the first charged with spiritualities and 


DiSTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES. 33 


the second with temporalities. The idea of a metro- 
politan bishop, having charge of all the churches 
of a great city, or of a diocesan bishop, having 
charge of a province, or state, is of post-apostolic 
origin and subversive of the scriptural idea of the 
bishop. 

(7) The ordinances of the church are but two, 
baptism and the Lord’s Supper, neither as a means 
of grace, but both purely figurative and commem- 
orative. The elements of validity in baptism are: 
(a) it must be by proper authority; (b) its subject 
is a penitent believer or saved person; (c) the act 
is immersion; (d) the design is a declaration or 
confession of faith, symbolizing the cleansing from 
sin and commemorative of the resurrection. The 
Supper is a festival observed by the church as a 
body, and commemorates the atoning death of our 
Lord and anticipates his second advent. Who may 
deny that this doctrine of the church is a distinctive 
principle of the Baptists? Allow me to sum up in 
one sentence the complex idea of the church: It 
is a spiritual body; it must be separated from the 
state; it is a particular congregation and not an 
organized denomination, whether Papistical, Epis- 
copal, Presbyterian or federal; it is a pure democ- 
racy; it is Christ’s executive and judiciary on earth; 
its officers are bishops and deacons; its ordinances 
are baptism and the Lord’s Supper. 

And now, brethren, allow me to put before you 
a mental diagram embodying the most of what has 


34 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


been said and which itself as a whole is distinctive 
of the Baptists. We will call it 


VI. GOD’S ORDER IN THE GOSPEL OF HIS SON 


Conceive of a circle; in it a man on his knees is 
reading the New Testament. Both the open book 
and the man’s heart are illumined by the shining 
of the Holy Spirit. Outside the circle are the 
man’s family, kindred and friends, society and the 
government. That illumined book is the law of 
Christianity. The man is individuality, isolated 
from home, family, kindred, society and govern- 
ment and shut in with God the Holy Spirit. His 
conscience is free to decide without embarrassment 
or hindrance from all external forces or influences. 
By the Spirit, through the book, his free conscience 
leads him to an opening in the circle which leads 
him to salvation. Conviction, changing of his mind, 
giving of faith on the Spirit’s part; the exercise of 
contrition, repentance and faith on the man’s part. 
These are the constituent elements of regeneration 
from both divine and human sides. The man is 
now justified—saved—a child of God. Here is 
Christian fellowship. 

Across the saved man’s path runs a river, called 
baptism. Up through its waters he comes to a door 
in another circle. This circle is the church, Christ’s 
executive and judiciary. In the center of this circle 
is the Lord’s table. Here is church fellowship and 
communion. This church is a single congregation, 


DISTINCTIVE BAPTIST PRINCIPLES 35 


a spiritual body, a pure democracy. Here is the 
elder or bishop, a simple pastor chosen by the 
church, and the deacons, who attend to temporal 
matters. Here is the church conference or court 
to which brethren bring their grievances for final 
settlement. Outside in the outlying world are the 
secular courts. All along the windings of that 
river of baptism and its tributaries are other church 
circles, each complete in itself, each with the Lord’s 
table, and the conference, and the bishop and the 
deacons. Comity prevails among these churches. 
There is one law, one Lord, one baptism. A brother 
in one church, aggrieved against a brother in an- 
other church, must carry his case to the church of 
the offending brother. There is no way to arraign 
the offending brother before the world’s courts 
without breaking down God’s barriers of law and 
putting religion to open shame. Out here in ter- 
ritory filled with churches is a convention, state or 
national. It is a purely co-operative and advisory 
body. It is composed of individuals, not churches. 
It is a method, without an iron organization which 
would swallow up the churches, to elicit, combine 
and direct the energies and resources of the willing- 
hearted in all the churches in order to push great 
movements of evangelization, establish Christian 
schools, eleemosynary institutions and devise agen- 
cies and means for filling the world with Christian 
literature, all these mighty enterprises lying beyond 
the power of a single church. 


36 BAPTISTS AND-THEIR DOCTRINES : 


- One successful.demonstration that all these great. 

things can be done by a simple and harmless agency 
of voluntary .co-operation of individuals refutes 
forever the idea of the church as an organized de- 
nomination.or general body. There is no necessity 
for it. There is tyranny in it. There is the sub- 
version of Christ’s church in it. There is hierarchy 
in it... My heart-exults! My soul leaps for joy 
that this. Convention has furnished proof beyond 
all successful contradiction that there is no necessity 
for a hierarchy in order to promote harmony, secure 
unity of faith and discipline, and to obtain co- 
operation broad enough and strong enough to do 
anything God’s people ought to do. That demon- 
stration lifts itself up like a granite mountain. 
Transient clouds of angry criticism hang around 
- its outskirts and splinter their petty lightnings on 
its adamantine sides. Foul aspersion and misrepre- 
sentation may spatter their mud and slime around 
its base. In the caves of its foothills a few skulking 
wolves of prejudice may make their dens and render 
night hideous by their howlings. But the mountain 
itself stands immovable and serene. No mists 
gather about its summit, far above the range and 
rage of storms. By night the stars silver its crest 
and by day its halo of sunlight is like the smile of 
God. This is God’s order in the gospel of his 
Son, and the order is itself a distinctive Baptist 
principle. 


II 
ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 


ATT. 16:18, 19 has been for many cen- 
turies a battleground of theological contro- 
versies. Though millions of the disputants 

have passed away, the questions which arrayed 
them against each other still survive to align their 
successors in hostile array. 
The most important of these divisive questions 
are: 
. What is the church? 
. Who established it, and when? 
. What the foundation? 
What the “ gates of hell”? 
What the “keys”? 
. What the “ adiae and loosing ’’? : 
ic replying to these questions it should constantly 
be borne in mind that all the intelligence, piety, 
sincerity and scholarship of the world are not 
_ monopolized by any one age, nor by any one de- 
nomination. Still less does infallibility of inter- 
pretation belong to any one party of conflicting 
views within a single denomination. And yet still 
less may any one man assume that wisdom on this 
subject will die with him. It becomes: a_ single 
teacher, therefore, to be modest, and while he may 
37 


SAA aii ee 


38 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


not from the nature of the case avoid dogmatism, 
let him at least shun offensive dogmatism and be 
duly considerate of the feelings of others. 

Of one thing you may be assured, that these 
questions cannot be satisfactorily answered by any 
human ipse dixit. Nor is there the slightest hope 
of solution in appeals to human creeds and his- 
tories. These are as variant and conflicting as 
their composers and all are without a shred of 
authority. . 

Let it be enough for us to seek a solution satis- 
factory to our own minds in the study for our- 
selves of the Bible alone. 

You will understand, therefore, that the conclu- 
sions herein set forth, though reached by careful, 
prayerful and honest study of the one book alone, 
are worth no more than their intrinsic merit may 
warrant, and that having already given you a list 
of all the New Testament uses of the word, you 
are left entirely free to test every conclusion for 
yourselves, by the given usage, and then to accept, 
modify or reject it, as your own judgment and 
conscience may direct. 

In this lecture there will be time for answer to 
the first question only: 


WHAT IS THE CHURCH ? 


From the given list of passages, taken from the 
Englishman’s Greek Concordance, and which you 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 39 


may verify by reference to the Bible, it appears 
that the word ecclesia, usually rendered “ church” 
in our version, occurs 117 times in the Greek New 
Testament (omitting Acts 2:47 as not in the best 
texts). 

Our Lord and the New Testament writers neither 
coined this word nor employed it in any unusual 
sense. Before their time it was in common use, of 
well-understood signification, and subject like any 
other word to varied employment, according to the 
established laws of language. That is, it might be 
used abstractly, or generically, or particularly, or 
prospectively, without losing its essential meaning. 

To simplify and shorten the work before us, we 
need not leave the New Testament to find examples 
of its classic or Septuagint use. Fair examples of 
both are in the list of New Testament passages 
given you. 

What, then, etymologically, is the meaning of 
this word? 

Its primary meaning is: An organized assembly, 
whose members have been properly called out from 
private homes or business to attend to public affairs. 
This definition necessarily implies prescribed con- 
ditions of membership. 

This meaning, substantially, applies alike to the 
ecclesia of a self-governing Greek state (Acts 19: 
39). the Old Testament ecclesia or convocation of 
National Israel (Acts 7: 38) and to the New Testa- 
ment ecclesia. 


40 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


When, in this lesson, our Lord says: “On this 
rock I will build my ecclesia,” while the “my ”’ dis- 
tinguished his ecclesia from the Greek state ecclesia 
and the Old Testament ecclesia, the word itself 
naturally retains its ordinary meaning. 

Indeed, even when by accommodation it is ap- 
plied to an irregular gathering (Acts 19:32, 41) 
the essential idea of assembly remains. 

Of the 117 instances of use in the New Testa- 
ment certainly all but five (Acts 7: 38; 19: 32, 39, 
42; Heb. 2:12) refer to Christ’s ecclesia. And 
since Hebrews 2: 12, though a quotation from the 
Old Testament, is prophetic, finding fulfillment in 
New Testament times, we need not regard it as 
an exception. These 113 uses of the word, in- 
cluding Hebrews 2:12, refer either to the partic- 
ular assembly of Jesus Christ on earth, or to his 
general assembly in glory. 

Commonly, that is in nearly all the uses, it means: 
The particular assembly of Christ’s baptized dis- 
ciples on earth, as “ The church of God which is 
at Corinth.” 

To this class necessarily belong all abstract or 
generic uses of the word, for whenever the ab- 
stract or generic finds concrete expression, or takes 
operative shape, it is always a particular assembly. 

This follows from the laws of language govern- 
ing the use of words. 

_ For example, if an English statesman, referring 
to the right of each individual citizen to be tried 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 41 


by his peers, should say: “On this rock England 
will build her jury and all the power of tyrants 
shall not prevail against it,’ he uses the term jury 
in an abstract sense, 1.e., in the sense of an institu- 
tion. But when this institution finds concrete ex- 
pression, or becomes operative, it is always a par- 
ticular jury of twelve men, and never an aggrega- 
tion of all juries into one big jury. 

Or if a law writer should say: “In trials of 
fact, by oral testimony, the court shall be the judge 
of the law, and the jury shall be the judge of the 
facts,” and if he should add: “In giving evidence, 
the witness shall tell what he knows to the jury, 
and not to the court,” he evidently uses the terms 
“court,” “ jury” and “ witness’ in a generic sense. 
But in the application the generic always becomes 
particular—i.e., a particular judge, a particular jury 
or a particular witness, and never an aggregate 
of all judges into one big judge, nor of all juries 
into one big jury, nor of all witnesses into one big 
witness. Hence we say that the laws of language 
require that all abstract and generic uses of the 
word ecclesia should be classified with the particular 
assembly and not with the general assembly. 

As examples of the abstract use of ecclesia, that 
is in the sense of an institution, we cite Matt. 16: 
EO sta PLO 25: 

Matt. 18:17 is an example of generic use. That 
is, it designates the kind (genus) of tribunal to 
which difficulties must be referred without restric- 


42- BAPTISTS AND: THEIR DOCTRINES 


tion of application to any one particular church 
by name. I mean that while its application must 
always be to a particular church, yet it is not re- 
stricted to just one, as the church at Jerusalem, but 
is equally applicable to every other particular 
church. 

As when Paul says: “ The husband is the head 
of the wife,” the terms “ husband” and “ wife”’ 
are not to be restricted in application to John Jones 
and his wife, but apply equally to every other spe- 
cific husband and wife. 

But while nearly all of the 113 instances of the 
use of ecclesia belong to the particular class, there 
are some instances, as Heb. 12: 23 and Eph. 5: 25- 
27, where the reference seems to be to the general 
assembly of Christ. But in every such case the 
ecclesia is prospective, not actual. That is to say, 
there is not now but there will be a general assembly 
of Christ’s people. That general assembly will be 
composed of all the redeemed of all time. 

Here are three indisputable and very significant 
facts concerning Christ’s general assembly : 

(1) Many of its members, properly called out, 
are now in heaven. . 

(2) Many others of them, also called out, are 
here on earth. - 

(3) Indefinite millions of them, probably the 
great majority, yet to be called, are neither on 
earth nor in heaven, because they are yet unborn, 
and therefore non-existent. 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 43 


It follows that if one part of the membership is 
now in heaven, another part on earth, another part 
not yet born, there is as yet no assembly, except in 
prospect. 

And if a part, probably the majority, are as yet 
non-existent, how can one say the general assem- 
bly exists now? 

We may, however, properly speak of the gen- 
eral assembly now, because, though part of it is 
yet non-existent, and though there has not yet been 
a gathering together of the other two parts, the 
mind may conceive of that gathering as an accom- 
plished fact. 

In God’s purposes and plans, the general assem- 
bly exists now, and also in our conceptions or an- 
ticipations, but certainly not as a fact. The details 
of God’s purpose are now being worked out, and 
the process will continue until all the elect have 
been called, justified, glorified and assembled. 

Commenting on our lesson, Dr. Broadus says: 

“In the New Testament the spiritual Israel, never 
actually assembled, is sometimes conceived of as 
an ideal congregation or assembly, and this is de- 
noted by the word ecclesia.” Here Dr. B. does not 
contrast “ spiritual Israel’ with a particular church 
of Christ, but with national or carnal Israel. 

The object of the gospel, committed to the par- 
ticular assembly in time, is to call out or summon 
those who shall compose the general assembly in 
eternity. 


44 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


When the calling out is ended, and all the called 
are glorified, then the present concept of a general 
assembly will be a fact. Then and only then, 
actually, will all the redeemed be an ecclesia. More- 
over, this ecclesia in glory will be the real body, 
temple, flock or bride of our Lord. 

But the only existing representation or type of 
the ecclesia in glory (i.e., the general assembly ) 
is the particular assembly on earth. 

And because each and every particular assembly 
is the representation, or type, of the general as- 
sembly, to each and every one of them are applied 
all the broad figures which pertain to the general 
assembly. That is, such figures as “the house of 
God,” “the temple of the Lord,” “the body,’ or 
“flock” or “bride of Christ.” The New Testa- 
ment applies these figures just as freely and fre- 
quently to the particular assembly as to the gen- 
eral assembly. That is, to any one particular as- 
sembly, by itself alone, but never to all the partic- 
ular assemblies collectively. 

There is no unity, no organization, nor gathering 
together and, hence, no ecclesia or assembly of par- 
ticular congregations collectively. So also the 
term ecclesia cannot be rationally applied to all de- 
nominations collectively, nor to all living professors 
of religion, nor to all living believers collectively. 
In no sense are any such unassembled aggregates 
an ecclesia. None of them constitutes the flock, 
bride, temple, body or house of God, either as a 


= * ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 45. 


type of time or a reality of eternity. These terms 
belong exclusively either to the particular assembly 
now or the general assembly hereafter. 

A man once said to. me, How dare you apply 
such broad terms as “ The house of God,” “The 
body of Christ,” “ The temple of the Lord,” to your 
little fragment of a denomination? My reply was, I 
do not apply them to any denomination, nor to any 
aggregate of the particular congregations of any or 
of all denominations, but the Scriptures do apply 
every one of them to a particular New Testament 
congregation of Christ’s disciples. 

Hear the Word of God: 

In the letter to the Ephesians, Paul says: “In 
whom each several building, fitly framed together, 
groweth into a holy temple in the Lord; in whom 
ye also are builded together for a habitation of 
God in the Spirit.” (Eph. 2:21, 22, R. V.) 

Here are two distinct affirmations: 

First—Each several building or particular as- 
‘sembly groweth into a holy temple of the Lord. 
That is, by itself it is a temple of the Lord. 

Second—What is true of each is true of. the 
church at Ephesus, “In whom ye also are builded 
together for a habitation of God through the 
Spirit.” 

Just before this he had written of the church as 
an institution, or abstractly, in which Jew and Gen- 
tile are made into one. But the abstract becomes 
concrete in each several building. 


46 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


To the elders of this same particular church at 
Ephesus he said: “‘ Take heed to yourselves, and to 
all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit hath made 
you bishops, to feed the church of the Lord which 
he purchased with his own blood.” (Acts 20: 28.) 

This flock, this church of the Lord, purchased by 
his own blood, is a particular assembly. 

Again to the particular church at Corinth Paul 
wrote: “ Ye are God’s building—ye are a temple 
of God and the Spirit dwelleth in you—now ye are 
the body of Christ, and severally members thereof.” 
CieCorn 3 <7, 10s kaa A) 

When concerning the body of Christ he says: 
“ And whether one member suffereth all the mem- 
bers suffer with it,” he is certainly not speaking of 
the ecclesia in glory, all of whose members will be 
past sufferings when constituting an ecclesia. 

Again concerning the particular church at Ephe- 
sus, he writes to Timothy, whom he had left in 
that city: “ These things write I unto thee, hoping 
to come unto thee shortly; but if I tarry long, that 
thou mayest know, how men ought to behave them- 
selves in the house of God, which is the church of 
the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.” 
He is certainly not writing of behavior in the gen- 
eral assembly in glory. The things he had written 
touching behavior were, when and how the men 
should pray, how the women should dress and work, 
and the qualifications of bishops and deacons. Even 
that remarkable passage, so often and so confi- 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 47 


dently quoted as referring exclusively to some sup- 
posed now-existing “ universal, invisible, spiritual 
church,” namely: Eph. 1:22, 23, “ And gave him 
to be head over all things to the church, which is 
his body, the fullness of him that filleth all in all ”»— 
even this very body, “ filled unto all the fullness of 
God,” is presently applied, in his prayer, to the par- 
ticular congregation. (Eph. 3: 19.) 

But it may be asked how could Paul pray that 
a particular congregation might be filled unto all 
the fullness of God? The reply is obvious. Each 
particular assembly is an habitation of God through 
the Spirit. The Spirit occupies each several build- 
ing. Into each he enters not with partial power, 
but in all the fullness of Omnipotent power. 

But though the fullness is there, the church is so 
dim-eyed—so weak in faith—so feeble in graces— 
it does not realize and lay hold of and appropriate 
this fullness of God. Hence the prayer that the 
eyes of their understanding might be open to see 
the fullness, their faith increased to grasp and ap- 
propriate it, their graces enlarged to corresponding 
strength to stand and work in that fullness. So 
fulfilled they realize in experience the fact that the 
Holy Spirit in all the fullness of God had already 
entered this particular body of Christ, and was 
only waiting to be recognized. It is like the ex- 
pression, “ Being justified by faith, let us have peace 
with God,” etc. (Rom. 5:1.) That is, we are en- 
titled to it, let us take it. 


48 BAPTISTS AND -THEIR: DOCTRINES 


In a great revival of religion we see Paul’s prayer 
fulfilled in the particular body of Christ. Gradu- 
ally the church warms up to a realization of the full- 
ness of God dwelling in them through the Spirit. 
Their spiritual apprehension becomes eagle-eyed. 
The grasp of their faith becomes the grip of a giant. 
Presently they say, we “can do all things.” No 
barrier is now insurmountable. And as more and 
more they comprehend the height and depth and 
width and length of the love of God, they glow 
like a spiritual furnace. Thus it is proven that 
all these broad terms appertaining to the future 
general assembly are equally applied to the present 
particular assembly, and that, too, because it is the 
only existing representation of the prospective gen- 
eral assembly. 

This leads to another conclusion: All teaching in 
the direction that there now exists a general assem- 
bly which is invisible, without ordinances, and which 
is entered by faith alone, will likely tend to dis- 
credit the particular assembly, which does now 
really exist and which is the pillar and ground of 
the truth. 

More than once when I have inquired of a man, 
are you a member of the church? the reply has been, 
I am a member of the invisible, universal, spiritual 
church. 

To make faith the exclusive term of admission 
into the general assembly is more than questionable 
and naturally generates such replies. 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 49 


The general assembly, by all accounts, includes 
all the saved. But infants, dying in infancy, are a 
part of the saved. Yet never having been subjects 
of gospel address they are saved without faith. But 
it may be said that such use of the term faith is only 
a way of saying “a new heart,” and dying infants 
are not without regeneration. To which we may 
rejoin that regeneration alone is not sufficient to 
qualify for membership in the general assembly. 
All the regenerates we know have spots and 
wrinkles, while the Bride, the general assembly, is 
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. 

Nor does complete sanctification of soul go far 
enough. There must also be glorification of body. 
Enoch, Elijah and probably those who rose from 
the dead after Christ’s resurrection are the only ones 
as yet qualified for membership in the general as- 
sembly. And they must wait until all whom God 
has called and will yet call have arrived with like 
qualifications, before there can be a general assem- 
bly in fact. 

As has been intimated, all organized assemblies 
have prescribed terms or conditions of membership. 
In the Greek state ecclesia membership was limited 
to a well-defined body of citizens. Not all.residents 
of the territory could participate in the business of 
the ecclesia. So with the Old Testament ecclesia 
or national convocation of carnal [srael. One must 
have the required lineal descent and be circumcised 
or become a proselyte and be circumcised. Corre- 


50 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


spondingly the conditions of membership in the 
church on earth are regeneration and baptism. 

But for the church in glory the conditions of 
membership are justification, regeneration and sanc- 
tification of soul and glorification of body. 

We submit another conclusion: 

Some terms or descriptives commonly applied to 
the church by writers and speakers are not only 
extra-scriptural, that is, purely human and _ post- 
apostolic, but may be so used as to become either 
misleading or positively unscriptural. For example, 
to put visible, referring to the particular assembly 
alone, over against spiritual as referring to the 
general assembly alone, as if these terms were oppo- 
sites or incompatible with each other. 

The particular assembly or church that now is, 
is both visible and spiritual. 

To confess Christ before men, to let our light 
shine before men, to be baptized, to show forth the 
Lord’s death in the Supper, are both visible and 
spiritual acts of obedience. And when the general 
assembly becomes a reality instead of a prospect, 
it, too, will be both visible and spiritual. 

Speaking of the general assembly, John says: 
“TI saw the holy city, the New Jerusalem, coming 
down out of heaven from God, made ready as a 
bride adorned for her husband.” ; 

When the King came to the earth in his humilia- 
tion he was visible. And when he appears in glory 
every eye shall see him. 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 51 


A city set upon an earthly hill cannot be hid. 
And the New Jerusalem on Mt. Zion, the city of 
the living God, will be the most conspicuous and 
luminous object the universe ever saw. 

The confusion wrought by these human appella- 
tives is manifest in the growth of what is commonly 
miscalled “the Apostles’ creed.”” In its earliest his- 
toric forms it says: “I believe in the holy church.” 
Later forms say: “ I believe in the holy catholic, 7.e., 
universal church.” Still later: “in the holy cath- 
olic and apostolic church.” Still gathering incre- 
ment from other creeds it becomes: ‘“‘ The holy 
Roman catholic and apostolic church.” Then comes 
“visible vs. invisible,’ or “ visible, temporal, uni- 
versal vs. invisible, spiritual, universal,’ and so ad 
infinitum. But the Bible in its simplicity knows 
nothing of these scholastic refinements of distinc- 
tion. In that holy book the existing church is a 
particular congregation of Christ’s baptized dis- 
ciples, and the prospective church is the general 
assembly. But mark you: 

These are not co-existent. 

One cannot be a member of both at the same 
time. When the general assembly comes the par- 
ticular assembly will have passed away. 

To impress more deeply the scripturalness of 
these reflections, let us consider the subject from 
another viewpoint: 

A house is built for an inhabitant. Unless the 
tenant is hard pressed, he will not move in until 


52 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


the building is completed. God is never hard 
pressed. 

A long time may be consumed in getting out 
and gathering together and preparing the material 
of a house. It is not a house, however, except in 
purpose, plan or prospect, until it is completed and 
ready for its occupant. 

In this light let us take a look at some Bible 
houses: 

(a) The house that Moses built. 

This was the Tabernacle of the Wilderness, or 
tent for God. The 4oth chapter of Exodus tells 
of the completion of this house. When it was 
finished and all things ready for the occupant it 
became a house, and then the cloud, that symbol 
of divine glory, moved in and filled the tabernacle. 

(b) The house that Solomon built. 

The 6th, 7th and 8th chapters of 1 Kings tell 
us about this house. When it was finished and 
furnished and dedicated, it also being now a house, 
then the cloud symbol of divine presence and glory, 
that had inhabited the tabernacle, left the tent as 
no longer useful and moved into and filled the new 
house. 

(c) The house that Jesus built. 

The gospel histories tell us about it. John the 
Baptist prepared much material for it. Receiving 
this material from John, and adding much of his 
own preparation, Jesus built a house. That is, he 
instituted his ecclesia on earth. At his death the 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 53 


veil of Solomon’s restored house was rent in twain 
from top to bottom. Henceforward, it was tenant- 
less, and, being useless, soon perished. But though 
the new house was built, it was empty until our 
Lord ascended into heaven, and fulfilled his prom- 
ise to send the Holy Spirit as the indweller of 
this new habitation. Acts 2 tells us how this house 
was occupied. The useless temple of Solomon now 
passes away as the useless tabernacle of Moses. 
passed away for its successor. The only house of 
God now existing on earth is the particular ecclesia 
of our Lord. But it in turn must have a successor 
in the general assembly, or, 

(d) The house Jesus will build. 

The tabernacle, the temple and the church on 
earth are all forecasts of the coming church in 
glory. The work of gathering and preparing 
material for the general assembly has been in 
progress for six thousand years. But material, 
much of it yet in the quarry or forest and little 
of it fully prepared, does not constitute a house. 
God is not hard pressed. His patience is infinite. 
Millions and millions have already been called out 
to be members of this prospective assembly. God 
is calling yet and will continue to call throughout 
the gospel dispensation. His mind is fixed on hav- 
ing a general assembly indeed—a great congrega- 
tion—“ a great multitude that no man could num- 
ber, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and 
tongues, to stand before the throne, and before the 


54 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Lamb, clothed with white robes and with palms 
in their hands.”’ 

The time of the constitution of this assembly is 
at the second coming of Christ and after the resur- 
rection of the dead and the glorification of the 
bodies of Christians then living. The processes of 
constitution are clearly set forth in Matt. 25: 31- 
34; 1-Corei§ 951-5454 Lhéss,;4 + 13-17; Eph-5: 27; 
Rev. 21: 2-9. 

It has now indeed become a church—a glorious 
church, or church in glory—to be presented to him- 
self as a bride without spot, wrinkle, or any such 
thing. When he comes he will be glorified in his 
saints and admired in all them that believe. 

That ecclesia, like the one on earth, will be both 
visible and spiritual. “I will show thee the bride, 
the Lamb’s wife,” says the angel to John. 

Recurring to the figure of a house, Rev. 21 and 
22 exhibit it as at last completed and occupied. At 
last completed God himself inhabits it, for says the 
Scripture, ‘ Behold the tabernacle of God is with 
men, and he shall be with them, and they shall be 
his people, and God himself shall be with them and 
be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears 
from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, 
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be 
any more pain; for the former things are passed 
away.” Mark that, brethren, “The former things 
are passed away.” Former and latter things are 
not co-existent. The tabernacle of the wilderness 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 5s 


passes away for the more glorious temple of Sol- 
omon. The temple then passes away for the still 
more glorious church on earth. In like manner the 
church on earth must pass away for the infinitely 
glorious church in heaven. There is a Jerusalem 
on earth, but the heavenly Jerusalem is above. It 
is free, and the mother of all the saved. But, 
brother, the general assembly is not yet. The 
church on earth, the house that Jesus has already 
built, the house of the living God, which is the 
pillar and ground of the truth—ihis house has the 
right of way just now. It is the only existing 
assembly. Honor the house that now is. 

Quite naturally, if tabernacle and temple had 
been co-existent, one then living would have pre- 
ferred the temple and discredited the tent. 

Equally so if the particular assembly and gen- 
eral assembly are now co-existent, side by side on 
earth, could you seriously blame a man for resting 
content with membership in the greater and more 
honorable assembly ? 

But as the Scriptures represent these two assem- 
blies, one existing now on earth, the other pros- 
pective in heaven, if a man on earth and in time, 
not qualified by either sanctification of spirit or 
glorification of body for the heavenly assembly, 
shall despise membership in the particular assembly 
because claiming membership in the general assem- 
bly, is not his claim both an absurdity and a pre- 
text? Does he not hide behind it to evade honoring 


56 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


God’s existing institution, and the assuming of 
present responsibilities and the performing of pres- 
ent duties? Yet again, if one believes that there 
are co-existent on earth and in time, two churches, 
one only visible and formal, the other real, invisible 
and spiritual, is there not danger that such belief 
may tend to the conviction that the form, govern- 
ment, polity and ordinances of the inferior church 
are matters of little moment? Has not this belief 
oftentimes in history done this very thing? And 
is it not an historical fact that, since Protestant 
Pedobaptists invented this idea of a now-existing, 
invisible, universal, spiritual church, to offset the 
equally erroneous Romanist idea of a present visi- 
ble, universal church, reverence and honor for God’s 
New Testament particular church have been ground 
to fine powder between them as between the upper 
and nether millstones? To-day when one seeks to 
obtain due honor for the particular assembly, its 
ordinances, its duties, is he not in many cases 
thwarted in measure, or altogether in some cases, 
by objections arising from one or the other of 
these erroneous views? 

And when some, endeavoring to hedge against 
the manifest errors of both these ideas, have in- 
vented middle theories to the effect that the church 
on earth is composed either of all professing Chris- 
tians living at one time, considered collectively, or 
of all real Christians so living and so considered, 
or of all existing denominations considered as 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 57 


branches of which the church is the tree, have they 
not multiplied both the absurdities and the difficul- 
ties by their assumed liberality of compromise ? 

Finally, replying to some of your questions: 

1. When our Lord says, On this rock I will build 
my church and the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it, does he refer to the church on earth or 
to the church in glory? My answer is, to the par- 
ticular assembly on earth, considered as an institu- 
tion. The church in glory will never be in the 
slightest danger of the gates of hell. Before it 
becomes an assembly, both death and hell, gates 
and all, are cast into the lake of fire. (Rev. 20: 14 
and 21:4.) It is the church on earth that is in 
danger, from the fear of which this glorious prom- 
ise is a guaranty. 

2. Does your idea of “a general assembly ” 
depend exclusively upon that phrase of doubtful 
application in Hebrews 12:23, which many good 
scholars, including prominent Baptists, construe 
with “myriads of angels”’ instead of with “the 
church of the First Born”? Certainly not. 
Though I myself strongly hold with our English 
versions in referring both the panegyros (general 
assembly ) and the ecclesia (church) of that passage 
to saved men and not to angels. The idea of gen- 
eral assembly is clearly in other passages as 
Eph. 5: 25-27; Rev. 7:9 and 21: 24. 

3. If the figures, ‘ body ” and “ bride,’ apply to 
each particular church, does not that teach that 


58 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Christ has many bodies, many brides? My answer 
is, first, that your objection, or supposed difficulty, 
lies not against my view, but against the express 
teaching of many scriptures. What the Scriptures 
teach is true, and difficulties and objections may 
take care of themselves. But, second, the objection 
is specious and the difficulty only apparent, since 
each particular assembly is a representation or type 
of the general assembly, and therefore the broadest 
figures of the antitype may be applied to all its 
types without being obnoxious to the criticism. 
There may well be many representations of the 
body or bride of Christ. 

4. Do you dis-fellowship your Baptist brethren 
who teach the present existence of “an universal, 
invisible, spiritual church ”’? 

Most certainly not so long as they duly honor the 
particular assembly and its ordinances, as multi- 
tudes of them do, in spite of the natural tendency 
of their theory to discredit it. Many of them, 
known to me personally, are devoted to the particu- 
lar church and its ordinances, responsibilities and 
duties. I delight to honor, fellowship and love 
these men. We agree that all the redeemed will 
constitute the general assembly, and that then it 
will be the real body, bride, temple, flock and house 
of God. We differ as to the co-existence of the 
two assemblies. They say both now. I say the 
particular now and the general hereafter. 

It will take a wider divergence than this to make 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH 59 


me dis-fellowship a Baptist brother, though I hon- 
estly and strongly hold that even on this point his 
theory is erroneous and tends practically to great 
harm. Yes, I do most emphatically hold that this 
theory is responsible for incalculable dishonor put 
upon the church of God on earth. I repeat that 
the theory of the co-existence, side by side, on earth 
of two churches of Christ, one formal and visible, 
the other real, invisible and spiritual, with different 
terms of membership, is exceedingly mischievous 
and is so confusing that every believer of it becomes 
muddled in running the lines of separation. Do let 
it sink deep in your minds that the tabernacle of 
Moses had the exclusive right of way in its allotted 
time and the temple of Solomon had the exclusive 
right of way in its allotted time—so the church of 
Christ on earth, the particular assembly, now has 
the exclusive right of way, and is without a rival 
on earth or in heaven—and so the general assembly 
in glory, when its allotted time arrives, will have 
exclusive right of way. 

Had I lived in the days of Moses I would have 
given undivided honor to the tabernacle—in the 
days of Solomon to the Temple alone—and when 
the general assembly comes, that shall be mv de- 
light. But living now I must honor the house that 
Jesus built. It is the house of the living God, the 
pillar and ground of the truth. To it are committed 
the oracles and promises of God. To it is given 
the great commission. It is the instructor of angels 


60 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


and in it throughout all the ages of time is the glory 
of God. If I move out of this house, I must remain 
houseless until Jesus comes. It is the only church 
you can join in time. 

5. What is the distinction, if any, between the 
kingdom and the church? 

My answer is that the kingdom and church on 
earth are not co-terminous. Kingdom, besides ex- 
pressing a different idea, is much broader in sig- 
nification than a particular assembly or than all the 
particular assemblies. The particular church is that 
executive institution or business body, within the 
kingdom, charged with official duties and responsi- 
bilities for the spread of the kingdom. 

In eternity and glory church and kingdom may 
be co-terminous. Like the church, the kingdom in 
both time and eternity has both visible and spiritual 
aspects. 

6. As a sufficient reply to several other ques- 
tions: 

Let it be noted that this discussion designedly 
avoids applying certain adjectives to the noun 
“church,” not merely because the New Testament 
never applies them to ecclesia, but because they are 
without distinguishing force when contrasting the 
particular assembly with the general assembly. 

For example: ‘“ Local,” “ visible,” “ spiritual.” 

Locality inheres in ecclesia. There can be no 
assembly now or hereafter without a place to meet. 
When existing in fact, both the particular assem- 


ECCLESIA—THE CHURCH OI 


bly in time, and the general assembly in eternity, 
are both visible and spiritual. Why attempt to 
distinguish by terms which do not distinguish? 

Kathohkos (Catholic or Universal) is not a New 
Testament word at all and hence is never applied 
by inspiration to ecclesia. Nor is it a Septuagint 
word at all. 

In post-apostolic times it crept without authority 
into the titles of certain New Testament letters, as 
“The First Epistle General (Katholikos) of Peter.” 
And even there it could not mean “ universal,” 
since Peter, himself, four times limits his ad- 
dress: 

(a) First to Jews (not Gentiles). 

(b) Then to “ elect” Jews (not all Jews). 

(c) Then to elect Jews of the Dispersion (not 
to Jewish Christians in Palestine). 

(d) Then to elect Jews of the Dispersion in 
“Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,” 
i.e., the comparatively small district of Asia Minor 
(not in the rest of Asia, Europe and Africa). 
Neither in the sense of every place, nor of every 
person in the universe, can the English word “ uni- 
versal” be applied to ecclesia. 

7. Certain other questions must be deferred to 
a subsequent lecture, namely: 

(a) Did our Lord purpose and provide for the 
perpetuity of the church on earth as an institution 
until his second advent? 

(b) Can this perpetuity be traced historically ? 


62 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Also, in subsequent lectures will be considered 
the other questions of our lesson, namely: Who 
established the church and when, What its founda- 
tion, What the gates of hell, Signification of the 
keys, and of binding and loosing. 


III 
THE BAPTISTS ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO 


N treating a historic subject the writer is con- 
fronted by two impossible things: First, it is 
impossible to draw a truly realistic picture of 

times prior to one’s own experience, observations 
and recollections. Strong indeed must be the his- 
toric imagination that can put one in his grand- 
father’s place and cause him to see with his grand- 
father’s eyes. 

Again, it is impossible to find distinct lines of 
cleavage at any century milestone. Concerning any 
great thought or movement of time, who can put 
his finger on date and place and confidently say, 
This is when and where it started? Past, present 
and coming events are mingled and related like 
the waves of the sea. Centuries are not divided 
from each other by mountain ranges, oceans, rivers 
or chasms. History, like nature, has no leaps. If 
we go back one hundred years, we must go beyond, 
or find ourselves reading the middle volume of a 
serial. 

Besides these two things, impossible to all men, 
there is another to me exceedingly difficult—to look 
back at all. There is in me little of the Chinaman, 
who delights to turn his back to the present and 

63 


64 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


worship ancestors. Habitual dwelling among remi- 
niscences indicates death at the top. Doubtless, 
occasionally, 


“?’Tis greatly wise to talk with our past hours 
And ask them what report they bore to Heaven.” 


Yet would I rather invoke Hope than stir up 
Memory, and face the future rather than the past. 
But as I am to tell somewhat of the Baptists one 
hundred years ago, reluctantly and only temporarily, 
I face to the rear, and turn back the shadow on the 
dial-plate of time one hundred years; turn it back 
until we are boys again; back until we become our 
own fathers; yet back until we become our grand- 
fathers. The process reverses Rip Van Winkle’s 
dream and loses us with strange identity in a 
strange world, experiencing the sensations of Mark 
Twain’s ‘Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur’s 
Court.” 

The time is January 1, 1800. The place is Phil- 
adelphia, both capital and metropolis of the United 
States, and nearly as large as Dallas, Texas. The 
alien and sedition laws are in force. John Adams 
is President, with fast fading power, prestige and 
popularity, and this very year he will be overwhelm- 
ingly beaten by Thomas Jefferson, who will be 
inaugurated next March at the new capital on the 
Potomac. George Washington has been dead about 
two weeks. Philadelphia itself is in mourning on 
account of a malignant fever, prevalent there for 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 65 


some years. The old Philadelphia Association, 
which for nearly a century has rarely convened 
out of this city, has been kept out now for three 
years in succession by this awful plague. Since 
1797, they have been praying, fasting and resolving 
concerning this dreadful visitation, and for at least 
seven years to come, each annual minute will record 
that Philadelphia has been selected as the place of 
the next meeting, provided there be no recurrence 
of the malignant and contagious fever. 

The year 1800! The crucial period of national 
trial is safely passed. By the ratification of the 
Federal Constitution, the United States has become 
a nation. Washington was inaugurated at New 
York eleven years ago as President of eleven United 
States. During the year North Carolina ratified 
the Constitution and entered the Union. Ten years 
ago, Rhode Island, the last of the original thirteen 
states, came in. Nine years ago Vermont was re- 
ceived as the first new state; eight years ago Ken- 
tucky followed; four years ago Tennessee made 
the third. Sixteen states in 1800. 

The first census—1790—shows a population of 
something over 4,000,000. This decade will ad- 
vance it a million. One hundred years ago. How 
must one shrink to fit the environment! Westward 
the national boundaries extend to the Mississippi 
River; southward to the mouth of the Yazoo River. 
near Vicksburg, but nowhere touching the Gulf of 
Mexico. Spanish Florida, joining hands with Span- 


66 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


ish Louisiana, blocks the way southward and west- 
ward. This very year Louisiana—a veritable em- 
pire of territory—will be retroceded to France, and 
three years hence Jefferson will buy it from Bona- 
parte, whose fear of Admiral Nelson surrenders 
colonial empire, for the paltry sum of $15,000,000. 
This purchase, beyond reasonabie doubt, includes 
Texas, which, on account of New England’s jeal- 
ousy, will not be claimed, and whose admission 
forty-five years later, when re-purchased by the 
blood of revolution, will be resisted by the same 
section and for the same cause. 

The great northwest territory, ceded by Virginia 
and conquered by George Rogers Clark, has been 
opened to settlement for three years. Only four 
years ago, in tardy compliance with the treaty of 
1783, the English garrisons were withdrawn from 
the forts which dominated it. Five years hence a 
son of the same Clark, with Meriwether Lewis, 
sent out by the same Jefferson, will add to the 
national domain by exploration the vast territory 
now covered by Oregon, Washington and Idaho. 
The French Revolution, which painted red the skies 
of the world, has given place to the Directory, 
which is Napoleon Bonaparte. An indiscreet envoy 
from that republic, impatient at Washington’s wise 
forbearance to embarrass our new nation with en- 
tangling alliances, has recently appealed from the 
President to the people, and by private canvass and 
agitation stirs up a commotion, whose rebuke led 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 67 


up to the threshold of war with France and un- 
sealed the triumphant thunders of Truxton’s guns. 
Strange recurrence of history—other envoys from 
another involved republic have just arrived upon 
our shores to repeat the hazardous experiment of 
“ Citizen Genet.” 

One hundred years ago! It is just eight years 
since Eli Whitney, at Savannah, invented the cotton 
gin which will revolutionize the industrial world. 
And though there are some people both North and 
South, projecting with the application of steam to 
navigation and commerce, it is yet seven years to 
Fulton’s steamboat, and thirty years to the first 
railroad and forty-four years to the first telegraphic 
message. The reaper, the power loom, and a thou- 
sand other mighty inventions are in the unknown 
future. Each community is isolated from every 
other by land travel. Philadelphia hears on New 
Year’s Day how New York celebrated Christmas, 
and one adventurous man has traveled overland 
from Atlantic tidewater to Oregon in only eight 
months. Fenimore Cooper and Washington Irv- 
ing are boys of seventeen, and William Cullen 
Bryant is a lad of seven. 

But what about the Baptists of that day? It is 
impossible, in the limits of time assigned me, to 
more than glance at salient points, barely touching 
the mountain tops of loftiest events and speaking 
mainly of our own Southern section of the United 


States. 


68 BAPTISTS AND THEIR. DOCTRINES: :; 


ENGLAND 


In England there are four hundred Baptist 
churches. and Bristol College. John Gill, the 
Hebraist,: the. commentator, the theologian, died 
twenty-nine years ago. John Milton, author of 
earth’s greatest epic, has been dead twenty-six years. 
John. Bunyan, author of earth’s greatest allegory, 
died fourteen years.ago. Only seven years ago 
William Carey, later himself a missionary in for- 
eign lands, preached his great sermon on “ Expect 
Great Things, Attempt Great Things.” From the 
top of that sermon, if you were to sight backwards 
on a dead level, no other sermon will be high 
enough to cross the line of vision until you strike 
Peter’s sermon on the Day of Pentecost. Tongues 
of supernatural fire that elder day enabled the 
apostles to speak to representatives of every nation 
under heaven in the tongue wherein they were 
born. But William Carey, by translation, gave 
the Word of God in twenty-three languages and 
many dialects to one-third of the world’s population. 

Very deliberately do I say it, the World’s Ecu- 
menical Conference on Foreign Missions, recently 
held in New York City, was but the outgrowth and 
the echo of William Carey’s sermon one. hundred 
and seven years ago. The Edinburgh Review de- 
nounced his mission as madness, and sneered at 
the. missionary as “a cobbler,” but the Quarterly 
more wisely will rejoin: “ Only fourteen years have 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED. YEARS AGO 69 


elapsed since Thomas and Carey set foot ‘in India, 
and in that time these missionaries have acquired the 
gift of tongues. In fourteen years these ‘low-born 
and low-bred mechanics’ have done more toward 
spreading the knowledge of the Scriptures among 
the heathen than has been accomplished or even 
attempted by all the world besides.” 

Thirty-four years hence the death of this “ cob- 
bler”’ will mark the exit of the greatest missionary 
factor since Paul, the tent-maker, died. Without 
Carey, Judson had not been. And, just here in 
passing, allow me to correct the prevalent misrep- 
resentation that American Baptists first came to love 
Foreign Missions when Providence thrust upon 
them the support of Judson and Rice. I have with 
me the historical records to show how American 
Baptists received appeals from Carey’s field, passed 
resolutions of sympathy and co-operation, and raised 
and forwarded funds long before Judson became a 
Baptist. While Carey is down in dark heathen 
mines, we see his greatest coadjutor, Andrew Fuller, 
holding the ropes in England—that Andrew Fuller, 
the greatest foe to Antinomianism in the century, 
and whose sermons and other ee are Bop: 
tist classics to-day. 

And there, too, in England one hundred years 
ago, Robert Hall is preaching in English of eclectic 
elegance and power, which possesses the excellencies 
of Shakespeare, Johnson, Addison, Burke and Sher- 
idan without their faults. The Philadelphia Con- 


70 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


fession of Faith, adopted in 1742, and printed by 
Benjamin Franklin in 1743, is, with some modifica- 
tions, but a reproduction of the old London Con- 
fession, adopted in 1689. It is the prevalent stand- 
ard in 1800. 

In Wales there are ten thousand Baptists in 1800, 
with Christmas Evans leading. Only four years 
ago he preached his famous sermon on the Healing 
of the Demoniac. It may interest and profit our 
young preachers here to-day to take a glimpse at 
the man and the sermon—particularly that class of 
modern preachers who read polite essays of fifteen 
minutes’ length, written on tinted paper and orna- 
mented with a pink ribbon. Over in my country 
if some idle wind with nothing else to do and no 
other chaff to blow along, should flutter the harm- 
less thing all the way from Texarkana to Laredo, 
and all the Baptists in the state were out hunting 
a sermon, not one of them would take a shot at 
that. But to speak of a real sermon from a live 
man: Consider that it is a hot day over in Wales, 
and that two long-winded and very dry preachers 
have just preceded him (for our Baptist people of 
that day had almost infinite capacity for hearing 
sermons), then rises up a man who is to hold them 
spellbound three hours longer. 

' Just look at him. His contemporaries sketch an 
outline of him. The tallest, stoutest, greatest man 
one ever saw. He appears like one composed, on 
the day after a great battle, out of the scattered 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 71 


members of the slain. Or like a book, taken in 
numbers, with some wanting. An Anak whose head 
is covered with thick, coarse black hair. His gait 
unwieldy, his limbs unequal. He has but one eye 
—if it might be called an eye—more properly a 
brilliant star, shining like Venus, bright enough to 
light an army through a forest. But, O my soul, 
how he can preach! The throng that hear him 
go wild. They fall to the ground as if rocked by 
an earthquake. They see that naked demoniac 
bounding out of the tombs; witness the bursting 
of his chains and the paroxysms of his fury, and 
cry out in terror at his approach. They see Jesus 
coming in the quiet of his majesty and casting out 
the demon by a word. They see the demon-driven 
swine hurl themselves into the deep. They witness 
the home-coming of that once awful father and 
husband. They hear the glad wife’s sobs of wel- 
come and see the astounded and yet trembling chil- 
dren creep from under the bed into a father’s arms, 
while high as heaven over every other name is the 
name of Jesus. 

That audience saw Christmas Evans as the per- 
fect ideal of Welsh character. To them he em- 
bodied, in his rugged, honest and fervent zeal, his 
clear penetration and poetic fire, all the spirit and 
pathos of the Welsh mind. Gentlemen! Gentle- 
men! I would rather be able to preach to lost souls 
like Christmas Evans than to be the author of every 
speculative vagary since Epicurus died, and all the 


72. BAPTISES AND THEIR - DOCTRINES 


flimsy higher criticism that ever evidenced a palsied 
grasp of faith. But how will such a man die? 
Hear him as the chariot of fire, and the convoy 
of angels come for him thirty-eight years hence: 
“Tam leaving you; I have labored in the sanctuary 
fifty-three years, and this is my comfort, that I 
HAVE NEVER LABORED WITHOUT BLOOD 
IN THE BASIN.” With his last breath he quotes 
an old Welsh hymn, waves a farewell and cries 
out to the angelic charioteer: “‘ Wheel about, coach- 
man, drive on!”” Ah me! the groundlings of the 
present day, who leave out the blood—a million of 
them would not make a shoestring for Christmas 
Evans! This man preached before Baptist asso- 
ciations one hundred and sixty-three times. Blessed 
associations! 

We have time only for one other Conti- 
nental reference. Look yonder in the north of 
Ireland in the Protestant province of Ulster, 
famous for its siege of Londonderry—that 
Scotch-Irish settlement from which, impelled by 
tyranny, there poured out a tide of emigration 
thirty thousand strong, to occupy all the Blue 
Ridge country—an immigration that. will furnish 
the victors of King’s Mountain and give to 
Kentucky her Breckenridges, to Tennessee her 
Andrew Jackson, to Texas her Sam Houston 
and to Virginia her Stonewall Jackson. And to 
all our states many illustrious names. There in 
Ulster in 1800, I ask you to look, just now, at 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 73 


one man only. It is Alexander Carson. He is but 
twenty-six years old, and soon will impress the 
polemical world with his unanswerable logic con- 
cerning the act of baptism, and console a million 
perplexed hearts with his history of Providence. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Turn to the New World. In the United States 
we have as data, contemporaneous with the first 
census in 1790, Asplund’s Register, which shows 
in statistics, state by state, that there were in this 
country 564 Baptist preachers, 748 churches and 
60,970 meinbers. But that was ten years ago. A 
circular letter to be read next year—1801—hefore 
the Philadelphia Baptist Association, will say: “ We 
have entered upon a new century; and while it is 
yet the morning of it, let us take a view of some 
of the works of God in the last. Ninety-four years 
have rolled on since the first meeting of this Asso- 
ciation, the first in America, and then composed of 
only five churches; but viewing the present state 
of our connection in this country, we perceive it to 
be as the thousands of Israel, embracing numerous 
_ associations, composed of at least 1,200 churches, 

including more than 100,000 members.” 

You see, by the way, that these early Baptists 
knew when a century commences. The writer does 
not give the original sources of information from 
which he obtained his figures. But he seems to 


74 BAPTISTS AND THEIR: DOCTRINES 


speak advisedly and with confidence. Fortunately 
we have the full text of the centennial sermon, com- 
memorative of the one-hundredth anniversary of 
the organization of the Association, which was 
preached in 1807. The preacher is Samuel Jones, a 
noted man in his day. He preaches from William 
Carey’s great text to show that the great things 
expected and attempted fourteen years ago have 
been marvelously fulfilled. Without accurate sta- 
tistics before him from other associations, the 
preacher concludes that there are 122,500 Baptists 
in the United States in 1807. He reckons 194 
churches in Massachusetts and 150 in New York. 
He observes with pleasure that religious persecution 
of his brethren had ceased in Virginia and had 
abated in Massachusetts. He calls special attention 
to the missionary spirit, prevalent for years in 
many places, tending to carry the gospel to the 
heathen world, and expects the millennium to come 
by the opening of the twentieth century. We can 
testify that it has not yet arrived. 

To put the condition before you in a realizing 
way, we may safely say: One hundred years ago 
there were in the United States about half as many 
Baptists as there are white Baptists in Texas to-day, 
and that there are in Texas to-day more Baptist 
preachers, churches, members and schools than there 
were in the whole world a century ago. Unques- 
tionably the great and historic association in the 
United States one hundred years ago was the Phil- - 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 75 


adelphia Association. [It is the Mother Eve of 
American Associations. From the beginning it has 
been sound in the faith and missionary in spirit. 
We hear much in that olden time of Virginia and 
the Carolinas sending help in many ways to New 
England, but Philadelphia sent help southward and 
her gospel came with healing in its wings. There 
was in 1800 no state or national organization of 
our people, but there were general committees, and 
widespread co-operation for missions, education and 
particularly for mutual protection against civil and 
religious persecution. There were no Sunday- 
schools of the modern kind, but there was much 
private and catechetical instruction. All the prin- 
ciples underlying the wider forms of present co- 
operation were then in full force. The time-limits 
of my address restrict discussion to the territory 
now covered by the Southern Baptist Convention. 
Let us commence with 


OLD VIRGINIA 


My heart always thrills at the name. The his- 
tory of two states of this Union furnishes higher 
themes for epic poems than the less heroic affairs 
which inspired the songs of Homer and Virgil. 
One of the two is Virginia—modesty forbids that 
I name the other. From the beginning of its en- 
trancing history until this good hour, life in the 
Old Dominion was set to heroic measure. Higher 


76 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


criticism has utterly failed to destroy the historic 
verity of the romantic story of John Smith and 
Pocahontas. You know Virginia once extended 
on the Atlantic Coast from Cape Cod to Florida 
and straight westward to the Pacific Ocean, sup- 
posed to lie somewhere back of the Blue Ridge. 

There is yet preserved the quaint record of an 
old-time writer, who states his case in a charming 
way. He calls attention to the intrusion of some 
Swedes upon Virginia soil, who were making their 
way up a river called Delaware, and of certain nos- 
ing Dutch who were also trespassing on a river 
called the Hudson. He wonders at two things: 
First, how far it may be from the falls of the 
James River, afterwards the site of Richmond, to 
the Pacific Ocean, Virginia’s other boundary, where 
Drake had been sailing. And second, that the 
twenty thousand Puritans of New England did not 
leave their cold and barren shores and come down 
to God’s country, where wild turkeys weigh sixty 
pounds, where raccoons are as good meat as lambs, 
"possums as good as hams and artichokes as sweet 
as yams and where are such worlds of good tobacco 
and where the rivers teem with bass and shad. 

You see there was some imagination there even 
then. The religious denominations were famous in 
old Virginia. The Episcopal was the state church, 
which for support made awful inroads on Baptist 
tobacco. Their own Bishop Meade tells us some 
marvelous stories of the gambling, swearing, horse- 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 77 


racing, cock-fighting and drunken clergy, who as- 
sumed to monopolize gospel functions. -One of 
them was a noted pugilist, who, getting into some 
trouble with his vestrymen, floored them all in a 
knock-down and drag-out fight. The following 
Sunday he commemorated his victory in a sermon 
from this text of Nehemiah: “ And I contended 
with them and cursed them, and smote certain of 
them, and plucked off their hair.” 

The Baptists, who were as plentiful as black- 
berries, themselves sometimes experimented. In the 
year before the American Revolution, they gravely 
restored apostolic succession by electing three 
apostles, with marvelous powers and responsibilities. 
One year of it was enough. It made them so sick 
they have been swinging back too far perhaps into 
the opposite extreme ever since. At least I am 
informed that many good brethren in those parts 
do not now believe in any kind of a succession or 
perpetuity, though holding fast yet, as I am proud 
to say, to the final perseverance of the saints. Time 
fails me to tell the wondrous story of Baptist prog- 
ress in Virginia—of their great revivals, their 
preachers and their sufferings. A notable and far- 
reaching event in their history was the happy union 
of the Separate and Regular Baptists under the 
title of the United Baptist Churches of Christ in 
Virginia. Writing in 1809, Robert Semple, the his- 
torian of Virginia Baptists, gives a graphic account 
of this union which occurred twenty-two years be- 


78 ~BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


fore. Throughout the Southern States the same 
union was accomplished, culminating in Kentucky 
one year ago. I have myself seen old church letters 
of the three varieties—Separate, Regular and 
United, and counted all of them valid. 

After the Revolutionary War, there were won- 
derful revivals among the Virginia Baptists. In 
1790-2, there were 200 churches and 20,000 mem- 
bers, to become as the new century opens nearly 
400 churches with 35,000 members, and that, too, 
after peopling Kentucky by migration. Oftentimes 
a whole church, a pastor and people, would move 
together to a new field without a break in organi- 
zation or regular service. As in the beginning “ the 
groves were God’s first temples,” so the campfires 
of these moving Virginians lighted up the primeval 
forests as they worshiped God. In the first church 
to which I ever preached was a colony of Virginia 
Baptists, all members of one of the churches min- 
istered to by that venerable Andrew Broaddus, Jr., 
of-Carolina, who recently passed away. Often have 
I read the manuscript copy of his farewell sermon 
to these pilgrims, one of whom, his kinsman, an- 
other Andrew Broaddus, became a distinguished 
Texas lawyer, and for years the president of our 
State Baptist Convention. 

A century ago there were twice as many Baptists 
in Virginia as in New York, and more than in all 
New England. Only last year their general com- 
mittee gave way to their general conference, which 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 79 


in turn will become their general association. Their 
annual meetings were famous for spiritual power, 
and never failed to leave a lasting and favorable 
impress behind. A Methodist preacher once told 
me that the Baptists captured Virginia by the power 
of their annual meetings, particularly of the old 
Dover Association and their General Association. 
Perhaps the three greatest leaders in Virginia one 
hundred years ago were John Leland, Andrew 
Broaddus, Sr., and Robert Semple. John Leland 
was a mighty man of affairs, and played no small 
part in the revolutionary movements of his day. 
And while I am proud of the association of his 
name with that of James Madison, I delight most 
to think of him in one of his happy pulpit efforts. 

It was a time of strong doctrine, and many Bap- 
tists were hyper-Calvinists in their view. But 
Leland himself tells us how, one day while preach- 
ing, “his soul got into the gospel trade-winds,” 
which so filled his spiritual sails that he forgot about 
election and reprobation and so preached Christ to 
sinners that many accepted him as their Saviour and 
Lord. And oh, I would to God that the preachers 
of this generation, like old John Leland of long 
ago, would now get into the gospel trade-winds 
and bear away with flaming canvas the everlasting 
gospel to earth’s remotest bounds! 

Andrew Broaddus was every way a remarkable 
man. Think of it, ye aspiring young preachers, 
who long for fat city pastorates, how this man 


80 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES © 


kept refusing calls to New York, Boston, Philadel- 
phia and other mighty centers, that he might abide 
with his dear old country churches. Semple became 
the historian of that historic time, and you would 
do good to yourself by adding to your library his 
valuable record, so recently and commendably re- 
produced by the Religious Herald men. 


NORTH CAROLINA 


In North Carolina, 1792, there were 94 churches 
with 7,500 members, to become, in 1812, 204 
churches, with 12,500 members. Here were two 
associations, one of them unhappily to become anti- 
missionary in spirit, the other to send out later 
by way of compensation, William T: Brantly and 
Basil Manly, the name of each to be perpetuated 
in a mighty son. 


SOUTH CAROLINA 


In South Carolina, 1792, there were 70 churches 
with 4,000 members, to become, in 1812, 150 
churches with 11,000 members. The very name of 
this state and date spontaneously call up the image 
of the most colossal Baptist of his day on the 
American continent, Richard Furman, whose name 
is perpetuated in a great university. My soul thrills 
as I watch the movements of this prince in Israel 
during that stormy period. I see Cornwallis post- 
ing rewards for his apprehension, so formidable 
is this patriot to British aggression. To the front 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 81 


always was he in every enterprise in peace or war, 
everywhere the advocate of civil and religious lib- 
erty. Blessed with large wealth, a superb gentle- 
man, an irreproachable character challenging the 
respect even of his enemies, a leader and organizer 
of men, Richard Furman’s name must ever remain 
on fame’s historic roll of the immortals. 


GEORGIA 


In Georgia, 1792, there were 50 churches, 72 
preachers and 3,000 members, to become, in 1813, 
5 associations, 164 churches and 15,000 members. 
The mighty men of this state are Henry Holcombe 
and Jesse Mercer. Holcombe will this very year, 
1800, organize the first Baptist church in Savannah, 
and two years hence commence his publication of 
the Analytical Repository. Jesse Mercer, a younger 
man, even now outstripping his great father, Silas 
Mercer, will leave an impress on his own and suc- 
ceeding generations time can never efface. How 
venerable in appearance! How equable in mind! 
The man who never had a personal quarrel. How 
pure in heart, how clean in life, how clear and 
sound and cogent in doctrine! His generosity and 
liberality illumine his life, and his character preaches 
louder than his tongue. 

It must have been a thrilling time when this 
young man in 1791 accompanied his father all the 
way from Georgia to a meeting of the General 


82 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Committee of Virginia at Nuckol’s meeting-house, 
Goochland County, and there heard in succession 
his father preach Calvinism and their fellow- 
Georgian, Jeremiah Walker, preach Arminianism. 
One of the most effective sermons ever preached 
on foreign missions was by Jesse Mercer from 
Acts 13:47.. Every drop of blood in his veins 
was missionary blood. His gift of $2,500 at one 
time sent the first missionaries to Texas. Let all 
Texas forever hold him in loving remembrance. 
Soon another gift will found Mercer University. 
Kentucky in 1792 had 42° churches*:and 3,000, 
members, to become, in 1812, 285 churches with 
22,000 members. Among the early Kentucky Bap- 
tists were the brother and children of Daniel Boone. 
Unfortunately in much of Kentucky, and. indeed 
the Southwest, there prevailed an inveterate preju- 
dice against educated and salaried ministers: 
‘Tennessee in 1792 had 21 churches with goo 
members, to become, in 1812, 156 churches with 
11,323 members. The Baptist growth in Mary- 
land has been always slow. Armitage reports: for 
1793 only 17 churches, 13 preachers and:g20 mem- 
bers. It will yet be eight years before a Baptist 
church will be organized in the Indian wilds: of 
Alabama Territory not to become, until Boe, 70 
churches with 2,500 members. 
’ In the territory now comprising Mississippi, a 
part of which was ceded ‘to the United States in 
1797, and another part in 1819, a church was con- 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED: YEARS AGO 83 


stituted as early as 1780, and eight years afterward 
another church. By 1806, the Mississippi Baptist 
Association is organized with ‘six churches. In 

1812 there will be 17 churches with 764 members. 
The early Baptists of this territory suffered mitch 
from persecution in the days of Spanish power. 
They were arrested, imprisoned and threatened with 
deportation to the mines of. Mexico, until they 
demanded immunity. from-persecution by force of 
atms.: The Baptists were the’first to convey the 
gospel beyond the Mississippi River. About eight 
Baptists, including one preacher, and the members 
of the: Boone family from Kentucky, were in the 
territory now comprised by: Missouri as early as 
1800. There was one baptism: By 1812 there will 
be seven churches with .192.members. This is but 
a scant and unsatisfactory glance at the status of 
Baptist churches in the world one hundred years 
Aeo. F vhs ike sririge? 

_ Any:careful retrospect over:the field:of modern 
Baptist history reveals at a glance certain mighty 
facts or movements, uplifting themselves:into clear 
visibility far above the dead level of ordinary events 
as mountain peaks tower above the plains.. These 
are the milestones and sign-boards along the high- 
way of human progress. Look back yonder while 
I point them out, peak by peak, and discern the 
mountain springs from- which flow the streams 
whose mingled currents make up the 1 river of pres 
ent denominational power:: 


84 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


1. First of all, the giving of the Bible to the 
common people of the English-speaking world. 
The Bible, in the mother tongue, without note of 
expert or comment of scholar, without a priestly 
shadow to darken one luminous page—the naked 
Bible, the Father’s message to men, naturally makes 
Baptists. One of the most thrilling and instructive 
classics in our language is Harwood Pattison’s 
“ History of the English Bible.” A few days ago, 
while dining in Judson Memorial Hall, with a son of 
Adoniram Judson, I found myself commending this 
book to a bright young man, who proved to be 
Pattison’s own son. He promised to read the book. 

2. Next comes, as the natural sequence of a free 
Bible, that mighty struggle between the Parliament 
and Charles I., which culminated in the Common- 
wealth. To ignore that period seals up history. 
Ignorance of it makes it impossible to understand 
the Baptists of to-day. It was a colossal strife for 
civil and religious liberty. Victories were won in 
that day whose laurels will never fade and whose 
influence will never die. And whenever that fight 
has raged in the last nineteen centuries, you may 
count that Baptists were in it, as confidently as 
you look for an Irishman at a wake. 

Wherever Cromwell’s armies march, the Bap- 
tists, who constituted a large, heroic and influential 
part of them, deposited the imperishable seeds of 
their principles. In his Irish garrisons, 1755, were 
twelve Baptist governors of cities, ten colonels, three 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO _ 85 


heutenant colonels, ten majors and forty-three com- 
pany officers. Hence Richard Baxter’s growl: “ In 
Ireland the Ana-Baptists were grown so high that 
many of the soldiers were rebaptized as a way 
to preferment.” In Scotland they stood unabashed 
under the frowns of John Knox, resisting even 
Cromwell’s later ambitions, reminding him of their 
timely help at Dunbar, and still later petition the 
famous General Monk, the king-restorer, for high 
civil and religious rights. The times ripened their 
literary genius until it kindled flames whose light 
illumined the skies of the world, whose aspiring 
sparks hailed the stars. “ The blind old bard of 
Scio’s rocky isle” was outsoared in epic fame by 
a blind Baptist bard, iron Cromwell’s Latin sec- 
retary. A pilgrim crept through the bars of Bed- 
ford jail and went forth into more byways and 
highways of earth, knocking at more doors and 
speaking to more peoples in their mother tongues 
than ever before or since a literary pilgrim has 
done. The tinker is dead. His statue stands where 
four roads meet, “a very grave person, the world 
behind him.” It yet 


“  . . has eyes uplifted to heaven; 
The best of books is his hand; 
The law of truth still written 
Upon his lips . 
It stands as if pleading 
With men.” 


86 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES = 


_ The tinker is dead. The statue stands. The 
pilgrim moves on, outlasting the Wandering Jew. 
Indeed, the tall, wide-spreading Baptist tree of to- 
day is deep rooted in Cromwell’s time. 

3. Next in order of time and natural sequence 
comes the Act of Toleration, 1689, during the reign 
of. William and Mary. This was life to England 
as- the. Revocation of the Edict of Nantes was 
death to France. They will stand over against 
each. other -until the judgment, in everlasting con- 
trast, as light and darkness. That evil stroke of 
the pen of Louis XIV. hurt France more than the 
defeats. at Blenheim,. Oudenarde and Malplaquet. 
That signature of William III. uplifted England 
more than all Marlborough’s victories... And both 
mightily built up the Baptist power in England and 
her colonies. 

. 4. Later in date but more far- treachige i in power 
is William Carey’s Foreign Mission Sermon. When 
he spoke, the sleeping world heard two far-off cries: 
one: from heathen lands, ‘“ Come over and help US,”’ 
and one from. the Mount of Ascension: “Go ye 
into all the world and preach the gospel to every 
creature.” And wherever and whenever since, op- 
pression lifts its heavy hand from Baptist necks, 
and God sends revivals, they hear those .two voices 
made audible by Carey’s sermon. The. cobbler’s 
body lies moldering in the ground, but ns cobbler’s 
soul goes marching on. 

And here allow me to isolate and emphasize one 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 87 


significant fact. In the year 1800, yonder in Bos- 
ton, was organized a Woman’s Missionary Society, 
which contributed $150 to missions the first year. 
Happy presage of a glorious future! Right glad 
was I that my Brother Eaton corrected the statistics 
submitted in the recent Ecumenical Conference con- 
cerning woman’s proportion of foreign mission 
work. Well do we know in this Convention the 
power of their co-operation. 

5. Passing over to the New World, we next note 
the struggle for civil and religious liberty in Amer- 
ica, culminating when the members of the old 
Philadelphia Association, then holding their 74th 
session, were roused at midnight by the watchman’s 
ery: “Past 12 o’clock and all is well, and Corn- 
wallis has surrendered!” Hence their resolution: 
“ And now, dear brethren, we feel ourselves con- 
strained to acknowledge the great goodness of God 
toward us, and to call on you to join with us in 
thankfulness and praise, as well for the unanimity 
and brotherly love which prevailed throughout our 
meeting as for the recent signal success granted 
to the American arms, in the surrender of the 
whole British army, under the command of 
Lord Cornwallis, with the effusion of so little 
blood.” 

Cornwallis surrendered October 19, 1781, at 
Yorktown, Virginia. This resolution was adopted 
in Philadelphia four days later. Happy people who 
are able to reckon unanimity and brotherly love 


88 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


as great a cause for praise as the surrender of an 
enemy's army. Lord help us ever to keep the lesson 
in mind! I can never think back into this period 
of fiery trials without seeing pictures, They fill 
a gallery in my mind. I walk among them and 
look up at them with bared head, in awed silence, 
while my heart is burning, There they are. I 
can see them now. I see Roger Williams, an out- 
cast, wandering in winter snows. I see the bared 
back of Obadiah Holmes, scarred with bloody 
stripes. 

I see that disgraceful spoliation of my brethren 
at Ashfield—their orchards, yards, fields and the 
very graves of their dead sacrificed under forced 
sale to supply funds for a needless meeting-house 
of another denomination, and to pay this Pedo- 
baptist preacher's salary—himself there bidding in 
their property for a song. And this only six years 
before the battle of Lexington, and not so very 
far from that historic field. 

I see the venerable Isaac Backus at the meeting 
of the First Continental Congress, laboring vainly 
with the Massachusetts delegates in behalf of re- 
ligious liberty for his persecuted people, and hear 
the reply of John Adams, that “you might as well 
attempt to turn the heavenly luminaries from their 
course as to ask Massachusetts to give up the union 
of church and state.” In this year, 1800, Backus 
has yet seven years to live, and it will be twenty- 
seven years more before this unnatural union is 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 8g 


dissolved in Massachusetts. It will be 1820 before 
Connecticut has religious liberty. 

But we are yet in the picture gallery. This time 
the scenes are from old Virginia: I see Lewis 
Craig, John Burrus, John Young, Edward Hern- 
don, James Goolrick, Bartholomew Choning, Ed- 
wain Saunders and John Walker in jail for the 
crime of preaching the gospel without Episcopal 
license. I see letters written to them while in- 
carcerated and their replies from behind prison 
bars. I hear them preaching through prison win- 
dows to friends gathered outside. I read the Bap- 
tist addresses and memorials and petitions addressed 
to the House of Burgesses, to the President of the 
United States. They bear familiar signatures: 
Samuel Harris, Reuben Ford, John Waller. I see 
the historic forms of Washington, Jefferson, Madi- 
son and Patrick Henry giving better counsel and 
help than John Adams gave to Father Backus. 
Brethren, in the war of the Commonwealth in 
England, and in our Revolutionary War, the Bap- 
tists were all patriots. In a long list of published 
Tories there is not a Baptist name. Dearer than 
life to a Baptist is soul-liberty. They are like the 
grim Douglas who said that “the smell of one 
fagot on the Tay” would bring him back from 
the English marches. 

And let me tell you that soul-liberty in these 
United States means soul-liberty one day for the 
whole world. And you may write this down and 


g0 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


ponder it: It was the struggle for civil and re- 
ligious liberty that brought about that voluntary 
Baptist co-operation, which to-day enables our in- 
dependent churches to elicit, combine and direct 
their resources in behalf of missions, education 
and fraternity. When they learned to co-operate 
voluntarily, without an autocratic pope, without a 
hierarchy, without a cast-iron organization, they 
settled the question of the ages. They took the 
divine precept, “ Love the Brotherhood,” and made 
it the centripetal force that would equalize the 
centrifugal force of church independence and the 
tangential force of individual liberty so as to bring 
about that circular motion which makes the or- 
bits and preserves the harmony of the heavenly 
bodies. 

Stand, therefore, by co-operation, as the one suc- 
cessful answer to the cavils of our enemies that 
Baptist polity, having no earthly head or graded 
hierarchy, can never accomplish the work of organi- 
zation. But to hold together many widely scat- 
tered and free communities there must be some 
mighty work to do beyond the ability of the few 
and commensurate with the power of the many. 
As in the past we have these mighty works before 
us now: (a) protection against tyranny; (b) mis- 
sions, home and foreign; (c) Christian education. 
Common necessities and mutual interests brought 
about that glorious union of the Separate and Reg- 
ular Baptists and may they ever remain one and 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO  og1 


indivisible! May differences on minor points never 
break up our unity! 

And now let us for a moment inquire somewhat 
into the doctrines, discipline and comity of our 
churches one hundred years ago. In all essential 
particulars they were the same as now. There 
were differences on minor points, but great agree- 
ment on vital points. Their more important doc- 
trines were: The plenary inspiration, sufficiency 
and supremacy of the Holy Scriptures. The divin- 
ity of our Lord Jesus Christ and his vicarious ex- 
piation. 

The necessity of regeneration and sanctification 
by the Holy Spirit arising from man’s fall and 
total depravity. Salvation by grace, with all its 
kindred doctrines. Repentance and faith the terms 
of discipleship. Salvation essential to baptism, and 
not baptism essential to salvation. Baptism and 
church-membership essential to communion. <A 
spiritual church. A_ distinct local church. An 
independent church. Interdependence of local 
churches for counsel and co-operation. The mis- 
sion of the churches to preach the gospel to every 
creature. Co-operation of the churches for pro- 
tection against tyranny, for missions and for edu- 
cation. Severance between church and state and 
soul-liberty. From the queries sent up to the asso- 
ciations and the answers returned, it is evident 
that their views of discipline accord in all essential 
points with ours to-day and that in comity they 


92 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


were somewhat ahead of us now. But who were 
the leading men of 1800? 

Truly ‘there were giants in those days.’’ Look 
at them! In Europe were Carey, Fuller, Robert 
Hall, Christmas Evans and Carson. In the North 
stands the venerable Backus at the head of the 
list. With him are Manning, Stillman, Stanghtan, 
Gano and a host of others. In the South are John 
Leland, Andrew Broaddus, Semple, Richard Fur- 
man, Jesse Mercer, Henry Holcombe and many 
others. And what men they were in character and 
power! Who overtops them now? 

And shall we not be called on to put forth all 
our strength to maintain the standards they estab- 
lished, and transmit unimpaired the priceless lega- 
cies they bequeathed? We have not space to write 
of their laymen and of that vast host of modest 
country preachers whose names are omitted from 
the historic page, but who snatched civil and re- 
ligious freedom from tyranny’s grasp, broke the 
bond uniting church and state, filled all the woods 
of the New World with campfires of revival and 
made every river, lake and pool bear testimony by 
baptism to the resurrection of the dead. Heaven 
is peopled by their converts, and myriad expectant 
cells of hell left forever vacant because of the 
brands they plucked from the burning. Let us 
glance at some of the coming men. 

I speak of the boys of 1800. Ivieny is twenty- 
seven, Benedict twenty-one, Peck is eleven and 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 93 


Cramp four years old. They will some day be- 
come historians of Baptist affairs. In North Car- 
olina are two boys destined to greatness—William 
T. Brantly, Sr., thirteen years old, and Basil Manly, 
Sr., two years old. In South Carolina is a boy of 
eight, W. B. Johnson, who alone will wear the dis- 
tinctive honor of presiding over both the Triennial 
and the Southern Baptist Conventions. Adiel 
Sherwood is nine years old. In 1827 he will preach 
a sermon that will cause four thousand penitents 
at one time to fall down before the throne of grace 
supplicating for mercy. 

Adoniram Judson is twelve years old. Oh, the 
vaulting ambition, the soaring aspiration, the in- 
corrigible pride of that boy! And how mightily 
he will wrestle with conquering grace before he 
surrenders his inordinate cravings for earthly 
honors to become wholly the servant of the Lord 
Jesus Christ—to become willing to be anything, to 
go ariywhere and everywhere, to be consecrated 
body, soul and spirit to his Master’s service. The 
Lord calls that kind sometimes to do great things. 
He called Saul of Tarsus. He called Adoniram 
Judson. 

And there is a boy in England five years old— 
Sir Henry Havelock. He will be a mighty general 
in heathen lands. Otte of Carey’s fellow-mission- 
aries will baptize him. His regiment will be called 
“ Havelock’s Saints.” They will equal the Iron- 
sides of Cromwell. This man will place his lamps 


94 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


in the laps of heathen gods, making them torch- 
bearers in their own temples while he and his men 
worship Jesus Christ. He will go as a deliverer 
to Lucknow, and, dying there, be in luck forever. 
And here is another boy thirteen years old, one 
Alexander Campbell, who will likely give you Bap- 
tists some trouble at a later day. Surely if the 
old Red Stone Association does not inquire into 
his case more carefully than I think. it will, it 
will become necessary that some competent Vir- 
ginian shall examine and re-examine him after a 
while. And here is another lad who will stir up 
things mightily later on. He will come from the 
frontiers of Georgia, without education, small in 
person, slovenly in dress, unprepossessing in ap- 
pearance, with shriveled features and small piercing 
eyes. So J. M. Peck describes him. . He is an 
Antinomian of Antinomians, assuming to speak 
from immediate inspiration. He will uproot the 
tender missionary gardens like a wild boar. He 
will oppose missions, education, Bible and temper- 
ance societies, prayer-meetings, Sunday-schools and 
all other evangelizing agencies with indescribable 
fury. He will take advantage of the prejudices of 
ignorance and the prevalent hyper-Calvinism and 
push his war into all the Southwest until in many 
associations of Ohio, Kentucky, Virginia, Georgia 
and Tennessee the late-blossoming gardens of mis- 
sionary work shall be as if a cold, chilling frost of 


BAPTISTS A HUNDRED YEARS AGO 95 


death had been breathed upon them. Who is this 
man? His name is Daniel Parker. 

In 1826-7 he will publish his notorious ‘“ two 
seed” pamphlets, that will become his winding 
sheet and cause his memory to rot. Among many 
other boys who will become famous or infamous, 
I select only two other names. In Rockridge 
County, Virginia, is a boy of seven who will follow 
the flag of Andrew Jackson to Indian wars,: who 
will be governor of Tennessee, then, suddenly leavy- 
ing civilization, will naturalize as an Indian, then 
go to Texas, and in spite of the downfall of the 
Alamo and the massacre at Goliad, will snatch an 
empire at the battle of San Jacinto from the 
hands of Santa Anna, the Napoleon of the West, 
- will become president of that new republic and 
hand back by annexation to the United States that 
vast territory now covered by Texas, the most of 
New Mexico, parts of the Indian Territory, Kan- 
sas, Colorado and Wyoming. The whole of it once 
ceded, but unclaimed in the Jefferson purchase, and 
now redeemed by bloody revolution. 

That boy’s name is Sam Houston, and on only 
a part of that territory now are 171 missionaries 
of this Convention and in it more Baptists than 
were in the world when Houston was a boy of 
seven. In Kentucky is another boy nine years old 
who will go to Texas, become a jurist and preacher, 
and, in the very year of this State Convention’s 
organization, lay the foundation of that institution 


96 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


which bears his name to-day. His name is R. E. B. 
Baylor, and Baylor University and the Texas Con- 
vention were born in 1845. 

As space fails me, I must leave my subject where 
Tacitus left his German hero—on the middle of a 
bridge—with mighty controversies vet pending and 
with this unanswerable question: Who of the boys 
now living will make the twentieth-century Baptist 
world memorable? 


IV 
SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 


FIRST SERMON 


“And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for 
I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here; for he 
is Figen as he said- Come, see the place where the Lord lay.’’—Matt. 
28:5, 6. 


HERE are two grand divisions of our Bible, 
so related and so interdependent that they 
stand or fall together. Either one apart 
from the other loses all sanctity and all obligation. 
Christians accept both of them as the inspired word 
of God, revealing all human relations to God and 
to each other, and all obligations arising from these 
relations, and all destiny determined by responsi- 
bility to observe these obligations; but if these books 
are not inspired they cannot make such revelations, 
nor create such obligations, nor entail such destiny, 
and in that case we have no Bible. 

The book then becomes no more to us than any 
other piece of purely human literature. Yea, it is 
entitled to less respect upon our part than that 
which is rightly accorded to many books of human 
literature that make no false pretensions of divine 
origin. The entire religious value of the Bible, 
its whole spiritual profitableness to us and its only 
claim to be an authoritative standard, depend upon 

97 


98 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


its inspiration. The question of the inspiration of 
the Bible is, therefore, a vital and fundamental 
question. That settled, all other things relating to 
it are settled. 

Not only so—and I pray you to mark this state- 
ment—if the satisfactory determination of the in- 
spiration of the Bible lies beyond the reach of 
the average busy man, on account of either the 
vastness or complexity of the question, that is equiv- 
alent to making it a question which cannot be solved. 
For if, indeed, the nature or extent of the investi- 
gation of the subject of its inspiration renders a 
proper and timely solution possible to experts only, 
that alone destroys all its claims to inspiration. 
Hence there must be some simple and easy way 
of ascertainment and of assurance upon this point, 
er revelation cannot be revelation. 

You may confidently assume that if a God of 
wisdom and love and power saw fit to reveal not 
merely important, but vital, matters to his creatures 
that he would not defeat the purpose of that reve- 
lation by putting the proofs of its being a revelation 
beyond the reach of the people who most need the 
assurance of that proof. Any proposed method of 
settling the question of the inspiration of the Bible 
which confessedly restricts its proof to a learned 
few may, therefore, be at once rejected, without 
any hesitation. I submit a simple method: 

All the claims of the Old Testament part of our 
Bible to be the inspired word of God may rest upon 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION — 99 


the proof of one historical fact, namely, its fore- 
told Messiah has come. And all the claims of the 
New Testament part of our Bible to be the inspired 
word of God certainly rest on the proof of another 
simple historical fact, namely, that Jesus of Naza- 
reth, claiming to be the Messiah of the Old Testa- 
ment, has risen from the dead. In support of the 
first statement the following simple tests are sub- 
mitted: 

First :—The Old Testament Messiah must be an 
attested descendant of the first man, through Seth 
and Abraham and David. Hence the carefully kept 
genealogical tables of the whole Old Testametit 
period, fully four thousand years. When this period 
ended proof of lineal descent from David could 
be made from these tables, but no Jew now living 
could be so attested. It follows that the Old Testa- 
ment Messiah has either already come or the in- 
spiration of the book fails. No future claimant 
could identify himself upon the point of descent. 
~ Second :—The Old Testament Messiah must come 
before Judah loses all national rule and autonomy, 
for the prophecy of Jacob declares: ‘“ The scepter 
shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s staff 
from between his feet, till Shiloh come. To him 
belongs the obedience of the nations.” But since 
the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, a.d. 70. 
Judah has been without national rule or country. 
A Shiloh coming since the time of Titus would be 
no Old Testament Shiloh, and could not on its 


10o0 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


promises claim the obedience of the nations. There- _ 
fore, if the Messiah did not come before the fall 
of Jerusalem, Old Testament inspiration fails. 

Third :—The Old Testament Messiah must come 
while the second temple is standing, for the pro- 
phetic compensation to those who sorrowed over 
its: inferiority to Solomon’s temple was that “ the 
glory of the latter house should exceed the glory 
of the former,” and that “the Messiah would come 
to that second temple and purify it.’ But that 
temple perished with Jerusalem, leaving not one 
stone upon another. For more than 1,800 years 
there has been no temple. Therefore, either the Old 
Testament Messiah did come before the destruction 
of the temple, or its inspiration fails. 

. Fourth:—In the days of Daniel’s fourth empire 
the God of Heaven, himself and not by agent, but 
personally, as the Messiah, was to set up a per- 
petual kingdom on earth; but Daniel’s fourth em- 
pire passed away ages ago, and though it took 
Rome seven hundred years to die, it is dead. A 
Messiah, therefore, who came not in the time of 
the Roman supremacy is no Old Testament Messiah. 
If, therefore he has not come already, Old Testa- 
ment inspiration fails. 

Yet, again, the Old Testament Messiah, theugh 
a Jew, must be an ensign for the gathering of the 
Gentiles. The peoples of all other nations must 
recognize his spiritual supremacy. If, therefore, 
history cannot identify some Jew, attested as a 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 101 


lineal descendant of David, coming in the days of 
the Roman empire, coming while Judah yet retains 
some mark of national rule, coming while the sec- 
ond temple is still standing and after coming estab- 
lishing a kingdom yet in existence and to whose 
King the other nations of the world look as a 
Saviour and ruler, then Old Testament inspiration 
fails. 

Yet again, the whole Old Testament economy 
was confessedly but a shadow of better things to 
come. All its institutions of type and ritual were 
appointed to stand until the substance came. Its 
temple and sacrifices were to abide until set aside 
by what they signified. And very clearly does it 
fix the date when sacrifice and oblation shall cease, 
when vision and prophecy shall be sealed up, when 
reconciliation for sin shall be effected, when ever- 
lasting righteousness shall be brought in, when the 
Messiah shall be cut off, but not for himself. ° 

Now, since we know that at this time no sac- 
rifice for sins smokes upon any Jewish altar, and 
all its prophetic oracles are dumb, and since :the 
types have perished at the precise time appointed, 
if no Messiah has come as the great anti-typical 
sacrifice, then Old Testament inspiration fails. 

Finally, the Old Testament predicts repeatedly, 
and with great precision, that the chosen people 
would be rejected, their temple destroyed, their city 
trampled underfoot of other nations, themselves 
dispersed among all nations, though not destroyed, 


102 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


abiding many days without a king, without a prince, 
without a sacrifice, without a pillar, without an 
ephod or priest, or teraphim or prophet, and yet 
preserved in continual persecution as a distinct 
people—and all this calamity because they would 
reject their Messiah coming at the time and in 
the manner designated by their prophets, and that 
this state of dispersion and persecution should last 
until they accepted the Messiah that they had re- 
jected, 

So that if these particulars have failed, or any 
one of them, or if in the 1,800 years since this great 
calamity came upon their nation, it can be estab- 
lished by historical proof that they have returned 
to their land, restored their government, rebuilt 
their temple, reinstituted their priesthood and its 
sacrifices, and yet not accepted the Messiah which 
they rejected, then Old Testament inspiration fails. 

Even the most carping hypercriticism will not 
affirm that the interpretation of all these seven dis- 
tinct lines of thought is unnatural. In every case 
that interpretation has been given which the lan- 
guage itself naturally suggests to the average mind, 
but by any one of these lines of thought the in- 
spiration of the Old Testament may be sufficiently 
attested for all practical purposes. That is to say, 
one does not have to travel over all the roads which 
lead to London in order to get there. Any one of 
them will suffice. 

These seven lines of thought have been selected 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 103 


out of a multitude equally good, because the test in 
each case is so very simple, and in every case is a 
matter of historical proof. So that we may safely 
conclude that all claims of Old Testament inspira- 
tion rest upon the proof of one historical fact, 
namely, that its foretold Messiah has come. But 
if Jesus of Nazareth be not this Old Testament 
Messiah no other Jew need set up a claim. It will 
not be denied that he claimed to be the Messiah 
in all four of the distinct phases of Messiahship, 
prophet, priest, king and sacrifice. Nor will it be 
denied that he testified on oath before God in the 
most solemn manner, when adjured by the high 
priest, that he was that Messiah. 

In like manner we now proceed to show that 
all New Testament claim of inspiration rests upon 
the proof of another simple historical fact, namely, 
that Jesus of Nazareth, claiming to be the Messiah 
of the Old Testament, did arise from the dead. 
Though all of the seven previous lines of thought 
focus on Jesus of Nazareth and upon him alone— 
that is to say, in his case proof was established by 
the genealogical tables that he was a lineal de- 
scendant of David; that he did come in the days 
of the Roman empire; that he did come while Judah 
still retained some marks of nationality; that he 
did visit the second temple time; that he has been 
an ensign for the gathering of the Gentiles; that 
he did fulfill the Jewish types and that since re- 
jecting him and in accordance with his own proph- 


104 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


ecy, their temple has been destroyed and their 
nationality lost; now, although all these focus in 
himself alone and constitute an argument of no 
slight force to a fair mind, yet he himself, while 
living, and in answer to a direct challenge of his 
claim, appointed as the one supreme test of that 
claim that after they put him to death he would 
arise from the dead. 

It is, therefore, quite needless to multiply or to 
complicate issues. All controversies between Chris- 
tians upon the one hand and the opposers of Chris- 
tianity, of whatever name, throughout the universe, 
on the other hand, may be narrowed to one decisive 
battlefield. The whole case compacts itself as a 
single kernel into one nutshell of historical fact. 
If Jesus of Nazareth rose from the dead at the 
date previously assigned by himself, and as a proof 
of his claim, then he is no impostor nor a deluded 
enthusiast. God would not raise from the dead 
one who made such a blasphemous claim, one who 
was an impostor. So that if he did rise from the 
dead he is divine. If he be divine just one word 
from him authenticated the inspiration of both Tes- 
taments. The Testaments being inspired by that 
fact become the supreme standard of human con- 
duct and creed and thought by which the world will 
be judged and eternal destiny fixed. 

Let us, therefore, glance rapidly at the proof that 
he himself, while living, did propose this test, and 
that the challenge was accepted, and that the dem- 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 10s 


cnstration did come in the way claimed. I read 
six distinct statements of this proposed issue at 
different periods of his life here upon the earth, 
the first early in his ministry, the last at the close 
of his ministry. This proves that it was no after- 
thought, but that from the beginning he recognized 
this to be the crucial point upon which all of his 
claims depended. 

When early in his ministry he came suddenly 
to his temple, in fulfillment of prophecy, and when 
by virtue of the authority claimed he scourged 
from that temple the robbers and thieves who held 
it, then they demanded a sign of his authority. I 
read it from the second chapter of John, commenc- 
ing at the eighteenth verse: “ The Jews therefore 
answered and said unto him, What sign shewest 
thou unto us, seeing thou doest these things? 
Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this 
temple and in three days I will raise it up. The 
Jews, therefore (not understanding), said, Forty 
and six years was this temple in building, and wilt 
thou rear it up in three days? But he spake of the 
temple of his body. When, therefore, he was risen 
from the dead his disciples remembered that he 
spake this, and they believed in the Scripture, and 
the word which Jesus had said.” It is admitted 
that when here he first set forth his test, they mis- 
apprehended his language. 

I read the next instance in the order of time, 
and from the twelfth chapter of Matthew: He is 


106 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


now in Galilee and not in Jerusalem. ‘“‘ Then cer- 
tain of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, 
saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee. 
But he answered and said unto them, An evil and 
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and 
there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of 
the prophet Jonah; for as Jonah was three days 
and three nights in the body of the whale, so shall 
the Son of man be three days and three nights in 
the heart of the earth.’ This time they did not 
misunderstand him, as will be clearly shown later. 

I cite the next instance in which the test was 
presented, reading from the sixteenth chapter of 
Matthew: “From that time Jesus began to shew 
unto his disciples how that he must go into Jeru- 
salem and suffer many things of the elders and 
chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the 
third day be raised up.” Mark’s record and Luke’s 
record accord exactly with this record by Matthew. 
This time the test was not proposed to his enemies, 
but to his friends, to his disciples, but through his 
disciples the knowledge of it rapidly reached his 
enemies. 

In the order of history I read the next instance 
from the seventeenth chapter of Matthew: “ And 
while they abode in Galilee Jesus said unto them, 
The Son of man shall be delivered up into the 
hands of men, and they shall kill him, and the third 
day he shall be raised up. And they were exceed- 
ingly sorry.” 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION $107 


I read the next presentation of the test.in the 
order of the history, and this time from the tenth 
chapter of John. He had just told them that he 
was the good shepherd, and would lay down his 
life for the sheep, adding the significant statement : 
“No one taketh my life away from me, but I lay 
it down myself. I have power to lay it down and 
I have power to take it up again. This is the 
commandment I received from my Father. There 
arose a division therefore among the Jews because 
of these words.” 

I cite the next instance. This time Matthew, 
Mark and Luke all record it. I read from the twen- 
tieth chapter of Matthew, commencing at the sev- 
enteenth verse: ‘“ Now as Jesus was going up to 
Jerusalem he took the twelve disciples apart while 
on the way, and he said to them, Behold, we go 
up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be de- 
livered unto the chief priests and scribes and they 
shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him 
unto the Gentiles to mock and to scourge and to 
crucify, and the third day he shall be raised up.” 

After these citations it is necessary to show you 
how this proposed test, that is, the proof of one 
historical fact, was considered by his enemies. I 
now read from the twenty-seventh chapter of Mat- 
thew. He is hanging on the cross. He has been 
delivered up, and they are putting him to death, 
and while he is dying they say this: “ And they that 
passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and 


108 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


saying, Thou that destroyest the temple and build- 
est it again in three days, save thyself.” 

I submit a much more conclusive statement. He 
is now dead. Those who have had charge of his 
execution have officially certified that he is dead. 
His body has been taken down from the cross, 
pronounced dead by the official executioner, received 
as dead by his friends, both hands and feet pierced 
and a spear driven into his heart; cold and dead, 
and he had been put in the grave and an immense 
stone rolled to the mouth of that sepulchre. I read 
from the twenty-seventh chapter of Matthew, com- 
mencing at the sixty-second verse: “ Now on the 
morrow, which is the day after the Preparation, the 
chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered to- 
gether unto Pilate, saying, We remember that this 
deceiver said while he was yet alive, After three 
days I will rise again. Command, therefore, that 
the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest 
haply his disciples come and steal him away and 
say unto the people, He is risen from the dead; and 
the last error will be worse than the first. Pilate 
said unto them: Ye have a guard. Go your way, 
make it as sure as you can. So they went and made 
the sepulchre sure, sealing the stones and setting a 
watch.” 

Now I submit to you if I have not proved from 
this book that while he was alive he himself rested 
all of his claims upon. the proof of one historical 
fact, and that he gave this as the sign, and that the 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 109 


challenge was accepted by his enemies? They un- 
derstood its significance. They did not understand 
the resurrection of the dead, as some moderns claim, 
to mean regeneration. They did not understand it 
to mean the deliverance of the soul from the body 
at the dissolution of the body. They understood it 
to apply to the body and not to the soul. They 
brought no word to Pilate as to the whereabouts 
of his disembodied soul. They sought not to seal 
up the gate that hides the invisible world. They 
sealed a grave. They established a guard to see 
that the body should not be wrested from the grave. 
They understood his test to be that his body, put 
to death upon the cross, would rise from the dead 
upon the third day, and any man who talks about 
the resurrection meaning any other thing does vio- 
lence to the literal, primary and commonly accepted 
signification of the word, and advertises himself 
as incompetent to deal with a critical question. 
Now, let us see where we stand. First, accord- 
ing to these records, there was a Jew named Jesus 
of Nazareth, who claimed to be the Messiah of the 
Old Testament; second, that the scribes and the 
Pharisees disputed his claim, demanding a sign; 
third, that he, while living, repeatedly to his friends, 
and repeatedly to his enemies and in answer to the 
demand that one who made such claims should have 
some adequate credentials, must furnish some proof 
of such high claim, gave as his credentials, as the 
authentication of his mission, as the divine estab- 


110 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


lishment of his divinity, that after they put him 
to death on the third day he would rise again. 

The record shows that they did take him, and 
try him, and condemn him, and crucify him, and 
that the authentication of his death was everything 
that evidence could supply. You cannot meet this 
question by saying that he only seemed to be dead, 
and his alleged resurrection merely a resuscitation 
of suspended life. A Roman centurion, charged 
with the execution of the prisoner, who goes back 
tothe one in authority and reports that this prisoner 
has been executed and is dead, would make no mis- 
take upon a point of that kind. You could not 
consistently affirm that anyone now sleeping in 
our cemetery is dead and then deny the sufficiency 
of the evidence that the man Jesus of Nazareth died 
and was buried. So thus far we are clear. 

I cite next the Scripture in connection with the 
text. The third day is just about to dawn, the 
critical hour, the precise time. The lesson reads: 
‘“ Now late on the Sabbath day, as it began to dawn 
toward the first day of the week, came Mary Mag- 
dalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre. 
And, behold, there was a great earthquake; for the 
angel of the Lord descended from heaven and came 
and rolled back the stone from the door and sat 
upon it. His countenance was as lightning, and 
his raiment as white as snow. And for fear of 
him the watchers did shake and become as dead 
men. And the angel answered and said unto the 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 111 


women, Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus, 
who hath been crucified. Why seek ye the living 
among the dead? He is not here, for he is risen, 
as he said.” 

So that we have come to this fact, that at the time 
designated by the test, the tomb is empty, the body 
is gone. So far there has been perfect agreement 
upon every fact stated: there was a man named 
Jesus of Nazareth; he claimed to be the Messiah 
of the Old Testament; he was challenged to give 
a sign that would authenticate his high claim; he 
did fix this as the sign and specified the time of 
the test; that he did die, he was buried, and at 
the appointed time, though a guard stood there to 
prevent imposture, the body is gone. What, then, 
became of the body of Jesus of Nazareth? If he 
did not rise either the Jews got the body or the 
disciples got it. The Jews were in this dilemma: 
If they took that body away why didn’t they exhibit 
it as dead and identify it as the very body that had 
been crucified, and disprove all claim of the resur- 
rection? 

To say that the disciples took away the dead body 
forces a question of unavoidable logic: What did 
they want with it dead? What could they do with 
it dead? What purpose would it answer for them? 
They felt that the battle was lost. They were cowed 
to death. They supposed that they were orphaned. 
What courage could come into their hearts by steal- 
ing that body, then lying with reference to it, and 


112 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


then destroying it so that it never could be found? 
A man’s gullibility must be huge to believe that 
these cowed disciples stole that body and reported 
that he was risen from the dead. 

So the important question is now fairly stated. 
In the following sermon the evidence will be ex- 
amined, and in a subsequent discourse the reason- 
ableness of the test proposed by Jesus will be shown. 


V 
SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 


SECOND SERMON 


_ _‘*To whom also he showed himself alive after his death by many 
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the 
things pertaining to the kingdom of God.’’—Acts 1: 3. 


OU will recall in the preceding sermon that I 
ys thought it important to show from the word 
of God that our Lord Jesus Christ when he 
was alive, at six different times—three times with 
his enemies and three times with his friends—espe- 
cially fixed the test of his Messiahship, and that 
that test was that he would rise from the dead. 
Three other things occurred in his lifetime bear- 
ing upon the same subject, all of them of tremen- 
dous signification. The first is the institution of 
the ordinance of baptism, which has no significa- 
tion apart from the resurrection of the dead, it 
being a picture of a burial and an emergence from 
the grave. That this institution was appointed be- 
fore he died, that it was appointed for perpetual 
obligation, showed the clearest apprehension in 
his mind of the nature of the test and the worth 
of this monumental evidence. 
The second is the institution of the Lord’s Sup- 
per, whose only hope is in the resurrection of the 


113 


114 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


dead. In the very act of commemorating his death 
he assures them that he will drink this wine anew 
with them in his Father’s kingdom, and that while 
this ordinance is to be a perpetual obligation and 
points significantly backward, it also points still 
more significantly to the future, in that it was to 
be observed until he came again. For 1,900 years 
these two monuments have stood in the eyes of 
the world. The third thing was that when they 
were saddened over the clear announcement of 
his departure from them by death, he gave them 
an assurance based upon his resurrection that he 
would not leave them always; that when he rose 
from the dead and reached his Father’s house, he 
would send the Holy Spirit, whose coming would 
confer upon them power to do all he had com- 
manded them to do. 

Thus the institution of baptism and the supper 
as perpetual ordinances and the promise of the 
Holy Spirit all conditioned on his resurrection, take 
their place with the test six times preannounced. 
That a mere man, and particularly that an impostor, 
would make such conditions of faith in himself is 
inconceivable. 

Our former sermon closed at the grave ‘of Jesus, 
and at the empty grave of Jesus. We stopped at 
the disappearance of the dead body that had been 
put in the grave, and with the question pending, 
What became of that body? I have never heard of 
but two theories concerning the disposition of the 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 115 


dead body of our Lord Jesus Christ. Both of the 
theories are possible. Both of them make allega- 
tions legitimately belonging to the domain of testi- 
“mony; that is, they are matters upon which testi- 
mony may be received and susceptible of sufficient 
proof. 

The first theory is set forth in the following lan- 
guage: “Some of the guard came into the city 
and told unto the chief priests all of the things that 
were come to pass”; that is, they told the chief 
priests that an earthquake came, and that there was 
a dazzling appearance of an angel from heaven, and 
that they fell down like dead men, and that when 
they arose from that prostration by the power of 
the heavenly messenger the grave was empty. 
Those were the facts they recited to the chief 
priests. Then the record adds: “ And when the 
chief priests were assembled with the elders and 
had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the 
- guards, saying, Tell ye that his disciples came by 
night and stole him away while ye slept, and if this 
come to the governor’s ears we will persuade him 
and rid you of all care. So they took the money 
and did as they were taught, and this saying was 
spread abroad among the Jews and continueth until 
this day.” This first theory, therefore, was that 
the body of our Lord Jesus Christ was stolen by 
night by his disciples and stolen for the purpose 
of making a claim that he was raised. 

.. This was a possible solution of the question, and 


116 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


it was an allegation that could be sustained by ade- 
quate testimony. We know that there have been 
such things as robbers of graves. We know of 
many historical instances where dead bodies have 
been taken from the grave for some purpose; med- 
ical students, for example, who carry them to the 
dissecting table, or robbers, whose object is to ob- 
tain a large ransom from the afflicted relatives. 
So then, if the evidence is sufficient there is nothing 
in the theory itself to make it objectionable. The 
witnesses are stifficient in number. That guard 
constituted enough witnesses to prove any fact, so 
far as numbers go. The only thing is that what 
they testify must.be subjected to the rules of evi- 
dence such as are commonly recognized among men. 
Let us look, then, at their statement. 

They first gave a different account. In the sec- 
ond place, they accepted a bribe of a large sum of 
money to put this theory in circulation. In the 
third place, what they finally allege was absolutely 
impossible, so far as their knowledge could go, to 
wit, that the disciples stole that body while they 
were asleep. If they were asleep they could not 
testify as to any disposition of the body. They 
could not prove that anyone removed that body. 
Moreover, on the face of it, their last story is ex- 
ceedingly improbable, namely, that when a special 
guard had been detailed for the express purpose of 
preventing the very thing which they now allege 
did take place, and when the very time had been 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 117 


given to them when they must be most particular 
in their vigils, it is unreasonable to suppose that 
a guard so appointed would have relaxed their vigi- 
lance. 

It becomes more improbable from the death pen- 
alty assigned to a Roman sentinel who went to 
sleep upon the post of duty. It is still more im- 
probable from the fact that no adequate motive 
can be suggested or conceived of why the disciples 
should want this dead body. It would be of no 
use to them. So that as far as this theory goes, 
and it is one of the only two that haye ever been 
advanced, we may at once reject it. 

Now, what is the other theory? The other theory 
is that Jesus himself rose from the dead: the par- 
ticular point upon which human testimony is to be 
brought is not to show the processes by which he 
overcame death and brought back life to himself. 
No witness is introduced who alleges that he actu- 
ally saw him rise from the dead. The only thing 
upon which they are to bear testimony is that they 
did see him alive after he was dead. Here we are 
met by a pertinent and important inquiry: Is the 
thing concerning which evidence is to be introduced 
a legitimate matter for evidence? I take it for 
granted that there are no other things upon which 
human testimony is accepted more readily than upon 
these two points: First, that a man is dead, and 
second that a man is alive. We accept evidence 
upon both of those points and act upon that evi- 


118 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


dence on innumerable occasions. It is oftentimes 
necessary to prove death. It is oftentimes necessary 
to prove life. In either case, it is easy to be under- 
stood what amount of testimony is sufficient to 
prove that death has taken place, or to prove that 
a man is alive. 

The evidence of his death is abundant, official, 
and has never been denied. Therefore let us look 
at the evidence that Jesus showed himself alive 
after his death to his apostles and others. There 
are extant four independent histories of Jesus of 
Nazareth, written by contemporaries, and written 
while multitudes who also knew him personally were 
yet alive. There are extant also twenty-three other 
books, written by contemporaries, and written while 
thousands were yet alive who personally knew Jesus 
Christ. I refer to the twenty-seven books of the 
New Testament. The most notable event in all 
of these records is that Jesus of Nazareth rose 
from the dead. To this fact, according to these 
records, hundreds and thousands of eyewitnesses 
bear testimony, and who counted it the chief busi- 
ness of their subsequent life to repeat that evi- 
dence. 

In other words, henceforth their life mission was 
to be witnesses of the resurrection. Fifteen distinct 
appearances of our Lord Jesus Christ, at least, are 
given in the New Testament, perhaps more, includ- 
ing the several appearances to Paul, to Stephen and 
to John on the Island of Patmos.. But there are 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 119 


ten distinct appearances mentioned in these four 
histories. 

These appearances, many of them, are connected 
with the most minute details of identification of the 
body. Sometimes he appeared to just one, as to 
Mary Magdalene, to Peter, to James. Sometimes 
he appeared to two, then again to three, then again 
to seven, then to ten, then to eleven and finally to 
five hundred at one time. These appearances cov- 
ered a period of forty days. Some of them were 
in the morning, some of them at brightest midday, 
some of them at night; some in the house, some 
out in the road, some in the suburbs and some in 
the city of Jerusalem; some by the sea and some on 
the mountains of Galilee. Speaking collectively of 
these witnesses, they saw him often. They ate with 
him just as they had done before his death. They 
heard him often in both brief and long-sustained 
conversation. They witnessed closely every familiar 
mannerism of speech and tone and gesture. They 
handled him critically, touching the prints of the 
well-known wounds received at his crucifixion, and 
feeling of his flesh and of his bones, to assure 
themselves that a material substance was before 
them. 

And this, too, by those who knew him most in- 
timately in his lifetime, those who could least easily 
be mistaken as to the identity of his person, includ- 
ing his own skepticism as to his resurrection, well- 
nigh incorrigible, and their tremendous interests at 


120 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


stake, required upon their part the most patient and 
exhaustive examination, and demanded abundant 
and infallible proof, not only to the bodily senses 
of sight, of hearing and touch, and to the keener 
mental tests of memory, intuition and reason, but 
to that more subtle and more satisfactory proof, 
spiritual recognition. They must not only know 
positively, unmistakably and absolutely that this 
was the very body which had died and was buried 
and was now alive, but also that it was reanimated 
by the same spirit which warmed it before death, 
so that in every respect, and beyond all possibility 
of doubt, this was the same person, the same Jesus 
who had been their teacher, and also that he pos- 
sessed and made over to them power to do things 
that would make that resurrection a declaration 
that he was the Son of God with power. 

In all the cases of the establishment of identity 
known to history there has never been one where 
the proof has been so abundant, so critical and so 
comprehensive, covering all departments of inves- 
tigation, nor where the testimony was so unequiv- 
ocal and so consistent. If these witnesses could not 
establish the proof that Jesus was alive, then no 
evidence could possibly prove any man to be alive. 

So that you have before you the two theories 
and the evidence upon which those two theories rest; 
the first that the disciples stole the dead body, and 
next, that Jesus showed himself alive to his people 
after his death, not only by proofs, but many proofs, 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 1az1 


not only by many proofs, but by many infallible 
proofs, 

I submit the following fundamental rules which 
govern matters of evidence: First, ‘In trials of fact 
by oral testimony the proper inquiry is, not whether 
it is possible that the testimony may be false, but 
whether there is sufficient probability that it 1s 
true.” Second, “A proposition of fact is proved 
when its truth is established by competent and 
satisfactory evidence.”’ Third, “In the absence of 
circumstances which generate suspicion, every wit- 
ness is to be presumed credible until the contrary 
is shown, the burden of impeaching his credibility 
lying on the objector.” Fourth, “ The credit due 
to the testimony of witnesses depends upon, firstly, 
their honesty; secondly, their ability; thirdly, their 
number and the consistency of their testimony; 
fourthly, the conformity of their testimony with 
experience; and fifthly, the coincidence of their tes- 
timony with collateral circumstances.” 

Now if we apply these four rules of evidence to 
what is said concerning the stealing of his body, 
that statement goes to the wall. If we apply them 
to the evidence that Jesus showed himself alive 
after death to his people, no sane man can question 
that the requirements of every one of them is met 
in every particular. The honesty of these witnesses 
cannot be impeached. Their ability of competency 
depends upon their being acquainted previously with 
the person of Jesus Christ, their having good sense 


122 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


enough to recognize one whom they had previously 
known, and their opportunities for seeing the one 
who is identified by their testimony. 

There can be no question of the competency of 
these witnesses. There is nothing in their testimony 
that bears on its face suspicion. What, let me ask 
you, can create a suspicion against this evidence? 
It is consistent. What one says is consistent with 
what another says. Now let us look at these people 
who gave this evidence, and see if in all the col- 
lateral circumstances what they say is affirmed. 
For these men to state that Jesus was alive meant 
that they must take upon themselves the lifetime 
obligation of the publication of the fact of his res- 
urrection; that to do this they must go counter to 
the world, its pleasures, its habits, its business; that 
they must entail upon themselves the most grievous 
burdens in life and the greatest hazards of death. 
They joyfully assume all these responsibilities. 
When they speak of Jesus as risen they impress 
every man that hears it with their sincerity. They 
testify it before kings, and the kings tremble as 
they listen. They testify it when chained to the 
martyr’s stake, and while the flames are burning 
their bodies, and with shouts and hosannas of tri- 
umph they declare in their own dying agonies that 
Jesus is risen. No amount of intimidation was ever 
able to shake their testimony. It was tried by im- 
prisonment, tried by stripes, tried by poverty, tried 
by fire, tried by casting them to the ravenous, wild 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 123 


beasts in the Roman Amphitheater, and in every 
way possible to human effort; many experiments of 
the most excruciating kind were resorted to to shake 
the testimony of these men and these women. 

I submit that if any man with an unbiased mind 
will read the Acts of the Apostles and see how that 
narrative glows, he will feel the power of these 
men giving this evidence. But we come now to 
another question in connection with it. Our Lord 
had told them in the last interview had with them 
there should come a confirmation that neither earth, 
heaven nor hell could doubt. He said, “I go to 
my Father, and if I go I will send upon you the 
Holy Spirit.” The history recites that ten days 
from that time a most remarkable transaction oc- 
curred openly in the city of Jerusalem. There were 
certain things visible in connection with it. Tongues 
as of fire seemed to rest upon their heads. There 
was the further remarkable phenomenon that these 
fishers of Galilee were able, under his power be- 
stowed upon them, to speak in the languages of all 
of the nations of the earth, as if they had been 
born and reared in those tongues. It was evident 
that a power characterized them utterly foreign to 
their previous experience, and when they were called 
upon to explain, what was their explanation? Let 
me read it to you. 

“Ve men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of 
Nazareth, a man approved of God among you bv 
miracles and wonders and signs, which God did 


124 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also 
know: 

‘“‘ Him being delivered by the determinate counsel 
and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken and by 
wicked hands have crucified and slain: 

“Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the 
pains of death; because it was not possible that he 
should be holden of it, and he hath shed forth this 
which ye see and hear.” 

They gave no other account of their power. 
They could heal the sick. They could raise the 
dead. They could perform other wonders impos- 
sible to men not spirit endued. They distinctly dis- 
claimed that the power rested in themselves, and 
affirmed that it came to them from the risen and 
ascended and glorified Lord Jesus Christ. 

The next question to be determined is, what sig- 
nificance did they attach to this doctrine of the 
resurrection? How important was it in their sight? 
How much in their judgment was involved in that 
issue? I read first from the seventeenth chapter of 
the Acts of the Apostles. Paul is standing on Mars 
Hill, and he says: “‘ The times of this ignorance 
God overlooked, but now commandeth all men 
everywhere to repent, because he hath appointed a 
day in which he will judge the world in righteous- 
ness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof 
he hath given assurance to all men, in that he hath 
raised him from the dead.” 

Is there to be a judgment, and must all men 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 125 


stand before that divine bar and answer for the 
deeds which are done in the body? The only proof 
that there will be a judgment is the resurrection of 
the dead. Is there a heaven? There is but one 
proof of it, that Jesus when alive said to his people, 
“T go to prepare a place for you, and if I go and 
prepare a place for you, I will come again and re- 
ceive you unto myself, that where I am, there ye 
may be also. In my Father’s house are many man- 
sions.” Or let us read from the fifteenth chapter 
of the first letter to the Corinthians, where this doc- 
trine of the resurrection of the dead is specifically 
discussed. I commence at the twelfth verse: 

“Now, if Christ be preached that he rose from 
the dead, how say some among you that there is 
no resurrection of the dead? 

“ But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then 
is Christ not risen: 

“And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching 
vain, and is also your faith vain. 

“Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; 
because we have testified of God that he raised up 
Christ; whom he raised not up, if so be that the 
dead rise not. 

“For, if the dead rise not, then is not Christ 
raised: 

“ And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; 
ye are yet in your sins. 

“ Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ 
are perished. 


126 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


“Tf in this life only we have hope in Christ, 
we are of all men most miserable.” 

When ever before in issues made by men has 
there been such a readiness to stake everything upon 
one single fact; such an openness to concede that 
preaching is vain; faith is vain; forgiveness of sin 
is a falsehood; your fathers and mothers who died, 
perished; there is no judgment; there is no heaven; 
there is no hell; there is no hope; if there is no 
resurrection of the dead? 

It is a matter of unspeakable sadness to me, par- 
ticularly in the case of young people, to hear them 
speak lightly of the doctrine of the resurrection of 
the dead. And there are some who imagine that 
they can be skeptical upon this point and remain 
Christians. Is there anything left of Christianity 
with this surrendered? If its preaching be vain, 
if its faith be vain, if there be no such thing as 
the forgiveness of sin, if there be no such thing 
as the judgment, if there be no such place as hell, 
if all who have professed it are now utterly anni- 
hilated in their graves, what infinitesimal shred of 
Christianity is left? 

When you say that you are only skeptical con- 
cerning the resurrection of the dead, you mean or 
ought to mean, that you are skeptical about the 
whole matter, in its height and width and length and 
breadth, in its center, in its solidarity and in its 
circumstances. You do not believe any of. it. 
There is nothing to profess if you deny this doc- 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 127 


trine. So far the discussion has been restricted 
to the resurrection of the body of Jesus Christ and 
necessarily has shown the relation between his res- 
urrection and the inspiration of the Scriptures. 

The two subjects cannot be considered apart. 
They stand or fall together. In our next sermon 
will be considered the doctrine of the resurrection 
of the dead as it applies to us, and the reasons given 
so far as Scripture light shines upon the subject, 
why this particular test of all others in the world 
was made the proof of Christianity, and a reply 
submitted to objections to the doctrine based upor 
exegesis Or upon science. 


VI 
SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 


THIRD SERMON 


“Verily, verily, Isay unto you, The hour is coming and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall 
live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to 
the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute 
judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for 
the hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear his 
voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resur- 
rection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of 
damnation.”—John 5:25-29. 

HE occasion of the deliverance which con- 
stitutes this text was restoration to perfect 
health of a man afflicted for thirty-eight 

years with the infirmity of impotence, brought about 
by sin. The man’s vital powers were all so wasted 
that recovery by nature or by medical skill was 
impossible. The restoration, therefore, was a 
miracle, by a word, instant, permanent. Such a 
case of healing is equivalent to life from the dead, 
since it involves creative power. 

Hence our Lord’s explanation of it in these 
words: “For as the Father raiseth up the dead 
and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth 
whom he will.” It is in this connection that he 
utters these words of the text: “ Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, The hour is coming and now is, 
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of 


128 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 129 


God: and they that hear shall live. For as the 
Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to 
the Son to have life in himself; and hath given 
him authority to execute judgment also, because he 
is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the 
hour is coming in which all that are in the graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of God and shall 
come forth; they that have done good, unto the 
resurrection of life; they that have done evil, unto 
the resurrection of damnation.” 

Here, evidently, are two resurrections; one that 
now is, and one that is to come; one a resurrection 
of the soul from spiritual death, the other a resur- 
rection of the body from physical death. Both 
resurrections are effected by the Son of God, who 
has become the Son of man, and following the 
resurrection from the physical death comes the gen- 
eral judgment. 

This text, therefore, prepares the way for an 
orderly and complete statement of the doctrine of 
the resurrection of the dead. I ask you to read 
carefully every term of this statement of the 
doctrine. While the Scriptures describe the future 
restoration of Israel as a symbolic restoration (in 
the thirty-seventh chapter of Ezekiel and in the elev- 
enth chapter of the letter to the Romans), and 
while they describe the impartation of life to the 
soul in regeneration as a spiritual resurrection (as 
in the first part of this text, and in the second 
chapter of the letter to the Ephesians), they also 


130 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


declare that at the second coming of Christ there 
shall be a resurrection of the body, and a reunion 
of the raised body with the selfsame spirit from 
which death separated us; that both the just and 
the unjust shall have part in this resurrection; that 
to the just it shall be a resurrection unto life, and 
the body shall be like Christ’s body, fitted for the 
eternal use of the sanctified spirit. 

To the unjust it shall be a resurrection unto con- 
demnation, and the body shall be fitted for the 
eternal uses of an unsanctified spirit; that this res- 
urrection of the just and of the unjust shall be 
followed by the general judgment, whose final and 
irrevocable decree fixes forever the alignment and 
status of the whole human family. It is important 
to know that this statement of the doctrine forbids 
the restriction of the term “resurrection” to a 
figurative import, while it concedes the figurative 
usage of the word in some cases, and that it forbids 
the restriction of the term to any change whatever 
that the soul may undergo, though it concedes a 
spiritual resurrection; that it forbids a restriction 
of the term to the resurrection of the bodies of the 
just, in that it insists that there shall be a resurrec- 
tion of both the just and the unjust. 

To avoid all possible ambiguity, even at the risk 
of tedious repetition, the resurrection of the dead, 
now under consideration, applies to the outer, not 
to the inner man. It means that the corruptible 
body shall put on incorruption; that the mortal 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 131 


body shall be swallowed up in immortality. It does 
not mean the spirit’s release by dissolution of the 
body, as a butterfly emerges into larger life by its 
escape from the chrysalis state. This would be 
to make death both the date and the means of the 
resurrection. It does not mean the quickening of 
the spirit in regeneration, nor. any part, or process, 
or consummation of the sanctification of the spirit. 
Nor does it mean any gradual change taking place 
in the renewal of our bodies now by natural 
processes. 

It announces a definite, instantaneous, future 
event, so entirely without what we call the realm 
of nature that it must be classed essentially as a 
miracle of supernatural power, indeed, the greatest 
of miracles. This general resurrection of human 
bodies is based entirely upon the resurrection of 
Christ’s body, to which resurrection of Christ his 
churches look back as the source of their light, 
and which irresistibly carries with it all other 
miracles of the Scriptures, and constitutes the irre- 
futable proof that these Scriptures are the inspired 
words of God, thus leaving no room for any mis- 
conception of the import of the doctrine. 

Let us now carefully review its historic and philo- 
sophic foundations. We may rest assured that our 
Lord prescribed no arbitrary and unsuitable test 
of his divinity. When he selected the sign of 
Jonas as the one sign establishing his divine cre- 
dentials and authenticating his doctrine as from 


132 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


heaven, it was because that sign and no other fitted 
the requirements of the case. 

A profound philosophy will be found to underlie 
the necessity for this specific demonstration of his di- 
vinity and of the inspiration of the Scriptures. And 
what is that philosophy? The philosophy of a thing 
is the reason of the thing. What reason, therefore, 
imperiously demanded this proof of Christ’s divin- 
ity? The answer is easy to find, and when found 
is easy to understand. It consists of the following 
three elements : 

First, the normal personality of the first man, 
body and soul, as originally created, with the pur- 
pose and provision of God that the body should be 
perpetuated. Second, the fall or death of that man, 
in both body and soul, through Satanic seduction. 
Third, the promise of a redeemer, the seed of a 
- woman, who would destroy the work of the devil 
and restore man to his normal condition of soul 
and body. That is the philosophic ground of the 
text. The Scripture record, the Old Testament 
Scriptures, by which the Messiahship must be tested, 
clearly shows that the first man was a dual being. 
His body, indeed, was fashioned of earthly matter. 
His soul was inbreathed. 

There was an inner and an outer man, and this 
dual being was the normal man. Both constituents 
are necessary to the make-up of man. Neither apart 
from the other constitutes a man. This is the first 
fact of human history, according to this Book, 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 133 


concerning the human race. The second fact is that 
by the appointed use of the tree of life, placed in 
the Garden of Eden, to which man had access as 
long as he was steadfast in his probation, provision 
was made for the perpetuity of his body, showing 
that God purposed that the body should live as long 
as the soul which inhabits it. Now, the intent of 
the Creator is the law of the creature. What pur- 
pose was in God’s mind when he made anything 
or any being is the law of that thing or that being, 
and when the Creator made man, making him dual, 
body and soul, and purposed and provided for the 
continuity of his body, that intent marks the bound- 
aries of man and becomes the law of his being. 
His intent was that man’s body should live for- 
ever, and adequate provision was made for it. 
Now, such is-man as he appears on the first sacred 
historic page. Look at him! in the image of his 
Creator, partly mortal, and yet the mortal, by the 
provision of a probation, to become immortal, and 
body and soul live forever. 

The third fact is that man failed in his probation 
through the seduction of the devil, and was cut 
off from access to the tree of life, lest, as God 
says, ‘‘He now eat of that tree and live forever.” 
The body, shut out from the means of perpetuity, 
hastened to dissolution. Thus the whole man fell. 
His soul by alienation from God became dead in 
sin. His mortal body, separated from the tree of 
life, returned to the dust as it was. It is im- 


134 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


portant here to make clear the meaning of mor- 
tality and immortality as predicated of the body. 
When we say the body is mortal, we do not mean 
that its constituent elements shall ever perish,— 
matter is indestructible,—but we mean that the or- 
ganism or form in which those elements cohere 
and constitute an animate form is mortal. When 
we Say an immortal body, we do not mean that its 
particles of matter exist forever, though this is true, 
but we mean that the organism or form in which 
these particles of matter cohere lives forever as an 
animate form. It is quite important to note what 
is meant by the mortality of the body and immor- 
tality of the body. The body is a living organism. 
When, therefore, our Lord claimed to be the Mes- 
siah of the Old Testament he well knew what char- 
acter of proof was requisite to establish his claim. 
Because the children of men were partakers of 
flesh and blood he likewise partook of the same, 
that through death he might destroy him that had 
the power of death, that is, the devil; and through 
his death deliver them who all their lifetime were 
subject to bondage through fear. He must show 
that one traveler has returned from that bourne 
which swallowed up the bodies of all the rest. If 
he cannot show that, he is not the Messiah. He 
could not be declared the Son of God with power 
except by the rising of his body from the death, 
and this rising—mark this point—this rising must 
be to die no more. It must not be like the rising 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 135 


of the girl whose hand he took and the maid arose. 
She died afterwards. It must not be like the rising 
of the widow’s son at Nain, whom he spoke unto 
life and gave back to his mother. He died again. 
It must not be like the rising when he stood at 
the mouth of the sepulchre full of corruption 
and said, ‘ Lazarus, come forth,’ for Lazarus 
died again. The risen body must be made im- 
mortal. 

Any resurrection like that of Lazarus, to be fol- 
lowed by death again, no matter how remote that 
death might be, would not meet the requirements 
of the case. The original man, according to God’s 
intent, was to have an immortal body. All mor- 
tality must be eliminated. He then, the firstfruits 
from the dead, must be able to say, as he did say: 
“T am he that liveth and was dead and will die 
no more. And I have the key of death and of 
hell.””, In no other way could he bruise the ser- 
pent’s head. In no other way could he win back 
all that man had lost, and restore man to the full 
fruition of God’s original purpose concerning him. 
Why, then, did he impose this test and no other? 
Because this and no other meets the requirements 
of the case. A Messiah who left out half of God’s 
original purpose has forever failed. A Messiah 
to save only a part of each man would not be the 
Old Testament Messiah. 

There was, therefore, profound Sil cen be- 
hind his reply to a challenge for a sign adequate 


136 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


to authenticate his claim when he said, ‘ No sign 
shall be given but the sign of the prophet Jonas; 
for as Jonas was three days and nights in the body 
of the whale, so must the Son of man be three 
days and nights in the body of the earth, and on 
the third day he shall rise again.” 

The historic and philosophic reason of this test 
thus made, we next inquire on what ground may 
we rest the fulfillment of such a test. The test 
requires that a body which had died shall rise from 
the grave, rise immortal, rise to die no more. On 
what ground can you rest that test? From the 
nature of the test there can be but one ground, 
namely, the power of God. If there be a God, he 
is omnipotent. An omnipotent God can raise the 
dead. 

Therefore to the Sadducees, when they denied 
the doctrine of the resurrection, he said: “ You do 
err, not knowing the scriptures, neither the power 
of God.” Let me read you the foundation on which 
this doctrine rests. To Moses God said: “I kill 
and I make alive.’ In the book of Samuel God 
says: “The Lord killeth and maketh alive. He 
bringeth down to the grave and he bringeth up 
from the grave.” Therefore, in sending out his 
apostles, and knowing what intimidation would be 
brought to bear upon their naturally cowardly na- 
tures, he pointed out to them the true objects of 
fear and said: “ Fear not him who can kill the 
body but cannot kill the soul, but fear him who 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 137 


after he hath killed the body can destroy both soul 
and body forever in hell.” 

Well might you doubt if one affirmed that man 
could raise the dead. Well might you be skeptical 
if one affirmed that Nature by her own inherent 
powers provides for the resurrection of the dead. 
But in the language of the great apostolic logician, 
“Why should it be thought by you a thing in- 
credible that God should raise the dead?” It is 
incredible that man can raise the dead. It is in- 
credible that nature provides for a resurrection. 
It is incredible that God should raise the dead. And 
the doctrine of the resurrection rests exclusively 
upon the power of God, and whoever denies the 
doctrine of the resurrection errs by not knowing 
the power of God. 

And to what purpose is all the vast array of 
testimony from human scientists declaring that they 
cannot find the resurrection of the dead by tele- 
scope, or microscope, or scalpel, or crucible? What 
fool ever said they could? Their investigation can- 
not go beyond the realm of nature. The resurrec- 
tion is without the realm of nature. Confessedly 
it is supernatural. 

And do you suppose that any Christian would 
rejoice or vaunt himself if the resurrection by scien- 
tific demonstration could be proved and located in 
the realm of nature? Mark the words. Listen to 
the statement. Let it sink down into your hearts. 
When scientists can make that proof they have 


138 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


destroyed Christianity. Does any skeptic on scien- 
tific grounds suppose for a moment that he harms 
Christianity by his failure to find the resurrection 
in nature? Let him disabuse his mind. If he wants 
to shoot a gun that will crumble all the foundations 
of Christianity, let him prove by a scientific demon- 
stration the resurrection of the dead. 

The sole value of the resurrection as a test of 
Christ’s divinity and of the inspiration of the Scrip- 
tures lies in its supernaturalism. It must essentially 
be by a miracle. It must be something that God 
only can do. Any man may say, “I lay down my 
life,” but only Jesus Christ could say, “I lay down 
my life and I take it up again.” 

It is pertinent to close this discussion by intro- 
ducing the witness of prophecy. Let us look at 
some of the prophetic facts, for a fact does not 
stand by itself. It is sure to cast a shadow in some 
direction. It is not merely a memorial post of a 
past event, but a future forecast. It indicates what 
can be. 

With this view let us look at a series of facts. 
First, all miraculous cases of healing in both Testa- 
ments. The element of miracle enters where the 
powers of nature and of science stop. Any kind 
of bodily or mental sickness beyond the recuperative 
powers of nature and also of medical skill that is 
cured, must be cured by a miracle, and that miracle 
will have an important signification. When such a. 
case is healed in a moment of time by a word or by 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 139 


a touch, it involves the exercise of creative power, 
and forecasts the redemption of the body. It argues 
not only divine sympathy for physical and mental 
pain, not only hints at the intrinsic value of the 
human body as an integral part of the normal man, 
but it prophesies the ultimate salvation of the body. 

Hence a characteristic feature of the Old Testa- 
ment Messiah is that he himself took our infirmities 
and bore our sicknesses. Hence the prophet says, 
“At his coming the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened, the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; 
then shall the lame man leap as an hart and the 
tongue of the dumb sing.” 

Hence, when John in prison was doubting and 
sent his disciples with the inquiry to Jesus, “ Art 
thou he that cometh, or look we for another?” 
it happened while his messengers stood by that 
Jesus cured many of diseases and plagues and evil 
spirits, and on many that. were blind he bestowed 
sight, and he returned this answer: “ Go your way. 
Tell John what things ye have seen and heard. 
The blind receive their sight; the lame walk; lepers 
are cleansed; the deaf hear; the dead are raised 
up; the poor have the gospel preached to them. 
Blessed is he who shall find no occasion for stum- 
bling in me.” 

In other words, the proof of the Messiah is the 
helping of the human body by counteracting the 
dreadful effects of sin upon the human body, and 
shall the Messiah’s work stop at temporary relief? 


140 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Shall he by touch give sight to an eye that shall 
one day be blind forever? Shall he speak to an 
unhearing ear that after all will never listen to the 
minstrelsy of heaven and the hosannas of redemp- 
tion? Shall he call Lazarus from the grave and 
beat back corruption for a few years, and then 
that body go back into the grave forever? 

These facts have a prophetic phase. They point 
from partial relief of human suffering to complete 
relief of human suffering. Precisely the same sign 
becomes the credential of Christ’s apostles. “ As 
ye go, heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the 
dead, these signs shall follow them that believe. 
In my name they shall cast out demons. They 
shall pick up serpents. They shall be exempt from 
the poison and shall be able to recover the sick.’ 

The most striking object-lessons of Messianic 
and apostolic days, the scenes that leap to the eye, 
not summoned by artful contrivances, but that 
spontaneously put themselves upon the arena be- 
fore the human sight when we think of Christ and 
when we think of his apostles, is that great crowd 
of sufferers, the halting lame man, the groping 
blind man, the straining deaf ear, listening for 
some sound of mercy; the shriveled arm, endeavor- 
ing to be whole again; the broken-hearted mothers, 
holding out babes flushed with fever; the friends 
climbing upon the roof and letting down through 
the tiles, laid aside, the paralyzed body. Oh! look 
at them! And in apostolic days see how they bring 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION. 141 


their sick and helpless ones and lay them down, 
that even the shadow of Peter may fall upon them. 

In Paul’s day notice how they timidly touched 
his body with their handkerchiefs and carried them 
off to some helpless ones that could not come and 
could not be brought. Now, with all miraculous 
healings of both Testaments is another class of 
prophetic facts, that class which reconveys to bank- 
rupted nature lost power. Behold Hannah, the 
childless woman, the reproach in Israel, unable to 
present as her successor any child. “ Lord, have 
mercy on me.” 

Behold Abraham, his body as good as dead, and 
all hope of the world dependent on a successor to 
Abraham, and now comes by divine power, not by 
some skill of medicine, not by ahy inherent recuper- 
ative power in nature, but by the power of God, 
there comes ability, as if one had never ha@ a bank- 
ruptcy of his natural powers. Still more striking 
are the recoveries from actual death. Let us look 
at them. A widow with an only son—how many 
here have just one?—and the bright little boy was 
out in the field one day following his father, and 
the sun was hot, and he had a sunstroke, and they 
brought him home and put him on his mother’s 
lap, and he moaned and died. He was dead! Dead! 
It was not a case of suspended animation. He was 
dead. And after a long time God’s prophet comes, 
not with healing medicaments, not with powerful 
restoratives, but in the name of God, and trusting 


142 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


in the power of God. He prostrates himself on 
the body of the child and cries out into the world 
where the spirit has gone, “Come back, O spirit, 
and reanimate this body,” and it came. 

Again, Elisha died, the great prophet, and he was 
buried, and the enemy were hovering around the 
borders, and a man had died while they were watch- 
ing for the force of the enemy, and they were try- 
ing to bury him in a hurry, and while they were 
picking up the body to carry him out someone cried, 
“To arms; they come! They come!” And they 
hastily gathered up the dead man and dropped him 
down in Elisha’s tomb, and when his body strikes 
Elisha’s body he wakes up and rises and comes 
out of that grave himself. 

See the little girl, thirteen years old, dead, with 
the flush just fading, so lately has she died, and 
Jesus comes and puts his hand upon her head and 
says, “ Little girl, I say unto thee, Get up.” And 
she arose. He meets that funeral procession—Life 
meeting Death. He sees the widow, her son on the 
bier, and commands them to stand still, and puts 
his hand upon that body and says, “ Young man, 
arise,’ and he gave him to his mother. 

And when other mothers, with hearts as badly 
broken, in grief as deep and immeasurable as hers, 
shall come from the millions of graves where sleep 
their sons and daughters, and say: “ O my Saviour, 
these bodies of the dead, shall they never Ms given 
back to us?” 


SERMONS ON THE RESURRECTION 143 


And when he stands before the grave of Lazarus, 
where corruption is rioting, and the offense of 
corruption fills the air with its loathsome smell, Jesus 
in a voice of authority penetrates the charnel house, 
in a tone that pierces the dull cold ear of death, 
wakes up Lazarus and the shrouded dead comes 
forth. Look at these facts. 

I will briefly mention three other facts, and they 
are far more significant than any which have been 
cited. I go back to the time when Enoch walked 
with God. There was that man, soul and body, 
here on earth, and Enoch came to where men usually 
found death, and Enoch was translated that he 
should not see death. Enoch’s body went to heaven. 
And shall it remain alone in heaven forever? Shall 
the body of no other saint join Enoch’s body? 

Elijah, the great prophet, who once prayed to 
die, is now informed that he shall never die, and 
while walking in the field God summoned him. 
The flashing chariot of heaven came down for the 
honored guest, and by translation, by transfigura- 
tion, by instant elimination of all corruption and 
all mortality the body of Elijah goes to heaven. 
Shall those two alone be in heaven? 

Here is another fact, the only fact in the world 
apart from the resurrection of the body of Jesus 
Christ that exactly fits the case. I quote from the 
gospel of Matthew at the death of Christ. ‘‘ There 
was a great earthquake, and the rocks were rent, 
and graves were opened, and many of them that 


144 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


had fallen asleep came out of the tombs, and after 
Christ’s resurrection showed themselves, alive in the 
holy city, to die no more.” 

Now that is the prophecy of fact. O man, into 
whose heart the breath of doubt as cold as the 
wind from the icebergs of the North comes to chill 
every warm hope that has a promise of life, why 
should it be a thing incredible with you that God 


_ should raise the dead? 


Vil 
A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 


___.‘Because he hath appointed a day, in which he will judge the world 
given assurance t> all men, inthat he hath raised bit from tae neon 
—Acts 17: 31. 

Y reason for preparing this particular series 
on “ The Judgment,” as following the ser- 
mons on “ The Resurrection,” grew out of 

the strong relation between the resurrection and 
the judgment. This relation consists of two parts: 
first, the relation between Christ’s own resurrection 
and the judgment, and the relation between our 
resurrection and the judgment. The first relation 
is clearly set forth in both the scriptures read here 
this morning. (Acts 10: 40-42; Acts 17: 22-31.) 
The first one says, “ God raised him from the dead 
and commanded us ’’—(We have no option. It is 
an imperious decree of the divine will.). He com- 
manded us that “ we should preach that this is he 
that shall judge the quick and the dead.” And 
in this text it is stated that the assurance that God 
has given to all men that there will be a judgment, 
and that Jesus of Nazareth will be the Judge, is 
the fact of his resurrection from the dead. The 
word “assurance” here is literally “ faith” in the 
original. He hath given faith to all men: that is 


145 


146 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


the ground of faith, the data, the basis upon which 
a rational faith can rest, in that he hath raised 
him from the dead. So far as the relation between 
our resurrection and the judgment is concerned, 
we may express it in this form: Our resurrection 
must precede the judgment—closely precede it. In 
every case where the general judgment of God is 
spoken of it is preceded by the general resurrection, 
the resurrection of the just and the resurrection 
of the unjust, and the cause of this precedent lies, 
doubtless, in this fact, that the judgment will be 
upon the entire man; not just a part of him, as the 
spirit, nor another part of him, as the body, but 
the entire man, body and spirit. And yet another 
cause lies in this, that until the resurrection of the 
dead, when we reach the end of the affairs of time, 
it is impossible for man to rightly comprehend the 
extent of his influence upon those that come after 
him, and we are responsible for our influence as 
well as for our deeds. One who poisons the minds 
of young people, or debauches their morals, or 
shakes their faith, or stands as an obstacle before 
Jesus Christ and keeps men from coming to God, 
does not find a termination of his evil in his own 
death. That influence goes on, as when a pebble 
is dropped in a lake the ever widening circles of 
waves never stop until they touch the remotest 
shore. Therefore, in order for the judgment to 
reach not only the whole man, but the whole effect, 
the moral effect, of the man’s life, it is necessary 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 147 


that it shall be deferred until the end of time and 
after the resurrection of the dead. 

Now, as this is but the beginning of a series of 
sermons upon this subject, I wish, first of all, to 
inquire into the basis of the judgment. What are 
the foundations upon which it rests? These founda- 
tions are clearly set forth in the passage read from 
the seventeenth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. 
First, God made the world. He made it and all 
things therein. It is his workmanship. He made 
men, all men. Not only is the judgment based first 
upon the fact of God’s creative act, but also upon 
the fact of his providence. His providence controls 
the world now and has always controlled it; and 
not merely by a general providence, but by a per- 
sonal, moral government he rules over the world. 
That moral reign of God extends throughout all 
ages and to all men. Not only this, but it is by 
his decree that our times are allotted to us and the 
boundaries of our habitation. And not only this, 
but in everything it is his decree that men should 
seek after him, if haply they might feel after him 
and find him, though he be not far from every one 
of us. In his omnipresence he is accessible to all 
men. Now, this creative act of God, this general 
providence of God and his special providence, and 
this moral government of God, when followed by 
the special revelation of God, constitute the broad 
foundation upon which judgment rests. You can 
easily understand, therefore, the feelings that filled 


148 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


the heart of the Apostle Paul when he passed 
through Athens. Oh, what a sad thing, that the city 
where intellectual development was the greatest, 
and physical training exhibited its most marvelous 
examples, and where the arts and sciences flourished 
to the greatest and highest degree—oh, how sad 
to think that this city was the most ignorant on the 
face of the earth! Ignorant! Ignorant! I do not 
mean ignorant in many things, but on the main 
thing. With all their books they were ignorant 
of that one Book whose first sentence would have 
flashed more light into their minds than all that 
had been ascertained by their wisest men, and that 
was, “In the beginning God created the heaven 
and the earth.” They did not know that they. 
were ignorant of God’s creation of the world. “It 
happened,” said the Epicureans, and their evolution 
descendants now say, “It was the result of a for- 
tuitous concourse of atoms. As God did not create 
the world, God cannot judge the world.”’ You see 
how that follows. God does not control the world. 
“Tt is Fate,” says the Stoic. Fate, and if Fate 
control there is no responsibility. Where there 
is no responsibility there can be no judgment. 
“ Chance,” said the Epicurean. “ Fate,’ said the 
Stoic. Oh, the ignorance, the ignorance! Then 
they were ignorant of the revelation of God, that 
in his compassion he had revealed himself by in- 
spiration of men, declaring his will. He had mani- 
fested himself in the flesh, in the person of his 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 149 


own Son, to come and redeem from darkness and 
from death the men whom he had created. They 
did not know it. By their boasted wisdom they 
had not found God. And so when Paul stood 
there in the market-place at Athens and kept preach- 
ing Jesus and the Resurrection, Jesus and the Res- 
urrection, they thought he was a babbler. You will 
see at once that unless the mind takes hold of the 
fact that God made the world and God governs 
the world by his providence, and God rules the 
world by his moral law, and God holds men re- 
sponsible to that moral law, we cannot have an 
idea of the judgment. 

Then again, a judgment coming from God must 
be a judgment in righteousness. The Judge of all 
the earth will do right. His justice will not dis- 
criminate. There will be no respect of persons 
with God. Those fictitious things that have much 
to do with turning justice aside in the tribunals 
of earth cannot possibly affect the final arbitra- 
ments of God. Everything will be taken into fair 
account. But in order for that judgment to 
be a judgment in righteousness, to be a judgment 
in such righteousness that the one who receives 
the heaviest punishment by way of penalty in the 
day of wrath may yet be compelled to testify to 
the righteousness of the verdict against him, it 
was imperative that the Judge himself should be 
one in some touch with the judged, and therefore 
in the revelation of God in the person of Jesus 


150 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


Christ he became the Son of Man, and because he 
was the Son of Man God commits all judgment to 
him. There are many points upon which we cannot 
enter sympathetically into the joys and the labors 
and the destinies of angels. We are different in 
nature, and God in his pure spirit, invisible to us, 
unapproachable in his glory, would frighten us, 
would horrify us, would dazzle us, if we had to 
appear before him. But if one is constituted as 
the Judge, himself also a man, having entered into 
human life and passed through its experiences from 
the cradle to the grave, knowing its heat, its cold, 
its hunger, its poverty, its pain, then such an one, 
from his experience, having been tempted in all 
things as we are tempted, would be for men the 
fairest and the best judge that the world could have. 
Yet, again, though a man in one phase of his na- 
ture, if he be a misanthropical man, a Timon the 
man-hater; if he be not compassionate to human 
infirmities, if he do not love men, if he do not love 
men enough to die for men, we would have a 
Judge upon the throne whose cold heart, though 
the heart of a man, would chill us when we came 
to stand before him. But if that Judge is a man, 
and the man of all men the most loving, of all 
men the most patient, the most condescending, the 
most pitying, one who gave himself to die for men, 
no man can question the verdict that is rendered 
on the score of an unjust and unsympathetic Judge. 
But if a man is to be the Judge, there must be 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 151 


some adequate assurance to us that he is so con- 
stituted, there must be some broad ground, some 
impregnable data, that will make the guaranty 
sufficient to us, that not someone else, but this very 
one, is constituted the judge of the world. And 
that was the assurance of the resurrection from 
the dead. When God raised him from the dead, 
after the claims that he had made, and when he 
had predicted those claims upon that resurrection, 
when he had put all of the claims upon the solitary 
test of the fact that God would raise him from 
the dead upon the third day, and that resurrection 
having taken place, there is ground, broad and 
adequate ground, for every man to believe that 
God has not only appointed a day in which he will 
judge the world, but that he has appointed a man to 
be the judge of the world. We, upon our part, can 
have no objection to the judge, and God, upon his 
part, can have no objection to the judge. The infi- 
nite love that he manifested toward_us he also mani- 
fested toward the Father; in his divinity he touches 
the throne. In his humanity he touches the cradle 
and the grave; so that in every respect God has 
assured that this judgment that is to be held will 
be a righteous judgment. And no matter what you 
think about it now; no matter how much you may 
complain of God’s government; one thing is certain, 
that when you hear the voice that pronounces the 
judgment, whether it be, “Come, ye blessed,” or 
“Depart, ye cursed,” there will rise to your lips 


132 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


no protest. Your memory and your conscience will 
be eternal witnesses of the complete righteousness 
of every temporal judgment of God and of the 
righteousness of this final verdict which is passed 
upon all men. So that to any objector you may 
say this: ‘“‘ The Bible teaches that when the general 
judgment is held, no matter what the verdict on 
you is, you are assured that you will testify when 
it is given that it was righteous, that it was fair, 
that there can be no question of its reasonableness 
in every particular, and you will be the judge of 
that.” 

~Now, having considered this basis of the judg- 
ment, we can understand how the apostolic heart 
was disturbed when he looked out upon that city 
which, with all of its culture, its refinement, its de- 
votion to arts and science, was in ignorance of the 
great fact of the universe. And now we can see 
what a relation there is between such a sermon to- 
day and the meeting which is in progress in the 
University. “ The times of this ignorance God over- 
looked, but now commandeth all men everywhere 
to repent.” Why? Why repent? ‘“ Because he 
hath appointed a day in which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath 
ordained.” And that judgment certain, however 
remote; that judgment clearer than sunlight, how- 
ever distant; that judgment in the text looms up 
before us as an eternal certainty, whose natural 
tendency is to awaken conviction in the hearts of 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 153 


men, and to cause men to turn from their sins, 
to repent of their sins, to accept the salvation offered 
in Jesus Christ. And this motive is as high as 
heaven itself. You see at once how, when it is 
grasped by the mind and felt by the heart, that 
it operates in bringing about repentance. There is 
a God. He made me. He made the world. His 
moral government rules over me. I am responsible 
to him. I have sinned against him. I have gone 
astray, and there is a judgment day appointed, and 
when that day comes I must stand before the judg- 
ment seat of Christ to answer for the deeds that 
are done in the body, and the light of that day 
will unmask every hidden thing, and bring every 
secret thing into judgment. The light of that day 
will not merely touch my overt acts and bring 
them clearly outlined into view, as a range of moun- 
tains on a clear day, but it will shine into my very 
heart. It will look to the seat and origin and spring 
of action. It will discern the thoughts and intents 
of the heart. It will bring out my motives. It 
will show me as I really am in God’s holy sight, 
and every word that fell from my lips in time, 
and every imagination that took wings, like a bird 
set free, and flew with wayward pinions into for- 
bidden space, and every slimy thought that was 
allowed to crawl like a serpent of hell through the 
inner chambers of my soul; all of them will be 
brought out in the light of that day. 

Oh, the scope of the final judgment of God, in 


154 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


view of which and of that assurance of the resur- 
rection of the dead, what ought I to do now? 
What action is becoming to one so situated, being 
possessed of a moral nature, a rational and account- 
able being, finding myself condemned under the 
righteous law of God, altogether helpless in myself 
to recover from my ruin, and the publication made 
to me that the Judge himself has come to redeem 
the world, and that by simple faith in him all of 
the black record of my wrong can be expunged 
from the books of the recording angel, and I can 
in a moment become whiter than snow? What a 
power, then, the judgment is, to bring about re- 
pentance? And instead of harsh censure, instead 
of bitter hostility to any form of speculative philos- 
ophy, that through chance or fate would retire 
God from the universe as its maker, and from its 
control as a ruler, oh, let there come into our 
hearts the most unspeakable compassion for such 
blindness, when we see them groping, groping. 
That is exactly the Greek idea of the expression, 
feeling after God. That we might feel after him 
and find him! And when we see them groping on 
the rugged edge of the pit, liable of themselves, 
even if none should give them a push, to fall any 
moment into perdition, oh, what should be the feel- 
ing of our hearts toward them, and how should 
we endeavor to lead them to repentance instead of 
ourselves passing judgment upon them now! 

We must all stand before the judgment seat of 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 155 


Christ. I have given you merely this introductory 
statement of the series of sermons to be preached 
upon this subject. You know—your conversation 
with men and your observation of men have taught 
you—that unless the judgment can come within the 
reach of man’s vision, unless the sense of respon- 
sibility to moral government can enter into men’s 
hearts, there will be no restraint of crime, and no 
deadlier poison could be concocted, nor could there 
be any more dangerous form in which it could be 
administered to human lips than for speculative 
philosophy to creep into the text-books of schools 
and weaken men’s convictions in the fact that God 
made the world, God rules the world and men are 
morally responsible to God, and men must answer 
to God in the general judgment for all the deeds 
that are done in the body. 

I close this introductory statement with a single 
idea, but though solitary it is huge, far-reaching, 
suggestive. It lies under that department of the 
subject called the scope of the judgment. Will 
God bring me into judgment for anything that my 
spirit does after my body dies? No; then as sure 
as there can be on this earth any logic, there can 
be no probation after death. God himself counts 
the books closed, the case made up, not another 
entry to be made upon its pages, when a man dies, 
when his body dies. And hell never generated a 
more dangerous fallacy than the delusion that some- 
how, in some way, in the other world there may 


156 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


be a gospel of mercy preached, there may be a mercy 
preached, there may be a means of recovery, there 
may be a new probation. Though Adam’s spirit 
has been with God since Adam died, not one thought 
of that spirit, not one deed that that spirit has 
done since Adam’s body died will be taken account 
of in the judgment. In other words, so far as the 
judgment is concerned, character, if not sooner, 
does certainly crystallize at death. It is no more 
malleable, it is no more fusible, it is no more ductile, 
it is fixed and fixed forever. If a man dies unjust, 
he is raised unjust. If a man dies vile, he is raised 
vile. The judgment shall make no inquisition into 
the grave, there will be no search or mvestigation 
except what you did, what you said, what you 
thought, what you felt, here, now, in time. See 
what a bearing that has on repentance. If death 
may come to me any hour; if death comes to some- 
body every hour; if every time we draw a breath 
some soul has laid down its body and departed out 
of the region of probation, and has gone into that 
fixedness of character in which it shall stand at 
the judgment; and if you and I in a few hours 
may be in that condition; oh, how timely that God 
now commandeth men everywhere to repent. All 
men! It makes it a matter not merely of eternal 
moment but of immediate concern. It presses for 
instant consideration. It admits of no delay. The 
thief of the world, deeper-branded as a thief than 
any of them is the thief that keeps stealing the 


A SERMON ON THE JUDGMENT 157 


precious moments in which alone we can prepare 
to meet God, and while stealing, whispers, ‘“‘ Time 
enough! Time enough! Time enough!” It may 
be your brother. It may be your daughter, that 
bright-eyed girl, O mother! that is the apple of 
your eye. [ tell you that if she were to die to-night, 
and die unprepared to meet God, not all your tears, 
not all your prayers, not all that your friends can 
bring to bear, not all that time can muster and 
eternity can congregate will give one spark of hope 
for the salvation of that child. Not a spark! 


“Then repent, the voice celestial cries, 
No longer dare delay.” 


Do not dare to shove aside this chief, momen- 
tous question, “ How shall I be judged before 
God?” Inasmuch as I am not judged now and can- 
not be, and inasmuch as I must stand before the 
white throne of the final judgment of my Lord, 
oh, what reasonable hope have I that in that judg- 
ment day I shall be acquitted and not condemned? 


VIII 


THE RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 


“The day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.”’— 
Rom. a:s5. 


HEN God created the world, with all of 
its creatures, under natural and spiritual 
laws according to their being, he did not 

turn it loose to work out its own destiny under 
these laws. It is true that in accommodation to 
man’s understanding it is said that after creation 
had been performed, God rested from all of the 
works that he had made; but our Lord interprets 
that declaration when he says: “ My Father work- 
eth until now ”’: that is, the work of God did not 
stop with the creation. No law ever enforces it- 
self, either in the natural or in the spiritual world, 
nor indeed, in the government of men, any more 
than a train, well equipped, would automatically 
run itself without a brakeman, without an engineer, 
without a conductor, without a fireman. There has 
been no vacation of the throne of God from the 
beginning. His superintendence in both the natural 
and spiritual worlds, and particularly his moral 
government over accountable, rational beings, have 
never relaxed for one moment, and this superin- 
tendence and rule have been not only general as 
158 


RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 159 


to systems and great things, but they have. conde- 
scended to the most minute particulars. While he 
doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, 
he also numbereth the very hairs of our head, and 
suffereth not even a sparrow to fall to the ground 
without his permission. 

Of course, under a superintendence, under a rule, 
so general, so special, so persistent, there have been 
numberless special judgments. Some of these spe- 
cial judgments have been and are astounding and 
repulsive to the unrenewed mind of man. In get- 
ting at the philosophy and the necessity of the 
general judgment, I wish to examine some of these 
special judgments that have taken place in time 
against which man has revolted. 

First, the judgment upon the apostate ees 
The angels which “ kept not their first estate’ and 
sinned, he judged and cast out of heaven, oe 
did not send them to their final abode; cast them 
dewn to the earth, where they come in contact 
with the human race to malign and injure it. Now, 
the mind of man has not revolted at the fact that 
God judged the apostate angels, but that he did not 
send them to their final abode and in their final 
fixed condition. He permitted them to stop in this 
world and tempt and torture the children of men. 
That part of the divine judgment man has criti- 
cised. He is unable to understand it. Even the 
most enlightened Christian does not yet fully com- 
prehend all of the reasons which actuated the divine 


160 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


mind in permitting the human race to be subjected 
to the seductive influences of the devil and his 
demons. They are reserved to the general judg- 
ment. 

Another one of the astounding special judgments 
was the judgment of God upcn the first Adam in 
the garden of paradise, set forth in the early chap- 
ters of Genesis. Man has not objected so much 
to the expulsion of these delinquents from the 
garden of paradise, nor to any infliction put upon 
them, but when “ In Adam all died,’ when by the 
decree of God death through Adam passed upon 
all men, and when, as a result, all of the posterity 
of Adam became depraved, inherited a hereditary 
bias against good and in favor of evil, man ob- 
jected to that part of the judgment in the Garden 
of Eden. To the unrenewed mind it has been an 
intensely revolting decree of God. In every pos- 
sible way men have fought against that decision. 
They have denied the facts. They have denied the 
conclusions. They have assailed the equity. In 
every way that special judgment of God has been 
rejected by the unrenewed mind. And what Chris- 
tian in his most enlightened state has ever been able 
fully to understand all the wisdom and righteous- 
ness of that judgment of God? 

Then again on one occasion, God judged the 
whole human race by sending the Deluge, only one 
family escaping from the universal ruin. Men look- 
ing at that specific act of the moral government 


RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 161 


of God have objected to it. They have denied the 
fact. They have denied the conclusions. They 
have denied the equity. 

Yet, again, when as a forecast of another deluge, 
not of water, but of fire, God sent swift and irre- 
trievable destruction upon the cities of the plain, 
swallowing up Sodom and Gomorrah in the venge- 
ance of eternal fire, men have objected. They 
are willing enough to concede that sometimes a 
volcanic eruption, like that of Vesuvius, or an 
earthquake, like that at Lisbon or Caracas, or a 
sea-storm, like that which swept away Galveston, 
or a tornado on the land, like that which desolated 
Cisco, they are willing enough to concede that these 
things occur in nature, but they deny that God, 
as ruler, specially intervened in the swallowing up 
of the cities of the plain by earthquake and fire. 
And it is exceedingly difficult for one even of the 
brightest faith and of the clearest and broadest 
general information to comprehend all the reasons 
involved in God’s using natural forces to bring 
about a swift and awful judgment upon a city. 

In like manner, while they have been willing to 
concede that cities and states have natural laws 
of growth and of attaining to their maximum, and 
then decaying and perishing, they have objected 
to the special judgments of God unon Tvre, upon 
Nineveh, upon Babylon and particularly that most 
awful destruction upon Jerusalem announced by 
our Lord himself; a judgment that came directly 


162 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


from God, a judgment that came on account of 
the sin of the cities judged, or of the nations; 
and however much natural or human instrumen- 
talities were employed, the immediate concern of 
the Almighty in it, it is that that they have revolted 
against. 

Still more have men revolted at a correlated series 
of judgments that have covered almost the whole 
historic period of the human race, consisting of 
five parts: First, the giving up of the Gentiles to 
the vile affections, giving them up to the lusts of 
the flesh, giving them up to work that which is 
unseemly, until every practical phase of wickedness 
was developed in them. Second, the judgment 
which selected one nation and made that nation 
the peculiar people of God, showering upon it bless- 
ings untold for many ages. Then, third, the re- 
jection and dispersion of that select people, accom- 
panied with a judicial blindness which exists to 
the present day, so that throughout the world the 
Jews, that once favored people of God, with whom 
were the urim of the priest and the thummin of 
the prophet, the Jews, who were God’s mouthpieces, 
are now blind, a veil over their eyes; and in all 
of their dispersion subjected to pitiless persecution; 
and then, fourth, the calling of the Gentiles; the 
door closed so long flung wide open; a judgment 
that not merely takes away the kingdom of God 
from the Jews but confers it upon another people 
and the 1,800 or 1,900 years in which the Gentiles 


~ RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 163 


have been the special favorites of God,—for how 
much longer we do not know,—followed by another 
judgment, as yet prophetic, when rejected Israel 
shall be recalled and restored. Now, upon every 
part of these correlated judgments, this system of 
judgments, man has raised a protest and stood in 
rebellious attitude. And Christians find themselves 
put to it, more perhaps than they are willing to 
admit, to explain in a thoroughly satisfactory man- 
ner these several and correlated judgments of God. 

But I come to one that beside all the others is 
as Mont Blanc to a mole-hill. Not the sentence on 
angels fallen, not the verdict on Adam and Eve, 
not the judgment of the Deluge and not the penalty 
on Sodom and Gomorrah, not the giving up of the 
Gentiles, the calling of the Jews, the opening of the 
door to the Gentiles, the rejection of the Jews, and 
the restoration of the Jews, all put together, equal 
the astonishment of man at another special judg- 
ment of God to which I wish now to call attention. 
It was when God Almighty, God the Father, judged 
to both physical and spiritual death his only be- 
gotten Son. I refer not to any judgment rendered 
by Pilate or the Sanhedrin and executed by Roman 
soldiers, but I refer to the fact that the Father was 
pleased to bruise him, that the Father awakened 
the sword of divine wrath against that gentle Shep- 
herd, that the Father stripped him of human sym- 
pathy and abandoned him in the hour of darkness. 
It is that verdict on the second Adam, as a sub- 


164 BAPTISTS. AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


stitute for sinners, to make vicarious expiation for 
sin, that is more repugnant to the unrenewed mind 
than all the others put together. Their gorge rises 
at it. It provokes their sneers and their gibes. 
They question it upon every part of the ground. 
They deny the fact.. They deny the reasons.. They 
deny the conclusions. And with bitterness and 
malignity they fight it, and have fought it from 
its first announcement. Christians in endeavoring 
to explain this special judgment of God have writ- 
ten many, and some of them good, bodies of sys- 
tematic theology. They have endeavored to fathom 
the motives and reasons of the divine heart, and 
through the revelation of God they have been able 
to. flash much light upon the subject, but this is like 
that system of correlated judgments. Only the 
most spirit-enlightened mind can say: “Oh! the 
depth both of the riches and of the wisdom of 
God. His judgments are past finding out.” And 
I venture to say that when we come to the general 
judgment, all of our bodies of systematic divinity, 
with their explanations, will fall inconceivably short 
of the fullness of the reasons and the fullness of 
the wisdom of the divine judgment upon Jesus 
of Nazareth, Son of Man and Son of God. 
Finally, the judgments that have come upon men 
as individuals, on two points. As men report it, 
no two men have the same circumstances, the things 
that stand around them are not the same; the light, 
the privilege, the opportunity, of no two is exactly 


RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 165 


even. And yet all of one class of men, as they say, 
are sent to a fixed and equal heaven, and all of 
another class of men, no two alike, either in oppor- 
tunity or in degree of guilt, are sent to one fixed 
and equal hell. The other point in the special judg- 
ments upon individuals that has awakened the op- 
position of man has been this: That here in time 
he is either justified or condemned, and as a result 
of that justification or condemnation, immediately 
upon the death of the body the soul goes to its 
reward or to its punishment, and yet at some re- 
mote date in the future, after ages of joy in re- 
ward, and ages of suffering of penalty, these souls 
are dragged from heaven and hell to a common 
tribunal, to be tried. Does reward, does penalty 
precede trial and sentence? 

‘I have cited these particular judgments of God, 
that have occurred in time, based upon the fact 
that he has never vacated the throne, and that he 
did not create the world and turn it loose to work 
out its own destiny, and that there is no such thing 
as a law enforcing itself, and that he has all the 
time been governing and ruling and judging. Now 
the difficulties which have been suggested by these 
special judgments lead us to consider the philosophy 
and the necessity of the general judgment, and 
hence our text: “ The day of the revelation of the 
judgment of God,” the main thought being this: 
That while that day is called the judgment day, it 
is not called judgment day so much from the fact 


166 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


that it is to be a day of ascertainment of man’s 
moral attitude, certainly not of ascertainment to 
God, but it is to be a day that reveals the wisdom 
and righteousness and equity of every past judg- 
ment of God,—reveals it not to God, but reveals 
it to the judged; the judged that could not under- 
stand it thoroughly in time, even the best informed, 
and hence could not glorify God as he deserved, 
since their glorification, to be intelligent, must be 
based upon knowledge, and men in turn are igno- 
rant. You can understand somewhat the reasons 
of your acquittal here and now. On the day that 
you accept the Lord Jesus Christ as your Saviour, 
God justifies you and he assures you that you shall 
never come into condemnation. You can see some 
of the philosophy of it, not all the philosophy of 
it. The most grateful heart that ever throbbed 
in the bosom of a saved man cannot intelligently 
adore and glorify God for his grace in salvation 
now as he will do it when he shall know even 
as he is known. “The day of the revelation of 
the judgment of God,” the day that will show to 
the saved Christian all of the reasons of his sal- 
vation, all of the wisdom and appropriateness of 
that divine plan of redemption, all the extent of 
that redemption, both as to soul and body, you 
need that day. Hosannas languish on your lips, 
even in revival times. Your spirit of praise is 
oftentimes the spirit of heaviness. You go around 
rejoicing somewhat, but O thou saved soul, when 


RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 167 


that day for which all other days were made shall 
come, and the height and depth and length and 
breadth of the love of God in your salvation shall 
appear, not painfully, not gradually, but in one 
instantaneous flash of information, your joy eclipses 
conception then. A man is condemned now. He 
stands condemned. The verdict has already been 
rendered and it stays a verdict so long as he rejects 
God’s plan of salvation. “ He that believeth not 
is condemned already.’”’ But there are many things 
about it that he does not comprehend, and there 
are many things about his condemnation that stag- 
ger you, the Christian. Not long ago a young 
preacher came to me. He said: “ The eternity 
of this penalty, it staggers me, it staggers me. 
My sentiment revolts at it. I cannot conceive how 
I would eternally condemn my child for any of- 
fense.” Is there any reason for that day, so as 
to cause each condemned soul to thoroughly com- 
prehend the reason of that unalterable sentence, 
“Depart from me,” and the eternity of that pen- 
alty, “into everlasting fire’’! 

God declares that when the light comes every 
knee will be bowed and every tongue will confess, 
and every heart will acquiesce in the righteousness 
of the verdict rendered. But I am not speaking 
so much just now of the condemned man’s under- 
standing it as of the Christian man’s understanding 
that condemnation. He will say, “One of these 
condemned is perhaps my father, may be my mother, 


168 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


my brother, may be my sister, my child.” I know 
that you cannot take in now, constituted as you 
are, with the flesh and its natural ties, and the ties 
of blood binding you, you cannot to your satisfac- 
tion acquiesce in the eternity of the judgment and 
of the penalty of the law. We need that day, “ the 
day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of 
God,” when every secret thing is uncovered, when 
every false face is unmasked, when flesh and blood 
have been left behind, when body has been sub- 
limated and spirit glorified, and all of the dignity 
and majesty of law is brought out in full view, and 
government in its foundation and superstructure is 
comprehended, when we ourselves are detached 
from earthly ties and united to God, we will be 
able to understand and to acquiesce in any penalty 
God may inflict upon any person. Heaven will not 
be unhappy over the eternal punishment of the lost, 
but you would be unhappy, situated as you now 
are, and with the little you know, if God were 
to uncap the pit before your eyes. 

The philosophy and the necessity of the general 
judgment seem to me clear from the consideration 
of the special judgments. It is bound to be future, 
because influence has not yet struck the shores of 
eternity. It is bound to be future because all of 
the man has not yet received either reward or 
penalty. It is bound to be final, for it takes place 
at the end, not only of the probation of one man 
and his complete probation in every transition, but 


RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT OF GOD 169 


at the end of the earth’s probation. There will 
never be a reason for recalling the case and re- 
opening the question. On the throne, the great 
white throne, are many books of explanation, and 
these books will be opened and they will shine in 
their record upon what a man has thought, what 
he has imagined and what he has done; but there 
is one book there, not a sentence in it written that 
day. Before the judgment is set, the last record 
in it has been made. Hence, it is a book of judicial 
decisions already rendered, and that is the Book of 
Life. And it comes to pass that whoso is not found 
already written in that book, not to be written that 
day, as a result of the investigation,—but whoso- 
ever is not found written in that book is cast into 
the lake of fire, which is the second death. In this 
way we can comprehend something of the nature 
of the general judgment. And yet there are real 
trials and judgments that day, and I want in sub- 
sequent sermons to show you the Christian at the 
judgment seat of Christ. There are some that deny 
that he stands there. I want to prove to you that 
he must stand there. True, he is not on trial for 
his life. That book of judicial decisions already 
rendered establishes that. But he is there to be 
investigated, and there is something that will be 
adjudged as the result of the investigation of the 
Christian. And then I want to show you, in sub- 
sequent sermons, what, after all, is the sole ground 
of the general judgment. It is not worth while 


170 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


to multiply causes. A single thought expresses the 
whole thing. The ministering angels that stand 
around the throne of God will be affected in all 
their future by the bearing of that thought. The 
angels which lost their first estate and received the 
verdict for that, but have been permitted under 
limitations to seduce the human race, shall come 
before that judgment, on that point. On that point 
Christians come before it. On that point sinners 
come before it. And as the last declaration of this 
sermon I avow that the treatment accorded to Jesus 
Christ in his gospel and in his people is the sole 
ground of the general judgment for angel or man. 
Let us unite in prayer. 


IX 
THE CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 


“ For we must ail appear before the Gudgrpoat sash er Christi" ot 
14:12} 3 + 5:10. 

N the first sermon of this series we have found 
the Scriptures teaching a future, final and gen- 
eral judgment of men and angels. The second 

sermon was devoted to the consideration of the 
nature, philosophy and necessity of this future, final 
and general judgment. The theme of the present 
sermon—third of the series—is 

THE CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT. 

The design of the discussion is twofold: 

First, to establish the ract that the Christian 
as well as the sinner must appear before that final 
tribunal; and second, to show wuHy he must so 
appear. For order and clearness the matter will 
be set forth under several distinct heads or propo- 
sitions. 

Prop. 1.—The Christian must stand before the 
judgment bar. 

Here at the outset we are confronted with the 
contention by some that the Christian is exempt 
from this judgment. This contention is plausibly 
based upon these or kindred passages of Scripture: 

“He that believeth on him is not judged.” 
(John 3: 18.) 


171 


172 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


“He that heareth my word and believeth on 
him that sent me hath eternal life, and cometh not 
into judgment, but hath passed out of death into 
life.” (John 5:24.) 

“ And by him everyone that believeth is justified 
from all things.” (Acts 13: 39.) 

“There is therefore now no condemnation to 
them that are in Christ Jesus.” (Rom. 8:1.) 

But if these and kindred passages mean all that 
the contention based on them claims, they prove 
too much, for by them it may be shown that the 
sinner is exempt from the final judgment. 

For example, let us complete the declaration of 
which the first passage quoted is only a part: “‘ He 
that believeth on him is not judged: he that believeth 
not is judged already.” (John 3: 18.) 

By the judgment here spoken of one class is 

already acquitted—the other already condemned. 
If, therefore, this judgment exempts the acquitted 
from appearance at the final judgment it must also 
exempt the condemned, and this would be to leave 
the final judgment without anybody to come before 
it except angels. 
_ For this cause the second sermon of this series 
considered the philosophy, necessity and nature of 
the final judgment as a day of the revelation of 
the past judgments of God. 

In that last day it is just as necessary to make 
manifest the past justification of the. righteous as 
to make manifest the past condemnation of the 


CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 172 


wicked. This is one reason why both saint and 
sinner must appear at the judgment. Neither one 
in time, either before or after death, has fully com- 
prehended all the wisdom and righteousness of 
these past verdicts. That day will make evident 
to all intelligences the dignity, majesty and holiness 
of law and the justice of the divine administration. 
But this by no means answers all the ends of the 
general judgment. Certain other scriptures make 
it evident that the Christian must appear before 
the judgment seat of Christ for actual judgment. 
To the Christians at Rome Paul wrote: “ But thou, 
why dost thou judge thy brother? or thou again, 
why dost thecu set at nought thy brother? For 
we shall all stand before the judgment seat of God. 
For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, to 
me every knee shall bow and every tongue shall 
_ confess to God. So then each one of us shall 
give account of himself to God.” (Rom. 14: I0- 
12.) To the church at Corinth he also wrote: 
“ Wherefore also we make it our aim, whether at 
home or absent, to be well-pleasing unto him. For 
we must all be made manifest before the judgment 
seat of Christ, that each one may receive the things 
done in the body, according to what he hath done. 
whether it be good or bad.” (Cor. 5:9, 10.) 
And our Lord himself said: ‘‘ The good man 
out of his good treasure bringeth forth good things; 
and the evil man out of his evil treasure bringeth 
evil things. And I say unto you that for every 


174 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


idle word that man shall speak, they shall give 
account thereof in the day of judgment. For by 
thy words thou shalt be justified and by thy words 
thou shalt be condemned.” (Matt. 12:35, 36.) 

Yet again he says: ‘‘ For the Son of man shall 
come in the glory of his Father, with his angels; 
and then shall he render to every man according 
to his deeds.” (Matt. 16: 27.) 

If one should be so foolish as to claim that our 
Lord here speaks only of the wicked when he says 
“every man,’ how can he escape from the later 
declaration of our Saviour recorded in Matt. 25: 
31-35? There unmistakably the Christian appears 
and is made to understand that his deeds come into 
account and the treatment he accorded to Christ, 
in his cause and in his people, receives a just though 
unexpected recompense of reward. 

To the same effect writes the brother of our 
Lord: “ Murmur not, brethren, one against another, 
that ye be not judged; behold the judge standeth 
before the door.” (James 5:9.) 

These scriptures establish the first proposi- 
tion. The Christian must stand before the judg- 
ment. 

As leading up to the next proposition we may 
revert to an objection against the final judgment 
urged by unrenewed men and cited in the second 
sermon, namely: 

“All the saved, no two alike in environment, 
hereditary bias, natural abilities, gifts of grace, op- 


CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 175 


portunities, or degrees of righteousness, are received 
alike into a fixed and equal heaven.”’ 

It is perhaps needless to say that this objection 
is a monstrous perversion of Scripture teaching. 
Neither heaven nor hell is without degrees. But as 
equality of conditions is conceded in one particular 
of the final award—whether in heaven or hell— 
let our next proposition cover this point. 

Prop. 2.—Salvation is equal at the judgment 
because its conditions were equal. 

Every Christian will be completely justified— 
completely sanctified in spirit—and completely glor- 
ified in body. There is no inequality of condition 
here. This follows because all of them are saved 
by grace, through faith and not of works. If any 
part of this salvation were awarded as a debt due 
to man’s performances, then would we rightly ex- 
pect salvation to be a variable quantity according 
to man’s variable work. But the apostles are no 
more saved than the pastors, and the pastors no 
more saved than the deacons, and the deacons no 
more saved than the private members. All are 
justified, all sanctified, all glorified. There is on 
none of them wrinkle, spot, blemish or any such 
thing. And that day will make manifest the right- 
eousness of Paul’s declaration: “ There is no differ- 
ence.” » (Rom: 3:22.) 

Men in constructing ladders up which to climb 
to heaven, and even Titans, who for such object 
pile mountains on mountains, will find that there is 


176 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


no difference in value in their ladders of various 
lengths, since all are too short to span the chasm. 
One is as good as the other, since all are worthless. 

God so loved the world as to give his only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him shall 
not perish, but have eternal life. It is of faith that 
it may be of grace and that promise may be sure 
to all the seed. In all this God’s ways are equal. 
And the light of that last day will bring home to 
every conscience that in this award the judge of 
all the earth doeth right. 

Prop. 3.—Rewards at the judgment will be un- 
equal because Christian fidelity will be found un- 
equal. 

Surely on this account there will be degrees in 
heaven. And particularly at this point the Chris- 
tian will come into actual judgment that day and 
not merely to a revelation of past judgment as in 
the matter of salvation. So justification unto life 
and condemnation unto death, that day will be a 
revelation and vindication of past judgments. But 
with reference to rewards in life or degrees in pun- 
ishment it will be a day of actual judgment. 

Some of the scriptures already cited establish 
‘this. To them many others may be added. As 
bearing directly upon this point we cite: 

The Parables of the Talents and of the Pounds. 
(Matt. 25: 14-30; Luke 19: 12-37.) “ Now after 
a long time the Lord of those servants cometh and 
maketh a reckoning with them.” 


-, CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 177 


“And it came to pass: when he was come: back 
again, having received the kingdom, that he com- 
manded these servants, unto whom he had given 
the money, to be called unto him, that he might 
know what they had gained by trading.” Both par- 
ables teach that our Lord himself is judge. That 
his second advent is the time of judgment. That 
each one will be held to a strict account of his 
stewardship. That he will reward each steward ac- 
cording to his fidelity. That as there will be vary- 
ing degrees of fidelity so there will be varying de- 
grees of reward. In respect to these rewards 
heaven will not be a fixed and equal quantity to all 
the saved. The inequality of the fidelity accounts 
for the inequality of the rewards. In all this, as 
in the matter of salvation, God’s ways are equal. 

In line with the unmistakable teaching of these 
parables is Paul’s doctrine of ministerial accounta- 
bility : ; ee 

“For we (preachers) are God’s fellow-workers. 
Ye (converts) are God’s husbandry, God’s build- 
ing. According to the grace of God which was 
given unto me, as a wise master builder, I laid a 
foundation, and another buildeth thereon.. But let 
each man take heed how he buildeth thereon. . For 
other foundation can no man lay than that which 
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But if any man 
buildeth on the foundation gold, silver, costly stones, 
wood, hay, stubble; each man’s work shall be made 
manifest; for the day shall disclose it, because it 


178 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


is revealed in fire; and the fire itself shall prove 
each man’s work of what sort it is. If any man’s 
work shall abide, which he built thereon, he shall 
receive a reward. If any man’s work shall be 
burned, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall 
be saved; yet so as through fire.” (1 Cor. 3: 9-15.) 

It would seem to be impossible to misunderstand 
this scripture. The command, “ Take heed,” is a 
distinct warning of future accountability. <A 
preacher may not lightly put into God’s building 
unconverted material, for God himself will inspect 
each building. Referring to this very building, the 
prophet Isaiah said: “ Therefore thus saith the 
Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation 
a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, of 
sure foundation; he that believeth shall not make 
haste. 

“Judgment also will I lay to the line and right- 
eousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep 
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall over- 
flow the hiding-place. 

“And your covenant with death shall be disan- 
nulled, and your agreement with hell shall not 
stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass 
through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. 

“From the time that it goeth forth it shall take 
you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, 
by day and by night, and it shall be a vexation only 
to understand the report. 

“For the bed is shorter than that a man can 


CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 179 


stretch himself on it; and the covering narrower 
than that he can wrap himself in it.” 

To the same effect is the word of the Lord by 
another prophet. “Because, even because they 
have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there 
was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, 
others daubed it with untempered mortar: Say unto 
them which daub it with untempered mortar, that 
it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; 
and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy 
wind shall rend it. 

“Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said 
unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have 
daubed it? . 

“Therefore thus saith the Lord God: I will even 
rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there 
shall be an overflowing shower. in mine anger, and 
great hailstones in my fury to consume it. | 

“So I will break down the. wall that ye have 
daubed with untempered mortar, and bring it down 
to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall 
be discovered, and it shall fall and ye shall be con- 
sumed in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that 
I am the Lord.” (Ezekiel 13: 10-14.) 

_ Brethren of the ministry, and there are many A 
you before me, let us not think we may avoid the 
final judgment of God. We must answer to him 
that day for all our work.. The fire of Paul, the 
overflowing scourge of Isaiah, the storm of Eze- 
kiel signify in strong and terrible figures some real 


#86 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


ordeal through: which’ at’ the judgment we ‘and :our 
work must pass: ‘The loss. we suffer: by’ the rejec- 
tion ‘and destruction’ of-our unfaithful: work is a 
réal’ and ‘dread ful-loss. If we be on the foundation 
ourselves we will be ‘saved for Christ’s sake, though 
unrewarded for our ‘work's sake. If-not’on the 
foundation © ‘we “must: Baty with the downfall ‘of 
our’ faulty’ building: fd it Semone 
‘What is trie ‘of. siteat hers is true ae alll. hete 
Abele cack one for himself must give account unto 
God. To the same effect is the teaching of.all those 
sériptitres: concerning’ the crowns bestowed upon 
the peoplé of’ the’ Lord: The crown ‘of life, the 
crown of righteousness, the crown of: ‘joy; ‘the 
crown of glory.’ Justification based on Christ, im- 
puted righteousness, received by faith, is.a judicial 
decision 6f time—and is equal in all the saved:. 
But the bestowal of crowns is a reward’ for per- 
sonal service and takes place at the final judgment 
—all‘at one time: Not even Paul is crowned. yet: 
The crowning is not only at the end of time but is 
in the presence of all ‘the intelligences of ‘the: uni- 
verse. The distinction in the crowns displays ina 
remarkable way the inequality of the fidelity of the 
saints. * But hear’ the’ Zap we Sg on these 
crowns: eer tS 
an Know ye not that fey that run in a race‘run 
all, but one receiveth the prize? Even so run that 
ye may attain. And every man that striveth in 
the games éxerciseth self-control in all things. : Now 


“CHRISTIAN AT. THE. JUDGMENT :181 


they do it :to receive a: corruptible crown; but we 
an incorruptible. I therefore so!irun, as not ‘un- 
certainly; so fight I, as not beating the air; but I 
buffet 'my body, and bring it into: bondage : best by 
any; means, after that I have preached. to others, 1 
myself should be rejected.” (1 Cor. 9: 24-27.) . 
_ The fear of rejection in this.case is not an appre- 
hension of being: finally lost, but of not winning 
the reward which is the prize of the race. In like 
manner Paul writes his farewell words: 

“For I am already being offered, and the time 
of my departure is come. I have fought the good 
fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the 
faith; henceforth there is laid up for me the crown 
of .righteousness which the..Lord, the: righteous 
judge, shall give to me at that day; and. not to 
me only, Dit also to all them that have loved his 
oT (2 Tim. 4: 6-8.) 

. The righteousness of this text is not the pied 
Beare onaness of Christ which Paul had already 
received.and by which he was justified, but is his 
personal righteousness, or right-doing, for which 
a crown: of reward is offered—not yet received by 
him, but. laid up for him and .to be bestowed .at 
the coming of his Lord. “ tae 

In the same direction ie earlier wrote: “For 
what is our hope or joy, or crown of glorying? Are 
not even ye before our Lord Jesus at his coming? 
For ye are our glory and our Joys. us Thess. 
25.10; 20. ): piearr ie 


182 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


This is similar to the reward of David’s faithful 

sower: “ They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. 
He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing seed 
‘for sowing, shall doubtless come again with joy, 
bringing his sheaves with him.” (Psa. 126: 
5, 6.) 
So Peter encourages pastors to be faithful by 
holding out a hope of future reward: “ And when 
the chief Shepherd shall be manifested, ye shall 
receive the crown of glory that fadeth not away.” 
(® Pet. 5:4.) Z 

James also aligns himself with this teaching, in- 
citing Christians to faithful endurance of trials, 
by hope of a future crown: “ Blessed is the: man 
that endureth temptation; for when he hath been 
approved he shall receive the crown of life, which 
the Lord promised to them that love him.”. (James 
Tt35) 

John, too, puts on record the words of our Lord 
himself, encouraging fidelity in the churches: “ Fear 
not the things which thou art about to suffer; be- 
hold, the devil is about to cast some of you into 
prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have 
tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful tinto death, 
and [I will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. 2: 
10.) 

Here is a distinction between “life” and the 
“crown of life.” “Life” comes in time and by 
grace, through faith. The “crown of life” is 
a reward of fidelity bestowed at the judgment. 


CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 183 


Oh, the crowns of the judgment—the crowns of 
the judgment—how bright and alluring are they! 

But stars do not differ more in luster than the 
crowns bestowed on the righteous. Well saith the 
prophet: “ And they that are wise shall shine as 
the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn 
many to righteousness as the stars for ever and 
evens) (Danyt2 $3.) 

Oh, be not deceived! There is inequality in 
heaven. God is just. All our instinctive judgments 
call for diversity of reward proportioned to fidelity 
in the service of our Lord. 

What think you, brethren? Compare the fidelity 
of two women in the same church: One with sweet- 
est meekness and self-denial honors her Lord in 
all things. When the world and society offer her 
their carnal pleasures, games, amusements and ab- 
sorbing round of exacting requirements, her ques- 
tions are: What would my Lord have me to do? 
Will these develop my spiritual nature? Will they 
be friends or foes to grace? Will they increase my 
Christian influence? Will they tend to lead my 
children towards God or away from God? She 
does not ask, What harm is in them, but what good? 
And so living in all things unto her Lord, ornament- 
ing her life with good works, she finishes her course 
with joy, dying also unto the Lord, so that children 
and grandchildren arise and call her blessed. 

Another indeed accepts the Lord as her Saviour, 
but lives ever with divided heart and service. The 


184 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


claims of the world, of society, are acknowledged 
more than the claims of Christ’s cause. She fol- 
lows Jesus afar off. Her heart is cold. She is a 
stranger to the services of the Lord’s house. 
She cannot be counted on for regular Chris- 
tian work. Her position, her social influence, her 
habits, are all quoted against religion rather than 
for it. Sinners through her are not convicted of 
sin and led to repentance. She worships much at 
the shrines of pleasure, of society, and but little 
and seldom at the altars of God. In times of death 
or other great bereavement she indeed remembers 
God—but her life, with its trend, has been after 
all but a shabby, ragged and miserable service of 
God. And so she passes away to the great judg- 
‘ment throne. Our question recurs with emphasis: 
What think you? Shall these two women find 
heaven equal? 

True, we rejoice if a long-expected ship enters 
the harbor. But there are different entrances. 
One barely enters, towed in by tugs of grace, almost 
a wreck, shrouds torn, masts fallen, cargo lost. 
The other has abundant entrance, every mast stand- 
ing, every sail full and cargoed to the water’s 
edge. | 
Is not this the lesson of Peter when he exhorts 
to that heavenly addition? I will not here quote 
his burning words, but go home and read them 
with earnest prayer for their profitable application 
to your souls: 2 Pet. 1: 1-11. So far we have 


CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 185 


found two reasons why the Christian must appear 
before the judgment seat of Christ: (a) That his 
justification in time by grace, without works, may 
be manifested and vindicated. (b) That he may 
be actually judged and rewarded as a steward of 
his Lord’s grace. 

We come now to consider other reasons to which 
but little attention is generally given. And yet are 
they very important. I never myself heard a ser- 
mon on them. Do therefore give your undivided 
attention to them now. 

Prop. 4.—After being judged himself the Chris- 
tian will sit on Christ’s throne and with him judge 
the unsaved world. 

John Bunyan, in “ The Pilgrim’s Progress,’’ well 
says: “When he shall come with sound of trumpet 
in the clouds, as upon the wings of the wind; you 
shall come with him; when he shall sit upon the 
throne of judgment, you shall sit by him; yea, 
and when he shall pass sentence upon the 
workers of iniquity, let them be angels or men, 
YOU SHALL HAVE A VOICE IN THAT JUDG- 
MENT, because they were his and your ene- 
mies.” 

For brevity sake, I cannot undertake to quote 
all the scriptures bearing upon this grave matter, 
but do cite enough to put the fact beyond question: 
“He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit 
down with me in my throne, as I also overcame 
and sat down with my Father in his throne.” 


i86 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


(Rev. 3:21.) “And he that overcometh, and he 
that keepeth my works unto the end, to him will 
I give authority over the nations. And ‘he shall 
rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of the 
potter are broken to shivers; as I also have received 
of my Father.” »(Rev.-2.226,.27.)" = Darevany or 
you, having a matter against his neighbor, go to 
law before the unrighteous, and not before the 
saints? Or know ye not that the saints shall judge 
the world? And if the world is judged by you, 
are ye unworthy to judge in the smallest matters?” 
(i Cor. 6:12.) ‘“ The men of Nineveh shall stand 
up in the judgment with this generation and shall 
condemn it: The queen of the south shall rise up 
in the judgment with this generation, and shall 
condemn it.” (Matt. 12:41, first clause, and 
12: 42, first clause.) “ And Jesus said unto them, 
Verily, I say unto you, that ye who have followed 
me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall 
sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon 
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” 
(Matt. 19:28.) “ But ye are they that have con- 
tinued with me in my temptation; and I appoint 
unto you a kingdom, even as my Father appointed 
unto me, that ye may eat and drink at iny table in 
my kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones judging 
the twelve tribes of Israel.” (Luke 22: 28-30.) 
‘And to these also Enoch, the seventh from Adam, 
prophesied, saying: Behold, the Lord cometh with 
ten thousand of his holy ones, to execute judgment 


CHRISTIAN AT THE JUDGMENT 187 


upon all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their 
works of ungodliness which they have ungodly 
wrought, and of all the hard things which ungodly 
sinners have spoken against him.’ (Jude 14, 15.) 
On these startling scriptures but little needs to 
be said now by way of comment. They speak for 
themselves. Yet we may profitably note some 
things: To sit on the throne of judgment with 
Christ is not an empty form. It means our identi- 
fication with him in all his honors. It implies an 
exercise of the functions of the throne both as to 
rule and judgment. It means that Christians actu- 
ally pass judgment upon the ungodly. The tyrants 
who condemned the martyrs in time must receive 
sentence from the martyrs in glory. Festus, Felix, 
Agrippa and Cesar then stand before the judgment 
seat of Paul. Herod must answer to John the 
Baptist. The earthly judges who condemned 
Obadiah Holmes and Lunsford and other Bap- 
tists to whipping or imprisonment in time, must 
be arraigned before their victims in eternity. 
Before your bar, brethren, the infidels and athe- 
ists and materialists who now laugh you to scorn 
must stand and receive their final sentence from 
your lips. Impenitent scribes and Pharisees must 
answer to the apostles whom they persecuted. 
What a time it will be when the bloody Sanhedrin 
must be judged by Stephen, whom they unright- 
eously stoned! But particularly would I have you 
note the honor which God puts on the judgment 


188 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


of his people when compared with the judgments 
of human law courts. _How intense is the con- 
demnation put upon the church member here who 
despises the verdict of his brethren and drags them 
before the courts of law, thereby putting shame 
upon Christ’s cause before unbelievers! “I say 
this to move you to shame. What, cannot there be 
found among you one wise man who shall be able 
to decide between his brethren, but brother goeth 
to law with brother, and that before unbelievers? 
Nay, it is altogether a defect in you that ye have 
lawsuits one with another. Why not rather take 
wrong? Why not rather be defrauded?” | (1 Cor. 
6: 5-7.) 

Ought not Paul’s words to be written in letters 
of fire upon the memory of him who despises the 
repeated verdict of his brethren and “dares to go 
to law before the unrighteous ”’? 

Prop. 5.—After being judged himself the Chris- 
tian shall judge angels. 

One scripture will suffice for this point: ‘““Know 
ye not that ye shall judge angels? How much more 
things that pertain to this life?” (1 Cor. 6:3.) 

Here we do well to note the inferiority of angels 
to men. In his first estate indeed man was made a 
little lower than the angels, but in his last estate 
he is destined to be above all angels, principalities, 
powers. Angels are the servants of men. Doubt- 
less it was on this very point Satan’s pride revolted 
and he fell from his own first estate. This accounts 


‘CHRISTIAN AT ‘THE ‘JUDGMENT 189 


for his malignity towards the human race, not only 
because they were designed to -be exalted above 
him, but because in a sense they were the provoca- 
tion of his pride and the occasion of his downfall. 
And is not this the sinner’s greatest degradation 
that he has become the slave of his servant? If 
it would be an unspeakable humiliation to an old- 
time Southern planter to become the slave of :his 
own bondman, how infinitely humiliating must ‘it 
be to be the sinner, made in God’s image, to be sent 
to the slave-quarters of hell and there in the place 
prepared for his felon slaves call the devil master 
forever! | 

But to return to our subject: 

Quite naturally servants are responsible to those 
whom they serve. And as angels were appointed 
to be ministering spirits to them that are the heirs 
of salvation, we may understand the philosophy 
of the Scriptures: Know ye not that ye shall judge 
angels? 

And is it unreasonable to think that the holy 
angels who serve this probation well, shall at the 
last judgment be confirmed in their steadfastness 
against even the possibility of future apostasy? 
Men on the throne can utter the verdict: These 
have been faithful in all things. They have en- 
camped about us. They have hovered over our 
assemblies. They have smitten our enemies. They 
have been diligent students of God’s manifold wis- 
dom as it was unfolded by the church on earth. 


190 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


They strengthened us in weakness; held up our 
heads in sorrow and met us at the depot of death 
with the chariots of the sky and borne us away 
into Paradise. 

But certainly there is poetic justice in man’s 
judgment of the fallen angels. Then Christians 
will see Apollyon cower before him. And who 
would miss it when Eve and Job and Peter sit 
in judgment on Satan! How he did beguile the 
woman with his subtle craft! How he did hate 
Job without a cause and afflict him! How he did 
sift and triumph over poor, impulsive Peter! 

Ah, well, it is their turn now. Everything comes 
to him who waits, and though the mill of God 
grinds slowly it grinds exceeding fine. For all these 
reasons, brethren, Christians must appear in the 
judgment. 


x 
THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 


Breccia ree (A 7 real apne 
E are come to the last sermon of this series. 
In the first sermon we found the Scrip- 
tures teaching a future, final and general 
judgment of men and angels. In the second sermon 
were considered the philosophy and necessity of 
this judgment as a revelation and vindication of 
the divine administration. In the third sermon 
the fact of the Christian’s appearance at this judg- 
ment was established and the reasons of his appear- 
ance there set forth in order. 

Our present theme is: 

THE SINNER AT THE FINAL JUDGMENT. 

As in the third sermon, so now, the matter for 
consideration will be submitted under several dis- 
tinct heads or propositions: 

Prop. 1.—Due notice of this judgment has been 
served on all sinners. 

(1) This judgment has been revealed in the 
book of nature—open to all men—“ For the wrath 
of God is revealed from heaven against all un- 
godliness and unrighteousness of men, who hinder 
the truth in unrighteousness: Because that which 

191 


192 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


is known of God is manifest in them. For the 
invisible things of him since the creation of the 
world are clearly seen, being perceived through the 
things that are made, even his everlasting power 
and divinity: that they may be without. excuse.’ 
(Rom. 1: 18-20.) 

“The heavens declare the glory of God; and the 
firmament showeth his handiwork. Day unto day 
uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth 
knowledge: There is no speech nor language where 
their voice is not heard. Their line is gone out 
through all the earth, and their words to the end 
of the world.” (Psa. 19: 1-4.) 

““God in the generations gone by suffered all 
the nations to walk in their own ways. And yet 
he left not himself without witness, in that he did 
good and gave you from heaven rains and fruitful 
seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.” 
GActs “142.16, 17.) 

It was the divine purpose that the light of nature 
should lead to nature’s God: “ The God that made 
the world and all things therein, he being Lord 
of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made 
with hands; neither is he served by men’s hands, 
as though he needed anything, seeing he himself 
giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; and 
he made of one every nation of men to dwell on 
all the face of the earth, having determined their 
appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habita- 
tion; THAT THEY SHOULD SEEK ‘Gop, if haply 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT. 193 


they might feel after him and find him, though 
he is not far from each one of us; for in him 
we live, and move, and have our being.”’ (Acts 
17: 24-28.) 

Concerning this light the apostle adds: ‘“ Be- 
cause that, knowing God, they glorified him not 
as God, neither gave thanks: but became vain in 
their reasonings, and their senseless heart was dark- 
ened. Professing themselves to be wise, they be- 
came fools, and changed the glory of the incor- 
ruptible God for the likeness of an image of cor- 
ruptible man, and of birds, and fourfooted beasts, 
and creeping things. 

“ Wherefore God gave them up in the lusts of 
their hearts unto uncleanness, that their bodies 
should be dishonored among themselves; for that 
they exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and 
worshipped and served the creature rather than the 
Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen, For this 
cause God gave them up to vile passions.”’ (Rom. 
I: 21-26.) 

“* And even as they refused to have God in their 
knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, 
to do those things which are not fitting: being 
filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covet- 
ousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, strife, 
deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, hateful 
to God, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of 
evil things, disobedient to parents, without under- 
standing, covenant-breakers, without natural affec- 


194 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


tion, unmerciful, who, knowing the ordinances of 
God, that they that practice such things are worthy 
of death, not only do the same, but also consent 
with them that practice them.” (Rom. 1: 28-32.) 

‘““ Wherefore thou art without excuse, O man, 
whosoever thou art, that judgest; for wherein thou 
judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou 
that judgest dost practice the same things. And 
we know that the judgment of God is according 
to truth against them that practice such things. 
And reckonest thou this, O man, who judgest them 
that practice such things, and doest the same, that 
thou shalt escape the judgment of God? Or de- 
spisest thou the riches of his goodness and for- 
bearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the 
goodness of God leadeth to repentance? but after 
thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up for 
thyself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judgment of God; who will render 
to every man according to his works.” (Rom. 
2: 1-6.) 

(2) The responsibility disclosed in external na- 
ture is also written within on men’s hearts. ‘“ For 
when Gentiles that have not the law do by nature 
the things of the law, these, not having the law, 
are the law unto themselves; in that they show the 
work of the law written in their hearts, their con- 
science bearing witness therewith, and their thoughts 
one with another accusing or else excusing them:” 
(ROm,222514P5.) 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 105 


' (3) Man’s establishment of civil government 
shows that he acknowledges that the notice of God’s 
judgment has been received and understood. He 
has. rightly interpreted the law of responsibility 
written without and within himself. He is duly 
sensible of right and wrong, and knows well that 
there must be a lawgiver whose law prescribes the 
right and: prescribes the wrong. He has never. 
hesitated to hold other men responsible for wrong- 
doing towards himself. 
'.(4). Responsibility to divine government has 
been revealed in all the providence of God. And 
throughout all human history it is evident that man 
has attributed the prosperity or adversity dispensed 
to individuals and nations as a token of either 
divine favor. or disfavor. But clearer than the 
external light of nature, or the internal light of 
conscience, or the teachings of. Providence, is— 
(5) The revelation of judgment in the Bible. 
The heart and conscience of man readily bow to 
the rightfulness of these announcements of the 
Holy. Book: ‘ Marvel not at this; for the hour 
cometh in which all that are in the tombs shall. 
hear his voice. and shall come forth; they that have 
done good, unto the resurrection of life;.and they: 
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judg- 
ment.” (John 5: 28, 29.) 
. “The times of ignorance therefore God over- 
looked; but now he commandeth men that they 
should all everywhere repent; inasmuch as he hath 


196 BAPTISTS. AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


appointed a day in which he will judge the world 
in righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained, 
whereof he hath given assurance unto all men,. 
in‘ that he hath raised him from the dead.”’ (Acts 
1723031; ) a 

“At the revelation of the Lord Jesus from 
heaven with the angels of his power in flaming fire, 
God will recompense vengeance to them that know 
not. God, and to them that obey not the gospel of 
our Lord Jesus: Who shall suffer punishment, even 
eternal destruction from the face of the Lord and 
from the glory of his might.’ (2 Thess. 1: 7-9.) 

“And Isaw a great white throne, and him that 
sat upon it, from .whose face the earth and the. 
heaven fled away; and there was found no place 
for them. And I saw the dead, great and small,. 
standing before the throne, and books wer¢ opened; 
and another book was opened, which is the book 
of life: and the dead were judged out of the things 
which were written in the book, accor mips to their 
works.” (Rev. 2Fs 11, 12.) sie 

Thus external nature, conscience, ees and 
revelation have served due notice of the final judg- 
ment on all men;:and their holding others responsi- 
ble for wrongdoing in civil government is an 
acknowledgment. of the service. 

Prop. 2.—The sinner stands often in anticipa- 
tion before the final judgment, both before and 
after death. 

(1) Many times before death. 


'“PHE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 197 


This anticipation is sometimes in dreams. In 
“The Pilgrim’s Progress.” the Christian is led to 
a room where a man rising from bed and eee 
in affright thus explains his terror: 

“This night, as I was in my sleep, I dreamed, 
and behold, the heavens grew exceeding black; also 
it thundered and lightened in most fearful wise, 
that it put me into an agony. So I looked up in 
my dream, and saw the clouds rack, at an unusual 
rate; upon which | heard.a great sound of a trum- 
pet, and also saw a man sitting upon a cloud, at- 
tended with the thousands of heaven; they were 
all in flaming fire; also the heavens were in a 
burning flame. I heard then a great voice, saying, 
‘Arise, ye dead, and come to judgment,’ and with 
that the rocks rent, the graves opened, and the 
‘dead that were therein came forth; some of them 
were exceeding glad, and. looking upward; and 
some sought to hide themselves under the moun- 
tains. Then I saw the man that sat upon the 
cloud, open the book and bid.the world draw near. 
Yet there was, by reason of a-fierce flame which 
issued out and came before him, a convenient dis- 
tance betwixt him and them, as betwixt the judge 
and prisoners at the bar. I heard it also proclaimed 
to them that attended on the man that sat on the 
cloud, ‘Gather together the tares, the chaff and 
stubble, and cast them into’ the burning lake.’ And 
with that the bottomless pit opened, just where- 
abouts I stood; out of the mouth of which there 


198 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


came, in.an abundant manner, smoke and coals of 

fire, with hideous noises. It was also said to: the 
same persons, ‘Gather my wheat into the garner,’ 
and with that I saw many catched up and carried 
away into the.clouds; but I was left behind. ‘I also 
sought to hide myself, but I could not; for the 
man that sat upon the cloud still kept his eye tipon 
ime; my sins also came into my mind; and.-my 
conscience did accuse me on every side. vee this 
1 awakened from my sleep.” 

_In his “ Systematic Theology,’ Dr. Strong ies 
cites the. case of John Nelson: “ A man who after- 
wards became a Methodist preacher. was converted 
in Whitfield’s time by.a vision of the judgment, 
in which he saw all men gathered before the throne 
and each one coming up to the Book of God’s Law, 
tearing open his heart before it ‘as one would 
tear open the bosom of his shirt,’ comparing his 
heart with the things written in the book, -and ac- 
cording as they agreed or disagreed with that stand- 
ard, either passing triumphant to the company of 
the blest, or going with howling to the company 
of the damned. No word was spoken; the judge 
sat silent; the seem was one of self- ce 
‘and Piltoniesnatens imee 
. Sinners, convicted under faithful preaching, an- 
ticipate the final judgment and tremble. When 
Paul, before the wicked Felix and Drusilla, “‘ rea- 
soned of righteousness, continence and ‘the judg- 
ment to come, Felix was terrified and broke: in 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 199 


with, Go thy way for this time; and when I have 
a convenient season, I will call thee unto me.” 

Some who commit the unpardonable sin antici- 
pate this judgment with most horrible forebodings. 
Having sinned wilfully and maliciously against all 
the grace manifested in the triune God—insulting 
the Father by treading under foot his only begotten 
Son—insulting the Son by counting his blood of 
the everlasting covenant an unholy thing—insulting 
the Holy Spirit by doing despite to his gracious 
wooing—“ there remaineth for them no more sac- 
rifice for sin, but a certain, fearful expectation of 
judgment and a fierceness of fire which shall de- 
vour the adversaries.’ (Heb. 10: 26-29.) These 
wretched souls never doubt the certainty, nearness 
and eternity of the final judgment. 

(2) Many times after death. 

Not only before death do men often in appre- 
hension stand before this judgment bar, but even 
more fearfully after death in their disembodied 
state. They feel it coming not only as an ex- 
planation of present torment, but as a prelude to 
greater woes. 

The fallen King of Babylon found hell’s greet- 
ing to be a foreboding of the judgment to which 
he was reserved: ‘ Hell from beneath is moved 
for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stirreth 
up the dead for thee. . . . And they shall say unto 
thee, Art thou become like unto us? . . . How 
att thou fallen from heaven, O day star, son of the 


200 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


morning! . . . Is this the man that made the 
earth to tremble, Tuis!”’ (Isa. 14.) 

Heaven's refusal to grant the rich man’s appeal 
for mercy announces the end of probation and 
heralds the coming judgment: “Son, remember 
that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things 

. but now thou art in anguish. And besides all 
this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, 
that they that would pass from hence to you may 
not be able, and that none may cross over from 
thence to us.”” (Luke 16.) 

Hell’s imprisonment and chains make lost souls 
sensible that they are being held over for trial at 
the great assize: Unlike the spirits of the made 
perfect (Heb. 12: 23), who, as purified souls, under 
the altar confidently invoke the coming judgment 
for redress of grievances (Rev. 6: 9-11); these, as 
“spirits in prison” (1 Pet. 3:19), are with evil 
angels “reserved unto judgment” (2 Pet. 2:14), 
and illustrate the truth that “ the Lord knoweth how 
to keep the unrighteous under punishment unto the 
day of judgment.” (2 Pet. 2:9.) 

Moreover, all the attending circumstances of our 
Lord’s second advent dreadfully tend to fix their 
minds on the judgment now at hand. 

The voice of the archangel and the sound of the 
trumpet smite them with terror. The discriminat- 
ing ministry of the angels in taking one and leaving 
another is fearfully suggestive. The difference be- 
tween their resurrection bodies and those of the 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 201 


righteous is sadly prophetic of other things. The 
separation before the throne of the wicked from 
the just is recognized as only a prelude of final 
destiny. But most terribly suggestive of all is the 
piercing look of the glorious One on the white 
throne. They recognize him as the crucified One, 
whom they despised and mocked on earth, but now 
crowned King of kings and Lord of lords. They 
shiver under the smiting of his silent glance and 
cry out, in agony, “Oh, rocks and mountains fall 
on us and hide us from the face of him that sitteth 
on the throne and from the wrath of the lamb.” 
(Rev. 6: 16.) 

Next to the eye of the Judge, the most dreadful 
anticipation of what awaits them is suggested by 
witnessing the beginnings of judgment in the house 
of God. They see all false professors, all deluded 
ones, all hypocrites eliminated from the body of 
the saints. And every time one of these is cast 
out, they do exceedingly quake and tremble for 
fear of the judgment about to fall on themselves. 
They witness the vain knocking of the foolish vir- 
gins who took no oil for their lamps, and hear 
their fruitless cry, “ Open to us,” and the stern 
voice of the bridegroom: “ Too late! too late! Ye 
cannot enter now.” 

They see the rejection of prophets and miracle- 
workers like Balaam and Judas and hear the awful 
colloquy: “Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by 
thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and 


202 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


by thy name do many mighty works? "—* I never 
knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.” 

They behold the Lord’s reckoning with the un- 
faithful servant who said in his heart, “ My lord 
delayeth his coming,” and began to beat his fellow- 
servants and to eat and drink with the drunken. 
They see him cut asunder and receiving his portion 
with hypocrites. Where is weeping and gnashing 
of teeth. (Matt. 24: 48-50.) 

They witness the summary disposal of the man 
who. buried his Lord’s talent and behold him cast 
into outer darkness as an unprofitable servant. 

They witness the bridegroom’s inspection of his 
guests and hear his inquiry of one hapless man, 
“Friend, what doest thou here without the wedding 
garment? Bind him hand and foot and cast him 
into outer darkness, where is wailing and gnash- 
ing of teeth.” They see the bound man’s speechless 
lips and helpless hands and feet. No voice now to 
plead for mercy, or to make excuse. No hands now 
to uplift in prayer or to work belated righteousness. 
No foot now to run to mercy’s seat, or to flee from 
the wrath to come. Poor dumb lips; poor bound 
hands and feet! . 
_ Finally they witness the terrible ordeal of fire 
in which even the Christian’s unscriptural work 
perishes, himself barely escaping as it were by fire. 
Now, indeed, do outbreaking sinners realize the 
awful import of the text: “If the righteous is 
scarcely saved, where, oh where, shall the ungodly 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 203 


and the sinners appear!” Thus both before and 
after death does the sinner stand in anticipation 
before the judgment seat of Christ. 

Prop. 3.—The sinner at the judgment. 

This judgment fulfills all anticipations. It is 
every way terrible. 

Its publicity is awful. All the intelligences of 
the universe are there—heaven’s shining angels— 
hell’s lowering demons—earth’s men, whether good 
or bad. 

Its scope is awful. Every idle word, brutal oath 
or foul blasphemy. © Every slimy thought, unclean 
imagination or undeveloped intent of envy or mal- 
ice.. Every deed of darkness. 

The books are awful. What God has. written 
is written. Written not alone in Hebrew, Greek 
and Latin, as was Pilate’s inscription on the cross, 
but in the Volapuk of men and angels. Fearful 
books. There is the winged book of God’s curses 
that swoops like a bird of prey on every thief and 
liar and adulterer and fixes beak and talon on his 
heart and lifts its shadows from his future NEVER- 
MORE. 

There is the book of tears. Every tear, O sinner, 
thy wickedness has caused to fall from a mother’s 
weeping eyes, every tear distilled from the sorrows 
of those whom thou hast wronged, and oh, in- 
finitely more than all others, every tear shed by 
the Redeemer when his heart was broken by thy 
impenitence and incorrigible rebellion, all these will 


204 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


be as scalding drops of liquid fire on thy soul 
forever. 

At this judgment, O sinner, three ee laws have 
ee ee emphasis : 

. THE LAW OF MEMORY—God’s memory and 

dane 

In time, thy memory is often treacherous. Thou 
hast put many things behind thee, and because thou 
didst not like to retain them in mind, thou hast 
held them as dead and quite forgotten. But God 
himself never forgets, and has the power to quicken 
thy memory. From the book of his recollection, 
all thy sins are set in order before thee and thy 
memory awakened to recognize them. As a 
palimpsest manuscript under the microscope reveals 
the earlier writing under the later writing, so shall 
thy memory be made to recall, reproduce and re- 
vivify all facts supposed long since to be sponged 
from the tablets of the mind. When God maketh 
inquisition for blood he remembereth, and thy mem- 
ory is quickened to verify all that his memory wit- 
nesseth. There can be no dispute as to the facts. 
As. the opposing attorneys for plaintiff and de- 
fendant submit to an appellate court a joint state- 
ment of facts, so shall thy memory and God’s mem- 
ory subscribe to an agreed statement of facts. 

2. THE LAW OF CONSCIENCE. 

But it is not enough to remember the facts. 
There must be recognition and confession of their 
moral quality. These deeds and thoughts and 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 205 


imaginations and words of thine were not idle 
things. They appear righteous or unrighteous, 
when quadrated with supreme law. Not the law 
of human custom or jurisprudence, but the infi- 
nitely holy law of God, prescribing all good and 
proscribing all evil. 

- Thy conscience in time, O sinner, becomes blunted 
in its moral perceptions. Thy sins debauch and 
corrupt it. But that day it will see clearly. There 
are no mists in the atmosphere of the last judgment 
and no illusions possible. That day thy spirit will 
be as the candle of the Lord. It will pronounce 
evil all that is evil. It will not put light for dark- 
ness and darkness ‘for light. What God condemns 
thy conscience will condemn. As thy quickened 
memory will prevent any dispute as to the facts, 
so thy quickened conscience will prevent any dis- 
pute as to the moral quality of actions. 

3. THE LAW OF CHARACTER. 

Thy habits of thought and conduct have pro- 
duced fixity of character. If it be now true that 
what a man thinks that he is, more certainly it be- 
comes true that what the trend of his thought and 
life has produced that will he remain forever. 
There is constant tendency to fixedness of type. 
“Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard 
his spots? Then may ye also do good that are 
ACCUSTOMED TO DO EviL.” This long-continued 
habit becomes second nature. Heaven is a pre- 
pared place for a prepared people. If, O sinner. 


206 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


thou art not now made meet for ‘the inheritance 
of the saints in light, thou couldest find no 
happiness in that light. If already thou pre- 
ferrest to be buried under hills and mountains 
rather than look once on the radiance and holy 
face of the enthroned Messiah, how couldest thou 
endure to see his face forever? With thy nature 
evil to the core, how couldest thou enjoy the blessed- 
ness of those whom grace hath redeemed? On the 
portals of the heavenly city is written, Let no un- 
clean thing enter here. The inscription on the 
seal which stamps the divine impress on Christians 
reads, Let him that nameth the name of the Lord 
depart from iniquity. And the six-winged Ser- 
aphim that stands in the presence of the immaculate 
One, with twain cover their face—with twain their 
feet—with twain they fly—while they cry continu- 
ally, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty! 

That place would be hell to thee. 

That music would harrow thy soul. 

That light would be so inexpressibly painful to 
thee that any depth of hell would be preferable. 

Ard when the supreme question is put to thy 
soul, O Soul, how didst thou treat God’s love in 
the gift of his Son’s grace? How didst thou treat 
the invitations of the gospel? How didst thou 
treat the messerigers who tendered the divine love? 
How didst thou treat God’s love in the gift of his 
Son? How didst thou esteem the cleansing blood 
of the covenant? How didst thou treat the wooings 


THE SINNER AT THE JUDGMENT 207 


of the Holy Spirit? Thy memory will recall the 
facts, thy conscience will declare their moral qual- 
ity and thy lips will confess the equity of thy eter- 
nal sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire 
prepared for the devil and his angels. 

One Book will tell all the story—the Book of 
Life. The mere absence of thy name from that 
roll will be sufficient. How suggestive, yea, how 
fearful the song: 


“When thou, my righteous Judge, shalt come 
To take thy ransomed people home; 
Oh, can I bear the piercing thought, 
What if my name should be left out!” 


- Prop. 4.—There will be degrees in the sufferings 
of the lost. 

Our Lord himself declared both the fact and the 
principle: “ Then began he to upbraid the cities 
wherein most of his mighty works were done, be- 
cause they repented not. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! 
woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works 
had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done 
in you, they would have repented long ago in 
sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall 
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day 
of judgment than for you. And thou, Capernaum, 
shalt thou be exalted unto heaven? thou shalt go 
down unto Hades; for if the mighty works had 
been done in Sodom which were done in thee, it 
would have remained until this day. But I say 


208 BAPTISTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 


unto you that it shall be more tolerable for the 
Jand of Sodom in the day of judgment than for 
thee.” (Matt. 11: 20-24.) 

According to the light, privileges and opportuni- 
ties neglected or despised will be the grade of suf- 
fering. Some are greater sinners than others. 
Their guilt is more aggravated. They have played 
ihe part of demons. They have debauched and 
seduced others. They have shed innocent blood. 
They have fattened on the woes of others. Self- 
ventered, they have selfishly lived and died. 

And some have been openly and daringly im- 
pious. They have blasphemed God and trampled 
scornfully under foot the blood of Jesus. They 
have mocked and blasphemed the Holy Spirit. But 
whatever the doom, its righteousness is confessed 
on bended knee. So at last the Scripture is ful- 
filled: “Jesus being found in fashion as a man, 
he humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto 
death, yea, the death of the cross. Wherefore also 
God highly exalted him, and gave unto him the 
name which is above every name; that in the name 
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven 
and things on earth and things under the earth, 
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.” 
(Phil. 2: 8-11.) 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 2 


ce 


AN A AL 
SY Oa ee 


