— 
or 


ee 
Spottt Sosa crest 
. zs 


mesesan evesent Bamce esto 


ie peer ersten ned 
os ore 
(ent 


Ser eeeanht ree 


SS 
er 


CALIFORNIA BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL SeMINART 


; AU DITO IU us DING 
“t Los ANGELES 13. CALIFORNIA 


i 


we? 
stare 


THE 


HOLY BIBLE, 


CONTAINING THE 


OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS 


(ACCORDING TO THE PRESENT AUTHORIZED VERSION.) 
» 


7 


*- 
WITH e 


CRITICAL, EXPLANATORY, AND PRACTICAL 
NOTES: 


THE MARGINAL READINGS OF THE MOST APPROVED PRINTED COPIES OF THE SCRIPTURES, 


WITH SUCH OTHERS AS APPEAR TO BE COUNTENANCED BY THE 
HEBREW AND GREEK ORIGINALS: 
A COPIOUS COLLECTION OF PARALLEL TEXTS; 


SUMMARIES OF EACH BOOK AND CHAPTER; 


AND THE DATE OF EVERY TRANSACTION AND EVENT RECORDED IN THE SACRED 
ORACLES, AGREEABLY TO THE CALCULATIONS OF THE 
MOST CORRECT CHRONOLOGERS. z 
o 
io} 
0 > 
a 


BY REV. JOSEPH BENSON. 


« VOLUME III.——ECCLESIASTES TO MALACHI. 


aout New-Dork: 
PUB HED BY GEORGE LANE & LEVI SCOTT, 
: 200 Mulberry-street. 
JOSEPH LONGKING, PRINTER. 


1850. - 


¥ 
7. 
- ; %« ‘ 
-r wo : 
~ 


* a 

- ’ 2 F 
*% : 4 : . = 
wut La came 


¥. 


‘ae 
¥ 


5 Th, eet hay Ne . 
» ce eae 


% THE 


BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES; 


—_ 
; : P * 7 
‘ OR, a. vv 
‘ s / 


™“ 


“ 


THE PREACHER. 


ARGUMENT. 


As this book does not present us with the name of Solomon in the front of it, some, both ancient and 
modern writers, have ascribed it to other authors: as the Talmudists, to Hezekiah; R. Moses 
Kimchi, and some other Jews, to Isaiah; and Grotius, to Zerubbabel. But there are so many 
passages in it which agree to none but Solomon, that it is a wonder any person should ever think 
of attributing it to any other person. For instance, no one but he could ever truly affirm what we 
read chap. i.16. And who but he could boast of such things as are mentioned chap. ii. 4—10, to 
represent the splendour wherein he lived above all that had been before him in Jerusalem? Or, 
on the contrary, who had such reason as he to make that sad complaint which we find ch. vii. 26, 
&c., of the mischief he had received by women? And to omit the rest, those words, in the last 
chapter, verses 9, 10, could belong to none but him, who set in order many proverbs, as appears by 
the foregoing book. Hence it has been ascribed to him, and that most justly, by the far greater 
part of interpreters, both Jewish and Christian. See Bishop Patrick. ’ ° 

Three particulars may be observed concerning this book :—1, That Solomon wrote it in his old age 
is more than probable from divers passages in it, as, that he did it after his buildings, (chap. ii. 4,) 
which yet took up twenty years of his life, (1 Kings ix.10,) and after some considerable enjoyment 
of them, and planting of gardens, and orchards, and reaping the fruit of them, (chap. il. 5,6,) and 
after long and much consideration and experience of all those methods in which men expect to 
find happiness, chap. vii. 27, &c. So this book was written by him, as a public testimony of his 
repentance and detestation of those wicked courses to which he had addicted himself: wherein he 
followed the example of his father David, who, after his sad fall, penned the fifty-first psalm. And 
the truth of this opinion may be confirmed by that expression, (2 Chron. xi.17,) They walked in the 
way of David and Solomon; that is, wherein they walked, both before their falls, and after their 
repentance. 2, The method of it. For whereas there are some passages in it which seem 
impious, it must be considered that it is in part dramatical; that Solomon speaks most things in 
his own name, but some things in the names of ungodly men, as is undeniably manifest both from 
the scope and design of the book, as it is expressed both in the beginning and in the conclusion 
of it, and from his serious and large disputation against those wicked principles and courses. And 
this way of writing was not unusual among both sacred and profane writers. 3, The design of it ; 
which is, to describe man’s true happiness, and the way leading to it. This he does both nega 
tively, proving that it is not to be found either in secular wisdom, or in sensual pleasures, or in 
worldly greatness and glory, or in abundance of riches, or in a vain profession of religion: and 
positively, showing that it is to be had only in the fear of God and obedience to his laws, which 
alone can give a man a cheerful enjoyment of his present comforts, and assurance of his ever- 
lasting happiness. 

3 ' 3 


The Preacher shows that ail 


ECCLESIASTES. 


human courses are vain. 


£ 


CHAPTER I. 


The title of this book, 1. The general doctrine, Au is vanily, 2,3. Proved from the shoriness of life, and the perpetual 
changes of all the creatures, 4-7. From the unsatisfying toil of men, and the return of the same things over again, 


The vanity of knowledge, 12-18. 


(THE words *of the Preacher, the 
son of David, king of Jerusalem. 
2 Vanity of vanities, oalith the Preacher, 
vanity of vanities; ° all is vanity. 
3 ¢ What profit hath a man of all his labour 
which he taketh under the sun? 
A 4 One generation passeth away, and another 
generation cometh: *butthe earth abideth for ever. 


8-11. 


A. M. 3027. 
B. C, 977. 


5 f The sun also ariseth, and the sun A. M. 3027. 
goeth down, and } hasteth to his piaey oe 
where he arose. 

6 & The wind goeth toward the south, and 
turneth about unto the north: it whirleth about 
continually, and the wind returneth again ac- 
cording to his circuits. 

7 * All the rivers run into the sea; yet the 


free 12; Chap. vii. 27; xii. 8, 9, 10.——» Psa. xxxix. 5, 
3 lxii.9; exliv.4; Chap. xii. fe Rom. viii. 20.—®4 Ch. 


ii, 22; iii. 9. € Psalm civ. 5; cxix. 90.— Psalm xix. 5, 6. 
1 Heb. panteth— John iii. 8.—— Job xxxviii. 10; Ps. civ. 8, 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. The words of the Preacher—Or, dis- 
courses. ‘The Hebrew word n>np, here used, may 
either signify the person who assembles the people, 
or the person that addresses them when assembled. 
“We must not suppose that Solomon was like the 
common or ordinary preachers among the Hebrews; 
yet it is certain he spake much in public for the in- 
struction of the people; for there came of all peo- 
ple to hear the wisdom of Solomon: All the earth 
sought to Solomon to hear his wisdom, which God 
had put into his heart, 1 Kings iv. 31, 34, and x. 
24. From whence it is plain that he made public 
discourses on several subjects, and that people were, 
in a manner, called together from all nations round 
about to hear them.”—-Dodd. “He was not only a 
king,” says Poole, “but also a teacher of God’s peo- 
ple: who, having sinned griev ously i in the eyes of all 
the world, thought himself obliged to publish his re- 
pentance, "and to give public warning to all, to avoid 
those rocks upon ‘which he had split.” 

Verse 2. Vanity, &c.—Not only vain, but vanity 
in the abstract, which denotes extreme vanity. Saith 
the Preacher—Upon deep consideration and long 
experience, and by divine inspiration. This verse 
contains the general proposition, which he intends 
particularly to demonstrate in the following book. 
All—All worldly things; is vanity—Not in them- 
selves, for they are God’s creatures, and therefore 
good in their kinds, but in reference to that happi- 
ness which men seek and expect to find in them. 
So they are unquestionably vain, because.they are 
not what they seem to be, and perform not what 
they promise, but, instead of that, are the occasions 
of innumerable cares, and fears, and sorrows, and 
mischiefs. Nay, they are not only vanity, but va- 
nity of vanities, the vainest vanity, vanity in the 
nighest degree. And this is redoubled, because the 
thing is certain, beyond all possibility of dispute. 

Verse 3. What profit—What real and abiding 
benefit? None at all. AlJl is unprofitable as to the 
attainment of that happiness which all men are in- 
quiring after. Of all his labour—Hebrew, his toil- 
some labour, both of body and mind, in the pursuit 


of riches, or pleasures, or other earthly things; un- 
m 


der the sun—In all worldly matters, which are usu-- 
ally transacted in the day-time, or by the light of 

the sun. By this restriction he implies, that the 

happiness which in vain is sought for in this lower 

world, is really to be found in heavenly places and 

things. 

Verse 4. One generation passeth away, &e.— 
Men continue but for one, and that a short age, and 
then they leave all their possessions, and therefore 
they cannot be happy here, because the source of 
happiness must needs be unchangeable and eternal; 
and the certain knowledge of the approaching loss 
of all these things must rob a man of solid content- 
ment in them. But the earth abideth—Through 
all successive generations of men;~-and therefore 
man is more mutable than the very earth upon 
which he stands, and which, together with all the 
comforts which he enjoyed in it, he leaves peken 
him to be possessed by others. 

Verses 5,6. Zhe sun also riseth—The sun is in 
perpetual motion, rising, setting, and rising again, 
and so constantly "repeating its course in all succeed- 
ing days, and years, and ages; and the like he ob- 
serves concerning the winds and rivers, verses 6, 7 ; 
and the design of these similitudes seems to be, to 
show the vanity of all worldly things, and that 
man’s mind can never be satisfied with them, be-_ 
cause there is nothing in the world but a constant — 
repetition of the same things, which is so irksome, 
that the consideration thereof hath made some per- 
sons weary of their lives; and there is no new thing 
under the sun, as is added in,the foot of the account, 
(verse 9,) which seems to be given us as a key toun- 
derstand the meaning of the foregoifig passages. 
And this is certain from experience, that the things 
of this world are so narrow, and the mind of man 
so vast, that the ere must be something new to satisfy 
the mind; and even delightful things, by too fre- 
quent repetition, are so far from yielding satisfac- 
tion, that they grow tedious and troublesome. The 
wind goeth, &c.—The wind also sometimes blows 
from one quarter of the world, and sometimes from 
another; successively returning to the same quar- — 
ters in which it had formerly been. 

Verse 7. T'he sea is not full—So as to overtow 


There is nothing new 


A. M. 3027. sea is not 


B. ©. 977 full: unto the place from 


~ whence the rivers come, thither they 
2 return again. 

8 All things are full of labour; man cannot 
utter if: 3 the eye is not sdtisficd with seeing, 
nor the ear filled with hearing. 

9 4 *The thing that hath been, it ts that 
which shall be ; and that which is done és that 
which shall be done: and there is no new thing 
under the sun. 

10 Is there any thing wheréf it may be 
said, See, this ts new? it hath been already 


CHAPTER I. 


under the sun. 


of old time, which was before A.M. 3027. 
us. ‘ hab hold 

11 There is no remembrance of former 
things ; neither shall there be any remem- 
brance of things that are to come with those 
that shall come after. 

12 4 ‘I the Preacher was ie over Israel in 
Jerusalem. 

13 AndI gave my heart to seek and search out 
by wisdom concerning all things that are done 
under heaven: ™ this sore travail hath God given 
to the sons of man *to be exercised therewith. 


2 Heb. return to go. 


i Prov. xxvii. 20.— Chap. iii.15. 


1 Verse 1——™ Gen. iii. 19; Chap. iii. 10.—* Or, to afflict them. 


. the earth, which might be expected from such vast 
accessions of waters to it. Whereby also he inti- 
mates the emptiness of men’s minds, notwithstand- 
ing the abundance of creature comforts. Unto the 
place from whence the rivers come—Unto their 
springs or fountains ; thither they return—By secret 
passages of the earth: or their waters, after flowing 
into the sea, and being mixed with its waters, are 
exhaled by the heat of the sun, become vapours 
and clouds, descend in showers on the hills and 
mountains, and feed the springs from which they 
flow again, in streams and rivers, into the lakes, seas, 
and oceans. He seems to speak of the visible and 
constant motion of the waters, both to the sea and 
from it, and then to it again in a perpetual recipro- 
cation. 

Verses 8,9. All things—Not only the sun, and 
winds, and rivers, but all other creatures; are full 
of labour—They are in continual restlessness and 
change, never abiding in the same state. The eye 
is not satisfied—As there are many things in the 
world vexatious to men, so even those things which 
are comfortable are not satisfactory, but men are 
constantly desiring some longer continuance or 
fuller enjoyment of them, or variety in them. "he 
eye and ear are here put for all the senses, because 
these are most spiritual and refined, most curious 
and inquisitive, most capable of receiving satisfac- 
tion, and exercised with more ease and pleasure than 
the other senses. The thing that hath been, &c.— 
There is nothing in the world but a continued and 
tiresome repetition of the same things. The nature 
and course of the beings and affairs of the world, 
and the tempers of men, are the same that they 
ever were, and shall ever be; and therefore, because 
no man ever yet received satisfaction from worldly 
things, it is vain for any person hereafter to expect 
it. And there is no new thing—In the nature of 
things, which might give us hopes of attaining that 
satisfaction which hitherto things have not afforded. 

Verse 11. There is no remembrance, &c.—This 
seems to be added, to prevent the objection, that 
there are many inventions and enjoyments unknown 
to former ages. To this he answers, This objection 
is grounded only upon our ignorance of ancient 
times, which, if we exactly knew or remembered, 


- ‘ 


we should easily find parallels to all present occur- 
rences. There are many thousands of remarkable 
speeches and actions done in this, and which will 
be done in the following ages, which neither are, 
nor ever will be, put into the public records or his- 
tories, and consequently must unavoidably be for- 
gotten in succeeding ages; and therefore it is just 
and reasonable to believe the same concerning for- 
mer ages. 

Verse 12. I the Preacher was king—Waving as- 
serted the vanity of all things in the general, he 
now comes to prove his assertion in those particu- 
lars wherein men commonly seek, and with the 
greatest probability expect to find, ‘true happiness. 
He begins with secular wisdom. And to show how 
competent a judge he was of this matter, he lays 
down this character, that he was the Preacher, 
which implies eminent knowledge; and a king, who 
therefore had all imaginable opportunities and ad- 
vantages for the aftainment of happiness, and par- 
ticularly for the getting of wisdom, by consulting all 
sorts of books and men, by trying ‘all manner of ex- 
periments; and no ordinary king, but king over Is- 
rael—God’s own people, a wise and a happy people, 
whose king he was by God’s special appointment, 
and furnished by God with singular wisdom for 
that great trust; and whose abode was in Jerusalem 
—Where were the house of God, and the most wise 
and learned of the priests attending upon it, and the 
seats of justice, and colleges, or assemblies of the 
wisest men of their nation. All these concurring 
in him, which rarely do in any other man, make 
the argument, drawn from his experience, more con- 
vincing. 

Verse 13. I gave my heart—Which phrase de- 
notes his serious and fixed purpose, and his great 
industry init. To search out by wisdom—'To seek 
diligently and accurately, by the help of that wis- 
dom wherewith God had endowed me. Concern- 
ing all things, &e.—Concerning all the works of 
God and men in this lower world; the works of na- 
ture; the works of divine providence; and the 
works and depths of human policy. T'his sore 
travail—This difficult and toilsome work of search- 
ing out these things, God hath inflicted as a just 
punishment upon man for his eating of the tree of 

5 


The vanity of ECCLESIASTES. human pleasures. 
+ 

A.M. 3027. 14 TI have seen all the works that ||been before me in Jerusalem: yea, A.M, 3027. 

B. C. 977. B. C. 977. 


are done under the sun; and behold, 
all is vanity and vexation of spirit. 

15 * That which is crooked cannot be made 
straight: and that which is wanting cannot be 
numbered. 

16 I communed with mine own heart, say- 
ing, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have 
gotten °more wisdom than all they that have 


my heart ®had great experience of 
wisdom and knowledge. 

17 ? And I gave my heart to know wisdom, 
and to know madness and folly: I perceived 
that this also is vexation of spirit. 

18 For *in much wisdom is much grief: 
and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth 
sorrow. 


B Chap. vii. 13—+* Heb. defect. ©] Kings iii, 12, 13; iv. 30; 
x. 7, 23 ;. Chap. ii. 9. 


knowledge. Jo be exercised therewith—To em- 
ploy themselves in the painful study of these things. 

Verses 14, 15. I have seen all the works, &c.— 
Diligently observed, and, in a great measure, under- 
stood them; and behold, all is vanity and vexation 
of spirit—Not only unsatisfying, but also an afflic- 
tion or breaking to a man’s spirit. That which is 
crooked, &c.—All our knowledge serves only to dis- 
cover our miseries, but is utterly insufficient to re- 
move them; it cannot rectify those disorders which 
are either in our own hearts and lives, or in the 
men and things of the world. T'hat which is want- 
wng—In our knowledge, and in order to man’s com- 
plete satisfaction and happiness; cannot be nuwmber- 
ed—Or, cownted owé to us from the treasures of hu- 
man learning, but.what is wanting will be so still; 
all our enjoyments here, when we have done our 
utmost to bring them to perfection, are still defect- 
ive: and that which is wanting in our own know- 
ledge is so much, that it cannot be numbered. The 
more we know, the more we see of our own igno- 
rance. 

Verses 16, 17. I communed with mine own heart 
—TI considered within myself in what condition I 
was, and what’ degrees of knowledge I had gained; 
and whether it was not my ignorance that made me 
unable to rectify those errors, and supply those 
wants of which I complain; and whether wiser 
men could not do it,-though I could not; saying, 
Lo! Iam come to gr eat estate—Hebrew, pyran, if 
am grown great, namely, in wisdom, or, I have 
magnified, or greatly enlarged ; and “hee gotien 
—Hebrew, din), have added, more wisdom—As 
I had a large stock of wisdom infused into me by 
God, so I have greatly improved it by conversation, 
study, and experience ; than all they that were be- 


5 Heb, had seen much. Chap. ii. 3, 12 ; vii. 23, 25 ; 1 Thess. 
y. 21.—4 Chap. xii. r. 


fore me—Whether governors, priests, or private 
persons. This was no vain boast, but a known and 
confessed truth, and the profession of it was neces- 
sary to demonstrate his assertion ; tz Jerusalem— 
Which was then the most eminent place in the 
world for wisdom and knowledge. Igave my heart 
to know wisdom, &c.—That I might thoroughly un- 
derstand the nature and difference of truth and 
error, of virtue and vice. J perceived that this 
is veration, &c.—Or, feeding wpon wind, as the 
Hebrew. m7 {yy, may be properly rendered, and 
as a similar phrase is rendered by many, both an- 
cient and modern translators, in verse 14, and by 
our translators, Hosea xii. 1. 

Verse 18. In much wisdom is much grief—Or 
displeasure to a man within himself, and against 
his present condition; and he that increaseth know- 
ledge, inereaseth sorrow—Which he does many 
ways, because he gets his knowledge with hard and 
wearisome labour, both of mind and body, with the 
consumption of his spirits, and shortening of his 
life ; because he is often deceived with knowledge, 
falsely so called, and often mistakes error for truth, 
and is perplexed with manifold doubts, from which 
ignorant men are wholly free; because he hath the 
clearer prospect into, and quieker sense of, his own 
ignorance, and infirmities, and disorders; and, with- 
al, how vain and ineffectual all his knowledge is for 
the prevention or removal of them; and because 
his knowledge is very imperfect and unsatisfying, 
yet increasing his thirst after more knowledge; 
lastly, because his knowledge quickly fades and 
dies with him, and then leaves him in no better, 
and possibly in a much worse condition, than that 
of the meanest and most unlearned man in the 


world. 
I 


‘ CHAPTER IL. 


Solomon shows that there 1s no true happiness to be found in mirth and the pleasures of sense, 1-11. 


_ He considers wisdom 


again, and owns it to be an excellent thing, and yet insufficient to give happiness, 12-16. He shows that business and 
wealth are only vanity and vexation of spirit, 17-23. And that if there be any bis therein, it is only to those who sit 


loose to them, 24-26. 
6 


ee) 


2 


_ —Mixing pleasure and profit together. 


The vanity of means CHAPTER II. used to obtain happiness. 
A.M. 3027. T *SAID in my heart, Go to now, I|/that were in Jerusalem before he any 
~&. ‘. 


B.Co9t7. z 3 ° 
———— ~ will prove thee with mirth ; therefore 


enjoy pleasure: and behold, ” this also is vanity. 

2 °I said of laughter, J¢ is mad: and of mirth, 
What doeth it ? 

3 ‘I sought in my heart ! to give myself unto 
wine, yet acquainting my heart with wisdom ; 
and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what 
was that good for the sons of men, which they 
should do under the heaven *all the days of 
their life. 

4 I made me great works; I builded me 
houses; I planted me vineyards: 

5 I made me gardens and orchards, and I 
planted trees in them of all kind of fruits: 

6 I made me pools of water, to water there- 
with the wood that kringeth forth trees : 

7 I got me servants and maidens, and had 
’servants born in my house; also I had great 
possessions of great and small cattle above all 


a Luke xii. 19.—— Isa. 1. 11.——¢ Prov. xiv. 13 ; Chap. vii. 6. 
4 Chap. i. 17.——" Heb. to draw my flesh with wine-——? Heb. the 
number of the days of their life. $ Heb, sons of my house. 


me; + a alc 
8 °I gathered me also silver and gold, and 
the peculiar treasure of kings, and of the pro- 
vinces: I gat me men-singers and women- 
singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as 
* musical instruments, and that of all sorts. 

9 So ‘I was great, and increased more than 
all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my 
wisdom remained with me. 

10 And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not 
from them, I withheld not my heart from any 
joy ; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: 
and £ this was my portion of all my labour. 

11 Then I looked on all the works that my 
hands had wrought, and on the labour that I 
had laboured to do: and behold, all was vanity 
and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit 
under the sun. 

12 § And I turned myself to behold wisdom, 


e] Kings ix. 28; x. 10, 14, 21, &c. 4Heb. musical instru- 
ment and instruments. £ Chap. i. 16.—— Chap. iii. 22; v. 18; 
ix. 9, h Chap, i. 3,14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IT. 

Verses 1, 2. I said in my heart—Being disap- 
pointed of my hopes from knowledge, I resolved to 
try another course. Go to now—O my soul! I will 
try whether I cannot make thee happy by the en- 
joyment of sensual delights. This also is vanity— 
Is vain, and unable to make men happy. J said of 
laughter, It is mad—This is an act of madness, 
more fit for fools who know nothing, than for wise 
men in this sinful, and dangerous, and deplorable 
state of mankind. What doth it—What good doth 
it? Or how can it make men happy? Ichallenge 
all the epicures in the world to give me a solid an- 
swer. 

Verse 3. I sought to give myself unto wine—To 
gratify myself with delicious meats and drinks; yet 
acquainting, &c.—Y et resolving to use my wisdom, 
that I might try whether I could not arrive at satis- 
faction, by mixing wine and wisdom together. To 
lay hold on folly, &e.—To pursue sensual pleasure, 
which was my folly; till I might see, &e.—Till I 
might find out the true way to contentment and 
satisfaction, during this mortal life. 

Verses 4-7. I made me great works—Magnificent 
works, for my honour and delight. J builded me 
houses—Of which see 1 Kings vii. 1, &c.; ix. 15, &e. ; 
Cant. viii. 11. I made me gardens—Hebrew, para- 
dises, or gardens of pleasure; I planted trees, &c. 
I made me 
pools of water—Because the rain there fell but sel- 
dom; to water therewith the wood—The nurseries 
of young trees, which, for the multitude of them, 
were like a wood or forest. J had servants born in 


my house—Of my bond-servants, which therefore | 


were a part of my possessions. 
3 


Verse 8. I gathered me silver and gold—Vast 
riches; and the peculiar treasure of kings—Riches, 
answerable to the state of a king, or, he means, the 
greatest jewels and rarities of other kings, which 
they gave to me, either as a tribute, or by way of 
present; and of the provinces—Which were im- 
posed upon or presented by all the provinces of my 
dominions. 

Verses 9, 10. So J was great—In riches, and pow- 
er, and glory. My wisdom remained—As yet I was 
not wholly seduced from God. And whatsoever 
mine eyes desired—Whatsoever was grateful to my 
senses, or my heart desired; I kept not from them 
—I denied myself nothing, at least, of lawful de- 
lights, but went to the very bounds of them; which 
was the occasion of his falling afterward into sinful 
pleasures. I withheld not my heart, &e.—As my 
heart was vehemently set upon pleasure, so I did 
not resist, or curb it therein, but made all possible 
provision to gratify it. For my heart rejoiced—t 
had the comfort of all my labours, and was not hin- 
dered from the full enjoyment of them by sickness 
or war, or any other calamity. This was my por- 
tion—This present enjoyment of them was all the 
benefit which I could expect from all my labours. 
So that I made the best of them. 

Verse 11. [looked on all the works, &c.—I made 
a serious review of my former works and labours, 
and considered whether [ had obtained that satisfac- 
tion in them which I had expected to find; and be- 
hold, all was vanity—I found myself disappointed, 
and wholly dissatisfied in this course. And there 
was no profit, &ce.—The pleasure was past, and I 
was never the better for it, but as empty as before. 

Verse 12. And I turned myself, &c.—Being frus- 

ir! 


Wisdom excelleth folly, as far 


ECCLESIASTES. 


as light excelleth darkness. 


A. M. 3027. 


iand madn Mer 
B. C. 977. madness, and folly: for what 


can the man do that cometh after the 
king ? Seven that which hath been already done. 

13 Then I saw ° that wisdom excelleth folly, 
as far as light excelleth darkness. 

14 * The wise man’s eyes are in his head; 
but the fool walketh in darkness; and I myself 
perceived also that ‘one event happeneth to 
them all. 

15 Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth 
to the fool, so it 7happeneth even to me; and 
why was I then more wise? 'Then [I said in 
my heart, that this also is vanity. 

16 For there is no remembrance of the wise 
more than of the fool for ever; seeing that 
which now is in the days to come shall all be 
forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as 
the fool. — 

17 Therefore I hated life; because the work 


iChap. i. 17; vii. 25. 5 Or, in those things which have been 
already done. 6 Heb. that there is an excellency in wisdom more 
thanin folly, &c. 


that is wrought under the sun is griey- A. M. 3027 
ous unto me: for all zs vanity an foe 
vexation of spirit. 

18 | Yea, I hated all my labour which I had 
*taken under the sun: because ™I should leave 
it unto the man that shall be after me. 

19 And who knoweth whether he shall be a 
wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule 
over all my labour wherein I have laboured, 
and wherein I have showed myself wise under 
the sun. ‘This zs also vanity. 

20 'Therefore I went about to cause my heart 
to despair of all the labour which I took undery, 
the sun. 

21 For there is a man whose labour is in 
wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity ; yet 
toa man that hath not laboured therein shall 
he °leave it for his portion. This also is 
vanity, and a great evil. 


K Proy. xvii. 24; Chap. viii. 1— Psa. xlix. 10 ; Chap. ix. 2, 
3,11, "Heb. happeneth to me, even to me=——® Heb. laboured. 
m Psa. xlix. 10, ® Heb. give, ‘ 


trated of my hopes in pleasure, I returned to a se- 
cond consideration of my first choice, to see whether 
there was not more satisfaction to be gotten from 
wisdom, than I discovered at my first view. For 
what can the man do—To find out the truth in this 
matter; to discover the utmost satisfaction possible 
to be found in pleasure ; that cometh after the king 
—That succeeds me in this inquiry. So this is add- 
ed as a reason why he gave over the pursuit of plea- 
sures, and directed his thoughts to another object; 
and why he so confidently asserted the vanity of 
pleasures, from his own particular experience; 
namely, because he had made the best of them, and 
it was a vain thing for any private man to expect 
that from them which could not be found by a king, 
and such a king, who had so much wisdom to in- 
vent, and such great riches to pursue and enjoy 
all imaginable delights; and who had made it his 
design and business to search this matter to the bot- 
tom. Even that which hath been already done— 
As by others, so especially by myself. They can 
make no new discoveries as to this point. They can 
make no more of the pleasures of sense than I have 
done. Let me then try, once more, whether wisdom 
can give happiness. 

Verses 13, 14. I saw that wisdom—I allowed thus 
much. Although wisdom is not sufficient to make 
men happy, yet it is of far greater use than vain 
pleasures, or any other follies. The wise man’s 
eyes are in his head—In their proper place. He 
hath the use of his eyes and reason, and foresees, 
and so avoids, many dangers and mischiefs. But 
the fool walketh in darkness—Manages his affairs 
ignorantly, rashly, and foolishly, whereby he shows 
that his eyes are not in his head, or are not used 
aright. And, or yet, I myself perceived also, &c.— 

8 


That, notwithstanding this excellence of wisdom 
above folly, at last they both come to one end. Both 
are stibject to the same calamities, and to death it- 
self, which takes away all difference between them. 

Verses 15, 16. Then I said—why was I-more 
wise— What benefit have I by my wisdom? or, to 
what purpose did I take so much pains to get wis- 
dom. For there is no remembrance of the wise— 
Their memory, though it may flourish for a season, 
yet will, in a little time, be worn out; as we see in 
most of the wise men of former ages, whose very 
names, together with all their monuments, are utter- 
ly lost. As the fool—He must die as certainly as the 
fool. 

Verses 17-19. Therefore I hated life—My life, 
though accompanied with so much honour, and 
pleasure, and wisdom, was a burden to me, and I was 
ready to wish, either that I had never been born, or 
that I might speedily die; because the work, &c., is 
grievous—All human designs and works are so far 
from yielding me satisfaction, that the consideration _ 
of them increases my discontent. J hated all my 
labowr—All] these riches and buildings, and other 
fruits of my labour, were aggravations of my mise- 
ry. Because I should leave it, &c.—Because I must, 
and that everlastingly, leave them all behind me. 
And who knoweth whether he shall be wise or a fool? 
—Who will undo all that I have done, and turn the 
effects of my wisdom into instruments of his folly. 
Some think he had such an opinion of Rehoboam. 

Verses 20, 21. I went to cause my heart to de- 
spair—I gave myself up to despair of ever reaping 
that satisfaction which I promised to myself. Fur — 
there is aman whose labour, &c.—Who uses great 
industry, and prudence, and justice too, in the man= 
agement of his affairs; yet to a man that hath not 

3 ; 


ae gs 
# eS 


7 


The vanity of CHAPTER II. human life. 
. - all 22 »For what hath man of all his ||labour. This also I saw, that it was 7 Be 3027. 


labour, and of the vexation of his 
heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun? 
23 For all his days are ° sorrows, and his 
travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in 
the night. This is also vanity. 
24 7 ’ There is nothing better for a man 
than that he should eat and drink, and that 
he should make his soul enjoy good in his 


from the hand of God. asians 


25 For who can eat, or who else can hasten 
hereunto more than 1? 

26 For God giveth toa man that is good } in 
his sight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy ; butto 
the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap 
up, that 4 he may give to him that is good hefore 
God. This also is vanity and vexation of spirit. 


“Chap. 1. 3; ili. 9, 


© Job v. 7; xiv. 1—p Chap. iii. 12; xiii. 
225; v. 18; viii. 15. 


10 Or, delight his senses. 


U Heb, before him, Gen. vii. 1; Luke 
is 6. 


4 Job xxvii. 16,17; Prov. xxviii. 8. 


laboured therein—shall he leave it for his portion 
—A portion which he will probably consume upon 
his lusts. This also is a great evil—A great disor- 
der in itself, and a great torment to a considering 
mind. 

Verses 22, 23. For what hath man—“'To what 
purpose,” a man may wellsay, “is all this toil of my 
body, and these solicitous thoughts, and this anguish 
of my mind? For all that aman can enjoy himself of 
the anxious labours wherein he spends his days, 
amounts to little or nothing; and what comfort hath 
he in thinking who shall enjoy the fruit of them 
hereafter?” For all his days are sorrows, &c.— 


“ And yet, such is our folly, there is no end of our | 


cares ; for we see many a man, whose life is nothing 
but a mere drudgery; who never is at leisure to en- 
joy any thing that he hath, but still engaged in one 
troublesome employment or other to get more; 
which he follows so eagerly, as if it were his busi- 
ness to disquiet and vex himself, and make his life 
uneasy to him! being not content with his daily 
toils, unless he rack his mind also with cares in the 
night! This is so void of all reason that nothing can 
be imagined more vain and foolish.”—Bishop Pat- 
rick. 
Verse 24. There is nothing better—Or, Is there 
‘any thing better for a man2—Which implies that 
there is nothing better, namely, for man’s present 
comfort and satisfaction ; than that he should make 
his soul enjoy good in his labour—That, studying 
first to free his mind from overmuch care and anxie- 
ty, he should, instead of heaping up perpetually for 
his heirs, allow himself a moderate and decent use 
of all the good things that he hath gotten by his ho- 
nest labours; praising God for them, and cheerfully 
communicating them with his friends and neigh- 
bours, and to the relief of the necessitous poor and 
afflicted. T'his also—Namely, that a man should 
‘ thankfully take, and freely and cheerfully enjoy and 
communicate with others, the comforts which God 
gives him; I saw—was from the hand of God— 
» Was a singular gift of God, and not to be procured 
by a man’s own wisdom and diligence. 

Verse 25. For who can eat, &c.—For the truth of 
this you may rely upon my experience: for who 
can more freely and fully enjoy the comforts of this 
life than I did? Or who else can hasten hereunto 
more than I?—Who can pursue them with more 
diligence, obtain them with more readiness, or em- 


7 


’ 


» * 


brace them with more greediness? And yet, (as his 
words imply,) I had not comfort in these things till 
God was pleased to impart it unto me; till he gave 
me grace to see and consider that they were his 
gifts, to acknowledge his goodness in bestowing 
them upon me, and to use and enjoy them with pru- 
dence and moderation according to his will, not 
seeking my happiness in them, or in any creatures, 
but in himself, above all creatures. For this verse is 
evidently added to confirm, from his own experience, 
what he said in the foregoing verse: and surely no 
man’s experience, in such a case, was ever greater ; 
no man was ever a more capable judge in these mat- 
ters: none could either have more creature-com- 
forts, or more addict himself to the enjoyment of 
them, or improve them to better advantage than 
he did; and therefore he could best tell what was the 
greatest good to be found in them, and whether they 
were able of themselves, without God’s special gift, 
to yield a man satisfaction. 

Verse 26. For God giveth to a man that is 
good in his sighi—Who not only seems to men to 
be good, as many bad men do, but is really and sin- 
cerely good; or, who pleaseth him, as the same 
phrase, 1199 214, is rendered, chap. vii. 26, and of- 
ten elsewhere: whereby he seems. to intimate the 
reason why he found no more comfort in his la- 
bours, namely, because his ways had been very dis- 
pleasing to God, and therefore God justly denied 
him that gift; wisdom and knowledge—To direct 
him how to use his comforts right, that so they may 
be blessings, and not snares and curses to him; and 
joy—A mind thankful for, and contented with, his 
portion. “'This is a blessing,” says Bishop Patrick, 
“which God reserves for him whom he loves; whose 
sincere piety he rewards with wisdom to judge 
when, and with knowledge to understand how, he 
should enjoy and take the comfort of all he hath ; 
especially with inward joy, satisfaction of heart, and 
tranquillity of mind in this favour of God to him; 
whereby the troublesome affairs of this life are tem- 
pered and seasoned.” But to the sinner he giveth 
travail—He giveth him up to insatiable desires, and 
wearisome labours, to little or no purpose, that he 
may have no comfort in the riches he gains, but 
leave them to others, yea, to such as he least expect- 
ed or desired, to good and virtuous men, into whose 
hands his estate falls, by the wise and all-disposing 
providence of God. 

: 9 


~~ ~ 
A time and a season 


ECCLESIASTES, 


for every purpose. 


“ CHAPTER, IIL, 


Solomon proves that we ought to make use of what God has given us, by showing the mutability of all human affairs, 1-10. 


The immutability and unsearchableness of the divine counsels, 11-15. 


The vanity of honour and power, often an instru- 


ment of oppression, for which God will judge the oppressors, 16,17; whose condition in this world is no better than that 


of brutes, 18-21. Therefore live well, 22. 


A. M. 3027. 


O every thing there is a season 
B. G. 977. T y s i 


and a *time to every purpose 
under the heaven : 

2 A time ! to be born, and a time to die; a 
time to plant, and a time to pluck up ‘hat 
which is planted ; 

3 A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time 
to break down, and a time to build up; 

4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a 
time to mourn, and a time to dance ; 

5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to 


@ Verse 17; Chap. 


‘ 


viii. 6. 1 Heb. to bear. b Heb. ix. 27. 


¢ Joel ii. 16; 1 Cor. vii. 5. 


— 


a time to em- A. M. 3027. 


ather stones together ; 
gather stones: tog : Be 977. 


brace, and °a time *to refrain from 
embracing ; 

6 A time to ? get, and a time to lose; a time 
to keep, and a time to cast away ; 

7 A time to rend, and a time tosew; 4a time 
to keep silence, and a time to speak ; 

8 A time to love, and a time to °*hate; a time 
of war, and a time of peace. 

9 f What profit hath he that worketh in that 
wherein he laboureth ? 


2 Heb. to be far from. © Luke 


xiv. 26. 


3 Or, seek.—4 Amos y. 13. 
£ Chap. i. 3. 


——— — 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verse 1. To every thing, &c.—Solomon haying 
mentioned God’s overruling providence in the lat- 
ter end of the foregoing chapter, proceeds in this to 
illustrate the imperfection of human wisdom, which 
is confined to a certain season for all things that it 
would effect, which if we neglect, or let slip, all our 
contrivances signify nothing. He then shows that 
the utmost perfection at which our wisdom can ar- 
rive in this world, consists, Ist, In being contented 
with this order in which God hath placed all things, 
and not disquieting ourselves about that which it is 
not in our power to alter. 2d, In observing and tak- 
ing the fittest opportunity of doing every thing, as 
the most certain means to tranquillity. 3d, In taking 
the comfort of what we have at present, and making 
a seasonable and legitimate use of it; and, lastly, in 
bearing the vicissitudes which we find in all human 
things with an equal mind; because they are order- 
ed by a powerful, wise, and gracious Providence. 
These were the things he had suggested in the con- 
clusion of the former chapter, and this may be con- 
sidered as having a relation to every one of them. 
See Bishop Patrick. There is a season—A certain 
time appointed by God for its being and continu- 
ance, which no human wisdom or providence can 
alter. And by virtue of this appointment of God, 
all vicissitudes which happen in the world, whether 
comforts or calamities, come to pass; which is here 
added to prove the principal proposition, that all 
things below are vain, and happiness is not to be 
found in them, because of their great uncertainty, 
and mutability, and transitoriness, and because they 
are so much out of the reach and power of men, 
and wholly in the disposal of God. And a time to 
every purpose—Not only things natural, but even 
the voluntary actions of men, are ordered and dis- 
posed by God. But it must be considered, that he 
does not here speak of a time allowed by God, 
wherein all the following things may lawfully be 

10 


done, but only of a time fixed by God, in which they 
are actually done. 

- Verses 2-8. A time to die—And as there is a time 
to dié, so there is a time to rise again, a set fime, 
when they that lie in the grave shall be remember- 
ed. A time to kill—When men die a violent death. 
A time to heal—When he who seemed to be mor- 
tally wounded is healed. A time to weep—When 
men have just occasion for weeping, as they fre- 
quently have in the present life, both for their own 
sins and for the sins and miseries of mankind. “Tt is 
in vain,” says Castalio, here, “to expect our happi- 
ness in this world: for this is no more the time and 
the place for it, than the seed-time is the harvest. . 
But we must stay till the next life for it; which is 
the proper time for complete happiness: here we 
must be content with a great many tears.” A time 
to cast away stones—Which were brought together 
in order to the building of a wall, or house, but are 
now cast away, either because the person who ga- 
thered them hath changed his mind, and desists from 
his project, or for other causes. A time to embrace 
—When persons enter into friendship, and perform 
all friendly offices one to another; and a time to re- 
frain, &c.—Kither through alienation of affection, 
or grievous calamities. A time to get, and atime 
to lose—“In our traffic and commerce one with an- 
other, there is a time of gaining much ; but there are 
other times, when a man must be content to lose by 
his commodities.” A time to keep, &c.—*Some- 
times also it is fit for a man to keep and lay up what 
he hath gotten; but at another time it will be as fit for 
him to spend or to give it away to those that need.” 
A time to rend--When men rend their garments, 
as they did in great and sudden griefs. A time to 
love--When God stirs up love, or gives occasion for 
the exercise of it. 

Verse 9. What profit hath he that worketh, &e.— 
Seeing then all events are out of man’s power, and 
no man can do or enjoy any thing at his pleasure, 

y 


<= 


* aa. 


- . 


CHAPTER IIT. 


righteous and the wicked. 


God shall judge the 
A.M. 3027. 10 &I have seen the travail, which 


B. C. 97. ‘ 
3S 8 God hath given to the sons of men to 


be exercised in it. 

11 4 He hath made every thing beautiful in 
his time: also he hath set the world in their 
heart, so that »no man can find out the work 
that God maketh from the beginning to the 
end. 

12 4 ‘I know that there is no good in them, 
but for @ man to rejoice, and to do good in his 
life. 

13 And also * that every man should eat and 
drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour; it 
as the gift of God. 


14 I know that, whatsoever God A. M. 3027. 
doeth, it shall be for ever: ! nothing aes ttie 
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: 
and God doeth ié, that men should fear before 
him. 

15 ™ That which hath been is now; and that 
which is to be hath already been ; and God 
requireth * that which is past. 

16 Y And moreover "I saw under the sun the 
place of judgment, that wickedness was there; 
and the place of righteousness, that iniquity 
was there. 

17 I said in my heart, °God shall judge the 
righteous and the wicked: for there is ? a time 


& Chap. i. 13.——) Chapter viii. 17; Rom. xi. 33——i Ver. 22. 
* Chap. ii. 24.—! James 1. "17 Chap. 1.8, 


*Heb. that which is driven away.—® Chap. v. 8. ©Rom, il. 
6,7,8; 2 Cor. v.10; 2 Thess. i. 6, 7.——»? Verse 1. 


but only when God pleaseth, as has been shown 
in many particulars, and is as true and certain in all 
others, hence it follows that all men’s labours, with- 
out God’s blessing, are unprofitable, and utterly in- 
sufficient to make them happy. 

Verse 10. [have seen the travail, &c.—I haye di- 
ligently observed men’s various employments, and 
the different successes of them. Which God hath 
given, &ce.—Which God hath imposed upon men as 
their duty; to which therefore men ought quietly to 
submit. Tobe exercised—That hereby they might 
have constant matter of exercise for their diligence, 
and patience, and submission to God’s will and pro- 
vidence. 

Verse 11. He hath made every thing beautiful in 
his time—This seems to be added as an apology for 
God’s providence, notwithstanding all the contrary 
events and confusions which are in the world. He 
hath made—Or, doth make, or do, by his provi- 
dence in the government of the world ; every thing 
— Which he doth, either immediately, or by the mi- 
nistry of men, or other creatures; beautiful—Con- 
venient, so that, all things considered, it could not 
have been better; in its time—Or season, when it 

“was most fit tobe done. Many events seem to men’s 
shallow judgments to be very irregular and unbe- 
coming, as when wicked men prosper and good 
men are oppressed ; but when men shall thoroughly 
understand God’s works, and the whole frame and 
contexture of them, and see the end of them, they 
will say, All things were done wisely. He hath set 
the world, &c.—It is true, God hath put the world 

' jnto men’s hearts, or made them capable of observ- 
ing all his dispensations in the world; but this is to 
be understood with a limitation, because there are 
-some more mysterious works of God which no man 
ean fully understand, because he cannot search them 
out from the beginning to the end. 

Verses 12, 13. Iknow—By clear reason, and my 
own long and certain experience; that there is no 
good in them—No other satisfaction or felicity that 
aman can enjoy in creatures or worldly things; 
but for a man to rejoice and to do good—To em- 

3 


% 


ploy them freely and cheerfully in acts of charity 
and liberality toward others, or to use them to the 
glory of God, living in his fear, which is necessary 
to the happiness of this as well as of the other life. 
And also that every one should eat, &e—Use what 
God hath given him. See the note en chap. ii. 24. 
Verse 14. Whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for 
ever—All God’s counsels or decrees are eternal and 
unchangeable. Nothing can be put to it—Men can 
neither do any thing against God’s counsel and pro- 
vidence, nor hinder any work or act of it. God 
doth it, that men should fear before him—That, by 


| the consideration of his power, in the disposal of 


all persons and things, men should learn to trust in 
him, to submit to him, to fear to offend him, and 
more carefully study to please him. 

Verse 15. That which hath been is now—Things 
past, present, and to come, are all ordered by one 
constant counsel, in all parts and ages of the world. 
There is a continual return of the same motions of 
the heavenly bodies, of the same seasons of the 
year, and a constant succession of new generations 
of men and beasts, but all of the same quality. 
God requireth—Or reneweth, as the Hebrew wp, 
may be rendered; that which is past—That time 
and those things which are irrecoverably gone in 
themselves; but are, as it were, recalled, because 
others of the same kind arise and come in their 
stead. 

Verse 16. And moreover, &c.—This is another 
argument of the vanity of worldly things, and a 
hinderance of that comfort which men expect in this 
life, because they are oppressed by their rulers. J 
saw the place of judgment—In the thrones of prin- 
ces, and tribunals of magistrates, where judgment 
should be duly executed. Solomon is still showing 
that every thing in this world, without the fear of 
God, is vanity. In these verses he shows that 
power, of which men are so ambitious, and life itself, 
are nothing worth without it. 

Verse 17. I said in my heart—I was sorely 
grieved at this, but I quieted myself with this con- 
sideration. God shall judge, &c.—Absolving the 

11 


The misery of 


ECCLESIASTES,. 


the oppressed. 


$s 


A. M. 3027. there for every purpose and for every 
B.C. 977. 


18 J I said in my heart concerning the estate 
of the sons of men, *that God might manifest 
them, and that they might see that they them- 
selves are beasts. 

19 4 For that which befalleth the sons of men 
befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth 
them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other ; yea, 
they have all one breath ; so that a man hath no 
pre-eminence above a beast: for all zs vanity. 


5 Or, that they might clear God and see, §-c.—4 Psa. xlix, 12, 
20; Ixxiii. 22; Chap. ii. 16. * Gen. li. 19.——s Chap, xii. 7. 
6 Heb. of the sons of man. 


just, and condemning the wicked. For there is a 
time there—Namely, at the judgment-seat of God ; 
atime fixed by God’s unalterable decree. He im- 
plies, that as this life is the sinner’s time, in which he 
doth whatsoever seemeth good in his own eyes, so 
God will have his time to reckon with sinners, and 
rectify all these disorders; for every purpose, and 
for every work—For examining not only men’s 
actions, but all their thoughts and purposes. The 
design of this verse is both to strike a terror into 
oppressing potentates, and to satisfy the doubts and 
support the spirits of good men, who are oppressed 
in this life. 

Verse 18. I said in my heart, &c.—And I fur- 
ther considered concerning their condition in this 
present world. That God might manifest them— 
God suffers these disorders among men, that he 
might discover men to themselves, and show what 
strange creatures they are, and what vile hearts 
they have. That they are beasts—That although 
God made them men, yet they have made them- 
selves beasts by their brutish practices, and that, 
considered only with respect to the present life, 
they are as vain and miserable creatures as the 
beasts themselves. 

Verse 19. For that which befalleth, &c.—They 
are subject to the same diseases, pains, and casual- 
ties. So dieth the other—As certainly, and no less 
painfully. They have all one breath—One breath 
of life, which is in their nostrils; by which the 


Tall A. M. 3027. 


20 All go unto one place; nl 


are of the dust, and all turn to dust 
again. 

21 4 * Who knoweth the spirit °of man that 
7 goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that 
goeth downward to the earth ? 

22 “| * Wherefore I perceive that there is 
nothing better, than that a man should rejoice 
in his own works; for “that is his portion: 
*for who shall bring him to see what shall be 
after him ? 


7™Hebrew, is ascending.——t Verse 12; Chapter ii. 24; v. 
18; xi. 9.—"Chapter ii. 10.——* Chapter vi. 12; viii. 7; 
x 14, 


beasts perform the same animal functions. For he 
speaks not here of man’s rational and immortal 
spirit, nor of the future life. So that a man hath 
no pre-eminence, &c.—In respect of the present 
life. 

Verses 20,21. All go wnto one place—To the earth, 
as it is expressed verse 21, out of which they were 
both taken. All turn to dust again—All their bo- 
dies, as it is explained chap. xii.7. Who knoweth 
the spirit of aman—True it is, there is a difference, 
which is known by good men, but the generality of 
mankind never mind it; their hearts are wholly set 
on present and sensible things, and take no thought 
for the things of the future and invisible world. 

Verse 22. I perceive there is nothing better—Foa, 
a man’s present satisfaction, and the happiness of 
this life ; than that a man should rejoice in his own 
works—That he should comfortably enjoy what 
God hath given him, and not disquiet himself with 
cares about future events. He seems to speak this 
not in the person of an epicure, but as his own judg- 
ment, which also he declares, chap. ii. 24, and v. 18, 
19, and viii. 15. For that is his portion—This is 
the benefit of his labours: he hath no more than he 
uses, for what he leaves behind him is not his, but 
another man’s. For who shall bring him to see, &c. 
—When once he is dead he shall never return to see 
into whose hands his estate falls, and how it is either 
used or abused ; nor is he at all concerned in those 
matters. 


CHAPTER IV. 
The misery of the oppressed and the oppressor, 1-3. Of being envied, which occasions sloth in others, 4-6. The folly of 


hoarding wp wealth, 7,8. The benefit of society, 9-12. 
ness of the prince, and the fickleness of the people, 13-16. 


A. os idl S° I returned, and considered all 
= ee the *oppressions that are done 


The mutability even of the royal dignity, through the foolish- 


under the sun: and behold the tears A. ah cas 
of such as were oppressed, and nes 


a Chapter 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 
Verse 1. So J returned, and considered—\ con- 


iii. 165 v. 8. 


under the sun—Whether by princes, magistrates, or 
other potent persons; and the tears of such as were 


sidered again more seriously ; all the oppressions— || oppressed—Their grievous sufferings, sighs, and 
3 


12 


y% 


The folly of 


CHAPTER IV. 


hoarding up wealth. 


A. M. 3027. had no comforters; and on the ‘side 
B. C. 977. . 
of their oppressors there was power; 
but they had no comforter. 
2” Wherefore I praised the dead whichare alrea- 
dy dead more than the living which are yet alive. 
3 ° Yea, better is he than both they, which 


hath not yet been, who hath not seen the evil, 


work that is done under the sun. 

4 4 Again, I considered all travail, and 
Zevery right work, that *for this a man is 
envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity 
and vexation of spirit. 

5. { * The fool foldeth his hands together, and 
eateth his own flesh. 


6 4 ° Better isa handful with quiet- A. M. 3027. 
ness, than both the hands full with Pa a 
travail and vexation of spirit. 

7 4 Then I returned, and I saw vanity under 
the sun. 

8 There is one alone, and there is not a se- 
cond; yea, he hath neither child nor brother : 
yet is there no end of all his labour; neither 
is his ‘ eye satisfied with riches: # neither saith 
he, For whom do I labour, and bereave my 
soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it 7s a 
sore travail. 

9 | Two are better than one; because they 
have a good reward for their labour. 


1 Heb. hand. b Job iii. 17. © Job ili. 11, 16, 21; Chap. 
vi. 3.——? Heb. all the rightness of work.—* Heb. this is the 
envy of a man from his neighbour. 


4 Proverbs vi. 10; xxiv. 33. Proverbs xv. 16, 17; xvi. 
8.—! Proverbs xxvii. 20; 1 John ii. 16——% Psalm xxxix. 
6. 


groans. And they had no comforter—None afforded 
them either pity or succour. For such was the 
greatness and power of their oppressors, that, as 
they could not defend themselves against them, so 
none else durst express their compassion toward 
them, much less plead for them, for fear of being 
made to suffer in the same way themselves. 

Verses 2,3. Wherefore I praised the dead, &c. 
—I judged them less miserable. For this is certain, 
that setting aside the future life, which Solomon 
doth not meddle with in the present debate, and 
considering the uncertainty, and vanity, and mani- 
fold calamities of the present life, a wise man would 
not account it worth his while to live. Yea, better is 
he than both they— Much more desirable than 
either of these is it not to have come into the world 
at all; and so to have had no sense of the miseries 
which the dead have formerly felt, and which the 
living now undergo.” 

Verse 4. Again I considered all travail—Hebrew 
Soy 52, all the labour, toil, or trouble, which men 
undertake or undergo; and every right work—All 
the worthy designs of virtuous men; that for this 
aman is envied of his neighbour—Instead of that 
honour and recompense which he deserves, he meets 
with nothing but envy, and obloquy, and many evil 
fruits thereof. 

Verse 5. The fool foldeth his hands, &c.—Is 
careless and idle: perceiving that diligence is attend- 
ed with envy, he runs into the other extreme. And 
ealeth his own flesh—Wastes his substance, and 
brings himself to poverty, whereby his very flesh 
pines away for want of bread. 

Verse 6. Better is a handful with quietness, 
&c.—These are the words, either, Ist, Of the slug- 
gard, making this apology for his idleness, that 
his little, with ease, is better than great riches got 
with much trouble ; or, 2d, of Solomon, who else- 
where speaks to the same purpose, and here pro- 
poses this antidote against the vanity of immode- 
rate cares and labours for worldly goods, against 
which he industriously directs his speech in divers 

3 


-% 


places of this book, and particularly in the follow- 
ing passage. 

Verse 8. There is one alone—Who has none but 
himself to care for. Yea, he hath neither child nor 
brother-—To whom he may leave his vast estate ; 
yet is there no end of his labours—He lives in per- 
petual restlessness and toil. Neither is his eye 
satisfied—His covetous mind or desire, fitly express- 
edby the eye, both because the eye is frequently the 
incentive to this sin of covetousness, (Josh. vii. 21,) 
and because the covetous man hath no good by his 
riches, save the beholding them with his eyes, as is 
affirmed, chap. v. 11. Neither saith he—Within 
himself: for he considers nothing but how he may 
get more and more: For whom do I labour ?— 
Having no posterity or kindred to enjoy it; and 
bereave my soul of good 2—Deny myself those com- 
forts and conveniences which God has allowed me ? 
Shall I take all this pains, and endure all these toils 
and hardships for a stranger, possibly for an enemy, 
who will reap the fruit of all my cares and labours? 
This is also vanity, yea, a sore travail—A dread- 
ful judgment and misery, as well as a great sin. 

Verse 9. T'wo—Or more, who live together in 
any kind of society, and join their powers together 
in pursuit of any important object; are better than 
one—-Act more cheerfully, and accomplish their de- 
signs more readily, than any of them could do ina 
solitary state; because they have a good reward for 
their labour—Have great benefit by such combina- 
tions and conjunctions of their counsels and abili- 
ties, whereby they exceedingly support, encourage, 
and stengthen each other, and effect many things 
which none of them could have effected alone. 
Gregory Thaumaturgus, says Bishop Patrick, under- 
stands Solomon as speaking here of kowaovia Bix, liv- 
ing in communion, or fellowship together, which he 
shows to be profitable, both to procure us greater 
happiness, which is the subject of the ninth verse, 
and to preserve us in the enjoyment of it when we 
have attained it, which is the subject of the three 
following verses. 

13 


The uncertainty of 


ECCLESIASTES. 


popular favour. 


A. M. 3027. 


10 For if they fall, the one will lift 
Bs GC, 977. 


up his fellow: but wo to him ¢ha¢ ts 
alone when he falleth; for he hath not another 
to help him up. 

11 Again, if two lie together, then they 
have heat: but how can one be warm 
alone ? 

- 12 And if one prevail against him, two shall 
withstand him; and a threefold cord is not 
quickly broken. 

13 4 Better 2s a poor and a wise child, than 


an old and foolish king, * who will no A. M, 3027. 
: B. C..977, 
more be admonished. a 

14 Foroutof prison he cometh to reign; whereas 
also he thatisbornin hiskingdom becometh poor. 

15 I considered all the living which walk un- 
der the sun, with the second child that shall 
stand up in his stead. 

16 There is no end of all the people, even of 
all that have been before them: they also 
that come after shall not rejoice in him. 
Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit. 


4*Hebrew, he who knoweth 


not to be admonished. 


Verses 10-12. For, if they fall—If one or more 
of them fall in any way; as into any mistakes, and 
errors, or sins, dangers, or distresses. T'he one will 
lift up his fellow—Will hold him up, if he be fall- 
ing, or raise him up, if he be fallen. Jf two lie to- 
gether, then they have heat--They will be sooner 
warm in a cold bed and a cold season. So virtuous 
and gracious affections are excited by good society ; 
and Christians warm one another, by provoking one 
another to love and good works. But how can one 
be warm alone ?--How can the warmth and fer- 
vency of true Christian love and zeal be retained by 
him who stands aloof from, and has no intercourse 
with, his fellow-Christians? Jf one prevail against 
him—If an enemy, visible or invisible, might easily 
prevail against either or any of them, if not associ- 
ated with others, two or more, uniting their coun- 
sels and efforts, will be able to withstand him; and 
a three-fold cord is not quickly broken—If a man 
have not only one, but two or more friends to assist 
him, he is so much the more secure against all 
assaults, and therefore the more happy. Thus, in 
our spiritual warfare, we may be helpful to each 
other, as well as in our spiritual work. And next 
to the comfort of communion with God, is that of 
the communion of saints. For they that dwell in 
love dwell in God, and God in them. 

Verses 13, 14. He now proceeds to another vanity, 
even that of honourand power, and the highest places. 
Better—More happy; is a poor and wise child—Who 
is doubly contemptible, both for his age and for his 
poverty; than an old and foolish king, who, though 
venerable for his age, and gravity, and royal dignity, 
yet hath neither wisdom to govern himself, nor to 
receive the counsels or admonitions of wiser men, 
but is foolish, rash, and incorrigible. For out of 
prisor, he—The poor and wise child; cometh to 
reign—Is ofttimes ‘advanced by his wisdom to the 
highest power and dignity; which was the ease with 
Joseph, Mordecai, and many others; whereas he 
that is born in his kingdom—That old king, who 
was born of the royal race, and had possessed his 
kingdom for along time; becometh poor—Is depriv- 
ed of his kingdom, either by the rebellion of his 
subjects, provoked by his folly, or by the power of 
some other and wiser prince. 

Verse 15. I considered all the living—The gene- 

14 


© 


ral disposition of common people in all kingdoms, 
that they are fickle and inconstant, weary of their 
old governors, and desirous of changes; with the 
second child that shall stand wp—That shall arise 

to reign. This may be understood of the king’s 
child, or son and heir, called second in respect to 
his father, whose successor he is. Some join this 
clause with the preceding, thus: J considered all the. 
living which walk—Or, that they walk; under the 
sun—That is, upon earth; with the second child— 
That is, that they follow, favotr, and worship him, 
as the rising sun, upon which the eyes and hopes of 
most people are fixed. Probably Solomon observed 
this disposition in his own people, who were grow- 
ing weary of his government, and beginning to de- 
sire a change, and to turn their eyes to Rehoboam 
his successor. At least he remembered the rebel- 
lion that had been raised against his father David in 
favour of Absalom, and might have reason to think 
the same leaven was still working in his kingdom. 

The verse is thus paraphrased by Bishop Patrick: 

“Such is the infelicity of princes, that I have seen 
aking left with nothing but the bare title, and the 

outward state of royalty; the hearts and affections 

of all, nobles, gentry, and common people, from one 

end of the kingdom to the other, inclining to his 

son (or next heir) that is to sueceed him; unto 

whom they do obeisance, as if he were already. upon 

the throne; but neglect his old father, who sees 

himself robbed of those honours in which he placed 

his happiness.” 

Verse 16. T'here is no end of the people—The 
sense seems to be, either, 1st, The people who have 
this humour are without end, or innumerable: or, 
2d, This humour of the common people hath no 
end, but passes from one generation to another: 
they ever were, and are, and will be, unstable and 
restless, and given to change: which sense the fol- 
lowing words favour: Even of all that have been 
before them—Before the present generation of sub- 
jects, who earnestly desired and promoted the 
change of government here expressed. And so, 
here are three generations of people mentioned; the 
authors of the present change, and their parents;— 
and their children; and all are observed to have the 
same inclinations in these matters. They also that 
come after shall not rejoice in him—They shall be 

a¢ 


Keep thy foot when going 


CHAPTER V. 


to the house of God 


as weary of the successor, though a wise and wor- 
thy prince, as their parents were of his foolish pre- 
decessor. Surely, this also is vanity—From all 
this it appears, that happiness is not to be found 


est pitch of it: for there also is not only dissatis, 
faction to be found, but many dangers, troubles- 
and vexatious cares, which much disturb and per- 
plex the minds of those that possess it, See Bishop 


in honour and power; no, not in the very high-|! Patrick. 


CHAPTER V. 


In this chapter Solomon discourses concerning the worship of God, prescribing that as a remedy against all those vanities 


which he had already observed to be in wisdom, learning, pleasure, honour, power, and business. 


In order that we may 


not be deceived by those things, nor have our spirits vexed with the disappointments we meet with in them, we must make 


conscience of our duty to God, and keep up communion with him in his ordinances. 


But as vanities may be, and often 


are, found, even in religious exercises, through which they lose their excellence, and become unable to help us against other 


vanities, he here first cautions us against these, 1-7. He then directs us to eye God as our judge, 8. 


Shows the vanity 


of riches, 9-17. And recommends the cheerful use of what God has given us, 18-20. 


A. M. 3027, KEEP 


a 
B. G.977. thy foot when thou goest 


to the house of God, and be 
more ready to hear, » than to give the sacrifice 
of fools: for they consider not that they do 
evil. 

2 Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not 
thy heart be hasty. to utter any 1 thing before 


God; for God is in heaven, and thou a pile 
upon earth: therefore let thy words ———— 
“be few. 

3 For a dream cometh through the multitude 
of business; and “a fool’s voice is known by 
multitude of words. ; 

4 °When thou vowest a vow unto God, 


a See Exod. iii. 5; Isa. i. 12, &c.——>1 Sam. xv. 22; Psa. 
1.8; Prov. xv. 8 ; xxi. 27; Hos. vi. 6. ——! Or, word. © Proy. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 

Verse 1. Keep thy foot—Thy thoughts and affec- 
tions, by which men go to God, and walk with him. 
See that your hearts be upright before him, devoted 
to him, and furnished with those graces essential to 
the true worship of him, especially with reverence, 
humility, resignation, meekness, faith, and love. It 
is a metaphor taken from a person’s walking in a 
very slippery path, in which more than ordinary 
care is requisite to keep him from falling: when 
thou goest to the house of God—The place of God’s 
solemn and public worship, whether the temple or 
a synagogue; and be more ready to hear—To 
hearken to, and obey, God’s word; than to give the 
sacrifice of fools—Such as foolish and wicked men 
are wont to offer, who vainly think to please God 
with their sacrifices, without true piety and obedi- 
ence. Jor they consider not that they do evil— 
They are not sensible of the great sinfulness of 
such thoughts and practices, but, like fools, think 
they do God good service. 

Verse 2. Be not rash with thy mouth—Speak not 
without due consideration; and let not thy heart 
be hasty—Do not give way to every sudden motion 
of thy heart, nor suffer it to break out of thy lips 
till thou hast well weighed it. We must think, and 
think twice, before we speak, when we are to speak, 
either from God in preaching, or to God in prayer, 
or in solemn vows and promises made in his pre- 
sence; which were very much in use in those times, 
and of which he speaks in the following verses. 
For God is in heaven—Is a God of infinite majesty, 
holiness, and knowledge, and therefore not even to 

3 


x. 19; Matt. vi. 7. 4 Prov. x. 19. 
xxiii. 21, 22,23 ; Psa, 1. 14; lxxvi. 11. 


e Num. xxx. 2; Deut. 


be thought of, and much more not to be worshipped, 
without profound veneration, great solemnity, and 
much serious consideration; and thou upon earth— 
Thou art a poor worm of the earth, infinitely below 
him, and therefore oughtest to stand in awe of him, 
and fear to offend him; therefore let thy words be 
few—Ist, In prayer: use not vain repetitions, nor a 
multitude of words, as if they were necessary to 
inform God of thy wants, or to prevail with him to 
grant thy requests; or as if thou shouldest certainly 
be heard upon that very account: see Matt. vi. 7. 
2d, In vowing: be not too prodigal in making more 
vows and promises than thou art either able or will- 
ing and resolved to perform. Remember that God 
looks down from heaven, hears all thy vows, and 
expects a punctual accomplishment of them. 

Verse 3. For adream cometh, &e— When men’s 
minds are distracted and oppressed with too much 
business in the day, they are frequently disturbed 
with confused and perplexed dreams in the night. 
And as such dreams proceed from, and are the evi- 
dence of,a hurry of business filling the head, so 
many and hasty words flow from, and are a proof 
of, folly reigning in the heart. 

Verse 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God-- 
When thou obligest thyself by a solemn promise to 
honour God, and serve the interest of his kingdom; 
or to do good to any of thy fellow-creatures in some 
particular way, to do which thou wast not under 
any antecedent obligation: when, for instance, under 
the sense of some affliction, or through thy desire 
of obtaining, or in thankfulness for having obtained, 
some particular mercy, thou hast vowed such a vow 

15 


The profit of the earth 


A. M. 3027. defer not to pay it; for he hath no 
. C. 977. Fed = Se 
—_——— pleasure in fools: ‘pay that which 

thou hast vowed. 

5 © Better zs i¢ that thou shouldest not vow, 
than that thou shouldest vow and not pay. 

6 Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to 
sin; neither say thou before the. angel, that 
it was an error: wherefore should God be 
angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of 
thy hands? 

7 For in the multitude of dreams and many 
words there are also divers vanities: but ‘ fear 
thou God. 


{ Psa. Ixvi. 13, 14——¢ Prov. xx. 25; Acts v. 4——4 1 Cor. xi. 
10.—i Chap. xii. 13. , 


as this unto God, know that thou hast opened thy 
mouth unto the Lord, and thou canst not go back ; 
defer not to pay it—Perform thy vow while the 
sense of thine obligation is fresh and strong upon 
thy mind; lest thou either seem to repent of thy 
promises, or delay should end in denials and resolu- 
tions of non-performance: see on Lev. xxvii. 2; 
Num. xxx. 2. For he hath no pleasure in fools— 
In hypocritical and perfidious persons, who, when 
they are in distress, make liberal vows, and when 
the danger is past, neglect and break them. He 
calls them fools, because it is the highest folly, as to 
think of mocking or deceiving the all-seeing and 
almighty God, so also to despise and provoke him. 
Better is it that thou shouldest not vow—For this 
would be no sin, because men are free to make such 
vows, or not to make them, as they think best ; but, 
having made them, they cannot forbear to pay them, 
without sin. 

Verse 6. Suffer not thy mouth—By any rash vow, 
or in any other way; to cause thy flesh to sin— 
That is, thyself: the word flesh being often put for 
the whole man; neither say thou before the angel— 
That is, as some interpret the expression, before the 
blessed angels, (the singular number being put for 
the plural,) who are present in the public assemblies, 
in which these vows were generally paid, (Psa. 
Ixvi. 13,) where they observe men’s religious per- 
formances, (1 Cor. xi. 10,) and, as they rejoice in 
the conversion of a sinner, so are displeased with 
the sins of men. Or, 2d, Christ may be meant, the 
Angel of the covenant, as he is called Mal. iii. 1; 
who, even in these ancient times, acted as God’s 
messenger, appearing and speaking to the patri- 
archs and prophets in his Father’s name; and who 
was, and, according to his promise, is, in an espe- 
cial manner, present in all religious assemblies, ob- 
serving the whole conduct of all that worship in 
them. Or, 3d, as many think more probable, the 
priest, or minister of holy things, is here intended. 
Such persons are often called angels, or, as the He- 
brew word here used is commonly rendered, mes- 
sengers. And this title may be given to the priest 
‘ here, because the vow made to God was to be paid 
16 


ECCLESIASTES. 


8 for Qu. 


8 4 If thou *seest the oppression A. Meg. 
of the poor, and violent perverting of ———— 
judgment and justice in a province, marvel not 
2at the matter: for 'he that is higher than 
the highest regardeth; and there be higher 
than they. 

9 “| Moreover, the profit of the earth is for 
all: the king himself is served by the field. 

10 He that loveth silver shall not be satis- 
fied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance 
with increase: this 7s also vanity. 

11 When goods increase, they are increased 
that eat them: and what good is there to the 


k Chap. iii. 16——? Heb. at the will, or, purpose——! Psa. xii. 5 ; 
Iviii. 11; Ixxxii. 1. 


to the priest, as one standing and acting in God’s 
name and stead; and it belonged to him, as God’s 
angel or ambassador, to discharge persons from their 
vows when there was just occasion. Jt was an 
error—I did unadyisedly in making such a vow. 
Wherefore should God be angry—Why wilt thou 
provoke God to anger by these frivolous excuses ? 
And destroy the work of thy hands—Blast all thy 
labours, and particularly that work or enterprise for 
the success whereof thou didst make these yows. 

Verse 7. For in the multitude, &c.—There is a 
great deal of folly, as ix a multitude of dreams, 
which for the most part are vain and insignificant, 
so also in many words, especially in making many 
vows, whereby a man is exposed to many snares and 
temptations. But fear thou God—Fear the wrath 
of God, and therefore be sparing in making vows, 
and just in performing them. 

Verse 8. If thou seest the oppression, &c.—Here 
is an account of another vanity, and a sovereign an- 
tidote against it. Marvel not—As if it were incon- - 
sistent with God’s wisdom and justice to suffer such 
disorders. For he that is higher than the highest— 
The most high God, who is infinitely above the 
greatest of men. Regardeth—Not like anidle spec- 
tator, but a judge, who diligently observes, and will 
effectually punish them. And there be higher than 
they—Namely, God; it is an emphatical repetition 
of the same thing. 

Verse 9. The profit of the earth is for all—The 
fruits of the earth are necessary and beneficial to all 
men. The wise man, after some interruption, re- 
turns to his former subject, the vanity of riches; one 
evidence whereof he mentions in this verse, that the 
poor labourer enjoys the fruits of the earth as well 
as the greatest monarch, and that the richest man in 
the world depends as much upon them as the poor- 
est. T'he king himself is served by the field—Is 
supported by the fruits of the field. 

Verses 10,11. He that loveth silver shall not, &c. 
—The greatest treasures of silver do not satisfy the 
covetous possessor of it, both because his mind isin= 
satiable, his desires being increased by and with his 
gains, and because silver of itself cannot satisfy his 


Riches perish 


CHAPTER V. 


by evil travail. 


A.M. 3 


ee dt owners thereof, saving the beholding 


~ of them with their eyes? 

12 The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, 
whether he eat little or much: but the abun- 
dance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. 

13 ™ There is a sore evil which I have seen 
under the sun, xamely, riches kept for the 
owners thereof to their hurt. — 

14 But those riches perish by evil travail: 
and he begetteth a son, and ¢here is nothing in 
his hand. 

15 As he came forth of his mother’s womb, 
naked shall he return to go as he came, and 


shall take nothing of his labour, which A. M. 3027. 
he may carry away in his Hild. fate ae 

16 And this also és a sore evil, that in all 
points as he came, so shall he go: and ° what 
profit hath he ?that hath laboured for the wind? 

17 All his days also “he eateth in darkness, 
and he hath much sorrow and wrath with his 
sickness. 

18 % Behold that which I have seen: *i¢3 
is good and comely for one to eat and to drink, 
and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he 
taketh under the sun ‘all the days of his life, 
which God giveth him: § for it 2s his portion. 


™Chap. vi. 1. » Job i. 21; Psalm xlix. 17; 1 Timothy 
Vide. © Chapter i. 3——P Proverbs xi. 29..——9 Psalm 
exxvii. 2, 


natural desires and necessities, as the fruits of the 
field can do, and the miserable creature grudges to 
part with his silver, though it be to purchase things 
needful and convenient for him. When goods in- 
crease, they are increased that eat them—As the 
rich man’s estate increases, the greater family and 
retinue, if he will live like himself, he must main- 
tain; and these have a. larger share than himself in 
the daily provision that is made by his expenses, 
and enjoy the same comforts which he doth in par- 
taking of it, without his cares, fears, and troubles. 
And as for the rest, that is not expended, which he 
calls peculiarly his, he hath no other benefit from it, 
but only that it feeds and entertains his eyes. 

Verse 12. The sleep of a labouring man is sweet 
—Because he is free from those cares and fears 
wherewith the minds of rich men are often distract- 
ed, and their sleep disturbed; whether he eat little— 
For his weariness disposes him to sleep ; or much— 
In which case his healthful constitution, and labori- 
ous course of life, prevent those crudities and indi- 
gestions which ofttimes break the sleep of rich 
men: but the abundance of the rich—Hebrew, yawn, 
the fulness, either, 1st, Of his diet, which commonly 
discomposes the rich man’s stomach, and hinders 
his rest: or, 2d, Of his wealth, which is generally at- 
tended with many perplexing cares, both by day and 
night. The Hebrew word is used in Scripture both 
ways, and probably is here intended to include both 
significations. 

Verses 13,14. There is a sore evil, &c.—“ There 
is another thing, which is very calamitous, and may 
rather be called a grievous plague than a mere afflic- 
tion; that these very treasures, which men have 
heaped up with a great deal of care, from thence 
expecting their felicity, prove, in the issue, their 
utter undoing;” being incentives to pride, luxury, 
and other hurtful lusts, which waste their bodies, 
shorten their lives, and destroy their souls; and 
being also great temptations to tyrants or thieves to 
take away their lives, in order to possess their pro- 
perty. Nay, it often happens, that “some of these 
miserable men are murdered by their servants, and 

Vor. II. (2) 


t Chap. ii. 24; ii. 12, 13, 22; ix. 7; xi. 9; 1 Timothy vi. 17. 
3 Heb. there is a good which is comely, §-c——* Heb. the number 
of the days.—— Chap. ii. 10; iii. 22. 


even by their own children, with a view to become 
masters of their riches; which riches bring them 
also at last to the same or like destruction.”—Bishop 
Patrick. But—Or for, or moreover, as the Hebrew 
particle may be rendered; those riches perish—If 
they be kept, it is to the owner’s hurt, and if not, 
they are lost to his grief; by evil travail—By some 
wicked practices, either his own, or of other men. 
And he begetieth a son, and there is nothing, &e.— 
Either, lst, In the father’s power to leave to his son, 
for whose sake he engaged in, and went through, all 
those hard labours; which is a great aggravation of 
his grief and misery. Or, 2d, In the son’s posses- 
sion after the father’s death. 

Verses 15-17. As he came forth, §c., naked shail 
he return—Into the womb, or belly of the earth, the 
common mother of all mankind. And shall take 
nothing of his labour—This is another vanity. If 
his estate be neither lost nor kept to his hurt, yet 
when he dies he must leave it behind him, and can- 
not carry one handful of it into another world. And 
what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind 
—For riches, which are empty and unsatisfying, un- 
certain and transitory; which no man can hold or 
stay in their course; all which are the properties of 
the wind. All his days also—Namely, of his life ; 
he eateth in darkness—He hath no comfort in his 
estate, but even when he eats, he doth it with anx-- 
iety and discontent. And wrath with his sickness— 
When he falls sick, and presages his death, he is 
filled with rage, because he is cut off before he hath, 
accomplished his designs, and because he must leave 
that wealth and world in which all his hopes and 
happiness lie, 

Verse 18. Behold that which Ihave seen—'That is, 
learned by study and experience; it is good’ and 
comely— Good, or comfortable to a man’s self, and 
comely, or amiable in the eyes of other men, as pe- 
nuriousness is base and dishonourable ; for one to— 
enjoy the good of his labowr—Both for the eonstant 
supply of all the necessities of nature, and for the 
entertainment of his friends, and the relief of his 
poor neighbours; all the days of his life—All tha 

17 3 


The rich man who has 


ECCLESIASTES. 


no power to use his riches. 


* er. 19 *tEvery man also to whom 


7. : ; 

God hath given riches and wealth, 
and hath given him power to eat thereof, 
and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his 


t Chap. ii. 245 iii. 13; vi. 2. 


time God shall be pleased to continue him in this 
world. For it is his portion—This is all that falls 
to his share of the good things of this life. It is his 
portion of worldly goods: if a truly pious man, he 
hath a better portion in heaven. This liberty is given 
him by God, and this is the best advantage, as to this 
life, which he can make of them. 

Verses 19, 20. Every man also, &e.—“ And who- 
soever he be whom God hath blessed, not only with 
plenty of worldly goods, but also with such a noble 
and generous mind that he is not their slave, but 
truly master of them,” (so the Hebrew, 1w5wn sig- 
nifies,) “being able to enjoy them innocently, and 
that with cheerfulness, and to delight in doing good 


labour; this zs the gift of God. A. Me Se 
20 5For he shall not much re- (ois oe 
member the days of his life; because God an- 
swereth him in the joy of his heart. 


5Or, Though he give not much, yet he remembereth, §c. 


to others with them; let him be very thankful to 
Almighty God for so great a happiness, and ac- 
knowledge it to be a singular gift of his bounty.” 
For he shall not much remember the days of his 
life—“For he that is thus highly favoured by God, 
will not think life tedious or irksome ; but, forgetting 
his past toils, and taking no” anxious “care for the 
future, will spend his time most comfortably ; be- 
cause God hath given him his heart’s desire, in that 
inward tranquillity of mind, or, rather, joy and glad- 
ness of heart, wherewith God hath compensated all 
his pains, and testified his extraordinary kindness to 
him.”—Bishop Patrick. See notes on chap. ii. 24; 
and iii. 12, 13. 


CHAPTER VI. 


We have here, (1,) A continuation of the argument handled in the latler part of the foregoing chapter, namely, the vanity of 


riches in the possession of a covetous person, 1-6, 
Jind happiness in the things of the world, 11, 12. 


A. M. 3027. 
B. C. 977. yt 
itis Lie seen under the sun, and it zs 


common among men : 

2 A man to whom God hath given riches, 
wealth, and honour, »so that he wanteth no- 
thing for his soul of all that he desireth, ° yet 
God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but 


aChap. v. 13.—>Job xxi. 10; Psa. xvii. 14; Ixxiii. 7. 
¢ Luke xii. 20, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verses 1,2. Thereis an evil which Ihave seen, &c. 
—A most wretched, miserable disposition reigning 
among mankind: A man to whom God hath given 
riches, &c.—When a man is blessed by God with 
all sorts of riches, as gold and silver, cattle and lands, 
&ce. So that he wanteth nothing that he desireth— 
Which he does or can reasonably desire; yet God 
giveth him not power to eat thereof—Hither be- 
cause his riches are unexpectedly taken away. from 
him by the hand of God, or rather, because, as a 
punishment of his ingratitude to God, and unchari- 
tableness to men, or of his inattention to, and neglect 
of, spiritual and eternal things, God gives him up to 
a base and covetous mind; but a stranger eateth it 
—Not his children, not any relation, however dis- 
tant; not a friend, nor even an acquaintance; but, it 
may be, an entire stranger enjoys all the good things 
which he has saved: this is vanity, and an evil 

18 


(2,) Their unsatisfactory nature, 7-10. 


(3,) The folly of thinking to 


? 


(THERE “is an evil which I have||a stranger eateth it: this 2s vanity, he og 


and it zs an evil disease. eae 

3 4 If a man beget a hundred children, and 
live many years, so that the days of his years 
be many, and his soul be not filled with good, 
and ‘also that he have no burial; I say, that 
°an untimely birth is better than he. 


42 Kings ix. 35; Isa. xiv. 19, 20; Jer. xxii. 19——® Job iii. 16; 
Psa, lviii. 8; Chap. iv. 3. 


disease—For surely what we possess we possess in 
vain, if we do not use it; and that temper of mind is 
certainly a most wretched distemper which prevents 
our using it. 

Verses 3-6. If aman beget a hundred children— 
Very many, to whom he intends to leave his estate ; 
and live many years—Which is the chief thing that 
he desires, and which gives him opportunity of in- 
creasing his estate vastly; and his soul be not filled 
with good—If he have not a contented mind, and a 
comfortable enjoyment of his estate ; and also have 
no burial—And if, after his death, he have either 
none, or a mean and dishonourable burial, because 
his sordid and covetous conduct made him hateful 
and contemptible to all persons, his children and 
heirs not excepted, so that he was by all sorts of 
men thought unworthy of any testimonies of honour, 
either in his life, or after his death: I say, an un- 
timely birth is better -~ he—Which, as it never 

( @ 3 


T he unsatisfactory 


CHAPTER VI. 


nature of riches.’ 


A. M. 3027. 


4 ot gg 
ee For he cometh in with vanity, and 


departeth in darkness, and his name 
shall be covered with darkness. 

5 Moreover he hath notseenthe sun, nor known 
any thing: this hath more rest than the other. 

6 Yea, though he live a thousand years 
twice told, yet hath he seen no good: do not 
all go to one place? 

7 9 All the labour of man is for his mouth, 
and yet the appetite ‘is not filled. 


f Prov. xvi. 26.——! Heb. soul. 


2 Heb. than the walking 


enjoyed the comforts, so it never felt. the calamities 
of life. For, or rather, although, he—The abortive ; 
of whom alone that clause, He hath not seen the sun, 
(verse 5,) is true ; cometh in with vanity—Cometh 
into the world to no purpose, without any comfort 
or benefit by it, which is also, in a great measure, 
the case with the covetous person here mentioned ; 
and departeth in darkness—Dieth in obscurity, 
without any observation or regard of men; and his 
name shall be covered with darkness—Shall be 
speedily and utterly forgotten. Moreover he hath 
not known any thing—Hath had no knowledge, 
sense, or experience of any thing, whether good or 
evil; this, namely, the untimely birth, hath more 
rest than the other—Because it is free from all those 
incumbrances and vexations to which the covetous 
man is long exposed. Yea, though he live a thou- 
sand years—Wherein he seems to have a privilege 
above an untimely birth; yet hath he seen no good 
—He hath enjoyed little or no comfort in it, and, 
therefore, long life is rather a curse than a blessing 
to him. Do not all—Whether born before their 
time or in due time, whether their lives be long or 
short; go toone place—To the grave! And so, after 
a little time, all are alike, as to this life, of which 
only he here speaks: and as to the other life, the 
condition of the covetous man, if he die impenitent, 
and therefore unpardoned and unrenewed, is infi- 
nitely worse than that of an untimely birth. 

Verses 7,8. All the labour of man is for his 
mouth—For meat and other necessary provisions of 
this life; and yet the appetite is not filled—Al- 
though all that a man can obtain by his labours is 
but a provision for his bodily wants, which the 
meanest sort of men commonly enjoy, yet such is 
the vanity of the world, and the folly of mankind, 
that men are insatiable in their desires, and restless 
in their endeavours after more and more, and never 
say they have enough. What hath the wise more 
than the fool—Namely, in these matters? Both are 
subject to the same calamities, and partakers of the 
same comforts of this life. What hath the poor— 
Especially ? What advantage in this respect? That 
knoweth--Even though he knoweth; to walk before 
the living?—Though he be ingenious and indus- 
trious; that is, fit for service and business, and 
knows how to conduct himself toward his supe- 
riors so as to deserve and gain their favour, and to 


8 For what hath the wise more A. M. 3027. 
than the fool? what hath the poor, alas ree 
that knoweth to walk before the living ? 

9 Better is the sight of the eyes than the 
wandering of the desire: this is also vanity 
and vexation of spirit. 

10 | That which hath been is named already, 
and it is known that it is man: & neither may 
he contend with him that is mightier than 
he. 


of the soul. 


§ Job ix.32; Isa. xlv.9; Jer. xlix. 19. 


procure a livelihood; what more hath he than the 
poor that do not know this? The verse is obscure, 
and some. think it should be rendered, For what 
hath the wise more than the fool? And what than 
the poor, who knoweth how to walk before the living ? 
That is, who knows how to act prudently: and they 
think the meaning is, that the wise and the fool, and 
even the poor, if they be industrious, and know how 
to behave themselves properly, all enjoy the neces- 
saries of life, food and raiment. The only objection 
to this interpretation is, that though it seems to im- 
prove the sense, it is not consistent with the Hebrew 
text, 39 9, signifying literally, not than the poor, 
but, What is there to the poor? or, what hath the 
poor? The Hebrew, however, may be rendered, 
What excellence hath the wise man more than the 
fool2 What excellence, especially, hath the poor 
that knoweth, that is, although he knoweth, &c. 

Verse 9, Better is the sight of the eyes—That is, 
The comfortable enjoyment of what a man hath, 
seeing being often put for enjoying ; than the wan- 
dering of the desire—Than restless and insatiable 
desires of what a man hath not. This is also vanity 
—This wandering of the desire, wherein many in 
dulge themselves; and vrexation of spirit—It is not 
the way to satisfaction, as they imagine, but to vexa- 
tion. 

Verse 10. That which hath been—Or, that which 
is, for the Hebrew Mnw 7, may be rendered either 
way ; namely, Man, considered with all his endow- 
ments and enjoyments, whether he be wise or fool- 
ish, rich or poor ; man, who is the chief of all visible 
and sublunary beings, for whom they all were made, 
is named already, namely, by God, who immediate- 
ly after his creation called him Adam, (Gen. v. 2,) 
to signify what his nature and condition were or 
would be. This verse seems to be added as a fur- 
ther instance of the vanity of all things in this life. 
And it is known that it is man—This is certain and 
manifest, that that being, which makes all this noise 
in the world, however magnified by himself, and al- 
most adored by flatterers; and however differenced 
from, or advanced above others, by wisdom or riches, 
or such like things, is but a mean, earthly, mortal, 
and miserable creature, as his very name signifies, 
which God gave him for this very end, that he might 
be always sensible of his vain and miserable estate 
in this world, and therefore never expect satisfac- 

19 


The benefit of 


ECCLESIASTES. 


a good name. 


Pia ae 11 Seeing there be many things 
__——"" that increase vanity, what is man the 


better ? 
12 For who knoweth what is good for man 


5 Heb. the number of the days of the life of his vanity.— Psa. 
cil. 11; cix. 23; exliv.4; James iv. 14. 


tion or happiness from it. Neither may he contend 
with him that is mightier than he-—That is, with 
Almighty God, with whom men are very apt to con- 
tend upon every slight occasion; and against whom 
they are ready 10 murmur on account of this their 
vanity, and mortality, and misery, although they 
brought it upon themselves by their sins. Bishop 
Patrick’s interpretation of this obscure verse is very 
nearly to the same purpose, thus: “ What if a man 
have already arrived at g@reat renown, as well as 
riches, still it is notorious that he is but a man, made 
out of the dust, and therefore weak and frail, and 
subject to many disasters; which it is not possible 
for him, by his most anxious cares, to prevent, or by 
his power and wealth to throw off when he pleases.” 
“This sense,” adds he, in a note, “seems to me the 
most simple, and most agreeable to the whole dis- 
course, and it is that which Melancthon hath ex- 
pressed in these words, ‘Although a man grow fa- 
mous, yet it is known that he is but a man; and he 
cannot contend with that which is stronger than 
himself ;’ that is, he cannot govern events.” 

Verses 11,12. Seeing there be many things which 
increase vanity—This seems to be added as a con- 
clusion from all the foregoing chapters; seeing not 


in this life, °all the days of his vain A. M. 3027. 
life which he spendeth as "a shadow ? Pee 
for ‘ who can tell a man what shall be after him 
under the sun ? 


i Psa. xxxix. 6; Chap. viii. 7. 


also many other things, which, instead of diminish- 
ing, do but increase this vanity, as wisdom, pleasure, 
power, wealth; seeing even the good things of this 
life bring so much toil, and cares, and fears with 
them; what is man the better-—-By all that he can 
either desire or enjoy here? For who knoweth what 
is good for a man—No man certainly knows what 
is best for him here, whether to be high or low, rich 
or poor, because those things which men generally 
desire and pursue, are very frequently the occasions 
of their utter ruin, as has been observed again and 
again in this book; all the days of his vain life— 
Life itself, which is the foundation of all men’s com- 
forts and enjoyments here, is a vain, uncertain, and 
transitory thing, and therefore all things that de- 
pend upon it must needs be so too; which he spend- 
eth as a shadow—Which, while it abides, hath no- 
thing solid or substantial in it, and which speedily 
passes away, and leaves no sign behind it; for who 
can tell a man, &c.—And as no man can be happy 
with these things while he lives, so he can have no 
satisfaction in leaving them to others, because he 
knows not either who shall possess them, or how 
the future owners will use or abuse them, or what 
mischief they may do by them, either to others, or 


only man is a vain creature in himself, but there are || even to themselves. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Having discoursed, in the foregoing part of this book, of the vain courses men take to make themselves happy ; Solomon 
now proceeds to prescribe the best remedies that can be found against that vanity to which we are subject, giving many 
wise precepts for our direction, support, and comfort in this troublesome world ; wherein it is confessed, that our happiness 
can be but umperfect ; yet so much we may attain as may make us well satisfied and contented during our abode init. In 


particular he recommends seriousness, 1-6. 
condition, 13, 14. 
Mind not the censures of others, 21, 22. 
*GOOD name is better than 
precious ointment; and the day 


A. M. 3027, 
BC. 077. 


Calmness of spirit, 7-10. 
The advice of an infidel answered, 15-18. 
Solomon’s experience of men and women, 23-29. 


Wisdom, 11, 12. Suiting ourselves to every 
The praise of wisdom, 19. All men are sinners, 20. 


3027. 


i ’s A.M. 
of death than the day~ of one’s 4; M. 3027 


birth. 


a Proverbs xv. 


30; xxii. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIL. 

Verse 1. A good name—A good and well ground- 
ed report from wise and worthy persons; a name 
for wisdom and goodness with those that are wise 
and good; is better than precious ointment—Which 
was very fragrant, acceptable, and useful, and of 
great price in those countries. And the day of death, 
than the day of one’s birth—Namely, the death of a 
good man, or of one who hath left a good name be- 
hind him; for to a wicked man, the day of death is 

: 20 


far worse, and most terrible. Or, if this clause be 
considered as spoken of this life only, abstracted 
from the future life, as many passages in this book 
are to be understood, then it may be true of all men, 
and is a consequence of all the former discourse. 
As if he had said, Seeing this life is so full of vanity 
and misery, it is a more desirable thing for a man. 
to go out of it than to come into it: an observation 
that is the more worthy of regard, because it is con- 
trary to the opinion and practice of almost e man- 


Advantages of 


CHAPTER VII. 


sorrow and correction. 


A, M. 3027, 


a 2 4 it is better to go to the house 


of mourning, than to go to the house 
of feasting : for that is the end of all men; and 
the living will lay <¢ to his heart. 

3 ‘Sorrow és better than laughter: » for by 
the sadness of the countenance the heart is 
made better. 

4. The heart of the wise is in the house of 
mourning; but the heart of fools is in the 
house of mirth. 

5 ° It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, 


M. 3027 


than for a man to hear the song of yea os 
‘ 


fools : ee di 

6 ‘For as the *crackling of thorns under a pot, 
so is the laughter of the fool: this also is vanity. 

7 4% Surely oppression maketh a wise man 
mad; °and a gift destroyeth the heart. 

8 Better is the end of a thing than the be- 
ginning thereof: and ‘the patient in spirit is. 
better than the proud in spirit. 

9 £Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: 
for anger resteth in the bosom of fools. 


1 Or, Anger. 
xii. 18; 


b 2 Cor. vii. 10.—< See Psa. exli. 5; Prov. 
xv. 31, 32: 4 Psa. exviii. 12; Chap. ii. 2. 


2 Heb. sound. e Exod. xxiii. 8 ; Deut. xvi. 19——f Prov. xiv. 
29.—£ Prov.xiv. 17; xvi. 32; James i. 19. 


kind, who celebrate their own, and their children’s 
birth-days, with solemn feasts and rejoicings, and 
their deaths with all expressions of sorrow. 

Verse 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning 
—Where mourners meet together to celebrate the 
funerals of deceased friends; than to the house of 
Seasting—Where people meet to indulge their appe- 
tites in eating and drinking, in which they frequently 
go to excess. For that—Namely, death, the cause 
of that mourning; is the end of all men—Is a lot 
that awaits all mankind, and to see instances of it 
tends to bring them to the serious consideration of 
their own last end, which is their greatest wisdom 
and interest; and the living will lay it to his heart 
—Will be seriously affected with it, and awakened 
to prepare for it: whereas feasting is commonly at- 
tended with levity and manifold temptations, and 
renders men’s minds indisposed for spiritual and 
heavenly thoughts. Hence it is evident, those pas- 
sages of this book, which seem to favour a sensual 
and voluptuous life, were not spoken by Solomon in 
his own name, or as his opinion, but in the person 
of an epicure. 

Verses 3,4. Sorrow is better than laughter—Either 
sorrow for sin, or even sorrow on other accounts; 
Sor by the sadness of the countenance--Sadness seat- 
ed in the heart, but manifested in the countenance ; 
the heart is made better—Is more weaned from the 
lusts and vanities of this world, by which most men 
are ensnared and destroyed; and more quickened to 
seek after and embrace that true and everlasting 
happiness which God offers to them in his word. 
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning— 
Even when their bodies are absent. They are con- 
stantly, or very frequently, meditating upon serious 
things, such as death and judgment, the vanity of 
this life, and the reality and eternity of the next; 
because they know that these thoughts, though they 
be not grateful to man’s carnal mind, yet are abso- 
lutely necessary r and highly profitable, and produc- 
tive of great comfort in the end, which every wise 
man most regards. But the heart of fools is in the 
house of mirth—Their minds and affections are 
wholly set upon feasting, jollity, and merriment, be- 
cause, like fools and irrational animals, they regard 
only their present delight, and mind not how dearly 
they must pay for it. 

3 


” 


Verses 5,6. Jt is better to hear the rebuke of the 
wise—Which, though it cause some grief, yet fre- 
quently brings great benefit, even reformation, and 
salvation both from temporal and from eternal de- 
struction; than the song of fools—Their flatteries, 
or merry discourses, which are as pleasant to cor- 
rupt nature as songs or music. For as the crack- 
ling of thorns—Which, for a time, make a great 
noise and blaze, but presently go out; so is the 
laughter of a fool—So vanishing and fruitless. 

Verse 7. Oppression maketh a wise man mad— 
Either, Ist, When a wise man falls into the sin of 
oppressing others, he is infatuated by it, and by the 
riches which he gains in this way: or, rather, 2d, 
When a man is oppressed by wicked men, it often 
makes him fret and vex himself, and speak or act 
unadvisedly and foolishly. And a gift destroyeth 
the heart—A bribe given to a wise man deprives 
him of the use of his understanding. So this verse 
discovers two ways whereby a wise man may be 
made mad, by suffering oppression from others, or 
by receiving bribes to oppress others. And this also 
is an argument of the vanity of worldly wisdom, 
that is so easily corrupted and lost; and so it serves 
the main design of this book. 

Verses 8,9. Better is the end of a thing than the 
beginning—The good or evil of things is better 
known by their end than by their beginning; which 
is true, not only respecting evil counsels and prac- 
tices, which perhaps seem pleasant at first, but, at 
last, bring destruction ; but also concerning all noble 
enterprises, the studies of learning, and the practice 
of virtue and godliness, in which the beginnings are 
difficult and troublesome, but in the progress and 
conclusion they are most easy and comfortable; and 
it is not sufficient to begin well unless we persevere 
to the end, which crowns all; and the patient in 
spirit—Who quietly waits for the-issue of things, 
and is willing to bear hardships and inconveniences 
in the mean time ; is better than the proud in spirit 
—Which he puts instead of hasty or impatient, be~ 
cause pride is the chief cause of impatience. Be 
not hasty in thy spirit, &c.—Be not angry with any 
man without due consideration, and just and neces- 
sary cause: see on Mark iii. 5. For anger resteth 
in the bosom of fools—That is, sinful anger, imply- 
ing not only displeasure at the sin or folly of an- 

21 


Excellence of wisdom. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


Against extremes. 


10 Say not thou, What is the cause 
that the former days were better than 
these? for thou dost not inquire ° wisely con- 
cerning this. 

11 4 Wisdom *7s good with an inheritance: 
and by it there is profit » to them that see the sun. 

12 For wisdom is a ‘defence, and money is 
a defence: but the excellency of knowledge is, 
that wisdom giveth life to them that have it. 

13 Consider the work of God: for i who can 
make that straight, which he hath made 
crooked ? 


A. M. 3027. 
B..C:-977. 


14 *In the day of prosperity be joyful, pep al 
but in the day of adversity consider: ———' 
God also hath ®set the one over against the 
other, to the end thet man should find nothing 
after him. . 

15 All things have I seen in the days of my 
vanity: 'there is a just man that perisheth in 
his righteousness, and there is a wicked man 
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness. 

16 ™Be not righteous overmuch; ™ neither 
make thyself overwise: why shouldest thou 
"destroy thyself? 


3 Heb. out of wisdom. 
better too—— Chap. xi. 7. 
14; Chap. i. 15; Isa. xiv. 27. 


4 Or, as good as an inheritance, yea, k Chap. ili. 4; Deut. xxviii. 47.——® Heb. made—!Chap. 
5 Heb. shadow.——i See Job xii. || viii. 14. m Prov. xxv. 16. » Rom. xii. 3.——7 Hebrew, 


be desolate. 


other, which is lawful and proper, but ill-will and a 
desire of revenge, hath its quiet abode in the heart 
of fools: is ever at hand upon all occasions, whereas 
wise men resist, mortify, and banish it. 

Verse 10. Say not thou—Namely, by way of im- 
patient expostulation and complaint against God, 
either for permitting such disorders in the world, or 
for bringing thee into the world in such an evil time 
and state of things: otherwise a man may say this 
by way of prudent and pious inquiry, that by search- 
ing out the cause, he may, as far as it is in his power, 
apply remedies to make the times better; What is 
the cause that the former days were better?2—More 
quiet and comfortable. For this is an argument of 
a mind unthankful for the many mercies which men 
enjoy even in evil times. And thou dost not inquire 
wisely concerning this—This question shows thy 
folly in contending with thy Lord and Governor, 
and opposing thy shallow wit to his unsearchable 
wisdom. 

Verses 11, 12. Wisdom is good—That is, very 
good; the positive being put for the superlative, as 
it frequently is in the Hebrew text; with an inhertt- 
ance—When wisdom and riches meet in one man, 
it is a happy conjunction, for wisdom without riches 
wants opportunities and instruments of doing that 
good in the world which it is willing and desirous 
of doing; and riches without wisdom are like a 
sword in a madman’s hand, and an occasion of much 
sinand mischief both to himself and others. And 
by it there is profit—By wisdom joined with 
riches there comes great benefit to them that see the 
sun—That is, to mortal men; not only to a man’s 
self, but many others who live with him in this 
world. For wisdom is a defence—Hebrew, is a 
shadow ; which in Scripture signifies both protec- 
tion and refreshment; and money is a defence—Thus 
far wisdom and money agree; but the excellency of 
knowledge—But herein knowledge or wisdom ex- 
cels riches, that whereas riches frequently expose 
men to destruction, true wisdom doth often preserve 
a man from temporal, and always from eternal ruin. 

Verse 13. Consider the work of God—Not of crea- 
tion, but of providence ; his wise, and just, and pow- 
erful government of all events, which is proposed as 

22 


the last and best remedy against all murmurings. 
For who can make that straight, &c.—No man can 
correct or alter any of God’s works; and therefore 
all frettings at the injuries of men, or calamities of 
the times, are not only sinful, but also vain and fruit- 
less. This implies that there is a hand of God in all 
men’s actions, either effecting them, if they be good, 
or permitting them, if they be bad, and ordering and 
overruling them, whether they be good or bad. 

Verse 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful—En- 
joy God’s favours with thankfulness. Jn the day of 
adversity consider—Namely, God’s work, that it is 
his hand, and therefore submit to it: consider also 
why he sends it: for what sins, and with what de- 
sign? God also hath set the one against the other 
—Hath wisely ordained, that prosperity and adver- 
sity should succeed one another; that man should 
jind nothing after him—Or, rather, after it, as it 
may be rendered; that is, after his present condi- 
tion, whether it be prosperous or afflictive: that no 
man might be able to foresee what shall befall him 
afterward; and therefore might live in a constant 
dependance upon God, and neither despair in trou- 
ble, nor be secure or presumptuous in prosperity. 

Verse 15. All things have I seen—All sorts of 
events, both such as have been already mentioned, 
and such as I am about to declare. Jn the days of 
my vanity—Since I have come into this vain life, 
A just man perisheth in his righteousness—Not- 
withstanding his righteousness ; whom his righteous- 
ness does not deliver in common calamities, or, for 
his righteousness, which exposes him to the envy, 
anger, or hatred of wicked men. And a wicked man 
prolongeth his life, &c.—Notwithstanding all his 
wickedness, whereby he provokes and deserves the 
justice and wrath both of God and men; and yet for 
many wise and just reasons he is permitted to live 
long unpunished and secure. MG 

Verse 16. Be not righteous overmuch—This verse 
and the next have a manifest reference to verse 15, 
being two inferences drawn from the two clauses of 
the observation there recorded. Solomon may here- 
be considered as speaking in the person of an un- 
godly man, who takes occasion to dissuade men from 
righteousness, because of the danger which — 


Wisdom is better than strength. 


CHAPTER VII. 


All men are sinners. 


aM. 1, 17 Be not overmuch wicked, nei- 
———— ther be thou foolish: ° why shouldest 


thou die * before thy time ?. 

18 J¢ is good that thou shouldest take hold 
of this; yea, also from this withdraw not thy 
hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth 
of them all. 

19 » Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more 


than ten mighty men which are in A. M. 3027. 
the city. bet ee 

20 1 For there is not a just man upon earth, 
that doeth good, and sinneth not. 

21 Also take no heed unto all words that 
are spoken ; lest thou hear thy servant curse 
thee : 

22 For oftentimes also thine own heart 


° Job xv. 32; Psa. lv. 23 ; Prov. x.27.—® Heb. not in thy time. 
P Prov. xxi. 22; xxiv. 5; Chap. ix. 16, 18. 41 Kings vii, 46 ; 


2 Chron. vi, 36 ; Prov. xx. 9; Rom. iii. 23; 1 John i. 8——® Heb, 
give not thy heart. 


it. Therefore, saith he, take heed of strictness, zeal, 
and forwardness in religion. And in consistency 
with this the next verse may be viewed as contain- 
ing an antidote to this suggestion ; “ Yea, rather,” 
saith he, “be not wicked or foolish overmuch; for 
that will not preserve thee, as thou mayest imagine, 
but will occasion and hasten thy ruin.” It must, 
however, be acknowledged, “there are many parts 
or appearances of religion which may be carried to 
an extreme. A man may be over tenacious of in- 
significant forms or human inventions: he may pre- 
tend to kinds and degrees of righteousness which 
the Scriptures do not require. His conscientious- 
ness may degenerate into superstition and scrupu- 
lousness; his benevolence into indiscretion, and his 
candour and good nature into folly: and in affecting 
to be acquainted with the whole of divine truth, he 
may become presumptuously curious, and intrude 
into unrevealed things. Thus many run into ex- 
tremes, and expose themselves to needless persecu- 
tion."—Scott. Dr. Waterland renders it, Do not ex- 
ercise justice too rigorously, according to the inter- 
pretation which Bishop Hall gives of it, namely, 
“Be not too rigorous in exacting the extremity of 
justice upon every occasion ; neither do thou affect 
too much semblance and ostentation of more justice 
than thou hast. Neither do thou arrogate more wis- 
dom to thyself than is in thee.” Others again ex- 
pound this and the next verse of the public adminis- 
tration of justice, which ought to be neither too rigid 
nor too remiss and negligent. “ Non dubium est, 
&ce. There is no doubt,” says Melancthon, “ but he 
speaks of political justice, which governs the things 
of this life ; and consists of a mean between cruelty 
and negligence. Too much severity becomes cruel- 
ty: and too much indulgence confirms men in wick- 
edness. A good governor takes a middle course. 
The like admonition,” adds he, “is subjoined about 
wisdom; for, as too much severity becomes cruelty, 
so too much wisdom, that is, subtlety, becomes cavil- 
ing, sophistry, and cheating.” Dr. Hammond, how- 
“ever, understands these verses according to the in- 
terpretation first given, considering verse 16, Be not 
2tghteous overmuch, as the objection of a carnal, 
worldly man, or of a lukewarm professor; “ who 
takes that for an excess of duty which brings any 
‘damage, or worldly loss, upon him, which objection 
is answered,” says he, “in verse 17, Be not wicked 
overmuch, S&c., that is, the fears, and, from thence, 


the prudential, but oftentimes very impious prac-| 


tices of the worldling, are the more probable path to 
the most hasty ruin.”—See Bishop. Patrick. This 
interpretation certainly appears the most probable, 
and most consistent with the context. 

Verses 18-20. It is good that thou shouldest take 
hold of this—Embrace and practise this counsel last 
given. Also from this withdraw not thy hand— 
—From the practice of the preceding advice: for he 
that feareth God—Who orders his actions so as to 
please God, and keep his commandments, walking 
by the rule of his word; shall come forth of them all 
—Shall be delivered from all extremes, and from all 
the evil consequences of them. This verse seems 
more exactly rendered by a late writer thus: “The 
good which thou shouldest take hold of consists in 
this, (nay, thou shouldest never withdraw thine 
hand from it,) that he who feareth God shall avoid 
all these inconveniences.” Wisdom strengtheneth 
the wise—Hebrew, yyn nnann, that wisdom will 
strengthen the wise, namely, that fear of God, men- 
tioned above, which is the true wisdom, and will 
teach a man to keep close to the rule of his duty, 
Without turning either to the right hand or to the 
left; more than ten mighty men which are in the 
city—It will support him better in troubles, and se- 
cure him more effectually against dangers, than 
many men uniting their forces to assist and protect 
him. Or, he shall be better enabled to go through 
this world, than any town can be to stand the attacks 
of her enemies, though ten powerful princes should 
unite in her favour, and join their forces to defend 
her bulwarks. This is a support which can never 
fail; whereas, that of a man’s own righteousness and 
strength cannot but be weak and precarious. For, 
(verse 20,) there is not a just man upon earth—Ra- 
ther, a righteous man, as P’1¥ TI properly signi- 
fies, and is generally rendered, namely, one that is, 
and always has been righteous, according to God’s 
law, the rule of righteousness, which is holy, just, 
and good, and by which shall no flesh living be jus- 
tified, Psa, exliii. 2; Rom. iii. 20; Gal. ii. 16. Thus 
St. Paul, quoting the words of David, testifies, 7'here 
is none righteous, no, not one. Solomon adds, that 
doeth good, and sinneth not—W ho is universally and 
perfecily good and holy, and free from sin, in 
thought, word, and deed. 

Verses 21, 22. Take no heed unto all words that 
are spoken—Namely, concerning thee, or against 
thee. Do not severely observe, or strictly search 
into them, or listen to hear them, as many persons, 

23 


He that fears God 


ECCLESIASTES. 


a ’ 
4 ha 
y ? m ‘~ 4 ‘ e/ 


shall escape evil. 


A. M. 3027. knoweth that thou thyself likewise 
B.C. 977. 

——— hast cursed others. 

23 4 All this have I proved by wisdom: 
TT said, I will be wise; but it was far from 
me. 

24 *That which is far off, and t exceeding 
deep, who can find it out? 

25 4° “applied my heart to know, and to 
search, and to seek out wisdom, and the rea- 
son of things, and to know the wickedness of 


r Rom. i, 22. Job xxviii. 12, 20; 1 Tim. vi. 16. 


* Rom. 
xi. 33. 10 Heb, Land my heart compassed. "Chap. i. 17; 
ii. 12. 


out of curiosity, are wont todo. Under this one 
kind of offences which are most frequent, namely, 
those of the tongue, he seems to comprehend all in- 
juries which we suffer from others, and advises that 
we should not too rigidly examine them, nor too 
deeply resent them, but rather neglect and forget 
them. Lest thow hear thy servant curse thee— 
Which would vex and grieve thee, and might, per- 
haps, provoke thee to treat him with severity, if not 
with vengeance and cruelty. For oftentimes also 
thine own heart—Thy mind or conscience, knoweth 
—Bears thee witness ; that thou thyself likewise— 
Either upon some great provocation, and sudden 
passion, or possibly upon a mere mistake, or false re- 
port, hast cursed others—Hast censured them un- 
justly, and spoken ill of them, if not wished ill to 
them. If therefore thy servant, or any other, act 
thus toward thee, thou art only paid in thy own 
coin. Observe, reader, when any affront or injury 
is done us, it is seasonable to examine our con- 
sciences whether we have not done the same, or as 
bad, to others: and if, upon reflection, we find we 
have, we must take that occasion to renew our re- 
pentance for it, must justify God, and make use of it 
to qualify our own resentments. If we be truly dis- 
pleased and grieved at ourselves for censuring and 
backbiting others, we shall be less angry at others for 
censuring and backbiting us. We must show all 
meekness toward ‘all men, because we ourselves 
were formerly foolish, Titus iii. 2. 

Verses 23, 24. All this have I proved—All these 
things, of which I have here discoursed, I have dili- 
gently examined and found to be true; by wisdom— 
By the help of that singular wisdom which God had 
given me, I said, I will be wise—I determined that 
I would, by all possible means, seek to attain per- 
fection of wisdom, and I persuaded myself that I 
should attain it; but it was far from me—I found 
myself greatly disappointed, and the more I knew 
the more I saw mine own folly. That which ts far 
off, &c.—No human understanding can attain to per- 
fect wisdom, or to the exact knowledge of God’s 
counsels and works, and the reasons of them, be- 
cause they are unsearchably deep, and far above out 
of our sight; some of them being long since past, 
and therefore utterly unknown to us, and others yet 
to come, which we cannot foreknow. 

24 


folly, even of foolishness ad mad- A. M. 3027. 
ness : ; ge oe 
26 * And I find more bitter than death the: 
woman whose heart is snares and nets, and 
her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God 
shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be 
taken by her. 

27 Behold, this have I found, saith Ythe 
preacher, ” counting one by one, to find out 
the account ; 


¥ Prov. v. 3, 4; xxii. 14——"! Heb, he that is good before God. 
y Chap. i. 1, 2.——1* Or, weighing one thing after another, to find 
out the reason. 


Verse 25. I applied my heart to know—I was not 
discouraged, but provoked, by the difficulty of the 
work, to undertake it. To know, search, and seek 
out wisdom—He useth three words signifying the 
same thing, to intimate his vehement desire, and 
vigorous and unwearied endeavours after it. And 
the reason of things—Both of God’s various provi- 
dences, and of the counsels and courses of men. 
To know the wickedness, &c.—Clearly and fully to 
understand the great evil of sin. 

Verse 26. And I find—By my own sad: experi- 
ence, which Solomon here records as a testimony of 
his true repentance for his foul miscarriages, for 
which he was willing to take shame to himself, not 
only from the present, but from all succeeding ge- 
erations; more bitter than death is the woman— 
The strange woman, of whom he speaks so much 
in the Proverbs; more vexatious and pernicious, as 
producing those horrors of conscience, those re- 
proaches, diseases, and other plagues, both temporal 
and spiritual, from God, which are far worse than 
the mere death of the body, and, after all these, 
everlasting destruction; whose heart is snares and 
nets—Who is full of crafty devices to ensnare men ; 
and her hands—By gifts, or lascivious actions, as 
bands—Wherewith she holds them in cruel bond- 
age, so that they have neither power nor will to for- 
sake her, notwithstanding all the dangers and mis- 
chiefs which they know attend upon such practices. 
Whoso pleaseth God—Hebrew, he that is good 
before God, who is sincerely, and in the judgment 
of God, truly pious; shall escape her—Shall be pre- 
served from falling into her hands. Hereby he inti- 
mates, that neither a good temper of mind, nor great 
discretion, nor a good education, nor any other 
thing, except God’s grace, is a sufficient preserva- 
tive from the dominion of fleshy lusts; but the sin- 
ner—Who rests satisfied without the saving grace 
of God and true piety, and therefore lives in known 
and wilful sin; shall be taken by her—Shall be 
entangled and held in her chains, 

Verses 27, 28. Behold, saith the preacher—Or, 
the penitent, who speaks what he hath learned, both _ 
by deep study and costly experience; this have I 
found—And it is a strange thing, and worthy of 
your serious observation; counting one by one— 
Considering things or persons, very exactly oo dis-. 


< 


a 
a 
The advantages of wisdom. 


A. M. 3027. 


28 Which yet my soul seeketh, but 
B. C. 977. 


I find not: * one man among a thou- 
sand have I found; but a woman among all 


those have I not found. 
ee 
z Job xxxiii. 23 ; Psa. xii. 1. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Respect to rulers enjoined. 


29 Lo, this only have I found, ese 
*that God hath made man upright; ———— 
but they have sought out many inven- 
tions. 


a Gen, i. 27—— Gen. iii. 6, 7. 


tinctly, one after another; to find out the account— 
That I might make a true and just estimate in this 
matter; or, as it is in the margin, to find out the 
reason. Which yet my soul seeketh—It seems so 
wonderful to me, that I suspected that I had not 
made a sufficient inquiry, and therefore I returned 
and searched again, with more earnestness; but I 
Jind not—That it was so he found, but the reason 
_ of the thing he could not find out. One man—A 
~ wise and virtuous man; among a thousand—With 
whom I have conversed; have I found—He is sup- 
posed to mention this number jin allusion to his 
thousand wives and concubines, as they are num- 
bered, 1 Kings xi. 3; but a woman—One worthy of 
that name, one who is not a dishonour to her sex; 
among all those, have Inot found—In that thousand 
whom I have taken into intimate society with my- 
self. It is justly observed by different commenta- 
tors here, that “we are not hence to infer, that 
Solomon thought there were fewer good women 
than men: but that he knew he had not gone the 
right way to, find the virtuous woman, when he 
deviated so widely from the original law of marriage ; 
and instead of seeking one rational companion, the 
sole object of his endeared affections, he had col- 
lected a vast multitude for magnificence and indul- 
gence. The more valuable part of the sex would 


not willingly form one in such a group; and, if 
any of them were previously well disposed, the 
jealousies, party interests, contests, and artifices 
which take place in such situations, would tend 
exceedingly to corrupt them, and render them 
all nearly of the same character. Solomon there- - 
fore here speaks the language of a penitent, warning 
others against the sins into which he had been be- 
trayed; and notthatofa waspish satirist, lashing indis- 
criminately one half of the human species.”—Scott. 

Verse 29, Lo, this only have I found—Though I 
could not find out all the streams of wickedness, 
and their infinite windings and turnings, yet I have 
discovered the fountain of it, original sin, and the 
corruption of nature, which is both in men and 
women; that God made our first parents, Adam 
and Eve, upright—Hebrew, right: without any 
imperfection or corruption, conformable to his nature 
and will, after his own likeness: but they—Our first 
parents, and after them their posterity ; have sought 
out many inventions—Were not contented with 
their present state, but studied new ways of making 
themselves more wise and happy than God had 
made them. And we, their wretched children, are 
still prone to forsake the certain rule of God’s word, 
and the true way to happiness, and to seek new 
methods of attaining it. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The benefit of wisdom, 1. 


Honour the king and obey God, 2-5. Prepare for sudden evils, and for death, 6-8. 
not at oppression, or the present impunity of the wicked, 9-11. 


Marvel 
Jit shall be well with the good, and ill with the wicked, 


though not immediately, 12-14. . Therefore cheerfully use the gifts of God, and acquiesce in his will, 15-17. 


A. M. 3027. 


\ N HO is as the wise man? and who 
B. C. 977. 


knoweth the interpretation of a 
thing? *a man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine, 
and 'the boldness of his face shall be changed. 


2 Prov. iv. 8,9; xvii. 24; see Acts vi. 15——" Heb, the strength. 
b Deut. xxviii. 50. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. 

Verse 1. Who is wise 2—There are few wise men 
in this world. Who knoweth, &c.—How few un- 
derstand the reasons of things, and can rightly 
expound the word and works of God! A man’s 
wisdom makes his face, &c.—Makes a man venera- 
ble, cheerful, mild, and amiable. The face is put 
for the mind, because the mind discovers itself in 
the countenance, The boldness of his face—The 

3 . 


2 G1 counsel thee to keep the A. M. 3027. 
at 5. Ac D. 97. 
king’s commandment, ° and that in ——— 
regard of the oath of God. 

3 ‘Be not hasty to go out of his sight : stand 


¢1 Chronicles xxix. 24; Ezekiel xvii. 18; Romans xiii. 5, 
4 Chap. x. 4. 


roughness or fierceness of it, shall be changed—Into 
gentleness and humility. ° 
Verses 2-4. I counsel thee to keep the king’s com- 
mandment—All his commands which are not con- 
trary to the will of God, who must be obeyed rather 
than any man, even rather than a king. Jn re- 
gard of the oath of God—Because of that oath 
which thou hast taken to keep all God’s laws, 
whereof this of obedience to superiors isone. Be 
25 


The misery of man. ECCLESIASTES. The certainty of death. 
x M. 3027. h 1 - A.M. 3027 
eos 202%. “shot in an evil thing; for he doeth) 8% There is nomanthathath pow waked 


whatsoever pleaseth him. 

4 Where the word of a king is, there is 
power: and *who may say unto him, What 
doest thou ? 

5 Whoso keepeth the commandment ? shall 
feel no evil thing: and a wise man’s heart 
discerneth both time and judgment. 

6 Because to every purpose there is time and 
judgment, therefore the misery of man is greater 
upon him. 

7 & For he knoweth not that which shall be: 
for who can tell him *when it shall be? 


er ‘overthespirit toretain the spirit: nei- 
ther hath he power in the day of death: and there 
zs no * discharge in that war ; neither shall wick- 
edness deliver those that are given to it. 

9 All this have I seen, and applied my heart 
unto every work that is done under the sun: 
there is a time wherein one man ruleth over 
another to his own hurt. 

10 And so I saw the wicked buried, who had 
come and gone from the place of the holy, and 
they were forgotten in the city where they had 
so done: this is also vanity. 


e Job xxxiv. 18. ? Hebrew, shall know. Chap. iii. 1. 
& Proy. xxiv, 22; Chap. vi. 12; ix. 12; x. 14. 


not hasty to go out of his sight—Hebrew, to go from 
his face or presence, namely, in dislike or discon- 
tent to withdraw thyself from the king’s service, or 
from obedience to him: stand not in an evil thing 
—If thou hast offended him, persist not to do so, 
but humbly acknowledge thine offence, and beg his 
pardon ; for he doth whatsoever pleaseth him—His 
power is uncontrollable. Where the word of a king 
is, there is power—Whatsoever he commands he 
wants not power nor instruments to execute, and 
therefore can easily punish thee as he pleases. And 
who may say unto him—Hebrew, who shall. say ? 
who will presume, or dare to say so? He does not 
affirm that it is unlawful to say so; for Samuel 
spoke in that manner to Saul, and Nathan to David, 
and several other prophets to the kings of Judah and 
Israel; but only that it is difficult and dangerous. 

Verse 5. Whoso keepeth the commandment--So- 
lomon here passes to a new subject; shall feel no 
evil thing~-Shall be delivered from those mischiefs 
which befall the disobedient. A wise man’s heart 
discerneth, &c.--Both when, and in what manner, 
he must keep the commands of God. 

Verses 6, 7. Because to every purpose there is a 
time, &c.—There is a fit way and season for the 
accomplishment of every business, which is known 
to God, but for the most part hidden from man. See 
notes on chap. iii.1l. Therefore the misery of man 
is great-—Because there are few who have wisdom 
to discern this, most men expose themselves to 
manifold miseries. For he knoweth not that which 
shall’ be--Men are generally ignorant of future 
events, and of the success of their endeavours, and 
therefore their minds are disquiected,-and their 
expectations frequently are disappointed, and they 
fall into many mistakes and miscarriages, which 
they might prevent if they foresaw the issues of 
things; who can tell when it shall be 2—No wise 
man, no astrologer, no soothsayer can discover this. 

Verse 8. No man hath power over the spirit— 
That is, over the soul of man; fo retain the spirit 
—-To keep it in the body beyond the time which 
God hath allotted to it. This is added as another 
evidence of man’s misery. Neither hath he power 

26 


Or, how it shall be. h Psalm xlix. 6, 7.——# Job xiv. ad 
4 Or, casting off weapons. 


in the day of death—Or, against the day, that is, to 
avoid, or delay that day ; and there is no discharge 
—aAs there is in other wars; in that war—In that 
fatal conflict between life and death, when a man is 
struggling with death, though to no purpose, for 
death will be always conqueror. Neither shall 
wickedness deliver, &c—And although’ wicked 
men, who most fear death, use all possible means to 
free themselves from it, yet they shall not escape it. 
The most subtle wickedness cannot out-wit death, 
nor the most daring wickedness out-brave it. 

Verses 9, 10. All this Ihave seen—All these things 
before mentioned ; and applied my heart unto every 
work—I have been a diligent observer of all actions 
and events. There is a time when one man ruleth, 
&c.—There are some kings, who use their power 
tyrannically, whereby they not only oppress their 
people, but hurt themselves, bringing the vengeance 
of God upon their own heads. And so I saw—In 
like manner; the wicked—Wicked princes or rulers, 
burted—With state or pomp; who had come and 
gone—Had administered public justice, which is fre- 
quently signified by the phrase of coming in and 
going out before the people; from the place of the 
holy—The seat of majesty and judgment, which 
may well be termed, the place, or seat, of the holy— 
That is, of God, often called the holy one; who is 
in a special manner present in, and presides over 
those places where justice is administered: and for 
whom, and in whose name and stead, magistrates 
act, who, therefore, are called gods. And the tribu- 
nal seems to be so called here, to aggravate their 
sin, who, being advanced by God into so high and 
sacred a place, betrayed so great a trust, and both 
practised and encouraged that wickedness which, by 
their office, they were obliged to suppress and pun- 
ish. And ther y were forgotten—Although they de- 
signed to perpetuate their names and memories to 
succeeding ages; in the city where they had so done 
—Where they had lived in great splendour, and 
were buried with great magnificence, which one 
might have thought would have kept up their 
remembrance, at least, in that place. This is also 
vanity—That men should so earnestly — after, 


The works of God 


CHAPTER VIII. 


cannot be found out. 


a ¥ pif 11 4 * Because sentence against an 
———. evil work is not executed speedily, 
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully 
set in them to do evil. 

12 4! Though a sinner do evil a hundred 
times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I 
know that ™ it shall be well with them that fear 
God, which fear before him : 

13 But it shall not be well with the wicked, 
neither shall he prolong his days, which are as 
a shadow ; because he feareth not before God. 

14 There is a vanity which is done upon the 
earth; that there be just. men, unto whom. it 
*happeneth according to the work of the wicked: 
again, there be wicked men, to whom it hap- 
peneth according to the work of the righte- 


I said that this also 7s vanity. A. M. 3027. 
B. C. 97. 


ous : 

15 7 °Then I commended mith, 
because a man hath no better thing under the 
sun than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: 
or that shall abide with him of his labourthedays 
of his life, which God giveth him under the sun. 

16 4 When I applied my heart to know wis- 
dom, and to see the business that is done upon 
the earth: (for also there is that neither day 
nor night seeth sleep with his eyes :) 

17 Then I beheld all the work of God, that 
Pa man cannot find out the work that is done 
under the sun: because though a man labour 
to seek i¢ out, yet he shall not find i¢; yea 
further; though a wise man think to know 7, 
4 yet shall he not be able to find 7¢. 


k Psa. x. 6; 1. 21; Isa. xxvi. 10.——! Isa. lxv. 20; Rom. ii. 5. 
m Psa. xxxvii. 11, 18, 19; Prov. i. 32, 33; Isa. iii. 10, 11; Matt. 
xxv. 34, 41. 


1 Psa. Ixxiii. 14; Chap. ii. 143; vii. 15; ix. 1, 2,3——° Chap. 
li. 24; ili. 12, 22 ; v. 18 ; ix. 7.——P Job v. 9; Chap. iii. 11; Rom. 
xi. 33.——4 Psa. lxxiii. 16. 


and please themselves with worldly glory, which is 
so soon extinct, and the very memory of which is 
so quickly worn out of the minds of men. 

Verse 11. Because sentence against an evil work 
—God’s determinate counsel for the punishment of 
all evil doers ; is not executed speedily—But is often- 
times delayed for some time, to give them space for 
repentance ; therefore the heart of the sons of men 
is fully set in them—Hebrew, 39 890, their heart 
is filled, or, as the LXX, render it etAypodopy dy xapdca 
is carried on with full sail, like a ship with a 
strong and violent wind; or, is bold, or preswmptu- 
ous, as the same phrase is used elsewhere. 

Verses 12,13. Though a sinner do evil a hun- 
dred times—F requently, and innumerably ; and his 
days be prolonged—The time of his life and prospe- 
rity; yet it shall be well with them that fear God 
—This implies both that good men might for a time 
suffer grievous things from tyrants, oppressors, and 
persecutors, and that it should be very ill with the 
wicked, which, indeed, is expressed in the following 
verse: which fear before him—Who stand in awe 
of God, and fear and forbear to sin, out of a sincere 
regard and reverence for him. But it shall not be 
well with the wicked—That is, it shall go very ill 
with him; great miseries are prepared for him; 
neither shall he prolong his days—Namely, very 
long, as he desires; which are as a shadow—His 
life, though it may seem long, yet in truth is but a 
shadow, which will quickly vanish and disappear. 
Because he feareth not God—He is cut off, and this 
misery is prepared for him as the punishment of his 
casting off the fear and service of God. 

Verses 14,15. There is a vanity which is done 
upon the earth—Hither by wicked potentates, who 
do commonly advance unworthy men, and oppress 
persons of the greatest virtue and merit: or, by 
God’s providence, who sees it fit for many weighty 
reasons so to manage the affairs of the present world. 
To whom it happeneth, &c.—Who meet with such 

3 


usage as the worst of men deserve. There be wicked 
men to whom it happeneth--Who, instead of those 
punishments which they deserve, receive those 
rewards which are due to virtuous men.  T'his 
also is vanity—This is a very unreasonable thing, 
if it be considered without respect unto another 
life, as it is here, where Solomon is discoursing 
of the vanity of the present life, and of the impossi- 
bility of finding satisfaction. and happiness in it. 
Then I comemnded mirth— Hebrew, nn2wn, joy or 
gladness. Upon these considerations I concluded, 
that it was most advisable for a man not to perplex 
and torment himself with the thoughts of the seem- 
ing inequality of the dispensations of Divine Provi-” 
dence, and of the great disorders which are in the 
world, or with cares and fears about future temporal 
events, or with insatiable desires of worldly things, 
but quietly, cheerfully, and thankfully to enjoy the 
comforts which God gives him. See notes on chap. 
ii, 24, and iii. 12,13; for that shall abide with him of 
his labour, &c.—This is the best advantage which he 
can make of this world’s goods, as to the present life. 

Verse 16. When I applied my heart to know 
wisdom—He seems to be here assigning the reason 
of that judgment which he had now passed, (verse 
15,) which reason is, that he had diligently studied 
wherein man’s wisdom consists, and had observed 
the restlessness of men’s minds and bodies in other 
courses; and to see the business—To observe men’s 
various designs and employments, and their unwea- 
ried labours about worldly things. or there is that 
neither day nor night seeth sleep—Having now 
mentioned the business which is done, or which 
man doth, wpon earth, he further adds, as an evi- 
dence of man’s eagerness in pursuing his business, 
For even by day and by night he—The busy man ; 
seeth not sleep with his eyes—He grudges himself 
necessary refreshments, and disquiets himself with 
endless cares and labours. 

Verse 17. Then—Hebrew, and, or, moreover, I 

27 


Outward things come %3 


beheld all the work of God—I considered the coun- 
sels and ways of God, and the various methods 
of his providence toward good and bad men, and 
the reasons of them. That a man cannot find 
out the work, &c.—No man, though ever so wise, 
is able fully and perfectly to understand these 


ECCLESIASTES, 


good and bad men alike. 


things. And therefore, it is best for man not to 
perplex himself with endless and fruitless inquiries 
about those matters, but quietly to submit to God’s 
will and providence, and to live in the fear of 
God, and the comfortable enjoyment of his bless- 
ings. ¥ 


CHAPTER IX. 


Outward things come to goad and bad men ahke, 1-3. Death puts an end to all, 4-6. 


mind the business of life while it lasts, 7-10. 
very useful, and yet gains them little respect, 13-18. 


A. M.3027. G‘OR all this 'I considered in ‘my 
B. C. 97. 
SE heart even to declare all this, 
“that the righteous, and the wise, and their 
works, are in the hand of God: no man 
knoweth either love or hatred by all that is be- 
fore them. 

2 P All things come alike to all: there is one 
event to the righteous and to the wicked; to 
the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean ; 
to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacri- 
ficeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner; 
and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an 
oath. 

3 This is an evil among all things that are 


God's providence disposes all things, 11, 12. 


Therefore enjoy the comforts and 
Wisdom often makes men 


done under the sun, that there is one A. M. 3027. 
event unto all: yea, also the heart of ———— 
the sons of men is full of evil, and madness zs 
in their heart while they live, and after that 
they go to the dead. 

A | For to him that is joined to all the living 
there is hope: for a living dog is better than a 
dead lion. 8 

5 For the living know that theyshall die: but 
*the dead know not any thing, neither have 
they any more a reward; for “the memory of 
them is forgotten. 

6 Also their love, and their hatred, and their 
envy, is-now perished ; neither have they any 


1 Heb. I gave, or, set to my heart. 4 Chap. viii. 14.——> Job 
xxl. 7; Psa. Ixxiii. 3, 12,13; Mal. iu. 15. 


¢ Job xiv. 21; Isa. lxiti. 16.——4 Job vii. 8,9, 10; Isaiah 
xxvi. 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 

Verse L. For, or therefore, as the LXX. render it, 
all this I considered in my heart—All that I have 
said concerning the methods of divine providence, 
toward. good and bad men; to declare all this—To 
make this evident, first to myself, and then to others ; 
that the righteous—Whom he mentions, not exelu- 
sively, as if wicked men were not also in God’s hand, 
for the next clause relates both to the good and bad; 
but eminently, because, by the course of God’s 
providence toward them, they might seem to be 
quite neglected by God; and their works are in the 
hand of God—All their actions and employments ; 
all events which befall them are governed by his 
providence, and therefore, although we cannot fully 
understand the reasons of all, yet we may be assured 


they are done righteously. Noman knoweth either | 


love or hatred—No man can judge by their present 
outward condition, whether God loves or hates 
them; for whom he loves he chastens, and permits 
those whom he hates to prosper in the world. 
Verses 2, 3. All things come alike to all—The 
good and evil things of this world equally happen to 
good and bad men; as is the good, so is the sinner— 
As to all outward things. This is an evil, &e.—A 
great trouble and temptation to a considerate and 
good man ; yea, also the heart of the sons of men— 
28 


Of wicked men, such as the generality of mankind 
are; is full of evil—Of wickedness; and madness 
is in their heart—Upon this account they go on 
madly and desperately in evil courses, without any 
fear of an after reckoning; and after that they go 
to the dead—And after all they appear to die in the 
same manner asthe best men do. So hitherto there 
is no difference. For Solomon here forbearstotake - 
into consideration the future life: he intimates, how- 
ever, that as the madness, so the happiness of the 
wicked, is ended by death: which is more fully ex- 
pressed i in the following words. 

Verses 4-6. For to him that is Linell to all the 
living—That continues with living men; there is 
hope—He hath not only some comfort for the pre- 
sent, but also hopes of further and greater happiness 
in this world, which men are very prone to enter. 
tain and cherish in themselves. Yea, he may have 
the hopes of a better life, if he improve his opportu- 
nities. For a living dog is better than a dead lion 
—Much happier as to the comforts of this world. 
“The meanest and most contemptible person here, 
in this world, hath the advantage of the greatest 
king, when he is gone out of it.” For the living 
know that they shall die—Whereby they are taught. 
to improve life while they have it. But the dead 
know not any thing—Of the actions and events of 


An exhortation to enjoy the comforts, 


CHAPTER IX. 


and mind the business of life. 


+ “ aig more a portion for ever in any thing 
that is done under the sun. 

7 4 Go thy way, °eat thy bread with joy, and 
drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God 
now accepteth thy works. 

8 Let thy garments be always white; and let 
thy head lack no ointment. 

9 *Live joyfully with the wife whom thou 
lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, 
which he hath given thee under the sun, all 
the days of thy vanity: ‘ for that is thy portion 
in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest 
under the sun. 

10 Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it 


e Chap. vill. 15. 


2 Heb. See, or, enjoy, life—— Chap. ii. 10, 
24;: iii. 13, 22; v.18, 


this world, as this is limited in the next verse. Nez- 
ther have they any more a reward—In this world. 
The reward or fruit of their labours is utterly lost to 
them, and enjoyed by others. See chap. ii. 21.. For 
otherwise, that there are future rewards after death, 
is asserted by Solomon elsewhere, as we have seen, 
and shall hereafter see. For the memory of them is 
Sorgotien—Namely, among living men, and even in 
those places where they had lived in great power 
and glory. Also their love and hatred, §c., is now 
perished—They neither love, nor hate, nor envy 
any thing in this world, but are unconcerned in 
what is done under the sun. 

Verses 7-9, Go thy way—Make this use of what I 
have said. Lat thy bread—Thy necessary and con- 
venient food; with joy, &c.—Cheerfully enjoy thy 
comforts, avoiding all distracting care and grief for 
the occurrences of this world. For God now. ac- 
cepteth thy works—Whosoever thou art, that art tru- 
ly pious and upright before him, he is gracious unto 
thee, accepts thy services for his honour, and allows 
thee a comfortable enjoyment of his blessings. Let 
thy garments be always white—In all convenient 
times and circumstances; for there are times of 
mourning. The eastern.people of the best sort used 
white garments, especially in times of rejoicing. But 
by this whiteness of garments he seems to intend a 
pleasant and cheerful conversation. And let thy 
head lack no ointment—Which, upon joyful occa- 
sions, was poured upon men’s heads. Live joyfully 
with thy wife—The one wife, whom thou lovest. 
Love her, and keep thyself only to her, avoiding all 
improper intercourse and familiarity with all other 
women, and thou wilt live comfortably with her ; all 
the days of thy vanity—Of this vain and frail life: 
which expression he uses to moderate men’s affec- 
tions even toward lawful pleasures, and to admonish 
them of their duty and interest in making sure of a 
better life, and more solid comforts. For that is thy 
portion—Allowed thee by God; and the best part of 
worldly enjoyments; in this life—By which addi- 
tion he again reminds him of the duty of seeking 
another and better portion in a future life. 


with thy might ; for there is no work, A. M. 3027. 

nor device, nor knowledge, nor wis- — 
dom, in the grave, whither thou goest. 

11 § I returned, and saw under the sun, 
that the race 7s not to the swift, nor the battle 
to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor 
yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet 
favour to men of skill; but time and chance 
happeneth to them all. 

12 For man also knoweth not his time: as 
the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as 
the birds that are caught in the snare; so are 
the sons of men ‘snared in an evil time when 
it falleth suddenly upon them. 


& Amos ii. 14, 15; Jer. ix. 23—— Chap. viii. '7.—— Prov. xxix. 
6; Luke xii. 20, 39 xvii. 26; 1 Thess. v. 3. 


Verse 10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, &c. 
—Whatever thou hast opportunity and ability to, 
in the duties of thy calling, or for the glory of God 
and the good of thy fellow creatures; do tt with all 
thy might—With unwearied diligence, vigour, and 
expedition. Hereby again Solomon shows, that he 
does not persuade men to an idle and sensual life, 
but only to a sober enjoyment of their comforts in 
God’s fear, and with an industrious prosecution of 
the business of their vocations. For there is no work, 
§c., in the grave—Thou canst neither design nor 
act any thing tending to the glory of God, or to thine 
own comfort or advantage there. Therefore neglect 
not thine only season. 

Verse 11. I returned and saw—This may have 
some respect to the foregoing verse: for having 
urged men to labour with all their might, he now 
adds, by way of caution, that yet they must not 
be confident of their own strength, as if they were 
sure of success by it, but must look up to God for 
his blessing, without which all their endeavours 
would be in vain. But it seems chiefly to be added, 
either, as another instance of the liberty and power 
of God’s providence, in the disposing of human af- 
fairs, of which he spake verses 1, 2; or as another 
of the vanities of this present life; that the race is 
not to the swift—Hither ability to run, or success and 
victory in running; nor the battle to the strong— 
The victory in battle; nor riches to men of under- 
standing—Who yet are most likely to get and keep 
riches; nor yet favour—Acceptance and love from 
men; to men of skill—Who know how to conduct 
themselves and all affairs, and therefore are most 
likely to find favour, at least, in the eyes of such 
as need their services; but time and chance hap- 
peneth to them all—There are times or seasons, ca- 
sual to men, but known by God, in which alone he 
will give men success. 

Verse 12. For man also knoweth not his time— 
Namely, the time of his death, or of some other sore 
distress, which God is bringing upon him; as fishes 
are taken in an evil net—While they are sporting 
| and feeding themselves, are suddenly and unexpect- 

29 


As dead flies corrupt precious ointment, 


ECCLESIASTES. 


so does foolishness pervert wisdom. 


13 4 This wisdom have I seen also 
~ under the sun, and it seemed great 
unto me: 

14 * There was a little city, and few men 
within it; and there came a great king against 
it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks 
against it: 

15 Now there was found in it a poor wise 
man, and he by his wisdom delivered the 


A. M. 3027. 
B.C. 


k See 2 Sam. xx. 16-22. 1 Prov. xxi. 22 ; xxiv.5; Chap. vii. 19; 


edly ensnared to their ruin; so are the sons of men 
snared—When they are most careless and secure. 
Verses 13-16. T'his wisdom have I seen—I have 
observed this among many other instances and ef- 
fects of wisdom. Which he adds for the commend- 
ation of wisdom, notwithstanding its insufficiency 
for man’s safety and happiness without God’s bless- 
ing. And it seemed great unto me—I judged it very 
praiseworthy, though others despised it, as it fol- 
lows. There was a little city, &e—It is doubtful 
whether Solomon be here relating a certain fact 
which had occurred in some neighbouring country, 
or delivering a parable to represent the value of wis- 
dom, and the ingratitude and neglect with which 
those who have greatly benefited others by it, are 
often treated by them. St. Jerome, as appears by 
the following paraphrase, considers him as allud- 
ing to several facts of the same or a similar kind, 
“Tt hath often been seen that a small city and few 
inhabitants, being beset by an army of innumerable 
enemies, and besieged so straitly that they were in 
danger, if not otherways, of perishing by famine; 
were, on a sudden, contrary to all men’s expecta- 
tion, delivered by a mean person, who, having more 
wisdom than all the great and powerful citizens, 


city; yet no man remembered that pra pn 
same poor man. ais Senta 

16 }Then said I, Wisdom is better than 
strength : nevertheless ™the poor man’s wisdom 
is despised, and his words are not heard. 

17 'The words of wise men are heard in quiet 
more than the cry of him that ruleth among fools. 

18 * Wisdom is better than weapons of war: 
but ° one sinner destroyeth much good. 


Ver. 18.—™Mark vi. 2, 3——"Ver. 16. 


© Josh, vii. 1, 11, 12- 
thought of a way to save them, when they gave 
themselves up for lost, and effected that of which 
they utterly despaired. And yet, O the ungrateful- 
ness of mankind! after the siege was raised, no one 
thought of this poor man;? namely, to give him 
thanks, much less to reward him for their safety. 
“Tt sets forth,” says Lord Bacon, “the depraved and 
malignant nature of mankind; who,in extremities 
and straits commonly flee to men of wisdom and 
courage, whom before they despised ; but, so soon 
as the storm is over, they become unthankful 
wretches to their preservers.” 

Verse 17. The words of wise men—Though poor ; 
are heard in quiet—Are uttered with a modest and 
low voice, and are, or should be, heard by wise men ; 
more than the cry—The clamorous and senseless 
discourses ; of him that ruleth among fools—Of a 
rich and potent, but foolish man, who has some in- 
fluence on fools like himself, but is justly neglected, 
and. his words disregarded by wise men. Or, as 
Aben Ezra interprets the verse, connecting it with 
the preceding, “The words of the wise are despised 
by the people when they are in prosperity, but when 
they are in distress, and silenced by fear and grief, 
then they listen eagerly and diligently.” __ 


CHAPTER X. 


Observations on wisdom and folly, 1-3. On rulers, 4-7. 


A. M. 3027. 


EAD ' flies cause the ointment of 
B. C. 977. 


the apothecary to send forth astink- 


1 Heb. Flies 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X. 

Verse 1. Dead flies, &c.—Solomon seems in these 
words to be prosecuting what he had said in the last 
clause of the preceding chapter; showing how much 
good one foolish action may destroy, what evil may 
result from it, and how a man, otherwise famed for 
wisdom, may thereby lose his reputation. So most 
interpreters understand the verse. “The wiser or 
better,” says Bishop Patrick, “any man is, so much 
the more cautious ought he to be in all his words 

30 


Miscellaneous observations, 8-11. 
12-14. More miscellaneous observations, 15-20. 


On governing the tongue, 


ing savour: sodothalittlefollyhimthat A, M. 3027. 
rs : ; B. C. 977. 
isin reputation for wisdom ad honour. 


of death. 


and actions, if he mean to preserve that credit, es- 
teem, and authority in the world, which give him 
great advantages for doing good. "For, as dead flies, 
though very small creatures, falling into a pot of 
ointment,” and abiding and being putrified in it, 
fi corrupt that precious composition, and turn the per- 
fume into a stink; so doth a small error or misear- 
riage blemish him who was highly valued for his 
discretion and virtue.” And this comes to pass, 
partly, because all the actions, and canes wheal 


Observations on wisdom and folly, 


A. M. goa. 2 A wise man’s heart is at his right 
———— hand; but a fool’s heart zs at his left. 

3 Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by 
the way, * his wisdom faileth him, *and he saith 
to every one that he is a fool. 

A If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, 
bleave not thy place; for ° yielding pacifieth 
great offences. 

5 There isan evil which I have seen under the 
sun, as an error which proceedeth * from the ruler. 


2Heb. his heart—— Prov. xiii. 16; xviii. 2——» Chap. viii. 3. 
€1 Sam. xxv. 24, &c.; Prov. xxv. 15.—* Heb. from before. 


follies of such men are most diligently observed, 
whereas the actions and follies of persons known to 
be ignorant and weak are generally disregarded ; and, 
partly, because of that envious and malicious dispo- 
sition which is in the minds of too many, and makes 
them quick-sighted to discover, and glad to hear, 
and forward to declare, the faults of such as, by 
their greater eminence, outshone and obscured 
them, 

Verses 2,3. A wise man’s heart is at his right 
hand—His understanding or wisdom is always pre- 
sent with him, and ready to direct him in all his ac- 
tions. He manages all his affairs prudently and 
piously. He mentions the right hand because that 
is the common instrument of action, But a fools 
heart is at his left—His understanding and know- 
ledge serve him only for idle speculation and vain 
Ostentation, but is not useful or effectual to govern 
his affections and actions. Yea also, when he walk- 
eth by the way—Not only in great undertakings, but 
in his daily conversation ; his wisdom faileth him— 
Hebrew, 10n 125, his heart is wanting ; he acts pre- 
posterously and foolishly, as if he were without a 
heart. He saith, &c.—He discovers his folly to all 
that meet him or converse with him. 

Verse 4. If the spirit of a ruler—His passion or 
wrath; rise up against thee—Upon some misin- 
formation given him, or mismanagement of thine ; 
leave not thy place—In anger or discontent. With- 
draw not thyself rashly and hastily from his pre- 
sence and service: see on chap. viii. 3. Continue in 
a diligent and faithful discharge of thy duty, as be- 
comes a subject, and modestly and humbly submit 
to him, For yielding pacifieth, &c.—Hebrew x50 
my, healing maketh to cease great sins: that is, 
a submissive, meek deportment, which is of a heal- 
ing nature, appeaseth wrath conceived for great 
offences. ' 

Verses 5-7. There is an evil, &c.—I have ob- 
served another great vanity and misdemeanour 
among men; as an error which proceedeth, &c.— 
Or rather, as the Hebrew may be translated, which 
is indeed an error proceeding from the ruler: for 
the following erroneous conduct must needs come 
from those who have power of conferring honour 
and authority. Folly is set in great dignity—Fool- 
ish and unworthy persons are frequently advanced 
by the favour or humour of princes into places of 

3 


oi c 


CHAPTER X. 


and on demeanour toward rulers. 


6 ‘Folly is set *im great dignity, and A. M. 3027. 
Se iH B. C. 977. 
the rich sit in low place. ee 

7 I have seen servants * upon horses, and 
princes walking as servants upon the earth. 

8 ‘He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; 
and whoso breaketh a hedge, a serpent shall 
bite him. 

9 Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt there- 
with ; and he that cleaveth wood shall be en- 
dangered thereby. 


4 Esth, iii. 1——* Heb. in great heights. © Prov. xix. 10; xxx. 
22,——/ Psa. vii. 15 ; Prov. xxvi. 27. 


great trust and dignity, which is at once a great re- 
proach to the prince, and a sore calamity to his 
people. And the rich sit in a low place—Wise and 
worthy men, rich in endowments of the mind, are 
neglected and despised, or removed from those 
places to which their merits had raised them. 7have 
seen servants on horses—Men of a servile condition 
and disposition riding in pomp and state as princes; 
and princes—Men of noble birth and qualities, fit to 
rule a kingdom, walking as servants—In a state of 
poverty and degradation, despised and disregarded. 

Verses 8, 9. He that diggeth a pit, &e.—The 
meaning of these verses, which may be considered 
as common proverbs, is, that those who are seeking 
and striving to injure others, often bring mischiefs 
thereby on their own heads; as he that digs a pit for 
another may, unawares, fall into it himself; and he 
who, in those hot countries, was pulling up a hedge, 
was in danger of being bit by a serpent lurking in it; 
and he that removes stones to undermine his neigh- 
bour’s house, may possibly be hurt, if not killed, by 
the upper stones falling on himself. It may be ob- 
served here, however, that Melancthon, Bishop Pa- 
trick, and many other interpreters, consider these 
verses as containing warnings to princes and people 
to take heed they do not rashly, and with violence, 
attempt to make changes in the established order of 
things in churches or states. ‘Let neither prince 
nor people,” says Henry, “violently attempt any 
changes, nor make a forcible entry upon a national 
settlement, for they will both find it of dangerous 
consequence. Let not princes invade the rights and 
liberties of their subjects; and let not subjects mu- 
tiny and rebel against their princes, but let both be 
content within their own bounds. God, by his ordi- 
nance, as by a hedge, hath enclosed the prerogatives 
and powers of princes, and their persons are under 
his special protection; those, therefore, that form 
any treasonable designs against their peace, their 
crown, and dignity, are but twisting halters for them- 
selves. And those that go about to alter a well-mo- 
delled, well-settled government, under colour of re- 
dressing some grievances, and correcting some 
things amiss in it, will quickly perceive, not only 
that it is easier to find fault than to mend; to demol- 
ish that which is good, than to build up that which 
is better ;” but that they pull a house down upon 
themselves, under the ruins of which they may per- 

31 


On governing the tongue. 


* a 10 If the iron be blunt, and he do 
~ not whet the edge, then must he put 

to more strength: but wisdom is pee to 
direct. 

11 Surely the serpent will bite * without en- 
chantment; and a * babbler is no better. 

12 » The words of a wise man’s mouth are 
6 gracious; but ‘the lips of a fool will swallow 
up himself. ) 

13 The beginning of the words of his mouth 
és foolishness: and the end of 7 his talk is mis- 
chievous madness. 


14 *A fool also ®is full of words: a man 


& Psa. lviii. 4,5; Jer. viii. 17. 5 Heb. the master of the 
tongue. h Prov. x. 32; xi. 13—® Heb. grace. i Prov. x. 
14; xviii. 7. 


haps be crushed to death. But this latter verse is 
thus interpreted by some, He that removeth stones— 
That rashly attempts things too high and hard for 
him ;. shall be hurt therewith—Shall_ suffer injury 
from such attempts. Andhe that cleaveth wood— 
With an iron instrument; shall be endangered there- 
by—May peradventure cut himself: thatiis, he that 
deals with men of knotty, stubborn tempers, shall 
have much vexation and trouble thereby, and proba- 
bly shall find his character as well'as peace much 
wounded. & 

Verse 10. If the iron be blunt—The axe where- 
with a man cuts wood ; he must put to more strength 
--To make it cut: that is, if a man do not use fit and 
proper means to accomplish any work, it will cost 
him so much the more Jabour and pains; but wis- 
dom is profitable to direct—Both in the choice and 
in the use of means. .In other words, As wisdom. in- 
structs a man in the smallest matters, so it is useful 
for a man’s direction in all weighty affairs, 

Verse 11. Surely the serpent will bite without en- 
chantment—Uniess it be seasonably prevented by 
the art and care of the charmer. This is an allusion 
to the general opinion, then and still prevailing in 
the eastern countries, that serpents might be charmed 
so as to be prevented from biting by certain incan- 
tations, or by singing and music. See note on Psalm 
lyiii. 4, 5. And a babbler is no. better—Hebrew, 
pwon bya, the master-of the tongue; which may be 
understood either of a rash, loose talker, a mere bab- 
bler, or of a backbiter and slanderer. Each of these 
is in the habit of using his tongue as if he were lord 
of it, and often does much mischief thereby, espe- 
cially the latter, who, by his malicious words, bites 
secretly like a serpent, and gives deadly wounds to 
the characters of the absent. “_ 

Verses 12-15. The words of a wise man are gra- 
cious—Hebrew, {N, grace; as they are profitable, so 
they are acceptable to others, procuring him favour 
with those that hear him. But the lips of a fool will 
swallow up himself--His discourses are ungracious 
and offensive to others, and therefore pernicious to 
himself. T'he beginning of his words is foolish- 

32 


_ TALIVORNTA “BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY 
AUDITORIUM BUILDING 
Los ANGELES 13, CALIFORNIA , 


ae ohh 


me? 


’ ‘3 N 
The great evil of pos chan , 


dawtot tell what shall be ; and ! what Al - 3027. 


shall be after him, who can tell him? 

15 The labour of the foolish wearieth every 
one of them, because he sersiee not how to 
go to the city. ‘ 

16 {J ™ Wo to thee, O land, wich thy king és — 
a child, and thy princes eat in the orning ! 

17 Blessed ar¢ thou, O land, when thy king 
is the son of nobles, and ® thy princes eat in due 
season, for strength, and not for drunkenness ! 

18 @ By much slothfulness the building de-. 
cayeth; and through idleness of the hands the 
house droppeth through. 


7 Heb. his mouth.——* Prov. xv. 2.——® Heb. uae eile, 
1 Chap. iii. 22; vi..12; viii. 7——™ Isaiah iii, 4, 5, 125. v. 11. 
a Pyoy. xxxi. 4. 


ness, &c.—All his talk, from the beginning to the 
end, is foolish and sinful; the more he talks themore 
his folly and wickedness appear; and the endis mis- 
chievous madness—He proceeds from evil to worse, 
and adds wilfulness to his weakness, and never de- 
sists till he hath done mischief to himself or others. 
A fool also is full of words—Forward to promise 
and boast what he will do; which is the common 
practice of foolish men, and. running on endlessly, 
and never knowing when to cease; for he will have 
the last word, though it be but the same with that 
which was the first. 
be—What he will say next; his talk is So incoherent. 
And what shall be after him; who can tell?—That is, 
what mischief his foolish talk eo produce. The 
labour of the foolish wearieth, &c.—Fools discover 
their folly by their wearisome and fruitless endea- 
vours after things which are too high for them. —Be- 
cause he knoweth not, &c.—He is ignorant of those , 
things which are most easy, as of the way to the 
great city whither he is going. 

~ Verses 16, 17. Wo to thee, O land, onan thy king 
is @ child——Either in age or childish qualities; and 
thy princes eat in the morning—Give themselves up 
to eating and drinking at that time of the day which 
is most fit for God’s service, for the despatch of 
weighty affairs, and for sitting in judgment. Blessed 
art thou when thy king is the son of the nobles—Not ° 
so much by birth, as even the worst of kings com- 
monly are, and have been, as by their noble and 
worthy dispositions and endowments, for such a one 
is opposed to the child in the former verse; and thy 
princes eat in due season—So as may further and 
not hinder their main. business; for strength, and 
not for drunkenness—To refresh and strengthen 
their bodies, that they may be fit to perform the du- 
ties of their station, and not to please their palates, 
and indulge themselves i in sensuality. 

Verse 18. By much slothfulness, §c., the house 
droppeth throvgh—That house which is negleeted 
by its owner, and not repaired, must needs come to 
ruin. Whereby he intimates that the sloth and care-. 
lessness of princes, in the management Wi public 


A man cannot tell what shall at 


« 
_ An exhortation to diligence 


CHAPTER XI. 


anz to works of charity 


A.M. 3027. 19 4 A feast is made for laughter, 
B.C. 977. ; 
—_——— and °wine *maketh merry: but money 


answereth all things. 
20 “1 ? Curse not the king, no, not in thy 


» thought ; and curse not the rich in fe st eo 
thy bedchamber : for a bird of the air ——__—~ 
shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings 


shall tell the matter. 


© Psa. civ. 15.——® Heb. maketh glad the life? Exod. xxii. 28 ; 


SS ee 
affairs, which is a usual attendant on that luxury of 
which he now spoke, is most destructive to them- 
selves and to their people. 

Verse 19. A feast is made for laughter, &c.—Not 
merely for eating, but chiefly for pleasant conversa- 
tion, and the society of friends ; not the laughter of 
fools, whichis madness, but that of wise men, namely, 
that cheerfulness by which they fit themselves for 
business and severe studies: and wine maketh merry 
—Hebrew, Dn now, maketh glad the life, exhi- 
larates the mind ; but money answereth all things— 
Procures not only meat and drink for feasting, but 
all other worldly advantages. Therefore be frugal, 
and spend not all in luxurious eating and drinking, 
remembering, that money is wanted fora great’ many 
other purposes. Some refer this verse to rulers, 
and consider this last clause as being added to ag- 
gravate the sin and folly of luxury, to which, when 
princes give up themselves, they not only neglect 
their business, but thereby waste that money and 
treasure which are so highly necessary for the sup- 
port and preservation of themselves and their king- 


- 


> bs 


Acts xxiii. 5.——1 Or, conscience, figure like Luke xix. 40. 


—) 


| squeeze money out oftheir people by oppressive taxes, 
and other dishonourable and dangerous practices. 

Verse 20. Curse not the king—Having spoken of 
| the miscarriages of kings, he now gives a caution to 
| their subjects, that they should not thence take oc- 
/casion to speak irreverently or contemptuously of 
them, or wish or design any evil against their per- 
}sons or government. For though vices may be 
condemned wheresoever they are, yet both reverence 
and obedience are due to magistrates, as they are 
|God’s deputies and vicegerents, and that, notwith- 
| standing their vices, as is manifest from Rom. xiii. 1, 
| &c.; 1 Pet. ii. 138. No, not in thy thought—In the 
most secret manner, by giving way to such thoughts 
and affections, for these would very probably break 
forth into disloyal words and practices: and curse 
| not the rich—The princes or governors under the 
king, who are commonly rich ; for a bird, ¢c., shall 
carry the voice—The king will hear of it by unknown 
and unsuspected hands, as if a bird had heard and 
carried the report of it. 


* 


# 


CHAPTER XI. 


An exhortation to works of charity, 1-6. 
M. 3027. 


C. 97. C 


__ = 


A 
“B ters: » for thou shalt find it after 
many days. s mn ‘< 


: 
AST thy bread *upon? the wa-|{ 2 °Give a portion ‘toseven, and also 4. 


i 


An admonition to prepare betimes for death and judgment, 7-10, 


A. 5 3027. 
: . C. 977. 
to eight; ° for thou knowest not what ———— 


| evil shall be upon the earth. 


= 


See Isa. xxxii. 20..—! Heb. upon the face of the waters. 
> Deut. xv. 10; Prov. xix. 17; Matt. x.42; 2 Cor. ix.8; Gal. 


vi. 9,10; Heb. vi. 10.—+ Psa. exil. 9; Luke vi. 30; i Tim. 
vi. 18, 19.——@ Mic. v. 5.——e Eph. v. 16. ; 


—— 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI. 

Verse 1. Cast thy bread—That is, thy seed, which 
is here called bread, as it is also Job xxviii. 5, and 
Isaiah xxviii. 28, because the produce of it makes 
bread, and the husbandman could ill spare it, wanting 
it, perhaps, for bread for himself and family ; pon 
the waters—That is, either by the rivers’ sides, or in 
moist and marshy ground, or even on t vaters 
that cover.it, where there might be little prospect of 
acrop. Solomon here probably alludes to the man- 
ner of planting rice in the eastern countries; for, as 
Sir John Chardin observes in his note on Isa. xxxii. 
20, “ They sow it upon the water; and, before sow- 
ing, while the earth is covered with water, they 
cause the ground to be trodden by oxen, horses, and 
asses, which go mid-leg deep; and this is the way 


water.” But, though Solomon alludes to this, it is 
evident he means in these words to inculcate liberal- 
itytothe poor. Asifhehadsaid, Cast—That is, freely 
and liberally bestow ; thy bread—That is, thy money, 
or provisions, or the necessaries of life, of whatever 
kind ; wpon the waters—Upon the poor, on whom thy 
bounty may at first, and for a time, appear to be lost, 


(as the seed does, which a man casts upon the waters, ) 
through their unthankfulness or inability to make thee 
any returns: yet, hou shalt findit—It shall be restored 
to thee, either God or men, more certainly than 
the rie or other seed corn, cast upon the marshy or 
watery ground, produces fruit in due season: after 
many days—The return may be slow, but it is sure, 

will be so much the more plentiful the longer it 


a 
Melovae This clause is added to prevent an ob- 


of preparing the ground for sowing. And, as they jection, and quicken us to the duty enjoined. 


sow the rice in the water, they transplant it in the 
Vor. II. (3) 


Verse 2. Give a portion to seven—A part of thy 
33 ‘ 


°> 


doms: and, in consequence thereof, are obliged to | 


> 


=.= * ? “’ +i . | fz. 
*. , : y ‘ | ot & 7 ee 


: i - # y Ny > sd \ 2 ; ; 5m 
: ia oh) ; in ee Py “he pi 4 ri * sy 
ae, yes ‘. jm : ‘ 3 
aM acs frequently ; 


A. gta. 3 If the ‘clouds be. full o fain, they J i w th ) he: 
7 ; a as 
+ empty: themselves “upon ie earth : withhold no thy 

ail if the tree fall toward the. south, or toward || for thou knowest not 


the north, in the place where the tree falleth, 
there it shallbee 
us "4 He that observeth a shall not sow ; 


either this or that, or 
be alike good. 


79 Truly the light oe 0 d a plea- 
sant thing it is: yr the eyes * to Belsgld the 


; as he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap. 
7 5 As ‘thou Pe not what is the way || sun: 3 ‘. 
of the > spirit, ®7 ow the bones do grow in|| 8 But if a man live many ye <— 


the womb fther that is with child: even||in them all; yet let him y ea 
so thou knowest not the works of God who|| of arin caer for they shall be many. 
maketh all. ¢ cometh és vanity. a : 


‘ Ye f John iii. 8——* Psa. exxxix. 14, 15. ? Heb. shall be right. — Chap. vii. 11. -. 


estate or provisions. He alludes to the ancient cus- || trails, bones, flesh, and skin, are gradually nad 


tom, whereby the master of the feast distributed nourished, increased, and brought to perfection : - $ 
several parts to each guest, and withal sent portions || even so hau knowest ‘not the works of God—What 
tothe poor. And also to eight—To as many as thou || God is doing, and will do with thee or others; the 
art able. For thou knowest not what evil shall be,|| counsels and methods of his providence inthe future © 
&c.—Great calamities may come, whereby thou || time of thy life, what evil God will send upon the 
mayest be brought to poverty, and so disabled from || earth, how he will chastise or punish mankind for 
doing good. And moreover thou mayest possibly || their sins, or how long he will continue thy life, or 
hereafter need the charity of others, which thou wilt || preserve to thee the enjoyment of thy property ; or 
have good reason to expect, through the powerful |} how soon he will call thee to an account. Therefore 
providence of God disposing men’s hearts to pity || use the present opportunity, and commit thyself and 
and help thee, if thou hast been kind and merciful || all thy affairs to him in well doing. 
to others ; whereas, on the contrary, they can expect Verse 6. In the morning—Early and late, in all 
no mercy from God or men, who have showed no|} seasons, and on all occasions; do it speedily a : 
mercy to others. |} continually: be not weary of it. Sow thy seed—Do — 
Verse 3. If the clouds be full of rain, they empty || all good works, especially that of alms-giving, as” 
themselves, &c.—Learn, O man, the practice of sowing means, 2 Cor. ix. 6; Gal. vi. 7. In the even- 
liberality from the very lifeless creatures, from the|| ing withhold not thy jond—Frome -working, or 
clouds; which, when they are filled with water, do || giving. For thou knowest not whether shall prosper 
not hoard it up, but plentifully pour it forth, for the |} Which shall prosper most; which. shall best 
refreshment both of the fruitful field and the barren || answer thine end, or do most good to others; or 
wilderness. And if the tree fall, &c.—As if he had || which shall tend most to the comfort. of thy gre 
said, Therefore, let us just now bring forth the fruits || and final account. For thy morning may p 
of righteousness, because death will shortly cut u bly be given to an unworthy pe o one wh 
down, and we shall then be determined to unchange-|| did not need them, and will ab 3 and thy 


able happiness or misery, according as our works | evening alms may fall upon a of eminent. 

have been. & worth, or upon one in extreme necessity, who neh 
Verse 4. He that observeth the wind, shall not || possibly have perished, both in soul and body, if 

sow, &c. <r Higeee neglects the necessary works of || hadst not relieved and comforted him. Besides, at 

one.time thou mayest give with a more pure inten- 


sowing and reaping, because the weather is not ex- 

“actly suitable to his desires, will lose his harvest. || tion, ¥ amore single eye to the glory of God, and 
Whereby he intimates, that men will never do good ore tender compassion to thy distressed fel- 
here, which is expressed by sowing, and consequently -creature, than at another time, and so the one 
will be-more right and acceptable to God than 


not receive good hereafter, which is called reaping, 
the other. Or whether they shall be both alike 


if they be discouraged from it by every doubt and 
ae, good anally successful to the receiver or to the 
giver. 


. As thou knowest not the way of the spirit 


with 


. -soul of man, how it comes into the childin|| Verses 7,8. T'ruly, the light is sweet—It cannot 


th ; or how it is united with the oe 


be denied, that this present life is in itself a great 
“how, and whather it goes out of the body. lb 


Nor lessing, and desirable; but it is not perpetual nor 
the bones do grow—That is, the whole body, 1 satisfactory : for, if a man live many years— 
is elsewhere signified by the bones, because th ey are Which is a privilege granted but to few persons 
a principal part, and the very foundation and sup- || comparatively ; and rejoice in them all— all 
portof the body ; that is, thou knowest not how, from || the comforts, and escape all the imbitterness of 
small and unpromising beginnings, the. onboF parts || human life all his days; yet let him remember the 
of the body, as nerves, arteries, veins, sinews, en-|] days of darkness—Of death, or the state a the 


ee 34 g 


Pe 


, 9 Rejoice, Oo ithe ‘man, in “thy 
“ youth; and let thy heart cheer thee 
e days of thy youth, iand walk in the 

thy heart, and in: the sight of thine 


3 an “kn a Sts that mn ae things 


=. Ton as Job x. 21; 
" paitin foxtepe 12; and here opposed to the fore- 
_ going light: for they shall be many—Far more than 


the days of his short life, especially if, to the days 
of ‘the be *s lying in the dark grave, be added that 
greater and utter darkness reserved for impenitent 


8, Which is everlasting. And this is added, for 
7 caution of mankind, that they may not rejoice 
excessively in, nor content themselves with, the hap- 
_ piness of the present life, but may seek a life more 
_ durable and satisfactory. /All that cometh is vanity 
—All things which befall any man belonging only to 
~~ this life, whether they be comfortable or vexatious, 
are but vain and inconsiderable, because they are 
short and transitory. 

Verse 9. Rejoice, &c.—This is an ironical conces- 
sion, like many which ee Scriptures, (see 
1 Kings xviii. 27, and xxii. 15; Ezek. xxviii. 3; 4; 
Matt. xxvi. 45,) and in other authors: O young man, 
in thy youth—-He speaks to young men particularly, 
because they have both the greatest ability and the 


ie inclination to pursue sensual pleasure, and 


si 


most impatient, either of restraint or admonition, 


et thy heart cheer thee, &c.—Indulge thy humour. 


and take thy fill of delights. And walk in the way 


¢ 


2 rity ‘i Se ‘ Jy 
But. ovisth\ : 
dion to e. Any,” _ CHAPTER XU. 


The preacher’s end in this book, 9-12. 


ey 


ee | PS | ae. 


enforced from: the calamities of age. 


é ‘M. 3027. 


*God will bring thee into judg: i bay 


ment. 

10 ‘Therefore remove * sorrow from diy heart, 
and ! put away evil from thy flesh : ™ for child- 
hood and youth are vanity. _ ve a 


3 Or, anger.——! 2 Cor. vii. 13 2 Tim, ii 22——m Pi XXXxix. 5, 


of thy Mari, &c.—Whatsoever thine eye or heart 


lusteth after, deny it not to them. But know thou 
—But in the midst of thy feasting, jollity, and ~ 
mirth, consider thy reckoning, and whether thou dost 
not purchase thy delights at too high a price: that 
for all these things—For all thy sinful lusts and fol- 


thee to appear before his judgment-seat, to account — 
for all thy forgetfulness of him, and neglect of his 
service, thy misemployment of ‘thy time and talents, 
and of all the gifts of his providence and grace, and 
for all thy carnal mirth, sensual pleasures, and the 
extravagances and exorbitances of thy youthful 
days, as well as of thy riper years. 

Verse 10, Therefore remove sorrow—Sensual and 
| disorderly lusts, which he elegantly calls sorrow, to 
intimate, that although such practices at present 
gratify men’s senses, yet they will shortly bring them 
to intolerable sorrows. And put away evil from 
thy flesh—All evil desires, though now they seem 
good to thee. For childhood and youth are vanity 
—Most vain. The time of youth is vanishing and 
ransitory, and old age and death will speedily come, 
against which every wise man will take care to lay 
in solid provisions and comforts. 


CHAPTER XII. 


The sum of all, to fear God and keep 


7 exhortation to remember God in youth, enforced from the calamities of old age, and the change which death will make, 


* 
1-7. mi all is vanity, 8. 
his commandments, in consideration of the judgment to 
A.M. 3027. MEMBER *now thy Crea 
B, C. 977. 


- the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, 


in ‘the days of thy youth, while 


13,14. in 
> when thou shalt say, I have no plea- A. ie re 
‘sure in them ; va 
2 While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or 


+ a Prov. xxii. 6; Lam. iii. 27. 


_ > See 2 Sam. xix. 35, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. , 

Verse 1. Remember—Namely, practically, so asito 
fear, love, and faithfully serve him, which, when men 
do not, they are said to forget him: thy Creator—The 
first author and continual preserver of thy and 
being, and of all the endowments and enjoyments 


which accompany it; to whom thou art under the 


highest and strongest obligations ; and upon whom 
thou art constantly and necessarily dependant, and 
therefore to forget him is most unnatural and disin- 
genuous. Now in the days of thy youth—For now 
thou art most able to do it; and it will be most ac- 
ceptable to God, and most comfortable to thyself, as 
being the best evidence of thy sincerity, and the 
best provision for oldageand death. While the evil 
- 3 - ° 


days come not—The time of old age, which is evil ; 
that is, burdensome and calamitous in itself, and far 
more grievous when it is loaded with the sad remem- 
brance of youthful follies, and with the dreadful 


prospect ofapproaching death and jud gment. When 
thou shalt say, Ihave no pleasure—My life is now 
bitter and burdensome to me: which is fi Mey 


the condition of old age. 


Ve . While the sun, or the light, &c. ~ ie 
W SUN, and the light, and tae moon, &e. 
That e, and the light, seamao be added to sig- 


nify, that he speaks of the darkening of the sun, and 
moon, and stars, not in themselves, but only in respect 


of that light. which they afford to men. And there- 
fore the same clause which is expressed after the SUD, 
35 
. , . , 


lies; God will bring thee to judgment—Will force _ 


«) 


Ae 


-and manifold calamities, which are usually the com- 


form their office; because they are few—Hebrew, 


. are either opened or shut: or, those humours and 


a 


Fie tied description of the feebleness 


ECCLESIASTES. 


consequent on extreme old age. 


=~ 


» Bene. the stars, be not darkened, nor the ||shall rise up at the voice of the bird, A. M3 3027 


clow return after the rain ;- 

3 In the day when the keepers of the house 
shall tremble, and the strong men ‘shall bow 
themselves, and ‘the grinders cease because 
they a are few, and those that peck out of the 
windows be darkened, ° 


_ 4 And the doors shall be shut in the streets, 


when the sound of the grinding is low, and he 


1 Or, the grinders fail, because they grind little. 


is to be understood after the moon and stars. And 
those expressions may be understood of the outward 
parts of the body, and especially of the face, the 
beauty of the countenance, the pleasant complexion 
of the cheeks, the liveliness of the eyes, which are 
compared to the sun, and moon, and stars, and which 
are obscured in old age, as the Chaldee paraphrast 
understands it. Or of the inward faculties of the 
mind, the understanding, fancy, memory, which 
may not improperly be resembled to the sun, moon, 
and stars, and all which are sensibly decayed in most 
old men. Or of external things, of the change of 
their joy, which they had in their youth, into sorrow, 


panions of old age. This interpretation agrees both 
with the foregoing verse, in which he describes the 
miseries of old age, and with the following clause, 
which is added to explain those otherwise ambiguous | 
expressions; and with the Scripture use of this] 
phrase; for astate of comfort and happiness is often 
described by the light of the sun, and a state of 
trouble is set forth, by the darkening of the light of 
the sun. Nor the clouds return after the rain— 
This phrase denotes a perpetual succession of rain, 
and clouds bringing rain, and then rain and clouds 
again. Whereby he expresses either the rheums or 
defluctions which incessantly flow in old men; or 
the continual vicissitude of infirmities, diseases, and 
griefs; one deep ealling upon another. ‘ 

Verse 3. When the keepers of the house—The 
body, which is often and fitly compared to a house; 
whose keepers are the hands and arms, which are 
man’s best instruments to defend his body from the 
assaults of men or beasts, and which, in a special 
manner, are subject to this trembling. . And the 
strong men shall bow themselves—Either the back, 
or the thighs and legs, in which the main strength 
of the body consists, and which, in old men, are 
very feeble. And the grinders—The teeth, those 
especially which are commonly so called, because 
they grind the meat which we eat; cease—To per- 


Wy" "3, because they are diminished, either in 
strength, or in number, being only here and 
there another, and neither united tegen ee one 
directly opposite to another, and consequently unfit 
for their work. And those that look out of the win- 
dows be darkened—The eyes. By wi s he un- 
derstands, either the eye-lids, which, like windows, 


i 


and all ° the daughters of music shall es 


be brought low ; 

5 Also when they shall be afraid of that 
which is high, and fears shall be in the way, 
and the almond-tree shall flourish, and the 
grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall 
fail: because man goeth to “his long home, and 
* the mourners go about the streets : 


¢2 Sam. xix. 35.——4 Job xvii. 13. © Jer. ix. 17. 


coats of the eyes, which are the chief instruments 
by which we see. ~ 

Verse 4. And the doors be shut in the streets—Or 
toward the streets: which lead into the street. 
This may be understood, either of the outward 
senses, which, as doors, let in outward objects to the 
soul; or, rather, of the mouth, or the two lips, here 
expressed by a word of the dual number, which, 
like a door, open or shut the way that leads into the 
streets or common passages of the body, as the gullet, 
stomach, and all the bowels; as also the wind-pipe 
and lungs, which also. are principal instruments both 
of speaking and eating. And these are said to be 
shut, not absolutely, as if men did never eat, or 
drink, or speak, but comparatively, because men, in 
old age, grow dull and listless, having little appetite 
to eat, and are very frequently indisposed for dis- 
course. When the sound of the grinding is low— 
When the teeth are loose and few, whereby both his 
speech is low, and the noise which he makes in eating 
is but small. And he shall. rise—From his bed, 
being weary with lying, and unable to get sleep. 
At the voice of the bird—As soon as the birds begin 
to chirp, which is early in the morning, whereas 
young men can lie and sleep long. And all the 
daughters of music—All those senses or parts of — 
‘the body, which are employed in music, shall be 
brought low—Shall be cast down from their former 
excellence, and become incapable either of making 
music, or of delighting in it. 

Verse 5. When they shall be Nal &c.—The 
passion of fear is observed to be most incident to old 
men, of which divers reasons may be given. Of 
that ‘which i is high—Of high things, lest they should . 
fall upon them; or of high places, as of going up 

ills or stairs, which i is very irksome to them, because 

their weakness, weariness, giddiness, and danger, 
or dread of falling. And fears shall be in the way 
—Lest, as they are walking, they should stumble, or 
fall, or be thrust down, or some infirmity or evil 
should befall them. And the almond-tree shall 
flourish—Their heads shall be as full of gray hairs 
jas the almond-tree is of white flowers. And the 
| grasshopper shall be a burden—If it accidentally 
light upon them. They cannot endure the least bur- 
den, being indeed a burden to themselves. And 
desire shall fail—Of meats, and drinks, and music, 
and other delights, which are vehemently desired 
by men in their youth. Because man goeth—Is 
travelling toward it, and every day nearer toit. To 

3 


; 


which is* unchangeable and everlasting. 


gold than any other part of the body does. And) 
this, upon the approach of death, is commonly | 
_ shrivelled up, and many times b n. And as} 


* 


+ 
+ 


At death the body returns to dust, 


A. M. 3027. 


B. C. 977. 6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, 


CHAPTER XII. 


or the golden bowl be broken, or the|| cher was wise, he still taught the peo- 


. 


“ 


e 
and the spirit to God who gave it. 


9 And 2-moreover, use the prea- A. M. 3027. 


C. 977. 


pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel/| ple knowledge: yea, he gave good heed, and 


broken at the cistern. _ 
7 ‘Then shall the dust return to the earth as 


it was: £ and the spirit shall return unto God|| able words: a 


s who gave it. 
8 4 ‘Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher ; 
all és-vanity. 


fGen. iii. 19; Job xxxiv. 15; Psa. xc. 3——é Chap. iii. 21. || xii. 1——i Psa. xii. 9; Chap. i. 2. 


sought out, and * set in order many proverbs. 
10 The preacher sought to find out ° accept- 


upright, even words of truth. : 
11 The words of the wise are as goads, and 
as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, 


2 Or, the more wise the 


5 Num. xvi. 22; xxvii.16; Job xxxiv. 14; Isa. lvii. 16; Zech. || preacher was. 1 Kings iv. 32.——* Heb. words of delight. 


his long home—From this place of his pilgrimage 
into the grave, from whence he must never return 
into this world, and into the state of the future life, 
And 
mourners go about the streets—Accompany the 
corpse through the streets to the grave. 

Verse 6, Or ever the silver cord be loosed—By 
the silver cord he seems to understand the spinal 
marrow, which comes from the brain, and goes 
down to the lowest end of the back-bone. And this 
is aptly compared to a cord, both for its figure, which | 
is long and round, and for its use, which is to draw | 
and move the parts of the body; and to silver, | 
both for its excellence and colour, which is white 
and bright, in a dead, much more in a living body. 
This may properly be said to be loosed, or dissolved, 
because it is relaxed, or otherwise disabled for its 
proper service. And answerably hereto, by the 
golden bowl we may understand the membranes of 
the brain, and especially that inmost membrane 
which insinuates itself into all the parts of it, fol- 
lowing it in its various windings, keeping each parcel | 
of it in its proper place, and dividing one from | 
another, to prevent disorder. This is not unfitly 
called a bowl, because it is round, and contains in it | 
all the substance of the brain; and a golden a 


| 
| 


partly for its great preciousness and usefulness; 
partly for its ductility, being drawn out into a great 
thinness or fineness; and partly for its colour, which | 
is somewhat yellow, and comes nearer to that of 


these clauses concern the brain, and the’ animal | 

owers, so the two following respect the spring of | 
the vital powers, and of the blood, the great instru- | 
ment whereof is the heart. And so Solomon here | 
describes the chief organs appointed for the produc- 
tion, distribution, and circulation of the blood. For 
though the circulation of the blood has been hid for 
many generations, yet it.»was well known to Solo- 
‘mon. According to this notion, the fountain is the 
right ventricle of the heart, which is now acknow- 
ledged to be the spring of life; and the pitcher is 


- the arteries which convey the blood from it to other 


parts, and especially that arterious vein, by which 
it is transmitted to the lungs, and thence to the left 
ventricle, where it is better elaborated, and then 
thrust out into the great artery, called aorta, and by 
37 “ 


- 


4 ‘ie 


~~ .. 
a Tye _ =e 


nd that which was written, was — 


its branches dispersed into all the parts of the body. : 


And the cistern is the left ventricle of the heart, and 
the wheel seems to be the great artery, which is 
fitly so called, because it is the great instrument of 
this circulation. The pitcher may be said to be 
_ broken at the fountain, when the veins do not return 
_ the blood to the heart, but suffer it to stand still and 
'cool, whence comes that coldness of the outward 
parts, which is a near forerunner of death. And 


the wheel may be said to be broken at the cistern, 


_ when the great arteries do not perform their office 
/of conveying the blood into the left ventricle of the 
heart, and of thrusting it out thence into the lesser 
arteries, whence comes that ceasing of the pulse, 
which is a certain sign of approaching death, = __ 
Verse 7. Then shall the dust—The body, called 
dust, both on account of its original, which was from 
the dust, and to signify its vile and corruptible 
/nature. As it was—Whence it was first taken. He 
a s to Gen. iii. 19. And the spirit—The soul of 
man, so called, because of its spiritual or immaterial 
| nature; shall return unto God—Into his presence, 
|and before his tribunal, that it may there be sen- 
'tenced to its everlasting habitation, either to abide 
' with God forever, if approved by him, or otherwise, 
to be eternally shut out from his presence and fa- 
vour. Who gave it—Namely, in a peculiar man- 
ner; by his creating power: whence he is called, 
the Father of spirits, Heb. xii. 9. . 
Verse 8. Vanity of vanities—This sentence, 
| wherewith he began this book, he here repeats in 
the end of it, as that which he had proved in all the 
foregoing discourse, and that which naturally fol- 
lowed from both the branches of the assertion laid 
down, verse 7. ; 7 
Verses 9-12. He still taught the people know- 


might bea teacher of others, so he used it to that 
end. Gave heed—He did not utter wh r came 
into his mind, but seriously pondered both his mat- 
ter and his words. Therefore despise not his coun- 
sel. The preacher sought to find out acceptable 
-words—Hebrew, y2n°21, words of desire, or, of 
delight: worthy of all acceptation, such as would 
minister comfort or profit to the hearers or readers. 


And that which was aeritten—By the preacher,in | 


this and his other books; was upright--Hebrew, ‘v1, 
right, or, straight, agreeable to the mind or will of 


God, which is the rule of right, not crooked or per- 
> 3° 
Qe Ps 
a > 
~~" = 
7 ‘ft ie -- 
tek : id - am. ~ i? bd 


4 


Pas 


» 
“a 


ledge—As God gave him this wisdom, that he... 


4 


ot 7 " 
God will bring the actions and — 


_ECCLESIASTES. 


re 


thoughts of all men into judgment. 


A. Me M, 3027. which are given from one shepherd. 
Bent. 12 And further, by these, my son, 
be admonished : of making many books there 


is no end; and ! much ‘study is a weariness 


ait 
%; 


re 


ne 
. 
ee 


? 


ry 


of the flesh. 
13 9 *Let us hear the conclusion of the whole 


A. M. 3027. 


m by 
matter: ™ Fear God, and keep his com: B,C. 977. 


mandments: for this” is the whole 
duty of man. : 

14 For "God. shall cages work into 
judgment, with every secret ing, whether 7 be 
good, or whether i¢ be evil. 


1Chap. i. 18——* Or, reading.—*® Or, The end of the matter, 
even alba been heard is, ——™ Deut. vi. 2; x. 12. 


ton even words of truth—Not fables, cunningly 


"y 


_from Christ, the great Shephe 


devised to deceive the simple ; but true and certain 
doctrines, which commend themselves to men’s rea- 
 sonand consciences; wholesome and edifying coun- 
sels. The words of the wise—Of spiritually wise 
and holy men of God; are as goads and as nails— 
Piercing into men’s dull minds, and quickening and 
exciting them to the practice of all duties; fastened 


by the masters of assemblies—Fixed in men’s me- | 


mories and hearts, in which they make powerful 
and abiding impressions, by the ministry of the 
teachers of God’s church and people, whether pro- 
phets or others, appointed by God for that work; 
which are given from one shepherd—From God, or 
Teacher of the 


church in all ages, by whose Spirit the ancient pro- 


‘2 Pet. i. 21. 


phets, as well as other succeeding teachers, were 
inspired and taught, Jer. iii. 15; 1 Pet. i. 11; and 
And further, by these—By these wise 
men, and their words or writings; be admonished 
—Take your instructions from them ; for their words 
are right and true, as he said, verse 10; whereas the 
words of other men are often false, or at best, doubt- 
ful. Of making many books there is no end if 
he had said, I could easily write many and large 
books upon these matters; but that would be an 
endless and needless work ; seeing things necessary 
to be known and done lie in a little compass, as he 
informs us, verse 13. And much study—The read- 


ing and considering of many books, as well as the 
. 38 


7 
4 


“y 
2Chap. xi. 9; Matt. xii. 36; Acts xvii. 30,31; Rom. ii. 16; 
xiv. 10, 12; 1 Gor. iv. 53 


2 Cor. v. 10. 
writing them; is a weariness to = flesh— 


Wasteth a:man’s strength and spirits, and yet does 
not give satisfaction to his mind, nor sufficiently re- 
compense the trouble and inconvenience to which © 
man is exposed by a 

Verses 13, 14. Let us hear the conclusion, &e.— 
The sum of all that hath been said or written by 
wise men. J'ear God—Which is put here for all 
the inward worship of God, reverence, and love, 
and trust, and a devotedness of heart to serve and 
please him; and keep his commandments—This is 
properly added, as a necessary t, and certain 
evidence of the true and genuine fearof God. Make 
conscience of practising whatever God enjoins, how 
costly, or troublesome, or dangerous soever it may 
be. .For this is the whole duty of man—Hebrew, 
The whole of man, or all the man: it is his whole 
work and business: his whole wisdom, honour, per- 
fection, and happiness: it is the sum of what he 
need either know, or do, or enjoy. This makes him 
a man indeed, worthy of the name, snd by this, 
and by this alone, he answers the end of his. crea- 
tion, and of all the divine dispensations toward him. 
For God shail bring every work into judgment— 
All men must give an account to God of all their 
works, and this alone will enable them to do that 
with joy. With every secret thing—Not only out- 
ward and visible actions, but even inward and secret 
thoughts. Reader, think of this, and prepare to 
meet thy God! 


* 


3 


- ey 

Be Set MS cin Sa Re be 

we THE ay ae 

be! eres a Bis ye 

a pg et | ; AL =i 
pps SONG OF SOLOMON. |. 
ve ™ on eh 


” wi r 
ARGUMENT. 
if 


-” 


Tue form of this book is dramatical, wherein several parts are uttered in the name of several persons, — 


-who are chiefly, the bridegroom and the bride, and the friends or companions of the one and of the © 


other. Nor is it declared what or when each of them speak, but that is left to the observation of 
_ the prudent reader. The design of the book in general. is to describe the love and happy marriage 
of two persons, but it is not to be understood concerning Solomon and Pharaoh’s daughter, (although 
the occasion might be taken. from that, or rather he makes an allusion to that,) but concerning 
God or Christ, and his church and people. This is sufficiently evident from the descriptions of 
this bridegroom and bride, which are such as could not, with any decency, be used or meant con- 
cerning Solomon and Pharaoh’s daughter. There are many expressions and descriptions, which 
being applied to them are absurd and monstrous. Hence it follows, that this book is to be under- 
stood allegorically concerning that spiritual love and marriage which is between Christ and his 
church. And this will be more than probable to any man who shall consider the following par- 


ticulars : 1, That the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, are full of allegorica passages ay 


which being known-and confessed, it is needless to prove: 2, That the doctrine of Christ being 
the head and husband of God’s church or people, was well known, atleast, to the prophets, and 
the wise and pious Israelites in the time of the Old Testament: 3, That God compares himself to 
eR briiego° and his church to a bride, Isa. xii. 5, and calls; and owns himself the husband of his 
_ people, Isa. liv. 5; Hos, ii. 16, 19,20. In which places, by comparing these with many other texts 
of Scripture, by God, or the Lord, is meant Christ, the second person in the Godhead, who then 
was to come down, and since did come from heaven to earth, for the consummation of that eternal 
design of marriage between God and his people : That the forty-fifth Psalm, which is a kind of 
abridgment of this book, although it alludes to the marriage between Solomon and Pharaoh’s daugh- 
ter, was written concerning the Messiah, as all interpreters, both Christian and Jewish, agree. From 
these considerations, and many others which might be suggested, it is sufficiently manifest, that 
the scope of this book is to describe the mutual.love, union, and communion which is between 

Christ and his church, in the various conditions to which it is liable in this world. 
- 


gs —— 
— : 


CHAPTER I. “ 


& * . in 
_ After the title, the church, the bride, speaks to Christ, the bridegroom, 1-4. To the daughters of Jerusalem, and to Christ 
ty. again, 5-7. Christ answers her complaints and requests, 8-11. The church expresses her value for Christ, and her de- 


light in him, 12-14. Christ commends the church, 15. And the chureh Christ, 16, 17. ‘ 
- A.M. 2990. THE *song of songs, which is|| 2 Lethim kissmewiththekissesof his A. M. 2990. 
» B.C. 1014. ; , onli] RRR po ie loveds Getter than wine) oes 
Bie etl Solomon’s. * a mouth: *for'thy love zs better than wine. — ® 
=< = se a = ——— 
* a1 Kings iv. 32. . ; >Chap. iv. 10.—-t Heb. thy loves. ~~ r 
é _ iB, 


. = 
in it the noblest of all the mysteries contained either 
in the Old or the New Testament; most pious and 
pathetical, breathing forth the hottest flames of love 
between Christ and his people, most. eet and com- 
fortable, and useful to all that read it with serious 


and Christian eyes. : : 
Verse 2. Let him kiss me_The begin ing is ab-| 
t; but is suitable to, ane in, Writings of this — 


4 NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse l. T'hesong of songs—The most exce 

_ ofallsongs. And sothis might well be called, whe 

we consider the author of it, who was a great prince, 

and the wisest of all mortal men; or the subject of 

it, which is not Solomon, but a greater than Solo- 

mon, even Christ, and his marriage with the church ; 
or the matter of it, which ig most lofty, 

*. 


ay lr Mi ica 
: ” s & MRE se " 
* . r tx 4 
. ' a * ig y- . ' 
* a a 9%. 


es , 


* 


a 


- 


5 


_ discourses, 


Xe 
The church, the bride, expresses 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


% 


her love to Christ, the bridegroom. 


Af. 2900 3 Because of the savour of thy good 


990. 
C. 1014. 


»4 ° Draw me, ‘we will run after thee: the 
King *hath brought me into his chambers: 


' we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will 
_ remember thy love more than wine; *the up- 


right love. thee. 

5 4 I am black, but comely, O ye daughters 
of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the cur- 
tains of Solomon. 


© Hos. xi. 4; John vi. 44; xii. 32, 4 Philippians iii. 12, 13, 14. 
e Psalm xlv. 14,15; John xiv. 2; Eph. ii. 6. 
— . = 


ointments thy name is as ointment || black, because the sun hath looked — 
_ poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. || upon me: my mother’s children were angry 


6 Look not upon me, because I am A. M. 2990. 
, B.C. 1014. 


with me; they made me the keeper of the 
vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not 
kept. 

7 @ Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, 
where thou feedest, where thou makest thy 
flock to rest at noon: for why should I be *as 
one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy 
companions ? . 


2 Or, they love thee uprightly. ar, as one that is 
muaverled. 8 


nature, wherein things are not related in a histori- 
cal and exquisite order, but that which was first done 
is brought in, as it were, accidentally, after many 
other passages; as we see in Homer, and Virgil, and 
others. _ These are the words of the spouse, where- | 
in she breathes forth her passionate love to the bride- | 
groom, whom she does not name; because it was 
needless, as being so well known to the persons to 
whom she speaks, and being the only person who 
was continually in her thoughts. By kisses, the 
“usual tokens of love and good-will, she means the 
communications of his love and favour, his graces 
and comforts breathed into hér from the Spirit of 
Christ... Thy love—This sudden change of the per- 
son is frequent in pathetic discourses. First she 
speaks of him as absent, but speedily grows into 
more acquaintance with him, and by ardent desire 
and faith, embraces him as present. Js better than | 
wine—Than the most delicious meat or drink, or 
than all sensual delights, one, kind being put for all. 

Verse 3. Because of the savour of thy good oint- 
nvents——Because of those excellent gifts and graces 
of God’s Spirit wherewith thou art replenished ; thy | 
name-~Thy fame or report, the very mention of 

nee, and all those things by which thou makest thy- | 
self known to men; thy word, particularly thine | 
offers of pardon and salvation to sinmérs; and all | 
thy works, especially that great work of redemption ; 
is as ointment poured forth—Is most acceptable 
and refreshing. Therefore do the virgins love thee 
—-Called the companions of the bride, Psa. Xv. 14; 
particular believers, who are called virgins, 2 Cor. 


xi. 2; Rev. xiv. 4; who have their senses exercised, 
to perceive this sweetness and fulness of Christ. 


Verse 4. Draw me—-By thy grace and Holy Spi- 
rit. We will—Both I, thy spouse, and the ; 


‘my companions. And this change of numbers 
teaches us, that the spouse is one great body, con- 


sisting of many members; run after thee—Will || 
follow thee readily, cheerfully, and swiftly.” The! 
king hath brought me, &e.—Christ, the king of his| 


church, hath answered my prayer; dnto his cham- 
bers—=Where I may freely converse with him, and 
enjoy him. He hath taken me into intimate com- 
munion with himself, We will remember thy love, 
&e.—This shall be the matter of our thoughts and 


y 7 


. : 40 a 
-_ ‘ 
3 ¢ a * . 
*> - “’ é ; 
> the. a: 
: a Pe 7 e* s 


Verse 5. I am black—I confess, as to myself, I 
am contemptible and deformed. She alludes to the 
complexion of Pharaoh’s daughter; but comely— 
Yet Iam glorious within, Psa. xlv. 13; and comely, 
through the beauty which my husband hath put 
upon me, by his graces conferred upon me, in justi- 
fication and sanctification. O ye daughters—By 
which she understands particular believers, whose 
mother Jerusalem is called, Gal. iv. 26. As the 
tents of Kedar—Of the wild Arabians, the posterity 
of Kedar, (Gen. xxv. 13,) who dwelt in tents, which 
were black and uncomely. As the curtains of Solo- 
mon—As the hangings wherewith Solomon’s house 
was furnished, which none can doubt were most 
beautiful and glorious. So these two last clauses 
answer to the two first, and that in the s order 
in which they lie. 

Verse 6. Look not upon me—With wonder and 
disdain; because the sun hath looked upon me-—My 
blackness is not essential and inseparable, but chiefly 


caused by the scorching beams of the sun; that is, 


sore persecutions and tribulations, which, by God’s 
permission, have befallen me, represented by the 
sun, Matt. xiii. 6-21. My mother’s children were 
angry with me—False brethren, who pretend that 


the church is their mother, when their actions de- _ 


monstrate, that God, the husband of the church, is 
not their father; hypocritical professors, who are, 
and ever were, the keenest enemies to the true 
church and people of God; false teachers, and their 
followers, who, by their corrupt doctrines, and divi- 
sions, and contentions, bring great mischief to the 


church. Made me keeper of the vineyards—Hav-— 


ing prevailed against me, they used me like a slave, 
putting me upon the most troublesome services, such 
as the keeping of the vineyards was esteemed, 2 
Kings xxv. 12; Isa. lxi. 5; Matt. xx. 17. Mine own 
a ‘have I not kept—They gave me such a 
ful ployment in the drudging work about their 
ards, that they left me no time to mind my 


by the sun. wnat 


a ; 


>. 
= = *, 


Verse 7. Tell me, &c.—Notwithstanding all these _ 
discouragements and afflictions, which I suffer for _ 
thy sake, and for my nae thee. Being reproached’ 

' 3 


NM 


own; they hindered me from doing my own duty, »» 
and from minding my own concerns. And there- ~~ 
fore it is no wonder if I be uncomely, and scorched! ‘a 


7 


"e 
: 


-_ 


Love of the church to Christ. 


CHAPTER I. 


~ 


Love of Christ,to the church. 


A.M. 2990. 8 4 If thou know not, f O thou fair- 
B.C. 1014. 


* est among women, go thy way forth 
by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids 
beside the shepherds’ tents. 

9 “1 have compared thee, £O my love, 


- to a company. of horses in Pharaoh’s chari- 


_ discover the true church, because she is deformed 


* 
$ 
. 


hi 


and for ever. 


_é¢ompany of horses—For horses are famous for that 


_church in this book is represented not only as fair 


~? 


ots. | 

10 ‘Thy cheeks are comely with rows of 
jewels, thy neck with chains of gold. 

11 {| We will make thee borders of gold with 
studs of silver. - 

12 4G While the King sitteth at his table, my 


spikenard sendeth forth the smell A. M. 2990. 
thereof. ae 

13 A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto | 
me ; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. 

14 My beloved is unto me as a cluster o 
* camphire in the vineyards of En-gedi. . 

15 * Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold 
thou aré fair; thou hast doves’ eyes. 

16 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, 
pleasant: also our bed is green. 

17 The beams of our house are cedar, and 
our ° rafters of fir. 


7 


SSE 
£ Chap. v. 9; vi. 1——s Chap. ii. 2, 10, 13; iv. 1, 7; v. 2; vi. 
4; John xv. 14. ane R ey Chron. i. 16, 17. i Baek. xvi. 11, 


12, 13: *Or, cypress, Chap. iv. 13——* Chap. iv. 1; v. 12. 
5 Or, my companion. © Or, galleries. 


 @ 


and persecuted by others, I flee to thee, O my only 
refuge and joy, and beg direction and help from thee ; 
where thou feedest thy flock—Discover to me which 
is thy true church, and which are those assemblies 
and people where ‘thou art present. This is the re- 
quest of particular believers. Where thou makest 
thy flock to rest at noon—In the heat of the day, 
when the shepherds, in those hot countries, used to 
lead their flocks into shady places. Whereby he 
means the time of persecution, when it is hard to 


by it, and because she is ’ obscured and driven into 
the wilderness. . Why should I be as one that turn- 
eth aside?—-Or a wanderer, or vagabond; like a 
neglected and forlorn creature, exposed both to cen- 
sure and danger. By the flocks of thy companions 
—The assemblies of corrupt teachers and worship- 
pers. These she calls Christ’s companions, because 
‘they profess the name of Christ, and their conjunc- 
tion with him in God’s worship. 

Verse 8. If thou know not—This is Christ’s an- 
swer; go thy way, &c.—Observe and follow the 
paths which my sheep have trodden before thee, my 
faithful servants, Abraham and others. For the 
church in all ages is one and the same, and there is 
but one way, for the substance, in which all the 
saints, from the beginning to the end of the world 
walk, Christ being the same yesterday, and to-day, 

Feed thy hide Take care for the 
feeding of all, and especially young and weak 
Christians. Beside the shepherds’ tents—Under 
the conduct, and according to the instruction of 
my faithful shepherds, chiefly those. who have gone 
before thee, the prophets and apostles, and in sub- 
ordination to them, and to their writings, others, 
whom [I shall raise, from time to time, to feed my 
people. 


courage, to overcome all thine enemies; to @ 


perty, and the strength of the battle was then 
ught to consist much in horses and chariots, espe- 
cially in a company or multitude of them, And the 


and beautiful, but also as gH to her - 


Verses 9-11. I have compared thee—For sco 


Thy cheeks, §c., with rows of jewels—Whieh being 
fastened to the heads of, brides, used to hang down 
upon their cheeks in those times. He mentions the 
cheeks, as the chief seat of beauty. Thy neck with 
chains ‘of 2 gold—Whereby, as well as by the rows 
of jewels, he may seem to design all those persons 
and things wherewith the church is made beautiful 
‘in the eyes of God and of men, such as excellent 
ministers and saints, righteous laws, holy ordinances, 
and the gifts and graces.of God’s Spirit. We—Tand 
my father; will make thee borders of gold—Beau- 
tiful and honourable ornaments, 

Verse 12. While the king—My royal husband ; 
sitteth at the table—With me in his ordinances. 
My spikenard—The graces of his Spirit conferred 
upon me, here compared to those sweet ointments, 
which the master Sf the feast caused to be Lb 
out upon the heads of the guests, (Luke vii. 3 
which ointments spikenard was a chief ingr often 
sendeth forth the smell thereof—This denotes the 
exercise and manifestation of her graces, which are 
a sweet-smelling savour in the nostrils of-her hus- 
band, and of her companions. 

Verses 13, 14. A bundle of myrth—Myrth was 
ever reckoned/among the best perfumes; shall le, 
&c.—This phrase may denote the church’s intimate 
union with, and hearty affection to Christ. My be- 
loved is as a cluster of camphire—We are not con- 
cerned to know exactly what this was; itbeing con- 
fessed that it was some grateful plant, and that it 
set forth that great delight which the church hath in 
the enjoyment of Christ; iz the vineyards of En- 
gedi—A pleasant and well-watered place in the tribe 
of Judah, where there were many pleasant plants. 

Verse 15. Behold, thou art fair—This is the 
speech of Christ.. The words are doubled to mani- 
fest his fervent affection for her. T'how hast doves’ 
eyes—Which are mild and harmless, chaste and 
faithful. And by the eyes he seems to ‘design both 
‘her outward berate and the inward disposition 
of her mind. ' 

Verses 16, 17. Behold, thou art fair—The church 


ae thou only, art fair indeed ; yea, pleasant— 
art omaestal j in thyself, so thou art amiable and 
4h 


>. * 2 


a 


a 
+ SS 


? _ 
oe 


here again speaks, and retorts Christ’s words ; og 


4 
" 


+} 


a 


~ apples: for I am sick of love. 


graces and blessings of Christ. 


The church rejoices in Christ. 


pleasant in thy condescension to me. Also, our bed 
~—-This seems to denote the place where the chureh 
enjoys sweet fellowship with Christ, by his Spirit 
accompanying his ordinances ; is green——Is pleasant, 
as that colour to the eye. J'he beams of our house 


a é 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


Her desire to please him. 


are cedar—Not only strong, but also fragrant and 
delightful; and our rafters of fir—Or, rather, as the 
ancients and others render Mn3, of cypress ; 
which also was strong and fragrant, and therefore 
suits well with cedar. 


Y 


CHAPTER II. 


Christ speaks of himself and his church, 1, 2. 


The church declares the delightful fellowship she had with Christ, 8,4. Re- 
joices in his favour, and takes care that nothing may displease him, 5+7. 


Triumphs in his love and gracious call, 8-18. 


Christ's care of the church, 14, 15. . Her faith and hope in him, 16, 17. | 


A. M. 2990. 


BC. 1014, [ AM the’rose of Sharon, and the 


lily of the valleys. 

2 As the lily among thorns, so is my love 
among the daughters. 

_3 As the apple-tree among the trees of the 
wood, so 7s my beloved among the sons. 11 
sat down under his shadow with great delight, 


_ *and his fruit was sweet to my * taste. 


4 He brought me to the * banqueting-house, 
and his banner over me was love. 
5 Stay me with flagons, *comfort me with 


—+ 


6 » His left hand is under my head, ety 2000. 
and his right hand doth embrace me. +—___~ 

7 °I° charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, 
by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that 
ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please. 

8 | The voice of my beloved! behold, he 
cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping 
upon the hills. ” 

9 «4 My beloved is like a roe, or a young hart : 
behold, he standeth behind our wall, he looketh 
forth at the windows, ®showing himself through 
the lattice. ; 


1 Hebrew, T delighted and. sat down, &¢.— Rev. xxii. 1, 2. 
? Heb. palate. * Heb, house of wine. 4 Heb. straw me with 


apples. 


b Chap. viii. 3.—5 Heb. I adjure you.——* Chap. 
iii. 5; viii. 4-4 Verse 17._—$ Heb. flourishing. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verses 1, 2. [am the rose of Sharon—These are 
the words of the bridegroom. e compares him- 
self to the rose and lily, for fragrancy and beauty. 
Sharon was a very fruitful place, and famous for 
roses. As the lily among thorns—Compared with 
thorns, which it unspeakably exceeds in glory and 
beauty; so is my love—So far doth my church, or 
»people, excel all other assemblies. The title of 
daughter is often given to whole nations. These 
are Christ’s words, to which the spouse makes the 
following reply. * 

Verse 3. As the apple-tree—Whose fruit is very” 
pleasant and wholesome; among the trees of the 
wood—Which are barren. J sat down under his 
shadow—I confidently reposed myself under his 
protection. His fruit was sweet to my taste—The 
benefits which I' received by him, namely, remis- 
sion of sins, faith, grace, and assurance of glory. 

Verses 4-6. He brought me to the banqueting- 
house—The places. in which believers received the 
His banner over 
me—By the lifting up whereof I was invited to come 
to him, and to list myself under him; was love— 
The love of Christ crucified, which, like a banner, is 
displayed in the gospel. Stay me—Or, swpport me, 
keep me from fainting. The spouse speaks this to 
her bride-maids, the daughters of Jerusalem: or 
to the bridegroom himself: with pies | 

h 


wine, which is'a good cordial: with apples—Wit 
odoriferous apples, the smell whereof was grateful 
42 a 


4 - 3, 


a 
¥- a wil »4 
» ae wv _— + ay 


to persons ready to faint. By these metaphors un- 
derstand the application of the promises, and the 
quickening influences of the Spirit. His left hand 
—No sooner did I cry out for help, but he was at 
hand to succour me. 

Verse 7. I charge you—This is spoken by the 
bride. By the roes—By the example of those 
creatures, which are pleasant and loving in their 
carriage toward one another; that ye stir not up, 
nor awake—That you do not disturb nor offend 
him; till he please—Neyer, as this word wntil, in 
such phrases, is commonly used. For neither can 
sin ever please him, nor can the church bear it, that 
Christ should ever be offended, or that her sweet 
fellowship with him should be interrupted. 

Verse 8. The voice of my beloved—Christ’s voice, 
the word of grace revealed outwardly in the gospel, 
and inwardly by the Spirit of God. Behold, he 
cometh leaping—She saith, leaping and skipping, 
to denote that Christ came readily and swiftly, with 
great desire’ and pleasure; and adds, upon the moun- 
tains and hills, to signify Christ’s resolution to 


come in spite of all difficulties. ; 


~ Verse 9. My beloved is like a roe—In swiftnéss. 
He is coming to me with all speed, and will not 
tarry a moment beyond the proper season. He_ 
standeth behind our wall—And while he doth, for 
wise reasons, forbear to come, he is not far from us. — 
Both this and the following phrases may denote the 
obscure manner of Christ’s manifesting himself to 
his people, under the law, in comparison of his dis- 


Christ's care of the church. 


CHAPTER If. 


Her faith and hope in him. 


A. M. 2990. 10 “| My beloved spake, and said 
B.C. 1014. : , 
—__— unto me, ° Rise up, my love, my fair 


one, and come away. 

11 For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over 
and gone; | 

12 The flowers appear on the earth ; the time 
of the singing of birds is come, and the voice 
of the turtle is heard in our land ; 

13 The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs, 
and the vines with the tender grape give a 900d 
smell. ‘ Arise, my love, my fair one, and come 
away. 

14 Y O my dove, that art in-the clefts of ane 


rock, in the secret places of the stairs, at in 
let me see thy countenance, *let me — 
hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy 
countenance 7s comely. 

15 Take us "the foxes, the little foxes, that 
spoil the vines: for our vines have tender 


grapes. 


16 4 ' My beloved is mine, and I am his; he — 


feedeth among the lilies. 

17 * Until the day break, and the shadows 
flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou ' like 
a roe or a young hart upon’ ‘the mountains ‘7 of 
Bether. 4 


x 


© Verse 13.— Verse 10.— Chap. viii. 13 -——» Psa. Ixxx. 
13; Ezek. xiii. 4; Luke xiii. 32. 


i Chap. vi. 3; -vii. 10.——* Chap. iv. 6——! Verse 9; Chap. viii. 
14. 7 Or, of division. 


coveries in the endl He looketh forth at the win- 
dow—This phrase, and that, through the lattice, 
intimate that the church does indeed see Christ, but 
as through a glass, darkly, as it is said even of gos- 
pel revelations, (1 Cor. xiii. 12,) which was much 
more true of legal administrations. 

Verses 10-13. My beloved spake—Invited me out- 
wardly by his word, and inwardly by his Spirit. 
Rise up, my love—Shake off sloth, and disentangle 
thyself more fully from all the snares of this world. 
And come away—Unto. me, and with me; follow 
me fully, serve me perfectly, labour for a nearer 
union, and more satisfying communion with me. 
The winter is past—Spiritual troubles, arising from 
a deep sense of the guilt of sin, the wrath of God, 
the curse of the law; all which made them afraid 
to come unto God. But, saith Christ, I have re- 
moved these impediments, God is reconciled ; there- 
fore cast off all discouragements and excuses, and 
come tome. The Song appear on the earth— 
The communications of God’s grace, the’ gifts, and 
graces, and comforts of the Holy Spirit, are vouch- 
safed unto, and appear in, believers, as buds and 
blossoms do inthe spring. The time of singing is 
come—When birds sing most freely and sweetly, as 
they do in spring. And the voice of the turtle 
is heard—This seems particularly to be mentioned, 
because it not only gives notice of the spring, but 
aptly represents the Spirit of God, which even the 
Chaldee paraphrast understands by this turtle, which 
appeared in the shape of a dove, and which worketh 
a dove-like meekness, and chastity, and faithfulness, 
in believers. he Jig-tree putteth forth her Sigs— 
Which it shoots forth in the spring; and the vines, 
§c., give a good smell—-Which, though not strong, is 
pleasant and grateful. 

Verse 14. O my dove—So the church is called, 
for her dove-like temper, and for her dove-like con- 
dition, because she is weak, and exposed to persecu- 


_tion, and therefore forced to hide herself in rocks; | 


in the secret places of the stairs—In the holes of 
craggy and broken rocks, which resemble stairs. 
3 


* 


Let mesee thy countenance—Be not afraid to appear — 


before me; let me hear thy voice—Thy prayers and 
praises. For sweet is thy voice, &e.—Thy person 
and services are amiable in my sight. 

Verse 15. Take us—The bridegroom gives this 
charge’ to his bridemen or friends. By whom he 
understands those magistratesand ministers to whom, 


; under Christ, the custody of the vineyards, of the 


churches, principally belongs. These he commands 
to take the foxes, to restrain them from doing this 
mischief; the fores—The disturbers of the vine- 
yard, or the church, namely, seducers or false 


teachers; the little fores—This he adds for more _ 


abundant caution, to teach the church to prevent 
errors and heresies in the beginnings; that spoil the 
vines—Which foxes do many ways, by gnawing 
and breaking the little branches and leaves, by dig- 
ging holes in the vineyards, and so spoiling the 
roots; for our vines have tender grapes—Which 
are easily spoiled, if great care be not used to pre- 
vent it. ; 

Verse 16. My beloved is mine—These are the 
words of the bride, who, having come to him upon 
his gracious invitation, now maketh her boast of him. 
He feedeth among the lilies—Abideth and refresh- 
eth himself among his faithful people, who are com- 
pared to lilies, verse 2. 

Verse 17. Until the day-break—Until the morn- 
ing of that blessed day of the general resurrection, 
when all the shadows, not only of ignorance, and sin, 
and calamity, but even of all ordinances, and out- 
ward administrations, shall cease. Turn, my be- 
loved—Return to me. For although Christ had 
come to her, and she had gladly received him, yet 
he was gone again, as is here implied, and evidently 
appears from the following verse. Which sudden 
change is very agreeable to the state of God’s people 
in this world, where they are subject to frequent 
changes; be thou like a roe—In swiftness; make 
haste to help me; wpon the mountains of Bether— 
A place in the land of promise, where it seems those 
creatures were in great abundance, - 


As 
. ir. 


The church seeks Christ, and 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


resolves not to displease him. 


4 # 


CHAPTER IIE 
The church seeks Christ, jinds him, and_ resolves not to displede him again, 1-5. 


Christ’s coming out of the wilderness ; 


his bed, guard, and chariot, 6-10. An invitation of the church to the kingdom of glory, 11. 


— M. 3027. 


“Bd BY* night on my bed I sought him 


whom my soul loveth ; I sought 
him, but I found him ftot. 

2 I will rise now, and go about the city in 
the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek 
him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but 
T found him not. 

3.>The watchmen that go about the city 
found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him whom 
my soul loveth ? 

A It was but a little that I passed from them, 
“but I found him whom my soul loveth ; I held 
_ him, and would not let him go, nou I had 
brought him | into my mother’s house, and into 


—" 
ee xh alsa. xxv. a Chap. v. 7. 


the chamber of her that conceived A. he: 9 a 
me. ses 
5%] cbatee you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, 
by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that 
ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please. 

6 4 ¢ Who is this that cometh out of the wil- 
derness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with 
myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the 
merchant ? 

7 Behold his bed, whichis Solomon’s: threescore 
valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. 

8 They all. hold swords, being expert in war: 
every man hath his sword upon his thigh be- 
cause of fear in the night. 


¢ Chap. ii. 7 ; viii. 4——4¢ Chap. viii. 5. 


— +i 


=f 


. NOTES ‘ON CHAPTER III. 
bi Verse L, By night on my bed—When others com- 
pose themselves to sleep, my affections were work- 
ing towardhim. Jsought him—I sought for Christ’s 
‘gracious and powerful presence, I sought him— 
This repetition denotes her perseverance and un- 
weariedness in seeking him; but found him not— 


_ For he had withdrawn the vet! See of his love 


_ from me, either because I had not sought him dili- 
gently, or because I had abused his favour. 

Verse 2. J will rise now—I will immediately 
apply myself to seek him, without whom my bed 
can give me no rest, nor comfort ; and go about the 
city—The city of God, the church in which Christ 
resides. And in the broad ways—-Not finding him 
in private prayer and meditation, I sought him in 
the places of public assemblies and ordinances; but 
£ Sound him not—He saw fit still to delay the dis- 
coveries of his grace. 

Verse 3. The watchmen—The ministers of Christ, 
and rulers of the church; that go about the city— 
To prevent disorders and dangers 3 fownd me— While 
they walked round about the city according to their 
duty: to whom I said, Saw ye him—She does not 
name him, because she thought it needless, as sup- 
posing a person of such transcendent excellence 
could not be unknown to men in that CHpACHY, 
Their answer is not mentioned, either because 
gave her no satisfactory answer, or, because by t 
silence she gathered that they were unable or 
willing to inform her; and being eager in the pur- 
suit, she would not lose time in impertinent dis- 
courses with them. — 

Verse 4, It was but a little, §c., but I found him 
—Christ met me, and manifested his love tome. J 
brought him into my mother’s house—As the spouse 
here signifies particular believers; so her mother is 
the universal church, or the true Jerusalem, which 
hath its rise from above, which is the mother of us 
all, (Gal. iv. 26,) in which Christ and believers are 

44 


funder "the notion of a wilderness: 


united, and have sweet communion together in holy 


ordinances, into which believers are said to bring 
Christ, by faith and prayer. Into the chamber of her 
that conceived me—Christ is, as it were, the father 
that begets, and the church, the mother that conceives 
and brings forth believers. 

Verse 6. Who is this, &c.—The persons speaking 
seem to be the daughters of Jerusalem, who, upon 
occasion of the bride’s speech to them, make this 
reply. The person spoken of is the spouse: that 
cometh out of the wilderness—Believers were to be 
called, not only out of the holy land, which was as 
the barden of God, but also out of the Gentile world, 
which, in prophetical writings, is frequently described 
ike pillars of 
smoke—Being conducted out of the wilderness as by 
a pillar. of smoke going before them, as the Israelites 
were led through the wilderness to Canaan, by @ 
pillar of cloud and fire: perfumed with myrrh— 
The spouse is said to be thus perfumed, for her ex- 
cellent virtues and religious services, which are 
pleasant and acceptable to God, and for the merits 
and graces of Christ, which are a sweet savour to 
God, wherewith she is enriched and beautified: with 
all the powders of the merchants—Which are 
fetched by the merchants from Arabia, or other re- 
mote parts. 

Verses 7, 8. Behold—The brid 1 continue 
their speech, and from the sdmiraon ot the bride, 
proceed to the admiration of the bridegroom: his 
bed—The bed seems to denote the church, which is 
comely through Christ’s beauty, and safe by his pro- 
tection, in which Christ is glorified, and believers 
enjoy ‘sweet fellowship with him. Solomon’s— 
Which is the bed, not of an ordinary man, but of a 
great king, whom Solomon typifies, and who is 
greater thanSolomon. ‘T'hreescore valiant men are 
about it—Very many, a certain number being put 
for an uncertain, He alludes to Solomon’s guard, 
whereby he designs ell those creatures, whether 

31% 


% 


Christ commends his church 


A. M. 2990. 
B. C.1 


9 King Solomon made himself .!a 
chariot of the wood of Lebanon. _ 
10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the 
bottom thereof of gold, the covering of it of 


CHAPTER IV. 


. 


Sor her very great beauty. 


. 
love, for the daughters,of Jerusalem. A. M. 2990. 
11 Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, 2° 1°'* 
and behold King Solomon with the crown where- 
with his mother crowned him in the day of hises- 


purple, the midst thereof being paved with 


pousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. 


= 


1 Or, a 


bed. 


angels, princes, ministers, or others, whose ministry 
God uses for the protection of his church. Every 
man hath his sword—Is prepared and ready to fight, 
to prevent those dangers which are frequent in the 
night season. The night may denote the whole time 
of this life, which may well be called night, in 
respect of that-ignorance and error wherewith it is 
attended, (as the future life is compared to day,) this 
‘life being the only time wherein such a guard is 
necessary. 

Verses 9, 10. King Solomon made a chariot—In 
which the royal bridegroom and bride might ride 
together in state, By this chariot he seems to un- 
derstand the word of Christ dispensed by his min- 
isters, wherein Christrides triumphantly in the world, 
conquering his enemies and subduing the world to 
the obedience of the gospel. . Of the wood of Leba- 
non—Of cedars, which wood being incorruptible, 
doth fitly signify the word of the gospel, which en- 
dureth for ever, 1 Pet. i. 25. He made the pillars 
thereof—There is no necessity that either this or the 
following particulars should be distinctly applied to 
several things in the gospel; this in the general may 
suffice, that as all the particulars are added to show 
the perfection and beauty of the chariot, so they 
imply that Christ’s word is every way amiable and 
perfect. The bottom thereof of gold—The under 
and lower part. Whereby he may seem to intend 


¢ 


the foundation of the word and promises, which is 
either God’s covenant, or Christ’s mediation, inwhom 
all the promises are yea and amen. The covering 
of it—The uppermost part of it. Zhe midst—The 
inward parts: being paved—Covered and adorned ; 
with love—The love of Christ to the sons of men. 
For the daughters of Jerusalem—F or their delight 
and comfort, who all bear a part in this marriage. 


Verse 11. Go forth--The church bids particular — 


believers go forth to see this sight. Behold, King 
Solomon—The Messiah, of whom Solomon Was an 
illustrious type. -With the crown—Which being 
applied to Solomon, may design that garland or 
crown which was usually worn in nuptial solemnities: 
but being applied to Christ, it denotes the honour that 


2 


was given him, which, though principally done by . __ 


his Father, yet is here ascribed to his mother, namely, 
the universal church, which, in respect to his hu- 


manity, may be called his mother, because he was | 
Ii 
|} the day of his espousals—When the church is mar- 


born in and of her, and one of her members. 
ried to him, which is done when the covenant is 
‘confirmed between them, or when persons are con- 
verted to Christ, and more completely when they 
are receivéd by Christ into his immediate fellowship 
in the kingdom of glory. And in the day of the 
gladness of his heart—When he rejoiceth over his 
bride. 


i 


CHAPTER IV. 


Christ commends his church for her beauty, 1-7. He calls her to go with ham, 8. Manifests his love and affection for her, 
9. A further commendation of her, 10-15. She prays for the effectual operation of his Holy Spurit on her to make her e 


fruitful, 16. 
A. M; ¥% EHOLD, *thou aré fair, my love ; 
= et behold, thou art fair; thou hast 


a >flock of goats, that appear from A. 
. B. 

mount Gilead. 
2 °'Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that 


M. 2990. 
C. 1014, 


doves’ eyes within thy locks; thy hair is as 


Chap. i. 15; \v. 12.— Chap. vi. 5. 
ae ON CHAPTER IV. 
Verse 1. Behold—These words are evidently 
spoken by the bridegroom; thou art fair—Being 
clothed with my righteousness, and adorned with all 
the graces of my Spirit. Behold, thou art fair— 
He repeats it both to confirm his assertion, and to 
show the fervency of his affection. Zhou hast 
dove’s eyes—Whereas the beauty of the spouse is 
here described in her several parts, we need not la- 
bour much about the application of each particular 
to some distinct grace of the church, it being the 
chief design of the description to show that com- 
pleteness and absolute perfection which the church 


“ee % 
? 


¥ 


1 Or, that eat of, $e. ¢ Chap. vi. 6. 


jath in part received, and shall more fully receive 
in the future life. Thy hair is as a flock of goats 
—-That is, as the hair ofa flock of goats, which in 
these parts was of extraordinary length, softness, 
and comeliness; that appear from ‘mount Gilead 
—A very fruitful place, fit for breeding all sorts of 
cattle, and especially of goats, because it was a hilly 
and woody country. 

Verses 2, 3.. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep— 
Numerous, and placed in due order: that are even 
and shorn—Smooth and even, as also clean and 
white. Whereof every one bears twins--Which 
seems to denote the two rows of teeth: and none is 


. 


¢. 


a. 


o 


$ 


% 


Nae 


ies 


Christ manifests his love to 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


and affection for the church. 


! - 2990. are even ‘shorn, which came up from 
. the washing; hereof every one bear 
twins, and none és barren among them. 

3 Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and 
thy speech is comely: “thy temples are like a 
piece of a pomegranate within thy locks. 

4 °Thy neck is like the tower of David, 
builded f for an armoury, whereon there hang a 
thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. 

5 £ Thy two breasts are like two young roes 
that are twins, which feed among the lilies. 

6 » Until the day *break, and the shadows flee 
away, I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, 
and to the hill of frankincense. 


ot in thee. 
me Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, 


‘3 Thou ar. all fair, my love; there is no 
a 


with me from Lebanon : look from the A. = ne: 
top of Amana, from the top of Shenir a 
kand Hermon, from the lions’ dens, from ‘the 
mountains of the leopards. 4 

9 Thou hast *ravished my heart, my sister, 
my spouse ; thou hast ravished my heart with 
one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 

10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse ! 
"how much better is thy love than ‘wine! 
and the smell of thine ointments than all 


spices ! 


11 Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honey- 
comb? ™ honey and milk are under thy tongue ; 
and the smell of thy garments is "like the smell 
of Lebanon. 

12 A garden ‘enclosed is my sister, my spouse ; 
a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. 


vl. 4%. © Chap: vii. 4.—f Neh. iii. 19. 
7.19 $ — vii. rete ii. 17. 
W027, 


2 Heb. breathe. 


tt 


. 5 
= See || 


k Deut. iii. 9. 2 Or, taken away my heart-——! Chap. i. 2. 
m Prov. xxiv. 13, 14; Chap. v. 1. 0 Gen. xxvii. 27; Hos. xiv. 
6,7, 4 Heb. barred. 


- & 34 re among them—Not one tooth is | ing. Thy 
speech is comely--Which is added as bo 9 ingre- 
- dient of an amiable person ; and to e e fore- 


a 


a 


, 


“going metaphor. The discourse of meer is edi- 
_ fying and comfortable, and acceptable to God, and to 
seriousmen. T'hy temples—Under which he eom- 
prehends the cheeks; are like a piece of pomegra- 
~nate—In which there i is a lovely mixture of red and 
white. 
- Verses 4, 5. T'hy neck—This may represent the 
grace of faith, by which we are united to Christ, (as 
the body is to the héad by the neck,) by which Chris- 
tians receive their spiritual food, and consequently 
their strength and ability for action; is like the 
tower—Upright, firm, and strong; and moreover, 
adorned with chains of gold, or pearl, or the like or- 
naments; of David—Some tower built by David, 
when he repaired and-enlarged his royal city, and 
used by him as an armory. Whereon there hang 
a thousand bucklers—Such as are reserved for the 
use of mighty men. A thousand is put indefinitely 
for a great number. Which Seed among the lilies—— 
In the fields where lilies grow. 

Verse 6. Until the day break, &c.--These words 
are uttered by the bride, (chap. iis17,) and here return- 
ed by the bridegroom as an answer to that request. 
And this place may be understood of the. di of 
glory, when all shadows and ordinances shall. a5 
I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, &c.—To 
my church upon earth, which was typified by the 
‘mountain of Moriah and the temple upon it. This, 
in prophetic writings, is called a mountain, and may 
well be called a mountain of myrrh and Ffrank- 
incense, both for the acceptable services which were 
there offered to God, and for the precious gifts and 
graces of the Holy Spirit, which are of a sweet- 
smelling savour to God and men. Thus Christ di- 
rects believers where they may find him, namely, 
in his church and ordinances. 


ww 
Verse 8. Come with me-—Unto the mountain of 


myrrh, mentioned verse 6. From Lebanon, my 
| spouse—This.is the first time that Christ gives her 


this name, which he does both to oblige and encou- 
rage he go with him. Look from the top of 
Am the place to which I invite thee to go, 

which fom those high mountains thou mayest easily 
behold. From the mountains of the leopards—From 
these or other mountains, which are inhabited by 
lions and leopards. This seems to be added as an 
argument to move the spouse to go with him, be- 
cause the places where now she was were not only 
barren, but also dangerous. h 

Verses 9, 10. My sister, my spouse—So he calls 
her to show the greatness of his love, which could 
not sufficiently be expressed by any one relation. 
With one of thine eyes—With one glance. One 
chain of thy neck-—With one of those other graces 
and perfections wherewith thou art adorned. How 
fair is thy love-—How amiable and acceptable to 
me. 
and graces of God’s Spirit, whersaa thou art 
anointed. 

Verse 11. Thy lips drop as the okey RRaNy 
speeches both to me in prayer and praises, and to 
men for their edification, are highly acceptable to 
me. Honey and milk are under thy tongue— 
Words more sweet and comfortable than honey or 
milk. The smell of thy garments—Of that right- 
eousness wherewith I have adorned thee ; is like the 
smell of Lebanon—Which was very sweet and 
grateful in regard of the great number of sweet- 


‘smelling spices and trees which grew on that 


mountain. 

Verse 12. A garden—For order and beauty, for 
pleasant walks, and flowers, and fruits; enclosed—= 
Defended by the care of my providence : and re- 
served for my proper use. A spring shut wp—To 
preserve it from all. pollution, and to a it for 


< 


The smell of thine ointments—Of the gifts - 


CHAPTER V. 


me he 
2% 
oF 


? 
bridegroom to his spouse. 


The address of the 
A. M. 2990. 
one 300 13 Thy plants are an orchard of 


pomegranates, with pleasant fruits ; 
Scamphire, with spikenard. 
14 Spikenard and saffron; calamus and cin- 
namon, with all trees of frankincense ; myrrh 
and aloes, with all the chief spices : ' 


5 Or, cypress, Chap. i. 14. 


€ 
- 


the use of its owner, for which reason springs were |! 


shut up in those countries were water was scarce 
and precious. 

Verses 13, 14. Thy plants are an orchard—Be- 
lievers, which are planted in thee, are like the plants 
or fruits of an orchard, which are pleasant to the 
eye, and delicious to the taste or smell, whereby he 
signifies the variety and excellence of the gifts and 
graces in the several members of the church. Spike- 
nard—Which he mentions here with camphire, and 
in the next verse with saffron, because it is mixed 
with both these, and, being so mixed, yields the more 
grateful smell. All trees of frankincense—Such 
trees as produce, frankincense. | 

Verse 15, A well of living waters--Though my 
spouse be in some sort a fountain shut up, yet that 
is not so to be understood as if she kept her waters 
to herself, for she is like a fountain of living or run- 


15 A fountain of gardens, awellof liv- te a 00. 
ing waters, and streams from Lebanon. a 

16 % Awake, O north wind; and come, thou 
south ; blow upon my garden, that the spices 
thereof may flow out. _? Let my beloved come 
into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. 


° John iv. 10; vii. 38——P Chap. v. 1. 


ning water, which flows into gardens, and makes its 
flowers and plants to flourish. The church conveys 
those waters of life, which she receives from Christ, 
to particular believers. And streams from Lebanon 
—Like those sweet and refreshing rivers which flow 
down from mount Lebanon, of which Jordan is one. 
Verse 16. Awake, O north wind, &c—These 
winds may signify the several dispensati s of God’s 
Spirit. Blow upon my garden—This verse isspoken 
by the spouse. And she calls the garden both hers 
and his, because of that oneness which is “between 
them, chap. ii. 16. That the spices may flow out-= . 
That. my graces may be exercised. Let my beloved — 
come into his. garden-—Let Christ afford his gra 
presence to his church ; and eat his pleasant fru , 
—aAnd let him delight himself in that service sence 
is given him, both by the religious worship, and by 


the holy conversation of his people. : 
4 . yt ~~ 


sy 


3 


7. 
Op ie 


CHAPTER V.° » 


Christ answers the church’s invitation, and shows her the delight he took in her fruit, 1 
to Christ in not opening the door, 2-6. Of the harsh usage she met with, 7. 


ts sick of love to Christ, 8. 
she boasteth, 16. 


A. M. 2990. 


«AM come into’ my garden, m 
B.C. 1014. y 8 Bai 


sister, my spouse: I have gathered 
my myrrh with my spice; >I have eaten my 
honey-comb with my honey ; I have drunk my 
wine with my milk: eat, O ° es drink, 


yea, drink abundantly, O beloved. 


2 41 sleep, but my heart waketh: it ¥s.the 


e acknowledges her neghgence 
She tells the daughters of Jerusalem she 


Their question concerning him, 9. A description of Christ by his graces, 10-15. In whom _ 


voice of my beloved 4 that knocketh, A 
saying, Open to. me, my. sister, my __* = 
love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is 
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops 
of the night. a“! ° 

3 Ihave put off my coat; how shall I put it on ? 
I have washed my feet; how shall I defile them ? 

+ 


a Chap. iv. 16.——» Chap. iv. 11.——* Luke xv. 7,10; John iii. 


29 ; xv. 14——! Or, and 


drunken with PS 20. 


_ NOTES ON-CHAPTER YV. 

Verse 1. J am'come into my garden—This is the 
bridegroom’s answer. J have gathered my myrrh, 
&ce—TI have eaten of my pleasant fruits; I have 
taken notice of, and delight in, the service and obedi- 
ence of my people. Eat, O frietide—Believers are 
here encouraged with freedom and cheerfulness to 
eat and drink their spiritual food. 

Verse 2. I sleep—I was dull and sluggish ; but 


my heart waketh—Y et in my very sleep my thoughts | 
run upon my beloved. Jt is the voice of my beloved | 


—Between sleeping and waking, I heard his voice ; | 
3 


i 


that knocketh—By ‘his word, and proyiagnee and 
Spirit, at the door of my heart ; saying, Open to 
me—Inviting me to let him into my soul; my sister, 
my love, &e.—This heap of kind compellations sig- 
nifies Christ’s fervent affection to his people. My 
head is filled with dew—While I wait without 

| door, which signifies his sufferings for the church’s 
good. My locks with the drops of the night—The 
dew which falls in the night.. 

Verse 3. I have put off my coat—My day clothes, 
as persons use to do when they go to rest. How 
shall I put it on?—It is inconvenient and trouble- 

47 


eal 


Zz 
Rb rd 


A description of 


SOLOMON S' SONG. 


ot 
the bridegroom. 


ere 2000. 4 My beloved put i 
_-— the hole of the door, a 
were moved ?for him. 

5 I rose up to open to my aoe and my 
hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with 
3 sweet-smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the 
lock. 

6 I opened to my beloved; but my beloved 
had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my 
soul failed when he spake: *.I sought him, but 
{ could not find him; I called him, but he gave 
me no answer. 

7 ‘The watchmen that went about the city 
found me, they smote me, they wounded me: 


hand by 
id my bowels 


the keepers of the walls took away my veil 
~ from 1 
3: . rge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if 


a Or, as some read, in me. 
e Chap. iii Chap. iii. 3.2 
SHeb) a standard- beater 5 Or, curled. 


_ 


‘" gf theron: or, running about. 
eb. what. s Chap. 1. 8. 


some to do it at this time. I have washed my feet 
—Which the eastern people commonly did eh 
they went to bed. 

Verses 4, 5... hole—He assayed to open the 
door. When his word would not prevail, his Spirit, 
which is called the finger of God, (Luke. xi. 20,) 
wrought inwardly upon my conscience.  M; y bowels 
were moved—With compassion for him and his suf- 

rings, and with affection to him. J rose—I went 

‘forth to receive him. My hands dropped with 
“myrrh——With oil or ointment made of myrrh, which 


dropped from the bridegroom’s hand upon the door | 


_--in great abundance, when he put it into the hole of 
the goor—And consequently upon her hands and 
ngers when’she touched the door to open it. By 
ich she signifies, that Christ, though he withdrew 
himself from her, yet left a sweet rd him 
Upon the handles of the lock-—-Hebrew, with myrrh 
passing, or flowing, upon the handles of the lock, 
which place the bridegroom had touched when 
he attempted to open it. d 
Verse 6. My beloved had withdrawn—Denied me | 
his comfortable presence, as a just punishment. for 
< former neglect. My y soul failed—Hebrew, went | 
m1 I fainted, and ready to die away ; 

en} he spake—Or, for what he spake; for those 


fia 


ye find my beloved, ‘that ye tell ‘him, A. M. 2990. 
that I am sick of feiss: pw ol 

9 “| What zs thy beloved more than another 
beloved, *O thou fairest among women? what 
is thy beloved more than another beloved, that 
thou dost so charge us? 

10 My beloved is white and a 5 the 
chiefest among ten thousand. 

11 His head is as the most.fine gold, his locks 
are ® bushy, and black as a raven. 

12 " His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the 
rivers of waters, washed with milk, and ” fitly 
set. 

13 His cheeks areas a bed of spices, as 
Ssweet flowers: his lips like lilies, dropping 
sweet-smelling myrrh. 

14 His hands are as gold rings set with the 


: 
Or 


we DS 3 cdvl. 7 Heb, sitting in fulness, that is, 


h Chap 
precious stone'in the foil of a ring. 


| placed, and set as a 
| towers of perfumes. 


of her relation to Christ. And so the taking of this 
veil away signifies their contemptuous usage of her, 


||and endeavours to represent aa as =" had 


no relation to Christ. 
ses 8,9. Icharge you, O ine &c.—The 
chur h having passed the watchmen, proceeds in 
the pursuit of her beloved, and inquires of every 
particular believer, whom ‘she meets, concerning 
him.. Zell him, that I am sick, &e. -—That I am 
ready to faint for want of his presence. What is 
thy beloved, &c., more than another—Wherein doth 
he excel them? Believers might ask this, that they 
might be more fully informed of it. c 
Verses 10-13. My beloved is white and ruddy— 
The white may denote his pure and spotless inno- 
cence, and the ruddy~colour, his bloody passion. 
His head is as the most fine gold—It shines like 
gold, by reason of the crown of pure gold upon his 
head. We need not aim at a distinct application of 
this and the following particulars unto some special 
'excellénces of Christ, because such things are mere 
conjectures, and the only design of this description 
is to set forth the beauty of Christ under the notion 
of a most amiable person, in. whom there is no de- 
fect or blemish, from the crown of his head to the 
sole of his fect. His eyes, the eyes of doves—Lovely 


endearing expressions relat erse 2, which then I 
did not heed. . J sought him--By diligent inquiry 
and importunate prayer. 

Verse 7. The watchman that went about the city 
—The governors of the church, who, though by 
their place they are obliged to comfort the faithful, 
do frequently discourage them. Fownd me, and 
smote me—With bitter calumnies and persecutions. 
The keepers of the walls--The same with the 
watchmen, whose office it is to keep the gates and 
walls of the city. Took away my veil from me-- 


and pleasant, chaste and innocent. By rivers of 
awaters—Where they delight to abide. Washed 
with milk—The doves, not their eyes, were of a 
white colour. -His cheeks—His face or countenance, 
an eminent part whereof is the cheeks; areas a 
bed of spices—Of aromatic flowers, which delight 
both the eye with a pleasant prospect, and the smell 
with their fragrancy. His lips are like lilies— 
Beautiful and pleasant; dropping sweet-smelling 
myrrh—Not only grateful to the eye, as lilies are, 

but also fragrant to the smell. 


Which was an ornament of her sex, and an ensign 
4 


y. 


ys 


Verses 14-16. His hands as gold rings set with 
3 


+ 


The.church confesses 


CHAPTER VI. 


her faith in Christ. 


A. M, 2990. 


ee at beryl: his belly is as. bright ivory 


- overlaid with sapphires. 
15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon 
sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as 


°Heb. His 


Lebanon, excellent as the cedars. A. M. 2900. : 


16 ° His mouth is most sweet: yea, rat ena 
he is altogether lovely. "This is my beloved, and 


this zs my friend, O daughters of fae 


palate. 


beryl—Beautiful and precious, and richly adorned, 
as it were, with gold rings set with precious stones; 
his belly as bright ivory—Which seems to be here 
used for the whole body, reaching from the neck to 
the bottom of the belly ; overlaid with sapphires— 
Of a pure and bright white colour, intermixed with 
blue veins; for some sapphires are of a bright blue 
colour. His legs as pillars of marble—White, and 
straight, and well shaped, and strong; set upon 
sockets of fine gold—His feet are compared to gold, 


i 


for their singular brightness, for which they are 
compared to fine brass, Rev. i. 15; his countenance 
—Hebrew, his aspect or appearance, his form or 
person; is as Lebanon, &c.—In respect of its 
cedars, tall, and upright, and, stately. He és al- 
together lovely—Not to run out into more particu- 
lars. Thisis my beloved, O ye daughters, &c. 
—And therefore you have no cause to wonder. if 
I am transported with love to so excellent a per- 
sonage. 


ies! 


iv 


‘CHAPTER VI. iy 


An inquiry after Christ, 1. The church’ s answer, 2. 


had been doing, 11. 

Ee atieae WHITHER 3 is thy beloved gone, 
* O thou fairest among women ? 

whither is thy beloved turned aside ? ae 
may seek him with thee. oe 

2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, 
to the beds of spices, to feed in the garden 
and to gather lilies. 

3 >I am my beloved’s and my beloved is 
mine: he feedeth among the lilies. : 

4 4 Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tir- 
zah, comely as Jerusalem, ° terrible as an army 
with banners. 


bead discovers his affection to her, 12. 


The church confesses her faith in Christ, 3. 
graces of his church, 4; and the beauty of her several parts, 5-10. He acquaints her where he had been, and what he — 


Christ’ shows the 


With an invitation of her to return to him meetin, 13., 2088 


5. 'Turnaway thine eyes from me, for A. M. 2990, 


. C, 1014. 


‘they have overcome me: thy hair zs 
“as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead. _ 

6 ° Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep. which 
go up from the washing, whereof every: one 
beareth twins, and there is not one barren 
among th < 

7 fAsa niece of a pomegranate are thy vomplae 
within thy locks. 

8 There are threescore queens, and fourscore 
concubines, and virgins without number. 

9 My dove, my undefiled is, but one; 


2Ch: i. 8. Ch. ii. 16; vii. 10——¢* Verse 10.—" Or, they 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verses 1,2. Whither is thy beloved .-—diame- 
ly, from thee: see chap. v. 6, 8. These are the 
words of the daughters of J erusalem, last mentioned, 
whom the preceding full and pathetical description 
of the bridegroom’s excellence had inflamed with 
love tohim. My beloved is gone into his garden— 
The spouse had hitherto been at a loss for her be- 
loved, but, having diligently sought him, now at last 
she meets with a gracious answer from God, direct- 
ing her where to find him. The garden may signi- 
fy the church catholic, and the gardens, as it fol- 
lows, as also the beds, the particular assemblies of 
the faithful, in which Christ affords his presence. 
To the beds of spices—In which the gifts and 
graces of God’s Spirit, fitly compared to spices, or 
aromatical flowers, appear and grow. To feed— 
To refresh and delight himself. To gather lilies— 
Which may denote either particular believers, whom 
Christ gathers to himself in his church, or the 

Vou. IIT. (4) 


¢ Ch. iv. 2——f Ch. iv. 3. 


have puffed me wp.—* Ch, iv. 1. 


| prayers and praises of his people in the public con- 


| gregations. 

lan Verse 4anUhon, art beautiful-—-These are the 
words of Christ, who had now again manifested 
himself to his chureh ; as Tirzah—A very plea- 
sant city, the reyal se ppt the kings of Israel ; come- 
ly as Jerusalem—W was beautiful, both "for its 
situation and for its g ‘aly buildings; ; terrible as an 
army, &c.—To her enemies, whom God will cer- 
tainly destroy. 

Verse 5. Turn away thine eyes from me—It is a 
poetical expression, signifying how beautiful the 
church was in Christ’s eyes. _7"hy hair, &c.—This 
clause and the whole following verse are repeated 
from chap. iv. 1, 2. And this repetition is not vain, 
but confirms what was said before, that the church’s 
miscarriage had not alienated Christ’s affection from 
her. 


Ps 
Verses 8, 9. There are threescore queens—A 


certain number for an uncertain. The sense seems 
3 


me P © 


s =. 


i 


she is 


« 


and 


A further description 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


‘ 


of the churcl’s graces. 


A.M. 2090. the only one of her mother, she’ is 
———— the choice one of her that bare her. 
The daughters saw her, and blessed her ; yed, 
the queens and the concubines, and they prais- 
ed her. — 

10 | Who is she that looketh forth as the 
morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, 
£ and terrible as an army with banners? _ 


11 I went down into the garden of nuts to 


see the fruits of the valley, and * tosee x 4 a 
whether the vine flourished, and the ———— 
pomegranates budded. 

12 * Or ever I was aware, my soul >made me 
like the chariots of Amminadib. 

13 Return, return, O Shulamite; return, re- 
turn, that we may look upon thee. What will ye 
see in the Shulamite? As it were the company 
* of two armies. ' 


sVerse 4, —1 Chap. vii. 12. 2 Heb. J knew not. 
on the chariots of my willing people. 


3 Or, set me 


tobe this: there are many beautiful queens and con- 
cubines in the world, in the courts of princes, butnone 
of them is to be compared with my spouse. My un- 
defiled is but one—The only beloved of my soul, 
my only spouse. J'heonly one of her mother--She 
is as dear and as precious to me as only children 
use to be to their parents, and especially to their 
mothers. T'he daughters saw her—Called virgins, 
verse 8. They praised her—As more beautiful 
and worthy than themselves. 

‘Verse 10. “Who is she, &c.—These are the words 
of the queens and concubines. Who—What manner 
of person is this, how excellent and glorious! that 
looketh Yorth as the morning—As the morning light, 
which, coming after the darkness, is very pleasant 
and amiable. Fair as the moon—Namely, when it 
is full, and walketh in brightness, Job xxxi. 26. 
Clear as the ou ithout any such spots or dark 
specks as are in the moon. Thus the church issaid 
to be without spot, or wrinkle, or blemish, (Eph. v. 
27,) which she is by God’s gracious acceptance of 
her, as such, in Christ, and through his merits and 
Spirit ; and terrible, &c.—See above, verse 4. 

Verse 11. Z went down—When I went. away 
from thee. These are the words of the bridegroom; 
to see the fruits of the valley—Which, being low, 

ell watered, is very fruitful. To see, &c.— 
What beginnings or appearances there were of good 
fruits or works among believers. 

Verse 12. Or ever I was aware—I was surprised 


* Or, of Mahanaim, Gen. xxxii. 2. 


with a vehement desire of my spouse, which is to 
be understood figuratively, and so as to agree with 
the majesty and omniscience of Christ. My soul 
made me, &c.—Eager in my desire, and swift in my 
motion toward the church. Amminadib is supposed 
to be some eminent charioteer then well known, and 
famous for his speed in driving chariots. ~ 

Verse 13. Return—Christ recalls his spouse, who, 
as when Christ was gone, she pursued after him, so 
now, when Christ was coming to her, she was ready 
to wander from him. Return—This word is, re- 
peated four times, to signify both Christ’s passionate 
love to her, and her wardness. .O Shulamite 
This title signifies the wife of Solomon, thus 
called after her husband’s name; see Isa. iv. 1; 
and as Christ is called by the name of Solomon, 
(chap. iii. '7,) so the church i described by the 
title of Solomon’s wife. 7% e may look wpon 
‘thee—That I and my companions may contemplate 
thy beauty. What will you see—But what do you, 
my friends, expect to discover in her? Christ pro- 
poses the question, that they might take special 
notice of this as a very remarkable thing in her. 
The company—Whereby he intimates, that this one 
spouse was made up of the whole multitude of be- 
lievers; of two armies—Confederate together, and 
so this may signify the union of Jews and Gentiles, 
and the safety and strength of the church, which is 
compared to a numerous host, distributed into two 
armies. ra 

» 


‘+s wy 


oi TBs . 


CHAPTER VIL. 


A further description of the chal s graces, 1-7. His design to visit the church, with the blessed effect thereof, 8,9. She 
professes her faith and desire, 10. She invites him to communion with her, 11. The end thereof, 12, 13. 


eo HOW beautiful arethyfeetwith shoes, 
oa *O prince’s daughter ! the joints of 


a Psa. 


——— 


“ae NOTES ON CHAPTER VIL. 

Verse 1. How beautiful are thy feet, &e.—The 
bridegroom, who spake the last words, here conti- 
nues his speech, and breaks forth into a particular 
description and commendation of the spouse, partly 

50 


~ 
- 


thy thighs are like jewels, the work of agave 
the hands of a cunnil workman. * = ———__— 


xlv. 13. 


from the. parts of her body, and partly from her or- 
naments. With respect to which the same thing isto 
‘be observed which was remarked concerning her 
description of the bridegroom, namely, that there is 
no necessity of a distinct application of every parti- 
( 4 ) ~ 

t 

° « 


# 


The church professes 


CHAPTER VII. 


her faith and desvre. 


A. M. 2990. 


aE 2 Thy navel is like a round goblet, 


which wanteth not ‘liquor; thy belly 
is like a heap of wheat set about with lilies. | 

3 > Thy two breasts are like two young roes 
that are twins. 

4 © Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine 
eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gate 
of Bath-rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of 
Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus. 

5 Thy head upon thee is like ? Carmel, and 
the hair of thy head like purple; the King is 
3 held in the galleries. 

6 How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, 
for delights ! 

7 This thy stature is like to a palm-tree, and 
thy breasts to clusters of grapes. ; 

8 Isaid, I will go up to the palm-tree, I will 
take hold of the boughs thereof: now also thy 


breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, 4 My pen 
and the smell of thy nose like apples; —— 

9 And the roof of thy mouth like the best 
wine for my beloved, that goeth down *sweetly, 
causing the lips ‘of those that are asleep to 
speak. 

10 4 *I am my beloved’s, and ° his desire is 
toward me. 

11 Come, my beloved, let us go forth into 
the field; let us lodge in the villages. 

12 Let us get up early to the vineyards; let 
us ‘see if the vine flourish, whether the tender 
grape °appear, and the pomegranates bud forth : 
there will I give thee my loves. 

13 The £ mandrakes give a smell, and at our 
gates » are all manner of pleasant fruits, new 
and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my 
beloved. * Ber 


© Ch. iv. 4. 2 Or, crimson. 
5 Or, of the ancient. 


+ Ch, iv. 5. 
4 Heb. straightly. 


1 Heb. mixture. 
3 Heb. bound. 


cular article of it, the design being only this, to de- 
scribe the beauty and glory of the church, under the 
representation of a beautiful and noble woman. This 
also is observable, that in the description of Christ, 
she begins at the dea, and so goeth downward, 
(chap. v. 11, &c.,) but Christ, in the description of the 
spouse, proceeds from the feet upward. With shoes 
—Shoes were iently evidences of a free and com- 
fortable state, whereas slaves and mourners used to 
go barefoot. ¥ 

Verse 4. Thine eyes like the fish-pools—Full, and 
clear, and quiet, and pleasant; in Heshbon—A plea- 
sant and well-watered city beyond Jordan; as the 
tower of Lebanon—Which was, in all probability, 
built by Solomon in the mountain of Lebanon, the 
northern border of the land of Israel; and therefore 
a very fit place for a watch-tower; which looketh to- 
ward Damascus—There was another tower or 
building, in or near Jerusalem, which was called the 
house of the forest of Lebanon, 1 Kings vii. 2. 

Verses 5,6. Thy head is like Carmel—Emi- 
nent and pleasant to the eye, and fruitful as mount 
Carmel was: which may denote that her mind wes 
replenished with knowledge, and other excellent 
gifts of the Holy Ghost. The hair of thy head 
like purple—Which colour was anciently much es- 
teemed. The king is held in the galleries—In 
which he walks, and, having once espied thee, is un- 
able to take off his eyes troll thee. How fair, $c., 
for delights—For those various and lovely features 
which are in thee. 

Verses 7,8. T'hy stature is like to a palm-tree— 
Tall and straight, or upright. And he seems to 
mention the palm-tree rather than any other, be- 
cause it is constantly green and flourishing, and 
grows upward in spite of all pressures. J said— 
Within myself, I resolved; J awill go up to the palm- 

3 


4Chap. ii. 16; vi. 3. 
§ Heb. open. 


€ Psalm xlv. 11. f Chapter vi. 11. 
& Gen. xxx. 14. h Matf xiii. 52. 


tree—Climb up, that so I may take hold of the 
boughs, which do not grow out of the sides, as in 
other trees, but only at the top of it. J will take 
hold, &e.—Partly to prune and dress them, and 
partly to gather the fruit. The smell, &e.—Of thy 
breath; which is often called the breath of a man’s 
nostrils. ' 

Verse 9. The roof of thy mouth—Thy speech, the 
palate being one of the principal instruments of 
speech ; like the best wine—Grateful and refresh- 
ing ; for my beloved—Who reapest the comfort and 
benefit of that pleasure which I take in thee. Caus- 
ing the lips, §c., to speak—The most dull, and stu- 
pid, and sleepy persons to speak. 

Verses 10,11. I am my beloved’s—This and the 
following verses contain the words of the bride, in 
answer to the bridegroom’s endearing expressions 
delivered in the foregoing verses. Let us go forth 
into the field—That, being retired from the crowd, 
we may more freely and sweetly converse together, 

Verse 12. Let us get wp early—The church hay- 
ing lost her beloved, by her former laziness, now 


doubles her diligence; to the vineyards—To parti- 
cular congregations. Let us see if the vines, &ce.— 
Let us inquire into the success of our labours, what 


souls are brought in and built up, and how they 
prosper and grow in grace. There will I give thee 
my loves—There I will discover the fervency of my 
affections to thee, and maintain communion with thee 
in thy holy ordinances. 

Verse 13. T'he mandrakes—This Hebrew word 
is used Gen, xxx. 14, 15, and the signification of it 
is very much doubted and disputed by interpreters. 
The word here signifies ayoatend pleasant flowers, 
and therefore if it be understood of mandrakes, they 
were of another sort than ours, as flowers of the same 
kind, in several climates, have very different natures 

51 


- 
— 


Commendation of the church 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


Sor her faith in Christ. 


and qualities. At our gates—Brought thither by di- 
vers persons to congratulate our nuptials. New and 
old fruits—Fruits of this year and of the former; 


which seems to be meant of the various fruits and 
operations of the Spirit, and degrees of grace in se- 
veral believers. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The church expresses her desire of familiarity with Christ, 1, by the entertanment she would make him, 2, 3.. She charges 
the daughters of Jerusalem not to disturb her beloved, 4. A commendation of the church for her faith in Christ, 5. She 
prays for full assurance of his love, through her invincible desire, 6. Which is insatiable, 7. The calling of the Gentiles, 


with their intent, and her condition, 8-13. 

A. M. 2000. O THAT thou wert as my bro- 
re Meee ther, that sucked the breasts of 
my mother! when I should find thee without, 
I would kiss thee; yea, 1I should not be 
despised. 

2 I would lead thee, and bring thee i into my 
mother’s house, who would instruct me: I 
would cause thee to drink of *spiced wine of 
the juice of my pomegranate. 

3 > His left hand should be under my head, 
and his right hand should embrace me. 

4 °I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, 
*that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, until 
he please. 


a Prov. ix. 2. b Chap. 


. Heb. they should not despise me: 
2 Heb. why should ye stir up, 


ii. 6——¢ Chap. ii. 7; iii. 5. 


Christ's coming prayed for, 14. 


5 *Who is this that cometh up from A. M. 2990. 
the wilderness, leaning upon her beloy- * chet 
ed? I raised thee up under the apple-tree: there 
thy mother brought thee forth: there she brought 
thee forth that bare thee. 

6 | °Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a 
seal upon thine arm: for love is strong as 
death; jealousy is *cruel as the graye: the 
coals thereof are coals of. fire, which hath a 
most vehement flame. 

7 Many waters cannot quench love, neither 
can the floods drown it: fifa man would give 
all the substance of his house for ye it would 
utterly be contemned. 


© Isa. xlix. 16; Jer. xxii. 24; 


or, why, §-ce.——4 Chap. iii. 6. 
£ Prov. vi. 35. 


Hag. xxii. 23.——* Heb. hard. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. 

Verse 1. O that thou wert as my brother—Most 
intimate, and free, and familiar with me, as brethren 
and sisters commonly are; that sucked the breasts 
of my mother—That came out of the same womb 
and sucked the same breasts, and were brother and 
sister by father and mother too: for such are gene~ 
rally most dear to one another. | The intent of these 
expressions, and of those in the three, following 
verses, is to signify the church’s earnest desire of a 
stricter union, and more intimate fellowship with 
Christ. When I should find thee without, &c.—In 
the open streets; I would kiss thee, &c.—And thus 
express my affection to thee openly, without fearing 
any scandal or contempt; such expressions being 
usual among persons so nearly and dearly related. 

Verses 2, 3. I would lead and bring thee—With 
joy and triumph, as the bridegroom was usually 
brought to the bride’s house ; into my mother’s house, 
who would instruct me—How I should behave 


myself toward thee: or, as the clause may be ren- 
dered, where she did instruct, or educate me. I) 
would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, &c.—-I 
would give thee the best. entertainment the house 
affords. My giftsand graces should all be employed 
to serve and glorify thee. His left hand, &e.—The 
same expressions are used chap. ii. 6, The sense is, 


i. 


- 


o 
He would not despise me for my forwardness in my 
affection to him, but would kindly accept of my love, 
and return it. 

Verse 5. Who is this, &c.—These seem tobe the 
wordsof the daughters of Jerusalem, or of the friends 
of the bride and bridegroom, admiring and congratu- 
lating this happy union: leaning upon sis 
—Which implies both great freedom and fa ity, 
and fervent affection and dependance upo my I 
raised thee up—These are Christ’s words: when 
thou wast fallen, and laid low, and dead in trespasses 
and sins, and in the depth of misery, I revived thee: 
Under the apple-tree—Under my own shadow: for 
she had compared him to an apple-tree, and declared, 
that under the shadow of the tree she had both de- 
light and fruit, (chap. ii, 3;) which is the same thing 
with this raising up. There—Under that tree, either 
the universal or the primitive church did conceive 
and bring thee forth. * 

Verses 6,7. Set me as a seal upon thy heart— 
These are undoubtedly the words of the bride. The 
sense is, Let thy mind and heart be constantly set 
upon me. Solomon seems to allude to the engraven 
tablets which were frequently worn upon. the breast, 
and to the signet on a man’s arm or hand, which they 
prized at a more than ordinary rate, and ‘which were 
continually in their sight. For love—My love to 

3 


CHAPTER VIII. 


of the Gentiles. 


The calling 
A.M. 2990. § | & We havea little sister, and she 


B.C. 1014. 
—————. hath no breasts: what shall we do for 


our sister in the day when she shall be spoken 
for ? 

9 Ifshe be a wall, we will build upon her a 
palace of silver: and if she be a door, we will 
enclose her with boards of cedar. 


10 I amawall, and my breasts like A. lad 
towers: then was I in his eyes asvone ,-__— 
that found ‘ favour. 

11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon ; 
*he let out the vineyard unto keepers; every one 
for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand 
pieces of silver. 


& Ezek. xxiii. 33,——* Heb. peace. 


h Matt. xxi. 33. 


thee, whence this desire proceeds, is strong as death 
—Which conquers every living thing, and cannot be 
resisted or vanquished. Jealousy—Or, zeal: my 
ardent love to thee, is cruel as the grave—Hebrew, 
nwp, is hard, grievous, and terribse, and sometimes 
ready to overwhelm me, and swallow me up; there- 
fore have pity upon me, and do not leave me. The 
coals thereof are coals of fire ~It burns and melts 
my heart like fire. Many waters cannot quench love 
—My love to thee cannot be taken off, either by ter- 
rors and afflictions, which are commonly signified 
in Seripture by waters and floods, or by temptations 
and allurements. Therefore, give me thyself, 
without whom, and in comparison of whom, I 
despise all other persons and things. 

Verse 8. We have a litile sister—These are still 
the words of the bride. The present church, which 
was that of the Jews, speaks of another future 
church, which was to consist of the Gentiles, which 
she calls little, because ‘she was the younger sister, 
and then, as a church, scarce had a being. A she 
calls her her sister, partly because she was such in 
the foreknowledge and purpose of God, their com- 
mon Father, though, at present, in a great measure, 
a stranger to him; and partly to intimate that this 
Gentile church should be admitted to the participa- 
tion of the same privileges with that of the Jews. 
And shehath no breasts—No grown and full breasts, 
as virgins have when they are ripe for marriage. 
This signifies the present deplorable state of religion 
among the Gentiles, and their want of the word and 
ordinances of God, the means of instruction and 
consolation, the milk’and food of life for themselves 
and their Sepa etd were neither married to 
the heavenly bridegroom, nor in a state to be mar- 
ried tohim. What shall we do for our sister ?— 
Namely, to fit her for this spiritual marriage ?, How 
shall we supply this defect.2? How shall we promote 
the conversion of the Gentiles, and their union with 
the promised Messiah? Jn the day when she shall 
be spoken for—When proposals of marriage shall 
be made from the King of heaven, and her consent 
shall be required ? 

Verse 9. If she be a wall, &c.—This and the fol- 
lowing verse are certainly very obscure, and it is, 
perhaps, impossible to ascertain the precise significa- 
tion of each of the terms or clauses used in them. 
The general meaning, however, of this verse is 
thought to be, that Christ engages himself to provide 
for her, in a way which should best suit with her 
condition. If the Gentiles, when they are converted, 
shall be like a wall, strong and firm in faith ; we— 

3 


my Father and I, as the principal builders, and my 
ministers, as workers with and under us, will build 
upon her a palace of silver+Willadd more strength 
and beauty to her, will enlarge and adorn her ; and 
if she be as a door—Which is weaker than a wall ; 

if she be weak in faith, yet we will not therefore 
reject her, but we will enclose, or (as many others 
render the word) strengthen, or fortify her with 
boards of cedar—Which are not only beautiful, but 
also strong and durable. , In other words, “ We will 
take care of her, in proportion as she is capable of 
receiving or profiting by our bounty, like as men are 
wont to build on good foundations.” The eastern 
people delight thus to express themselves by para- 
bles,or comparisons. ‘The bride’s answer in the next 
verse is thought to show that the bridegroom alludes 
to the sister’s degree of growth. 

Verse 10. Zam a wall, &c.—“ The ancient church,’ 
says Mr. Scott, “ seems here thankfully to reflect on 
her privileges ; she was, before the coming of the 
Messiah, as a wall built on the precious foundation, 
a part of the glorious temple that was to be erected ; 
and the lively oracles and ordinances which she en- 
joyed were her security, as wellas the sustenance . 
and comfort of her children: and she was thus dis- 
tinguished, because ‘hen (even when this difference 
originated,) she was in his eyes as one that found 
favour,and peace with him.” | Bishop Patrick, how- 
ever, considers these as the words of the little sister, in 
answer to those of Christ, “Iam such a wall, Iam 
no longer of a low and despicable stature, nor unfit 
for his love: but from this time forth I shall be ac- 
ceptable unto him, and find such favour with him, as 
to enjoy all the happiness which he imparts to those 
that are most dear unto him.” 

Verse 11. Solomon had avineyard at Baal-hamon 
—A place, according to Aben-ezra, not far, from 
Jerusalem, where many persons had vineyards, He 
let out the vineyard unto keepers—To farmers or 
tenants: to how many is not said; but the text sup- 
poses to several. Every one for the fruit was to 
bring athousand of silver—That is, shekels, supposed 
to be in value about two shillings and four pence 
halfpenny each: as much as to say, it brought hima 
vast revenue yearly. The words imply the great 
extent of the vineyard, which required so many 
keepers, and its singular fertility, which afforded so 
great arent. Thus Christ, typified by Solomon, had 
achurch ina very fruitful place, (Isa. v. 1,) under the 
means of grace. He appointed ministers to watch 
over, defend, and cultivate it; to dispense the word 
and administer the ordinances of God for the edifi- 


& 53 


. hing on Christ’s. ef 
reg Hebrew of this verse will admit of a different 


SOLOMON’S SONG. 


Sor Christ's coming. 


The church prays 
A.M. 2990. - 12 My vineyard, which is mine, is 


B.C. 1014. 
———— before me: thou, O Solomon, must 


have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit 
thereof two hundred. 
13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the 


1 Chap. ii. 14——* Rev. xxii. 17, 20. 

cation of its members. And each minister was to 
endeavour to the utmost of his power to promote 
the fruits of righteousness in every individual, to the 
honour and glory of the great proprietor of the whole. 
See notes on Isa. v. 1-7; and Matt. xxi. 33, 43. 

Verse 12, My vineyard, which is mine—My soul, 
may every true member of the church say, my 
heart and life, my time and talents ; or, my privileges 
and advantages, may the church in general say, 
which are committed to my trust, and for which I 
must be accountable; are before me—Under my 
continual care. Thou, O Solomon, must have a 
thousand—Thou, O Christ, must have the honour 


‘and glory: thou must receive returns of sowed 


love, and duty for the blessings thou hast bestowed ; 
thou must be served with the produce of the vine- 
yard, and of every plant therein. And those that 
keep the frutt thereof, two hundred—Those ministers 
that take pains with thy people to make them fruit- 
Tul, must have that reward and encouragement that 
“Ae due to them, 1 Cor. ix.7, They that give Christ 
his ee will also give ministers theirs; yet without 

It may be observed here 


transla ion, thus; My vineyard, which before brought 


_ me a thousand pieces,is now thine, O Solomon, and 


. 


. there are two hundred pieces for those who look 


after the fruit thereof. They who adopt this trans- 
lation suppose that the occasion of writing this book 
was taken from Solomon’s marriage of a beautiful 
person called Shulamith, (chap. vi. 13,) and generally 
supposed to be Pharaoh’s daughter: and that in’ her 
single state she possessed a vineyard, which upon 
her marriage became Solomon’s; because, though 
among the Jews it was usual for the husband to en- 
dow his spouse with a sum of money at their mar- 
riage, yet the bride also often brought a portion to 
her husband, as appears from Tobit x. 10. Now, 
supposing it to be a fact, that Solomon’s marriage 
gave occasion to this book, and that what has now 
. 54 


companions hearken .to thy voice: A. M. 2990. 
i B. C. 1014. 

cause me to hear it. : ee a 
~14 41 *Make® haste, my beloved, and !be thou 
like to a roe or to a young hart upon the moun- 
tains of spices. 


5 Heb. Flee away.—! Chap. ii. 17. 


been stated is the literal meaning of this verse; in 
the application of it to Christ and his church, we 
must say, as Solomon’s spouse gave her vineyard, or 
her whole property, to him on her marriage, so the 
church, the spouse of Christ, upon her marriage to 
him, gives him, not only herself, but her all, and 
retains a propriety or exclusive right in nothing 
She lays herself and her all at his feet. With her 
heavenly husband’s permission, however, she takes 
care to provide for those who are employed in cul- 
tivating and keeping the vineyard. For:while Solo- 
mon has the vineyard, two hundred pieces, arising 
from the produce of it, are reserved for those who 
look after the fruit thereof. For the labourer, said 
Jesus, is worthy of his hire: and he that is taught 
in the word must communicate unto him that teach- 
eth in all good things. 

Verse 13. Thou that dwellest—The word nawyn 
thus rendered, is in the feminine gender, which 
plainly shows that Christ speaks here to his spouse, 
being about to depart from her for a season, as the 
next verse shows; in the gardens—Not in the wil- 
derness of the world, for believers are called out of 
the world, (John xy. 19,) but in the church, the garden 
of God, which God hath fenced and appropriated to 
himself. -He saith, gardens, because of the many 
particular congregations into which the church is 
divided. Thecompanions—The friends of the bride 
and bridegroom; hearken to thy voice—Diligently 
observe all thy words, and thy whole conduct 
toward me, and all the transactions between thee 
and me. Cause me to hear thy voice—When I am 
gone from thee, let me hear thy prayers and 
and the preaching of my gospel in the work 

Verse 14. Make haste, my beloved—Se 
must part for a time, make haste, O m 
bridegroom, and speedily cae work w: 
hast to do in the world, that so thou mayest take me 
to thyself, that I may live i in vthine everiaating 
embraces, 


3 


a. 


x 


THE BOOK 


OF THE 


u 


PROPHET ISATAH. 


ARGUMENT. at 


WE are now come to a part of the Scriptures entirely different from those we have gone through; to 
a revelation of God’s word and will, delivered chiefly in prophetic visions: in which a multitude 
of symbolical representations, signifying things to come, and making known the will of God, and, 
in part, his counsels, were divinely impressed on the prophets’ minds; and‘this not only respecting = 
things near at hand, but those also that were to come to pass in distant ages. _“ Prophecy,” says. 
a learned and ingenious writer, ‘“‘ may be styled an influx. of the divine mind upon the human, to 
inform it of those things, or truths, with which before it was unacquainted, to the knowledge of 
which it could not attain by its own natural powers; and likewise to awaken within it, and clear 
up to it, those truths which are engraven on our very nature, how much soever they may be ob- 
secured.” Or, in the words of Joseph Albo, a famous Jewish rabbi, it is “ An influence from God 
upon the rational faculty, either by the mediation of the fancy or otherwise ; and this influence, 
whether communicated by the ministry of an angel or otherwise, makes a man to know such things, — 
as, by his natural abilities, he could not attain to the knowledge of.” This rabbi hath disting : 
prophecy into these four degrees: The first and lowest is, when the imaginative power is mos 
predominant, so that the impressions made upon it are too rapid and turbulent for the rational faculty. 
to discern the true mystical and spiritual sense of them clearly ; and, in this case, the prophe 
expressed themselves chiefly in parables, similitudes, and allegories, in a dark and obscure manner, 

"as is very manifest in Zechariah, and in many of Ezekiel’s prophecies. This declining state of 
prophecy the Jews suppose to have principally taken place when they were carried captive into 
Babylon. The second degree of prophecy is, when the strength of the imaginative and rational 
powers, equally balance one another. The third is, when the rational power is most predominant ; 

in which case, the mind of the prophet is able to strip those things that are represented to it in the 

of fancy, of all their materiality and sensible nature, and apprehend them more distinctly in 

own naked essence. The last, and highest, is the Mosaic degree ; in which all imagination 

es, and the Ten of truth descends not so low as the imaginatyig part, but is made in ~ 


ee 


_ the highest st f reason and understanding. 

In the former times of the Israelitish commonwealth, after Moses, the prophets, to whom God made 
known his will, and whom he raised up to reprove, warn, exhort, or instruct his people, delivered — 
their messages only or chiefly by word of mouth: we read but ome that was communicated in 
writing, and that was a message from Elijah to Jehoram, king of Israel, recorded 2 Chron. xxi. 12. 
The histories of those times, however, which are left us, were compiled by prophets, under a di- 
vine direction, and when the Old Testament is divided into the Law, ihe Prophets, and the Psalms ; . 
the historieal books are, for that reason, reckoned among the prophets ; Solomon’s writings, and 
some others, being classed with the Psalms. But, in the latter times of the kingdoms of Judah and 
Israel, some of the prophets were divinely inspired to write their prophecies, or abstracts of them, 
and to leave them upon record for the benefit of after ages, that “the children which should be 
born might praise the Lord” for them, and, by comparing the event with the prediction, might have 

their faith confirmed. And, as we have reason to think, these later prophets: spoke more fully and 
clearly of the Messiah and his kingdom than their predecessors had done ; probably, on that account, 
God inclined them to record their prophecies, in order that they might both afford encouragement 
to the pious Jews, that looked for the consolation of Israel, and might minister edification tous 
Christians, upon whom the ends of the world are come; as David’s Psalms had been written for 

55 


General view of the contents ISATAH. of the Book of Isaiah. 


the same reason; and that thus the Old and New Testaments might mutually give light and lustre to 
each other. It must be observed, however, that there were many other faithful prophets, at the 
same time, who spoke in God’s name, and did not commit their prophecies, or any part of them, to 
writing, but who were, nevertheless, of those whom God raised up and sent, partly to assist the 
pious and faithful priests and Levites in teaching the people, and partly to supply the lack of service 
of such as were unfaithful and negligent. And the contempt of them, and the other prophets, and 
of their messages, in the end, brought ruin, without remedy, upon that senseless and infatuated 
people, who knew not the day of their visitation. 

The holy prophets, who wrote their prophecies, and whose writings are contained in the sacred Serip- 
tures, are sixteen. Of these Isaiah is first in place, and, as seems probable, in time also. Or, if 
Hosea began to prophesy and write before him, Isaiah certainly began soon after, as is evident by 
comparing Isa. i. 1, with Hosea i. 1; and he appears to have prophesied above sixty years, com- 
puting from the year in which Uzziah died, when he seems to have been first solemnly called to the 
prophetical office, (see chap. vi. 1,) to the end of Hezekiah’s reign, whom he is said to have out- 
lived. St. Jerome, in his preface to this book, tells us he was of noble birth; and the Jews 
say he was of the ‘plod royal of Judah. That, how ever, is uncertain. But undoubtedly he was 
the prince of all the prophets, whether we considér the great extent and variety of his prophecies, 
the excellence and sublimity of those mysteries which were revealed to him and by him, the majesty 
and elegance of his style, the noble metaphors and striking imagery wherewith he illustrates and 
adorns his writings, or the incomparable liveliness and power of his sermons. He is universally 
and justly esteemed the most eloquent of all the prophets. Grotius compares his eloquence to that 
of Demosthenes. “In the prophet-we meet with all the purity of the Hebrew tongue, as in the 
orator all the delicacy of the Attic taste. Both are sublime and magnificent in their style, vehement 
in their emotions, copious in their figures, and very impetuous when they set off things of an enor 
mous nature, or which are grievous and odious. Whatever of its ancient sweetness and sublimity 
the Hebrew poetry preserves, it is all to be found in this exquisite book.” See Bishop’ Lowth’s 
admirable translation of it, with the Preliminary Dissertation and notes annexed. It is the con- 
stant tradition, both of Jews and Christians, that Isaiah was put to death with a saw at the begin- 
ning of the reign.of Mannasseh; to which the apostle is generally thought to refer, Heb. xi. 37. 

The great and principal objects of Isaiah’s proplhfecies are, the captivity of Babylon, the return of the 
Jews from this captivity, and the reign of the Messiah, whose Bon, offices, sufferings, and king- 
_ dom he so evidently and fully describes, that some of the ancients called him the fifth evangelist. 
- And, accordingly, it is observable, that there are Pa og \ se in the New Testament taken out 
of this book than out of the books of all the other prophets, ‘I divide the book of Isaiah,” says 
Vitringa, “into eee prefixed to it, and the matter contained in it. ‘The matter is two-fold, pro- 
phetical and historical, which are interwoven together. ‘The prophetical,is divided into five parts ; 
the first of which, from the first chapter to the thirteenth, contains five prophetic sermons, imme- 
diately directed to the Jews, and ae the Ephraimites, whom the prophet variously reproves, 
exhorts, consoles. ‘The second part, from the thirteenth to the twenty-fourth chapter, contains eight 
sermons, in which the fate of other nations is declared.. The third part, from the twenty-fourth 
chapter to the thirty-sixth, explains the penal judgments denounced by God upon the disobedient 
Jews, and the enemies of the church, with the most ample promises given to the true church; and 
is ‘comprehended i in three sermons. The fourth part, from the fortieth chapter to the forty-ninth, 
sets forth, in four sermons, of a consolatory kind, the manifestation of the Messiah in the ne 
with its circumstances and effects, and the signs ‘preceding it; particularly the deliverance of the ra 
Jewish Church from their exile in Babylon. The fifth part exhibits, in five seri , from the forty- 
ninth chapter, the fate and events of Jesus Christ, his person and kingdom; with which this most 
noble prophecy closes. The historical part relates some notable events of those times, in which 
God was pleased to make use of the ministry of Isaiah, and, beginning with the thirty-sixth, ends 
with the thirty-ninth chapter.” Or, according to another, perhaps still more accurate division of 
the sections of this book, in the first five chapters the prophet describes the corruptions of Judah, 
admonishes them what would be the fatal consequences of their sins, and most pathetieally exhorts 
them to amendment of life, showing that, without it, all sacrifices, and the niost exact observance 
of the outward ceremonies of religion, were vain. But, amidst the terrible evils that he denounces 
against those that continued in sin, he promises God’s peculiar protection and happiness to the 
righteous ; and, to comfort them, intersperses promises of a return of far better times, taking into 
this view the glorious times of the gospel which were es the divine dispensations. In the 
six following chapters he promises, in the name of the Lord, the deliverance of Jerusalem, then 
besieged by the Syrians in confederacy with Israel, and denounces’ the speedy destruction of both 
those kingdoms ; but, at the same time, he foretels the future destruction of Judah by the Assyrians, 

dgpneh it was to be delivered from its present calamities. From the thirteenth to the twenty-ninth 

pter are prophecies against several kingdoms; namely, Babylon, the.Philistines, Moab, Damas- 

cus, Egypt, Kedar, Arabia, Tyre, Samaria, and the ten tribes; against all which he denounces 
56 3 


The vision of Isaiah CHAPTER I. concerning Judah and Jerusalem. 


God’s severe judgments, but interspersed with indications of future mercy to them in bringing them 
to the knowledge of himself. From the twenty-ninth to the end of the thirty-fifth chapter are 
prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, by the Babylonians, but mixed with con- 
solatory promises of future happiness. ‘The thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh, and thirty-eighth chapters 
contain an account of Sennacherib’s invasion of Judea, and the sickness of Hezekiah, which hap- 
pened at the same time; that history being a key to explain several passages in the foregoing 
prophecies ; for he had foretold this siege of Jerusalem, and when it came to pass, though things 
seemed reduced to the last extremity, declared, that the city would be delivered from it, without 
receiving the least damage ; and that the author of it, Sennacherib, would be followed with exem- 
plary punishment from God. The fortieth and four following chapters contain a discourse in 
demonstration of the existence and perfections of Jehovah, the only living and true God, of the 
truth of the Jewish religion, and of the folly and vanity of idolatry, with some promises of the 
coming of the Messiah. In the four following chapters he foretels the reign of Cyrus, and the de- 
liverance and return of the Jewish people from their captivity at Babylon. From the forty-ninth 
chapter to the end are more express prophecies of Christ, of the kingdom he would establish among 
men, of his sufferings and future glory, of the preaching of the gospel, and the calling of the Gen- 
tiles to the knowledge of the true God. 

St. Jerome says of Isaiah, that his writings are, as it were, an abridgment of the Holy Scriptures; 
and that the instructions they give in morality and divinity are highly excellent. Certainly this 
prophet corrects with so much power, admonishes and exhorts so pathetically, describes the true 
nature of religion and virtue, and exposes all false notions of them, in so strong and clear a manner, 
that this book of his will be eminently useful to pious minds in all ages, for conviction of sin, and 
direction in duty ; and we cannot read it, with due attention, without being greatly profited thereby. 
It may be proper to add here, that Bishop Lowth considers Isaiah as delivering all his visions, 
prophecies, or messages from God in Hebrew poetry, like the song of Israel at the Red sea, that 
of Deborah, recorded Judges v., or the Song of Moses, Deut. xxxii., on which see the notes. 


» . Sail 


CHAPTER I. 

In this chapter we have Judah’s sins, 1-4. Her judgments, 5-9. The rejection of her worship, 10-15. Exhortatwns to 
repentance, promises of mercy and grace, threatenings of sore judgments, and complaints by reason of their back- 
sliding, 16-31. Dr. Taylor, in his Scripture Divinity, observes, that this chapter, “ by reason.of its grand exordium, 
might be judged proper to stand at the front of the book ; but that it gives such an account of the distressed, desolate state 
of the land, as agrees much better with the wicked and afflicted reign of Ahaz, than with the flourishing circumstances of 
the country in the reigns of Uzziah, and of his son and successor Jotham ; who were both, in the main, good princes.” 
Compare chap. i. 7-9, with 2 Chron. xxvi. 1-16, and xxvii. 1-6. 


eee HE *vision of Isaiah the son|j cerning Judah and Jerusalem in Ke 
Ra es Sha ‘of Amoz, which he saw con-||the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, ——— 
‘ * * ~ 2Num. || xii! 6. A 7 


— 


xxxii. 32; where the book of Isaiah is cited by this 


% NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 


Verse 1. The vision of Isaiah—“ It seems doubt- 
ful,” says Bishop Lowi “whether this title belong 
to the whole book, or only to the prophecy contained 
in this chapter. The-former part of the title seems 
properly to belong to this particular prophecy: the 
latter part, which enumerates the kings of Judah, 
under whom Isaiah exercised his prophetical office, 
seems to appropriate it to the whole collection of 
prophecies delivered in the course of his ministry. 
Vitringa, to whom the world is gréatly indebted for 
his learned labours on this prophet, has, I think, 
very judiciously resolved this doubt. He supposes, 
that the former part of this title was originally pre- 
fixed to this single prophecy; and that when the 
collection of all Isaiah’s prophecies was made, the 
enumeration of the kings of Judah was added, to 
make it, at the same time, a proper title to the whole 
book. And such it is plainly taken to be, 2 Chron. 

3 


¥ 


; reader must observe, 


title.’ Thus understood, the word vision is used 
collectively for visions, and the sense is, “‘Thisis the 
book of the visions, or prophecies, of Isaiah.” The 
“he two usual ways, whereby- 
God communicated his will to the prophets, were 
visions and dreams: see Num. xii. 6. In visions, 
the inspired persons were awake, but their external 
senses were bound up, and, as it were, laid asleep in 
atrance. Thus Balaam describes them as to him- 
self, Num. xxiv. 16. They are called visions, not 
from any use made of corporal sight, but because of 
the clearness and evidence of the things revealed, 
and the conformity-of this kind of inspiration to the 
information which the mind receives by the sight of 
the bodily eyes. Hence, also, prophets were calle 
seers, 1 Sam. ix. 9. Sometimes, however, Visio 
were accompanied with external representations, 
See chap. vi. 1; Ezek. xl. 2; Rev. xxi. 10. See notes 
57 


4 


ip 


The sins and 


he ve og and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. 
————_ 2 » Hear, O heavens, and give ear, 
O earth: for the Lorp hath spoken: °I have 
nourished and brought up children, and they 
have rebelled against me. 

3 ¢'The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass 
his master’s crib: but Israel * doth not know, 
my people f doth not consider. 

4 Ah sinful nation, a people ‘laden with ini- 
quity, £a seed of evil-doers, children that are 
corrupters! they have forsaken the Lorn, they 


» Deut. xxxii. 1;, Jer. ii. 12; vi. 19; xxii. 29; Ezek. xxxvi. 
4; Micahi. 2; vi. 1, 2. ¢ Chapter v. 1, 2. 4 Jer, viii. 7. 
e Jer. ix. 3, 6. £ Chap. v. 12.—" Heb. of heaviness. 


ISAIAH. 


judgments of Judah. 


have provoked the pas: One of Israel x meets. 
unto anger, they are *gone away back- ; 
ward. 

5 “| » Why should ye be stricken any 
more? ye will *revolt more and more: the 
whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 

6 From the sole of the foot eyen unto the 
head there is no soundness in it; bu¢ wounds, 
and bruises, and putrifying sores: 4+they have 
not been closed, neither bound up, neither mol- 
lified with * ointment. 


& Chap. lvii. 3,4; Matt. iii. 7. 2 Heb. alienated, or, sepa- 
rated, Psa. lviii. a er Chap. ix. 13 ; Jer. 11.30; v. 3——? Heb. 
increase revolt—— Jer. viii. 22,——* ‘Or, oil. 


on Isaiah, by Wm. Lowth, B.D. Which he saw— 
Foresaw and foretold. For he speaks, after the 
manner of the prophets, of things to come, as if 
they were either past or- present. - Concerning 
Judah--Principally, but not exclusively. For he 
prophesies also concerning Egypt and Babylon, and 
divers other countries ; yet with respect to Judah. 
In the days of Uzziah, &c—In the time of their 
reign. This, probably, was not the first vision which 
Isaiah had, but is placed at the beginning of his book, 
because, together with the four following chapters, 
it contains a general description of the state of the 
Jews, under the several judgments which God had 
brought upon them, and is a fit preface or introduc- 
tion to the rest of his prophecy. 

Verse 2. Hear, O heavens, &c.—‘ God is intro- 
duced as entering upon a solemn and public action, 
or pleading, before the whole world, against his diso- 
bedient people. The prophet, as herald, or officer, 
to proclaim the summons to the court, calls upon all 
created beings, celestial and terrestrial, to attend and 
bear witness to the truth of his plea, and the justice 
of his cause.’—Bishop Lowth. See the same scene 
more fully displayed, Psa. 1.3, 4. With the like in- 
vocation Moses begins his sublime song, Deut. xxxii. 
1; seealso Mich. vi. 1, 2. For the Lord hath spoken 
—Or, It is Jehovah ie speaketh, as Bishop Lowth 
renders it, there seeming to be an impropriety in de- 
manding attention to a speech already delivered. J 
have nourished, &c.—I first made them a people, 
and, until this time, I have pene and blessed 
them above all other nations; God’s eare over them 
is compared to that of parents in nursing and train- 
ing up their children. And they have rebelled 
against me—Or, as °1\ywD may be rendered, have 
revolted from ime—Even they, peculiarly favoured 
as they have been, have proved deserters, nay, trait- 
ors, against my crown and dignity. This is the 
Lord’s plea against them, of the equity of which he 
is willing that all the creatures should be judges. 

Verse 3. The ox knoweth his owner, &c.—In these 
words the prophet amplifies “the gross insensibility 
of the disobedient Jews, by comparing them with 
the most heavy and stupid of all animals, yet not-so 
insensible as they. Bochart has well illustrated the 
comparison, and shown the peculiar force of it. ‘He 


sets them lower than the beasts, and even than the 
stupidest of all beasts; for there is scarce any more 
so than the ox and the ass. Yet these acknowledge 
their master ; they know the manger of their lord ; 
by whom they are fed, not for their own, but his 
good ; neither are they looked upon as children, but 
as beasts of burden; neither are they advanced to 


‘honours, but oppressed with great and daily labours. 


While the Israelites, chosen by the mere favour of God, 
adopted as sons, promoted to the highest dignity, yet 
acknowledged, not their Lord and their God, but de- 
spised his com ments, though in the highest de- 
gree equitable and just.’” See a comparison of Jere- 
miah, chap. viil. 7, to the same purpose, equally ele- 
gant, but not so forcible and severe as this of Isaiah. 

Verse 4. Ah, sinful nation—The prophet bemoans 
those who would not bemoan themselves; and he 
speaks with a holy indignation at their degeneracy, 
and with a dread of the consequences of it. A pec- 
ple laden with iniquity—Laden, not with the sense 
of sin, as those described Matt. xi. 28, but with the’ 
guilt and bondage of sin. A seed of evil-doers— 
The children of wicked parents, whose guilt they 
inherit, and whose evil example they follow ; chil- 
dren that. are corrupted—Hebrew, Mn-nwn, that 
corrupt, namely, themselves, or their ways, or 
others, by their counsel and example: or, that de- 
stroy themselves and their land by their wickedness, 
They have Sorsaken the Lord-—Not indeed in pro- 
fession, but in practice, and therefore in reality, ne- 
glecting or corrupting his worship, and refusing to 
be subject and obedient to him. They have pro- 
voked the Holy One, &c.—They have lived as if it 
were their great design and business to provoke him. 
They are gone away backward—Instead of proceed- 
ing forward, and growing in grace, which was their 
duty, they are fallen from their former professions, 
and have become more wicked than ever. Dh 

Verses 5,6. Why should ye be stricken any more 
—It is to no purpose to seek to reclaim you by one 
chastisement after another ; ye will revolt more and 
more--I see you are incorrigible, and turn even your 
afflictions into sin. he whole head ts sick, &e:— 
The disease is mortal, as being in the most noble 
and vital parts, the very head and heart of the body 
politic, from whence the plague is derived to all the 

3 
- 


The vanity and 


CHAPTER T. 


hypocrisy of Israel. 


A. M. 3244, 


7 * Your country zs desola 
B. C. 760. UY 34 bor Nour 


cities are burned with fire: your land, 
strangers devour it in. your presence, and i¢ is 
desolate, °as overthrown by strangers. ‘ 

8 And the daughter of Zion is left. ! as a cot- 
tage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of 
cucumbers, ™ as a besieged city. 

9 » Except the Lorp of hosts had left unto us 
a very small remnant, we should have been 
as °Sodom, and we should have been like unto 
Gomorrah. 


10 4 Hear the word of the Lorp, A, M. 3244. 

i B. C. 760. 

ye rulers Pof Sodom: give ear unto ——— 
the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah. 

11 To what purpose is the multitude of your 
4 sacrifices unto me? saith the Lorn; I am full 
of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed 
beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bul- 
locks, or of lambs, or of ° he-goats. 

12 When ye come 7to™ appear before me, 
who hath required this at your hand, to tread 
my courts ? 


k Deut. xxviii. 51, 52. 5 Heb. as the overthrow of strangers. 
1 Job xxvii. 18.——® Jer. iv. 17——" Lam. iii. 22; Rom. ix. 29. 
o Gen. xix. 24.—? Deut. xxxii. 32; Ezek. xvi.46. —— 1 Sam. 


xv. 22; Psa. 1. 8,9; li. 16; Prov. xv. 8; xxi. 27; Chap. Ixvi. 3; 
Jer. vi. 20; vii..21 ; Amos v. 2], 22; Mic. vi. 7.——® Heb. great 
he-goats, 7 Heb, to be seen.——t Exod. xxiil. 17 ; xxxiv. 23. 


other members. “The end of God’s judgments, in 
this world, is men’s reformation ; and when peo- 
ple appear to be incorrigible, there is no reason to 
expect that he should try any further methods of 
discipline with them, but consume them all at once.” 
From the sole of the foot, &c.—“ The whole frame 
of the Jewish Church and state is corrupted, and their 
misery is as universal as their sin which caused it.” 
—Lowth. 

Verses 7, 8. Your country is desolate—“'The de- 
scription of the ruined and desolate state of the coun- 
try, in these verses,” says Bishop Lowth, “does not 
suit with any part of the prospe times of Uzziah 
and Jotham. It very well agrees with the time of 
Ahaz, when Judea was ravaged by the joint invasion 
of the Israelites and Syrians, and by the incursions 
of the Philistines and Edomites. The date of this 
prophecy is therefore generally fixed to the time of 
Ahaz.” Strangers devour it in your presence— 
Which your eyes see to torment you, when there is 
no power in your hands to deliver you. As over- 
thrown, &¢.—)3993, as the overthrow; of stran- 
gers—That is, such as strangers bring upon a land 
which is not likely to continue in their hands, and 
therefore they spare no persons, and spoil and de- 
stroy all things, which is not usually done.in wars be- 
tween persons of the same or of a neighbouring na- 
tion. And the daughter of Zion is left—Is left 
solitary, all the neighbouring villages and country 
round about it being laid waste. As a cottage—Or, 
as a shed in a vineyard, as Bishop Lowth trans- 
lates it, namely, “a little temporary hut, covered with 
boughs, straw, turf, or the like materials, for a shel- 
ter from the heat-by day, and the cold and dews by 
night, for the watchman that kept the garden, or 
vineyard, during the short season while the fruit was 
ripening ; see Job xxvii. 18; and presently removed 
when it had served that purpose.’”—See Harmer, 
Observ. i. 454. | 

Verse 9. Except the Lord had left us a rem- 
nant—If God, by his infinite power and goodness, 
had not restrained our enemies, and reserved some 
of us, we should have been as Sodom—The whole 
nation of us had been utterly cut off, as the people of 
Sodom and Gomorrah were. So great was the rage 
and power of our enemies, and so utterly unable 

3 


aa 


were we to deliver ourselves. This remnant was 
“a type of those few converts among the Jews, who, 
embracing the gospel, escaped both the temporal and 
eternal judgments which came upon the rest of the 
nation for rejecting Christ and his messengers,” 
Rom. ix. 2, and xi. 5.—Lowth. 

Verse 10. Hear the word of the Lord—I bring 
a message from your Lord and governor, to whom 
you owe all reverence and obedience ; ye rulers of 
Sodom—So called for their resemblance of them in 
wickedness. Compare Deut. xxxii. 32; Ezek. xvi. 
46, 48. “The incidental mention of Sodom and 
Gomorrah in the preceding verse, suggested to ‘the 
prophet this spirited address to the rulers and inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem, under the character of princes 
of Sodom and people of Gomorrah. Two examples, 
of an elegant turn, of the like kind, may be observy- 
ed in St. Paul’s epistle to the Romans, chap. xv. 
4,5, and 12, 13."—Bishop Lowth. Give ear unto 
the law of our God—The message which I am 
now to deliver to you from God, your great law- 
giver. Ee 

Verses 11, 12. To what purpose, §c., your sa- 
crifices unto me ?—Who am a Spirit, and therefore 
cannot be satisfied with such carnal oblations, but ex- 
pect to be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and to 
have your hearts and lives, as well as your bodies 
and sacrifices, presented untome. J delight not in 
the blood, &c.—He mentions the fat and blood, be- 
cause these were, in a peculiar manner, reserved for 
God, to intimate that even the best of their sacrifices 
were rejected by him. ‘The prophets often speak of 
the ceremonies of Moses’s law as of no value, with- 
out that inward purity, and true spiritual worship, 
and devotedness to God, which were signified by 
them. This was a very proper method to prepare 
the minds of the Jews for the reception of the gos- 
pel, by which those ceremonies were to be abolished. 
When ye come to appear before me—Upon the 
three solemn feasts, or upon other occasions. Who 
hath required this at your hand?—The thing I 
commanded was not only, nor. chiefly, that you 
should offer external sacrifices, but that you should 
do it with true repentance, with faith in my pro- 
mises, and sincere resolutions of devoting you es 
to my service. 

69 


Exhortations and 


ISAIAH. 


threatenings. 


f — = a 


a ea 13 Bring no more ‘vain oblations: 
: ~ incense is an abomination unto me; 
the new-moons and sabbaths, ‘ the calling of 
assemblies, I cannot away with; itis °i iniqui- 
ty, even the solemn meeting. 

14 Your * new-moons and your * appoint: 
ed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble 
unto me: Iam weary to bear them. 

15 And * when ye spread forth your hands, I 
will hide mine eyes from you; * yea, when ye 


— 


®make many prayers, I be not heat: your 
hands are full of ° blood. 
16 % ° Wash ye, bn you clean: 


“put away the evil of your doings from be- 


5 Matt. i. 5, 9. « Numbers. 


+ Joel i. 14.>—* Or, grief. 


fore mine eyes; ‘cease to do evil; A Pe. 
cis n to do well; *seek ‘Fail: a=. 
nt, relieve the oppressed, judge the father- 
ie, paced for the widow. a 
18 Come now, and ‘let us reason together, 
saith the Lorp: though your sins be as scar- 
let, &they shall be as white as snow; though 
they bered like crimson, they shall be as wool. 
19 If ye be willing and pico ve shall eat 
the good of the land: __ o 
20 But if ye refuse and rebel, - shall be 
devoured with the sword: "for the mouth of the 
Lorp hath spoken it: . 


=) g.i ‘How i is the faithful city baa a har- 


taiJer. i iv. 14.——4 Psa. xxxi 


14; Xxxvil. 27; Amos v, 15; 


xxvill. 11. x Lev. xxiii..2; Lam, ii. 6——yY Chap. xliii. 24. || Rom. xii.9; 1 Pet iii. 11. ¢ Jer. xxii. 3,16; Mic.vi. 8; Zech. 
2 Job xxvii. 29 ; es CXXxiv. 2; Prov. i. 28; Chap. lix. 2; Jer. || vii. 9 ; vill. 16. ——"! Or, righten——t a 26; Mic. vi, 2. 
xiv. 12. Ps, Ixvi. 18; 1 Tim. ii. 8° Heb. multiply roller: 5 Ps. ii. 7; Rev. vii. 14. —b Num. xxiii Tit..i. 1 2— er. 
> Chap. lix. 3. 10 Heb. bloods, Z ii. 20, 21. 

—- —, noe = — 


Verse 13. Bring no more vain oblations—I nei- 
ther desire, nor will accept of any on these terms. 
Incense is an abomination to me—So far is it from 
being a sweet savour to me, as you foolishly ima- 
gine. T'he new moons—Which were holy to God, 
and observed with great solemnity; the calling of 
assemblies—-At all other solemn times, wherein the 
people were obliged to meet together. I cannot 
away with--Hebrew, 9218 x5; I cannot endure + it 
is grievous to me. It is iniquit y—lIt is so far from 
pleasing me, that it is an offence to me: and, instead | 
of reconciling me to you, which is your design, it, 
provokes me more against you; even the solemn | 
meeting—The most solemn day of each of the three 
feasts, which was the last day, which was called by 
this very name, 77x)’, Lev. xxiii. 36; Num. xxix. 
39, and elsewhere ; although the word be used some- 
times more generally of any other solemn festival 
day. Perhaps the great day of atonement was es- 
pecially intended. Bishop Lowth renders it, theday 
of restraint, certain holy days, ordained by the law, 
being distinguished by a particular charge, that “no 
servile work should be done therein.” This cireum- 
stance clearly explains the reason of the name, the 
restraint, given to those days. . 

Verse 15. When ye spread forth your hands— 
When ye pray with your handsspread abroad, as the 
manner was; J will hide mine eyes from you—I 
will take no notice of your persons or requests. 
Your hands are full of blood—-You are guilty of 
murder and oppression, and of other crying sins, 
which I abhor, and have forbidden under pain of my 
highest displeasure. 

Verses 16,17. Wash ye, make you clean—Re- 
pent, and do works meet for repentance: cleanse your. 


mine eyes--Reform yourselves thoroughly, that you 
may notonly approve yourselves. to men, but to me, 
who search mo hearts and try all your actions. 
Learn to do well—Begin, and inure yourselves, to 
live soberly, righteously, and godly. Seek judgment, 
&c.—Show your religion to God, by practising justice 
and mercy to mens Judge the fatherless, &ce.—Deli- 
ver and defend those that are poor and helpless,and lia- 
ble to be oppressed by unjust and potent adversaries. 

Verses 18-20. Come now, let us reason together 
—The word 7n31) is properly understood of two 
contending parties arguing a casé; or, as Bishop 
Lowth translates it, pleading together ; but here it 
seems to import also the effect, or issue of such a de- 
bate, namely, the accommodating their differences. 
Though your sins be as scarlet—Red and bloody 
as theirs were, mentioned verse 15; great and hei- 
nous; they shall be white as’ snow--God, upon 
your repentance and reformation, will pardon all that 
is past, and look upon you with the same grace and 
favour as if you had never offended, your sins being 
expiated by the blood of the Messiah, typified by 
your legal sacrifices. It is a metonymical expres- 
sion, by which sins are said to be purged, as Heb. i. 
3, when men are purged from their sins, Heb, ix. 
14. If ye be willing and obedient—If you be 
heartily willing and fully resolved to obey all my 
commands; ye shall eat the good of the land— 
Together with the pardon of your sins, you shall re- 
ceive temporal and worldly blessings. But if ye re- 
fuse and rebel—If you obstinately persist in your 
disobedience to me, as hitherto you have d ye 
shall be devoured with the sword——With theater 
of your enémies, which shall be commissioned to 
destroy you, and with the sword of God’s justice, 


hearts and hands from all filthiness of flesh and spi-|| his wrath and vengeance, which shall be drawn 
rit, and do not content yourselves with your ceremo- || against you; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken 


nial washings: . He refers to the charge preferred 


it—And he will surely make it good for the main- 


in the preceding clause, and alludes to the legal puri- || taining of his own honour. 


fications commanded offwaverat occasions: see Lev. 


xiv, 8, 9, 47. 


Verse 21. How is the faithful city—Jerusalem, 


Put away the evil, §&c., from before || which in the reign of former kings was faithful to 
60 3 


se 


“ae 


Degeneracy of the people. 


CHAPTER I. 


Promises of restoration. 


ro - 2 lot! it was full of judgment; right- 
——— eousness lodged in it; but oy, mur- 
derers. : 

22 *Thy silver is become dross, thy wine 
mixed with water : 

23 ''Thy princes are rebellious, and ™com- 
panions of thieves: ™ every one loveth gifts, and 
followeth after rewards: | they °judge not the 
fatherless, neither doth the cause oh. the widow 
come untothem. ) 

24 Therefore saith the Lord, the Lorp of 
hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, ? J will ease 
me of mine adversaries, and a me of mine 
enemies : Su - 

25 And I will turn my hand upon 1 thee, and 


se 
* Jer. vi. 28, 30 ; Ezek. xxii. 18, 19——! Hos. ix. 15,——™ re 
xxix. 24,— Jer. xxii. 17 ; Ezek. xxit. 12; Hos. iv. 18. —o Ji 
vy. 28; Zechariah vii. 10. 
12 Heb. according to pureness. 


P Deut. xxviii. 63 ; Ezaki, 13. 


é 


God; become a harlot—Filled with idolatry, called 
whoredom in the Scriptures. Jt was full of judg- 
ment, &c.—Judgment was truly and duly executed 


in all its courts, and righteousness, or justice, lodg-| 


ed, or had its seat in it; but now murderers—Un- 
der that one gross kind, he comprehends all sorts of 
unrighteous men and practices. 

Verses 22, 23. Thy silver is become dross—Thou 
art wofully degenerated from thy former purity. 
Thy wine mired with water—If there be any re- 
mains of religion and virtue in thee, they are mixed 
with many and great corruptions. J'hy princes are 
rebellious—Against me, their sovereign Lord; and 
companions of thieves—Partly by giving them con- 
nivance and countenance, and partly by ‘practising 
the same violence, and cruelty, and injustice that 
thieves used to do. 
is, bribes given to pervert justice. 

Verse 24: Ah, I will ease me, &c.—This is an ex- 
pression borrowed from men’s passions, who find 
some sort of ease and rest, in their minds upon 
venting their anger on just occasions, or in bringing 
offenders to condign punishment. Thus God, 
speaking after the manner of men, represents him- 
self as feeling satisfaction in executing justice upon 
obstinate and incorrigible offenders. _ Compare 
Ezek. v. 13, and xvi. 42, and xxi. 17. But let it be 
observed, God is never said to take pleasure in the 
punishment of any, but those who have filled up the 
measure of their iniquities. 


s 25, 26. And I will turn my hand upon thee 
chastise thee again, and thereby reform thee: 


- >= = 
——— 


Every one loveth gifts—That | 


\|'? purely? purge away thy dross, and A. M. 3244. 
take away all thy tin: eat Dida 
26 And I will restore thy judges ‘as at the 
first, and thy counsellors as.at the beginning : 
afterward *thou shalt be called, The city of 
righteousness, the faithful city. 

27 Zion shall be redeemed with judg- 
ment, and ™ her converts with righteous- 
ness. * 

28 {| And the ‘destruction™ of the trans- 
gressors and of the sinners shall be together, 
and they that forsake the Lorp shall be con- 
sumed. 


29 For they shall be ashamed of "the oaks 


\* _ader. vi. 29; ix.7; Mal. iii. 3——* Jer. xxxiii. 7.——* Zech. 
viii. 3. 13 Gr, they that return of her. t Job xxxi. 3.; Psa. i. 


«Ch. 


6; v. 6; Ixxiii. 27 > xcii. 9; civ: 35. 


14 Heb. breaking. 
lvil. 5. x Chap. Ixv. 3 5, ixvi. 17 


as thou hadst in the beginning, either, Ist, Of thy 
commonwealth, such as Mosesand Joshua: or, 2d, Of 
thy kingdom, such as David. And thy counsellors 
—Thy princes shall have, and shall hearken to, wise 
and faithful counsellors. Afterward thou shalt be 
called—Namely, justly and truly, the city of right- 
eousness, &¢.—Thou shalt besuch. “The reforming 
of the magistracy,” says Henry, 
toward the reforming of the city and country too.” 

Verses 27, 28. Zion shall be redeemed—Shall be 
delivered from all their enemies and calamities; with 
judgment—By the exercise of God’s strict justice in 
destroying the obdurate; by purging out those 
wicked and incorrigible Jews, who; by their sins, 
hindered the deliverance of the ple; and by 
punishing and destroying their unmerciful enemies 
who kept them in cruel bondage; a er converts 
—Hebrew, 71, her returners, _ them who 
shall come out of captivity into their own Jand; 
with righteousness—Or, by righteousness ; either by 
God’s faithfulness, in keeping his promise ot deliv er- 
ing them after seventy years, or by his goodness; 
for both these qualities come under the name of 
righteousness in the Scriptures. And, or rather, 
but, the destruction of the. transgressors, &c., shall 
be together—Though I will deliver my people from 
the Babylonish captivity, yet those of them who 
shall still go on in their wickedness, shall not have 
the benefit of that mercy, but shall be reserved for 
a more dreadful and total destruction. 

Verse 29. For they shall be ashamed—He does 
not speak of an ingenuous and penitential shame for 


or, I will do that for the reviving pee which || sin, but of an involuntary and penal shame for the 


I did at first for the planting of it. purge away 
thy dross—I will purge out of thee those wicked 
men that are incorrigible, and, as for those of ay 
that are curable, I will by my word, and by the fi 
nace of affliction, purge out all that corruption t 
yet remains in you. And I will restore thy IF uices, 
&c.—I will give thee such princes and magistrates ‘| 


4 ? 


° 


disappointment of the hopes which they had placed 
in their idols; of the oaks which ye have desired— 
)) Which, after the manner of the heathen, you have 
consecrated to idolatrous uses. ° Of what particular 
| basen the trees here mentioned were, cannot be de- 
termined with certainty. The Hebrew word 7x, 
here used, is rendered ilex by Bishop Lowth, which 
61 


which ye have desired, *and ye shall be con- © 


“is a good step 


a“ 


A prophecy of m tie OY _ISAIAT, bay a ae ee 


> M. aa founded for the gardens that ye bate 


Se He 


chosen. - 
30 For ye shall be as an oy whose leat 
and asa garden that, hat h no w rat aie i ; 


cant 


© Y Ezek, xxii, 21 ——*Chap. x 1 


properl ly means the scarlet oak, Others think the |! wo 
terebinth-tree was intended. And ye beet be ‘con-|} Ly 


Sounded for the gardens, &c.—In w , as ig ' 

in the grov , practised idolgier g see Is ong 9 wisest, str 

3; and Ixvi. “Sacred groves, reader wil jlo ri ink to secure 
observe, ss Aes a very ancient and fa e append- || the ~ ea je lan a their 
“age of idolatry. They were furnished with the || ,¥ power, and mmue they 
temple of the god to whom they were dedicated ; oe woe n elpless; shall 19" Shall 


with altars, images, and every thing necessary fo ‘or || I 


. performing the various rites of worship offere d 
there ; and were the scenes of many impure conte 
monies, and of much abopinab ie tition. TI 
made a principal part of the religion of the old 
habitants of Canaan ; : the Israelites were ¢ 


wo ig .* 2 i 3 4. 
Christ's kingdom. 


Bt y ieee shall be? as tov ce 

‘end the maker of it as a ark, ie: te 
Il both burn ae nd none née shall 
them. ae ‘ee : ie 


sf ~ 380r, and his work 


= —: 2 


is is oie 
we would 
baste elause.” 


A eg which 
d enter into the 


be as si and e 
nents as tow is by the 
T e.m 
elf nor his acetate ae 3 as a 
: by his sin he shall bring him 


as. 713° ear , may be rendered, his w 


manded to destroy their groves, among other mont come a spark, shall be the cause of his uc- 
ments of their false worship. The Israelites th ce tion. isis ords are elegant, and th ng of 
selves, however, became afterward very - much: - || them ie. rich, the powerf great, 
dic sto this s species of idolatry” Bsc p fheant by the word yonn, which we res strong,) 
285; Hos. iy, 13.- Bishop Lowth. _ || who seemed like a lofty and well-rooted oak, shall 

Voie For ye shall be as anoak, &e.—As fn ds with their works ; for their works, their great 
have sinned under the oaks and in the gardens, so || and wicked undertakin bes bye he yhad sought 
you shall be like unto oaks and gardens, not when || safety, like sparks, ae emo nilgend consume 


_they are on and flourishing, but when they wither 
and dec This verse is remarkably elegant, 
mayyhieh, what was the pleasure and confidence of 
those idolaters, is made to denote their punishment. 
“ All the gardens in the East,” says a late writer, 
“have water in them, which is so absolutely 
necessary, that without it every thing, in summer, 

: 


te 
& 


them like tow. They shall perish, like fools, by their 
own devices. The very works themselves, which 
they had raised for the glory and preservation of 
themselves and their republic, shall be turned into 
the very cause of theirdestruction. Vitringa thinks 
the prophet alludes to the destruction of their state 
and temple by the Romans.”—Dodd. 


i 


a 


CHAPTER IL. 
A prop of Christ’s kingdom, and the calling of the Gentiles, 1-5; and rejection of the Jews for their idolatry and 


pride, 6-9. 
not to trust'in man, 10~22. 
A. M, 3244. HE word that Isaiah the son of 
B. C. 760. 
oe Ea Amoz saw concerning Judah and 
Jerusalem. 


The great majestyand power of God, and his terrors on the wicked ; with an exhortation to fear God, and 


2 And *it shall come to pass ?in the A. " 
last days, ° that the mountain of the Gr. 
Lorp’s house shall ' be established in the top of 


a Mic. iv. 1, &c.——» Gen. xl. 1; Jer. xxiii. 20. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

’ Verse 1. The word that Isaiah saw—T he mat- 
ter, or thing, as the Hebrew word, 1277, commonly 

gnifies; the prophecy or Vision, He speaks of 
the prophecy contained in this and the two following 
chapters, +h makes one continued discourse. 
“The first five verses of this chapter foretel the 
kingdom of the mie, ae conversion of the Gen- 
tiles, and their admission intoit. From the 6th verse 
to the end of this second chapter is foretold the pun- 

62 


| Sion, 


¢ Psa. Ixviii, 15, 16.—— Or, prepared. , 


ishment of the unbelieving Jews for their ido us 
practices, their confidence in their own stren md 
distrust of G protection: and, moreover, the de- 
struction of idolatry in consequence of the estab- 
lishment of the Messiah’s kingdom. The whole 
third chapter, with verse io the fourth, is a pro- 

y e calamities of Babylonian invasion 
am cy with a particular amplification of the 
distress of the proud and. luxurious daughters of 
Chap. iv. 2-6, promises to the remnant, 

. 3 


* % 


.« 


4 


A. M. 3244. mountains, and shal 
ee ic pte rene ¥ 
pti it. 
many 
let us go 
= to the house ane he 


aoaee 


4 Psa. lxxii. 8 ; “as axxvii. 132 
viii. 2 


. A? % 
ad ~ 
| ae Pe 
yee 


| t Luke xxiv. 47,—s Ponhs. ae. . alos: _,.* Zechoteah 


od 


? 


Christ's ee 2 


s paths: ffor out of 
h the law, and the word of the 


orp from Jer 
a And he shall fade. among the einen, and 
rebuke n “many peoples and they shall 


fac: : 


‘there. established, It never happened, du 
‘ages that inte ened between thi e of Isaiah and 
‘deliver the destruction of their city and temple, and the di 
ra to || persion of their nation by the Romans, that their ~~ 
d he pro- religion was so exalted, or made such great account 


27 


segs sr pul ey 
, Pia d protec 


as, in sit 
of his aes 
r days) i 


3.” —Bisho 


last 
are alway 
ecause they are the last times and a2 
rch, Christ’s institutions being to conti 
of the world. See Joel ii. - 28, ‘4 pared |): 
17; Mic. iv. 1, compar ith 
1 Pet. i. 20. The J ews, it must be observed, divided 
the times or succession of the world into three ages 
or periods: the first, before the law ; the second, 
under the law; the thi, under the Messiah: 
which they ivy enoidered d asthe last dispensation, 
designed of to remain till the consummation of 
all things.. “Accordingly St. Paul tells us, that 
Christ appeared ex: ovrte2eca Twv awwvev, at the con- 
summation of the ages, or several periods of the 
world, Heb. ix. 26; and, speaking of his own times, 
saith, teAq tov awvor, the ends of the world, or con- 
clusion of the ages, are come, 1 Cor.x. 11. The 
‘mountain of the Lord’s house—Mount Moriah, on 
which the Lord’s house stood, or rather, * Lord’s 
house upon that mount, shall be established wpon 


the top of the conics th be raised above, be 


ys—The times of the Messiah, 


rendered more conspic han, and shall be pre- 
ferred before, all other mountains on which houses 
are built, and altars erected and dedicated to any god 
or gods. The prophet speaks figuratively. He 
means, that the worship of the true God should be 
established on the ruins of idolatry, that the true re- 
ligion should swallow up all false religions, and the 
chur of God, typified by the temple at Jerusalem, 
be most eminent and conspicuous, as a city on 
a high mountain: and shall be exalted above the 
hills—Above all churches, states, and kingdoms in 
the world, and all that is excellent and glorious 
therein. T'hestone cut out of the mountain, without 
hands, shall ‘become itself a mountain, cyid shall 
fill the whole earth, Dan. ii. 34, 35. And all nations 
—FEven the Gentile nations; shail flowunto it—Shall 
come in great abundance and with at eagerness 
to embrace the true religion, and- become members 
of the true church, ike ro %treams, or mighty 
rivers, flowing swiftly and impetuously toward 
ocean, as the word *93, here used, signi Noy 
it is well known, this was not the case respect 
to the Jewish Church at Jerusalem, or the worship 
3 


a * 
» 


oken of by the prophets as the}! phee: 


eb. i. 15) 


‘thereby al 


God, and in church fellowship. But this pro- 
has been in a great measure fulfilled with + 

o the Christian Church, which has so drawn 

e greater part of the civilized nations, that it has 

ssed all other ee ee 


heathen, ae edan: and ° 
e four ving s, spoken of Dan. . 


5, and vii. 19-27, shall bedestroy d 
yemoyed, it sal ly 


g 


bstructio 
and perfectly accomplished, andthe king under 
the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the 
Most High. For the Messiah shall h dominion 
from sea to sea, and from the river een of * 
the earth: yea, all kings shall fall down before hi 
and all nations shall serve him, Psalm Ixxii, 8, 11 
Verse 3, And many people shall go—Shall not 
only have some weak desires of going, but shall take 
pains, and actually go; and say, Come, &c.—Yea, 
such shall be their zeal, that they shall not only go 
themselves, but shall persuade and others to go 
with them. And we will walk in his paths—Thus 


they show the truth of their conve by their 
hearty desire to be instructed in the way of worship- 
ping and serving God acceptably, and by their firm 


purpose of practising the instructions given. For 
out of Zion shall go forth the law—The law, 
the doctrine of the gospel, which is frequently called 
a laa, because it hath ‘the nature and power of a law, 
obliging us no less to the belief and practice of it 
than the old law did; and the word of the Lord— 
For the accomplishment of this promise, see Luke 
xxiv. 47; Actsi.8; Rom. x. 18. This last clause 
shows the reason why the people should be so for- 
ward to go, and to invite others to go with them. 
Verse 4. He shall judge among the nations—He 
shall set up and exercise his authority, in and over 
all nations, not only giving laws to them, as other 
rulers do, but doing that which no others can do, 
convincing their consciences, changing their heat 
and ordering their lives; and shall rebuke ma 
people—By the power of his word, pared to a 
wo-edged sword in Scripture, and » e grace of 
his Spirit, convincing the world of sin: as also by 
the remarkable judgments which he will execute on 
those that are incorrigible, and y on those 


able as of || of, ‘iw any nations remote or near, as is here ex-. | 

i : much, less did whole nations flow unto. 

nd—Or rather, now, it shall come to || | em, or unite themselves with them in the service 
0 


The rejection of the Jews 


ISATAH. 


= 
pride. 


for their idolatry and 


—. -—— 


A.M. wale beat their swords into plough-shares, | 

: and their spears into *pruning-hooks : 
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, 
» neither shall they learn war any more. 

5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us ‘ walk 
in the light of the Lorp. ‘ 

6 4 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people 


2 Or, scythes-—— Psa. lxxii. 3, 7——i Eph. v. 8.——* Or, more 
than the east. 


of his implacable enemies who set themselves to op- 
pose the propagation of his gospel. J'hey shall 
beat their swords into plough-shares—This descrip- 
tion of a well-established peace is very poetical. The 
Prophet Joel hath reversed it, and applied it to war 
prevailing over peace; beat your plough-shares into 
swords, and your pruning-hooks into spears, Joel 
iii, 10. And so likewise the Roman poet: 


P “ Non ullus aratro 
Dignus honos, squalent abductis arva colonis, 
Et curve rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.” 
Virg. Georg. i. 506.) 
“The peaceful peasant-to the wars is press’d ; . 
The fields lie fallow in inglorious rest. 
The plain no pasture to the flock affords, 
The crooked scythes are straightened into swords.” 
Dryden. 


Nation shall not lift up sword against nation— 
Peace is frequently mentioned in Scripture as the } 
distinguishing character of Christ’s kingdom, and he 
himself is called the prince of peace. The design 
and tendency of his gospel are to produce a peacea- 
ble disposition in mankind, by subduing their pride, 
and various passions and lusts, which are the causes 
of wars and contentions, and by working in them hu- 
mility, incline self-denial, and true and fervent 
love to all men, from whence peace necessarily fol- 
lows. And the gospel actually does produce this 
effect in those that rightly receive it. It disposes 
them, as much as in them lieth, to live peaceably 
with all men. And as to that dissension and war 
which the preaching of the gospel has sometimes 
occasioned, as it was foretold it would do, Matt. x. 
21, 22, it was wholly accidental, arising from men’s 
corrupt lusts and interests, which the gospel opposes ; 
and it was not among those who received the truth 
in the love of it, but between them and those who 
were either open enemies, or false friends to them 
and to the gospel. But this passage foretels that 
even an external and general peace will be establish- 
ed in the world under the reign of the Messiah, 
which undoubtedly, in due time, will take place, 
namely, when the’ fulness of the Gentiles shall be 
brought in, and all Israel shall be saved, and both 
Jews and Gentiles shall be united together in one 
fold, under Christ their great Shepherd. 

Verse 5. O house of Jacob, come ye—Since the 
Gentiles will be thus ready and resolved to seek “| 


serve the Lord, and to excite one another so to do, 
let this obli . provoke you, O ye Israelites, to 
. 64 


the house of Jacob, because they be re- A. Mat 
plenished *from * the east, and tare ——— 
soothsayers like the Philistines, ™ and they 
* please themselves in the children of strangers. 
7 ®'Their land also is full of silver and gold, 
neither is there any end of their trea- 
sures; their land is also full of horses, nei- 


k Num. xxiii. 7——! Deut. xviii. 14. ——™ Psa. evi. 35; Jer. x. 2. 
* Or, abound with the children, d-c.—* Deut. xvii. 16, 17. 


join with, or rather to go before them in this good 
work. 


a 


“The prophet,” says Lowth, “ acre 


himself to those Jews of later times, that should live ¥ 


when the glad tidings of the gospel should be pub- 
lished; and exhorts them to make use of those means 
of grace which God would so plentifully afford them, 
and not continue stubborn and refractory, like their 
forefathers, which disobedience of theirs had pro- 
voked him to forsake them, as it follows, verse 6. 
And let us walk in the light of the Lord—Take heed 
that you do not reject that ih ih be so 
clear, that even the blind Gentiles will discern it.” 
Verse 6. T'herefore-—-For the following causes ; 
thou hast forsaken thy people—Or, wilt certainly 
forsake and reject them. TJ'he house o 
body of that nation. The prophet here begins his 
complaint of the state of the Jewish nation, and “as- 
signs the ‘reason of God’s withdrawing his kindness 
from those of the present age, (as there would be a 
more remarkable rejection of them under the gos- 
pel,) because of their following the corrupt manners 
of the idolatrous nations round about them, in seek- 
ing to soothsayers and wizards, which God had so 
lemnly and expressly forbidden, Deut. xviii. 14.”-- 
Lowth. Because they are replenished from the 
east—Ory, as the margin reads it, more than the east, 
which Dr. Waterland interprets, T'hey are fuller of 
sorceries than the east ; and Bishop Lowth, They 
are filled with divination from the east. The ge- 
neral meaning seems to be, that their land was full of 
the impious, superstitious, and idolatrous manners of 
the eastern nations, the Syrians and Chaldeans, and 
perhaps also they had encouraged these heathen to 
settle among them, that they might learn tf cus- 
toms. And are soothsayers—Undertaking to dis- 
cover secret things, and to foretel future, contingent 
events, by observing the stars, or the cloud the 
flight of birds, and in other ways of divination; like 
the Philistines—Who were infamous for those prac- 
tices ; of which see one instance, 1 Sam. vi. 2. They 
please themselves in the children of strangers—- 
They delight in their company and conversation, 
making leagues, and friendships, and marriages with 
them. Dr. Waterland renders the clause, .They 
please themselves in the conceptions, or produc- 
tions, of strangers. 
Verse 7. Their land a 
They have heaped up ric moderately, and still 
jare greedily pursuing after more. Lowth thinks the 
prophet is especially reproving those who, in the 
midst of the public calamities, made no conscience of 


is full of silver, &e— 


% » 


cob—The — 


» 


u 


ea The ‘ lofty looks of man shall be humbled, 


more the people. 1e origi is i 
smof a sats of fos lines, in which the construction 
~ of the tw 


P : 


=n 


The ettioniente of the -* 


CHAPTER II. 


Lord upon the wicked. 


A. M. at ther 7 
B. C,7 
ar Sid ots: 

8 ° Their land also is full of idols; they wor- 

ship the work of their own hands, tliat gach 
their own fingers have made : 

9 And the mean man boweth down, and the 
great man humbleth himself: therefore =e 
them not. 

10 4 » Enter into the rock, and hide thé in 
the dust, for fear of the Lon, and for the glory | 


_of his majesty. 


is there any end of their chari~ 


‘and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed 


down, and the Lorp alone shall be A. M. 3244. 
exalted ‘in that t day. See 

12 For the day. of the Lorp of hosts shail be 
upon every one ¢hat is proud and lofty, and 
upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall 
be brought low: 

13 And upon all ‘the cedars of Lebanon, 
that are high and lifted up, and upon all the 
oaks of Bashan, 

14 And tupon all the high mountains, and 
upon all the hills chat are lifted up, , 

15 And upon every high tower, and upon every 
fenced wall, 


© Jer. ii. 28,—P Verses 19,21 Rey. vi. 15,—— Verse 17% 
Chap. v. 15, 16; xiii. 11. * Chap. iv. 1; xi. 10, 11; xii. 1, 4; 
7" XXIV«eL 5, XXV. 9; xxvi. 1; xxvii. 1, 2, 12, 135 xxvill. 5; xxix. 
[85 xxx, 23; li, 6; Jeremiah xxx. 7, 8; Ezek: xxxviii. 14, 1 


Re iriching themselves by oppression and injustice. 
heir land also is full. of horses—Which even 
their kings were forbidden to multiply, (as they were 
also forbidden to multiply gold and silver,) and much 

In the original this verse consists 


bers is alternate, the first line answer- 
ing to the third, and the second to the fourth. 

Verses 8, 9. 7 heir land - also is full of idols—— 
Every city’ had its god, (Jer. xi. 13,) and, according 
to the goodness and fertility of their lands, they 
made goodly images, Hos. x. 1. They worship: the 
work of their own hands—They gave that worship 
to their own creatures, to the images which their 
own fancies had devised, and their own fingers had 
made, which they denied to Jenovan their Creator, 
than which nothing could be more impious or more 
absurd. And the mean man boweth down, &c.— 
Men of all ranks, both high and low, rich and poor, 
learned and ignorant, fall down and worship idols. 
The corruption is universal, and the whole land is 
given to idolatry. Therefore forgive them not— 
Thou wilt not forgive them, the imperative being put: 
for the future, as we have seen it frequently is in the 
Psaln Vitringa, however, Dr. Waterland, and 
Bishop Lowth, with many others, consider this verse, 
not as describing their idolatry, but as a'predicting 
the punishment which God was about to bring upon 
them oe and therefore translate it, in perfect con-' 
siste with the Hebrew, in the future tense, thus: 
Therefore the mean man shall be bowed down, and \ 
the mighty man shall be hwnbled; and thow wilt 
not forgive them. “They bowed themselves down 
to their idols, therefore shall they be bowed down, 
and brought low, under the avenging hand of God.” 
—Bishop Lowth. According to this interpretation, 
“the prophet begins here to describe the imminent 
severe judgments of God, wherewith he would punish 
the pride of these menyand their alienation from the, 
true worship of God and their disobedience to his law.” 

Verses 10, 11. Enter into the rock, &e.—-Such 
calamities are coming upon you, that you will be 
ready to hide yourselves in rocks and caves of the 

Vor ail.” 


— 


xxxix. 11, 22; Hos. i ii. 16, 18, 21; Joel iii. 18; Amos ix. 11; 
Obad. 8; ’ Mic. iv. Oye 105) yi. 11, 125 Zeph. iii. 11, 16; 
Zech. ix. 16. s Chap. xiv. 8; XXxVvil. 24; "Ezek. xxxi. 34 Zech. 


xi, 1, 2 Chap. xxx. 25. 


earth, for fear of the glorious and terrible judgments 
of God. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled 
—-The eyes that looked high; the countenance, in 
which the pride of the heart had showed itself, shall 
be cast down in shame and despair. The havghtiness 
of men shall be bowed down—SJudicially, as they 
prostrated themselves before their idols voluntarily, 
the punishment being suited to their sin. And the 
Lord alone shall be exalted—The justice and power 
of Jehovah shall be magnified, and the impotence 
and ‘vanity of all other gods shall be detected, at the 
same time that the self-confidence, self-sufficiency, 
and vain glory of man are abased and vilified. __ 
Verses 12-16. For the day of the Lord—The time 
of God’s taking vengeance on sinners ; shall be upon 
every one that is proud—-To mortify and bring him 
downto the dust ; and wpon all the cedars of Lebanon, 
&c.—In these and the following words, to verse 17, 
the prophet is considered, by most commentators, as 
speaking metaphorically, according to the symbol- 
ical language of the Egyptian nerog pp nice. The 
cedars of Lebanon, and oaks of Bashan, are sup- 
posed 1o mean princes and nobles, who carried 
themselves high, and behaved themselves insolently ; 
high mountains and hills, to signify states and cities ; 
high towers and fenced walls, those who excelled in 


ingenuity, wisdom, and strength; and the ships of 


Tarshish, &c., (verse 16,) the merchants who con- 
fided in their wealth and splendour. Thus Bishop 
Lowth: “These verses afford us a striking example 
of that peculiar way of writing, which makes a 
principal characteristic of the parabolical, or poetical 
style of the Hebrews, and in which their prophets 
deal so largely: namely, their manner of exhibiting 
things divine, spiritual, moral, and political, by a set 
of images taken from things natural, artificial, reli- 
gious, historical, in the way of metaphor or allegory. 
Thus, you will find in. many other places, besides 
this before us, that cedars of Libanus and oaks of 
Bashan are used, in the way of metaphor and alle- 
gory, for kings, princes, potentates, of the highest 

rank ; high mountains and lofty hills, e r kingdoms, 

republics, states, cities ; ag an ghia, for 


+ 


ey to 
The vanity of ISATAH. trusting in idols. 
A. Renn 16 "And upon all the ships of 'T'ar- || ty, when he ariseth ” to shake terribly 4 Me os 


shish, and upon all® pleasant pictures. 
17 *And the loftiness of man shall be bowed 
down, and: the ‘haughtiness of men shall be 
_made low: and thé'Lonb alone shall be exalted 
“Yin that dag 
18 And ° the idols he shall utterly abolish. 
“49 And “they shall 20 into the * holes of the 
rocks, and into the caves of ‘the earth, * for 
fear of the Lorp, and for the glory of his majes- 


= 


C= 


the earth. cl aa 

20 °Tn that, day day a man shall cast ® his idols 
of silver, and his idols. of gold, ° which they made 
each one for himself to worship, to the moles 
and to the bats ; 

21 4'To go into the clefts of the rocks, and . 
into the tops of the ragged rocks, ® for fear of 
the Lorp, and for the glory of his majesty, 
when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 


4] Kings x. 22.——5 Heb. pictures of desire——* Verse 11. 
y Verse 11.——* Or, the idols shall utterly pass away. z Verse 
10; Hos. x. 8; Luke xxiii. 30; Rev. vi. 16; ix. 6. 7 Heb. the 


dust: 5 


a2 Thess. i..9.— Chap. xxx. 32; Hag. ii. 6, 21; Heb. xii. 


26. ¢ Chap. xxx. 22; xxxi. 27.—— 8 Heb. the idols of his 
silver. ° Or, which they made for hima Verse 19.— Ver. 


10, 19. ‘ 


“Tr. 
. defenders and protectors, whether by counsel or 
strength, in. peace or war; ships of Tarshish, and 
works of art and invention employed in adorning 
them, for merchants, men enriched by commerce, 
and abounding in all the luxuries and elegancies of 
life, such as those of Tyre and Sidon; for it appears 
from the course of the whole passage, and from the 
train of ideas, that the fortresses and ships-are to be 
taken metaphorically, as well as the high trees and 
lofty mountains.” ‘Some, however, it may be ob- 
served, incline to understand this whole passage 
literally, remarking, that the judgment was to be so 
universal and terrible, as not only to reach to men, 
but to things also, whether natural or artificial, in all 
which there would be manifest tokens of God’s dis- 
pleasure agate the land. “Ships of Tarshish,” 
adds Bishop Lowth, “are’ in Scripture frequently 
__ used by a metonymy for ships in general, especially 
~ such as are employed in carrying on traffic between 
distant countries ; as Tarshish was the most celebra- 
ted mart of those times, frequented of old by the 


Phenicians, and the principal source of wealth ‘to }} 


Judea and the neighbouring countries. “The learned 
seem now to be ‘perfectly agreed that Tarshish is 
Tartessus, a city of Spain, (near Cadiz, now called 
Tariffa,) at the mouth of the river Betis, (now named 
Guadalquiver, running through Andalusia, ) whence 
the Phenicians, who first opened this trade, brought 
silver and gold, (Jer. x.9; Ezek. xxvii. 12,) in-;which 
that country then abounded ; ; and, pursuing their 

oyage still further to the Cassiterides, the islands of 
Sicily and Cornwall, they: brought from thence Jead 
and tin.” 

Verses 17; 18. And the loftiness of man shall be 
bowed down—Here the prophet expresses literally 
what he had delivered metaphorically in the pre- 
ceding verses. The same things were. asserted 
verse 11, but they are here repeated, partly to assure 
the people of the certainty of them, and partly to 
fix them more deeply in their minds, because men 
aré'very backward to believe and consider things of 
this nature. And the idols he shall utterly abolish 
—He will discover the impotency of idols to suc- 
cour their worshippers, and thereby destroy ‘the 
worship of them in the world. , 

Verse 19. they—The idolatrous Israelites; 

of ¥ 
tf 
ei 


shall go into the holes of the rocks, &e.——Their usual 
places of retreat in cases of danger; see Josh. x. 
16; Judg. vi. 2; 1 Sam. xiii. 6. The idea is taken 
fans the nature of the land of Canaan; ‘which was 
full of caves and dens; for fear of the Lord, and 
the glory of his majesty, &c.—“ The meaning is, 
that there should be, at this time, a great and most 
bright display of the divine majesty and justice, 
which the impious and hypocritical could not bear ; 
and that, struck with the terror of the divine judg-" 
ment, they should consult for their safety, with the 
utmost terror and consternation, im caves, dens, and 
holes of the earth.” “The Prophet Hosea hath car- 
ried the same image further, and added great strengtlf 
and spirit to it, chap. x.8. Whey shall say to the 
mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us ; 
which image, together: with these of Isaiah, is 
adopted by the sublime author of the Revelation, 
chap. vi. 15, 16.” See Dodd and Bishop Lowth. 
Verse 20. In that day a man shall cast his idols, 
§c., to the moles and to the bats—Shall cast them 
into the meanest and darkest places, in which moles 
and bats have their abode; whereas before they set 
them up in high and honourable places, where they 
might be seen and worshipped. Or, as Bishop 
Lowth -thinks the meaning may be, d They shall 
carry their idols with them into the dark caverns, 
old ruins, or desolate places, to which they shall flee 
for refuge ; and so shall give them up, and relinquish 
them to the filthy animals that frequent such places, 
and have taken possession of them as their proper 
habitation.” » The wasting ef Judah by the Syrians 
and Israelites in the time ‘of Ahaz, might be here 
first in the prophet’s view, when, besides a great 
multitude that were partly slain, and partly carried 
captive to Damascus by the Syrians, the king of Is- 
rae] slew in Judah one hundred and twenty thousand 
in one day, and carried away captive, of men, women, 
and children, two hundred thousand, taking away also 
much spoil, 2 Chron. xxviii. 5, 6,8. The prophecy 
may refer, secondly, to the invasion of the country 
by Sennac rib; but, undoubtedly, the destruction 
of Judah and J erusalem by the Chaldeans, and the 
Babylonish captivity, are chiefly intended, for then 


idolatry was entirely abolished g the Etre, 
and never practised by them aft 
( 5* ) 3 


u- 
7" . 


Judgments on both people 


Sy rhspedt 22 !Cease ye from man,’ whose 
~ Sbreath is in his nostrils: for 


f Psa. cxlvi. 35. Jer. xvii. 5. 


Verse 22. Cease ye from man—*“The prophet 
here subjoins an admonitory exhortation to the men 
of his own and of all times, to dissuade them from 
placing any confidence in man, however excellent 
in dignity, or great in power; as his life depends 
‘upon the air which he breathes through his nos- 
trils, and which, if it be stopped, he is no more; and 
therefore, if you abstract from him the providence 

»and grace of God, and consider him as left to him- 
~ self, he is worthy of very little confidence and re- 
wa: see Psa. exlvi. 3, 4. Vitringa is of opinion, 
that the prophet here alludes immediately to the 


kings of Egypt: see chap. xxxi. 3. And he adds, | 
that the mystical interpretation of the period from | 


Ped a 


CHAPTER III. 


s 
’ ¢ 
a 7 


and rulers for their sin. 


~ 


wherein’ jdiehet to be accounted . ~ 3244, 
. 760. 
of 2? 2 Me a 


& Job xxvii. 3. 


the twelfth tothis verse, may refer d1dhto'o other 
days of the divine judgment of which there are ae 
peculiarly noted in Seri e, ahi’: rring to. the 
new economy. Ist, Theday of tk ubversion of the 
Jewish republic; 2d, The day o "Peng ance on the 
governors of the Romanempire, the persecutors of » 
the church, in the time of Constantine; 3d, 'The fu- 
ture day of judgment hereafter to tale place upon — 
Antichrist and his crew; of which the prophets, and 
St. John in the Revelation particularly, have spoken; 
and, 4th, The day of general judgment. It is to this 
third day that he thinks the present period more 
immediately refers: see 2 Thess. ii. 2; Rev. xvi. 14,” 


—Dodd. 


y] a 


CHAPTER II. 
Great confusion on both people and rulers for their sin, and impudence init, 1-9. Peace to the righteous, and misery to 


the wicked, 10, 11: 
16=26. 


riyt M. 4 ea behold, the Lord, the Lorn of 


hosts, *doth take away from Je~ 


rusalem and from Judah >the stay and the staff, 
the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of 
water, 


The oppression and covetousness of the rulers, 12-15. 


The pride of women, and their judgments, 


2 °'The mighty man, and the man 4. arti 5 


of war, the judge, and the prophet, oes + 


and the prudent, and the ancient 


3 The. captain of fifty, and the + honoura- 


-ble man, and the counsellor, and the cun-. 


—— 


a Jer. xxxvii. 21; xxxviii. 9——» Lev. xxvi. 26. 


¢ See 2 Kings xxiv. 14. 


= 


NOTES ON CHAPTER TIL. 

Verse 1. For, &c.—The prophet, having in the 
preceding chapter declared, in general terms, the 
terror of the day of the Lord, now descends to a 
more particular explication, and special confirmation 
of what he had advanced concerning it. - Behold— 
Look upon what follows to be as certain as if it 
were already accomplished; the Lord doth take 
away, §c., the stay and the staff—All their supports, 
of what kind soever; all the things they trust to, 
and look for help and relief from; the whole stay of 
bread, and the whole stay of water—Bread is com- 
monly called the staff of life: see Lev. xxvi. 26; 
Ezek. xiv. 13. But by bread and water here are 
meant all kinds of alimenf, whereby the body is 
supported. This judgment seems to relate especi- 
ally to the siege of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, 
when bread and water were both very scarce: see 
Jer. xiv. 1-6, and xxxvii. 21, and xxxviii. 9. 

Verses 2, 3. The mighty man, &c.—Strong and 
valiant men. The judge—The civil magistrates ; 
and the prophet—Kither strictly so ealled, the want 
of whom is matter of grief, (Psa. lxxiv. 9,) or more 
largely taken, so as to include all skilful and faithful 


teachers; and the prudent—Whose wisdom and 

conduct we ry to preserve them from ruin; 

and the an —Whose wisdom was increased 
8 


by long experience. This likewise relates to the 
same times, particularly to” Jehoiachin’s capti- 
vity, when all the men of note were carried away 
captive with him, 2 Kings xxiv..14. The captain 
of fifty—There shall not be a man J@ft able to com- 
mand fifty soldiers, much less such as could com- 
mand hundreds or thousands, who yet were neces- 
sary; and the honourable man—-Men of high birth, 
place, power, and reputation; and the counsellor— 
Wise and learned statesmen; and the cunning arti- 
Jficer—Who could make either ornaments for times © 
of peace, or instruments for war, whom therefore 
conquerors were wont to take away from those na- 
tions whom they subdued, 1 Sam. xiii. 19, 20; 2 
Kings xxiv. 14; and the eloquent orator—Hebrew, 
wn} 1133; literally, the skilful of charm, or the skit. 
ful charmer, or enchanter; whereby he under- 
stands either, Ist, Charmers, whom he threatens God 
would take away, not as if such persons were bless- 
ings to a people, or the removing of them a ae 
but only because they made great use of them mens 
trusted to them. Andso hesignifies that God would 
remove all the grounds of their confidence, both 
right and wrong, and make their case desperate, 
Thus, for the same reason, God’threatens the Isra- 
elites, (Hos. iii: 4,) that they should be, as without a 
i. so without an image and teraphim. Or, 
67 


* gg. 


1 Heb. aman eminent in countenance. 


ISATAH. 


to the righteous. 


Gracious promises 
AU ke. ing artificer, and the ? eloquent ora- 


upsbipeor” Fo. 

4 And I will give ¢ children ¢o be their princes, 
and babes shall rule over them. 

5 And the people shall be oppressed, every 


one by another, and every one by his neigh- 


bour: the child shall behave himself proudly 


against the ancient, and the. base against the 


honourable. ae 

6 When a man shall take hold of his brother 
of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast 
clothing; be thou our ruler, and Je¢ this ruin be 
under thy hand: 


7 In that day shall he *swear, saying, I will 


2 Or, skilful of speech. 
and, Gen. xiv. 22. 


4 Eccles. x. 16.+—* Heb. lift up the 
+ Heb. binder up. 


not be a ‘healer; for in my house pe. 
is neither bread nor clothing : make ———_— 
me not a ruler of the people. 

8 For ° Jerusalem ‘is ruined, and Judah is 
fallen: because their tongue and their doings 
are against the Lorp, to provoke the eyes of 
his glory. ’ 

9 The show of their countenance doth wit- 
ness against them; and they declare their sin 
as f Sodom, they hide i¢ not. Wo unto their soul! 
for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. 

10 4 Say ye to the righteous, * that 2 shall 
be well with him: ™ for they shall eat the fruit 
of their doings. e! ifeamige . 


° Mic. iii. 12. Gen. xiii, 13; xviii. 20, 21; xix. 5 -—# Ec. 


: viii. 12.——+ Psa. exxviii. 2. 


he may mean, 2d, Such as could persuade powerfully, 
and, as it were, charm people, by their eloquence, 
and induce them to do those things which were ne- 
cessary. for their safety ; for the expression may be 
taken in a good sense, as Mp, divination, is Prov. 
xvi. 10. Accordingly, Bishop Lowth translates it, 
the powerful in’ persuasion. 

Verses 4,5. And I will give children to be their 
princes—Kither, Ist, Children in age, whose minor- 
ity corrupt ministers of state commonly abuse, to 
the producing of much evil: or, 2d, In understand- 
ing and experience. When all the eminent persons, 
mentioned verses 2, 3, were removed, the necessary 
consequence must be, that persons of no qualifica- 
tions for government must succeed in their places. 
This also was fully accomplished in the succession 
of weak and wicked princes, from the death of, Jo- 
siah to the destruction of the city and temple: And 
the people shall be oppressed—By the command or 
permission of such childish rulers. T'he child shall 
behave. himself proudly, &c.—The child in under- 
standing, or the young and inexperienced ; ‘and the 
base against the honourable—* The usual effects,” 
says Lowth, “of a weak and unsettled government, 
where faction grows too hard for justice, and sedi- 
tious men become so bold as openly to insult those 


. that are in authority.” 


Verses 6-8. A man shall take hold of his bro- 
ther--Of his relation, friend, or neighbour. To 
take hold of another implies entreating his assist- 


ance ; see chap. iv. 1; Zech. viii. 23; saying, Thou | 


hast clothing—We are utterly undone, and have 
neither food nor raiment.; but thou hast something 
left to support the. dignity, which we offer to thee; 
be thou our ruler—And we will be subject to thee. 
It is taken for granted that there would be no way 
of redressing all these grievances, and bringing things 
into order again, but by good magistrates, who should 
be invested with power by common consent, and 


- exert that power for the good of the community ; 


and let this ruin be under thy hand—Namely, to 
heal it. In that day he shall swear—To show that 
he was resolved. Hebrew, he shall lift up, namely, 
68 
¥ 


7 
« 


his hand, which was the us al gesture in swearing; 
I will not be a healer—A repairer of the ruins of 
the state; for in my house is neither bread nor 
| clothing—I have not sufficient provisions, either of 
food or raiment, for my own family; much Jess, as 
-you falsely suppose, for the discharge of so high a 
trust. For Jerusalem is ruined—The case is des- 
perate, and past relief: it will be to no purpose to 
|| attempt affording any; because their tongue and 
their doings are against the Lord—They have 
broken the law of God in word and deed, and that 
in ‘contempt of his authority and defiance of his jus- 
tice. Their tongue was against the Lord, for they 
contradicted his prophets, and their doings were 
against him, for they acted as they spoke; to provoke 
the eyes of his glory—Of his glorious majesty, whom 
they ought to reverence and adore; the all-seeing 
eyes of Him who is of purer eyes than to behold ini- 
quity, unless with abhorrence, aah Sa 
Verse 9.. The show of their countenance—Their 
pride, wantonness, and impiety, manifestly show 
themselves in their very looks and whole behaviour, 
and will be swift witnesses against them, both before 
Godand men. They declare their sinas Sodom— 
They commit it publicly, casting off all fear of God, 
-and reverence to men; and they glory init. They 
hide it not—As men do, who have any remains of 
modesty or ingenuity. T'hey have rewarded evil to 
themselves—That is, procured a fit recompense for 
their wickedness, even utter ruin; or, they have done 
evil, &c.. They cannot blame God, but themselves: 
their destruction is wholly from themselves. The 
word 7797, rendered show, in the first clause of the 
verse, not occurring elsewhere in the Bible, is of ra- 
ther uncertain signification. Bishop Lowth renders 
it, steadfastness ; and Dr. Waterland, impudence. 
The former translates the whole verse thus: “The 
stead iene their countenance witnesseth against 
them: for their sin, like Sodom, they publish, they 
hide it not: wo to their souls! for upon themselves 
have they brought down evil.” . 
1 Verses 10, 11. Say ye to the 
| priestsand Levites, in your sermon 


eous—O ye 
exhortations 
3 


\ 


T he oppression and 


CHAPTER III. 


covetousness of the rulers. 


5 rs og 11 Wo unto the wicked! 'i¢ shall 
——_—. beill with him: for the reward of his 
hands shall be ° given him.» 

12 4] As for my people, «children are their 
oppressors, and women rule over them. O-my 
people, 'they ® which lead thee cause thee to err, 
and ’ destroy the way-of thy paths. 

13 The Lorp standeth up ™to plead, and 
standeth to judge the people. 


5 Heb. done to him.——* Verse 


iPsa.xi.6; Eccles. viii. 13. 
§ Or, they which call thee blessed. 


4,—! Chap. ix. 16. 


A. M. 3244, 


14 The Lorp will enter into judg- et 


ment with the ancients of his people, 
and the princes thereof: for ye have * eaten up 
"the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your 
houses. 

15 What mean ye that ye ° beat my people 
to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith 
the Lord Gop of hosts. 

16 4% Moreover the Lorp saith, Because the 


7Heb. swallow up.——™ Mic. vi. 2. 8 Or, burnt ——® Chap. v. 
7; Matt. xxi. 33. ©Chap. lviil. 4; Mic. iil. 2, 3. 


tothe people; that it shall be well with him—Even 
when it is ill with the wicked, and with the nation in 
general; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings 
—God will be their safeguard and portion in the 
common calamity; therefore let them not fear, but 
let them commit themselves, and their all, to his pro- 
tection, and resign themselves up to his disposal. 
‘They shall either be hid in the day of the Lord’s 
anger, or shall have divine supports and comforts, 
which shall abound in proportion as trials and trou- 
bles abound. “This is an admirable sentence to sup- 
port the souls of the pious, amidst all the calamities 
of this life. God will not forsake those who truly 
love and serve him. This, reason teaches us; this, 
the experience of all times confirms; and ‘it is the 
constant and comfortable doctrine’ of the word of 
God. The event must and will be happy to the good 
man.” Wo unto the wicked, &c—These heavy 
judgments are designed against them, and shall 
certainly find them out, though here they be 
mixed with the righteous. As happiness, either 
in this world or the next, is, by the divine deter- 
mination, the certain consequence of righteousness, 
so the contrary is the certain consequence of »wick- 
edness. | AgiA 

Verse 12. As for my people—In this and the fol- 
lowing verses, says Dr. Dodd, “the prophet describes 
the incapacity and weakness, the ignorance and cor- 
ruption, the oppression and cruelty of the priests and 
rulers of the people; such as we learn from history 
they were before the Babylonish captivity.” Chil- 
dren are their oppressors—Persons young in years, 
of little experience, and who have not due considera- 
tion, but, following the impulse of their passions, 
without regard to any thing else, have the power in 
their hands, which they use at their pleasure, of ex- 
acting tribute of the people; and women rule over 
them—Weak and effeminate rulers. Or, perhaps’ he 
speaks of the wives and concubines of their kings 
and great men, who, by their arts, gaining an as- 
cendency over their husbands, induced them to act 
as they desired, though frequently to the people’s 
prejudice, and in a manner contrary to all the laws. 
Thus it was in the reign of Schoran king of Judah, 
whose wife Athaliah, a cruel and weak woman, oc- 


casioned great disorders in the state; see 2 Chron. 


chap. xxi. i.; and thus undoubtedly it fre- 

quently hap after the time Isaiah uttered this 

prophecy. ey who lead thee—Thy rulers, civil 
3 


"hon 


¢;* 


and ecclesiastical, whose duty it is to show thee the 
right way; or, as }WwWsxD, may be properly rendered, 
they that bless thee ; that is, thy false prophets, who 
flatter thee, and speak peace to thee; cause thee to 
err—From the way of truth and duty, from the way 
of safety. and prosperity.. Instead of leading thee to 
repentance and reformation, they encourage thee to 
go on in sin and rebellion against him, on whom thou 
art dependant for all things. Those teachers are in- 
deed impostors, that pronounce a people safe and 
happy who continue in sin; for it is contrary to the 
very nature of things, that any people can be happy 
whore contemners of the divine laws. Their pun- 
ishment may be delayed, but it is not therefore re- 
mitted; and every step they take in such a way is 
a step toward misery and ruin. And destroy the 
way of thy paths—Keep thee from the knowledge 
or practice of those paths. which lead to safety and 
happiness, and mislead thee into evil courses, by 
their wicked counsels or examples. 

Verses 13-15. The Lord standeth up to plead—_ 
He will shortly and certainly stand up as a judge to 
inquire into the cause, and to give sentence; and 
standeth to judge the people—To call the wicked 
into judgment, and to denounce upon them as they 
deserve; or to defend and deliver his own people, 
judging for them, as this phrase often means. Will 
enter into judgment with the ancients—The princes 
or rulers, as it is explained in the next clause, often 
called elders, because they were commonly chosen 
from those that were: advanced in years. For ye 
have eaten up the vineyard—Destroyed, instead of 
preserving and dressing it, as you should have done. 
The church and commonwealth of Israel is often 
called God’s vineyard, and here the, vineyard, by 
way of eminence, intrusted to the care of these rulers. 
The spoil of the poor is in your houses-—The 
goods which you have violently taken away from 
them. What mean ye that ye beat my people?— 
What warrant have ye for it? How durst -you pre- 
sume to do it? and grind the faces of the poor—— 
A strong metaphor to denote grievous oppression ; 
but it is exceeded by the Prophet Micah, chap. 
ili. 1-3. 

Verse 16. Moreover, the Lord saith—Afier God 
had reproved the rulers of the Jews for their iniqui- 
ty, injustice, and rapacity in spoiling the people, “he 
draws an argument of the same kind from the 
pride and luxury of the noble matrons and virgins, 

“ 69 


\ 


ina — 


~ i 


The pride of women, 


ISAIAH. 


and their judgment. 


= 
5 boxe 3244. daughters of Zion are haughty, and 

a8 wall with stretched-forth necks and 
* wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they 
go, and making a tinkling with their feet : 

17 Therefore the Her will smite with ?a 
scab the crown of the head of the daughters of 
Zion, and the Lorp will ! discover" their 
secret parts. 

18 In that day the Lorp will take away the 


°Heb. deceiving with their eyes. 
XXVIII. 27. ‘Heb, make naked. 


10Or, tripping nicely. PDeut. 
Chap. xlvii. 2, 3 ; Jer, xiii. 


bravery of their tinkling ornaments A. M8244 
about their feet, and their ™ cauls, 
and their * round tires like the moon, =~ 

19 The #8 rl and the saber and the 
* mufflers, ae 

“20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the 
legs, and the head-bands, and the % tablets, and 
the ear-rings, . 4 

21 The rings, and nose-jewels, 


22; Nah. iii, 5.——12Or, net-works.—Judges viii. 21.——0Or, 
sweet balls—"*Or, spangled ornaments.—1*He. houses of the soul. 


~ whose ornaments, collected from e spoils of the 
people, were borne proudly and insolently by them ; 
upon whom therefore he denounces judgments; for 
of these two parts consists this last period of his re- 
proving discourse: urging, lst, In this verse the crimes 
of luxury and wanton haughtiness; denouncing, 2d, 
The punishment with which God would pursue these 
crimes, verse 17 to chap. iv. 1:” see Vitringa and 
Dodd. Because the daughters of Zion are haugh- 
ty——Proud and disdainful; and walk with stretched- 
Sorth necks—Affecting stateliness, (Psa. Ixxv. 5,) and 
endeavouring to appear tall; aad wanton eyes— 
‘Hebrew, nypw, falsifying their eyes; that is, 
falsely setting off their eyes with paint, as Bishop 
Lowth translates it, observing that he takes it to be 
the true meaning and literal rendering of the word ; 
walking and mincing as they go--Taking petty 
tripping steps in their walking, that they may appear 
the younger; making a tinkling with their feet— 
Dr. Waterland renders this clause, .and with chains, 
or shackles, upon their feet. The prophet is thought, 
by some learned men, to “allude toa custom among 
the eastern ladies of wearing on their legs large hol- 
low rings, or-circles, with little rings hanging round 
them; the cavities of these rings being filled with 
small flints, which caused them to sound like bells 
on the least motion.” Bishop Lowth translates the 
last two clauses, “Mincing their steps as they go, 
and with their feet lightly tripping along.” 

Verse 17. Therefore the Lord will smite, &e.— 
Will humble the head of the daughters of Zion ; 
and Jehovah will expose their nakedness. Thus 
Bishop Lowth renders the verse, observing, that “it 
was the barbarous custom of the conquerors of 
those times to strip their captives naked, and to 
make them travel in that condition, exposed to the 
inclemency of the weather; and, which was worst 
of all, to the intolerable heat of the sun. . But this; 
to the women, was the height of cruelty and indigni- 
ty ; and especially to-such as those here described, 
who had indulged themselves in all manner of deli- 
cacies of living, and all the superfluities of ornament- 
al dress; and even whose faces had hardly ever 
been exposed to the sight of man. This is always 
mentioned as the hardest part of the lot of captives. 
Nahum, denouncing the fate of Nineveh, paints it 
in very strong colours,” chap. iii. 5, 6. 

Verse 18. In that day the Lord, &¢.— Punish- 
ment, which, though slow, always follows vice, is 

70 


ee 


here denounced. upon the luxurious and proud wo- 
men: first, taking away, not only the ornaments, 
wherewith they set off their beauty, but also 

garment which were of necessary use, to verse 243 
secondly, de eprivation of their husbands and children, 
verses 25, 26; thirdly, the equence hereof, .by 
which this loss might a. re chap. iv. 1 2? see 
Vitringa. Will take bravery of their 
tinkling ornaments, & ia is justly observed by a 
learned commentator’ e, that the words which 
describe the women’s Offaments in this and the ‘fol- 
lowing verses are of very doubtful signification ; the 
modes of every age and country varying so often, 
that the succeeding fashion makes the former to be 


+ 


quickly forgotten, and the words that expréss it to 


become obscure, or even unintelligible. Probably a 
hundred years-hence the names of e of the or- 
naments that are now in use in ou land will 


be as little understood as some of those here named, 
It is judged unnecessary and improper, therefore, to 


| trouble the reader here with the different interpreta- 


tions which learned men have given of them. It is 
agreed by all, that they were ornaments used by the 
women in Judea at that time, and that they were 
made the means of increasing their pride and other 
vices, and therefore were displeasing to God. And 
it is of no concern exactly to understand the differ- 
ences of them. Instead therefore of spending time 
on this barren subject, we shall content ourselves 
with laying before the reader Bishop Lowth’s trans- 
lation of the Hebrew terms used to express them, 
= some occasional observations which he bas 
made.on some,.of the articles. Jn that day will the 
Lord take away from them the ornaments of the 
feet-rings, and the net-works, and thé crescents, 
verse 18. T'he pendents, and the bracelets, and 
the thin veils, verse 19. The tires, and the fetters, 
and the zones, and the perfume-bo.ves, and the amu- 
lets, verse 20, The rings, and the jewels of the 
nostril, verse 21. Many commentators explain this 
of jewels, or strings of pearl, hanging from the fore- 
head, and reaching to the upper part of the nose, 
But it appears from many passages of Holy Seripture, 
that the phrase is to be literally and properly under- 
stood of nose-jewels, rings set with jewels, hanging 
from the nostrils, as ear-rings fr e ears, by holes 
bored to receive them. Sb the 
common ornaments of women of the first rank, has 


not omitted this particular, and is to be understood 


e 


Desolate state of 


CHAPTER IV. 


‘the land of Judea. 


sz 


A. A M. 3244, 22 The changeable suits of apparel, 
and the mantles, and the wimples, and 
the crisping-pins, 
23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and the 
hoods, and the veils. 
24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of 
sweet smell -there’ shall be stink ; and instead 
of a girdle, a rent ; and instead of well-set hair, 


= 


y baldness ; and instead of a stomacher, i "3044, 

. C.'760. 
a girding of sackcloth: and burning - ee 
instead of beauty. 

25 41 Thy men shall fall by-the ‘word, and 
thy 1° mighty in the war. :" 
26 t And her gates shall lament and mourn ; 
and she, being ce desolate,!® * shall sit upon the 


ground. nity 


’ Chap, xxii. 12; Mic. i. 16.——1® Heb. might. Jer. xiv. 2; 


17Heb. cleansed. uLam, ii. 10. 


Lam, i. 4. 18 Or, emptied. 


in the same manner, chap. xvi. 11, 12; see also Gen. 
xxiv. 47, and, Prov. xi. 22. 
Verses 22-24. The embroidered robes, ane the 
s, and the cloaks, and the little purses, verse 
eB transparent garments—A kind of silken 
ransparent like gauze; worn only by the 
most delicate women, and such as dressed themselves, 
as Sallust observes, d elegantius quam necesse esset 
probis,” more elezay y than was necessary for 
modest women. 'T rt of garments was after- 
ward in use among the Greeks. And the fine linen 
vests ; and the turbans, é mantles, verse 23. 
And there shall be, instead of perfume, a putrid 
ulcer—A principal part of the delicacy of the Asiatic 
ladies consists in the use of baths, and of the richest 


oils and perfumes; an attention to which is, in some | 


degree, necessary in those hot countries. Frequent 
mention (as we have seen) is made of the rich oint- 
ments of the spouse in the Song of Solomon; and 
the preparation to Esther’s being introduced to King 
Ahasuerus was a Course of bathing and perfuming 
for a whole year; six months with oil of myrrh, 
and six months with sweet odours, Esther ii. 12. 


A diseased and loathsome habit of body, instead of,a | 
beautiful skin, softened and made agreeable with all | 


that art could devise, and all that nature, so prodigal, 
in those countries, of the richest perfumes, could 
supply, must have been a punishment the most se- 
vere and the most mortifying to the delicacy of 
these haughty daughters of Zion. 
well-girt raiment, rags ; and, instead o 


girdle of sackcloth: a sun-burnt skin, instead of 


beauty, verse 24. Me. 
Verses 25, 26.. Thy men shall fall, &c.—We have 


' And, instead of | 
fikigh-| 
dressed hair, baldness ; and, instead of a zone, a 


in these verses the second evil; the desolation and 
widow good of the matrons and virgins: see Lam. ii. 
21, 22. But we must observe, that the rophet here 


{which frequently is spoken of and represented in 
the character of a woman. Her gates shall lament 
—The gates of Zion, which, by a figure, are said to 
lament, to imply the great ‘desolation of the place, . 

that there would be no people to go out and come in 
by them, or to meet together there as they ‘used to 
do. And she, being desolate—Bereaved of her chil- 
dren ; Hebrew, 7np3, emptied, or cleansed, that is, 

deprived of all "that st she had held dear, and delighted 

in; shall sit wpon the ground—In the posture of a 
mourner, bewailing her sad calamity. Sitting on the 
ground, the reader will observe, was a posture de- 
noting deep distress: see on Job ii. 13. The Prophet 
Jeremiah has noticed it, in the first place, among 
many indications of sorrow, in an elegant description 
of this same state of distress of his country, Lam. 
ii, 8-10. Thus also the psalmist, By the rivers of 
Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept when we 
remembered Zion. For, undoubtedly, Isaiah in this 
prophecy had in his view, at least first and immedi- 
ately, the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, ‘and the dissolution of the Jewish state under 
the captivity of Babylon. , His prediction, however, 

received a second, and still more awful accomplish- 
ment, in the destruction of that city and nation by 
the Romans. And, what is remarkable, in a medal 
coined by Vespasian’s order, Jerusalem is represent- 
ed, according to the picture drawn of her here by 
the prophet, as lamenting that calamity, under the 
emblem of a woman sitting on the ground in a mel- 
ancholy and mournful posture. . 


CHAPTER IV. 


Tn the extremity of evils, Christ's glorious’ kingdom should appear to those who are left alive, 1, 2. 


They shall be holy, 3 


Purged, 4. A glory and a defence wpon them, 5, A sanctuary from evils, 6 


A. M. 3244. 
B. C. 760. 


ing, We will » eat our own bread, and wear our 


ND *in that day seven women | 
shall take hold of one man, say-. 


own apparel: only ‘let us be called bhai 
by thy name, *to take away ° our re- 
proach. : 


f: a Chap. ii. 11, 17.——® 2 Thess. iii. 12,——* Heb, let thy name 


2 Or, take thou away. ¢ Luke i. 25. 


be called upon us. 


—— 


-. NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 


Verse 1. Int. 
been speaking, chap. ii. and iii., and still continues to 


# 


day—Of which he has hitherto 


speak; in that calamitous time; seven women shall 

take hold on one man——“ The war and captivity shall 

-make such a prodigious scarcity in the male sex, 
ae 


oa 


does not address the women themselves, but Zion, - 


es 
7 


_ reproach—For not barrenness 


~~ 


PR 
ay 
>» 


-% 


The appearance of t 


ISAIAH. t 


‘Christ’s glorious kingdom. 


A. M 324: 3244, 2° In that Way-shall 4 the branch 
— of the Lorn be *beautiful and glorious, 
ind th fruit of the earth shall be excellent 
an ‘comely ‘for them that are escaped, of Is- 
rael. 


at 


4 Jer. xxiii..5; Zech. iii, 8; vi. 12—* Heb. band ly. 


on * Heb. for the escaping of Israeli 


that seven women shall be glad to apa asingle 
ston nd 


~ man for protection, preservation, and marz 
shall importune him, though contrary to the n 
modesty of their sex, to consent to,take away yi 
ly, but. 
state also was reckoned: | ious ar Z 
Jews.” “And in spite of the al nibeortns ot of 
jealousy, they will each be content with a share only 
of the rights of ae common with ‘several 
rs; and that on hard conditions, Tenouncing the 
Jegzal demands of the wife pone the husband, (see 
Exod. xxi. 10,) and begging only the name and 
credit of wedlock, to be freed from the reproach of 
celibacy.” See Vitringa and Bishop Lowth. 

Verse 2. In that day—About and after that time, 
when the Lord shall have washed away (as this 
time is particularly expressed, verse 4,). the filth of 
Zion, by those dreadful judgments now described. 
The third part of this discourse, the reader will ob- 
serve, begins here, in which is set forth the flourish- 
ing state of the remnant of the Jews after the times 
of the, former calamity. Shall the branch of the 
Lord be beautiful and glorious—The church and 
people of Israel may be here intended by the branch 
of the Lord, being often called God’s vine, or vine- 
yard, as we have seen before, and the branch of his 
planting, chap. 1x. 21. It is a metaphorical expres- 
sion, taken from a tree cut down, which, notwith- 
standing, sprouts forth anew from the root, by young 
suckers, and brings forth many trees. And thus the 
prophet foretels, that, notwithstanding the grievous 
calamities and great destructions which he had 
predicted, and which would certainly come to pass, 
yet, nevertheless, the small remainder of them 
which should return out of captivity, with ‘those 
that shouldbe left in the land, when it was laid de- 
solate by the Chaldeans, should increase into a great 
people. And to them the fruit of the earth should 
be excellent and comely—That is, through the 
abundant produce‘of the land they should be made 
rich, and should be rendered respectable to the 
neighbouring nations. This seems to be the pri- 
mary and most obvious meaning of the passage, 
considered in connection with: what precedes and 
follows. The Chaldee Paraphrast, however, says, 
the branch here means the Messiah of Jehovah, and 
of him many Jewish doctors, as well as Christian 
commentators, understand the expression. Certainly 
he is frequently signified, in Scripture, by this title, 
the branch: see chap. xi.1; Jer. xxiii. 5, and xxxiii. 
15; Zech. iii. 1; and, in one place, namely, Zech. 
vi. 12, his name is expressly said to be the branch, 
Understood of him, the meaning of the passage must 
be, that after the foregoing miseries had been 

72 


e 


3 And it shall come to pass, that he A. at 
that is left in Zion, and he that re- 

maineth in Jerusalem, ° shall be tina <r 
| even every one that is ‘ written * among thes, 
living i in Jerusalem : 


e Chapter lx. 21. dk Phil. iv. 3; “Revelation iii, — Or, 
to life. 


Pi cach upon the Jews, and they had been restored 


to their own land; and after they had been chastised 
and_ purified still,more, by the calamities brought 
upon them by ‘Antiochus Epiphanes and other 
princes of the Grecian empire, and by the Romans 
under Pompey, the Messiah should be born; and 
in after the utter destruction which should be 


brought we he Jewish city, temple, and nation, 
by Titus, yman ‘general, the kingdom of the 
Messiah ia Bree heautiful and glorious, as is 


here express - According to this interpretation, 
the expression, 77 that day, in the beginning of the 
verse, must be consid as used with great latitude, 
as it “often i is by this prophet, signifying, as Lowth 
observes, “not the same time with that which was 
last mentioned, but an extraordinary season, remark- 
able for some signal events of providence, called else- 
where, by way of excellence, the day of the Lord, 
just as that day denotes the day of judgment in 
the New Testament, as being a time of all others 
the most remarkable ; see 2 Thess. i. 10; 2 Tim. i. 
12, 18, and iv. 8. “It is usual,” sayaroue, “ for 
the prophets to pass from the threatenings that re- 
late to their own times, to the promises whit ong 
to the.times of the gospel. » Tt may be further ob- 
served here, that the Scriptures often speak of great 
tribulations, as preceding, and preparing the way 
for, the enlargement and prosperity of Christ’s king- 
dom. In consistency with this application of the 
passage, by the fruit of the earth, here said to be ex- 
cellent and comely, must be meant the spjritual 
blessings of the gospel, fee described tnder 
the emblems of the fruitfulness of the earth and 
plenty. And by them that are escaped of Israel, 
we must understand those Jews who, the prophet 
foresaw, would -be converted by the preaching of 
Christ and his apostles, and should thereby escape 
that vengeance which would involve the rest of their 
nation. This accords well with the following verses 
of the chapter. 

Verse 3. And he that is left in Zion—Those that 
escape the common destruction brought on theif 
countrymen; see verse 2; shall be called holy— 
Shall be really such. The Jews that survived the 
Babylonish captivity, and returned into their own 
land, were greatly reformed, especially in one point, 
they relapsed no more into idolatry: and in other 
respects also a spirit of religion was revived among 
them. Butthe prophecy was much more eminently 
fulfilled in the first converts from Judaism to Chris- 
| tianity, to whose purity and holiness the apostles 
often bear witness, and of which glory in their 
writings. Even every one thatis written among the 
living, &c.—Whose names are recorded in the book 


we 


« 


. 
The presence of God in 


* ¥ 
CHAPTER IV. 


ee 


the assemblies of his people. 


eaNxnj{je"jaowo#OsO0ooooooaoWwna@soaesSOeeSO«=«Oaes=anw@=“$wnmwoqa=»oFe 


A.M. 3244. 4 When §£the Lorp ‘shall have blies, »a cloud and sm 


PR washed away the filth of the daugh- 
ters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood 
Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the 
irit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. 
5 And the Lorp willicreate upon every dwell- 


5 Mal. iii. 2, 3.4 Exod. xiii, 211 Zech. ii. 56 Or, |! 


of life, or the book of the divine knowledge and 
remembrance, as persons who, by repentance toward 
God and faith in the Messiah, expected, or already 
revealed, have passed from death unto life. 
phrase is used in allusion to the registers which were 
kept of the Jewish tribes and families: see notes on 
Exod. xxxii. 32 ; Psa. lxix. 28.7 ; - 
Verse 4. When the Lord shall ha ed away 
the filth, &¢.—This shall be accomplis vhen God 
shall have thoroughly cleansed the Jewish nation 
from their sins; and ‘shall purged away the 
blood of Jerisalem— sins of *eruelty and op- 
pression, (eh.v. 7,) or of bloodshed and murder, par- 
ticularly in killing the prophets, and persecuting 
God’s servants. By the spirit of judgment.and burn- 
ing—By the effects of his justice and wrath’in pun- 
ishing them severely ; by making them pass through 
the furnace of affliction, as it is expressed ch. xlviii. 
10: or the Holy Spirit’s influences may be chiefly 
intended, especially as this mode of purification is 
opposed to the legal way, which was by water. , The 
Holy Spifit may well be called a spirit of judgment, 
because he executes judgment in the church, and in 
the eonsciences of men, convincing, sinners of sin, 
leading them to judge and condemn themselves, and 
humbling them before God. And the same Spirit 
may be properly called a spirit of burning, because 
he burns up and consumes the dross which is in the 
church, and in the hearts of sinners, operates like 
refiners’ fire, purges believers as gold and silver are 


The || Ch 


oke by day, and A.M, 3244. 
ithe shining of a flaming fire by night: Seen 
for °upon all the glory shall be7a defence. 
6 And there shall bea tabernacle for a shadow 
in the day-time from the heat, and * for a place — 
of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from 


attempts of their enemies, as we learn from the book 
of Nehemiah: and thus especially he was present 
with, ¢ ided, protected, and preserved the first 
Ch: ‘Church, when he destroyed their unbe-. 
i Vink ahd’ dpvobbiont  oudhir men. on all the 
glory shall.be a defence— se all that church and 
people, which God will make glorious: upon the 
literal, but especially upon the mystical Jerusalem, 
upon all holy»societies,, or assemblies of sincere 
Christians. A learned commentator, who says the 
dwelling-places and assemblies of Sion.“ refer to 
the meetings of the apostles and other Christians 
at Jerusalem ;” and that next clause, wpon all 
the glory, &c., means that the divine protection shall 
be afforded wherever God manifests himself by the 
extraordinary signs .of his gracious presence, adds 
as follows: “Every symb the divine grace and 
glory, such as was the cloud, brings with it the pro- 
tection and defence of that place or assembly, which 
is blessed with this prerogative. The event proves 
the truth Of this interpretation. So long as God 
| was in the temple, that place rejoiced in the benefit 
| of thedivine protection. When the voice was heard, 
‘ Let us depart hence, it was left to the desolation 
of its enemies.” Now the same, as he says, holds 
good in the Christian Church. - While she cleaves to 
God, adheres to his truth, possesses his grace, obeys 
his laws, and.worships him in the. beauty of holi- 
ness, she has his presence with her, and is safe and 
happy.’ But, when the reverse of all this takes 


oo 


purged, (Mal. iii. 3,) inflames their souls with love to\, place, when his truth is disbelieved, his grace 


God and zeal for his glory, and transforms them 
into his holynature andimage. This was effectually 
done with respect to those Jews that embraced the 
gospel in the early days of Christianity. A 
Verse 5. And the Lord will create—Will, in a 
marvellous manner, produce, as it were, by a new 
work of. creation; wpon. every dwelling-place of: 
mount Zion—Upon all the private habitations of his 
people; and upon her assemblies—Upon the places 


neglected, his laws broken, and his ordinances 
slighted, or attended in a mere formal way, his 


| presence is withdrawn, and her glory and» defence 


depart together. 

Verse 6. And there shall be, &e.—Or, He, that is; 
the Lord, shall be, a tabernacle, or a tent, for a 
shadow from the heat, &e.—He alludes to the cir- 
cumstance of tents being necessary, in those eastern 


of their public worship, and the persons -assembled- 
therein ; a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining, 
&c.—He alludes to the pillar of a cloud and fire, 
which conducted and protected the Israelites in the 
wilderness, and afterward rested upon the taberna- 
cle; and his words imply, that God would be the 
protector and glory of Zion. Such he was to Jeru- 
salem after the return from Babylon; directing the 


countries, to defend people from the intolerable 
heat, of the sun, and the violent tempests which fre- 
quently happen; in consequence of which a portable 
tent becomes an important part of ‘@traveller’s bag- 
gage, for defence and shelter.. Thus, he signifies, 
the Christian Church, in its early ages, exposed as it 
was to the heat and violent storms of repeated per- 
secutions, stood in peculiar need of the divine pro- 
tection, and was favoured therewith, and that fre- 


Jews in their various difficulties, and defending them 
in their weak ainst all the contrivances and 
Pi ; 


4 


quently, in a very extraordinary and even miracu- 
lous way. 


73 oi 
™_P 


> 


a, 


; 


i” 


The parable of 


ISAIAH. 


the vineyard. 


CHAPTER V. | ; 


This chapter, containing the prophet’s third discourse, appears to stand single and alone, unconnected with the preceding and 


following. 


Its subject.is nearly the same with that of the first chapter, namely, a general reproof of the Jews for their 


wickedness ; “but it exceeds that chapter,” says Bishop Lowth, ‘in force, in severity, in variety, and elegance; and it 


adds a more express declaration of vengeance, by the Babylonian invasion. 


parts, being partly parabolical and partly proper. 


It naturally divides itself into two principal 


The first contains the parable, setting forth, under the allegory of a 
vineyard, God’s mercies to Israel, and Israel’s unfruitfulness, 1-6. 


The other, the explanation and application of the 


parabie, manifesting some of the more notorious sins of the Jewish people, and foretelling the judgments which God was 
about to bring wpon them, as the punishment of t those sins, 7-80. 


A: M. 3244, 


woken NOW will I sing tomy well-beloved 


pot ee iy a‘song of my beloved touchi 
* his vineyard. My well-beloved hath a vil 


yard in ‘a very fruitful hill: 


2 And he ? fenced it, and gathered | A. M, 3244. 
out the stones thereof, and planted it — ante 
with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the 
midst of it, and also * made a wine-press therein : 


a Psa. Ixxx. 8; Cant. viii. 12; Chap. xxvii. 23 Jer. ii. 21; 
xxi. 33; Mark xii. 1-; Luke xx. 9. 


Matt. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 

Verse 1. Now will I sing, &c.—Bishop Lowth 
translates this clause, “Let me sing now a song to 
my beloved; a song of loves concerning his vine- 
yard.” This is the exordium, a kind of title placed 
before the song; which song he records, as Moses 
did his, that it might be a witness for God, and 
against Israel. The beloved, to whom the prophet 
addresses the song; is the Lord of the vineyard, as 
appears by the latter clause of the verse, namely, 
God, or his Messiah, whom the prophet loved and 
served, and for whose glory, eclipsed by the barren- 
ness of the vineyard, he was greatly concerned: @ 
song of my beloved—Not devised by me, but inspired 
by God, which, therefore, it behooveth you to lay 
deeply to heart: touching his vineyard—The house 
of Israel, (verse7,) or his church among the Israelites, 
often, and very properly, called a vineyard, because 
of God’s singular regard to it, and care and cultiva- 
tion of it; his delight in it, and expectation of good 
fruit from it. My beloved "hath, &c.—Hebrew, 25 
MAT, my beloved hath had avineyard, namely, 
for many ages, with which he hath long taken great 
pains, and on which he hath bestowed much culture ; 
in a very fruitful hill—Hebrew, on a horn, the son 
of oil, “ an expression,” says Bishop Lowth, “ highly 
descriptive and poetical.” According to Kimchi the 
prophet gives the land of Israel this appellation 
because of its height and fertility. . Accordingly, the 
bishop renders the phrase, on a high and fruitful 
hill, observing, that “the parts of animals are, by an 


easy metaphor, applied to parts of the earth, both in} 


common and poetical language. A promontory is 
called a cape, or head; the Turks call it a nose; a 
ridge of rocks, a back, (‘dorsum immane mari 
summo, a huge back in the deep sea;’ Virg.) Thus 
a horn is a proper and obvious image fora mountain, 
or mountainous country.” Hills are places most 
commodious for vines, and the hills of Canaan being 
very fertile, the phrase, son of oil, is added to ex- 
press that cireumstance, both because oil includes 
the idea of fatness, and because oil-olive was one of 
the most valued productions of that land. Indeed 
the word horn also is frequently used in Scripture 
as an emblem of plenty, their wealth consisting very 
much i in their herds, as well as. flocks. 
74 


1 Heb. the horn of the son of oil. 2 Or, made a wall about it. 
3 Heb. hewed. 


Verse 2. And he fenced it—In this verse the 
prophet, carrying on the allegory, proceeds to ex- 
press, in parabolical languagé, the singular favours 
which God had bestowed on the Jewish nation, and 
the peculiar care which he had taken of them. He 
separated them from other nations, took them into 
covenant with himself, gave them a vatiety of laws 
and ordinances respecting his worship and service, 
and-became, in an especial manner, their protector 
and governor. Thus he fenced his vineyard; He- 
brew, Wpiy", ctrcumsepsit eam, hedged it round on 
all sidvat In removing the heathen nations, and de- 
stroying all the forms of their idolatrous worship, 
forbidding all idolatry, and all intimate friendship 
and intermarriages with idolaters, and by giving 


| them plain andample directions for their whole con- 


duct, lest they should fall by, error or mistake, he 
gathered out the. stones thereof—Which otherwise 
might have marred the land, (2 Kings iii. 19,) and 
injured the vines. In other words, he removed all 
the hinderances of fruitfulness. In that he formed 
his church of the posterity of those wise, holy, and 
faithful men, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and purged 
and reformed the nation in the wilderness before he 
established them in Canaan, he might truly be said 
to plant his vineyard with the choicest vine—Or, as 
the Hebrew is, the vine of Sorek, alluding to a valley 
between Ascalon and Gaza, running up eastward 
into the tribe of Judah, and famous for the best 
vines, and the richest vineyards. And he built a 
tower in the midst of i it—As edifices, termed towers 
by the Jews, were erected in vineyards, containing, 
as Bishop Lowth supposes, “ all the offices and im- 
plements, and the whole apparatus necessary for 
the culture of them, and the making of wine ;” and, 
doubtless, also serving for the accommodation and 
defence of the labourers; and as places of pleasure 
for the owners of the vineyards; so God provided 
his church with a most commodious and magnificent 
temple, furnished with all conveniences for every 
part of that worship and service which he required 
his people to perform to him, and affording every 
requisite accommodation for the residence, support, 
and comfort of the priests and Levies, while min- 
istering in holy things, and employed in cultivating 
God’s mystical vineyard; and where he, the Lord 
3 


‘ 


Explanation of the - 


CHAPTER V. 


parable of the vineyard. 


we ee >and he looked that it should bring 
~—-— forth grapes, and it brought forth wild 
grapes. 4 } 

3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and 
men of Judah, ° judge, I pray you, betwixt me 
and my vineyard. 

4 What could have been done more to my 
vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, 
when I looked that it should bring forth grapes 
brought it forth wild grapes? 

5 And.now goto; I will tell you what I will 
do to my vineyard: ‘I will take away the 


hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten A. ¥ ae 
up; and break down the wall thereof, —— "~~ 


and it shall be * trodden down : 


6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be 


pruned, nor digged;. but there shall come be 


briers and thorns: I will also command the 
clouds that they rain no rain upon it. & 


_ 7 For the vineyard of the Lorn of hosts és the 


house of | Israel, and the men of Judah ‘his 
pleasant plant ; and he looked for judgment, 
—— S oppression; for righteousness, but 
behold a ery. . 


me 
¢ Rom. iii. 4.——4 Psa. 


b Deut. xxxii. 6; Chap. i. 2, 3. 
- lxxx. 12. 


*Heb. for a treading. 1g.-—5 Heb: plant of his pleasures. 
5 Heb. 


a scab. 
a aes 


of the vineyard, might be peculiarly present, as the 
protector and consolation of his people, their refuge 
and strength, and very present help in times of 
trouble or danger. Thus the’Chaldee paraphrast : 

“J have constituted them the plant of a choice vine, 
and built my sanctuary in the midst of them.” So 
also Jerome interprets the clause. He also made a 
wine-press therein—Hebrew, 3¥n 3° (3), which 
Bishop Lowth properly translates, “ And he hewed 
out also a lake’ therein ;” observing that the word 
ap’ means, not the wine-press itself, or calcatorium, 
(the vessel or place where the grapes were stamped, 
or trod for the wine, which is expressed by another 
word,) but “what the Romans called lacus, the lake ; 
the large open place or vessel, which, by a conduit, 
or spout, received the must (or new wine) from the 
wine-press.” This place, he thinks, in very hot 
countries, it was necessary, or very convenient, 'to 
have under ground, or in a cave hewed out of the 
side of a rock, “for coolness; that the heat might 
not cause too great a fermentation, and sour the 
inust.” -Now this lake, made to contain the new 
wine, may here signify the great altar, made to re- 
ceive the sacrifices and oblations, as the fruits of the 


spiritual vineyard. And he looked that it should | 


bring forth grapes—Real, genuine fruit, true, sub- 
stantial piety and virtue, or godliness and righteous- 
ness; and it brought forth wild grapes—Or, rather, 
poisonous berries, as Bishop Lowth translates vn2, 
the word here used, which does not signify “merely 
' ‘useless, unprofitable grapes, such as wild grapes ; 
but grapes offensive to the smell, noxious, poison- 
ous ;” such as those mentioned 2 Kings iv. 39-41. 
For, according to the force and intent of the allegory, 
“To good grapes ought to be opposed fruit of a dan- 
gerous and pernicious quality; as, in the explication 
of it, to judgment is opposed tyranny, and to right- 
eousness oppression.” See anelegant persphiveke of 
this part of the parable, Jer. ii. 21. 

Verses 3, 4. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, 
&ce.—God ‘is here introduced as calling upon the 


guilty themselves to pass sentence, or judgment, in’ 


the case, and leaving it to them; because, without 
downright madness, they could do no other than 
condemn themselves ; who, when they had receivéd 


so many benefits from God, had been’so ungrateful’ 
3 


to him. What could have been done, &e—What 
work is there belonging to the office of an owner or 


keeper of a vineyard, which I have neglected ?. 


Wherefore—brought it forth wild grapes—How 
unworthy a conduct and inexcusable a crime is it, 
that you not only have been unfruitful in* good 
works, but have brought forth, in abundance, the 
fruits of wickedness! Who can read these words 
without being moved at the justness as well as the 
tenderness of the reproach; which is equally appli- 
cable now to professing Christians in general, as it 
was to the Jews at that time? What is it that God 
has not done for us? What good thing has he with- 
held from us? How many invaluable blessings has 
he bestowed upon us in our creation and preserva- 
tion! And how many still more inestimable in our 
redemption |: What more could have been done for 
us than he has done? Wherefore then, when ‘he 


looketh for grapes, does he only find wild grapes, or 


rather poisonous’ berries? When he looketh for a 
tribute of grateful praise, does he find ingratitude, 
oot tries of his mercies, and cisapelianes to his 
commands. ? 

Verses 5,6. And now J wiil tell you, &e—He 
graciously warns them beforehand, that they may 
have space and encouragement to repent, and so to 
prevent the threatened miseries. J will take away 
the hedge thereof, &c.—I will withdraw my presence 
and protection from you, and give you up into the 
hands of your enemies. J will lay it waste—It 
shall be overrun by heathen and infidels, and shall 
no longer bear the form of avineyard. Jt shall not 
be pruned nor digged—Vine-dressers used to dig up 
and open the earth about the roots of the vines. 
The meaning is, I:will remove my ministers, who 
have used great care and diligence to make you 
fruitful: but there shall come up briers and thorns 
—I will give you up to your own wicked lusts. J 
will also command the clouds—I will deprive you 
of all my blessings. 

Verse 7. For the vineyard, &c.--Or rather, Now 
the vineyard, as Dr. Waterland renders it: here we 
have the interprétation of the preceding parable in 
general., In the subsequent verses the prophet en- 
ters into particulars. ‘This general interpretation is 
fully verified by the history of the Jewish pe 

75 


Pa 


1& 


~ephah. 


" bg 


The prophet reproves the 


4 ISAIAH. 


people for their wickedness. 


SSS —————————— 


A.M. 3244, 


8 47 Wo unto them that join * house 
B. C. 760. 


to housé,. that lay field to field, till 
there be no place, that 7they may be placed 
alone in the midst of the earth ! 

9 ‘In ® mine ears, said the Lorp of hosts, 
°Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, 
even great and fair, without inhabitant. 

10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one 
&bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield an 


ne 
11 4 > Wo unto them that rise up early in 
the morning, that they may follow strong drink ; 


that continue until night, 2i/2, wine A. M. 3244 

B. C. 760. 

20 inflame them! Bo colt 

12 And i the harp, and the ‘viol,. the tabret, 

and pipe, and wine,.are in their feasts: but 

* they regard not the work of the Lorp, neither 
consider the operation of his hands. 

13 ! Therefore my people are gone into capti- 
vity, ™because they have no knowledge: and 
4 their honourable men are famished, and their 
multitude dried up with thirst. - 

14 Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and 
opened her mouth without measure : and their 


© Mic. ii. 2. 7 Heb. ye—f Chap. xxii. 14. Or, This is 
in mine ears, saith the Lorn, &c. ® Heb. Jf not, &e.——e See 
Ezek. xlv. 11.— Prov. xxiii. 29, 30; Eccles. x. 16; Verse 22. 


10 Or, pursue them.—i Amos vi. 5, 6——* Job xxxiv. 27; Psa. 
xxviii. 5 Hos. iv. 6. m Chap. i. 3; Luke xix. 44——"! He, 
their glory are men of famine. ‘ . 


especially in the time of our Lord and his apostles: 
and the menof Judah his pleasant plant—In whom 
God formerly delighted ; and he looked for judg-' 
ment—Both the administration of justice by magis- | 
trates, and justice in the dealings of the people with 
one another: but behold oppression—-From the pow- | 
erful upon their inferiors; and for righteousness— 
For equity, mercy, and benevolence ; but behold a 
cry—From the oppressed, crying to men for ‘help, 
and to God for vengeance. “ The paronomasia, or 
play on the words, in the Hebrew, in this place, is 
very remarkable; mispat, mispach ; zedakah, zea- 
kah. 'There are many examples of it in the other | 
prophets; but Isaiah seems peculiarly fond of it. | 
The rabbins esteem it a great beauty: their term for | 
it is, elegance of language. ”_Bishop Lowth. 
Verses 8-10. Wo unio them, &c.—The unfolding:| 
of the parable, after the general keyin the preceding | 
verse, comprehends two things, according to the ar- 
gument of the parable ; the crimes of this ungrateful | 
people, and the punishment decreed to their crimes. 
That join house to house—That add new purchases 
of houses and lands to their former possessions. 
Not that this was in_itself absolutely unlawful, but 
because they did it from an inordinate desire of 
riches, and with the injury of their brethren. That 
they may be placed alone—That they alone may be 
the lords and owners, and all others only their tenants 
and servants. Thus, “the first crime condemned i is | 
avarice and rapacity ; which is strongly described in | 
' this verse, and which prevailed remarkably among 
the Jews. Its punishment, even the desolation of 
those houses which they coveted, and the devasta- 
tion of those fields which they obtained so rapacious- 
ly, is set forth in the two. following verses.” See 
Vitringa. In mine ears, said the Lord—That is, It 
was revealed in mine ears: or, I heard God speak 
what Tam now about to utter. Ofa truth many 
houses shall be desolate—“ In vain are ye so intent 
upon joining house to house, and field to field ; yours 
houses shall be left uninhabited, and your fields shall 
become desolate and barren: so that a vineyard of 
ten acres shall produce but one bath (not eight gal- 


lons) of wine, and the husbandman shall reap but a 
tenth part of the seed which he has sown." Bishop| 
. 76 


Lowth. Thus it is predicted that a fruitful land 
should be made barren for their wickedness, accord- 
ing to God’s threatening, (Psa. evil. 34,) and they 
would have aé little comfort in their lands as in their 
houses. ‘ 
Verses 11,12. Wo unto them that rise up early, 
&c.—Here we find another vice reproved, namely, 
that of luxury, or intemperance ; whose companion 
and daughter is Inattention to the works of God, 
whose child, also, is Ignorance ; see verse 13 ; that 
rise up early to follow strong drink—As husband- 
men and tradesmen rise early to follow their em- 
ployments; as if they were afraid of losig time 
from that which is the greatest misspending of time 
and the most sinful abuse of it. That continue until 
night—Spending the whole day at their cups; till 
wine inflame them—Inflame their lusts and pas- 
sions: for chambering and wantonness, on the one 
hand, and contentions “and wounds without cause, on 
the other , generally follow upon rioting and drunk- 
enness, Rom. xiii. 13; Prov. xxiii. 29. And the harp, 
and the viol, §c., are in their feasts—Musical in- 
struments of all sorts must accompany their wine, 
that every sense may be gratified to the utmost, and 
their pleasures rendered more exquisite. But they 
regard not thework of the Lord—What God hath 
lately done, and is yet doing, and about to do, among 
them; his grievous judgments, partly inflicted, and 
partly threatened, which require another course of 
life, even to give themselves to fasting and prayer, 
and to reform their manners, that so they might re- 
move the calamities which now afflicted them, and 
prevent those which were approaching. _— 
Verses 13,14. Therefore the people are gone ‘into 
captivit y—The prophet may refer to those earried 
captive in the time of Ahaz: see on chap. ii. 20. Or 
his words may be rendered, the people go into, &e. ; 
that is, shall certainly and shortly go, speaking of 
the approaching judgments as if they were already 
come. Because they have no knowledge—No seri- 
ous consideration of God’s works, and of their own 
duty and danger. And their honourable men are 
famished—Who thought themselves quite out of 
the reach of famine. Therefore hell hath enlarged 
herself—T'he grave, or the place of torment, to 
8 


The desolations 


CHAPTER V. ' , 


SS 


of Judah. 


a 


4 5 ag glory, and their multitude, and their 

: pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall de- 
scend into it. 

15, And’** the mean man shall be brought 
down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, 
and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled ; 

* 16 But the Lorn of hosts shall be exalted in 
judgment, and God }° that is holy shall be 
sanctified in righteousness. 


17 Then shall the lambs feed after their man- 


ae 


12 Or, the holy God.——3 Heb. the God, 
the holy. 


2 Chap.-ii. 9, 11,.17. 


ner, and the waste places of ® the fat * ¥ et. 
one shall strangers eat. 


18 4 Wo unto them that draw ‘iniquity | with 


cords of vanity, and sin as it were e with a cart- 
rope : 

19 That say, Let him make speed, aind 
hasten his work, that we may see iy and 
let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel 


draw nigh and come, that we may know % 


ut! 4 


= 


ae 
© Chap. x. 16.—P? Chap. Ixvi. 5; Jer. xvii. 15; Amos v. 18; 
2 Pet. iti. 3, 4. 


SSS 


which certainly the souls of such persons must de- 
scend; and opened her mouth without measure— 
To receive those vast numbers which die by this fa- 
mine, or otherwise,.as is here implied. The pro- 
phet is thought to allude “to the form of the ancient 
sepulchres, which were subterraneous caverns hol- 
lowed out of a rock, the mouth of which, was 
generally closed by a great stone. The prosopo- 
peia is extremely ,fine and expressive, and the 
image is fraught with the most tremendous horror.” 
And their glory, &c.—Their nobles, or honourable 
men, as they are called, verse 13, being. distinguish- 
ed, both here and there, from the multitude; and 
their pomp—Which shall die with them; and he 
that rejoiceth—That spendeth‘all his days in mirth 
and jollity, and casteth away all cares and fears; 
shall descend into it—Not only into the grave, but 
into hell. Bishop Lowth’s translation of this verse 
is peculiarly striking: : 


“Therefore Hades-hath enlarged his ah ctaes' . 

And hath stretched open his mouth without measure: 
And down go her nobility, and her populace, 

And her busy throng, and all that exult in her.” 


“These verses,” (13 and 14,) he justly observes, 
“havea reference to the two preceding. They that 
indulged in feasting and drinking, shall perish with 
hunger and thirst: and Hades” (the invisible world, 
hell prepared to receive these sinners that live and 
die in sin) “shall indulge his appetite as much as 
they had done, and devour them all. The image is 
strong and expressive in,the highest degree. Habak- 
kuk uses the same image with great force, chap. ii. 
5. But in Isaiah, Hades is introduced, to much 
greater advantage, in person ; and placed before our 
eyes as a ravenous monster, opening wide his un- 
measurable jaws, and swallowing them all together.” 
Verses 15-17. And the mean man, &¢c.—All of 
them, both high and low, shall be brought to de- 
struction. But the Lord shall be exalted in judg- 
ment—By the execution of his just judgment upon 
his incorrigible enemies. And God that is holy 
shall be sanctified—Shall appear to be a holy God ; 
in righteousness—That is, by displaying his right- 
eousness, or executing his righteous judgments. 
Then, &c—When God shall have finished that 
work of judgment upon the ungodly, he will extend 
mercy to the remainder ; the lambs—The poor and 


harmless people, who shall be left in the land, when the 
rich are carried into captivity, as it happened 2 Kings 
xxv. 12; shall feed after their manner—Or, without 
restraint, as Bishop Lowth rendersit. Andthe waste 
places of the fat ones—The lands left by their. own- 
ers, the rich and great men, who were either slain 
or carried into captivity; shall strangers eat—The 
poor Israelites who were left in the land to be vine- 
dressers and husbandmen, who are called strangers, 
because they were so in reference to that land, not 
being the proper owners of it, nor. related to them. 
Vitringa is of opinion that this verse “refers to the 


| first disciples of Jesus Christ, who, seeing and de- 
| ploring the destruction of the Jews, should rest 


safely under the protection of God; while, aceord- 
ing to the next clause, the Gentiles should be 
breught into the communion of the church, and ‘re- 
joice in those benefits, prerogatives, and privileges, 
whereof the carnal, rich, and luxurious Jews were 
deprived.” See John x. 16. 

Verses 18, 19. .Wo unto them that draw iniquity 
—That are not only drawn to sin by the allurements 


_ of the world, or by the persuasions of wicked men, 


but are active and industrious in drawing sin to them- 
selves, or themselves to sin: with cords of vanity— 
Or, of lying, as the word sw frequently signifies; that 
is, with vain and deceitful arguments and pretences, 
whereby sinners generally draw themselves to sin, 
such as,'That God does not regard human affairs; 
that many of the greatest sinners often go unpun- 
ished ; that we see no proofs of the divine interpo- 
sition, &c. See 2 Pet. iii. 3,4. And sin with a 
cart-rope—With all their might, as beasts that draw 
carts with ropes. 
Namely, God, in whose name thou and other pro- 
phets are always reproving ‘and threatening us; 
and hasten lis work, that we may see it—He only 
thinks to affright us, as if we were fools or children, 
with bugbears, or pretended evils: he either cannot, 
or will not,do us any harm. This was the plain 
language of their actions; they lived as if they 
were of thisopinion. And let the counsei of theHoly 
One draw nigh—What you have declared to be his 
counsel, with regard to our going into captivity, and 
which, you say, his holiness obliges him to execute: 

they scornfully repeat the title of Holy One, usually 
given by the prophets to God. And come, that. we 
may know it—We cannot believe that it will ever 


That-say, Let him make speed— 


oe 


The crimes of 


A. M. 3244. 


20 4 Wo unto them “that call evil 
B.C. 760. 


good, and good evil; that put darkness 
for light, and light for woo that pac bitter 
for sweet, and sweet for bitter ! 

21 Wounto them that are ‘wise in their own 
eyes, and prudent *° in their own sight ! 

22 * Wo unto them that are mighty to drink 
wine, and men of strength to mingle strong 
drink : 

23 Which § justify the wicked for reward, and 
take away the righteousness of the righteous 
from him ! 

24 Therefore tas ‘the fire devoureth the 
stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so 


ISAIAH. 


Judah. enumerated. 


* their root shall be as rottenness, and A. M. 3244 
their blossom shall go up as dust : be- ibe 
cause they have cast away the law of the Lorp 
of hosts, and despised the word Me the Holy One 
of Israel. 

25 *'TTherefore is the anger of the Lorp 
kindled against his people, and he hath stretched 
forth his hand against them, and hath smitten 
them: and ‘the hills did tremble, and their 
carcasses were ”” torn in the midst of the streets. 
“ For all this his‘anger is not turned away, but 
his hand is stretched out still. 

26 {| * And he will lift up an ensign to the 
nations from far, and will "hiss unto them from 


4 Prov. iii. 
* Verse 11, 
16Heb. the tongue 


ie Heb. that say ates § evil, It is good, ge. 
7; Rom. i. 22 ; xii. 16, Heb. before their face. 
® Prov, xvii. 4; xxiv. 24.——t Exod. xv. 7. 


of fire-——* Job xviii. 16 ; Hos. ix. 16; Amos ii. 9, 2 Kings 
xxii. 13, 17.——Y Jer. iv. "24. 17 Or, as dung. 2 Lev. xxvi. 
14; Chap. ix. 12, 17, 21; x. 4. * Chap. xi. wa Ch. vii. 18. 


happen unless we see it with our eyes. Thus, “by 
a long progression in iniquity, and a continued 
accumulation of sin, men arrive at length to the 
highest degree of wickedness; bidding open defi- 
ance to God, and. scoffing at his threatened judg- 
ments ;” to which they cannot be persuaded to give 
any credit till they find them executed upon them. 

Verse 20. Wo unto them that call evil good, and 
good evil--That-endeavour to confound both the 
names and the natures of virtue and vice, of piety 
and impiety; commend ,and applaud what is evil, 
and disparage and discountenance what is. good ; 
that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, 
&c.—Ignorance and error, for knowledge and truth: 
in other words, who subvert, or pervert, all the great 
principles of truth, wisdom, and of righteousness. 
A most corrupt condition of a church and state is 
that indeed, “in which men, accustomed to vices, 
begin, with "the things themselves, to lose also the 
names of them, and to draw a veil, as it were, over 
their impieties, ‘by sanctifying their crimes with the 
names of virtues.” This reproof. of the: prophet 
supposes, that the difference between good and evil, 
sin and holiness, is as self-evident as that between 
the most contrary qualities which we are informed 


of by the report of our senses: and that the advan- 


_ tage which light hath above darkness does not shine 
out with a brighter evidence than the pre-eminence 
which virtue hath above vice, righteousness above 
unrighteousness. See Lowth. 

Verse 21. Wo unto them that are wise in their 
own eyes—Who, being puffed up with a high opinion 
of their own wisdom, despise the counsels and in- 
structions of Jehovah by his prophets, and prefer 
their own vain imaginations before the decisions of 
infinite wisdom. 

Verse 24. Therefore as the fire, &e.—“ The latter 
part of the parabolic song, contained in verse 6, be- 
gins here to be more fully explained ; and, to the end 
of, the chapter, we have an account of that total de- 
struction of the republic, which was to be brought upon 
it by a people most skilful’in war, and coming from 

78 


é 


a very distant country.” ‘The greatness and dae. 
ling cause of this threatened destruction are explain- 
ed in this and the- following verse: the instruments 
‘of it, a fierce and warlike people, are described 
verses 26-29. And the consequence Of it, the trouble 
and desperation of those that remained from this 
slaughter, verse 30. See Vitringa. Their root shall 
be as rottenness—They shall be like a tree, which 
not.only withers in its branches, but dies and rots at 
the roots, and therefore is past all hopes of recovery. 
That is, they shall be destroyed, both root ,and 
branch, and that as certainly and irresistibly as fire 
devours the stubble on which it kindles, and the flame 
consumes the chaff which it touches. Their blos- 
som shall go up as dust—Shall vanish as the dust, 
which is blown away with every wind, or shall be 
resolved into dust, and yield no fruit; "because they 
have cast away the law of the Lord, &c.—Have 
cast off all obedience to it, and treated it with 
contempt. 

Verse 25. Therefore is the anger of the Lord 
kindled—This implies that, before the time of that 
final vengeance, concerning which the. prophecy 
principally treats, God had afflicted, or, rather, would 
afflict and chastise this rebellious people, with the 
most grievous calamities: that those calamities 
should consume many, who, being slain in the wars, 
should be trod upon by their enemies, like the dung 
in the streets ; most certain indications these of the 
divine justice and wrath, while they, unawakened 
by these chastisements; would not so much as at- 
tempt to appease the divine displeasure, but would 
provoke it still more by repeated crimes; till, at 
length, it should come upon them to the uttermost.— 
Vitringa. And the hills did tremble—A metaphor- 
i¢al and hyperbolical description of a grievous ca- 
lamity, familiar to the prophets: see the margin. 
For all this, his anger is not turned away, &e.— 
This is not the end, as you vainly imagine, but, if 
you repent not, only the beginning of your sorrows, 
and an earnest ‘of further miseries. 

Verse 26. And he will lift vp an ensign to the 

3 


4 


| 


The judgments of the 


CHAPTER V. 


Lord against Judah. 


a ote, the end of the earth; and. behold, 
——___ ‘they shall come with speed swiftly : 

27 None shall be weary nor stumble among 
them; none shall slumber nor sleep ; ee 
¢ shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the 
latchet of their shoes be broken : 

28 ‘Whose arrows are sharp, and all their 
bows bent, their horses’hoofs shall be counted 
like flint, and their wheels like a whirl- 
wind. 


© Deut. xxviii. 49; Psa. Ixxii. 8. ——4 Joel ii. 7. e Dan. v. 6. 
* Jer. v. 16. Chap. vill. 22; Jer. iv. 23; Lam. iii. 2 ;Ezek. 


———— 


29 Their roaring shall be like a A.M. 3244. 
lion, they shall roar like young lions: 
yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of | the prey, 
and shall carry i¢ away safe, and none shall 
deliver it. 

30 And in that day they shall, roar against 
them like the roaring of the sea: and if one 
Slook unto the land, behold, darkness and 
sorrow, and the light is darkened in the 
heavens thereof. 


Xxxii. TSS. 18 Or, distress.——1* Or, when it is light, it shall 
be dark in the destructions thereof. 


nations—To call them together for his service: Here 
that decree of the divine severity, which had been 
spoken of in general terms in verse 24, is explained. 
God is shown to be the supreme general or leader of 
the people, which were to come from far to execute 
his vengeance} they were: to assemble at his setting 
up his ensign as a signal; and at his hissing—A 
metaphor taken from the practice of persons keep- 
ing bees; who used to draw them out of their hives 
into the fields, and lead them back again, cvpicpact, 
by hissing, whistling, or some sounds of that kind; 
as Cyril, Theodoret, and Bochart have shown. The 
meaning is, that God would collect the people, like 


bees, by the slightest indication of his will, and bring: 


them into Judea to execute his vengeance.—Bishop 
Lowth and Dodd. It isnot expressed particularly 
from whence they should be brought, but only said 
in general, Ist, That they should come from far— 
Which may be applied, either to the Assyrians, spo- 
ken of under this same character, (chap. x, 3,) and 
who, notlong after, invaded Judea, and did much mis- 
chief in it; or to the Chaldeans, even Babylon being 
called a far country, chap. xxxix. 3. 2d, That they 
should come from the ends of the earth—An ex- 
pression hardly applicable either to the Assyrians or 
Chaldeans, but which exactly agrees to the Romans, 
and which undoubtedly received its final and most 
perfect accomplishment in the destruction brought 
on the Jews by. them. In saying, they shall come 


with speed swiftly, the prophet refers to verse 19.. 


As the scoffers had challenged God to make speed, 
and to hasten his work of vengeance, so now they 
are assured, that with speed, and swiftly, it shall 
come. 

Verses 27-29. None, &¢c.—In these verses the 
prophet describes the ‘quality of the forces which 
should come against Jerusalem; their vigour, ac- 
tivity, and diligence, verse 27; their military expe- 
dition, readiness, skilfulness, and apparatus, verse 
28; their fortitude and undaunted courage, verse 29 ; 
for all which particulars the Romans were remark- 
ably eminent.—Dodd. None shall be weary— 
.Though their march be long and tedious. As I have 

3 


light there. 


called them to this work, -so. I will assist them in it. 
None shall slumber nor sleep—They shall all be 
watchful and diligent to take all opportunities of ex- 
ecuting my judgments. Nor the latchet, §c., be 
broken—I will take all impediments out of their 
way. Whose arrows are sharp—Who are every 
way furnished and ready for my work, waiting only 


‘for my command, Their horses’ hoofs like flint— 


Because they shall not be broken or battered by the 
length or stoniness and .ruggedness of the way. 
And their wheels like a whirlwind—For the swift- 
ness of their march, and for the force and violence 
of their chariots in battle. Phey shall roar like 
young lions-—Which signifies both their cruelty, and 
their eagerness to catch and devour the prey.- They 
shall lay hold on the prey, &c.--These words.do not 
agree to the Assyrians, for they were forced to re- 
treat with great shame and loss, and the Jews were 
delivered from them: but they-agree’ perfectly both 
to the Chaldeans and the Romans, both of whom car- 
ried the prey away safe, and none ‘delivered u— 
That is, neither, the Jews themselves, nor any of 
their confederates, to whose help they trusted. 

Verse 30. And in that day, &e—* Here Isaiah 
closes this prophecy, with a strong and eloquent de- 
scription of the consequences of this. calamity; set- 
ting forth, in the most emphatical terms, the utter 
confusion, blackness, and desperation, of the miser- 
able Jews.” See chap. viii. 22. They shall roar 
against them like the roaring of the sea—Which is 
violent and frightful; and if one look, &c., behold, 
darkness and sorrow—Darkness, that is, sorrow: 
the latter word explains the former. Every thing 
looks black and dismal. And the light is darkened 
in the heavens thereof-—-When they look up to the 
heavens, as men in distress usually do, they see no 
Their comforts are wholly eclipsed, and 
their hopes like the giving up of the ghost. It must 
be observed, that the Scriptures frequently express 
great calamitiés and changes, in states and churches, 
by the heavens being darkened, and the sun, moon, 
and stars withdrawing their light, or falling from 
heaven. 

79 


C. 760. - 


Account of the 


ISATAH. 


vision of Isaiah. 


CHAPTER VI. ; 


In this chapter we have the prophet’s fourth discourse, containing an account of a glorious vision iver he was favoured ; 
the design of which'was, 1st, To exhibit a figure of the kingdom of the Son of God, hereafter to be manifested in the 


world ; and, 2d, To foretell the future blindness and hardness of heart of the greatest part of the Jewish nation. 


We have 


(1,) A symbolical manifestation of the glory of the God of Israel, 1-4. (2,) The sanctification of Isaiah to the performance 


of an important prophetic office, 5-7. 
state of the Jews, 8-13. 
ap be the year that * King Uzziah died, 
I» saw also the Lorp sitting upon 
a a iitene high and lifted up, and } his train 
filled the temple. d 
2 Above it stood the seraphims: each one had 


A. M. 3246. 
“a, Se 


>] Kings xxii. 19 ; John xii. 41; Rey. 


lv. 2. 


22 Kings xv. 7.—— 


(3,) A peculiar command given to the prophet-concerning the future and unhappy 


six wings; with twain he covered his A. os 
face, and ° with twain he covered his ————~ 
feet, and with twain he did fly. 

3 And ? one cried unto another, and said, 
4 Holy, holy, holy, is. the Lorp of hosts : 


‘ 


¢ Ezek. i. 11.— 
4 Rev. iv. 8. 


1 Or, the skirts thereof.— 


2 Heb. this cried to 
this. > 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verse 1. In the year that. King Uzziah died, T 
saw the Lord— As this vision,” ‘says Bishop Lowth, 
“seems to.contain a solemn designation of Isaiah to 
the prophetical office, it is by most interpreters 
thought to be the first in order of his prophecies. 
But this perhaps may not be so: for Isaiah is said;in 
the general title of his prophecies, to have prophe- 
sied in the time of Uzziah, whose acts, first and last, 
he wrote; (2 Chron. xxvi. 22,) and. the phrase, iz 
the year ‘when Uzziah died, probably means, after 
the death of Uzziah; as the same phrase, (chap. 
xiv. 28,) means, after the death of Ahaz. Not that 

Isaiah’s prophecies are placed in exact order of time: 
- chapters ii., iii, iv., v. seem, by internal marks, to be 
antecedent. to chapter i.; they suit the time of Uz- 


ziah, or the former part of Jotham’s reign: whereas, } 


chapter i. can hardly be earlier than the last years 
of Jotham:. 
This might be a new designation of the whole course 
of God’s dispensations in regard to his people, and 
the fates of the nation; which ‘are even now stild de- 
pending, and will not be fully accomplished till the 
final restoration of Israel.” ; 

I saw the Lord—In a vision or ecstasy. The 
place of this vision is supposed to be the temple, 
from which the particular scenery of it is taken. 
The Divine Majesty is represented as seated wpon a 
throne, high and lifted up—Probably above the ark 
in the most holy place, where the glory appeared 
above the cherubim, surrounded by his attendant 
ministers. “The veil, separating. the most. holy 
place from the holy, or the outermost part of the 
temple, is supposed to be taken away, for the prophet, 
to whom the whole is exhibited, is manifestly placed’ 
by the altar of burnt-offering, at the entrance of the 
temple, (compare Ezek. xliii. 5, 6,) which was filled 
with the train of the robe, the spreading and over- 
flowing of the divine glory. The Lord upon the 
throne, according to St. John, (chap. xii. 41,) was 
Christ, and the vision related to his future kingdom; 
when the veil of separation was to be removed, and 
the whole earth was to be filled with the glory of 
God, revealed to all mankind. It respects, indeed, 
primarily the prophet’s own time, and the obdura- 
tion of the Jews of that age, and their punishment 


see note on chap. i. 1, 7, and ii. 1. 


= 


by the Babylonish captivity ; but extends, in its full 
latitude, to the age of the Messiah, and the blindness 
of the Jews to the gospel; the desolation of their 
country by the Romans, and their being rejected by 
God; that, nevertheless, a holy seed, a remnant, 
should be preserved, and that the nation should 
sprout out and flourish “again from the old stock.— 
Bishop Lowth. . 

Verse 2. Above it—Or, rather, above him, as Synn 
14 might be better rendered ; ‘stood the seraphim 
—As ministers attending upon their Lord, and wait- 
ing to receive and execute his commands. "The-word 
seraphim, which, like cherubim, is plural, signifies 
burning, or flaming ones, from the verb Ww, seraph, 
to burn or flame. The expression here means spir- 
itual beings, gui a claritate et aspectus splendore, 
quasi flammantes et ignei vist sunt, “who, from 
their brightness, and the splendour of their aspect, 
appeared as if they were fiery and flaming.” It is 
probable that both their name anid their fiery, burn- 
ing appearance were intended to signify, 1st; Their 
nature, which is bright and glorious, subtle and 
pure; and, 2d, Those qualities of fervent love to 
God, and zeal for his glory and service, which they 
possess. Each one had six wings—-For the purpose 
immediately mentioned. ! With twain he covered his 
face—Out of profound reverence, as being sensible 
of the infinite distance between,Ged and him, so 
that he durst not presume to look directly upon him, 
and judged’ himself neither able nor worthy to be- 
hold the,brightness of his glory. And with twain 
he covered his feet—To signify the sense he had of 
his own natural, though not moral, infirmity; and 
his desire that God would not too severely examine 
all his ways and actions, commonly signified by the. 
feet; because, though they did not swerve from 
God’s commands, yet they were not worthy of the 
acceptance, nor suitable to the dignity of so glorious 
amajesty. And with twain he did fly—Which im- 
plies his great readiness and alacrity, his activity and 
celerity in executing God’s commands. We may 
infer from this description of the seraphim, that they 
appeared in a human form: but whether that is the 
form they always bear, or whether it was only assum- 
ed on this occasion, cannot be determined. 

Verse 3. And one cried unto another—Divided.. 

3 


a, hy 


Account of the ae FP 


CHAPTER VI. 


viston of Isaiah. 


pan 


A.M, 3246. * the © whole earth zs full of his glo- 
B.C. 758. 
4 And the posts of the 4 door moved at the 

voice of him that cried, and £ the house was 

filled with smoke. . 

5 4 & Then said I, Wo is me! for I am ° un- 
done ; because I av a man of unclean lips, and 

I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips : 


3 Hebrew, his glory is the fulness of the whole earth. e Psalm 
Ixxii. 19. * Hebrew, thresholds——f Exod. xl. 34;.1 Kings 
viil. 10. 


for mine eyes have seen the King, A. M. 3246 
the Lorp of hosts. oe 

6 Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, 
® having a live coal in his hand, which he had 
taken with the tongs from off» the altar: — 

7 And he” laid ‘ ¢¢ upon my mouth, and said, 
Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine ini- 
quity is taken away, and thy sin purged. 


& Exodus iv. 10; vi. 30; Judges vi. 22; xiii. 22; Jer. 1.6. 
5 Hebrew, cut off. 6 Heb, and in his hand a live coal.—— Rev, 
viii. 3. 7 Heb. caused it to touch. i Jer.i.9; Dan. x. 16. 


into two choirs, they sung responsively one to the 
other; and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of 
hosts—* God’s holiness,” says Lowth, “or the super- 
lative purity of his. nature, implies in it all the rest 
of his attributes,especially his justice and mercy, 


which are dispensed by the most exact rules of rec- | 
titude. The. Christian Church has always thought | 
‘the doctrine of the Trinity to be implied in this three- | 
fold repetition of holy: as it is also intimated in sev- | 
eral other passages of the Old Testament, particu-_ 
larly in that form commandéd to be used in blessing 
the people, Num. vi. 24-26; and chap. xlviii. 16, of | 


this book ;” where see the notes... Thus Jerome ob- 
serves the design of their hymn was “to show that 
there is a Trinity in the one Godhead ; and to testify, 


that, not the Jewish temple, as formerly, (for that | 


was to be forsaken of God,) but the whole earth was 
full of his glory:” namely, of the effects and demon- 


strations of his glorious holiness, as well as of his | 


‘power, wisdom, and goodness. |. 

Verse 4. And the posts of the door moved—To- 
gether with the door itself. 
were commonly tokens of God’s anger. 


Such violent motions , 
And here, it | 


seems, this concussion of the temple was intended | 


to signify God’s displeasure against his people for 
their sins, and to be a token of its destruction, by 
‘the Babylonians first, and afterward by the Romans; 
and the house was filled with smoke—Which else- 
‘where is a token of God’s presence and acceptance, 
but here, of his anger; and may be considered like- 
wise as an emblem of the darkness and blindness of 


that generation of Jews, accustomed to worship | 


in that temple, as also of that future generation of 
the same people, who should worship there in the 


days of the Messiah, before its second destruction by | 


the Romans. . 
Verse 5. Then said I, &c.——The second part of 


this vision begins here, containing the sanctification | 


of the prophet, in order to his undertaking of a great 
- prophetical office, and showing, 1st, his state of mind 
upon the sight of the preceding illustrious vision: 
his consternation under a sense of his great, unwor- 
‘thiness ; and, 2d; describing the singular mode of his 
sanctification— Wo is me, for I am undone, &c.— 
That is, if God deal with me in strict justice. For I 
have made myself obnoxious to his displeasure ; be- 
cause I am a man of unclean lips—I am a great sin- 
ner, having offended him, as in many other ways, 
fo particularly by my lips., And I dwell in the 
midst of a people of unclean lips—I am an unclean 
» Vou. TL 6 


branch of an unclean tree ; besides my own unclean- 
ness, I have, both by want of zeal and of diligence, 
and faithfulness in the discharge of my duty, in- 
volved myself in the guilt of their sins, and there- 
fore may justly fear to partake with them in their 
plagues. Add to this, his consternation probably 
also arose, in part, from a sense of his want of due 


| qualifications for the important office in which he 


was to be employed, and of his unworthiness to be 
God’s messenger to his people, or even to join with 
the seraphim in praising him. For mine eyes have 
seen the King, the Lord of hosts-—The sight of this 
glorious and holy God gives me cause to fear that 
he is come to enter into judgment with me. Ob- 
serve, reader, while sinners are presumptuous and 
secure, even in the acts of their worship, though 
merely formal and hypocritical, holy persons have 
always been filled with reverence and humiliation 
before Ged: and the more extraordinary the mani- 


|| festations of GOd’s presence have been to them, the 


more have they reverenced and stood in awe of him, 
and the more have they abhorred themselves. Thus 
Job xiii. 5,6, Now mine eye seeth thee, wherefore 
I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes! 


| And@hus may not only every penitent sinner, but 


every justified believer, say, 


« My humbled-soul, when thou art near, 
In dust and ashes lies; 
How shall a sinful worm appear, — 
Or meet thy purer eyes! 


Verses 6, 7. Then flew one of the seraphim 
unto me—By God’s command; having a live coal 
in his hand—Both a token and an instrument of . 
purification, as the next verse explains it; which he 
had taken with the tongs from off the altar—Of 
burnt-offering, which stood in the court of the priests, 
where the prophet appeared to himself to be during 
the vision. The seraph took it’ from the altar, to 
show that men areto expect the expiation of sin, 
and purification from it, only by such means as God 
hath appointed, and particularly by the mediation of 
Christ, whom that altar manifestly represented, and 
by that purifying and refining grace of. the. Holy 
Spirit, which was signified by this live coal, and is 
conferred on none except through the merit of 


| Christ’s sacrifice ; see Heb. ix. 14, and xiii. 10. And 


he laid it wpon my mouth—So as only to touch my 

lips, and not to burn them. This was done to signi- 

fy, not only that all the gifts and graces Be purify 
81 


rd 


Account of the 


ISATAH. 


vision of Isaiah. 


A. M. S246. 8 4 Also I heard the voice of the 
———— Lorp, saying, Whom shall I send, 
and who will go for § us? Then said I, § Here 
am 1; send me. Pee ae 

9 And he said,..Go, and tell this people, 
' Hear ye ® indeed, *° but understand not ; and 
see ye }! indeed, but perceive not. - 

10 Make ™ the heart of this people fat, and 


make their ears heavy, and shut their 4. acre 
eyes ; ™ lest they see with their eyes, ———— 
and hear with their ears, and understand with 
their heart, and convert, and be healed. ~ 

11 Then said I, Lord, how long?) And he 
answered, ° Until the cities be wasted without 
inhabitant, and the houses without man, and 
the land be ™ utterly desolate ; 


& Gen. i. 26; iii. 22; xi. 7.——®Heb. behold me.—— Chap. 
xliii)8; Matt. xiii. 14; Mark iv. 12; Luke yi. 10; John xii. 
40; Acts xxviii.26; Rom. xi. 8. 


9 Or, without ceasing, &e. 10 Hebrew, hear ye in hearing. 
11 Heb. in seeing. m Psa. exix. 70;, Chap. lxiii. 17—— ® Jer. v. 
21.—— Mic. iii. 12.——? Heb. desolate with desolation. 


the mind, and fit us for the discharge of any particu- 
lar duty or function, come from God; but that there 
must be a real application and communication of 
them to our souls, It is not sufficient that we hear, 
think, and speak of them; or even that we desire 
them, and believe them to be attainable; but we must 
really receive and possess them. Observe this, 
reader. It-is of infinite consequence to thy salva- 
tion. Lo, this hath touched thy lips, and thy ini- 
quity is taken away—This is a-sign that the guilt 
of thy:sin is removed by pardoning meréy, and thy 
corrupt disposition and inclination to sin, by renew- 
ing grace; and, therefore, nothing can hinder thee 
from being accepted of God, as a worshipper, in con- 
cert with the holy angels; or from being employed 
for God, as a messenger to the children of men. 
Those only, who are thus purged from an evil con- 
science, are prepared to sérve the living God, Heb. 
ix. 14. The taking away of sin is necessary, in order 
to our speaking with confidence and, comfort, either 


to God in prayer, or from*God in preaching. Nor | 


are any so fit to display to others the riches and power 
of gospel grace, as those who have themselves tasted 
the sweetness, and felt the influence of that grace. 


Verse 8. Also I heard the voice of the Lord—We | 
have here the third part of this vision, comprehend- | 
ing, Ist, A trial of the disposition of the prophet, | 
now sanctified, with his reply to the,Lord, in this | 


verse; 2d, The command delivered to him concern- 


ing the execution of the divine judgment upon the | 


Jews, of blindness, &c., verses 9, 10; 3d, A more 
full and explicit declaration of a most grievous tem- 


poral judgment, which should be joined with the spi- | 


ritual one, verses 11-13.—Vitringa. Whom shall I 
send ?—God asks this question, not as if he were 
unresolved whom to send, but that Isaiah might have 
an: opportunity of voluntarily offering his service. 
And who will go for wus 2—To deliver the following 
message. The change of the number, J and ws, is 
very remarkable ; and both being meant of one and 
the same Lord, do sufficiently intimate a plurality 
of persons in the Godhead. .T'hen said I, Here am 
I, &c.—God’s last and great favour to him both.en- 
couraged and obliged him to be thus forward in his 
service. . , 

Verses 9, 10. And, he said, Go, and tell, this peo- 
ple—Not my people, for I disown them as they have 
rejected me. Hear’ ye. indeed,.but understand not, 
&c.—-The Hebrew words are imperative; yet they 
are not to be taken as a command, enjoining what 

82 


‘the state of the Jews before the Babyl 


SS SSeS 
the people ought to do, but only as a prediction, 
foretelling what they would do... The sense is, Be- 


‘cause you have so long heard my words, and seen 


my works, to no purpose, and have hardened your 
hearts, and will not learn nor reform, I will punish 
you in yourown way ; your sin shall be your punish- 
ment. I will still continue my word and works to 
you, but will withdraw my Spirit, so that you shall be 
as unable, as now you are unwilling, to understand. 
Make the heart of this people fat--Stupid and 
senseless. This making of their hearts fat, is here 
ascribed to the prophet, as it is ascribed to God in the 


‘repetition of this prophecy, (John xii. 40,) because 


God inflicted this judgment upon them by.the minis- 
try of the prophet, partly by way, of -prediction, 
foretelling that this would be the effect of his preach- 
ing, and partly by withdrawing the light and help 
of his Spirit. Make their ears heavy—Make them 
dull of hearing. Lest they see with their eyes— 


That they may not be able, as before they were not 


willing to see. And convert—Turn from their sin- 
ful practices unto God; and be headled—Of sin, 
(which is the disease of the soul,) by remission and 
sanctification, and of all the deadly effects of sin. 
This prophecy might relate, in some sure, to 

os cap- 
tivity, but certainly it did not receive its full accom- 
plishment till the days of our Lord; and in this 
sense it is understood and applied by the writers of 
the New Testament, and by Christ himself. 

Verses 11,12. Then said I, Lord, how long ?— 
An abrupt speech, arising from the prophet’s great 
passion and astonishment: how long shall this 
dreadful judgment last? Until the cities be wasted, 
&c.—Until this land be totally destroyed, first by the 
Babylonians, and afterward*by the Romans. And 
the Lord have removed men far away—Hath caused 
this people to be carried away captive into far 
countries. And there be a great 
houses. and lands be generally forsaken of their 
owners. The reader will observe, “There is a re- 


markable gradation in denouncing these judgments; _ 


not only Jerusalem and the cities should be wasted 
without inhabitant, but even the single houses 
should be without man ; and not only the houses of 
the cities, but even the country should be utterly 
desolate ; ‘and not only the people should be removed 


out of the land, but the Lord should remove them 


far away ; and they should not be removed for a 
short period, but there should be a great, or rather, 
3 


Lye 


forsaking—Till . 


Confederacy 


CHAPTER VII. 


against Judah. 


A. M. 3246. 12 P And the Lorp have removed 
B. C. 758. 


men far away, and there be a great 
forsaking in the midst of the land. 
13.4 But yet in it shall be a tenth, * and it 


asa A.M. 3246. 


shall return, and shall be eaten : 
B. C. 758. 


teil-tree, and as an oak whose ™sub- 
stance is in them, when they cast their leaves: 
so 4 the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. 


P2 Ki, xxv. 21.—30r, when it is returned, and hath been browsed. 


14 Or, stock, or, stem.——4 Ezra ix. 2; Mal. ii. 15; Rom. xi. 5. 


a long forsaking in the midst of the land. And 
hath not the world seen all these particulars exactly 


fulfilled 2 Have not the Jews laboured under a/ 


spiritual blindness and infatuation, in hearing, but 
not understanding, in seeing, but not perceiving the 
Messiah, after the accomplishment of so many pro- 
phecies, ‘after the performance of so many miracles ? 
And, in consequence of their refusal to convert and 
be healed, have not their cities been wasted without 
inhabitants, and their houses without man? Have 
they not been removed far away into the most dis- 
tant parts of the earth? and hath not their removal, 
or banishment, been now of above 1700 years dura- 
‘tion? And do they not still continue deaf and blind, 
obstinate and unbelieving ? The Jews, at the time 
of the delivery of this prophecy, gloried in being 
the peculiar church and people of God; and would 
yany Jew, of himself, have thought or have said, that 
-his nation would, in process of time, become an infi- 
del and reprobate nation; infidel and reprobate for 


many ages, oppressed by man, and forsaken of God? | 
It was above 750 years before Christ that Isaiah’ 


predicted these things; and how could he have pre- 
dicted them, unless he had been illuminated by the 


divine vision; or could they have succeeded accord- 
ingly, unless the Spirit of prophecy had been the 
Spirit of God?’ See Bishop Newton on the Pro- 
phecies, vol. i. p. 233. . 

Verse 13. But yet in it shall be a tenth—A small 
remnant reserved, that number being put indefinitely. 
And it shall return—Out of the “Babylonish cap- 

tivity, into their own land. And shallbe eaten—Or, 
shall be for a prey, as Dr. Waterland translates it : 
that is, that remnant shall be devoured a second 
time by the kings of Syria, and afterward by the 
Romans. Yet as a teil-tree, and as an oak, &e.— 
Yet there shall be another remnaiit, not such a one 
as that which came out of Babylon, but a holy seed, 
who shall afterward look upon him whom they 
have pierced, and mourn over him. Whose sub- 
stance ts in them when they cast their leaves, &¢.— 
Who, when their leaves are cast in winter, have a 
substance within themselves, a vital principle, which 
preserves life in the root of the tree, and in due time 
sends it forth into all the branches. So the holy seed 
shall be the substance, or, rather, the support thereof 
—Of the people, who, were it not for the sake of 
these, should be finally rooted out and destroyed. 


CHAPTER VIL : . 


We have here, (1,) an historical account of the epee this prophecy, 1-3. 
4-16. 


design the Israelites and Syrians against Juda 

king and people of Judah by the Assyrians, 17-25. 
c oy es AND it came to pass in the days of 
Li Ahaz the son of Jotham, the 
son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin, the 
king of Syria, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, 
king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to 


(2,) A prediction of the ill success of the 
(3,) A denunciation of the calamities to be brought upon the 


war against it, but could not prevail as % ees 
against it. pea 2k 

2 And it was told the house of David, saying, 
Syria 1 is confederate with Ephraim. And his — 
heart was moved, and the heart of his people, 


— 


a2 Kings xvi. 5; 2 Chron. xxviii. 5, 6, 


1 Heb. resteth on Ephraim. . 


. NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. 

Verse 1. And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz 
—Of whose idolatries and abominable wickedness 
the reader will find a particular account, 2 Chron. 
xxviii, 1-4. Rezin and Pekah went wp toward 
Jerusalem—“ The confederacy of these two kings 
against the kingdom of Judah was formed in the 
time of Jotham; and perhaps the effects of it were 
felt in the latter part of his reign. See 2 Kings xv. 
37. However, in the very beginning of the reign 
of Ahaz, they jointly invaded Judah with a power- 
ful army, and threatened to destroy, or to dethrone 
the house of David. The king and royal family 


being in the utmost consternation on receiving ad- |. 


vices of their designs, Isaiah is sent to them to sup- 
port and comfort them in their present distress, by 
assuring them) that God would make good his pro- 
mises to Davidand his house. This makes the sub- 
ject of this and the following chapter, and the be- 
ginning of the ninth.” But could not prevail 
against it~That is, against Jerusalem. But yet 
they carried away a multitude of captives out of 
Judea, slew a vast number of the people, and Rezin 
restored Elah to his own dominions. See notes on 
2 Kings xvi. 5, and. on 2 Chron. xxviii. 5, 6. 

Verse 2. And it’ was told the house of David— 
Ahazand his royal relations and courtiers. He calls 
them thé house of David, to intimate that the follow- 

83 


ad 


Confederacy 


ISAIAH. 


against Judah. 


A. M. 3246. as the trees ‘a the wood are moved 
B. C. 758. 
atte with the wind. 

3 Then said the Lorp unto Isaiah, Go forth 
now to meet Ahaz, thou, ® and ? Shear-jashub 


thy son, at the end of the ° conduit of the upper | 


pool in the “highway of the fuller’s field ; 

4 And say unto him, Take heed, and be 
quiet: fear not, * neither be faint-hearted for 
the two tails of these smoking fire-brands, for 
the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the 
son of Remaliah. 

5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the’: son of 


“b Olan. x 21. pees That i is, “The remnant shall return, 8 see e Chap. 
vi. 13; x. 21.——° 2 Kings xviii, 17; Chap. xxxvi, 2.——* Or, 
causey-way. 


Remaliah, have taken evil counsel 4, M. 3246 

B. C. 758. 

against thee, saying, ———— 

6 Let us go up against Judah, and § vex it, 

and let us inal a ‘bread therein for us, and 

set a king in the midst of it, even the son of 
Tabeal : 

7 Thus saith the Lord Gen; at shall :not 
stand, neither shall it come to pass. 

i Re the head of Syria is Damascus, and 
the head of Damascus is Rezin: and within 
threescore and five years shall Ephraim, be 
broken, ®that it be not a people. 


~ 4Heb. let not thy heart be tender. 5 Or, waken.—4 Prov. 
xxi. 30; Chapter viii. 10——e 2 Sam. viii. 6 ——® Heb. from a 


people, af 
= ; - ) ¥ 


ing comfortable message was sent to Ahaz, not for 
his own sake, but only for the sake of his worthy 
progenitor David, to whom God had promised an 
everlasting kit dom. Sy yria is confederate with 
Ephraim—With the kingdom of the ten tribes, 
commonly called Ephraim, because that tribe was 
by farthe most numerous and potent of them. And 
his heart was moved—Namely, the heart of Ahaz; 
and. the heart. of his people—With excessive fear, 
arising partly from a°consciousness of their own 
guilt, whereby they had-put themselves out of God’s 
protection; and partly from the consideration of the 
great strength and power of their enemies. 

Verse 3. Then said the Lord unto Isaiah—This 
fifth discourse, delivered as immediately from. the 
Lord, which extends from hence to the end of chap. 
xii., is of a very mixed and various argument. It 
may be divided into five parts: the first contained 
in this chapter; the second from chap. viii. 1, to 
chap. ix. 7; the third from chap. ix. 7, to chap. x. 5; 
the fourth from chap. x. 5, to the end of that chap- 
ter; and the fifth is contained in the eleventh and 
twelfth chapters. The first part of this prophecy, 
which foretells the invasion of Judea by the Ephraim- 
ites, the Syrians, and Assyrians, contains a kind 
of introduction to the subsequent prophecies in this 
discourse. Its design is two-fold; first, to comfort the 
pious in Jerusalem, amidst this great calamity which 
threatened their nation, and to testify the singular 
providence of God toward the house of David, 
which he had hitherto preserved, and would continue 
to preserve till the completion of his great design : 
and, secondly, to upbraid the folly and ingratitude 
of Ahaz.. See Vittinga. Go forth now to meet 
Ahaz—Here we have an eminent instance of God’s 
preventing merey toward one who neither ° inquired 
of him, nor sought his help, Thus God is often 
found of those who seek him not: mueh more will 
he be found of those who seek him diligently! And 
Shear-jashub thy son—Whose very name, signify- 
ing, A remnant shall return, carried in it a sign and 
pledge of the promised deliverance. At the end of 
the conduit—W hither he probably went to take care 


about the waters which thence were brought into the, 


city, to secure them to himself, or keep them from 


tgs 


the enemy, as Hezekiah afterward did, 2 Chron. 
Xxxii. 3, 4, 

Verse 4. Say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet— 
Settle thy mind by the belief of that joyful message 
which I amnow to deliver to thee from the Lord ; 
Fear not for the two tails, &¢.—These two kings 
and their forces, which, thou gh they seem to threaten 
utter destruction, yet shall not be able to do much 
mischief, being not whole fire-brands, but only small 
pieces or ends of them, taken out of the fire, in 
which there is more smoke than fire: and the fire 
will be speedily extinguished. They have more of 
show and terror than of strength, their power being 
much wasted and almost consumed. He terms the 
king of Israel, the son of Remaliah, by way of con- 
tempt, intimating that he was unworthy of the name 
of king, his father being an obscure person, and he 
having got into the throne by usurpation, and the 
murder of his master Pekahiah, 2 Kings xv. 25. 

Verses 5, 6. Syria and Ephraim have taken evil, 
or mischievous counsel, saying, Let us go up against 
Judah, and vex it—Hebrew, 133"p3, harass, weary, 
or distress it ; and make a breach therein—Vio- 
lently break in upon the land, or break their power 
and kingdom, and subdue it to ourselves; and set a 
king in the midst of it—Or viceroy, that shall act 
by our authority; even the son of Tabeal—Some 
considerable captain, in whose fidelity both of them 
had great confidence ; but whether he wasan Israel- 
ite or Syrian is uncertain, and not material. 

Verses 7-9. Jt shall mot stand—Namely, their 
evil counsel. For the head of Syria is Damascus 
—As if he had said, As Damascus is the head city 
of Syria, and Rezin is the head, or king, of Damas- 
cus, so shall they continue to be, and not advance 
themselves, and enlarge their territories, by pos- 
sessing themselves of Jerusalem and the kingdom 
of Judah as they design.  Rezin shall be ‘Kept 
within his own bounds, and be head of Damascus 
only. And, in-a similar sense, (verse 9,) Samaria 
shall continue. to be the chief pS of the kingdom 
of Israel, and Pekah shall not conquer Jerusalem 
as he hopes todo. The Hebrew particle *3, however, 
which introduces this passage, instead of being ren- 
dered for, may, with propriety, be translated though, 

8 


The Lord gives 


CHAPTER VII. 


Ahaz a sign. 


A.M, 3240. 9 And the head of Ephraim is Sa- 
= maria, and the head of Samaria is 


Remaliah’s son. ‘If’ ye will not believe, 
“£2 Chron. xx. 20.—" Or, Do ye not believe? it is because 


as it frequently is, (see Josh. xvii. 18; 1 Sam. xiv. 39,) 
and then the meaning -will be, Though the head of 
Syria be Damascus, andthe head of Damascus 
Rezin, and the head ‘of Ephraim be Samaria, §c., 
yet within threescore and five years shall Ephraim 
be broken, &c. In this sense Bishop Lowth under- 
stands the words, joining the first clause of the ninth 


verse to the first of the eighth, judging that, by some. 


means, a transposition of it has taken place, which 
seems very probable. As to the chronological diffi- 
culty, which has embarrassed commentators in this 
place, the best solution seems to be that of Arch- 
bishop Usher, (see his Annals of the Old Testament, 
A. M. 3327,) who explains the latter clause of verse 
8, not of the first captivity of the ten tribes by Shal- 
maneser, but of their final deportation by Esar-had- 
don, who totally dispeopled the land, and brought 
new inhabitants from Babylon, Cuthah, and other 
cities of the Assyrians, to inhabit the cities of Israel. 
See Ezra iv. 2, compared with 2 Kings xvii. 24. 
“Compute,” says Bishop Newton, who adopts this 
explication, “sixty-five years in the reigns of Ahaz, 
Hezekiah, and,Manasseh, and the end of them will 
fall about the twenty-second year of Manasseh; 
when Esar-haddon, king of Assyria, made the last 
deportation of the Israelites, and planted other na- 
tions in their stead, and in the same expedition pro- 
bably took Manasseh captive, and carried him to 
Babylon, 2 Chron. xxxiii-11. Ephraim was broken 
from being a kingdom before; but now he was bro- 
ken from being a people, and from that time to this 
what account can be given of the people of Israel, 
as distinct from the people of Judah?’ On the 


passage is also approved by Bishop Lowth. It may 
seem strange, at first sight, that the prophet, who 
here foretels the entire destruction of Ephraim, 
should. say nothing about the Syrians. But the 
Syrians were now in confederacy with Ephraim, 
and therefore what is here said of one may be well 
supposed to be spoken of both ; and that the destruc- 
tion of both, at or near the same time, is indicated. 
In fact, the Syrians and Israelites were such near 
neighbours, that the Israelites could scarcely be 
invaded by a foreign army, without Syria being sub- 
dued. Tf ye will not believe, &e.—If ye will not 
believe what I now speak to you in the name of 
God; if ye will not put confidence in him, but, dis- 
trusting his providence, will seek to the Assyrians 
for succour; ye shall not be established—Or, pre- 
served in your possessions, any more than the 
Syrians or Israelites: your state, whether political 
or ecclesiastical, shall not be upheld and confirmed ; 
but ye shall be distressed and consumed by those to 
whom you seek for help: the accomplishment of 
which threatening is recorded 2 Chron. xxviii. 20. 
The design of the prophet was to raise up their 
fainting minds to a reliance on God, rather than on 
3 : 


| 


| king, verses 13-16.” 


| here. 
Prophecies, vol. i. p. 204. This interpretation of the || 


surely ye shall not be established. Acie 46, 
10 “I ® Moreover, the Lorn spake feb. 
again unto Ahaz, saying, 


ye are not stable. 


s Heb. And the Lorp added to speak. 


‘See a passage very like this, 


the king of ‘Assyria. 
2 Chron. xx. 20. 
Verses 10-12. T'he Lord spake again unto Ahaz 
—Namely, by Isaiah. “ From hence to verse 16, we’ 
have the confirmation of the promise, by a sign to 
Ahaz, in the name of God; in which we have, first, 
the prophet’s address to Ahaz, exhorting him, by 
the divine command, to ask whatever sign he would, 
with the reply of Ahaz, verses 10-12: and, second- 
ly, a declaration of God’s good pleasure to give 
an illustrious sign, which he offers rather to the true 
believers than to a hypocritical and incredulous 
Through the strong and forei- 


| ble objections which some learned men have made 


against .applying-the prophecy contained in these 
verses to Christ, in its primary sense, Huetius, Gro- 
tius, and some other commentators, have been led 
to suppose that it immediately related to the birth 


| of a child in a natural way, and that it only refers 


in a secondary sense to the birth of Christ. .Thus 
Bishop Lowth observes, “ The obvious, literal mean- 
ing of the prophecy, not excluding a higher second- 
ary sense, is this: ‘That, within the time that a 
young woman, now a virgin, should conceive, and 
bring forth a child, and that child should arrive at 
such an age as to distinguish between good and evil, 
that is, within a few years, (compare chap. viii. 4,) 
the enemies of Judah should be destroyed.’” But, 
surely, as Dr. Doddridge observes, on Matt. i. 23, 
“ & son’s being born of one, then a virgin, when she 
was married, was no such miraculous event as to 
answer such a pompous introduction” as we have 
Of this the reader may easily judge by at- 
tending to the prophet’s words, and a short and easy 
paraphrase upon them. Ask thee a sign of the Lord 
thy God—A sign is a miracle wrought for the con- 
firmation of some message, promise, or doctrine deli- 
vered from God. “Some unusual or extraordinary 
effect, production, or phenomenon, which could not 
be explained from natural causes, but only from the 
omnipotence of the Ruler of the universe ; which, 


| moreover, signified that God was present, and rati- 


fied the word, or declaration, for which the sign was 
given.” See Exod. iv. 8; Judg. vi. 17; Isa. xxxviii. 
22. Ask it either in the depth, or in the height above 
—Demand some prodigy to be wrought, either in 
earth or heaven, at thy pleasure. By speaking thus, 
the prophet signified that “all nature-was, subject to 
the power and control of that God, whom he calls 
the God of Ahaz, as being the God of his fathers, 
and in order to admonish him wherein to place his 
confidence.” But Ahaz said, I will not ask—This 
refusal did not proceed from faith in God and true 
humility, but rather from his contempt of God, and. 
disregard of his word, as is sufficiently evident from 
the history of his life. He probably feared lest, if 
such a sign should be given as he did not choose, he 
should be compelled to desist from his purpose of 


es * 
* 


Promise of 


ISAIAH. 


the Messiah. 


A. M. 3246. 
B.C. 758.. 


11 * Ask thee a sign of the Lorp 
thy God ; ° ask it either in the dope, 
or in the height pte 

12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will 
I tempt the Lorp. 

13 And hesaid, Hear ye now, O house of David: 


jmen, but will ye weary my God also? 


Is it a small thing for you to weary 4. M. 3246. 

14 Therefore the Lorp himself shall give 
you a sign ; " Behold, a virgin. shall. conceive, 
and bear ‘a son, and ?° shall call his name 
k Immanuel. 


& Judges vi. 36; Matt. xil. 38.——® Or, make thy petition deep. 
h Matt. i. 23 ; Luke xxxi. 34.——i Chap. ix. 6. 


10Oy, thou, O virgin, shalt call, see Gen. iv. 1,25; xvi. 11° 
xxix. 32; xxx. 6, 8; 1 Saw. iv. 21.——* Chap. viii. 8. 


calling in the aid of Assyria, which he could not 
well have called in after Jehovah had given a sign. 
to the contrary. Besides, he did ‘1iot dare to com- 
mit himself to that divine favour and providence, 
which he had heretofore so proudly despised ; pre- 
ferring to it the protection of other and false deities. 
See Vitringa. Neither will I tempt the Lord—By 
distrusting his providence, or asking a sign, as if I 
questioned the truth of his word. But this was 
deep hypocrisy, as appears by the prophet’s answer. 

Verses 13,14. And he said, Hear now, O house of 
David—The prophet no longer addresses himself 
to, Ahaz singly, who would not regard his words, but 
to the whole royal family, all of whom he reproves, 
as being the king’s counsellors, and promoting the 
design of sending for the Assyrian succours. Js it 
asmall thing for you—Is it not wickedness enough ; 
to weary men?—To-vex God’s prophets and people 
with your oppressions and horrid impieties? But 
will ye weary my God also?—By your ingratitude, 
unbelief, and disobedience to his commands ? ‘ There- 
Jfore—Because you despise me, and the sign which 
I now offer you, God, of his own free grace, will 
send you a more honourable messenger, and give 
you anobler sign. Or, Nevertheless, (as the particle 
12? often signifies, ) the Lord will give you a sign— 
Although you deserve no sign nor favour, yet for the 
comfort of those few, believers who are among you, 
and to ledve you without excuse, I shall remind you 
of another and greater sign, namely, of your deli- 
verance and preservation ; which God hath promised, 
and will in. his due time perform. Behold, a virgin 
shall conceive, &c.—One, in the strictest sense, a 
virgin, as the Hebrew word, 95y, almah, here 
used, properly signifies, and is translated by all the 
ancient interpreters, being never once used in Scrip- 
ture in any other sense, as several learned men have 
proved, against the pretensions of the modern Jews. 
See particularly Bishop Kidder’s Demonstration of 
the Messias, part ii. chap. v., and Dr. Whitby on 
Matt. i. 23. Indeed, independent of the term ren- |) 
dered virgin, the text implies it. For, as the last- 
mentioned writer observes, “this promise is made as 
a sign, or miracle, to confirm the house of David in 
God’s promise made to him of the perpetuity of his 
kingdom. Now what sign or miracle could it be, that 
a-woman should be with child, after the ordinary 
manner? Where is the sign or wonder in this? Had 
no more been intended, what need was there of these 
words, The Lord himself shall. give you a sign? 
What need of that solemn notice, Behold! there 
being nothing new or strange in all this.” Add to 
this, that the original expressions are very emphati- 


“’ 


cal, and are literally rendered by, Bishop’ Lowth, — 
Behold, the virgin conceiveth, , _and beareth a@ son, 
namely, that only woman, who ever was, or should 
be a mother, while she was still a virgin: and whose 
offspring, being conceived and born without the 
concurrence of man, was, therefore, with peculiar 
propriety, denominated and characterized, the seed 
of the woman, being her seed exclusively. 

But it is inquired, how this birth from a virgin, 
which was not to happen till many ages after, could 
be a sign to Ahaz and the Jews, of their deliverance 
from present danger ; and it is urged, that “this pro- 


‘mise, being made to Ahaz as a sign, must have rela- 


tion to a child born in ‘his time, and therefore not to 
our Jesus, born above seven hundred years after his 
death.” To this, Dr. Whitby answers, “ This objec- 
tion is founded on a mistake: this promise, or sign, 
being not given to Ahaz, who, we have just seen, re- 
fused to ask a sign; but to the house of David, 
according to verse 13. Now the house of David 
being then in great danger of being eut off and ex- 
tinguished, by the ‘kings of Israe} and Syria, the 
promise of a Messiah, who was to be of the seed of 
David, and to sit upon his throne, was a great 
security that that house should not be extinguished, 
and so was a proper remedy against those fears.” 
To this may be added, that this promised birth of 
the Messiah supposed not only the preservation of 
the house of David, but also the preservation of that 
city, and nation, and tribe, in and of which he was 
to be born: therefore there was ho cause to fear that 
ruin which their enemies now threatened. This 
argument is greatly strengthened by the following 
clause: And shall call—That is, his virgin mother 
shallcall; hisname Immanuel—The mother usually 


giving the name to the child, and this mother haying 


a peculiar right to do it, the child having no human 
father. 'To be called, in. Scripture language, is the 
same thing as to be: the meaning is, He shall be 
Immanuel, that is, God with us; God dwelling 
among us in our nature, the Word made flesh, John 
i. 14. God and man meeting in one person, and: 
being a mediator between God and men. Now to 
whom but the Messiah was this applicable? | Or, 
waiving the import of the name; supposing the being 
called by this name did not imply that the child or 
person should be what his name signified, namely, 
God with us, what other person, Save the Messiah, 
can be pointed out, that was called by this name 3 
To what other ev ent can this passage of the pro: 
phecy be made to accord? What woman, then a 


-virgin, and afterward marrying, and bearing a: son, 


called that son Immanuel? Surely they who con- 
3 . 


i 


Promise of 


CHAPTER VIi. 


= 


A 


» the Messiah. 


A. See 15 Butter and honey shall he eat, 


that he may know to refuse the er 
and choose the good. — = 


know to refuse the evil, and choose 


16 * For before the child shall A: M. 3246. 
B. C. 7538, 


the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall 


1 Chap. 


viii. 4. 


tend for this sense of the prophet’s words, should 
point out the person so called. None have done 
this, and none can do it. No such person ever ex- 
isted. As to what some have suggested, that Heze- 
kiah, the son-of Ahaz, might be meant, and be said 
to be called by that name, because he was the future 
governor of the land, (see chap. viii. 8,) and God 
was with him, it must be observed, that he was born 
at least nine years before this prophecy was deli- 
vered, even before Ahaz came to the throne, and 
therefore his birth could not be intended by the pro- 
phet here. But not to pursue the argument further, 
which certainly is not necessary in so clear a case ; 
we will only add, that even if it could be supposed 
that the prophet did first and immediately refer to 
some child to be then born, yet, as: Bishop Lowth 
observes, (in words hardly consistent with what he 
had said, as quoted aboveyof the primary sense of 
the passage,) “The prophecy is introduced in so 
solemn amanner; the sign is so marked, as a sign 
selected and given by God himself, after Ahaz had 
rejected the offer of any sign of his own choosing, 
out of, the whole compass of nature; the terms of 
the prophecy are so peculiar, and the name of the 
child so expressive, containing in them much more 
than the circumstances of the birth of a common 
child required, or even admitted; that we may easily 
suppose; that, in minds prepared by the general ex- 
pectation of a great deliverer, to spring from the 
house of David, they raised hopes far beyond what 
the present occasion suggésted; especially when it 
was found that in the subsequent prophecy, deliver- 
ed immediately afterward, this child, called Im- 
manuel, is treated as the Lord and Prince of the 
land of Judah. Who could this be, other than the 
heir of the throne of David? under which charac- 
ter a great, and even a divine person -had been pro- 
mised. St. Matthew, therefore, in applying this 
prophecy to the birth of Christ, does it, not merely 
in the way of accommodating the words of the pro- 
phet to a suitable case, not in the prophet’s view ; but 
takes it in its sttictest, clearest, and most important 
sense, and applies it according to the original de- 
sign, and principal intention of the prophet.” 
Verse 15, Butter and honey shall he eat—The 
common food of children in that country, where 
these articles were in great abundance, and of the 
best sort. The principal meaning of the verse 
seems to be, that this child, called Immanuel, should 
be brought up in the usual manner, “the samé re- 
puvlic still continuing, and the cultivated fields, un- 
occupied by the enemy, abundantly supplying all 
necessary food; and that thus he should grow up 
to maturity.” The words, however, also signify, 
that though he should be miraculously conceived, 
and should be possessed of a nature truly divine, 
yet he should be also hwman, subject to all the in- 
firmities of our nature, standing in need of food for 
3 


his support as other children do, and by the help 
thereof growing up from childhood to manhood. 
Thathe may know—Or rather, till he know, as npr 
may be properly rendered; to refuse the evil and 
choose the good—That is, till his faculties be fully 
unfolded, or, as Bishop Lowth renders it, when he 


knows, &c.; when they are unfolded, and he is: 


arrived at mature age. “Both in childhood and in 
manhood, he shall be sustained by the usual diet of the 
country, which, being neither invaded nor distressed 
by ‘any foreign enemy, shall yield food sufficient 
for all its inhabitants. 

Verse 16. For before the child, &e.—“ The learn- 
ed Vitringa,” says Dr. Dodd, “seems to have proved 
beyond any doubt, that the child spoken of in this 
verse can be no other than he who is spoken of in 
the preceding verses. The connecting particle for, 
and the repetition of the words, refusing the evil and 


choosing the good, evidently demonstrate,” he thinks, 


“that the IMMANUEL is, here meant, and that, in 
order to enter into thé immediate: “design of the 
prophet, we are to consider that, rapt, as it were, 
into future times, he proposes the Immanuel, asa 
sign of salvation to the people of God, as if present ; 
Behold a virgin conceives; as if he understood 
him to be at this time conceived in the womb of the 
virgin, and shortly to. be, born: and he says, that 
more time-shall not elapse = his birth to his capa- 
bility of discerning between good and evil, than from 
henee to the desertion of the land of the two kings,” 
or the time specified, chap. viii. 4. Archbishop 
Usher, however, Poole, Henry, Dr. Kennicott, and 
some other celebrated writers, conceive that we have 
a two-fold'prophecy in this passage, the former part, 
contained in verses 14, 15, referring to the Messiah, 
and the latter, containéd in this verse, to Shear- 
jashub, the son of Isaiah. “That the 16th verse,” 
says Dr. Kennicott, “contains a distinct prophecy, 
appears from hence: Ist, The words preceding have 
been proved to be confined to the Messiah, whose 
birth was then distant above seven hundred years ; 
whereas,the words here are confined to some child 
who was not to arrive at years of discretion be- 
fore the kings, then advancing against Jerusalem, 
should be themselves cut off. 2d, Some end was 
undoubtedly to be answered by the presence of 
Isaiah’s son, whom God commanded him to take 
with him when he went to visit Ahaz; and yet no 
use at all appears to have been made of this son, un- 
less he be referred to in this sentence; and, 3d, 
These: prophecies are manifestly distinguished by 
being addressed to different persons. The first was 
addressed to the house of Dav id, for the consolation 
of the pious in general; as it assured them, not only 
of the preservation of that house, but of God’s 
fidelity to his great promise: whereas the second 
promise is addressed to the king in particular, as it 
foretold the speedy destruction of the two king gs, his 


“ 


Bl e bila beh, a i 
‘ ‘ iN “4 
wae he! 
Desolation of the -: : 5 ad a ISAIAH. Jews predicted. 


way ' 
A, M. 3246. be forsaken of ™both her kings. 


"BO: 758, 17» The Lorp shalbring upon 


thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father’s; 


house, days that have not come, from the day. 
that ° Ephraim departed from Judah; even the 
king of Assyria. 

18° And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
the Lorp ? shall hiss for the fly that zs in the. 
uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for 


i bee that is in the land of Assy- Ames. 
19 And they shall come, and shall rest all 
of them in the desolate valleys, and in ?the 
holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and 
upon all ™ bushes. 

20 In the same day shall the Lorp shave 
with a ‘razor that is hired, namely, by them 
beyond the river, a the king of Assyria, the 


m2 Kings xv. 30; xvi, 9. 


ig 12 Chron. xxviii, 19. ©] Kings 
_ xii. 16.——? Chap. v. 26. 
fig af 


Chap: il. 19; Jer. xvi. 16. 


11 Or, commendable trees ——t 2 Kings Se ae 8; 2 Chron. xxviii. 
20, 21; Ezek. v. 


enemies.” Dr. Doddridge, who also thinks that this 
verse refers to Shear-jashub, judging with Dr. Ken- 
nicott, that Isaiah “was ordered to take him in his 
hand for no other imaginable reason, but that some- 
thing remarkable was to be said of him, ” defines the 
general sense of these verses from the 13th to be 
this: “You have affronted God by refusing a sign 


», now; yet his transcendent mercy will make your 


We? pypeent forfeited deliverance, (by the death of these 


Saal 


yi gin, and shall condescend to pass throug 


federate kings, which shall happen before, 7y3n, 
ts Child in my hand is grown up to the exercise of 
ind a sign of a much nobler deliverance by tl 
Messiah ; who shall be born’ of an ir culate vir- 
he tender 
oS i scenes of infancy, as other children do, > In the latter 
part of the verse, the land that thou abhorrest, 
means the coutitries of Syria and Israel, which Ahaz 
abhorred for their cruel designs and practices against 
him, Shall be forsakenof ‘both her kings—So far 
shall Rezin and Pekah be from conquering thy land, 
that they shall lose their own lands, and their lives 
too : which they did within two years after this time, 
being both slain by the king of Assyria, 2 Kings xv.’ 
29, 30; and xvi. 9. 

Verse 17. The Lord shall bring upon thee—But 
although God will deliver you at this time, for his 
own name’s sake, yet he will remember and requite 
your wickedness, and hath a dreadful judgment in 
store for you. And upon thy people, and thy father’s 
house—Upon thy subjects, and upon thy sons and 
successors, the kings of Judah: the accomplishment 
of which threatening is recorded in their history. 
Part of the Assyrian storm fell in Ahaz’s reign, 2 
Chron. xxviii. 20; and he began to reap the bitter 
fruit of his confiding in the king of Assyria, rather 
than in the Lord of hosts. Days that have not 
come—Namely, evil days, or calamities; from the 
day that Ephraim departed, &c.—When the. ten 
tribes revolted from thy father’s house, and set up 
another opposite kingdom. The king of Assyria 
might well be called their plague or calamity, as he 
is called the rod of God’s anger, chap. x. 5. 

Verses 18, 19. Tn-that day—Known to God, and 
appointed by him for’ the execution of these judg- 
ments; the Lord shall hiss for the fly—The flies, 
rather. Thus he calls these enemies, to signify 
either their great number, or their speedy march: 
see on chap. v. 26. As the word hiss carries with it 
a low idea, and does not properly express the mean- 


¢ 


+ 


ing of the original word prw, sherele which properly 
signifies, sibilando advocare, to call by whistling, it 
seems desirable that it should not have been used 
here and chap. v.26. Bishop Lowth renders it, Je- 
hovah shall hist the fly, shall call them softly, bring 
them by a slight intimation of his will. Jn the utter- 
most part of the rivers, &c.—In their extremity, 
where they go out into the sea. The river Nile is 
undoubtedly intended, which may be called rivers, 
either for its greatness, or because toward the end 
of it-it is divided into seven streams. ‘When the 
Chaldeans had, in good measure, subdued the Egyp- 
tians, it is probable great numbers of the Egyptian 
soldiers listed themselves in the Chaldean army, and 
with them invaded the land of Judah. And for the 
bee, &c.—The Assyrian army, compared to bees, as 
for theif numerous forces and orderly march, so for 
their fierce attempts and mischievous effects. In 
the land of Assyria—In the empire of Assyria or 
Babylon; for these two were united into one empire, 
and therefore in Scripture are promiscuously called: 
sometimes by one title, and sometimes by the other. 
They shall come—The flies, and especially the 
bees. And shall rest all of them—They shall have 
an easy victory; few or none of them shall be slain 
in the attempt. Jn the desolate valleys—Such as 
they found very fruitful, but made desolate. And 
in the holes of the rocks—To which possibly the 
Israelites fled for refuge. . Upon all bushes—Which 
he mentions, because flies and bees use frequently 
to rest there ; and to intimate, that no place should 
escape their fury. . 

Verse 20. The Lord shall shav@—Shall utterly 
spoil, as shaving takes away the hair; with a razor — 
that is hired-+-Hired by Ahaz ; for he "purchased the 
aid of the Assyrians with large sums of silver and 
gold, 2 Kings xvi. 7, 8. And so the prophet signi- 
fies the just judgment of God, in scourging them 
with a rod of their own making. By them beyond 
the river—Euphrates, called the river, by way of 
eminence, beyond which Assyria lay. . By the king 
of Assyria—By the successive kings of.the Assyrian 
empire, Sennacherib, Esar-haddon, and especially by 
Nebuchadnezzar, who, having subdued the Assyrian 
monarchy, from thenceforth was king of Assyria as 
well as of Chaldea. "he head and the hair of the 
feet, &c.—This highly parabolical mode of expres- 
sion is used to denote “the utter devastation of the 
country from one end to the other, and the a 


! : Jae * 
Isdiah prophesies CHAPTER VIII. %: r - against Israel. 
- — »¢ 


As Maange. head, and the hair of the feet: and it 

. ’ shall also consume the beard. 

21 And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that a man shall nourish a young cow and two 
sheep; < . 

22 And it shall come to pass, for the abun- 
dance of milk ¢hat they shall give that he shall 


eat butter: for butter and honey shall every. 


one eat that is. left in the land. 
23 And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that every place shall be, where there were a 


12 Heb. in the midst of the land. ° 


‘thousand vines “at a thousand silver- A. M. 3246. 


ae : B. C. 758. 
lings, *it shall even be for briers and ane 


thorns. 

24 With arrows and with bows shall men 
come thither; because all the land shall become 
briers and thorns. 

25 And on all hills that shall be digged with 
the mattock, there shall not come thither the 
fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for 


‘the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading 


of lesser cattle. ; 


% 


sChap. v. 6. 


ing of the people from the highest to the lowest. 
The hairs of the head are those of the highest order 
in the state ; those of the feet, or lower parts, are 
the common people : the beard is the king, the high- 
priest, the very supreme in dignity and majesty : 
for the eastern people have always held the beard in 
the highest veneration, and have been extremely 
jealous of its honour.” 

Verses 21-25. These verses “contain an elegant 
and very expressive. description of a country. de- 
populated, and left to run wild, from its adjuncts 
and circumstances; the vineyards and corn-fields, 
before well cultivated, now overrun with briers and 


thorns; much grass, so that the few cattle that are 
left, a young cow and two sheep, have their full 
range, and abundant pasture; so as to yield milk 
in plenty to the scanty family of the owner: the 
thinly-scattered people living not on corn, wine, 
and oil, the produce of cultivation, but on milk 
and honey, the gifts of nature; and the, whole) 
land given up to the wild beasts; so that the mis- 
erable inhabitants are forced to go out armed 
with bows and arrows, either to defend them- 
selves against the wild beasts, or to supply them- 
selves with necessary food by hunting.”—Bishop 
Lowth. 


* 


CHAPTER VIII. 7 


The prophet foretels that Syria and 
Declares God's judgments to be arr 
godly, and a stone of stumbling to the wicked, 14, 15. 


and misery of idolaters, 21, 22. 
A. M. 3246. OREOVER, the Lorp said unto 
peas Pree. me, Take thee a great roll, and 


el should be subdued by Assyria, 14. That Judah also should be afflicted, 5-8, 
stible, and that they ought to be feared, 9-13, 
The prophecy is sure, 16, 

seems to disregard his people's prayers, and necromancers and wizards must not be consulted, 17-20. 


That the Lord is a sanctuary to the 
God must be waited on, even when he 
The perplexity 

. 
“write in it with a man’s pen con- - . — 
cerning } Maher-shalal-hash-baz. weedeat 


2 Chap. xxx. 8; Hab. ii. 2——1 Heb. in making speed 


to the spoil he hasteneth the prey, or, make speed, gc. 


NO@ES ON CHAPTER VIII. 

. Verse 1. Moreover, the Lord said unto me—Here 
begins “the second section of this discourse, which 
reaches to the séventh verse of the next chapter, and 
is nearly of the same argument with the preceding ; 
being prophetical, and containing matter both of 
comfort and reproof. It may be divided into two 
parts: The first part, in the first four verses, con- 
tains a confirmation and sign of the prediction con- 
‘ cerning the sudden subversion of the kingdoms of 
Syria and Israel. The second part more fully and 
distinctly explains the purpose of God with respect 
both to the Israelites and Jews, for the consolation 
of the pious, and the terror of the impious and car- 
nal, among them.” T'ake thee a great roll—Or, a 
great volume, because the prophecy to be written in 
it was large, and God would have it written in very 

3 


large and legible characters ; and. write in it with a 
man’s pen—With such a pen as writers use, that so 
all may read and understand it. Bishop Lowth, de- 
riving the word v3, here rendered roll, from 772, 
to show, to. reveal, rather than from 453, to roll, 
translates it, a large mirror, or polished tablet of 
metal, like those which were anciently used for mir- 
rors, and also for engraving on. Accordingly, he 
renders the word U1n,.which we translate a pen, a 
graving tool. “In this manner,” says he, “the 
prophet was to record the prophecy of the destrue- 
tion of Damascus and Samaria by the Assyrians: 
the subject and sum of which prophecy are here 
expressed, with great brevity, in four words, maher, 
shalal, hash, baz ; that is, to hasten the spoil, to take 
quickly the prey: which was afterward applied as 
the name of the prophet’s son, who was made a sign 
89 


Conquest of the Assyrians 


ISAIAH. 


over Israel predicted. 


2 And I took unto me faithful wit- 
~ nesses to record, » Uriah the priest, 
and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. 

3 And I? went unto the prophetess; and she 
conceived, and barea son. Then said the Lorp 
‘to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 

4 ° For before the child shall have knowledge 
to cry, My father, and my mothet, ° the ¢ riches 


A. M, 3246. 
B. G. 758 


of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria 4. M. As. 
shall be taken away before the king , 
of Bis! bae 
5 The Lorn spake also unto me . 3 gee 
again, saying, rr ics 
6 uchantatl as this people refuseth the wa- 
ters of °Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice\fin 
Rezin and Remaliah’s son ; 


© See Chap. 


52 Kings xvi. 10.—®* Heb. approached unto. 
*Or, he that is before the king of Assyria shall take 


vil. 16. 


away the riches, gc. 42 Kings xv. 29; xvi. 9; Chap. xvii. 3. 
¢ Neh. iii. 15; John ix. 7——f Chap. vii. 1, 2, 6. 


ntl 


of the speedy completion of it; Haste-to-the-spotl, 
Quick-to-the-prey. And that it might be done with 
the greater solemnity, and to preclude all doubt of 
the real delivery of the prophecy before the event, 
he calls witnesses to attest the recording of it.” 
Concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz — Concerning 
that thing which is signified by the name of the 
child, which is here mentioned by way of anticipa- 
tion, as not being given him till verse 3; that is, 
concerning that which God is making haste to do, 
the giving up Syria and Israel for a prey to the 


=” heen 
erses 2,3. And I took me faithful witnesses— 
Persons of unquestionable reputation, who should 
bear witness that the following name and prophecy 
Were written, and published by me, according to 
~God’s command. It is likely these witnesses signed 
a copy of the prophecy with their own hands, and 
dated it according to the time it was declared by the 
prophet. And I went untothe prophetess—His own 
wife, so called, because she was the wife of a pro- 
phet, wives being frequently denominated from their 
husband’s titles. Or possibly she herself might be 
endowed with the gift of prophecy. Some com- 
mentators suppose that Isaiah married another wife 
on this occasion, and that the witnesses above men- 
tioned were called to attest the matrimonial contract, 
according to the custom of the Jews. But there are 
no indications of this, and, as it is certain from the 
preceding chapter that he already had a wife, the 
mother of Shear-jashub, it seems highly improbable 
that he should take another. Others again suppose, 
that these witnesses, who were persons of rank, 
“were called on to attend the circumcision of the 
prophet’s son, and to attest the name by which he 
was called, as well as the prophecy, confirmed and 
illustrated by that name.” 

Verse 4. Before the child shall have knowledge to 
cry, My father, &c.—To speak and know his parents; 
which is within the space of two years. And this 
agrees with the other prophecy, chap. vii. 16. For 
it requires a longer time for a child to know to re- 
Suse the evil, and choose the good, than to distinguish 
his parents from strangers; and Shear-jashub, being 
born some years before this child, was capable of 
that higher degree of knowledge as soon as this was 
capable of the lower degree. J'he riches of Da- 
mascus, §c., shall be taken away—The kingdoms of 
Syria and Israel, here signified by their two capital 
cities, shall be stripped of their wealth and power, 

90 


+ 


5 


as they were by Tiglath-pileser, within the time 
here limited, 2 Kings xv. 29. 

Verse 5. The Lord spake also—*After having 
given the promise concerning the deliverance of the 
people from the fear of the two adverse kingdoms, 
God, by a new, or a continued revelation, (for it was 
not very distant in time from the former,) more dis- 
tinctly unfolds his purpose concerning the fate, not 
only of Israel, but of Judah, and confirms what he 


|had advised in the former prophecy concerning 


them. See chap. vii. 17, &c. For this is of nearly 
the same argument, except that it is more extensive, 
and involves many more mysteries. 
is entirely prophetical, from this to verse 11, and 
contains a declaration of the events of the subsequent 
period, immediately leading to the time of fulfilling 
the promise respecting Immanuel: of these events, 
the first is the subversion of Ephraim, verses 6, 7; 
the second, the affliction of Judah, by the Assyrians 
also, verse 8; the third, the destruction of the hos- 
tile counsels and attempts of future times, which 
seemed to threaten a total excision of the church of 
God, verses 9, 10.’—Vitringa and Dodd. 

Verse 6. ForasMuch as this people—The people 
of Israel, of whom he last spake, and. who are the 
chief subject of this whole prophecy; and who did 
rejoice, not only in their own king Pekah, but also 
in the assistance of so powerful an ally as Rezin was; 
refuseth—Or, rather, despiseth, as the word OND 
more properly, and most frequently, signifies ; the 
waters of Shiloah that: go softly—That small and 
contemptible brook which ran gently (as little rivers 
generally do) by Jerusalem, and whieh is here op- 
posed to the great rivers of Tigris and*Euphrates, by 
which the Assyrian empire was fortified. By these 
waters of Shiloah, he intends the munitions and 
strength of the Jews, including the kingdom of Da- 
vid, and the divine protection and promise engaged 
to support it, all which their enemies despised. And, 
as the people of Judah, from a consideration of their 
own weakness, and a distrust of God’s promises, ap- 
plied for assistance to the Assyrians, they also might 
properly be said to despise or refuse these waters of 
Shiloah, although they could not be said to rejoice 
in Rezin and Remaliah’s son. Here, therefore, the 
prophet assigns the reason which moved God to pun- 
ish both the Ephraimites and the Jews by the Assy- 
rians. They disbelieved his word, distrusted his pro- 
tection, and confided.in an arm of flesh, and therefore 
the Lord chastised them. = in die 


The first part _ 


Exhortation to 


CHAPTER VII. 


trust in God. 


= 


A. M. 3263. 7 Now, therefore, behold, the Lorp 
B. C. 741. . 

bringeth up upon them the waters of 
the river, strong and many, even £ the king of 
Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come 
up over all his channels, and go over all his 
banks : 

8 And he shall pass through’ Judah ; he ‘shall 
overflow and go over, ™ he shall reach even to 
the neck; and ‘the stretching out of his wings 
shall fill ‘the “ype of thy land, O ‘ Imma- 
nuel, 

9 4] * Associate yourselves, O ye people, ° and 


|| to naught ; 


ye shall be broken in pieces ; and give A. M. 3263. 
B.C. 741. 
ear, all ye of far countries: gird your- wes 
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces ; gird 
yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. 

10 ' Take counsel together, and it shall come 
speak the word, ™and it shall not 
stand: ® for God is with us. 

11 4 For the Lorp spake thus to me ° with 
a strong hand, and instructed me that I should 
not walk in the way of this people, saying, 

12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to 
whom. ° this people shall say, A confederacy ; 


§ Chap. x. 12.—— Chap xxx. 28.——* Heb. the fulness of the 
breadth of thy land shall be the stretchings out of his wings. 
*Chap. vii. 14. K Joel iii. 9, 11. 


» Chap: vii, 14 ; 
® Heb. in strength of hand. 


5 Or, yet——| Job v, 12,—— = Chap. vil. 7. 
Acts v. 38, 39; Rom: viii. 13. 
© Chap. vii. 2. 


Verses 7, 8: Now, therefore—Because the Israel- 
ites and their army, combined with the Syrians, de- 
spise the weak state of the Jews, and the kingdom 
of David, now brought very low, and having no such 
defence as can be compared toa ‘great river, but only 
one that resembles a small brook that glides gently 
along; behold, the Lord bringeth upon them the wa- 
ters of the river—Of Euphrates, often called the 
river, for its eminent greatness; whereby he under- 
stands the Assyrian forces, as the next words ex- 
plain the metaphor, which should oyerwhelm the 
whole kingdom of Israel under Tiglath-pileser and 
Shalmaneser ; the king of Assyria and allhis glo- 
ry—His numerous and puissant army, in which he 
gloried, chap. x. 8. He shall come up over all his 
channels—This great river shall overflow its own 
proper channels: that is, this great monarch shall 
not keep within his own proper bounds, but invade 
and overrun the whole land of Syria and Israel, as 
an overflowing river does the neighbouring méa- 
dows. As multitudes of people are often spoken of 
in Scripture under the emblem of great waters, so 
an invading army is very fitly represented by the 
inundation of a rapid river, which carries all before 
it, and leaves the ground waste and desolate. And 
he shall pass through Judah—Having overrun the 
land of Israel he shall invade the land of Judah, as 
Sennacherib did a few years after the conquest of 
Samaria by Shalmaneser; see 2 Kings xviii. 9, 13. 
And he shall reach even to the neck—So ‘that they 
shall be in great danger of being destroyed. He per- 
sists in the metaphor of a river swelling so high as 
to reach to a man’s neck, andbe ready to overwhelm 
him. Such was the danger of Judah’s land when 
Sennacherib took all the fenced cities of Judah, 
(2 Kings xviii. 13,) and sent his army against the ca- 
pital city of Jerusalem. he veretchine out of his 
wings—Of his forces, or of the wings of his army, 
as they anciently were, and still are, called. Shall 
Jill the breadth of thy land—Of the land of Judah, 
so called, because the Messiah, who is called Im- 


manuel (chap. vii. 14,) should certainly be born, and 
live, and die there. And this is added emphatically | 
for the consolation of God’s people, to assure them, | 


that notwithstanding this dreadful scourge, yet God 
would make a difference between Israel‘and Judah; 
and: whereas Israel should be so broken by the As- 


syrian, that they should not be a people, Judah should 


be restored, for the sake of the Messiah, to be the 
place of his birth and ministry, according to Gen. 


| xlix. 10. 


Verses 9, 10. Associate yourselves, O ye people— 
O ye Syrians and Israelites; and ye shall be broken 
in pieces—Y our attempts against the house of Da- 
vid, and kingdom of Judah, will be fruitless, yea, will _ 
issue in your own ruin. And give ear, all ye of far — 
countries—Immanuel’s name inspires the prophet 
with new courage, and makes him send a challenge 
to all God’s enemies, and foretel their certain down- 
fall. He is, indeed, wrapt, as it were, into an ecstasy, 
upon considering the land as belonging to Immanuel, 
and foreseeing the future interposition of God for its 
protection. Gird yourselves—With armour: prepare 
for war; and ye shall be broken in pieces—He re- 
peats it again for the greater assurance of the thing, 
and the comfort of God’s people. T'ake counsel to- 
gether--Against the Lord, and against his anointed, 


Psa. ii. 2; and it shall come to naught—All your 


counsels shall be defeated, and your designs render- 
ed abortive. Speak the word—Not only fix, but de- 
clare your purpose, and make your boast of it; and 
it shall natbtand. Stil you shall fail of accomplish- 
ing what you so ardently desire; for God is with 
us—The Almighty and only true God fighteth for 
us and against you. This address of the prophet, to 
the confederate nations, is most elegant and spirited ; 
and the foundation of his confidence is finely ex- 
pressed in this last clause, in which he himself inter- 
prets the name Immanuel before given to the Mes- 
siah. 

Verses 11, 12. For the Lord spake thus unto me 
—Here the’ prophet teaches the people by his own 
example, as one immediately taught by God, with 
what dispositions they should receive all the attempts 
of their enemies, to subvert the kingdom of God in 
their land, even to the'time of the Messiah, of whose 
manife: station this instruction contains a repeated 
prophecy for the consolation of the pious, together 


Evxhortation to 


A. M. 3263, P neither fear ye their fear, nor be 
B. C. 741 ‘ 
afraid. 

13 4 Sanctify the Lorp of hosts himself; 
and * de¢ him be your fear, and le¢ him be your 
dread. 

14 And ‘he shall be for a sanctuary ; but for 
‘a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence 


ISAIAH. 


* 


trust n God. 


to both the houses of Israel, for a gin A. M. 3263 


and for a snare to the ithabitants of ae 
Jerusalem. — 

15 And many among them shall "stumble, and 
fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. ° 
16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among 
my disciples. 


) 


me = 


P1 Pet iii. 14,15. 


4Num. xx. 12,— Psa. Ixxvi. 7; Luke 
xii. 5.——* Ezek. xi. 16. 


t Chapter xxviii. 16; Luke ii. 34; Romans ix. 33; 1 Pet. ii. 8. 
« Matt. xxi. 44; Luke ox 18; Rom, ix. 32; xi. 25. 


with a denunciation of the most grievous judgments, 
spiritual and temporal, upon the impious, incredu- 
lous, and’ profane. See Vitringa. With a strong 
hand—With a. vehement and more than ordinary 
inspiration. The Chaldee renders it, In the strength 
of prophecy; perhaps it refers to those ecstasies into 
which the prophets were frequently wrapt. J'hat 
I should not walk. in the way of this people-—Of 
the generality of the people of Judah; whose immi- | 
nent danger and calamity he.foretold, (verse 8,) giv- | 
ing them, however, full assurance that God would de- | 
liver them out of it, verses 9,10. Say ye not, A con- 
federacy, &c.—-You, my people, be not associated 
with them in the confederacies which they are pro- | 
jecting: do not join with those that, for the securing 
of themselves, are for making a league with the As- 
syrians, through ‘unbelief, and distrust of God and | 
their cause: do not come into any such confederacy. | 
Neither fear ye their fear—Be not afraid of the 

confederacy with which they frighten themselves | 
and one another, namely, that between Syria and | 
Ephraim ; or that thing which they fear, that, if they | 
do not call in the Assyrian succours, they hall be. 
destroyed by those two potent kings. Thus, when | 
sinful confederacies are formed against God’s church | 
and people by their enemies, ‘they should guard | 
against sinful fears of such confederacies, 

Verses 13-15. Sanctify the Lord of hosts—Give 
him the glory of his power, and goodness, and faith- 
fulness, by trusting in his promises for deliverance; | 
and let him be your fear—Let God, and. not the 
kings of Syria and Israel, be the chief object of your | 
fear. And he shall be for a sanctuwary—A sure re- 
fuge to all that truly fear him, and rely upon him; 
but for a stone of stumbling—An occasion of sin and | 
ruin, at whom they will take offence, and stumble, so as. 
to fall andbe broken, as itis expressed verse 15; to both 
the houses of Israel—To the two kingdoms, that of the | 
ten tribes, and that of the two tribes. And fora gin, | 
§c., to the inhabitants of Jerusalem—This is dis- 
tinctly mentioned as a wonderful thing, because | 
Jerusalem was the seat of the temple, and of God’s 
solemn worship; where all the means of knowledge 
and grace were in the greatest plenty; where the 
thrones of -civil and ecclesiastical judicature were 
established; where the most wise and learned doc- 
tors had: their constant. abode. And that such a 
place and people should reject Immanuel, when he 
should appear, was so strange an occurrence, that 
the prediction of it was highly necessary, lest other- 
wise, when it came to pass, it should shake the faith 
of all who did believe on him; whereas, now the ac- 

92 


complishment hereof was a notable confirmation of 
their faith, And many among them—Not all; for’ 
there shall be a remnant, as was foretold, chap. iv. 23 
vi. 13; shall stumble—At that stone or rock, men- 
tioned verse 14, The writers of the New Testa- 
ment, who have so frequently quoted this pases 
prove, beyond all controversy, that the subject of it 
is, God manifest in the flesh; the Messiah, who 
performed for his people all those benefits of grace 
which this promise implies, being a sanctuary, er 
place of refuge to them; and who, at the same time, 
became to. the hypocrites and unbelievers in Judea, 
a stone of stumbling, and a-rock of offence, to the 
destruction. of the far greater part of that peoples 
See. the margin. 

Verse 16. Bind wp the testimony—There seems 
no doubt that the person here introduced speaking, 
is God the Father. By the testimony, and the law 
or doctrine, the prophet, understands one and the 
same thing, as he doth.also verse 20, namely, the 
word of God, and especially that which is the main 
scope thereof, the doctrine of the Messiah, which, 
though now professed by all the Israelites, should be 
disowned by the generality of them, when the Mes- 
siah should come. Bind up and seal are to be under- 
stood. prophetically, that is, declare and prophesy, 
that it shall be bound up and sealed; as Isaiah is said 
to make fat, and to blind, &c., Isa. vi. 10; and Jere- 
miah, to root out, and pull down, &c., Jer. i. 10, 
when they foretel these events. Moreover, the ex- 
pressions, bind wp, and seal, design the same thing; 
and that is, 1st, Security, as things are bound up and 
sealed, that they may not be lost. So he signifies, - 
that although this doctrine should be lost among. the . 
body of the Israelites, yet it should be preserved 
among his disciples; and, 2d, Secrecy, as many things 
are bound up, or sealed, that they may be hid from’ 
the eyes of others. And so he-informs them that 
this doctrine now was, and should be, hid, in a great» 


measure, from all God’s people, till the aecomplish- 


ment of if; and that even when it was accomplished, 
it should still continue to be as a secret and mystery, 
known, indeed, to God’s true disciples; but hid from 
the body of the natio ho would not see it, and 
therefore should be ning by God’s just judgment, 
ay they should not t, as was prophesied Isa. 

. 9, 10. By God’s disciples, Hebrew, 775, he 
means those who were taught of him, as it is ex- 
pressed Isa. liv. 13, where this very word is used; 
or, every one that hath heard and learned of the 
Father, and therefore cometh unto Christ, as it is 
explained, John vi. 45. 

3 


. Exhortation to 


CHAPTER VIII. 


trust in God. ' 


en 17. And I will wait upon the Lorn, 
———— that * hideth his face from the house 
of Jacob, and I ¥ will look for him. 

18 * Behold, I and the children whom the 


Lorp hath given me, * are for signs and for 


-wonders in Israel from the Lorp of hosts, | 


which dwelleth in mount Zion. 

19 And when they shall say unto you, >Seek 
unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto 
wizards ° that peep, and that mutter: should 
not a people seek unto their God? for the liv- 
ing “to the dead ? 


== Chap, liv. 8——¥ Hab. ii. 3; Luke ii. 25, 38. 2 Heb. ii. 
a Psa, Lxxi. 7 ; Zech. iii, 8 —— 1 Sam. xxviii. 8; Chap. 


ee 3. 


20 °'T'o the law and to the testimony : A. M. 3263. 
if they speak not according to this’ piv HB. 
word, it is because ‘there is ™no light in 
them. 

21 And they shall pass through it hardly be- 
stead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, 
that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret 
themselves, and & curse their king and their 
God, and look upward. 

22° And * they shall look unto the earth ; and 
behold trouble and darkness; ‘dimness of an- 
guish ; and they shall be driven to darkness. 


d Psa. evi. 28. € Luke xvi. 29._—S Mie. 
5 Rev. xvi. 11.—» Chap. v. 30. 


_¢ Chap. xxix. 4. 
ili. 6. 7 Heb. no morning. 
ye: ix. 


Verses 17, 18. And—Or yet,as the same particle is| 


iranslated, Jer. ii..32, 35, and elsewhere; J will wait 
‘on the Lord—Notwithstanding this dreadful prophe- 
ey, concerning the unbelief and rejection of Israel, 
é will cast my care upon him, and expect the accom- 
plishment of his promise, in sending’ the Messiah, 
and in conferring upon me, and all believing Israel- 
ites, all his mercies and blessings, to be procured for 
mankind by his merits; that hideth his face from 
the house of Jacobh—That now doth, and threatens 
chat he will hereafter, withdraw his favour and bless- 
ing from the family or people of Israel. And I will 
look for him--With an eye of faith and expectation, 
till his time come. Behold, -I, &c.—These words 
were literally spoken by Isaiah concerning himself, 
but mystically concerning Christ, of whom the pro- 
phet was a type, and therefore they are fitly applied 
to Christ, Heb. ii. 13; and the children whom the 


Lord hath given me—His spiritual children, whom. 


he had either begotten or instructed by his ministry ; 
are for signs, §c., in Israel—Are a gazing-stock ; 
are derided and ridiculed, for our folly in believing 
_God’s promises, and this even among the Israelites, 
who have been taught and who profess better things. 
From the Lord of hosts—Which comes to pass by 
the wise counsel and providence of God; which 
dwelleth in Zion—Where the temple was now, and 
where the Messiah ‘was to set up his kingdom. 

Verse 19. And when, &c.—The prophet, having 
foretold the coming of the Messiah, and spoken of 
the disciples he should have, takes this occasion of 
addressing the Jews, and reminding them of their 
duty, as he had done, chap. ii. 6, compared with 
verses 1,2. He saw the nation much inclined to 
foreign superstitions, particularly to the divinations, 
soothsayings, and astrolo the Syrians, Egyp-| 
tians, &c., but not rearing th pure doctrine of |, 
God’s word as they ought: he therefore warns them | 
against placing any dependance on such follies, and 
exhorts them to disregard all merely human teaching |, 
and assistance, and to apply solely to the divine law 
and testimony. When they—Those Israelites, to 
whom I and my children are for signs and wonders, | 
and who are fallen from God into superstition and 

3 


salary shall say unto you—Who are the true peo- 
ple of God; Seek unto them: that have familiar 
spirits—For advice and help; and unto wizards— 
Of whom, and of familiar spirits, see on Lev. xix. 
31, and xx. 27; Deut. xvili. 113 that peep and mut- 
ter—That speak with a low.voice, as the two Si 
| here used signify, which they affected to do, “speak- 
ing rather inwardly in their bellies, than audibly with 
their mouths. Should not a people seek unto their 
God?--This answer the prophet puts into their 
| mouths; doth not every nation, in cases of difficulty, 
| seek to their gods? Much more should we do so, 
that have the only true God for our God.- For the 
living to the dead—That is, for living men to im- 
quire of the living God, ‘is proper and reasonable ; 
| but it is highly absurd for them to forsake him, and 
to seek dead idols, either to the images, or to the 
spirits of dead men, which are supposed to speak in 
them. 

Verse 20. To the law and to the testimony—Let 
this dispute between you and them be determined 
by God’s word, which is here, and in many other 
places, called the law, to signify their obligation to 
believe and obey it; and the testimony, because it 
is a witness between God and man, of God’s will, 
and of man’s duty.. Jf they speak not, &c.—-Your 
antagonists, who seek to pervert you. No light— 
This proceeds from the darkness of their minds; 
they are blind, and cannot see. But these words are 
understood by divers learned interpreters, not as a 
declaration of their ignorance, but a prediction of 
| their misery, light bemg most commonly used in 
Scripture for comfort and happiness, and darkness 
| for sorrows and calamities. And this sense seems to 
_be much favoured by the following passage: and 
‘then the words, 7mw ys, mean, no light, or no 
| morning, shall be to them; that is, a night of misery 

shall come upon them, and they shall never have a 
/morning of deliverance from it; they shall be swal- 
lowed up in endless calamities, as is farther declared 
| in the following verses. 
| Verses 21, 22. And they-—The idolatrous and apos- 
tate Israelites ; shall pass through it—Namely, their 
‘own land, into captivity; or, as 1272p may be 
93 


A prediction of 


ISATAH. 


the coming of Christ. 


rendered, shall pass to and fro, or wander hither 


and thither, in it, like distracted men, not knowing |, 


whither to go, or what to do; whereas, if they had 
not forsaken God, they might have had a quiet and 
settled abode in it. Hardly bestead \and hungry-—- 
Hebrew, 27) nwpi, distressed and famished, as 
Bishop Lowth translates the words: they shall_fret 
themselves, &c.—Shall be impatient under their pres- 
sures, and, in the rage of their despair, curse their 
king—To whose ill conduct they impute a great part 
of their miseries; and their God—Their idol, to 
whom they trusted, and whom now, too late, they 
find to be unable to help them; and look upward— 


To heaven for help, as men of all nations and reli- 
gions, in great calamities, are wont todo. And they 
shall look unto the earth—Finding no help from 
heaven, they turn their eyes downward, looking 
hither and thither for comfort; and behold trouble 
and darkness, &c—Many words, expressing the 
same thing, are put together, to signify the variety, 
and extremity; and continuance of their miseries: 


Bishop Lowth, who connects with this verse the last 


clause of the twenty-first, renders the’ passage thus: 
“He shall cast his eyes upward, and look down to 
the earth; and lo! distress and darkness! gloom, 
tribulation, and accumulated darkness !” 


CHAPTER IX. 


Joy in the midst of affliction, 1-5. The birth, person, office, and kingdom of Christ, 6,'7. . Judgments for their pride, 8-12, 
For their impenitency and hypocrisy, 13-21. 


tar | NEVERTHELESS *the dimness 
ah lil shall not be such, as was’ in her 
vexation, when at the » first he lightly afflicted 
the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, 


and © afterward did more grievously ry M. a 
afflict her by the way of the sea, be- st 
yond Jordan, in Galilee ' of the nations. ° 

2 4'The people that walked in darkness have 


2 Chap. viii. 22. 2 Kings xy. 29 ; 2 Chron. xvi. 4 —© Lev. 


xxvi. 24 ; 2 Kings xvii. 5, 6. 


1 Or, populous. 4 Matt. iv..16; Eph. v. 8, 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 

Verse 1. Nevertheless, &c:—In the Hebrew, this 
verse is joined to the preceding chapter, as it is also 
in Bishop Lowth’s translation ; and if it be consid- 
ered as connected therewith, and the connecting 
particle, °5, be’ translated for, (which is its usual 
meaning,) instead of nevertheless, the words may 
be understood to express an aggravation of the dark- 
ness, or misery, threatened in the two former verses, 
as the punishment of those who should reject the 
Messiah: thus, For the dimness—Or darkness ; shall 
not be such as was in her vexation, &c.—That is, 
this shall not be so slight an affliction as that which 
befell these parts of the country by Pul, 2 Kings xv. 
19; nor as that which succeeded it, by. Tiglath- 
pileser, 2 Kings xv.:29; which was a heavier 
stroke than the former; but this shall be far heavier 
than either of them. Subsequent events, supposed 
to be here predicted, seem to confirm this interpreta- 
tion, the calamities which, by the just judgment 
of God, befell the Jews for rejecting and crucifying 
the Messiah, being incomparably greater than those 
brought on the land by Zebulun and Naphtali by any, 
or all, of the Assyrian invasions. Our translation, 
however, and most commentators, consider this verse 
as containing a mitigation of the foregoing threat- 
ening, and that the sense of it is this: The calamity 
of this land and its inhabitants shall be great, yet not 
so great as that which was brought upon Zebulun 
and Naphtali by the king of Assyria, because then 
the Israelites were not only quite rooted out, and 
carried away into a dreadful captivity, out of which 
they were not to return; but their calamity was not 

: 94 


alleviated by the coming of the Messiah and the 
gospel light; whereas, before and amidst this dark- 
ness, of which I have now spoken, shall a glorious 
light arise to cheer all who open their eyes to behold 
it. Thus interpreted, this verse is rather connected 
with the following than the foregoing verses, and is 
introductory to them, in which light Bishop Lowth 
considers it; although, as has been observed, follow- 
ing the Hebrew, he joins it to the preceding chapter. 
His translation of it, nearly the same with that of 
Dr: Waterland, is worthy of the reader’s attention, 
as it casts anew light onthe words, It is as follows: 
“But there shall not. hereafter be darkness in the 
land which was distressed: In the former time he 
debased the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naph- 
tali; but in the latter time he hath made it glorious: 
Even the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of 
the nation.” The reader must observe, that “ Zebu- 
lun, Naphtali, and Manasseh, that.is, the country of 
Galilee, all around the sea of Genesareth, were the 
parts that principally suffered in the Assyrian inva- 
sion under Tiglath-pileser; and they were the first 
that enjoyed the blessing of Christ’s preaching the 
gospel, and exhibiting his miraculous works among 
them.” : 

Verse 2. T'he people—Israel and Judah; that 
walked—Or sat, as it is in Matt. iv. 16; in.darkness 
—Both in the darkness of ignorance, and in the 
darkness of calamity ; have seen a great light— ~ 
The prophet speaks of what was future, and would 
not take place till after seven hundred years, as 
though it were already arrived. Though “there 
would be-very many among the Jews, to whom the 

3 


A prediction of 


CHAPTER IX. 


the coming of Christ. 


AM $264. seen a great light: they that dwell in 
———. the land of the shadow of death, upon 
them hath the light shined. 

3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and * not 
increased the joy: they joy before thee accord- 
ing to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice 
* when they divide the spoil. . 


4 * or thou hast broken the yoke of A. M. 3264. 
his burden, andthe ‘ staff of his shoul- ae 
der, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of 
§ Midian. 

5 * For every battle of the warrior is with con- 
fused noise, and garments rolled in blood ; * but 
° this shall be with burning and ° fuel of fire. 


== 


2 Or, to him. 
f Chap. x. 5; xiv. 5. 


© Judges v. 30. 3 Or, When thou brakest. 
é Judg. vii. 22; Psa. lxxxiii. 9; Chap. 


x. 26. “Or, When the whole battle of the warrior was, &c. 
h Chap. lxvi. 15, 16.—— Or, and it was, $c. © Heb. meat. 


Messiah, arising with his new light, would be an 
offence ; who would resist his salutary doctrine, and 
“who would therefore fall into the most grievous 
calamities, and. thick darkness;” yet, “there would 
be others to whom the Messiah would truly appear 
with the light of grace and consolation, and who 
should receive him with the greatest joy, as attaining 
the summit of their hope and desire.” Accordingly, 
after the prophet had described the misery of those 
who, he foresaw, should reject him, he turns his 
style to describe the felicity of those on whom this 
‘Sun of righteousness should arise, setting forth both 
their joy,and the cause of it. 

Verse 3. Thou hast multiplied the nation—Thou 
hast made good thy promise to Abraham, concern- 
ing the multiplication of his seed, by adding his 
spiritual seed unto the carnal, by gathering in the 
Gentiles to the Jews, and making them both one 
people in Christ, John x. 16; Eph. ii. 14. For, in 
the Scriptures, the believing Gentiles are accounted 
the seed of Abraham as well as the Jews, Gal. iii. 
7-9. Or, as the Hebrew may be rendered, T’how 
hast magnified,.the nation, honoured it with peculiar 
privileges above all other nations, and especially 
with this transcendent privilege, that the Saviour of 
the world should be born in it, and live among its 
people; of which he speaks more fully verses 6, 7. 
And not increased—Or rather, according to the 
marginal reading in the Hebrew, (which, instead of 
5, not, has 19, it, him, or them,) confirmed by many 
of the ancient versions, T"how hast increased their 
joy, which reading, it is evident, the next words re- 
quire. Dr. Waterland’s version of these two clauses 
is, Thou hast advanced the nation ; hast heightened 
upon her joy, ‘The meaning is, thou hast conferred 
upon it a. very great benefit, and thereby prepared 

for it the highest joy: joy which shall be to all peo- 
ple; true joy arising from the consolations of the 
gospel. See Zech. ii. 10, 11; Luke ii. 10. They 
joy before thee—In thy presence, and in the place of 
thy worship; according to the joy in harvest, &e.— 
When men, with great joy, reap the long-expected 
fruit of their great labours and expectations, or as 
when, after a glorious victory, they come to take 
the spoil. j 

Verse 4. For thou hast broken, &c.—Bishop 
Lowth translates this verse, Jor the yoke of his bur- 
den, the staff laid on his shoulder, the rod of his 

. oppressor hast thou broken, as in the day of Midian. 

The Jews had been under the yoke repeatedly, to 

one hostile people or another, and had been sorely 
3 


oppressed by them; formerly by the Philistines, 
Moabites, Ammonites, and Midianites, and, in after 
times, bythe Assyrians, Chaldeans, Persians, and 
Macedonians ; and many and successive deliverances 
from their oppressors had God granted them. Now, 
asthe yokes which they had been under were emblem- 
atical of those of Satan, sin, and death, the spiritual 
enemies of God’s people, so their deliverances were 
figures of the spiritual deliverance which believers, 
whether Jews or Gentiles, receive through Christ. 
And of this spiritual deliverance and salvation, as 
the context shows, this verse is to be understood. 
For the preceding verses foretel the diffusion of gos- 
pel light, and those that follow attest the birth of the 
Messiah, unfold his characters. and offices, and set 
forth the blessings of his peaceful and righteous 
reign... See Jer. xxiii. 6; Luke i. 70-74, where 
Zacharias, full of the Holy Ghost, seems most admi- 
rably to expound this passage of the prophet. As in 
the day of Midian—-When God destroyed the Midi- 
anites in so admirable a manner, and by such unlikely 
and contemptible means, which was an eminent type 
of Christ’s conquering the powers of darkness, and 
all his enemies, by dying on the cross, and by the 
preaching of a few unlearned, and poor, despised 
men. P 
Verse 5. Por every battle of the warrior is with 
confused noise, &e.—With the triumphant exclama- 
tions of the conqueror, and the bitter lamentations 
of the conquered, and the different cries of the same 
persons, sometimes conquering and sometimes con- 
quered; and garments rolled in blood--With great 
difficulty and slaughter. But this shall be with burn- 
ing, &c.—But this victory, which God’s people shall 
have over all their enemies, shall be more terrible to 
their adversaries, whom God shall utterly consume, 
as it were, by fire. The reader must observe, how- 
ever, the words {XD J)ND, here rendered batile of the 
warrior, occurring only here, are of very doubtful 
signification, and of consequence are rendered dif- 
ferently by learned men. Dr. Waterland, from Vi- 
tringa, translates the verse, “Every clashing of the 
noisy warrior, and the garment rolled in blood, shall 
be thrown to be burned; fuel for the fire.’ Bishop 
Lowth renders it,'“For the greaves of the armed 
warrior in the conflict, and the garment rolled in 
much blood, shall be for a burning, even fuel for the 
fire.” It is probable, as Vitringa observes, that the 
words are intended to signify, that, in consequence 
of Christ’s appearing in.the flesh, and destroying the 
enemies of his church, a time of peace and tran- 
95 


The birth, person, 


ISAIAH. 


and office of Chu ist. 


A. M. 3264. 6 ‘For unto us a child is born, unto 

B. C, 740. pit ty Pedestal Ith 
us a ¥son is given: and 'the govern- 

ment shall be upon his shoulder: and his name 


———; 


shall be called ™ Wonderful, Counisel- te sg 
lor," The mighty God, The everlast- ad, a 
ing Father, ° The Prince of peace. 


iCh. vii. 14; Lukeii. 11——* John iii. 16——! Matt. xxvii. 18 ; 


quillity shall take place on earth, and the instruments 
of war and slaughter be of no further use. 

Verse 6. For,.é&c.—Having spoken of the glorious 
light, and joy, and victory of God’s people, the pro- 
phet now proceeds to show the foundation and cause 
thereof. And, “though he is everywhere most ex- 
cellent, he is peculiarly so in this passage, which 


contains an emphatical description of the person and | 


kingdom of the Son of God; the kingdom of peace; 
the eternal and universal kingdom, in which the 
church should have the highest cause for joy; which 
should bring with it an abolition of the whole yoke 
of sin, and the ceremonial law, and a destruction of 
all hostile and adverse powers with respect to the 
saints.” Who. then can wonder at the joy of the 


church in so great a light, in so excellent a Teacher, | 


Mediator, Saviour, and Governor, King, and Lord ? 
Unto us a child is, or, shall be, born—The pro- 


phet, as usual, speaks of a blessing which he foresaw | 


with certainty would be bestowed, as if it were con- 
ferred already. That’ the Messiah is here intended, 
not only Christian but Jewish interpreters, in general, 
of any credit or reputation, agree. For so the an- 
cient Hebrew doctors understood the place, and par- 
ticularly the Chaldee paraphrast ; although the later 
Jews have laboured, out of opposition to the Lord 


Jesus, to apply it to Hezekiah. Which extravagant. 


notion, as it hath no foundation at all in this or any 
other text of Scripture, and therefore may be reject- 
ed without any further reason ; so it is fully confuted 
by the following titles, which are such as cannot, 
without blasphemy and nonsense, be ascribed to 
Hezekiah, nor indeed to any mere man or mere crea- 
ture, as we shall see. “The human nature of the 
Messiah is here first set forth. He shall be the child 
born, the Word made flesh, and that for us ; not only 
for us Jews, but for us men, for us sinners, and 
especially for us believers. Unto us a son is given 
—Or, the son, namely, of the virgin, spoken of chap. 
vii. 14; the Immanuel, the Son of God, so called, 
not only on account of his miraculous conception, 
but because of his eternal generation, the Word, who 
was in the beginning with God, had glory with the 
Father before the world was, was loved by him be- 
fore the foundation of the world, and by whom he 
made the worlds, and created all things. Seé John 
i, 1-3, and xvii. 5, 24; Heb. i. 2; 1 Cor. viii.6; Eph. 
iii. 9; Col. i.16. This person, the Father’s own Son, 
his only-begotten Son, is given, John iii. 16; sent 
forth, Gal. iv. 4; sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, 
Rom. viii. 3; though rich, and in the form of God, 
made in the likeness of men, poor, and of no repu- 
tation, Phil. ii.'7; 2 Cor. viii. 9; given to be our 
infallible. Teacher, our prevalent Mediator, our al- 
mighty Saviour, our righteous Ruler, and our final 
Judge. Accordingly, The government—Of the 
church, of the world, yea, of all things; for the 
96 


1 Cor. xv. 25.+— Judg .xiii. 18, —— Tit. ii. 13. 


Eph. ii. 14. 


church’s benefit, Eph. i. 21, 22; shall be upon his 
shoulder--That is, upon him, or in his hands; all 
power being given to him in heaven and on earth. 
In mentioning shoulder, he speaks metaphorically ; 
great burdens being commonly laid upon men’s 
shoulders, and all government, if rightly managed, 
being a great burden, and this especially being, of 
all others, the most weighty and important trust. 
Possibly here may be also an allusion to the ancient 
custom of ‘carrying the ensigns of government be- 
fore the magistrates, upon the shoulders of their offi- 
cers, Or, as some think, to the regal robe worn by 
kings and governors. And his name shall be called 
—-That is, he shail be: for the following particulars 
are not to be taken for a description of his proper 
name, but of his glorious nature and qualities; Won- 
derful—He is wonderful in his person, as God and 
man, God manifest in the fiesh, which union of two 
such different natures in one individual, intelligent, 
and self-conscious being, is a great and incomprehen- 


‘sible mystery. Hence we are told, No man knoweth 
the Son but the Father, Matt. xi. 27; and he is said » 
to havehad aname written, which no man knew but” ~ 


himself ; and hence, when appearing to Manoah, he 
said, Why askest thou after my name, seeing it is 
secret: Hebrew, x59, wonderful, the same word 
here used, Judg. xiii. 18. He is also wonderful with 
respect to his birth, life, doctrine, miracles; his love 


and sufferings ; his death, resurrection, and ascen- - 


sion; his humiliation and exaltation ; his cross and 
crown; his grace and glory. Counsellor—He is so 
called, because he knew the whole counsel of God, 
and, as far as was necessary, revealed it to us, and is 
the great counsellor of his church and people in all 
their doubts and difficulties, in all ages and nations, 
being made of God unto them wisdom. He also is 
the author and giver of all those excellent counsels, 
delivered not only to the apostles, but also by the 
prophets, (1 Pet. i. 10-12,) and hath gathered, en- 
larged, and preserved his church by admirable coun- 
sels, and the methods of his providence; and, in a 
word, hath in him all the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge. The mighty God—This title can agree 
to no man but Christ, who was God as well as man, 
to whom the title of God or Jehovah is given, both 
in the Old and New Testaments, as Jer. xxiii. 6; John 
i. 1; Rom. ix. 5; and in many other places. And it 
isa true observation, that this Hebrew word 5x, eel, 


is never used in the singular number of any creature, 


but only of the Almighty God, as is evident by 
perusing all the texts where this word oceurs. The 
everlasting Father—Hebrew, 1) °18, The Father 
of eternity: having called him a child and a son, lest 


this should be misinterpreted to his disparagement, - 


he adds that he is a Father also, even the Father of 

eternity, and, of course, of time, and of all creatures 

made in time. Christ, in union with the Father an 
a . 


3. 


. 


= 


Threatenings against 


CHAPTER IX. 


the disobedient. 


a Of the increase of his govern- 

- ment and peace ? ¢here shall be .no 
end, upon the throne of David, and upon. his 
Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it’ with 
judgment and with’ justice from henceforth 
even for ever. The 4 zeal of the Lorn of hosts 
will perform this. 

B,c. 740, -8 I The Lorp sent a word into 
—————~ Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel. 

9 And all the people shall know, even 
Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, that 
say in the pride and-stoutness of heart,. 


10 The bricks are fallen down, but A. M. 3264, 
we will build with hewn stones: the °° 
sycamores are cut down, but we will change 
them into cedars. 

11 ‘Therefore the Lory shall set up the ad- 
versaries of Rezin against him, and "join his 
enemies together; ; 

12 The Syrians before, and the Philistines 
behind; and they shall devour Israel, *with - 
open mouth. .*For all this his-anger is not 
turned away, but his hand zs stretched out 
still. 


i 


p Daniel ii. 44; Luke i. 32, 33——12 Kings xix. 31; 
XXxvil. 32. 


Chapter 


® Heb. with whole mouth. 
4; Jer. iv. 8. 


Heb. mingle. 


© Chap. v. 25; x. 


the Holy Ghost, is the God and Father of all things, 
the maker and upholder of all creatures, John i. 3; 
Heb. i. 3; and especially the Father. of all believers, 
who are called his children, (Heb. ii. 13,) and the 
author of eternal life and salvation to them, Heb. v. 
9. Or, this title may be given him because he is 
the father of the new and eternal age, that is, of 
the economy which is to endure for ever; for Christ 
is the father of a new generation, to continue 
through all eternity ; the second Adam, father of a 
“new race; the head of a new and everlasting family, 
in which, all the children of God are reckoned. 
The Prince of peace—This is another title, which 
certainly does not agree to Hezekiah, whose reign 
was far from being free from wars, as we see 2 
Kings xviii. but it agrees’ exactly to Christ, who is 
called our peace, Mic. v.5; Eph. ii. 14; and is the 
only purchaser and procurer of peace between God 
and men, Isa. liii. 5; and between men ‘and men, 
between Jews and Gentiles, Eph. ii. 15; and of the 
peace of our own consciences ; and who leaves 
peace as his legacy to his disciples, John xiv. 27, and 
xvi. 33. 

Verse 7. Of the increase of his government, &e, 


—His-peaceable and happy government shall be en-’ 


larged without end: either without end of duration, 
for ever, as is expressed in a following clause of this 
verse, or without limitation: his peaceable and hap- 
py government shall be extended to all the ends of 
the earth. Upon the throne of David—The throne 
which was promised to David, and to his seed for 
ever; from henceforth, &c.—From the beginning of 
it unto all eternity. T'he zeal of the Lord of hosts, 
&c.—This great work shall be brought to pass by 
Almighty God, out of that fervent ‘affection which 
he hath to his own glory, to the honour of his Son, 
and to his people. 

Verses, 8-12. The Lord sent a word, &c.—A 
prophetical ~nd threatening message by me : for now 
the prophet, naving inserted some consolatory passa- 
ges for the support of God’s faithful people, returns 
to his former work of commination against the re- 
bellious Israelites ; and it lighted—Hebrew, 5p3, it 
fell, that is, it shall fall in the prophetical style. It 
shall certainly be accomplished; wpon Israel—The 
same with Jacob in the former clause. We have 

Vou. il. (7) 


| 


here the third section of the fifth discourse, which 
reaches to the fifth verse of the next chapter, “and 
makes,” says Bishop Lowth, “a distinct prophecy, 
and a just poem, remarkable for the regularity of its 
disposition, and the elegance of its plan. It has no - 
relation to the preceding or following prophecy, 
which relate principally to the kingdom of Judah ; 
whereas, this is addressed exclusively to the king- 
dom of Israel. The subject of it is a denunciation 
of vengeance awaiting their crimes. It is divided 
into four parts, each threatening the particular pun- 
ishment of some grievous offence; of their pride; 
of their perseverance in their vices ; of their impie- 
ty; and of their injustice. To which is added a 
general denunciation. of a further reserve of divine 
wrath, contained in a distich before used by the pro- 
phet on a like occasion, (chap. v. 25,) and here 
repeated after each part: this makes the interealary 
verse of the poem}; or, as we call it, the burden of 
the song.” And all the people shall know—Namely, 
by experience. They shall know whether my word 
be true or false. Even Ephraim, &c.—The people 
of the. ten tribes, and particularly Ephraim, the 
proudest of them all. And Samarra—The strongest 
place, and the seat of the king and court. Here we 
have the first’ fault of the Ephraimites, namely, 
the pride and contempt with which they had receiv- 
ed the threatenings of the true prophets of God, 
who had denounced to them the unhappy conse-~. 
quences of their undertakings. Elevated with vain 
hope, they had declared that they would never desist 
from their purpose of invading Judah for any denun- 
ciations of the prophets; on the contrary, they had 
boasted proudly, that, strengthened as they were by 
their present alliance with the king of Syria, though , 
they had heretofore suffered great loss, they had no 
doubt of repairing their fortune. Though the bricks 
were fallen down, they would build with hewn stones, 
&c.—The expression is metaphorically elegant, and 
-denotes the restoration of a fallen state for the better, 
and the change of a mean and low to a more honour- 
able and excellent situation. For their pride and | 
arrogance, the God who laugheth vain men to scorn, 
denounces their punishment in the two following 
verses; and, according to his usual justice, assures 
them that the union with Rezin, wherein they boast- 
97 3 


Desolation and 


ISATAH. 


ruin of the wicked. 


13 9 For ‘the people turneth not 
unto him that smiteth them, neither 
do they seek the Lorn of hosts. 

14 Therefore the Lorp will cut off from 
Israel head and tail, branch'and rush, tin one 
day. 

15 The ancient and honourable, he is the 
head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he 
is the tail. 

16 For “the® leaders of this people cause 
them to err; and 1° they that are led of them 
are destroyed. 

17 Therefore the Lorp *shall have no joy 
in their young men, neither shall have mercy 


A. M. 3264. 
B 


on their fatherless and widows: ¥ for A. M. 3264. 
A 5 C. 740. 

every one is a hypocrite and an evil- 

doer, and every mouth speaketh folly. 7 For 

all this his anger is not tumed sie but. his 

hand is stretched out still. 

18 4% For wickedness *burneth as the fire; 
it shall devour the briers and thorns, and 
shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and 
they shall mount up like the lifting: up of 
smoke. 

19 Through the wrath of the Lorp of hosts 
is >the land darkened, and the people shall be 


-as the 1 fuel of the fire: *no man shall spare 


his brother. 


sJer. v. 3; Hosea vii. :10, 
® Chap. ili. 12. ° Or, they that call them blessed.——! Or, they 
that are called blessed of them. 1 Heb, swallowed up. 


t Chapter x. 17; Rev. xviii. 8. ||’ 


'b Chap. viii, 22. 


x Psalm exlvii. 10, 11.——y Micah vii. 2. 
2 Verses 12, 21; ; Chap. Ws 2515 xvid, 
13 Heb. meat. 


12. Or, villany. 
a Chap. x. 17; Mal. iv.1 
© Mic. vii. 2, 6. 


ed, should itself prove their dentenehibes This pro- 
phecy was fulfilled by Tiglath-pileser. See 2. Kings 
xvi. 17, Vitringa, and Dodd. Dr. Waterland renders 
the beginning of the twelfth verse, “The Syrians 
from the east, and the Philistines from the west.” 
Though Rezin, king of Syria, was destroyed, yet the 
body of the nation survived, and submitted them- 
selves to the king of Assyria, and upon his command 
invaded Israel afterward. And they shall devour 
Israel, &c.—Like wild beasts. 

Verses 13-15. For the people turneth not, &e.— 
We have here the second crime of this refractory 
people, who, impenitent and stupid, regarded not the 
chastisement of the Lord, nor turned to him at his 
reproof. Therefore a total subversion of their state 
and polity is denounced as the severest punishment 
upon them. The Lord will cut off, &c. head and 
tail—High and low, honourable and contemptible, 
as the next verse explains it; branch: and rush— 
The goodly branches of tall treesy the mighty and 
noble; and the bulrush, the weakest and meanest 
persons. Jn one day—All-together, one as well as 
another, without any distinction. The ancient, ¢c., 
he is the head—That is, is signified by the word head, 
in the former verse; and the prophet that teacheth 
lies, &c.—Whose destruction he mentions, not as if 
it were a.punishment to them to be deprived of such 
persons, but partly to show the extent of the calami- 
ty, that it should reach to all sorts of persons; and 
partly to beat down their vain presumptions of peace 
and prosperity, by showing that those false prophets, 
which had fed their vain hopes, should perish, and 
their false prophecies with them. He is the tail— 
The basest part of the whole people. 

Verses 16,17. For, &c.— We have here a defence 
of the divine judgment, taken from the universal 
corruption of the people, wherein God sets forth the 
justice of his proceedings, and shows, that not from 
choice, but from the iniquities of the people, he is 
compelled to punish. . Zhe leaders of this people— 
Their governors, both civil and ecclesiastical, espe- 
cially the latter, their teachers, or the false prophets, 

98 


last-mentioned ; cause them to err—Their governors 
compelling them by power, and their teachers de- 
ceiving them by. false doctrines, and evil counsels 
and persuasions. They that are led, §c., are de- 
stroyed—Shall certainly perish; nor will it avail 
them to plead, in their. excuse, that they followed the 
counsel and conduct of their leaders. The Lord 
shall have no joy in their. young men—Shall not re- 
joice over them to do them good, as he doth over his 
faithful people, Isa. lxii.5; Zeph. iii. 17. Neither 
shall have mercy.on their fatherless—Who gene- 
rally are the special objects of his care and pity, and 
much less upon others. For every one—Not pre- 
cisely ; for there were seven thousand pious persons 
among them, when they seemed to Elijah to be uni- 
versally corrupt; but the body or.generality of the 
people are intended; is a Aypocrite—For though 
they professed to worship the true God, yet indeed 
they had forsaken him. Every mouth speaketh folly 
—That is, wickedness, which is commonly called 
folly. They are not ashamed to proclaim their own 
wickedness ; and the corruption of their hearts breaks 
forth into ungodly speeches. 

Verse 18. For wickedness burneth as fire, &c.— 
Rageth like a fire, destroying and laying waste the 
nation. We have here the third great evil, on ac- 
count.of which divine vengeance was about to come 
upon them; namely, the power of reigning and 
barefaced impiety; the punishment whereof, denounc- 
ed in the subsequent verses, is, as usual, assimilated 
to the vice, namely, destructive factions, which 
should overthrow their republic. Haying, rendered 
themselves hateful to God by their crimes, they shall 
be destroyed by those crimes, by their dissensions, 
animosities, divisions, tumults, insurrections, and 
civil broils, arising from the wickedness of their own 
dispositions, and issuing in their mutual destruction. 
Inflamed by envy, avarice, and impurity, they shall 
perish in this very fire let loose among them by the 
wrath of God, and permitted to rage uncontrolled, 
like fire among briers and thorns, verse 19. The lat- 
ter state of the Israclitish government abundantly 


UfTy 


Go@s judgments against 


CHAPTER X. 


oppressive rulers. 


on rif 20 And he shall “snatch on the 
———— right hand, and be hungry; and he 
shall eat on the left hand, ‘and they shall not 
be satisfied: ° they shall eat every man the flesh 


of his own arm: 


21° Manasseh, Ephraim; 
Ephraim, Manasseh: and they to- 
gether shall be against Judah. ‘For all this 
his anger is not turned away, but his hand is 
stretched out still. 


and A. M. 3264, 
B. C. 740. 


*4 Heb. cut.——é4 Lev. xxvi. 26.—° Chap. xlix. 26 ; Jer. xix. 9. || 


SE eT AT 
proves the exactness of this prophet’s prediction, 2 
Kings xv. 10, 30, and xvii. 1, 18-24. 

Verses 20, 21. He shall snatch on the right hand 
—They shall plunder and devour one another, with- 
out ever being satisfied, or. ceasing. T'hey shall eat 
every man the flesh, &c—They shall destroy one 
another by their intestine wars: see chap. xlix. 26. 
But it was literally fulfiled when they were reduced 
to that extremity that they ate the fleshof their own 
children, 2 Kings vi. 28; Jer. xix. 8,9; a judgment 
denounced for their sins by Moses, Deut. xxviii. 53, 
where see the note. They together shall fall on 
Judah--When those tribes have preyed upon and 


f Verses 12,17; Chap. v. 25; x. 4. 


nearly destroyed one another, they shall turn their 
rage on Judah. The prophet in the above verses 
describes the infatuation of the Israelites and Jews, 
who, instead of uniting in a confederacy against 
their common enemies, the Syrians and Assyrians, 
with whom they were not singly able to contend, fell 
out among themselves, and so far destroyed each 
other, that they became, one after the other, an 
easy prey to those heathen nations, whom, humanly 
speaking, they would have been able to have repel 
led, had they united in a league, and aided each 
other. But God suffered them to be infatuated, as a 
punishment of their sins. 


\ 


CHAPTER X. shes 


The wo of the unjust oppressors of God’s people, 1-4. _ The commission given to the king of Assyria to invade Judah, 5, 
6. His pride and insolence in the execution of that commission, 7-11. A rebuke given to his haughtiness, and a threat- 
ening of his fall and ruin, 12-19. A remnant shall be saved, and 4 purer state of the church shall take place,/after it has 


passed through these afflictions, 20-23. 


Great encouragement given to the people of God not to fear this storm, but to 


hope it would end in the Assyrians’ destruction and their deliverance, 24-27. Sennacherib marching toward Jerusalem, 
28-31. The downfall of this haughty and formidable enemy, 32-34. 


A. M. 3264. 


W O unto them that * decree un- 
B.C, 740. ‘ 


righteous. decrees, and that 
write grievousness which. they have prescrib- 
ed; | ‘ 

2 To turn aside the needy from judgment, 
and to take away the right from the poor of my 


people, that widows may be their prey, A.M. 3904, 
and that they may rob the fatherless !: ——_— 

3: And ’what will ye do in ° the day of visita- 
tion, and in the desolation which shall come 
from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and 
where will ye leave your glory ? 


a Psa. lviii. 2 ; xciv. 20.—+ Or; to the writers that write griev- 


6 Job xxxi. 14. Hos. ix. 7; Luke xix. 14. 


ousness. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X. 

Verses 1,2. Wo, &c.—The first four verses of this 
chapter are closely connected with the foregoing, 
and ought to have been joined thereto, being a conti- 
nuation of the subject treated of in it. We have 


here the fourth evil charged on the people, and the |. 


punishment of it: The sin complained of ‘is the in- 
justice of the magistrates and judges, who decreed 
unrighteous decrees—That is, made unjust laws, and 
gave forth unjust sentences, which is termed in the 
next clause, writing grievousness, or grievous things, 
edicts which cated grief and vexation to their sub- 
jects. To turn aside the needy from judgment— 
From obtaining a just sentence, because these 
rulers and judges either denied or delayed to hear 
their causes, or when they heard them decided un- 
justly; to take away the right from the poor— 
Whom I have, in a special manner, committed to 
3 


=! roe 


your care ; of my people--Whom I had taken into 
covenant with myself; and therefore this is an in- 
jury, not only to them, but also to me. The punish- 
ment assigned to this iniquity is, that they should be 
absolutely deserted and deprived of all help and pro- 
tection from God, whose laws they had so shame- 
fully perverted ; and should perish miserably before 
their enemies, who should come from far. 

Verses 3,4. What will ye do—To save yourselves ? 
in the day of visitation ?—When I shall come to 
visit you in wrath, as the next words limit the ex- 
pression. ‘he desolation which shall come from 
far—From the Assyrians. This he adds, because 


| the Israelites, having weakened the Jews, and being 


in amity with the Syrians, their next neighbours, 

were secure. To whom will ye flee for help—To 

the Syrians, as now you do? But they shall be de- 

stroyed together with you, 2 Kings xvi. 9; and where 
99 


The prophet foretels the 


ISATAH. 


invasion of Sennacherib, 


A. M. 3264. 


4 Without me they shall bow down 
B. C. 740 


’ under the prisoners, and they shall fall 
under the slain. 4 For all this his anger is not 
turned away, but his hand is stretched out 
still. 
B.c.733. °9 % 70 3 Assyrian, * the rod .of 
mine anger, ‘and the staff \in their 
hand is mine indignation. 

6. I will send him against EYEE na- 


tion, and against the people of my Aa Be 2986, 
B. C. 738. 

wrath will I 8 give him a charge, to 

take the spoil, and to take the prey, and ° to tread 

them down. like the mire of the streets. 

7 »Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth 
his heart think so; but i¢ zs in his heart to 
destroy and cut off nations not a few. 

8 *Forhe saith, Are not my princes altogether 
kings ? 


4Chapter v. 25; ix. 12, 17, 21. 


2 Or, Wo to the Assyrian. 
3 Heb. Asshur. 


e Jer. li. 20.——* Or, though. Chap. xix. 


17,4 Jer. xxxiv. 22.* Heb. to lay them a treading. —Gen. 
1.20; Mic. iv. 12.——i 2 Kings xviii. 24, 33, &e.; i ‘xix. 10, &c. 


will you leave your glory—To be kept safe for your 
use, and to be restored to you when you call for it ? 
By their glory, he means, either, Ist, their power 
and authority, which now they so wickedly abused ; 
or, 2d, their wealth, gotten by injustice, as glory 
sometimes Means: see Gen. xxxi. 1; Psa. xlix. 16, 
17. Without me—Without my favour and help, 
which you have forfeited, and do not seek to recover; 
they shall bow down--Notwithstanding all their suc- 
cours; under the prisoners—Or among the pri- 
soners; and they shall fall under the slain—Or 
among the slain. The meaning is, that it was in 
vain for the Israelites to trust in their own strength, 
or in the assistance of the Syrians; or any other 
allies, since it was from God alone they could ob- 
tain deliverance, without whose aid, or when he de- 
serted them, they should all bow down under the 
yoke of the Assyrians. In the Septuagint, and vul- 
gar Latin, these words are joined to the foregoing 
verse, to this sense: “ Whither will this people flee 
for refuge to preserve themselves, that they may not 
bow down, or bé subdued among the captives, or de- 
stroyed among the slain ?” 

Verse 5. O Assyrian, &c.—We have here the 
fourth section of the fifth sermon, which reaches to 
the end of this chapter, and which is two-fold; con- 
taining, Ist, A proposition in this verse ; and, 2d, The 
unfolding of it in the following verses. It isa new 
and distinct prophecy, and, as the former part of it 
foretels the invasion of Sennacherib and the destruc- 
tion of his army, it must have been delivered before 
the fourteenth year of Hezekiah’s reign. “In the 
former chapters the prophet had foretold the fate of 
the Ephraimites and Syrians, who had. determined 
to attack, and, if possible, subvert the Jewish Church 
and state. He therefore now turns his discourse to 
the Assyrians, the executors of this judgment, who 
also in their time should make the same attempt 
against Judea, and denounces their punishment, 
teaching, at the same time, in what light they. were 
held by God, and consequently were to be considered 
by the careful observers of the ways of God. The 
proposition in this verse is elegant, but very difficult 
to be turned into another language, according to its 
original force.. Its immediate meaning is, ‘ Wo to 
the Assyrian, who is the rod of mine anger, and the 
staff, which is in his hands, is my severity ; that is, 
‘whatever strength or power they have, which they 
have used in afflicting my people, would have been 

100 


none a all, if my people had not provoked my wrath 
and severity ; ; so that, not the Assyrians themselves, 
but my wrath and severity, and the decrees of my 
justice, ought to be esteemed the rod and staff beat- 
ing my people ; ; since, without that severity, the As- 
syrians themselves could have done nothing.’ Vi- 
tringa remarks, that all the characters of this prophe- 
cy belong to Sennacherib; though possibly it may 
have a more extensive scope, and refer to the de- 
struction of all the enemies of God, and the following 
great empires, which God made use of as rods and 
scourges, to chastise and amend his people, till the 
manifestation of the kingdom of his Son in the world: 
see Jer. li. 20.”—Dodd. Be this as it will, the pro- 
phet here instructs us in a great and important truth: 
“That God often prospers wicked and tyrannical 
governments to be his scourge and the instruments 
of his vengeance upon others; and ‘when they have 
done the work which God allots them, he then pun- ~ 
ishes them for those very oppressions which they 
have exercised toward their neighbours, and to which 
they were carried on purely by their own ambition 
and ‘covetousness, although Providence made them 
serviceable to better ends and purposes.”—Lowth. 

Verses 6,7. I will send him—By my providence, 
giving him ‘both opportunity and inclination to un- 
dertake this expedition; against a hypocritical 
nation—Or, a profane nation, as the word ))3n ra- 
ther signifies; and against the people of my wrath 
—The objects of my just wrath, devoted to destrue- 
tion. .T'o tread them down like the. mire of the 
streets—Kasily to conquer them, and utterly to de- 
stroy them, as he did after this. time, Howbeit, he 
meaneth not so—He does not design the execution 
of my will, but only to, extend his conquests, and 
thereby to enlarge his empire, and gratify his ambi- 
tion. Which is seasonably added, to justify God in 
his judgments threatened to the Assyrian, notwith- 
standing this service. But to destroy nations not a 
few—To sacrifice multitudes of people to his own 
pride and covetousness, which was abominable im- 
piety. 

Verses 8-10. For he saith, Are not my princes, &c. 
—Are they not equal for power, and wealth, and 
glory, to the kings of other nations, though they be 
my subjects and servants? Js not Calno as Carche- 
mish 2—Have I not conquered one place as well as 
another, the stronger as well as the weaker? Have 
‘I not from time to time added new conquests to the 


The impious vauntings 


CHAPTER X. 


of Sennacherib. 


she 3 ae 


be 9 Is not *Calno !as Carchemish ? 


* is not’Hamath as Arpad? is not Sa- 
maria ™as Damascus ?: 

10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of 
the idols, and whose graven images did excel 
them of Jerusalem and of Samaria ; 

11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria 
and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols ? 

12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when 


the Lorn hath performed his whole work ® upon: 


mount Zion and on Jerusalem, ° I will ° punish 
the fruit ’of the stout heart of the king of As- 
syria, and the glory of his high looks. 

13 ? For he saith, By the strength of my hand 


= 


k Amos yi. 2,—!2 Chronicles xxxv.'20.—2 Kings xvi. 9. 
52 Kings xix. 31—— Jer. 1. 18 —— Heb. visit upon. 7 Heb. 
of the greatness of the heart. 


—— 


Thave done if, and by my wisdom; for ee 
I am prudent: and I have cited 

the bounds of the people, and have robbed their 
treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants 
Slike a valiant man : 

14 And ‘my hand hath found as a nest the 
riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs 
that-are left, have I gathered all the earth; and 
there was none that moved the nae, or epaiiend 
the mouth, or peeped. 

15 Shall * the axe boast itself against him that 
heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify 
itself against him that shaketh it? %as if the 
rod should shake itself against them that lift it 


P Isa, xxxvil. 243 Ezek. xxviil. 4, &c. ; wae iv. 30.—§8 Or, 
like many people. 4 Job xxxi. 25. Jer. li. 20.—* Or, as 
if a rod should shake them that lift it up. 


a eee 


old? None of those cities, against which he had 
turned his arms, had been.able to resist him; but he 
had subjugated them all. Calno, Carchemish, Ha- 
math, and Arpad, were cities of Syria and Israel, 
which this mighty monarch had subdued. Js not 
Samaria—Or, Shall not Samaria be, as Damas- 
cus 2—Shall I not take that as I have done this city ? 
For although Damascus, possibly, was not yet taken 


by the Assyrians, yet the prophet speaks of it as: 


actually taken, because these words are prophetically 
delivered, and supposed to be uttered by the.king 
of Assyria, at or about the time of the siege of Sa- 
maria, when Damascus was taken. As my hand 
kath found—Hath taken; as this word is often used, 
the kingdoms of the idols—Which worshipped their 
own idols, and vainly imagined that the~ could pro- 
tect them from my power. He calis the gods-of the 
nations, not excepting Jerusalem, idols, by way of 
contempt, because none of them could deliver their 
people out of his hands, and because he judged them 
to be but petty gods, far inferior to the sun, which 
was the god of the Assyrians. Whose graven 
images did excel them of Jerusalem—Namely, in 
reputation and power. Which blasphemy of his 
proceeded from his deep ignorance of the true God. 

Verse 12. Wherefore—Because of this impudent 
blasphemy ; when the Lord hath performed his whole 
work—Of chastising his people as long as he sees 
fit. I will punish the fruit of the stout heart, &c.— 
Here it is foretold, says Bishop Newton, that when 
the Assyrians “shall have served the purposes of 
Divine Providence, they shall be severely punished 
for their pride and ambition, their tyranny and cru- 
elty to their neighbours. Now there was no pros- 
pect of such an event” when Isaiah uttered this 
prediction, namely, “ while the Assyrians were in 
the midst of their successes and triumphs; but still 
the word of the prophet prevailed; and it was not 
long after these calamities brought upon the Jews, 
that the Assyrian empire, properly so called, was 
overthrown, and Nineveh destroyed.” 


Verses 13, 14. For he saith, &e.—*From hence | 
3 


tothe twentieth verse we have a more full exposition 
and confirmation of what had gone before, particu- 
larly the pride of the Assyrian and his vain boasting 
in these verses; a refutation thereof in verse 15; 
and the punishment ordained for him by God, in 
verses 16-19. By the strength of my hand I have 
done tt, &c.—Here the prophet sets forth his insolent 
boasting of the greatness of his deeds, the prosperity 
of his empire, and the success of his warlike expe- 
ditions, all which are ascribed by him to the prudence 
of his own counsels, and the valour and strength of 
his forces; but without any the least’ acknowledg- 


‘ment of any ‘superior and overruling power.” J 


have removed the bounds of the people—I have in- 
vaded their lands, and added them to my own do- 
minions, Prov. xxii. 28. And have robbed their 
treasures—Hebrew, Damn wy, their prepared 
things, their gold and silver, and other precious 
things, which they had been long preparing and 
laying up in store. And I have put down the inhab- 
itants—Deprived them of their former glory and 
power. And my handhath found as a nest—As one 
finds young birds in a nest; and as one gathereth 
eggs—Which the dam hath left in her nest; have I 
gathered all the earth—All the riches of the earths 
an hyperbole not unusual in the mouths of such 
boasters. “ The comparison is elegant; and nothing 
could more strongly or significantly describe the 
insolent boasting of the Assyrian. It is remarkable, 
that birds, after they have laid their eggs in their 
nests, are most diligent in their care of them; and 
if, at'any time, they are obliged, for fear of the 
spoiler, to forsake them, they hover about their nests, 
and flutter around, Sate their wings, and peeping, 
chirping, or lamenting ; thusimitating the affections 
of the human mind. “The prophet elegantly implies 
by this simile the extreme dread of this proud and 
oppressing king which reigned in the minds of the 
conquered people, and we find that the mighty 
tyrants and conquerors of Asia did spread such 
terror.” See Lowth’s Twelfth Prelection, and Dodd. 

Verse 15. Shall the axe boast itself, &e—How 

101 


T hreatenings against 


ISAIAH. 


Sennacherib’s army. 


A. M. 3266. up, or as if the staff should lift up 1° i¢- 
nl self, as if it were no wood. ° 
16. Therefore shall the Lord, the. Lord of 


hosts, send among his * fat ones leanness; and || 


under his glory he shall kindle a burming like 
the burning of a fire. 

17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, 
and his Holy One for a flame: * and, it shall 
burn and devour his thorns and. his briers in 
one day ; 

18 And shall consume the glory of his ahi 


and of “his fruitful field, “both soul me M. bj 
and body: and they shall be as when 
a standard-bearer fainteth. E 

19 And the rest of the trees of his. forest shall 
be }? few, that a child may write them. 

20 § And it shall come to passin that day, 
that the remnant of Israel, and such as are 
escaped of the house of Jacob, * shall no more 
again stay upon him that smote them ; but shall 
stay upon, the Lorn, the Holy One of Israel, in 
truth. 


10, Or, ‘that ‘which is not wood.- 
XXxvil. 4. 


* Chap. v. be © Chay x. 18; 
u 2 Kings xix. 23. 


absurd is it for thee, who art but an instrument in 
God’s hand, to blaspheme thy Lord and Master, who 
has as great power over thee as a mar hath over the 
axe wherewith he heweth? As if the rod, &e.—See 
the margin; or, as if the staff, &c.—Should forget 
that it was wood, and should pretend, or attempt, to 
lift up itself—Kither without, or against the man that 
moyeth it. As if it were no wood—Literally trans- 
lated, it is, As if the staff should lift wp. no wood ; 
that is, should lift up man, who is very different 
from wood: as if the staff should lift the man instead 
of the man lifting the staff. In this way does the 
prophet refute the vain boasts of the Assyrian, and 
teach him, that, “in all his counsels, motions, and 
works, he. was but the minister of the Divine Provi- 
dence ; incapable of doing any thing without the 


divine will and permission ; and therefore his boast- 


ing was to be considered in no other light than as 
if the axe, or saw, or rod, should magnify themselves 
against him who handled them, and should ascribe 
to theniselves that effect which was only caused by 
the mover.” 

Verses 16-19. Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord 
of hosis—The sovereign Lord and General of his 
and of all other armies; send among his fat ones 
leanness—Strip him, and all his great princes and 


‘commanders, of all their wealth, and might, and 


glory. And under his glory he shall kindle, &¢e.— 
He will destroy his numerous and victorious army, 
and that suddenly and irrecoverably, as the fire doth 
those combustible things which are cast into it; 
which was fulfilled 2 Kings xix. 25. And the light 
of Israel—That God, who is, and will be, a comfort- 
able light to his people; shall.be @ fire—To the As- 


. syrians; and it shall devour his thorns and briers 


——His vast army, which is no more’able to resist God 
tige dry thorns and briers are to oppose the fire 
which is kindled among them. And shall consume 
the glory of his forest--“The briers and thorns,” 
says Bishop Lowth, “are the common people; and 
the glory of his forest are. the nobles, and those of 
the highest rank and importance. The fire of God’s 
wrath shall destroy them, great and small.” And 
of his fruitful field-—Of his soldiers, who stand as 
thick as ears of corn do in afruitful field. Hebrew, 
Of his Carmel; an allusion possibly to the vain 
threat, which God foreknew the Assyrian would 
102 


12 Heb; number. 


1 Heb. from the soul, and even to the flesh. 
x See 2 Kings xvi. 7; 2 Chron. xxviii. 20. 


hereafter utter,.with regard to Israel, I will enter 
into the height of his border, and the forest of his 
Carmel, chap. xxxvii. 24. Both soul and bedy— 
Hebrew, wa 73) wain, from the soul, even to the 
flesh, a proverbial expression. The fire of God’s 
wrath shall consume them entirely and eo orien 
And they shall be—The state of the king, and of his 
vast and valiant army, shall be as when a standard- 
bearer fainteth—Like that of an army, when either 
the standard-bearer is slain, or rather flees away, 
which strikes a terror into the whole army, and puts 
them to flight. Bishop Lowth, in this-clause, follows 
the reading of the LXX., we o gevywy aro groyoc 
xaowevyc; It shall be, as when one fleeth out of raging 
flames: that is, “ The few that escape shall be looked 
upon.as having escaped from the most imminent 
danger.” The rest of the trees of his forest—The 
remainders of that mighty host; a child may write 
them—A child, or the meanest accountant, may 
number and register them. It is justly observed by 
Dr. Dodd, that “the emphasis of this passage con- 
sists in the elegance of the metaphors.” . The first, 
taken from leanness, destroying the fat, and marring 
the beauty of the human form, well describes that 
terrible plague which destroyed the flower of the 
Assyrian host. The second, taken from fire, which, 
with unconquerable fury, in a short time reduces 
combustible matter to ashes, gives us a striking pic- 
ture of the quick and almost. instantaneous ruin 
brought on that army, by the irresistible power of 
the destroying angel,,especially as that fire is. repre- 
sented as kindled by the light of Israel: And the 
third metaphor of the thorns and briers, which are 
so far from having any power to withstand the fury 
of the flames, that they provoke and feed it, affords 
us a lively emblem of the utter inability of the As- 
syrian monarch, or his mighty host, to make the 
least resistance against that divine vengeance which 
their crimes had merited. 

Verse 20. And it shall come to pass, &e.—The 
prophet having, Ist, Explained the cause for which 
God had.decreed to permit the Assyrians to have 
such power over his people, namely, for the punish- 
ment of hypocrites, and the purification of his 
church ; and having also shown the crimes which 
the kings of Assyria would commit in executing his 
judgments, and the punishment ordained for them, 


% 


iH 


CHAPTER X. 


yee 


“ 
4 


behalf Sh Batibwe 


The goodness of God in 
:. ~ axe 21 ¥ The remnant shall return, even 


the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty 
God. 

22 * For though thy people Sarath be as the 
sand of the sea, * yet a remnant } of them shall 
return: »the consumption decreed shall over- 
flow ™ with righteousness. 


a 


23 ° For the Lord Gon of hosts shall A. M. 3266. 
make a consumption, even determin- eahaelutis 
ed, in the midst of all the land. 

24 “| Therefore, thus saith the Lord Gop of 
hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, “be 
not afraid of the Assyrian; he shall smite 


thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff 


¥ Chap. vii. 3—-z Rom. ix. 27. 


a Chap. vi. 13. 
in, or, among.—— Chap. xxviii. 22. 


14 Or, in. 


¢ Chapter 


verses 6-12; and having, 2d, Confirmed.these things, 
and given a new exhibition ‘of the pride of the As- 
syrian, with a yet fuller declaration ‘of the divine 
judgment upon him, verses 13-19; proceeds now, 


3d, To predict, that a two-fold consequence, friendly | 


to the state of the church, should arise from this 
memorable judgment; opposed to the two-fold vice 
of the people, before the execution of it: Ist, There 
were among them men fearing God, but who yet 
regarded the ‘power of the Assyrian with greater 
fear than they ought. These, by this great deliver- 
ance granted to the church, would be henceforth 
confirmed, as to their faith and confidence in the 
power and goodness of God. 2d, There were, 
besides these, many others totally alienated from 
God, who, by means of this great miracle, would be 
brought to repentance, and a serious acknowledgment 
of the God of Israel. Nay, not only the pious of 
those, but of future times, would, by this means, be 
confirmed in their faith, and adherence to the true 
God. Thus the prophet: Such as. are escaped of 
the house of Jacob—Such Jews as shall be preserved 
from that sweeping Assyrian scourge, by which 
great numbers, both of Israel and Judah, shall be 
destroyed, and from the succeeding calamities. For 
that this place looks beyond the deliverance from the 
Assyrian army, unto the times of the New Testa- 
ment, seems probable, 1st, From the following 
verses, which belong to that time, as we shall see: 


2d, From the state of the Jewish nation, which, after |. 


that deliverance, continued to be very corrupt, and 
averse from that reformation, which Hezekiah and 
Josiah prosecuted with all their might; and .there- 
fore the body of that people had not yet learned 
this lesson, of sincerely trusting in God alone. 8d, 
From St. Paul’s explication and application of these 
words, Rom. ix. 27. Shall no more stay upon him 
that smote them—Shall learn by this judgment, not 
to trust to the Assyrians, or any other allies, for help, 
as Ahaz and his people now did; but shall stay wpon 
the Lord in truth—Not by profession only, ‘but 
sincerely. 

Verses 21-23. T'he remnant shall return—He- 
brew, 21v” WNW, shearjashub, the name given to one 
of the prophet’s sons, (see chap. vii. 3,) in confirma- 
tion of the truth of God’s promises. It may be ren- 
dered, as here, the remnant, or, a remnant, or, but 
a remnant, shall return ; inde the mighty God— 
Hebrew, 123 5x, the very appellation given to Christ, 
chap. ix. 6.. For though thy people Israel—Or, thy 
people, O Israel; to whom the prophet, by an apos- 
trophe, directs his speech; be as the sand, §c., yet a 

3 


’ 


13 Heb. 


| all-before if. 


xxviii. 22; Daniel ix. 27; Rom. ix. 28. 
18 Or, but he shall lift up his staff for thee. 


4 Chapter xxxvii. 6. 


remnant—Or, a reninant only, as before; shail re- 


‘ turn——For that this isa threatening in respect of some, 


as well as a promise in respect of others, is evident from 
the rest of this, and from the following verse. I’hecon- 
sumption decreed shall overflow—God’s judgments 
are said to overflow when they spread generally, the 
metaphor being taken from aninundation that sweeps 
The destruction of the people of Israel 
was already decreed by the fixed counsel of God, 


and therefore-must needs be executed, and like a 


deluge overflow them, with, or in righteousness, as 
the word is rendered Rom. ix. 28, that is, with jus- 
tice, and yet with clemency, inasmuch as he spared 
a considerable ,remnant of them, when he might 
have destroyed them utterly. Jn the midst of the 
land—In all the parts of the land, not excepting 
Jerusalem, which was to be preserved in the Assyrian 
invasion. Bishop Lowth translates these verses, 
“Though thy people, O Israel, shall be as the sand 
of the sea, a remnant, of them only shall return. 


‘The consummation decided overfloweth with strict 


justice: For a full and decisive decree shall Jehovah, 
the Lord of hosts, accomplish in the midst of the 
land.” The prophet’s affirming, that only aremnant 
of Judah and Ephraim should be preserved, and re- 


turn in true repentance to God, might justly cause 


wonder and offence, both to Jews and Israelites, at 
the time when-he spoke these things: for it implied 
that far the greater part of the people should perish, 
which they must have conceived highly improbable, 
especially as they were at that time very numerous 
and flourishing. The prophet, therefore, declares 


repeatedly, and more explicitly, that God had deter- 
mined, by an absolute and precise decree, thus to 
exercise his justice and severity upon them. This, " 
it is evident, is the sense of the present pasage, ‘ & 
* 


though there is some difficulty in the expressions. 
This ‘prophecy was, in part, fulfilled at the Baby- 
lonish captivity, but there can be no doubt that it has 
also a reference to the times of the Messiah: see 
note on Rom. ix. 27. Indeed, as Lowth. observes, 
the remnant, so miraculously preserved in Jerusalem 
from Sennacherib’s invasion, were a type or ore 
of that small number.of converts under the gospel, 
d cafouevor, (Acts ii. 47,) such as should be 
saved, namely, such as should escape the vengeance 
which fell upon the main body of the Jewish na 
for their sin in rejecting Christ. And there shall be be 
another remnant of them that shall be saved in the 
latter days of the Christian Church. 
Verse 24. Therefore, &c—We have here the 
fourth part of the enarration, or unfolding of the 
103 


£ 


oh 


The goodness of God in 


ISAIAH. 


behalf of his followers. 


A. M. 3266. against thee, after the manner of 
B.C. 738. J 

es gzypt. 
25 ‘For yet a very little while, &and the in- 
dignation shall cease, and mine anger in their 
destruction: 


26 And the Lorp of hosts shall stir up >a 


scourge for .him according to the A. ae ame 
slaughter of ' Midian at the rock of ———— 
Oreb: and *as his rod was upon the sea, so 
shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. 
27 And.it shall come to pass in that day, 


that ‘his burden shalt be taken away from 


aa 


£Chap. liv. 7——s Dan, xi, 36.—— 2 Kings 


¢ Exod. xiv. 
\ eax, oas 


i Judges vii. 25 ; Chap. ix. 4—— Exod. xiv. 26,27 ——! Chap. 
xiv. 25.——!6 Heb. shall remove. 


proposition, mentioned verse 5, namely, the applica- 
tion of it to the consolation of the people of God: 
to which, having digressed a little, the prophet re- 
turns, it being the true and proper scope of his dis- 
course, to comfort the pious with respect to the evils 
that threatened their republic. The words are an 
inference, not from the verses immediately foregoing, 
but from the whole prophecy: as if he had said, 
Seeing the Assyrian shall be destroyed; and the rem- 
nant of my people preserved and restored, thus 
saith the Lord God of, hosts-The Lord of all the 
armies of earth and heaven, the God superior to all 
human, yea, to all created power ; O my people that 
dwellest in Zion—-Where I dwell; where are the 
ordinances of my worship and service, my temple, 


my priests; the thrones of justice which I have } 


established, and the princes of the house of David 
mine anointed ; where my people assemble to wor- 
ship me, and where Iam present to defend them: 
Be not afraid of the Assyrian—A man that shall 
die, the son of man that shall be as grass; forgetting 
the Lord thy maker, that stretched forth the heavens, 
and laid the foundations of the earth. With his 
staff indeed shall he smite thee, (as Bishop Lowth 
translates it,) and his rod shall he lift up against 
thee. He shall threaten and correct, yea, afflict thee, 
but not destroy thee; after the manner of Egypt— 
As the Egyptians formerly did, and with the same ill 
success to themselves, and comfortable issue to you, 

Verses 25, 26. For yet a very little while, &e.— 
Here the prophet proceeds to assign the reasons why 
the Lord would:not have his people to fear the As- 
syrians, because, in a short time, he would take ven- 
geance upon them, and that ina very: singular and ex- 
traordinary manner, as he did upon the Midianites and 


ee the consequence of. which would be the 


removal of the yoke now imposed, or to be imposed 
uponthem. The indignation—My displeasure at my 
people, which is the rod and staff in their hand, verse 5; 
shall cease—And, when it ceaseth, they wilh be dis- 
armed, and disabled from doing any farther mischief. 
And mine anger in their destruction—Hebrew, 
‘oman 4y, upon, or, with their destruction, as Dr. 
Waterland properly renders the words, namely, ea 
destruction of the Assyrians. The enemy 
threatens and afflicts God’s people, shall himse ~ 
reckoned with and punished. The rod wherewith 
God corrected them shall not’only be laid aside, but 
put into the fire, and it shall appear by its destruction 
that his anger is turned away from them, The 
reader will recollect that, upon the destruction of the 
Assyrian army, the calamities wherewith God had 
chastised his people in a great measure ceased, at 
104 


me foratime. Z'he Lord of hosts—Who. is well 
able; shall stir up a scourge for him—He lifted up 
his staff against Zion; and. God will now lift up.a 
scourge for him: he was a terror to God’s people, 
and God will be a terror to him. The destroying 
angel shall be his scourge, which he can neither flee 
from nor contend with. According to the slaughter 
of Midian—Whom God slew suddenly and unex- 
pectedly in the night. At the rock of Oreb—Upon 
which one of their chief princes was slain, and nigh 
unto which the Midianites were destroyed. And as 
his rod was upon the sea—To divide it, and make 
way for thy deliverance, .and for the destruction of 
the Egyptians. So’shall he lift it up after the man- 
ner of Egypt—As he did in. Egypt, to bring his — 
plagues upon that land and people. Thus the pro- 
phet; for the encouragement of God’s people, quotes 
precedents, and puts them in mind of what God had 
done formerly against the enemies of his church, 


‘who were very strong and formidable, but were 


brought to ruin. Respecting. the last clause of this 
verse, “I think,” says Bishop Lowth, “there is a de- 
signed ambiguity inthese words, Sennacherib, soon 


after his return from his Egyptian expedition, which, 


I imagine, took him up three years, invested Jeru- 
salem. He is represented by the prophet as lifting up 
his rod, in his march from Egypt, and threatening 
the people of God, as Pharaoh and the Egyptians 
had done, when they pursued them to the Red sea. 
But God, in his turn, will lift up his red, as he did at 
that time over the sea, in the way, or, after the man- 
ner of Egypt: and as Sennacherib had imitated the 
Egyptians. in his threats, and came full of rage ~ 
against them from the same quarter; so God will act 
over again the same part that he had taken formerly 
in Egypt, and overthrow their enemies in as signal 
a manner.” 
Verse 27. In that day his burden shall be taken 
away, &c.—The burden imposed on the Jews by 
the Assyrian. They shall not only be eased of the 
Assyrian army, now quartered upon them, and which 
was a grievous yoke and burden on them; but they 
shall no more pay that tribute to the king of Assyria 
which, before this invasion, he had exacted from 
them, 2 Kings xviii. 14; shall no longer be at his 
service, nor lie at his mercy, as they had done; nor 
shall he ever again put the country under contribu- 
tion. Perhaps, as some think, the promise may look 
to the deliverance of the Jews from the ¢ coptiriny of 
Babylon, if not also to the redemption of believers 
from the tyranny of sin and Satan, Because of the 
anointing—Hebrew, {nw 351, literally, Because of, 


Srom before, or, from the presence of, the oil, oint- 
; 3 j 


% < 
“< 


The march of the 


CHAPTER X. 


destroying army. 


—~ reg off thy shoulder; and his yoke fron 
———— off thy neck, and the yoke shall be 
destroyed because of ™ the anointing. 

28 4 He is come to Aiath, he~is passed to 
Migron ; at Michmash he hath laid up his car- 
rlages : . 

29 'They are gone over the "passage: they 
have. taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah 
is afraid ; ° Gibeah of Saul is fled. 


30°) Lift up thy voice, O daughter y, ae 
of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto ——" “~~ 
4 Laish, *O'poor Anathoth. " 

31 *Madmenah is removed} the inhabitants 


| of Gebim gather themselves to flee. 


32 As yet shall he remain ‘ at Nob that day: 
he shall "shake his hand against the mount 
of * the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. 

33 Behold, the Lord, the Lorn of hosts, shall 


_™Psa. ev. 15; Daniel ix. 24; 1 Jolin ii, 20. 
xiii. 23.——° ] Samuel xi. 4. 
voice. 


21 Samuel 
‘Hebrew, Cry shrill with thy 


P] Samuel xxv. 44. 
5 Josh. xv. 31. 
« Chap. xiii» 2. 


4 Judges xviii. 7.—* Joshua xxi. 18, 
t 1 Samuel xxi. 1; xxii. 19; Nehemiah xi. 32. 
* Chap. xxxvii. 22. 


ment, or fatness. Leigh says, “ Est nomen generale 
ad omnem pinguedinem sive naturalem, sive condi- 
tam: It is a general name for every kind of fatness, 
a natural or artificial.” Hence some trans- 
late the sentence, “The yoke shall be loosed because 
of the fatness ;” supposing the meaning to be, that 
the affairs of the Jews would be in so good a condi- 
tion, signified by fatness, after this destruction of 
the Assyrian army, that the Assyrians would not 
pretend any longer to lay any burden of tribute, or 
any impositions upon them, as they had done, ever 
since Ahaz put himself under their protection, and, 
as it were, made-a'surrender of himself and people 
to them, to become tributary to them. But the com- 
mon interpretation given of the text seemis prefer- 
able, namely, 7'he yoke shall be destroyed, because 
of the (oil, unction, or) anointing—That is, out of 
regard to the holy unction, which God had estab- 
lished among his people. Or, for the preservation 
of the priesthood and kingdom, priests and kings 
being both initiated into their offices by the ceremo- 
ny Of anointing. The Jews, therefore, and some 


others, apply this to Hezekiah, who was the anoint- 


ed of the Lord, an active reformer, and very dear to 
God, and in answer to whose prayers, as we read, 
(chap. xxxvii. 15,) God. gave this deliverance. But 
possibly it might be better understood of David, who 
‘is often mentioned in Scripture by the name of God’s 
anointed ; and for whose sake God gave many de- 
liverances to the succeeding kings and ages, as is 
expressly affirmed 1 Kings xi. 32, 34. And, which 
ismore considerable, God declares that he would 
give this very deliverance from the Assyrian for 
David's sake, 2 Kings xix. 34; xx.6. But the Mes- 
siah is principally intended, of whom David was but 
a type; and who was ina particular manner anointed 
above his fellows, as is said Psa. xlv.7. For he is 
the foundation of all the promises, (2 Cor. i. 20,) 
and of all the deliverances and mercies granted to 
God’s people in all ages. Vitringa is of opinion, 
that “the prophet, in this last passage, rises in his 
ideas; and, having expressed the temporal deliver- 
ance of the church in the preceding clauses, here 
seals up the period with a consolatory clause, ad- 
monishing the pious of their deliverance from a 
spiritual yoke, that is, from all the power of sin and 
Satan, and.their vindication into the full and perfect 
iiberty of the sons of God, through Jesus Christ, the 


3 
tis 


king of his church, who, for this purpose, would 
communicate an abundance of the anointing spirit 
of wisdom, knowledge, prayer, liberty, and adop- 
tion: see Zech. iv. 6.” The reader may see an ex= 
plication and defence of this interpretation in Vitringa 
on the place. , 

Verses 28-32. He is come to Aiath—Here the pro- 
phet returns to his former discourse concerning 
Sennacherib’s invasion of Judah, of whose march 
toward Jerusalem, the route of his army, and their 
several stations, he gives so minute a detail, that 
though the description is a prophecy, he seems ra- 
ther to speak like an historian, who is relating facts 
already past.’ This is the fifth part of the prophet’s 
discourse, in which we have, Ist, the expedition of 
the Assyrian monarch, described in the most lively 
manner: in these verses; and, 2d, the unhappy sue- 
cess of that expedition, with its consequences, 
verses 33, 34. The several places here mentioned, 
are those where Sennacherib may-be. supposed to 
have pitched his camp; and were most of them 
towns of Benjamin, though some were in Judah, as 
appears from other scriptures. He is passed to Mi- 
gron—Namely, Sennacherib, in‘his way to Jerusa- 
lem. At Michmash he hath laid up his carriages 
—Leaving such things there as were less necessary, 
that so he might march with more expedition. 
They are gone over the passage—Some considera- 
ble passage, then well known. Gibeah of Saul is 
jfled—The people fled to Jerusalem for fear of the 
Assyrians. Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gal- 
lim—Jerusalem was the mother city, and lesser 
towns were commonly called her daughters. O 
poor Anathoth—Hebrew, ‘niniy 3p, Aniah Ana- 
thoth, where the former word, rendered poor, relates 
to the signification ‘of Anathoth; “a beauty fre- 
quently to be met with in the original of the sacred 
Scriptures, but which can seldom be preserved in 
any translation.” He shall shake his hand against 
the mount of Zion—By way of commination. But, 
withal, the prophet intimates, that he should be able 
to do no more against it; and that there his proud 
waves should be stayed, as is declared in the follow- 
ing verses, and in the history. 

Verses 33, 34. The Lord of hosts shail lop the 
bough—The top bough, Sennacherib ; with terror 
—Hebrew, nx1y2 bemagnaratza, with a dread- 
ful crash, as Bishop Lowth renders it, expressed 

105 


: 
. 


A prediction 


ISATAH. 


of the Messiah. 


4 73 266, lop the bough with shri and Y the 
high ones of stature shall be hewn 
down, and the haughty shall be humbled. 


34 And he shall cut down the thick- A. wv. 2 
ets the forests with iron, and Leba- —— 
non'shall fall *° by a mighty one. 


y Amos ii. 9. 


_ 8 Or, mightily. 


by the very sound of the Hebrew word; by a most 
terrible and unexpected blow; and the high ones, 
&e. —The lofty boughs, Hebrew, mapa egcelsi 
statura, the high of stature: that is, his valiant sol- 
diers, or the great: commanders of his army, com- 
pared to the tall trees of a forest; shall be hewn 
down—By a sudden and irresistible stroke; and 
the haughty—The proud, self-confident boasters, 
elatt animo, the high-minded, as T7IIN signi+ 
fies; shall be humbled—Shall be laid motionless in 


¥ 
- 
> 
- 


3 


the dust, namely, by the invisible power of the de- 
stroying angel. And he shall cut down the thickets, 
§c., with iron—Or, as with iron, as the trees of the 
forest are cut down with instruments of iron; and 
Lebanon—Or, his Lebanon, the Assyrian army, 
which being before compared to a forest, and being 


| calledhis Carmel in the Hebrew text, (verse 18,) may 


very fitly, upon the same ground, be called his Leba- 
nonhere. Shall fall byam ighty one—By a mighty 
angel, chap. xxxvii. 36. t 


CHAPTER XI. 


his kingdom, 6-9. The accession of the Gentiles to it, 10 ; 

with them in the Messiah’s kingdom, 11-16. 
A. M, 3266. ND * there shall come forth a rod 
y= Ste Nar out of the stem of Jesse, and ° a 
branch shall grow out of his roots: 

2 * And the Spirit of the Lorn shall rest upon 


a Chap. liii. 2; Zech. vi. 12; Rev. v. 5—— Acts xiii. 23 ; 
Verse ‘10. 


? 


. In this chapter we have a prophecy concerning Messiah, the prince, and his kingdom. His rise out of the house of David, 
and his qualifications for his important office, 1-3. The justice and equity of his government, 3-5. 


and with them the remnant of the Jews that ba be united 


pe the os of wisdom and under- A. M. 3266, 
standing, the spirit of counsel and Bie: 

might, the spirit of knowledge and of re fear 
ofthe Lorp; | . ; 


¢ Chap. iv. 2; Jer, xxiii. 5.——4 Chap. lxi.1; Matt. i iii. 16 ; John 
1, 32738; Tito 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI: 

Verse 1. And, &c.—The fifth section of the fifth 
discourse begins here, and concludes with the next 
ehapter. It is two-fold: in the first part the king- 
dom of Christ is described ; in what manner, arising 
from the smallest beginnings, it should go on to in- 
crease, till, at length, it attained the highest perfec- 
tion, verses 1-9. In the second. part are set forth 
some remarkable events of that kingdom, illustra- 


ting its glory, with their consequences, verse 10 to| 


chap. xii. 6: see Vitringa. here shail come forth 
arod—The prophet, having despatched the Assy- 
rian, and comforted God’s people with the promise 
of their deliverance from that formidable enemy, 
now proceeds further, and declares that God would 
do greater things than that for them; that he would 
give them their long-expected and much-desired 
Messiah, and by him would work wonders of mercy 
for them. For this is the manner of the prophets, 
to take occasion, from particular deliverances, to fix 
the people’s minds upon that. great and everlasting 
deliverance from all their enemies by the Messiah. 
And having said that the Assyrian yoke should be 
destroyed, because of the anointing, 
particularly explains who that anointed person was. 
Bishop Lowth mentions another particular, which 
he thinks plainly shows the connection between this | 
106 


he now morejj 


and the preceding chapter. . “The prophet had de- 
scribed the destruction of the Assyrian army under 
the image of a mighty forest, consisting of flourish- 
ing trees, growing thick together, and of a great 
height : of Lebanon itself crowned with lofty cedars, 
but cut down, and laid level with the ground, by the 
axe wielded by the hand of some powerful and i 
lustrious agent ; in opposition to this image he repre- 
sents the- great person, who makes the subject of 
this chapter, as a slender twig, shooting out from 
the trunk of an old tree, cut down, lopped to the 
very .root, and decayed; which tender plant, so 
weak in appearance, should nevertheless become 
fruitful and prosper.” Out of the stem—Or, rather, 
stump, as the word properly signifies: which he 
clearly implies that the Messiah should be born of 
the royal house of David, at that time when it was 
in a most forlorn condition, like a tree cut down, 
and whereof nothing is left but a*stump, or root 
under ground. Of Jesse—He doth not say of David, 
but. of Jesse, who was a private and mean person, to 
intimate, that at the time of Christ’s birth the royal 
family should be reduced to its primitive obscurity. 
Verse 2. And the Spirit of the Lord—The Holy 
Ghost, by which he was anointed, we 38,) and 
by whose power his human natur formed in 
ithe womb of the virgin, (Luke i. 35,) shall rest 
} 3 = 


% 


‘The peaceableness of 


The justice and equity 


CHAPTER XI. 


of his government. 


ky ve 3 And shall make him of !quick un- 


———— derstanding im the fear of the Lorn ; 
and he shall not judge after the sight of his 
eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his 
ears : By 

4 But ° with righteousness shall he judge the 
poor, and *reprove with equity for the meek of 


a 


the earth: and he shall smite the A.M. 3266. 
earth with the rod of his mouth, and f tele 
with the breath of his lips shall he slay the 
wicked. ww, ’ 

5 And S righteousness shall be. the girdle of 
his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his 
reins. 


1 Heb. scent, or, smell. 


€ Psa. Ixxii. 2,4; Rev. xix. 11. 
2 Or, argue. 


upon him—Shall not only come upon him at certain 
times, as it came Upon the prophets, but shall have 
its constant and settled abode in him; the spirit of 
wisdom and understan —It is not needful ex- 
actly.to distinguish these two gifts; it is sufficient 
that they are necessary qualifications for a governor 
and a teacher, and it is evident they signify perfect 
knowledge ofall things necessary for his own andpeo- 
ple’s good, anda sound judgment to distinguish be- 
tween things that differ; the spirit of counsel and 
might—Of prudence, to give good counsel; and of 
mightand courage, to execute it; the spirit of know- 
ledge—Ofthe perfect knowledge ofthe whole willand 
counsel of God, as also of all secret things, yea, of 


the hearts of men; fear of the Lord—A fear of re- 
verence, a Care to please him, and aversion to offend 
him. yi 


‘Verse 3. And shall make him of quick under- 
standing—Hebrew, 11°70), shall make him of quick 
scent, smell, or perception ; or, of quick discern- 
ment, as Bishop Lowth renders it; in the fear of 
the Lord—In things which concern the worship and 
service of. God, and every part of religion. Or the 
meaning may be, He shall not judge rashly and par- 
tially, but considerately and justly, as the fear of 
God obliges all judges to do. And he shall not 
judge—Of persons, things, or causes; after the 
sight of the eyes—According to outward appearance, 
as men do, because they cannot search men’s hearts; 
neither reprove—Condemn, or pass sentence against 
any person; after the hearing of the ears—By uncer- 


tain rumours or suggestions, but shall thoroughly 


deluded 


examine all causes, and search out the truth of things, 
and the very hearts of men.’ It implies also, that, 
“in collecting the people who shall compose hisking- 
dom, he shall principally regard in them this quality 
of fear, or reverence for the Lord; and with the 
greatest sagacity and perspicuity of judgment, shall 
discern and separate those subjects in whom he 
finds this quality ; not suffering that judgment to be 
he external appearance of truth or ho- 
nesty, but, penetrating into the interior recesses of 
the mind by his prophetic spirit, he shall discrimi- 
nate truth from error, the good from the bad, the 
sincere and pious from the hypocritical and impious.” 
All the churches shall know, says he, that I am he 
who searcheth the reins and the hearts. 

Verse 4. With righteousness—With justice and 
impartiality; shall he judge the poor—Whom hu- 
man jud ommonly neglect and oppress, but 


whom he 1 defend and deliver; and reprove 
with equity for the meek of the earth—Shall con- 
3 


¥ 


. . ve . ae ? . 
f Job iv.9; Mal. iv.6; 2 Thess. ii.8; Rev. i. 163i. 16; xix. 
15.— Eph. vi. 14. : 


= 
demn their malicious enemies, and give sentence for 
them. He calls them meek, whom before he called 
poor, partly to show his) justice in defending them 
when they are most exposed to the contempt and 
injuries of men; and partly to signify that his, sub- 
jects should be poor in spirit, as well as poor in the 
world, and not poor and proud, as many worldly 
‘persons are. And he shall smite the earth—That 
is, the men of the earth, intending chiefly the car- 
nal and wicked, as it is in the next braneh of the 
verse ; with the rod of his mouth—With his word, 
which is his sceptre, and the rod of his power, (Psa. 
ex. 2,) which is sharper than a sword, (Heb. iv. 
12,) by the preaching -whereof he subdues the 


world to himself, and will destroy his enemies, 2 Font 


Thess. il. 8.. This’ he adds farther, to declare the 
nature of ‘Christ’s kingdom, that it-is not of this 
world, and that his sceptre and arms are not carnal, 
but spiritual, asit is said 2 Cor.x.4. And with the 
breath of his lips—With his word, breathed out of his 
| lips; whereby he explains what wasmeantby the fore- 
| going expression; rod ; shall heslay the wicked—The 
impenitent and unbelieving, the obstinate and irre- 
claimable, who will not obey the truth, but persist to 
obey unrighteousness. These he will slay or de- 
stroy, by the terrible judgments which he will exe- 
cute upon them. This latter part of the verse will 
be eminently fulfilled in the destruction of anti 
christ, to whom St. Paul applies it 2 Thess. ii. 3-8 
(compare Rey. xix. 21,) who is, by way of, emi- 
nence, called the Wicked one, the man of sin, and 
o avrixeruevoc, the adversary to God's truth and peo- 
le. 
Verse 5. And righteousness shall be the girdle o 
his loins—It shall adorn him, and be the glory of his 
government, as a girdle was used for an ornament, 
Isa. iii. 24; and as an ensign of power, Job. xii. 18; 
and it shall constantly cleave to him in all his ad- 
ministrations, as a girdle cleaveth to a man’s loins. 
And faithfulness the girdle of his reins—The same 
thing in other words. Here then we have the basis 
and foundation of this kingdom, namely, the justice 
and fidelity of the king. . These virtues shall be con- 
spicuous in the whole administration of his govern- 
ment, and, at once, be the ornament and the support 
of it. “The sum is, that the kingdom of Christ 
should be a kingdom of the highest equity, and the 
king of it perfect: who, though judging his true 
subjects by the law of grace, by faithfully performing 
all the promises of the gospel, and every condition 
of the covenant to them, will yet not omit to punish 
the enemies of his church according to their deserts, 
° 107 


r 


& 


fa, 


The peace and glory of 


ISAIAH. 


the Messiah’s kingdom. 


A.M, 3266. 6 ''The wolf also shall dwell with 
‘ C. 738. 


——. the lamb, and the leopard shall lie 
down with the kid ; and the calf and the young 
lion and the fatling together ; and a little child 
shall lead. them. 

7 And, the cow and the bear shall feed ; their 
young ones shall lie down together: and the 
lion shall eat straw like the ox. 

8 And the sucking child shall play on the 
hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall 


Wash 


h Chap. xv, 25 ‘Baek. xxxiv. 25 5 Hos. ii. 18——* ry adderte: 
i Job v. 23 5 Chg ii. 45 xxxv. 9. 


and thus. to sifisfy the law of pri so “that The 
shall not be less venerable and awful for his justice 
in judgment, than amiable and desirable for his truth, 
fidelity, and constancy in performing his promises ; 
which being things naturally united, are not, by any 
means, to,be separated.”—Dodd. 

Verses 6-8, The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, 
&o.—“ We have here the illustrious consequence 
of the economy of this divine kingdom, this king- 
dom of righteousness, equity, faith, and grace.” 
The expressions which dese¢ribe it are metaphorical: 
they represent the subjects of it under the figure of 
a flock, lying down and feeding under the care of 
the Messiah, as the great and chief shepherd, in the 
utmost peace, harmony, and security. Men of fierce, 
cruel, and ungovernable dispositions shall be so 
transformed by the preaching of the gospel, and by 
‘the grace of Christ, that they shall become most 
humble, gentle, and tractable, and shall no more vex 
and persecute those meth and poor ones, mentioned 
verse 4; but shall become such as they. Yea, the 
most inveterate enemies of the kingdom of God, 
such as the perse cuting Saul, shall be brought into 


$ communion, having laid down their cruelty, bar- 
a 


rity, and ferocity, their inclination to hurt, their 
eraft.and subtlety ; and not only so, but this kingdom 
also shall be purged from all offences, from all evils 
and instruments of malice. For the people, being 
enlightened with truth, and renewed by grace, shall 
put off their-barbarous and depraved manners; shall 
willingly subje¢t themselves to the rule of the 
Messiah, with meekness and ey and shall 
fulfil the law of brotherly love in all the offices of 
good-will. This is the sum of the present passage, 
divested of metaphor, For, it is evident, as Michaelis 
has observed, that a mystical sense is not mtended 
to be assigned to each of these im: iges, or figurative 
expressions, and,a particular and partial truth to be 
deduced therefrom ; but a general doctrine is to be 
learned from the whole, namely, that the kingdom 
of the Messiah is a kingdom of peace, as well as of 
righteousness ; of happiness, as well as:of holiness; 
and that the natural tendency of his religion is to 
. produce meekness, gentleness, long- -suffering, and 
i the exercise of mutual benevolence among men, as 
well as piety in all-its branches toward God, This 
indeed is declared i ; plain words in the next verse, 


Verib, They seal wt hurt nor destroy in all | 


‘ 


holy mountain : 


| more literally rendered, And it shall 


23 A. M. 3266 
By 


i the ° cockatrice 
put his hand on. the * co ape 


den. aa, 

9 ‘They shall not whe nor destroy in all my 
for * the earth shall be full of 
the knowledge of the hie as the waters cover 
the sea. 

10 4 1 And in that day ™ chee shall be a root 
of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the 
people ; to itshall the "Gentiles seek : and °his 
rest shall be * glorious. 


“Hab. ii. 14, 1Chap. ii. i, ta Verse 1; Rom. xv. 12. 
» Rom. xv. 10. ——? Heb, iv. 1——*Heb. glory. 


my holy mountain—Here the prophet himself gives 
us a key wherewith to open-his meaning in the three 
preceding verses. By the holy mountain he means, 
the Christian Church, frequently termed Zion, Jeru- 
salem, and God’s holy mountain, in the writings of 
the prophets. Wherever the gospel comes and 
prevails; wherever the true and genuine religion of 
Christ takes place and is established, these effects 
are produced, And in due time the gospel shall 
prevail, and the true religion of Jesus be established’ 
everywhere. or the earth—The world, with its 
inhabitants, shall be full of the knowledge of the 
Lord—By this he intimates, that all that savageness 
and malignity which are in carnal and wicked men 
toward the people of God, and all those unholy, un- 
kind, and unhappy dispositions which are in any of 
the human race, proceed from their ignorance of 
God, or their.want of a true and saving acquaintance 
with him, which, wherever it takes place, produces 
amarvellous and thorough change in men’s hearts 
and lives. As the, waters cover the sea—As the 
waters spread themselves over the bottom, and 
entirely fill all the channels of the sea. Although 
this prophecy begins to be fulfilled wherever the 
kingdom of grace is set up ypond men, and is more 
and more fulfilled in proportion as that kingdom is 
enlarged; yet the perfect accomplishment of it will 
not be witnessed till those latter days come, when, ~ 
according to the Scriptures, the knowledge and prac- 
tice of Christianity willbe universally diffused, and 
all those divine virtues which it ineuleates will be 
most eminently exerted and displayed. 4, ‘ 

Verse 10. And in that day, &e.—We have here 
the latter part of this propheey, which sets forth 
some more illustrious events of this kingdom, with 
their consequences. ‘The events are set forth verses 
10-16, and are three. Ist, The remarkable conver- 
sion of the Gentiles, verse 10. 2d, The calling of 
the dispersed Jews to the communion of the king- 
dom of Christ, verses 11-14. 3d, A diminution of 
the powers of the adverse empires, Egypt and As- 
syria, verses 15, 16, The consequence of these 
events is represented tobea remarkable thanksgiving 
of the Jewish people, converted to the Messiah, for 
the wedemption granted to them, chap. xii. 1-6, 
There shall be a root of Jesse, &c.—This verse is 
that day, 
—Namely, in that glorious gospel day, al Rie 


The restoration of 


as 3266. 11 And it shall come to pass Pin 
———— that day, that the Lorn shall set his 
hand again the second time to recover the rem- 
nant of his people, which shall be left, from As- 
syria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and 
from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, 
and from Hamath, and from the islands of the 
sea. 

12 And he shall set up an ensign for the 


CHAPTER Xi. 


Israel predicted. 


nations, and shall assemble the out- A, M. 3266 
casts of Israel, and gather together * the “aed 
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the 
earth. ‘ ‘ 

13 * The envy also of Ephraim shall depart; 
and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: 
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall 
not vex Ephraim. 

14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of 


P Chapter ii. 11.——a Zech. x. 10.—— John vii. 35; James i. 1, 


— 
tiles shall seek to the root of Jesse, which stands for 
an ensign of tie people; and his rest shall be glo- 
rious. By the root of Jesse, we may either under- 
stand a branch growing from that root, and so may 
interpret it of Christ’s human nature, or, referring it 
to his divine nature, we may take it for a root properly 
so called, as the expression is to be understood Rev. 
xxii. 16; where Christ is represented as being as 
well the root, as. the offspring of David. Which 
shall stand, or which stands, yor an ensign of the 
people—Which shall grow up into a great and high 
tree, shall become a visible and eminent ensign, 
which not only the Jews, but all nations may discern, 
and to which they may and shall resort; to it shall 
the Gentiles seek—As the gospel shall be preached 
to the Gentiles, so they shall rokee it, and believe 
in the Messiah; and his rest—That is, either, Ist, 
His resting-place, his temple, or church, the place of 
his: presence and abode;’shall be glorious—Filled 
with greater glory than the Jewish tabernacle and 
temple were ; only this glory shall be spiritual, con- 
sisting in the plentiful effusion of the gifts and 
graces of the Holy Spirit.. Or, 2d, The rest enjoyed 
by those who are true worshippers in this temple, or 
true members of this church: their rest of grace, of 
faith, hope, and love: the rest consequent on the 
justification of their persons, and the renovation of 
their nature; the rest which they enter into by be- 
lieving, (Heb. iv. 3,) which they receive in conse- 
quence of coming to Christ, weary and heavy laden, 
and learning of him, Matt. xi. 28; their peace with 
God, peace of conscience, and tranquillity of mind, 
is glorious, for it passeth all-understanding, Phil. 
iv. 7. And itshall be much more glorious ina future 
world, when they enter the rest remaining for the 
* people of God, Heb. iv. 9. Then their rest shall be 
not only glorious, but glory: and glory shall be their 
rest, as the words may be also rendered. 

Verses 11,12. And it shall come to pass in that 
_ day—As this chapter contains a general prophecy 
of the advancement which Christ’s kingdom should 
make in the world, and as this advancement was 
to be made by different steps and degrees, so the 
several parts of this prophecy may be supposed to 
point at different ages or periods of time: see note 
onchap.ii.2. “ And, I take this part of the chapter,” 
says Lowth, “ from verse 10 onward, to foretel those 
glorious — hd the church, which shall be ushered 
in by theres 


shall embrace the gospel, and be restored to their || 


3 
2 


ation of the Jewish nation, when they |, 


| 


5 Heb. wings Jer. iii. 18 ; Ezek. xxxvii. 16, 17, 22; Hos. i. 11. 
: = nto : 


own country, ‘from the several dispersions where 
they are scattered. This remarkable scene of provi- 
dence is plainly foretold by most of the prophets of 
the Old Testament, and by St. Paul in the New.” 
See the margin. Bishop Lowth also observes, that 
“this part of the chapter contains a prophecy, which 
certainly remains yet to be accomplished.” The 
Lord shall set his hand again thé second time— 
The first time to which this word second relates, 
seems to be, either, lst, The deliverance out of 
Egypt, and then this second must be that out. of 
Babylon; or, rather, 2d, The deliverance out of 
Babylon; and then this Second deliverance must be 
inthe days of the Messiah. This latter interpretation 
seems more probable, Ist, Because that first deliver- 
ance, like the second, is supposed to be a deliverance 
of the remnant of this people from several countries 
into which they were dispersed: whereas that out 
of Egypt was a déliverance, not of a remnant, but, 
of the whole nation, and out of Egypt only: 2d, 
Because this second deliverance was universal, ex- 
tending to the generality of the outcasts and dis- 
persed ones, both of Israel, or the ten tribes, and of 
Judah, or the two tribes, as is evident from these 
verses, whereas that out of Babylon reached only 


to the two tribes, and to some few of the ten wr 


which were mixed with them: 3d, Because th 
second deliverance was to be given them in the days 
of the Messiah, and to accompany, or follow, the 
conversion of the Gentiles, as is evident from verses 
9, 10, whereas that out of Babylon was long before 
the coming of the Messiah and the calling of the 
Gentiles. And from the islands of the»sea—From 
all places, both far and near, into which either the 
ten tribes, or the two tribes, were carried captives 

athros was a province of Egypt. The other places 
named are well known, and have been spoken 
of before in our notes on other texts. And he shall 
setup an ensign for the nations—All nations, Jews 
and Gentiles. And shall assemble the outcasts of 
Israel—-Those of the ten tribes that had been 
driven out of their own land into foreign parts ; and 
gather together the dispersed of Judah—Here dis- 
tinguished from those of Israel. The reader must 
observe here, that the prophet’s ideas respecting this 
future and spiritual deliverance of the Jews and 
Israelites, are wholly taken from their temporal de- 
liverances out of Egypt and Assyria. 

Verses 13, 14. The envy alsoof Ephraim shall 
depart, &c.—Ephraim here stands for the ten tribes, 

109 


~ 


Bi) 
: 


et restoration of 


Messe erie 


Israel Di a 


— ——}- 


A. M, 266. a. ie Philistines toward the west } ihe. 
*S i. shall spoil ° them of the east together’ ; 
‘they’ shall lay their hand upon Edom and 
Moab; ®and the children of Augfmon “shall 
obey theta. 

15 And the Lorp *shall uiterly destroy the 
tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his 


Bey wind shall he shake his hand over the 


— ES 


6 Heb, the children ofthe e east. ‘Dan, xi. 41.—7 Heb, Edom 
and Moab shall be the laying on of their hand,——® Heb, the chil- 
dren of Ammon their obedience. 


and the orophat alludes t to the great emulations arid 
contentions which had subsisted between them and 
Judah: but his intention is to set forth the spiritual 
state of the Jews after their conversion to the faith 
of the gospel, which he predicts, Ist, “That all envy 
shall be extinguished among them, and a true bro- 
therly love shall fill their souls; and, 2d, That, join- 
ed to the Gentiles, they shall strenuously defend the 


cause of Christ and his kingdom against the enemies | 


and opposers of it.” Ephraim shall not. envy Ju- 
dah, &c.—Not only all outward hostilities shall 
~ cease, but also their inward animosities. But they 
shall hy y upon the shoulders, &c.—This is a metaphor 
taken from birds and Beasts of prey, which, com- 
monly fasten’ on the shoulders of cattle. «They 
shall spoil them of the east together—They shall 
subdue them; whieh is to be understood of the spir- 
— victory which the Messiah should obtain, by 
iis apostles, ministers, and people, over all nations, 
in bringing them to the obedience of his gospel. 
For it is the manner of the prophets to speak of the 
spiritualthings of the gospel under such figurative 
representations. Indeed, as a late writer observes, 
this fourteenth verse can be understood in no other 
than a spiritual and mystical sense, to signify that 
those who are called by the gospel, and converted 
to Christ, shall be full of zeal for his glory, and shall 
labour with all their might to reduce to the obedience 
of Christ all individuals and nations around them. 

Verses 15, 16, And the Lord shall utterly destroy 
—Shall not only divide it, as of old, but shall quite 
dry it up, that it may be a highway; the tongue of 
the Egyptian sea—The Red sea, which may well 
be called the Egyptian sea, both because it borders 
upon Egypt, and because the Egyptians were drown- 
ed in it, 
Hebrew text, (Josh. xv. 2, 5,) as having some re- 
semblance to a singe and for a similar reason the 
name of tongue has been given by geographers to 
promontories of land which shoot forth into the sea, 
as this sea shoots out of the main ocean into the 
Jand, Bishop Lowth renders the clause, Jehovah 


It is called a wenn both here and in the’ 


river, and shall smite it in the seven A, M, 3266. 
B. C. 738. 
streams, Yand make men go over 

* dry-shod. 

16 * And there shall be a highway for the 
remnant of his people, which shall be left, 
from Assyria; “like as it was to Israel in the 
day that he came up out of the land of 


Figypt. 


‘ 


oy 


« Chap. Ix, 14. 
in shoes.——* Chap. xix, 23. 
Ixiii. 12, 13. 


« Zech. = Vos Rev, xvi. 12,——® Heb. 
« Exod. xiv. 29; Chap. li. 10; 


ee 


shall smite with a drought the tongue, &¢., follow- 
ing the Chaldee, which, instead of o~Nn, he de- 
stroyed, reads 2Nn, he dried wp. And the next 
clause, which he. understands, not of the river Nile, 
but of the Euphrates, the bishop very properly 
translates, “And he shall shake his hand over the 
river with his vehement wind; and he shall strike 
it into seven streams, and make them pass Over it 
dry-shod.” Thus also Dr. Waterland, after Vitringa: 


“We shall shake: his hand over the ‘Euphrates, and 


shall smite it into seven outlets;” that is, he shall 
divide or separate it into seven small rivers, so as to 
render it easy to be passed over. What is thus ex- 
pressed metaphorically in this clause, is declared in 
plain words in the next verse; And there shall be a 
highway for the remnant of his people, &c.—As 
there shall be a highway from Egypt, the Red sea 
being dried up, so shall there. be from Assyria, the 
river Euphrates being rendered fordable. In other 
words, and without a figure, all impediments shall 
be removed, and a-way shall be made for the return 
of God’s Israel from all parts of the world. He 
mentions Egypt and Assyria particularly, because 
they were then two flourishing kingdoms which 
bordered upon Judea, and by turns were the great 
oppressors of God’s people. And the ten tribes hay- 
ing been carried captive to Assyria, their case 
especially seemed desperate. But these two king- 
doms stand here, in the prophetic style, for the ad- 
verse empires in general, especially those of idolatry 
and superstition, which shall be either destroyed or 
reduced to such a state of weakness as not to be able 
to hinder the progress of the conversion of the Jews 
and Gentiles. “My belief,’ says Vitringa, “upon 
the strength of this prophecy is, that all the impedi- 
ments of the great empires of the world being remov- 
ed, which yet delay the perfect completion of the 
great and excellent promises made to the church, 
and hinder the calling and collection of the Jews and 
Gentiles, the empire of the kingdom of Christ will 
extend itself over the whole world, according to the 
remarkable prediction of Daniel, chap. ii, 35, &¢.” 


CHAPTER XI. 
The salvation promised in the foregoing chapter being compared to that of Ioratt in the day when they came out of the Nes 


of Egypt ; and Moses and Israel having then sung a song of praise, to the glory of say 


110 


a 


the prophet here puts a eu. — 
3 


Prophetic hymn of 


CHAPTER Xi. 


praise faa God's mercies. 


charistic hymn into the mouths. of the Lord’s redeemed. under. the ‘Christian dispensation, when the root - ries should 


stand for an ensign of the people, and’ become the desire and joy of all nations. 


a song of praise for his own interest in that salvation, 1-3, 


shall join in it oe for the common benefit arising from il, 4-6. 


le 


A. M. 3266. 


Sib ND in that day thou shalt say, 


O Lorp, I will praise thee: 
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger 
is turned away, and thou comfortedst me. 

2 Behold, God is my salvation ; I will trust, 


(1,) Hvery particular believer shall sing 
‘Thou shalt say, Lord, I will praise thee. (2,) Many wn concert 
Ye shall say, Praise the Lord. 


and not be afraid: re the orp *JE- A. M, 3266. 
HOVAH is my °strength and my pes 
song ; he also is become my salvation. 

3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw 4 water 
out of the wells of salvation. 


Chap. ii. 11.—— Psa. Ixxxiii. 18. 


© Exod. xv. 2; 


Psa. exviii. 14——4 John iv. 10,.14; vii. 37, 38. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. 

. Verses 1, 2. And, &c.—“ Isaiah concludes this 
most noble prophecy with a doxology from the 
mouth of those who should share in the blessings of 
the great redemption before specified. This doxolo- 
gy is two-fold: in the. first’ part, the redeemed, in 
their own names and persons, praise God for the be- 
nefits of salvation and consolation through Christ, 
conferred upon them. In the second part they mu- 


tually exhort and encourage themselves and others,.| 


to praise and celebrate their God and Redeemer.” 
Dodd. Jn that day—When this great work of the 
reduction of Israel, and the conversion of the Gen- 
tiles, promised in the foregoing chapter, is fulfilled: 
when the kingdom of the Messiah is set up in the 
world, in despite of all opposition from earth and 
hell; thou shalt say—Thou church of God, compo- 
sed of Jews and Gentiles, united in one body, shalt 
say, as One man, with one mindand one mouth ; and 
every particular member of the community shall 
say ; that is, shall have cause to say, and a heart to 
say, O Lord, I will praise thee—“I will give thanks 
unto thee, O Jehovah;” so Bishop Lowth. For 
though thowhastbeen angry withme—Namely, while 
I was in my unenlightened and unconverted state of 
heathenish ignorance, or of Jewish unbelief; my 
state of sin and guilt, of depravity and alienation 
from thee; thine anger is turned away—In conse- 
quence of my conversion to thee by true repentance, 
unfeigned faith, and new obedience; and thou com- 
fortedst me—By evident tokens of thy presence, com- 
munications of thy grace, and prospects of thy glo- 
ry. Behold, God is my salvation—The author, 
giver, and source of my salvation; which, in all its 


branches and degrees, hath been effected, not by the || 


power of man, but by the mercy and grace of God. 
He, therefore, shall have the glory of the salvation 
that has already been wrought for me, and from him 
only will I expect the salvation which I further need. 
And for this, J will trust—In his power, love, and 
faithfulness ; and not be afraid—Lest he should de- 
ceive my confidence or disappoint my expectations ; 
lest he should be either unable or unwilling to save 
me in time to come, as he has saved me in time past. 
For, not a dead. idol, or a mere creature, whether 
made by manor God, but the Lord Jehovah—Hebrew, 
Jah Jehovah, (the former word being a contraction 
of the latter, and both signifying his self-existence, 
his eternity, and unchangeableness,) is my strength 
and my song—He, who is the living and true God, 
and who has all possible perfections in and of him- 
” 


self; he, who is both infinite and everlasting, hath 
undertaken my cause, and gives me both support in 
weakness and comfort in trouble; he enables me both 
to withstand my enemies and to rejoice and glory 
in him, being, as. I know by experience, already be- 
come my salvation. — 

Verse 3. Therefore—Because the Lord Jehovah 
is your strength and song, and is, and will be, your 
salvation; with joy shall ye drat water, &c.—The 
assurances God has given you of his love, and the 
experience you have had of the benefit and comfort 
of his grace, should greatly encourage your faith in 
him, and your expectations from him. Out of the 
wells of salvation—Your thirsty and fainting souls 
shall be filled with divine graces and comforts; 
which you shall plentifully draw from God, in the 
use of gospel ordinances, and which are often signi- 
fied by water, both in the Old and in the New Tes- 
tament. He seems to allude to the state of Israel in 
the wilderness, where, when they had been tormented _ 
with thirst, they were greatly refreshed and delight- 
ed with those waters which God so graciously and 
wonderfully afforded them 1 in that dry and barren 
land, Num. xx. 11; xxi. 16-18. As this hymn evi- 
dently appears by. its whole tenor, and by many ex- 
pressions in it, to be much better calculated for the 
Christian Church than it could be for the Jewish, in 
any circumstances, or at any time that can be assign- 
ed; so “the Jews themselves seem to have applied 
it to the times of the Messiah. On the last day of 
the feast of tabernacles, they fetched water, in a 
golden pitcher, from the fountain of. Siloah, spring= 
ing at the foot of mount Sion, without the city ; they 
brought it through the water-gate into the temple, 
and poured it, mixed with wine, on the sacrifice as 
it lay upon the, altar, with great rejoicing. They 
seem to have taken up this custom, for it is not or- 
dained in the law of Moses, as an emblem of future 
blessings, in allusion to this passage of Isaiah: Ye 
shall draw water with joy from the fountains of sal- 
vation: expressions that can hardly be understood 
of any benefits afforded by the Mosaic dispensation. 
Our Saviour applied the ceremony, and the inten- 
tion of it, to himself, and to the effusion of the Holy 
Spirit, promised and to be given by him.” Thus 
Bishop Lowth, who quotes a passage from the Jeru- 
salem Talmud to show.that the Jews thought this 
song to be intended of the timesof the Messiah, and 
considered the water, said to be drawn from the 
wells of salvation, as signifying the influences of the 
Holy Spirit to be given in his days. 

111 


45 be 


Prophetic hymn of 


ISATAH. 


ae Wu 
praise for God's mercies. 
™, 


A. M, 3266.) 4 And in that day shall ye. say, 
B. C.. 738. ; 4 
roel Praise the Lorp, ‘call upon his 
name, ‘declare his doings among the people, 
make mention that his £ name is exalted. 

5 Sing unto the Lorn; for he hath done 


excellent things: this is known in all A. M. 3266. 

; B, C. 738. 

the earth. oes — 

6 ‘Cry out and shout, thou ? inhabitant of 

Zion; for great is * the Holy One of Israel in 
the midst of thee. 


e1 Chron. xvi. 8; Psalm ev. 1. 1 Or, proclaim his name. 
f Psa. exlv.4, 5, 6——8 Psa. xxxiv. 3—— Exod. xv. 1, 21; Ps. 


Verses 4-6. In that day ye shall say, &e.—Here 
we have the second part of the evangelical song, the 
subject of which, as of the former, is the praise of 
God. In the former part,believers stir up them- 
selves to praise God; here they invite and encour- 
age one another to do it, and are represented as con- 
triving. to spread his praise, and to draw in others to 
join with them in it. Praise the Lord, call upon 
his name—As giving thanks for former mercies 
isa modest way of begging for further mercies, so 
requesting further and fresh mercies is graciously 
accepted as a thankful acknowledgment of the mer- 
cies we have received. Declare, &c.—By speaking 
and writing. We must not only speak to God, but 
speak to others concerning him; notonly call upon 
his name, but (as the margin reads it) proclaim his 
name. Let others know something more from us 
than they did before concerning God, and those 
things whereby he hath made himself known. His 
doings—Or, mighty deeds ; as Bishop Lowth renders 
ravoy. The works of redemption and salvation are 
especially intended; these and his other. wonderful 
works we should declare ; among the people—Among 
the heathen, that they may be brought into commu- 
nion with Israel, and the God of Israel. When the 
apostles preached the gospel to all nations, beginning 
at, Jerusalem, then this scripture was fulfilled. Make 


a 


Ixvili. 32 ; xeviii. 1——i Chap. liv. 1; Zeph. iii. 14-——* Heb. 
inhabitress— Psa. ]xxi,. 22; lxxxix., 18; Chap. xli. 14, 16. 


mention—Hebrew, 112i, Record, or cause it to be 
remembered, that his name is exalted—Is become 
more illustrious and conspicuous than ever, in and 
by the incarnation and life, doctrine and miracles, 
death, and resurrection, and ascension ef his Son, 
and the effusion of his Spirit, in gifts and graces, on 
the Messiah’s disciples and servants. Sing unto the 
Lord ; for he hath done excellent things—For his 
people, to whom he hath given a wonderful proof of 
his love, and whom he hath magnified and made 
honourable. Bishop Lowth renders the original 
expression, Wy M'Nw, he hath wrought a stupendous 
work. In making his Son a sacrifice for our sins. 
This is known—Or, shall be made known; in all 
the earth—The knowledge of this glorious work 
shall no longer be confined to the land of Fsrael and 
Judah, as hitherto it hath been, but shall be publish- 
ed to all nations. Cry owt and shout—In a holy ex- 
ultation and transport of joy; thou inhabitant of 
Ziou—Hebrew, Naw, inhabitress, thou daughter of 
Jerusalem, thou church of the living God, represent- 
ed under the emblem of a woman. Welcome the 
gospel to thyself, and publish it to others with loud 
acclamations; for great is the Holy One of Israel 
in the midst of thee—Manifesting himself to thee, 
appearing and doing wonders for thee, and enrich- 
ing thee with his gifts and graces in great abundance. 


CHAPTER XIIL. 


We now enter upon the second part of Isaiah's prophecies, contdining a wonderful account of God's dealings with the enemies 


of his chutch and people. 


It begins at this chapter and extends to the twenty-fourth, comprising eight discourses. The 
Jirst respects the fate of Babylon, and occupies this whole chapter and the next, to verse 28. 


We have here God's armies, 


1-5. The destruction of Babylon by the Medes and Persians ; their great distress, and anguish, and utter destruction, 


6-22. 
lig HE *burden of Babylon, which 
oe SO Tsaiah the son of Amoz did see. 


@ Chap. xxi. 1; xlvii. 1; Jer. 1. 51. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIII. 

Verse 1. The burden of Babylon—Of the city 
and empire of Babylon. The original word, xwn, 
here. rendered burden, is, by Dr. Waterland, after 
Vitringa, translated, T'he sentence upon, or, deliver- 
ed concerning Babylon. It is “derived from a verb, 
which signifies to take, or lift wp, or bring ; and 
the proper meaning of it is, any weighty, important 
matter or sentence, which ought not to be neglect- 
ed, but is worthy of niga, cosriee in the memory, 


2 »Lift ye up a banner ° upon the A, M. 3274. 
: nee as : B. C. 730. 
high mountain, exalt the voice Unto =o 


> Chap. v. 26; xviii. 3; Jer. 1. 2.——¢ der. li. 25. 


and deserves to be lifted up, and uttered with em- 
phasis.” See Rey. ii. 24, and Vitringa. Bishop New- 
ton and others have observed, that “the prophecies 
uttered against any city or country, often carry the 
inscription of the burden of that city or country: and 
that by burden is commonly understood a threaten- 
ing, burdensome prophecy, big with ruin and de- 
struetion: which, like a dead weight, is hung upon 
the or country to sink it.” But it appears that 
the word is of more general import, and sometimes 
e 


The prophecy 


CHAPTER XIII. 


geceinat Bakylep. 


A. M,3 


c= - them 3 
B. C.7 


may go into the gates of the nobles. 
3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I 
have also called *my mighty ones for mine 
anger, even them that ‘ rejoice in my highness. 
4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, 
‘like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise 


ashake the hand, that they 


of the kingdoms of nations gathered A. ME, 3974 
together : the Lorn of hosts mustereth Eyes 
the host of the battle. Pep | 

5 They come from a far country, from the 
end of heaven, even the Lorp, and the wea- 
pons of his indignesialh to destroy the whole 
land. . 


4 Chap, x: 32,.—— Joel iii. 11. 


* Psa, exlix. 2,5, 6.——! Heb. the likeness of. 


——+r 


signifies a prophecy at large, sometimes a prophecy 
of good as well as of evil, as in Zech. xii. 1; and 
sometimes, where the original word is used, it is 
translated prophecy, where there is no prophecy, but 
only a grave moral sentence. 

This prophecy against Babylon, which consists of 
two parts, the former contained in this chapter, the 
latter in the next, was probably delivered, as Vitrin- 
ga has shown, in the reign of Ahaz, about two hun- 
dred years before the completion of it; and a hun- 
dred and thirty before the Jews were even carried 
captive to Babylon; which captivity the prophet 
does not expressly foretel here, but supposes, in the 
spirit of prophecy, as what was actually to take place. 
“And the Medes, who are expressly mentioned, 


verse 17, as the principal agents in the overthrow of. 


the Babylonian monarchy, by which the Jews were 
to be released from that captivity, were at this time 
an inconsiderable people; having been in a state of 
anarchy ever since the fall of the great Assyrian 


empire, of which they had made a part under-Sar- } 


danapalus; and did not become a kingdom till about 
the seventeenth of Heézekiah.”—Bishop Lowth. The 
great design of God in inspiring his prophet with 
the knowledge of these future events, and exciting 
him to deliver these prophecies concerning them, 
seems to have been, Ist, To set forth the reasons of 
his justice, in punishing the enemies of his church, 
in order to console the minds and confirm the faith 
of the pious. 2d, With respect to this prophecy 
especially, concerning the destruction of Babylon, 
the design was to comfort the minds of true believ- 
ers against that sad and sorrowful event, the Ba- 
bylonish captivity. And, 3d, Under the figure of that 
destruction, to announce. the destruction of the spi- 
ritual Babylon, the whole kingdon of sin and Satan. 
See Vitringa, and Rev. xiv. 8, and xvii. 5. 

“The former part of this prophecy,” says Bishop 
Lowth, “is one of the most beautiful examples that 
can be given, of elegance of composition, variety of 
imagery, and sublimity of sentiment and diction, in 
the prophetic style: and the latter part consists of 
an ode of supreme and singular excellence. The 
prophecy opens with the command of God to gather 
together the forces which he had destined to his ser- 
vice, verses 2, Upon which the prophet hears 
the tumultuous noise of the different nations crowd- 
ing together to his standard ; he sees them advancing, 
prepared to execute divine wrath, verses 4,5. He 
proceeds: to describe the dreadful consequences of 
this visitation; the consternation which will _ 
those that are the objects of it; and transferring 
wares the speech from himself to God, verse ll, ti 

Vou. WT. (8)° 


forth, ander a variety of the most striking images, 
the dreadful destruction of the inhabitants of Baby- 
lon, which will follow, verses 11-16; and the ever- 
lasting desolation to which that great city is doom- 
ed, verses 17-22. The deliverance of Judah from 
captivity, the immediate consequence of this great 


‘revolution, is then set forth without being much en- 


larged upon, or greatly amplified, chap. xiv. 1, 2: 
This introduces, with the greatest ease,'and the ut- 
most propriety, the triumphant song on that subject, 
verses 4-28. The beauties of which, the various 
images, scenes, persons introduced, and the elegant 
transitions from one to another, I shall endeavour to 
point out in their order.” * 

Verses 2,3. Liftup a banner—To gather soldiers 
together for this expedition ; wpon the high mouni- 
ain—Whence it'may be discerned at a considerable 
distance. Ewalt the voice unto then—To the Medes, 
named verse 17. Shake the hand—Beckon to them 
with your hand, that they may come to this service. 
That they may go into, the gates of the nobles— 
That they may go and take Babylon, and so may en- 
ter into the palaces of the king, and of his princes, 
and spoil them at their pleasure. Lhave commanded 
my sanctified ones—Or, my appointed ones, as Dr. 
Waterland renders ‘wip, namely, the Medes and 
Persians, who were solemnly designed and set apart 
by God for his service, in this sacred work of exe- 
cuting his just vengeance upon the Babylonians. J 
have called my mighty ones—Those whom I have 
made mighty for this work ; even them that rejoice 
in my highness—Or, exult in my greatness, as Bish- 
op Lowth renders it, that is, in the doing that work 
which will tend to the advancement of my glory, in 
destroying the Babylonian empire. Not that’ the 
Medes and Persians had any regard to God or to his 
glory, in undertaking and prosecuting this war: they 
certainly had only the.gratifying their own ambition, 
and lust of power and empire, in view. 

Verses 4, 5. The noise of a multitude in the 
mountains—No sooner had the Almighty given the 
command, than the multitude assembles to his ban- 
ners; like as a great people—Not rude and barba- 
rous; but well-disciplined, regular, and veteran 
troops, such as are wont to be furnished by a great 
and powerful people; of the kingdéms of nations— 
Cyrus’s ‘army was made up of different nations be- 
sides the Medes and Persians. The Lord of hosts: 
—The God of armies; mustereth the host of the bat- 
tle—He raises the soldiers, brings them together, 
puts them in order, reviews them, keeps an exact ac- 
count of them, sees that they be all in their respect- 
ive posts, and gives them their necessary orders, 

113 


The prophecy 


ISAIAH. 


against Babylon. 


A.M 3874. 6 Yj Howl ye; ®for.the day of the 

‘ "Lorp és at hand; "it shall come as 
a destruction from the Almighty. : 

7 Therefore shall all hands ? be faint, and 
every man’s heart shall melt ; ; 

8 And they shall be afraid ; ‘pangs and sor- 
rows shall take hold of them j they shall be in 
pain as a woman that travaileth : they shall 


2be amazed ‘one at another ; their A. pr ee ea 
faces shall be as ° flames. Fue ire 

9 Behold, * the day of the Lorp cometh, cruel 
both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the 
land desolate: and he shall destroy | the sinners 
thereof out of it. 

10 For the stars of heaven and the constella 
tions thereof shall not give their light: the sun 


& Zeph. i. 7; Rev. vis 17.—) Job xxxi. 23; Joel 1. 15. 
2Or, fall down.—— Psa. xlviii. 6; Chap. xxi. 3. Hebrew 


The expressions are noble, and contain a lively de- 
_seription of that terror which the appearance of a 
hostile army strikes into the beholders. They come 
from a far country—Many of Cyrus’s. auxiliary 
forces came from very distant countries: see Jer. 1. 
41, and li. 27,28. The prophet adds this as an aggra- 
vation of the judgment. From the end of heaven— 
This is not to be understood strictly and properly, 
but popularly and hyperbolically, as such expres- 
sions are commonly used, both in sacred and pro- 
fane authors. Even the Lord, and the weapons of. 
his indignation—The Medes and Persians, who 
were but a rod in God’s hand, and the instruments 
of his anger, as was said of the Assyrian, chap. x. 5. 
To destroy the whole land—Namely, of Babylon, of 
which he is now speaking. 
Verses 6-8. Howl ye—We have here a very ele- 
gant and lively description of the terrible confusion 
_ and desolation which should be made in Babylon by 
the attack which the Medes and Persians should 
make upon it. They who were now at ease and se- 
cure are premonished to howl, and make sad lament- 
ation, Ist, Because God was about: to appear in 
wrath against them, and it is a fearful, thing to fall 
into his hands. And, 2d, Because their hearts would 
fail them, and they would have neither courage nor 
comfort left them; would neither be able to resist 
the judgment coming, nor bear up under it; neither 
to oppose the enemy nor to support themselves. For 
the day of the Lord is at hand—A day of judgment 
and recompense, when God would act as'a just aven- 
ger of his own and his people’s injured cause, and 
severely chastise the Babylonians for their pride and 
luxury, their inhumanity and cruelty; their idolatry 
and superstition, and, above all, their sins against 
the people of God, his religion and sanctuary, and so 
against God himself: see Jer.1. 31. It shall come as 
a destruction—Or, rather, A destruction shall it 
come, not merely as, or like a destruction, but such 
in reality, and that most awful, as being from the 
Almighty, whose power is irresistible, and wrath 
intolerable. - “ The prophet begins here to describe 
the calamity coming upon them, but in figures, ac- 
cording to his manner, grand, and adapted to raise a 
terrible image of it.” | All hands shail be faint—He- 
brew, N°), shall fall down, and be unable to, hold 
a weapon and every mans "heart shall melt—So 
that they shall be ready to die with fear. God often 
strikes a terror into those whom he designs for de- 
struction. Pangs, ¢c., shall take hold of them—The 
pangs of their fear shall be like those of a woman in 
114 


wonder. 


5 Heb. faces 


“Heb. every man at his neighbour. 


| of the flames,—-* Mal. iv. 1—— Psa. civ. 35; Prov. ii. 22. 


hardlabour. They shall be amazed one at another— 
To see such a populous, and, apparently, impregna- 
ble city, so easily and unexpectedly taken. Their 
faces shall be as flames—Hebrew, shall be faces 
of flames ; either pale with fear, or inflamed with 
rage and torment, as men in great misery often are. 
Bishop Lowth renders it, Their ong encrnoes.s shall 
be like flames of fire. 

Verses 9, 10. Behold the day—cruel, both with 
wrath and fierce anger—Dr. Waterland renders the 
clause, fierceness, wrath, and hot anger: divers 
words are heaped together, to signify the extremity 
of the divine indignation; to lay the land desolate— 
Hebrew, naw cow, to make it a desolation, an en- 
tire and ‘perpetual desolation, verses 19-22. ‘And he 
shall destroy the sinners thereof—The inhabitants 
of that city, who had persisted in their idolatries, op- 
pressions, and all sorts of luxuries, notwithstanding 
the faithful testimony against their practices borne 
by Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and 
other pious Jews, and the solemn warnings given 
by God himself to Nebuchadnezzar, in repeated 


‘dreams and visions, and the humiliating and distress- 


ing affliction wherewith that monarch was chastised : 
see Dan. iv. 13-33. For the stars of heaven—Here 
the calamity to be brought.upon them is set forth 
“under the figure of a dreadful tempest, inducing 
such a face of things in the heavens as the prophet 
describes.” It would be so grievous as to “deprive 
them of all light, that is, of all joy and consolation, 
as well as of the causes of them, and would fill them 
with sorrow and distress, and a fearful sense of the 
divine wrath pouréd forth from heaven upon them.” 
Or, rather, the prophet foretels the utter subversion 
of their republic, and the entire overthrow of their 
religion and polity, under the emblem of the extinc- 
tion or passing away of the sun, moon, and stars, 
and all the heavenly bodies. For, as Bishop 
Lowth observes, the Hebrew writers, “to express 
happiness, prosperity, the instauration and advance- 
ment of states, kingdoms, and potentates, make use 
of images taken from the most'striking parts,of na- 
ture; from the heavenly bodies, from the sun, moon, 
and stars, which they describe as shining with in- 
creased splendour, and never soit the moon be- 
comes like the meridian sun, and the sun’s light is 
augmented seven-fold: see Isa. xxx. 26, . New hea- 
vens and a new earth are created, and abrighter age 
commences. On the contrary, the overthrow .and 
destruction of kingdomsare represented by opposite 
images; the stars are ae the moon withdraws 
( 8* 53..¥ 


* 


The desolation 


CHAPTER XIII. ” 


of Babylon. 


aia shall be ™ darkened in his going forth, 

———— and the moon shall not cause her light 
to shine. 

11 And I will punish the world for their evil, 
and the wicked for their iniquity; " and I will 
cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and 
will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. 

12 I will make a man more precious than 
fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge 
of Ophir. 

13 ° Therefore I will shake the heavens, and 
the earth shall remove out of her place, in the 
wrath of the Lorp of hosts, and in ? the day 
of his fierce anger. 

14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a 
sheep that no man taketh up: 4 they shall every 


man turn to his own people, and flee every one: 


into his own land. 


15 Every one that is found shall A. 4 3274. 
B. C. 730. 
be thrust through; and every one 
that is joined sida them shall fall by the 
sword. 

16 Their children also shall be rdashed to 
pieces-before: their eyes; their houses shall be 
spoiled, and their wives ravished.. 

17 * Behold, I will stir up the Medes against 
them, which shall not regard silver; and as for 
gold, they shall not delight in it. 

18 Their bows alsoshall dash the young men 
to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the 
fruit’ of the womb ; their eyes shall ws poral 
children. 

19 4 * And- Babylon, the glory of ie 
the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall 
be ®as. when God overthrew *Sodom and Go- 
morrah, 


—- == 


m Chapter xxiv. 21, 23; Ezek. xxxii.7; Joel ii. 31; iii. 15; 
Matt. xxiv. 29; Mark xiii. 24; Luke xxi. ‘25. o Chap. ii. 17. 
oe ii. 6. Psa. ex. 55 Lam. i. 12.-— Jeremiah 1. 16; 
i. 9 


her light, and the sun shines no more; the earth 
quakes, and the heavens tremble; and all things 
seem tending to their original chaos.” 

Verses 11-16. I will punish the world—The Ba- 
bylonish empire, which is called the world, as the 
Roman empire afterward was, (Luke ii. 1,) because 
it was extended to a great part of the world, and be- 
cause it-was very populous, and Babylon itself look- 
ed more like a world than one city. I will lay low 
the haughtiness of the terrible—Of them’ who for- 
merly were very terrible for their great power and 
cruelty.. Iwill make a man more precious, &¢c.— 
The city and nation shall be so depopulated, that 
few men shall be left in it. J will shake the heavens, 
&c.—A poetical and prophetical description of great 
confusions and terrors, as if heaven and earth, were 
about to meet together. And it shall be as the chased 
roe—That Babylon, which used to be like a roar- 
ing lion and a raging bear to all about her, shall be- 
come like the timid, frighted roe, pursued by the 
hunter, and as a sheep which no man taketh up—In 
a most forlorn and neglected condition. And the 
army they shall bring into the field, consisting of 
troops from divers nations, as great armies usually 
do, shall be so dispirited by their own fears, and so 
dispersed by their enemies’ sword, that they shall 
turn every man to his own people—Shall each shift 
for his own safety. Or the prophet may refer to 
those inhabitants of Babylon who were originally 
of different ~ but had settled there: as many 
of these, he signifies, as can, shall flee out of it, and 


endeavour to escape to their own countries. Every | 


one that is found—In Babylon, at the taking of it; 

shall fall by the sword—The fear of which shall 

make them flee away with all speed. Their chil- 

dren also shall be dashed, &c.—As a just recom- 
3 


> 
A 


r Psa. exxxvil. 9;. Nah. ili. 10; Zech. xiv. 2.——s Chap. xxi. 
2; Jer. li. 11, 28; Dan. v.28, 31. Chap. xiv. 4, 22. 6 Heb. 
as the overthrowing. " Gen, xix, 24,25; Deut. xxix. 23; Jer. 
xlix. 18; 1. 40. 


pense for the like cruelty acted by them upon the 
Jews, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17, which was also foretold 
Psa. exxxvil. 9. ’ 

Verses 17, 18. Behold, &c.—Here follows the se- 
cond part of this prophecy, in which the calamity 
which the prophet had foretold, principally in figure, 
is plainly related and set forth in its causes and con- 
sequences. Its causes are stated to be the Medes, 
raised up by God himself against the Babylonians, 
and described as being extremely full of cruelty and 
avidity of revenge, verses 17,18. The consequences 
are, the desolation of Babylon, and the calamity 
to be brought upon it, verses 19-22. J will stir up 
the Medes—Under whom he comprehends the Per- 
sians, who were their neighbours and confederates 
in this expedition. Which shall not regard silver, 
&c.—That is, comparatively speaking. They shall 
more eagerly pursue the. destruction of the people 
than the getting of spoil. Their bows also—Under 
which are comprehended other weapons of war; 
shall dash the young men to pieces—Or, shall pierce 
the young men through, as the Chaldee renders it. 
But, as both Herodotus and Xenophon affirm that 
the Persians used rofa peyaia, large bows, accord- 
ing to the latter, bows three cubits long, and un- 
doubtedly proportionably strong; we may easily 
conceive, as Bishop Lowth observes, that, with suck 
bows, especially if made of-brass, as bows anciently 
often were, (see Psa. xviii. 35 ; Job xx. 24,) the sol- 
diers might dash and slay the young men, the weak- 
er and unresisting part of the inhabitants, (here 
joined with the fruit of the womb and the children, 
in the general carnage in taking the city. 

Verse 19. Babylon, the glory of kingdoms— 
Which once was the most noble and excellent of all 
the kingdoms then in being, and was more glorious 

115 


» ISATAH. 


of Babylon. 


The desolation 
A. M. 3274. 20 * It shall never be inhabited, nei- 


B.C. 7 ther shall it, be dwelt in‘ from gene- 


ration to generation: neither shall the Arabian 
pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds 
make their fold there : 

21 Y But 7 wild beasts of the desert shall lie 
there ; and their houses shall be full of * doleful 


creatures; and ° owls’? shall dwell he ey 
there, and satyrs shall dance there. — 

22 And “the wild beasts of the islands shall 
cry in their ’desolate houses, and dragons in 
their pleasant palaces: 7 and her time is near 
to come, and her days shall not be prolong- 
ed. 


x Jer. 1. 3, 39; li. 29, 62.—Y Chap. xxxiv. 11-15; Rev. xviii. 2. 
Heb. Ziim. § Heb. Ochim. 


than the succeeding empire, and therefore i is repre- 
sented by the head of gold, Dan. ii. 37. The beauty 
of the Chaldees’ excellency—The famous and beau- 
tiful seat of the Chaldean monarchy; shall be as 
when God overthrew Sodom, &c.—Shall be totally 
and irrecoverably destroyed, as is more fully ex- 
pressed in the following verses. Babylon, “ accord- 
ing to the lowest account given of it by ancient histo- 
rians, was a regular square, forty-five miles in com- 
pass, ’ enclosed by a wall two hundred feet high and 
fifty broad; in which there were one hundred gates 
of brass. Its principal ornaments were the temple 
of Belus, in the middle of which wasa tower of eight 
stories,” (or towers placed one above another, dimi- 
nishing always as they went up,) “upon a base of a 
quarter of a mile square; a most magnificent palace ; 
and the famous hanging gardens, which were an ar- 
tificial mountain, raised’ upon arches, and planted 
with trees of the largest, as well as the most beau- 
tiful sorts.” What is very remarkable, “this great 
city was rising to its height of glory at this very 
time, while Isaiah was repeatedly denouncing its ut- 
ter destruction. From the first of Hezekiah to the 
first of Nebuchadnezzar, under whom it was brought 
to the highest degree of strength and splendour, are 
about one hundred and twenty years.” 
Lowth. 

Verse 20. It shall never be inhabited—After the 
destruction threatened shall be fully effected. This 
was not done immediately upon the taking of the 
city by Darius the Mede and Cyrus the Persian, his 
nephew ; but was fulfilled by degrees, as is recorded 
by historians, and as appears at thisday. It will be 
satisfactory to the reader to note some of the steps 
by which this prophecy was accomplished. “Cy- 
rus took the city by diverting the waters of the Eu- 
phrates, which ran through the midst of it, and en- 
tering the place at night, by the dry channel. The 
river, being never restored afterward to its proper 
course, overflowed the whole country, and made it 
little better than a great morags: this, and the great 
slaughter of the inhabitants, with.other bad consé= 
quences of the taking of the city, was the first step 
to the ruin of the place. The Persian monarchs 
ever regarded it with a jealous eye; they kept it un- 
der, and took care. to prevent its recovering its for- 
mer greatness. Darius Hystaspis, not long after- 
ward, most severely punished it for a revolt, greatly 
depopulated the place, lowered the walls, and de- 
molished the gates, Xerxes destroyed the temples, 
and, with the rest, the great temple of Belus. The 
building of Seleucia on the Tigris exhausted Baby- 

116 


See Bishop 


° Or, ostriches ——"? Heb. daughters o of the owl—" Heb. lim. 


12 Or, palaces. ér. li. 33. 


lon by its neighbourhood, as well as by the immedi- 
ate loss of inhabitants taken away by Seleucus to 
people his new city. (Strabo, lib. xvi.) A king of 
the Parthians. soon after carried away into slavery 
a great number of the inhabitants, and burned and 
destroyed the most beautiful parts of the city. Strabo 
says, that in his time a great part of it wasa mere 
desert: that the Persians had partly destroyed it - 
and that time, and the neglect of the Macedonians 
while they were masters of it, had nearly completed 
its destruction. Jerome (on the place) says, that in 
his time it was quite in ruins, and that the walls 
served only for the enclosure of a park or forest, for 
the king’s hunting. Modern travellers, who have 
endeavoured to find the remains of it, have given 
but a very unsatisfactory account of their success, 
Upon the whole, Babylon is so, utterly annihilated, 


| that even: the place where this wonder of the world 


stood cannot now be determined with any certain- 
ty.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Verses 21, 22. The wild beasts of the desert shall 
lie there—Which was literally fulfilled, as we have 
just seen, in Jerome’s time, when it was a forest for 
breeding wild beasts, or a royal chase for hunting. 
And their houses shall be full of doleful creatures— 
This likewise has been exactly accomplished. Ben- 
jamin of ‘Tudela, a Jew, in his Itinerary, written 
above seven hundred years ago, asserts, “ Babylon is 
now laid waste, excepting the ruins of Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s palace, which men are afraid to enter, on 
account of the serpents and scorpions that have 
taken possession of it.” This account is confirmed by 
Rauwolf, who informs us, “that the supposed ruins 
of the tower of Babylon are so full of venomous 
creatures, that no one dares approach nearer to them 
than half a league.” It must be observed, however, 
that interpreters are not agreed as to the precise 
meaning of the word tons, here rendered, doleful 
creatures. Some‘connect this clause with the pre- 
ceding, and read it, And shall fill (namely, the wild 
beasts shall fill) their houses with their howlings, It 
is more probable, however, that some living crea- 
tures) are intended, but whether reptiles, quadru- 
peds, or fowls, is uncertain. It is also doubtful what 
creatures are meant by several of the other Hebrew 
words here used, particularly by the word Oryv, 
seirim, translated satyrs. The term indeed signifies 
goats. And many have supposed that evil spirits 
often appeared, of old time, in the shape of goats. 
“Upon which account,” says Lowth, “the word is 
sometimes taken for devils, and is sO translated, Ley. 

xvii. 7,” (where see the note,) “and in 2 Chron. xi. 
3 


* 


The deliverance of Israel 


15. But here, and chap. xxxiv. 14, it is rendered 
satyrs. The expression may be taken from a vul- 
gar opinion, that desolate and forlorn places are in- 
habited by evil spirits. See Baruch iv. 35; Rev. 
xviil. 2.. Accordingly our Saviour, in his parable of | 
an unclean spirit, says, that he walks through dry, 
or uninhabited places, Matt. xii. 43.” And. dragons 
‘in their pleasant places—The word (*3n, rendered | 
dragons, signifies any large creature of the creeping | 
kind, whether upon land or in the sea. Here it seems 
to be taken for a great serpent, such as ‘are usually 
found in deserts and desolate places. But instead of 
wasting time in a fruitless attempt to ascertain what 
kind of creatures are meant by the different Hebrew 
words here used, which would only perplex and not 
edify the reader, we shall present him with Bishop 
Lowth’s translation of these two verses. ' 


“But there shall the wild beasts.of the deserts lodge; | 
And howling monsters shall fill their houses: 

And there shall the daughters of the ostrich dwell ; 
And there shall the satyrs hold their revels. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


\ from captivity predicted. 


And wolves shall how] to one another in their palaces; 
And dragons in their voluptuous pavilions.” 


What makes the present desolate condition of Ba- 


sbylon the more wonderful is, that Alexander the 


Great intended to have made it the seat of his em- 
pire, and actually set men to work to rebuild the 
tempie of Belus, to repair the banks of the river, 
and to reduce the waters again to their own chan- 
nel; but he met with too many difficulties to proceed 
with the work. And now, how justly may we re- 
flect with Bishop Newton, (Dissert. xth.,) “ How is 
Babylon become a desolation! How wonderful are 
such predictions, compared with the events! And 
what a conyincing argument of the truth and divini- 
ty of the Holy Scriptures! Well might God allege 
this as a memorable instance of his prescience, and 
challenge all the false gods, and their votaries, to 
produce the like, chap. xlv..21, and xlvi.10. And 
indeed where can be found a’ similar instance, but 
in Scripture, from the beginning of the world to this 
day ?”” 


3 | CHAPTER XIV. vidi 
We have here, (1,) The immediate consequence of the fall of Babylon, and the great revolution spoken of in the preceding 


chapter, namely, the deliverance of Judah from captivity, 1, 2. 


The triumphant song of the Jews on that subject, 3-23, 


God's purpose against Assyria, 24-27. Palestine is threatened, 28-32. ; ‘ 


A. M. 3274. FoR the Lorp * will have mercy 
Se acinatin on Jacob, and will yet choose 
Israel, and set them in-their own land: ° and 
the strangers shall be joined with them, and 
they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. 

2 And the people shall take them, 4 and bring 


them to their place: and the house 4. pottecs 
of Israel shall possess them in the land _———___ 
of the Lorp-for servants and handmaids : and 
they shall take them captives, ' whose captives 
they were; °and they shall rule over their op- 
pressors. . 


2 Psa. cil. 13.—> Zech. i. 17; ii. 12. 


© Chap. lx. 4, 5, 10; 
Eph. ii. 12, 13, &c. ; 


4 Chap. xlix. 22; 1x. 9; Ixvi. 20. 1 Heb. that had taken them 
captives. © Chap. lx. 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIV. 

Verse 1. For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob 
—Will pity and deliver his people; and therefore 
will destroy Babylon, which hinders their deliver- 
ance, and will raise up and exalt Cyrus, who shall 
promote it; and he will not prolong the time, but do 
these things speedily, as the prophet had just affirm- 
ed. For he is continuing his discourse concern- 
ing Babylon, and assigning the reason, not only of 
its fall, but of the speedy approach of that fall, 
as predicted in the last clause of the preceding 
chapter. It was not to be delayed, because the de- 
liverance of the church of God depended n it. 
And will yet choose Israel—Will renew his choice 
of them, for he had appeared to reject and cast them 
off: or he will still regard them as his chosen peo- 
ple, however he may seem to desert them by giving 
them up to their enemies, and scattering them among 
the nations.. Israel is put for Judah, as it frequent- 
ly is. Israel being the name which God gave to 


Jacob, as a mark of his favour, it is chiefly made use 
3 


“> 


of by the prophets when they deliver some gracious 
promise, or announce some blessing from the mouth 
of God, especially such a one as concerns the twelve 
tribes, all equally descended from Jacob, as this pro- 
phecy, in its ultimate sense, undoubtedly does. And 
the strangers shall be joined to them—It is probable 
that many strangers were made proselytes to the 
Jewish religion during their captivity, who were 
willing to go along with them into Judea, there to 
enjoy the free exercise of their religion. And others, 


ee had not been proselytes before, might be in- 
U 


iced to become such, and unite themselves to them, 
either through the favour shown to the Jews in the 
Persian court, or by consideration of their wonder- 
ful deliverance taking place exactly at the time fore- 
told by the prophets. But what was then begun was 
more fully accomplished at the coming of the Messiah. 

Verse 2. And ‘the people shall take them, &c.— 
They shall provide them with all necessary accom- 
modations for their journey: see Ezra iv. 1, And 
Israel shall possess them for servants—Those of 

117 


Pride and destruction of ISAIAH. the king of Babylon. 


— 


A.M. 3274. 3 YJ And it shall come to pass ‘in the || hath the oppressor ceased, the °golden® A.M. 3274. 
alate day that the Lorp shall give thee-rest || city ceased ! \ oe a ~ ~ 
from thy sorrow, and from thy-fear, and from|| 5° The Lorp hath broken "the staff of the 
the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to || wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers. 
serve, 6 He who smote the people in wrath with *a 
4 That thou ‘shalt take up this ? proverb || continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in 
-against the king of Babylon, and say, How || anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth. 


f Chap. xiii. 19; Hab. ii. 6. ? Or, taunting speech. 3 Or, g Rev. xviii. 16.—— Psa. exxv. 3.—* Heb. a stroke 
' exactress of gold. ~ f . without removing. 


the Chaldeans who left their own country for the || the fallen tyrant; and boast their security now he 
sake of religion, and went along with the Jews||/is no more. The scene is immediately changed, 
into. Judea, would probably be content to live among || and a new set of persons is introduced; the regions 
them in an inferior condition, and give them the be- || of the dead are laid open, and Hades is represented 
nefit of their service. Or, the meaning may be, that || as rousing up the shades of ‘the departed monarchs: 
many of the Jewish peoplé should be in such cir- || they rise from their thrones to meet the king of Ba- 
cumstances as to be able to procure servants in the || bylon at his coming; and insult him on his being 
land where they were captives, and to take them || reduced to the same low estate of impotence and dis- 
with them into their own land as their servants. So |/ solution with themselves, This is one of the boldest 
that the people of the country where’ they had been |} prosopopeias that ever was attempted in poetry ; 
captives, became. captives or. servants to the Jews, || and is executed with astonishing brevity and perspi- 
in their own land; who might therefore be said || cuity, and with that peculiar foree which, in a great 
strictly to rule over those who had oppressed them. || subject, naturally results from both. The Jews now 
But, without question, these words have a further || resume the speech; they address the king of Baby- 
meaning in them, and point at those times under the || lon as the morning-star fallen from heaven, as the 
gospel, when the apostles, and. other ministers of || first in splendour and dignity in the political world, 
Christ, who were of the Jewish nation, should con- | fallen from his high state: they introduce him as 
quer a great part of the Gentile world, and subject || uttering the most extravagant vaunts of his power, 
them to the worship of the true God, obedience to |} and ambitious designs in his former glory: these are 
the Jewish Messiah, and the laws of Christianity. strongly contrasted in the close with his present low 
Verses 3-5. And in the day that the Lord shall || andabject condition. Immediately follows a different 
give thee rest from thy sorrow—From thy grief, || scene, and a most happy image, to diversify the same 
fear, and the hard bondage of former times; where- || subject, and to give it a new turn and an additional 
in thou wast made to serve—According to the plea-|| force. Certain persons are introduced, who light 
sure of thy cruel lords and masters; thou shalt take || upon the corpse of the king of Babylon, cast out, and 
up this proverb—Into thy mouth, as it is expressed || lying naked on the bare ground, among the common 
Psa. 1.16; and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! || slain, just after the taking of the city; covered with 
—This is spoken by way of astonishment and tri- |} wounds, and so disfigured, that it is some time be- 
umph, as if he had said, Who would have*thought || fore they know him. They accost him with the se- 
this possible? The golden city ceased !—So they || verest taunts, and bitterly. reproach him with his de- 
used to call themselves; which he expresses here in || structive ambition, and his cruel usage of the con- 
a word of their own language. T'he Lord hath || quered; which have deservedly brought upon him 
broken the staff, &c.—This is an answer to the fore- || this ignominious treatment, so different from that 
going question. It is God’s own work, and not || which those of his rank usually meet with, and which 
man’s; and therefore it is not strange that it is ac- || shall cover his posterity with disgrace. To com- 
complished. But before we proceed with our re- || plete the whole, God is introduced declaring the fate 
marks on some particular passages of this song, we || of Babylon, the utter extirpation of the royal family, 
shall present our readers with the general view || and the total desolation of the city; the deliverance 
which Bishop Lowth has given of its unparalleled || of his-people, and the destruction of their enemies ; 
beauties, which he has pointed out, in a very strik- || confirming the irreversible decree by the awful sanc- 
ing manner, as follows: “A.chorus'of Jews is intro- || tion of his oath. I believe it may, with truth, be af- 
duced, expressing their surprise and astonishmenti]| firmed, that there is no poem of its kind extant in 
at the sudden downfall of Babylon, and the great re- || any language, in which the subject is so well laid 
verse of fortune that had befallen the tyrant, who, || out, and so happily conducted, with such a richness 
ke his predecessors, had oppressed his own, and || of invention, with such variety of images, persons, 
harassed the neighbouring kingdoms. These op-||and distinct actions, with such rapidity and ease of 
pressed kingdoms, or their rulers, are represented || transition, in so small a compass as in this ode of 
under the image of the fir-trees, and the cedars of ||Isaiah. For beauty of disposition, strength of co- 
Libanus, frequently used to express any thing in the || Iouring, greatness of sentiment, brevity, perspicuity, 
political or religious world that is super-eminently || and force of expression, it stands among all the mo- 
great and majestic: the whole earth shouteth for || numents of antiquity unrivalled.” . 
ioy: the’cedars of ne utter a severe taunt over Verses 6-11. He that ruled the nations in anger 


* 


The fall of 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Nebuchadnezzar. 


A. M. 3274. 


oe ooo 7 The whole earth is at rest, and 


is quiet: they break forth into singing. 
8 ' Yea, the fir-trees rejoice’ at thee, and the 


cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid | 


down, no feller is come up against us. 

9 * Hell® from beneath is moved for thee to 
meet thee at thy coming: it stirreth up the 
dead for. thee, even all the ®chief? ones of the 
earth: it hath:raised up from ater thrones all 
the kings of the nations. 

10 All they shall speak and aay unto thee, 
Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou 
become like unto us? 

11 Thy pomp is brought down to. the grave, 


~ iChap. lv. 12’; Ezek. xxxi. 16—* Ezek. xxxii. 215 Or, 
The grave. é Heb. leaders. 7 Or, great goats! Chap. 


and the noise of thy viols: the worm A. M. 2274. 
, C. 730. 
is spread under ‘thee, and the worms 
cover thee. 


12 |! How art thou felbia from heaven, °O. 


Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut 
down to the ground, which didst weaken the 
nations ! 

13 For thou hast said in thy habit ™T will 
ascend into heaven, "I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the 
mount of the congregation, ° in the sides of the 
north : 

14 I will ascend above the heights of the 
clouds ;_? I will be like the Most High. 


® Or, O day-star. m Matt. xi. 23.——" Dan. viii. 
» Chap. xlyii. 8; 2 Thess. ii. 4? 


Xxxiv. 4. 
10. © Psa. xlviii. 2. 


—With rigour, and not with clemency; is perse- 
cuted and none hindereth—Neither the Babylonians 
themselves nor their confederates. The whole earth 
is at rest—The subjects of that vast empire who 
groaned under his cruel bondage. Yea, the cedars 
of Lebanon—Which were felled for the service of 
his pride and luxury, but are now suffered. to stand 
and flourish. It is.a figure usual in sacred and pro- 
fane writers. Hell—The invisible world, or rather, 
the grave, asthe same word is rendered verse 11, 
and in innumerable other places; to which he ele- 
gantly ascribes sense and speech, as poets and ora- 
tors frequently do; ts moved to meet thee at thy 
coming—And to compliment thee on thy arrival. in 
their dark regions. “ This image of the state of the 
dead, or the Infernwm Poeticum of the Hebrews, is 
taken from their custom of burying, those at least 
of the higher rank, in large sepulchral vaults hewn 
in the rock. Of this kind of sepulchres there are 
remains at Jerusalem now extant; and some that 
are said to be the sepulchres of the kingsof Judah: 
see Maundrell, p. 76. You are to form to yourself 
an idea of an immense subterraneous vault, a vast 
gloomy cavern, all round the sides of which are cells 
to receive the dead bodies ; here the deceased mon- 
archs lie ina distinguished sort of state; suitable to 
their former rank, each on his own couch, with his 
arms beside him, his sword at his head, and the bodies 
of his chiefs and companions round about him: see 
Ezek. xxxii. 27. These illustrious shades rise at 
once from their couches, as from their thrones; and 
advance to the entrance of the cavern to meet the 
king of Babylon, and to receive him with insults on 
his fall."—Bishop Lowth. All they shall say, Art 
thou become weak as we?—Thou, who wast king of 
kings, and far superior to us in power and authority ? 
that didst neither fear God nor reverence man, but 
rather didst rank thyself among the immortals; 
thou, before whom all people, nations, and languages 
trembled and feared, art thou come to take thy fate 
. with us poor mortal men? Where now is thy power 
and thy glory? Thy pomp is brought down to the 


ship God: 


grave—Is lost and buried with thee; and the noise 


of thy viols—All thy musical instruments, which 
were much used in Babylon, and were doubtless 
used in Belshazzar’s solemn feasts, (Dan. v. 1,) at 
which time the city was taken; to which possibly 
the prophet here alludes. The worm is spread 
under thee—Instead of those stately carpets upon 
which thou didst frequently tread. 

Verses 12-14. How art thou fallen from heaven 
—From the height of thy glory; O Lucifer—Lu- 
cifer is properly a bright star, that ushers in the 
morning; but is here metaphorically taken for the 
mighty king of Babylon, who outshone all the kings 
of the earth by his great splendour. Son of the 
morning—The title of son is given in Scripture, not 
only to a person or thing begotten or produced by 
another, but-also to any thing which is related to it, 
in which sense we read of the son of a night, 
Jonah iv. 10, a’son of perdition, John xvii. 12, and, 
which is more agreeable to the present case, the sons 


‘of Arcturus, Job xxxviii. 32.° How art thou cut 


down to the ground—Thou, whose power raised 
thee, in the estimation of men, even‘to heaven 
itself? Thou, who didst trample on, and destroy all 
the nations! For thou hast said in thy heart— 
Which lay open to God’s inspection ; 7 will ascend 
into heaven—I will advance myself above the state 
of weak and mortal men. J will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God—Above all other kings and 
potentates ; or, above the most eminent persons 
God’s church. J will sit upon the mount of the con- 
gregation—I will establish my royal throne upon 
mount Zion, where the Jews meet together to wor- 
in the sides of the north—This is added 
as a more exact description of the place of the tem- 
ple ; it stood upon mount Moriah, which was north- 
ward from the hill of Zion, strictly so called. J 
will be like the Most High—In the uncontrollable- 
ness of my. power, and the universal extent of my 
dominion. By putting these and such like words 
into the mouths of ‘the kings of Babylon, the 
prophet means to show their excessive pride, and 
the confidence which they entertained, that they 
should perpetually reign over the Jews. 
119 


The fall of 


ISATAH. . 


Nebuchadnezzar. 


A.M. 3274. 15 Yet thou ‘shalt be brought down 


ae to hell, to the sides of the pit, | 
They that see thee shall narrowly look 


gros thee, and consider thee, saying, Js this 


he man that made the earth to’ tremble, that 
did shake kingdoms : 

17 That made the world as a wilderness, and 
destroyed the: cities thereof: that ®opened not 
the house of his prisoners? *_* 

18 All the kings of the nations, even all of 
them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. 

19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an 
abominable branch, and as the raiment of those 
that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that 
go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcass 
trodden under feet. oo he 


20 Thou shalt not be joined with A. a Sze 
them in burial, because thou hast de- 
stroyed, thy land, and slain thy people: * the 
seed of evil-doers shall never be renowned. 

21 Prepare slaughter for his children * for the 
iniquity of their fathers; that’ they do not rise, 
nor possess the land, nor fil the face of the world 
with cities. 

22 For I will rise up against thieris saith the 
Lorp of hosts, and cut off from Babylon * the 
name, and “remnant, * and son, and nephew, 
saith the Lorp. 

23 YI will also make it.a possession for the 
bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep 
it with the besom of destruction, saith the Lorp 
of hosts. 


4 Matt, xi. 23. ° Or, did not let his prisoners loose homeward. | 
Job xviii. 19; Psa. xxi. 10; xxxvil. 28; cix. 13.——* Ex 


Nidenen 15-17. Yet thou shalt be brought down to 
hell—To the grave, and the state of the dead ; to the 
sides of the pit—And lodged there in the lowest 
state of misery and degradation. , They that see thee 
—-In this humbled and wretched state, shall narrowly 
look upon thee—As not knowing thee at first sight, 
and hardly believing their own eyes, because of this 
great alteration of thy condition, a change which, to 
them, seemed next to impossible. Js this the mam 
that made the earth to tremble—All the nations of 
the earth? that did shake the kingdoms—At his 
pleasure ? that made the world.a wilderness—By 
slaying or carrying away captive its inhabitants, and 
destroying its produce: that opened not the house 
of his prisoners—That did not restore them to their 
own country, as Cyrus afterward did the Jews; but 
kept them in perpetual slavery, Jer. ]. 33. By this 
the prophet signifies both his irresistible power, and 
his continued cruelty, 

Verses 18-20, All the kings of the nations—That 
is, other kings generally; lie in glory, &c—Are 
buried in their own sepulchres, having stately mon- 
uments erected to their memory. The persons who 
are represented as uttering these words are supposed 
to have before their eyes the carcass of the king of 

bylon, lying on the bare ground among the com- 
mon slain, greatly disfigured and covered with blood 
and wounds. | But thou art cast out of thy grave— 
Deprived of a grave, or burying-place. Which very 
probably happened to Belshazzar, who, according to 
Dan. v. 30, was slain in-the night in which the city 
was taken by Cyrus, when his people had neither 
opportunity nor heart to bestow an honourable inter- 
ment upon him, and the conquerors would not suffer 
them to doit. Liké an abominable branch—Like 
a rotten twig of a tree, which he that prunes the 
trees, casts away: and as raiment of those that are 
slain—Which, being mangled, and besmeared with 
mire and blood, is cast away with contempt. That 
go down to the pit—Who, being slain, are cast into 

120 


5; Matt. xxiii. 35. Prov. x. 7; Jer. li. 62.——-" 1 Kings xiv. 
10.— Job xviii. 19. Ponts XXxiv, 4; Zeph. ii. 14. 


some pits He saith, to the stones a the pit, because 
when dead bodies are cast in thither, men use to 
throw.a heap of stones upon them. As @ carcass 
trodden under feet—Neglected, like such-a eareass. 
And this;might literally happen to Belshazzar’s dead 
body. T'hou shalt not be joined with them in burial 
—Not buried, as they are. Because thou hast slain 
thy people—Thou hast exercised great tyranny and 
grey, not only to thine enemies, but even to thine 

wn subjects. The seed of evil-doers—Such as Bel- 
shazzar was, being descended. from that Nebuchad- 
nezzar who had made such horrid slaughters and 
devastations in the world, merely to gratify his own 
insatiable lusts, and who had been so impious toward 
God and his. temple, and so bloody toward his church 
and people; shall never be renowned—Or, shall 
not be renowned for ever: although I have long 
borne with thee and thy family. 

Verses 21-23. Prepare slaughter for his children 
—O ye Medes and Persians, cut off all the branches 
of the royal family. ‘This, it is probable, was actu- 
ally done, for Belshazzar being slain, and the mon- 
archy translated to the people last mentioned, it is 
not likely that any related to the family of the former 
monarchs were suffered to survive. T'hat they do 
not rise, nor possess the land—Not recover their 
former power, nor fill the face of the world with 
cities—“ It was the ambition of the great monarchs 
of those times, to build new cities, and call them by 


their own names, thereby to perpetuate their memory. 
Hence the cities took their rise, which were called 
by the names of, Seleucia, Ptolemais, Alexandria, 
&e. . Some render the latter part of the verse, Nor 
fill the face of the world with enemies, such as 
should continue a succession of war and bloodshed, 
and disturb the peace and quiet of mankind.”—Lowth. 
I will cut off from Babylon the name, &c.—The re- 
membrance of those that are dead, and the persons 
of those who yet survive. J will make it.a@ pos- 
session for the biltern--A great water-fowl, which 


Palestine is CHAPTE 


R XIV. severely threatened. 


— 


A.M. 3274. 24 41 The Lorn of hosts hath sworn, 
——— saying, Surely as I have thought, so 
shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, 
so shall it stand: 

25 ‘That I will break the Assyrian in my land, 
and upon my mountains tread him under foot : 
then shall * his yoke depart from off them, and 
his burden depart from off their shoulders. 

26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon 
the whole earth: and this 7s the hand that is 
stretched out upon all the nations. 


2 Chap. x.'27——* 2 Chron. xx. 6; Job ix. 12; xxiii. 13; Psa. 
xxxili. 11; Prov. xix, 21; xxi. 30; Chap. xliii. 13; Dan. iv. 31, 


delights in solitary places, as also in watery grounds, 
such as those were about Babylon. And pools of 
water—The ground about Babylon was of. itself 
very moist, because of the great river Euphrates 
running by it, which was kept from overflowing the 
country with charge and labour; this being neg- 
lected, when-the city was destroyed, it was easily 
turned into pools of water. And I will sweep it 
with the besom of destruction—I will make.a clear 
riddance of all its wealth and substance: see similar 
expressions 2 Kings xxi.13. Bishop Lowth trans- 
lates this‘clause nearly according to the version of 
the LXX. And I will plunge it in the miry gulf of 
destruction, saith Jehovah, God of hosts. 

Verses 24-27. The Lord of hosts hath sworn, &c. 
—Here begins another prophecy against the Assy- 
rlans, which was to be fulfilled much sooner than 
the foregoing, even in the life-time of the prophet. 
Bat, “though of a peculiar and different, it is not of 
a totally foreign argument: it contains the epilogue 
and conclusion of the foregoing prophecy. As what 
the prophet foretold concerning the destruction of 
Babylon might justly seem great beyond expecta- 
tion, he was desirous that the truth of the predic- 
tion should be collected from another remarkable 
and not dissimilar divine judgment, which should 
precede the completion of this prophecy, namely, 
the:wonderful slaughter which the king of Assyria 
should meet with in Canaan itself, as an example of 
the divine indignation, and a pledge of the truth 
of similar predictions denouncing the destruction 
of the enemies of the people of God.” And 
here, to give his people greater assurance of the 
’ accomplishment of this prediction, and thereby to 
confirm their faith in it, and all other prophecies 
which his prophet was commissioned to deli- 
ver, God adds his solemn oath; saying, Surely as 
I have thought, so shall it come to pass, that I will 
break the Assyrian—Sennacherib and his Assyrian 
army; in my land—In Judea, which was God’s 
land in a peculiar sense, chosen by him, and inhabit- 
ed by his people; and upon my mountains tread him 
under foot—In my mountainous country, for such 
Judea was, especially about Jerusalem, where his 
army was destroyed; then shall his yoke depart, 
&c.—See on chap. x. 27. This the purpose upon 

3 


posed, and who shall disannul i¢? 


27 For the Lorp of hosts hath pur- A. M. 3274, 


and his hand is stretched out, and who shall 


turn it back ? ry 


28 Inthe year that.» King Ahaz died was this 
burden. 

29 FY Rejoice not thou. whole Pales- B. C. 726. 
tina, ° because the rod of him that 
smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent’s 
root shall come forth a 1° cockatrice, 4and his 
fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. 


35.—> 2 Kings xvi, 20. 
42 ean xviii. 8, 


©2 Chron. xxvi. 6.+—!° Or, adder. 


the whole earth—Upon this vast empire, now in the 
hands of the Assyrians, and shortly to come into 
the hands of the Babylonians; and this is the hand, 
&c.—The providence of God executing his purpose. 

arses 28, 29. In the year Ahaz died was this 
bur en—This is the second sermon of this second 
part of Isaiah’s prophecies, (see the general argu- 
ment, and the contents of chap. xiii.,) in which the 
prophet denounces judgment against the Philistines, 
exulting in the prosperous state of their affairs, 
under the reign of Ahaz, and conceiving on the 
death of that king, when this prophecy was detiver- 
ed, still greater hopes of increasing prosperity. 
Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina—Hebrew, Patles- 
tina, 72, all of thee, that is, all thy tribes, or clans, 
For they were still, as. formerly, it seems, under the 
government of five lords or heads, 1 Sam. vi. 16; 
because the rod of him that smote thee is broken— 
Because Ahaz, the son of Uzziah, thy deadly enemy, 
is cut off; or, because the power of the kings of 
Judah, who were wont to be a great scourge to thee, 
is now much impaired. Uzziah had smitten and 
subdued the Philistines, 2 Chron. xxvi. 6, 7; but, 


| taking advantage of the weak reign of Ahaz, they had 


since then not only recovered their former power, 
but had gained much more, had even invaded Judea, 
and taken and held in possession divers cities and 
villages in the southern part of that kingdom, 2 
Chron. xxviii. 18. - But the prophet here foretels the 
grievous calamities which they should suffer as well 
from Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz, as from the Assy 

rians; thus humbling their pride and boasting, ange 
encouraging the pious and afflicted Jews with the 
hope of better times. Jor out of the,serpent’s root 
shall come forth a cockatrice—Or basilisk, as Bi- 
shop Lowth translates y5¥, a serpent of the: most 
poisonous kind, termed Dyn Yw, a fiery flying 
serpent, in the next clause. As if he had said, As 
much as a basilisk, or fiery flying serpent, is more to 
be dreaded than a common viper; so much more 
reason have you to fear Hezekiah than his grand- 
father Uzziah, because the grandson will gain greater 
victories over you. This Hezekiah did, for he smote 
the Philistines even unto Gaza, and the borders 
thereof, 2 Kings xviii. 8. “A flying serpent,” says 


| Lowth, “is what) the Latins call serpens jaculus. 


121 


me 


a 


w 


* 


In the midst of trouble 


A. M. 3278. 
BP? hall feed, and the needy: shall lie 
down in safety: and I will.kill thy root with 
famine, and he shall slay thy remnant. + 


31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole 


Palestina, art dissolved: for there shall come 


ISAIAH. 


30 And the firstborn of the poor 


‘of the nation ? 


God will establish Zion. 


from the north.a smoke, and 1 none - i: ity 
shall/be alone in his appointed times. 

32 What shall one then answer the messengers 
That *the Lorn hath founded 
Zion, and ‘the poor of his people shall ?° trust 
in it. 


11 Or, he shall not be alone. 12 Or, assemblies ——€ Ps. lxxxvii. 


1, oO seCi. 16. 


£ Zeph. iii. 12; Zech. xi. 11. 


13 Or, betake.themselves 
unto it. ; 


which darts itself against any creature it meets; 
and they are called fiery, because they cause an in- 
flammation where they sting.” 

Verse 30. And the firstborn of the poor—Those 
who are most remarkably poor; shall feed—Shall 
have plenty of provisions, in spite of all thy at- 
tempts againstthem. The same Hezekiah, who shall 
be such a scourge to thee, Palestina, shall be a mild 
and gracious governor to his own subjects; he shall 
take care of them asa shepherd does of his flock, 
and relieve those who were oppressed in his father’s 
time. It is probable, that the inhabitants of the 
southern parts of Judea, who were particularly ex- 
posed to the incursions of the Philistines, the Idu- 
means, and the’ Arabs, are chiefly meant here by the 
firstborn of the poor: and concerning these the 
prophet foretels, that under Hezekiah’s government 
they should have food and security for themselves 
and flocks. And I will kill thy root, &e—When 
the root is killed, the plant or tree is wholly de- 
stroyed. The meaning therefore is, I will utterl 
destroy thee, both root and branch, so that there 
shall be no remnant of thy people reserved, as it 
follows. This utter extirpation of the Philistines, 
here threatened, was begun by Hezekiah, and was 
completed by famine and various calamities, which 
came upon them afterward. 

Verse 31. Howl, O gate—O people, who used to 
pass through the gates; cry, O citty—O inhabitants 
of the city; or city may be put.collectively for all 
their cities. Thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved 
—Hebrew, 1193, art melted, which may be under- 
stood,. either of the faintness of their spirits and 
courage, or of the dissolution of their state; there 
shall come from the north a smoke—A grievous 
judgment, or calamity, often signified by smoke, as 
Gen. xv. 17; Joel ii.30; both because smoke is gene- 
rally accompanied with fire, and because it darkens the 
air, and afflictions are frequently signified by fire 
and darkness. Many interpreters understand the 
prophet as speaking here ofthe calamity brought on 
the Philistines by Hezekiah, foretold in the preceding 
verses, observing that Judea lay to the north of some 
partsofPalestine. But certainly itlay more to the east 
than north of the greater part of that country: and 
accordingly, the Scriptures generally speak of the 
Philistines as being to the west of the Jews: see 
chap. xi. 14. It seems, therefore, that Chaldea, and 

122 


not Judea, is here meant by the north, asit generally 
is in the writings of the prophets; and that the cala- 
mity intended is not that spoken of in’verses 29, 30, 
but a new affliction to be brought upon them by the 
Assyrians or Babylonians: probably the same which 
Jeremiah predicted as coming from the north on the 
Philistines, Jer, xlyii. 2, &e. And none’ shall be 
alone in his appointed times—When God’s appoint- 
ed,time shall come, not one. of all fhat numerous 
army that shall invade Palestine, shall desert his co- 
lours, lag behind the rest, or withdraw his hand, till 
the work of destruction be finished. 

Verse 32. What shall one then answer the mes- 
sengers of the nation—At.the same time that “the 
prophet sees, as it were, a thick cloud, coming from 
the north, darkening the heavens, an emblem of the 
calamity coming from'that quarter on the Philistines, 
he sees the messengers of that nation, as in a com 
mon danger, going to the king of Judah, and delibe- 
rating concerning the common safety.. While he 
beholds the first he turns his discourse to the Philis- 

ines, and excites them to lamentation » but obsery- 
ing the second, he teaches the Jews what answer 
they should give to the messengers of that nation 
on this occasion :” see Jer. xlvii. 2, and’ Vitringa. 
What shall a Jew say in that day, when not only 
the Philistines, but even the Jews themselves, shall 
fall by the hands of one and the same enemy ? 
That the Lord hath founded Zion, &c.—They shall 
give them this answer, That although Zion at pre- 


| sent be ina very distressed and deplorable condition, 


and seems to be forsaken by her God, yet she stands 
upon a firm foundation, and God, who first founded 
her, will again restore and establish her; and his 
poor, despised people, shall resort to her, as to a 
strong and sure refuge. This verse seems evidently 
to be added, to express the very different condition 
of God’s people from that of the Philistines, in the 
events of the Babylonian invasion: that, whereas 
the Philistines should be irrevocably "destroyed 
thereby, and no remnant of them should be left, as 
was said verse 30; God’s people, though they 
should be sorely scourged, and carried into captivity, 
yet should be strangely preserved, and, after some 
years, delivered, and restored to their own land ; 

whereby it would appear that Zion stood upon a sure 
foundation, and although it was grievously shaken, 
yet it could not be utterly and finally overthrown. ~ 


Calamities to fall 


CHAPTER XV. 


on the Moabites. 


“CHAPTER XY. . 


This and the next chapter contain a prophecy of some great desolation coming upon the country of the Moabites, which bordered 


upon Judea, and had often been injurious and vexatious to it. 


We have here great lamentation made by the Moalites, 


and by the prophet himself for them, 1-5. The great calamities which should occasion and justify that lamentation, 6-9. 


A. M. 3278. 


B.C, 726. Gee *burden of Moab. Because 


in the night ° Ar of Moab is laid 
waste, and * brought to silence ; because in the 
night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought 
to silence ; 7p , 

2 * He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the 
high places, to weep: Moab shall. howl over 
Nebo, and over Medeba: ‘on all their heads 
shall be baldness, and every beard cut 
off. 

3 In their streets they shall gird themselves 
with sackcloth : °on the tops of their houses, and 


in their streets, every one shall howl, A. M. 3278. 
2 weeping abundantly. yee es 

4 And Heshbon shall cry, fand Elealeh : their 
voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore 
the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out ; his 
life shall be grievous unto him. 

5 &§ My heart shall cry out for Moab; 3 his 
fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, a * heifer of three 
years old: for‘ by the mounting up of Luhith 
with weeping shall they go it up; for in the 
way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of 
* destruction. 


@ Jer. xlviii. 1, &c.; Ezek. xxv. 8-11; Amos ii. 1—> Num. 
xxi. 28.—! Or, cut off Chap. xvi. 12.——4 Leviticus xxi. 
5; Chap. iii. 24; xxii. 12; Jer. xlyii. 5; xlviii. 1, 37,38; Ezek. 


vii. 18.— Jer. xlviii. 38. 


Ae 


—— 


® Heb. descending into weeping, or coming down with weeping. 
£ Chap. xvi. 19. § Chap. xvi. 11; Jer. xlviii. 31. 5 Or, to the 
bor thereof, even as a heifer. b Chap. xvi. 14; Jer: api 


34. Jer. xlviii. 5——* Heb. breaking. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XV. 

Verse 1. The burden of Moab—A prophecy of 
the destruction of the Moabites, the inveterate and 
implacable enemies of the Jews, begun by the As- 
syrian, and finished by the Babylonian monarchs. 
This prophecy, which occupies this and the next 
chapter, very improperly separated from each other, 
makes the third discourse of this second part. The 
time of the delivery, and consequently of the com- 
pletion of it, (which was to be in three years after,) 
is uncertain, neither of them being marked in the 
prophecy, nor recorded in history.  “ But the most 
probable account is, that it was delivered soon after 
the foregoing, in the first year of Hezekiah; and 
that it was accomplished in his fourth year, when 
Shalmaneser invaded the kingdom of Israel. He 
might probably march through Moab ; and, to secure 
every thing behind him, possess himself of the whole 
country, by taking the principal strong places, Ar 
and Kir-haresh. Jeremiah has ‘introduced much of 
this prophecy of Isaiah into his own larger prophecy 
against the same people, (chap. xlviii..) denouncing 
God’s judgments on Moab, subsequent to the calamity 
here foretold, to be executed by Nebuchadnezzar.” 
Bishop Lowth. Jn the night—Or, in a night, sud- 
denly and unexpectedly, Ar of Moab is laid waste 
—The chief city of Moab, Num. xxi. 28. Kir of 
Moab is laid waste—Another eminent city of Moab, 
called more largely and fully, Kir-hareseth and 
Kir-haresh, Isa. xvi. 7, 11; Jer. xlvili. 31, 36. 

Verse 2. Heis gone up to Bajith—Whicth signifies 
a house. It is supposed to be the name of a place, 
so called from some eminent house or temple of 
their idols which was in it; and to Dibon—Another 
city of Moab; to weep—To offer their supplications 
with tears to their idols for help. Moab shall howl 
over Nebo and Medeba—Two considerable cities 
anciently belonging to the Moabites, from whom 
they were taken by the Amorites, and from them by 

3 


the Israelites ; but were, it seems, recovered by the 


‘Moabites, in whose hands they now were. 


“ce 4 Wy 
prophet so orders his discourse in this prophecy, ¥ 
if, being placed on a high mountain, he beheld the 
army of the Assyrians, suddenly, and contrary to 
all expectation, directing their course toward Moab; 
and in this unforeseen attack, ravaging and plunder. 
ing, rather than besieging, the principal cities and 
fortifications of this country; while the Moabites, 
astonished at the report of this event, burst forth 
into weeping and lamentation, hasten to the temples 
and altars of their god Chemosh, to implore his aid, 
making bare their heads, cutting off their hair, and 
filling all places with howling and lamentation, like 


‘desperate men; while some of them fall by the 


sword of the enemy, some of them flee toward 
Arabia, their goods, land, vineyards, &c., being left a 
spoil to the enemy.” See Vitringa. 

Verse 4. And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh— 
Two other Moabitish cities; of which see Num. 
xxi. 25, 26, and xxxii. 3, 37. Their voice shall be 
heard unto Jahaz—Another city in the utmost bor- 
ders of Moab. . The armed soldiers shall cry out— 
Even the warriors themselves, who should defend 
the state, shall lose all their spirit and courage, an 
join in the general lamentation and dismay: see 
Jer. xlviii. 34, 41. His life shall be grievous unto 
him—The Moabites shall generally long for death, 
to free them from those dreadful calamities which 
they perceive unavoidably coming upon them. 

Verse 5. My heart shall cry out for Moab—“ Hith- 
erto the prophet had set forth the lamentations of 
the Moabites, but, seeing these future evils, as it were, 
present to his own mind, he compassionates their 
griefs, and declares his own participation of their 
sorrows... His fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, &c. 
—The meaning of this clause is thought to be, His 
fugitives shall cry, so as they may be heard unto 
Zoar ; or, shall wander and cry as they go along the 

123 


Calamities to fall 


a 
ISAIAH. 


on the Moabites. 


6 For the waters Fof Nimrim shall 
be > desolate: for the hay is withered 
away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing. 


7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, 


and that which they have-laid up, shall they 
carry away to the © brook of the willows. 
8 For the ists is gone round about the borders 


of Moab, the howling thereof unto alee 


Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto 


Beer-elim. ' 

9 For the waters of Dimon shall be full of 
blood: for I will bring 7more upon Dimon, 
‘lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and 
upon the remnant of the land. 


k Num, xxxii. 36.——* Heb. desolations. 6 Or, valley 


of the Arabians. —’ Heb. additions. ——! 2 Kings xvii. 25. 


way, even till they come to Zoar.’ A heifer—Or, 
as a heifer as the words are translated Jer. xlviii. 
34; that is, they shall send forth their cries, by 
weeping and lamenting, like a heifer. “ Three 
years old, is mentioned only to denote a full-grown 
heifer, the lowing of which, naturalists have re- 
marked, is deeper and more affecting than that of the 
male.” Zoar was a town bordering upon Moab. 
By the mounting up of Luhith—It is not certain 
what place this was, but it.is evident enough that it 
was some elevated tract, or ascent, in the extremity 


of Moab. Horonaim was also a city of Moab, situated. 


probably in thedescent from Luhith. They shallraise 
up acry of destruction—Such a cry as men send 
forth when they are just falling into the pit of de- 
struction. He signifies that the ery should be uni- 
versal in all places where they’ should come, and 
reaching from one side of the country to the other. 
Verses 6-8. For the waters, &c.—The prophet, 
in these verses, sets forth the causes of lamentation 
among the inhabitants of the southern part of Moab. 
The first is the desolation of their fruitful fields, 
verse 6. The waters of Nimrim, or, the waterish, 
or well-watered grounds, shall be desolate—Such 
grounds, being very fruitful, are commonly most in- 
habited and cultivated ; but now they also, and much 
more the dry and barren grounds, should be desolate, 
and without \inhabitant. T'hat which they have laid 
up, &c.—Here we have a second cause of their 
grief: the property which they had acquired, and 
reserved for their future use, and that of their 
offspring, should be seized and carried away by the 
Assyrians their enemies. 7'o the brook of the witl- 
lows—Or, rather, to the valley of the willows, as 
Bishop Lowth translates it, that is, to Babylon: see 
note on Psalm cxxxyil. 2. The cry is gone round 
_about the borders, &c.—“ The prophet, contemplating 
with the most lively imagination the consternation 
of all Moab, as if present to his view, scarcely satis- 
fies himself in painting thescene. He repeats again 
the proposition, and supplies, by a general declara- 


tion, what he might seem not to have expressed with 
sufficient perfection before. He therefore declares, 
that this lamentation, of which he speaks, shall not 
be private, nor peculiar to one place, or to.a few, but 
common to all: and that the tempest shall not break 
upon this or that part of the country only, but shall 
afflict all Moab, every corner and boundary of it, and 
take in the whole land from. Eglaim to Beér-elim, 
two. cities in the extremities of Moab.”—Vitringa. 
Verse 9. For the waters of Dimon—This seems 
to be the same place with Dibon, mentioned verse 2; 
shall be full of blood—This is athird evil, and cause 
of lamentation; the great slaughter which the 
enemy should make of the people. For J will 
bring more upon Dimon—Hebrew, I will place, or 
lay upon Dimon, N23, accessions, or additions, 
that is, I will increase those waters by the torrents 
that shall flow into them from the blood of the slain. 
The expression is strong and elegant. Bishop 
Lowth, however, interprets the clause, “ Yet will I 
bring more evils upon Dimon,” that is, though the 
waters are full of blood, yet will I bring upon them 
further and greater evils. Lions upon him that es- 
capeth,of Moab, &c.—This is the fourth evil, the 
completion of all the rest, and the severest cause of 
their lamentation, that God would not even spare a 


remnant hereafter to restore and renew their fallen 


state; but would pursue them with his judgments 
to the last extremity, and send upon them, and on 
their desolate country, lions and other wild beasts, 
entirely to destroy all that remained. Vitringa, 
however, thinks that Nebuchadnezzar is pointed out 
in this clause ; who, after the. Moabites, reduced ex- 
tremely low by the ‘Assyrians, began to recruit them- 
selves, should give the remnant of the nation to 
destruction, and complete the judgment which the 
Assyrian had begun: see Jer. iv. 7, and y. 6, and 
xlviii. 40. The Chaldee paraphrast must have so 
understood it, translating the word, which we render 
lion, by king: A king with his army tu, destroy the 
Moabites. ) 


CHAPTER XVI. ; 
The Moabites are exhorted to submit to the kings of Judah, and show kindness to the banished Jews, 1-5. They are threat 


ened for their pride and arrogance, 6-8, The prophet bewails them, 9-11. 


124 


Their judgment, 12-14. 
3 


The distress of 


4. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Moab described. 


A. M. 3278: 


Setayae SEND “ye the lamb to the ruler 


of the land >from 1Sela? to the 
wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of 
Zion. 

2 For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird 
* cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab 
shall be at the fords of ° Ammon. 

3 *Take counsel, execute judgment; make 


thy shadow as the night in the midst A. M. 3278. 


s a B. C. 726. 
of the noon-day ; hide the outcasts ; : 


bewray not him that wandereth. 

4 Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; 
be thou a covert to them from the face of the 
spoiler: for the °extortioner is at an end, the 
spoiler ceaseth, *the oppressors are consumed 
out of the land. 


22 Kings iii, 4. 


b2Kings xiv. 7. 
Petra.— 


1 Heb, a rock.——? Or, 
+ Or, a nest forsaken. : 


¢Num, xxi. 13, 


6 Heb, 


4 Heb. bring. 5 Heb. wringer. 
the treaders down. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVI. 

Verses 1, 2. Send ye the lamb, &c.—The prophet 
continues his prophecy against Moab, and gives them 
counsel what to do to prevent, if possible, or at least 
to mitigate, the threatened judgment. First he ad- 
vises them to be just to the house of David, and to 


pay the tribute they had formerly covenanted to pay | 


to the kings of hisline. David, it must be recollected, 
had subdued the Moabites, and made them tributaries 
to him, 2 Sam. viii.2. Afterward they paid their 
tribute to the kings of Israel, 2 Kings iii. 4; which, 
it appears, was not less than 100;000 lambs annually. 
This it is likely had been discontinued, and neither 
paid to the kings of Israel nor those of Judah. Now 
it is thought the prophet here requires them to pay 
this tribute, or, at least, what, they had .covenanted 
with David to pay, to the king of Judah, who was 
now Hezekiah, that thereby they might at once do 
an‘act of neglected justice, and make him and the 
Jews their friends, which would be of great use. to 
them in their calamity. These verses therefore are 
thus paraphrased by Vitringa: “ Ye Moabites, who, 
subdued by David, and made tributary to his house 
and kingdom, have, with pride .and arrogance, 
shaken off his yoke: placate in time, and render 
propitious to you, the Jews, and their king, by 


sending those lambs, which you owe to them as a/| 


tribute. Send them from Sela, or Petra, (which 
was most celebrated for its flocks, 2 Kings xiv. 7,) 
toward the desert, the desert near Jericho, a medium 
place between Sela and mount Zion, Josh. v. 10.” 


Or, as the words may be rendered, from Sela, of, or, | 


in the wilderness. “ Pay this tribute, for it shall 
most certainly come to pass, that the daughters of 
the Moabites, like a wandering bird from a deserted 
nest, driven from their seats, must somewhere seek 
a place of safety in the great calamity which shall 
befall their nation. It is therefore now time to solicit 
the friendship of the Jews, and to remember the 
duty owing to them, but-so long omitted ; that when 
expelled from your own habitations, you may be re- 
ceived kindly by them, and dwell hospitably in their 
land, and under the shadow of their kings.” . Some, 
however, understand the prophet as advising them 
to send a lamb for a sacrifice unto God, the ruler 
of the land of the Moabites, as well as of that of the 
Jews; or the ruler of the earth, as 78 iscommonly 
rendered ; to him who is the God of the whole earth, 
as he is called, chap. liv.5.. Of all the kingdoms of 


your peace with God, by sacrifice, for all your inju- 
ries done to him and to his people. Zhe fords of 
Arnon was the border of the land of Moab, where 
their daughters are supposed to be with a design to 


flee out of their own land, though they knew not 


whither. 

Verses 3, 4. Take counsel, &e.—We have here 
the second counsel given to the Moabites, which 
“contains a complex of various offices, equity, jus- 
tice, humanity, to be exercised toward those of the 
Israelites whom the Assyrian affliction had driven, 
or should drive, to their borders and cities, and who 
should seek refuge among them: which'counsel is 
so given to the Moabites, by the prophet, as evident- 
ly to upbraid them for the fault of having neglected 
these offices; the pernicious consequences of which 
they were sure to feel in the ensuing calamities, if 
they altered not. so bad a practice.”—Dodd. Pve- 
cute judgment—Hebrew, 15°09 ‘wy, make a distinc- 
tion. The expression denotes that act of the mind 
whereby it “discriminates truth from falsehood, 
right from wrong;” as if he had said, “Consider 
what becomes you, what is your duty in this case; 
what ydu owe to exiles and outcasts, both by the 
laws of equity and reason, of humanity and brotherly 
love.” Make thy shadow as the night—Or, as the 
shadow of the night, large and dark, as the shadow 
of the earth is in the night-season. “ Afford my ex- 
iled and afflicted people, who shall flee to you for 
safety, a safe retreat, defence, and succour against 
the extreme, the noon-day heat of the sharp perse- 
cution which so heavily oppresses them.” The idea 
is taken from the comfort of a shady situation in 
those hot countries; and the metaphor is fully ex- 
plained in what follows. Vitringa is of opinion that 
the prophet here refers to the distress of the Reu- 
benites,, Gadites, and Manassites under 'Tiglath-pile- 
ser. But it is more probable that he refers to the 
distress which should be caused in Judah by Pekah 
and Rezin, in the days of Ahaz, (chap. ix. 1,) or that 
by the Assyrians, when Sennacheribcame up against 
the defenced cities of Judah, and took them, chap. 
xxxvi. 1; during which distresses, undoubtedly, many 
of the Jews sought shelter among the Moabites and 
other neighbouring nations. For the extortioner is 
at an end—Hebrew, yon ODS, the presser, wringer, 
or oppressor hath left off, or, as Bishop Lowth trans- 
lates it, is no more ; that is, shall shortly be destroy- 
ed, and my people shall ere long be restored, and 


the earth, chap. xxxvii. 16. ' As if he had said, Make || then thou wilt not lose the fruit of thy kindness 


125 


we. 


The desolations of 


A. M. 3278. 


5 And in mercy ‘shall the throne 
B. C. 726. 


be 7established ; and he shall sit upon 
it in truth in the tabernacle of David, ° judging, 
and seeking judgment, and hasting righteous- 
ness. 

6 We have heard of the ‘ pride of Moab; 
he is very proud: even of his haughtiness, ni 
his pride, and his wrath: & but his lies shall not 
be so. 

7 Therefore shall Moab ™howl for Moab, 
every one shall howl: for the foundations ‘ of 
Kir-hareseth shall ye 8 mourn ; weely they are 
stricken. 

8 For *the fields of Heshbon languish, and 
1the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen 
have broken down the principal plants thereof, 
they are come even unto Jazer, they wan- 


ISATAH. 


dered through the wilderness: 


Moab described. 


her A. M. 3278. 
branches are ° stretched out, they are x 
gone over the sea. 

9 'Therefore ™ I will bewail with the weeping 
of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee 
with my tears," O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for 
10 the shouting for thy summer-fruits -_ for thy 
harvest is fallen. 

10 And ° gladness is taken: away, and joy out 
of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards 
there shall be no ees neither shall there be 
shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine 
in their presses; I have made their vintage- 
shouting to cease. . 

11 Wherefore ? my bowels shall sound like 
a harp for Moab, wise mine’ inward parts for 
Kir-haresh. 


4 Dan..vii. 14,27; Mic. iv. i; Luke i. 33. 7 Or, prepared. 
¢ Psa. Ixxii. 2; xevi. 13; xcviii~-9.— Jer. xlviii. 29, : Teh. 
ii. 10.—8 Chap. xxvili. 15.—— Jer. xiviii. 20.—i 2 Rings 
iii. 25. ——8 Or, mutter. 


The bishop renders the next two clauses, ‘The de- 
stroyer ceaseth, he that trampled under foot is perish- 
ed from the land.” The present tense is put for the 
future, as it often is in prophecies. Thus “the pro- 
phet supports his counsel by a reason, the sum of 
which is, that oppression should cease, the spoilers’ 
of the earth be cut off, and the throne of clemency 
and grace established, on which a king of righteous- 
ness and equity should sit.” 

Verse 5. And in mercy—By my.mercy. I am 
now punishing their sins, yet I will deliver them for 
my Own mercy’s sake. The throne shall be estab- 
lished—The kingdom of Judah. He—Their king; 
shall sit upon it in truth—That is,. firmly and con- 
stantly ; for truth is often put for the stability and 
certainty of a thing; as 2 Chron. xxxii. 1; Prov. xi. 
18. In the tabernacle of David—tin the house, or 


palace, which is called a tent, or tabernacle, with) 


respect to the unsettledness of David’s house, which 
now indeed was more like a tabernacle than a strong 
palace. Seeking judgment—Searching out the truth 
of things with care and diligence; and hasting 
righteousness—Neither denying nor yet delaying 
justice. Interpreters vary greatly-concerning the’ 
application of this, passage. Some refer it entirely 
to Hezekiah, a pious and just king, whose throne, 

after the chastisement of Sennacherib in Judea, was 
established in glory ; others refer it immediately to 
the Messiah; and others again to both: to Hezekiah 
as the type, and to the Messiah, in a more sublime 
sense, as the antitype; and this seems to be nearly 
the opinion of Vitringa, who thinks that while the 
prophet was speaking of the advantages of the king- 
dom of Hezekiah, he was carried forward to a con- 
templation of the kingdom of Christ, and made use 
of such phrases as, in their full extent, can only be | 
applied to that kingdom. 

Verses 6,7. We have heard of the pride of Moab, 
126 


k Chap. xxiv..7.——! Verse 9.——*® Or, plucked 


te wom fe. 
| xlyiii. 32. 2 Chap. xv. 4.——”® Or, thagianle fallen , de. 
© Chap. xxiv. 8; Jer. xlviii, 33.——P ‘Chap. xv. 5; Ixiii. j Jer. 


xlvili. 36. 


&c.—The prophet, having spakent to the Moab- 
ites, now turns his speech. to God’s people. The 
sense is, I do not expect that my counsels will have 
any good effect upon Moab; they will still carry 
themselves insolently and outrageously. Jiis lies 
shall not be so——His vain imaginations, and false and 
crafty counsels, ‘shall not take effect.  T'hereforé 
shall Moab howl for Moab—One Moabite shall how! 
or lament to or for another; for the a of 
Kir-hareseth—An ancient and eminent city of Mo 
called Kir, chap. xv. 1, and Kir-haresh, verse 11, which 
was preserved when their other cities were ruined, 
and therefore the destruction of it was more lament- 
ed. . Surely they are stricken—-Or broken, over 
thrown or destroyed... > 

Verses 8-10. The fields of Heshbon languish— 
Either for want of rain, or, rather, because no men 
should be left to till and manure them. And the 
vine of Sibmah—These vines and those of Heshbon 
were greatly celebrated, and held in high repute 
with all the great men and princes of that and the 
neighbouring countries, and were propagated from 
thence, not only over all the country of Moab, but 
to the sea of Sodom; yea, scions of them, as is sig- 
nified in the last clause of this verse, were sent 
even beyond the sea into foreign countries: but the 
prophet here foretels, that the lords of the heathen— 
That is, the Assyrians or Chaldeans, the great rulers 
of the eastern nations, would soon destroy them, and 
all other productions of the land; and-then their 
shouting and singing for the vintage or harvest would 
utterly cease, as is expressed verses 9, 10. 

Verses 11, 12. Wherefore my bowels shall sound 
as a harp—Through compassion. In excessive 
grief, the bowels are sometimes rolled together, so as 
to make an audible noise. Hereby he signifies the 
"greatness of their approaching calamity, which, be- 
ing so grievous to him, must needs be intolerable to 

3 


Divine judgments 


CHAPTER XVII. 


= - rd 


against Damascus. 


A.-M. 3278. 


eet, 2 12 And it shall come to pass, when 


it is seen that Moab is weary on “the 
high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary 
to pray ; but he shall not prevail. 

13 This is the word that the Lorp hath 
spoken concerning Moab since that time. 


4 Chap. xv. 2. * Chap. xxi. 16. 


14 But now the Lorp hath spo- A. M, 3278 

: ers B: C. 726. 

ken, saying, Within three years, as ———— 

the years of a hireling, and the glory of Mo- 

ab shall be contemned, with all that great mul- 

titude; and the remnant shall be very small 
and \* feeble. 


11 Or, not many. 


them. And when it is seen that Moab is weary; 
&e—When it shall appear to them and others, that 
all their other devotions are vain and ineffectual; he 
shall come to his sanctuary to pray—To the temple 
of his great god Chemosh; but he shall not prevail 
—His god can neither hear nor help him. In other 
words, the Moabites, “as their last efforts, shall go to 
their altars, there to perform their sacred rites to ap- 
pease the anger of their deity: but, wearied’ here- 
with, they shall enter into some more sacred and 
celebrated sanctuary of their god, to pour forth their 
earnest supplications and prayers, but shall obtain 
nothing; thus proving the vanity of their supersti- 
tion, and the imbecility of those false deities on 
whom they trusted.” 

Verses 13, 14.. This is the word that the Lord 
hath spoken—This prophecy, hitherto related ; since 
that time—Since the beginning of God’s revelation 
to me concerning Moab hitherto; or, rather, a good 
while ago, for so the Hebrew, 18D, meaz, signifies, 
chap. xliv. 8, and elsewhere. This judgment, says 
the prophet, was denounced against Moab in former 
times, particularly by Amos, (chap. ii. 1,) and is now 
confirmed, and the particular time specified when it 
shall be accomplished. For now the Lord hath 
spoken—Hath made this further discovery of his 
mind to me; saying, Within. three years—To be 
computed, it seems, from the time of the delivery of 
this prophecy; as the years of a hireling—That is, 
within three years precisely counted; for hirelings 


are very punctual in observing the time for which 
they are hired; and the glory of Moab shall be con- © 
temned—Their strength, and wealth, and other things 
in which they glory, shall be made contemptible to 
those who formerly admired ‘them; with all that 
great multittude—With the great numbers of their 
people, of which they boasted. And the remnant 
shall be very sinall and feeble—Comparatively to 
what they were before. Vitringa is of opinion, that 
this prophecy was delivered at the same time with 
that preceding, that is, in the year when Ahaz died, 
at which time the Israelites, as well as the Jews, 
stood much in need of the kindness of the Moabites ; 
so that it had its completion in the third year of King 
Hezekiah, namely, from the death of his father, 
which was really the fourth year of his reign, 
when Shalmaneser, coming against the Ephraimites, 
on a’sudden attacked the Moabites, and plundered 
and destroyed their cities: see 2 Kings xviii.9._ This 
is also Bishop Lowth’s opinion, as has been stated in 
the note on chap. xv. 1. It may, however, be under- 
stood of some other great blow given to the Moab- 
ites; perhaps by Sennacherib, or by his son Esar- 
haddon; (in which case Isaiah must have delivered 
this prophecy some years later;) from which blow, 
notwithstanding, they in a little time recovered them- 
selves, and flourished again, and continued so to do, 
till Nebuchadnezzar completed their destruction ac- 
cording to the prophecy of Jeremiah, chapter xlviii. 
1, &c. 


CHAPTER XVII. ; 


Damascus, Samaria, Israel, and their-cities, to be ruined by the Assyrians, 1-5. A remnant shall consider and repent, 6-8. 


The rest plagued for their impiety, 9-11. 


A. M. 3263. 


THE *burden of Damascus. Be- 
B. C. 741. 


hold, Damascus is taken away 


The wo of Israel's enemies, 12-14. 
from being a city, and it shall be Ae ME S268. 
a ruinous heap. pinata 


- a Jer. xlix. 23; Amos i. 3; 


Zech. ix.1; 2 Kings xvi. 9. 


——— + 


SS 


’ NOTES ON CHAPTER XVII. 

Verse 1. The burdenof Damascus—Both of that 
city and kingdom. But though “this prophecy, by 
its title, should relate only to Damascus, it full as 


much concerns, and more largely treats of, the king- | 


probably soon after the prophecies of the seventh 
and eighth chapters, in the beginning of the reign 
of Ahaz. And it was fulfilled by Tiglath-pileser’s 
taking Damascus, and carrying the people captives 
to Kir, (2 Kings xvi. 9,) and overrunning great part 


dom of Samaria and the Israclites, confederated || of the kingdom of Israel, and carrying a great num- 
with Damascus and the Syrians against the kingdom '\ber.of the Israelites also captives to Assyria: and 
of Judah.” It is the fourth discourse of the second | still more fully in regard to Israel, by the conquest 


book of Isaiah’s prophecies, and “was delivered of the kingdom, and the captivity of the people, 
3) 127 . 


ISAIAH. 


and their good effects. 


The divine judgments 
A.M. 3263. 2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken : 


BLO. 741. they shall be for flocks, which shall 


lie down, and none shall make them afraid. 

3 ° The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, 
and the kingdom from Damascus, and the 
remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory 
of the children of ‘Israel, saith the Lorp of 
hosts. 

4 And in that day it shall come to pass, that 
the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and “the 
fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. 

5 * And it shall be as when the harvest-man 


gathereth the corn, and reapeth the A. M. toy 
ears with his arm; and it shall be as he 
that gathereth ears in the valley of ie: 

6 Jf Yet gleaning-grapes shall be 3g © 74. 
left in it, as the shaking of an olive- 
tree, two or three berries in. the top of the up- 
permost bough, four or five in the outmost 
fruitful branches thereof, saith the Lorp God 

of Israel. 

7. At that day shall a man £ look to his , Maker, 
and his eyes shall have, respect to the Holy 
One of Israel. 


b Jer, vii. 33. 


¢ Chap. vii. 16; viii. 4——4 Chap. x. 16. 


iz 


: ee 
e Jer. li. 33, Chap. xxiv. 13.——8 Mice. vil. 7. 


effected .a few years after by Shalmaneser:” see 
2 Kings xvii.3,and Bishop Lowth. Behold Damas- 
_cus is taken away from being a city—It was, how- 
ever, afterward rebuilt, and prophesied against by 
Jeremiah, (chap. xlix. 23,) and by Zechariah, chap. 
1x, 1. 

Verse 2. The cities of Aroer are forsaken— 
“What has Aroer,” says Bishop Lowth, “on the 
river Arnon, (see Deut. ii. 36,) to do with Damascus ” 
He therefore follows. the LXX., (who, he supposes, 
for Wy, Aroer, read 1) *7y, el¢ Tov atwva,) and. ren- 
ders the clause, The cities are deserted for ever. 
Grotius, however, thinks the present reading of the 
Hebrew text is-right, and that this Aroer was a tract 
of ground in Syria, (a valley, say some, which lay 
between the mountains of Libanus and Anti-Liba- 
nus,) and not that Aroer which was on the confines 
of Moab and Ammon, and part of the possession of 
the Reubenites and Gadites. But as Tiglath-pileser 
carried. the Reubenites and Gadites into eaptivity, 
(see 1 Chron. v. 26,) and made the country, which 
they had possessed, desolate, why may not the very 
Aroer, which was on the "confines of Moab, be 
meant, and mentioned here, as Ephraim is in the 
next verse, as being confeder ate with Syria against 
Judah ? And none shall make them afraid—Beeause 
the land shall be desolate, and destitute of men who 
might disturb them. 

Verses 3-6. T'he Sortr ess also shall cease from 
Ephraim—The meaning may be, that Damaseus 
being destroyed, that fortress or protection, in which 
the Ephraimites had placed their confidence, should 
be taken ; or, that at what time Damascus should be 
overthrown, and deprived of all government and 
power, the Ephraimites also should be weakened, 
and deprived of their chief fortresses by the Assyr- 
ians; which latter seems to be the true- sense: see 
Hos. x. 14; Mic. i.6. The reader will observe, the 
Syrians of Damascus bordered upon the Ephraim- 
ites; and though they had long lived in a state of 
hostility with them, yet their King Rezin, on receiv- 
ing some injuries from Uzziah, king of Judah, had 
found means to unite them with him in an expedition 
against Jerusalem. As the design of that expedition 
was wholly frustrated, (see chap. vii. 3-9,) so it has- 
fened the destruction ‘of both those nations: for the 

128 


Assyrians, who were called in by Ahaz to his help, 
and who had a long time threatened Syria, took this 
occasion to seize and, destroy Damascus, and trans- 
port the’ Damascene Syrians .to Assyria and Media, 
which same fate, partly at the same time, and partly - 
a little after, befell the Ephraimites also; a common 
cause involving these nations inacommon calamity. 
In that day, the glory of Jacob shall be made thin 
—Hebrew, 94°, attenuabitur, shall be diminished, 
emptied, or exhausted. Andthe fatness of his flesh 
shall wax lean—Their principal citizens shall/be 
spoiled of their dignity and wealth, and carried, with 
their property, into Assyria. And it shall be as 
when a harvest-man gathereth the corn—Taking 
care, as far as may be, that all be gathered in, and 
nothing left. So shall the whole body of the ten 
tribes be carried captive, some few gleanings only 
being left of them as it is in harvest. As he that 
gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim—A very 
fruitful place near Jerusalem. Thus “the prophet 
explains the judgment upon Ephraim by two similes, 
and both. elegant; the first taken from a beautiful 
body reduced by a consumption, meaning that their 
state should be deprived, not only of its chief citizens, 
.but of all its power, wealth, and honour ; that what- 
ever it formerly possessed, which gave excellence 
and beauty, should entirely waste away and be con- 
sumed. The second simile is taken from the auttm- 
nal gathering in of fruits, or from that fertile harvest, 
whether of corn, wine, or oil, which used to be 
gathered in the valley of Rephaim.” Yet gleaning 
grapes shall be left in it, &c—* Whereas the 
reapers are wont to leave a few ears of corn, and 
those that gather grapes and olives, a few of the 
worst bunches of the grapes, and of the worst ber- 
ries of the olives, so, from the harvest, which the 
Assyrian should reap in Ephraim, a few men, and 
those of the least consequence, should be left as a 
remnant in the land.” This accordingly came to 
pass: some few Israelites were left after their cap- 
tivity, who joined themselves to Judah, and were 
carried captive to Babylon with them, from whence 
also they returned with them. 

Verses 7, 8. At that day shall a man—Those few 
men that are left; look to his Maker—They shall 
sincerely respect, trust in, and worship God, and 

oy = 


The wo of 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Sg ' Israel’s enemies. 


A. M. 3263. 8 And he shall not look to the al- 

~ tars, the work of his hands, neither 
shall respect that which his fingers have made, 
either the groves or the ! images. 

9 4 In that day shall his strong cities be asa 
forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, 
which they left because of the children of Israel : 
and there shall be desolation. 

10 Because thou hast forgotten "the God of 
thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the 
Rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant 


pleasant plants, and shalt set it with ery 
strange slips : ei ed 

11 in the day shalt thou ind ice thy plant to 
grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy 
seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be 2a 
heap in the day.of grief and of desperate 
sorrow. 

12 % Wo to the * multitude of many people, 
which make a noise ‘like the noise of the seas ; 
and to the rushing’ of nations, that make a 
rushing like the-rushing of ‘ mighty waters ! 


SS 
2 Or, sun-images. h Psa. Ixviii. 19. 2 Or, removed in the day 
of inheritance, and there shall be deadly sorrow. 


3 Or, noise. 


i Jer. vi. 23.——* Or, many. 


God only. In other words, at that time, when God 
shall execute these severe judgments upon the 
Ephraimites, some, being fully convinced by expe- 
rience that ‘they had been deceived by their false 
prophets, and that their worship of idols had turned 


out as the true prophets, foretold, shall turn. them-, 


selves, by sincere repentance, to the God of their 
fathers, and, renouncing the errors of former times, 
and all their sins,shall worship and' serve him in 
true faith and obedience. 

‘Verse 9. In that day—The day of Jacob’s teas 4nd 
of which he spake, verse 4; shall his strong cities 
be as a forsaken bough—The cities belonging to the 
ten tribes shall stand solitary and destitute of inhab- 
itants, all the country about them being destroyed; 
and an uppermost branch, which they left because 
of the children of Israel—* The sense,” says Lowth, 
“is here imperfect: most expositors understand the 


words of the Assyrians, that they left some cities | 


with a few inhabitants in the kingdom of Israel, that 
a remnant of that people might be preserved: see 
verse §. But the copy which the LXX. followed, 
instead of the Hebrew words, YAN) WINN, hacho- 
resh vehaamir, that is, bough and uppermost branch, 
must have read NM) INN, hachivi vehaemori, the 
Hivites and Amorites: for they translate the verse 
thus: Thy cities shall be forsaken, as when the 
Hivitcs and Amorites forsook them, because of the 
children of Israel. Which reading gives a plain 
and full sense to the text.” Thus also his son, 
Bishop Lowth: “The translation of the LXX has 
happily preserved what seems to be the true reading 
of the text, as it stood in the copies of their time. 
And it is remarkable, that many commentators, who 
never thought of admitting the reading of the LXX., 
yet understand the passage as referring to that very 


event, which their version expresses: so that, it is. 
plain, nothing can be more suitable to the context.” 


Thus understood, the prophet’s words were calcu- 
lated to awaken the Israelites to a serious belief of 
this threatening, as they reminded them that God 
had inflicted the same judgment upon the Canaan- 
ites, and for the same sins of which they were 
guilty: and therefore: gave them reason to appre- 
hend, according to the prediction of Moses, that as 
they committed the same abominations, the land 
Vo. III. (9) 


e 


would spew them out as it spewed out the nations 
which were before them. 
Verses 10, 11. Because thou, O Israel, hast for- 


| gotten the God of ‘thy salvation—TWat God, who 


was thy only sure defence ; therefore shalt thou plant 
pleasant plants—Fetched from far countries, and 
therefore highly esteemed. 'The sense is, Thou shalt 
use much industry and cost, but to no purpose, as it 
follows. In the day shalt thou make thy plant to 


|| grow, &c.—Beginning early in the morning, thou 


shalt, from day to day, use all care and diligence, 
that what thou hast planted and sown may thrive ; 
but the harvest shall be a heap, &c.—But in the 
time of your grief, or when this grievous calamity 
shall come, all your harvest shall be but one heap, 
very inconsiderabie in itself, and easily carried away 
by your enemies: in other words, “when thou ex- 
pectest to reap the fruit of thy labours, thou shalt 
find nothing but loss and disappointment.”—Lowth. 
See the margin, where the day of inheritance 
means the time of enjoying anything which we 
have taken pains for. 

Verses 12-14. Wo, &c.—“ We have here the third 
member of this prophetic discourse, and the first 
part of the section concerning the unexpected over- 
throw of the Assyrians. After the prophet had 
exhibited the divine judgments upon the Syrians, 
(verses 1-3,) and upon the Ephraimites, (verses 4+11,) 
he immediately beholds the Assyrians themselves, 
after they had destroyed both those states, (that is, 
eight years after,) advancing against the Jews, that 
they might oppress and subject to them their state 
also. But, at the same time, he sees their grievous 
and sudden fall, that is, the fall of Sennacherib; for 
almost all ancient and modern interpreters are agreed 
that this prophecy refers to him.” Wo to the multi- 
tude of many people—Combined against Judah, 
namely, the Assyrians, whose army consisted of vast 
numbers, and of men of several nations. “Which 
make a noise like the noise of the seas—Which in- 
vade my land and people with great force and fury, 
as the sea assaults the shore, or pours itself upon the 
land, when it has made a breach in the banks which 
béfore confined it. And to the rushing of natio 
Hebrew, Co°2Nd p Nw, twmultuatio populorum, the 


| noise, rage, and impetuous fury of the people of dif, 


129 3 


ory 


i al 7 ., — 


The land shadowing 


» ISAIAH. 


% Os! ae 


with wings threatened. 


ail 


x a. Re. 13 The nations shall. rush like the 

‘rushing of many waters: but God 
shall * rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, 
and ‘shall be chased as the chaff of the 


mountains before the wind, and like 5a 


k Psa. ix. 5.——! Psa. Ixxxiii. 13; Hos,xiii. 3. 


rolling thing before the whirlwind. ‘Aol, 6%. 
14 And behold at evening-tide ———— 
trouble; and before the morning ~he is not. 
This zs the portion of them that spoil 7 and 


the lot of them that rob us. 


5 Or, thistle-down. 


ferent countries united in one mighty overwhelming 
army. Bishop Lowth translates the clause, And to 
the roaring of the nations, who make a roaring like 
the roaring of mighty waters. Like the roaring 
of mighty waters do the nations roar... And he ob- 
serves that, “though this simile is taken from a com- 
mon appearance, it is wrought up with such an 
elegant boldness and inexpressible propriety, that 
we are at a loss whether we should admire most the 
judgment or sublimity of the sacred writer.” But 
God shall rebuke them—Not in words, but in deeds; 
shall discomfit and overthrow them. But the He- 
brew, 03) 12 13), should rather be rendered, But 
God rebukes him, and he flees from far, namely, 
Sennacherib, who is here immediately pointed out, 
one hundred and eighty-five thousand of his army 
being smitten with instantaneous death. The pro- 
phet’s idea seems to have been taken from God’s 
rebuke of the sea, when the ‘Israelites passed 
through out of Egypt. And they shall_be chased as 
the chaff of the mountains—The Jews used to thrash 
and winnow their corn on hills and places exposed 
to the wind, ‘which dispersed and blew away the 
chaff; and like a rolling thing—Which is moved by 
the slightest touch, and much more by a violent wind. 
The word, which is 5353, is rendered thistle-down in 
the margin, and gossamer, which is the down of any 
plants, by Bishop Lowth. The metaphor shows 


with what ease God overcomes his enemies. And 
behold at even-tide trouble+Great terror and con- 
sternation among. God’s. people for fear of their 
enemies; and before the morning he is not—Their 
enemies are cut off by the hand of God: The pro- 
phet here evidently “alludes to the time and cireum- 
stances of the judgment which was inflicted on the 
Assyrian by night, and indeed in one night. At 
even-tide the Jews were certainly in great terror, 
perplexity, and perturbation, when besieged by the 


-Assyrians: in the morning, behold ‘these their ene- 


mies were all dead corpses. Such is the sudden 
and unexpected deliverance which God sometimes 
grants to his people, when their enemies are ready 
to devour them: weeping may endure for a night, 
but joy cometh in the morning. This is the portion 
of them that spoil us, &c.—This is a triumphant 
conclusion, uttered by the prophet in the name of 
God’s people. “It holds good in all ages of the 
church; none can endeavour to remove this stone 
from its place, but they will find hurt to themselves, 
Zech. xii. 3. In this one example we see the fall of 
all the great empires and kingdoms of the world 
which oppose the kingdom of Christ, and the event 
of all the attempts of Satan tending to its destruc- 
tion : ‘in the evening, confusion; in the morning, 
serenity, arising by divine grace on the church. - | See 
Vitringa.. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


The Signa contained in this chapter, says Bishop Lowth, “is one of the most obscure ‘in the whole book of Isaiah. The 
subject of it, the end and design. of it, the people to whom it is addressed, the history to which it belongs, the person who 
sends the messengers, and the nation to whom the messengers are sent, are all obscure and doubtful. ” Hence, as may 
be easily supposed, this prophecy has been. very differently interpreted by learned mén, with whose discordant opinions, 
however, we shall not trouble the reader; but rather shall lay before him that exposition which seems to be attended with the 


Fewest difficulties, and therefore to be most probable. 


Vitringa, who has bestowed much labour wpon it, considers it as 


being closely connected with the preceding prophecy concerning the destruction.of the Assyrian army, of which ‘he thinks, it 
contains an enarration. Accor ding to him, we have a description of Egypt, 1,2. A command to send messengers to them, 
as also to other nations, to inform them concerning this great work of divine sot to be effected on the Assyrian power, 


3-6. The glory that would hereby redound to God, 7. 


A. M. 3290. O *to the land shadowing with 
B.C. 714. 

a wings, which 4s beyond the 
rivers of Ethiopia: 


a 
St ——s S68 _ = 


“ “a Chap. xx. 4, 5; Ezek. xxx. 


2 That sendeth srabialaetiogs by the a os soo 
sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon = 
the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, 


4, 5,9; Zeph. ii. 12; iii. 10. 


NOTES ON*CHAPTER XVIII. 


Verse 1. Wo to the land--Or, rather, as Bishop 
Lowth renders it, and as the particle Wn, here used, 
pouty means, chap. lv. 1, and elsewhere, Ho! 


Z 130 
e 2 


— 


to the land. The words seem evidently to contain 
an address to the land here meant, which is supposed 
to be Egypt, because of the attributes under which 
it is spoken, of. Ist, It is said to be shadowing, or 
(hae 


4 


The land shadowing 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


ar ‘ 


with wings threatened 


A. M. 3290. to, a nation | scattered and 


B.C. 714. peek 


ed, to a people terrible from their 


beginning hitherto’; 7a °* nation meted ‘ Ms 3290. 
O74. 
out and trodden down, * whose pete 


» Verse 7.——! Or, outspread and polished.——* Or, a nation that 
‘ meteth out, and treadeth down.. : 


3 Hebrew, a nation’ of line, line, and treading under foot.——* Or, 
whose land the rivers despise. _ 


shadowed with wings, a description which, it is 
thought, agrees to Egypt, as connected with Ethiopia, 
because it is situated between two mountains on the 
eastern and western side of the Nile, which, as it 
were, overshadow it, especially where it is most nar- 
row, toward Ethiopia, and which unfold themselves 
moré and more in the manner of two wings, from 
the south toward the north. Thus Vitringa inter- 


prets the first member of the prophet’s description. | 


But the Hebrew word, which our translators render 
shadowing, properly signifies a sort of timbrel, call- 
ed in Latin sistrwm, which was an instrument of 
music peculiar to the Egyptians in their sacrifices to 
Isis; and the two words here used, (7533 yx, 


tziltzal kenaphim, are interpreted by some, a wing-, 


ed timbrel_ or cymbal, which is an exact description 
of.the Egyptian sistrum, and therefore is supposed 
to be made use of here as a distinguishing epithet of 
Egypt, termed the land of the winged timbrel, or 
cymbal. This interpretation is adopted by Bishop 
Lowth and many others. Both interpretations agree 
in this, that;)Egypt is the land intended; which is 
still more manifest from the second attribute. men- 
tioned as descriptive of it, that it is beyond, or rather 
borders upon, the rivers of Ethiopia, the word 137, 
signifying either on this side, or on the further side. 
The word wi, chush, here rendered Ethiopia, some- 
times signifies Arabia, and some interpreters think 
some rivers. of a part of Arabia are meant, beyond 
which Egypt lay; but Vitringa, Bishop Lowth, and 
many others, understand the prophet as speaking of 
the Nile, and some great and celebrated rivers which 
flow into it from Ethiopia, and very much increase 
its waters. It is probable, that either the eastern 
branches of the lower Nile, the boundary of Egypt 
toward Arabia, are intended, or the parts of the up- 
per Nile’ toward Ethiopia. It is thought the prophet 
the rather denominates Egypt from this epithet, 
because at this time it was under the power of the 
Ethiopians. 

Verse 2. That sendeth ambassadors by sea—That 
is accustomed to send, or at this time is sending, am- 
bassadors to strengthen themselves with leagues and 
alliances, or to encourage their confederates ; in 
vessels of bulrushes upon the waters—This circum- 
stance agrees perfectly well with Egypt; Pliny, 
Lucan, Diodorus Siculus, and Strabo, all affirming 
that the Egyptians commonly used on the Nile a 
light sort of ships, or boats, made of the reed papy- 
rus. Go, ye swift messengers—“To this nation 
before mentioned, who, by the Nile, and by their 
numerous canals, have the means of spreading the 
report, in the most expeditious manner, through the 
whole country; go and carry this notice of God’s 
designs in regard to them. By the swift messengers 
are meant, not any particular persons specially ap- 
pointed to this office, but,any of the usual conveyers 

3 


} 


of news whatsoever ; travellers, merchants, and the 
like, the instruments and agents of common fame; 
these are ordered to publish this declaration, made 
by the prophet, throughout Egypt, and to excite their 
attention to the promised visible interposition of 
Providence.” \Thus Bishop Lowth; who further 
says, “I suppose that this prophecy was delivered 
before Sennacherib’s return from his Egyptian ex- 
pedition, which took up three years; and that it was 
designed to give to the Jews, and. perhaps likewise 
to the Egyptians, an intimation of God’s counsels in 
regard to the destruction of their great and powerful 
enemy.” To a nation scattered—Or stretched out, 


jas many translate wisn. “ Egypt, that is, the fruit- 


ful part of it, exclusive of the deserts on each side, 
is one long vale, through the middle of which runs 
the Nile, bounded on each side to the east and west 
by’a chain of mountains, seven hundred and fifty 
miles in length, in breadth, from one to two or three 
days’ journey : even at the widest part of the Delta, 
from Pelusium to'Alexandria, not above two hundred 
and fifty miles broad.” And peeled—Or rather smooth- 
ed, as 0110) may be rendered. This, Bishop Lowth 
thinks, “either relates to the practice of the Egyp- 
tian priests, who made’ their bodies smooth by shay- 
ing off the hair; or, rather, to the country’s being 
made smooth, perfectly'plain and level, by the over- 
flowing of the Nile.” Terrible:from the beginning 
hitherto—This also well suits the Egyptians, whose 
kingdom was one of the most ancient, and continued 
long to be extremely formidable. And they were 
wont to boast extravagantly of the antiquity and 
greatness of their kingdom, asserting that gods were 
their first kings, and then’demi-gods, and lastly men. 
A nation meted out and trodden down—Hebrew, 
70131 1p 1p °11,-a nation of line, line, and treading 
down. ‘See the margin. - The prophet is here gene- 
rally supposed to refer, Ist, To the necessity which 
the Egyptians were frequently under of having re- 
course to mensuration, in order to determine the 
boundaries of their lands, after the inundations of the 
Nile; which is thought by some to have given birth to 
the science of geometry ; (Strabo, lib. 17;) and, 2d, 
To a peculiar method of tillage in use among them. 
“Both Herodotus and Diodorus say, that when the 
Nile had retired within its banks, and the ground 
became somewhat dry, they sowed their land, and 
then sent in their cattle to tread in the seed; and 
without any further care expected the harvest.” 
Whose land the rivers have spoiled—The word 
wxt2, here used, may either be rendered spoiled, or 
despised. It.seems plainly to relate to the over- 
flowing of the Nile ; which, as it were, claims Egypt 
to itself, while it overwhelms with its waters the 
whole land, except the cities and towns, secured by 
the banks raised about them. It is true, this over- + 
flow is rather an advantage than a ce 
: 131 


a 7 " 


- 


7" 


O 
,» > See 
ee, ‘7 i » 


God’s interposition in 


the rivers have _ spoiled! 
3. All ye inhabitants of the world, 
and dwellers on the earth, see ye,° when he 
lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and 
when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye. 

4 For so the Lorp said unto me, I will 
take my rest, and I will ®consider in my 
dwelling-place like a clear heat ® upon herbs, 
and like a cloud of dew in the heat of har- 
vest. 

5 For afore the harvest, when the bud is 
perfect, and the sour gtape is ripening in the 
flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs: with 


A. M. 3290. land 
B. C. 714. 


© Chapter v. 26.— Or, regard my set dwelling. — Or, after 
rain. 


Ss 


the land, as it renders it fruitful; nevertheless it puts 
the inhabitants to very great inconveniences during 
its continuance. 


Verse 3. All ye inhabitants of the world, §c., see 


ye—Take notice of what I say, and what ‘God will 
do: Or, Ye shall see. “We have here the declara- 
tion made to the other people of the world, to expect 
the fall of the Assyrian. God invites all the people 
of the earth to this sight ; that, as soon as they should 
observe the sign appointed by God, namely, the 
standards lifted up by Sennacherib, on the moun- 
tains of Judea, and the sound of the trumpets of the 
hostile army preparing to besiege Jerusalem, they 
should attend to the execution of this divine judg- 
ment.”—Vitringa. 

» Verse 4. For so the Lord said unto me—That is, 
revealed this thing to me from his secret. purposes; 
Twill take my rest—While the ‘Assyrian is forming 
designs for the destruction of my people, I will seem 
to rest, as if I had no regard for their preservation. 
The reader will observe,-God is said in Scripture to 
rest, or sit still, when he does not work on the behalf 
of a person or people ; as, on the contrary, he is said 
to bestir himself when he acts for them. And I will 
consider in my dwelling-place—Namely, in the 
heavens, what time will be most proper for the.exe- 
cution of my purpose upon these proud blasphemers 
of my name, and persecutors of my people. This 
is spoken after the manner of men. Like a clear 
heat upon herbs, &c.—The meaning of. these meta- 
phorical expressions is, that God would not so rest 
as to lay aside all care and regard for his people ;.but 
that he rested with the best and most benevolent 
purpose of comforting them after this affliction, and 
of giving them refreshment, like that of a serene 
heat after a heavy rain, ora cloud of dew in the time 
of harvest. 

_ Verse 5. For afore the harvest—Here the Lord 
informs his people how he would act toward. those 
of their adversaries, for whom he had prepared this 
great slaughter. He compares them to a vine, 
which, after it hath sent forth its buds, then its 

132 


ISAIAH. 


e; sz 


” favour of his people. 


pruning-hooks, and take away and A. M, 3290. 
B, C. 714. 
cut down the branches. aneenneeianeas 
6 They shall be left together unto the fowls 
of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth : 
and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all 
the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. 
_ % % In that time ‘shall the present be brought 
unto the Lorp of hosts of a people ‘scattered 
and peeled, and from a people tertible from 
their beginning hitherto; a nation_meted out 
and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers 
have spoiled, to the place of the name of the 
Lorp of hosts, the mount Zion. 


4 Psalm Ixviii. 31; Ixxii. 10 ; Chapter xvi. 1; Zeph. iii. 10; 
Mal. i. 11. —~" Or, outspread and polished, verse 2. 


flowers, and the flowers the sour grapes, which too 
were beginning to ripen, is suddenly stripped of its 
shoots and branches by the pruning-hook of the 
vine-dresser, who leaves them, burdened with grapes, 
a prey to the fowls of heaven, and the beasts-of the 
earth. By which allegory, continued’ through this 
and the sixth verse, the prophet means, that, when 
every thing respecting the Assyrians was in the 
most promising situation, when Sennacherib’s great 
designs seemed almost ‘mature, and. just ready to 
be crowned. with success, his mighty efforts should 
be in a moment. frustrated, his vast expectations 
rendered abortive, and the chief part of his immense 
army-made a prey to the beasts and birds. 

Verse 7. In that time—After the execution of this 
signal judgment; shall the present be brought unto 
the Lord, &c.—Here the prophet foretels that Egypt, 
being delivered from the oppression of the Assyrian, 
and ‘avenged, by the hand of God, of the wrongs 
which-she had suffered, should return thanks for the 
wonderful deliverance, both of herself and of the 
Jews, from this most powerful adversary. “The 
Egyptians,” it must be observed, “were in alliance 
with the kingdom of Judah, and were fellow-sufferers 
with the Jews, under the invasion of the common 
enemy Sennacherib; and so were very nearly in- 
terested in the great and miraculous deliverance of 
that kingdom, by the destruction of the Assyrian 
army. Upon which wonderful event it is said, 
(2 Chron. xxxii. 23,) that many brought gifts unto 
Jehovah, to Jerusalem, and.presents to Hezekiah ; so 
that he was magnified of all nations from thence- 
forth. And it is not to be doubted, that among 
these the Egyptians distinguished themselves in 
their acknowledgments on this occasion.” These 
offerings, then made from Egypt and other nations, 
were a prelude of a more perfect conversion of the 
Gentiles to the God of Israel; and there is nothing 
more certain than that God, after the remarkable 
overthrow of Sennacherib, was like the clear heat 
after rain, and like dew in the time of harvest, to 
the people of Israel. See Bishop Lowth and Vitringa. 


“g* & 


- 


The desolations 


CHAPTER XIX. 


vayt 


of Egypt. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
The prophecy contained in this chapter is two-fold. The first part describes the evils which should happen to Egypt. These 


are enumerated, 1-4. The consequence of them is set forth, 5-10. 


The immediate causes of those evils, 11-17. The 


latter part exhibits declarations and promises concerning the grace of God, and the knowledge of true religion to be com- 
municated to the Egyptians, with the causes and consequences of these benefits, 18-25. 


A. M. 3204. "IVHE * burden of Egypt. Behold, 
pS T the Lory rideth upon a swift 
cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and ° the 
idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, 
and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst 
of it. / 


a Jer. xlvi. 13; Ezek; xxix, xxx.—— Psalm xviii. 10; civ. 3. 
: ¢ Exod. xii. 12; Jer, xliii. 12) 


| 2 And I will ‘set¢ the Egyptians A, M, 3204. 
against the Egyptians: and they, ~~ — 
shall fight every one against his brother, and 
every one against his neighbour; city against 
city, and kingdom against kingdom, 

3 And the spirit of Egypt *shall fail in the 


+ Heb, ‘mingle. —4 Judgesvii. 22; 1 Sam. xiv..16, 20; 2 Chron. 
xx. 23.——* Heb. shall be emptied. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIX. 

Verse 1. The burden of Egypt—Concerning the 
term burden, see on chap. xiii. 1.. “Not many years 
after the destruction of Sennacherib’s army before 
Jerusalem, by which the Egyptians were freed from 
the yoke with which they were threatened by so 
powerful an enemy, who had carried on a successful 
war of three years’ continuance against them, the 
affairs of Egypt were again thrown into confusion 
by intestine broils among themselves, which ended 
in a perfect anarchy that lasted some years. This 
was followed by an aristocracy, or rather tyranny, 
of twelve princes, who divided the country between 
them, and at last by the sole dominion of Psammiti- 
chus, which he held for fifty-four years. Not long 
after that, followed the invasion and conquest of 
Egypt by Nebuchadnezzer; and ‘then by the Per- 
sians under Cambyses, the sonof Cyrus. The yoke 
of the Persians was so grievous, that the conquest 
of the Persians by Alexander may well be considered 
asa deliverance to Egypt; especially as he and his 
successors greatly favoured the people, and improved 
the country. To all these events the prophet seems 
to have had a view in this chapter ;” which contains 
the’ fifth discourse of the second part of Isaiah’s 
prophecies, delivered at another time, and much 
later than the preceding, and copiously setting forth 
the fate of Egypt, a nation, from the remotest an- 
tiquity, famous in the East. See Bishop Lowth and 
Vitringa. 

Behold; the Lord rideth on a swift cloud—As a 
general at the head of his army: or, as a judge 
going in state to the bench, to try and condemn male- 
factors. He makes the clouds his chariots, and rides 
upon the wings of the wind, with a power far above 
the reach of opposition or resistance, and with a 
majesty far excelling the greatest pomp and splen- 
dour of earthly princes. He is‘said to ride upon a 
swift cloud, to signify that the judgment should come 
speedily and unexpectedly: for God’s judgments do 
not linger when the time of his long-suffering is 
completed.. And the idols of Egypt shall be moved 
at his presence—From their seats, and from their 
former reputation. Or they shall shake or tremble, 
as the word 1), here used, properly signifies. So 
far shall they be from helping the Egyptians, as they 


the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it— 
The Egyptians shall lose all their ancient strength 
and courage, and their very souls shall faint within 
them, through dread of their approaching calamities. 
From these particulars of the prediction we learn, 
that the prince who should come upon Egypt, as 
the executer of the decrees of the divine justice, 
should approach with the most swift and rapid mo- 
tion; that he should throw down and destroy their 
idols, and fill all Egypt with the greatest consterna- 
tion. Now it is certain that Cambyses, the son of 
Cyrus, the Persian, exactly fulfilled these things, 
particularly with respect to the idols of Egypt. 
“The first attempt made by Cambyses,” says Bishop 
Newton, “was upon Pelusium, a strong town at the 
entrance of Egypt, and the key of the kingdom; 
and he succeeded by the stratagem of placing before 
his army a great number of dogs, sheep, cats, and 
other animals, which being held sacred by the 
Egyptians, not one of them would cast a javelin or 
shoot an arrow that way: and so the town was 
stormed and taken, in a manner, without resistance. 
He treated the gods of Egypt with marvellous con- 
tempt, laughed at the people, and chastised the 
priests for worshipping such deities. He slew Apis, 
or the sa¢red ox which the Egyptians worshipped, 
with his own hand; and burned and demolished 
their other idols and temples; and would likewise, 
if he had not been prevented, have destroyed the 
famous temple of Jupiter Ammon. Ochus, too, who 
was another king of Persia, and subdued the 
Egyptians again, after they had revolted, plundered 
their temples, and caused Apis to be slain, and 
served up in a banquet to him and his friends.” 
Verses 2,3. Iwill set the Egyptians against the 
Egyptians—Two principal calamities to befall Egypt 
are foretold in this prophecy; the first of which is 
here described: civil wars should arise among them. 
‘They shall fight every one against his brother and 
neighbour—Whom he ought to love as himself. 
City against city, and kingdom against kingdom— 
“The LXX. read, voyoc er: vouor, province against 
province, Egypt being divided into prefectures, or 
provinces. Vitringa and others apply this to the 


and the civil wars that ensued, in which Psammiti- 


expect, that they shall tremble for themselves. And | chus prevailed over the rest; but it may, perhaps, 
3° am 133 ¥ ‘e 
. i . ~ - 
a e -"* ° 


time of the twelve kings, the anarchy that preceded,’ 


Consequence of the 


ISATAH. 


desolations of Egypt. 


A. M. 3294. midst thereof: and I will *destroy|| 7 The paper-reeds by the brooks, by A; M. 3294. 


ane 120- the counsel thereof: and they shall 


® seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to 
them that have ‘familiar spirits, and to the wi- 
zards. 

4 And the Egyptians will I +give over tinto 
the hand of a cruel lord; anda fierce king 
shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lop 
of hosts. 

5 & And the waters shall fail from the sea, and 
the river shall be wasted and dried up. 

6 And they shall turn the rivers far away ; 
and the brooks of defence shall be emptied 
and dried up: the reeds and mee shall wither. 


the mouth of the brooks, and every BEY: 


thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven 
away, °and be no more, 

8 The fishers also shall mourn, Yand all they 
that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and 
they that spread nets upon thé waters shall 
languish. 

9 Moreover they that work in i fi a 
and they that weave ° net-works, shall be con- 
founded. 

10 And they shall be broken in the 7 p 
thereof, all that make sluices and ponds ° for 
fish. ' 


—— Or, shut 
up. pig Chap. XX, 4; Jer. xlyi. 26; a eek. xxix. ag ths li. 
36 ; Ezek, xxx. 12/ 


~< 


he Kings xix. 24——® Heb. and shall not be——‘ 1 Kings x. 
28; Prov. vii. 16. 6 Or, white works. . Heb. foundations. 
8 Heb. of living things. 


be more properly applied to what agrees better, in 
point of time, with other parts of the prophecy, the 
civil wars between Apries and Amasis, at the time 
of Nebuchadnezzar’s invasion; and the civil wars a 
little before the country was finally subdued by 
Ochus. It is no wonder, that in such distractions 
and distresses as these, the Egyptians, being natu- 
rally a cowardly people, should be destitute of cown- 
sel, and that the spirit of Egypt should fail in the 
midst thereof, as the prophet foretels, (verse 3,) and 


that, being also a very superstitious people, they 


should seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to 
them that had familiar spirits, and to the wizards. 
But their divination was all in vain,” God having de- 
termined that they should be subdued and oppressed 
by cruel lords and tyrants, as it follows. 

Verse 4. The Egyptians will I give into the hand 
of a cruel, lord, &c.—This is the second calamity 
here threatened, and the most essential part of the 


prophecy; and “it may with great truth and pro- 


priety be understood of Nebuchadnezzar and the 
Babylonians, whose dominion was very grievous to 
the conquered nations: but with the greatest pro- 
priety and justice may be applied to the Persians, 
and especially to Cambyses and Ochus; one» of 
whom put the yoke upon the neck of the Egyptians, 
and the other riveted it there, and who are both 


branded in history for cruel tyrants and monsters of | 


men.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verses 5-10. T'he waters shall fail from the sea, 
&c.—The river Nile shall cease to pour its usual 
quantity of water into the sea, being wasted and 
dried up, as it follows. “ Tremellius,’ says Lowth, 
“shows out of Herodotus, that this was literally 
fulfilled under the government of the twelve petty ty- 
rants who ruled Egypt after Sethon. And Scaliger 
understands it of a great drought, which occasioned 
a dearth, by the failing of the inundation of the 
Nile.” They shall turn the rivers—Those rivulets, 
by which the waters of the Nile were distributed 
into several parts of the land, shall be turned far 
away, as they must os when the river which 


? 
¢ 


Ss 


fed them was dried up. J'he brooks of defence shall 
be emptied—The several branches of the river Nile, 
which were a great defence to Egypt. J'he reeds 
—Which were useful to them for making their boats; 
shall wither—As they commonly do for want of 
water. The paper-reeds shall wither—These, by 
a needle, or other fit instrument, were divided into 
thin and ‘broad leaves, which, being dried and fitted, 

were used, at that time, for writing; and conse- 
quently were a very good commodity for trade. 
Every thing sown by the brooks shall wither—And 
much more what was sown in more dry and un- 
fruitful places. The fishers also shall mourn— 
Because they can catch no fish; which was a great 
loss to the people, whose common diet this was. 

They that work in fine flax—That make fine lirien, 
which was one of-theix best commodities; shall be 
confounded—Kither for want of flax to work on, or 
for want of a demand of that which they have’ 
worked, or opportunity to export it. They shall be 
broken, that make sluices, &c.—Their business’shall 
fail, either for want of water to fill their ponds, or 
for want of fish to replenish their waters. But it is 
probable the expressions in these verses are meta- 
phorical, and denote the decay of the strength, 
wealth, trade, and prosperity of Egypt, by metaphors 
taken from the decrease of the river Nile, upon the 
overflowing of which all the plenty and prosperity 
of that country depended. “The prophet,” says 
Bishop Newton, “ sets forth, in figurative language, 
the consequences of. the forementioned subjection 
and slavery, the poverty and want, the mourning 
and lamentation, the confusion and misery which 
should be entailed on both them and their posterity.” 
The Nile, the reader must observe, is supposed to 
“figure out the whole kingdom of Egypt. The 
reed, the lotus, the papyrus, and the other produc- 
tions of the Nile, signify the riches, merchandise, 
and whatever was found in the flourishing state of 
Egypt.. And, as when the waters of the Nile are 
withdrawn, or dried up, or do not rise to their proper 
height, all things languish and wither in Egypt, and. 

9 


— tial — . 


,  —— 2 = a 
+‘* ? .% - ) # 


 % . os y < 
The desolations - _CHAPTER XIX. of Egypt. 


i 
A M3294 11 4 Surely the princes of * Zoan||caused Egypt to err in €very work 4 M 2234 
B.C. | Ps a 
at Pe fools, the desibtatices:| dltck er cckctr cae fanaa 


sellors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say | in his vomit. Z 
ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the} 15 Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, 
son of ancient kings ? "|| which ° the head or tail, branch or rush, may 
12 } Where are they? where are thy wise | do. -- 

men? and let them tell thee now, and let them 16 In that day shall Egypt ? be like unto 
know what the Lorn of hosts hath purposed | women : and it shall be afraid and fear, be- 
upon Egypt. ¥ || cause of the shaking of the hand of the Lorp 
13 The princes of Zoan are become fools, | of hosts, * which he shaketh over it. ‘ 
™ the princes of Noph are deceived; they have|| 17 And the land of Judah shall be a terror 

also seduced Egypt, even * they that are the | unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention _ 
stay of the tribes thereof. _- || thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the © . 
14 The Lorp hath mingled “a* perverse || counsel of the Lorp of hosts, which he bets, % 
spirit im the midst thereof: and they have) determined against it. 3 . 
st eee Ss 


. 


: 


© Nom xii. 221 ii Cor: 20. —_— Jer. ii. 16 ——* Or, govern- || ® 1 Kinzs xxii. 22; Chap. xxix: 10 + bap. iz 11—,Je 
ors.—** Heb. corners" Heb. a spirit of perversencss. || E. 30; Nahum iii. 13——+ Chap. xi. 15. 


the greatest poverty and want ensue; so the king- | Their chief counsellors; of the tribes—Of the pro- 
dom of Egypt being depressed under the dominion vinces, which he calls by a title berrowed from the - 
“of its cruel lords the Persians, who should rule it by Hebrews. in whose language he spake and wrote 
“rapacious governors, all things should languish in this prophecy. The Lord hath mingled—Hath 
that kingdom ; the cities, with the temples and-orna-) poured out, or given them to drink, a perverse spirit 
ments, be subverted; their commerce, to which the —A spirit of error, or delusion, as the LXX- and 
_ Nile was so subservient, should fail ; their riches be Chaldee render it. That is, he has suffered them, 
consumed by strangers, and their lands be left un-| in punishment of theirsins to take foolish steps, and 
cultivated. In short, the face of the country should © follow- pernicious counsels They hare caused 
esolate and melancholy, as when the Nile with-. Egypt to err in every work—In all their designs and 
its necessary overfiowings.”—See Vitringa. | undertakings. They have given such ill counsel, 
Verses 11-15. Surely the princes of Zoan are and pursued such wrong measures, that nothing has 
&c.—Zoanh was the chief city, in which the succeeded-as it should. Neither shall there be any 
king and court frequently resided. In these verses work which the head or tail do—The- people 
the prophet describes “the immediate causes of these shall’ generally want employment, or, as some ex- 
evils ; Ist, The folly of the princes and rulers, who | plain it, all orders of men, from the highest to the 4 
valued themselves upon their wisdom ; and, 24, The lowest, shall fail in the discharge of their duty, or 
cowardice and effeminacy of the people in general. be unsuccessful in all they undertake. 
Egypt would not have become a prey tosomany), Verses 16,17. In thai day shall Egypt be like 
foreign enemies, but through the excessive weak-| uxfo women—Feeble and fearful, as it follows. The 
ness of the Egyptians, both in counsel and in action. cowardice and effeminacy of the people in general, 
They had not the courage even to defend themselves. joined with their fear and trepidation, are here set 
They trusted chiefly to their Grecian and other | forth asecond cause of their calamity ; and the 
mercenaries, who, instead of defending, were ofien » reaso this, among other things, is drawn from a 
the first to betray them."—Bishop Newton. How | sense of the divine judgment. They shail be like 
say ye uaio Pharaoh—Why do ye put such false women, and fear, because of the shaking of the 
and foolish words into Pharaoh’s mouth? Jam the | handof the Lord, &c.—Because they shall perceive 
son of the wise—Wisdom is hereditary and natural | that they do not fight with men only, but with the 
tome. This vain opinion of himself they cherished | Lord of hosts, who now lifts up his hand against 
by their fatteries. T' of the ancient kings— | them, as he did against their forefathers. The land 
The prophet derides the vanity of the Egyptians, of Judah shallbeat unto Egypt—Thiat is, the 
who used to boast of the antiquity of their nation, , calamities brought on the land of Judah by the 
and especially of their kings, who, as they pretended, _ Assyriansand Chaldeans. When the Egyptians shall - 
had reigtied successively for 10,000 years. Where | hear of the ravages and desclations made in Judah, 
are thy wise men ?—Who pretended, that either by | by the army of Sennacherib, and shall afterward be 
their deep policy, or by their skill in astrology, or | informed of its overthrow by Nebuchadnezzar, they 
magic, they could certainly foresee things to come. shail be dreadfully afraid of suffering the same ca- 
city, and one ef the king's called also --MopA, | neighbourhood to Judah, and their sirict alliances - 
in the Hebrew text, (Hos. ix. 6,) and by other and | therewith. Indeed Judah 
later writers, Memphis. They that are the stey—|}the Assyrians and 
a b 4 e 


rt 


” 


i 


¥ eh », ae be ae & 
: ina ie é. . a. 
ia " 
~ ao Fa aes 
Promises of the conversion ‘ahs ISAIAH: a -. and happines of Peaicoine 33 
A. Mi, 3294. Ri | Int y shall five cities in t é 19 In that day * shall, there be an A.M. 3204. 
» © 71% Tand of t ‘speak ' the language | altar to - 


of a and swear to the Lorp of hosts ; 


one shall be called, The city of dosagenp: 


the Lorp in the midst of the = 
land of Feypt, anda pillar at the border thereof 
to the Lorp. 


5. 


* Zeph. iii. 9 


\ 


r : .——12 He . the lip —* Or, of Heres, ony of the sun. 
wark was > they had just cause , fear. 
“ The. threatening hand of God,” says Bishop Lowth, 
“will be he ity and shaken over Egypt, from the 
side of J through which the Assyrians 


march to invade | hy Every one that male ntion 
thereof, &c.—Poole thinks their fear of mentioning 


_ Sudah’s name might proceed partly froma sense 
ts: guilt and misconduct toward Judah, and an 


hension that the God of Judah was calling 

to an account for it. Perhaps, also, as the next 
Bosice seems to imply, they coded ard of the 
prophecies uttered in Judah con these very 
calamities coming upon them. 

Verse 18. In that day—After that. time, as this 
phrase is often used ; that is, in the times of ‘the Z0s- 
pel. This latter part of the prophecy contains, an 
account of the salutary! benefits. which God would 
bestow on Egypt after the above-mentioned calami- 
ties. “Isaiah, to whom God had most clearly re- 
vealed the mystery of the calling of the Gentiles to 
the grace of Christ, everywhere takes occasion to 
speak of it; and frequently finishes his prophecies 
concerning the nations with a promise of the spirit- 
ual blessings designed-for them by, God; but he 
does this. nowhere more explicitly than in the pre- 
sent passage ;’? in which one cannot but observe 
with what ease he passes from the one argument to 
the other. He had said that some of the Egyptians, 
when under these calamities, should be afraid of 
the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he should shake 
over Egypt, and should fear, because of his counsel 
which he had determined against it ; and he now 
teaches, that this servile fear and dread should here- 
afterbe turned into a religious fear, with this effeet, 
that five cities in the land of Egypt, that is, that 
many of their chief cities, a certain number being 
put for an uncertain, should speak the language of 
Canaan—That is, should profess the Jewish religion, 
or agree with the Jews in their worship of one liv- 
ing and true God« Thus, J will turn to the people 
a pure language, (Zeph. iii. 9,) signifies, I will re- 
store to the people a pure religion; or, I will change 
and purify their conversation, their hearts and lips, 
that they may call wpon the name of the Lord, to 
serve him with one consent, And shall swear to the 
Lord of hosts—Swearing to the Lord implies the 
dedication and yielding up of a person or thing to 
the Lord, by a solemn vow or covenant, as appears 
from 2 Chron. xv. 14; Psa. exxxii. 2; Isaiah xlv. 
23, 24. One—Or one of them, namely, of the five; 
shall be called the city of destruction—Or, of the 
sun, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, meani 


Heliopolis, a famous city in Egypt, and a chief seat’ 


of idolatry, being a city of the priests, as Strabo re- 
ports > and therefore, its conversion to the faith wa " 
the more wonder 


‘nW ° 


of the sum 


‘and evangelical altar; 
| the Levitical altar was confined to one place, Deut. 


; ih be acknowledge 
+% ’ 
ae Pl i 7s - s 


8 Gen. xxviii. 18; Exod. xxiv. 4; Jos. xxii. 10, 26, 27. 
however, that there is much uncertainty as to big 
true reading of the text, whether it be D1N7 Vy, city 
or, DNA Vy city of destruction, and 
therefore “no one,” as Bishop Lowth justly ob- 
serves, “can pretend to determine what the city was 
that is here mentioned by name; much less to de- 
termine what the four other cities were which the 
prophet does not name.” “I take the whole pas- 
sage,” says he, “from the eighteenth verse to the 
end of the chapter, to contain a general intimation 
of the future propagation of the knowledge of the 
true God in Egypt and Syria, under the successors 
of Alexander ; and, in consequence of this propaga- 
tion, of the early reception of the gospel in the 
same countries, when it should be Leeriarin to 94 
world.” 

Verse 19. In that day shall there be an cittanes: 
For God’s worship; not a Levitical, but a spiritu 
as appears from hence, that’ 


xii. 13, 14. The altar is here put fo: worship 
of God, as it is in many places, both of the Old and 
New Testaments. And nothing is more common in 
the prophets than to speak of gospel worship’ in 
those phrases of the law which were suitable to t 
own age. And, accordingly, when they speak .o 
the Gentiles coming into the church, they represent 
them as serving the true God by such acts of devo- 
tion as were most in use in their own time, and 
therefore could be best understood by those to whom 
they directed their discourses. And a pillar—A 
monument of the true religion; (he alludes to the 
ancient custom of erecting pillars to God ;) at the 
border thereof—Of the land, as before in: the midst 
ofit. The meaning is, There shall be evidences of 
their piety in all places. This passage evidently 
implies that the temple-service, which was confined 
to Jerusalem, should be abolished, as it was by t 
introduction of Christianity, and that the God of Is- 
rael should be worshipped with the most solemn 
rites, even in the most abhorred and unsanctified 
places, such as the Jews esteemed Egypt to be. 
Such is the meaning of this prophecy, as it refers to 
the Christian dispensation, and such will be its more 
remote and ultimate accomplishment. But, in its 
primary sense, it seems to relate to the conversion 
of the Egyptians to the Jewish religion; which was 
brought about by the following progressive changes. 
“ Alexander the Great. transplanted many of the ~ 
Jews to Alexandria, and allowed them extraordi- 
nary immunities, equal to those of the Macedonians 
themselves. Ptolemy Soter carried more of them. 
into Egypt, who enjoyed such advantages that 
many of them were allured to settle there. Ptolemy 
Philadelphus redeemed and released the captive 
Jews; and in his and his father’s reign, the Jewish— 
. 3 


— 7a “Saw > wre 
: - 
&, 2 ~ ¥ ” a Ay . ea ra) 
~~. > ; is : a \ 
oy aa \ > : ¥ by > +. 
Promises of the conversion % RATER IX. =’ a and happiness of Egypt. 


A. M. 3204. 20 And tit shall be for a sign | and 
710. 

——— for a witness) the Lora hosts 

in the land of Egypt: { they shall f unto 
Lorn ‘because of the oppressors, and he 


shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and | 


he : shall deliver them.. 


Pe 


as r “t Josh. 1v. 20; xxii. 27. 


Scriptures were translated ‘into Greek. Sp tolemy 


Euergetes, having subdued Syria, did not sacrifice 
to the gods of Egypt in acknowledgment of his 
victory, but, coming to Jerusalem, made his oblations 
to God after the manner of the Jews. Ptolemy Phi- 
lometer, and his queen, Cleopatra, committed the 
whole management of the kingdom to two Jews, 
Onias and Dositheus, who were the chief ministers 
and generals. This Onias obtained a license to 
build a temple for the Jews in Egypt, alleging for 
that purpose this very prophecy ; and the king and 
queen, in their rescript, make honourable mention 
of the law and of Isaiah, and express a dread of 
offending God. The place chosen for this temple 
s in the prefecture of Heliopolis, or the city of 
un, likewise mentioned in prophecy. It was 
built after the model of the temple of Jerusalem, but || 
not so sumptuous. Onias himself: was made high- 
priest; other priests and Levites were appointed for 
the ministration, and. divine service was daily per- 
formed there in the same manner as at Jerusalem, and 
continued as long: for Vespasian, having destroyed 
‘hie ple at Jerusalem, ordered this to be demolish- 
ed also.” See Newton, Proph., vol. i. p. 375. 
Verses 20-22. And it shall be for a sign—Namely, 
the altar or pillar, last mentioned; and for a wit- 
ness unto the Lord of hosts—To testify that they 
own the Lord for their God. For they shall, cry 
unto the Lord because of their oppressors—Being 
sorely distressed, and finding that their idols are 
unable to help them, they shall turn unto the true 
God. And he shall send them a saviour, and a 
great one—In these words the prophet sets forth 
the cause of this happy change in Egypt, with its 
immediate effects, namely, their crying to the Lord 
in their distress, and his sending them a saviour, 
who should deliver them. “Here it is clearly fore- 
told,” says Bishop Newton, “that a great prince, 
sent by God, from a foreign country, should deliver 
the Egyptians from their Persian oppressors, and 
heal their country, which was smitten of God, and 
afflicted: and who could this be but Alexander, 
who is always distinguished by the name of Alez- 
ander the Great, and whose first successor in Egypt 
was called the great Ptolemy, and:Ptolemy Soter, 
or the saviour? Upon Alexander’s first coming 
into Egypt the people all cheerfully submitted to 
him out of hatred to the Persians, so that he became 
master of the country without any opposition. For 
this reason he treated them with- humanity and 
kindness, built there a city, which, after his own 
name, he called Alexandria, appointed one of their 
own country for their civil governor, and permitted 


| 


| sacrifice and. oblation; ye 


own A. M. 3294. 


a1 And the Lorp sha a ee 


to Egypt, and the Egyptians s shall 
know the Lorp in that, ay, and "shall do 
» they shall vow a 
vow unto the Lorp ie perfah vot. 

22 And the Lorp shall smi , 


t: he shall 


“Mal. ne subieg 


them to be governed by their own laws and eus- 
toms. By these changes and regulations, and, by 
the prudent and gentle administration of some of 


the first Ptolemies, Egypt revived, trade and bee ; 


ing flourished, and, for a while, peace and ple 

blessed the land. But. it is more largely foretold, 
that, about the same time, the true religion and the 
worship of t of Israel should b to spread 
and ‘prevail a. d of Egypt; hat event 
was ever more unlikely to happen ‘than the conyer- 
sion of a people so sunk and lost in superstition and 
idolatry, of the worst and grossest kind? It is cer- 
tain that many of the Jews, after Nebuchadnezzar 
had. taken Jerusalem, fled into Egypt, and carried 
along with them Jeremiah the prophet, who there 
uttered many-of his prophecies concerning the con- 
quest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar. “From hence,” 
and by the means above described, “some know- 
ledge of God, and some notice of the prophecies, 
might easily be derived to the Egyptians.” “By 
these means, the Lord must, in some degree, have 
been known to Egypt, and the Egyptians must have 
known the Eord—And, without doubt, there must 
have been many proselytes among them. Among 
those who came up to the feast of pentecost, (Acts 
ii. 10,) are particularly eae dwellers in 
Egypt, and in the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, 
Jews and proselytes. Nay, from the mstance of 
Candace’s eunuch, (Acts viii. 27,) we may infer 
that there were proselytes even beyond Egypt, in 
Ethiopia. Thus were the Jews settled and encour- 
aged in Egypt, insomuch that Philo represents their 
number as not less than a hundred myriads, or ten 
hundred thousand men.” But though this prophecy 
concerning Egypt might have its first accomplish- 
ment in the deliverance of the Egyptians from the 
Persian yoke by Alexander the Great, and in that 
knowledge of the true God, and of his revealed will, 
which many of the Egyptians received under the 
government of the Ptolemies, through their inter- 
course with the Jews, and the translation of the 
Jewish Scriptures into thesGreek language ; yet, 
doubtless, this prediction has a further and higher 
aspect, a8 commentators in general have understood 
it, and refers to that spiritual redemption and salva- 
tion which the Egyptians, among many other igno- 
rant and idolatrous Gentiles, were to receive, and 
actually did receive, by the coming of Christy the 
great and ‘only Saviour of lost mankind, and by the 
publication of his: gospel to them. This appears 
still more evidently from the verses which follow. 
But the full and final accompli nt of this, as 
well as of many ey pat 7a shall 


a» 
he. 


+ re 


° @. 


~~ 


a 


ss 


2 


. 


The Assyrians 


“4 7 3204. smite and heal #¢: and they. shall re- 
“~ turn even to the Lorp, and he shall 
be entreated of them, and shall heal them. 

23 4 In that day *shall there be a highway out 
of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come 
into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and 
the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. 


ISATAH. 


shall oppress Egypt. 


24 In that day shall Israel be the A. M, 3294: 
third with Egypt and with Assyria, ® °° 
even a blessing in the midst of the land: 

25 Whom the Lorp of hosts shall bless, say- 
ing, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria 
¥ the work of my hands, and Israel mine in- 
heritance. : ’ 


x Chap. xi 16. 


0. 


y Psa. c. 3; Chap. xxix. 23 ;, Hos. ii. 23; Eph, ii. 1 


not take place till Mohammedanism and idolatry 
shall be completely overthrown, and the earth shall 
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters 
cover the sea. . 
' Verses 23-25. In that. day, &c.—Here the pro- 
phet proceeds to show the effect of this benefit of 
divine grace toward the Egyptians, namely, their 
spiritual alliance with the Assyrians and Israelites, 
with a great abundance of the divine blessings. 
There shall be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria 
—A happy correspondence and intercourse settled. 
And the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, &c.—They 
who were. implacable enemies one to another, and 
both to the church of God, shall now be reconciled 
and united together in the service of God, and love 
to his church. In that day shall Israel be the third 
—The third party in that-sacred league, whereby 
all of them oblige themselves to serve God. With 
Egypt and with Assyria—These are named, be- 
cause they were the most obstinate enemies to 
God’s church, but they are here put for all the Gen- 
tiles. Even a blessing—That is, Israel shall be a 


\ 


blessing. This is peculiar to Israel, who,is not only 
a third party, but is the most eminent of: the three, 
as being the fountain by which the blessing is con- 
veyed to the other two; because Christ was to be 
born of them, and the gospel-church and ordinances 
were first established among them, and from them 
derived to the Gentiles. In the midst of the land— 
Or, of those lands, namely, Egypt and Assyria, be- 
tween which Israel lay: or, in the midst of the 
earth, as YIN 379p3, more properly means: which 
may be added, to imply that God’s blessing should 
be conveyed from and by Israel, not only to the 
Egyptians and Assyrians, but to all the natigns of 
the earth, in the midst of which the land of Israel 
might well be said to be. Whom the Lord of hosts 
shall bless—That is, which people, Israel, Egypt, 
and Assyria; of whom he speaks as of one people, 
because they were all to be united into one church. 
Blessed be Egypt my people—This title, and those 
which follow, that were peculiar to the people of 
Israel, should now be given to these and all other 
nations. ~ 


$s 


CHAPTER XX. 


We have in this chapter an addition to the discourse contained in the preceding, namely, a prediction of the carrying away 


of multitudes, both of the Egyptians and Ethiopians, into captivity by the king of Assyria.. Here is, (1,) The sign by 
which this was foretold, which was the prophet’s going, for some time, barefoot, and almost naked, like a poor captive, 1, 


2: (2,) The explication of this sign, with the application of it to Egypt and Ethiopia, 3, 4. 
quence of this prophecy, and the use the people of God should make of it, 5, 6. 


a 3 ee [ the year that * Tartan came unto 
———— ~~ Ashdod, (when Sargon the king 
of Assyria sent him,) and fought. against Ash- 
dod, and took it ; 


22 Kings xviii. 17——" Heb. by the hand of Isaiah- 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XX. 

Verse 1. Inthe year that Tartan came to Ashdod 
—Namely, to besiege it. Tartan is mentioned 
(2 Kings xviii. 17) as one of the generals of Senna- 
cherib, who is generally supposed to be here meant 
by Sargon; which was. probably one of the seven 
names by which Jerome, on this place, says he was 
called.. Ashdod, or Azotus, was an eminent and 
strong city, formerly belonging to the Philistines, in 


the utmost part of the land of Canaan toward Egypt. 


Afterward, according to Herodotus, it held out 
twenty-nine years against Psammitichus, king of 
Egypt. Itis likely that at this time it belonged to 

138 . 


‘gr 
=? . 


(3,) The scope and conse- 


2 At the same time spake the Lorp AM. a 
by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saymg, ———— 
Go, and loose the » sackcloth from off thy loins, 
and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did 


> Zech. xiil. 4. 

Hezekiah’s dominions, and that its inhabitants ex- 
pected to be relieved during the siege by the Egyp- 
tians and Cushites, or Ethiopians. The taking of it, 
Bishop Lowth thinks, must have happened before 
Sennacherib’s attempt on Jerusalem; when he 
boasted of his late conquests, chap. xxxvii. 25: and 
the warning of the prophet had ‘a principal respect 
to the Jews also, who were too much inclined to de- 
pend on the assistance of Egypt. 

Verse 2. Go loose the sackcloth from off thy loins: 
—By the sackcloth is meant either the hairy gar- 
ment usually worn by the prophets, or a mournful 
habit, such as was commonly, made of sackcloth 

=... 


wk 


The destruction of 


CHAPTER XXI. 


Babylon foretold. 


a 23 Mos any ‘walking naked and_ barefoot. 

“__. 3 And the Lorp said, Like as my 
servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot 
three years “for a sign and wonder upon Egypt 
and upom Ethiopia ; | 

A So shall the king of Assyria lead away * the 
Hgyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians cap- 
tives, young and old, naked and barefoot, * even 


with their buttocks uncovered, to the A. M. 3294. 
® shame of Egypt. = 

shame of Egyp 

5 € And they shall beafraidandashamed of Ethi- 
opia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. 

6 And the inhabitant of this ‘isle shall say, 
tin that day; Behold, such 4s our expectation, 
whither we flee for help to be delivered from the 
king of Assyria: and how shall we escape ? 


¢1 Sam, xix. 84; Mic. i. 8, 11—4Chap. viii. 18. 
the captivity of Egypt. 
which he wore in token of his grief for the great 
calamities that were already come upon Israel, and 
were coming on Judah. And he did so, walking 
naked and_barefoot—Not wholly naked, but without 
his upper garment; as slaves and prisoners used to 
do, whose condition he was to represent. This ac- 
tion was.both agreeable to the mode of instruction 
made use of in those times, and, as it was intended to 
excite the attention of the Israelites, was likewise very 
well adapted to promote that intention.— Vitringa. 

Verses. 3-6. And the Lord—Who here explains 
and applies the sign, said, Like as my servant hath 
walked naked, §c., three years—Not constantly, but 
when he went abroad among the people, to whom 
this was appointed to beasign. Bishop Lowth says, 
probably three days, to show, that within three years 
the Egyptians and Ethiopians should be conquered 
and made captives by the king of Assyria, and be 
in the same condition, and that the town should be 
taken. But it is objected, that although a day is 
usually put for a year in the prophetic. scriptures, a 

_ year is never put for a day. The former interpret- 
ation, therefore, is more probable. For a sign and 
wonder, &c.—Kither when this judgment should 
come, namely, three years after this prophecy was 
thus uttered, or how long it should continue, namely, 
for three years: for some have observed, that the 
Assyrians spent so much time in conquering Egypt 


2 Heb. 
© 2 Sam. x. 4; Chap. iii. 17; Jer. xiii. 
s 


ee 
22, 26;: Mic. i. 11.——* Heb. nakedness 2 Kings xviii. 21; 
Chap. xxx..3, 5, 7; xxxvi. 6. # Or, country, Jer. xlvii. 4. 


and Ethiopia. So shall the king of Assyria lead 
away the Egyptians—Like beasts, as NY is com- 
monly used. And they shall be afraid and ashamed 
—Namely, all they that shall trust to them, and glory 
in them. In which words, “we have the conse- 
quence of the divine judgment upon the Egyptians 
and Ethiopians, and the scope of the prophecy, 
namely, to convince the inhabitants of Palestine, 
and among these some factious persons in Jerusalem, 
of the vanity of the confidence they placed in them; 
for when they should see the completion of this 
prophecy, they should then condemn their own 
folly for placing their expectations on so feeble a de- 
fence.” The inhabitant of this isle—Of this land, 
in which the prophet was, and to whose inhabitants 
these words were uttered. For the name of is/es, or 
islands, is frequently given in Scripture, not only to 
lands encompassed with the sea, but also to such 
countries as Were on the sea-coast, as Palestine or 
Canaan was. Shall say, Behold, such is our ex- 
pectation—So vain-is our hope, placed upon such a 
|people as are unable to deliver themselves, and 
much more to deliver us: whither we flee for help 
—To whom we now and usually trust: and how 
shall we escape—Kither by their help, who cannot 
defend themselves, or by our own strength, seeing 
they, who were much more potent than we are, could 
not escape ? 


CHAPTER XXI. 


We have here, under a mysticat name, a second representation of the overthrow of Babylon by the Medes and Persians, 1, 2. 
The prophet, to show the dreadfulness of the calamity, represents himself as being seized with astonishment and horror at 
the prospect of it, 3,4. An emblematical confirmation of it, 5-10. The burden of Dumah or Idumea, 11, 12. Of Arabia 


or Kedar, 13-17. 


A: M. $290. THE burden of the desert of the sea. 
eevee As * whirlwinds in the south pass 


— 


3290 


on od ates ; desert, A. M. 
through ; so it cometh from the desert, KGHAE 


from a terrible land. 


— 


a Zech. 


ix. 14. 


‘NOTES ON CHAPTER XXI. 

Verse 1. The burden of the desert of the sea— 
That is, of Babylon, as is evident from verse 9. 
Some think it is so called prophetically, because, 
although it was at present-a ulous city, it was 
shortly to be made desolate, and turned into a marsh, 
and pools of water. But.’ 1270 may be properly 

3 : 


rendered, the plain of the sea: for Babylon stood 
on a plain, and the country about it, and especially 
below it, toward the sea, was a great flat morass, 
often overflowed by the Euphrates and Tigris. 
“ Semiramis,” says Herodotus, “confined the Eu- 
phrates within its channel, by raising great dams 
against it; for before it~ overflowed the whole 
139 


Destruction of 


A.M, 3290. 2 A grievous vision is declared unto 
ants me; »'The treacherous dealer dealeth 
treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. ° Go up, 
O Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing 
thereof have I made to cease. 


ISAIAH. 


Babylon foretold. 


3 Therefore 4 are my loins filled with A. M. 3290, 
: a 714, 
pain: * pangs have taken hold upon 
me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I 
was bowed down at the hearing of it; . 1 was 
dismayed at the seeing of it. 


‘2 He. hard. © Chap. xiii. 17; Jer. xlix. 


> Chap. xxxiii. 1. 


34.—4 Chap. xv. 5; xvi. 11.——e Chap. xiii. 8. ‘ 


country like a-sea.” 
the building of Babylon, observes, “It is reported 
that all this part was covered with water, and was 
called the sea; and that Belus drew off the waters, 
conveying them into proper receptacles.” It was 
only by these means, it appears, and by the many 
canals that were made in the country, that it became 
habitable. 
answered the title of the plain, or desert of the sea, 
here given it, in consequence of the Euphrates being 
turned out of its ‘channel by Cyrus, and afterward 
suffered still to drown the neighbouring country, by 
which it became, in time, a great barren, morassy 
desert, which it continues to be to this day. See 
note on chap. xiii. 20. 

This second prediction, concerning Babylon, 
(which, with the two short prophecies following, 
makes the sixth discourse of this second part of 
Isaiah’s Visions,) “isa passage,” says Bishop Lowth, 
“ of a singular kind for its brevity and force; forthe 
variety and rapidity of the movements; and for the 
strength and -energy of colouring, with which the 
action and event are painted. It opens with the 
prophet’s seeing, at a distance, the dreadful storm 
that is gathering, and ready to burst upon Babylon: 
the event is intimated in general terms; and God’s 
orders are issued to the Persians and Medes to set 
forth upon the expedition which he has given them 
in charge. ,Upon this the prophet enters into the 
midst of the action; and in the person of Babylon 


expresses, in the strongest terms, the astonishment | 


and horror that seizes her on the sudden surprise of 


the city, at the very season dedicated to pleasure |’ 


and festivity. Then, in his own person, he describes 
the situation of things there; 
Babylonians, and, in the midst of their feasting, the 
sudden alarm of war. The event is then declared 
in a very singular manner. God orders the prophet 
to. set a watchman to look out, and to report what 
he sees ;, he sees two companies marching onward, 
representing, by their appearance, the two nations 
that were to execute God’s orders; who declare that 
Babylon is fallen.” 

As whirlwinds in the south, &ce.—Bishop Lowth’s 
translation of this passage gives it a peculiar force 
and elegance. 


“Like the southern tempests, violently rushing along, 

From the desert he cometh, from the terrible country. 

A dreadful vision! it is revealed unto me: 

The plunderer is plundered, and the destroyer is 
destroyed, 

Go up, O Elam; from the siege, O Media! 

I have put an end to all her vexations.” 


By southern tempests, or whirlwinds in the south, 


a 


a 


It, however, still more fully and perfectly’ 


And Abydenus, speaking of | 


‘buildings. 


the security of the} 


the prophet means tempests in those extensive de- 
serts which lay southward from Judea, in which the 
winds rush along with great force, as meeting with 
no obstruction from, mountains, “hills, trees, or 
To these he compares the sweeping and 
irresistible ruin which, by terrible armies, was about 
to come on Babylon from Media and Persia, through 
the deserts that lay between it and those countries. 
“The prophet,” says Lowth, “renews his threaten- 
ings against Babylon, as he. does afterward, (chap. 
xlvii.,) to convince the Jews, by this repetition, of the 
certainty of the event, and thereby support them 
under their captivity when it should come.” 

Verse 2. A grievous vision is declared unto me— 
A vision or prophecy, predicting dreadful calamities 
about to fall upon Babylon, The treacherous 
dealer, &c.—In these words the prophet either de- 
scribes the sin of the Chaldeans, for which God 
would send the following judgment upon them, 
namely, they persisted in the~practice of treachery - 
and rapine, to which they had been so long accus- 
tomed ; or he speaks of the Medes and Persians, 
and represents them as paying the Babylonians in 
their own coin, and using the same treachery and 
violence toward them which they had used toward 
others. The words may be ‘properly rendered, 
Thou, O Elam, that dealest treacherously with the 
treacherous dealer, or, that oppressest the oppressor, 
and spoilest the spoiler, go up, besiege, &c. Baby- 
lon had long oppressed and ravaged other countries: 
and it was now her turn to be oppressed and ravaged. 
Elam was an eminent province of Persia, bordering 
upon Media, and is here put for Persia in general, 
God here gives the Medes and Persians their com- 
mission to go up and take Babylon, and thereby to 
put an end to the sighs and groans of the captive 
Jews, and of other nations held in bondage, and 
oppressed by that tyrannical and cruel empire. 

Verses 3, 4. Therefore my loins, &e.—“ We have 
here a symbolical description of the greatness of 
the Babylonish calamity ; the prophet exhibiting in 
himself, as in a figure, an emblem of the extreme 
distress, consternation, and horror, which should en- 
sue on this occasion.” See chap. xv. 5, and xvi. 8, 
9; Luke xxi. 26. He speaks of his loins being filled 
with pain, with a reference to the following simili- 
tude of child- bearing. Pangs have taken hold on 
me—Sharp and grievous pains, or extreme anguish, 
as the word [""¥ properly means, torments like 
those of a woman in labour. J was, or, rather, J 
am, bowed down—Oppressed with, an intolerable 
load of sorrow and distress, at the hearing of it— 
Hebrew, pow, that J cannot (that is, cannot endure 
to) hear it. So aterland, who reads the three 


|| next clauses thus: Jam dismayed that I cannot see 


+ 


—* 


The prophet’s astonishment 


CHAPTER XXI. 


at the prospect of it. 


A. M. 3290. A ?My heart panted, fearfulness af- 
———— frighted me: ‘ the night of my pleasure 


hath he * turned into fear unto me, 

5 & Prepare the table, watch in the watch- 
tower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes,-and anoint 
the shield. 

6 For. thus hath the Lorn said unto me, Go, 


2 Or, my mind wandered—f Deut. xxviii. 3 ee Heb. put. 


set a watchman, let him declare what A. te ti 
he seeth. pedicle seen 

7 ® And he saw a chariot with a couple of horse- 
men, a chariot of asses, anda chariot of camels ; 


and he hearkened diligently with much heed : 


8 And ‘he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand 
continually upon the ‘ watch-tower in the day 


— — 


© 7 
& Dan. v. 5. Verse 9. 4 Or, cried as a lion. —— Hab. ii. 1. 


= 


it: my heart panteth: horror.confounds me. 
was the distress and anguish, the confusion and dis- 
may, undoubtedly, of myriads of the inhabitants of 
Babylon, on the night when the city was unexpect- 


edly taken; and particularly of Belshazzar, when 


he saw the hand that wrote, and the writing on the 
wall, and especially when he heard Daniel’s inter- 
pretation of it. Then, indeed, was the night of his 
pleasure turned into fear unto him,in which re- 
markable words the prophet alludes to the cireum- 
stance of Babylon’s being taken in the night of an 
annual festival, “ while the inhabitants were daneing, 
drinking, and revelling, which is more ‘fully set 
forth in the next verse.” According to Herodotus, 
the extreme parts of the city were in the hands of 
the enemy, before they, who dwelt in the middle of 
it, knew any thing of their danger. 

Verse 5. Prepare the table—Furnish it with meats 
and drinks, as it follows. The prophet foretels what 
the Babylonians would be doing when their enemies 
were upon the point of entering their city: Watch in 
the watch-tower—To give us notice of any approach- 
ing danger, that we may more securely indulge our- 
selves in mirth and pleasures. Arise, ye princes-- 
Hither, lst, Ye princes of Babylon. Arise from the 
table, and. run to your arms: Which sudden alarm 
was the consequence of tidings from the watch-tower. 
Or, 2d, Ye Medes and Persians; as if he had said, 
While your enemies, the Babylonians, are feasting 
securely, prepare and make your assault. Most com- 
mentators understand the clause in this latter sense. 
Dr. Waterland, after Vitringa, renders it, T'he table 
is spread: the watchman stands upon the watch ; 
they eat, they drink: Arise now, ye princes, &c. 


The words paint in lively colours the security and | 


revelling of the Babylonians, at the very time when 
the divine command is given to the Medes and Per- 
sians to seize this proper moment to make the as- 
sault: See Jer. li. 11, 28, &c. The expression, 
Anoint the shield, means, Prepare your arms: make 
ready for the battle. The shield is-put for all their 
weapons, offensive and defensive. They used to 
‘anoint their shields with oil to preserve and polish 


them, and make them slippery, that their enemies’ | 


darts might not fix in and penetrate, but slide off 
from them. 

Verse 6. For thus hath the Lord said unto me— 
I speak only. what God hath caused me to see and 
hear in a vision, the particulars whereof are related 


in the following verses. “The Holy Spirit, to make 
Isaiah, and, by him, the church, most certain of this 
memorable event, confirms the preceding revelation 
3 
y : 
iz a wills 


Such 


by an elegant emblem, offered to the prophet in 
vision. This emblem exhibits to us the prophet 
commanded by God to set a watchman, in this verse ; 

nd, in what follows, the consequence of the execu- 
tion of the command, namely, that the watchman 
attended accurately to the least motion of the nations 
against Babylon, and, after long expectation, had dis- 
covered” what is afterward related. See Vitringa. 
The reader will observe, that as the command to set 
a watchman was given to the prophet in a vision, so 
it was executed by him only inavision. It signified, 
however, what should really be done afterward, 
namely, when the Medes and Persians should march 
to besiege and attack Babylon. 

Verse 7. And he saw a chariot with two ‘riders, 
&c.——“ This passage,” says Bishop’ Lowth, “is ex- 
tremely obscure from the ambiguity of the term 
355,” (here rendered chariot, ) “ which is used three 
times ; and which signifies a chariot, or any other 
vehicle, or the rider in it; or a rider on a horse, or 
any other animal; or a company of chariots or 
riders. The prophet may possibly mean a cavalry 
in two parts, with two sorts of riders; riders on 
asses, or mules, and riders on camels: or led on by 
two riders, one on an ass, and one’on a camel.” Or, 
as some think, the verse may be rendered, He saw 


a cavalcade, two file of horse, (C°wID WD¥,) wilh 


ass-carriages, and carriages of camels ; ode he 
attended with very Close attention. According to 
this translation, the meaning is, that the watchman 
saw the army of the Medes.and Persians, with their 
usual cavaleade of horse, (attended by those beasts 
of burden, asses.and camels, which accompanied 
armies,) moving toward Babylon; upon which he 
gave the greatest attention possible. Or, according 
to the common reading, Darius and Cyrus, leading 
the Medes and Persians, are intended to be distin- 
guished by the two riders, or the two sorts of cattle. 
The baggage of Cyrus’s army, Herodotus tells us, 
was carried on camels. 

Verses 8, 9. And he cried, A lion—“ The present 
reading, 78, a Lion, is so unintelligible,” says Bishop 
Lowth, “and the mistake so obvious, that I make no 
doubt that the true reading is MN,” (he that saw, 
or looked out,) “as the Syriae translator manifestly 
found it in his copy, who renders it by “p17, specu- 
lator,” the observer, or watchman. The bishop, 
therefore, renders the clause, He that looked out on 
the watch cried aloud. My lord, I stand continu 
ally upon the watch-tower—The watchman speaks 
these words to. the prophet, who, by command from 
God, had set him in this station ; ‘tow hom, therefore 


vk 


¥ 


, = 


a 


‘R 


The prophecy 


a 


4a 
* , 
“ 
., “¢ 


concerning Dumah. 


« 2 ; : - 
ws . ) SD Peres 


A. M. ae. 


od Fs _time, and I am set in my ward * whole |) 


cel nights. 

9 And behold, here cometh a chariot af: men, 
with a couple of horsemen. And he answered 
and said, * Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and ‘all 
the graven images of her gods he hath broken 
unto the ground. 


5 Or, every night. Tee li. 8; Rev. xiv. Pg xviii. 2.——! Ch. 
xlvi. 1 ; Jer. 1. 2; li. 4 


he gives, the 
the office wherewith he was intrusted. In the day- 
time, §c., whole nights—According to thy command 
I have stood, and do stand continually, both day and 
night, in my ward. This is.said to express his great 
care and attention, and thereby to confirm the truth 
of the prediction which follows, as that which would 
“as certainly come to pass, as if a watchman had de- 
scried the approach of an enemy afar off. And be- 
hold, here cometh a chariot, &c.—Or, as in verse 7, 
a cavalcade of men; two file of horse, &c. Bishop 
Lowth renders it, from the Syriac and Ephraim Sy- 
rus, Behold, here cometh a man, one of the two 
riders: and he answered— Answered to the prophet, 
who set him to watch, or-the Lord, by whose com- 
mand he wasset. Babylonis fallen, is fallen—The 
expression is doubled, to show the certainty of the 
event. 
speak of a thing future as if it were already accom- 
plished, to signify that it will certainly be accom- 
plished; and all the graven images of her gods he 
hath broken, &e—“It is remarkable that Xerxes, 
after his return from his unfortunate expedition into 
Greece, partly out of religious zeal, being a profess- 
ed enemy to image-worship, and partly to reimburse 
elf after his immense expénses, seized the sa- 
treasures, plundered or destroyed the temples 
idols of Babylon, and thereby accomplished this 
prophecy.”—-Bishop Newton. 

Verse 10. O my thrashing, &c.—In these words, 
which form the conclusion of the prophecy, “the 
application, the end, and design of it, are admirably 
given in a short expressive address to the Jews, 
partly in the person of God, partly in that of the 
prophet.” The first words of the verse, O my 
thrashing, and the corn of my floor, are supposed 
to be spoken by God, in which thrashing is put for 
the corn thrashed, and the corn thrashed for people 
sorely afflicted and punished: as if he had said, “O 
my people, whom for your punishment I have made 
subject to the Babylonians, to try and to prové you, 
and to separate the chaff (or straw) from the corn, 
the bad from the good among you; hear this for your 
consolation: your punishment, your slavery and op- 
pression, will have an end in the destruetion of your 
oppressors.” The reader will observe, “the image 
of thrashing is frequently used by the Hebrew poets, 
with great elegance and force, to express the punish- 
ment of the wicked and the trial of the good, or the 
utter dispersion and destruction of God’s enemies.” 
That which I have heard, &e.—Here “the prophet 
abruptly breaks off the speech of God, and instead 


142 


ollowing account of his discharge of | 


It is usual, likewise, for the prophets to | 


10 ™O my thrashing, and the ® corn A/M.-3290. 
of my floor: that hich Ihave heard °° "* 
of the Lorp of hosts, the God of Asrael, have I 
declared unto you. 

11 % "The burden of Dumah. He calleth to 
me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? 
Watchman, what of the night? 


m Jer. li. 33. 


6 Heb. son. 2] Chron. i. 30; Jer. “xlix. 7, 8 
Ezek. xxxv. 2; Obad. 1 


of continuing it in the form inf whic he had begun, 
and in the person of God, he changes the form of 
address, and adds, in his own person, That which I — 
have heard, §c., have I declared unto you.” In 
which words he signifies, that he had faithfully re- 
lated to them what God had revealed to him, and 
that the predictions which he had uttered were not 
his own inventions, but the very word of God, which, 
therefore, would be infallibly accomplished in. their 
season. See Bishop Lowth. 

‘Verses 11, 12. The burden of Dumah—Or Idu- 


|mea, as appears by the mention of mount Seir, 


which follows. This prophecy, “from the uncer- 
tainty of the occasion on which it was uttered, and 
from the brevity of the expression,” is acknowledged 
to be extremely obscure. The general opinion of 
interpreters seems to be, that it refers to the time of 
some common calamity, which the prophet foresaw 
would oppress Judea and the neighbouring countries, 
as suppose the invasion of the Assyrians, or the 
tyrannical domination of the Babylonians. During 
this calamity the prophet introduces the Idumeans, 
inquiring of him concerning the quality and duration 
of it. He informs them in answer, that “the calami- 
ty should soon pass from Judea, and that the light 
of the morning should arise to the Jews, while the 
Idumeans should be oppressed with a new and unex- 
pected affliction; so that what should be a time of 
light to the Jews, should be to them a time of dark- 
ness. The ‘prophet, foreseeing that they would 
scarcely believe his words, admonishes them that the 
matter was fixed, as they would find the more accu- 
rately they inquired into it.’ According to this 
general view of the passage, the particular expres- 
sions may be interpreted as follows: Watchman— 
So they term the prophet, either seriously or in scorn, 
because the prophets were so called by God and by 
the people of the Jews; what of the night—What 
have you certain to tell us of the state of the night? 
How far is it advanced? “Do you observe no signs 
of the approach of the morning? That is, what do 
you observe of our present distress and calamity ? 
Is there-any appearance of its departure, and of the 
approach of the morning of deliverance? The pro- 
phet answers enigmatically, Fhe morning cometh— 
Deliverance to the Jews; and also the night—To 
the Idumeans: to them I ‘will give light; you I will 
leave in darkness. So St. Jerome and the Chaldee 
Paraphrase. See Dodd. Or the meaning of the 
prophet’s answer be, “that the deliveranee of 
the Jews would e in its appointed time; but that 
the day of their prosperity would be succeeded by a _ 
Ss | 


ed 


bees. 


e S 


The prophecy 


CHAPTER XXII. 


concerning Arabia. 


= 


—— 


A.M. 3290. 12 'The watchman said, The morn- 
B.C. 714. 

np Bins ing-cometh, and also the night: if ye 
will inquire, inquire ye: return, come. 

13 4 ° The burden upon Arabia. In the fo- 
rest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ia travelling 
companies ? of Dedanim. 

14 The inhabitants of the land of Tema 
7 brought water to him that was thirsty, they 
prevented with their bread him that fled. — 

15 For they. fled * from ° the. swords, from the 


Jeremiah xlix. 28. 1 ie a Chron. i. 9, 32.——7 Or, bring ye. 
Or, for fear. 


drawn sword, and from the bent bow, A. M. 3290 
and-from the erievousness of war. * anit dad 

16 For thus hath the Lorp said unto me, 
Within a year, 4according to the years of a 
hireling, and all the glory of *Kedar shall 
fail : 

17 And the residue of the number of archers, 
the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall 
be diminished : for the Lorn God of Israel hath 
spoken it. 


* Heb. _ from dhs face me Chap, xvi. i 14. 
Ix. 


a exx. 5; Chap. 
g Hee bows. 


dark night of adversity: or, that after a short con- 
tinuance of approaching prosperity to the Edomites, 
a dreadful ruin would come upon them, of which the 
prophet saw no end.”—Scott. The last clause, Jf ye 
will inquire, &c., is taken by some to be an exhort- 
ation to the Edomites, to consider their ways, to 
repent and turn to God. Lowth paraphrases it thus: 
“Tf you will inquire indeed, and ask questions in 
earnest, inquire of God first, ask his mercy, and af- 
terward come again, and ye shall have a more favour- 
able answer.” 

Verse 13. The burden of Arabia—“ While God 
revealed to his prophet the fate of foreign nations, 
among others he declares that of those Arabians 
who inhabited the western part of Arabia Deserta, 
or Petrea,” and bordered upon the. Idumeans last 
mentioned. They are here termed the companies 
of Dedanim, being the ‘descendants of Dedan, the 
son of Jokshan, the son of Abraham by Keturah; 
and travelling companies, because a great number 
of them used to travel together the same way, as 
now companies travelling together in those parts 
are called caravans. ‘In saying, In the forest shall 
ye lodge, the prophet foretels that they should be 
driven into flight by the Assyrians, or that that pop- 
ulous country should be turned into a desolate wil- 
derness. 

Verses 14, 15. T'he inhabitants of the land of Te- 

‘ ma—Another part of Arabia, (of which see Job vi. 
19; Jeremiah xxv. 23,) namely, the posterity of 
Tema, Ishmael’s son; brought water to him that was 

thirsty-—To the Dedanites, “who are here represented 
as being reduced to great straits, being forced to flee 
from the enemy without any provision for their sub- 
sistence. They prevented with bread him that fled 

—That is, that fled for his life from the sword of the 

enemy, as is more fully expressed in the next verse. 


ee To bring forth bread wa water, in such cases of 
distress, is an instance of common humanity; espe- 


cially in these desert countries, in which the common 


necessaries of life, more particularly water, are not 
easily met with, or procured.” See Deuteronomy 
xxiii. 4. 


Verses 16, 17. For thus hath the Lord said—Hith- . 


erto the prophet had spoken figuratively: now he 
ceases to do so; within a year—From the time of 
the delivery of this prophecy, according to the years 
of a hireling—Namely, an exact year: for hirelings 


| diligently observe and wait for the end of the year, 


when they are to receive their wages. And this 
prophecy “was probably delivered about the same 
time with the rest m this part of the book, that is, 
soon before or after the 14th of Hezekiah, the year 
of Sennacherib’s invasion. In his first. march into 
Judea, or in his return from the Egyptian expedition, 
he might, perhaps, overrun these several clans of 


7 


Arabians, whose distress, on some such occasion, is _ 


the subject of this pr ophecy. ”_ Bishop Lowth. And 
all the glory of Kedar shailfail—Their power and 
riches, and all things wherein they used to glory 
The Kédar enes were another division of the Arab 
descended from Kedar, Ishmael’s son, (Genesis 
13,) who were famous for the use of the bow, as is 
intimated in verse 17, at which weapon their ancestor 
Ishmael was very expert, Genesis xxi. 20. The same 
people are said to dwell in the tents of Kedar, (Psalm 
exx. 5; Cant. i. 5,) and were remarkable for their 
éwarthiness, the word Kedar signifying black or 
tawny. It is here foretold that they should suffer a 
grievous slaughter, whereby their mighty men should 
be diminished, and that they should be deprived of 
their flocks, tents, furniture, and wealth, and be 
obliged to save themselves by fleeing into the inte- 
rior parts of the desert. : 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Lhe contents of thes chapter relate to the city of Jerusalem, and the neighbouring country. We have the grievous distress anto 
‘which the Jews should be brought b: 4 the Assyrian invasion, under Sennacherib, or that of the Chaldeans, under Nebu- 


chadnezzar, 1-7. .A reproof gi 
neglecting to look.to God, 8-11. 
2° 


PTs 


em for depending for preservation-on the contrivances of their own wisdom, and 
For indulging themselves in profane Joy and luxurious revelling, when they ought to 


143 


co 


. 


. 


s 


~ as gh 
_ a Se 

oe iz. — aK 

The prophecy 

“hav 


| Shebna for his pride, 15-19. 
Oe iad 


r d.. 


Eliakim appoi 


? 


ete 3292, PHE burden of the valley obgeion. 

e able What aileth thee now, that thou 
ee rt wholly gone up to the house-tops ? 

aed Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, 

} joyous city: thy slain men are notslain with 

hacsvibrd, dead in battle. 
All My s are fled together, they are 
: s: all that are found in 


f the bow.—— Jeremiah iv. 19; 


S$ ON CHAPTER XXII. 
Verses 13. e burden of the valley of vision— 
Fa % rage Judah, and especially of Jerusalem, called a valley, 
b cause a great part of it stood in a valley between 
posite hills of Zion and Acra, and between 

Acra and Moriah; (see Josephus’s Jewish War, v 
13; and vi. 6;) and the valley of vision, because it 
Eo the seat of divine revelation, the place where 
chiefly prophetic visions were given, and.where God 
manifested himself visibly in the most holy place. 
The reader will observe this is the seventh discourse 
of the second part; and relates to the calamity brought 
on Jerusalem by the invasion of, the Assyrians or 

Chaldeans, or both, and to the fall of Shebna. 

~ What aileth thee now 2—The prophet. refers here 
to the commotion into which the city was, or, he 
foresaw, would be, thrown upon the report of the 
approach of the hostile army to besiege it, and to the 
perturbation of the people’s minds and the general 
confusion. That thou art wholly gone up to the 
_house-tops—Hither to reconnoitre the approaching 
enemy, or to consult for thine own safety. Thou 
\ that art--Or rather, wast, full of stirs—Of great 
trade, people hurrying to and fro about-their busi- 
ness; a tumultuous city—Populous and noisy; a 
joyous city=-Full of revelling and jollity. What 
ails thee now that the shops and mercantile houses 
are quitted, and there is no more walking in the 
streets, but thou art to be seen crowding the house- 
tops ?-=“'The houses in the East were, in ancient 
times, as they are still generally, built in one the 
same uniformmanner. The roof, or top of the house, 
1s always flat, covered with broad stones, or a strong 
plaster of terrace, and’ guarded on every side with a 
low parapet wall. The terrace is frequented as much 
as any part of the house. On this, as the season 
favours, they walk, they eat, they sleep, they trans- 
act business, they perform their devotions. The 
house is built with a court within, into which chiefly 
the windows open; those that are open to the street 
are so obstructed with lattice-work that no one either 
without or within can see through them. Whenever, 
therefore, any thing is to be seen or heard in the 
streets, any public spectacle, any alarm of a public 


» th 


& 


& 


nature, every One immediately goes u the house- 
tops to satisfy his curiosity. In the same manner, 
when any one had occasion to make thing pub- 


14 


“a 
: 
7 


- 


ISATAH. 


mbled themselves under his mighty hand, which conduct God would ¢ 


a 


{ 


a punish, 12-14. 
tee? m office, to “—- reat “benefit of the country and his own 


The displacing of 


thee are bound pest which have ‘A. M. 3292. 
fled from far. eae ing 

A Therefore said I, Look away from me; 
>]? will weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me, 
because of the ee of the daughter of my 
people. 

5 ° For it is a day of trouble, and of- tteoiding 
down, and of perplexity “by the Lord Gon of 


~ Heb. T will be bitter in warping: ——* Chap. xxxvii.3.——¢ Lam. 
3 11.2, 


lic, the readiest and most effectual way of doing it 
was, to proclaim it from the house-tops to the people 
in the streets.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Thy slain men are not slain with the sword—But 
either by famine or pestilence in the siege. Senna- 
cherib’s army having laid the country waste, and 
destroyed the fruits of the earth, provisions nmst 
needs be very scarce and dear in the eity, which 
would be the death of many of the poorer sort of 
people, who would,be constrained to. feed:on what 


was unwholesome. But this prediction, with that 
contained in the next verse, ore eminently 
fulfilled when the city was besieged by the Chaldeans, 


See Jer. xiv. 18; xxviii. 2. And Vitringa is of opin- 
ion, that the prophet has that calamity in view, as 
well as the affliction suffered under the Assyrian 
invasion. Allthy rulers are fled together—Zedekiah 
and his chief commanders, whose flight he foretels. 
See Jer, xxxix. 3, 4. They are bound by the archers 
—Bishop Lowth renders ‘this clause, they are fled 
from the bow, that is; from the bows and arrows of 
the Assyrian archers: or, as others translate this 
former part of the verse, "All thy captains are fled 
together with a wandering ight from the bow. 
That is, they are fled far and wide; they are bound 
—Namely, those who could not flee away fast 
enough to escape the Chaldeans. All that are found 
in thee—Namely, in the city, with Zedekiah, during 
the siege; for those who had fled to the Chaldeans 
saved their lives and liberties. Or, as the words, 
yxyn2 52, may be rendered, All that are found of 
thee, or belonging to thee ; which have fied from far 
—Or, have fled a great way off, namely, who fled 
from Jerusalem, but were pursued and overtaken by 
the enemy, 2 Kings xxv. 4-7, and Jer. Iii. 8-11. _ 
Verses 4,5. Therefore said I, &e—* Behold the 
prophet here anticipating those lamentations which 
he was afterward to pour forth, and which Jeremiah 
so pathetically poured forth, an eye-witness of this 
calamity. For the expressions here are too stro 
to be applied to any other calamity-than the great 
and final one, when the Jews were carried captives 
to Babylon;” of which the prophet had a clear 


% 


foresight. Look away from me—Take off your 
eyes and thoughts from me, and leave me alone, that 
I may take my sorrow. Labour not to comfort 


me--For all your labour will be-lost. I neither can 
3 


, = 


.  * 


ae, 


7 7 + 
ale r 


The prophecy 


7: ee 3292. 2 hosts j in the valley 7 
———— down the walls, and of. crying to th 
mountains. 
6 ° And Elam bare the quiver with chariots 
of men and horsemen, and £ Kir ® uncovered 
the shield. — Rik 
7 And it shall come to pass, that *thy choicest 
valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horse- 
men shall set themselves in array ‘at the gate. 
8 4 And he discovered the covering of Judah, 
and thou didst look in that day to the armour 
® of the house of the forest. 


e Jer. xlix, 35. £Ch..xv, 1.——* Heb. made \naked. 
the choice of thy valleys——* Or, toward. 


4 Heb. 


nor will receive any consolation, Because of the 


spoiling, &c.—Of that city and nation, whereof I | 


amamember. The title of daughter is often given 
both to cities and nations, as hath been observed 
before. For it is a day of treading down--In 
which my people are trodden under foot by their 
insolent enemies; and of perplemity by the Lord of 


hosts—-This is added, partly to show, that this did | 


not happen. without God’s providence; and partly 
to aggravate thefgelainity, because, not only men, 
but God himself fought against them; breaking 
down -the walls—Of the strong cities of Judah; 
which was done both by Sennacherib and by Nebu- 
chadnezzar; and of crying to the mountains—With 
such loud and dismal outcries as should reach to 
the neighbouring mountains. “Who does not see,” 
says Vitringa, “in Isaiah, thus weeping over Jerusa- 
lem, a type of Jesus weeping over this same city in 
its last extremity ?” 

Verses 6, 7. And Elam bare the quiver—This se- 
cond member of the first part of this prophecy, 
which begins here, seems evidently to, refer to the 
Assyrian invasion; for the Medes and Elamites, 
or Persians, were united with the Assyrians in the 
time of Sennacherib, but not of Nebuchadnezzar. 
The Persians were expert bowmen, as appears 


from’ Jer. xlix. 35, and from Strabo’s testimony. | 


With chariots of men and horsemen—As some of 
them fought on foot, so others from chariots and 
horses. And HKir—That'is, the Medes, so called, 
from an eminent city and region of that: name in 
Media; 2 Kings xvi. 9; Amos i. 5; wncovered. the 
shield-—Prepared their defensive and offensive wea- 
pons, and themselves, for the battle; for in times 
of peace arms were wrapped up and covered, to 
preserve them clean and fit for use. 
valleys shall be full of chariots—Valleys were the 

t proper places for the use of chariots; and the 
horsemen at the gate—To assist and defend the 
footmen, while they made the assault, and to prevent 

those who endeavoured to escape. 

Ver. 8-11. And he—Namely, the enemy Sennache- 
rib, of whose invasion he seems to speak ; discovered 
the covering of Judah-—Took e fenced cities 
which were a covering or-safeguard, both to the peo- 

Wow. Iii. (10) 


, 


CHAPTER XXII. 


ision, nore 


Thy choicest’ 


at 


4 * 4 Ln > . 

. - peal a 
% i ae 

~ » Tae 

, . ; oa . “chp as 

ne - . , ee % 

> a: ‘against Jerusalem s6 
7 - i, 


9 ® Ye have seen also. the breaches Teese 
of the city of David, that they are - e 
m -and ye gathered. together the x of # 
the lower pool. 

10 And ye have numbered the houses 5 ae 
rusalem, and the houses haye ye imino & 


to fortify the wall. ty 
11 } Ye made also a. ditch bety s the bee 


walls for the water of the old Pods bu phe 


* 


have not looked unto * the. 
ther had respect -unto him tha 
long ago. 


pane vil. 2; x. 17. ings x 
5, 30. —i Neh. iii, 16.—* 


tdst ot oo r 
p Low po 


Thor 

Or, rather, as Dr. Waterland and Bishc 
der it, Thow shalt, or wilt look, &e. 
phet is evidently predicting an ‘invasion which was 
future, and the behaviour of the Jews on that occa- 


ple of Tridel and to Jerusalem. 


sion. He is showing beforehand some of the causes 
of these judgments, namely, the. crimes and vices of | 
the people; and first, in these verses, their incon- 
sideration and want of faith.. They would look, he 
says, to the armour of the house of the forest-—But 
not to God. The history (2 Chron. xxxii. 2, &c.) 
best explains this passage. From thence we learn, 
that the prince and the people were rather. solicitous 
to seek for human defence, by fortifying their city, 
than for that which was divine, by haying respect 
unto him who was their king and protector. The 
house of the forest is that mentioned 1 Kings vii. 2, 
where the armory was kept. ‘See the note there. 
The pr ophet proceeds to foretel that they would see, 
| that is, observe or consider, the breaches of the city. 
of David—Namely, in order to the reparation. 
them, and to fortify the city ; that they would gather 
the waters of the lower pool—In order that they 
might both deprive the-enemy of water, and supply 
the city with it: of which see on 2 Chron. xxxii. 3, 
4, That they would number the houses of Jerusa- 
lem—Namely, with a view to know their own 
strength,-and the number of their people, ‘that so 
they might lay the burdens more equally upon them, 
and make sufficient provision for them; that they 
would break down the houses--Namely, whiek stood 
upon or without the walls of their city, and which 
therefore would have given their enemies advantage 
against them, and have hindered the fortifying of the 
city. But, adds he, ye have not looked, or will not 
look, unto the maker thereof—That is, of Jerusalem, 
mentioned in the foregoing verse; him that fashion- 
ed it—Hebrew,. 793", the former, or framer of it, 
God, who made it a city, and the place of his special 
presence and worship; which also he had under- 
taken to protect, on condition that the people would 
observe his commands; to whom, therefore, they 
should have » recourse in this time of their dis- 
tress. The expression pin, of old, or long ago, 
may be added: to aggravate their sin in distrusting 


145 
hs, 


av” 


‘ee 


i 


The displacing of 


ISAIAH. 


Shebna for his pride. 


A. M. 3292. 12 And in that day did the Lord 


B72 Gop of hosts call to weeping, and to 
mourning, and ™ to baldness, and to girding with 
sackcloth : -'> 

13 And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen 
and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine: 
Jet us eat and drink ; for to-morrow we shall die. 

14 °And it was revealed in mine ears by the 
Lorp of hosts, Surely this iniquity ? shall not 
be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord 
Gop of hosts. ~ toe 

15 4 Thus saith the Lord Gop of hosts, Go, 
get thee unto this treasurer, even unto 9 Shebna, 
* which zs over the house, and say, 


16 What hast thou here, and whom A. M., 3292. 
‘hast thou here, that thou hast: hewed. 92" 
thee out a sepulchre here, * as he * that heweth 
him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth 
a habitation for himself in a rock? 

17 Behold, 7the Lorn will carry thee. away 

with * a mighty captivity, ‘and will surely cover 
thee. : a, 
18 He will surely violently turn and toss thee 
like a ball into a °large country: there shalt 
thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory 
shall be the shame of thy lord’s house. _ 

19 And-I will drive thee from thy station, and 
from thy state shall he pull thee down. 


~ 


1 Joel i. 13,——™ Ezra ix. 3; Chapter xv. 2; Micah i. 16, 
» Chap. Ivi. 12; 1 Cor. xv. 32. oChap. -v. 9. P 1 Sam. iii. 
14; Ezek. xxiv. 13.——42 Kings xviii. 37——" 1 Kings iv. 6. 
Or, O he——' 2 Sam. xviii. 18; Matt. xxvii. 60. a 


that God’ who had now, for a long time, given proof 


_ of his care and kindness in defending that city. 


Verses 12-14. And in that day did, or will, the 
Lord call, &c.—Another fault, which the prophet 
imputes to the carnal Jews, is impenitence, or carnal 
security. He foretels that God would call them to 
weeping and mourning, and other instances and evi- 
dencés of humiliation and godly sorrow; but that, 
instead thereof, he should find them given up to joy 
and gladness, slaying oxen, &c., that is, to levity and 
luxury, mirth and feasting: saying, Let us eat and 
drink, for to-morrow we die—The prophet tells us, 
that we shall certainly and suddenly be destroyed; 
it concerns. us, therefore, to make our best of the 
present time, and to be merry while we have oppor- 
tunity : a most perverse and desperate conclusion, 
proceeding from obstinate profaneness and contempt 
of God’s judgments. Jt was revealed in mine ears 
—God himself hath said to me; Surely this iniquity 


shall not be purged till youdie—This, your harden- | 


ing your hearts, under and against God’s judgments, 
and defeating and rendering ineffectual the means 
provided for bringing you to repentance, shall never 
be forgiven you, but you shall feel the effects of such 
conduct, and of God’s displeasure against you for it, 
as long a8 you live. . 
Verse 15.\ Thus saith the Lord of hosts, &e.— 
This second part of the prophet’s discourse, which 
contains the judgment upon Shebna, seems to be so 
connected with the former as to give reason to sup- 
pose that this man was the chief among the profane 
nobles of that time, against whom the prophet de- 
claims in the preceding verses; and that, having the 
first place in the state and palace after the king, he 
had, by his example, corrupted many others. “We 
know nothing certain concerning him, further than 
that he was the treasurer, or steward of the king’s 
household. He seems to have been a different per- 
son from that Shebna, the scribe, mentioned chap. 
xxxvii. 2. Some have thought that he was not a 


native Jew, but a foreigner, and a man of low birth; 
“se 


1 


}| Spaces. 


7 Or, the LorD, who covered thee with an excellent covering, and 
clothed thee gorgeously, shall surely, &e., Verse 18. © Hebrew, 
the captivity of a man.—— Esther vii. 8. ® Hebrew, large of 


” "a 


= 


which they infer from “the pride of his. desire to 
ennoble himself by a splendid sepulchre:” but of 
these things there is no evidence. z ' 

Verses 16-19. What hast thou here?—Or, What 
dost thou here? What right hast thou to this place 
and office? And whom hast thou here 2—What re- 
lations or family? T'hat thou hast hewed thee out 
a sepulchre—That thou art ambitious of raising a 
stately sepulchre for thyself and thine heirs? As he 
that heweth out a sepulchre on high—In a high 
and eminent place; a habitation for himself in @ 
rock—A monument that shall preserve his memory 
to all succeeding times. _7'he Lord will carry thee 
away with a mighty captivity—Will cause thee to 
be carried: into captivity by-a strong hand, or by the 
hand of a mighty man, from which, therefore, thou 
shalt not be able to escape. The Hebrew, powhwis 
422 muy, is rendered by Dr. Waterland, will throw 
thee ovt hence with a mighty throw, and may also 
be rendered, will cast thee away with the casting 
of a mighty man, that is, with great force ; and will 
surely cover thee—Namely, with confusion, as is 
here implied, and as this phrase is more fully ex- 
pressed Psa. cix. 29. Or, this may be an allusion to 
the condition of mourners in general, and particular- 
ly of condemned persons, whose faces were wont to 
be-covered.: He will violently turn and toss thee 
like a ball—Hebrew, 73 151¥ 1238" *)3I¥, rolling 
he will roil thee with the rolling of a ball ; into a 
large country—Like a ball which is cast into a large 
and plain spot of ground, where, being thrown with 
great force, it runs far and wide. Or, to a far cown- 
try, meaning probably Assyria. T'here shalt thow 
die—After having lived in obscurity. And the 
chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord’s 
house—The honour thou didst arrive at, and the 
chariots in which thou didst ride with so much state 
at Jerusalem, shall turn to thy shame, and to the re- 
proach of those who preferred so unworthy a person. 
Dr. Waterland translates the verse, He will toss and 
whirl thee, as he were whirling a. ball, &ce., and 

: -¢ Foe 


( 10% ) 
i> 


4: 
The prophecy 


A. M. 3292. 


2 har 20 J And it shall come to pass in 


——— that day, that I will call my servant 
* Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah. 

21 And I will clothe him with thy robe, and 
strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will com- 
mit thy government into his hand: and he shall 
be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and 
to the house of Judah. 

22 And the key of the house of David will I 
Jay upon his shoulder: so he shall * open, and 
none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none 
shall open. 


«2 Kings xviii. 18—* Job xii. 14; Rev. iii. 7 


there shall be thy glorious chariots, O thou shame 
of thy lords house. And I will drive thee, &e.— 
These are the Lord’s words; and from thy state 
shall he. pull thee down-Namely, the Lord shall ; 
such sudden changes of Rersanh being very usual in 
these writings. 

Verses 20-22. J will ail my servant Eliakin— 
By my Spirit fitting him for the work, and moving 
the heart of Hezekiah to call him to it And I will 
clothe him with thy robe, &e.—There was a-peculiar 
sort of robe and girdle, which was the badge of his 
office, which should be taken from him and given to 
Eliakim: And he shall be a father to. the inkabit- 
ants of Jerusalem—He shall not only have the au- 
thority of a father; which thou now hast, but he shall 
govern them with fatherly care and affection. And 
the key, &c:—As the robe and the girdle or baldric, 
mentioned in the preceding verse, were the ensigns 
of power and authority, so likewise was the key ; 3 
being a significant emblem of the power of opening 
and shutting, of binding and loosing, of letting infe- 
riors into an Office, or putting them out of it; whence } 
the opt of the .keys of a house or city into a 
person’s hands signifies the giving him the power 
and possession of it, or the: confirming to him such 
a grant. “To comprehend, ” says Bishop. Lowth, 
“how the key could be borne on the shoulder, it will 
be necessary to observe, that one sort of keys, used 
by the ancients, was of considerable magnitude, and, 
as to the shape, very much bent and crooked. Ho- 
mer ( Odyss., xxi. 6) describes the key of Ulysses’s 
storehouse as eveayrnc, a large curvature, which Eu- 
‘stathius explains by saying it was Rawtnsesiec. in |, 
shape like a reap-hook. Huetius says, the constel- 
lation Cassiopeia answers to this description; the 
stars to the north making the curve part, that is, the 


principal part of the key; the southern stars the 
handle.. The curve part was introduced into the 
key-hole, and, being properly directed by the handle, 
took hold of the bolts within, and moved them from 
their places. We may easily collect from this ac- 
count, that such a key would lie very well upon the 
shoulder; that it must be of some considerable size 
and weight, and could hardly be commodiously car- 
ried otherwise. In allusion to the key as the ensign 
of power, the unlimited extent of that power is ex-)| 
3 


| 


f ~ 


CHAPTER XXIL 


-serve for convenience. 


| Bishop Lowth. 


ee 


COnCErTeRE Eliakim. 


23 And I will fasten him as Ya nail A. M. 3292 
ima sure place; and he shall be for a Nae 
glorious throne to his father’s house. 

24 And they shall hang upon him all the 
glory of his father’s house, the offspring and 
the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the 
vessels of cups, even to all the !° vessels of flagons. 

25 In that day, saith the Lorn of hosts, shall 
the nail that is fastened in the sure place be 


removed, and be cut down, and fall; and he #. 
burden that was upon it shall be @: off: for the ~ 


Lorp hath <ares it. 


y Ezra ix. 8 


pressed here with great clearness as well as force by 
the sole and exclusive authority to open and to shut. 
Our Saviour, therefore, has, upon a similar occasion, 


_made use of a like manner of expression, Matt. xvi: 
/19; and in Rev. iii. 7 has applied to himself the very ~ 


words of the prophet.” 
Verse 23. I will fasten him as a nat will 


| establish the. power in his hands, as a nail is fixed 


in the strong. walls or solid timber of a house. “In 
ancient times, and in eastern countries, as the’°way 
of life, so the houses were much more ‘simple than 
ours at present. They had not that quantity and 
variety of furniture, nor those accommodations of 
all sorts, with hich we abound. It was convenient, 
and even necessary for them, and it made an essen- 
tial part in the building of a house, to furnish the 
inside of the several apartments with sets of spikes, 
nails, or large pegs, upon which to ‘dispose of, and 
hang up, the several moveables and utensils in com- 


| mon use, and proper to the apartment. These spikes 


they worked into the walls at the first erection of 
them; the walls being of such materials that they 
could not bear their being driven into them after- 


| ward; and they were contrived so as to strengthen 


the walls by binding the parts together, as well as to 
We see, therefore, that 
these nails were of necessary and common use, and 
of no small importance in all thei apartments ; con- 
spicuous, and much exposed servation ; and if 
they seem to us mean and insignificant, it is because 
we are not acquainted with the thing itself, and 
have no name to express it by, but what conveys to 
us alow and contemptible idea: Grace hath been 
showed from the Lord our God, says Ezra, (ix. 8,) 
to leave us arémnant to escape, and to give us anail 
in his holy place; that is, as the margin of our 
Bible explains it, a constant and sure abode.” 

And he shall bea glorious throne 
to his father’s house—By his prudent and right- 
eous government he shall procure great glory, not 
only. to himself, but to all that have any relation to 


| him. 


Verses 24, 25. They shall hang upon him all the 
‘glory of hid father’s house—Of his own kindred 


‘and family, who shall all depend upon him, and 
| receive ec! from him ; the offspring and the issue 
147 


™, 


Jo 


s* 
ze Or, instruments of viols. 3 ; * 


’ 


wv 


The prophecy 


ISAIAH. 


against Tyre. 


—Great and small, the children and grand-children, 
of his father’s house. All vessels of small quan- 
tity—The meanest of them shall receive a lustre 
and advantage from their relation to him; from 
the vessels of cups, &c.—All sorts of vessels, great 
or small, mean or precious, may be hanged upon 
him, without any fear of falling. In that day 
shall the nail, &c—This must be understood 


of Shebna, as a repetition and confirmation of 
the sentence above denounced “against him; shall 
the nail that is fastened—That séemed to be so, 
both in his own eyes, and in the eyes of others; be 
removed and fall—As above described; and the 
burden that was upon it shall be cut off—All those 
wicked officers that were advanced and supported 
by his power. vi 


» | 
; / CHAPTER XXIII. 


__ An this chapter is foretold, (1,) The lamentable desolation of Tyre, by the Chaldeans, to the consternation of the Tyrians 
a themselves, and their neighbours, 1-14. (2,) The restoration of Tyre after seventy years, when their trade and commerce 


should flourish again, 15-17. 
A. M. 3289, [THE “burden of Tyre. Howl, ye 
B. C. 715. ; : ta hee 
~eereenacarin ships of Tarshish ; for it is laid 
waste, so that there is no house, no enfering in: 

» from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them. 


(3,) The conversion of the Tyrians to God, 18. - . 


2 Be. ‘still, ye inhabitants of the 8 wh 
isle; thou whom the merchants of ———_— 
Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished. 

3 And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the 


a Jer. xxv. 22; xlvii. 4; Ezek. xxvi., xxvii-, xxviii. ; Amos 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIII. 

Verse 1. T'he burden of. Tyre—Tyre was an an- 
cient and wealthy city, situated upon the Mediterra- 
nean sea, and for many. ages one of the most cele- 
brated cities in those parts:of the world. The Greek 
geographer, Strabo, says, that after Sidon, it was the 
greatest and most ancient city of the Phenicians. 
Accordingly, Bishop Lowth makes no question but 
it is meant Josh. xix. 29, where mention is made of, 
the strong city Tyre,-as existing when Canaan 
was divided by lot to the tribes of Israel. And it is 
mentioned also in the fragments of Sanchoniathon, 
the Phenician historian, who is reckoned to have 
lived about the-time of Gideon, or somewhat later. 
In the days of David and Solomon it evidently ap- 
pears to have been a place of great note, and it con- 
tinued and increased in its commerce, wealth, popu- 
lation, and power, during the reigns of the subse- 
guent kings of Israel and Judah. When Isaiah ut- 
tered this prophecy respecting its desolation, (which 
he did one hundred and twenty-five years at least 
before its aeccomplishment,) it stood firm in its 
strength and glory, abounded in riches, and ‘was es- 
pecially mighty in naval power, having lately con- 
quered the navy which the Assyrians had brought 
against it.. Yet this city, according to this prophecy, 
was destroyed, and that twice; first by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, and long afterward by Alexander the Great. 
The former it withstood thirteen years, at the end 
of which time the inhabitants, wearied out by end- 
less efforts, resolved to place the sea between them 
and their enemy, and accordingly passed into an isl- 
and about half a mile from the shore, where, as Vi- 
tringa has proved at large from good authorities, a 
smaller city already stood, accounted a part of Tyre, 
and where had long been the prineipal station for 
ships. The city on.the island was by this means 
greatly enlarged, and was afterward termed New 
Tyre. 


148 


i.9; Zech. ix. 2; 4.——> Verse 12——* Heb. silent. 


months; and before he could take it he was obliged 
to fill up the strait which separated the island from 
the continent. Although this prophecy first and 
more directly respects the former destruction, yet it 
seems to‘have some reference to the latter also; 
only it.is here foretold, that seventy years after the 
former destruction, and before the latter, Tyre should 
recover her former power and glory, which came to 
pass accordingly. This is the eighth and last dis- 
course of the second part of Isaiah’s prophecies. . 
Howl, ye ships of. Tarshish—By Tarshish, it 
seems, Tartessus in Spain is meant, a place which, 
in the course of trade, the Tyrians greatly frequent- 
ed: see note on chap. ii. 16. Howling and lament- 
ing are ascribed: to the ships by a known figure; for 
it ts. laid waste—It shall shortly be laid waste; so 
that there is no house, &c.—Every house, or ware- 
house, shall be shut up, and all trade shall cease. 
From the land of Chittim it is revealed to them— 
Namely, to the ships, that is, the negotiators and 
mariners of Tarshish, whose gain proceeded princi- : 
pally from Tyre, and whom the prophet here ad- 
dresses ; as if he had said, “ Lament and deplore the 
mournful fall of this city, which you, shall hear of 
while you are trafficking in the most distant parts of 
the Mediterranean sea.” Chittim, ‘in Seripture, sig- 
nifies all the countries lying upon that sea; and the 
words import that the news of the siege of Tyre 
should be dispersed through them all. Indeed, ac- 
cording to Jerome on verse 6, when the Tyrians 
saw they had no other means of escaping except 
by sea, while some of them fled in their ships to the 
adjoining island,.as mentioned above, ‘others of them 
took refuge in Carthage, and in the islands of the 
Ionian and Egean seas, from whence the news would 
easily reach Tarshish. , 
Verses 2, 3. Be still, ye inhabitants of the isles— 
Hebrew, 195, be silent ; as persons confounded, and 


This stood out against Alexander seven’| not knowing what to say, or as mourners use to be. 


The prophecy 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


against Tyre. 


A.M. 3 ag harvest. of the. river, is her revenue; 

B.C. 

~ and “she is a mart of nations. 

4 Be thou ashamed, O-Zidon: for the sea 
hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, say- 
ing, I travail not, nor bring forth children, nei- 
ther do I nourish up young men, nor bring up 
virgins. 

5 ‘As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall 
they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre. 

6 Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabit- 
ants of the isle. 


¢ Ezek. xxvii. 3 —4 Ohap. xix. 16—* Ch. xxii. 2——* Heb. 


Silence is a mark of grief and consternation: see 
chap: xlvii.5; Lam. xi. 10. The prophet here ad- 
dresses the people of Tyre now fled to the island. 
The title of island, however, is often given by the 
Hebrews to places not surrounded by the sea, but 
only bordering: upon it; whom the merchants of Zi- 
don have replenished—With mariners and commo- 
dities. Tyre and Sidon, being cities near each other, 
and both,famous for merchandise and navigation, 
helped to enrich each other. And-by great waters 
the seed of Sihor, &c.—Sihor here means the river 
Nile, so called, as it is also Jer. ii. 18, and 1 Chron. 
xiii. 5, from the blackness of its waters charged with 
the mud, which it brings down from Ethiopia, when 
it overflows; as it was called by the Greeks Melas, 
and by the Latins Melo, for the same reason. “The 
English translation,” says Lowth, “ published under 
Queen Elizabeth, gives us a clearer sense of this 
verse thus: The seed of Nilus, growing by the abun- 
dance of waters, and. the harvest of the river was 
her revenues.” Egypt, by. its extraordinary fertili- 
ty, caused by the overflowing of the Nile, supplied 
the neighbouring nations with corn, by which branch 
of trade the Tyrians gained great wealth. 

Verse 4. Be thow ashamed, O Zidon—Tyre is 
ealled the daughter of Zidon, verse 12, being built 
and first inhabited by a colony of the, Zidonians. 
Or, rather, as Justin says, “The Zidonians, when 
their city was taken by the king of Ascalon,. betook 
themselves to their ships, and landed and built 
Tyre.” Zidon, therefore; as the mother city, is here 
supposed to be deeply afflicted with the calamity of 
her daughter. For the sea hath spoken—That part 
of the sea in which Tyre was, and from which ships 
and men were sent into all countries; even the 
strength of the sea—This is added to explain what 
he meant by the sea, even Tyre, which might be 
called the strength of the sea, because it was strong 
at sea, both by its situation, and the strength of its 
naval forces; saying, I travail not, &e.—I, who 
was so fruitful that I sent forth colonies into other 
countries, (of which Carthage was one,) am now 
barren and desolate. 

Verse 5. As at the report concerning Egypt, &c. | 

—“ The words, as they. stand in our translation, im- 
‘ply, that the Zidonians, spoken of verse 4, or in gen- | 


| 


7 Is this your * joyous city, whose A. ee 
antiquity zs of ancient days? her own 
feet shall carry her ? afar off to sojourn. 

8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, 
‘the. crowning city, whose merchants. are 
princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of 
the earth ? 

9 The Lorn of hale hath purposed it, 3 to 
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into 
contempt all the honourable of the earth. 

10 Pass through thy land asa river, O daugh- 


from afar off. 


concerned at the news of the destruction of Tyre 
as they were at the calamity of Egypt, mentioned 
chap. xix. But there is a difficulty in admitting 
this sense, because the destruction of Tyre here 


f See Ezek. xxviii. 2, 12——* Heb: to pollute. 


spoken of was before that of Egypt, if we mean _ 


that calamity of Egypt.which is usually joined with 
the destruction of Tyre in the prophets: see Jer. 
xxv. 19, 22; Ezek. xxix. 18-20. . Therefore others 
read this verse thus: As soon as the report of Tyre 
shall come to, or be heard in, Egypt, they shall be 
in great pain for it; namely, because they exported 
their corn to Tyre, and made a gainful trade by it.” 
—Lowth. 

Verses 6,7. Pass ye over to Tarshish—F lee from 
your own country to Tartessus in Spain, and there 
bewail your calamity. Or, betake yourselves for re- 
fuge to some of the parts to which you used to 
traffic. The LXX. say, e¢ Kapyndova, to Carthage, 
which was a colony transplanted from Tyre. Hoavl, 
yeinhabitants of the isle—Of Tyre, as verse 2. Is 
this your joyous city 2-—That formerly lived in so 
much pomp, and pleasure, and security? Whose 
antiquity is of ancient days—See on verse 1. Tyre, 
though not so old as Zidon, yet certainly was of 
very high antiquity. Justin, in the passage above 
quoted, had dated the building of it at a certain num- 
ber of years before the taking of Troy; but the num- 
ber is lost in the present copies. Her own feet shall 
carry her—Whereas before, like a delicate lady, she 
would not set her foot to the ground, but used to be 
carried in stately chariots; afar off to sojourn—To 
seek for new habitations. 

Verses 8, 9. Who hath taken this counsel against 
Tyre 2—Words of admiration. Who, and where, is 
he that could imagine, or durst attempt such a thing 
as this? This is the work of God, and not of man. 
The crowning city—Which was a royal city; and 
carried away the crown from all other cities: whose 
merchants are princes—Equal to princes for wealth, 
and power, and reputation. The Lord of hosts 
hath purposed it—This is the Lord’s own doing} to 
stain the pride of all glory—God’s design is, by this 
example, to abase the pride of all the potentates of 
the earth, that they may see how weak they are 
when he sets himself against them. 

Verse 10. Pass through thy Lawk-pheaay no 


eral other neighbouring places, should be as much , longer in thy own territories, but flee through them, 


149 


- 


 till-you be all gon 


_ which the Hebrews used the word son and daugh- 


_. strengthens the loins of a man being here put for 


The desolation 


ISAIAH. 


of Tyre. 


A. M. 3289. ter of Tarshish : 
B.C. 715. , 
strength. . 
11 He stretched out his hand over the sea, he 
shook the kingdoms; the Lorp-hath given a 
commandment * against ° the merchant-city, to 
destroy the 7 strong holds thereof. 
12 And he said, § Thou shalt no more rejoice, 
—— 


there is no more||O thou oppressed virgin, 


daughter of alt, CUR. 
Zidon : arise, "pass over to Chittim; ——~ 
there also shalt thou have no rest. 

13. Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this 
people was not, ¢i/ the Assyrian founded it for 
‘them that dwell in the wilderness: they set 


up the towers thereof, they raised up the 


* He. girdle. 


5Or, concerning a merchantman. © He. Canaan. 


7 Or, strengths. — Rey. xviii. 22——Ver. 1——# PsasIxxii. 9. 


into other countries, for safety and relief. As a 
river—Swiftly, Oe on be prevented ; continually, 

and in shoals and multitudes. 
O daughter of Tarshish—Tyre is here called the 
daughter of Tarshish, because it was enriched and 
increased by trade to that place: or, rather, as 
Bishop Lowth supposes, “ because.of -the close con- 
nection and perpétual intercourse between the two 
cities, according to that latitade of signification in 


ter, to express any sort of conjunction ‘and depend- 
ance whatever.” There is no more strength—Or, 
no more a girdle, as in the margin: the gitdle which 


strength, as frequently elsewhere, as if he had said, 
It behooves you, O Tyrians, to flee away, as I advise, 
for your city is unable to defend you; your wealth, | 
the sinews of war, is lost; your walls are broken | 
down; and your former friends and allies have for- | 
saken you. 

Verses 11, 12. He—Namely, the Lord, mentioned | 
in the latter part of the verse; stretched out his hand | 
over the sea—That is, Tyre, called the sea, (verse 4 | 
to overthrow it. He shook—Hebrew, 77390, he made 
to tremble, the kingdoms—Either the two kingdoms 
of Tyre and Zidon, or the ‘neighbouring and con- | 
federate kingdoms, which might justly quake at her 
fall, for the dreadfulness and unexpectedness of the 
event; and because Tyre was'a bulwark and a refuge | 
to them. T'he Lord hath. given a commandment, | 
to destroy, &c.—Hath put this design into the hearts | 
of her enemies, and given them courage to attempt, 
and strength to execute it. how shalt 0 more re- 
joice, oppressed virgin—He calls her a virgin, be- 
cause she had hitherto never borne the yoke of a| 
conquering enemy ; though withal he signifies that 
she should be oppressed, and, as it were, ravished, 
by her enemies. Daughter of Zidon—Tyre is 
called the daughter of Zidon, because she was first 
built and inhabited by a colony of the Zidonians ; 
as Pliny calls Carthage the daughter of T'yre, be- 
cause she was built by a colony of Tyrians. “It is 
certain,” says Lowth, “ that of the two cities, Zidon 


1] 


| tories, which are now lost. 


was much the most ancient, being mentioned by | 


Moses in his account of the peopling of the world 
after the flood, Gen. x. 19; and again, chap. xlix. 13. 
Afterward it is called by Joshua, great Zidon, 
Josh. xi. 8: Homer likewise takes notice of Zidon, 
but not of Tyre; and the authority of Strabo is ex- 
press to the same purpose.” Arise, pass over to 
Chittim, &c.—See on verses | and 6. « Of all the 
Phenicians,” says Bishop Newton, “the Tyrians 
150 


were the most celebrated for their shipping and co- 
lonies. Tyre exceeded Zidon in this respect, as 
Strabo testifies, and sent forth colonies into Africa 
and Spain; unto and beyond the pillars of Hercules: 
and’ Quintus Curtius says that her colonies were 
diffused almost over the whole world. The Tyrians, 
therefore, having planted colonies at Tarshish, and 
upon the coasts of Chittim, it was natural for them, 
when they were pressed with dangers and difficulties 
at home, to flee to their friends and countrymen 
abroad for protection. That they really did so, St. 
Jerome asserts, upon the authority of Assyrian his- 
But,” it is here foretold, 
that, “though they should pass over to Chittim, yet 
even there they should find no quiet settlement; 
There also shalt thou have no rest—Megasthenes 
‘| (an historian. who lived about 300 years before 
| Christ) is quoted by several ancient authors, for 
| saying that Nebuchadnezzar subdued a gteat part 
of Africa and Spain, and proceeded as far as the 
pillars of Hercules. After he had subdued Tyre 
and Egypt, we may suppose he carried his arms 
further westward; and if he proceeded as far as 
Megasthenes reports, the Tyrians might well be said 
to have no rest, their conqueror pursuing them from 
one country to " another. But besides this, and after 
this, the Carthaginians, and other colonies of the 
Tyrians, lived in a very unsettled state. Their his- 
tory is made up of little but wars and tumults, even 
before their three fatal wars with the Romans, in 
every one of which their affairs grew worse and 
worse. Sicily and Spain, Europe and Africa, the 
land, and their own element, the sea, were theatres 
of their calamities and miseries; till, at last, not only 
the new, but old Carthage too, was utterly destroyed. 
As the Carthaginians sprung from the Tyrians, and 
the Tyrians from the Zidonjans, and.Zidon was the 
firstborn of Canaan, (Gen. x. 15,) so the curse upon 
Canaan seems to have pursued them to the most 
distant parts of the earth.” 

Verse 13. Behold the land of the Chaldeans, &c. 
—This verse, in which there is much obscurity, 
wili admit of different interpretations. One adopted 
by Dr. Lightfoot and some others, is to this purpose: 
Behold, how easily the land of the Chaldeans was 
destroyed by the Assyrians, though their own hands 
founded it, set wp the tower of Babylon, and raised 
up its palaces ; yet he, the Assyrian, it to 
ruin: the king of Assyria having lately taken Baby 
lon, and made it tributary to the Assyrian empire. 
Another: and more probable interpretation is thus 
stated by Poole, and adopted by rs “You 


> 


The restoration of Tyre 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


, = 
” 


after seventy years. 


ae 88 ». palaces thereof, and he brought it to 
: ruin. 

‘14 * Howl, ye ships of Tarshish : for your 
strength is laid waste. 

15 4 And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, 
according to the days of one king: after the 
end of seventy years 8 ‘shall Tyre sing as a 
harlot... 


16 Take a harp, go about the city, thou har- 


e 


_ ¥ Verse 1; Ezek. xxvii. 25, 30.—® Heb. it shall be unto Tyre 


—s 


lot that hast been forgotten; make A. M. 3289. 
sweet melody, sing many songs, that er Se 
thou mayest be remembered. 

17 And it shall come to pass after the end of 
seventy years, that the Lorp will visit Tyre, and 
she shall turn to her hire, and ! shall commit 
fornication with all the kingdoms of the world 
upon the face of the earth. 

18 And her merchandise and her hir = shall 
be holiness tothe Lorn: it shall not b 


as the song of a harlot. Rev. xvii. 2: Zech. “ie. 
ee 


Tyrians, who think your city impregnable, cast your 
eyes upon the land and empire of the Chaldeans, or 
Babylonians ; which though now it be a flourishing 
kingdom, and shall-shortly become more glorious 
and potent, yet: shall certainly be brought to utter 
ruin: and therefore your presumption is unreasona- 
ble and vain.”, The last clause especially, in the 
original, mba3b now, hehath placed, or appointed, 
it for ruin, seems evidently to favour. this interpret- 
ation. Bishop Newton, however, (with whom 
Bishop Lowth, Dr. Waterland, and many others 
agree,) understands the prophet as speaking in this 
clause, not of the ruin of Babylon, but of Tyre: 
He therefore interprets the verse thus: “ Behold— 
An exclamation, that he is going to utter something 
new and extraordinary ; the land of the Chaldeans— 
That is, Babylon, and the country about Babylon ; 
this people was not--Was of no note or eminence ; 
till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in 
the wilderness—They dwelt, before in tents, and led 
a wandering life in the wilderness, till the Assyrians 
_ built Babylon for their reception. They set up the 
towers thereof, they raised’ up the palaces thereof— 
Herodotus, Ctesias, and other ancient historians 
agree, that the kings of Assyria fortified and “beau- 
tified Babylon; and he—That is, this people,” (as 
Bishop Lowth renders it,) “ mentioned before, the 
Chaldeans or Babylonians, browght it to rwin—That 
is, Tyre, which is the subject of the whole prophecy. 
The Assyrians were at that time the great monarchs 
of the East; the Chaldeans were their slaves and 
subjects ; and therefore it is the more extraordinary 
that the prophet should, so many years beforehand, 
foresee the successes and conquests of the Chal- 
deans.” - 

Verses 15-17. And it shall come to pass, &¢.— 
Here begins the second part of this discourse, which 
contains an alleviation of the judgment decreed 
against Tyre. The prophet foretels, 1st, “'That 
God would circumscribe within certain bounds 
his severity to Tyre, and within seventy years re- 
store it to its former state ;” and, 2d, “ That in pro- 
cess of time the Tyriansshould be converted to the 
true religion,” verse 18. The former particular is 
predicted, first literally,and then figuratively. T'yre 
shall be forgotten—Neglected and forsaken by those 
who used tortraffic with her; seventy years, according 
to the days of one king—-“ Or kingdom, meaning 

3 ; 


the Babylonian, which was to. continue mty 
years.” After the end of seventy years shall Tyre 
sing as a harlot, &c—The plain meaning of this 
metaphorical passage, says Bishop Newton, in which 
Tyre is represented as a harlot, “ is, that she should 
lie neglected of traders and merchants for seventy 


years, as long as the Babylonian empire lasted, and. 


after that she should recover her liberties and her 
trade, and draw in several of all-nations to deal with 
her, and particularly the kings of the earth to buy 
her purples, which were worn, chiefly by emperors 
and kings, and for which Tyre was famous above all 
places in the world. Seventy years was the time 
prefixed for the duration-of the eebieg alee: 
So long the nations were to groan under that tyran- 
nical yoke, though these nations were subdued, some 
sooner, some later than others, Jer. xxv. 11, 12. Ac- 
cordingly, at the end of sev enty years, Cyrus and the 
Persians subverted the Babylonian empire, and re- 
stored the conquered nations to their liberty.” The 
bishop observes further, that these seventy years 
may-also be computed after another manner. “Tyre 
was taken by Nebuchadnezzar in the thirty-second 
year of his reign, and in the five hundred and seventy- 
third before Christ. Seventy years from thence will 
bring us down to the year five hundred and three 
before Christ, and the nineteenth of Darius Hystas- 
pis. At that time, it appears from history that ‘the 
Tonians had rebelled against Darius, and the Pheni- 
cians assisted him with theirfleets: and, consequently, 
it is reasonable to conclude that they were now re- 
stored to their former privileges. In the succeeding 
reign we find that they, together with the Sidonians, 
furnished Xerxes with several ships for his expedi- 
tion into Greece. And, by the time of Alexander, 
the Tyrians were grown to such power and great- 
ness that they stopped the progress of that rapid 
‘conqueror longer than any part-of the Persian em- 
pire besides. But this is to be understood of the in- 
sular Tyre; for, as the old city flourished most be- 
fore the time of Nebuchadnezzar, so the new city 
flourished most afterward, and this is the ‘yn that 
henceforth is so much celebrated in history.” 

Verst 18. And her merchandise, §c., shall be 
holiness to the Lord—The meaning of the prophet 
is extremely clear, namely, “that the time should 
come, after the restoration of Tyre, in which the 
Tyrians; out of reverence to the true God, would 

151. 


) 


red 


i 


ISAIAH. 


bad 


vee tiape. 


¥ 

The terrible judgments 
Sele 2969. nor laid up; for her merchandise 
=~: "* shall be for them that dwell before the 
. . Heb. 


consecrate their wealth and gain to him, and would 
readily contribute that gain and wealth to the sup- 
port of the teachers of true religion. In short, that 
the Tyrians should become converts to. that re- 
ligion. The reader will easily observe that the pas- 
sage is metaphorical.” “'The Tyrians were much 
addicted to the worship of Hercules, as he was call- 


- “ed by the Greeks, or of Baal, as he is denominated 


in Scripture ; but, in. process “of time, by the means 
of some Jews and proselytes, living and: conversing 
with them, some of them also became proselytes to 
the Jewish religion ; so that we find a gréat muiti- 
tude of people from the sea-coast of Tyre and Sidon 
came to hear our Saviour ; and he, though peculiarly 
sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, yet came 
into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon ; and the first 
fruits of the gospel there was a T'yrian woman, a 
woman of Canaan, as she is called, a ‘Syro-pheni- 
cian by nation. When St. Paul, in his way to Jeru- 


Lorp, to eat sufficiently, and for ° du- A: M. 3280. 
rable clothing. : 


* & 


old. 


salem, came to Tyre, he found disciples there, who 
were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and prophesied ; 
and with them he tarried seven days, In the time 
of Dioclesian’s persecution, the Tyriams were such 
sincere converts to Christianity that they exhibited 
several glorious examples of confessors and martyrs ; 
and when the storm of persecution was blown over, 
under’ their Bishop. Paulinus, they built an oratory, 
or rather a temple, for the public worship of God, 
the most magnificent and sumptuous in all Palestine. 
Eusebius produces this last occurrence in proof of 
the completion of Isaiah’s prophecy ; and St. Jerome 
is of the same opinion. ‘To these proofs we will 
only add, that as Tyre consecrated its merchandise 
and hire unto the Lord, so it had the honour of be- 
ing erected into an archbishopric, and the first under 
the patriarchate of Jerusalem, having fourteen bishops 
under its primacy; and in this state it continued sev- 
eral years.”—Bishop Newton : 


t 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


After ae foretold the debtrtceton of the foreign nations, enemies to Judah, the prophet declares the judgments impending 
on, the Jews themselves, for their apostacy and wickedness, and the desolation that should be brought on their whole country. 
This is the general subject of this chapter, in which we have, (1,) A threatening of these desolating judgments, 1-12. 


(2,) An assurance that in the midst of them the truly pious should be eee 13-16. 


(3,) A further threatening of 


the like desolations, 17-24. To which is added an assurance that, in the midst of all, God should be glorified. But con- 
cerning the particular application of the subject of this chapter, interpreters are not all agreed. Some refer it to the deso- 
lation caused by the invasion of Shalmaneser ; others to the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar, and others to the destruction of 


the city and nation by the Romans. 


Perhaps it may have a view to all these three great desolations of the country, espe- 


cially the last, to which some parts of it may seem peculiarly applicable. 


A. a 3292, 1 ota the Lorp maketh the 
B.-C. 712. , 
ben” Sion and maketh it 


earth empty, 
waste, and * turneth’ it upside down, and 


£ Heb. perverteth 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIV. 

Verse 1. Behold, &e.—According to Vitringa, the 
third book of Isaiah’s prophecies begins with this 
chapter, and extends to the thirty-sixth, being divided 
into three discourses; the first comprehending four 
chapters, ‘the second six, and the third two. The 
general subject of the book is the penal judgments 
denounced by God upon the disobedient Jews, and 
the enemies of the church, with the most ample 
promises to the true church. This first discourse; 
contained in this and the three following chapters, 
Bishop Lowth thinks, was delivered “before the de- 
struction of Moab by Shalmaneser, (see Bx XxV. 
10,) and consequently before the destruction of Sa- 
maria, and probably in the beginning of Hezekiah’s 
reign. * 

152 


The: Lord maketh the earth empty—The | 


scattereth abroad the inhabitants A. eS a 
thereof. een 
2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with 


the face thereof. 


word yoNn, here translated the earth, may, with 
equal propriety, be rendered the land, as indeed it is 
in verses 3 and 13 of this chapter, and very frequent- 
ly elsewhere. . The land of Canaan seems to be here 
meant, including both Israel and Judah, which was 
made empty when the inhabitants of it were carried 


into captivity, which they were, first by the Assyri- 
ans, and then by the Chaldeans. And it ade 
still more empty and desolate in the last great 


destruction of its cities and people, particularly of 
Jerusalem and its inhabitants by the Romans; of 
which see on Deut. xxviii. 62. To this destruction 
especially the prophet is thought to refer in ne A 
parts of this chapter. ~~ 

Verses 2, 3. And it shall be, as with the so 
with the priest, &c.—-The calamity shall be pagal 


Pe 


e le 


Terrible desolations 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


- 


and judgments foretold. 


A. M. 3292. the ? priest; * as with the servant, so 
712, : 3 H : 
with his master; as with the maid, so 
with her mistress; > as with the buyer, so with 
the seller; as with the lender, so with the bor- 
rower ; as with the taker of usury, so with the 
giver of usuryto him. ; 


3 The land shall be utterly emptied, and utter- | 


ly spoiled: for the Lorp hath spoken this word. 
4 The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the 
world languisheth and fadeth away, the 
haughty people of the earth do Janguish. 
5 ° The earth also is defiled under the inha- 
bitants thereof; because they have transgressed 


the laws, changed the ordinance, bro- A. M, 3292, 
ken the everlasting covenant. i ogabee 

6 Therefore hath ‘the curse devoured the 
earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate 
ihlatefaid the inhabitants of the earth are burned, 
and few mien left. 

7 ©The new wine mourneth, the vine lan- 
guisheth, all the merry-hearted do sigh. 

8 The mirth ‘ of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of 


them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the bemP i 


ceaseth. 
9 They shall not drink wine with a’ song; 


strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it. 
= ee 


3 Heb. the 
4 Mal. 


a Hos. iv. 9.——> Ezk. vii. 12, 13. 
Gen. i. 17; Num. xxxv. 33: 


? Or, prince. 
height of the people. 


iv. 6. € Chap. xvi. 8, 9; Joel i. 10, 12.—— Jer. vii. 34; xvi. 
9; xxv. 10; Ezek. xxvi. 13; Hos. ii. 11; Rev. xviii. 22. 


sal, without any respect or distinction of persons or 
ranks of men;-the priests themselves, having been 
partakers of the people’s sins, shall also partake with 
them of their plagues. As with the buyer, so with 
the seller—The purchaser of lands shall. have no 
more left than he that hath sold his patrimony; but 
all persons shall be made. equal in beggary and 
slavery. The land shall be utterly emptied and 
utterly spoiled—Shall be deprived both of its riches 
and inhabitants.. “As the public calamities coming 
upon the land were to be repeated, at various times 
and in various manners,” the sacred writer is thought 
by some interpreters to have “accommodated his 
discourse to these calamities, and divided it into va- 
rious articles and gradations.” See Vitringa. 

Verse 4. The earth, the land, mourneth. and 
fadeth away—Hebrew, 1933 no, abelah nabe- 
lah, lamenteth, falleth. The world languisheth, 
&e.— The world,” says Bishop Lowth, “is the same 
with the land ; that is, the kingdoms of Israel and 
Judah; orbis Israeliticus,” the Israelitish world. 
Heathen authors frequently speak, of particular pro- 
vinces and countries under the name of orbis, orbis 
habitabilis, and orbis terrarum, the world, the habit- 
able world, the whole world, &c. 
mode of speaking is often used in the Scriptures, 
where we not only find the Roman empire termed 
the world, (even all the world,) as Luke ii. 1; Acts 
X1, 28 ; but also Babylon, (Isa. xiii. 11,) and this very 
land of Judea, John xii. 19; and xviii. 20. The 
haughty people of the land—Hebrew, Dy D109, 
the height of the people, those ofthe highest dignity 
in it; or the lofty people, as Bishop Lowth renders 


it. Not only common people are depressed and sunk 
in sorrow, but the magistrates and rulers, the rich 
and powerful, the haughty and high-minded. In- 


deed, these are wont to suffer most under such 
calamities, either as having most to lose, or as not 
being used to hardships. 

Verses 5,6. The earth also—Rather, And the 
land is defiled under the inhabitants thereof—By 
the wickedness of its people. Here we have the 
causes of the divine judgment upon the land: be- 
cause they have transgressed the laws—The laws 

3 


And the same | 


of God revealed to them, and pressed upon them in 
a singular manner ; Ger eed the ordinance—GoW’s 
ordinances concerning his worship.and service; bro- 
ken the everlasting covenant—The covenant made 
between God and Abraham, and all his posterity, 
which was everlasting, both on God’s part, who, upon 
the conditions therein expressed, engaged himself 
to be a God to them, and to their seed for ever; and 
on Israei’s part, who were obliged thereby to con- 
stant and perpetual obedience through all genera- 
tions., Therefore hath the curse—The curse of God 
threatened to transgressors; devoured the earth— 
See this illustrated Zech. v. 1. And they that dwelt 
therein are desolate—Reduced to poverty, by the 
spoiling of their goods. The inhabitants are burn- 
ed—Destroyed., by fire and sword, or consumed by 
the wrath of God,.which is often compared to fire; 
and few men left—The prophet’s general meaning 
is, that the inhabitants of the land should waste away 
and be consumed, being partly cut off by the sword, 
partly dispersed by the public calamities, partly de- 
stroyed by famine, and partly carried into captivity, 
so that but few of them should remain, and they only 
of the poorer sort. 
in Judea at the time referred to. 

Verses 7-9. The new wine mourneth, &e.—In 
these verses we have a description, m metaphorical 
language, of the ruin and desolation brought ona 
once flourishing land by a destructive enemy. ‘The 
wine, figuratively speaking, mourns, because there 


are none, or none but enemies'to God and Israel, to 
drink it. The vine languisheth—Because there are 
no people left to dress it, or gather its grapes; or 
because it is broken down and spoiled by the enemy. 
In other words, the vineyards are destroyed, and the 
fruits of the earth consumed by hostile invasions. 
The mirth of tabrets ceaseth—There is no place for 
mirth or rejoicing, much less for the usual expres- 
sions of it, when men are under such great calami- 
ties. They shall not drink wine with a song— 
Those that can command wine under this scarcity 
will have no heart to drink it: nor would it, if 
drunk, be able to cheer their spirits amidst such great 


troubles. 
153 


And this was the face of things 


as 


. 


‘In the midst of oe aed 


ISATAH. 


the pious shall be comforted. 


A. M, 3202. 
B ONT? down: every house is shut up, that 
no man may come in. 

11 There is a crying for wine in the streets ; 
all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone. 

12 In the city is left desolation, and the gate 
is smitten with destruction. 

13 4% When thus it shall be in the midst of the 
land among the people, & there shall’be as the 


10 The city of confusion is broken |j shaking of an olive-tree, and as the = = 


gloaning-ethipes when the i is — 


done. 
14 They shall lift up their voice, shat shall 
sing for the majesty of the Lorn, they s shall cry 
aloud from the sea. 

15 Wherefore glorify ye the Lorn in the *fires, 
even ™the name of the Lorp God of ‘Asrael in 
the isles of the sea. 


ee 


; ; & Chap. xvii. 5, 6. 


* Or, valleys. b Mal. i. 11, 


Verses 10-12. The city—Jerusalem, and other 
cities, for the word may be here taken collectively ; 
of confusion—Hebrew, nn, which signifies vanity, 
emptiness, desolation, or confusion. And the city 
may be thus called, either, 1st, In regard of the judg- 
ments of God coming upon it, as if he had termed it 
a city devoted to desolation and destruction : or, 2d, 
For its sin, a city of contin and disorder; break- 
ing ali the laws and orders which God had established 
among them; or a city walking in and after vanity, 
worshipping vain idols, and pursuing vain things. 
And this may seem the most proper and suitable, 
that.the sin of the city should be pointed out in this 
word, as the punishment is-expressed in the next; 
is broken down—Its walls, palaces, and temple bat- 
tered down and demolished; every house is shut up 
—Either for fear of the enemy, who have entered 
the city, or because the inhabitants are either fled or 
dead, or gone into captivity. This seems to be only 
applicable to the destruction of the city by the 
Chaldeans, or by the Romans. Thereis acrying for 
wine--For the want~-or loss of their wine; or 
for the spoiling of the vintage, whereby they were 
deprived of the means both of their profit and plea- 
sure. Jn the city is desolation—In Jerusalem itself, 
that had been so much frequented, there’ shall be 
left nothing but desolation; grass shall grow in the 
streets. 
The gates of the city are totally ruined, so that the 
enemy may enter when and where they please. 
Or, all that, used to pass and repass through the 
gates are smitten, and all the strength of the city is 
destroyed. How.soon can God make a city of order, 
a city of confusion ; and then it will soon be a city 
of desolation ! 

Verses 13, 14. When thus it shall be in the midst 
of the land, &ec—When this judgment shall be 
executed, there shall be left a remnant;.as there 
are some few olives or grapes left after the vintage 
is over. They shall lift up their voice, &c.—The 
remnant shall sing for the glorious power and good- 
ness of God manifested in their deliverance. Z'hey 
shall cry aloud—In a way of exultation and thanks- 
giving to God; from the sea—From the isles of the 
sed, as it is expressed in verse 15, that is, from the 
isles of the Western or Mediterranean sea, whither 
many of the Jews were scattered, and where they 
sojourned. “The great distresses brought upon 


Israel and Judah drove the people away, and dis- | 


154 


The gate is smitten with destruction— 


persed them all over the neighbouring countries; 
they fled to Egypt, to Asia Minor, to the islands and 
coasts of Greece. They were to be found in great 
numbers in most of the principal cities of these 
countries... Alexandria. was, in a great measure, 
peopled by them. ~ They had synagogues for their 
worship in many places; and were greatly instru- 
mental in propagating the knowledge of the true 
God among these heathen nations, and preparing 
them for the reception of Christianity. This is what 
the prophet seems to mean by the celebration of 
the name of Jenovan in the distant coasts, and in 
the uttermost parts of the land.”—Bishop Lowth. 
Verse 15. Wherefore glorify ye the Lord—These 
seem to be the words of the prophet directing and 
exciting God’s people to glorify him in their afflic- 
tions, because of that deliverance which he had 


promised, and would assuredly grant them ; in the 


jfires—When you are in the furnace of affliction. 
But, as the word "5n3, here translated, in the fires, 
is not used elsewhere in Scripture, in this sense, 
others render it, in the valleys; and others again, 
in the holes, or caves; as if he had said, Glorify ye 
the Lord, who are forced to hide yourselves in 
secret places. Possibly, however, the word may 
be better rendered, for lights, or illwminations, 
which may be understood, either of the light of the 
truth which God would reveal to them, or of the 
comfort which God would confer upon them, light 
being frequently taken in both senses in Scripture. 
For this Hebrew word, in alt other. places of Serip- 
ture where it is found, signifies the Urim, which 
was in the high-priest’s breast-plate, and which 
properly signifies lights or illuminations, as both 
Jews and Christians understand it: see note on 
Exodus xxviii. 30. Add to this, that this part of the 
prophecy seems to concern the days of the gospel, 
and that light which the Jews should then receive 
by the Messiah; of whom the high-priest, with his 
ephod and urim, was a type. Thus understood, 
this is an exhortation to the converted Jews to 
bless God for the true Urim, even for Christ and 
the gospel. The name of the Lord in theisles of 
the sea—In remote countries beyond the sea, which 
in Scripture are commonly called isles. - It is a just 
observation of Mr. Scott, that “the chief accom- 
plishment of this prophecy seems to have been 
after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. 
At that season there was a small Mirra vy like the 


Terrible desolations.. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


and judgments foretold. 


A. M. 3292. 


B. C.-712, 16 4 From the ‘uttermost part of 


the earth have we heard songs, even 
glory to the righteous. But I said, ° My lean- 
ness, my leanness, wo unto me! ‘the treache- 
rous dealers have dealt treacherously ; yea, the 
treacherous dealers have dealt very treache- 
rously. 

17 * Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon 
thee, O inhabitant of the earth. 

18 And it shall come to pass, that he who 
fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into 


the pit; and he that cometh up out of A. M. 3292. 
the midst of the pit shall be taken in — anes 
the snare: for 'the windows frém on high are 
open, and ™the foundations of the earth do shake. 

19 » The earth is utterly broken down, the 
earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved ex- 
ceedingly. 

20 The earth shall °reel to and fro like a 
drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage ; 
and the transgression thereof shall be heavy 
upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again. 


® Hebrew, wing. 


® Hebrew, Leanness to me, or, My secret to me. 
f Jer. v. 11. 


———————— 


k See 1 Kings xix. 17; Jer. xlviii. 43, 44; Amos v. 19.—! Gen. 
vii. 11 ——™ Psa. xviii. 7 Jer. iv.23. © Chap. xix. 14. 


gleanings of the vine,-or of the olive, which had 
embraced Christianity; and wherever they were 
dispersed among the nations, and in the isles of the 
sea, they lifted up their voice in songs of praise, 


while they beheld the majesty of God displayed | 


in accomplishing these predictions; and mingled 
thanksgivings with their fervent prayers; nay, they 
excited one another to glorify God in the fiery trial 


of persecution, and though banished to the remotest } 


regions. The destruction of Jerusalem was exceed- 
ingly conducive to the establishment of the Chris- 
tian Church ; and, in this respect, was the subject 
of joy and praise to the primitive Christians.” 
Verse 16. From, the uttermost part, &c.—From 
all parts of the earth, or land, where the Jews are, 
or shall be, have we heard ‘songs--Songs of joy 
and praise; even glory to the righteous—By the 
righteous, may be here understood, either, Ist, right- 
eous and holy men, who formerly were despised, but 
now shall be honoured ; or, 2d, the Lord, theright- 
eous one, as the Hebrew ox, being singular, 
properly means; or, 3d, the Messiah, to whom this 
title of the just, or righteous one, is frequently 
given. But I'said—But in the midst of these joyous 
tidings, I discern something which interrupts my 
joys, and gives me cause of bitter complaint and 
lamentation; My leanness! my leanness!--I faint 
and pine away for grief; for the following reason: 
The treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously 
—The Jews, who have been frequently guilty of 
great perfidiousness toward God; are now acting the 
same part. This he spéaks of those who should 
live when the Messiah shotld be upon earth, fore- 
seeing, by the Holy Spirit, that they would forsake 
God and reject their Messiah, and thereby bring utter 
destruction upon themselves. For even the Hebrew 
doctors expound this place of the perfidiousness of 
some Jews in the times of the Messiah. And it is 
not-strangé that so sad a sight made the prophet ery 
out, My leanness, §c., the treacherous dealers, 
&c. This he repeats, to show the horridness of the 
crime, and how deeply he was affected with it. 
Verses 17, 18. Fear, and the pit, and the snare, 
&c.—Great and various judgments, some actually 
inflicted, and others justly feared, as the punishment 
of the last-mentioned perfidiousness of the Jews 
3 


toward God and their own Messiah. He that fleeth 
from the fear, &e.—Upon the report of some terri- 
ble evil coming toward him; shall fall into the pit 
—When he designs to avoid one danger, by so doing 
he shall plunge hi self into another and greater 
mischief. For the windows fromon high ar e opened, 
&c.—Both heaven and earth conspire against him. 
He alludes to the deluge of waters which God poured 
down from heaven, and to the earthquake which he 
ofteit causes below.. Thereisaremarkable elegance 
in the original of the 17th verse. - The three Hebrew 
words, 19, pachad, nnd, pachath, and Nd, pach, 
being a paronomasia, or having an affinity in sound 
with each other, which. cannot be translated into 
another language. And there is also great sublimity 
in the latter clause of the 18th verse, in which the 
ideas and expressions, taken from the deluge, are 
strongly expressive of that deluge of divine wrath 
which should fall upon, and totally overwhelm, the 
apostate Jews for rejecting and crucifying their own 
Messiah. 

Verses 19, 20. The earth is utterly broken down 
—This is repeated again, to show the dreadfulness 
and certainty of these judgments, and to awaken the 
stupid Israelites. Z'he earth shall reel to and fro— 
The people of the earth, the inhabitants of the land, 
shall be, sorely perplexed and'distressed, not know- 
ing what to do, or whither to go. Or rather, the 
prophet here, in metaphorical expressions, borrowed 
from an earthquake, signifies how terribly Judea 
should be shaken by wars, desolations, and other 
divine judgments, to the entire overthrow of their 
church and commonwealth ; and shall be removed 
—The people shall be removed, or their constitution, 
civil and religious, like a cottage—Or, like a lodge in 
a garden, of which this word is used, Isa. i. 8, which 
is soon taken down and set up in another place: or, 
like a tent, which is easily and commonly carried 
from place to place. And the transgression thereof 
shall be heavy upon it—Upon their state and nation, 
especially the sin of crucifying the Lord of glory. 
And it shall fall—Their government shall be over- 
turned, their state dissolved, and their nation ruined ; 
and not rise again—Not till the latter days, when 
they shall believe in and receive Him whom they 
rejected and crucified. 

155 


General judgments on the 


ISAIAH. 


Jews and other people. 


A. M. 3292. 


21 And it shall come to pass in that 
B, C. 712. . 


day, that the Lorp shall ’ punish the 
host of the high ones that.are on high, ? and 
the kings of the earth upon the earth. 

22 And they shall be gathered together, *as 
prisoners are gathered in the ° pit, and shall be 


P Psalm Ixxvi. 12. 
° Or, dungeon. 


7 Hebrew, visit upon. 
the gathering of prisoners. 
ing. : 


10 Or, found want- 


Verses 21, 22. It shall come to pass in that day— 
At or soon after the time when God shall execute 
the above-mentioned judgment.on the apostate Jews ; 
that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones 
—The proud and potent enemies of his people, who 
possess the high places of the earth; and the kings 
of the. earth—The great monarchs of the world, who 
now scorn and trample on his people. Some think 
the idolatrous persecuting Roman empire is here 
intended, but what follows seems to require that 
we should understand these verses as a further 
prediction of the ruin of the Jewish constitution 
in church and state. Bishop Lowth translates 
them, Jehovah shall summon on high the host that 
zs on high ; and on earth the kings of the earth; 
which he interprets of “the ecclesiastical and civil 
polity of the Jews, which were to be destroyed ;” the 
host of the high ones meaning the chief priests, with 
the high-priest at their head, or their ecclesiastical 
government, and the kings of the earth their civil 
power; the name of king being frequently given in 
Scripture unto inferior rulers. And they shall be 
gathered together—By God’s special providence, in 
order to their punishment. And thus the unbeliev- 
ing Jews were generally gathered together at Jeru- 
salem, to their solemn feasts, when Titus came and 
besieged and destroyed them; and shall be shut up 
in prison—-As malefactors, which are taken in se- 
veral places, are usually brought to one common 
prison. 
ter the apostate Jews shall have been shut up in un- 


5 Hebrew, with’ 


After many days they shall be visited—AF- | 


belief, and in great tribulations for many ages toge- | 


ther, they shall be convinced of their sin in erucify- 
ing the Messiah, and brought home to God and Christ 
by true repentance. “The nation,” says Bishop 
Lowth, “shall continue in a state of depression and 
dereliction for a long time. The image seems to be 


taken from the practice of the great monarchs of' 


that time, who, when they had thrown their wretch- 
ed captives into a dungeon, never gave themselves 
the.trouble of inquiring about them, but let them 
lie a long time in that miserable condition, wholly 
destitute of relief, and disregarded. God "shall at 
length revisit and restore his people in the last age: 
and. then the kingdom of God shall be established in 
such, perfection, as wholly to obscure and eclipse the 
glory of the temporary, typical, preparative king- 
dom now subsisting,” as is signified in the next 
verse. 


Verse 23. Then the moon shall be confownded— 


The shadowy, typical, temporary, and imperfect 
156 


shut up in the prison, and after many 2 ‘hy 
days shall they be 1° visited. 

23 Then the 4 moon shall be confounded, and 
the sun ashamed, when the Lorp of hosts shall 
‘reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and 
1 before his ancients gloriously. 


C12, 


4 Chap. xiii. 10; Ix. 19; Ezek. xxxii. 7; Joel ii, 31; iii. 1. 
Rev. xix. 4, 6. S Heb. xii. 22. a Ons there shall be glory 
before his ancients. 


THe sa 
dispensation of Moses, which afforded only a dim and 
uncertain light, like that of the moon, shall be eclips- 
ed and vanish; and the sun ashamed—The glory of 
the civil government, also even of the kingdom of 
David itself; shall be obscured by the far greater 
splendour of the kingdom of Christ, the King of kings, 
at whose feet the kings of the earth shall fall down 
and worship. When the Lord of hosts—The Mes- 
siah, who, though man, is yet also God, and the Lord 
of hosts; shall reign tn-mount Zion, &c.—Shall 
come in the flesh, and set up his kingdom, first in 
Jerusalem, and afterward in all other nations; be- 
fore his ancients—His ministers, who are, in some 
sort, the.courtiers of this King of glory, as being con- 
tinually attendant upon him, enjoying his presence, 
and executing the offices intrusted to them ; and es- 
pecially before his apostles, who were the witnesses 


‘of his divine words and works, and particularly of 
‘his resurrection and ascension, by which he entered 


upon his kingdom; and of the-exercise of his royal 


power in subduing both Jews and Gentiles to him- 


self. The word ancient, or elder, is not a name of 
age, but of office. And the ancients here represent, 
and are put for, the whole church, in whose name, 
and for whose service, they act. 

Some think that, at the twenty-first verse, a baat 
tion is made from the ruin of the Jewish nation for 
opposing the gospel, to the destruction of the anti- 
christian powers, which is to introduce the general 
prevalence of true religion, and the glory of Christ’s 
millennial reign; and that the twenty-first and twen- 
ty-second verses are intended of that destruction. 
There is, however, this objection to that interpreta- 
tion: it is not reconcileable with the last clause of 
verse 22, namely, after many days they shall be vi- 
stted. For surely these antichristian powers are 
not to be visited and restored. This clause indeed, 
considering the connection in which it stands, does 
not seem to be applicable to any event predicted in 
Scripture, but the conversion and restoration of the 
Jewish nation after the many ages of their dereliction 
and depression. Then, however, when the Sulness 
of the Gentiles shall be brought in, and all Israel 
shall be saved, the twenty-third verse shall receive 
a far more complete accomplishment. The Mes- 
siah’s kingdom shall then appear in its greatest glo- 
ry on earth; and the moon shall be confounded, and 
the sun ashamed. Not only the borrowed light.of 
inferior and subordinate states, but the splendour of © 
the mightiest empires shall be eclipsed and put to 
shame by it. 

3 


Thanksgiving for 


CHAPTER XXV. 


approaching deliverance. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


The prophet, reflecting on the contents of those great and glorious prophecies which he had delivered, concerning the destruc- 
tion of God's enemies, and the deliverance of his people, and especially concerning the sending of the Messiah, and the 
establishment and enlargement of his kingdom, in spite of all opposition, and the great glory of it, as predicted in the last 
verse, here interrupts the course of his prophecies, and breaks forth into a solemn celebration of these wonderful works. (1,) 
He praises God for his judgments on his proud enemies, and the protection and help afforded to his poor and destitute peo- 
ple, 1-5. (2,) He foretels the rich ‘provision which would be made for the spiritual wants of all mankind in the gospel, 


the glorious salvation of which he celebrates, 6-8. 
thereupon, 9-12. 
A. M, 3292. 
BST" will exalt thee, I will praise thy 
name; » for thou hast done wonderful things ; 
° thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth. 

2 For thou hast made ‘of a city a heap; of 
a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to 
be no city; it shall never be built. 

3 Therefore’ shall the strong people ° glorify 
thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear 
thee. ; ‘ 

4 For thou hast been a strength to the poor, 


* Exod. xv. 2; Psa. cxviii. 28. Psa. xeviii. 1. ¢ Num. 
xxiii. -19.——4 Chap. xxi. 9; xxiii. 13; Jer. li. 37. e Rev. xi. 


O LORD, thou art my God; *Ij/a strength to the needy in his distress, 


(3,) Shows the church's\triumph in God, and over all her enemies 


A. M, 3292, 
fa refuge from the storm, a shadow oe 
from the heat, when the blast of the terrible 
ones is as a storm against the wall. 

5 Thou shalt bring down the noise of stran- 
gers, as the heat in a dry place; even the heat 
with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the 


terrible ones shall be brought low. n 


6 | And in £this mountain shall ® the Lorp 


of hosts make unto ‘all people a feast of fat 
things, a feast of wines on the lees; of fat 


13.—f Chap. iv. 6.——s Chap-ii. 2, 3—— Prov. ix. 2; Matt. 
xxii. 4——' Dan, vii. 14; Matt. viii. HM. ‘ 


NOTES ON CHAPTER. XXV. 

Verse 1. O Lord—O Jehovah, thou art my God 
—In covenant with me: my friend, my father, my 
portion. The prophet speaks in the name of the 
whole church, and of every true member of it. 
will exalt thee, I will praise thy name—Expressions 
these flowing from a deep and grateful sense of the 
divine goodness. Those that have Jehovah for their 
God are in duty bound to praise him. For thou hast 
done wonderful things—In different ages and nations 
from the beginning hitherto, especially for. thy own 
people, and against their enemies. 7hy counsels of 
old—Hebrew, p10, properly, from afar, signifying 
not only counsels long before taken, but which had 
been long before declared and published by the pro- 
phets; are faithfulness and truth—That is, thy 
counsels, from which all thy works proceed, and 
which thou hast from time to time revealed to thy 
prophets and people, which were of old, being con- 
ceived from all eternity, are true and firm, and shall 
certainly be accomplished. me 

Verse 2. Thou hast made of a city a heap-—Ni- 
neveh, Babylon,..Ar of Moab, or any other strong 
city, or fortress, possessed by the enemies of the 
people of God. Vitringa has made it appear proba- 
ble that Babylon is chiefly meant, “which was em- 
phatically called the city; which was. remarkably 
fortified, and which was inhabited by strangers, as 
the Assyrians and Babylonians are commonly call- 
ed in prophetical language, and in the destruction of 
which the ancient believers rejoiced most especial- 
ly, having therein a pledge and earnest of future de- 
liverance, and particularly a type of the deliverance 
of the Christian Church from persecution, by the fall 
of spiritual Babylon.” See Rey. xviii. 20; and 
xix. 1. A palace of strangers—A royal city, in which 


qT} 
'| never be built—It has been, or shall be, utterly and 


M 


were the palaces of strangers, that is, of the kings! 


of strange peuple, or of the Gentiles. Bishop Lowth, 
on the authority of two MSS., instead of >i, stran- 


i gers, reads Ta, proud ones: which reading, he 


thinks, the LXX. countenance, as, they render the 
word acebwr, the ungodly. To be no city; it shall 


irrecoverably desiroyed. v 

Verses 3,4. Therefore shall the strong people 
fear thee—Thy stoutest enemies, observing thy 
wonderful works, shall be.converted, or at least, con- 
vinced, and forced to tremble before thee. For thou 
hast been a strength to the poor—Hast defended thy 


‘poor and helpless people against the fiercest as- 


saults of their enemies. JVhen—Or rather, for, or 
therefore, as the particle °D, generally signifies ; the 
blast of the terrible ones is as a storm—Of hail, rain, 
or wind, which makes a great* noise, but ‘without 
any effect; against the wall—Which stands firm in 
spite of it. It is probable the prophet, in these words, 
had a special respect to the miraculous deliverance 
of Jerusalem from the rage and attempt of Senna- 
cherib; although the words be general, and include 


; other deliverances of a like nature. ~ 


Verse 5. Thou shalt bring down the noise of 
strangers—The tumultuous noise, as the word pro- 
perly signifies; the rage and furious attempts of 
those heathen nations that fought against God’s 
people. As the heat in a dry place—Withas much 
ease as thou dost allay the heat of a dry place, by 
the shadow of thy clouds, or by the rain which falls 
from black and shadowy clouds. Here again, as in 
verse 2, instead of strangers, Bishop Lowth reads, 
the proud. T'he branch of the terrible ones—Their 
arm or power, as a branch is the arm of a tree; 
shall be brought low—Shall be humbled and broken. 

Verses 6, 7. And in this mountain—In mount Zi- 
on, namely, God’s church, very frequently meant by 

157 
. 


Glorious effects of 


TSATAH. 


the gospel of Christ. 


A. M. 3292. things full of marrow, of wines on the 

B.C, 712. 

lees well refined. 

7 And he will * destroy in this mountain” 
the face of the covering *cast over all peo- 
ple, and * the veil that is spread over all na- 
tions. 

8 He will 'swallow up death in victory ; and 
the Lorp God will ™ wipe away tears from off 
all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he 
take away from off all the earth: for the Lorp 
hath spoken iz. 

9 And it shall be said im that day, Lo, this 
is our God; *we have waited for him, and he 
will save us: this is the Lorp; we have waited 


1 Heb. swallow up.—* Heb. covered——* 2 Cor. iii. 15; Eph. 
iv. 18.——! Hos. xiii. 14; 1 Cor. xv. 54; Rev. xx. 14; xxi.4. 


for him, ° we will be glad and rejoice A. M. 3292. 
B, C. 712. 
in his salvation.) ~ a A 

{0 For in this mountain shall the'hand of the 
Lorp rest, and Moab shall be * trodden down 
under him, even as straw is *trodden down for 
the dunghill. 

11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the 
midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth 
forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring 
down their pride together with the spoils of their 
hands. 

12 And the ? fortress of the high fort of thy 
walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring 
to the gt ound, even to the dust. 


—. Gen. xlix. 18; Tit. ii. 13.—° Psixx: 5. 
“Or, thrashed in Madmenah. p Chap. xxvi. 5. 


™ Rey. vii. 17; xxi. 4: 
3 Or, thrashed. 


the names of Zion and Jerusalem, both in the Old 
and New Testaments; shall the Lord make unto all 
veople—Both Jews and Gentiles, who shall then be 
admitted to a participation of the same privileges 
and ordinances; a feast of fat things—A feast made 
of the most delicate provisions: which is manifestly 
meant of the ordinances, graces, and comforts given 
by God in his church, Of wines on the lees—Which 


have continued upon the lees a competent time, ' 


whereby they gain strength, and are afterward 
drawn out and refined. He will destroy the face of 
the covering—The covering of the face, or the veil, 
as the next clause expounds it, namely, of ignorance 
of God, and of the true religion ; cast over all people— 
Which then wasupon the Gentiles and the Jews, 2 Cor. 
iii. 14- 16, This.is a manifest prophecy concerning 
the illumination and conversion of the Gentiles. 
Verse 8. He—The Lord, expressed both in the 
foregoing and following words,’even the Messiah, 
who is both God and man; will ‘swallow up death— 


Shall, by his death, destroy the power of death, (Heb. | 


ii. 14,) take away the sting of the first death, and pre- 
vent the second death, and give eternal life to all that 
truly believe in him. In victory—Hebrew, ns39, unto 
victory, that is, so as to overcomeit perfectly ; which 


complete victory Christ hath already purchased for, | 


and will, in due time, actually confer upon his peo- 
ple. And will wipe away tears—Will take away 
from his people all sufferings and sorrows, with all 
the causes of them, which deliverance is begun here 
and perfected in heaven. The rebuke of his people 
—The reproach and contempt cast upon his faithful 
people by the ungodly world; shall he take, &ce.-— 
From all the church and people of God, wheresoever 
they shall be. For the Lord hath spoken it—There- 
fore doubt it not, though it seem incredible to you. 
Verse 9, And it shall be said in that day—By 
God’s people, in the way of triumph and reply to 
their enemies; Lo, this is our God—Your gods are 
senseless.and impotent idols; but our God is omni- 
potent, and hath done these great and glorious works 
which fill the world with admiration. We may well 
boast of him, for there is no god like him. We have 


| waited for him—To appear in flesh ; have waited for 


the coming of our Messiah, or Saviour, long since pro- 
mised, and have waited a long time ; and now at last 
heis come into the world, bringing salvation with him. 

Verse 10. For in this mountain—In the gospel 
church; (he alludes to mount Zion, which was a 
type of it;) shall the hand of the Lord rést—His 
powerful and gracious presence (which is often sig- 
nified in Scripture by God’s hand) shall: have its 
constant and settled abode: it shall not move from 
place to place, as it formerly did, with the taberna- 
cle; nor shall it depart as it did from Jerusalem, but 
shall continue in his church, even to the end of the 
world, Matt. xxviii. 20. And Moab shall be trodden 
down ‘under him--Under his feet, as appears by the 
following similitude. The Moabites, having been 
constant and implacable enemies to Israel, are here 
put for all the enemiés of God’s church, as the Edom- 
ites upon the same account are, chap. xxxiv. 6, and 
Ixiii. 1. Even as straw is trodden down—Even as 
easily and effectually as the straw, left upon the 
ground, is trampled upon by the feet of men and 
beasts. 

Verses 11, 12. And he—Kither, Ist, Moab, who, 
being plunged into a sea of troubles, shall endeavour 
to swim out of it, but to no purpose; or, 2d, The 
Lord, (who is designed by this pronoun he, both in 
the latter clause of this verse, and in the following 
verse, ) whose power they shall be no more able to re- 
sist than the waters can resist aman that swims, who, 
with great facility, divides them hither and thither. 
The former sense is adopted by Bishop Lowth, who 
says, “I cannot conceive that the stretching out 
the hands of a swimmer can be any illustration of 
the action of God stretching out his hands over 
Moab to destroy it.” The latter, however, is prefer-. 
red by most interpreters, as connecting best with the 
following clause. And they consider the compari- 
son as implying, that God should extend his power- 
ful hands on every side, to the utmost limits of Moab, 
to bring down his enemies, as a swimmer stretches 
out his hands to beat down with them the opposing _ 


|; waters. 


Thanksgivings for the 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


mercies of God. 


CHAPTER XXYVI. 


In this chapter we have a second doxology, or song of praise, in which the great things God had engaged, in the foregoing 
chapter, to do for his people, and against his and their enemies, are celebrated. It is prepared to be sung when that pro- 
phecy shall be accomplished. In this song the people of God are taught to triumph in the safety, both of the church in 
general, and of every particular member of it, under the divine protection, and in an assurance of the destruction of all 


opposing powers, 1-6. 


pidity of those who neither regard the merciés nor the judgments of God, 10, 11. 


To walk with God, and wait for him in the worst and darkest times, 7-9. 


To lament the stu- 
To encourage themselves and one — 


another with hopes, that God would still continue to deliver and do.them. good, 12-14. To recollect God’s providences 
toward them in their low and distressed condition, and. their deportment wnder them, 15-18./ In confident expectation 
of relief and deliverance in the needful time, and of a glorious resurrection to hide themselves under the divine protection, 
while the wicked are punighed and cut off for their iniquities, 19-21 


A. M. 3292. ° 


iret N *that day shall this song be sung 


in the land of Judah; We havea 
strong city; » salvation will God appoint sat 
walls and bulwarks. 

2 © Open ye the gates, that the righteous na- 
tion which keepeth the } truth may enter in. 

3 Thou wilt keep him ? in perfect peace whose 
3mind zs stayed on thee: because he trusteth 
in thee. 

4 Trust ye in the Lorn for ever : 


= 


4 for in the 


3292, 


Lorp JEHOVAH: is * everlasting 2 Me i 


page pret 
5 4 For he bringeth down them that dwell on 

etn ; ° the lofty city, he layeth it low; he lay- 
eth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it 
even to the dust. 

6 The foot shall tread it down, even.the feet 
of the poor, and the steps of the needy. 

7 The way of the just ¢s uprightness: ‘ thou, 
most upueht dost weigh the path of the just, 


¢ Psa. exviii. 19, 20. 1 Heb. 
3Or, thought, or, 


@ Ch. ii. 11.—» Ch. Ix. 18. 
truths. * Heb. peace, peace ; Chap. lvii. 19. 


4 Ch. xlv, 17.4 Heb. this Rock of ages, Deut. 
€ Chap. xxv. 12; xxxii. 19. Psa. xxxvii. 23. 


imagination. 
XXXxll. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVI. 

Verses 1, 2. In that day—When God shall do 
such glorious works for the comfort of his people, as 
are described in the foregoing chapter; shall this 
song be sung in the land of: Judah—In the church 
of God, often signified by the titles of Judah, Jeru- 
salem, Zion, and the like. We have a strong city—— 
Jerusalem, or the church, which is often compared 
toacity.. Salvation will God appoint, &c.—God’s 
immediate and saving protection shall be to his 
church instead of walls. Open ye the gates—Of the 
city, mentioned verse 1. An expression which im- 
plies the increase of the number of believers, and 
the enlargement of the church. That the righteous 
nation—The whole body of righteous men, whether 
Jews or Gentiles; (for he seems to speak here, as 
he apparently did in the foregaing chapter, of the 
times of the gospel ;) which keepeth the truth--Which 
is sincere and steadfast in the profession and practice’ 
of the true religion; may enter in—May be received 
and acknowledged as true members of the church, 
which all such persons undoubtedly are. 

Verses 3,4. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
—Hebrew, in peace, peace; peace with God, and 
peace of conscience ; peace at all times, and under 
all events; whose mind is stayed on thee—Hebrew, 
W9D Ww, the thought, or, mind fixed, or, the stayed 
mind, as Bishop Lowth renders it; that is, the man 
whose thoughts and mind are fixed and settled on 
thee by faith, as the next clause explains it. 
foregoing verse, the righteous are represented as 


being admitted into the city, and here as being pre-) 


served and defended in it by God’s almighty power. 

Trust ye in the Lord—Ye, who truly turn to and 

obey him; for ever—In all times and conditions, and 

as long as you live; for in the Lord Jehovah —In 
3 


In the, 


him who was, and is, and is to come; ts everlasting 
strength—Hebrew, corny 8, the rock of ages ; 
which will assur edly support those who build their 
confidence thereon. That is, he is a sure refuge to 
all those that trust in him through all generations. 

Verses 5,6. For he bringeth down—Hebrew, he 
hath brought down, or, as it: may be rendered, he 
will bring down, them that dwell on high—He speaks 
not so much of height of place, as of dignity and 
power, in which sense also he mentions the lofty 
city in the next clause; which may be understood, 
either of proud Babylon, or of all the strong and 
stately cities of God’s enemies. The foot shall 
tread it down—God will bring it under the feet’of 
his poor, weak, and despised people. The meaning 
is, you have good reason for trusting in God, for he 
can and does raise up some and throw down others, 
according to his own good pleasure. 

Vere 7. The way of the just is uprightness— 
Hebrew, Dw", righteousness. The just proceed 
steadily on in the practice of the various duties of 
righteousness, which they owe to God and man ; or, 
their way is evenness, or plainness, as the word may 
be rendered. It is their constant care and endeavour 
to walk with God in an even, steady course of obe- 
dience and. holy conversation. Bishop Lowth trans- 
lates the clause, the way of the righteous is perfectly 
straight, not crooked, involved, and intricate, like 
that of the wicked. T'hou, most upright, dost weigh 
the path of the just—Dost mark and consider it, and 
observe the various difficulties and dangers that 
will occur in it, and wilt give them grace sufficient 
for them; or, thou dost examine it. Thou, who art 
most upright in all thy ways, and therefore a lover 
of uprightness, and of all upright men, dost weigh, 
dost. narrowly observe and ponder, the path of the 

159 


Lamentation for the 


ISATAH. 


stupidity of the wicked. 


8 Yea, *in the way of thy judg- 
ments, O Lorn, have we waited for 
thee; the desire of owr soul ¢s to thy name, and 
to the remembrance of thee. ; 

9 » With my soul haye I desired thee in the 
night; yea, with my spirit within me will I 
seek thee early : for when thy judgments are in 
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness. 


. > ALM. 3292, 
BG, 712, 


1 0 ‘Let favour be showed to the A. M. 2292. 
wicked, ye¢ will he not learn righteous- eae 
ness: in ‘the land of uprightness will he deal 
unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the 
Lorp. e 

11 Lorn, when thy hand is lifted up, ! they 
will not see : but they shall see, and be ashamed 
for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of 
thine enemies shall devour them. 


&-Chap. lxiv. 5—— Psa. xiii. 6; Cant. iii. 1——i Eccles. yiii. 
12; Rom. ii. 4. 


k Psa. exliii, 10.— Job xxxiv. 27; Psa. xxviii.5 ; Chap. v. 12. 
5 Or, toward thy people. p 


just; the whole course of their actions, and, which 
is implied, dost approve of them, and direct them to 
a happy issue, This seems to be the most common 
meaning of the word 54a, here rendered fo weigh: 
see Prov. iv. 26, and v. 21. It bears, ‘however, , an- 
other sense, Psa. Ixxviii.50,namely, to make the way 
plain, or, to remove, obstructions out of it. In this 
sense Bishop Lowth understands it here, and there- 
fore translates the clause, thou most exactly level- 
lest the path of the righteous. While the way of the 
wicked is perplexed, and rugged, and full-of obstrue- 
tions, God makes the way of the righteous plain. and 
easy before them, by preventing or removing those 
things that would be stumbling-blocks to them, so 
that they walk safely and comfortably forward in 
the path of duty. 

Verses 8,9. Yea, in the way of thy judgments, 
O Lord—That is, as some understand it, of thine 
ordinances and commandments, m which we. care- 
fully-and conscientiously walk; or, in the way of 
thy chastisements. As we, thy people, have loved 
and served thee, when thou didst make our way 
smooth and pleasant before us, so we have not for- 
saken thee, but waited upon thee, when thou didst 
see fit, for our trial, to make it difficult and trouble- 
some. We have possessed our souls in patience 
under-thy chastisements, and have waited thy time 
for our deliverance. T'he desire of our soul is to 
thy name—Hebrew, to thy name and thy memory ; 
that is, to the remembrance of thy nature and attri- 
butes, according as thou hast made thyself known 
by thy word and works.. And so the sense of this 
clause is, our affections are not alienated from thee 
by thy judgments, but we still continue to desire thy 
presence and favour, and we support and comfort 
ourselves with the remembrance of what thou art, 
and what thou hast done, and what thou hast’ pro- 
mised to be to, and do for, thy people. With my 
soul—Sincerely and most affectionately ; have I de- 
sired thee—The prophet speaks this in the name of 
all God’s people; in the night—In the time of afflic- 
tion, often termed night, or darkness ; or, rather, in 
the night, properly so called, as appears from the 
next clause, wherein early, or in the morning, is 
opposed to it, When others are sleeping, my 
thoughts and desires,are working toward thee. Yea, 
with my spirit within me—By fervent and importu- 
nate prayer for thy loving-kindness; will I seek 
thee early—Betimes in the morning. For when thy 


160 


judgments are inthe earth—And good reasonitis that 
we should thus desire and seek thee in the way of thy 
‘judgments, because this is the very design of thy judg- 
ments, that men should thereby be awakened to 
learn and return to their duty; and this is a common 
effect of them, that those who have been careless in 
prosperity are made wiser and better by afflictions. 
Verses 10, 11: Let favour be showed-to the wicked 
—If thou dost spare them, when thou chastisest thy 
own people, and grantest them health, prosperity, 
and other blessings ; yet will they not learn right- 
eousness—They will not be led to repentance by thy 
goodness; and therefore it is requisite thou shouldest 
send thy judgments into the earth, to reckon with 
men for abused mercies. In the land of upright- 
ness—Even in thy church, and among thy people, 
where righteousness is taught, professed, and, among 
many, practised; and.where unrighteousness is dis- 
countenanced.and punished; will he—The wicked 
man, deal unjustly—Hebrew, ny, will act perfidi- 
ously, perversely, or injuriously ; and will not be- 
hold the majesty of the Lord—Although God gives 
such plain and clear discoveries of his majesty and 
glory, not only in his words, but also in his works, 
and in all the dispensations of his providence, 
whether those of justice, or those of grace; and 
especially in his glorious patience and merey toward 
wicked men; yet they wilfully shut their eyes 
against. these discoveries, and will not believe, or 
will not consider, and lay to heart, what.a God of 
terrible and glorious majesty he is. Lord, when thy 
hand is liftedup—To smite and chastise them, in 
order that by repentance, faith, and prayer, they may 
make their peace with thee; they will not see—They 
will not take notice of. it; are not aware that thou 
art angry with them, and about to execute thy judg- 
ments upon them. . Nay, even when thou dost actu- 
ally smite and punish them, they are guilty of the 
same obstinate blindness as when thou dost only | 
threaten them, shutting their eyes against the clear- 
est convictions of guilt and wrath, and ascribing to 
chance, common fate, or second causes, what is 
manifestly a-divine correction and rebuke. They 
regard not the symptoms of their own ruin, but ery, 
“Peace, peace,” when thou, the holy and righteous 
God, art waging war against them. . But they shall 
see—Whether they will-or not. They shall know 
and feel, and that by sad experience, what they 

would not learn by other and easier ways. Atheists, 
. 


Thanksgivings for the 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


mercies of God. 


A. M. 3292, 


pet 12 4 Lorp, thou wilt ordain peace 


for us: for thou also hast wrought all 
our works °in us. 
13 O Lorp our God, ™other lords besides 
thee have had dominion over us; but by thee 
only will we make mention of thy name. 


are deceased, they shall not rise: cheaa: Aadhe 2202 
fore hast iliou visited and. destroyed 
them, and made all their memory to perish. 

15 Thou hast increased the nation, O Lorn, 
thou hast increased the nation; thou art glori- 
fied: thou hadst removed it fix unto all the 
ends of the earth. 


14 They are dead, they shall not live; they 


§ Or, for us. 


scorners, and: the carnally secure shall shortly feel 
what now they will not believe, that it is a fearful 
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 
They will not see the evil of sin, and particularly 
the sin of hating and persecuting the people of God; 
but they shall, at length, be convinced to their sor- 
row, by the tokens of God’s displeasure against 
them for it, that what is done against his people, 
God takes as done against himself. And be ashamed 
for their envy at the people—They shall see that 
they have done God’s people a great deal of wrong, 


and therefore shall be ashamed of it, and of the en- | 


mity and envy which produced it. Yea, the fire of 
thine enemies, &c.—Such fire or wrath as thou 
usest to pour forth upon thy implacable enemies. 

Verse 12. Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us— 
That is, for thy true and genuine church and péo- 
ple. Though thou hast afflicted us, (verse 8,). yet 
the time will come when we shall be in a very dif- 
ferent, yea, in a happy condition. Or, referring to 
what he had last ‘said, he means, as thou wilt destroy 
thine and our enemies, so thou wilt bless us, thy 
people, with peace and prosperity. For thou hast 
wrought allour works in us—Hebrew, 134, to, or for 
us. All the good works done by us are the effects 
of thy grace. And all the good and great works 
which have been wrought for us, all the wonderful 
deliverances and singular blessings vouchsafed us, 
came from thee. The argument is this: God hath 
done great things for us, and delivered us formerly 
upon many occasions, and therefore he will still de- 
liver us, and give us peace. 

Verses 13, 14. O Lord our God, &c.—The people 
of God, having already obtained their deliverance in 
part, with the overthrow and destruction of their 
enemies, proceed to unfold and express their hope, 
that God would perfect all his good works for them. 
Other lords besides thee—Who art our only King, 
Lawgiver, and Judge; and besides those gover nors 
who have been appointed over us by thee, and have 
ruled us in subordination to thee; even foreign and 
heathen lords, such as the Philistines formerly, and 
lately the Assyrians, and afterward (as the prophet 
foresaw would come to pass) the Babylonians, have 
had dominion over us—Have exercised a tyrannical 
power over us. The reader will observe, the song 
begun, verse 1, is continued, and Isaiah is foretelling 
what the language of the church would be after her 
deliverance. By thee only—By thy favour and 
help, by, which alone we have been rescued from 
the tyranny of our enemies, and not by our merits 
or strength; will we make mention of thy name— 

Vou. IIT. ( ll ) 


m2’Chron. xii. 8. 


Celebrate thy praise, and trust in thee for the future. 
Bishop Lowth renders the clause, Z’hee only, and 
thy name, henceforth will we celebrate. They are 
dead, §c., they shall not rise—Those tyrants are 
destroyed, they shall never live or rise again to mo- 
lest us. He probably refers to the miraculous de- 
struction of Sennacherib’s army before Jerusalem, 
and to the overthrow of the Babylonian empire. 
Therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, 
&c.—That they might be thus effectually destroyed 
thou didst undertake the work; and thou hast per- 
fectly accomplished it, and abolished the monuments 
or memorials of their greatness and glory. The 
prophet speaks of what he foresaw, with certainty, 


; would be done, as though it were effected already. 


Verse 15. Thou hast increased the nation— 
Namely, the Jewish nation, which multiplied ex- 


| ¢eedingly in Egypt, and afterward in Canaan, so that 


they filled the land. But the prophet, perhaps fore- 
tels their increase after their return from captivity 
in Babylon; and, as some think, that increase of the 
church (called the righteous nation, verse 2) which 
was to take place in gospel days. Thow art glori- 
Jjied—In faithfully fulfilling thy promises made to 
Abraham concerning the multiplication of. his seed, 
and making him the father of many nations. Thou 
hast removed it far unto all the ends of the earth— 
Thou hast scattered thy people over all the world, 
so that they are found'in every nation under heaven, 
where they are witnesses for thee, the only living 
and'true God, against idolaters of all descriptions. 
This was the case before, and at the time of the 
coming of the Messiah, and of the opening of the 
gospel dispensation, Acts il. 5. And in a little time, 
the Gentiles being called into the church of Ged, 


/the Christians were spread over all parts of the Ro- 


man empire, and far beyond its utmost limits, and 
they were much more faithful witnesses of the truth 
than the Jews had ever been. But, as the Hebrew 
of the first clause of this verse, 139 Nad, when lite- 
rally rendered, is only, thow hast added to the na- 
tion ; some think the prophet does not speak of 
adding to their number, or increasing them, but ra- 
ther of adding to their plagues or chastisements. 
This, it must be acknowledged, would agree well 
with what follows. Then the interpretation of the 
next clauses would be, Thy justice is glorified in 
their punishment, and thou hast removed them out 
of their own land, and suffered them to be carried 
captive to the ends of the earth. This, as the reader 
will. easily observe, would accord perfectly with 
what, follows to the end of the chapter. 


161 3 


«. 


\) Thanksgivings for the 


A. M. 3292. 16 Lorn, ™ in trouble have they vi- 
BO 1? sited thee ; they poured out a 7 prayer 
when thy chastening was upon them. 

17 Like as °a woman with child, that draw- 
eth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, 
and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been 
in thy sight, O Lorp. 

18 We have been with child, we have been 


2 Hos. v. 15. 


7 Heb. secret speech Chap. xiii. 8; John 


Verses 16-18. O Lord, in trouble—Amidst the vari- 
ous calamities brought upon them for their correction, 
and especially in their captivity ; have they—Name- 
ly, thy people ; visited thee—Come into thy presence 
with their prayers and ‘supplications; they poured 
out a prayer—Prayed much and earnestly, as the 
expression implies; when thy chastening was upon 
them—When thou wast punishing them for their 
sins. Like as a woman isin pain, &c:—A compari- 


_ son often used to express men’s consternation under 


great calamities, from which they cannot deliver 
themselves ; so have we been in thy sight—Such has 
been our anguish and danger, of which thou, O 
Lord, hast been a witness. We have been with child 
—That is, we have had great expectation of a speedy 
and happy deliverance, have been big with hopes; 
and we have been in pain—Have comforted our- 


-selves with this, that the joyful birth would make 


us forget our misery, but, alas! we have, as it were, 
brought forth wind—We have had the torment of a 
woman in child-bearing, but not the comfort of a 
living child. “We have had no good issue of all 
our pangs and-throes; they did not produce deliv- 
erance and ease, as in the case of travailing women, 
but all our own labours proved abortive: in vain we 
struggled with our enemies, who were still too 
mighty for us,” and we were utterly unable to effect 
our deliverance. To bring forth wind, is much the 
same kind of phrase with feeding on wind, and 
reaping wind, Hos. xii. 1, and viii.7; and signifies, 
to take a great deal’of pains to no’purpose. This 
seems to be spoken of the siege which the Jewish 
people endured, and of all their other labours and 
sufferings to prevent their coming under the Chal- 
dean yoke. Thus the attempt of Zedekiah to with- 
stand Nebuchadnezzar we find only brought greater 
evils upon the country, 2 Chronicles xxxvi. 18. We 
have not wrought any deliverance in the earth 
—In our land, where we had far greater advant- 


‘ages than we could have had elsewhere. Neither 


have the inhabitants of the world—The Assyriatis, 


~Chaldeans, or our other enemies; fallen—By our. 


means.. 

Verse 19. Thy dead men shall live—The prophet 
here, speaking in the name of God, turns his speech 
to God’s church, and gives her a cordial to support 
her in that deep distress which he had foretold she 
should suffer, and which is described in the preced- 
ing verse. Thy dead men are not like those men- 
tioned verse 14; for they shall not live, as was there 
gaid, but thine shall-live. You shall certainly be 

162 


* ISATAH. 


mercies of God. 


in pain, we have as it were brought o 4 i , 
forth wind: we have not wrought any —— 
deliverance in the earth ; neither have ? the in- 
habitants of the world fallen.‘ 

19 4'Thy dead men shall live, together with my 
dead body shall they arise. * Awake and sing, 
ye that.dwell in dust : for thy dewis as the dew 
of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. 


xvi. 21——P Psa. xvii: 14——4 Ezek. xxxvii. 1——" Dan. xii. 2. 


ah 


delivered from all your fears and dangers. For here, 
as Bishop Lowth observes, “The deliverance of the 
people of God, from a state of the lowest depres- 
sion, is explained by images taken from the resur- 


rection of the dead.” And nothing is more frequent, 


both in Seripture and other authors, than for great 
calamities to be compared to death, and deliverance 
from them to reviving, a resurrection, and life ; 
and particularly the captivity of the Jews in Baby- 
lon, and their deliverance out of it, is largely ex- 
pressed by this very similitude, Ezek. xxxvii. 11, 
&e. “It appears from hence,” says Bishop Lowth, 
“that the doctrine of the resurrection was at that 
time a popular and common doctrine; for an image 
which is assumed, in order to express or represent 
any thing in’ the way of allegory, or metaphor, 
whether poetical or prophetical, must be an image 


| commonly known and understood, otherwise it will 


not answer the purpose for which it. is assumed.” 
Together with my dead body shall they arise—It is 
to be observed here, that the words, together awith, 
are supplied by our translation, there being nothing 
for them in the Hebrew. “All the ancient versions,” 
says Bishop Lowth, “render the word in the plural; 
they read ‘71922, my dead bodies.” The’ Vulgate 
has it, Interfecti met resurgent, My slain men shall 
rise. ‘The Syriae and Chaldaic read, their dead 
bodies ; andthe LXX. eyepSnoovrar o¢ ev rote pvnuetorc, 
those that are in their graves shall be raised. It 
seems this clause is added merely as an amplifica- 
tion or repetition of the former, being entirely equi- 
valent therewith, and expressing only that the Jew- 
ish Church, with which the prophet conneets himself, 
as being a member of it, should be delivered out of 
captivity in Babylon, but not that he himself should 
either personally suffer in that captivity, or have a 
part in that deliverance. Thus, in a similar way, 
(1 Thess. iv: 15, 17,) the apostle connects himself with 
those that should be found alive at Christ’s second 
coming, we who are alive, &c., certainly not intend- 
ing to signify that he personally should be alive at 
that time. Awake, &c.—Out of your sleep, even 
the sleep of death, ye that dwell in the dust—You 
that are dead and buried in the earth.. For thy dew 
—The favour and blessing of God upon thee ; is as 
the dew of herbs—Which refreshes and revives 
them, and makes them grow and flourish. And the 
earth shall cast out the dead—As an abortive birth 
is Cast out of the womb, to which the grave is com- 
pared, Job i. 21. But, as the verb ‘vpn, here used, 
does not properly signify to cast owt, but to cast 
( 11*) S07 


Destruction of the 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


A.M. 3292. 20 Come, my people, ‘enter 

~ thou into thy chambers, and shut 
thy doors ‘about thee: hide thyself as it were 
‘for a little moment, until the is Soe be 
overpast. 


’ Exod. xii. 22.—+t Psa. xxx. 5; Chap. liv. 7; 2Cor. iv. 17. 
So Se 
down, or cause to fall, these words are by many, 
both ancient and later interpreters, rendered other- 
wise, namely, thou wilt cast down, or she, that is, 
the church, shall cast down the land of the giants, 
or violent ones. Thus the Vulgate: Thou shalt 
draw intoruin the land of the giants ; and the LXX., 
nO yn Tov acebwr mecettar, the land of the ungodly 
shall fall, or be brought down. The sense is, the 
church shall prevail against all oppressors, and shall 
cast them down: when brought low she shall rise, 
but her enemies shall not. 

Verses 20,21. Come, my people, &c.—These two 
Verses are supposed not to belong to the song which 
takes up the preceding part of the chapter, but to be 
an address of the prophet to the people of God on 
the contents of it. Having foretold their wonderful 
deliverance, and the utter destruction of their ene- 
mies, lest they should suppose that these predictions 
would immediately begin to be fulfilled, and thereby 
should meet with ‘a disappointment, which might 
shake their faith respecting the ‘future fulfilment of 
them, he here warns them that they must first ex- 
pect storms, and exhorts them to prepare for them, 
and patiently to wait God’s time for the accomplish- 
ment of his promises. Enter thou into thy cham- 
bers, &c.— Withdraw thyself from the company and 
conversation of the people of the world, lest, parta- 
king with them in their sins, thou shouldst also par- 
take of their plagues; and shut thy doors about thee 

arate and seclude thyself, as far as may be, 
ae men and things, and give thyself up to medi- 
tation on these awful dispensations of divine justice 
and mercy, and to prayer. Having entered into thy 
closet, and shut thy door, pour out thy supplications 
and intercessions before thy Father, who seeth in 


21 For behold, the Lorp "cometh out A. M. 3292. 
of his place to punish the inhabitants See 
of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also 
shall disclose her * blood, and nis aaah no more 
cover her slain. 7 


U Mic. i.3; Jude 14.—*® Heb, bloods. 


secret. Hide thyself, as it were—In this time of 
danger and calamity, when the judgments of God 
are so awfully abroad in the earth, put thyself under 
the protection of his providence and grace, by faith 
and prayer. He alludes to the common practice of 
men, who, when there are storms or dangers abroad, 


| betake themselves to their houses or chambers for 


safety: or, it may be, to the history, , Exod. ix. 19, 
20; or, to the command of Moses to the Israelites, 
(Exod. xii. 22,) not to go out of the doors of their 
houses, while the destroying angel was going through 
the land of Egypt; or, to the like charge given to 
Rahab, as the condition of her preservation, Josh. ii. 
For a little moment—Whereby he intimates, that 
all their afflictions, how long and tedious soever they 
might seem, were but short and momentary in com- 
parison of that happiness which was reserved for 
them; wntil the indignation be overpast—The dread- 
ful effects of God’s anger, mentioned in the next 
verse. For the Lord cometh out of his place— 
Cometh down from heaven, which, in Scripture, he 
is frequently said to do, when he undertakes any 
great and glorious work, either of delivering his 
people or destroying their enemies. The expression 
is borrowed from the manner of princes, who come 
out of their palaces either to sit in judgment, or to 
fight against their enemies, both which things God 
is here represented as doing. To punish the inhabit- 


ants of the earth—All the enemies of God and of - 


his people; for their iniquity—For all their sins, 
and especially for oppressing and persecuting his 
church. The earth also shall disclose her blood— 
The innocént blood which hath been shed upon the 
earth shall be brought to light, and shall be severely 
revenged upon the murderers. 


CHAPTER XXVIL 
“ The subject of this chapter,” says Bishop Lowth, ‘seems to be the nature, the measure, and the design ye God's dealings 


with his people.” 


We have his judgments inflicted on their great and powerful enemies, 1. 


_ His constant care and pro- 


tection of his favourite vineyard, 2-6. The moderation with which the severity of his judgments had been and is tem- 


pered, 7,8, The end and design of them, to recover his church from idolatry, 9-11. 


repentance, from their several dispersions, 12, 13. 


-* 3202. bone, LN that day the Lorn, with his sore hace leviathan the? piercing serpent, A. 


and great and strong sword, shall 


1 Or, crossing like a bar. 


~ NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVIL 
Verse 1. In that day, &c.—This verse, which 
Bishop Lowth considers as being connected with the 
3 


The recalling of them, on their 


M. 3292. 
B. C. 712. 


* even leviathan that crooked serpent ; 


a Psa, Ixxiv. 13, 14. 


last two verses of the preceding chapter, is translated 

by him as follows: “In that day shall Jehovah punish 

with his sword; his well-tempered, and great, and 
163 


. af, 
enemies of the chur fs : 


er. 


“ns 


ISAIAH. 


em and he shall slay » the dragon that is 
in the sea. 


o--—* 2 4 In that day ° sing ye unto her, ‘A vine- 


as 


yard of red wine. 

3 °I the Lorp do keep it; I will water it 
every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it 
night and day. eit y 

4 Fury is not in me: who wield set ‘the 
briers and. thorns against me in battle? I 


~ Chap. li. 9; Ezek. xxix. 3; xxxviii. 2. 
4 Psa. lxxx. 8; "Jer. ii, 21.— Psa, exxi. 4. 
6; Chap. ix. 18, 


c Chapter v. i. 
£2 Sam. xxiii. 


would ? go through them, I would burn 4, M, M, pee. 
them together. —— 

5 Or let him take hold & of my strength, ¢hat 
he may "make peace with me, and he shall 
make peace with me. 

6 He shall cause them that come of Jacob * to 
take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and 
fill the face of the world with fruit. 

7 Hath he smitten him, *as he smote those 


b Job xxii. 21. 
3 Heb. ccoording to the stroke 


? Or, march against.——s Chapter xxv. 4. 
i Chap. xxxvii. 31; Hos. xiv. 5. 
of those. 


strong sword; Leviathan the rigid serpent, and Le- 
viathan the winding serpent: and shall slay the 
monster that isin the sea.” And he observes, “'The 
animals here mentioned seem to be, the crocodile, 
rigid, by the stiffness of the back-bone, so that he 
cannot. readily turn himself when he pursues his 
prey; hence the easiest way of escaping from him 
is by making frequent and short turnings: the ser- 
pent, or dragon, flexible and winding, which coils 


himself up in a circular form ; the sea-monster, or 


the whale. These are used allegorically, without 
doubt, for great potentates, enemies and persecutors 
of the people of God; but to specify the particular 
persons or statés designed by the prophet under these 
images, is a matter of great difficulty.” Vitringa, 
who considers the prophecy contained in verse 19 
of the preceding chapter, as referririg to the deliver- 
ance granted to the Jews under the Maccabees, 
thinks that by the first two of these creatures, the 
piercing, or rigid serpent, and the crooked, or wind- 
ing serpent, “the kingdoms of Egypt and Assyria 
are meant, as they existed after the times of Alex- 
ander the Great ; and by the whale, the kingdom of 
Arabia, and the other neighbouring nations, which 
were adversaries to the people of God; or that by 
these three animals are to be understood the. perse- 
cutors and adversaries of the church, who should 
exist successively in the world, and be destroyed by 
the divine judgments.” But whether this be the 
right interpretation of the allegory is much to be 
questioned. 

Verses 2, 3. In that day--When these powerful 
enemies shall be destroyed. Sing ye unto her— 
Hebrew, 15 11y, answer ye her, or say ye to her, 
namely, to the church of God. A vineyard of red 
wine—“ Behold a vineyard,” or, “Thou art a vine- 
yard of red wine,’ that is, of the choicest and best. 
wine, which in those parts was red, as appears both 
from the Scriptures and from heathen authors. J 
the Lord do keep it, &c.—I will protect my church 
from all her enemies, and supply her with my ordi- 
nances, word, and Spirit, with all necessary means 
and helps. “The import of these two verses,” says 
Lowth, “is, that when the enemies of God’s people 
are destroyed, among other songs and thanksgivings, 
- this a¢ 

* God, the church which he protects, that as 
she is fruitful i in all good works, so God continually 
watches over her, and defends her from danger.” 

164 


ledgment shall be made to the praise of | 


—————————— 

Verses 4, 5.. Fury is not in me—Namely, against 
my vineyard or my people; I have been displeased 
with them, and have chastized them, but I am not 
implacable toward them, and resolved utterly to 
destroy them, as their enemies are. Who would set 
the briers and.thorns against.me, &¢c.—Yet if any 
hypocrite ‘in the church, false professor, or wilful 
sinner, shall offer to contend with me, he shall feel 
the effects of my fury. Or, more largely, thus: 
“Though fury doth not belong to me, and ven- 
geance be called my strange work, (ch. XXViii, 21,) 
yet if the briers and thorns, that is, the wicked and 
incorrigible, bid defiance to me, they will find I shall 
soon destroy and consume them like fire” Or let 
him take hold of my strength, &c.—Rather, let such 
a one return to me, and make his peace with me, 
by unfeigned repentance and living faith, and he 
shall make peace.with me—For I am always ready 
to receive returning sinners, and to pardon the truly 


his vineyard. 
3 ; 


# 


penitent, who have recourse to me for mercy and . 


salvation, 

Verse 6. He shall cause them of Jacob to take 
root—To be fir mly settled in their possessions. The 
words may be rendered, In times to come he shail 
cause Jacob to take root. Israel shall blossom and 
bud—Shall revive and flourish. The metaphor of 
a vine is still pursued, and these expressions signify 
the increase-of the Jewish people, after their return 
from their captivity in Babylon. And fill the face 
of the world with fruit—Their posterity shall be so 
numerous that their own land shall not be sufficient 
for them, but they shall be forced to seek habitations 
in other countries, and shall replenish them with 
people. This prediction was indeed fulfilled after 
the captivity ; forthe Jews filled all Judea and Syria, 
and were spread over all the Roman empire, as ap- 
pears, not only from their own histories, but from 
the books of the New Testament. See note on ch. 
xxvi. 15. But, perhaps, this is chiefly intended to 
be understood of the spiritual seed of Jacob, or of 
believers, who are often called God’s Israel, as Rom. 
ix. 6, and elsewhere. 

Verse 7. Hath he smitten him—Namely, Jacob ; 
as he smote those that smote him?—The question 
implies a denial. He hath not so smitten him. He 
hath not dealt so severely with his people as he hath 
with their enemies, whom he hath utterly destroyed. 
Or is he slain as those slain by him—Namely, those 
slain by God on the behalf of Israel? The meaning 

3 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


and restoration. 


P Promises of favour 
*. Ae 3292. that smote him ? or is he slain accord- 
WG. 712. |. 
—__—— ing to the slaughter of them that are 
slain by him ? 

8 * In measure, * when it shooteth forth, thou 
wilt debate with it : ° he! stayeth his rough wind 
in the day of the east wind. . 

9 By this therefore shall the.iniquity of Jacob 
be purged; and this is all the fruit to take 
away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of 
the altar as chalk-stones that are beaten in sun- 
der, the groves and ° images shall not stand up. 


10 4 Yet the defenced city shall be A. M. 3292. 
desolate, and the habitation forsaken, a — 
and left like a wilderness: ™ there shall the calf 
feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume 
the branches thereof. 

11 When the boughs thereof are withered, 
they shall be broken off: the women come and 
set them on fire: for "it is a people of no un- 
derstanding: therefore he that made them will 
not haye mercy on them, and ° he that formed 
them will show them no favour. 


ee 


k Job. xxiii. 6; Psa. vi,15 Jer. x.24; xxx. 11; xlvi.28; 1 Cor. 
x. 13.—* Or, when thou sendest it forth. 5 Or, when he re- 
moveth it Psa. ]xxviii. 38. 


[SY 
is, God had never permitted the Jews to be smitten 
to their entire destruction, as he had their enemies, 
but had always taken care to preserve a remnant. 

Verse 8. In measure when it shooteth forth— 

Rather, In measure when thou sendest it forth, as 
mNow 3 ANDNDI, may be properly rendered. The 
words seem to be addressed by the prophet to God, 
and to signify that God would observe a measure in 
punishing the Jewish people, and not go beyond a 
certain degree ; and that he then would send them 
forth again, namely, from captivity: from which God, 
after they had suffered sufficient correction, would 
deliver them by a singular providence. Thow wilt 
debate, or contend with it—God is said to debate or 
contend with men, when he executes his judgments 
upon them. But 732°. may be rendered, T'how 
wilt contend for it, that is, undertake its cause and 
defend it. This is still spoken of God’s singular 
protection of the Jews, when they returned from 
Babylon. He stayeth his rough wind—He mitigates 
the severity of the judgment; in the day of the east 
wind—lIn the time when he sendeth forth his east 
wind, that is, very grievous and destructive calami- 
ties. The east wind, being a dry, blasting wind, and 
the most violent and destructive of all others in 
those parts of the world, is frequently put, in the 
Scriptures, for the calamities of war, and such like 
wasting judgments: see Jer. iv. 11, 12; Ezek. 
xvii. 10; and xix..12; Hos. xiii. 15. Here it seems 
to be mentioned with a reference to the shooting 
forth of the branches of the vine, spoken of in the 
foregoing words, that wind being very prejudicial 
to tender shoots. 

Verse 9. By this therefore—By this manner of 
God’s dealing with his people; shall the iniquity 
of Jacob be purged—Hebrew, 193°, expiated, or 
forgiven: that is, by these chastisements Jacob shall 
be brought to true repentance, and in consequence 
thereof shall be pardoned. And this is all the fruit 
—The effect designed to be produced, by these 
severe corrections ; to take away. his sin—Not to 
destroy the sinner, as others are often destroyed by 
the calamities brought upon them, but only to take | 
away the guilt and power of his sins; when he, &c. | 
—Whieh sin of Jacob shall be taken away, and the 


punishment thereof removed, when he shall give _ 


6 Or, sun-images.——™ Chapter xvii. 2; xxxii. 14.——» Deut. 
xxxil. 28 Chap. i. 3; Jer, viii. 7. © Deut. xxxii. 18; Chap. 
xliil. 1, 7; xliv. 2, 21, 24. 


such an evidence of the reality of his repentance as 
to destroy. all the objects, instruments, means, and 
signs of idolatry out of the land; when he maketh the 
stones of the altar—Namely, the idolatrous altar, or 
altars, as chalk-stones—That is, broken into small 
pieces, and reduced to powder and dust. Possibly he 
may say, the altar, with respect to that particular altar 
which Ahaz had set up in the place of God’s altar ; 
and this prophecy might be delivered in Ahaz’s time, 
while that altar stood and was used. He seems to 
allude to Moses’s showing his detestation of idolatry, 
by taking the golden calf, burning it, and grinding it 
to powder: and he intimates that when their repent- 
ance should be sincere, it would discover itself in a 
similar way. It. must be observed, that of all sins, 
which are of a heinous nature, the Jews, till they 
were carried into captivity, were most inclined to 
idolatry, and for that sin especially, most of God’s 
judgments, which they had hitherto suffered, had 
been inflicted upon them, But of that most unrea- 
sonable and wicked inclination they were in a great 
measure cured by that severe punishment, the 
seventy years captivity in Babylon. The groves 
and images shall not stand wp—Shall be thrown 
down with contempt and indignation. 

Verses 10, 11. Yet, &c.~-Before. this glorious 
promise, concerning the removal of Israel’s sin and 
calamity, shall be fulfilled, a dreadful and desolating 
judgment shall-:come upon them. T'he defenced city 
shall be desolate—Jerusalem, and the rest of the 
defenced cities of the land, the singular number 
being put for the plural; and the habitation forsaken 
—The most inhabited and populous parts of the 
country; or, as 713 properly signifies, their pleas- 
ant habitation, whether in the city or country; left 
like a wilderness—Which was the case in the time 
of the Babylonish captivity. There shall the calf 
feed—The calf is put for all sorts of cattle, which, it 
is foretold, should securely feed there, because there 
should be no man left to disturb or:annoy them; 
and consume the branches thereof—Of their pleasant 
habitation ; of the young trees that grow up in that 
desolated country. When the boughs thereof are 
withered—As they will be when they are thus 
gnawed and cropped by cattle; they shall be broken 
off—That there may be no hopes of their recovery. 

165 


wy 


ISATAH. 


against Ephraim.) 


aa 


Woes denounced 
A. M. ie 12 4 And it shall come to pass in 
—_ that day, that the Lorp shall beat off 
from fron ee channel of the river unto the stream 
of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, 
O ye children of Israel. 

13 » And it shall come to pass in that day, 


ini p Chap. ii. 11. 
po aera a eS 


‘that the great trumpet shall - be ay ae 
blown, and they shall come which —— — 


‘were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, 


and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and 
shall worship the Lorp in the pelys mount at 
Jerusalem. 


—+ 


4 Matt. xxiv. 31;( Rev. xi. 15. 


The women come, &c.—He mentions women, be- 
cause the men would be destroyed: For it is a 
people of no understanding—They neither know 
me, nor themselves; neither my word, nor my 
works: they know not the things which concern 
their peace, but blindly and wilfully go on in sin. 
Therefore he that made them—Both as they are 
creatures, and as they are his people; for this also is 
expressed by making, or forming; will not have 
mercy on them—So as to save them from this dread- 
fal calamity and ruin, which they bring on themselves. 
Thus he overthrows“their false and presumptuous 
conceit, that God would never destroy the work of 
his own hands, nor the seéd of Abraham his friend. 

‘Verses 12, 13. It shall come to pass, §c., that the 
Lord*shall "beat off—Or, beat out: which is not 
meant in the way of punishment, but as an act of 
mercy, as is evident from the following clause of this, 
and of the next verse: the sense is, He shall sever, 
and take from among the nations, and gather 
together, like thrashed corn into the garner; from 
the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt— 
All the Israelites that are scattered in those parts, 
It is.a metaphor taken from thrashing,'or beating 


»» out and separating the pure grain from the chaff. 


i 


And ye shall be gathered one by one—Which signi- 


: 


/ 


fies God’s exact and singular care of them. And in 
that day the. great trumpet shall be blown—God 
shall summon them, as it were, by the sound of 
trumpet, namely, by an eminent call, orract of his 
providence on their behalf. He alludes to the cus- 
tom of calling the Israelites together with trumpets : 
of which see Num. x. 2, 3.. And they shall come 
which were in the land of Assyria—Into which the 
ten tribes had been carried captive ; and the outcasts 
in the land of Egypt—Where many of the Jews 
were, as is manifest, both from the Seriptures and 
from other authors. This prediction had its first 
accomplishment in the restoration of the Jews from 
Babylon, to whom many of the Israelites from 
Assyria were joined, and returned with them; and 
to whom many from Egypt, and other parts, came 


-and united themselves, and having rebuilt the city 


and temple, worshipped the Lord, as is here said, in 
his holy mountain at Jerusalem. .But this prophecy 
has manifestly a further aspect, and foretels.the res- 
toration of the Jews in the latter times; when, the 
gospel trumpet having been blown, and the fulness 
of the Gentiles brought in, the Jews shall be gath- 
ered from their several\dispersions, united to God’s 
church, numbered among his true worshippers, and 
probably reinstated in their own land, 


t 


“CHAPTER XXVIII. 


In this chapter the Ephraimites are reproved for their pride and drunkenness, their security and sensuality, 1-4. A gracious 


promise of God's favour 1s made to Judah, termed the residue of his people, 5, 6. 


A reproof is given to many of them 


also, for the same vices; and for their stupidity\and unteachableness under the instructions which the prophets gave them in 
the name of God, 7-13. Their rulers are reproved and threatened for their contempt of God's judgments ; and, after a gra- 
cious promise of Christ and his grace, they are given: to know that their hopes of escaping the judgments of God were 


Jalse, and would certainly deceive them, 14-22. 
husbandman takes with his ground and grain, 23-29, 


We to *the crown of pride, to the 
drunkards of Ephraim, whose 


4s M., 3279. 
BY. 725,” 725. 


All this is ee med by a comparison drawn from ~ method which the 


> glorious beauty is a. fading flower, A.M, sz. 
which are on the head of the fat val- —— 


a Verse 3. 


——— 


> Verse 4, 


~/ 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Verse 1. Wo, &c.—The second discourse of the 
third book of * “‘Isaiah’s prophecies, according to 
Vitringa, s here, and is continued to the end |! 
ird chapter. He supposes that the 
was delivered before the expedition of 
b, and ‘on occasion of some solemn em- 
‘to Egypt to implore the help of the 

166 


Egyptians against the Assyrians. Jo the crown of 
pride—The proud, state and kingdom of the ten 
| tribes, commonly called Ephraim ; or, as some think,’ 
Samaria, the capital city, is chiefly intended, ‘which 
was situated, says Maundrell, “on a long’ mount of 
an oval figure; having first'a fruitful valley, and 
then a ring, or crown, of hills running round about 
it? Journey from ‘Aleppo, p. 59. It is pe 


The abominable 


3 %- ih leys of them that are ! overcome with 
——— wine! 

2 Behold, the Lorp hath a mighty and 
strong one, ° which. as a tempest of hail and 
a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters 
overflowing, shall cast’ down to the earth with 
the hand. . : 

3 ‘The crown of pride, the drunkards of 
Ephraim, shall be trodden ? under feet : 

4 And *the glorious beauty, which is on 
the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading 
flower, and as the hasty fruit before the sum- 
mer; which when he that looketh upon it 
seeth, while it is yet in his hand he ° eateth it up. 

5 4% In that day shall the Lorn of hosts be 


- & ms 
CHAPTER XXVIII. ¥ state of the people. 


for a crown of glory, and for a diadem |A, M. 3279. 
of beauty, unto the residue of his peo- —— & 
ple, 2) Va ay 

6 And for a spirit of judgment to him that 
sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them 
that turn the battle to the gate. 

7 % But they also fhave erred through 
wine, and through strong drink are out of the 
way ; ®the priest and the prophet have erred 
through strong drink, they are swallowed up 


of wine, they are out of the way through strong’ 


drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judg- 
ment. : 

8 For all tables are full of vomit and filthi- 
ness,.so that there is no place clean. 


1 Heb, broken.- 


© Chap. xxx. 30; Ezek. xiii. 11—4 Verse 1. 
2 Heb. with feet. © Verse 1. 


that the prophet alludes to the crown of flowers 
which used to be worn by the drunkards in their 
revels; “an image not unfrequently made use of 
by the prophets, to convey a strong idea of the 
universal depravity and folly of the nation.” 7'o 
the drunkards of Ephraim—Having many and 
excellent vines among them, the Ephraimites were 
much exposed to this sin, and very frequently guilty 
of it, verse 7; Hos. vii. 5; Amos vi.6. Whose glo- 
rious beauty is a fading flower—Whose glory and 
greatness shall suddenly wither.and perish, like the 
garlands of flowers wherewith they crown their 
heads, amidst their intoxicating cups. Which are 
on the head of the fat valleys—Which proud and 
drunken Israelites have their common and chief 
abode in Samaria, the head of the kingdom, and 
seated at the head of fat and rich valleys which 
encompassed it. 

Verses 2-4. Behold, the Lord hath—Namely, at 
his command, prepared and ready to execute his 
judgments; a mighty and strong one—Shalmaneser, 
the king of Assyria; which, as a tempest of hail, 
§c., shall cast down—The crown of pride, to the 
earth, by his hand—By the hand of God, which 
shall strengthen him in this work. The crown, the 
drunkards, shall be trodden under feet—The expres- 
sion is emphatical; the crown which was upon their 
own heads shall be trodden under the feet of others; 
and they, whose drunkenness made them stagger 
and fall to the ground, shall be-trodden down there. 
The glorious beauty shall be as the hasty fruit— 
That is, the first ripe fruit, which, coming before the 
season, and before other fruits, is most acceptable. 
Which he that seeth it eateth wup—Which, as soon as 
aman sees, he plucks it off and devours it as soon as 
he can get it into his hand. And so shall it be with | 


Ephraim’s glory, which his enemies shall covet and i 
“The image,” says | 


spoil, and devour. greedily. 
Bishop Lowth, “ expresses, in the strongest manner, | 
the great ease with which the Assyrians should take | 


the city and the whole kingdom, and the avidity | 


3 Heb. swalloweth——! Prov. xx. 1 ; Hos. iv. 11——s Chap. lvi. © 


10, 12. 


with which they should seize the rich prey without 
resistance.” 

Verses 5,6. “Thus far,” says Bishop Lowth, “the 
prophecy relates to the Israelites, and manifestly 


denounces their approaching destruction by Shal- 


maneser. Here it turns to the two tribes of Judah 
and Benjamin, the remnant of God’s people, who 
were to continue a kingdom after the final captivity 
of the Israelites. It begins with a favourable prog- 
nostication of their affairs under Hezekiah: but 


soon changes to reproofs and threatenings, for their _ 


intemperance, disobedience, and profaneness.” Jn 
that day—When the kingdom of Israel shall be ut- 
terly destroyed; the Lord of hosts shail be for a 
crown of glory, &c.—Shall give eminent glory and 
beauty unto the residue of his people—Unto the 
kingdom of Judah, who shall continue in their own 
country, when Israel is carried into captivity. And 
for a spirit of judgment, &c.—He explains how, or 
wherein, God would glorify and beautify them, even 
by giving wisdom to their rulers, and courage to 
their soldiers; which two things contribute much to 
the strength, safety, and glory of a.nation. TJ'o them 
that turn the battle to the gate—Who not only drive 
their enemies from their land, but pursue them into 


their own lands, and besiege them in their own 


cities. 

Verse 7. But they also have erred—But, alas! 
Judah is guilty of the same sins with Israel, there- 
fore they also must expect the same calamities, of 
which he speaks afterward, Zhe priest—To whom 
strong drink was expressly forbidden in the time of 
their sacred ministrations; and the prophet-—The 
teachers, who should have been patterns of sobriety 
to the people, and to whom: sobriety was absolutely 
necessary for the right discharge of their office; 
have erred—In their conversation an: in their holy 
administrations. They are swallow wine 
+They are, as we say, drowned in it. 
in vision—The prophets miscarry in 
employment of prophesying or teaching, 

167 u’ 


*) 


ey 


Pip 
. 


3 


4 Q - ‘ wy z p 7 
73 : 
» “4 
The rulers wr threatened for ISAIAH. contempt of God’s judgment. 


4M 79. 9 *Whom shall he teach know- 
Lene and whom shall he make to 


understand ‘docttine? them that are weaned 


Migém the milk, ad drawn from the breasts. 
10 For precept * mst be upon precept, pre- 
cept precept; line upon line, line upon 


ie. 


’ captives they were. 


line- “tore a little, and there a little: 

11 For with ®stammering ‘lips and another 
tongue 7 will he speak to this people. 

12 Towhom he said, This is the rest where- 
with ye may cause the weary to rest; and 
this 7s the refreshing: yet they would not 
hear. a Sa . 
13 But the word of the Lorp was unto them, 


b Jeremiah vi. 10. 5 Or, hath been. 


+ Hebrew, the hearing. 
® Heb. stammerings of lips. 


sometimes called vision. They stumble in judg- 
ment—The priests mistake in pronouncing the sen- 
tence of the law, which was their duty. 

Verses 9,10. Whom shall he—Namely, God, or 
his prophet, or-minister; teach knowledge? and 
whom shall he make to understand doctrine ?2—Who 
is there among'this people, that are capable and will- 
ing to be taught the good knowledge of God ?- them 
that are weaned from the milk, &c.—A minister 
may as soon teach a young child as these men. F'or 
precept must be upon: precept, &c.—They must be 
taught like little children, slowly, and with leisure, 
the same things being often repeated, because of 
their great dulness. Line upon line—One line of 
the book after another, as children are taught to read. 

Verses 11, 12. For—Or, rather, ther efore, as the 
particle *3 is often used. For the prophet here evi- 
dently intends to express the punishment of their 
dulness: With stammering lips, and another tongue 
—By people of a strange language, whom he will 
bring among. them, and. into whose power he will 
deliver them; will he speak to this people—Seeing 
they will not hear him speaking by his prophets and 
ministers, in their°own language, they shall hear 
their enemies speaking to them in a strange lan- 
guage. It was a great aggravation of the misery of 
the Jews, during their captivity, that they did not 
understand the language of the Chaldeans, whose 
To whom he said—To which 
people, the Lord, by his ministers, said, T’”his—This 
doctrine, or the word of the Lord; as it follows, 
verse 13; is the rest—The only way, in the observ- 
ance of which you will find rest. Wherewith, &c. 
—The word wherewith is supplied by our trans- 
lators, there being nothing for it in’ the Hebrew, 
which is, cause ye the weary to rest—Namely, your 
wearyyminds and weary country. As if he had 
i rest is offered you by the ‘prophets i in God’s 
ou embrace. it; which is to be done by 
God’s word. So shall this people, 
so often, and so long, wearied and 
at and manifold calamities, find rest 
Yet they would not hear—They were 

168 


and wee 


precept upon precept, precept upon A. Ls 3279. 
B. C. 725. 
precept; line upon line, line -upon ———— 
line; here a litile, and there a little; that they 
hight go, and fall backward, and ™ a; 
and snared, and taken. 
14 “| Wherefore hear the word of the Lorn, 
ye scornful men, that rule this — which 
is in Jerusalem. 


15 Because ye have said, We have made a 


covenant with death, and with hell are we 
at agreement; when. the overflowing scourge 
shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: 
k for we have made lies our refuge, and under 
falsehood have we hid ourselves: 


Se See 
i} Corinthians xiv. 21——’ On he hath spoken——* Amos 
ii. 


wilfully ignorant, and obstinately refused the very 
means of instruction. 

Verse 138. But the word of the Lord was unto 
them, &c.—The sense of the passage thus rendered, 
may be, that they spake of God’s word with scorn 
and contempt, repeating the prophet’s words, (which 
are as peculiar in sound, as they are strong and ex- 
pressive in sense, P? yj 1p, po P; r35 ry, 4 oy, tzav 
latzav, tzav latzav, En Naito kav ‘lakan,) ina 
scoffing manner, and with a ridiculous tone of voice ; 
as if they had said, Tt seems the prophet takes us to 
be mere children, ‘that need to be taught the very 
rudiments of knowledge, and that but slowly. Pre- 
cept upon precept, line upon line, &e.—That these 
were scornful men and mockers, is affirmed verses 
14, 22; and, as scoffers frequently catch the words 
out of other men’s mouths, and use them in the way 
of derision; so it may be thought they did with the 
prophet’s words. But the clause may be rendered 
alittle otherwise, as indeed it is by divers learned 
men, thus: And the word of the Lord shall be unto 
them, precept upon precept, &c.; as this’ method 
has been used, and was altogether necessary for 
them, so it still is, and for the future shall be. “As 
they were children in understanding, they shall con- 
tinue to be such; they shall be ever learning, and 
never Come to the knowledge of the truth; as they 
formerly would not, so now. they shall not profit by 
the word, and their sin shall be their punishment. 
That they may, or might go, and fall backward— 
This will be the event, or consequence of their sin: 
they will fall backward, which is the worstand most 
dangerous way of falling’; 3 and so be broken to 
pieces. 

Verses 14, 15. Wherefore hear, ye scornful men 
—Who make a mock at sin, and at God’s word and 
threatenings, and who doubt not that by your crafty 
counsels, and human efforts, you shall escape God’s 
judgments; who have said—In your hearts; we 
have made a covenant with death, &c.—We are as 
safe from death and hell, or the grave, (as the word 
Sysw here means,) as if they had entered into cov- 
enant with us, that they would not invade 7 1 “To 


A gracious promise 


~ 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


5 ” 


Sof the Messiah. 


A. x 3279. 16 4 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
——— Gop, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foun- 
dation ' a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner- 
stone, a sure foundation : he that believeth shall 
not make haste. 

17 & Judgment. also will I lay to the Hi 
and righteousness to the plummet: and the 


hail shall sweep away ™ the refuge of 
lies, and the waters shall overflow the. 
hiding-place. 


18 And your covenant ite eaidl shall ddigthe . 


annulled, and your agr eement ith hell shall not 


stand ; voller the overflowing scourge shall pass — 
through, then ye shall be ° trodden down by it its? 


1 Gen. xlix. 42; Psa. exvili. 22; Matt. xxi. 42 ; Acts iv. 11; Rom. 
ix. 33 ; x. 11; Eph. ii. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 6, 8. 


be ia covenant with any thing, is a kind of proverbial 
expression to denote perfect security from evil, and 
mischief from it:” see Job v. 23; Hos. ii. 18. When 
the overflowing scourge—The calamity which the 
prophets speak of as coming; shall pass through— 
Namely, the land: if it should pass through, which, 
however, we do not believe it will; if shall not come 
unto us—We shall escape. For we have made lies 
our refuge, &c.—These words the prophet puts into 
their mouths, as declarative of the real nature of 
their false confidence and vain hopes of safety: as 
if he had said, You are confident the calamity shall 
not come to you, because you have taken sanctuary 
in a refuge of lies! You depend on your vain idols, 
or on your riches, or strength, or erafty devices, 
which will all fail you. Or, you hope to secure 
yourselves by your arts of cunning and falsehood, 
but you will find yourselves disappointed. 

Verse 16. T'herefore, thus saith the Lord—Be- 
cause your refuges are vain and deceitful; therefore 
I will direct you to a better and surer refuge, which 
will never fail those that trust to it, which God hath 
prepared in Zion. But if you shall despise and re- 
ject that refuge, which Inow offer to you all; if you 
will not believe, then know, that J will lay judgment 

.to the line, &c., as it follows, verse 17. Some think 
that in this famous prophecy, .Behold I lay in Zion, 
&c., the prophet only means to tell these scorners, 
that God would protect Jerusalem, but not them, 
whom he would suffer to perish; and that he “ ex- 
presses, the protection which God would afford it 
under the image of laying a foundation for new 
walls, with the largest and hardest stones, and those 
most fit for the purpose, to make it impregnable, and 
to stand for ages.” But to understand the prophet 
thus, is to make him utter a false prophecy, which 
was afterward contradicted by facts. For Jerusa- 
lem, whether we understand thereby the city or its 
inhabitants, was not protected, but given up into the 
hands, first of the Chaldeans, and then of the Ro- 
mans, to be destroyed: Certainly, as Lowth ob- 
serves, “this prophecy cannot belong to any but 
Christ, to whom it is often applied in the New Tes- 
tament. But it may import thus much, with respect 
to the time wherein Isaiah lived, that those should 
never be disappointed who believed in God, who 
had made peculiar promises to his church, which 
should be eminently fulfilled ‘at the coming of the 
Messiah, in whom all God’s promises made to his 
people should receive their final accomplishment.” 
Understood of Christ, the interpretation of every 
expression in the passage is natural and easy; Be- 
3 


m Verse 15.—® Heb. a treading down to it. 


hold I lay—I have promised it, and in the fulness 
of time will perform it; in Zion—In my church; 
for a fowndation—Upon which I will build my 
church, the foundation of all the confidence, hope, 
and comfort of my people; a stone—Not Hezekiah, 
as some have supposed, but the Messiah, as appears, 
lst, From those passages of the Old Testament; in 
which he is called a stone, as Psa. exviii. 22; Isa. 
viii. 14; Dan. ii. 34-45; Zech. iii. 9. 2d, From ihosé) 
texts of the New Testament in which this prophecy _ 
is directly expounded of him, as Rom. ix. 32, 33; 
1 Pet. ii. 4, 3d, From the last clause, wherein ‘faith . 
in this stone is required, which is not to be placed 
in any mere man, or mere creature. A tried stone 
—Which I have tried and approved, as every way 
sufficient for a foundation to. support the building. 
A precious corner-stone—Uniting the several parts 
of the building together, making Ephraim and Ju- 
dah, and Jews and Gentiles, theugh now implacable 
enemies, one church, and giving not only strength, 
but beauty and glory to the building, as corner- 
stones frequentiy do. A sure foundation—Upon 
whom you may securely rest; one who will not fail 
nor deceive you, as your refuges of lies will. 
that believeth—Namely, this promise, or places his 
confidence in this stone, as it is explained 1 Pet. ii. 
6; shall not make haste—Shall not hastily catch 
at any way of escaping his danger, whether it be 
right or wrong, but shall@patiently wait upon God 
in his way till he deliver him. The words wm x), 
here rendered, shall not make’ haste, are by the 
LXX. translated, #¢ zy caraicyvv6n, shall in no wise be 
ashamed or confounded, because precipitation, or 
haste, commonly exposes men to shame and con- 
fusion. 

Verse 17. Judgment also will I lay to the line, 
&c.—I will execute just judgment, as it were bya 
line and plummet annexed to it; that is, with exact- 
ness and caré. I will severely punish and utterly 
destroy all who reject that stone. For the line and 
plummet, or the plumb-line, was not only used in 
erecting buildings, but also in pulling them down ; 
those parts of the building being thus marked out 
which were to be demolished. And the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, &e.—My judgments 
(which in the Scriptures are compared toa storm of 
hail or rain) shall discover the vanity of all your 
crafty and wicked devices, and shall swee you away 
with the besom of destruction i ins ' thems 

Verses 18, 19. And your coven 
be disannulled—Made void, or 


shall be trodden down—Namely, by the overflowing 
169 


=" aad 
.M: 3279) 
2 


He 


a iB. C. 725. 


ag. ** 


The husbandman 


ISATAH. 


instructed by the Lord. 


= 
19 From the time that it goeth forth 
it shall take you: for morning by 


-A. M. 3279. 


» morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: 


d it shall be a vexation only ° ¢o understand 


_ the report. 


% 20 FB 


id 


prophecy. 


the bed is shorter than that a man 
an stretch himself on i¢: and the covering 
natrower than that he can wrap himself in i¢. 

‘21 For the Lorp shall rise up as im mount 
" Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley 
of ° Gibeon, that he may ‘do his work, ” his 
strange work ; and bring to pass his act, his 
strange act. 

22 Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest 
your bands be made strong: for I have heard 


from the Lord Gop of hosts 4a con- A. M. 3279 

40; 725. 
sumption, even determined upon the ———— 
whole earth. 

23 9 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; 
hearken, and hear my speech. — 

24 Doth the ploughman plough all day to 
sow? doth he open and break the clods of his 
ground ? 

25 When he hath made plain the face thereof, 
doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter 
the cummin, and cast in 1° the principal wheat, 
and the appointed barley, and the ™ rye in er 
2 place ? 

26 For his God doth instruct him to dis- 
cretion, and doth teach him. 


= Sure St 


n2 Sam. 


9 Or, when he shall make you to understand doctrine. 
Vv. 20; 1 Chron.-xiv. 11. © Joshua x. 10, 12; 2 Samuel v, 25; 
1 Chron, xiv.16.—p Lam. iii. 33. eg Ch, Kies, Danek 27. 


10 Or, the wheat in the princ mere Paes and barley in the aeaiiad: 
ed place.——*! Or, spelt.——? Heb. border ?——™8 Or, And he 
Bindeth it in such sort as his God doth teach him. 


scourge, which you flattered yourselves should not 


come unto you. From the time that it goeth forth 
—Namely, from me into the land, it shall assuredly, 
and with the first, seize upon and carry away you 
scoffers, Morning by morning it shall pass over, 
&c.—It shall not only come to you, but it shall abide 
upon you; and when it hath passed over you, it 
shall return again to you, morning after morning, 
and shall follow you day and night, without giving 
you the least respite. Jt shall be a vexation to un- 
derstand the report—So dreadful shall the judgment 
be, that it shall strike you with horror when Me only 
' hear the rumour of its approach. 

Verses 20, 21. For the bed is shorter, &e.—For 
those lying refuges, to which you trust, will not be 
able to give you that protection which you expect 
from them, no more thanya man can stretch himself 
upon a bed that is too short forhim, Jor the Lord 
shall rise up as in mount Perazim—Where he 
fought against the Philistines, 2 Sam. v. 20. He 
shall be wroth as in Gibeon—Where he fought 
against the Canaanites, (Josh. x. 10, &c.,) and after- 
ward against the Philistines, 1 Chron. xiv.16. That 
he may do his strange work—For this work of 
bringing total destruction upon Israel was contrary 
to the benignity of his own nature, and to the usual 
way of dealing with his people. The calamities and 
alarms occasioned by the Assyrian invasion under 
Sennacherib were a partial accomplishment of this 

It was still more fully accomplished in 
the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, 
and the Babylonish captivity: but certainly it did 
not receive its perfect fulfilment till shatesteaiticn 
of that city, and of the church and state of the Jews 
by the Romans, after their obstinate rejection of their 
Messiah, the corner-stone, here spoken of. This 
alone fully answers the import of these awful pre- 
dictions of divine wrath and vengeance. , 

Verse 22. Now therefore be not mockers—For 
your own sakes do not make a mock of God’s word 

. 170 


SRT ia ta po gS 


and threatenings, as youuse todo. Lest your bands 
be made strong—Lest thereby. you make the judg- 
ments of God, which are often compared to bands, 
more sure and unavoidable, and more severe and 
terrible, as bands are when they are tied faster and 
more strongly upon a prisoner. For Ihave heard 
from the Lord a consumption, &e.—God hath as- 
sured me that he will utterly root out the people of 
Israel, the kingdom of the ten tribes; as indeed he 
did in Hezekiah’s reign, and the Jews, the kingdom 
of the two tribes, in the reign of Zedekiah. 

_ Verses 23-25. Give ye ear—Observe what I say, 


and do you judge if it be not reasonable. “We have + 


here the last member of this section, in which this 
severe judgment of God, denounced in the preceding 
verses, is defended by a parable taken from agricul- 
ture, wherein the prophet represents allegorically 
the.intentions and methods of the divine judgments.” 
“As the husbandman uses various methods in pre- 
paring his land, and adapting it to the several kinds 
of seed to be sown, with a due observation of times 
and seasons ; and when he hath gathered in his har- 
vest, employs methods as various in separating the 
corn from the straw and the chaff by different in- 
struments, ae to the nature of the different 
sorts of grain; so God, with unerring wisdom and 
with strict justice, instructs, admonishes, and corrects 
his people; chastises and punishes them in various 
ways, as the exigence of the case requires; now 
more moderately, now more severely; always tem- 
pering judgment with mercy; in order to reclaim 
the wicked, to improve the good; and finally, to sepa- 
rate the one from the other.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Verse 26. For his God doth instruet him—The 
art of husbandry is so necessary for the support of 
human life, that all men have ascribed its original to 
God as the inventor and ordainer of it. ‘The Most 
High hath ordained husbandry, saith the son of Si- 
rach, Ecclus. vii. 15. In like bau Virgil, Georg., 
lib. i. line 121: i 


es — 


Dreadful state of Jerusalem, 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


# 


| ae 
and destruction of her enemies. thy 


= -s ie 27 For the fitches are not thrashed 

____ with a thrashing instrument, neither 
is a cart-wheel turned about upon the cummin ; 
but the fitches are beaten: out with a staff, and 
the cummin with a rod. 


28 Bread-corn is bruised; because he will 


r Psa. xcii. 55, 


c 


not ever be thrashing it, nor break if A.M. 3279. 
B. C. 725, 


with the wheel of his. cart, nor bruise . ‘ 
it with his horsemen. ~ ws * sitf "of o 
‘ et 


29 This also cometh forth from the L 


of hosts, * which is wonderful in counsel, mgt 


excellent in working. “titsa 


Jer. xxxii. 19. 


«“ —Pater ipse colendi 


Haud facilem esse viam voluit, primusq; per artem 
Movit agros i 


“Himself invented first the shining share, 
And whetted human industry by care ; 
Himself did handicrafts and arts ordain; 
Nor suffer’d sloth to rust his active reign.” 


By other heathen, the invention of agriculture is as- 
cribed to the goddess Ceres. 

Verses 27-29. “Four metfiods of thrashing are 
here mentioned, by different instruments: the flail, 
the drag, the wain, and the treading of cattle. The 
staff, or flail, was used for the grain that was too 
tender to be treated in the other methods. ‘The 
drag consisted of a sort of frame of strong planks, 
made rough at the bottom, with hard stones or iron: 
it was drawn by horses or oxen over the corn-sheaves 


| spread on the floor, the driver sitting upon it. 


The 
wain was much like the former, but had wheels with 
iron teeth, or edges, likeasaw. This not only forced 
out the grain, but cut the straw in pieces for fodder 
for the cattle; for in the eastern countries they have 
no hay. The last method is well known from the 
law of Moses, which forbids the ox to be muzzled 
when he treadeth out the corn, Deut. xxv. 
Bishop Lowth. | Z'his also cometh from the Lord of 
hosts, &c.—This part of the husbandman’s disere- 
tion expressed in ‘these verses, as well as that ex~ 
pressed in verses 24, 25. These words contain the 
application of the similitude. The husbandman 
manages his affairs with common discretion; but 
God governs the world and his church with wonder- 
ful wisdom: he is great and marvellous, both in 
the contrivance of things, and in the execution of 
them. 


”. 
peng 


‘ 4 CHAPTER XXIX. r 


One principal “ subject of this and the four following chapters is the invasion of the Assyrians, and the great distress of the 
' Jews while it continued ; their sudden and unexpected deliverance by God’s immediate interposition in their favour ; the 
subsequent prosperous state of the kingdom under Hezekiah ; interspersed with severe reproofs and threats of punishment 
‘for their hypocrisy, stupidity, infidelity, their want of trust in God, and their vain reliance on the assistance of Egypt ; 
and with promises of better times, both immediately to succeed and to be expected in the future age.” That section. of the 
prophet’s discourse which is contained in this chapter is directed wholly to the Jews of Jerusalem, and is nearly of the 
same argument with the preceding. It may be divided into two parts ; the first containing the denunciation of a tempo- 
ral, the second, of a spiritual judgment. It is foretold, (1,) That Jerusalem should be greatly distressed, but that, their 
enemies, who distressed them, should be baffled and defeated, 1-8. (2,) A reproof is given to three sorts of sinners. To 
those that were stupid and regardless of the warnings given them, 9-12. To those that were formal and hypocritical in 
their religious performances, 13, 14. And to those that profanely despised God's providence, and set wp their own pro- 
jects in competition with it, 15-17. (3,) Precious promises of grace and mercy are made to a remnant whom God would 


sanctify, and in whom he would be sanctified, when their enemies and persecutors should be cut off, 18-24. 


A. M, 3279. O ‘to* Ariel, to Ariel, * the 
eae city »where David dwelt! add 


A. M. 3279. 


re year to year; let them ? kill sacri- 
yey ashes it B. C. 725. 


fices. 


1 Or, O Ariel, that is, the lion of God.——* Ezek. xliii. 15. 


= 
2 Or, of the city.——» 2 Sam. v. 9.—* Heb. cut off the heads. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIX. 

Verse 1. Wo to Ariel—This word signifies a strong 
lion, or the lion of God, and is used concerning lion- 
like men, as it is rendered 1 Chron, xi. 22; and of 
God’s altar, as it is translated Ezek. xliii. 15, 16; 
which seems to be thus called, because it devoured 
and consumed the sacrifices put upon it, as greedily 
and as irresistibly as the lion doth his prey. “That 
Jerusalem is here called by this name,” says Bishop 
Lowth, “is very certain; but the reason of this name, 

3 


and the meaning of it, as applied to Jerusalem, are 
very obscure and doubtful, Some, with the Chal- 
dee, suppose it to be taken from the hearth of the 
great altar of burnt-offerings, which Ezekiel plainly 
calls by the same name ; and that Jerusalem is here 
considered as the seat of the fire of God, 58 18, which 
should issue from thence to consume his enemies; 
compare chap. xxxi.9. Some, according to the com- 
mon derivation of the word, suppose. that it is called 
the lion of God, or the strong lion, on account of the 
171 


a 


te. 


Dreadful state of Jerusalem, 


ISAIAH. 


and destruction of her enemies. 


A. M. 3279. 


2 Yet I willdistress Ariel, and there 
B, C. 725. 


shall be heaviness and sorrow : and it 
shall be ‘unto me as Ariel. 
_3 And I will camp against thee round about, | 


fad will lay siege against thee with a mount, 


_ and I will raise forts.against thee. 


4 And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt 


‘speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall 


be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, 
as of one that hath a familiar spirit, ° out of 
the ground, and thy speech shall * whisper out 
of the dust. 


5. Moreover, the multitude of thy = oly 

4 strangers shall be like small dust, 
and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be 
° as chaff that passeth away : yea, it shall be 
fat an instant suddenly. 

6 £ Thou shalt be visited of the Lorn of hidsts 
with thunder, and with earthquake, and great 
noise, with storm and a and the flame 
of devouring fire. 

7 » And the multitude of all the nations that 
fight against Ariel, even all that fight against 
her and her munition, and that distress her, 


¢ Chap. viii. 19. 4 Heb. peep, or, chirp. d Chap. xxv. 5. 


e Job xxi. 18; Chap. xvii. 13. 


strength of the plage, by which it was enabled to resist 
and overcome all itsenemies. There are other expla- 


nations of this name given, but none that seems to be 


perfectly satisfactory.” T'he city where David dwelt 
—The royal city, and seat of David and his posterity, 


whichis probably here mentioned, because this wasthe | 


ground of their confidence, and also to intimate that 
their relation to David, and their supposed interest 
in the promises made to him and to his seed, should 
not secure them from the destruction here threaten- 
ed. Add ye year to year, &c.—-The prophet speaks 
ironically: Go on year after year, and kill sacrifices 
at the appointed times, whereby you think to ap- 
pease me; but all shall be in vain. For know, that 
God will punish you for your hypocritical worship, 


“consisting of mere form, destitute of true piety. As 


the latter clause, ApY Cn, is literally, Let the 
feasts go round; it is probable this discourse was 
delivered at the time of some great feast. 

Verse 2. Yet will I distress Ariel—Notwithstand- 
ing all your sacrifices, by bringing and strengthening 
her enemies against her. And’ there shall be heavit- 
ness and sorrow—Instead of your present joy and 
festi ity: And it shall be to me as Ariel-—That is, 
either, Ist, I will treat her like a strong and fierce 
lion, which the people, among whom it is, endeavour 
by nets and pits, and divers other ways, to take and 
destroy. 
Ariel the altar, filling it with sacrifices, even of men, 
whom I will slay in my anger; which act of God is 
called his sacrifice, Ezek. xxxix. 17-19. Agreeably 
to this latter interpretation, Bishop Lowth renders the 
clause, Jé shall be unto me as the hearth of the great 
altar; that is, as he explains it, “all on flame; as it 
was when taken by the Chaldeans § or cov oree with 
carcasses and blood, as when taken by the Romans: 
an intimation of which more distant events, though 
not immediate subjects of the prophecy, may per- 
haps be given in this obscure passage.” 

Verses 3,4. And Iwill camp against thee, &e— 
That is, by those enemies whom I will assist and 
enable to take and destroy thee. 
here refer to different sieges of Jerusalem, that of 
Sennacherib, that of the Chaldeans, or even to that || 
of the Romans. T'how shalt be brought down—thy |, 

172 
¥ 


ee 


“Or, 2d, I will make Ariel the city like | 


The prophet may | 


f Chap. xxx. 13.8 Chap. xxviii. 2 ; xxx. 30.—» Chap. 
XXxvil. 36. 


speech shall be low—-Thou, who now speakest so 
loftily, shalt be humbled, and in a submissive man 

ner, and with a low voice, shalt beg the favour of 
thine enemies. As of one that hath a familiar spirit, 

out of the grownd—“ That the souls of the dead 
uttered a feeble, stridulous sound, very different from 
the natural human voice, was a popular notion among 
the heathen, as well as among the Jews. This ap- 
pears from several passages of their poets, Homer, 
Virgil; Horace. The pretenders to the art of necro- 
mancy, who were chiefly women, had an art of 
speaking with a feigned voice, so as to deceive those 
who applied to them, by making them believe that it 
was the voice of the ghost. They had a way of ut- 
tering sounds, as if they were formed, not by the 
organs of speech, but deep in the chest, or in the 
belly, and were thence called vy yaohanitlea ventrilo- 
qui. They could make the voice seem to come from’ 
beneath the ground, from a distant part, in another 
direction, and not from themselves, the better to im- 
pose upon those who consulted them. From these 
arts of the necromancers, the popular notion seems 
to have arisen that the ghost’s voice was a weak, 
stridulous, almost-an inarticulate sort of sound, very 
different from the speech of the living. ”—Bishop 
Lowth. 

Verses 5-7. Moreover—Or, rather, But, the mul- 
titude of thy strangers—Of ‘the strangers that en- 
camp and fight against thee; shall be like small dust 
—Dispersed by the least breath of air; and the mul- 
titude of the terrible ones—Of the Assyrian army, 
terrible’ for courage and ferocity; shall be as the 
chaff that passeth away—Which is quickly carried 
away by the wind. Yea, at an instant, suddenly— 
This dissipation and destruction of thine enemies 
shall be as instantaneous as it is unexpected. Bishop 
Lowth, who considers these verses as containing 
“an admirable description of the destruction of Sen- 
nacherib’s army, with a beautiful variety of the most 
expressive and sublime images, adapted to show the 
greatness, the suddenness, and horror of the event,” 
gives us the following elegant and striking transla- 


‘tion of them, which will give the reader a more just 


and enlarged view of their meaning, than any note 
_wherewith we might ‘attempt to explain it: 
3 i 


Stupidity and hypocrisy 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


* 


of the Jews. 


A.M. 3279. shall be ‘as a dream of a night-vi- 
B. C..725. |. 
sion. ‘ 

8 ‘It shall even be as when a hungry man 
dreameth, and behold, he eateth ; but he 
awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when 
a thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drink- 
eth ; but he awaketh, and behold, he is faint, 
and his soul hath appetite: so shall the mul- 
titude of all the nations be, that fight against 
mount Zion. 

9 | Stay yourselves, and wonder ; ° cry ye out, 
and cry: ‘they are drunken, ™but not with 
wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink. 


10 For "the Lorp hath poured AM. a270. 
out. upon you the spirit of-deep sleep, ——— 


and hath °closed your eyes: the prophets 


and your ‘rulers, ? the seers hath, he cover- _ 


ed. 
11 And the vision of all is become unto you 


\ 


as the words of a7 book 4 that is sealed, which’ 


men deliver to one that is learned, saying, 
Read. this, I pray thee: ‘and he saith, I can- 
not; for it is sealed : ie 

12 And the book is delivered to him that is 
not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: 
and he saith, lam not learned. 


i Job xx. 8. P3a. xxiii, 20. Or, take your pleasure and 
riot Chapter xxviii. 7. m Chapter li. 21. 1 Romans 
xi. 8. © Psa, lxix. 23; Chap. vi. 10. 


6 Heb. heads, Chapter iii. 2; Jer. xxvi. 8——? 1 Sam. ix. 9. 
7 Or, letter. 4 Chap. viii. 16. t Dan. xii. 4,9; Rev. v. 1-5, 
9; vi. 1. : 


But the multitude of the proud shall be like the 
small dust ; i 

And like the flitting chaff, the multitude of the ter- 
rible : 

Yea, the effect shall be momentary, in an instant. 

From Jehovah there shall be a sudden visitation, 

With thunder, and earthquake, and a mighty voice ; 

With storm, and tempest, and flame of devouring 
fire. 

And like as a dream, a vision of the night, 

So shall it-be with the multitude of all the nations, 
that fight against Ariel ; 

And all their armies, and their towers, and those that 
distress her. 


The reader will observe, that this view of the pas- 
sage has the sanction of the Vulgate version, and is 
approved by Prebendary Lowth, Vitringa, Dr. Wa- 
terland, Henry, and several others. 
think that these verses should be connected with the 
preceding, and that the prophet continues in them 
to describe the judgment to be inflicted on Jeru- 
salem. 

Verse 8. “ AS when a hungry man dreameth ; and, 
lo! he seemeth to eat; but he awaketh, and his ap- 
‘petite is still unsatisfied: and as a thirsty man, &c. 
So shall it be with the multitude of all the nations, 
which have set themselves in array against mount 
Zion.” Thus Bishop Lowth.: The Assyrians had 
swallowed up Jerusalem in their imagination: but 
God would suddenly disappoint all their hopes, and 
send them away empty and ¢ 
reader will observe, “Sennacherib- and his mighty 
army are not here compared to a dream, because of 
their sudden disappearance ; but the disappointment 
of their eager hopes is compared to what happens to 
a hungry and thirsty man, when he awakes from a 
dream, in which fancy had presented to him meat 
and drink in abundance, and finds it nothing but a 
vain illusion. The comparison is elegant and beau- 
tiful in the highest degree, well wrought up, and 
perfectly suited to the end proposed.” 

Verses 9, 10. Stay yourselves and wonder—The 

3 


Some, however, | 


founded. For, the | 


prophet, having described the temporal judgment 


coming on the Jews, (see the contents of the chap- 


ter, ) proceeds now to predict the spiritual one, the first 
gradation of which is contained in these and the twe 


| following verses, which both describe the judgment 
;and the consequence.of it. 
| predicted chap. vi. 9-12; and viii. 


It is the same with that 

* 15. On which 
see the notes. Hebrew, non waNNN, Pause and 
be astonished. Stop and consider the stupidity of 
this people, and you cannot but wonder at it. Cry 
ye out, and cry-—Through amazementsand horror. 
They are drunken, but not with wine-—But with 


| stupidity and foily, which makes them, like drunken 


men, insensible of their danger, and not knowing 
what to do. For the, Lord hath poured out upon 
you—Hath suffered to come upon you, in a way of 
righteous judgment, and as a punishment for your 
loving darkness rather than light; the spirit of 
deep sleep—Hardness of heart, and insensibility of 
your danger and misery. The prophets and your 
rulers—Y our magistrates and ministers, whose blind- 
ness and stupidity are a great curse to the people; 
hath he covered—Permitted to be covered with the 


veil of ignorance and stupidity ; ‘that is, he hath with- 
drawn his abused light and grace from them, so that 
they no more see things in a true light than if a thick 


veil were spread over them, The prophets and seers 
here mean the same persons. 

Verses 11, 12. And the vision of all—Of all your 
prophets, or everyvision ; 7s unto you as the words 
of a book that is sealed—Which no man can read 
while it is sealed up, as books then sometimes were, 
being in the form of rolls. Which men deliver to 
one that is learned—That understands the language 
in which the book is written; saying, Read this— 
he saith, I cannot ; for it is sealed—Mere human 
learning, without supernatural illumination, will not 
enable any man rightly to understand the word of 
God, and things divine: see 1 Cor. ii. 11,14. The 
book is delivered—Unsealed and opened; to him 
that is unlearned—and he saith, 1 cannot read it; 
for I am unlearned. Thus, neither the learned 
nor the unlearned among the J ews Were any better 

173 


teh 


: 


a 


vit ; 
usual discretion, and be infatuated. This threaten- 


x 


Hypocrisy and profanity 


A. M. 3279, 


BO. 935. 13 4 Wherefore the Lorp said, 


. * Forasmuch as this people draw near 
me with their mouth, and with their lips do 
honour me, but have removed their heart far 
from me, and their fear toward me is taught 
by * the precept of men : 

14 * Therefore, behold, °1 will prboped to do 
a marvellous work among this people, even 
a marvellous work and a wonder: *for the 
wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the sepichpemeers: of their prudent men shall 
be hid. 

15 ¥ Wo unto them that seek deep to hide 
their counsel from the Lorp, and their works 


s ee xxxili. 31; Matthew xv. 8; Mark vii. 6. t Col: ii. 
Hab. i. 5. ae Heb. I will add. x Jer. xlix.7; Obad. 


ISATAH. 


of the Jews. 


2 SoS ee 
are in the dark, and ” they say, Who a270. 
seeth us? and who knoweth us ? : 

16°Surely your turning of things upside 
down shall be esteemed as the potter’s clay: 
for shall the ® work say of him that made it, 
He made me not? or shall the thing framed 
say of him that framed it, He had no under- 
standing ? 

17 % Js it not yet a very little while, and 
¢ Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, 
and the fruitful field shall be cree as a 
forest ? 

18 And ¢ in that day shall the deaf hear the 
words of the book, and the eyes of the blind 


8; 1 Cor. i. 19——y Chap. xxx. 1. 


z Psa. xciv. 7.——> Chap. 
xlv. 9; Rom. ix. 20. 


© Chap. xxxii, 15.—— Chap. xxxv. 5. 


for .. which God sent them ‘by his ser- 


vants the prophets, nor desired to be better. 


Verses 13, 14. Forasmuch as this people draw 
near to me—Namely,in acts of worship ; with their 
mouth—Speaking to me in prayer and praise, and 
promising and professing to serve me; and with 
their lips do honour me—With mere outward devo- 
tion and bdily Wor but have removed their 
heart far from me—Do not render me: that love 
and gratitude, that regard and obedience, which I 
require; and their fear toward me is taught by the 
precept of men—By mere human wisdom, and not 
by my word and Spirit. They worship and setve me, 
not in such a manner as I have prescribed, but ac- 
cording to men’s inventions, preferring the devices 
and traditions of their false prophets before my in- 
stitutions. Or, their religion is merely of human, 
not of divine, origin: it is the fruit of corrupt nature, 
and notof renewing grace. JI will proceed todo a 
marvellous work—A thing that will scarce be be- 
lieved ; for the wisdom of their wise men shall per- 
ish—Shall disappear and vanish. A veil shall be 
cast w upon the eyes of their minds, and their folly 
shall be made manifest to_all. The most refined arts 
of their politicians shall not avail their authors, nor 
be able to preserve them from God’s judgments ; 
nd their most wise and learned men shall lose their 


ing was remarkably fulfilled in the Jews of our 
Lord’s time, who crucified him out of fear of the Ro- 
mans, and thereby brought the Romans upon them! 
And « their learned rabbis, ever since, have minded 
little else but fabulous stories, and the Cabbalists have 
vented trifles for profound mysteries.” As, in reject- 
ing Christ and his gospel, they removed their hearts 
far from God, therefore God justly removed wisdom 
far from them, and hid from their eyes the things 
that belonged even to their temporal peace. 

Verses 15,16. Wo unto them that seek deep—He- 
brew, co praynn, that make, or dig deep; a metar 
phor from persons digging deep into the earth, that 
they may hide what they wish to keep safe and un- 
known. 

’ 174 


a 


To hide their counsel from the Lord— || 


Who vainly imagine that they can conceal ‘ide hy- 
pocrisy and secret wickedness from him, and can 
deceive, not only. men, but God, by their external 
professions and services; or, who think they can 
carry on their projects without the observation. or 
interposition of Providence. And their works are in 

the dark—Their wicked counsels are contrived, and 

their idolatry is practised, in secret and dark places, 

of which see Ezek. viii. 12.. And they say, Who 

seeth us?—Neither God nor man can discover us, 

Surely your turning of things upside down—* Your 
giving things unexpected turns, or false appearances, 

to hide your true designs, shall signify no more to- 
ward producing the intended effect, than the clay 

does without the artificer.’” Dr. Waterland renders 

the verse, “This perverseness of yours is as if the 

potter were reputed as clay ; that the work should 

say of its maker, He made me not; or the thing 
framed, say of him. that framed it, He hath no under- 

standing.” Bishop Lowth reads the passage in the 
interrogative form, and thereby gives it still more 
force : “ Perverse as ye are! shall the potter be es- 
teemed as the clay? Shall the work iy the work- 
man, He hath not made me?” &c. “We, and all our 
works are in the hands of God, as “clay i in the hands 
of the potter, to give what form and fashion to them 

he pleases ; and when the finest schemes are laid, 

he can work things to a quite contrary end.”— 

Lowth. 

Verse 17. Is it not a very little while, &c.—The 

following paragraph, to the end of the chapter, re- 

lates to the times of the gospel; the prophet foretel- 

ling therein, in figurative language, the rejection of 

the Jews and the calling of the Gentiles. Lebanon, 
a barren mountain, a desolate wilderness, here stands 

for the Gentile world. This was to be turned into a 

fruitful field—Hebrew, 4195, into Carmel, or the 

vineyard of God, as the word signifies. On the other 

hand, the fruitful field, what had formérly been the 

vineyard of God, the Jewish Church, should be esteem- 
ed asa forest——-See this interpretation confirmed, 

chap. xxxii. 15; and Matt. xv. 7, 8. 

Verses 18,19. Jn that day, &c.—In these ie verses 


t 


ee | te a | 


ai >» 

; ie ns 
Gracious promises by) CHAPTER XXIX. of restoration. 
= —~ nT _ 2 we a 
eA ri 3279, shall see out of obscurity , and out of || 22 Therefore thus saith the Lorn, A. M. 3279 
darkness. B. C. 725. 


19 ° The meek also shall increase their j joy 


in the Lorn, and ‘the poor among men shall 
rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. 

20 For the terrible one is brought to naught, 
and ®the scorner is consumed, and all that 
» watch for iniquity are cut off: 

21 That make a man an offender for a word, 
and ‘lay a snare for him that reproveth in the 
gate, and turn aside the just ‘for a thing of 
sath is 


‘who redeemed Abraham, concefn- —— 
ing the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now 
be ashamed, neither shall his face how wax 
pale. * 
23 But when he used his cbildean, ™ the 
work of my hands, in the midst of him, they 
shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy 
One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. 
24 They “also that erred in spirit 1 shall 
come to understanding, and they that murmut- 
ed shall learn doctrine. 


“e Oh. Ixi. L——* Heb. shall add.—§€ Jam. ii. 5. ——8 Ch. xxviii. 
14, 22.—— Mie. ii. 1. i Amos v. 10, 12. Prov. XXVill. 


10.—|! Jos. xxiv. 3. 


m Chap. xix.25; xlv.11; 
ii. 10. 


lx. 21; Eph. 
« Chap. xxviii. 7. 


10 Heb, shall know understanding. 


we have the firsthappy consequence of Lebanon’s be- 
coming a fruitful field, “the spiritual blessings of light 
and understanding in divine things, and of joy andcon- 
solation to be diffused among the Gentiles, formerly 
deaf and blind.” The deaf hear the words of the book 
—That is, the truths of divine revelation are declared 
to the heathen, and their ears are opened to hear, and 
their hearts to understand them. And the eyes of 
the blind to see—They who had been for ages in a 
state of the greatest spiritual blindness and darkness, 
shall be enlightened with the clear and satisfactory 
knowledge of God and his will. 
ELumble and meek believers of the Gentiles, opposed 
to these proud and scornful Jews, spoken of in the 
former part of this,and in the foregoing chapter; 
shall increase their joy in the Lord—Shall greatly 
rejoice in this, that Jehovah is now their God and 
portion. And the poor among men—The poor in 
spirit, or the poor of this world, to whom, espe- 
cially, the gospel has been and is to be preached, 
or those whom the Jews viewed as a mean and 
despicable people; shall rejoice in the Holy One 
of Israel—Whom before they neither knew nor 
regarded. 

Verses 20, 21. For, ¢ &c:—Here we have the second 
event connected with the calling of the Gentiles, the 
punishment of the enemies of God and his truitiy 
For the terrible one is broughttonaught—The proud 
and potent enemies of those meek and poor believers, 
mentioned in the last verse, such as the unbelieving 
Jews and their rulers, and the heathen potentates, 
were in the first age of Christianity. And the scorn- 
er is consumed—The scornful opposers of God’s 
word and servants. And all that watch for iniquity 
—That early and diligently apply themselves to the 
practice of wickedness. T'hat make aman an offend- 
er for a word—That condemn a man, as if he were a 
great criminal, fora verbal reproof; and lay a snare 
for. him that réproveth—For God’s faithful prophets 
and ministers, whose office it is to reprove ungodly 
men ; in the gate—Where the people used to assem- 
ble, both upon civil and sacred accounts, and where 
prophets used to deliver their prophecies. And turn 
aside—From his right ; the just—Hebrew, the just, 
or righteous one, meaning chiefly the prophets and 
ministers of God, and especially Christ, often called 

3 


¥ 


. 
.. 


The meek also—. 


the Just One, both in the Old and New Testaments ; 
for athing of naught—Not for any great advantage, 
but for a trifle, which was a great aggravation of their 
injustice, or, with vanity, as WN gifs i is, 
with vain and frivolous pretences, or without any 
colour of reason or justice. Vitringa applies all this 
to those who opposed Christ.and his apostles. 
Verses 22-24. Therefore thus saith the Lord— 
These verses contain the third sumeeqnence of turn- 
ing Lebanon into a fruitful field ; “a wonderful in- 
crease of the true seed of Abrah d Jacob dis- 
seminated through the whole world, whom those 
patriarchs, according to the promises given them by 
God, might be able to recognise their true image.” 
Who redeemed Abraham—From manifold dangers, 
and especially frem idolatry, in which his family and 
ancestors were generally’involved; Jacob shall not 
now be ashamed—The posterity of Jacob, who had 
great cause to be ashamed for their continued infidel- 
ity, for their persecutions of God’s prophets and 
righteous servants, and for their rejection of their own 
Messiah, shall, at last, be brought back unto the God 
of their fathers, and-to their own Messiah. Neither 
shall his face now wax pale—Through fear of their 


enemies, who from time to time had molested them, . 


for now they shall be delivered from them al 


ad 


shall serve God without fear, Luke i. 74. But when 


he-seeth his children—When ‘the believing seed of 
Jacob shall see those children whom they, have be- 
gotten to, God, by the gospel, even the Gentiles; 


&. 


7 


the work of my hands—The children, not of the 2) 


flesh, but of the promise, whom I, by my almighty 
grace, have regenerated; in the midst of him—In- 
corporated with the Jews, into one and the same 
body; they shall sanctify my name, &¢c.—Instead 
of despising and hating the Gentiles, and envying 
them the grace of God, they shall praise and glorify 
God with them, and for them. They also that err- 
ed—Those Gentiles who had erred from God’s truth, 
being led aside by a lying spirit to idolatry, and all 
manner of impiety; shall come to understanding— 
Shall come to the knowledge of the truth ; and they 
that murmured, &e—They that would not receive 
the doctrine of God, but. murmured at his faithful 
teachers who delivered it; shall learn doctrine 
Shall receive God’s truth in the love of it. 
175 we 


_ 


4 


oe 


The people threatened for 


ISAIAH. 


Wt 


their reliance on Egypt. 


7 


CHAPTER XXX. “ 


The prophecy of this chapter, lake that of the preceding, 
vasion. 
thence, are reproved and threatened, 1-7. 


~ 


relates to the approaching danger of Jerusalem by Sennacherib’s in- 
(1,) Those who, in that distress, trusted to the Egyptians for help, and were in haste to fetch succowrs from 
(2,) A terrible threatening is denounced against those who slighted. the import- 
ant advice given them by the prophets in the name of God, 8-17. 


(3,) A gracious promise is made to those who trusted 


in God, that they should not only be brought owt of their troubles, but should see happy days after them, in the enjoyment 


of both tempor al-and spiritual blessings, 18-26. 


(4,) A prophecy of the total ruin of the ascii army, which should be 


an occasion of great joy, and an introduction to those happy times, 27-33. 


A. M. 3279. 


1.0. 7. et W O to the rebellious children, saith 


the Lorn, * that take counsel, 
but not c not of me; and that cover with’ a covering, 
but not of my Spirit, > oi they may add sin 
to sin’: 

2 ° That walk to-go ie into Egypt, and 
*have not asked at my mouth ; to strengthen 
themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to 
trust in the shadow of Egypt! 

3 © Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh 
be your shame, and the trust in the shadow 
of Egypt your confusion. 


A For his princes were at  Zoan, A ae 
and his ambassadors came to Hanes. 

5 & They were all ashamed of a people that 
could not profit them, nor be a help nor profit, 
but a shame, and also a reproach. 

6 > The burden of the beasts of the south : 
into the land of trouble and anguish, from 
whence come the young and old lion, ‘the 
viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry 
their riches upon the shoulders of young 
asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of 
camels, to a people that shall not profit them. 


2 Chapter ix. 15.— Deut. xxix. 19——* Chapter xxxi. 1. 
&@Num. xxvii. 21 ; Jos. ix. 14; 1 Kings xxii. 7; Jer. xxi. 2; xli. 
2, 20. 

. N ON CHAPTER XXX. 


Verses 1-5. Wo to the rebellious children—The 
Jews, who called themselves God’s children, though 
they were rebellious ones, as was said chap. i. 2. 
That. take cownsel—That consult together, and re- 
solve what to do; but not of me—Not following nor 
asking my advice, which I encouraged and command- 
de themtodo. And cover with a covering—Seek 
protection ; but not of my Spirit—Not suchas by my 
Spirit, speaking in my word, I have directed and re- 
quired them to seek; that they may add sin to sin— 
That unto all their other sins, by which they have 
deserved and provoked my judgments, they may 
add distrust of my power and mercy, and put confi- 
dence inan arm of flesh. That walk to go down 

- into Egypt—-That send ambassadors to Egypt for 
succour, which the Jews were prone to do upon all 
occasions, and did now upon the invasion of the king 
of Assyria, chap. xx. 5,6; and have not asked at 

my mouth--Hither by the priests or prophets, as they 

"were commanded to do in weighty cases. The 

strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame--Not only 
unprofitable, but mischievous to you. For his princes 

—The princes of Judah;: were at’ Zoan—Sent 

thither by the king, or by their brethren. His am- 
bassadors cameto Hanes—An eminent city of Egypt, 
ealled more largely Tahapanes. They were all 
ashamed—Both the messengers and they who sent 
them; of a people’that could not profit thenm—For, 
though the Egyptians, in conjunction with the Ethi- 
opians, did so far assist the Jews as to give a diver- 
sion to Sennacherib’s forces; yet, being entirely 
routed, they became rather a burden than a help to 
the Jew s, and are therefore (chap. xxxvi. 6) compar- 
ed to a broken reed, which not only fails the hand 
that leans upon it, but pierces and wounds it. 

176 


cy 


+ 


| with its shameful and sorrowful event.” 


e Chap. xx. 5; Jer. xxxvii. 5, 7.——f Chap, xix. 11,—# Jer. 
ii. 36.» Chapter lyin 9% Hosea viii. 9; xii. 1.——i Deut. 
}) wili. 15. 


Verses. 6, 7. The burden of the beast of the south 
—The burden of riches or treasures, carried upon 
beasts travelling southward. In these verses the ~ 
prophet has before his eyes “the ambassadors of the 


Jews, or, as some think, also of Hosea, and the 


Ephraimites, (see 2.Kings xvii. 4,) bearing their 


| splendid and sumptuous presents on asses and .¢a- 


mels into Egypt; and perceiving that they would 


| reap no advantage from this proud and sumptuous 


embassy, and that the whole would be: fruitless, or 
rather would raise the indignation of the Assyrians, 
he cannot refrain, but exhibits, to the life, the whole 
scheme of this imprudence, folly, and ineredulity, as 
it was immediately presented to his prophetic sight, 
Into the 
land of trouble and anguish—Into Egypt and Ethi- 
opia, for both were joined together in this matter, 
(see chap. xx.,) whose land see be called a land 
of trouble, &c., prophetically, because they should 
distress and not help those that applied to and trust- 


ed in them, as was said of the Assyrians in the like 


case, 2 Chron. xxviii. 20, Bishop Lowth, who sup- 
poses that the deserts are here meant, which the Is- 
raelites passed through when they came out of 
Egypt, renders it, by, or through a land of distress, 
&e. But it seis more likely, as it certainly was 
more important, that the land to which, than that 
through which, they went; should be spoken of. Be- 
sides, “the direct road from Judea to Egypt was not 
through such a country as is here described. From 
whence come the young and old lion, &e.—This may 
be understood literally, for “ Egypt, at this time, 
joined to Ethiopia, was, of all countries, most fertile 
of every fierce and wild creature, which the nature 
of man abhors, both terrestrial and aquatic.” See 
Boch. Hieroz., p. ii.1. iii. c. 18, The words, however, 
3 


* 


The people threatened for 


CHAPTER XXX. 


b 


their reliance on Egypt. 


7 * For the Egyptians shall help in 

~ vain and to no purpose: therefore 

have I cried 1 eoncerning this, ! Their strength 
as to sit still. 

‘8 7 Now go, ™write it before them in a 
table, and note it in a book, that it may be 
for * the time to come for ever and ever : 

9 That “this is a rebellious people, lying 
children, children ¢hat will not hear the law 
of the Lorn: 

10 ° Which say to the seers, See not; and 
to the prophets, Prophesy not unto ‘us right 
things, » speak unto us smooth things, prophesy 
Sande: 

11 Get you out of the way, turn aside out of 
the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease 
from before us. 


A. M. 3279. 
B.C. 725 


Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in 
] 2 
3 oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon : 


13 Therefore this iniquity shall be to A. M. 3279. 
you ‘as a breach ready to fall, swell- . ssaphind 
ing out in a high wall, whose breaking * "Sonnet 
suddenly at an instant. 

14 And ‘he shall break it as the breaking 
of ‘the potter’s vessel that is broken in pieces ; 
he shall not-spare: so that there shall not be 
found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire 
from the hearth, or to take water withal out of 
the pit. 

15 For thus saith the Lord Gon, the Holy 
One of Israel; ‘In returning and test shall ye 
be saved ; in Naidbitess and in confidence shall 
be your riot’ “and ye would not. 

16 But ye said, No; for we will flee upon 
horses ; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will 


|/tide upon the swift; therefore shall they that 
12 Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of, 


pursue you be swift. 
17 * One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of 


one; at the rebuke of five: shall ye i till ye 


k Jer. xxxvii. 7.——! Or, to her- 1 Verse 15; Chap. vn. 4. 
m Hab. ii. 2. 2 Heb. the latter day. 1 Deut. xxxii. 20 ; Chap. 
1.4; Verse 1. 9° Jer. xi. 21; Amos ii. 12; vii. 13; Mic. ii. 6. 
PI Kings xxii. 13; Mic. 1i. 11. 


may have a higher and mystical meaning, and by 
these wild and savage creatures may be designed the 
craft and cruelty of the Egyptians and Ethiopi- 
ans, and the danger and injury the Jews, or Is- 
raelites, would bring upon themselves by a confede- 
racy with them. Therefore have I cried concern- 
ing this—This counsel, or practice; their strength 
is to sit still—It is safer and better for them to stay 
quietly at home, seeking to God for help, than to go 
or send to Egypt for it. 

Verses 8-11. Now go, write it before them —Write 
this prophecy and warning, which I have now deli- 
vered, in their presence; in a table, and in a book— 
So it was to be written twice over, once in a table, to 
be hung up.in some public place, that all present 
might read it; and again in a book, that it might be 
kept for the use of posterity. That it may be for 
the time to come—As a witness for me and against 
them, that I have given them fair warning, and that 
they have wilfully run upon their own ruin. That 
they are lying children—Who profess one thing, 
and practise another; that will not hear the law of 
the Lord—The commands of Cofggither contained 
in the Scriptures, or delivered by the mouth of the 
prophets, whereby these practices were expressly 
forbidden them. Which say to the seers, See not, 

&c.—This they said in effect, in that they were not 
willing to know and do the will of God. They 
loved darkness rather than light. Prophesy not 
unto us right things—The prophets told them of 
their faults, and warned them of their misery and 
danger, but they could not bear it. They. wanted 
smooth things to be spoken to them, things that 
would give them no pain, but please their corrupt 

Vou, III. ( 12 ) 


* 


20, fraud 4 Psa. Ixii. 3. Chap. xxix. 5.—— Psa. ii. 9; 
Jer. xix. 11. * Heb. the bottle of potters. Verse “3 Chap. ° 
vil. 4. 4 Matt. xxiii. 37. x Rev. xxv, leut. xxvili. 25 ; 
xxxli. 30; Jos. xxiii. 10. be 


minds, and flatter them in theirsins. Get ye out of 
the way—In which you now walk, out of your pre- 
sent course of preaching unpleasing and frightful 
things; or, out of our way. For the prophets stood 
in their way, like the angel in Balaam’s road, with 
the sword of God’s wrath drawn in their hands, so 
that these sinners could not proceed on in their sin- 
ful practices without terror; and this they took 
heinously. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease 
from before us—Do not trouble us with harsh and 
repeated messages from God, as you use to do. 

Verses 12-14. Because ye despise this ee 
and trust in oppression—In the wealth which you 
have gotten by oppression, whereby you now think 
to procure Egyptian succouts ; aid perverseness— 
In your perverse and rebellious course of sending to 
Egypt for help. This iniquity shall be to you as a 
breach, &c.—Like a wall, which is high, and-seems 
to be strong, but, swelling out in some parts, upon 
the least accident falleth down suddenly to the 
ground. Such shall be the issue of your high.and 
towering confidence in Egypt. And he shall break 
it—Namely, God, or the enemy whom God will send 
against you. 

Verses 15-17. In returning—From your present 
purpose of sending to Egypt; or, as the LXX., the 
Syriac, and Arabic understand it, in returning to 
God ; shall ye be saved—Preserved from the power 
of your enemies. In quietness and confidence—In 
a calm and quiet submission to the divine will, and 
a confidence placed on his mercy, power, and faith- 
fulness ; shall be your strength—Y our support under 
your troubles, and your ability to withstand your in- 
vaders. But ye said, No; for we will flee upon 

177 3 


=~ 


Gracious promises 


ISAIAH. 


ty oo 


_ of restoration. 


ae “a 3279. he left as °a beacon upon the top of a 
. C. 725. 
mountain, and as an ensign on a hill. 
18 4 And therefore will the Lorp wait, that 
he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will 
he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon 
you : for the Lorn is a God of judgment: ¥ bless- 
ed are all they that wait for him. 
19 For the people * shall dwell in Zion at Je- 
rusalem : thou shalt weep no more: he will be 


very gracious unto thee at the voice of es mt. en. 
thy cry ; when he shall hear it, he will —-_— 
answer thee. | 

20 And though the Lorp give you *the 
bread of adversity, and the water of ° affliction, 
yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a 
corner any more, but thine eyes shall : see thy 
teachers : 


21 And thine ears shall hear a 5 oath behind 


y Psa, ii, 


* Or, a tree bereft of branches, or, boughs, or, a mast. 
2; xxxiv. 8; Prov. xvi. 20; Jer. xvii. 7. 


ae 


z Chap. Ixv. 9. 
ii eos 


a1 Kings xxii. 27; Psa. exxvii. 2——* Or, 
> Psa. Ixxiv. 9; Amos viii. 11. 


_ horses; on the swift—We will have swift horses 
from Egypt, that, in case of danger, we may escape 
from our enemies. It is probable many of the richer 
sort intended to flee, and perhaps did actually flee 
into Egypt, having sent their treasures thither before 
them. Therefore shall ye flee—Your sin shall be 
your punishment: you will flee, and you shall flee. 
One thousand at the rebuke of one—You shall be so 
dispirited and enervated by your fears, that, instead 
of one of you chasing a thousand, as God promised 
you should do, if you were obedient, a thousand of 
you shall ad chased by one of your enemies. At the 
rebuke, or assault, of five—Of a comparatively small 
number ; sha ye flee—All of you, however nume- 
rous; till ye be left, &c.—Till_ye be generally de- 
stroyed, and but a few of you left. “The meaning 
_of the whole period is, that if the Jews, in the uncer- 
tain state of their affairs, would abstain from all en- 
deavours to defend themselves by foreign aid, and 
would commit themselves to the care and provi- 
dence of God, with settled minds, in faith and hope, 
they should then be safe, and avoid the calamities 
which threatened them.” -But this they would not 
do; they were determined to seek for preservation 
or deliverance from the yoke of the Assyrians in 
the help of the Egyptians, and therefore it is fore- 
told they should méet with the calamities here men- 
tioned; and “should be seized with such a panic 
fear that, when they came to the point, they should 
turn their backs on their enemies, and flee with that 
swiftness wherewith they had thought to make their 
enemies flee, insomuch that very few of them should 
escape the common destruction.” 

Verse 18. And therefore—Because of your great 
misery: for the misery of God’s people is frequently 
mentioned in Scripture as a motive to God’s mercy: 
or, notwithstanding, as 12) may be rendered ; will 
the Lord wait—Patiently expect your repentance, 
and stop the course of his proceedings against you, 
that you may have an opportunity of making your 
peace with him, and of preventing your utter ruin. 
He will be evalted—He will lift up himself, and exert 
his power gloriously in your behalf; that he may 
have mercy upon you—That he may show his mercy 
in your deliverance. For the Lord is a God of 
judgment—That is, he is wise and just in all the 
dispensations of his providence, acting toward his 
people with equity and moderation. Blessed are 
all they that wait for him—In the way of their duty, 

78 


with faith and Pationce ; that will not take any indi- 
rect course to extricate themselves out. of their 
straits, but patiently expect God to appear for them 
in his own way and time: which is a much surer 
way to safety and happiness than having recourse to 
mere human aids, and placing confidence in the arm 
of flesh. 

Verse 19. For, &c.—“ The consdlatory: part: of 
this discourse begins here, which is connected with 
the preceding part by the last clause of the former 
verse, Blessed, &c. Here follows, therefore, a series 
of excellent blessings, to be conferred by God after 
these judgments. And the prophet hath so ordered 
his style in setting them forth, that when he seems 
to promise only temporal blessings to the church, he 
would be understood mystically under these figura- 
tive emblems.”—Vitringa. T'he people shall dwell 
in Zion, &c.—This is the first of these blessings, the 
restoration of their state upon their repentance and 
earnest prayers: as if he had said, Although the 
time is coming when.the people shall be banished 
from Jerusalem and carried into captivity; yet after 
a set time they shall return and have a fixed and 
comfortable abode in Jerusalem, the seat of their re- 
ligion, and metropolis of their republic. This was 
in part fulfilled upon their return from Babylon, 
“when the tears which they had shed in their ban- 
ishment were wiped away, and God heard the pray- 
ers and vows of his people, after the time of his in- 
dignation. was expired.” But it was more fully 
accomplished in the times of the gospel, when many 
of them were, and the whole body, of them shal] be, 


.brought into Christ’s church, often called Zion and 


Jerusalem. 

Verses 20, 21. And though the Lord give you the 
bread of adversity—Although in that time and state ~ 
of the church you will be subject to many outward 
straits and afflictions, which was the case with the 
Jews after t restoration from Babylon, and 
which was also the lot of the first converts to Chris- 
tianity ; yet shall not thy teachers be removed, &c.— 
As they have been in former times, both in Israel 
and Judah, when the godly prophets, and other in- 
structers of the people, were, but few, and when 
they were persecuted and banished by their wicked 
rulers. The Jews, after their return from Babylon, 
were blessed with many excellent instructers, as ap- 
pears from the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, at the 
head of which we must place these two eminent 

( 12* ) 


4 


Gracious promises of 


CHAPTER XXX. 


1 


restoration and favour. 


ae thee, saying, This is the way, walk 
———— ye in it, when ye *turn to the right 
hand, and when ye turn to the left. 

22 * Ye shall defile also the covering of 7 thy 
graven images of silver, and the ornament of 
thy molten images of gold: thou shalt ® cast 
them away as a menstruous cloth ; °* thou shalt 
say unto it, Get thee hence. 

23 ‘Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, 
that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and 


bread of the increase of the earth, and A. M. 3279. 
it shall be fat and plenteous : in that aoa 
day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures. 

24 The oxen likewise and the young asses 
that ear the ground shall eat ®clean 1° proven- 
der, which hath been winnowed with the 
shovel and with the fan. 

25 And there shall be upon eyery high 
mountain, and upon every high. hill, rivers 
and streams of waters in the day of the 


© ] John i. 7.——42 Chron. xxxi. 1; Chapter ii. 20; xxxi. 7. | 


5 Heb. scatter. 


7 Heb. the graven images of thy silver. © Hos. 


xiv. 8.—f Matt. vi. 33; 1 Tim. iv. ce Or, savoury. 10 Heb. 


leavened.— Chap. ii. 14, 15; eae 11 Heb. lifted up. 


servants of God. In the times of the New Testa- 
ment, however, God provided still better for his 
church, sending his Son, the great teacher of his peo- 
ple, into the world ; and pouring forth the gifts and 
graces of the Spirit in. abundance, increasing the 
number of faithful ministers, and promising a con- 


tinued succession of them to the end of the world. | 
This is the second great benefit predicted by the pro- | 


phet to follow these judgments. Thine eyes shall 
see thy teachers—They shall be present in your as- 
semblies, instrueting, exhorting, warning, and en- 
couraging you from time to time. The original 
word, Nn, here used, means ordinary teachers, 
and not those of an extraordinary kind, such as the 
prophets or seers were. And thine ears shall hear 
a word, &c.—As often as need shall require, thou 
shalt hear the voice of God’s word and Spirit direct- 
ing thee in thy course: behind thee—A metaphor, 
borrowed either from shepherds, who used to follow 
their sheep, and to recall them when they went out 
of the way; or from travellers, who, if they go out 
of the right way, are ofttimes admonished of their 
error, and recalled by some other passenger or per- 
son behind them. - 

Verse 22. Ye shall also—To show your contempt 
of it; defile the covering of thy graven images—The 
leaves or plates,’ wherewith their wooden images 
were frequently covered: and the ornament of thy 
molten images—Or, the coat, or covering ; Hebrew, 
n7Dx, the ephod, as the word is rendered, Exod. 
xxviii. 8; and xxxix.5;- which was a costly and glo- 
rious robe. The images also were of gold: for the 
idolaters spared .no cost in the making and adorning 
of their idols. Thou shalt cast them away, &c.— 
Thou shalt so deeply abhor idolatry that thou shalt 
east away, with indignation, all the monuments and 
instruments thereof. This prophecy was fulfilled in 
some measure even before the Assyrian invasion, as 
we learn from 2 Chron. xxxi. 1; Hezekiah inciting 
the people to destroy idolatry out of the land. Pro- 
bably it was fulfilled still more upon the deliverance 
of Jerusalem from Sennacherib’s army, which, 
doubtless, would convince thousands of individuals 
of the almighty power of Jehovah, of the impotence 
of idols, and the sin and folly of worshipping them. 
But it was verified in the whole body of the Jewish 
nation, at their return from their captivity in Baby- 
lon, for they abhorred idols ever after. Add to this, 

3 


it is accomplished daily in the conversion of souls, 
by the power of divine grace, from spiritual idola- 
try, to the fear and love of God. This deliverance 
from the love and practice of idolatry is the third 
blessing here represented as being conferred on the 
people, after the forementioned judgments.. In the 
two following verses we have a fourth. 

Verses 23, 24. I"hen shall he give thee the rain 
of thy seed—Or rather, to, or for thy seed, namely, 
when thou hast newly sown it, which was called the 
former rain; or, such as thy seed. requires, which 
may include both the former and the latter rain. 
Their sins, the cause of all God’s judgments, being 
removed by their sincere repentance and God’s gra- 
cious pardon, God showers down his blessings upon 
them. “When he gives them their teachers,” says 
Henry, “and they give him their hearts, so that 
they begin to seek the kingdontof God and his right- 
eousness, then all other things are added unto them.” 
And bread of the increase of the earth—Which 
shall be the fruit of thy own land and labour. And 
it shall be fat and: plenteous—Excellent for quality, 
which is called fat, Deut. xxxii. 14, and abundant 
for quantity. This promise, by the special blessing 
of God, was remarkably fulfilled after the defeat of 
Sennacherib, (chap. xxxvii. 30,) God. thus repairing 
the losses ‘they sustained by that devastation. The — 
oxen likewise, §c., shall eat clean provender-—There 
shall be such plenty of eorn that the very beasts, in- 
stead of straw, shall eat corn; and that not in the 
ear, or with the straw, but the pure grain. Vitringa, 
with some other commentators, thinks it appears 
plainly, from the next two verses, that the prophet 
is to. be understood. in this passage as speaking, not 
so much literally as figuratively, and that the words 
contain a splendid promise of pure and abundant 
spiritual provision, made-by the Lord for his people, 
in the ministry of the word, the spiritual sowing; 
the effusions of his Spirit, the rain of the seed ; and 
in the due administration of his various ordinances, 
the large pastures in which his flock feeds. 

Verse, 25. On every high mountain, and every 
high hill—Which are commonly dry and barren ; 
shall be rivers and streams of water—Fertilizing 
and refreshing blessings, showered down by God 
upon his church and people. This verse certainly 
cannot be understood literally, and the mystical 
meaning, according to Vitringa and some others, is, 

179 


Gracious promises of 


ISAIAH. 


restoration and favour. 


A. M. 3279. great slaughter, when the towers 
iia tS 

26 Moreover *the light of the moon shall 
be as the light of the sun, and the light of the 
sun shall be seven-fold, as the light of seven 
days, in the day that the Lorn bindeth up the 
breach of his people, and healeth the stroke 
of their wound. 


27 4 Babel the name of the Lorp cometh 


from far, burning with his anger, A. M. 3279. 
22 and the burden thereof is 2° heavy : oni: 
his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue 
as a devouring fire: ' 

28 And ‘his breath, as an overflowing stream, 
k shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift 
the nations with the sieve of vanity: and 
there shall be ‘a bridle in the jaws of the peo- 
ple, causing ¢hem to err. j 


~ 


b Ges ix. 19, 20. aes Or, ond the grievousness of flame. 
eb. heaviness. 


i Chapter xi. 4; 2 Thessalonians 11. 8—* Chapter vin. 8. 
1 Chapter xxxvii. 29. 


: 
_ “that in all the more celebrated places, whether of 


md? 


kingdoms or cities, there should be synagogues, pub- 
lic schools, or oratories; in which the word of God, 
and the doctrine of pure religion, should be copiously 
taught, and the waters of sound instruction poured 
out,” so that the lovers of true wisdom, piety, and 
virtue, might there. quench their thirst. The time 
in which these benefits should be conferred upon the 
church is denoted by this character, namely, in the 
day of the great slaughter, when the towers shall 
fall—That is; when God should take severe ven- 
geance upon the enemies of his people.. Perhaps 
the destruction of Jerusalem and of the temple, with 
the subversion of the Jewish state, and the slaughter 
of immense multitudes of Jews, events connected 
with the calling of the Gentiles, and the extensive 
propagation:of the gospel, might be first in the pro- 
phet’s view. The words may further refer to the 
overthrow of the pagan, persecuting Roman empire, 
and the great slaughter that preceded or accompa- 
nied it. But, undoubtedly, the words ultimately 
refer to the destruction of all the antichristian pow- 
ers, the subversion of the fortresses and towers of 
Satan’s kingdom, making way for the universal dif- 
fusion of divine truth and spread of true religion. 
“This shall be remarkably fulfilled,” says Lowth, 
“at the time when there shall be a terrible destruc- 
tion of God’s enemies, (Rev. xiv. 20, and. xix. 21,) 
and when the great ones of the earth shall fall, de- 
noted here by high towers, or the fortifications of 
mystical Babylon.” 

Verse 26. The light of the moon shall be as the 
light of the sun—For constancy and brightness, 
which, ‘as also the following clause, is to be under- 
stood metaphorically, of that glorious and happy 
state of the church which should take place in future 
times. And the light of the sun seven-fold, as the 
light of seven days—As if the light of seven days 
were combined together.in one. Its light shall then 
be transcendently more bright and glorious than ever 
it was before. Which magnificent expressions seem 
evidently to be too high for the deliverance of the 
Jews, either from Sennacherib or out of Babylon; 
and do much better agree to the times of the gospel, 
in which the light is far more clear, and the grace 
of God conferred on his people much more abund- 
ant, than ever it was in former times. In the day 


that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, 
&c.—When God shall effectually cure the wounds 
180 


and breaches of his people, first making up the breach 
between himself and them, then making Israel and 
Judah to be one, and making Jews and Gentiles to 
be one fold under one shepherd. 

Verses 27, 28. Behold, &c.—Here begins the last 
part of the discourse contained in this chapter, in 
which the prophet gives an earnest of those greater 
blessings promised, for times to come, by ascuting 
his people of the approaching destruction of the 
‘syrian forces. “It is an exquisitely fine and sublime 
passage, and closely connected with the argument 
and scope of the whole ‘discourse, in that it teaches 
that the Jews and Israelites had no need to flee to 
Egypt for help against the Assyrians, to the neglect 
of their duty toward God, since/God was perfectly 
sufficient to defend them, and had determined to de- 
stroy the Assyrian. ”__Vitringa. The name of tie 
Lord is here put for the Lord himself, and he is said 
to come from far, either as coming unexpectedly, 
or as having for along time appeared to withdraw 
his presence, and withhold his help from his people ; 
burning with anger—Determined to take signal 
vengeance on his enemies. And the burden thereof 
is heavy—The punishment which he will inflict will 
prove very grievous and intolerable. His lips are 
Sull of indignation—He hath pronounced a severe 
sentence against them, and will give command for 
the execution of it. And his breath—His anger, or 
rather, the effects thereof; (the expression is bor- 
rowed from men’s discovering their anger by strong 
and vehement breathing; see on Job iv. 9;) as an 
overflowing stream—Coming from him as vehe- 
mently as a mighty torrent of waters; shall reach 
to the midst of the neck—Shall bring the Assyrian 
into a most dangerous condition, as a man, who is in 
waters which reach to his neck, is in great danger 
of being drowned ; see on chap, viii. 8. To sift the 
nations with the sieve of vanity—To shake and seat- 
ter, as it were, with a sieve, the Assyrian army, 
made up of the people of different nations. “Vanity,” 
says Lowth, “sometimes signifies destruction: so 
chap. lIvii. 13. Vanity shall take them, that is, they 
shall be destroyed. And here the sieve of vanity is 
such a one as doth not separate the chaff in order to 
save the corn, but makes an entire riddance, as when 
chaff is scattered before the wind.” Bishop Lowth 
translates the clause, 7'o toss the nations with the 
van of perdition, judging that 723 rather signifies a 
| yan than a sieve, and observing from Kimchi, “ The 

3 


Destruction of the 


CHAPTER XXX. 


Assyrians foretold. 


A. M.-3279. 


B. C. 725. 29 Ye shall have a song, as in the 


night ™whena holy solemnity is kept ; 
and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with 
a Pipe | to come into the ® mountain of the Lorn, 
to the Mighty One of Israel. 

30 ° And the Lorp shall cause * his Bigddias 
voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting 
down of his arm, with the indignation of his 
anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, 
with scattering, and tempest, ? and hail-stones. 

31 For ‘through the voice of the Lorn shall 


™ Psa. xlii. 4——" Ch, ii. 3.—14 Heb. Rock, Deut. xxxii. 40. 
© Chap, xxix. 6—*> Heb. the glory of his voice. P Chap. 
XxvVill. 2; xxxii. 19. 4 Chap. xxxvii. 36.— Chap. x. 5, ot. 


use of the van is to cleanse the corn from the chaff 
and straw: but the van with which God will winnow 
the nations, will be the van of emptiness or perdi- 
; for nothing useful shall remain behind, but 
shall come to nothing, and perish. In like man- 
ner @ bridle is designed to guide the horse in the 
right way; but the bridle which God will put in 
the jaws of the people, shall not direct them aright, 
but shall make them err, and lead them into de- 
struction.” : 

Verses 29-31. Ye shall have a song, &c.—You 
shall have oceasion of great joy, and of singing songs 
of praise for your stupendous deliverance from that 
formidable enemy ; as in the night, &c.—He men- 
tions the night, either because the Jewish feasts 
began in the evening, and were celebrated with 
great joy during a part of the night, as well as on 
the following day; or because he has a particular 
respect to the solemnity of the passover, in which 
they spent some considerable part of the night in 
rejoicing, and singing sacred songs before the Lord. 
As when one goeth, &c.—Like the joy of one that 
is going up to the solemn feasts with music. The 
Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard—His 
thunder, metaphorically taken for a terrible judg- 
ment. “This destruction shall be from the imme- 
diate hand of God, in which he shall as evidently 
appear as if he had discomfited the army by a tem- 
pest of thunder, and lightning, and hail-stones, as he 
formerly destroyed the Canaanites and Philistines.” — 
Lowth. And show thelighting down of his arm—Upon 
the Assyrian, whom he will smite with a deadly blow 
in. the face of the world ; with the indignation of his 
anger—With great wrath; which is signified by 
heaping so many words of the same signification to- 
gether. The Assyrian, who smote with a rod— 
Who was the rod wherewith God smote his people 
and other nations: he who used to smite others shall 
now be smitten himself. 

Verse 32. Where the grounded staff shall pass 
—Instead of M7301 NN, the grounded, or founded 
staff, of which, he says, no one yet has been able to 
make any tolerable sense. Bishop Lowth, on the 
authority of two MSS., (one of them ancient,) reads 
M219 NW, the staff of correction, which Le Clere 
also supposes to be the true reading. The bishop, 

3 


‘thus inhumanly murdered : 


the Assyrian be beaten down, * which 4 M. po. 
smote with a rod. ; —— 

32 And ' in every place where, the grounded 
staff shall pass, which the Lorp shall " lay 
upon him, ¢ shall be with tabrets and harps: 
and in battles of ‘shaking will he fight 1 with it. 

33 * For Tophet is ordained " of old: yea, for 
the king it is prepared; he hath made i¢ deep 
and large: the pile thereof zs fire and much 
wood ; the breath of the Lorp, like a stream 
of brimstone, doth kindle it. 


16 Heb. every passing of the rod founded. 
rest upon him. s Chap. xi. 15; xix. 16, 
t Jer. vii, 31; xix. 6, &c. 19 Heb, from yesterday. 


therefore, translates.the clause thus: And it shall be, 
that wherever shall pass the rod of correction, which 
Jehovah shall lay heavily upon him, it shall be ac- 
companied with tabrets and harps ; that is, as the 
bishop explains it, “with every demonstration of 
joy and thanksgiving for the destruction of the ene- 
my in so wonderful a manner: with hymns of praise, 
accompanied with musical instruments.” And in bat- 
tles of shaking, &c.—Or, as it may be better rendered, 
in fierce or tremendous battles shall he, namely, the 
Lord, fight against them, that is, against the Assy- 
rians. 

Verse 33. For Tophet is ordained of old—* To- 
phet is a valley very near to Jerusalem, to the south- 
east, called also the valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna ; 
where the Canaanites, and afterward the Israelites, 
sacrificed their children, by making them pass 
through the fire ; that is, by burning them in the fire, 
to Moloch.” It is.supposed to have been called 7- 
phet, from the drums, timbrels, or tabrets, which 
sounded there, to drown the cries of the children 
see notes on Lev. xviii. 
21; 2 Kings xxiii. 10; and Josh. xv. 8. Hence the 
word “is used for a place of punishment by fire, and 
by our Saviour in the gospel for hell-fire, as the 
Jews themselves had applied it.’ As the place had 
been thus polluted by idolatry, Josiah, to render it 
as despicable and abominable as possible, ordered 
the filth of the city and dead carcasses to be thrown 
there, and made it acommon burying-place. There 
also fires were kept continually burning, as the Jews 
say, to consume dead bodies, hones, and such sordid 
things. Vitringa justly observes, “ that Tophet must 
be understood here, not in a literal, but in a figura- 
tive sense, for the place of punishinent to be inflicted 
upon the Assyrians, by the burning indignation of 
God; in the same manner as gehenna denotes the 
place of punishment of the reprobate: that the fire 
and much wood denote the matter of the punishment 
destined for the king of Assyria and his army, as 
well with respect to its nature and effect, as its cause: 
see Rev. xix. 20. The making the valley deep and 
large, signifies the same as the pile constructed of 
much wood; namely, the greatness of the destruc- 
tion to-be spread through the extensive army of the 
Assyrian ; and indeed it was necessary this valley 


17 Heb. cause-to- 
18 Or, against them, 


on 


The Israelites reproved 


and this pile should be large, to contain one hundred 
and eighty-five thousand men. The meaning of the 
phrase, ordained of old, is, that God had absolutely 
fixed and determined this, event. It was prepared 
for the king; whereby the prophet shows, that his 
army first, and Sennacherib himself afterward, 
should become obnoxious to the divine judgment. 
And the last phrase, the breath of the Lord, &c., 
alludes to the destroying angel, the executors of his 


ISATAH. 


for trusting in Egypt.' 


judgment: see chap. x. 17. This is the literal inter- 
pretation of the words, wherein the prophet repre- 
sents the Assyrian destruction as the type of that of 
all the enemies and persecutors of the church; and 
further, these destructions as a figure of the infernal 
fire, wherein the unbelieving and eruel persecutors 
of the church shall be tormented for ever, and which 
is said to be prepared for the devil and his angels,” 
Matt. xxv. 41. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


In this chapter the same subject is continued which was treated of in the preceding. 
trusted to the Egyptians, and not to God, for succour, when the Assyrian army invaded them, 1-3. 
given them, that God would take care of Jerusalem in that tume of danger and distress, 4, 5. 

(4,) The prophet foretels the fall of the Assyrian army, 8, 9. 


pentance and reformation; 6, 7. 


A. M. 3279. 


O to them *that go down to 
B. C. 725. 


_ Egypt for help; and ?stay on 
horses, and trust in chariots, because they are 
many; and in horsemen, because they are 
very strong; but they look not unto the Holy 
One of Israel, ° neither seek the Lorn! 

2 Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, 
and ¢ will not * call back his words: but will 
arise against the house. of the evil-doers, and 
against the help of them that work iniquity. 

3 Now the Egyptians are °* men, and not 
God; and their horses flesh, and not. spirit. 
When the Lorp shall, stretch out his hand, 


(1,) A wo is pronounced on those that 
(2,) An assurance is 
(3,) They are called to re- 


both he that helpeth shall fall, and he 4. ~ oak 
that is holpen shall fall down, and ‘ 
they all shail fail together. 

A For thus hath the Lorp spoken unto me, 
f Like as the lion and the young lion roaring 
on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is 
called forth against him, he will not be afraid 
of their voice, nor abase himself for the ? noise 
of them: £so shall the Lorp of hosts come 
down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill 
thereof. 

5 » As birds flying, so will the Lorp of hosts 
defend Jerusalem ; defending also he will 


@ Chap. xxx. 2; xxxvi. 6; Ezek. xvii. 15.——> Psa. xx. 7; 
mre XXxvl. 9, ¢ Dan. ix. 13 ; Hos. vii. 7,——4 Num. xxiii. 
9. 1 Heb. remove. 


e Psa. exlvi. 3, 5——f Hos. xi. 10 ; Amos iii. 8——* Or, mul- 
titude. 5 Chap. xlii, 13 Deut. xxxil. 11; Psa, xci. 4. 
i Psa. xxxvii. 40. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXI. 
Verses 1-3. Wo to them that go down to Egypt, 
&c.—As the Jews did, contrary to God’s command, 
Deut. xvii. 16.. And stay on horses—For Egypt had 
many and choice horses, But they look not unto the 
Lord—Their confidence in the creature was accom- 
panied with, and produced, a distrust of God, and a 
neglect of seeking to him by prayer for his help. 
Yet he also is wise, &c.—You think you are wise, 
in engaging the Egyptians; but God is not inferior 
to them in wisdom or strength, but much superior, 
and therefore you have done foolishly in preferring 
them before him, who will execute his judgments 
upon you, notwithstanding all the Egyptians can do. 
And will not call back his words—His threatenings 
denounced against you; but will arise against the 
evil-doers—Against this wicked and rebellious peo- 
ple; and against the help—That is, the helpers, as 
it is explained in the next verse; of them that work 
iniquity--That act in direct opposition to the ex- 
press command of God. The Egyptians are men, 
and not God—And therefore are utterly unable to 
defend you, either without or against God’s will; 
and their horses, flesh--Weak and frail, and not 
182 


spirit—Not like spiritual substances, such as the an- 
gels, who are immortal, and invisible tomen. When 
the Lord shall stretch out his hand—Shall exert 
his power to oppose or punish them, both he that 
helpeth and he that is holpen shall fall, §c., to- 
gether—And their alliance shall prove their joint 
ruin. 

Verses 4, 5. For, or but c or, nevertheless, thus hath 
the Lord spoken—That i is, although you have done 
evil in sending to Egypt for help, and they will not 
be able to help you, yet the Lord will of his own 
grace, and for the glory of his own name, give you 
that help and deliverance which you do not deserve, 
and had no reason toexpect from him. Like as the 
lion roaring on his prey—When he is ready to seize 
upon and devour it; he will not be afraid, nor abase 
himself—So as to be in the least moved, either to 
quit his prey, or to make any more haste than other- 
wise he would do in seizing it. So shall the Lord 
of hosts fight for. mount Zion—With such an un- 
shaken and undaunted resolution, not to be moved 
by any opposition: and he will as- easily and irre- 
sistibly destroy the Assyrian army, as-a lion tears a 
lamb in pieces. As birds SPying, &¢e.—Which come 

3) 


‘ 


The Lord will 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


protect Zion. 


A. ard se deliver i¢ ; 
preserve es 

6 4 Turn ye unto him from whom the chil- 
dren of. Israel have * deeply revolted. 

7 For in that day every man shall ! cast 
away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, 
which your own hands have made unto you 
for ™a sin. 

8 § Then shall the yee "fall with the 


and passing over he will 


and A. M. 3279. 


sword, not of a mighty man; 
B. C. 725. 


the sword, not of a mean man, 
shall devour him: but he shall flee 4 from the 
sword, and his young men shall be * discom- 
fited.® 

9 And ° he’ shall pass over to ® his strong hold 
for fear, and his-princes shall be afraid of the 
ensign, saith the Lorp, whose fire is in Zion, 


and his furnace in Terutalea 
ne 


3 Heb. the idols of 
his gold-——™ | Kings xii. 30. ng Kings xix. 35; Chapter 


XXxVii. 36. 


<a t 


*Or, for fear of the sword. 


melting, or, tribute. 
pass away for fear. 


& Or, tributary. ® Heb. for 
© Chap. xxxvii. 37,7 Heb. his rock shall 
8 Or, his strength. 


from above, and so cannot be kept off; which fly 
swiftly, and engage themselves readily and resolutely, 
when they perceive their young ones are in danger. 
Bishop Lowth renders the clause, As the mother birds 
hovering over their young; so shall Jehovah, God 
of -hosts, protect Jerusalem—With such care and 
compassion, such swiftness and resolution. Defend- 
ing also he will deliver it—That is, he will so defend 
it as to secure the continuance of its safety, and not 
suffer it to fall intothe enemy’shand. And passing 
over he will preserve 1i—The word mp9, here ren- 
dered passing over, is the word constantly used of 
the destroying angel’s passing over the houses of the 
Israelites, when he slew all the firstborn of the 
Egyptians, (Exod. xii.,) to which history the prophet 
seems here to refer. The destroying angel was to 
pass over Jerusalem, and leaveit untouched, although 
it deserved to be destroyed, and was only to smite 
the Assyrian army. The besiegers were to be slain 
by the pestilence, but none of the besieged were to 
take the infection.: 

Verses 6, 7. Turn yeunto him, &c.—Let the con- 
sideration of this gracious promise engage you to 
repent of all your sins, and among the rest, of your 
carnal policies in seeking and trusting to Egypt for 
help, and sincerely to return to God. From whom 
the children of Israel—From whom not only the 
Israelites, strictly so called, those of the ten tribes, 
but from whom you of the two tribes, you Jews, 
who are alse the children of Israel, and therefore 
are under very great obligations to God, have deeply 
revolted—In your hearts and lives, your affections 
being alienated from him, and set upon your sins 
and idols, and your actions a scene of disobedience 
to his laws. Jor in that day—When the Assyrian 
shall invade your land; every man shall cast away 


his idols—Youvshall find the vanity of age idols” 
to which you have trusted ; and therefore shall cast 
them away with indignation, and be forced to seek 


to Jehovah for help; which your hands have made 


unto you for sin—That is, as instruments of your 
sin of idolatry, and of many other sins connected 
therewith. 

Verses 8,9. T'hen shall the Assyrian, &c—When 
you have cast away your idols, and seriously sought 
unto God for help; both which things were per- 


\|formed by Hezekiah; fall by the sword, not of a 


mighty man, &c.—Not of any man, mean or mighty, 
but of an angel. But he shall flee from the sword 
—Fron, or for fear of, that plague, which so strangely 
and suddenly destroyed his army. And his young 
men—Hebrew, 1N2, his choice young men, his 
guards, and valiant commanders, and soldiers, shall 
be discomfiled—Hebrew, \iv"0197, shall be for melt- 
ing, or shall melt away ; a great part. of them being 
destroyed by the angel, and the hearts of the rest 
melting for fear. And he shall pass to his strong 
hold—Sennacherib. shall flee away with all speed 
from Jerusalem, to his strong eity of Nineveh. Or, 
as it is in the margin, which. see. And -his princes 
shall be afraid of the ensign—Of the Lord’s ensign, 
which he hath lifted up against them. Or, as nm 
D3, may be properly rendered, shall be struck with 
consternation at his flight. Saith ‘the. Lord, whose 
fire is in Zion—That is, either, lst, whose fire is 
continually burning upon the altar in Zion; a sign 
that his presence and residence.are there. Or, 
rather, 2d, who is, and will appear to be, in Zion like 
a fire, to defend his people, and to consume their ene- 
mies. Thus God promises that he would be, unto 
Jerusalem, a wall of fire round about, Zech. ii: p- 
See also Zech. xii. 6. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


This chapter contains a prophecy of the reign of Hezekiah, typifying the reign of Christ in the gospel church. 


Here is 


predicted, (1,) The reformation with which he should begin his reign, and the happy influence it should have on the people, 


who had been wretchedly corrupted and debauched in the reign of his predecessor, 1-8. 


(2,) The great calamities which 


should come upon the Jews by the Assyrians and Chaldeans, but especially by the Romans and others in the times of the 


gospel, 9-14. 


(3,) The purity, peace, and plenty of the latter part of Hezekiah’s reign, ptr tien of the Pages » 


peace, and glory of the gospel church in the apostolic and millennial periods, 15-20. 


183 


= 


The righteous king, 


ISATAH. 


and his prosperous reign. 


A. M. 3279, 


Ag BEHOLD, *a King shall reign in 


; righteousness, and princes shall 
rule in judgment. 

2 And a man shall be as a hiding-place from 
the wind, and ° a covert from the tempest; as 
rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow 
ofa } great rock in a weary land. 

3 And ° the eyes of them that',see shall not 
be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall 
hearken. foi 

4 The heart also of the ?xash shall under- 
stand knowledge, and the tongue of the stam- 
merers shall be ready to speak ° plainly. 


5 'The vile person shall be no more A. M. 3279. 
called liberal, nor the churl said to be — 
bountiful. 

6 For the vile person will speak villany, 
and his heart will work iniquity, to practise 
hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lorn, 
to make empty the soul of the hungry ; and 
he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. 

7 The instruments also of the churl are evil: 
he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor 
with lying words, even *when the needy 
speaketh right. | 

8 But the liberal deviseth liberal things; 


—— F 
a Psalm xlv. 1, &e.; Jer. xxiii. 5; Hos.-iii. 5; Zech. ix. 9. 
> Chap. iv.6; xxv. 4——1' Heb. heavy.— Chapter xxix. 18 ; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXII. 

Verse 1. Behold, a king—WHezekiah,,a type of 
Christ, and Christ typified by him, shall reign in 
righteousness—Therefore Hezekiah was not king 
when this prophecy was delivered. And whereas 
some say that he speaks of the good government of 
Hezekiah, after the destruction of Sennacherib, it 
is easy to observe, that his government was as good 
before that time as afterward; and that in the very 
beginning of his reign he ruled with righteousness 
and the fear of God. And princes—The ministers 
of state, judges, and’ magistrates under the king, 
shall rule in judgment—Shall execute their offices 
with integrity and faithfulness. “ Ahaz and his 
princes had ruled very wickedly, but a king was 
about to mount the throne who would reign in right- 
eousness, employ upright magistrates, and protect 
the people, both from internal oppression, by his 
equitable administration, and from external invaders, 
by his: faith and prayers.”—Scott. But although 
these expressions are, in some sort, applicable to 
Hezekiah and his good reign, they are much more 
true of Christ and his reign, as are also several 
other expressions here used, especially those in the 
third and fourth verses, which evidently relate to 
happier times than Hezekiah lived to see. And 
therefore we may justly say, “ That the reformation 
which Hezekiah made was but a shadow of those 
greater improvements in grace and holiness, which 
properly belong to the times of the gospel.—Lowth. 

Verses 2-4. And a man—Either the man or king 
spoken of, or each of his princes, shall be ahiding- 
place—aA protection to the people under their go- 
vernment, especially to such as are oppressed or 


injured by those that are more powerful than they ; | 


from the wind—From the rage and violence of evil 
men. As rivers of water in a dry place—Not less 
refreshing and acceptable shall this king and his 
princes be to their subjects. And as the shadow of 
a great rock—In a dry and scorched country, which 
is called weary, because it makes travellers weary ; 
as death is called pale in other authors, because it 
makes men’s faces pale. And the eyes of them that 
see—Of the people, who shall not shut their eyes 
184. 


= ——— SSS 
xxxv. .5, 6. 2Heb, hasty.— Or, elegantly——* Or, when 
he speaketh against the poor in judgment. 


and ears against the good counsels and examples of. 
their religious king and rulers, as they have done 
formerly ; both princes and people shall be reformed. 
The heart also of the rash—Who were hasty in 
judging of things; which is an argument of igno-- 
rance and folly; shall understand knowledge—Shall 
become more knowing and considerate in their 
judgments and actions. And the tongue of the stam- 
merers—Who used to speak of the things of God 
darkly, doubtfully, and unwillingly ; shall be ready 
to speak plainly—As men’s understandings shall be 
enlightened, so their speech shall be reformed: 
which, though it was in part fulfilled in Hezekiah, 
yet was truly and fully accomplished only by Christ, 
who wrought this wonderful change in an innumer- 
able company, both of Jews and Gentiles. 

Verses 5, 6. The vile person—Base and worthless 
men; shall be nomore called liberal—Shal!no longer 
be reputed honourable, because of their high and 
honourable places, but wickedness shall be disco- 
vered. wherever itis, and virtue manifested and 
rewarded. Nor the churl said to be bountiful—The 
sordid and covetous man; but under this one vice all 
vices are understood, as under the opposite virtue 
of bountifulness all virtues are comprehended. Jor 
the vile person will speak villany-—Men shall no 
longer be miscalled; for every one will discover 
what he is by his words and actions. And will work 
iniquity—He will, from time to time, be devising 
wickedness, that he may execute it when he hath 
opportunity. Zo practise hypocrisy—To do bad 
things, though with a pretence of religion and justice. 
To utter error—To pass unjust sentences, directly 
contrary to the command of God. To cause the 
drink, &c.--Whereby they take away the bread and 
drink of the poor. 

Verses 7,8. The instruments also of the churl 
are evil—Hebrew, *49, the vessels. It is a word of 
a very general: signification among the Hebrews, 
and signifies any person or thing which is employed 
in a man’s service. The sense is, that such covet- 
ous or wicked princes most willingly choose and 
employ wicked men in their affairs, because such 
men will, without any regard to conscience or 
& 


Calamities of the Jews 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


« 


in the times of the gospel. 


sae are. and by liberal things shall he ° stand. 

; * 9 Rise up, ye women “that are 
at ease ; hear my voice, ye careless daughters ; 
give ear unto my speech. 

10 ® Many days and years shall ye be trou- 
bled, ye careless women ; for the vintage shall 
fail, the gathering shall not come. 

11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be 
troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make 
you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. 


12 They shall lament for the teats, A. M. ay 
for 7the pleasant fields, for the fruitful 


|| vine. 


13 ° Upon the land my people shall come 
up thorns and briers ; § yea, upon all the houses 
of joy in ‘ the joyous city: 

14 £ Because the palaces shall be pene : 
the multitude of the city shall be left; the 
forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a 
joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks ; 


5 Or, be established. 4 Amos vi. 1.—* Heb. days above a 
year. 7 Heb, the fields of desire. e Chap. xxxiv. 13; Hosea 


ix. 6, 5 Or, burning upon, &c. f Chap. xxii. 2.——s Chee 
xxvil. 10:——° Or, clefts and watch-towers. ' 


justice, serve all their exorbitant desires. It in- 
cludes, however, his counsels, practices, and arts, 
which are here declared to be generally evil. He 
deviseth wicked devices—He uses .all his under- 
standing and art to do injuries to others; to destroy 
the poor with lying words—With false and unright- 
eous decrees. When the needy speaketh right— 
When their cause is just and good. But the liberal 
deviseth liberal things—He who is truly liberal and 
virtuous, will show it by designing and practising 
liberal or virtuous actions. And by liberal things 
shall he stand—He who does so will not destroy 
himself thereby, as wicked men falsely suppose, but 
establish and advance himself. “The Christian 


reader need not be told how exactly the particulars, | 


expressed in these verses, belong to Christ’s king- 
dom, who is a hiding-place from the storm of sin 
and the world, John xvi. 33; whose kingdom is a 
kingdom of light, of faith, of love; all whose subjects 
are enlightened by the knowledge of the glory of 
God, in the face of Jesus Christ; who gave eyes to 
the blind, ears to the deaf, tongues to the dumb, and, 
by his divine grace, changed the most churlish and 
illiberal dispositions into generosity and love.” 
Vitringa. 

Verses 9-12. Rise up, &c.—The prophet, to show 
the sinners and hypocrites in Zion, (ch..xxxiii. 14,) 
that they must not expect to receive blessings from 
God, such as he had just now predicted, while they 
remained in astate of impenitence, denounces against 
them the calamities which should come upon them; 
Ist, By the Assyrian, and then by the Babylonish de- 
struction. Yewomen that are at ease—That indulge 
yourselves in idleness and luxury; shake off your 
carelessness and sloth, and prepare yourselves to 
hear the sentence pronounced by God concerning 
you. Hear my voice, ye careless daughters—He- 
brew, Minwa, ye confident and secure, who are 
insensible of your sin and danger. Many days and 
years—Hebrew, 737 Sy can, days above a year ; 
that is, a year and some days: which, it seems, 
expresses the time of the continuance of the judg- 
ment by the Assyrians; that it should last some days 
above one year, as indeed it did, and no longer; for 
Hezekiah reigned in all but twenty-nine years, 2 
Kings xviii. 2. And Sennacherib invaded the coun- 
try in his fourteenth year ; and, after his defeat and 

3 


departure, God promised and added to him fifteen 
years more, 2 Kings xx. 6. For the vintage shall 
fail—During the time of the Assyrian invasion. 
The gathering shall not come—Namely, of the 
other fruits of the earth; as that feast which was 
observed after the gathering of all the fruits was 
called the feast of ingathering, Ex. xxiii. 16.. Trem- 
ble, ye women, &c.—It seems probable, from these 
repeated addresses to the women, that those of Jeru- 
salem especially, and, perhaps, also of many of the 
other towns in Judea, were, at that time, peculiarly 
vain, luxurious, dissipated, and wanton, and regard- 
less of all religion. The prophet, therefore, espe- 
cially addresses them, and warns them that a time 
of trouble awaited them. Strip ye and make ye 
bare—Put off your ornaments, as God commanded 
upon a like occasion, (Ex. xxxiii. 5,) that you may 
put on sackcloth instead of them, as mourners and 
penitents used to do. They shall lament for the 
teats—For the pleasant and fruitful fields which, like 
teats, yielded you plentiful and excellent nourish- 
ment. 

Verses 13, 14. Upon the land, §c., shall come up 
thorns and briers—If any of you think there is no 
great, cause for such trembling and lanrentation, on 
account of a calamity which shall last but for a year 
and some days, know that this affliction by the 
Assyrians is but an earnest of further and sorer 
judgments. For the time is coming when this land 
shall be laid desolate; and, instead of vines and other 
fruits, it shall yield nothing but briers and thorns. 
Yea, upon all the houses of joy—Upon that ground 
where now your houses stand, in which you take 
your fill of mirth and pleasure. Because the palaces 
—Hebrew, })0N, the palace, the king’s house, and 
other magnificent buildings in the city, shall be for- 
saken—-Shall be destitute of inhabitants. The 
multitude of the city shall be left—Shall be forsaken 
of God and given up into their enemies’ hands. 7'he 
forts, §c., shall be for dens for ever—For a long 
time; a joy of wild asses—Desolate places, in which 
wild asses delight to be. “This description,” says 
Bishop Lowth, “of impending distresses belongs to 


other times than that of Sennacherib’s invasion, 


from which they were so soon delivered, It must, 
at least, extend to the ruin of the country and city 
by the Chaldeans, And the promise of blessings 
2 185 


~ 


be 


Prosperity of the church 


ISATAH. 


in the latter days. 


A.M. 3279. 15 § Until >the Spirit be poured 
B. C. 725. : 
————. upon us from ‘on high,.and ‘the wil- 


derness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field. 


be counted for a forest. 
16 Then judgmentshall dwellin the wilderness, 
and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. 
17 * And: the work of righteousness shall be 
peace; and the effect of righteousness, quiet- 
ness and assurance for ever. 


18 And my people shall dwell in a A. M..3279. 
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwell- ia 
ings, and in quiet resting-places. 

19 'When it shall hail, coming down ™on 
the forest; 1° and the city shall be low in a 
low place. 

20 Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, 
that send forth thither the feet of » the ox and 
the ass. 


h Psalm civ. 30; Joel ii. 28.——iChapter xxix. 17; xxxv. 2. 
« James iii. 18.— Chap. xxx. 30. 


m Zechariah xi. 2. 


10 Or, and the city shall be utterly abased. 
n Chap. xxx. 24. 


which follows was not fulfilled under the Mosaic 
dispensation; they belong to the kingdom of Mes- 
siah.” 

Verse 15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us, &e. 
—And this calamity shall, in a manner, continue 
until the time come in which God will pour, or, as 
7, properly signifies, reveal, that is, evidently 
and plentifully confer his Spirit upon his people. 
Which was done, in some sort, upon their return 
from Babylon, when God, by his Spirit, moved 
Cyrus to give them liberty of returning to Jerusalem, 
and the people to return and build the city and tem- 
ple. But it was far more clearly and fully accom- 
plished in the days of the Messiah, when God’s 
Spirit-was in a most evident and glorious manner 
poured forth upon the apostles and other believing 
Jews, to the astonishment of their very adversaries ; 
and when the following promises were, in a good 
measure, fulfilled, and are more fully to be accom- 
plished in God’s due time. And the wilderness be a 
Sruitful field—-Which expressions are to be under- 
stood allegorically of the conversion of the Gentile 
nations, which had been long barren, and of the 
rejection of the Jews in the time of the Messiah. 
See on chap. xxix. 17. 

Verses 16-18. Then judgment-—Just judgment, as 
the next clause explains it, shall dwell in the wilder- 
ness—In what had formerly been a wilderness, 
namely, among the Gentiles, now supposed to be 
converted to Christianity; by whom righteousness 
also shall be practised, and among whom it shall 
remain. And the work of righteousness shall be 
peace—The effect of this righteousness shall ‘be 
peace of conscience, possessed by all that practise it, 
and tranquillity, of mind, as well as peace with God. 
‘Or, perhaps, outward prosperity may be chiefly 
intended. And the effect—Hebrew, 173), the service, 
of righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever 
—92) Dpwn, rest and confidence. The being truly 
righteous before God, and walking in his ordinances 
and commandments blameless, (Luke i. 6,) shall be 
attended with an assurance of God’s favour, and a 


dependance on him for the fulfilment of his promises ; 
from whence will arise a holy serenity and security 
of mind, with a lively and joyful expectation of eter- 
nal felicity, of which no external circumstances of 
prosperity or adversity can deprive the possessors. 
And my people—The conyerted Gentiles, who shall 
then be my people; or the Jews upon their conver- 
sion to Christianity in the latter days; shall dwell 
in a peaceable habitation—Shall be safe and happy 
under the peculiar protection and care of God. 

Verse 19. When—Or, rather, And it shall hail— 
As my blessings shall be poured down upon my peo- 
ple, who, from a wilderness, are turned into a fruitful 
field, so my judgments (which are signified by hail, 
chap. xxviii. 2, 17, and elsewhere) shall fall upen 
them who were a fruitful field, but are turned into a 
forest, as was said verse 15; that is, upon the unbe- 
lieving and rebellious Jews. And the city—Jerusa- 
lem, which, though now it was the seat of God’s 
worship and people, yet he foresaw would be the 
great enemy of the Messiah; shall be low in a low 
place—Hebrew, awn nawa, shall be humbled with 
humiliation; that is, shall be greatly humbled, or 
brought very low. 

Verse 20. Blessed are ye that sow, &c.—As the 
barren forest shall be destroyed, so the fruitful field. 
shall be improved and bring forth much fruit, which 
is signified -by a declaration of the blessedness of 
them that sow in it; beside all waters—In all moist 
and flat grounds which are likely to yield good fruit ; 
or, in every well-watered place, as Bishop Lowth 
renders it, who quotes Sir John Chardin as observ- 
ing, that the place exactly answers the manner of 
planting rice in the East; concerning which, see the 
note on Eecles. xi. 1. But this passage, as well as 
that in the foregoing verses, is to be understood mys- 
tically of the times of the gospel, and of the great 
and happy success of the ministers of it, whose spir- 
itual sowing of the word, accompanied with the in- 
fluences of the Holy Ghost, produced much fruit in’ 
the Gentile nations, to the glory of God and their 
own comfort. ae 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


In this chapter, which is a triwmphant ode upon the destruction of Sennacherib’s army before Jerusalem, the prophet sets 
forth the several scenes of that transaction with all the bequties of a poetical description. (1,) He addresses hamselfto 


186 


Prophecy concerning Sennacherib. 
Ae AS Seren 
Sennacherib, briefly, but ‘strongly and elegantly, expressing the injustice, of his designs, and the sudden disappointment of 
them, 1. (2,) He introduces the Jews, with himself, offering up earnest supplications to God in their present distressful 
condition, 2. (3,) Foretels, as an answer to their prayers, the discomfiture and dispersion of the Assyrians, and that 
they should become an easy prey to those whom they intended to subdue, 3, 4. ‘ (4,) Introduces-a chorus of Jews, acknow- 
ledging the mercy and power of God, who had undertaken to protect them, and extolling the wisdom and piety of their 
King Hezekiah, who had placed his confidence in God, 5,6. (5,) He describes the distress and despair of the Jews upon 
Sennacherib’s marching against Jerusalem, and sending his summons to them to surrender, 7-9. (6,) God is introduced, 
declaring that he will interpose in this critical situation of affairs, and disappoint the vain hopes of the enemies of his 
veople, by utterly consuming them, 10-13. (7,) We have a description of the dreadful apprehensions of the wicked in 
those times of distress and danger, finely contrasted with the confidence and security of the righteous, 14-22. The ode’ 
concludes with a description of the security of the Jews, under the protection of God, and of the wretched state of Senna- 
chertb and his army, wholly discomfited, and exposed to be plundered, even by the weakest of the Jews, 23, 24. “ Could 
a translation,” says Lowth, “ be made of this chapter, that should come up to the original, it would appear. tobe as noble a 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


prece of poetry as is to be found in the most admired writings of the ancients.” 


A. M. 3279. 


O to th a th is : 
B. C: 725. W o thee *that spoilest, and 


thou wast not spoiled ; and deal- 
est treacherously, and they dealt not treacher- 
ously with thee! » when thou shalt cease to 
spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt 
make an end to deal treacherously, they shall 
deal treacherously with thee. 

2 O Lor», be gracious unto us; ° we have 


waited for thee: be thou their arm A.M. 3279: 
: a ie tay eis 

every morning, our salvation also in ———— 

the time of trouble. : 

3 At the noise of the tumult the people fled ; 
at the lifting up of thyself the nations were 
scattered. | 

4 And your spoil shall be gathered like the 
gathering of the caterpillar: as the rumning to 


a Chap. xxi. 2; Hab. ii, 8. 


» Rev. xiii. 10. 


© Chap. xxv. 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Verse 1. Wo to thee that spoilest—To Sennache- 
rib, who wasted the land of Judah. The prophet 
speaks “as if he had found this great spoiler,” to 
whom he addresses himself, “in the very act of spoil- 
ing, and was face to face denouncing the divine judg- 
mentupon him.” And thou wast not spoiled—Hadst 
not received the like injuries. “It is the practice of 
the great oppressors of the world to make war upon 
their neighbours without any just provocation, or 
having received any real injury from them ; and it 
is against such practices that this wo is denounced.” 
—Lowth. And dealest treacherously—So Senna- 
cherib dealt with Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 14, 17. 
And, or when, they dealt not treacherously with thee: 
—Hezekiah and the Jews did not. “ We read, in- 
deed, (2 Kings xviii. '7,) that Hezekiah rebelled 
against the king of Assyria; but the meaning is 
no more than that he would not stand to those dis- 
honourable terms of slavery, to which his- father 
Ahaz had submitted, when he professed himself the 
servant of the king of Assyria,” (2 Kings xvi. 7,) 
begging his assistance against the Syrians and 
Ephraimites, for which he paid him well; but the 
king of Assyria did not keep his agreement with 
him, for he distressed him, but strengthened him 
not, 2 Chron. xxviii. 20. When thou shalt cease to 
spoil, thou shalt be spoiled—When thou hast per- 
formed the work of chastising my people, to which 
I have sent thee, thou also shalt be spoiled by thine 
enemies. The further meaning of this prediction 
may be, that when the Assyrians, glutted, as it were, 
with their conquests, should cease to make any fur- 
ther conquests, and give themselves up to luxury and} 
pleasure, then other nations, either mindful of the 


injuries which they had received from them, or out 
: - 


of rapacity, would attack them in their turn, and 
spoil them, as they had spoiled others: which came 
to pass accordingly. Their calamities seem to have 
begun from the times that Dejoces, king of the Medes, 
shook off their yoke, about seven hundred years 
before Christ: for other nations soon followed his 
example. 

Verse 2. O Lord, be gracious unto us—The pro- 
phet and the pious Jews, contemplating the calamity 
coming upon their country, here direct their prayer 
unto God for themselves and their people. Be thou ~ 
their arm—That is, their strength, namely, the 
strength of all that trust in thee, and wait for thee, 
Psa. xxv. 3; every morning—-Hebrew, T7p34, in 
the mornings; that is, every day seasonably and 
speedily; on all occasions as they need. In men- 
tioning the mornings, the prophet is thought to refer 
to the time of the morning sacrifice, which was the 
morning hour of prayer with the pious Jews; but he 
includes all other times of prayer, in all which he 
desires God to hear-and answer his people, and to be 
their salvation all the day long, and especially ‘to 
support them in the time of trouble. 

Verses 3, 4. Al the noise of the tumult--Which 
shall be made upon the angel’s destroying the army ; 
the people fled—Namely, those of the army who es- 
caped that stroke. At.the lifting up of thyself--To 
execute judgment; the nations were scattered—The 
people of divers nations which made up Sennache- 
rib’s army. And your spoil-That treasure which 
you have raked together by spoiling divers people ; 
shall be gathered—By the Jews at Jerusalem, when 
you shall be forced to flee away with all possible 
speed, leaving your spoils behind you; like the 
gathering of the caterpillar--As caterpillars gather 
and devour all the fruits of the earth, which was a 

187 


4 


The Lord will be exalted 


A. M. 3279. and fro of locusts shall he run upon 
them. 

5 ‘The Lorp is exalted ;_ for he dwelleth on 
high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and 
righteousness. 

6 And wisdom and knowledge shall be the 
stability of thy times, and ‘strength of ! salva- 
tion: the fear of the Lorn is his treasure. _ 

7 Behold, their ? valiant ones shall cry with- 
out: ° the ambassadors of ean shall weep 
bitterly. 

8 ‘The highways lie waste, the wayfaring 
man ceaseth : £ he hath broken the covenant, he 
hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man. 

9*The earth mourneth and languisheth : 


ISAIAH. 


against his enemies. 
< 


Lebanon is ashamed and * hewn ee. 
down: Sharon is like a wilderness : atl 
and Bashan and Carmel shake off their 
Sruits. 4 
10 ‘ Now will I rise, saith the Lorp; now 
will I be exalted ; now will I lift up rival 
11* Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring 
forth stubble: your breath, as fire, shall de- 
vour you. 
12 And the people shall be dethe burnings 
of lime; ‘as thorns cut up shall they be 
burned in the fire. 
13 4 Hear, ™ ye that are far off, what I have 
done; and ye that are near, acknowledge my 
might. 


Heb. salvations. 
f Judges v. 6. 


4Psaim xevil. 9. 
e2 Kings xviii. 18, 37. 
15, 17. 


2 Or, messengers. 
§2 Kings xviii. 14, 


i Psalm xii. 5. 


h Chapter xxiv. 4% Or, withered away. e3 
m Chapter 


k Psalm vii. 14; Chap. lix. 4! Chap. ix. 18. 
xlix. 1. 


common plague in those countries; as the running 
to and fro of locusts, &c.—As locusts, especially 
when they are armed by commission from God, 
come with great force, and run hither and thither 
devouring every thing before them; shall he run 
upon them—Namely, Hezekiah, with his people, 
shall thus eagerly run to the spoil of the Assyrian 
camp, and shall take it. 

Verses 5,6. The Lord is exalted—By the de- 
struction of so potent an,army, and by the defence 
of his people. For he dwelleth on high-—He is, and 
will appear to be, superior to his enemies, both in | 
place and power. He dwelleth in heaven, whence | 
he can easily and irresistibly pour down judgments 
upon his enemies. He hath fulfilled—Or, he will | 


fill Zion—Or Jerusalem ; with judgment and right- 


eousness—That. is, either, Ist, With a glorious in- 
stance of his just judgment against the Assyrians; 
or, 2d, With the execution of justice by good Heze- | 
kiah, and the practice of righteousness among the | 
people, as before the same city was filled with im- 
piety and injustice under Ahaz. The city shall not 
only be delivered from that wicked enemy, but shall | 
also be established and blessed withtrue religion and | 
righteousness; which was a great addition to that 
mercy. And wisdom and knowledge—To govern 
thyself and the people well. The words seem to be 
addressed to Hezekiah, either by the prophet, or, as) 
Bishop) Lowth thinks, by a chorus of the Jews. 


Shall be the stability of thy times—Of thy reign; |) 


times being often put for the things done in those |, 
times. The sense is, thy throne shall be established |, 


upon the sure foundations of wisdom and justice ; || 


and strength of salvation—Thy saving strength, or 
thy strong and mighty salvation. The‘ fear of the, 
Lord is his treasure—Thy chief treasure and de-| 


4 


light shall be in promoting the fear and worship of | 

God, which shall be a great honour and safeguard to, 

thyself and people. * 

Verses 7-9, Behold, &c.—That the mercy hee 

promised might be duly appreciated and magnified, 
188 


he gives a a lively representation of the great danger 
and distress in which it found them. "heir valiant 
ones-—“ Three MSS.,” says Bishop Lowth, “read 
Moni, lions of God, or strong lions; so they 
called valiant men, heroes; which appellation the 
Arabians and Persians still use.” The Hebrew doc- 
tors, however, understand by the word, their heralds, 
or messengers, namely, those whom Hezekiah sent. 
to treat with the Assyrian commissioners, 2 Kings 
xvili. 18. Shall cry without—Through grief and 
fear: the ambassadors of peace—Whom Hezekiah 
sent to beg peace of the Assyrian; shall weep bit- 
| terly—Because they cannot obtain theirdesire. T'he 
| wayfaring man ceaseth—Because the Assyrian sol- 
| diers possessed and filled the land. He hath broken 
the covenant—Sennacherib broke his faith given to 


| Hezekiah, of departing for a sum of money, 2 Kings 


xviii. 14,17. He hath despised the cities—The de- 
fenced cities of Judah, which he contemned and 
easily took. He regardeth no man——Kither to spare, 
or to fear; or keep faith with him. Wpneither fear- 
eth God nor reverenceth man. The earth mourneth, 
&c.—Being desolate and neglected. Lebanon is 
hewn down—By the Assyrians. Or, as Sap rather 
' signifies, and is here rendered by some, withereth, or 
_languisheth, because its trees are spoiled and de- 
_stroyed by the Assyrians. Sharon is like a wilder- 
1 ness—Although before it was a pleasant and fruitful 
‘place. Bashan and Carmel shake off their Sruits 
—-Are spoiled of them. These two places, ad 
for fertility, and especially for good Memes Ny 
| here put for all such places. 
Verses 10-13. Now will Irise—I this oxtrtf 
I will appear on the behalf of my people and 
Ye shall bring forth stubble—Instead of solid corn. 
Your great hopes and designs, O ye Assyrians, shall 
be utterly disappointed. Your breath, as fire, shall 
devour you—Y our rage against my people shall bring . 
ruin upon yourselves. Or, the arrogance, pride, 
wrath, and blasphemies which you vent against God 
shall be your oe Dr. Waterland renders 
3 —_— 


4 


The apprehensions of the wicked, 


CHAPTER XXXIIL. 


and security of the righteous. 


A. M. 3279. 


eae 14 The sinners in Zion are afraid ; 
» (ao. 


fearfulness hath surprised the hypo- 
crites. Who among us shall dwell with the de- 
vouring fire? who among us shall dwell with 
everlasting burnings ? ; 

15 He that " walketh * righteously, and speak- 
eth °uprightly ; he that despiseth the gain of 
*oppressions, that shaketh his hands from 


holding of bribes, that stoppeth his A. ‘et 3279, 
ears from hearing of 7 blood, and —— 
°shutteth his eyes from seeing évil ; 

16 He shall dwell on *high: his place of 
defence shall be the munitions of rocks: bread 
shall be given him; his waters shall be 
sure. ; : 


17 Thine eyes shall. see the»King in his 


5 Heb. 


* Heb. in righteousnesses. 
uprightnesses. 


a Psa. xv. 2; xxiv, 4, 


5 Or, deceits. 


es = aie —— 
7 Heb. bloods.——° Ppp. exix, 37——® Hebrew 
heights, or, high places. 


the clause, “ Your breath shall be the fire that shall 
consume you.” The people shall be as the burnings 
of lime—Shall be perfectly consumed, as when chalk- 
stones are reduced to lime ; calcining, or reducing to 
ashes, being one of the last effects of fire. Thus we 
learn from this period, that when the calamity of the 
people, as well as the insolence of their enemies, 
should be come to the height, God would delay no 
longer, but immediately interpose and severely pun- 
ish the oppressors, and thereby exalt his glory be- 
fore the eyes of the nations, whom he calls upon, 
in the next words, to consider his doings. Hear, ye 
afar off, &e.—So remarkable a judgment as this de- 
serves to be known, and laid to heart, by all men, both 
far and near. 

Verse 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid—This 
is spoken, not of the Assyrians, but of the Jews. The 
prophet, having foretold the deliverance of God’s 
people, and the destruction of their enemies, for the 
greater illustration of that wonderful work, may be 
here considered as returning to the description of the 
dismal condition in which the Jews, especially such 
of them as were unbelieving and ungodly, should be 
before this deliverance came. For, although the pi- 
ous Jews would be, in some measure, supported by a 
sense of God’s favour,and by his promises, delivered 
to them by Isaiah, yet very many of them, probably 
the generality, he foresaw, would be filled with hor- 
rors, and expectations of utter destruction. Who 
among us shall dwell avith the devouring fire ?— 
How shall we be able to abide the presence, and en- 
dure, or avoid, the wrath of that God, who is a consu- 

“ming fire; who is now about to destroy us utterly 
by the Assyrians, and will afterward burn us with 
unquenchable fire? Or, the prophet may be consi- 
dered as describing, in these words, the consternation 
with which the sinners in Zion would be struck, 
when they should see the Assyrian army destroyed; 
for the destruction of that is the fire spoken of imme- 
diately before, (verses 11, 12,) and they were con- 
scious to themselves of having provoked this God, by 
their secret worshipping of other gods, as well as by 
many other sins. As if he had said, This miraculous 
destruction of the Assyrians shall strike even the 
most profane among the Jews, who used to scoff at 
God’s threatenings, with terror, lest he should pro- 
ceed in wrath against themselves; so that they shall 
say, Who among us shall dwell with this devouring 
fire—Before which so vast an army is as thorns? 
Who shall dwell with these everlasting burnings— 
Which have made the Assyrians as the burnings of 
3 ? "| 
me, 


lime? Wow shall we be able to endure the wrath of 
this God, which, if it once seize upon us, will utterly 
consume us, and will also be a pledge and forerun- 
ner of eternal terments in hell, if not prevented by 
timely repentance? For, since it is su itly evi- 
dent from both the Old and New Testaments, that the 
Jews, except the Sadducees, did generally believe in 
the rewards and punisitonts of a future life; itis 
not strange if their guilty consciences made them 
dread both present judgments here, and the terrible 
consequences of them hereafter. 

Verses 15, 16. He that walketh righteously—He 
who, being first made righteous by the justification 
of his person, and the renovation of his nature, (see 
on Gen. xv. 6, and Psa. xxxii. 1, 2,) afterward prac- 
tises righteousness in all its branches, (1 John iii. 7, 


| 8,) and particularly in all-his dealings with men, of 


which the following clauses explain it; and speaketh 
uprightly—Hebrew, TWD, wprightnesses, who 


_speaks what is true and right, and with an honest in- 


tention. Who does not think one thing and speak 
another, but whose word is to him as saered as his 
oath; that despiseth the gainof oppressions—Who 
is so far from coveting gain unjustly gotten, that he 
despises it; thinks it a mean and sordid, as well as‘a 
wicked thing, to enrich himself by any injustice done 
to, or hardship put upon, his neighbour; that shaketh 
his hands from.holding of bribes—Or, from taking, 
or receiving them, as }/) is often rendered ; who 
will not receive, much less will retain bribes; that 
stoppeth lis ears, &c.—Who will not-assent, or even 
hearken, to any counsels or practices tending to 
shed innocent blood; or to any kind of cruelty to- 
ward any one; orto any suggestions inciting him 


to revenge; and shutleth his eyes from seeing evil - 


—That abhors the very sight of sin committed by 
others, and who himself watches against the occa- 
sions of it. Those that would preserve the purity 
of their souls, must keep a strict guard on the senses 
of their bodies; stop their ears to temptations, and 
turn away their eyes from beholding vanity. He 
shall dwell on high—Out of the reach of danger ; 
his place of defence—the munitions of rocks—The 
divine power will keep him safe, as though he were 
in a tower, strong and impregnable, fortified by na- 
ture as well as art. ‘ God, the Rock of ages, will be 
his place of defence. Bread shall be given him, 
&c.—God will furnish him with all things needful. 
They that fear the Lord shal] not want any thing that 
is good for them. 

Verses 17, 18. Thine eyes. shall see the king in 

189 


we 


Remarkable preservation 


ISAIAH. : \y 


of the Lord’s —— 


— 


A. M. 3279. 


wacree beauty : they shall behold ° the land 


~ that is very far off. 

18 Thy heart shall meditate terror. ?” Where 
is the scribe ? where is the ! receiver? where 
is he that counted the towers ? 

19.4'Thou shalt not see a fierce people, * a 
people of deeper speech than thou canst per- 
ceive ; of a ™stammering tongue, that thou 
canst not understand. 

20 * Look upon Zion, the city of our solem- 
nities: thine eyes shall see * Jerusalem a quiet 


habitation, a tabernacle ¢haé shall not A. ong 
be taken down; “not one. of * the” 
stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither'shall 
any of the cords there be broken. , 

21 But there the glorio 
us a place,” of broad | 
wherein shall go novg ey with oars, neither 
shall gallant ships pass. thereby. 

22 For the Lorp is our judge, the Lorp z 9" 


D will be unto 


iNeed 


awegiver,'® - the Lorp is our King; he 
ave us. * , * ; 
Les 3 4 


°Heb. the land of far distances. 
weigher, 12 Kings xix. 32. 
4 Or, ridiculous. 


P1 Cor. i. 20. 
r Deut. xxviii. 49; Jer. v. 15. 
S Psa. xlviii. 12. 


10 Heb, || 


a, xlvi. 5; cxxv. 1, 
- '2 Heb. broad of s 
y@tatute-maker. 


4 Chap. xxxvii. 33 .——»Chapter 
aces, or, hands.——Y James lv. 12. 
«Ba. lxxxix. 18. -- 


his beauty—Hezekiah, in a more prosperous condi- 
tion than formerly. Having put off his sackcloth, 
and all the sadness of his countenance, he shall ap- 
pear publicly in his beauty, in his royal robes, and 
with a pleasing aspect, to the great joy of all his lov- 
ing subjects. Thine eyes shall see the King Mes- 
siah, (typified by Hezekiah,) triumphing ever all his 
enemies, and ruling his own people with righteous- 
ness. Those that walk uprightly shall not only have 
bread given them, and their water sure, but they 
shall see, by faith, the King of kings, in his beauty, 
the beauty of holiness, and that beauty shall be upon 
them. T'hey shall behold the land that is very far 
off—The- siege being raised, by which they were 
kept close within the walls of Jerusalem, they shall 
be at liberty to go abroad without danger of falling 
into the enemies’ hands, and they shall visit the ut- 
most corners of the nation, and take a prospect of 
the adjacent country, which will be the more pleas- 
ant after so long a confinement. Bishop Lowth 
renders it, Z"hey (thine eyes) shall see thine own 
land far extended. We may apply the words to 
the heavenly Canaan, that land which is very far 
off, which believers behold by faith, and comfort 
themselves with the prospect of it in evil times. 
Thy heart shall meditate terror—Bishop Lowth 
reads, Thy heart shall reflect on the past terror. 
Thou shalt call to mind, with delight and thankful- 
ness, the former troubles and distresses_ in which 
thou wast involved. Where is the scribe, &¢.— 
‘Every one shall, with pleasure, reflect on the dan- 
gers they have escaped, and shall-ask, in a triumph- 
ant manner, Where is the scribe, or muster-master, 
ofthe Assyrianarmy? Where is the receiver—Their 
weigher, or treasurer? . Where is he that counted 
the towers—“ That is,” says Bishop Lowth, “ The 
commander of the enemy’s forces, who surveyed the 
fortifications of the city, and took an account of the |) 
height, strength, and situation of the walls and to 
ers; that he ‘might know where to make the assai 
with the greatest advantage.” Thus understood, the. 
words are considered as containing J erusalem’s tri- 
umph over the vanquished army of the Assyrians; and 
the rather, because the apostle alludes to them in his 
triumphs over the learning of this world; when it 
was baffled by the gospel of Christ, 1 Cor. i. 20. The 
; 190 


* it God was solemnly worshipped, and the solem 
a blies and feasts kept in her. 1 hine eyes" ha 
see « 


virgin, the daughter of Zion, despises all their mili- 
tary preparations. Poole, however, with some others, — 
thinks these words are rather to be considered as the » 
language of the Jews in the time of their distress, 
and that they are here recorded to give a lively re- 
presentation of it; the officers here mentioned not 
seeming to be those of the Assyrian army, but rather 
those of the Jews, who, upon the approach of the 
Assyrians, began to be more active in making milita- 
ry preparations for the defence of the city, and to 
choose such officers as were necessary and useful for _ 
that end, such as these, here mentioned were ; name- 
ly, the scribe, or, muster-master, who was to make 
and keep a list of the soldiers, and to call them toge- 
ther as occasion required; the receiver, whoreceived 
and laid out the money for the charges of the war; 
and he that counted the towers, who surveyed all the 
parts of the city, and considered what towers or for- 
tifications were to be made or repaired for the secu- 
rity of it. And unto these several officers the people 
resorted with great distraction and confusion, to ac- 
quaint them with all occurrences, or to transact busi- 
ness with them, as occasion required. 

Verse 19. Thou shalt not see a Sierce people—As 
Moses said of the Egyptians, (Bxodgliy: 13,) The 
Egyptians, whom you have seen to-day, you shall 
see them again no more ; so I say of the Assyrians, _ 
that fierce and warlike people, whom thou hast seen, 
with great terror, near the walls of Jerusalem, thou 
shalt see them again no more; a people of a deeper 
speech, &c.—A foreign nation whose ia 2 is un- 
known to thee. Ofa stammering tongue, &¢c.—Of 
which see on Isa. xxviii. 11. 

Verses 20-22. Look upon Zion—Conteniplate 
Zion’s beauty and safety, and her glorious and pe 
culiar privileges; the city of our solemnities—This 
ae the chief part of Zion’s glory and happiness 


salem a quiet habitation, &c.—Whatis here 
predic d was but very obscurely and imperfect] 
filled in. the literal Zion; but was, and will "hee. 
clearly and full complished i in the mysti 
ue church of God, in the times of thegospel, a 
ich we are ass the gates of hell shall-n 
vail, Matt. xvi. 1 "here—In and about Zion, 


\ e 


ts and ‘streams ; : 


a 


er 


oe 


The terrible judgments 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


of the Lord. 


A. M. 3279. 


th os 23: 14 Thy tacklings are loosed ; ; they 


could not well strengthen their ie 
they could not spread the sail: then is the prey 
ofa great spoil divided ; the lame take the prey. 


a = 


24 And the inhabitant shall not A, M, 2279 
: . C..725. 

say, I am sick: *the people that - 

dwell therein shall be forgiven their ini- 

quity. 


oa On They have forsaken thy Sickiingss 


“a Jer. 1, 20. 


glorious. Lord will be a place of ova rivers— 
_ Though we have nothing but a small and contempti- 
ple brook to defend and refresh us, yet God will be 
as sure a defence, and source consolation to us, as 
if we were surrounded wih ea rivers. Wher ein 
shall go no galley—No ship of the enemies shall 
be able to come into this river to annoy us. For the 
Lord is our judge—To judge for us, to read our 
‘eause against our enemies, as the ancient Tides of | 

srael did. he Lord is our lawgiver, &e. —Our 


mi chief governor, to whom it belongs to give laws, and 


e 


Sent oe : 
“.-"%< NOTES ON CHAPTER, XXIV 


| ‘Gz 
ee 24: Come, &c.—Here beg ns the third di 
f of be third Pree s prophecies, te 


\ to defend his people. 


Ver. 23, 24. Thy tacklings are loosed—This apos- 
trophe of the prophet is directed to the hostile na- 
tion. Having designed their army under the notion 
of a gallant ship, (verse 21,) he here represents their 
undone condition by the metaphor of a ship, tossed 
in a tempestuous sea, having her cables broke, and 


_-all her tacklings loose, so that she could have no 
benefit of her masts and sails; and therefore is quick- 


ly swallowed up. They could not strengthen their 


. mast—Namely, thé Assyrians could not, of whom 


eth hear, 


he still speaks, asin the first clause he spake to them. 
The lame tale the prey—They who came to spoil 


* and prey upon my people, shall become a prey to 


them, and shall be forced to flee away so suddenly 
that they shall leave so many spoils behind them, 
that, when strong and active men have carried away 
all that they desired, there shall be enough left for 
the Jame, who come last to the spoil. Thus God 
would bring good out of evil; and not only deliver 
Jerusalem, but enrich it, and abundantly recompense 
the losses it had sustained. And the inhabitant shall 


» 


not say, I am sick—As the lame shall take the prey, 
so shall the sick, notwithstanding their weakness, 
make a shift to get to the abandoned camp, and 
seize something for themselves. In this sense the 
clause is. understood by Bishop Lowth, and many 
other interpreters. Or, the sense may be, There 
shall be such a wniversal4ransport of joy upon this 
occasion, that even the sick shall, for the present, 
forget their sickness, and the sorrows of it, and join 
}with the public in its rejoicings; the deliveraitee of 
their city shall be their cure: or, they shall have no 
cause to complain of any sickness or calamity ; they 
shall be fully delivered from all their enemies and 
troubles; and shall enjoy perfect tranquillity and 
prosperity. The people that dwell therein shall be 
forgiven their iniquity—This may be added, either, 
Ist, As the reason of the foregoing privilege ; their 
sins, the main causes of their distresses, shall be par- 
doned; and therefore their sufferings, the effects of 
sin, shal ‘cease: or, 2d, As an additional favour. 
They shall not only receive from mea glorious tem- 
poral deliverance, but, which is infinitely better, the 
pardon of all their sins, and all those spiritual and 
everlasting blessings which attend upon that mercy. 
Observe here, reader, sin is the sickness of the soul: 
when God pardons sin, he heals the disease; and 
when the diseases of sin are healed by pardoning 
mercy, the sting of bodily sickness is taken out, and 
the cause of it removed: so that either the inhabitant 
shall not be sick, or, at least, shall say, Iam sick 
—If iniquity be taken away, we have little reason to 
complain of outward affliction: Son, be of goad cheer, 
thy sins are forgiven thee. 


a 
z ay 


t 


a CHAPTER XXXIVisi ae 
The contents of this and the next chapter make one distinct prophecy ; “an entire, regular, and beautiful poem,” says Bishop 


Lowth, “consisting of two parts: the first containing a denunciation of divine vengeance against the enemies of the people’ 


or church of God ; the second describing the flourishing state of the church of God, consequent upon the execution of those 


judgments.” The former of these parts of the prophecy is 


_ universal attention, 1. (2,) A direful scene of blood and confusion presented, 2-7. 


penis, 8 3 
+ abandoned to wild beasts ge melancholy fowls, 11- 15. (5, 


4 vss Com oe , ye nations, to eget ; 


earken, ye people: ? let | 
and ‘all that is therein; the wi 


_ *Psa. xlix. 1—~> Deut, xxxii. 1 A 


7 


- ot 


. ite 


ite 


contained in this chapter, in which we have, (1,) A demand of 


) The solemn ratification of all this, 16, 17. 


and all things that come forth of ae. 
25 


_—— 


2 Por the madigagtion of the Lorp is upon 
pS oe oe 


fi P A Heb. the he fulness ar 


ar 

continued to the end of the next chapter. It 1s con- 

nected with the preceding, and, Vitringa thinks, was 

delivered at the same time. - It is divided into two 
rent)’: 


(3,) The reason given for these judg- 
(4,) The continuance of this desolation, the country being made like the lake of Sodom, 9, 10; and the cities 


Terrible desolations 


ISAIAH. 


io %. yet 


“and saiiendeal 


ee a 3279. all nations, and his fury upon all their 
“~~ armies: he hath utterly destroyed 


them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. 


3 Their slain also shall be cast out, and 
° their stink shall come up out of their car- 
casses, and the mountains shall be melted with 
their blood. } 

4. And “all the host of heaven shall be dis- 
solved, and the heavens shall be ° rolled toge- 
ther as a scroll: fand all their host shall fall 


down, as the leaf falleth off from the A.M. 3279. 
vine, and as a & falling fig from the ka 
fig-tree. , 

5 For 'my sword shall be bathed in heaven : 
behold, it } shall come down upon Idumea, 
and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. 

6 The sword of the Lorp is filled with blood, 
it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood 
of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys 
of rams: for * the Lorp hath a sacrifice in Boz- 


© Joel ii. 20.—4 Psa. cii. 26; Ezek. xxxii. 7,85; Joel ii. 
31; ili. 15; Matthew xxiv. 29; 2 Pet. iii. 10. ¢ Revelation 
vi. 14. 


sections: the first, contained in this chapter, exhibits 
judgments upon the adversaries of the church, and 
particularly upon Edom; the latter, in chap. xxxv., 
the jubilee of the church, and its happy, flourishing 
state. The events foretold are represented as being 
of the highest importance, and of universal concern, 
and all nations are called upon to attend to the de- 
claration of them. Thus the prophet: Come near, 
ye nations, and hear; hearken, ye people—As if he 
had said, Let the people of all nations take notice of 
what I am about to say, as that wherein they are 
generally concerned, and by the consideration 
whereof they may be instructed and reformed, and 
so delivered from the calamity here denounced. 
Verses 2, 3. For the indignation of the Lord is 
upon all natioris—Not only upon the Assyrians, and 
those nations which are confederate with them in 
their expedition against Judea, but upon all other 
enemies of my people. He hath utterly destroyed 
them—He will infallibly destroy all of them. Their 
slain also shall be cast out—into the fields, where 
they shall lie unburied, and be left a prey to ravenous 
beasts and birds. In which words he implies, either 
that such vast numbers would be slain, that the sur- 
vivers would not be able to find time or place to 
bury them, or that they should be held in such con- 
tempt and abhorrence that none would be inclined 
to do them that.office: and the mountains—About 
Jerusalem, where they are supposed to be gathered, 
to fight against her, like the Assyrians; shall be melt- 
ed with their blood—Shall be covered with their 
blood, which shall flow down abundantly from them 
with great force, and dissolve, and carry down with 
it a part of the soil of the mountains, as great show- 
ers of rain frequently do. This sentence upon the 
nations, which thus exhibits a kind of general judg- 
ment, to be executed upon the enemies of God and 
hisspeople, by the sword of God, is sufficient to strike 
terror into every hearer. 


Verse 4. And all the host of heaven—The sun, |} 


moon, and stars; shall be dissoluved—We have fre- 
quently had occasion to observe, that, in the pro- 
phetic language, the heavenly luminaries represent 
kings, empires, and states: see note on chap. xiii. 10. 
The prophet here foretels the overthrow and disso- 
lution of such states and kingdoms as were hostile to 
his church, whether under the Jewish or Christian 


|| high ‘and low, rich and poor. 


to him; in Bozrah—A chief city of Edom, (chap. 
es "@ 


f Chap. xiv. 12——< Rev. vi. 14.——} Jer. xlvi. 10.—— Jer. 
xlixted ot 4.——* Chapter lxiii. 1 ; Jeremiah xlix. 13; 
Zeph. i. 2 


dispensation. Or, alluding to a horrid tempest raging 
furiously, during which the heavens grow black, the 
sun disappears, and the stars seem to fall to the 
earth, and it appears as if the whole body of the hea- 
vens were about to be utterly dissolved, he intends 
to signify, that, during these destructive judgments, 
of which he speaks, the confusion and consternation 
of mankind would be as great as if all the frame of 
the creation were broken into pieces. Some, in- 
deed, understand the words as intended of the day 
of general and final judgment, but the context pre- 
ceding and following will not agree with such an in- 
terpretation. And it is very usual for the prophetic 
writers, both of the Old and New Testaments, to 
represent great and general changes and calamities 
in such words and phrases‘as properly agree to the ~ 
day of judgment, and the dissolution of all things: 
as, on the contrary, they often set forth the glorious 
deliverances of God’s people by such expressions as 
properly and literally belong to the be orn 
from the dead. 

Verses 5, 6. For my sword shall be petheg—In 
the blood of these people ; in heaven—WhereGod 
dwells; in which this is said to be done, beeause it 
was there decreed and appointed. Or, it shall, as it 
were, be sharpened and made ready in heaven, to 
bathe itself on earth. Jt shall come down upon Idu- 
mea—Upon the Edomites, who, though they were 
nearly related to the Israelites, yet were their impla- 
cable enemies. But these are named for all the ene- 
mies of God’s church, of whom they were an eminent 
type. The people of my curse—Whom I have de- 
voted to utter destruction, as the word properly sig- 
nifies. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood— 
Shall drink its fill of blood. The metaphor is taken 
from a great glutton, who is almost insatiable. With 
the blood of lambs, &c.—By lambs, and goats, and 
rams, he means people of all ranks and conditions, 
Dr. Waterland renders 
the verse, “ When my sword’in heaven is bathed, 
behold it shall sink deep into Idumea, into the peo- 
ple whom I have devoted to judgment.” For the 

hath a sacrifice--So the prophet terms this 
bloody work, because it was done by God’s com- 
‘mand, and for t e honour of his justice and righteous 
vernmient, A therefore was a service acceptable 


= 


‘ 
i. 
‘ A 
we ee 
>» > be 


Terrible desolations 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


and judgments <at> 


4. M. 3279. rahyand a great slaughter in the land 
B. C. 725. 

—— .of Idumea. 

7 And the ?unicorns shall come down with 
them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and 
their land shall be *soaked with blood, and 
their dust made fat with fatness. 

8 For itis the day of the Lorn’s ! vengeance, 
and the year of recompenses for the contro- 
versy of Zion. 

9 ™ And the streams thereof shall be turned 


into pitch, and the dust thereof into 4. M, Rat 
brimstone, and the land thereof shall 
become burning pitch. 

10 It shall not be quenched night nor day ; 
the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: ° from 
generation to generation it shall. lie waste ; 
none shall pass through it for ever and ever. 

11 ” But the ¢ cormorant and the bittern shall 
possess it; the owl also and the raven shall 
dwell in it: and ¢ he shall stretch out upon it the 


? Or, rhinoceros. —' Or, drunken. 1 Chap. Ixiii. 4.——m Deut. 
xxix. 23—— Rev. xiv. 11; xviii. 18; xix.3 — 


° Mal. i. 4. _p Chap. xiv. 23; Zeph. ii. 14; Rev. xviii. 2. 
* Or, pelican.——4 2 Kings xxi. 13; Laim ii. B. 


Ixiii. 1,) and a type of those cities which should be 
most hostile to God’s people. 

Verses 7, 8. And the unicorns shall come down— 
The word nw», reemim, here rendered unicorns, 
is the same with that used Num. xxiii. 22, where see 
the note. Bishop Lowth renders it here, wild goats ; 
and Dr. Waterland, stags. But many learned men 
prefer the marginal reading, rhineceros. It is im- 
possible to determine precisely what sort of a crea- 
ture is meant, but it is allowed by all that it was a 
beast of great strength and fierceness, and that it is 
here used metaphorically, together with the bullocks 
and bulls, for princes and. potentates, which should 
be brought down and humbled, or should fall down, 
as Bishop Lowth reads it, according to the LXX. 
and Syriac, namely, as beasts do when they have 
received a deadly blow; that is, they shall be sacri- 
ficed, with the lambs, goats, and rams, the inferior 
people, mentioned verse 6. And their land shall be 
soaked with blood—Hebrew, 101, watered, as with 
rain coming oft wpon it, and in abundance ; and their 
dust—Their dry and barren land; made fat with 
faltness—With the fat of the ‘sacrifices, namely, of 
the slain men, mingled with it. For it is the day of 
the Lord’s vengeance—This is the time which God 
hath long since appointed and fixed to vindicate the 
cause of his oppressed and persecuted people against 
all their enemies ;. for the controversy of Zion—Dr. 
Waterland reads, for the avenging of Zion. Upon 
the whole, “the meaning of this period,” from verse 
5, “is, that on a certain day of judgment, which is 
elsewhere called the great day of the Lord’s ven- 
geance, a mighty slaughter should be made of the 
hardened enemies of the church, (which had been 
a long time oppressed and afflicted by them,) 
with the effusion of much blood, and the de- 
struction of many great, noble, and powerful men. 
The figure is taken from the master of a family, who, 
preparing a great feast, and a sacrifice, finds it ne- 
cessary to slay many lambs, rams, and fatted animals, 
so that his knife may be said to ‘be inebriated with 
the blood and fat of the slain.” As to the application 
of this prophecy, in which the Edomites are particu- 
larly mentioned, it may be observed that they, toge- 
ther with the rest of the neighbouring nations, were 
ravaged and laid waste by Nebuchadnezzar, and the 
general devastation spread through all these coun- 
tries by him may be the event which the prophet 

Vow. IIT. ( 13 ) 


had first in view in this chapter: but, as Bishop 
Lowth observes, “ this event, as far as we have any 
account of it in history, seems by no means to come 
up to the terms of the prophecy, or to justify so 
highly wrought and so terrible a description. And 
it is not easy to discover what connection the ex- 
tremely flourishing state of the church or people of 
God, described in the next chapter, could have with 
those events, or how it could be the consequence of 
them, as it is there represented to be. By a figure, 
very common in the prophetical writings, any city 
or people, remarkably distinguished as enemies of 
the people and kingdom of God, is put for those 
enemies in general. This seems here to be the case. 
with Edom and Bozra._ It seems, therefore, reason- 
able to suppose, with. many learned expositors, that 


|this prophecy has a further view to events still fu- 


ture; to some great revolutions to be effected in later 
times, antecedent to that more perfect state of the 
kingdom of God upon earth, and serying to intro- 
duce it, which the Scriptures warrant us to expect.” 
Vitringa is of opinion, that Papal, as well as heathen 
Rome, red or drunken with the blood of the saints 
and martyrs of Jesus, is here meant. And he ob- 
serves, that “ Rome, which, in the Hebrew, signifies 
fortification, well answers to Bozra, which signifies 
a fortified city.” Is not the destruction of the anti- 
christian powers foretold in the xviith, xvViiith, and 
xixth chapters of the Revelation by St. John, here 
intended by Isaiah? and especially the destruction 
in Armageddon, termed /he great day of God Al- 
mighty, Rev. xvi. 14, and that described chap..xix. 
17-19? Certainly these terrible destructions are to 
prepare the way for that millennial reign of Christ, 
described Rey. xx., and which seems to be intended 


in the next chapter of this prophecy. 


Verses 9-15. And the streams thereof—The rivers, 
which seem most secure from the judgment here 
threatened ; shall be turned into pitch, &ce.—The 
country shall be dealt with as Sodom and Gomorrah 
were, even utterly destroyed, as it were, by fire, or 
burning pitch and brimstone, thrown down upon it 
from heaven. From generation to generation tt 
shall lie waste—It shall be irrecoyerably ruined, and 


| shall remain a spectacle of God’s vengeance to all 


succeeding ages. The cormorant, §c., shall possess 

it—The inhabitants shall be wholly cut off, and it 

shall be entirely ‘possessed by those creatures which 
193 3 


Flourishing state of the church, 


ISATAH. 


after the overthrow of its enemies. 


A. M. 3279. line of confusion, and the stones of 
B.C. 725; 
eee, emptiness. 

12 They shall call the nobles thereof to the 
kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her 
princes shall be nothing. 

13 And * thorns shall come up in her palaces, 
nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: 
and * it shall be a habitation of dragons, and a 
court for °owls.® 

14 7The wild beasts of the desert shall also 
meet with * the wild beasts of the island, and the 
satyr shall cry to his fellow ; the® screech-owl also 
shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. 


15 There shall the great owl make A. M. 3279. 
her nest, and lay, anit hatch, and Be sce ata 
gather under her shadow: there shall the 
vultures also be gathered, every one with her 
mate. 

16 4 Seek ye out of tthe book of the Lorn, 
and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall 
want her mate: for my mouth, it: hath com- 
manded, and his spirit, it hath gathered them. 

17 And he hath cast the lot for them, and 
his hand hath divided it unto them by line: 
they shall possess it for ever, from generation 
to generation shall they dwell therein. 


* Chapter xxxii. 13; Hos. ix. 6——* Chapter xiii. 21.——§ Or, 
ostriches. 


§ Hebrew, daughters of the owl——’ Heb. Ziim.—— Heb. Tim, 
r, night monster. t Mal. iii. 16. 


delight:in deserts and waste places: see Isa. xiii. 21, 
22; and xiv. 23. He shall stretch out wpon it the 
line of confusion, &c.—He shall use the line, and the 
stone, or plummet, joined to it, not to build it up, 
but to mark it out for destruction and desolation. 
Thus the prophet goes on to “ paint, in the most 
chosen figures, an image of the land and city deso- 


lated by war, wasted by fire, and devoted to eternal’ 


desolation, by the divine judgment; which should 
not only be deprived of its inhabitants, and left to 
impure beasts and birds, but also, by the desolations 
brought upon it, should be rendered uninhabitable, 
and present the appearance of the infernal flames, 
like another Sodom and Gomorrah, sending forth 
continually black smoke and horrid smells, The 
desolation of Babylon is set forth in similar terms, 
chap. xiii. 19, &ce. Though Rome pagan and the 
Roman powers have already suffered great desola- 
tion from the Goths and others, yet Vitringa is of 
opinion that this prophecy has not yet had its full 
completion, but will hereafter have it in the destruc- 
tion of Papal Rome. The state of Italy, and the 
sulphurous soil in the vicinity of Rome, render the 
probability of this devastation greater.”—Dodd. 
Verses 16,17. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord 
—Here the prophet confirms the preceding predic- 


tion ; and, “to convict hypocrites, and confirm the 
pious, assures them of the certain completion of his 
prophecy.” He terms it, and his other prophecies, 
The book of the Lord, as being a part of divine reve- 
lation ; and he supposes they would be extant at the 
time of the completion of their contents, and there- 
fore invites all men to seek into and consider them 
in all their parts, in order that, comparing the events 
with the predictions, they might be fully satisfied of 
the truth of them, and thereby might find their faith 
in them, and all the other parts of God’s book, con- 
firmed. Not one of these shall fail—No, not so 
much as the minutest circumstance, even respecting 
the impure beasts now mentioned. None shall want 
her mate—As I have said that the vultures should 
all have their mates, so it shall be: for my mouth— 
The mouth of the Lord; zt hath commanded—The 
direful muster of the beasts and fowls; these marks 
and evidences of desolation ; and his Spirit—That 
is, his power; it hath gathered—Shall gather all his 
creatures together, as he formerly brought the erea- 
tures to Adam and to Noah, by an instinct which he 
put into them. And he hath cast the lot for them, 
&c.—He hath divided the land to them, as it were, 
by lot and line, as Canaan was divided among the 
Israelites, 


CHAPTER XXXV. . 


a 


bes 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The flourishing state of the church, after the overthrow and destruction of its enemies. (2,) An 
exhortation to the ministers of the church to confirm and comfort the weak and afflicted people of God, from the certain hope 


of this benefit. 


duty, 6. A diffusion of grace among persons of all orders, and in places heretofore subject to Satan, 6, 7. 


and holiness of the church, 8. 


(3,) An enarration of the privileges of the church at this time ; such as, Illumination, 5. Alacrity in 


The purity 


Its preservation, in peace and security, from the temptations of Satan a “pee _cesricl 


oer 9x. Its unity, joy, and consolation in this flourishing state, 10. 


A. M. 3279. 
B. C. 725. 


a Chap. 


TPHE * wilderness and the solitary || the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as 
place shall be glad for them ; and/| the rose. 


4 Ss 3279. 
B. ©0725. 


lv. 12. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXV. 
Verse 1. The wilderness and solitary place, &c. 
—As the land of the church’s enethies, which had 
194 


enjoyed many external blessings and comforts, shall 

be turned into a desolate wilderness, as was declared 

in the foregoing chapter, so, on the contrary, Em- 
( 13* ) WE acz 


Prophetic view of the 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


gospel dispensation. 


A. M. 3279. 


are me 2 It shall blossom abundantly, and 


~ rejoice, even with joy and singing: 
the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the 
excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall 
see the glory of the Lorn, and the excellency 
of our God. 


39° Strengthen ye the weak hands, BR 
and confirm the feeble knees. Serio 

4 Say to them that are of a ‘fearful heart, 
Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will 
come with vengeance, even God with a recom- 
pense ; he will come and save you. 


_? Chap. x Xxxii. 15. © Job iv. 3, 4; Heb. xii. 12. 


1 Heb. hasty. 


- 


manuel’s land, or the seat of God’s church and peo- 
ple, which formerly was barren and despised, like a 
wilderness, shall flourish exceedingly. We have 
more than once had occasion to observe, that by the 
wilderness is generally meant the Gentile world: 
now, it is here foretold, that, through the influence 
of the gospel and the grace of God, it should put on 
a new face, and become like a pleasant and fruitful 
garden; that multitudes of converts to the true reli- 
gion should be made- therein, and a vast number of 
spiritual and holy worshippers should be raised up 
to God in it. Some, indeed, would interpret this 
chapter as referring merely to the flourishing state 
of Hezekiah’s kingdom in the latter part of his reign, 
or to the cultivation of Judea again after the return 
of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon. But, as 
Bishop Lowth observes, that it has a view beyond 
any such events as these, “is plain from every part, 


especially from the middle of it, where the miracu- | 


lous works wrought by our blessed Saviour are so 
clearly specified that we cannot avoid making the 
application. And our Saviour himself has, more- 
over, plainly referred to this very passage, as speak- 


ing of him and his works, Matt. xi..4,5. He bids | 


the disciples of John to go and report to their Mas- 
ter the things which they heard and saw; that the 
blind receive their sight, &c., and leaves it to him to 
draw the conclusion in answer to his inquiry, whe- 
ther he, who performed the very works which the 


prophets foretold should be performed by the Mes- | 


siah, was not indeed the Messiah himself. And 
where are these works so distinetly marked by any 
of the prophets as in this place? And how could 
they be marked more distinctly? 'To these the 
strictly literal interpretation of the prophet’s words 
directs us. According to the allegorical interpreta- 
tion, they may have a further view; and this part of 


the prophecy may run parallel with the former, and | 


relate to the future advent o: rist ; to the conver- 
sion of the Jews, and their restitution to their land ; 
to the extension and purification of the Christian 
faith, events predicted in Scripture as preparatory to 
it.’ We may conclude, therefore, with certainty, 
that as the slaughters and desolations foretold in the 
former chapter look far beyond the calamities 
brought on Idumea and the neighbouring nations, 


by the Assyrians or Chaldeans; so does the bright | 
and pleasant picture of the prosperity and happiness 


of God’s people, drawn in this chapter, look far be- 

yond any felicity experienced by the Jews, either in 

any part of Hezekiah’s reign, or after the return 

from Babylon. It is undoubtedly the flourishing 

state of the kingdom of Christ, or of the gospel 

church, composed of Jews and Gentiles, which is 
3 ‘ 


here predicted, and especially as it shall exist in the 
latter days, after the destruction of all the antichris- 
tian powers, when the fulness of the Géntiles shall 
be brought in, and.all Israel shall be saved. 

Verse 2. It.shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice 
—Great shall be the prosperity and felicity of God’s 
church in these gospel days. Spiritual blessings are 
often set forth under the emblems of fruitfulness and 
plenty, as the reader may see, chap. iv. 2; xxx. 23; 
xxxil. 15, and elsewhere. The glory of Lebanon 
shall be given unto it, &c.—The prophet goes on to 
express the great change which should be made in 
the Gentile world by the gospel. For Lebanon was 
a mountain famous for its excellent cedars, Carmel 
was a most delightful woody mountain, and Sharon 
a most pleasant place for pasture ; so that all these 
added together express great excellence: as if he 
had said, Whatever was valuable and desirable in the 
Mosaic economy shall be translated into, and appear 
in perfection in, the gospel of Christ; and the Gen- 
tile world, formerly a wilderness, shall be as much 
enriched with spiritual blessings, and be as fruitful 
in all the graces and virtues which belong to true 
and genuine religion, as ever Judea was, and abun- 
dantly more. TJ'hey—Who formerly were in the 
wilderness of heathenism ; shall see the glory of the 
Lord—The glorious discoveries and effects of God’s 
power and goodness to his people. 

Verses 3, 4. Strengthen ye.the weak hands—Ye 
prophets and ministers of God, comfort and encour- 
age his people, who are now ready to- faint, with 
hopes of that. salvation which, in due time, he will 
work for them. The prophet mentions hands and 
knees, because the strength or weakness of any man 
eminently appears in those parts. Say to them that 
are of a fearful heart—Who, because of their own 
weakness and the strength of their enemies, are dis- 
couraged and cast down: Hebrew, 35 “71235, that 
are hasty of heart, that are for betaking themselves 
to flight, upon the first alarm, and for giving up the 
cause. Be strong, fear not—Resist your fears, con- 
fide in the power, love, and faithfulness of God, who 
has promised to deliver those that trust in him, and 
has engaged, that as your day is your strength ‘shall 
be, and you shall become strong. Behold, your God 
will come—Though he seem to be absent, and to 
have departed from you, he will come and abide with 
you. He will come with vengeance—Namely, upon 
your enemies; and save you—The destruction he 
brings upon your enemies will be the means of your 
deliverance and salvation. If we suppose this to be 
spoken with any reference to the state of the Jews 
in Babylon, God avenged them when he overthrew 
the Babylonish empire, and brought them back to 

195 


P > 


ISAIAH. 


holiness of the church 


The purity and 
Aah 2973. 5 Then the ‘eyes of the blind shall 
. 725. 


_ "be opened, and ° the ears of the deaf 
shall be unstopped. 

6 Then shall the flame man leap as a hart, and 
the §tongueof thedumbsing: for in the wilderness 
shall " waters break out, and streams in thedesert. 

7 And the parched ground shall become a 
pool, and the thirsty land springs of water : 
‘the habitation of dragons, where each aa 


shall be grass with reeds and rushes. A. M. 3279 

8 And a highway shall be there, ba sadata 
and a way, and it shall be called, The way of 
holiness ; * the unclean shall not pass over it; 
Shut it shall be for those: the way-faring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein. 

9 ! No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous 
beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found 


there ; but the redeemed shall walk there: 


4 Chap. me 18; xxxii.3,4; xlii.7; Matt. ix. 27, &c.; xi. 5; 
xii. 22; xx. (0, &c. ; 3 XXL. 14; John ix. 6, 7._—¢ Matt. xi. 5) 
Mark vii. 32! Matt, xii5 3 ave 0s wits 14; John v. 8,9; 
Acts iii. 2, 6c. ; viii. 7; xiv. 8, &c.——3 Chap. xxxil. 4; Matt. 


their own land. But, undoubtedly, the words are 
primarily intended of the coming of the Messiah in 
the flesh, and of the redemption and deliverance of 
God’s people through him; that is, of such as em- 
braced Christianity, whom God signally avenged for 
all the malice and cruelty which the Jews had exer- 
cised upon them, when, by the Romans, he laid Je- 


rusalem even with the ground, and cut off many hun- 


dreds of thousands of them by the sword, by famine, 
and other ways, for their obstinate rejection of the 
gospel, and crucifying of their Messiah. Thus Christ 
is said to have been set for the fall, as well as ris- 
ing again, of many in Israel. 

Verses 5-7. Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened—The poor Gentiles, who before were blind 
and deaf, shall now have the eyes and ears of their 
minds opened to see God’s works, and to hear and 
receive his word. And, in token hereof, many per- 
sons who are literally and corporally blind and deaf, 
shall have sight and hearing miraculously conferred 
upon them; all which things being so fully accom- 
plished in Christ, and, as has been just observed, ap- 
plied by him to himself, it is plain that this prophecy 
belongs primarily to the times of the gospel. Then 
shall the lame leap as a hart—For joy, or shall 
proceed readily and nimbly in the way of duty. 
And the tongue of the dumb shall sing—The praises 
of his. Redeemer and Saviour. For in the wilder- 
ness shall waters break out—The most dry and 
barren places shall be made moist and fruitful: which 
is principally meant of the plentiful effusion of God’s 
grace upon such persons and nations as had been 
wholly destitute of it. In the habitation of dragons 
shall be grass, &c.—Those dry and parched deserts, 
in which dragons have their abode, shall yield abun- 
dance of grass, and reeds, and rushes, which grow 
only in moist ground. Thus it was when Christian 
churches were planted and flourished in the cities 
of the Gentiles, which for many ages had been 
habitations of dragons, or rather of devils, Rev. 
XVill. When the property of the idols’ temples 
was altered, and they were converted to the service 
of Christianity, then the habitations of dragons be- 
came fruitful fields. 

Verse 8. And a highway shall be there, and a 
way—The highway and the way are not to be taken 
for two different ways, but for one and the same way, 
even a cast-way, which 6 raised ground, as the 

196. 


Pe - 


ix. 32; xii. 22; xv. 30.——h Chapter xli. 18; xliii. 19; John 
vii. 38, ee Chap. xxxiv. 13. 3 Or, a.court for reeds, &e. 
k Ghap. lii. 1; Joel ii. 17; Rev. xxi. 27. 4Or, for he shall be 
with them.—! Lev. xxvi. 6; Chap. xi. 9; Ezek. xxxiv. 25. 


former Hebrew word on signifies, and a way for 
persons to travel in, as the latter word here used 
means, both signifying a convenient, prepared, plain, 
and common road or path for travellers ; namely, the 
way of truth and duty marked out by the gospel, 
which is the rule both of our faith and practice. 
“The knowledge of the truth and will of God,” says 
Mr. Scott, “when made very plain and clear to any 
people, is like casting up a highway through a coun- 
try that was before impassable. The Gentile world 
was a desert, in this as well as in other respects; no 
highway to God and heaven was to be there met 
with. But this advantage began to be vouchsafed to 
the nations when the gospel was sent to them,” and 
the way of duty was plainly marked out. And it 


shall be called, The way of holiness—Trodden by 


holy men, and. filled with holy practices; the way 
of holy worship, and a holy conversation. The way 
of holiness is that course of religious duties in yich 
men ought to walk and press forward, with an eye 
to the glory of God and their own felicity, i in the.en- 
joyment of him. It is “not a way of sufferance,” 
says Henry, “but an appointed way, a way into 
which we are directed by a divine authority, and in 
which we are protected by a divine warrant: it is 
the king’s, yea, the King of kings’ highway, in which 
we may be waylaid, but cannot be stopped. It is 
the good old way, (Jer. vi. 16,) the way of God’s 
commandments. The unclean shall not pass over 
it—Kither to defile it, or to disturb those that walk 
in it. It isa way by itself, distinguished from the 
way of'the world; for it is a way of separation from, 
and nonconformity to, this world.” The expression 
further means, that: ean persons shall, by a pro- 
per exercise of good discipline, be kept out of Christ’s 
church on earth, as they certainly shall not be ad- 
mitted into his kingdom in heayen. But it shall be 
for those—Termed afterward the redeemed, who 
shall walk there, verse 9. But Bishop Lowth and 
some interpreters think the clause may be better 
rendered, He, namely, God, shall. be with them walk- 
ing in the way ; that is, he shall be their companion 
and guide in the way. Hence, though fools, they 
shall not err therein--The way shall be so plain and 
straight, that even the most foolish travellers cannot 
easily mistake it. 

Verse 9. No lion shall be there, &e.—It shall not 
only be a plain, but a safe aa Oe that keep 

3 


Sennacherib invades Judea, 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


and besieges Jerusalem. 


A. M. 3279, 


Lorp shall return, and come to 
Zion with-songs and everlasting joy upon their 


m Chap. li. 11.——® Chap. xxv. 8; 


10 And the ™ ransomed of the} 


heads: they shall obtain joy and glad- Ag, 3308. 
ness, and "sorrow and sighing shall. a 
flee away. 


Ixv. 19; Rev. vii. 17; xxi. 4. 


close to God in this way, keep out of the reach of 
Satan, the roaring lion: that wicked one toucheth 
them not; nor shall any of their other spiritual ene- 
mies be suffered to destroy, subdue, or bring them 
into bondage. They may proceed with a holy secu- 
rity and serenity of mind, and may be quiet from 
the fear of evil. This is the same promise with that 
of Isaiah xi. 9: T'hey shall not hurt nor destroy in 
all my holy mountain, 

Verse 10. And the ransomed of the Lord—They 
whom God shall rescue from their captivity and 
slavery in Babylon, say some; shall: return and 
come to Zion—Shall be restored to their own land, 
from whence they had been carried captive. But 
the following expressions are far too magnificent and 
emphatical to be answered by the mere return of the 
Jews to Judea and Jerusalem, which was accompa- 
nied and followed by many sighs and sorrows, as 
appears both from sacred and profane historians. 
We must, therefore, of necessity, understand this 
verse as being intended, like the preceding verses, of 
gospel times, and therefore by the ransomed of the 
Lord we must understand those who are delivered 


from the guilt and power of sin, and from every 
kind of spiritual bondage, whether to the devil, the 
world, or the flesh. These may be said to return, 
and come to Zion, with songs, when they unite 
themselves to God’s church and people on earth, and 
more especially when they arrive at the heavenly 
Canaan, and are admitted. into the New Jerusalem, 
the city of the living God, and incorporated in a 
glorious society, with an innumerable company of 
angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect ;’ 


with the general assembly and church of the first- 


born, who are written in heaven. 'Then, indeed, are 
their heads crowned with everlasting joy ; and they 
obtain joy and gladness in perfection, and sorrow 
and sighing flee away for ever. Thus these pro- 


phecies, which relate to the Assyrian invasion, con- 


clude, for the support of the people of God, ‘under 
that and other subsequent calamities, and to direct 
their joy, in their deliverance from them, to some- 
thing higher. And thus should our joyful hopes 
and cheering prospects*of eternal life swallow up 
both all the joys and all the sorrows of, this present 
time. 


¥ 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Tn this and the three following chapters is contained the historical part of the book of Isaiah, relating a memorable transac- 


tion, strongly confirmative of the divine mission of our prophet, and illustrative of some of the foregoing predictions. 
this chapter we have the invasion of Judah by Sennacherib, 1. 


tempts Hezekiah to despair, and the people to revolt, 2-22. 


- Now *jt came to pass in the four- 
Pa it teenth year of King Hezekiah, 
that Sennacherib king of Assyriacame upagainst 
all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them. 
B.c.72. 2 4 And the king of Assyria sent 
Rabshakeh fe chish to Jerusa- 
salem unto King Hezeki: ith a great army. 
And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool 
in the highway of the fuller’s field. 
3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hil- 
kiah’s son, which was over the house, and 


A. *e ae 
B.C 


22 Kings xviii. 13,17; 2 Chron. xxxii. 1. 1 Or, secretary. 


v2 Kings xviii. 19. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Verse 1. Now it came to pass, &c.—The history 
related in this and the three following chapters is 
contained, almost wholly in the same words, 2 Kings 
xviii., xix., xx.; where see the notes. It was proba- 
bly first written by this prophet, and from him taken 

3 


In 
He sends Rabshakeh, who, by his blasphemous persuasion, 


Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph’s A. Ae wi 
son, the recorder. a 8.7 ts ae 

4» And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye 
now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, 
the king of Assyria, What confidence is this 
wherein thou trustest ? 

5 I say, sayest thou (but they are but * vain 
words) ° Ihave counsel and strength for war: 
now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebel- 
lest against me? 

6 Lo, thou trustest in the ° staff of this 


3Or, but counsel and strength are for the 


2 Heb. a word of lips. 
¢ Ezek. xxix. 6, 7. 


war. 


into the second! book af Kings to complete that history: 

and we may conjecture that it is that part of the ac- 

count of Hezekiah’s reign which is said to have been 

written by Isaiah, 2Chron. xxxii. 32. It is inserted 

here, because it casts great light on several particu- 

lars of the foregoing ecies; and chapter xxxix. 
07 


5 a 


The blasphemous message 


A. M, 3292. broken reed, on Egypt; wheréon if 

B. C : 

a man Recta it will go into his hand, 

and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all 
that trust in him. 
7 But if thou say to me, We trust in the 
Lorp our God: is it not he, whose high 
places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken 
away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, 
Ye shall worship before this altar? 

8. Now therefore give ‘pledges, I pray thee, 
to my master the king of Assyria, and I will 
give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able 
on. thy part to set riders upon them. 

9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of 
one captain of the least of my master’s ser- 
vants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots 
and for horsemen ? 

10 And am I now come up without the 
Lorp against this land to destroy it? the 
Lon dibaid unto me, Go up against this land, 
and destroy it. 

11 Then said Eliakim,-and Shebna, te 
Joah, unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, 
unto thy servants in the Syrian language; 
for we understand it: and speak not to us in 
the Jews’ language, in the ears of the people 
that are on the wall. 

12 But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master 
sent me to thy master and to thee to speak 


these words? hath he not sent me to the men} 


that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their 
own dung, and drink their own piss with you ? 

13 4 Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with 
aloud voice in the Jews’ language, and said, 
Hear ye the words of the great king, the king 
of aha 


* Or, hostages. 


5 Or, Seek my favour by a present. 


contains a prophecy of the captivity, and is an intro- 


duction to the remainder of Isaiah’s prophecies, a. 


great part of which relate ‘to the restoration of 
the Jews, and their return from Babylon to their 


ISATAH. 


_ of Rabshakeh. 


14 Thus saith the king, Let not He- A. M. 3292. 
zekiah deceive you: for hd shall not be 2°: 7 
ablé to deliver you. 

15 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in 
the Lorp, saying, The Lorp will surely de- 
liver us: this city shall not be delivered into 
the hand of the king of Assyria. 

16 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith 
the king of Assyria, °Make*® an agreement 
with me by a present’ and come out to me: 
‘and eat ye every one of his vine, and every 
one of his fig-tree, and drink ye Ore ts one 
the waters of his own cistern ; 

17 Until I come and take you away to a 
land like your own land, a land of corn and 
wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 

18 Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, say-~ 
ing, The Lorn will deliver as. Hath any of 
the gods of the‘nations delivered his land out 
of the hand of the king of Assyria ? , 

19 Where are the gods of Hamath . and 
Arphad ? where are the gods of Sepharvaim ? 
and have they delivered Samaria out of any 
hand ? 

20 Who are they among all the gods of these 
lands, that have delivered their land out of my 
hand, that the Lorn should deliver Jerusalem 
out of my hand ? . 

21 But they held their peace, and answered 
him not a word: for the king’s commandment 
was, saying, Answer him not. 

22 Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, 
that was over the household, and Shebna the 
scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the re- 
corder, to Hezekiah with ¢heir clothes rent, 
and told him the words of Rabshakeh. 


a blessing —-4 Zech, iii. 10. 


6 Heb. Make with m 


own land. For the same reason, the. history of the 
taking of Jerusalem by the Babylonians is annexed 
to Jeremiah’s prophecies, because it helps to explain 
and confirm several passages in them. 


CHAPTER XXXVIL. 


Hezekiah mourns, and sends to Isaiah to pray for him and the people, 1-5. He comforts them, 6, 7. Sennacherib, called 
away against the king of Ethiopia, sends a blasphemous letter to Hezekiah, 8-13. His prayer, 14-20. Isaiah’s pro- 


phecy, 21-35. An angel slays the Assyrians, 36. 
198 


Sennacherib is slain at Nineveh by his own sons, 37, 38. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


prayer to the Lord. 


Hezekial’s affecting 


A. M. 3292 


B.C. 712, 


AND “it came to pass, when King 

Hezekiah heard i¢, that he rent 
his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, 
and went into the house of the Lorn. 

2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the 
household, and Shebna the scribe, and the 
elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, 
unto Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz. 

3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Heze- 
kiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of 
rebuke, and of ‘blasphemy: for the children 
are come to the birth, and there is not strength 
to bring forth. 

4 It may be the Lorp thy God will hear 
the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of 
Assyria his master hath sent to. reproach the 
living God, and will reprove the words which 
the Lorn thy God hath heard : wherefore lift 
up thy prayer for the remnant that is ® left. 


5 So the servants vis King Hezekiah came | 


to Isaiah. 

6 4 And Isaiah said unto Shin Thus ‘shall 
ye say unto your master, Thus saith the 
Lorp, Be not afraid of the words that thou 
hast heard, wherewith the servants of the 
king of Assyria have blasphemed me. 

7 Behold, I will *send a blast upon him, 
and he mae hear a rumour, and return to his 
own land; and I will cause him to fall by the 
sword in his own land. 

8 {So Rabshakeh returned, and found the 
king of Assyria warring against Libnah : for he 
had heard that he was departed from Lachish. 

9 And he heard say concerning Tirhakah 
king of Ethiopia, He has come forth to make 
war with thee. And when he heard i¢, he 
sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying, 

10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king 
of Judah, saying, Let a God, in whom 
thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem 
shall not be given into the hand of the king 
of Assyria. 

11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings 
of Assyria have done to all lands by destroy- 
ing them utterly ; and shalt thou be delivered ? 


hands, wood and stone: 


12 Have the gods of the nations A.M. 3292. 
delivered them which my fathers have pea 
destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, 
and the children of Eden which were in Te- 
lassar ? . 

13 Where is the king of » Hamath, and the 
king of Arphad, and the king of the ‘city of 
Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah ? 

14 4 And Hezekiah received the letter from 
the hand of the messengers, and read it: and 
Hezekiah went up unto the house of the Lorp, 
and spread it before the Lorn. — 

15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lon», 
saying, 

16 O Lorn of hosts, God of Israel, that 
dwellest between the cherubim, thou art the 
God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of 
the anual thou hast made heaven and earth. 

17 * TAvling thine ear, O Lorn, and hear ; 
open thine eyes, O Lorn, and see: and hear 
all the words of Sennacherib, which hath 
sent to reproach the living God. 

18 Ofatruth, Lorp, the kings of Assyria have 
laid waste all the ‘ nations, and their countries, 

19 And have ‘cast their gods, into the fire; 
for they were no gods, but the work of men’s 
therefore they have 
destroyed them. 

20 Now therefore, O Lorp our God, save 
us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the 
earth may know that thou ar¢ the Lorn, even 
thou only. 

21 “ Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto 
Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith. the Lorp God 
of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me 
against Sennacherib king of Assyria: 

22 This is the word which the Lorn hath 
spoken concerning him; The virgin, the 
daughter of Zion, hath despised thee, and 
laughed thee to scorn; the daughter. of Jeru- 
salem hath shaken her head at thee. 

23 Whom hast thou reproached and_blas- 
phemed ; and against whom hast thou exalted 
thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? 
even against the Holy One of Israel. 


= — 


#2 Kings xix. 1—— Or, provocation.—?® Heb. found.——* Or, 
put a spirit into him. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVII. 

Verse 36. Then the angel of the Lord went forth 
—When “Sennacherib, in his opprobrious message 
to Hezekiah and his subjects, not only inveighed 

3 


© Daniel ix. 18. 4 Hebrew, lands. 


5 Hebrew, given. 


b Jeremiah xlix. 23. 


against them, but blasphemously reviled even their 

God, bringing down the great God of Israel to the 

contemptible level of the gods of the nations, put- 

ting him to open defiance, and charging him with im- 
199 


& 


Sennacherib is slain 


ISAIAH. 


by his own sons. 


A, M, 3202. 24 °By thy servants hast thou re- 
= proached the Lorn, and hast said, 
By the multitude of my chariots am I come: up 
to the height of the eating * the sides of : 
Lebanon ; and I will cut down ’ the tall cedars 
thereof, and the choice fir-trees thereof: and 
I will enter into the height of his. border, and 
Sthe forest of his Carmel. 

25 I have digged, and drunk water; and 
with the sole of my feet have I dried up all 
the rivers of the ° besieged places. 

26 ?° Hast thou not heard long ago, how I 
have done it; and of ancient times, that I 
have formed it? now have I brought it to 
pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste de- 
fenced cities into ruinous heaps. 

27 Therefore their inhabitants were ' of small 
power, they were dismayed and confounded : 
they were as the grass of the field, and as the 
green herb, as the grass on the house-tops, 
and as corn blasted before it be grown up. 

28 But I know thy * abode, and thy going out, 
and thy coming in, and thy rage against me, 

29 Because thy. rage against me, and thy 
tumult, is come up into mine ears, therefore 
4will I put my hook in thy nose, and my 
bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back 
by the way by which thou camest. 

30 And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye 
shall eat this year such as groweth of itself; 
and ‘the second year that which springeth of 
the same: and in the third year sow ye, and 


®Heb. By the hand of thy servants. 7 Heb. the tallness of the 
cedars thereof, and the choice of the fir-trees thereof. ® Or, the 
forest and his fruitful field. ® Or, fenced ,and closed. AH OF 
Hast thou not heard how I have made it long ago, and formed it 
of ancient times? should I now bring it to be laid waste, and de- 
Fenced cities to be ruinous heaps? as 2 Kings xix. 25. 


M. 3292. 


teap, and plant vineyards, and eat = ce 


the fruit thereof. Pema al 

31 And “the remnant that is escaped of the 
house of Judah shall again take root downward, 
and bear fruit upward : 

32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a 
remnant, and ‘ they that escape out of mount 
Zion : the ° zeal of the Lorp of hosts shall do this. 

33 Therefore thus saith the Lorp concern- 
ing the king of Assyria, He shall not come 
into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor 
come before it with shields, nor cast a bank 
against it. \ 

34 By the way that he came, by the same 
shall he return, and shall not come into this 
city, saith the Lorn. 

35 For I will ‘defend this city to save it, for 
mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake. 

36 7 Then the £ angel of the Lorp went 
forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians 
a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: 
and when they arose early in the morning, 
behold, they were all dead corpses. 

37 So Sennacherib king of Assyria de- 
parted, and went and returned, and dwelt at 
Nineveh. 

38 And it came to pass, as he was worship- 
ping in the house of Nisroch his’ god, that 
Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote 
him with the sword; and they escaped into 
the land of 1° Armenia: and Esar-haddon his 
son reigned in his stead. 

11 Hebrew, short of hand. 
xxx. 28; Ezekiel xxxviii. 4. 
the house of Judah that remaineth. 14 Hebrew, the escaping. 
e2 Kings xix. 31; Chap. ix. 7. 15 Heb. shield ——f 2 Kings 


xx.'6; Chapter xxxviii. 6.——2 Kings xix. 35.——1* Hebrew, 
Ararat. 


12Or, sitting. @ Chapter 
13 Hebrew, the escaping of 


potence to his face, it was time for the Lord to vin- 
dicate his honour, to assert his supremacy and pow- 

r, and to make both parties sensible that he was 
‘glorious in might, equally able to help and to cast 
down, to save and to destroy.” Accordingly, this 
blasphemous tyrant had scarcely advanced to the 
holy city, before his forces were instantly broken, 
and he was obliged to retreat with shame and con- 
fusion.” By this tremendous act, Jehovah made it 
visible to all the nations, especially to the Jews, who 
had greatly apostatized from his worship and ser- 
vice, and strangely gone over to the heathen idola- 
try, changing their glory for that which did not 
profit, that he was a God, “mighty in strength, and 
excellent in power ;” that he was truly what he had 
styled himself, The Lord of hosts ; and that there 
was no other god that could deliver after this sort. 
—Dodd. 

200 


—— 


Verses 37, 38. So Sennacherib departed, &¢.— 
“ The great king, the king of Assyria,” says Henry, 
“looks very little when he is thus forced to return, 
not only with shame, because he cannot accomplish 
what he had projected with so much assurance, but 
with fear and terror, lest the angel that had destroyed 
his army should destroy him; yet he is made to 
look less when his own sons, that should have guard- 
ed him, sacrificed him to his idol, whose protection - 
he sought. God can quickly stop the breath of those 
who breathe out threatenings and slaughter against 
his people, and will do it when they have filled up 
the measure of their iniquity.” The Lord ts known 
by the judgments which he executeth ; known espe- 
cially to be a God that resists the proud, and fails 
not to take speedy and exemplary vengeance on the 
insolent revilers of his Godhead, and the contempt- 
uous blasphemers of his divine power er glory. 


Fifteen years added to 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


the life of Hezekiah. 


We may observe, upon the whole of this wonderful 
story, that many very important ends were evidently 
answered by the war which God permitted the king 
of Assyria to make on Hezekiah, and the invasion 
of Judea, and by the remarkable issue of that cala- 


mity. Hereby, lst, The Jews were chastised for: 


their various idolatries and other sins, and many of 
them, no doubt, were humbled and brought to re- 
pentance. 2d, The faith of their pious king was 
tried, and, in consequence of the extraordinary de- 
liverance granted him and his subjects, was greatly 
increased and confirmed in the power and faithful- 
ness of God. 3d, The people of God were taught 
and encouraged in all their dangers and distresses 


to have recourse to him, their refuge and strength, 
their very present and never failing help in trouble. 
4th, A demonstration was given, in the face of the 
whole world, of the almighty power of Jehovah, 
and of his superiority over all the gods of the 
heathen. And, lastly, by this signal vengeance 
taken on a proud and haughty blasphemer, man- 
kind were given to know that the God of Israel, 
the only living and true God, was a holy and 
jealous, as well as a mighty God, who would not 
give his glory to another, nor suffer it to be in- 
sulted with impunity; and were warned of the con- 
sequences of reviling and blaspheming his glorious 
name. 


CHAPTER XXXVIIL « 


In this chapter we have the sickness of Hezekiah, and the sentence of death which he received from Isaiah, 1. His prayer in 


his sickness, 2, 3. 


The answer of peace which God gave to that prayer, assuring him that he should recover, and live 


yet fifteen years ; and that, fora sign thereof, the sun should go back ten degrees, 4-8. Hezekiah’s thanksgiving for his 
recovery, 9-20. The means he was enjoined to use in order to his recovery, and the end he had in view in desiring it, 


21, 22. 


ae. ie “those days was Hezekiah sick 
~~ unto death. And Isaiah the prophet 


A. M. 
B. C. 


the son, of Amoz came unto him, and said unto | 


him, Thus saith the Lorn, » Set? thy house 
in order: for thou shalt die, and not live. 

2 Then Hezekiah turned his face toward 
the wall, and prayed unto the Lorp. 

3 And said, ° Remember now, O Lorp, I 
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee 
in truth and with a perfect heart, and have 
done that which is good in thy sight. And 
Hezekiah wept ? sore. 

4 4 Then came the word of the Lorp to 
Isaiah, saying, 

5 Go and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the 
Lorp, the God of David thy father, I have 
heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: be- 
hold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years. ‘ 


6 And I will deliver thee and this A. M. 3292. 
city out of the hand of the king of sakes’ 
Assyria: and “I will defend this city. 

7 And this shall be °a sign unto thee from 
the Lorp, that the Lorp will do this thing 
that he hath spoken ; 

8 Behold, I will bring again the shadow of 
the degrees, which is gone down in the *sun- 
dial of Ahaz ten degrees backward. So the 
sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees 
it was gone down. 

9 4 The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, 
when he had been sick, and was recovered of 
his. sickness : 

10 I said in the cutting off of my days, I 
shall go.to the gates of the grave: I am de- 
prived of the residue of my years. 

11 I said, I shall not see the Lorn, even the 


22 Kings xx.1; 2 Chron. xxxii. 24. 
1 Heb. Give charge concerning thy house. 


b 2 Samuel xvii. 23. 
© Neh. xiii. 14. 


2 Heb. with great weeping. d Chap. xxxviis 35. © 2 Kings xx. 
8; Chap. vii. 11—® Heb. degrees by, or, with the sun. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Verses 1-8. In those days was. Hezekiah sick— 
See notes.on 2 Kings xx. 1-11. 

Verse 9. Grotius is of opinion that this song was 
dictated by Isaiah. But it is more probable, as He- 
zekiah was a truly pious man, and inspired by the 
Holy Spirit, that he was moved thereby to write this 
form of thanksgiving, both as a testimony of his own 
gratitude to Ged, and for the instruction of future 
ages. ‘ 

Verses 10, 11. J said—Within myself; I con- 
cluded, in the: cutting off of my days—When my 

3 


days were cut off by the sentence of God, related 
verse 1; I shall go to the gates of the grave—I per- 
ceive that I must die without any hopes of preven- 
tion. The grave is called man’s long home, Eccles. 
xii. 5; and the house appointed for all living, Job 
xxx. 23; and death opens the gates of thishouse. J 
am deprived of the residue of iny years—Which I 
might have lived according to the common course 
of nature, and of God’s dispensations ; and whieh I 
hoped to live for the service of God and of my gene- 
ration. I shall not see the Lord—I shall not behold 
his beauty and glory as he manifests them in his 
201 


Hezekiah’s thanksgiving 


ISAIAH. 


Sor his recovery. 


A. M. 3292. 


B.C. 712. Lorp, fin the land of the living: I 


shall behold man no more with the 
inhabitants of the world. 

12 £ Mine age is departed, and is removed 
from me as a shepherd’s tent: I have cut off 
like a weaver my life: he will cut me: off 
‘with pining sickness: from day even to night 
wilt thou make an end of me, 

13 I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, 
so will he break all my bones: from day even 
to night wilt thou make an end of me. 


f Psa. xxvii. 13; exvi. 9.——8 Job vii. 6. 4 Or, from the thrum. 


14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did A. M. 3292. 
I chatter: ®I did mourn as a dove: ~& 1 
mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lorn, 
I am oppressed: ° undertake forme. | — 

15 What shall I say? he hath both spoken 
unto me, and himself hath done i: I shall go 
sofily all my years ‘in the bitterness of my 
soul. ; 

16 O Lorp, by these things men liye, and in 
all these things is the life of my spirit : so wilt 
thou recover me, and make me to live. 


5 Or, ease me-——' Job vii. 11; x. 1. 


h Chap. lix. 11. 


temple, in his oracles and ordinances; I shall not 
enjoy him: for seeing is frequently put for enjoy- 
ing; even the Lord inthe land of the living—In this 
world, which is often so called; which limitation is 
prudently added, to intimate that he expected to see 
God in another place and manner, on the other side 
death; but he despairs of seeing him any more on 
this side death, as he had seen him i in the sanctuary, 
Psa, Ixiii. 2. I shall behold man no more, &e.—I 
shall have no more society with men upon earth. 
Many good men, under the law, had but imperfect 
notions of a future state, and thought it a great un- 
happiness to be deprived, by death, of the communion 
of saints here upon earth. 
Lord in the land of the living, Hezekiah might pro- 
bably mean that. he should not see the effects of 
God’s grace and goodness in the deliverance of: his 
people. . 

Verse 12. Mine age is departed—The time. of 
my life is expired; and is removed as a shep- 
herd’s tent—Which is easily and speedily removed: 
I have cut off—Namely, by my sins, provoking God 
to do it; or, I have concluded, and declare that my 
life is, or will be, soon cut off: for men are often 
said, in the Scriptures, to do those things that they 
only declare and pronounce to be done; like a 
weaver my life-—-Who cutteth off the web from the 
loom, either when it is finished, or before, according 
to his pleasure. . He—God; will cut me off with 
pining sickness—With a consuming disease, wast- 
ing my spirits and life; from day, even till night, 
wilt thou make an end of me—That is, either, Ist, 
This sickness will kill me in the space of one day; 
or, 2d, Thou dost pursue me night and day with con- 
tinual pains, and wilt not cease till thou hast made a 
full end of me; so that I expect every day will be 
my last day. Bishop Lowth translates. this verse: 
“My habitation is taken away, and is removed from 
me, like a shepherd’s tent: my life is cut off, as by 
the weaver; he will sever me from the loom; in the 
course of the day thou wilt finish my web.” Vitrin- 
ga and Dr. Waterland read the verse nearly in the 
same manner, considering the similitude of the 
weaver as being continued to the end of it. 

Verses 13, 14. Treckoned till morning, &e.—When 
night came I reckoned I should die before the next 
morning, my pains being as great as if my bones had 
been broken, and the whole frame of my body 

202 


pieces all my bones. 


But by not seeing the. 


crushed by alion. Bishop Lowth reads: I roared 
until the morning like the lion; so did he break to 
Like a crane or a swallow, 
&c.—“ My pains were sometimes so violent that they 
forced me to cry aloud; at other times my strength 
was so exhausted that I could only groan inwardly, 
and bemoan my unhappy condition in sighs.” J did 
mourn as adove--Whose mournful tone is observed 
Isa. lix. 11, and elsewhere; mine eyes fail with 
looking wpward—While I lift wp my eyes and heart 
to God for relief in vain; O Lord, I am oppressed 
—Namely, by my disease, which, like a sergeant, 
hath seized upon me, and is haling me to the prison 
of the grave; undertake for me—Stop the execution, 
and'rescue me out of his hands. 

Verse 15. What shall I say?—I want words suf- 
ficiently to express my deep sense of God’s dealings 
with me; he hath spoken, &c.—He foretold it by his 
word, and effected it by his hand. In this verse he 
seems to make a transition into the thanksgiving, 
which is undoubtedly contained in the following 
verses, and so the sense is, He hath sent a gracious 
message to me, by his prophet, concerning the pro- 
longation of my life, and himself hath made good his 
word. Thus the words are understood by the Chal- 
dee paraphrast, the LXX., and by the Syriac and Ara- 
bic interpreters. 'To this purpose also Bishop Lowth 
reads the clause. He hath given me a promise, and 
he hath performed it: Ishall go softly all my years 
—I will conduct myself with humble thankfulness to 
God for conferring so great a favour upon so un- 
worthy a person, as long as I live. I shall never 
forget my unworthiness and his loving kindness; 
in the bitterness of my soul—That is, or rather, up- 
on, or after it: or, as the Chaldee paraphrast reads 
it, because of my deliverance from bitterness of soul. 

Verse 16. By these things men live—By virtue of 
thy gracious word, or promise, and powerful work ; 
or, by thy promises, and thy performance of them: 
and therefore it is not strange that one word of God 
hath brought me back from the jaws of death. And 
in all these things is the life of my spirit—As all 
men’s lives are thy gift, so I shall always acknow- 


| ledge the preservation of mine to be owing to thy 


goodness in promising, and thy faithfulness in ful- 
filling thy promise. So wilt thow recover me, &c.— 
Or, for thou hast recovered me. Thou hast restored 
my health and prolonged my life.—Bishop oe 


Hezekiah’s thanksgiving 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


for his recovery. 


A. ae 17 Behold, *for peace I had great bit- 
terness : but * thou hast in love to my 

soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for 

thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back. 

18 For ‘the grave cannot praise thee, death 
cannot celebrate thee : they that go down into 
the pit cannot hope for thy truth. 

19 The living, the living, he shall praise 
thee, as I do this day: 1 the father to the chil- 
dren shall make known thy truth. 


6 Or, on my peace came ‘great bitterness ——' Heb. thou hast 
loved my soul from the pit-—— Psa. vi. 5; xxx. 9; Ixxxyiii. 11; 


Verse 17. Behold, for peace I had great bitter- 
ness—“ When I perceived and feared no evil, and 
seemed to enjoy my usual health, then this terrible 
evilcameuponme.” The Hebrew, however, Dow 
sm 15 9, may be properly’ rendered, Behold my 
grievous anguish 4 is turned into ease; or, My great 
bitterness was unto peace, that is, became the occa- 
sion of my safety and comfort, for it drove’me to 
prayer, and prayer prevailed with God fora gracious 
answer, and the prolonging of my life. Thou hast 
in love to my soul, &c.—-'That is, in kindness to me, 
(the soul being put for the man,) delivered it from 
the pit of corruption—This is an emphatical cireum- 
stance, for sometimes God prolongs men’s days in 
anger, foreknowing that they will only fill up still 
more the measure of their iniquities. For thou hast 
cast all my sins behind thy back—Thou hast for- 
given those sins that brought this affliction upon me, 
and, upon that account, hast removed the punish- 
ment of them. 

Verses 18-20. For the grave cannot praise thee 
—The dead cannot be instruments of promoting thy 
glory among men upon earth, or of making thy 
goodness known to others, which I desire and deter- 
mine todo. They cannot hope for thy truth—Can- 
not expect nor receive the accomplishment of thy 
promised goodness in this world. The living, ¢c., 
shall praise thee—They are especially obliged to 
do it, and they only have the privilege of doing it 
among men on earth. The father to the children, 
&c.—They shall not only praise thee while they 
live, but shall take care to propagate and perpetuate 
thy praise to all succeeding generations. Or, he 
means, “ Thy wonderful mercy toward me shall be 


20. The Lorp was ready to save rie 3292. 
me: therefore we will sing my songs oe 
to the’ stringed instruments all the days of our 
life in the house of the Lorp. 

21 For ™ Isaiah had said, Let them take a 
lump of figs, and lay i¢ for a plaster upon the 
bile, and he shall recover.. : 

22 ™ Hezekiah also had said, What is the 
sign that I shall go up to the none) of the 
Low 4 


exy. 17; Eccles. ix. 10——! Deut. iv. 9; vi. 7; Psa. Ixxviii. 3, 4. 
m2 Kings xx. 27. n 2 Kings xx. 8. 


recorded for the benefit of after ages; and fathers 
shall mention it to their children, as an instance of 
thy faithfulness.” The Lord was ready to save me 
—Was a present help to me, ready to hear and suc- 
cour me upon my praying to him in my great extre- 
mity. Therefore will we sing my songs—Both I 
and my people will sing those songs of praise which 
are due, especially from me, for God’s great mercy 
to me ; to the stringed instruments—Or, to the harp, 
(as Bishop Lowth renders it,) which was according 
to the custom of those times. Some infer from this 
verse that Hezekiah composed several other sacred 
songs, some of which may be still extant among the 
Psalms. All the days of our life in the house of the 
Lord—Here we are taught, that the proper fruit of 
deliverance from evil is thanksgiving, diffusing itself 
through all the actions of our life. This passage 
exhibits to us especially a picture of our duty and 
state-as Christians, who, redeemed as we are by the 
precious blood of the Son of God from everlasting 
destruction, ought, with all the powers of our souls 
and bodies, to celebrate his name and glory, so that 
our whole life ‘may appear one continued thanks- 
giving.—Vitringa. 

Verses 21, 22. For Isaiah had Said, Let them take 
a lump of. figs —See note on 2 Kings xx.'7. Heze- 
kiah also had said—Or, for Hezekiah had said ; 
What is the sign that I shall go up—Namely, within 
three days, as is more fully related 2 Kings xx. 5, 8; 
to the house of the Lord?—For thither he designed 
to go first, partly that he might pay his vows and 
thanksgivings to God, and partly that he might 
engage the people to praise God with him and for 


him. 
a 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


The king of Babylon sends ambassadors with letters and a present to Hezekiah, who shows them his treasures, 1, 2. _ Isaiah 
foretels the Babylonish captivity, 3-7. Hezekiah’s resignation, 8 


* * 


\ 


203 


Merodach-baladan’s 


ISAIAH. 


message to Hezekiah. 


os. zoe, AT * that time Merodach- -baladan, 
the son of Baladan, king of Baby- 
lon, sent letters and a: present to Hezekiah : 


for he had heard that he hac 
was recovered. 

2 >And Hezekiah was glad of them, and 
showed them the house of his ? precious things, 
the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and 
the precious ointment, and all the house of 
his ?armour,? and all that was found in his 
treasures: there was nothing in his house, 
nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah showed 
them not. : 

3 4 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto King 
Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these 
men? and from whence came they unto thee ? 
and Hezekiah said, They are come from a far 
country unto me, even from Babylon. 

_4 Then said he, What have they seen in thy 


een sick, and 


|that 7s in my house have they seen: 


house? And Hezekiah answered, All Ae apt. 
there is nothing among my treasures that [ 
have not showed them. 

5 Then said Isaiah to Hexalaal Hesr the 
word of the Lorn of hosts: 

6 Behold, the days come, ° that all that zs in 
thy house, and that which thy fathers have 
laid up in store until this day, shall be carried 
to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the 
Lorp. . 

7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, 
which thou shalt beget, shall they take away ; 
and ‘they shall be eunuchs in the palace of 
the king of Babylon. 

8 Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, 4 Good is 
the word of the Lorp which thou hast spoken. 
He said moreover, For there shall be peace 
and truth in my days. 


22 Kings xx. 12.——>2 Chronicles xxxii. 31.—-* Or, spicery. 
2 Or, jewels. 


¢ Jer. xx; 5.———* Fulfilled, 
41 ‘Sam. iii. 18. 


2 Heb.. vessels, or, instruments. 
Dan. i, 2, 3, 7. 


— 


-& NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIX, 

Verse 1. At that time Merodach-baladan—Mero- 
dach was the name of an idol worshipped by the 
Babylonians, and Bel, another; and these two idols, 
with the addition, Adan, or Adon, which signifies 
Jord, it appears, gave name to this king. In 2 Kings 
XxX. 12, where we have the same history, and where 
see the notes, he is called Berodach, by the change 
of one letter, not unusual in proper names in the 
Hebrew language. Whether he was an Assyrian, a 
_ Mede, or Babylonian, is ‘not easy to determine, nor is 
it worth while to inquire. Butthisis certain, that about 
this time there were wars between the Assyrians and 


Babylonians, the issue whereof was, that ‘the latter 
subdued the former. 

Verse 8. Hezekiah said, Good is the word of the 
Lord—Convinced of his error, and perceiving that he 
had justly provoked the divine indignation, he submits 
to, and acquiesces in, God’s decree, acknowledging 
the justice of it, and humbling himself for the pride of 
his heart, as is said 2 Chron. xxii. 26. Forthere shail 
be peace and truth in my days—He thought it a 
great favour, that God would delay that punishment, 
which he might justly have inflicted presently, and 
that he would prolong the tranquillity of his king- 
dom for some time. See note on 2 Kings xx. 19. 


$e CHAPTER XL. 


Here begins the latter section of Isaiah’s prophecies, continued from hence to the end of the book, without any apparent inter- 


ruption. 


Testument ; interspersed.also with many passages of the highest sublimity.” 


“ Taken together,” says Bishop Lowth, “they constitute the most elegant part of the sacred writings of the Old 


They were probably delivered in the latter 


part of Hezekiah’s reign, after the defeat of Sennacherib, and are divided from those of the former section, not only by the 
historical chapters which intervene, but are distinguished from them in the scope and manner of writing, which, in general, 
is more elevated and sublime than in those of the preceding part The subjects being chiefly more grand and magnificent, 
the prophet raises his style, and treats them with a loftiness of expression suitable to their dignity. Inthe former part the 
name of the prophet is frequently prefixed to the particular sermons, besides the general title at the beginning of the book, 
as chap. ii. 1; vii. 3; xiii. 1; but henceforward to the end the prophecy proceeds, as in one continued discourse, and the 
prophet is not so-much as once named. There the distress which the people of God were in by the Assyrian, and their 
deliverance from that calamity, were the principal subjects ; but here these things are spoken of as past, chap. lil. 4; and 
the captivity in Babylon,-and their deliverance out of it, which were much greater events, and of more extensive and abiding 
concern, are foretold and enlarged upon. For inthe midst of deserved wrath, God remembered mercy, and * before 
he sent his people into captivity, he furnished them with the means of support and comfort under their trouble : and we 
may well imagine of what great use to them the glorious and gracious light of these prophecies was in that cloudy and 
dark day, and how much it helped to dry up their tears by the rivers of Babylon. But they look further yet, and to greater 


204 3 


Promises of restoration CHAPTER XL. and comfort to Israel. 


things. Much of Christ and.of gospel grace we met with in the foregoing part of this book; but in this latter part we 
shall find much more: and, as if it were designed for a prophetical summary of the New Testament, it begins with the 
subject which begins the gospels, the voice of one crying in the wilderness, chap. xl. 3; and concludes with that which 
concludes the book of the Revelation, the new heavens and the new earth, chap. Ixvi. 22.” ; ' 

In this chapter we have, (1,) A command to comfort God's people with the glad tidings of redemption, 1,2. (2,) These 
‘tidings introduced by a voice in the wilderness, giving assurance that all obstruction shall be removed, and that’ though 
all creatures fail and fade, the word of God shall be confirmed and accomplished, 3-8. (3,) A joyful prospect given to the 
people of God of the happy consequences of this redemption, 9-11. (4,) The sovereignty and power of that God magnified, 
who effects this redemption, 12-17. (5,) Idols triumphed over, and idolaters upbraided with their folly, 18-26. (6,) The 
people of God reproved for their fears and despondences, and encouragement given them by gracious promises, 27-31. 


Bes oe COMFORT ye, comfort ye my 
EuisS people, saith your God. : 

2 Speak ye 'comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry 
unto her, that her ? warfare is accomplished, that 
her iniquity is pardoned : * for she hath received 
of the Lorn’s hand double for all her sins. 

3% >The voice of him that crieth in the 


A.M. 3294, 
B. C. 710. 


wilderness, ° Prepare ye the way of 
the Lorn, ‘make straight in the de- 
sert a highway for our God. 

4 Every valley shall be exalted, and every 
mountain and hill shall be made low: * and 
the crooked shall be made ° straight, and the 
rough places ¢ plain : 


1 Heb. to the heart.——? Or, a 


ointed time.——4 Job -xlii. 10; 
Chap. lxi. 7.——> Matt. iii. 3; 


ark i.3; Luke iii.4; John 


13.«22: ¢Mal. iii. 1. 4 Psalm lxviii. 4;:Chapter xlix. 11. 
| © Chap. xly, 2.-—— Or, a straight place. 4 Or, a plain place. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XL. 

Verses 1,2. Comfort ye, &e.—“ The prophet, in 
the foregoing chapter, had delivered a very explicit 
declaration of the impending dissolution of the king- 
dom of Judah, and of the captivity of the royal house 
of David, and of the people, under the king of Baby- 
lon. 
was to be chiefly of the consolatory kind, he opens 
them with giving a promise of the restoration of the 
kingdom, and the return of the people from, that 
captivity, by the merciful interposition of God in 
their favour. But the views of the prophet are not 
confined to this event ; as the restoration of the royal 
family, and of the tribe of Judah, was necessary, in 
the design and order of Providence, for the fulfilling 
of God’s promises of establishing a more glorious 
and everlasting kingdom, under the Messiah, to be 
born of the tribe of Judah, and of the family of Da- 
vid; the prophet connects these two events toge- 
ther, and hardly ever treats of the former without 
throwing in some intimation of the latter, and some- 
times is so fully possessed with the’ glories of the 
future more remote kingdom, that he seems to leave 
the more immediate subject of his commission al- 
most out of the question.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Comfort ye my people—Ye prophets and minis- 
ters of the Lord, which now are, or hereafter shall 
be; the LXX. say, ceperc, ye priests ; deliver the fol- 
lowing comfortable message from me to my people, 
that they may not sink under their burdens. Speak 
ye comfortably to Jerusalem—Hebrew, 35 y, to the 
heart of Jerusalem. So the LXX., Aaanaare ete ryv 
capdiav. And cry unto her, that her warfare is ac- 
complished—Proclaim in my name, that the time of 
her servitude, captivity, and misery, is finished. The 
LXX. render it, Comfort her, ort exAnodn n rar ewuorc 
avrnc, because her humiliation, that is, the time of 
her humiliation, is fulfilled. Her iniquity is par- 
doned—I am reconciled to her; I will not impute 
sin to her, so as to punish her any longer for it. She 


As the subject of his subsequent prophecies. 


z 


| Not twice as much as her sins deserved, for she her- 
self confesses the contrary, Lam. iii. 22; Ezra ix. 13; 
but abundantly enough to answer God’s design in 
this chastisement, which was to humble and reform 
them, and to warn others by their example ; double 
‘being often put for abundantly. Or, “ double in pro- 
portion to God’s usual severity in punishing men’s 
sins.” See Jer. xvi. 18, and xvii. 18; Rev. xviii. 6. 
God always punishes.men less than their iniguilies 
| deserve ; yet he showed greater severity against the 
sins of the Jews than toward those of other nations, 
Dan: ix. 12; Amos ili. 2. For as they had received 
more peculiar favours from God, and a clearer know- 
| ledge of his will, than the rest of mankind, their sins 
were the more aggravated, and required a severer 
chastisement. Vitringa, however, and Bishop Lowth, 
not to mention some other learned interpreters, un- 
derstand the clause in a different light. The mean- 
|ing, according to the former, is, “that though God 
| might, with great justice, punish the sins of his peo- 
ple more severely, yet, at this time of grace, he 
would cease from his severity, would forgive their 
sins, and crown them with a double portion of his 
blessings.” And the bishop, comparing the passage 
with ch. lxi. 7; Job xlii. 10; and Zech. ix. 12, (whieh 
see,) translates the verse, “Speak ye animating 
words to Jerusalem, and declare unto her that her 
warfare is fulfilled ; that the expiation of her iniquity 
is accepted ; that she shall receive, at the hands of 
Jchovah, blessings double. to the punishment of all 
her sins.” 

Verses 3, 4. The voice of him that crieth—Or, as 
|the Hebrew may be properly rendered, A voice 
crieth; an abrupt and imperfect speech, implying, 
|“ Methinks I hear a voice ;” or, “ A voice shall be 
heard ;” in the awilderness—Which word signifies 
| the place, either where the cry was made, or where 
_ the way was to be prepared, as it is expressed in the 
following clause, which seems to be added to ex- 
plain this. Bishop Lowth understands it in this. 


hath received at the Lord’s hand double, &c.— || latter sense, and translates the words, A voice crieth 


3 


205 


The frailty of 


ISAIAH. 


man described. 


A. M. 3294. 
B.C. 710. 


shall 


5 And the glory of the Lorp 
shall be revealed, and all flesh 
see @ together: for the mouth 


fJob xiv. 2; Psa. xe. 5; cii. 11; 
eee 


at, A.M. 3294. 


of the Lorp hath © spoken B. C. 710. 


6 The voice said, Cry...And he 
said, What shall I cry? {All flesh zs grass, 


ciii. 15; James i. 10; 1 Pet, i. 24. 


i ta Oo 
In the wilderness, prepare ye the way of Jehovah. 
Which he thus interprets, “ He hears a crier giving 
orders, by solemn proclamation, to preparé the way 
of the Lord in the wilderness; to remove all obstruc- 
tions before Jehovah marching through the desert ; 
through the wild, uninhabited, unpassable country. 
The idea is taken from the practice of the eastern 
monarchs, who, whenever they entered upon an ex- 
pedition, or took a journey, especially through desert 
and unpractised countries, sent harbingers before 
them to prepare all things for their passage, and 
pioneers to open the passes, to level the ways, and 
to remove all impediments. The officers appointed 
to superintend such preparations the Latins called 
stratores.” The bishop understands the prophet 
as referring to the return of the Jews from Babylon, 
which he has “no doubt was the first, though not the 
principal thing in his view.” This deliverance, he 
says, “is considered as parallel to the former deli- 
verance of them from the Egyptian bondage. God 
was then represented as their king, leading them in 
person, through the vast deserts which lay in their 
way t e promised land of Canaan. It was not 
merely for Jehovah himself that in both cases the 
way was to be prepared, and all obstructions to be 
removed ; but for Jehovah’ marching in person at 
the head of his people.” “ Babylon,” the bishop 
adds, “was separated from Judea by an immense 
tract of country, which-was one continued desert ; 
that large part of Arabia, called very properly De- 
serta. This was the nearest way homeward for the 

_ Jews; and whether they actually returned: by this 

way or not, the first thing that would occur, on the 
proposal or thought of their return, would be the 
difficulty of this almost impracticable passage. Ac- 
cordingly, the proclamation for the preparation of 
the way is the most natural idea, and most obvious 
circumstance, by which the prophet could have 
opened his subject.” 

But though Bishop Lowth considers the prophet 
as first intending to comfort the Jews in their cap- 
tivity, by predicting, in these words, that God would 
make the way plain for their return, yet he views 
him also as employing this deliverance out of Baby- 
lon, “as an image to shadow out a redemption of an 
infinitely higher and more important nature.” “ Ob- 
vious and plain,” says he, “as I think this literal sense 
is, we have nevertheless the irrefragable authority of 
John the Baptist, and of Christ himself, as recorded 
by all the evangelists, for explaining this exordium 
of the prophecy of the opening of the gospel by the 
preaching of Jolin, and of the introduction of the 
kingdom of Messiah, who was to effect a much 
greater deliverance of the people of God, Gentiles as 
well as Jews, from the captivity of sin, and the do- 
minion of death. And this we shall find to be the 
case in many subsequent parts also of this prophecy, 
where passages, manifestly relating to the deliver- 

206 


ance of the Jewish nation, effected by Cyrus, are, 
with good reason, and upon undoubted authority, to 
be understood of the redemption of mankind by 
Christ.” This interpretation supposes the wilder- 
ness to be the place where the way was prepared, 
rather than the place where the cry was made, and, 
in the spiritual or mystical application now mention- 
ed, that wilderness signifies “ the Jewish Church, to 
which John was sent to announce the coming of 
Messiah, and which was, at that time, in a barren 
and desert condition, unfit, without reformation, for 
the reception of her king. It was in this desert 
country, destitute at that time of all religious culti- 
vation, in true piety and good works unfruitful, that 
John was sent to prepare the way of the Lord, by 
preaching repentance.” It mustbe observed, however, 
that, according to the translation of this clause by the 
LXX., and the punctuation, as we have it in their 
copies, and as it is understood by all the evangelists, 
the voice cried in the desert. For they all read, 
Govn Bowvroc ev 7] EPNLO, Erowmacare, &e. The voice 
of one crying in the desert, Prepare ye, &e. 
But, omitting the consideration of the poimting, we 
may allow, with some interpreters of the.first au- 
thority, that “the words, in the desert, belong to 
both parts of the sentence. The voice of one crying 
in the desert, Prepare ye in the desert the way of the 
Lord. And the word desert may be understood 
both in a proper and mystical sense, for it is certain 
that John proclaimed this approach of the Messiah 
in a desert, in the wilderness of Judea; and thence 
took occasion to consider that people, in which the 
kingdom of God was to be manifested under the 
figure of a desert, to be levelled before the face of 
Jesus Christ; for the metaphorical expressions which 
follow refer to that great preparation of mind which 
is necessary for the reception of Christ > see Mala- 
chiiii. 1. That raising the low, that debasing the 
high, that refutation of all false and erroneous doc- 
trine, and introduction of truth and righteousness, 
which was the consequence of the revelation of 
Christ.” See Vitringa. . 

Verse 5. And the glory of the Lord shall be re- 
vealed—It was revealed in some sort when God 
brought his people out of Babylon: for that was a 
glorious work of God, in which he displayed his 
power, and love, and faithfulness in fulfilling his 
promises. But his glory was much more eminently 
revealed when Christ, the Lord of glory, was mani- 
fested in the flesh, and gave much clearer and fuller 
discoveries of God’s glorious wisdom, holiness, good- 
ness, and other divine perfections, than ever before 
had been imparted to mankind, or to his church. 
And all flesh shall see it together—All nations, 
Jews as well as Gentiles, For the mouth of the Lord 
hath spoken it—Though it may seem incredible, yet 
God is able to accomplish it. ey 

Verses 6-8. The voice said, Cry—Rather, A voice ; 

3 


The frailty of man, and 


CHAPTER XL. 


certainty of God's word. 


ae. and all the goodliness thereof is as 
-_——— the flower of the field : 

7 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: 
because * the Spirit of the Lorn bloweth upon 
it : surely the people is grass. 

8 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth : but 


*the word of our God shall stand for ever. A. M: 3294. 
9 4° O Zion, that bringest good tidings, Pan Ds 
get thee up into the high mountain: ® O Jerusa- 
lem, that bringest. good tidings, lift up thy voice 
wih str engih; lift 7¢ up, be not afraid; say 
unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! 


& Psalm ciii. 16. bh’ John xii. 34; 1 Peter i. 25. 
5 Or, O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion, Chapter 


fa 2s 


li. 7.——®* Or, oO thou that tellest good tidings to 
Jerusalem. 


for it isnot the voice last mentioned, which cried in the 
wilderness, that is intended, but the voice of God, 
who (verse 1) said, Comfort my people. Having, 
with a view to comfort them, commissioned his pro- 
phet to foretel glorious and wonderful things, which 
he was determined to do for them, he here com- 
mands him to assure them of the certainty of these 
things, by representing the vast difference between 
the nature, word, and work of men, and those of 
God. All that men are or have, yea, their highest 
accomplishments, are but like the grass, or flower of 
the field, weak and vanishing, soon nipped and brought 
to nothing : but God’s word is like himself, immuta- 
ble and irresistible: and, therefore, as the mouth of 
the Lord, and not of man, had spoken this, as was 
said verse 5, so they ought not to doubt but it would 
be fulfilled in due time. The passage first refers to 
the. deliverance from Babylon, and imports both that 
the power of man, if it should set itself to oppose 
that deliverance, was not to be feared, for it should 
be as grass before the word, that is, before the pur- 
pose and promise of the Lord; should soon wither 
and come to nothing; and if it should favour, and 
endeavour to promote the deliverance, it was not to 
be confided in, for it was still but as grass, compared 
with the Lord’s word, the only firm foundation for 
men to build their hopes upon. The words are still 
more applicable to the salvation of the gospel, the 
salvation from the power of Satan, sin, and death: 
with respect either to the preventing or effecting 
this, the wisdom, or power, or merit of man, is but 
as grass, or a flower of the grass; weak, and frail, 
and fading, and neither to be trusted in nor feared. 
When God is about to work deliverance for his peo- 
ple, he will have them to be taken off from depend- 
ing upon creatures, which would fail their expecta- 
tion ; for he will not allow any creature to be a rival 
with him for the confidence and hope of his people. 
As it is his word only that shall stand for ever, so on 
that word only must our faith stand. St. Peter ap- 
plies this passage to the salvation effected for God’s 
spiritual Israel, and by this word of our God which. 
shall stand for ever, he understands that word of 
the gospel which is preached to us, and by which 
we are regenerated and purified. See | Pet. i, 23-25. 
The grass withereth, §c., because the Spirit of the 
Lord bloweth upon it—-Rather, the wind of the Lord, 
as 717 MN is with equal propriety translated, and 
undoubtedly here signifies; which Bishop Lowth 
justly observes, “is a Hebraism, meaning no more 
than a strong wind ;” adding, “ It is well known, that 
a hot wind in the East at once destroys every green 
thing.” See note on Psa. ciii. 16. Surely, the peo- 


pleis grass—Or, this people, as TYN may be pro- 
perly rendered, namely, the Jews no less’ than the 
Gentiles. But the word of our God shall stand for 
ever—Whatsoever God hath said shall infallibly be 
verified, and come to pass. And particularly the 
glad tidings of salvation by Christ, published in the 
ministry of the gospel, and received by true faith, 
shall be confirmed and established, and be a solid 
foundation for the confidence and hope of the people 
of God to rest on in all ages. 

Verse 9. O Zion, thou bringest good tidings—Of 
deliverance from the Babylonish captivity, to other 
cities, and parts of the country; and of redemption 
by Christ to other nations. Lowth, and 1 many other 
interpreters, think the marginal reading i is to be pre- 
ferred, as giving a better sense, O thou that bringest 
good tidings to Zion, &c. According to which, Zion 
is not the deliverer, but the receiver of the tidings, as 
she is in the parallel place, chap. lii. 7. t the 
translation in our text agrees better with the Hebrew, 
in which the word for the bringer of the tidings, 
n wan, and the verb y, get thee up, are both in the 
feminine gender, and agree with Zion and Jerusalem, 
continually spoken of, as cities generally are, in that 
gender, but not with any prophet, apostle, or other 
messenger of God in the masculine gender. It is 
true, Bishop Lowth supplies a word to suit the text, 
as to this particular, and reads, O daughter, that 
bringest good tidings. But that seems to be taking 
a liberty with the text which necessity only could 
warrant, a necessity which certainly does not here 
exist. For the passage, as we have it rendered, 
makes good sense, representing Zion or Jerusalem, 
collectively considered, and including its inhabitants, 
as the publisher, and the cities of Judah as the hear- 
ers of the good tidings. The glad tidings of the 
coming of Christ into the world, and of the salvation 
of mankind through him, having been made known 
to Zion, or Jerusalem, were carried from thence, first 
to all the cities of Judah, and then to the most distant 
nations. For out of Zion went forth the gospel law, 
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and the 
rod of the Messiah’s strength, the gospel word, was 
sent forth out of Zion. See notes on chap. ii. 3; and~ 
Psa. cx. 2, Get thee up upon the high mountain— 
That thy voice may be better heard. Lift up thy 
voice; be not afraid—Lest thou shouldest be found 
a false witness, for the declaration shall certainly be 
verified; say to the cities of Judah—To all my peo- 
ple in the several places of their abode, whether 
cities or countries; behold your God—Take notice 
of God’s appearance for er comfort and deliver- 
ance; and also that the Messiah, so long expected, is 

207 


now at last exhibited, in and 


which is in his power. 
‘@ shepherd, &c.—He shall perform all the offices of 


God’s care of and 


ISAIAH. 


affection for ‘vis ai 


10 Behold the Lord Gop will come 
’ Twith strong hand, and ‘his arm 
shall rule for him: behold, * his reward is. with 
him, and ® his work before him. it 

‘11 He shall ' feed his flock like a shepherd: 
he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and 
carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead 
those ° that are with young. 


A. M. 3294. 
C. 710 


12 4 ™ Who hath measured thé waters in. 


the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven 
with the span, and comprenended the dust. of 


* Chap. lix. 16. &k Chap. lxil. 
11; Rev. xxii. 12. 5 Or, recompense for his work, Chap. xlix. 4, 
1 Chap. xlix. 10; Ezek. xxxiv..235; xxxvii. 24; John x. 11; Heb. 
xili. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 25; v. 45 Rev. vu. 17. 


7Or, against the strong. 


the earth in ?° a measure, and weighed A. M. 3294. 
. C. 710. 

the mountains in scales, and the hills 

in a balance ? 


13 » Who hae lirected. the Spirit ‘of. the 
Lorp, or, being © 1is counsellor, hath taught 
him ? 


14 With whom took he counsel, and who 
2 instructed him, and taught him in the path 
of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and 
showed to him the way of ' understanding ? 

15 Behold, the nations are as a drop of a 


/ “4 Or, that_ give suck.——™ Prov. xxx. 4. 10 Heb, a tierce. 
a Job xxi. 22; xxxvi. 22; Romans xi. 34; 1 Corin. i. 16. 
1 Heb, man of his counsel. 12 Heb. made him understand. 
13 Heb. understandings ? 


i through whom ‘God 
will be so present with you, that men may, point 
at him, and say, Behold, here he is! See Hag. ii. 7; 
Zech. ix. 9; Mal. iii. 1; “Acts xiii, 32, 33. 

Verses 10,11. Behold, the Lord God will come 
with a str hand—With invincible strength, to 
deliver his people from their most powerful enemies; 
and his arm shall rule for hin—His own power 
shall be sufficient, without any other help, to overcome 
all opposition. His reward is with him—He comes 
furnished with recompenses, as well of mercy and 
blessings for his friends and followers, as of justice 
and vengeance for his enemies: or, “ the reward and 
the recompense which he bestows, ‘and which he will 
pay to his faithful servants, he has ready at hand 
with him, and holds out before him to encourage 
those who trust in him, and wait for him; and his 
work before him—He is ready to execute what he 
hath undertaken; or, he carries on his work effectu- 
ally; for that is said in Scripture to be before a man 
He shall feed his flock like 


a tender. and faithful shepherd toward his people, 
conducting himself with great wisdom, condescen- 
sion, and compassion to every one of them, aecord- 
ing to their several capacities and infirmities. And 
shall gently lead those that are with young—Or, 
thosé that give suck, as the word n\>by, may be ren- 
dered. Bishop Lowth translates the clause, 7'he 
nurs ag ewes shall he gently lead ; observing, that 
‘itis a beautiful i image, expressing, with the utmost 
propriety, as well as elegance, the tender attention of 
he shepherd to his flock.” 
y es 12-14. Who hath measured the waters, &c. 
can do this but God? And this discourse on 
x0d’s infinite power and wisdom is added, to give 
them the greater assurance, that he was able, as he 
had declared himself willing, to do those great and 
wonderful things which he had promised ; and nei- 
ther men. nor false gods were able to hinder him. 
Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, &e.— 
Whom did God either need or take to advise him in 
any of his works, either ha ot a or the government 


of the world? Were they not all the effects of his 

own sole wisdom? Therefore, though all the nations 

of the world should conspire and contrive against 
208 


| 


him, and oppose this work of his, as indeed they will 
do, yet his own counsel shall confound all their de- 
vices, and he will carry on his work in spite of them. 
Who taught him in the path of judgment—How 
to conduct himself, 4nd managé his affairs with good 
judgment and discretion? Bishop Lowth translates 
the verse, “ Whom hath he consulted, that he should 
instruct him, and teach him the path of judgment; 


, that he should impart to him science, and inform him 


in the way of understanding?” Thus the prophet, 
“in the most sublime manner, celebrates the divine 
majesty and greatness, but particularly his wisdom. 
Rap into an ecstasy, etter he had described the be- 
gin ia and the nature of the new economy, he sees 
that there would be many men of worldly prudence, 


|who would hesitate at the methods of the divine 
counsel, and that the pious themselves, considering 
| the extent and firmness of the kingdom of Satan in 


the world, the obstinate prejudices of the Gentiles, 
and the power of idolatry, would have their fears 


and doubts of the effect and success of the kingdom 


of the Messiah; a spiritual kingdom, to be established 
without any external means, by the mere preaching 
of the. word, and to oppose itself to whatever was 
great or strong among men. The prophet, there- 
fore, recurs to these thoughts ; teaching, first, that the 
divine counsel, though it might seem strange to car- 
nal judgment, was yet founded i in the sovereign and 
most perfect wisdom and knowledge of God, where- 
of the clearest proofs were discernible in the structure 
of this world; that God was wiser than men; that 
his counsel was maturely weighed ; that it pertained 
to his wisdom and glory to establish and to promote 
his kingdom in the world, rather by this method than 
any other, that he might put te shame all carnal wis- 
dom, both of the Jews and Gentiles; for that the 
foolishness of God, as it seems to carnal men, is 
wiser than men, and the weakness of God stronger 
than men, (1 Cor. i. 22,) &c., therefore he knew that 
this method of establishing his kingdom would have 
its certain effect; that this word, this faith, would 
overcome the world, and subvert idolatry.” = See Vi- 
tringa and Dodd. 

Verses 15-17. Behold the nations, &e—As the 
drop of a bucket is as nothing when compared with 
the waters of the immense ocean, so-all the nations 

3 


The gross folly and 


CHAPTER XL. 


vanity of idolatry. 


- i = bucket, and are counted as the small 
BEY. dust of the balance : _behold, he taketh 
up the isles as a very little thing. 

16 And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor 
the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. 

17 All nations before him are as ° nothing ; 
and ? they are counted to him less than ie 
thing, and vanity. 

18 7 To whom then will ye *liken God? 
or what likeness will yé compare unto him ? 

19 * The workman melteth a graven image, 
and the goldsmith spreadeth-it over with gold, 
and casteth silver chains. | 

20 He that ™ 2s so empoverished that he hath 
no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; 
he seeketh unto him a cunning workman § to 
prepare a graven image ¢hat shall not be moved. 


21 t Have ye not known? have ye * - at 
not heard ? hath it not been told you 
from the beginning? have ye not understood 
from the foundations of the earth ? 

22 % It is he iH eiceth upon the circle of 
the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as 
geieckio née that "stretcheth out the hea- 
vens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as 
atent to dwell in: 

23 That bringeth the * princes to inothirig/; 
he maketh the judges of the earth as va- 
nity. 

24 Yea, they shall 
shall not be sown: } 
take root in the earth : 
upon them, and they shall wither, and the 
whirlwind shall ae them away as stubble. 


be aariteds yea, they 
, their stock shall not 


° Dan. iv. 34.——? Psa. ‘Ixii. 9.——4 Verse 25; Chap. xlvi. 5; 
Acts xvii. 29. "Chap. xli. 6; ‘xliv. 12, &c.; Jer..x. 3, &c. 
4 Heb. is poor of oblation. sChap.-xli. 7; Jer. x. 4.., 

—- 


tPsalm xix. 1; Anes xiv. 17; Romans i. 19-—15 Or, him 
that sttteth, &c: u Job ix. 8; Psa. civ. 25 ii. 5; xliv. 
24; li. 13;' Jer. x. 12——* Job xii. 21s Psa. evil. 40. 


of the world are as nothing when compared with 
God; and are counted by him, and in comparison 
of him, as the small dust which accidentally cleaves 
to the balance, but makes no alteration of the weight. 
Behold, he taketh up ‘the isles, &c.—Those nume- 
rous and vast countries, to which they went fr 
Judea by sea, which are commonly called 

in the Scriptures. And Lebanon is not sufficient to 
burn, &¢c.—Although he is pleased to accept poor and 
small sacrifices from his people, yet, if men were to 
offer a sacrifice suitable to his infinite excellency, the 
whole forest of Lebanon could not afford either a 
sufficient number of beasts to be sacrificed, or a 
sufficient quantity of wood to consume the sacrifice. 
All nations before him—In his eyes, or being set 
against him, as 171) properly and usually signifies ; 
are as nothing—In his judgment ; or in comparison 
of him; less than nothing—Less than a thing of 
naught, or of no account or worth. 

Verse 18. T'o whom then will ye liken God ?—This 
is a proper inference from the foregoing discourse of 
God’s infinite greatness; from whence he takes oc- 
casion to show both the folly of those that make 
mean and visible representations of God, and the 
utter inability of men or idols to give any opposition 
to God. And this discourse, concerning the madness 
of idolaters, prosecuted both here and in the follow- 
ing chapter, was designed by God as a necessary an- 
tidote, whereby the Jews might be preserved from 
the contagion of idolatry, to which God saw they 
now had strong inclinations, and would have many 
and great temptations while they were in captivity. 

Verses 19, 20. The workman melteth a graven 
image—He melteth some base metal into a mould 
which giveth it the form of an image, which after- 
ward is graven or carved to make it the more exact 
and pleasing likeness of some creature. Thus the 
image. owes all its excellence to the earth for the 
matter of it, and to the art of man for the fashion 

Vo. III. ( 14 ) 


of it. The goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold 
—Beaten out into leaves or plates; and casteth 
silver chains—For ornaments ; or rather, for use, to 
fasten it to a wall or pillar, lest it should down 
and be broken in pieces. Which is spoken by way 
of derision of such ridieulous deities as needed such 
supports. He thathath no oblation—That ean hard- 
ly procure money tc buy the meanest sacrifice ; 
chooseth a tree, &¢.—He is so mad upon his idols, 
that he will find money to procure the choicest mate- 
rials, and the best artist to make his idol; to prepare 
a graven image, &c.—Which, after all this cost, can- 
not stir one step out of its place to give him any help. 

Verses 21-24. Have ye not known-—-Jehovah to be 
the only true God, the Maker and Governor of the 
world, and all its inhabitants? How can ye be ig- 
norant so evident a truth? He addresses his 
speech to the idolatrous Gentiles ; from the begin~ 
ning—Namely, of the world, as the next clause 
explains it: were not thiese infinite perfecti 
of God manifestly discovered to all manki nd 


—Asa lige or governor upon his thine upon 
or rather, above, the circle of the earth—Far above 
this round earth, even in the highest heavens; 


where men appear to him like grasshoppers. , 


here we have the circle of the earth, so elsewh ore 


we read of the circle of heaven, Job xxii. 14, and of — 
the circle of the deep, or sea, Prov. Vili. 27, because 
the form of the heaven, and earth, and sea, is eircu- 
lar. Spreadeth them out as a tent-—For the benefit 
of the earth and of mankind, that all parts might 
partake of their comfortable influences. That bring- 
eth the princes to nothing—Who can, at his plea- 
sure, destroy all the great, potentates of the world. 
Yea, they—The princes and judges last mentioned ; 
shall not be planted, &c.—They shall take no root, 
for planting and sowing are in order to taking root, 


Sid the shall also blow 


- 


oe 
€ 


The infinite prffieiency. 
— 


iid 


of the Lord. 


A. M, 3204. 
B.C. 710. 
Holy One. 
26 4 Lift up your eyes 0 high, and behold 
who hath created these things, that bringeth 
out their host by number: 7 he calleth them 
all by names, by. the greatness | f his might, 
for that he is strong in power ; not one faileth. 
27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, 
O Israel, My way is hid from the Lorp, and 
my judgment is passed over from my God ? 

28 Hast thou not known? hast thou . not 


25 ¥'To hae then -will ye liken 
me; or. shall I be equal? saith the 


heard, that the everlasting God, the A. a. ae04 
Tosi) the Creator of the ends of the 


|learth, fainteth not, neither is weary? * there 


is no searching of his understanding. 

29 He giveth power to the faint: and to them 
that have no might he increaseth strength. 

30 Even the youths shall faint and be weary, 
and the young men shall utterly fall: 

31 But they that wait upon the Lorp ? shall 
16 renew their strength ; they shall mount up 
with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not 
be weary ; and they shall walk, and not faint: 


y Verse 18; Deut. iv. 15, &e. 2 Psa. exlvii. 4. 


a Psa. exlvii.5; Rom. xi. 33—— Psa. ciii. 5 ——*® Heb. change. 


fi hey shall not continue and. flourish, as they have 
ainly imagined, but shall be rooted up, and perish. 
~ Verses 25, 26. To whom, then will ye liken me— 
He repeats what he said verse 18, that he might 
oblige them to the more serious and frequent consi- 
deration of the absurdity of idolatry. Lift wp your 
eyes on high—To the high and starry heaven, as ap- 
pears from the following words. 
things--Which you see on high? The host of hea- 
ven, as it follows. That bringeth out their host— 
That at first brought them out of nothing, and from day 
to day brings them forth, making them to rise and set 
in their appointed times; by number—As a general 
brings forth his army into the field, and there mus- 
ters them. He calleth them all by names—-As a 
master calleth all the members of his family. For 
that he is strong—-Which work is a certain and evi- 
dent proof of God’s infinite power ; not one faileth 
—-Hither to appear when he calls them, or to do the 
work to which he sends them. 

Verses 27, 28. Why sayest thou, O Jacob—The 
consolatory part of the prophet’s discourse begins at 
this verse, wherein the foregoing doctrine and prophe- 


cy are applied to the comfort of the church, complain- | 


ing, amid her various afflictions, that she had been 
neglected of the Lord; which complaint makes the 
basis of the consolation contained in this period. 
Why dost thou give way to such jealousies con- 
cerning thy God, of whose infinite power, and wis- 
dom, and goodness, there are such evident demon- 
strations? My way is hid—He takes no notice of 
my prayers, and tears, and sufferings, but suffers 

_ mine enemies to abuse me at their pleasure. This 

~ complaint is uttered in the name of the people, be- 
_ ing prophetically supposed to be in captivity. My 
judgment is passed over from my God-—My cause. 
God has neglected to plead my cause, and to give 
judgment for me against mine enemies. Hast thou 
not known ?—Art thou ignorant, wilt thou not consi- 
der; that the everlasting God—Who had-no begin- 
ning of days, and will have no end of life; who was 
from eternity, and will be to eternity, and with whom 
therefore there, is no deficiency, no decay; the Lord 
—-Hebrew, Jenovan, i self-existent Being; the 
Creator of the ends of the earth—That’ is, of the 
whole earth, to its utmost bounds, and of all that is 

in it; fainteth not, neither is weary—With the care 

21 


Who created these | 


of his church, or of the world? He is not by age: 
or labour become weak and unable to help his peo- 
ple, as men are wont to be; nor is the care of them 
any burden to him. There is no searching of his 
understanding—-His providence comprehends all 
things, and nothing is exempted from it: and the 
counsels by which he governs all the world, and, in an 
especial manner, the affairs of his people, are far above 
the reach of any human understanding; and there- 
fore we act ignorantly and foolishly if we pass a rash 
judgment upon the ways of the infinitely wise God. 
Verses 29-31. He giveth power to the faint--He 
hath strength eno not only for himself, but for 
all, even the weakest of his creatures, whom he can 
easily strengthen to bear all their burdens, and to 
vanquish all’ their oppressors. ‘The prophet seems 
to speak with an especial reference to those among 
God’s people whose faith and hope were very low, 
which he would support, even until the time of their 
promised deliverance. Even the youths shall faint 
—Those that make the greatest boast of their 
strength, as young; men are apt to do, shall find it 
fail them whenever God withdraws his support. 
But they that wait upon the Lord—That rely on him 
for strength to bear their burdens, and for deliver- 
ance from them in due time; l.renew their 
strength—Shall grow stronger and stronger in faith, 
patience, and fortitude, whereby they shall be more 
than conquerors over all their enemies and adversi- 
ties. Z"hey shall mount up on wings as eagles— 
Which, of all fowls, fly most strongly and swiftly, 
and rise highest in their flight, and out of the reach 
of all danger. Instead of, They shall mount up, 
&c., Bishop Lowth reads, T'hey shall put forth fresh 
feathers, like the moulting eagle; observing, “It 
has been a common and popular opinion, that the 
eagle lives and retains his vigour to a great age; 
and that, beyond the common lot of other birds, he 
moults in his old age, and renews his feathers, and 
with them his youth. T'how shalt renew my youth 
like the eagle, says the psalmist, on which place St. 
‘Ambrose notes, ‘Aquila longam etatem ducit, dum, 
velustis plumis fatiscentibus, nova pennarum suc- 
cessione juvenescit. ” The eagle extends his age to 
a great length, while thé dld feathers failing, he grows 
young. by a new succession of feathers. See note 
on Psa. ciii. 5. 


3 


4 


( 14* ) 


2 
% 


Gracious purposes 


CHAPTER XLI. 


of redemption. 
me 


CHAPTER XLI. 


Tn this and the five following chapte 


and challenging the idols to show such instances of their power and goodness in 
alleged in his behalf, with respect to his care and providence over his people. 


d is introduced as pleading his own cause against the false gods of the heathen, 


otecling their votaries, as might be 
These instructions were- very” proper to 


confirm the Jews in their religion, and preserve them from being drawn aside to comply with the Babylonish idolatry. But 
they likewise contain plain predictions of the coming of the Messiah, and of the calling of the Gentiles and their turning from 


idols to serve the true and living God. Jn this chapter, God, by his prophe 
(2,) He encourages his faithful people to trust in him, with an assurance that he would take their part against 


idols, 1-9. 


1,) Shows the folly of those that worshipped 


their enemies, make them victorious over them, and bring about a happy change in their affairs, 10-20. (3,) He challenges 


the idols, that were rivals with him for men’s adoration, to vie with him, either for knowledge or power: either to show 


_ things to come, or to do good or evil, 21-29, 


(EEP * silence before me, O isl- 
pe reer ands; and let the people renew 
their strength: let them come near; then let them 
speak: let us come near together to judgment. 
2 Who raised up! the righteous man ” from 


—_—— 


A. xi 3294. » 
B. C. 710. 


a Zech. ii. 13. 1 Heb: righteousness —— Chap. xlvi. 11. 


the east, called him to his foot, A.M. 3294, 
° gave the nations before him, and eles 
made him rule over kings? he gave them as 
the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble t 
his bow. 


© Gen. xiv. 14; Verse 25; Chap. xlv. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLI. 

Verse 1. Keep, &c—“ The prophet, having in 
view the subversion of idolatry, had, in the former 
chapter, from verse 18, argued against it, from the 
essence and nature of God, the supreme Creator and 
Ruler of the world, being such as not to be repre- 
sented by any corporeal matter or figure. 'To this 
disputation he subjoined a consolation, directed to 
the people of God, from verse 27 to the end of the 
chapter.. Therefore, after this consolatory paren- 
thesis, he renews his disputation against idolaters, 
by an argument taken from God’s certain foreknow- 
ledge, and foretelling of future events, from which 
he selects that remarkable one respecting Cyrus, as 
the deliverer of the people of God, and the destroyer | 
of Babylon: an event utterly unknown to idols and 
idolaters, and therefore an astonishment to the na- 
tions; and yet an event which God so long time be- 
fore exactly foretold in every circumstance by our 
prophet. 
the prophet ur 
divinity. He. 
nour. 
argument, because paganism so much gloried in|, 
its false prophecies and oracles. Here then is God 
exhibited, as if appearing in public, opening 
himself to dispute with idolaters, for ruth and 
glory; and therefore the islands and people, all the 
nations of the world, are summoned to plead their 
cause; and an awful silence is enjoined, according to 


, must be allowed to possess true |, 
cannot, has no claim to that ho- | 


the forms observed in courts of justice, for both in | 


this and verse 21 the expressions and ideas are taken 
from those courts.” See Vitringa and Dodd. The 
phrase, Lét the people renew their strength, signifies, 
“Let them prepare themselves, and come forth to 


the cause, furnished with all the strength of argument |) 


and reason they can collect; let them unite all their 
powers, and set their cause in the best light possible.” 
Verses 2, 3. Who raised wp—Into. being and 
power? Was itnot my work alone? T'he righteous 
man—Many expositurs understand this of Abraham, 
who was a person eminently righteous, and was 


The prophet the rather makes use of this | 


He who can thus predict future events, | 


| of the east ; 


i, mentioned by the prophet are most, or all of 


called from the other side of the Euphrates, which 
lay eastward from Judea, and who performed -the 
things here mentioned, partly in his own person, 
conquering five kings and their_people with them, 
(Gen. xiv.,) and following God he knew not whither; 
and partly by his posterity, whose exploits may well 
_be ascribed to him, not only because they came out 
| of his loins, but also, and especially, because all their 
successes and victories were given to them for 
Abraham’s sake, and by the virtue of God’s covenant 
made with him. And this interpretation seems to 
‘receive some countenance from verses 5, 6, which 
agree well with the practice of the Canaanites and 
| neighbouring nations; who, upon Israel’s march 
toward them, were filled with great consternation, 
| anid used all possible diligence in seeking both to 
their idols and to men for help against them, To 
' which may be added, that Abraham was called out 
and his posterity were introduced into 
the land of Canaan, in order to destroy the idolaters 
of that country; and they were established there on 
purpose to stand as a barrier against idolatry, then 
prevailing, and threatening to overrun the whole 


face of the earth. But though the particulars oa 


2 


applicable to Abraham, yet Lowth, Vitringa, and 
j many other commentators of great authority, think 
that they more exactly belong to Cyrus, and that 


no doubt ‘that he is here meant. Cyrus might 

called a righteous man, or, amanof bibNtecousntoe 
as the Hebrew rather means, because he was raised 
up in righteousness, as is said of him chap. xlv. 13, 
and was God’s great instrument, to manifest his 
faithfulness in fulfilling his promise of delivering 
| his people out of Babylon, and his justice in punish- 
ing the enemies and oppressors of his people, the 
Babylonians ; upon which account the Medes, who 
served under Cyrus in his expedition, are called 


God’s sanctified ones, chap. xiii. 3,17. And all the 
other expressions here used are very applicable to 
211 


upon a comparison of them with what is asser » 
verse 25; chap. xlv. 1, 13; and xlvi. 1, there ca 


The gross folly of 


ISAIAH. 


worshipping idols. 


A. M. 3294. 


3 He pursued seats and oars 
B. C. 710. 


2 safely; even by the way that he 
had not gone with his feet. 

4 * Who hath wrought and done ié, calling 
the generations from the beginning ? I the 
Lorp, the ° first, and with the last ; I an 
he. , 

5 The isles saw i¢, and feared; the ends of 
the earth were afraid, drew near, and came. 

6 ‘They helped every one his neighbour ; 
and every one said to his brother, * Be of good 
courage. 


~ 


7 ®So the carpenter encouraged the * gold- 


smith, and he that smootheth with A, M. 3294. 
710. 

the iarakies Shim that smote the 

anvil, ° saying, It is ready for the soldering ; 

and he fastened it with nails, ® hat it should 

not be moved. 

8 But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob 
whom I have ‘ chosen, the seed of Abraham 
my * friend. 

9 Thou whom I have taken from the ends 
of the earth, and called thee from the chief 
men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my 
servant ; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee 
away. 


= 


Se Efobrow. @ in peace. a Yau 26; Chapter xliv. 7; xlvi. 10. 
¢ Chapter xliii. 10; xliv.6; xlviii. 12; Rev. 1.173; xxii. 13. 
f Chap. xl. 19; xliv. 12. 3 Heb. Be strong. 
- Or, Lbsvirsel 


5 Or, the smiting. 6 Or, saying of the solder, It is good. 
» Chapter xl. 20. i Deuteron. vii.6; x.15; xiv. 2; Psalm 
exxxv.4; Chapter xliil. 1; xliv. 1——*2 Chronicles xm 75 
James ii. 23, a 


him, and were verified in him. He came from the 
east, from Persia, which was directly eastward from 
Judea and from Babylon. He was raised up by 
God in an eminent and extraordinary manner, as is 
observed both by sacred and profane historians, To 
him also all the following particulars agree, as we 
shall see. And although these things were yet to 
come, yet the prophet speaks of them as if they 
were ‘already past, a practice not unusual with the 
prophets. And as in the former chapter, (verse 27,) 
he speaks of God’s people as if they were actually 
in captivity in Babylon, so here he speaks of themas 
if they wereactually brought out of itby Cyrus. And 
by this instance he pleads his cause against the Gen- 
tiles and their idols; because this was an evident proof 
of God’s almighty power, (as the-prediction of it was 
of his infinite wisdom, ) and of the vanity and weakness 
of idols, which eminently appeared in the destruction 
of the Babylonians, who were a people mad upon 
their idols, and yet were destroyed together with 
their idols, Jer. 1. 38, and li. 47. Called him to his 
foot—To march after him, and under his banner 
against Babylon. . Thus Barak’s army is said to be at 
his feet, Judg. iv. 10. Gave the nations before him, 
é&e.—Subdued nations and kingsbefore him. Gave 
them as the dust to his sword—To be put to flight 
as easily as the dust is scattered by the wind: He 
pursued them, and passed safely—Went on in the 
pursuit with great ease, safety, and success; even by 
_ the way that he had not gone—By unknown paths; 
_ which is added as a further evidence of God’s provi- 
dential care of him. This was verified both in 
Abraham and in Cyrus. 

Verses 4-6. Who hath done it?—Whose work 
was this but mine? Calling the generations—Calling 
them out of nothing ; giving them breath and being ; 
disposing and employing them asI see fit: from the 
beginning—All persons and generations of mankind 
from the beginning of the world. I the Lord, the 
first, &e.—Who was before all things, even from 
eternity, and shall be unto eternity: the isles saw it, 
and feared—Even remote countries discerned the 
mighty work of God in delivering his people, and 

212 


overthrowing their enemies in so wonderful a man- 
ner, and were afraid lest they should be involved in 
the same calamity. 'he ends of the earth drew 
near and came—They gathered themselves together 
to consult for their common safety, and to. maintain 
the cause of their idols, which, by this instance, they 
perceived to be in great jeopardy. They helped 
everyone his neighbour—They encouraged and as- 
sisted one another in their idolatrous practices. 
“Remote countries,” says Lowth, “ were astonished 
at the sudden rise of the conqueror Cyrus, and 
joined in an alliance to check his growing greatness, 
just as several artificers that are concerned in the 
trade of idol-making assist one another in carrying 
on their common interest, and stir up the. zeal of 
others in.defence of image-worship :” see Acts xix. 
25. Or, according to others, the. prophet describes 
in these verses the vain and fruitless attempt of 
idolaters to hinder the effect of Cyrus’s appearance, 
namely, the demolition of Babylon and its idols. 
“The passage may be also fitly applied to the heathen 
powers combining together to support idolatry, and 
suppress the Christian religion.” 

Verses 8-13. But thou, Israel, art my servant— 
Thus the Gentiles show themselves to be the servants 
of their idols, and own them for their gods: but thou 
art my people, and I am and will be thy God. Jacob, 
whom I have chosen—Out of the multitude of idola- 
trous nations, to be my peculiar people. The seed 
of Abraham my friend—With whom I made a 
strict league of perpetual friendship: see Gen. xii. 
2, 3, and xv, 1,8. “The expressions are very en- 
dearing: it is honourable to be God’s servant, still 
more so tobe his chosen servant, and to be descended 
from one to whom he-vouchsafed the title of friend, 
as God did to Abraham, (2 Chron. xx.7,) the greatest 
honour that any man is capable of: which glorious 
privilege Christ was pleased to communicate to his 
disciples, John xv. 13. Thou whom I have taken, 
&c.—Thou Israel, whom I took to myself, and 
brought hither in the loins of thy father Abraham, 
from a remote country, namely, from Chaldea; or, 
whom I brought out of Babylon into thine a 2 land: 


ta, 


God’s merciful purpose 


CHAPTER XLI. 


to defend his followers. 


A.M. 3204. 10 f 1 Fear thou not ; ™ for I am 
-——— with thee: be not dismayed; for. I 
am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I 
will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with 
the right hand of my righteousness. 

11 Behold, all they that were incensed 
against thee shall be ® ashamed and confound- 
ed: they shall be as nothing; and 7 they that 
strive with thee shall perish. 

12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find 
them, even ®them that contended with thee: 
® they that war against thee shall be as no- 
thing, and as a thing of naught. 

13 For I the Lorp thy God will hold thy 


right hand, saying unto thee, °Fear not; I 


will help thee. 

14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye !° men 
of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lorn, 
and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. 

15 Behold, ? I will make thee a newsharp thrash- 


1 Ver. 13, 14; Chap. xliii, 5——™ Deut. xxxi. 6, 8. o Ex. 
xxiii. 22; Chap. xlv. 24; lx. 12; Zech. xii. 3. 7 Heb. the men 
of thy strife. 5 Heb. the men of thy contention. ° Heb. the men 


which, though yet to come, he may speak of as of a 
thing past, according to the usual custom of the 
prophets when foretelling future events. But the 
former interpretation seems better to agree with the 
foregoing verse. And called thee from the chief 
men thereof—From the midst of many great and 
noble persons, among whom he lived in Chaldea. 
But the Hebrew, 7’xyNn, is rendered by Vitringa 
and Dr. Waterland, from the sides thereof, and by 
Bishop Lowth, from the extremities thereof, which 
is probably the prophet’s meaning. JF have chosen, 
and not cast thee away—Or, and will not reject thee: 
I have chosen thee and thy seed through all gene- 
rations. They that were incensed against thee 
shall be confounded—Both because their hopes and 
designs shall be utterly disappointed, and because the 
mischief which they contrived against thee shall 
fallonthemselves. They shall be as nothing—Shall 
come to nothing, or perish. T'how shalt not find 
them—They shall be so totally consumed, that 
although thou search for them, thou shalt not be able 
to find them anywhere in the world. “The power- 
ful monarchies that have been incensed against the 
church, and have contended with her, have been 
put to shame, and brought to nothing: and this pre- 
diction hath already been fulfilled in the ruin of the 
Egyptian, Assyrian, Chaldean, Macedonian, and 
Roman empires, which we now may seek for in 
vain; for no vestiges of the four former, and scarcely 
any of the last, can be found; while the church still 
subsists! In like manner all that now do, or hereafter 
shall contend with her, shall perish.”—Scott. J the 
Lord will hold thy hand—Or, will strengthen it, as 


"71> signifies: I will assist and enable thee to van. 


quish all thine enemies. 


ing instrument having !! teeth: thou A. M. 3294. 
shalt thrash the mountains, and beat ih ak 
them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff. 

16 Thou shalt 4 fan them, and the wind shall 
carry them away, and the whirlwind, shall 
scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the 
Lorp, and * shalt glory in the Holy One of 
Israel. 

17 When the poor and needy seek water, 
and there is none, and their tongue faileth for 
thirst, I the Lorn will hear them, J the God 
of Israel will not forsake them. | 

18 I will open ‘rivers in high places, and 
fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will 
make the * wilderness a pool of water, and the — 
dry land springs of water. 

19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, 
the shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and the oil- 
tree ; I will set in the desert the fir-tree, and 
the pine, and the box-tree together’: 


of thy war. © Verse 10, 10 Or, few men.—? Mic. iv. 13 ; 
2 Cor. x. 4, 5. 11 Heb. mouths. 4 Jer. li: 2——tChap, xlv. 
25.—+* Chap. xxxv. 6; xliii. 19 ; xliv. 3——* Psa. evii. 35. 


Verses 14-16. Fear not, thou worm Jacob—Who 
art weak in thyself, despised and trodden under foot 
by thy proud and potent enemies. J will make thee 
anew sharp thrashing instrument—Such as were 
usual in those times and places. Thou shalt thrash 
the mountains and jills—The great and lofty po- 
tentates of the world, which set themselves against 
thee: or, the greater or lesser kingdoms or countries 
which were enemies to God’s truth.and people; so 
the phrase signifies, chap. ii. 14, and Psa. Ixxii. 3. 
The expressions of this and the following verse 
allude to the custom of the eastern countries, of 
haying their thrashing-floors upon the tops of hills 
and mountains. T'how shalt fan them—When thou 
hast beaten them as smallas chaff; and the wind 
shall carry them away—They. shall no more molest 
thee; they shall be scattered and lost. And thou 
shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel—For to him, 
and not to thyself, thou shalt ascribe thy victory over 
thine enemies. 

Verses 17-20. When the poor and needy seek wa- 
ter, &c.—When my poor people are come to the 
greatest extremity of danger and misery, then will 
I appear for their relief. J will open rivers in high 
places—Upon the hills and mountains, where, by the 
course of nature, there are no rivers; and fountains 
in the midst of valleys—Or, in the valleys, namely, 
in such of them as are not well watered. J will 
make the wilderness a pool of water, &c.—Those 
people who are like a dry and barren wilderness, I 
will abundantly water with my blessings, and make 
them fruitful: which may be understood eitherof 
the Jews, who were in a wilderness condition, till 
God brought them out of it; or of the Gentiles con- 
verted to the true religion under the gospel. J will 

213 


ISAIAH. 


Vanity Gfidole, : 


Blessings of the godly. 


A. M. 3294. 


ime 20 “That they may see, and 


know, and consider, and , under- 
stand together, that the. hand of. the Lorp 
hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel 
hath created it. 

21 4}? Produce your cause, saith the Lorp; 
bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King 
of Jacob. 

22 * Let them bring them forth, and show us 
what shall happen : let them ee the former 
things, what they be, that we may 7° consider 
them, and know the latter end of them; or 
declare us _— for to come. 


23 ¥ Show the things that are to come A. M. 3294. 
.C. 710. 
hereafter, that we may know that ye 
are gods: yea, 7 do good, or do evil, that we 
may be dismayed, and behold 7¢ together. 

24 Behold, *ye are ‘of nothing, and your 
work * of naught: an abomination is he that 
chooseth you. 

25 Ihave raised up one from the opel and 
he shall come: from the rising of the sun 
» shall he call upon my name : ° and he shall 
come upon princes as wpon mortar, and as*the 
potter treadeth clay. 

26 * Who hath declared from the beginning, 


“a Job. xii. 9. 
13 Heb. set our-hearts upon them. 
xly, 3; John xiii. 19.—— Jer. x. 5. 


ne Heb. Cause to come near. x Chap, xlv. 21. 
y Chap. xhi. 9; xliv. 7; 


plant in the wilderness the cedar, the myrtle, &c.— 
Trees which are both useful and pleasant to the eye, 
and affording a good shadow to the traveller. 
But what particular trees the Hebrew words here 
used signify is not certainty known. 
may see—Or, that men may see: that all that see 
this wonderful change may consider it, and acknow- 
ledge that the hand of the Lord hath done this— 
That it is the work of God. ‘The many wonderful 
steps by which the restoration of the Jewish nation 
shall be brought about, will convince all considering 
persons that it is the work of God; and his power 
will still more undeniably discover itself in the propa- 
gation of the gospel, and the enlightening of those who 
sit in darkness with the saving truth of it.’--Lowth. 

Verses 21-24. Produce your cause--He renews 
his challenge to the idojaters to plead the cause of 
their idols, and give convincing proof of their divini- 
ty: see onversel. Bring forth your strong reasons 
—Hebrew, Ma ny¥y wan, which Bishop Lowth 
renders, “Produce these your mighty powers ;” and 
Jerome, “ Accedant idola vestra, que putatis esse for- 
tissima,” let those of your idols, whom you think 
most powerful, approach, “I prefer this,” says the 
bishop, “to all other interpretations of this place. 
The false gods are called upon to come forth and 
appear in person, and to give evident demonstration 
of their foreknowledge and power, by foretelling 
future events, and exerting their power in doing good 
or evil.” Let them--Hither the idols, or the idola- 
ters in the name and by the help of their idols; show 
us what shall happen—All future events, which he 
divides into two sorts in the following clause, the 
former andthe latter. Let them show the former 
things—Let the idols, or you their worshippers, 


prove that they ever uttered any true oracles or pro-| 


phecies relating to former times, and that the event 
hath exactly answered the pr ediction, and this will 
give credit to any predictions they shall deliver rela- 
ting to things yet future. Or, by the former things, 
may be meant such things as should shortly come to 
pass, which might be better discerned than those 
things which were Re at a greater distance. So un- 
derstood, he proposes the easiest part first. Let us 


That they 


| 


| 


“a Psa. cxv. 8; Chap. xliv. 9; 1 Cor. viii. 4-——'* Or, worse 
than nothing.—— Or,. worse than of a viper——> Ezra i. 2. 
¢ Verse 2,——4 Chap. ‘xiii. 9. 


try whether they'can foretel those things which are 
even at the door, and, if so, we will try them further. 
Let them tell us what things shall happen, and in 
what order; which first and which last. T'hat we 
may consider them—Hebrew, 1129 now, and we 
will set our heart to it. Wewill allow the argu- 
ment its due weight, and either fairly answer it, or 
give up our cause against idols; and know—That we 
may know; the latter. end.of them--The conse- 
quence of them, as JINN may be rendered, whether 
the events answer to their predictions. Or declare 
us things for to come—Namely, after along time. 
That.we may know that ye are gods—That we may 
have, if not'a certain proof, yet a probable argument 
of your deity. Yea, do good or do evil—Protect 
your worshippers, whom I intend to destroy, or de- 
stroy my people, whom I intend to save; that we 
maybe dismayed, &c.—That I and my people may 
be astonished, and forced to acknowledge your god- 
head. Behold, ye.are of nothing—You lately were 
nothing, without any being at all; and your work of 
naught—Y our operations are like your beings; there 
is no reality in your beings, nor efficacy In your ac- 
tions. An abomination is he that chooseth you—He 
that chooseth you for his gods is most abominable 
for his folly, as well as his wickedness. 

Verse 25. J have raised up, &c.—You neither 
foreknow, nor ean do any thing. But I do now fore- 
tel, and will certainly effect, a great revolution and 
change in the world, which you shall not be able to 
hinder; one from the xorth—Cyrus might be said to 
come from the north, because he was a Mede by his 
mother, as he was a Persian by his father; or because 
great. part of his army was gathered out of Media, 
which was northward in reference to Judea, and be- 
cause Darius the Mede was joined with him in this 
expedition. From the rising, §c., shall he call upon 
my name-—-Or proclaim my name, as the words may 
be rendered, which Cyrus did in express and em- 
phatical terms, Ezra i.1,2. He shall come upon 
princes as upon mortar—Treading them down as 
easily as a man treadeth down mortar. 

Verse 26. Who hath declared from the beginnings 
—Which of your idols could foretel such things as 

3 


The vanity of 


CHAPTER XLII. 


worshipping idols. 


A.M, 3294. that we may know? and beforetime, 
BsC.710. (1° Wives 
that we may say, He is righteous? 

yea, there is none that showeth, yea, there is 
none that declareth, yea, there is none that 
heareth your words. 

27 °' The first f shall say to Zion, Behold, be- 
hold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one 
that bringeth good tidings. 


28 & For I. beheld, and there AGM. ae 
was no man; even among them, ———— 
and there was no counsellor, that, when 
I asked of them, could 1% answer a 
word. 

29 ® Behold, they are all vanity, their works 
are nothing: their molten images are wind 
and confusion. 


) 


© Verse 4. —f Chap. xl. 9.—s Chap. lxiii. 5. 


these from the beginning of the world unto this day ? 
And beforetime—Before the things come to pass. 
That we may say, He is righteous—-His cause is 
good; he is a God indeed. Yea, there is none that 
showeth—Hebrew, surely, there is none of your 
gods that hath done or can do this, and therefore 
their claim to divinity is false and foolish. There 
is none that heareth your words—Because you are 
dumb and cannot speak. 

Verse 27. The first shall say, &c.—Hebrew, 
Psd pws, literally, first, or the first to Zion; 
which words some interpret thus: I, who am the 
first, (verse 4,) do and will-foretel to my people 
things to come. Behold, behold them--I represent 
things future (namely, the rise of Cyrus, and the 
deliverance of my people from Babylon by him) as 
if they were present, and to be beheld with men’s 
bodily eyes. Behold the wonderful works which 
God hath wrought for you: or, Behold my people 
returning to their ancient habitations. Bishop Lowth, 
who observes, “'The verse is somewhat obscure by 
the transposition of the parts of the sentence,” trans- 
lates it thus: I first to Zion, (gave the word,) Behold, 
they are here; And to Jerusalem I give the messen- 
ger of good tidings. The sense of which he says 


16 Heb. return. 


h Verse 24. 


is, “I first, by my prophets, give notice of these 
events, saying, Behold, they are at hand! I give to 
Jerusalem,” &c. ' 

Verses 28, 29. For I beheld—I looked to see if I 
could find any of them that could certainly foretel 
future events; and there was no man—Not any of 
the idols; for the word man is sometimes used by 
the Hebrews of brute creatures, and even.of lifeless 
things. There was no counsellor—Though these 
idols were often consulted, yet none of them were 


‘able to give any solid or certain advice concerning 


future things. Behold, they are all vanity—This is 
the conclusion of the whole dispute, and_the just 
sentence which God passes upon idols: they are 
vain things, and falsely called gods. Their molten 
images are wind—-Empty and unsatisfying things, 
and which, like the wind, do quickly pass away and 
come to nothing ; and confusion—Confused, useless 
things, like that rude heap in the beginning of God’s 
creation, of which this, word, wn, is used, Gen. i. 2. 
He mentions molten images particularly, because 
their materials were most precious, and more cost 
and art were commonly bestowed upon them than 
upon others: but under these he comprehends all 
images whatsoever. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


The prophet having in the former chapler manifested the vanity of idols, by their ignorance of future things; and having 
given one eminent instance of God’s certain foreknowledge of them, in the prediction of the destruction of Babylon, and the 
deliverance of the Jews out of it by Cyrus; now adds another more eminent and remote example of it, and foretels the 
coming of the Messiah, and several great effects or consequences thereof. This he the rather does because the Messiah 
was the person by whom the idols were to be utterly abolished, as was foretold Isa. ii. 18, and as it happened accordingly. 
We have here, (1,) The Messiah exhibited as Jehovah's chosen servant, endowed with his Spirit, and qualified thereby for 
his work with great meekness, power, and courage, 1-4. (2,) His divine commission to his work most solemnly opened, 5-9. 
(3,) The joy and gratitude wherewith the tidings of this should be received, 10-12. (4,) The wonderful success of the 
gospel for the overthrow of Satan's kingdom, 13-17. (5,) The rejection and ruin of the Jews for their unbelief, 18-25. 


. BEHOLD "my servant whom I 
itr bis uphold; mine elect, in whom my 


aChap. xliii. 10; xlix. 3,6; lii. 13; lili, 11; Matt. xii. 18, 
20s F pil a. 7, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLII. 
Verse 1. Behold my servant, &c.—“ The prophet, 
having opened his subject with the preparation for 
the return from the captivity at Babylon, and inti- 
3 


soul » delighteth ; ° I 
my Spirit upon him: 


have put A, M. 3294. 
B. C. 710. 
hes shall set 


bMatt. ili, 17; xvii. 5; Eph. i. 6. ¢ Chap. xi. 2; John 


in. 34, 


mated that a much greater deliverance was covered 

under the veil of that event, proceeded to vindicate 

the power of God, as Creal and Disposer of all 

things, and his infinite knowledge from his predic 
215 


The gracious conduct 


-ISATAH. 


of the Messiah. 


A. M. 3294. bring forth judgment. to the Gentiles. 
B. C. 710. a. 
"2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, hor 
cause his voice to be heard in the street. 

3 A bruised reed shall he not. break, and 


the ?smoking flax shall he not ? quench: he 


A. M, 3294. 


shall bring forth judgment unto 4. M, 3204 


truth. 
‘4 He shall not fail nor be ° discouraged, till 
he have set judgment in the earth: 4 and the, 
isles shall wait for his law. 


1Or, dimly burning. 


2 Heb. quench it. 


tion of future events, and in particular of that de- 
liverance ; he then went still further, and pointed 
out the instrument by which he should effect the 
redemption of his people from slavery, namely, a 
great conqueror, whom he would call forth from the 
‘north and the east, to execute his orders. 
proceeds to the great deliverance, and at.once brings 
forth into full view the Messiah, without throwing 
any veil of allegory over the subject.” For, though 
the person here spoken of has by some been suppos- 
ed to be Cyrus, and by others Isaiah himself, and by 
others again the people of the Jews; yet we are di- 
rected by an infallible interpreter to understand the 
prophet as speaking of Christ. For to him St. Mat- 
thew has directly applied his words; nor, as Bishop 
Lowth ‘has observed, can they, “with any justice or 
propriety, be applied to any other person or charac- 
ter whatever.” ‘This is so evident, that not only the 
generality of Christians, but the Chaldee paraphrast, 
and divers of the most learned Jews, understand the 
passage of the Messiah, and of him alone; and pass 
a very severe sentence upon their brethren that ex- 
pound it of any other person, and affirm that they 
are smitten with blindness in this matter. Indeed, 
to him, and to him only, all the particulars here fol- 
lowing do truly and evidently belong, as we shall 
see. My servant—Though he was the only Son of 
the Father, in a sense in which no creature, man or 
angel, was, is, or can be -his son; see Heb. i. 2-5; 
yet, as Mediator, and with respect to his human na- 
ture, he sustained the character, and appeared in the 
form of a servant, learned obedience to his Father’s 
will, practised it, and was continually employed in 
advancing the interests of his kingdom. Whom I 
uphold—Whom I assist, and enable to do and suffer 
all those things which belong to his office; mine 
elect—Chosen by me to this great work of media- 
tion and redemption ; in whom my soul delighteth— 
Or, as 7N¥> is often rendered; is well pleased, both 
for himself and for all his people, being fully satisfied 
with that sacrifice which he shall offer up to me: 
see Matt. iii. 17, and xvii. 5; 2 Pet: i. 17; John iii. 
35. I have put my Spirit upon him—Not by, but 
without, measure, John iii. 34; by which he is fur- 
nished with that abundance and eminence of graces 
and gifts which are necessary for the discharge of his 
high and mighty undertaking. He shall bring forth 
judgment to the Gentiles—He shall publish or show 
(as the word sx. often signifies, and is translated 
Matt. xii. 18) the law, counsel, or will of God con- 
cerning man’s salvation; and that not only to the 
Jews, towhom the knowledge of God’s law had been 
hitherto in a great measure confined, but to the hea- 
then nations also. 

Verses 2, 3. He-shall not cry-—In a way of con- 

» 216 


He now |’ 


3 Heb. broken.——4 Gen, xlix. 10. 


tention or ostentation. He shall neither erect nor 
govern his kingdom with violence or outward pomp 
and state, like worldly princes, but with meekness 
and humility. He shall not lift up—Namely, his 
voice; nor cause it to be heard. in the street—As 
contentious and vain-glorious persons frequently do. 
“He shall instruct those that oppose themselves, 
with all meekness and gentleness; he shall patiently 
endure the contradictions of sinners against him- 
self, and not vindicate himself against their calum- 
nies in an angry or clamorous manner.”—Lowth. 
A bruised reed shall he not break—He will not deal 
roughly or rigorously with those that come to him, 
but he will use all gentleness and kindness to them, 
bearing with their infirmities, cherishing and encou- 
raging the smallest beginnings of grace, supporting 
and comforting such as are bowed down under the 
burden of their sins, and healing wounded con- 
sciences. And the smoking flax shall he not quench 
—-That wick of a candle, which is almost extinct, he 
will not quench, but revive and kindle it again. He 
shall bring forth judgment, &c.—The law of God, 
or the doctrine of the gospel, which he will bring 
forth unto, with, or according to truth-—That is, 
truly and faithfully. St. Matthew reads the clause, 
Till he send forth judgment unto victory, expressing 
not so much the words, as the sense, of the original, 
which seems to be, “till he make the cause of right- 
eousness and truth completely victorious, and glori- 
ously triumphant over all opposition.” 

Verse 4. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged— 
Though he be thus meek and gentle, yet he is also 
courageous and resolute, notwithstanding all the 
many and great difficulties and conflicts to which he 
will be exposed, and he will persevere till he have 
finished his work. Tvll he have set judgment in the 
earth—Till, by his holy life, his extreme sufferings, 
his many miracles, his resurrection from the dead, 
his visible ascension into heaven, and the wonderful 
effusion of his Holy Spirit, in extraordinary gifts and 
graces on his apostles and other servants, he shall - 
fully evince the certain truth and infinite importance 
of his doctrine, and the divine original and authority 
of that holy religion which he came to establish: or, 
till he shall erect his kingdom in the world, or a 
church for himself among men, and, by the power 
of his gospel and grace, shall reform mankind, and 
fix such principles in their minds as will make them 
wise and holy, just and good. Lowth thinks this 
prophecy relates chiefly to the propagation of the 
gospel in the world by his apostles and other mes- - 
sengers; observing that Christ himself was not sent 
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and con- 
sequently could be a light to the Gentiles only as 
he commissioned others to preach the gospel to_ 

3 


Blessings of the * 


CHAPTER XLII. 


Messiah’s kingdom. 


5 “ Thus saith God the Lorp, 
* he that created the heavens, and 
stretched them out; £ he that spread forth the 
earth, and that which cometh out of it; * he 
that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and 
spirit to them that walk therein : 

6 > the Lorp have called thee in right- 
eousness, and will hold thy hand, and will 
keep thee, ‘ and give thee for a covenant of 
the people, for * a light of the Gentiles ; 

7 !'To open the blind eyes, to ™ bring out the 
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in 
» darkness out of the prison-house. 

8 Lam the Lorp: that is my name: and my 


A. M. 3294. 
B. C. 710. 


e Chap. xliv. 24; Zech. xii. 1— Psa. exxxvi. 6.——8 Acts 
xvii. 25.—» Chap. xliii. 1.——i Chap. xlix. 8. k Chap. xlix. 
6; Luke ii.32; Acts’ xiii. 47-——! Chap. xxxv. 5. 


° glory will I not give to another, nei- 
ther my praise to graven images. 

9 Behold, the former things are come te 
pass, and new things do I declare: before 
they spring forth I tell you of them. 

10 “|? Sing unto the Lorp a new song, and 
his praise from the end of the earth, 4 ye that 
go down to the sea, and ‘all that is therein; 
the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. 

11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof 
lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth 
inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, 
let them shout from the top of the moun- 
tains. 


A. M. 3294, 
B, C; 710. 


~ 
m Chap. Ixi,1; Luke iv. 18; 2 Tim. ii. 26; Heb. ii. 14, 15. 
1 Chap. ix. 2. © Chap. xlviii. 11.—P Psa. xxxiii. 3; xl. 3; 
xevili. 1. ——4 Psa, evii. 23, “ Heb. the fulness thereof. 


them: see Eph. ii. 17. And, taking the words in 
this comprehensive sense, they import, that our Sa- 
viour and his apostles would not be discouraged at 
the difficulties they were to meet with in the dis- 
charge of their office, but would still continue un- 
wearied in their work, till, at last, they should sur- 
mount all opposition, plant judgment and truth in 
the earth, and make the remotest parts of the world 
own their dependance upon him as their Lord, and 
submit to his government. And the isles—Of the 
Gentiles, the countries remote from Judea, as the 
word often signifies ; shall wait for his law—Shall 
gladly receive his doctrine and commands from time 
to time. 

Verses 5-7. Thus saith God the Lord, &c.—This 
large description of God’s infinite power is here 
seasonably added, to give assurance of the certain 
accomplishment of these great and wonderful pro- 
mises, which otherwise would seem incredible. J 
the Lord have called thee in righteousness—To 
declare my righteousness, as is said Rom. iii. 26: or, 
my faithfulness, manifested in fulfilling my pro- 
mises, long since made, and often renewed ; and 
will hold thy hand—Will give thee counsel and 
strength for thy great and mighty work. And will 
keep thee—That thou shalt not fail in, nor, by thine 
enemies, be hindered from, the accomplishment of 
thy work; and give thee for a covenant of the peo- 
ple—To be the Angel of the covenant, Mal. iii. 1; 
or, the Mediator, in and by whom my covenant of 
grace is made and confirmed with mankind, even 
with all people who will accept of it. For a light 
of the Gentiles—To enlighten them with true and 
saving knowledge, and to direct them in the right 
way to true happiness, out of which they had mis- 
erably wandered. 7'o open the blind eyes—The 
eyes of men’s minds, blinded with long ignorance, 
deep prejudice, and inveterate error, and by the god 
of this world, 2 Cor. iv. 4. And to bring out the 
prisoners, &c.—Namely, sinners who are taken cap- 
tive by the devil at his will, (2 Tim. ii. 26,) and en- 
slaved by their own lusts, and who can only be made 


free by Christ, John viii. 32, 36: compare Isa. lxi. 1, 
and Luke iv. 17-21. 

Verses 8,9. I am the Lord--Hebrew, Jehovah ; 
who have all being in and of myself, and give being 
to all my creatures. The everlasting, and unchange- 
able, and omnipotent God, who therefore both can 
and will fulfil all my promises. That is my name 
—Which I must own and justify to the world. He 
seems to allude to Exod. ili. 14, and vi. 3. My glo- 
ry will I not give to another—I will not any longer 
suffer that honour and worship which are peculiar 
to me to be given to idols, as it hath been, but I will, 
by the Messiah and his gospel, abolish idolatry out 
of the world. . Behold, the former things are come 
to pass—As all things which I have formerly pro- 
mised or foretold, have exactly come to pass in their 
proper seasons, and not one of them has failed; so 
you have great reason to believe that what I now 
promise, though it be new and strange to you, shall 
infallibly be accomplished. Before they spring forth 
I tell you of them—That when they come to pass 
you may know that Iam God, and that this is my 
work. 

Verses 10, 12. Sing unto the Lord a new song— 
Upon this new and great. occasion, the salvation of 
the world by Christ. It is with peculiar propriety 
and elegance that the nations are here called upon 
and exhorted to praise and extol Jehovah, for the 
singular blessing conferred upon them by the gospel. 
And his praise from the end of the earth—All na- 
tions, from one end of the earth to another. Ye 
that go down to the sea—You that go by sea, carry 
these glad tidings from Judea, where Christ was 
born, and lived, and died, and published the gospel, 
unto the remotest parts of the earth. Let the wil- 
derness, &c.—Those parts of the world which are 
now desolate and forsaken of God, and barren of all 
good fruits. The villages that Kedar doth inhabit 
—The Arabians, who were a heathen and barbarous 
people, and are put for all nations. Let them shout 
from the top of the mountains—Whose inhabitants 
are commonly more savage WAroorent than others, 

217 ~ 


Gracious promises 


- ISATAH. 


of deliverance. 


12 Let them give glory unto the 


A. M. 3294, 
B. C. 71 a 
Lorp, and declare his praise in the 


C. 710. 
islands. 
13 & The Lorp shall go forth as a mighty 
man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of 
war: he shall cry, * yea, roar; be shall ° pre- 
vail against his enemies. 


14 I have long time holden my peace; I 


have been still, and refrained myself: now 
will I cry like a travailing woman; I will de- 
stroy and ° devour at once. 

15 I will make waste mountains and hills, 
and dry up all their herbs; and I will make 
the rivers islands, and I will dry up the 
pools. 


16 And I will bring the blind by a A. M, 3294, 
way that they knew not; I will lead fe aad 
them in paths zhat they have not known; I 
will make darkness light before them, and 
crooked things “straight. These things will I 
do unto them, and not forsake them. — 

17 They shall be * turned back, they shall be 
greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, 
that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods. 

18 4 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that 
ye may see. 

19 t Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, 
as my messenger ¢hat'I sent ? who és blind 
as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lorp’s 
servant ? 


® Chap. xxxi. 4 Or, behave himself mightily. § Heb. swal- 
low, or, sup up. 7 Heb. into straightness. 


s Psa. xevii. 7; Chap. i. 29; xliv. 11; xlv. 16.——t Chap. xliii. 
8; Ezek. xii. 2; John ix. 39, 41. 


Let them declare his praise in the islands—In the 
remotest parts of the world, as well as in Arabia, 
which was near to them. 


Verses 13-15. The Lord shall go forth—Namely, | 


to battle against his enemies. He shall stir wp jea- 
lousy—His fierce indignation against the obstinate 
enemies of his Son and gospel. He shall cry, yea, 
roar—As a lion, doth upon his prey, and as soldiers 
do when they begin the battle. J have long time 
held my peace—I have been long silent, and not in- 
terposed in behalf of my cause, but have suffered 
Satan and his servants to prevail in the world, to af- 
flict my people, and hinder the entertainment of 
my doctrine and worship among mankind; and this 
my forbearance has increased the presumption of 
myenemies. Now will Icry like a travailing wo- 
man—Now I will no more contain myself than a 
woman in the pangs of travail can forbear crying 
out: but I will give vent to my just resentments for 
the injuries offered to myself and my oppressed peo- 
ple, by bringing some exemplary punishment upon 
their oppressors. J will destroy and devour at once 
—TI will suddenly and utterly destroy the incorrigi- 
ble enemies of my truth. When men’s provoca- 
tions come toa great height, God is represented in 
Scripture as if his patience were quite tired out, and 
he could no longer forbear punishing them: see Jer. 
xv. 6, and xliv. 22. J will make waste mountains 
and hills—He does not mean dry and barren ones, 
for these were waste already, but such as were 
clothed with grass and herbs. Which clause is tobe 
understood metaphorically of God’s destroying his 
most lofty and flourishing enemies, often compared 
in Scripture to mountains and hills. J will dry up 
the pools—Remove all the sources of their prosperity 
and comfort. “As God’s mercy is represented by 
pouring water wpon the dry ground, chap. xxxv. 6, 
and xliv. 3, so his wrath is described as if it were a 
consuming fire, parching up every thing, and redu- 
cing it to barrenness. 

Verses 16,17. And I will bring the blind—The 
ignorant Gentiles, represented as blind, verse 7, and 

218 


=e 


in many other parts of Scripture, and accounted 
blind by the Jews; by a way that they knew not— 
By the way of truth, which hitherto hath been hid- 
den from them. J will make darkness light before 
them, &c.—I will enlighten their dark minds, rectify 
their perverse wills and affections, and direct them in 
the right way, until I have brought them, with safety 
and comfort, to the end of their journey. They 
shall be turned back, &c.—This may be understood, 
either, Ist, Of the converted Gentiles, turned back 
from their former sinful courses, and sincerely griev- 
ing, and being ashamed, that they should ever have 
been guilty of such folly and wickedness as to wor- 
ship and trust in idols; or, 2d, Of those Gentiles 
who, when their brethren embraced the true reli- 
gion, persisted obstinately in their idolatrous prac- 
tices. 

Verses 18-20. Hear, ye deaf, &c.—O you, who- 
soever you are, whether Jews or Gentiles, who shall 
resist this clear light, and obstinately continue in 
your former errors, attend diligently to my words, 
and consider these mighty works of God. Who is 
blind but my servant?—But no people under hea- 
ven are so blind as the Jews, who call themselves my 
servants and people, who will not receive their Mes- 
siah, though he be recommended to them with such 
evident and illustrious signs and miraculous works 
as force belief from the formerly unbelieving and 
idolatrous Gentiles. Or deaf as my messenger that. 
I sent—Or rather, as Bishop Lowth renders it, as he 
to whom I have sent my messengers. Thus the 
Vulgate and Chaldee, “ut ad quem nuncios meos 
misi.” Who is blind as he that is perfect—Or, per- 
fectly instructed, as Iw may be rendered, who 
has all the means of knowledge and. spiritual im- 
provement. Perhaps the prophet may chiefly in- 
tend the priests and other teachers of the Jews, who, 
as they were appointed to instruct the people in the 
right way of worshipping and serving God, so they 
had peculiar advantages for knowing that way them- 
selves, having the oracles of God in their hands, and 
much leisure for reading and considering them. Or — 

i 


Transgression the cause 


CHAPTER XLII. 


of Israel’s misery. 


A. M. 3294, 


: Acal, 
A M. 3204. 20 Seeing many things, “ but thou 


observest not; opening the ears, but 
he heareth not. 

21 The Lorp is well pleased for his sian! 
eousness’ sake ; he will magnify the law, and 
make °7¢ honourable. 

22 But this is a people robbed and spoiled ; 
®* they are all of them snared in holes, and.they 
are hid in prison-houses ; they are for a prey, 
and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none 
saith, Restore. 

23 Who among you will give ear to this? 


who will hearken, and hear ! for the A. M. 3294 
time to come ? page a 
24 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel 
to the robbers ? did-not the Lory, he against 
whom we have sinned? for they would not 
walk in his ways, neither were they obedient 
unto his law. 

25 Therefore he hath poured upon him the 
fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: 
* and it hath set him on fire round about, ¥ yet 
he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid 
at not to heart. 


Rom. ii. 21.—® Or, him.——® Or, in snaring all the young 
men of them. 


he may be understood as speaking sarcastically, and 
terming them per fect,or, perfectly instructed, because 
they pretended to greater knowledge and piety than 
others, to a more perfect acquaintance with, and 
conformity to, the divine will, proudly calling them- 
selves rabbis and masters, and despising the peo- 
ple as cursed and not knowing the law, John vii. 49; 
and deriding Christ for calling them blind, John ix. 
40. And blind as the Lord’s servant 2—Which 
title, as it was given to the Jewish people in the first 
clause of the verse, may be here given to the priests, 
because they were called and obliged to be the Lord’s 
servants, ina special manner. Seeing many things, 
but thow observest not—Thou dost not seriously con- 
sider the plain word and wonderful works of God. 

Verse 21. The Lord is well pleased, &c.—Al- 
though thou art a wicked people, that rebellest 
against the clearest light, and therefore God might 
justly destroy thee suddenly, yet he will patiently 
wait for thy repentance, that he may be gracious; 
and that not for thy sake, but for the glory of his 
own faithfulness, in fulfilling that covenant which 
he made with thy pious progenitors. 
nify the law—He will maintain the honour of his 
law, and therefore is not forward to destroy you, 
who profess the true religion, lest his law should, 
upon that occasion, be exposed to contempt. Thus 
the verse may be interpreted according to the 
present translation. But it may be rendered dif- 
ferently, as it is by Vitringa and Dr. Waterland, 
thus: “The Lord took delight in him for his right- 
eousness’ sake; he hath magnified him by his 
law, and made him honourable.” God liberally 
provided for his people whatever was needful or 
useful, in order to their salvation and the stability 
of their state. “He had given them excellent 
laws; he had increased and honoured them; had 
made, and was willing to make them glorious 
among their neighbours. But they had been want- 
ing to peer had despised his laws, and incur- 
red his just vengeance.”—Dodd. 

Verses 22-24. But this is a people robbed and 
spoiled—Notwithstanding the great respect which 
God hath had, and still hath, for his people, it is evi- 
dent he hath severely scourged them for their sins. 


% 


He will mag- | 


10 Heb. @ treading. 11 Heb. for the after time ? 


*2 Kings 
xxv. 9. ¥ Hos. vii. 9, 


They areall of them snared in holes, &e.—They 
have been taken in snares made by their own hands, 
and, by God’s just judgment, delivered into the 
hands of their enemies, and by them cast into pits, 
or dungeons, and prisons. And none saith, Restore 
—None afforded them either pity or help in their 
extremities. Who will give ear to this—O that 
you would learn from your former and dear-bought 
experience to be wiser for the future, and not to 
provoke God to your own total and final ruin. Who 
gave Jacob for a spoil? Did not the Lord ?2—Do 
not flatter yourselves with a conceit of impunity, 
because you are a people whom God hath favoured 
with many and great privileges; for as God hath 
punished you formerly, be assured, if you continue 
to sin, he will punish you more and more. “It was 
reasonably to be expected that the Jews, blessed 
with such great privileges, would-have been greatly 
honoured and respected ; but, abusing those privi- 
leges, their case and situation have been, in various 
periods, what the prophet describes in these verses ; 
broken, plundered, spoiled, despised by other na- 
tions, subject to the insolence of conquerors, shut up 
in prison, trod upon, abused and punished in such a 
manner as may justly raise the greatest commisera- 
tion. Their history, since the crucifixion of the Re- 
deemer, supplies us with one continued detail of their 
miseries and afflictions; yet, which is most astonish- 
ing, who among them giveth ear? who heareth 
for the time to come?—Who among them consi- 
dereth the cause of their sufferings, and becometh 
obedient to the law.of Christ ?”—Dodd. 

Verse 25. Therefore he hath poured upon him 
the fury, &c.—Most grievous judgments. Jt hath 
set him on fire round about—This was literally ful- 
filled when the Chaldean army took their city, and 
burned both it and their temple. Yet he knew it 
not—Considered it not: they were secure and stu- 
pid under God’s judgments; neither fearing them 
when threatened, nor truly sensible of God’s hand in 
them, of the causes of God’s displeasure, or of the 
means of cure. The reader will easily observe, 
that “the force and elegance of the metaphor in this 
verse are very great. Of all natural evils which af- 
fect the human mind, which arouse and awaken it, 

219 


eo , and ever since have treated thee with uncom- 


straits and difficulties. 
ater is a proverbial expression, to signify being 


God will preserve 


ISAIAH. 


Israel in tribulation. 


a 


none do so with greater quickness than fire, than a 
mighty flame encompassing a man on every side. 
No sleep, no lethargy is so great, which this will not 
shake off; and yet the stupor and insensibility of 
the Jews are here represented to be so great, that in 
the midst of the fire and flame, which they might 


and ought to think kindled by God, they inquired 
not into the causes of this judgment. They knew 
them not, nor considered them; but, persisting in 
their impenitence and stupidity, applied not to God 
in faith and repentance, nor humbled themselves 
before him.” See Vitringa. 


CHAPTER XLIIL 


After the threatenings recorded at the close of the foregoing chapter, God here revives his people with encouraging declara- 


tions and promises. 


(1,) As the Creator, Redeemer, and Lord of Israel, he engages to be present with them in their 


. manifold afflictions, to support them under and deliver them out of them, and to protect and enlarge his church, 1-7. 
(2,) He challenges idolaters to produce among their_gods any that could vie with him in knowledge and power, and appeals 


to his people as witnesses, 8-13. 


from the consideration of what he did for their fathers when he brought them out of Egypt, 14-21. 


(3,) He encourages them to expect deliverance from Babylon, and a new state of things, 


(4,) To humble 


and bring them to repentance, and thereby prepare them for the reception of such great mercies, they are reminded of, and 
reproved for, the sins whereby they had srnouken God to send them into captivity, and to continue them so long therein, 


22-28. 


A. M. 3294. 


BUT now thus saith the Lorp. 
BG. 710. C. 710. 


* that created thee, O Jacob,” and 
he that f that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: ° for [| 
have redeemed thee, “I have called thee by thy 
name; thou aré mine. _ 

2 ° When thou passest through the waters, 
‘TI will be with thee; and through the rivers, 
they shall not overflow thee: when thou 
®walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be 


burned ; neither shall the flame kin- ne Rg 
: C. 710. 
dle upon thee. Verret ie) 

3 For I am the Lorp thy God, the Holy One 
of Israel, thy Saviour: "I gave Egypt for thy 
ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. 

4 Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou 
hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: 
therefore will I give men for thee, and people 
for. thy * life. 


¢ Chap. xliv. 6. 
e Psa. Ixvi. 12; xci. 3, &c. 


2 Ver. 7.——» Ver. 21 ; Chap. xliv. 2, 2], 24. 
4 Chap. xlii. 6; xlv. 4. 


f Deut. xxxi. 6, 8——8 Dan. iii. 25, 27-—— Prov. xi. 8; xxi. 
18,— Or, person. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIII. 

Verses 1, 2. But now, thus saith the Lord—But, 
notwithstanding thy gross insensibility under for-_ 
mer judgments, for which I might justly send far 
heavier calamities upon thee, yet I will deal merci- 
fully with thee. That created thee, O Jacob, &c. 
—Who made thee his people, and that in a manner | 
as miraculous as if he had created thee a second | 
time out of nothing; and therefore he will be gra- 
cious to his own workmanship. Fear not; for I | 
have redeemed thee—From the Egyptians and divers | 
other enemies; and therefore I will redeem thee 
again. J have called thee by thy name, &c. —The | 
name of God’s people, which was as proper and pe-| 
culiar to them as the name of Israel. Or, “I have 
made a particular choice of thee for my peculiar 
people, and singled. thee out from the rest of the 


on instances of kindness and familiarity.” When | 
thou passest through the waters, &c,—* I will sup- 
port and deliver thee when thou art in the greatest 
To pass through fire and 


| 


exposed to all kinds of dangers.” how shalt not 


be burned, &¢c,—Though I will chastise thee for thy || 
220 


% ; 


sins, yet I will not suffer thine enemies utterly to 
destroy thee. 

Verses 3,4. I gave Hgypt Sor thy ransom—Some 
think this was fulfilled when God smote the firstborn 
and others in Egypt, and afterward drowned Pha- 
raoh and his host in the Red sea, for the safety and 
benefit of his people. But it is more “ commonly 
referred to the time of Sennacherib’s invasion ; who, 
when he was just ready to fall upon Jerusalem, soon, 
after his entering Judea, was providentially diverted 
from that design, and turned his arms against the 
Egyptians; and their allies the Cushean Arabians, 
with their neighbours the Sabeans, probably joined 
with them, under Tirhakah: see chap. xx., and 
xxxvii. 9. Or, as there are some reasonable objec- 
tions to this opinion, perhaps it may mean, more 
generally, that God had often saved his people at the 
expense of other nations, whom he had, as it were, 
in their stead, given up to destruction.” —Bishop 
Lowth. Since thou wast precious, §c., thou hast 
been honowrable—That is, from the time that I chose 
thee for my precious and pectiliar treasure and peo- 
ple, I have had a great esteem and affection for thee. - 
Bishop Lowth translates the clause, Because thou 
hast been precious in my sight, thou hast been 


ane , 


é 


x 


The great power and 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


goodness of God. 


A. M. 3294. 


5 iFea ¢ i : 
Lae Fear not: for I am with thee: I 


will bring thy seed from the east, and 
gather thee from the west ; 

6 I will say to the north, Give up; and to the 
south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, 
and my daughters from the ends of the earth; 

7 Even every one that is ‘called by myname : 
for 'I have created him for my glory, ™ I have 
formed him ; yea, I have made him. 

8 "Bring forth the blind people that have 
eyes, and the deaf that have ears. 


iChapter xli. 10, 14; xliv. 2; Jeremiah xxx. 10; xlvi. 27. 
k Chap. Ixiii. 19; James ii. 7——! Psa. c.3; Chap. xxix. 23; 
John iii. 3, 5; 2 Cor. v.17; Eph. ii. 10.——™ Verse 1. 


9 Let all the nations be gathered to- A. M. 3294. 

B. C. 710. 

gether, and let the people be assembled: ——— 

° who among them can declare this, and show 

us former things? let them bring forth their 

witnesses, that they may be justified: or let 
them hear, and say, J/¢ is truth. 

10 P Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lorn, 
tand my servant whom I have chosen: that 
ye may know and believe me, and understand 
that I am he: * before me there was ? no God 


® Chap. xliv. 8. 4 Chap. xlii. 1; lv. 4 
xliv. 6. 2 Or, nothing formed of God. 


‘Chap. xh. 4; 


honoured, &c. Vitringa thinks the prophet refers to 
the deliverance from Sennacherib, whereby God 
abundantly showed that the Jewish nation was p7e- 
cious and honourable in his sight; and the men, in 
the last clause, refers to the Assyrians, and the peo- 
ple to the Chaldeans. The Assyrians suffered a 
fearful slaughter (chap. xxxvii. 36) for the sake of 
the Jews, and the empire of the Chaldees was to be 
overturned by the Medes and Persians to procure 
their deliverance. In both which instances God 
abundantly testified that his church was precious, 
and honourable in his sight, and much beloved by 
him. 


Verses 5-7. I will bring thy seed from the east, | 


&c.—Although the Jews, for their sins, shall be car- 
ried captives out of their own land northward and 
eastward into Babylon, and the adjacent countries ; 
and others of them ‘shall flee southward and west- 
ward, and shall there pine away in their iniquities, 
as I have threatened; yet I will bring back their 
posterity into Canaan, from all the places where 
they are dispersed. J will say to the north, Give 
up—Thou, who hast so long held my people in bond- 
age, resign them to me, and permit them to return 
to their own land. He speaks to the countries by a 
prosopopeia. Bring my sons from far—Not only 
permit, but assist and further their return. Every 
one that is called—Rather, every one is called, or, 
they are all called, by my name—I own them for 
my people and children; and, therefore, what kind- 
ness or cruelty you exercise toward them, I take it 
as done to myself. Ihave created him for my glory 
—And therefore I will glorify my power, and good- 
ness, and faithfulness in delivering them. J have 
formed him—I have not only created them out of 
nothing, but I have also formed and made them my 
peculiar people. We must observe, however, that 
while Isaiah “ appears to speak of one thing only, 
two are understood: the less includes the greater. 
Speaking ogy and properly of the collection of 
the dispersed church from Babylon,—a more noble 
collection, the spiritual one, of the converted Jews 
and Gentiles to the church of Christ, was in his 
view; and this is described in expressions taken 
from the external collection of the church from 
Babylon, and the restoraili of the republic under 
3 


® 


the Maccabees; exactly in the same manner as in 
chap. xi. 12, which should be compared with this 
place. The 7th verse plainly shows that the spirit- 
ual seed of Israel is spoken of. Every one that is 
called by my nae, means, every one who is truly my 
son; for to be called by the name of any one is to be 
his son.” See chap. xlv. 5, and Vitringa. 

Verses 8-10. Bring forth the blind people, &¢.— 
O ye idolatrous Gentiles, bring forth your false gods, 
which have eyes but see not, and ears but hear not. 
Let the people be assembled—To plead the cause of 
their idols with me. Who among them can declare 
this—This wonderful work of mine in bringing my 
people out of captivity. And show us former things 
—Such things as shall happen long before the return 
from the captivity, which yet your blind idols cannot 
foresee. See on chap. xli. 22. Let them bring forth 
their witnesses—Who can testify the’ truth of any 
such predictions of theirs, that they may be owned 
for true gods; or if they can produce no evidence 
of any such thing, let them confess that what I say 
ic truth, that Lam the only trueGod. Ye are my 
witnesses—They can produce no witnesses for them- 
selves; but you, my people, are able to witness for 
me, that Ihave given you many plain demonstra- 
tions of my certain foreknowledge of future events. 
And my servant whom Ihave chosen—Kither Isaiah 
and other prophets, the singular word beimg put col- 
lectively, or, the Messiah, as not only Christians, but 
the Chaldee paraphrast understands it; who was 
thus described, (chap. xlii. 1,) and who is the most 
eminent witness in this cause ; and that on two ac- 
counts; Ist, As he was the chief subject of prophecy, 
and the various particulars foretold concerning him 
came exactly to pass; and, 2d, As many future things 
were predicted by him, of which we have many ex- 
amples in the New Testament. That I am he— 
He whom I have affirmed myself to be, namely, the 
true God. Before me there was no God formed— 
The gods of the heathen neither had a being before 
me, nor shall continue after me. Wherein more is_ 
understood than is expressed; that whereas Jehovah — 
is God from everlasting to everlasting, these false 
pretenders to deity were but of yesterday, and should 
shortly be abolished. And withal he calls them 
formed gods, by way of contempt, and to show the 


4 


n 


7 es 


»* 


The people encouraged to expect 


ISAIAH. 


deliverance from Babylon. 


“A.M. 3204. 11 I, even I, Sam the Lorn; and 
ey nas . , 
besides me the7e 1s no saviour. 

12 I have declared, and have saved, and I 
have showed, when there was no ‘strange god 
among you: “therefore ye are my witnesses, 
saith the Lorn, that I am God. 

13 * Yea, before the day was, I am he; and 
there is none that can deliver out of my hand: 
I will work, and who shall *let ¥ it ? 

14 4 Thus saith the Lorn, your Redeemer, 
the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have 
sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their 


4 nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry A. M, 3294. 
. :; B. ©. 710. 

is in the ships. 

15 I am the Lorn, your Holy One, the Cre- 
ator of Israel, your King. 

16 Thus saith the Lorp,which * maketh a way 
in the sea, and a *path in the mighty waters ; 

17 Which *bringeth forth the chariot and 
horse, the army and the power; they shall lie 
down together, they shall not rise: they are 
extinct, they are quenched as tow- 

18 4 ° Remember ye not the former things, 
neither consider the things of old. 


8 Chap. xlv. 21; Hos. xiii. 4—t Deut. xxxii, 16; Psa. lxxxi. 
9. « Chap, xliv. 8; Verse 10. x Psa. xc. 2; John vii. 58. 
3 Heb. turn it back ? 


y Job ix. 12; Chap. xiv. 27——* Heb. bars.——2 Exod. xiv. 
16, 22; Psa. lxxvii. 19; Chap. li. 10.—* Josh. ili. 13, 16 
b Exod. xiv. 4-9, 25. ¢ Jer. xvi. 14; xxiii. 7. 


ridiculousness of their pretensions to divinity, who 
are formed by the hands of men. 

Verses 11-13. Besides me there is no saviour— 
None that can and does save his worshippers: 
wherein is implied, that the false gods were not only 
weak and unable to save those that trusted in them, 
but also were their destroyers, as being the great 
cause oftheir ruin. Ihave declared, and have saved 
—I first foretold your deliverance, and then effected 
it. And Ihave showed, when there was no strange 
god, &c.—Rather, I made it known; nor was it 
any strange god. So Bishop Lowth. This divine 
prescience and predicting of future events is thus 
repeatedly insisted upon, because it is the principal 
argument used here, and in chap. xli., to determine 
this controversy between Jehovah and idols. Yea, 
before the day was—Before all time: or, which is 
the same, from all eternity. I am he—I am God, 
and have proved myself tobe so. None can deliver 

~out of my hands—None of those that are called gods 

can save them whom I will destroy. Therefore 
they are impotent, and consequently no gods. J will 
work, and who shall let it?2—Nor can they hinder 
me in any other work which I resolve to do. 

Verse 14. For your sake I have sent to Babylon— 
Ihave sent Cyrus, and the Medes and Persians with 
him, to war against Babylon, to this very end, that 
he might deliver. you out of captivity, and restore 
you to your land, according to my promise. I have 
brought down—From that height of power and 
glory to which they were advanced; all their nobles 
—Their princes and great commanders. Bishop 
Lowth prefers the reading of the margin, (the word 
t’n13 properly signifying bars,) and renders the 
next clauses, J wild bring down all her strong bars, 
and the Chaldeans exulting in their ships. On 

“which he observes, “ Babylon was very advantage- 
ou situated, both in respect to commerce, and as 
a naval power. It was open to the Persian gulf by 

e Euphrates, which was navigable by large vessels; 

d, being joined to the Tigris above Babylon, by 
‘the canal called Naharmalca, or the royal river, 
supplied the city with the produce of the whole 
country to the north of it, as far as the Euxine and 
Caspian seas.—Herod. i., 194. Weare not to wonder 


222 * . 
e - 


that in later times we hear little of the commerce and 
naval power of Babylon: for, after the taking of the 
city by Cyrus, the Euphrates was not only rendered 
less fit for navigation by being, on that occasion, di- 
verted from its course, and left to spread over the 
country ; but the Persian monarchs, residing in their 
own country, to prevent any invasion by sea on that 
part of their empire, purposely obstructed the navi- 
gation of both rivers, by. making cataracts in them, 
that is, by raising dams across the channel, and 
making artificial falls in them ; that no vessel, of any 
size or force, could possibly come up.—Strabo, lib. 
xvi. Alexander began to restore the navigation of 
the river by demolishing the cataracts upon the Ti- 
gris,as far up as Seleucia; but he did not live to 
finish his great designs: those upon the Euphrates 
still continued.” 

Verses 16,17. Which maketh’a way in the sea, 
&c.—Who, as he formerly made a way for Israel 
through the Red sea, will, in a no less wonderful 
manner, remove all impediments out of the way of 
his people when they return from Babylon. Which 
bringeth forth—Or, rather, who brought forth, the 
chariots, &c.—That is, Pharaoh and his chariots, 
horses, and army. They shall lie down, &c. 
They lay down together—In the bottom of the sea, 
whence they never rose again to molest the Is- 
raelites. They are quenched as tow—As the wick 
of a candle is extinguished when it is put into water. 

Verses 18, 19. Remember ye not the former things 
—But although your former deliverance out of Egypt 
was in itself a most glorious work, which you ought 
always to remember and consider; yet this other 
work, of your deliverance out of Babylon, and those 
blessings w shall follow upon it, and particularly 
that of sending the Messiah, shall be so transcendent 
a favour, that, in comparison thereof, all your former 
deliverances are scarcely worthy of your remem- 
brance and consideration. See two, parallel texts, 
Jer, xvi. 14, 15, and xxiii. 5-8. From which pas- 
sages laid together it appears that this latter deliver- 
ance, compared with that out of Egypt, is not to be 
confined to their restoration from captivity, but to be © 
extended to the consequences thereof, and especially 
to the redemption of t essiah. Indeed, other 

3 


" 


The abundant 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


mercy of God. 


A. M, 3294. 19 Behold, I will do a 4 new thing ; 
B. C. 710. : : ah 

now it shall spring forth; shall ye 
not know it? °I will even make a way in 
the wilderness, and rivers in the desert. 

20 The beast of the field shall honour me, 
the dragons and the *owls:® because ‘I give 
waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the 
desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen. 

21 & This people have I formed for myself; 
they shall show forth my praise. ; 

22 4 But thou hast not called upon me, O 
Jacob; but thou "hast been weary of me, O 


fsrael. @ 


23 ''Thou hast not brought me the A. M. 3204 
7 on MCITID, 

small cattle of thy burnt-offerings ; 
neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacri- 
fices. I have not caused thee to serve with an 
offering, nor wearied thee with incense. 

24 Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with 
money, neither hast thou § filled me with the fat 
of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to 
serve with thy sins, thou hast * wearied me with 
thine iniquities. 

25 I, even I, am he that !blotteth out thy 
transgressions ™ for mine own sake, ® and will 
not remember thy sins. 


42 Cor. v. 17; Rev. xxi. 5——e Exod. xvii. 6; Num. xx. 11; 
Deut. viii. 15; Psa. Ixxviii. 16; Chap. xxxv. 6; xli. 18. 5 Or, 
striches ——® Heb. daughters of the owl. £ Chapter xlviii. 21, 
Psa. cii. 18; Verses 1,7; Luke i. 74, 75; Eph. i. 5, 6. 


| Mal. ii. 17. 


h Malachi i. 13.——i Amos vy. 25. 7Heb. lambs, or, kids. 
® Heb. made me drunk, or, abundantly moistened. k Chap. i. 143 
1 Chap. xliv. 22; xlviii.9; Jer.1.20; Acts iii. 
a Chap. i. 18; Jer. xxxi. 34. 


19. m Ezek, xxxvi. 22. 


aaa, ° 
wise the deliverance from Egypt was more glorious 
and wonderful, in many respects, than that out of 
sabylon. Behold, I will do a new thing—Such a 
work as was never yet done in the world. Now it 
shall spring forth—The Scripture often speaks of 
things at a great distance of time, as if they were 
now at hand, to make us sensible of the inconside- 
rableness of time and all temporal things, in com- 
parison of God and eternal things; upon which 
account it is said, that a thousand years are in God’s 
sight but as one day. Shall ye not know it ?——Cer- 
tainly, you Jews shall know it by experience, and 
shall find I do not deceive you with vainhopes. J will 
make a way in the wilderness, &c.—I will give you 
direction and provision in the wilderness, where 
there is commonly no path, and where all necessaries 
are wanting ; which, as it literally speaks of God’s 
conducting them through the great desert which lay 
between Babylon and Judea, so it is mystically meant 
of those spiritual blessings which God, in and through 
Christ, would confer upon all his people, not the 
Jews only, but also the Gentiles, who, in prophetical 
language, are often compared to a wilderness. 

Verse 20. The beast of the field shall honour me 
—Shall have cause, if they had abilities, to honour 
and praise me for their share in this mercy; the 
dragons, &c.—Which live in dry and barren deserts. 
“The image,” says Bishop Lowth, “is elegant and 
highly poetical. God will give such an abundant, 
miraculous supply of water to his people traversing 
the dry desert, in their return to their country, that 
even the wild beasts, the serpents, the ostriches, and 
other animals that haunt those adust regions, shall 
he sensible of the blessing, and shall break forth into 
thanksgiving and praises to him for the unusual re- 
freshment which they receive from his so plentifully 
watering the sandy wastes of Arabia Deserta, for the 
benefit is people passing through them.” 

Verses 22-24, But thou hast not called upon me 
--Thou hast grossly neglected, or very negligently 
and hypocritically performed the duties of my wor- 
ship. T'how hast been —” of me--Thou hast not 

3 


ad 


esteemed my service to be a privilege, as in truth it 
is, but asa burden anda bondage. “The connection 
is: But thou, Israel, whom I have chosen, whom I 
have formed for myself, to be my witness against 
the false gods of the nations; even ¢thow hast revolted 
from me, hast neglected my worship, and hast been 
perpetually running after strange gods. The Jews 
were diligent in performing the external services of 
religion; in offering prayers, incense, sacrifices, ob- 
lations ; but their prayers were not offered with faith, 
and their oblations were made more frequently to 
their idols than to the God of their fathers.” Nez- 
ther hast thou honoured me—If thou didst not neg- 
lect sacrificing to me, thou didst perform that duty 
merely out of custom; or didst dishonour me, and 
pollute thy sacrifices by thy wicked life Ihave not 
wearted thee—Or, Although Ihave not wearied thee, 
&e. Although God had not laid such heavy burdens 
upon them, nor required such costly offerings, as 
might give them cause to be tai nor such as 
idolaters did freely perform in the service of their 
idols. Thou hast brought me no sweet cane--This 
was used in the making of that precious ointment, 
(Exod, xxx. 34,) and for the incense, Exod. xxx. 7. 
See Jer. vi. 20. Thou hast been niggardly in my 
service, when thou hast spared for no cost in the 
service of thine idols. Nor, filled me, &¢e.—Thou 
hast not multiplied thy thank-offerings and free-will- 
offerings, though I have given thee sufficient occa- 
sion to do so. But thou hast made me serve, &e.— 
Thou hast made me to bear the load and burden of 
thy sins. . 

Verse 25. I, even J—Whom thou hast thus despis- 
ed, and wearied, and provoked to destroy thee; am 
he that blotteth outthy transgressions—Out of my 
book, in which they were all written, to be read unto 
thee, and charged upon thee at a future day. Sins 
are often compared to debts, (Matt. vi. 12, &c.,) wri 
ten in the creditor’s book, and crossed or blotted 0 
when they are paid. For mine own sake—Being 
moved thereunto, not by thy merits, but by my own 
mere goodness and free mercy. And will not re- 


223 
~ Bd 


y 


An abundant effusion 


ISATAH. 


of the Spirit promised. 


mi oat tg 26 Put me in remembrance: let us 
_—_——_ plead together: declare thou, that thou 
mayest be justified. 


27 Thy first father hath sinned, and thy 


*teachers have transgressed against me. A. M. 3294. 
28 'Therefore °I have profaned the oa a 

princes of the sanctuary, ?and haye given 

Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches. 


3 Heb. interpreters, Mali ii. 7, 8. 
2, 6, 7. 


© Chap. xlvii. 6; Lam. ii. 


P Psa. lxxix. 4; Jer. xxiv.9; Dan. ix. 
11; Zech. viii. 13. 


2° Or, holy princes. 


member thy sins—So as to punish them, and destroy 
thee for them, as thou deservest. 

_ Verse 26. Put me in remembrance--Of thy good 
deeds and merits. Let us plead together--I give 
thee free liberty to urge all thou canst in thy own 
behalf. Declare thou, that thou mayest be justified 
—Bring forward all thou canst, in order to thy justi- 
fication, and declare on what ground thou expectest 
to be acquitted, and continued in my favour. But 
perhaps the words are not to be considered as spoken 
ironically, and intended as a rebuke to such as were 
proud and self-righteous; but are rather to be under- 
stood as a direction to penitent sinners, showing them 
how they might obtain the pardon offered in the pre- 
ceding verse. Is God thus ready to.pardon sin ; and, 
when he pardons it, will he remember it no more ? 
Let us then put him in remembrance, mention be- 


fore him those sins which he forgives; for they must. 


be ever before us, to humble us, even though he 
pardons them, Psa. li. 3. We must put him in re- 
membrance of the promises he has made to the 
penitent, and of the. satisfaction his Son has made 
for them. We must plead these with him when we 
implore a pardon, and declare these things, in order 
that we may be justified freely by his grace. 'This 
is the only way, and it is a sure way, to pardon and 
peace. 


Verses 27, 28. Thy first father hath sinned— 
Some think that Urijah, who was high-priest in the 
time of Ahaz, is here especially meant; see 2 Kings 
xvi. 10,11. But it is more probable that the ex- 
pression is put for their forefathers collectively; and 
so he tells them, that as they were sinners, so also 
were all their progenitors, yea, even the best of them. 
Thus Lowth: “ Your ancestors, reckoning from 
Adam downward, have been sinners, and you have 
trod in their steps:” see Ezek. ii. 3, and xvi. 2, &¢.; 
Ezra ix.7. And thy teachers have transgressed, 
&c.—-Your prophets, priests, and teachers, who ought 
to have been guides to you, and intercessors for you 
with God, have led you into sin and error, and there- 
fore you have no reason to fancy yourselves inno- 
cent. Therefore Ihave profaned the princes of the 
sancluary—The highest and best of your priests, 
whose persons were most sacred, and therefore were 
supposed, by themselves and others, to be the farthest 
from danger. As they had made themselves pro- 
fane, so have I dealt with them as such, without any 
regard to the sacredness and dignity of their func- 
tions. Have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel 
lo reproaches—Have exposed them to contempt 


and destruction, and made them a proverb of ex- 


ecration and reproach to all the neighbouring na- 
tions. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


The prophet proceeds an this chapter, as in the last, to encourage God's people with promises of spiritual blessings to be con- 
ferred upon them, after their return from captivity, and especially in the days of the Messiah, 1-5. God solemnly avows 
his own absolute eternity, sole divinity, and infinite forcknowledge, 6-8. Exposes the vanity of idols, and the folly of 


those who first made and then worshipped them, 9-20. 


Charges his people to consider his relation to them, and what he 


had done, did, and would do for them, as @n incitement to repentance and thanksgiving. 


A. M. 3294, 


B. C. 710. YET now hear, *O Jacob, my ser- 


vant; and Israel, whom I have 
chosen : - 
2 Thus saith the Lorp that made thee, > and 


2Verse 21; Chap. xli. 8; xliii. 1; der. xxx. 10; xlvi. 27, 28. 


formed thee from the womb, which A. ent 
will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, —— 


my servant; and thou, °Jesurun, whom I have 


chosen. 


© Deut. xxxil. 15. 


» Chap. xliii. 1, 7. 


~ NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIV. 

Verses 1, 2. Yet now hear, O Jacob-—Although I 
have chastised thee for thy sins, and had just cause 
utterly to destroy thee, yet in judgment I will re- 
member mercy, and will still own thee for my ser- 
vant and chosen people. T'hus saith the Lord, that 
formed thee from the womb—“He speaks of the 
Jewish people under the character of a single per- 


¢ - 


son ; nie as God sometimes designed certain persons 
for particular offices, from their birth, or conception, 
so he set apart the posterity of Abraham to be his 
people from the very original of the family ;” and 
formed and fashioned them for himself, by laws, or- 
dinances, teachers, promises, threatenings, correc- 
tions, and many other ways. Jeswrun is another 


'name for Jacob or igs a to them by Moses, _ 
. Aes 


€ 


The vanity and folly of 


—— 


A.M. 3291. 3 For I will “pour water upon 
B.C. 710. ,. Re 
——— him that is thirsty, and floods upon 


the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit 
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine 
offspring : 

4 And they shall spring up as among the 
grass, as willows by the water-courses. 

5 One shall say, I am the Lorp’s; and an- 
other shall call himself by the name of Jacob; 
and another shall subscribe with his hand unto 
the Lorn, and surname himself by the name 
of Israel. 

6 Thus saith the Lorp the King of Israel, 
® and his Redeemer the Lorp of hosts; § I am 
the first, and I am the last; and besides me 
there is no God. 

7 And £ who, as I, shall call, and shall de- 
clare it, and set it in order for me, since I ap- 
pointed the ancient people? and the things that 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


idols, and their worship. 


are coming, and shall come, let them 4. M. 3294. 
show unto them. St 

8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid: » have not I 
told thee from that time, and have declared i¢ 2 
‘ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God 
besides me? yea, * there ts no1God; I know 
not any. 

9 4 ' They that make a graven image are all 
of them vanity; and their ? delectable things 
shall not profit; and they are their own wit- 
nesses ; ™ they see not, nor know, that they may 
be ashamed. 

10 Who hath formed a god, or molten.a graven 
image ™¢hat is profitable for nothing ? 

11 Behold, all his fellows shall be ° ashamed : 
and the workmen, they are of men: let them 
all be gathered together, let them stand up; 
yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed 
together. 


@ Chapter xxxv. 7; Joel ii. 28; John vii. 38; Acts ii. 18. 
e Verse 24; Chap. xliii. 1, 14.——1 Chap. xli. 4; xlviii. 12; Rev. 
i. 8, 17; xxii. 13.— Chap. xli. 4, 22; xlv.21.—— Chap. xli. 
22,——' Chap. xliii. 10, 12. 


k Deut. iv: 35, 39 ; xxxii. 39; 1 Sam. ii. 2; 2 Sam. xxii. 32; 
Chap. xlv. 5. 1 Heb, rock, Deut. xxxii. 4.——1! Chap. xli. 24, 
29. 2 Heh. desirable. m Psa. xv. 4. 2 Jer.x.5; Hab. ii. 
18. © Psa, xevii. 7; Chap. i. 29; xlii. 17; xlv. 16. 


Deut. xxxii. 15, (where see the note,) and xxxiii. 
5, 26. 

Verses 3-5. I will pour water—My Spirit, as it is 
expounded in the latter part of the verse, frequently 
compared to water in the Scriptures ; wpon him that is 
thirsty-—That is destitute of it, and that sincerely and 
earnestly desires it; and my blessing upon thine off- 
spring--All the blessings of my covenant, especially 
those of a spiritual nature. This promise seems to 
have been made with a design to raise the minds and 
hearts of the Jews from carnal and worldly things, 
to which they were too much addicted, to spiritual 
and heavenly blessings, and thereby to prepare them 
for the reception of the gospel. And they shall 
spring up, &c—They shall increase and. flourish 
like: grass, and those herbs and plants which grow 
up in the midst of it. One shall say, I am the 
Lord's, &c.—This verse seems to relate to the in- 
crease of the church by the accession of the Gen- 
tiles: as if he had said, The blessing of God upon the 
Jews shall beso remarkable that many of the Gentiles 
shall jom themselves unto them, and accept Jehovah 
for their God, and own themselves for his people. 

Verses 6-8. Thus saith the Lord, &c.—Here 
God renews his contest with idols, which he insists 
on so often, and so much, because his own people 
wereexceeding prone toidolatry. And who—Which 
of all the heathen gods; shall call, and shall declare 
it—Shall, by his powerful call, cause a future event 
to be, and, by his infinite foreknowledge, declare 
,that it shall be. And set it in order for me—Order- 
ly relate all future events in the same manner as 
they shall happen. Since I appointed the ancient 
people—Agy’ # exoincaavipwrov. Since I first made 


man upon the earth: so the LXX. And the things | 


Vou. HL (15) 


that are coming, &c.—Such things as are near at 
hand, and such as are to come hereafter. Have not 
I told thee?—Thee, O Israel, whom he bids not to 
fear. The sense is, I call you Israelites to bear me 
witness, whether I have not, from time to time, ac- 
quainted you with things to come; from that time 
—When I appointed the ancient people, (verse 7,) 
fromthe first ages of the world. And have declared 
it--Have published it to the world in my sacred 
records. Ye are even my witnesses—Both of my 
predictions, and of the exact agreeableness of events 
to them. 

Verses 9-11. They that make a graven image 
are vanity—Hereby discover themselves to be vain, 
empty, and foolishmen. And their delectable things 
shall not profit—Their idols, in which they take so 
much pleasure. They are their own witnesses— 
They that make them are witnesses against them- 
selves and against their idols, because they know 
they are not gods, but the work of their own hands. 
They see not, nor know-~Have neither sense nor 
understanding, therefore they have just cause to be 
ashamed of their folly in worshipping such senseless 
things. Who hath formed a god, &e—What man 
in his wits would do it? Behold, all his fellows 
shall be ashamed--The workmen who, in this work, 
are partners with him, by whose cost and command 
the work is done; or those who any way assist in 
this work, and join with him in worshipping the 
image which he makes. T'hey are of men—They | 
are of mankind, and therefore cannot possibly make 
agod. They shall be ashamed together—Though 
all combine together, they shall be filled with fear 
and confusion when God shall plead his cause 
against them. | 

225 g 


* 
¢ 


The vanity and folly of 


ISAIAH. 


idols, and their worship. 


A. M. 3294. 


12 »The smith * with the tongs both 
B. 0.710. 


worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it 
with hammers, and worketh it with the strength 
of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength 
faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint. 

13 The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he 
marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with 
planes, and he marketh it out with the com- 
pass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, 
according to the beauty of a man; that it may 
remain in the house. 

14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh 
the cypress and the oak, which he ‘strength- 
eneth for himself among the trees of the 
forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth 
nourish if. 

15 Then shall it be for a man to burn: for 
he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, 
he kindleth 2, and baketh bread; yea, he 
maketh a god, and worshippeth i¢ ; he maketh 
it a graven image, and falleth down thereto. 

16 He burneth part thereof in the fire; with 
part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, 


P Chap. xl. 19; xli. 6; Jer. x. 3, &c.— Or, with an aze. 
*Or, taketh cowrage-——1 Chap. xly. 20.——"2 Thess. u. 11. 
5 Heb. daubed, 


Verses 12-17. The smith, &¢—* The sacred wri- 
ters,” says Bishop Lowth, “are generally large and 
eloquent upon the subject of idolatry: they treat it 
with great severity, and set forth the absurdity of it 
in the strongest light. But this passage of Isaiah 
far exceeds any thing that ever was written upon the 
subject, in force of argument, energy of expression, 
and. elegance of composition. One or two of the 
apocryphal writers have attempted to imitate the 
prophet, but with very ill success: Wisd. xiii. 11-19, 
and xv. 7, &c.; Baruk, chap. vi.; especially the lat- 
ter, who, injudiciously dilating his matter, and intro- 
ducing a number of minute circumstances, has very 
much weakened the force and effect of his invective. 
On the contrary, a heathen author, in the ludicrous 
way, has, in a line or two, given idolatry one of the 
severest strokes it ever received: 

“Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum ; 


Cum faber, incertus seamnum faceretne Priapum, 
Maluit esse Deum,” 


“J was of old the trunk of a fig-tree, a useless block ; 
when the carpenter, uncertain whether to make a 
bench or a Priapus, chose that I should be a god.”-- 
Hor., lib. i. sat. 8. He maketh it after the figure 
of a man, &c.——In the same comely shape and pro- 
portions which are in a living man; that it may re- 
main in the house—In the ‘dwelling-house of him 
mat made it. He heweth him down cedars and the 
oak—Which afford the best and most durable tim- 
ber ; which he strengtheneth for himself--He plants, 
226 


and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth A. M, 3294. 
himself, and saith, Aha, Iam warm, — a 
I have seen the fire: 

17 And the residue thereof he maketh a god, 
even his graven image: he falleth down unto 
it, and worshippeth iz, and prayeth unto it, and 
saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god. 

18 4 They have not known, nor understood : 
for *he hath ‘shut their eyes, that they cannot 
see; and their hearts, that they cannot un- 
derstand. 

19 And none ‘considereth*® in his nessst, 
neither is there knowledge nor understanding 
to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; 
yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals 
thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten 7: 
and shall I make the residue thereof an abo- 
mination? shall I fall down to 7 the stocl of a 
tree ? 

20 He feedeth on ashes: ta deceived heart 
hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver 
his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my ugnt 
hand ? 


® Hebrew, setteth to his heart. 
brew, that which comes of a tree. 
OT 35:2 "bhesswit. ws 


‘Chapter xlvi. 8.——" He- 
t Hosea iv. 12; Romans i. 


and with care and diligence improves those trees, 
that he or his posterity may thence have materials 
for their images, and those things which belong to 
them. He maketh an image, and falleth down 
thereto—Having related the practices of idolaters, 
he now discovers the vanity and folly of them, that 
they make their fire and their god of the same ma- 
terials, distinguished only by the art of man, and 
roast their meat with the article which they worship. 
Verses 18-20. They have not known, &¢.—They 
want common discretion, and have not the under- 
standing of a rational being in them. For what an 
absurdity is it for a man to dress his meat and make 
his god with the same piece of wood! Or to think 
that a log of timber hath any more divinity in it than 
it had before, because of the form man ean give it, 
or any thing he can do to it! “When,” says Minu- 
tius Felix, “does it become a god! Behold, it is 
cast, fashioned, and carved! It is not yeta god. It 
is soldered, put together, and set up. Neither is it 
yeta god. Behold, it is adorned, consecrated, and 
prayed to! Then at length it is a god when men 
have chosen and dedicated it.” He hath shut their 
eyes—God hath. Not as if God made men wicked ; 
he only permits them so to be, and orders and over- 


‘rules their wickedness to his own glorious ends. 
|| And none considereth in his heart—By which the 


prophet implies, that the true cause of this, as well 
as of other absurd and brutish practices of sinners, 
is the neglect of serious and impartial consideration. 


_ He feedethon ashes—An unprofitable and penal 


» (16*) 


Expressions of the 


A. M. 3294. 21 4 Remember these, O Jacob and 

B. ©. 710. 

Israel; for “thou aré my servant: I 
have formed thee; thou art my servant: O Is- 
rael, thou shalt not be forgotten of me. 

22 *I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy 
transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins: return 
unto me; for YI have redeemed thee. 

23 *Sing, O ye heavens; for the Lorp hath 
done i¢: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: 
break forth into singing, ye mountains, O 
forest, and every tree therein: for the Lorp 
hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in 
Israel. 

24 'Thus saith the Lorp * thy Redeemer, and 
» he that formed thee from the womb, I am the 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


divine regard for Israel. 


Lorp that maketh all things ; ° that A. M, 3294. 
stretcheth forth the heavens alone ; sete Fah 
that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself: 

25 That ¢ frustrateth the tokens ° of the liars, 
and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise 
men backward, fand maketh their knowledge 
foolish ; 

26 © 'That confirmeth the word of his servant, 
and performeth the counsel of his’ messengers ; 
that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inha- 
bited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be 
built, and I will raise up the ®decayed places 
thereof : 

27 »'That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will 
dry up thy rivers: 


bd 


4 Verses 1, 2.——* Chap. xliii. 25. y Chap. xliii. 1; xlviii. 
20; 1 Cor. vi. 20; 1 Pet. i. 18, 19,—— Psa. lxix. 34; xevi. 11, 
12; Chapter xlii. 10; xlix.13; Jer. li. 48; Revelation xviii. 20. 
a Chap. xliii. 14; Verse 6. 


food, and no less unsatisfying and mischievous is the 
worship of idols. A deceived heart—A mind cor- 
rupted and deceived by deep prejudice, gross error, 
and especially by his own lusts; hath turned him 
aside—From the way of truth, from the knowledge 
and worship of the true God, unto this irrational and 
foolish idolatry; that he cannot deliver his soul— 
From this error, and the vengeance that will follow 
upon it; nor say, Is there not a lie, &c.—Is not this 
idol which I honour and trust to a mere fiction and 
delusion which will deceive me ? 

Verses 21-23. Remember these—These things, 
the deep ignorance and stupidity of idolaters. O 
Tsrael, thou shalt not be forgotten—I will not forget 
nor forsake thee; therefore thou shalt have no need 
of idols. Ihave blotted out as a cloud, &c.—As the 
sun arising disperses the clouds, and causes them to 
vanish and disappear, so have I, arising for thy 
salvation, with the light and influence of my grace, 
scattered and removed thy transgressions, that there 
is no remnant or appearance of them left: a beauti- 
ful and expressive metaphor. Return unto me— 
From thine idolatry, and other sinful practices. For 
J have redeemed thee—Therefore thou art mine, and 
obliged to return and adhere to me. Sing, O ye 
heavens, &c.—“The prophet here, by an elegant 
apostrophe, calls upon all creatures to glorify God for 
his singular blessing to his people in delivering them 
from their captivity in Babylon; which also has a 
further respect to the great and spiritual deliverance 
of mankind by the Messiah;” a mercy so transcend- 
ent, that, as he intimates, it is sufficient, were it pos- 
sible, to make even the stones break forth in praises 
to God. 

Verses 24-27. I am the Lord that maketh all 
things—And therefore I can save thee without the 
help of any other gods, or any creature; that frus- 
trateth the tokens of the liars—Of the magicians 
and astrologers, who were numerous and greatly 
esteemed in Babylon, and who had foretold the long 
continuance and prosperity of the Chaldean empire. 

3 


b Chap. xiii. 1. © Job ix. 8; Psa. civ. 2; Chap. xl. 22; 
xlii. 55 xlv. 12; li. 13——4Chap. xlvii. 13.——e Jer. 1. 36. 
£1 Cor. i. 20,——8 Zech. i. 6. 8 Heb. wastes. h Jer. 1. 38; 
li. 32, 36. 


And maketh the diviners mad—With grief for the 
disappointment of their predictions, and their dis- 
grace which followed it. That turneth wise men 
backward—Stopping their way, and blasting their 
designs. That confirmeth the word of his servants 
—The prophets, as appears from the next clause, 
namely, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others, whom God 
sent to foretel the destruction of Babylon, and the 
redemption of his people. The connection of this 
with verse 25, is, As God discovers the folly and 
madness of such false prophets, so he punctually 
fulfils the predictions of his own prophets. Z'hat 
saith to the deep, Be dry—That with a word can dry 
up the sea and rivers, and remove all impediments. 
“Cyrus took Babylon by laying the bed of the Eu- 
phrates dry, and leading his army into the city by 
night, through the empty channel of the river. This 
remarkable circumstance, in which the event so ex- 
actly corresponded with the prophecy, was also 
noted by Jeremiah. A drought shall be wpon her 
waters, and they shall be dried up: I will lay her 
sea dry; and Iwill scorch up her springs, Jer. 1. 
38; li. 36. Itis proper here to give some account 
of the method by which the stratagem of Cyrus was 
effected. The Euphrates, in the middle of summer, 
from the melting of the snows on the mountains of 
Armenia, like the Nile, overflows the country. In 
order to diminish the inundation, and carry off the 
waters, two canals were made by Nebuchadnezzar a 
hundred miles above the city; the first on the eastern 
side, called Naharmalea, or the Royal river, by 
which the Euphrates was let into the Tigris; the 
other on the western side, called Pallacopas, or Na- 
haraga, (Hebrew, D3 Wi}, the river of the pool,) 
by which the redundant waters were carried into a 
vast lake, forty miles square, contrived, not only to 
lessen the inundation, but for a reservoir, with sluices 
to water the barren country on the Arabian side. 
Cyrus, by turning the whole river into the latter lake, 
laid the channel, where it ran through the city, 
almost dry; so that his army entered it both above 
227 


Cyrus and his 


28 That saith of Cyrus, He 
is my shepherd, and shall per- 
form all my pleasure: even saying to Jeru- 


A. M. 3294. 
B. C. 710. 


ISATAH. 


| salem, iThou shalt be built; 


victories foretold. 


and A; 7 3294. 
to the temple, Thy foundation shall tia 


be laid. 


i2 Chron. xxxvi. 22, 23; 


Ezra i. 1; Chap. xlv. 13. 


and below by the bed of the river, the water not 
reaching above the middle of the thigh. By the 
great quantity of water let into the lake, the sluices 
and dams wey destroyed ; and being never repaired 
afterward, the waters spread over the whole country 
below, and reduced it into a morass, in which the 
river is lost.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Verse 28. That saith of Cyrus—Whom God here 
mentions by his proper name, two hundred years 
before he was born, that this might be an undeniable 
evidence of the exactness of God’s foreknowledge, 
and a convincing argument to conclude this dispute 
between God and idols. He is my shepherd—Him 
will I set up to be the shepherd of my people, to 


rescue them from wolves or tyrants, to gather them 
together, to rule them gently, and to provide com- 
fortably for them. Xenophon tells us, that Cyrus 
used to compare kings in general, and himself in 
particular, to a shepherd.— Cyroped., lib. 8. And 
shall perform all my pleasure—All that I command 
him to do, especially to give leave and order for the 
rebuilding of the city and temple of Jerusalem, as 
it here follows. This prophecy, which thus speaks 
of Cyrus by name, as foreknown and appointed by 
the divine counsel for the performance of the great 
work designed by providence, is one of the most 
remarkable contained in Scripture, of the same 
kind with that 1 Kings xiii. 1, 2. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


In pursuance of the subject of the preceding chapter, we have here the commission which God would gwe Cyrus, ‘and the 


success wherewith he would bless his arms, \-4. 
and his universal incontestable sovereignty, 5-7. 


The proof God would hereby give of his eternal power and godhead, 
A prayer for the hastening of this deliverance, 8. “A check to those who 


murmured against the appointments and dispensations of God, 9,10. Encouragement given to those who trusted in 
God, and continwed instant in prayer, 11-15. Idols and their worshippers shall be destroyed, and God alone exalted, 


16-21. 


Both Jews and Gentiles are called to renounce their idolatries and turn to Jehovah, who reveals himself as a just 


God and a Saviour, engaging that all mankind shall bow to him, and that in him Israel shall be justified and shall glory, 


22-25. 


HUS saith the Lorp to his anoint- 
eee SR ed, to Cyrus, whose * right hand I 
thave holden, »to subdue nations before him ; 


A. M. 3294. 
B. C. 710. 


and I will loose the loins of kings, to . % wos 
open before him the two-leaved gates, - , 
and the gates shall not be shut ; 


2 Chap. xli. 13. 


1 Or, strengthened. 


> Chap. xli. 2; Dan. v¥. 30. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLV. 

Verse 1. Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, 
&c.—Cyrus is called the Lord’s anointed, a title 
usually given to the kings of the Jews, who were 
God’s immediate deputies, not because material oil 
had been poured upon him when he was made king, 
as was the case with most of them, but because he 
was raised up, and ordained by the divine counsel, 
to perform God’s good pleasure, and furnished for 
that purpose with the necessary endowments; 
among which must be reckoned “his singular jus- 
tice, his reverence toward the divine nature, his 
prudence, fortitude, and distinguished clemency and 
humanity:” to all which, and many other of his ex- 
cellent qualities, his historian, Xenophon, bears tes- 
timony. Whose right hand I have holden—Or 
strengthened, as ‘\pinn may be properly rendered ; 
whom I will powerfully assist, teaching his hands to 
war, as the phrase is Psa. xviii. 34, supporting and 
directing his right hand, and enabling him to sur- 
mount all difficulties, and to overcome all opposition. 

228 


To subdue nations before him—The nations con- 
quered by him, according to Xenophon, were “the 
Syrians, Assyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians, the 
Phrygians, Lydians, Carians, Phenicians, Babylo- 
nians. He moreover reigned over the Bactrians, 
Indians, Cilicians, the Sacw, Paphlagones, and Ma- 
riandyni.” All these kingdoms he acknowledges, 
in his decree for the restoration of the Jews, to have 
been given him by Jehovah, the God: of heaven, 
Ezra i. 2. And I will loose the loins of kings—I 
will weaken them, and render them unprepared and 
unable to oppose Cyrus. “The eastern people, 
wearing long and loose garments, were unfit for ac- 
tion or business of any kind, without girding their 
clothes about them: when their business was finish- 
ed, they took off their girdles. A girdle, therefore, 
denotes strength and activity; and to wnloose the 
girdle is to deprive of strength, to render unfit for 
action.” To open before him the two-leaved gates 

—“The gates of Babylon, within the city, leading 
from the streets to the river, were Provideutily lef 


Sd f 


Cyrus and his 


CHAPTER XLV. 


victories foretold. 


A. M, 3294. 


A B00 2 I will go before thee, ° and make 


the crooked places straight: ¢I will 
break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in 
sunder the bars of iron: . 

3 And I will give thee the treasures of dark- 
ness, and hidden riches of secret places, ° that 
thou mayest know that I, the Lorp, which 
feall thee by thy name,.am the God of 
Israel. 

4 For Jacob my servant’s sake, and Israel 
mine elect, I have even called thee by thy 


© Chap. xl, 4 ——4 Psa. evii. 16——® Chap. xli. 23.——f Exod. 
xxxili. 12, 17; Chapter xliii. 1; xlix. 1—s Chapter xliv. 1. 
1 Thess. iv. 5. 


open in the night when Cyrus’s forces entered the 
city through the channel of the river, in the general 
disorder occasioned by the great feast which was 
then celebrated: otherwise, says Herodotus, the 
Persians would have been shut up in the bed of the 
river, and taken as in a net, and all destroyed. And 
the gates of the palace were opened imprudently 
by the king’s orders, to inquire what was the cause 
of the tumult without, when two parties of Medes 
and Persians rushed in, got possession of the palace, 
and slew the king.” See Xenoph. Cyrop., vii. p. 
528; and Bishop Lowth. 

Verses 2, 3. I will go before thee—To remove all 
obstructions, and prepare the way for thee. 
divine protection which attended Cyrus, and ren- 
dered his expedition against Babylon easy and pros- 
perous, is finely expressed by this highly poetical 
image of God’s going before him, and making the 
mountains level.” J will break in pieces the gates 
of brass—I will destroy all that oppose. thee, and 
earry thee through the greatest difficulties. “ Aby- 
denus says that the wall of Babylon had brazen 
gates. And Herodotus more particularly: ‘In the 
wall all round, there are a hundred gates all of brass ; 
and so, in like manner, are the sides and the lintels.’ 
The gates, likewise, within the city, opening to the 
river, from the several streets, were of brass; as 
were those also of the temple of Belus.”. And I will 
give thee the treasures of darkness—Treasures that 
have been stored up, and long kept in dark and se- 
eret places, as well in Babylon (Jer. 1. 37; and li. 13) 
as in other countries which Cyrus conquered, and 
from which, as Pliny and others relate, he took infi- 
nite treasures. “Sardes and Babylon,” as we learn 
from Xenophon, “ when taken by Cyrus, were the 
wealthiest cities in the world. Creesus, celebrated 
beyond all the kings of that age for his riches, gave 
up his treasures to Cyrus, with an exact account, in 
writing, of the whole, containing the particulars with 
which each wagon was loaded, when they were 
carried away: and they were delivered to Cyrus at 
the palace of Babylon. The gold and silver esti- 
mated by weight, according to the account given by 
Pliny, amount to 126,224,000 pounds sterling.”— 


Bishop Lowth. That thou mayest know that Iam 
the God of Israel—That I, Jehovah, who have so) 
5 


* 


“The 


name: I have surnamed thee, though A. M. 3294. 
thou hast " not known me. bon atid 

5 4 1‘ am the Lorn, and * there is none else, 
there is no God besides me: 11 girded thee, 
though thou hast not known me : 

6 ™'That they may know from the rising of 
the sun, and from the west, that there is none be- 
sides me. I am the Lorn, and there is none else. 

7 I form the light, and create darkness : I make 
peace, and ™ create evil: I the Lorn do all these 
thing's. 


i Deut. iv. 35, 39; xxxii. 39; Chap. xliv. 8; xlvi. 9. Ver. 
14, 18, 21, 22,——! Psa. xviii. 32, 39.——m Psa. cii. 15; Chap. 
Xxxvil. 20; Mal. i. 11. 2 Amos iii. 6. 


highly favoured thee, and have mentioned thy name 

so long beforehand, as the peculiar instrument of . 
my providence, am the true God, and that Israel is 

my people. If this prophecy was shown to Cyrus, 

as Josephus says it was, Anfigq., lib, ii. cap. 2, (see 

note on Ezra i. 1,) it is very reasonable to suppose, 

when he found his own name mentioned in it, and 

his achievements described so long before, he must 

thereby be brought to know and acknowledge the 

God of Israel to be the only living and true God. 

Verses 4-6. For Jacob my servant’s sake, &c.— 
The prophet here gives us the reasons why God: 
showed such favour to a prince, who had been ad- 
dicted to the superstition of his country, and igno- 
rant of the true God, that he prospered all his under- 
takings, and gave success to all his endeavours. It 
was, Ist, For Israel’s sake: For Israel, mine elect, 
I have even called thee, &c.—I have called thee to 
this honour, and that by name; not for thy own 
sake, but for Israel’s sake: therefore, neither despise 
them, though a poor and despised people, nor be 
puffed up in a great opinion of thyself. I have sur- 
named thee, though thou hast not known me—I knew 
and called thee, when thou didst neither know nor 
think of me; nay, when thou hadst no being. J 
girded thee, &c.—i made thee strong and active, 
and fitted and disposed thee for these great and war- 
like enterprises. It was, 2d, For the sake of all 
nations; that they might be convinced of the true 
divinity and almighty power of the God of Israel. 
That they may know from the rising of the sun, §c., 
that I am the Lord, &c.—That all nations may know 
it by my foretelling these things so long before, and 
by the wonderful success that I shall give thee, and 
by my overruling thy heart and counsels, to the 
deliverance of my people. Or, as Lowth explains 
it, “ My interposing so visibly in behalf of my own 
people, and returning their captivity by such unex- 
pected means, will convince the heathen part of the 
world that I am the only true God.” 

Verse 7. I form the light, and create darkness, 
&c.—All men’s comforts and calamities come from 
my hand. “Itwas the great principle of the Magian 
religion, which prevailed in Persia in the time of 
Cyrus, and in which probably he was educated, that 
there are two supreme, coeternal, and independent 

° 229 


God is the universal Ruler, 


A.M. 3294. 


8 ° Drop down, ye heavens, from 
B. C. 710, 


above, and let the skies pour down 
righteousness: let the earth open, and let them 
bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring 
up together ; I the Lorn have created it. 

9 Wo unto him that striveth with ? his Maker ! 
Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the 
earth. 4Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth 
it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no 
hands? 

10 Wo unto him that saith unto his father, 


° Psa. alee 3; Ixxxv. 11.——? Chap. Ixiv. 8.——4 Chap. xxix, 
; Jer. xviii. 6; Rom. ix. 20.— Jer. xxxi. 9. 


causes, always acting in opposition one to the other; 
one, the author of all good, the other, of all evil; 
the good being they called Light; the evil being 
Darkness; that, when Light had the ascendant, then 
good and happiness prevailed among men; when 
Darkness had the superiority, then evil and misery 
abounded. An opinion that contradicts the clearest 
evidence of our reason, which plainly leads us to the 
acknowledgment of one only Supreme Being, infi- 
nitely good as well as powerful. With reference to 
this absurd opinion, held probably by the person to 
whom this prophecy is addressed, God, by his pro- 
phet, in the most significant terms, asserts his omni- 
potence and absolute supremacy. J am Jeuovan, 
and none else; forming light, and creating dark- 
ness ; making peace, and creating evil; I Jenovan 
am the author of all these things.” Declaring that 
there is no power, either of light or darkness, of 
good or evil, of happiness or misery, independent of 
the one supreme God, infinite in power and in good- 
ness.—Bishop Lowth. 

Verse 8. Drop down, ye heavens, from above, &c. 
—It appears from the last clause of this verse, that 
these are the words of Jehovah himself, commanding 
blessings to descend upon his people, and exhorting 
his people willingly and gratefully to receive them, 
and to walk worthy of them. ‘The passage is strongly 
figurative, and Vitringa is of opinion, that it “re- 


fers primarily to the blessings consequent upon the | 


deliverance from the Babylonish captivity ; but se- 
condarily, and in its more complete sense, to that 
righteousness and salvation liberally imparted to 
man by the grace of the Messiah.” ‘The words may 
be thus paraphrased: Let the heavens drop down, 
or, they shall drop down, as it were, from above, &c. 
God’s righteous and gracious acts, done for his peo- 
ple, and his blessings conferred upon them, shall 
be as many and illustrious as if he rained them 
down from heaven. But let the earth open itself, 
both to receive those refreshing and fertilizing show- 
ers, and to bring forth those fruits which they might 
be reasonably expected to produce. And let them 
—The heavens and the earth conspiring together ; 
bring forth salvation—The redemption and deliver- 
ance of God’s people from Babylon, by Cyrus, and 
from ignorance and error, sin and death, by the 
230 


ISAIAH. 


and upholds all things. 


What begettest thou? or to the wo- A. M. 3204. 
man, What hast thou brought forth ? a 

11 Thus saith the Lorp, the Holy One of 
Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to 
come concerning *my sons, and concerning * the 
work of my hands command ye me. 

12 tI have made the earth, and "created man 
upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out 
the heavens, and *all their host have I com- 
manded. | 

13 YI have raised him up in righteousness, 


Chap. xlii. 5; Jer. xxvii, 5——"Gen. 1. 26, 


x Gen. ii, 1——Y Chap. xli. 2.- 


Messiah. And let righteousness spring up together 
—Together with salvation. Let the holiness of my 
people bear some proportion to their privileges and 
advantages, and the great things I have done for 
them. Jthe Lord have created it—I am the author, 
both of-the salvation and of the righteousness which 
springs up together with it. 

Verses 9, 10. Wo unto him that striveth, Bee 
Bishop Lowth renders this verse, “ Wo nmnto him 
that contendeth with the power that formed him, 
the potsherd with the moulder of the clay! Shall 
the clay say to the potter, What makest thou? And 
to the workman, Thou hast no hands.” “ The pro- 


phet,” he thinks, “answers or prevents the objections 


and cavils of the unbelieving Jews disposed to mur- 
mur against God, and to arraign the wisdom and 
‘justice of his dispensations in regard to them; in 
permitting them to be oppressed by their enemies, 
and in promising them deliverance, instead of pre- 
venting their captivity. St. Paul has borrowed the 
image, and has applied it to the like purpose with 
equal force and elegance, Rom. ix. 20, 21.” 

Verses 11-13. Thus saith the Holy One of Israel, 
and his Maker—Israel’s Maker. A preface this 
which always ushers in some gracious promise: see 
chap. xliii, 1, 3, 14; and xliv.6; and xlvili. 17. Ask 
me of things to come, &c.—The words thus rendered 
contain a concession, and the sense of them may be 
this: although the potter doth not give an account 
to the clay, nor parents to their children, yet I will 
so far condescend to you as to be at your command 
in this matter, to give you an account of those great 
actions of mine for which you quarrel with me. 
Many interpreters, however, prefer rendering the 
words interrogatively, thus:.Do you, or will you, 
ask, or question me, of things to come concerning 
my sons? and concerning the work of my hands will 
you command me? As if he had said, Will you not 
allow me the liberty which yourselves take, of dis- 
posing of my own children and works as I see fit? 
Must I give youan account of these matters? Which 
he does in thle words following. J have made the 
earth, and created man, &c.—The earth and its in- 
habitants are wholly and solely. my creatures, and 
therefore are absolutely at my disposal. J have 


raised him wp—Namely, Cyrus, named. before, 
ae, 
* 


1. ae. 


Idolaters shall be destroyed, 


CHAPTER XLV. 


and God alone exalted. 


LA a a a a TL Sd 


Borie and I will direct all his ways: he 

——— shall “build my city, and he shall 
let go my captives, *not for price nor reward, 
saith the Lorp of hosts. 

14 Thus saith the Lorp, >The labour of 
Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the 
Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto 
thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come 
after thee; °in chains they shall come over, 
and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall 
make supplication unto thee, saying, 4 Surely 


God is in thee ;’and ° there is none A. M. 3204 
else, there is no God. eee oe 

15 Verily thou art a God ‘that hidest thy- 
self, O God of Israel, the Saviour. 

16 They shall be ashamed, and also confound- 
ed, all of them: they shall go to confusion toge- 
ther that are § makers of idols. : 

17 » But Israel shall be saved in the Lorp 
with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not 
be ashamed nor confounded world without 
end, 


? Or, make straight 2 Chronicles xxxvi. 22; Ezra i. 1; 
Chap. xliv. 28.—*Chap. lii.3; Romans iii, 24.» Psalm 
Ixvilil. 31; Ixxii. 10; Chapter xlix. 23; lx. 9, 14, 16; 


Zech. viii. 22. ¢ Psalm exlix. 8, 4 | Corinthians xiv. 25. 
¢ Verse 5.——! Psa. xliv. 24; Chap. viii. 17; lvii. 17——s Chap. 
xliv. 11.—+ Chap. xxvi. 4; Verse 20; Rom. xi. 26. 


verse 1; in righteousness—Not in a way of absolute 
sovereignty, as I might have done, but most justly 
to punish the oppressors of my people, to plead the 
cause of the oppressed, and to manifest my righteous- 
ness, truth, and goodness. And I will direct his 
ways— Will guide and assist him in all his marches, 
wars, and battles, crowning all his undertakings with 
success. He shall let go my captives, not for price, 
&c.—That is, freely, without requiring any ransom 
for them, as is usual in such cases. Such an exact 
prediction of events, which depended on the mind 
and will of Cyrus, is mentioned here as an infallible 
evidence of the certainty of God’s foreknowledge, 
and of his being the only true God, because idols 
could discover no such things. 

Verse 14. Thus saith the Lord, &c.—Here the 
prophet turns to Jerusalem, or to the company of 
returning exiles, and relates some joyful conse- 
quence of the deliverance foretold, which probably 
chiefly respects the future admission of the Gentiles 
into the church of God. The labour of Egypt— 
The wealth gotten by their labour; and mer- 
chandise of Ethiopia—The gains of their merchan- 
dise; and of the Sabeans, men of stature—A tall 
and strong people; shall come over unto thee—O my 
city, or church. The sense is, Jerusalem shall not 
only be rebuilt, but the wealth and glory of other 
countries shall be brought to it again, as in former 
times. “The words,” says Lowth, “may be sup- 
posed, in some degree, verified in Cyrus’s devoting 
the tribute coming out of those rich provinces of 
Egypt, Ethiopia, and Seba, to the building and ser- 
vice of the temple.” To which may be. added, 
that “some of the succeeding Persian monarchs 
settled revenues upon the temple for the offering of 
sacrifices for themselves and their families, Ezra vi. 
10. And the same was done, in after times, by 
Alexander the Great, and several of the Syrian and 
Egyptian kings, 2 Mageab. iii. 2, 3, and v. 16.” But 
“the place is principally meant of the flourishing 


state of the church, (often described under the | 


figure of a city,) when the Gentile world should 
come into it, bring in their riches to the support of 


it, and submit themselves to its government, as be-| 


ing the only seat and temple of truth.” Jn chains 
they shall come over—Subdued by the rod of the 
3°: 


* 


Messiah’s strength, (Psa. cx. 2,) the power of his 
word, and led captive thereby: they shall confess 
themselves to be conquered, and shall willingly sub- 
mit themselves to thee. The subjection of the Gen- 
tiles to God’s church is often expressed in Scripture 
by such metaphors as this; as Psa, xlv. 5; and 
exlix. 8; and lxviii. 18, compared with Eph. iv. 8. 
They shall make supplication unto thee—To. ob- 
tain thy favour and society; saying, Surely God is 
in thee—Or, with thee. We plainly discern that 
God is on thy side, or in the midst of thee; and 
therefore we desire to join ourselves with thee; and 
there is none else—We are now convinced that Je- 
hovah, thy God, is the only true God, and that idols 
are vain and empty nothings. 

Verse 15. Verily, &c.—These are the words of 
the prophet, drawn from him by the consideration 
of the great and various works and dispensations of 
God toward his church, and in the world; thow art 
a God that hidest thyself—Namely, from thy peo- 
ple for a season: thy counsels are deep and incom- 
prehensible, and thy ways past finding out; O God 
of Israel, the Saviour—Who, though thou conceal- 
est the grounds and reasons of thy dispensations, 
and often deferrest to help thy people in the time of 
distress, yet art still carrying on their deliverance, 
and the destruction of their enemies, although in a 
mysterious way. And therefore it is meet that we 
should patiently wait for the accomplishment of 
these glorious things here promised us. 

Verses 16,17, T'hey—The idolatrous Gentiles, as 
it is explained in the end of the verse, opposed to 
Israel in the beginning of the next verse, shall be 
ashamed, &ce—Hebrew, 75 19933 Dar ws, They 
are ashamed, they are even confounded, all of them ; 
that is, after the completion of this prophecy. They 
shall go—Hebrew, 1297, they go, to confusion toge- 
ther, the makers of idols—Both the artificers, and 
the masters that set them on work, and consequently 
all their worshippers. “The reader cannot but ob- 
serve the sudden transition from the solemn adora- 
tion of the secret and mysterious nature of God’s 
counsels in regard to his people, to the spirited 
denunciation of the confusion of idolaters, and the 
final destruction of idolatry; contrasted (verse 17) 
with the salvation of Israel, not from temporal cap- 


231 
“ 


God never forsakes 


ISAIAH. 


‘ 


those who trust in him. 


A. M, 3294. 


18 For thus saith the Lorp ‘that 
B. C. 710. 


created the heavens; God himself that 
formed the earth and made it; he hath estab- 
lished it, he created it not in vain, he formed it 
to be inhabited: "I am the Lorn; and there 
zs none else. 

19 I have not spoken in ! secret, in a dark 
place of the earth: Isaid not unto the seed of 
Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: ™I the Lorn speak 
righteousness, I declare things that are right. 

20 “| Assemble yourselves and come; draw 
near together, ye that are escaped of the 


up the wood of their graven image, A. By an. 
and pray unto a oa that cannot 
save. 

21 Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let 
them take counsel together: °who hath declared 
this from ancient time? who hath told it from 
that time? have not I the Lorp? and there 
is no God else besides me; a just God anda 
Saviour; there is none besides me. 

22 Look unto me, and be ye saved, all 
the ends of the earth: for lL am Gots and there 
is none else. 

23 *I have sworn by myself, the secede is gone | 


nations: “they have no knowledge that set 
»Chapter xiii, 5——* Verse 5. —! Deut. xxx. 11; Chapter 
xviii. 16.——™ Psa. xix. 8; cxix. 137. n Chap. xliv. 17;,: 385 


xlvi. 7; xlviii.'7; Rom. i. 22. 


° Chap. xli. 22; xliii.9; xliv.7; xlvi.10; xlviii. 14——pVer, 
5, 14, 18; Chap. "sliv. 8; * xlvi. 9; xlviii. 3. 4 Psa, xxii. 27; 
ixv. 5.——F Gen. xxii. 16; Heb. vi. 13. 


tivity, but the eternal salvation by the Messiah, 
strongly marked by the repetition and augmentation 
of the phrase, ty ‘nb ay, usque ad secula eterni- 
tatis, to the ages of eternity.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Verse 18. Thus saith the Lord—Hebrew, Jeho- 
vah; that created the heavens, &c.—This descrip- 
tion of God is here added, Ist, To detect the vanity 
of idols, by asserting that none was to be owned as 
the true God, besides that one Jehovah who made 
the heavens and the earth, and the inhabitants there- 
of. 2d, To demonstrate God’s sufficiency to fulfil 
all these glorious promises made to his church, be- 
cause he created the world, and upholds it by the 
word of his power. And, 3d, To manifest his good- 
ness to mankind, inasmuch as he did not create the 
earth in vain, but for the use and comfort of men, 
that it might be a fit habitation for them: whence it 
was easy to infer that he would much more be gra- 
cious to his own people. 

Verse 19. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark 
place, &c.—This is declared in opposition to the 
manner in which the heathen oracles gave their 
answers ; which were generally delivered not only 
darkly and doubtfully, but from obscure cells and 
caverns of the earth: such was the seat of the Cu- 
mean Sibyl: 


“Excisum Euboice latus ingens rupis in antrum.” 


“A spacious cave within its farmost part 
Was hew’d, and fashion’d by laborious art: 
Through the hill’s hollow sides—” 


Vira. Ain., vi. 42, 


Such was that of the famous oracle at Delphi: of 
which, says Strabo, lib. ix., “The oracle is said to 
be, avrpov xovAov pera | Badour, # aha evpvotopor, a hol- 
low cavern of considerable depth, with an opening 
not very wide.” And Diodorus, giving an account 
of the same oracle, says, “There was in that place 
a great chasm, or cleft, in the earth; in which very 
place is situated what is called Adytwm ;” that is, the 
cavern, or hidden part of the temple. Jehovah, on 
the contrary, delivered his oracles to Israel publicly 
and plainly. J said not to the seed of Jacob, Seek 
232 


ye me in vain—Serve and worship me for naught. 
As I appointed them work, so from time to time I 
have given them abundant recompense. I Jehovah 
speak righteousness, &c.—That which I promise is 
true, and that which I command is just and good. 
I require nothing of my people but what. is right- 
cous in itself, and for their real advantage: whereas 
the idols, or their priests rather, command their. 
worshippers to do many sinful and shameful things, 
even in their worship, as is most notorious. Bishop 
Lowth renders this clause, J am Jehovah, who speak 
truth, who give direct answers; observing, “'This 
also is said in opposition to. the false and ambiguous 
answers given by the heathen oracles; of which 
there are many noted examples.” 
’ Verses 20-22. Draw near together—To attend to 
what I have said, and am now about to say again, 
concerning the vanity of your idols; .ye that are es- 
caped of the nations—Ye that survive those many 
and great destructions which I am bringing upon 
heathen nations for their abominable idolatries and ~ 
other wickedness. Let those dreadful judgments 
upon others, and God’s great mercy in sparing you, 
awaken you to a more impartial and serious consi-~ 
deration of this subject, and induce you to renounce 
those idols which have now manifested their ina- 
bility to afford any help to those who serve and 
trust in them. They have no knowledge, &¢.— 
See on chap. xliv. 9, 17, 18. Let them take counsel 
together—To maintain the cause of their .idols, 
See on chap. xli. 22; and xliii. 9; and xliv. 7. 
Look unto me, §c., all ye ends of the earth— 
Upon these considerations I call upon all people, 
from one end of the earth to the other, to cast 
away their idols, and to turn their eyes and hearts 
to me, expecting salvation from me, and from me 
only; and they shall not be disappointed. And 
this is not only an exhortation to the Gentiles to 
turn from idols to God, but a prediction that they 
shall turn to him, and look unto Christ, who is 
and will be the author of eternal salvation to all 
that obey -him, whether Jews or Gentiles, which 
is confirmed by the following verse. : 
Verse 23. I have sworn by meet ea age. i. 


& 


The overthrow of the 


A. M. 3294. out of my mouth 77 righteousness, and 
B. C. 710. . 
———— shall not return, That unto me every 
* knee shall bow, * every tongue shall swear. 

24 *Surely, shall one say, In the Lorp have 


I “righteousness * and strength: even to him 


s Romans xiv. 11; Philippians ii. 10—tGenesis xxxi. 
53; Deuteronomy vi. 13; Psalm Ixiii. 11; Chapter lxv. 16. 
Or, Surely he shall-say of me, In the LORD is all righteous- 


highest and most solemn oath possible, Heb. vi. 13; 
and therefore signifies that the matter, thus con- 
firmed, is of extraordinary importance. The word 
ts gone out of my mouth in righteousness—lIt is 
what I will faithfully perform. And shall not re- 
“turn—Namely, unto me void, or without effect, as 
this phrase is more fully delivered, chap. lv. 11. It 
is a metaphor taken from ambassadors, who some- 
times return to their princes without any success in 
their business. T'hat wnto me every knee shall bow 
—Not only the Jews, but all nations shall worship 
me, and submit to my laws: which is signified by 
the bowing of the knee, a posture of reverence and 
subjection, and by one eminent part of God’s wor- 
ship, swearing by hisname. Surely shall one say 
—Or, shall he say, each or every one of these, who, 
he now declared, should bow their knees to God, 
&e. Inthe Lord—Hebrew, Jehovah. By, or from 
God alone, or the Messiah, who is the true Jehovah 
as well as man; have I righteousness—To justify 
me from all things, from which I could not be justi- 
Jied by the law of Moses. See Acts xiii. 39. This 
plainly points us to the Messiah, whose very name 
is the Lord our righteousness, Jer. xxiii. 6; and 
whose great business it was to bring in everlasting 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


righteousness, Dan. ix. 24; and who of God is made 


Babylonish idolatry predicted. 


shall men come; and *all that are A. M, 3294. 
4 : . B. C. 710. 
incensed against him shall. be ———. 
ashamed. 

25 Y¥In the Lorp shall all the seed of Israel 
be justified, and ” shall glory. 
ness and strength. « Jeremiah xxiii.5; 1 Corinthians i. 30, 


4 Hebrew, righteousnesses. * Chapter xli. 11, ¥ Verse 17. 
21 Cor. i, 31. 


unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. i. 830. And strength— 
Support and assistance to bear all my burdens, over- 
come all my enemies, and perform all my duties. 
The sense is, The Gentiles shall expect and obtain 
from Christ both justification, or forgiveness of sins 
by his blood, and sanctification by his Spirit. Even 
to him shall men come—The Gentiles shall come to 
Christ, either, Ist, By constraint, or necessity, to be 
judged by him at the last day: or, 2d, Willingly by 
prayer to seek, and by faith to receive, righteousness 
and strength from him. Coming to Christ is put for 
believing on him, Matt. xi. 28; John v. 50, and vi. 
35-37, and elsewhere. And, or, but, all that are 
incensed against him—All his implacable enemies 
shall be brought to shame and punishment. 

Verse 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel 
—All Israelites indeed, whether Jews or Gentiles; 
all believers, who are frequently called God’s Israel 
in Scripture ; be justified—Acquitted, both from real 
guilt before God, and from all false aspersions before 
the world ; for this. justification of the true Israel is 
opposed to their enemies being ashamed, verse 24; 
which seems to be intended of their public shame and 
confusion before God and men. And shall glory 
—They shall not only receive him, but they shall 
rejoice and triumph in him as their God and portion. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
In this chapter we have, (1,) A prediction of the overthrow of the Babylonish idolatry, 1,2. (2,) An address to the people 


of God, assuring them of his kind regard to them, and of the constancy of that regard, 3, 4. 


(3,) The vanity of idols 


shown from the manner of making them, and their inability to move, to give their worshippers any answer, or afford them 


any help, 5-7. 


(4,) An exhortation to the Jews to consider this, and still to adhere to their own God, remembering the 


undeniable proofs he had given of his true and sole divinity, from his illustrious works in former times; and his predic- 


tions of events, certainly fulfilled, or soon to be fulfilled, 8-11. 


(5,) The unbelievers and stout-hearted are addressed, 


who doubted the completion of these predictions and promises, 12, 13. 


A. M. 3294. 


iM. 9204. FQEL * boweth down. Nebo stoop- 


eth, their idols were upon the 
beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages 


were heavy loaden; ” they are a bur- A. M. 3294, 
B. C. 710, 

den to the weary beast. ——_——— 
2 They stoop, they bow down together; 


«Chap. xxi. 9; Jer.1.2; li. 44. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVI. 

Verses 1, 2. Bel—The chief idol of the Babyloni- 
ans, called by profane historians Jupiter Belus ; bow- 
eth down—As the Babylonians used to b}w down 
to him to worship him, so now he bows down, and 
submits himself to the victorious Persians. Nebo | 

or 2 


b Jer. x. 5. 


stoopeth—Another of their famous idols, probably a 
deified prophet, the word signifying to deliver ora- 
cles, or to prophesy. The names of these idols were 
included in the names of several of their princes, as 
Bel, in Belshazzar ; Nebo, in Nabonassar; Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Nebuzar-adan. T'heir idols were upon 


233 


The vanity of idols 


A. M. 3294. they’ could not deliver the burden, 

B. C. 710. 

——__. ° but ! themselves are gone into cap- 
tivity. 

3 9 Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, 
and all the remnant of the house of Israel, 
4 which are borne by me from the belly, which 
are carried from the womb: 

4 And even to your old age ° I am he; and 
even to hoar hairs f will I carry you: I have 
made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and 
will deliver yout. 

5 4 £'To whom will ye liken me, and make 
me equal, and compare me, that we may be 
like ? 

6 ®'They lavish gold out of the bag, and 
weigh silver in the balance, and hire a gold- 


ISAIAH. 


and idolaters. 
smith; and he maketh it a god: A. ue eng 


they fall down, yea, they worship. § ———— 

7 ?They bear him upon the shoulder, they 
carry him, and set him in his place, and he 
standeth ; from his place shall he not remove: 
yea, * one shall cry unto him, yet can he not 
answer, nor save him out. of his trouble. 

8 Remember this, and show yourselves men : 
‘bring 7 again to mind, O ye transgressors. 

9 ™ Remember the former things of old: for 
I am God, ™ there is none else; I am God, 
and there is none like me, 


10 ° Declaring the end from the ag 


and from ancient times the things that are not 
yet done, saying, »My counsel shall stand, 
and I will do all my pleasure: 


€ Jer. xlviil. 7. 1 Heb, their soul. 4 xod. xix, 4; Deut. 
4.315 xxxii 11; Psa. lxxi.6; Chap. lxiii. 9. € Psa. cil. 27; 
Malachi iii. 6 ——‘ Psalm xlviii. 14; lxxi. 18. € Chapter xl. 
18, 25. 


their beasts—Were taken and broken, and the ma- 
terials of them, which were gold, and silver, and 
brass, were carried upon beasts into Persia. Your 
carriages—O ye Persians, to whom he suddenly 
turns his speech, were heavy loaden— With these use- 
jess gods, which were so far from being able to come 
forward to the help of their worshippers, that they 
could not move themselves, but must be dragged on 
carriages by cattle. They bow down together—The 
Babylonians and their idols, neither of them being 
able to help the other. They could not deliver the 
burden—The Babylonians could not deliver their 
idols, which he now had called a burden; but them- 
selves are gone ito captivity—They as well as 
their idols. 

Verses 3, 4. Hearken, &c., all the remnant of the 
house of Israel—All that remain of the twelve 
tribes. He terms them a remnant, either because 
the ten tribes were already carried into captivity by 
Shalmaneser, or because he addresses that remnant 
of the two tribes, which he foresaw would return 
from Babylon; which are borne by me, &e.—Whom 
I have nourished and cared for from time to time, 
ever since you were a people, and came out of 
Egypt, and that as affectionately and tenderly as pa- 
rents bring up their own children. Even to hoar 
hairs will I carry you—That kindness which I have 
shown you, and that care which I have taken of 
you, I will continue to you to the end, never forsak- 
ing you, unless you wilfully and obstinately cast me 
off; which the Jews did when their Messiah came. 
Ihave made yeu, and will carry, and deliver you— 
You are my workmanship, both as you are men, 
and as you are my peculiar people; and therefore I 
. will preserve and deliver you. The reader will ob- 
serve, that the prophet here “very ingeniously, and 
with great force, contrasts the power of God, and 
his tender goodness effectualiy exerted toward his 
people, with the inability of the false gods of the 

234 


bh Chap. xl. 19; xli. 6; xliv. 12,19; Jer. x. 3.1 Jer, x. 5, 
rile 8 xlv. 20.—! Chap. xliv. 19; xlvii, 7——™ Deut. xxxii. 
2 Chap. xlv. 5, 21—®° Chap. xlv. 21——>? Psa, xxxiii. 
; Prov. xix. 21; xxi. 30; Acts v. 39; Heb. vi. 17. 


heathen: he, like an indulgent father, had carried 
his people in his arms, ‘as a man carrieth his son,’ 
Deut. i. 81; he had protected them and delivered 
them in their distresses; whereas the idols of the 
heathen were forced to be carried about themselves, 
and removed from place to place, witha great labour 
and fatigue to their worshippers; nor could they an- 
swer, or deliver their votaries, when they cried unto 
them.” See Num. xi. 12. 

Verses 5-8. To whom will you liken me, &e.—If 
you be tempted at any time to exchange me for an 
idol, do me and yourselves the right seriously to con- 
sider, whether you can find another god, who will 
be more able and more ready to do you good than I 
have been. They lavish gold §c., and he maketh 
it a god—Let us suppose a god made with the great- 
est cost and art. J'hey bear him upon the shoulder 
—From that place where he is made, unto that place 
where they intend to set him up. From his place 
shall he not remove—Or, rather, he cannot remove. 
He cannot stir, either hand or foot, to help his peo- 
ple. Remember this—Consider these things which 
I now speak, O ye Israelites; and show yourselves 
men—Act like reasonable creatures, and be not so 
brutish as to worship your own works: be so wise 
and courageous as to withstand all solicitations to 
idolatry. Bring it again to mind, O ye transgres- 
sors—Think of this again and again, O ye who have 
been guilty of this foolish sin, and who, therefore, 
are obliged to take the better heed, lest you should 
relapse into it again. 

Verses 9-11. 
What I have done for you and in the world, my evi- 
dent predictions of future things, justified by the 
event; and those other miraculous works, whereby 
I have abundantly proved my divinity. Declaring 
the end from the beginning—Foretelling from the 
beginning of the world, or from the beginning of 
your nation, those future events which me hap- 


Remember the former things— ; 


‘ 


Prophecy concerning the 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


destruction of Babylon. 


11 Calling a ravenous bird ° from 

- the east, ? the man "that executeth 

my counsel from a far country: yea, *I have 

spoken 2¢, I will also bring it to pass; I have 
purposed 7¢, I will also do it. 

12 % Hearken unto me, ye * stout-heart- 


A. M. 3294, 
0. 


ed, “that are far from righteous- 3 u. ee 
ness. Aiteestin ses 

13 *I bring near my righteousness ; it shall 
not be far off, and my salvation ¥shall not 
tarry: and I will place * salvation in Zion for 
Israel my glory. 


Chap. xli. 2, 25. 2 Heb. the man of my counsel. 
xliv. 28; xlv. 13. s Num. xxiii. 19. 


* Chap, 


pen in succeeding ages, even to the end of the 
world, or to the end of your commonwealth; for 
such predictions we find delivered by Moses, the 
first founder of their state. My counsel shall stand 
—As I will not, so no other power can, disappoint 
my purposes and predictions. This is another argu- 
ment urged for the divinity of the God of Israel, 
namely, his foreknowledge and prediction of future 
events, of which the prophet subjoins a particular 
instance in the next words. Calling a ravenous 
bird, or eagle, from the east—From Persia, as Isa. 
xli. 2. “ There can be no doubt that Cyrus is here 
meant. Kings and princes are often compared in 
Scripture to eagles, Jer. xlix. 22; Ezek. xvii.3. But 
it has been thought that there is a peculiar propriety 
in this application to Cyrus, as the eagle well de- 
notes the magnanimity, the quickness of judgment, 
the celerity in all his expeditions and motions, for 
which Cyrus was so remarkable. We are also told 
by Plutarch, that Cyrus had an aquiline nose; and 
Xenophon expressly relates, that his standard was a 
golden eagle; which yet continues, says he, to be 
the standard of the Persian kings.”—Vitringa. 
Verses 12, 13. Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted 
—*“ God had addressed those kindly who had suffer- 
ed themselves, through imprudence, to be seduced 


id 


“Rom. x. 3. *Chap. li.5; Rom. i. 17; 


t Psa. Ixxvi. 5. 
iii y Hab. ii. 3——* Chap. Ixii. 11. 


iii. 21. 


from the right way, and whose conversion might 
more reasonably be expected; but he speaks more 
severely to the hypocrites, the incredulous, the 
fierce and proud in heart, who obstinately doubted 
the completion of his excellent promises: ‘O you, 
says he, who are yourselves far from faith, truth, in- 
tegrity, and all true piety, but full of deceit, hypo- 
crisy, incredulity, and who complain thatmy salva- 
tion is far off, and call my fidelity in question, 
hearken to me, and know that my righteousness, or 
justification, is not far off, but near at hand, and 
shortly to be revealed’” Jbring near my right- 
eousness—Though you are unrighteous, I will show 
myself a righteous and faithful God, making good 
my promise of delivering you out of Babylon after 
seventy years. J¢ shall not be far off—Namely, 
my work of saving you from captivity. J will place 
salvation in Zion—I will bring my people from 
Babylon to Zion, and there I will save them from all 
their enemies; for Israel my glory—In whom I 
will again glory, as my people, and the illustrious 
monuments of my wisdom, power, truth, and good- 
ness ; whom I will make a great and glorious peo- 
ple, though now they are mean and contemptible, 
and among whom I will once more settle my glori- 
ous presence and ordinances. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


The prophet had intimated the destruction of the Babylonish empire in a few words at the beginning of the last chapter ; and 
he here foretels it more plainly, and denounces it as a just judgment upon the Babylonians for their cruelty toward God's 


people, 1-6. Their pride and carnal security, 7-9. 


Their confidence in themselves and contempt of God, 10. 


Their 


magic arts, their enchantments and sorceries, which should be so far from affording them any help or support, that they 


should hasten their ruin, 11-15. 


(jOME “ down, and ° sit in the dust, 
O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit 
on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter 


A. M, 3294. 
B. C. 710. 


a Jer. xlviii. 18.——» Chap. iii. 26. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVI. 

Verses 1, 2. Come down—From thy throne ; and 
sit in the dust—As a mourner for thy approaching 
calamities; O virgin daughter of Babylon—Thou 
that art tender and delicate like a virgin. Sit on the 
ground—In a condition the most abject and de- 
graded. There is no throne—Namely, for thee. 


of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no A. M. 3294. 
more be called tender and delicate. ote des 
2 ¢'Take the millstones and grind meal : 


¢ Exod. xi. 5; Judg. xvi. 21;.Matt. xxiv. 41. 


Imperial power is taken from thee, and translated 
to the Persians. Thou shalt no more be called ten- 
der—Thou shalt be reduced to the greatest hard- 
ships and miseries. ‘J'ake the millstones—Thou 
shalt be subjected to the basest kind of slavery, which 
grinding at the mill was esteemed; for that work 
was most generally performed by slaves. The reader 
235 


The cruelty of 


ISAIAH. 


the Chaldeans. 


A. M. 3294. uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, 
B.C: 7) “uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers. 
3 4 Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, 
thy shame shall be seen : °I will take ven- 
geance, and I will not meet ¢hee as a man. 

4 As for four Redeemer, the Lorn of hosts 
is his name, the Holy One of Israel. 

5 Sit thou & silent, and get thee into dark- 


4 Chapter iii. 17; xx.45; Jeremiah xiii. 22,26; Nah. iii. 5. 
e Romans xii. 19.—f Chapter xliii. 3, 14; Jeremiah 1. 34. 
& 1 Sam. ii. 9. 


will observe, “they used hand-mills: water-mills 
were not invented till a little before the time of Au- 
gustus Cesar: wind-mills long after. It was not 
only the work of slaves to grind corn, but the hard- 
est work; and often inflicted upon them as a severe 
punishment. And in the East it was the work of fe- 
male slaves, Exod. xi. 5, and xii. 29; (in the version 
of the LXX.;) Matt. xxiv. 41. And it is the same 
to this day. ‘Women alone,’ says Shaw, p. 297, 
‘are employed to grind their corn.’ ‘They are the 
female slaves,’ says Sir. J. Chardin, ‘ that are ‘gene- 
rally employed in the East at those hand-mills: it is 
extremely laborious, and esteemed the lowest em- 
ployment in the house.’”—Bishop Lowth. Uncover 
thy locks—Take off the ornaments wherewith:such 
women as were of good quality used to cover and 
dress their heads. These are predictions of what 
they should be forced to do or suffer. Make bare 
the leg, &c.—Gird up thy garments close and short 
about thee, that thou mayest be fit for travelling on 
foot, and for passing over those rivers through which 
thou wilt be constrained to wade in the way to the 
land of thy captivity. 

Verse 3. Thy nakedness shall be uncovered— 
Hither for want of raiment to cover it, or rather, by 
thine enemies in the way of scorn and contumely. 
I will take vengeance—Upon thee, for thy many and 
great injuries done to my people. J will not meet 
thee as a man—But like an Almighty God, whose 
power thou canst not resist. I will not treat thee 
with moderation and gentleness, as those men who 
have not quite put off humanity use to do, but like 
a lion, to tear thee to pieces: see Hos. v. 14; and 
xiii. 7,8. Thou shalt feel the most dreadful effects 
of my anger, and I will show no humanity or pity 
towardthee, The original expression, D4N PIDs 8, 
is peculiar, and: is literally, J will not meet a man, 
which may be an inverted sentence put for, @ man 
shall not meet me, that is, no man shall prevent or 
hinder the effects of my wrath. Bishop Lowth ren- 
ders it, “ Neither will I suffer a man to intercede 
with me.” 

Verse 4. As for our Redeemer, &c.—The words, 
as for, not being in the Hebrew text, Bishop Lowth 
translates this verse, “ Our Avenger, Jehovah God 
of hosts, the Holy One of Israel, is his name.” And 
he observes, ‘Here a chorus breaks in upon the 
midst of the subject, with a change of construction 
as well as sentiment, from the longer to the shorter 


ness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: A. M. 3294, 
» for thou shalt no more be called, The aa 
lady of kingdoms. 

6 ‘Iwas wroth with my people, *I have 
polluted mine inheritance, and given them 
into thy hand: thou didst show them no 
mercy; ‘upon the ancient hast thou very 
heavily laid thy yoke. 


hVerse 7; Chap. xiii. 19; Dan. ii. 37.—i2 Sam. xxiv. 14; 
2 Chron. xxviii.9; Zech, i. 15. Chap. xliii. 28.—— Deut. 
xxviii. 50. 


style are resumed.” ‘The passage seems to be insert- 
ed in the midst of this prophecy against Babylon, 
as Jacob inserts a like passage in the midst. of his 
blessings and prophecies concerning his sons, Gen. 
xlix. 18. It gives the reason why the judgment, 
here denounced, should be certainly inflicted, be- 
cause he who had undertaken it was the Lord of 
hosts, and therefore able to effect it; and the Holy 
One, and the Redeemer of Israel, whom the Baby- 
lonians had cruelly oppressed, whose quarrel God 
would avenge upon them, and whom he had deter- 
mined and promised to deliver out of their hands. 
If the words be considered as a pathetical exclama- 
tion, or acclamation of God’s people, they thereby 
ascribe to God, as their God and Redeemer, this 
wonderful work of breaking the staff of their op- 
pressors: and they make their boast of, and celebrate 
him for, this glorious deliverance. 

Verses 5, 6. Sit thow silent—Through grief and 
shame, and as mourners used to do, Job ii. 13. 
Cease thy vaunting and insolent speeches. And cet 
thee into darkness—Thou shalt go into an obscure, 
disconsolate, and calamitous condition. Thou shalt 
no more be the lady of kingdoms—The chief and 
glory of all kingdoms; the most large, potent, and 
glorious empire of the world, as thou hast been. J 
was wroth with my people—* The metaphor in this 
verse,” says Vitringa, “is taken from a father, who, 
being angry with his children, delivers them up to 
chastisement ; but his anger soon subsiding, and his 
affection reviving, he turns his indignation against 
those who had so executed his commands, as to 
punish immoderately and severely.” J have pol- 
luted mine inheritance—I cast them away as an 
unclean thing; I stained their glory; I removed 
them from the place of my presence and worship ; 
I banished them into a polluted land, among unclean 
persons, by whom they were many ways defiled. 
And given them into thy hand—To punish them. 
Thou didst show them no mercy—Thou hast ex- - 
ceeded the bounds of thy commission, and, instead 
of that compassion which humanity teaches men to 
show to such as are in misery, thou didst exercise 
toward them the greatest cruelty. Upon the ancient 
—The old and feeble, whose venerable gray hairs 
should have been their sufficient protection; hast 
thou very heavily laid thy yoke—Not considering 
that, besides the calamity of being made captives, 
they were afflicted with the miseries of old age, and 


kind of verse ; after which, the former subject and || therefore required both thy pity and reverence, | tt 
‘Se 


236 


The pride and folly 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


of the Chaldeans. 


a 
0V_6—00WwWwasSsamamS$SmM9wmm9m9MmmHo9aDoaDTuo—””.. aan 


A.M. 3294. 7 And thou saidst, I shall be ™a 
B.C. 710. ; 
———— lady for ever : so that thou didst not 
"Jay these things to thy heart, ° neither didst 
remember the latter end of it. 

8 Therefore hear now this, thow that art 
given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, 
that sayest in thy heart, ?I am, and none else 
beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, 
neither shall I know the loss of children : 

9 But * these two things shall come to thee 

m Verse 5; Rev. xviii. 7—— Chapter xlvi. 8. ° Deut. 


xxxii. 29——pP Verse 10; Zeph. ii. 15——4 Rev. xviii. 7. 
t Chap. li. 19. 


is justly observed here by Bishop Lowth, that “ God, 
in the course of his providence, makes use of great 
conquerors and tyrants, as his instruments, to exe- 
cute his judgments in the earth: he employs one 
wicked nation to scourge another. The inflicter of 
the punishment may, perhaps, be as culpable as the 
sufferer, and may add to his guilt by indulging his 
cruelty in executing God’s justice. When he has 
fulfilled the work to which divine vengeance has or- 
dained him, he will become himself the object of it: 
see chap. x. 5-12. God charges the Babylonians, 
though employed by himself to chastise his people, 
with cruelty in regard to them. They exceeded 
the bounds of justice and humanity in oppressing 
and destroying them; and though they were really 
executing the righteous decree of God, yet, as far as 
it regarded themselves, they were only indulging 
their own ambition and violence.” 

Verses 7,8. Thou sayest, I shallbea lady for ever 
—I shall always be the chief city and mistress of the 
world, and shall never know any change of condi- 
tion in this respect. If we consider that the city of 
Babylon had no less than one hundred gates made 
of solid brass; that its walls were two hundred feet 
high, and fify broad, according to the lowest account 
given of them by historians, and, according to some, 
three hundred and fifty feet in height, and eighty- 
seven in thickness, so that six chariots could go 
abreast upon them; that it was defended by the 
river Euphrates, and supplied with provisions for 
many years; it might well be deemed impregnable: 
and “such a city as this might, with less vanity than 
any other, boast that she should continue for ever, 
if any thing human could continue for ever.””—Bi- 
shop Newton. Zhou didst not lay these things to 
thy heart—Thy cruel usage of my people, and the 
heavy judgments which thou hadst reason to expect 
for them. Neither didst thou remember the latter 
end—Thou wast so puffed up with pride, and so in- 
fatuated with ease and pleasure, that thou didst not 
consider the instability of all worldly power and 


greatness, and what might and was likely to befall: 


thee afterward. Therefore hear, thou that dwellest 

carelessly—And layest nothing to heart ; that sayest, 

I am, and none else beside me—I am independent, 

self-sufficient, and unchangeable, and there is none, 

no people, state, or kingdom, that is not either sub- 

ject, or far inferior to me in power and glory. J 
3 


‘in a moment in one day, the loss A. M. 3294. 
of children, and widowhood: they Ve 
shall come upon thee in their perfection, * for 
the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great 
abundance of thine enchantments. 

10 For thou * hast trusted in thy wicked- 
ness: *thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy 
wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath ! perverted 
thee; ¥ and thou hast said in thy heart, I am, 
and none else besides me. 


81 Thess. v. 3.——t Nah, iii. 4, 
xxix. 15; Ezek. viii. 12; ix. 9. 
away. y Verse 8. 


4 Psa. lil. 7. x Chap. 
1 Or, caused thee to turn 


shall not sit as a widow—In solitude and sorrow: I 
shall not lose that wealth and dignity to which Iam 
wedded. 'The kingdom shall never want a monarch 
to espouse and. protect it, and be a husband to the 
state... Neither shall [know the loss of children— 
The diminution of the number of my people. I shall 
never want either a king or people to defend me 
from all dangers. 

Verse 9. These two things shall come to thee— 
The very two things that thou didst set at defiance; 
loss of children and widowhood—Both. thy princes 
and thy people shall be cut off, so that thou shalt be 
no more a government, and no moreanation, They 
shall come in their perfection—In the highest de- 
gree: thy king and kingdom shall be utterly and 
irretrievably destroyed. This prophecy was twice 
fulfilled ; “having been accomplished the yery night 
that Babylon was taken, when the Persians slew the 
king himself and a great number of the Babylonians: 
it was fulfilled a second time, when that city was be- 
sieged by Darius.. Being determined to hold out to 
the last extremity, they took all their women, and 
each man choosing one of them, whom he liked 
best, out of his own family, they strangled all the 
rest, that unnecessary mouths might not consume 
their provision. By means of this shocking expe- 
dient they sustained a siege and all the efforts of 
Darius for twenty months, and the city was at last 
taken by stratagem. As soon as Darius made him- 
self master of the place, he ordered three thousand 
of the principal men to be crucified ; and thus this 
prophecy was signally fulfilled, both by the hands 
of the Babylonians themselves, and by the cruelties 
exercised upon them by their conquerors.”—Bishop 
Newton. For the multitude of thy sorceries—For 
thy superstitious and magical practices, which were 
very frequent in Babylon, as we see below, (verses 
12, 13,) and as has been observed before. Hebrew, 
in the multitude, &c., or, as Dr. Waterland renders 
it, “ Notwithstanding the multitude of thy sorceries, 
and the force of thy enchantments ;” notwithstand- 
ing all thy diabolical artifices, whereby thou thinkest 
to foresee all dangers, and to secure thyself from 
them. 

Verses 10, 11. For thou hast trusted in thy wick- 
edness—Thou hast thought that thy cunning and 
policy would still preserve thee; and hast said, 
None seeth me—My counsels are so deeply and 

237 


ISATAH. 


of the Chaldeans. 


The pride and folly 
A. a ane 11 Therefore shall evil come upon 


thee; thou shalt not know * from 
whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall 
upon thee; thou shalt not be able to 
3 put it off: and 7 desolation shall come 
upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not 
know. 

12 4 Stand now with thine enchantments, 
and with the multitude of thy sorceries, where- 
in thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so 
be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou 
mayest prevail. 

13 *'Thou art wearied in the multitude of 


thy counsels. Let now ” the * astro- A.M, 3294. 
logers, the star-gazers, >the monthly teed, 
prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from 
these things that shall come upon thee. 

14 Behold, they shall be °as stubble; the 
fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver 
6 themselves from the power of the flame: 
there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire 
to sit before it. 

15 Thus shall they be unto thee ee whom 
thou hast laboured, even 4 thy merchants from 
thy youth: they shall wander every one to 
his quarter ; none shall save thee. 


2 Heb. the morning thereof. 
salonians v, 3. a Chapter lvii. 10. 
Dan. ii. 2. 


3 Heb. expiate——z 1 Thes- 
b Chapter xliv. 25; 


ceraftily laid, and my designs so secretly carried on, 
that none can discover them or prevent their execu- 
tion. And thou hast supposed that God himself 
either did not regard thee, or would not call thee to 
an account for thy wicked conduct. Thy wisdom 
and thy knowledge—Thy skill in the arts of human 
policy, or thy pretended foreknowledge of future 
events by astrology; hath perverted thee—Hath 
misled thee into the way of transgression and per- 
dition; and thou hast said, I am, &c.—This is re- 
peated from verse 8, to signify their intolerable ar- 
rogance and self-confidence. Therefore shall evil 
come upon thee—Which thou shalt neither have 
time nor means to provide against or to prepare for ; 
thou shalt not know from whence it riseth—Or, 
rather, when it shall come; Hebrew, M1nw, the 
morning of it, the day, or time, of its approach. 
With all thy skill in astrology and fortune-telling, 
thou shalt neither be able to foresee the evil that is 
coming upon thee, nor to prevent it. This inter- 
pretation agrees with the history, Babylon being 
surprised by Cyrus when they were in a state of the 
greatest security, as is manifest both from the Scrip- 
tures and from other authentic records: see Jer. li. 
31; Dan. v. And desolation shall come upon thee 
suddenly—As a thief in the night; which thou shalt 
not know—Or, when thou shalt not know. 'Thou 
shalt not apprehend thy danger till it be too late. 
Fair warning was indeed given them, by this and 
other prophets of the Lord, of this desolation ; but 
they slighted that notice, and would give no credit 
to it; and therefore justly was it so ordered, that 
they ‘should have no other warning of it, but that 
‘partly through their own security, and partly through 
the swiftness and subtlety of the enemy, when it 
came it should be a perfect surprise to them. 
238 


* Heb. viewers of the heavens. 5 Heb. that give knowledge con- 
cerning the months———¢ Nah. i. 10; Mal. iv. 1——® Heb. their 
souls, 4 Rey. xviii. 11. 


Verse 12-15. Stand now with thine enchantments— 
Persist in these practices. Wherein thou hast la- 
boured from thy youth—From the beginning of thy 
kingdom. For the Chaldeans. in all ages were 
famous, or rather infamous, for the study and prac- 
tice of these arts. TJ'how art wearied in thy coun- 
sels—Thou hast spent thy time and strength in going 
from one to another, in trying all manner of experi- 
ments, and all to no purpose. Let now the astrolo- 
gers, §c., stand up—To succour thee, or to inquire 
for thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble—They 
shall have no more power to withstand the calami- 
ties coming upon them than stubble has to resist the 
violence of the fire. They shall not deliver them- 
selves from the flame—And much less thee. There 
shall not be a coal to warm at, &c.—They shall be 
totally consumed, and all the comfort which thon 
didst expect from them shall utterly vanish. "hus 
shall they be unto thee—Such comfortless and help- 
less creatures, namely, thy sorcerers, astrologers, 
&e.; with whom thou hast laboured—Upon whom 
thou hast spent thy time, pains, and money; even 
thy merchants—Or negotiators, as Bishop Lowth 
translates JM, with whom thou hast had so much 
intercourse, and so many dealings. They shail 
wander every one to his quarter—Or, as some inter- 
pret the meaning, “'They shall wander by whatso- 
ever ways they can to the extreme boundaries of 
thy empire, to save themselves from the general 
calamity.” None shall save thee—From thy im- 
pending ruin, but all shall leave thee to perish with- 
out help, and without hope. Observe, reader, they, 
and only they, are safe and happy, who, by- faith 
and prayer, deal with one that will always be a pre- 
sent help in time of trouble to those that flee to him 
for refuge, and trust in him. 

a 


The obstinacy of 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


the. Jews reproved. 


CHAPTER XLVIIL. 


According to Vitringa, the fourth discourse of the fourth part of this prophecy is contained in this chapter. In which we 
have, (1,) A solemn address to the Jews, reproving them for their hypocrisy, obstinacy, and especially their idolatry, not- 
withstanding the many convincing proofs God had given them of his true and sole dwinity, 1-8, (2,) An assurance that 
their deliverance would be wrought purely for the sake of God’s own name, and not for any merit of theirs, 9-11. (3,) 
An encouragement given them to depend purely on God’s power and promise for their deliverance, showing that his predic- 
tion concerning the raising up of Cyrus, and many others, had been declared clearly and publicly, 12-16. (4,) He removes 
from himself the charge of those evils which had happened to the nation, as they might have enjoyed his favour, and the 


blessings consequent thereon, if they had conducted themselves otherwise, 17-19. 


(5,) Proclaims their release from Baby- 


lon, and enjoins them to declare everywhere the blessing of it, and the singular care of Providence over them in their 


return, 20, 21.  (6,) No peace to the wicked, 22. 


A. Ue oo HEAR ye this, O house of Jacob, 

Rent RS which are called by the name of 
Israel, and * are come forth out of the waters 
of Judah, » which swear by the name of the 
Lorp, and make mention of the God of Israel, 
© but not in truth, nor in righteousness. 

2 For they call themselves ‘of the holy city, 
and ° stay themselves upon the God of Israel ; 
The Lorp of hosts is his name. 

3 ‘I have declared the former things from 
the beginning ; and they went forth out of 


2 Psa. lxviii. 26.—— Deut. vi. 13; Chap. Ixv. 16; Zeph. i. 5. 
eJer. iv. 2; v.2-—1 Chap. lii. 1. © Mic, iii, 11; Rom, 
it a7. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVIII. 

Verses 1, 2. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob—For 
your conviction and humiliation; that, acknowledg- 
ing God to be just, and even merciful, in what he 
has brought upon you, you may give glory to him, 
and take shame to yourselves; which are called by 
the name of Israel—Who are Israelites in name, but 
not in truth; and are come out of the waters of Ju- 
dah—From the lineage of your progenitor, Judah, 
as waters flow from a fountain; which swear by the 
name of the Lord—Who profess the true religion, 
one act thereof being put for all; that own him to 
be the true God and your God, and give glory to 
him as the righteous judge of all. Or, that swear 
to the name of the Lord, as the words may be ren- 
dered; that take an oath of allegiance to him as your 
king, and join yourselves to him in covenant. And 
make mention of the God of Israel—In your prayers 
and praises, who often speak of, seem to glory in, 
and call yourselves by his name; but not in truth 
‘nor in righteousness—Which are the two chief in- 
gredients of a lawful oath, and of a sincere profes- 
sion of religion. Observe, reader, our religious 
professions avail nothing unless they be made in 
truth and righteousness. If we be not sincere in 
them, we do but take the name of the Lord our God 
in vain. For—Or, as the Hebrew particle often 
signifies, Though, they call themselves the holy 
city~-Though they glory in this, that they are citi- 
zens of Jerusalem, a city sanctified by God himself 
to be the only place of his true worship and gracious 
presence, which, as it was a great privilege, so it 
laid a great obligation upon them to walk more 

3 2 


my mouth, and I showed them; I A. M. 3296. 
did them suddenly, * and they came ees 
to pass. 

4 Because I knew that thou art ' obstinate, 
and * thy neck ¢s an iron sinew, and thy brow 
brass ; 

5 ‘I have even from the beginning declared 
it to thee; before it came to pass I showed it 
thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath 
done them; and my graven image, and my 
molten image, hath commanded them. 


€ Chap. xli. 225 xlii, 9; xliii. 9; xliv. 7,8; xlv. 21; xlvi. 9, 
10.—<£ Joshua xxi. 45. 1 Heb. hard. h Exod. xxxii. 9; 
Deut. xxxi. 27.—— Verse 3. 


holily than they did. And stay themselves upon the 
God of Israel—Not by a true and well-grounded 
faith, but by a vain and presumptuous confidence, 
flattering themselves, as that people commonly did, 
that they should enjoy peace and safety, notwith- 
standing all their wickedness, because they were the 
Lord’s people, and had his temple and ordinances 
among them; which disposition the prophets fre- 
quently notice, and sharply censure in them. 

Verses 3-5. Ihave declared—That is, predicted; 
the former things—Those things which are already 
come to pass. These, opposed to new things, (verse 
6,) seem to intend the events foretold by Isaiah in 
the former part of this book, relating to the two con- 
federate kings of Syria and Israel, (chap. vii.,) and to 
Sennacherib, (chap. x.,) as the new things, and things 
to come, (chap. xli. 22,) respect the Babylonian cap- 
tivity, and their return from thence, as figures of gos- 
pel times. They went forth out of my mouth, and 
I did them suddenly—What my mouth foretold my 
hand effected, even when there was no likelihood 
of such events taking place, whereby I gave you full 
proof of my Godhead. Because I knew that thou 
art obstinate—Therefore I gave thee the more and 
clearer demonstrations of my nature and providence, 
because I knew thou wast an unbelieving and per- 
verse nation, that would not easily nor willingly be 
convinced. And thy neck an iron sinew—Which 
would not bow down to receive my yoke. It isa 
metaphor taken from untamed and stubborn oxen. 
The sense is, I considered that thou wast unteachable 
and incorrigible. And thy brow brass—That thou 
wast impudent and insolent. Before it came to pass 

239 


* 


ISAIAH 


God’s mercy to the Jews f i } 


A. M. 3296. 


6 Thou hast heard, see all this; 
C: 708. 


and will not ye declare i¢? I have 
showed thee new things from this time, 
even hidden things, and thou didst not know 
them. 

7 They are created now, and not from the 
beginning ;. even before the day when thou 
heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, 
Behold, I knew them. 

8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest 
not; yea, from that time ¢hat thine ear was not 
opened : for I knew that thou wouldest deal very 


in their captivity. 


treacherously, and wast called * a A. M. 3296. 
B. C. 708. 
transgressor from the womb, Set ae 

9 4 ! For my name’s sake ™ will I defer mine 
anger, and for my praise will I refrain ee thee, 
that I cut thee not off. ; 

10 Behold, “I have refined thee, frist not 2 with 
silver; I Lave chosen thee in the furnace of 
affliction. 

11 » For mine own sake, even for mine own 
sake, will I do i¢: for thow should my name 
be polluted? and * I will not give my 'y glory unto 
another. 


k Psa. lviii. 3——1! Psa. Ixxix.9; evi.8; Ch. xliii. 25; Ver. 11; 
Ezek. xx. 9, 14, 22, 44. m Psa. Ixxviii. 38. » Psa. Ixvi. 10. 


* 2 Or, for silver ; Ezek. xxii. 20,21, 22. p Ver. 9.——4 Deut, 
xxxii. 26, 27; Ezek. xx. 9. r’ Chap. xhi. 8. 


I showed it thee, lest, &e.—I foretold these things, 
that it might be evident that they were the effects of 
my counsel, and not of thine idols. “God ordained 
a succession cf prophets to foretel the most remark- 
able events which should happen to the Jews, on 
purpose to prevent their ascribing them to their idols, 
which their infidelity and obstinacy might have 
prompted them to do.”—Lowth. 

Verses 6-8. Thou hast heard, see all this—As 
thou hast heard all these things, ‘from time to time, 
seriously consider them. And will not ye declare 
it—I call you to witness: must you not be forced to 
acknowledge the truth of what Isay?. Ihave show- 
ed thee new things from this time—And I have now 
given thee new predictions of secret things, such as 
till this time were wholly unknown to thee, concern- 
ing thy deliverance out of Babylon by Cyrus. They 
are created now—Revealed to thee by me; brought 
to light, as things are by creation. The idea is ele- 
gant; for what is revealed exists by the word that 
proceeds from the mouth of God, which is the cha- 
racter of creation. And not from the beginning— 
Hebrew, 1x9 0), not from thence, not from these 
ancient times when other things were revealed to 
thee. Even before the day—Hebrew, and, or, or 
before this day. This day answers to now in the 
first clause, and seems to be added as an exposition 
of it; when thou heardest them not—Hebrew, And 
thou didst not hear them, namely, before this time 
in which God hath revealed them to thee by my 
ministry. Lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew 
them—Kither by thine own sagacity, or by the help 
of thine idols. Yea, thou knewest not—The same 
thing is repeated, because this was so illustrious a 
proof of the infinite power and providence of God, 
and so clear and full a discovery of the vanity of 
idols. Yea, from that time—Hebrew,. from then, as 
in the foregoing verse; thine ear was not opened— 
That is, thou didst not hear; I did not reveal these 
things unto thee: for so this phrase of opening the 
ear is understood, 1 Sam. ix. 15. For I knew that 
thou wouldest deal treacherously—I knew all these 
cautions were necessary to cure thine infidelity. 
And wast called—Namely, justly and truly ; atrans- 
gressor from the womb—Thou wast indeed such 
from thy very origin as a people. The contents of 

240 


this verse, therefore, are not only to be considered 
as a confirmation of what was said in the preceding 
verse, namely, that the Jews had no knowledge of 
these new things, (as they are called verse 6,) before 
the revelation of them made by Isaiah; but as “ con- 
taining a conviction of the inconsideration, ineredu- 
lity, and prejudices of the Jewish people; who, 
notwithstanding the prophecies so clearly fulfilled 
among them, had neither duly attended to them, nor 
become obedient to God, which he observes was. 
nothing strange, since, from the first time of their 
adoption as a people, from their deliverance ont of 
Egypt, which was, as it were, their birth, they had. 
been full of perfidy and transgression. ” See Vi- 
tringa. 

Verses 9-11. For my name’s sake will I defer 
mine anger—Although thou dost justly deserve my 
hottestangerand most dreadful judgments, whichalso, » 
if thou repentest not, I will in due time inflict, yet at 
present I will spare thee, and deliver thee out of cap- 
tivity, not for thy sake, but merely for my own sake, 
and for the vindication of my name, that I may be 
praised for my power, faithfulness, and goodness. 
Behold, I have refined thee—Although I will not eut 
thee off, yet I will put thee into the furnate, not to 
consume, but to purify thee, and purge away thy 
dross. Not with. silver—Not with such a furious 
heat, nor for so long a time, as is required to melt 
down silver; I will not deal so rigorously with thee, 
for then I should wholly consume thee. In judg- 
ment I will remember mercy. It must be observed, 
that silver is the most difficult to be refined, and re- 
quires a hotter and clearer fire than gold and other 
metals. I have chosen thee in the furnace of afftic- 
tion—I have taken this method to purge thee from 
thy dross, and render thee a chosen people to my- © 
self. For mine own sake will I do it-——Namely, this 
great work of delivering my people out of Babylon. 
For how should my name be. polluted—If 1 should 
not deliver my people, my name would be profaned ~ 
and blasphemed, as if I were either impotent; or im- 
placable to them. J will not give my glory unto 
another—I will not give any colour to idolaters, to ; 
ascribe the divine nature and properties to idols, as 
they would do if I did not reseue my people ad Lindl 
their hands, in spite of their idols. tafe 3 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


God the only 
Sa. 2908. 12 % Hearken unto me, O Jacob 


® and Israel, my called ; 
am the * first, I also az the last. 

13 * My hand also hath laid the foundation 
of the earth, and *my right hand hath spanned 
the heavens: when *1 call unto them, they 
stand up together. 

14 ¥ All ye, assemble yourselves and hear; 
which among them hath declared these things ? 
7 'The Lorp hath loved him: *he will do his 
pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on 
the Chaldeans. 

15 I, even I, have spoken, yea, °I have called 


‘lam he; I 


. 


infallible teacher. 


him: I have brought him, and he A. M. 3296. 
B. C. 708. 

shall make his way prosperous. ——_— 

16 “| Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; 
°T have not spoken in secret from the begin- 
ning ; from the time that it was, there amI: and 
now “the Lord Gop, and his Spirit, hath sent me. 

17 'Thus saith ° the Lorp, thy Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel: I am the Lorp thy God 
which teacheth thee to profit, ‘which leadeth 
thee by the way that thou shouldest go. 

18 £O that thou hadst hearkened to my com- 
mandments! "then had thy peace been as a river, 
and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea: 


s Deut. xxxii. 39.—+* Chap. xli. 4; xliv.6; Rev. i.17; xxii. 


13. u Psa. ci. 25.——4 Or, the palm of my right hand hath 
spread out.——* Chap. xl. 26.——Y Chap. xli. 22; xlili. 9; xliv. 
7; xiv. 20, 21. 


Verses 12, 13. Hearken unto me, Israel, my called 
—Whom I have called out of the world to be my 
peculiar people, to serve, and glorify, and enjoy me; 
and therefore you, of all others; have least cause to 
forsake me, or to follow after idols. My right hand 
hath spanned, or doth span, the heavens—Or, hath 
meted them out with a span, as the phrase is, Isa. 
xl. 12; hath stretched them out by an exact measure, 
as the workman sometimes metes out his work by 
spans. See also the margin. When J call them, 
they stand up together—“ Nothing can give us a 
more sublime idea of God than this passage. The 
idea is taken from servants, who, at the voice of their 
masters, instantly rise up, and stand ready to execute 
their commands. The whole creation, at the call of 
God, arises with prompt obedience, and is ready to 
execute his sovereign will.”—Dodd. 

Verses 14,15. All ye assemble yourselves and hear 
—Ye Jews, to whom he addressed his speech, (verse 
12,) and to whom he continues to speak; which 
among them hath declared these things—Which of 
the gods, whom any of you have served, or do now 
serve? The prophet gives a general challenge to 
the idols and their worshippers, to bring proof that 
ever such a remarkable turn of providence as that 
of the Jews’ restoration was foretold by any of the 
heathen oracles. T'he Lord hath loved him—Name- 


ly, Cyrus; that is, he hath done him this favour, this || 


honour, to make him an instrument of the redemp- 
tion of his people, and therein a type of the great Re- 
deemer, God’s beloved Son. He will do his pleasure 
on Babylon—Cyrus shall execute what the Lord 
hath appointed for the destruction of Babylon, and 
the deliverance of God’s people. And his arm 
shall be on the Chaldeans—He shall smite and sub- 
due them. J, even I, have spoken, &c.—Both the 
prediction and the execution of this great work are 
to be ascribed to me only. The idols had no hand 
therein. He shall make his way prosperous—I will 
give him good success in his undertaking. 

Verse 16. Come ye near unto me, &c.—That you 
may the better hear me. Here, as in verse 14, Jacob 
and Israel are summoned to hearken to the prophet 

Vor. III. ( 16 ) 


z Chap. xlv. 1. «Chap. xliv. 28.——>Chap. xlv. 1, 2. 
¢ Chap. xlv. 19——4 Chap. Ixi.1; Zech. ii. 8, 9, 11. ¢ Chap. 
xliii. 14; xliv. 6, 24; Verse 20. f Psa. xxxii. 8, 5 Deut. 


h Psa. exix. 165. 


XXXil. 29 ; Psa. ixxxi. 13. 


speaking in God’s name, and as a type of the great 
prophet, by whom God has in these last days spoken 
unto us. I have not spoken in secret—I have not 
suppressed, concealed, or kept back the counsel 
and word of God, or any part thereof, but have 
declared it openly and publicly. See nete on chap. 
xlv. 19, where these very words are spoken by 
God in his own name, as they are here by the 
prophet in God’s name. JLrom the beginning— 
From the first time that I began to prophesy until 
now: os, if the prophet be considered as uttering 
God’s words, the meaning is, From the beginning 
of my taking you to be my people, and revealing 
my mind to you. Irom the time that it was, there 
am, or rather, was, J—These words also, as well as 
the former, are the words either, 1st, Of the pro- 
phet; andso the sense is, From the time that I was 
first called to be a prophet, I have been there, that 
is, I have diligently pursued my prophetical func- 
tion; I have hearkened, from time to time, to hear 
what God would speak to me, that I might impart 
it to you: or, 2d, Of God ; and then the sense may 
be this: From the time that I first foretold it, I was 
there to take care to effect what I predicted. And. 
now—This is opposed to the foregoing words, from 
the beginning; the Lord God and his Spirit—God, 
by his Spirit, or God, even the Spirit, namely, the Holy 
Ghost, to whom the sending and inspiring of God’s 
prophets is ascribed, 2 Pet. i. 21; hath sent me-- 
Namely, the prophet, who yet was a type of Christ, 
and so this may have a respect to him also. 

Verses 17-19. Tam the Lord, which teacheth thee 
to profii—Who from time to time has made known 
to thee all necessary and useful doctrines, which, if 
observed by thee, would have been infinitely profit- 
able to thee, both for this life and that to come; so 
that it is not my fault, but thine own, if thou dost 
not profit: which leadeth thee, &c.——Who acquainteth 
thee with thy duty in all the concerns of thy life, so 
that thou canst not pretend ignorance. O that thou 
hadst hearkened, &c.—This failure hath not been on 
my part, but on thine: I gave thee my counsels and 


!commands, but thou hast neglected and disobeyed 
3 


i 


There is no peace 


ISATAH. 


unto the wicked. 


A. M. 3296. 


ged 19 ‘Thy seed also had been as the 


sand, and the offspring of thy bow- 
els like the gravel thereof; his name should 
not have been cut off nor destroyed from before 
me. sh it 
20 1 *Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from 
the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare 
ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth ; 


say ye, The Lorp hath ‘redeemed A. M. 3296. 
his servant Jacob. Son sa 
21 And they ™thirsted not sohieae he led them 
through the deserts: he ™ caused the waters to 
flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock 
also, and the waters gushed out. 
° There is no peace, saith the Lorp, unto 
the wicked. 


Gen. XXil. IT; . Hea. i, 10, Chap. lil. 11; Jer.1.8; li. 6, 
45 ; Zech. ii. 6, 7; Rev. xviii. 4, 
them, and that to thy own great disadvantage. Con- 


cerning such wishes as these, when ascribed to God, 
see note on Deut. v. 29, and xxxii. 29, and especially 
on Psa. Ixxxi. 13. - Then had thy peace been as a 
river--Which runs pleasantly, strongly, plentifully, | 
and constantly. ‘Thou shouldst have enjoyeda series 
of mercies, one continually following another, as the 
waters of a river, which always last, and not like the | 
waters of a land-flood, which are soon gone; and | 
thy righteousness—The fruit of thy righteousness, 
thy peace and prosperity; as the waves of the sea— | 
Numberless and abundant. Or the meaning may be 
Thou wouldest have been as remarkable for virtue | 
and holiness as for peace and happiness. Thy seed 
also had been as the sand--Namely, for multitude, 
according to my promise made to Abraham ; whereas 
now, for thy sins, I have greatly diminished thy 
mumnbens by invasions, captivities, and other judg- i 
ments. His name—The name of thy seed, or off- || 
spring, mentioned in the former clauses ; should not | 


| no mention 


|| the rock for them in the desert.” 


have been cut off—As now it hath been ina great 
measure, namely, from the land of Israel, which is || 
either desolate, or inhabited by strangers; nor de- 
stroyed from before me—Or, out of my sight, from 
the place of my special presence and residence. 
Verses 20, 21, Go ye forth of Babylon—The im- | 
perative is here, as it is very frequently, put for the | 
futures ye shall go forth, &c. For the words do. 
not so much contain a command asa promise. This | 
form of speaking, however, may be the rather used 
to intimate, that it was their duty to go forth, as well 
as God’s promise to earry them forth. Flee ye from | 
the Chaldeans—Not silently and sorrowfully, but | 
with a voice of singing—With joy, and songs of | 
praise to the Lord. Declare ye, &c., even to the end 
of the earth—Publish God’s wonderful works on 
your behalf to all nations. A figure this of the pub- 
lishing of the gospel to all the world. And they 
thirsted not, &c.—This is part of the matter which | 
the Jews are here commanded to declare to all peo- 
ple, as they had opportunity, namely, that God took 
the same care of them in their return from Babylon 
to Canaan, which was through many dry and deso- 
late places, ashe did of their forefathers, in their 
march from Egypt to Canaan. They thirsted not, 
&c.—That is, hey shall not thirst. He speaks of 
things to come, as if they were already present or 


past, asthe prophets commonly did. He caused the 

waters to flow out of, the rock, &c.—“Tf this pro- 

_ phecy,” says Kimchi, “relate to the return from the 
242 


1Exod. xix. 4, 5,6; Chap: be Fay 22, 23. Chap, 
n Ex. xvii. 6; Num. xx. he 


xli. 17,18. 
h. lvii. 21. 


Babylonish captivity, as it seems to do, it is to be 
wondered how it comes to pass, that in the book of 
Ezra, in which he gives an account of their return, 
is made, that such miracles were 
wrought for them; as, for instance, that God clave 
On this strange 
observation of the learned rabbi, Bishop Lowth re- 
marks as follows: “It is really much to be wonder- 
ed, that one of the most learned and judicious Jew- 
ish expositors ofthe Old Testament, having advanced 


/so far in a large comment on Isaiah; should ap- 
, | pear to be totally ignorant of the prophet’s manner 


of writing; of the parabolic style which prevails in 
the writings of all the prophets, and more particu- 


'|larly in the prophecy of Isaiah, which abounds 
|| throughout in parabolic images, from the beginning 


to the end: from Hear, O heavens, and give ear, 
O earth, to the worm and the fire in the last verse. 
And how came he to keep his wonderment to him- 
self so long? Why did he not expect, that the his- 
torian should have related how, as they passed 
through the desert, cedars, pines, and olive-trees shot 


Up at once on the side of the way to shade them ; 


and that, instead of briers and brambles, the acacia 
and the myrtle sprang up under their feet, accord- 
ing to God’s promises, chap. xli. 19, and lv. 13? 
These, and a multitude of the like parabolical or po- 
etical images, were never intended to be understood 
literally, All that the prophet designed in this 
place, and which he has executed in the most ele- 
gant manner, was an amplification and illustration 
of the gracious care and protection of God, youch- 
safed to his people in their return from Babylon, by 
an allusion to the miraculous exodus from Egypt.” 
Verse 22. There is no peace unto the wick 
God having, in the foregoing verses, foretold 
blessed deliverance which he would give to his ger- 
vant Jacob, (verse 20,) here adds an explication and 
limitation of the blessing, and declares that wicked 
men should not enjoy the benefit of this mercy. 
And by the wicked, he means the unbelieving and 
ungodly Jews ; of whom these very words are used 
again, (chap. vii. 21,) and for whom such a denun- 
ciation was very proper and necessary, because they 
were exceeding prone to ery, Peace, Peace, to 
themselves, when there was no solid ground of 
peace. This, therefore, was a very seasonable cau- 
tion to the Jews in Babylon, to take heed to them- 
selves, and prepare for this mercy. For those of 
them who should either oe tarry in oe 
( 16* 


Address of the 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


Messiah to the Gentiles. 


when God invited and required them to go out of it, 
and return to their own land; or who should con- 
tinue in wickedness when they had returned, should 
not enjoy the tranquillity and comfort which they 
promised themselves. “There is no peace,” says 
Vitringa, “no serenity of mind and conscience ; 
more desirable than all blessings, superior to all con- 
ception ; there is no durable prosperity on earth, no 


unbelievers, and profane persons; to despisers of 
God and his prophetic word; to those who honour 
him with their lips, but in mind and affection are 
alienated and removed to a great distance from him, 
remaining in a state of impenitence. But why ? 
Because they have no part in the righteousness and 
favour of God, which is not. obtained without faith, 
reverence for the divine word, and an, humble obe- 


Sw 


eternal salvation or hope of salvation to hypocrites, || dience to the divine commands.” 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


The fifth, last, and most excellent part of Isaiah’s prophecies, according to Vitringa, begins here, and is divided into five 
discourses ; the first of which is contained in this chapter, and the three first verses of the next; the second in the ‘n 
remaining part of that chapter and chapter li.; the third in chapters lii-lx.; the fourth in \xi., Ixii.; the fifth in chap- 
ters Ixiii—Ixvi. In this chapter we have, (1,) An address of the Messiah to the Gentiles, calling upon them to attend, and 
declaring his solemn appointment to, and qualification for, the mediatorial office, 1-3. (2,) A complaint of the small 
success of his ministry among the Jews, and of his being constituted the Teacher and Saviour of the Gentiles, 4-6. (3,) 
An address of God the Father to Christ, comforting him in his state of humaliation, with assurances of the glory that 
should follow in the great success of the gospel among the Gentiles, and the happy, flourishing state of the church, 7-12. 
(4,) Heaven and earth exhorted to break forth into exultation and praise on that account, 13. (5,) The Jewish Church 
a state of great despondency, but comforted with promises of a numerous accession of Gentiles, and great enlargement 
and prosperity, 14-23. (6,) A ratification of the prophecy of the release of the Jews from Babylon, as the figure and 


type of all these blessings, 24-26. 
LR nis LSSTEN, *O isles, unto me; and 
fenestra hearken, ye people, from far ; 
> The Lorp hath called me from the womb ; 
from the bowels of my mother hath he made 
mention of my name, 


2 Chap. xli. 1— Verse 5; Jer. i. 5; Matt. i. 20,21; Luke i. 
15, 31; John x. 36; Gal. i. 15. 


| 


2 And he hath made °my mouth A. pe 
like a sharp sword; ‘in the shadow ———— 
of his hand hath he hid me, and made me 
*a polished shaft; ‘in his quiver hath he hid 


me ; 


¢ Chapter xi.4; li.16; Hos. vi.5; Heb. iv. 12; Rev. i. 16. 
4 Chap. li. 16. e Psa. xlv. 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIX. 

Verse 1. Listen, O isles, &¢c.—* Hitherto the sub- 
ject of the prophecy has been chiefly confined to 
the redemption from the captivity of Babylon, with 
strong intimations of a more important deliverance 
sometimes thrown in; to the refutation of idolatry, 
and the demonstration of the infinite power, wisdom, 
and foreknowledge of God. The character and 
office of the Messiah were exhibited in general terms, 
at the beginning of chap. xlii., but here he is intro- 
duced in person, declaring thé full extent of his 

mission; which is not only to restore the Israel- 
ites, and reconcile them to their Lord and Father, 
from whom they had so often revolted, but to be a 
ight to lighten the Gentiles, to call them to the 
nowledge and obedience of the true God, and to 
bring them to be one church, together with the Isra- 
elites, and to partake with them of the same com- 
mon salvation procured for all, by the great Redeem- 


er and Reconciler of man to God.”—Bishop Lowth. | 


By the isles here, and the people from far, the Gen- 
tiles are meant, who are frequently addressed by the 
appellation of isles, and who, in general, lived in 
countries far remote from Judea, now the only 
place of God’s special presence and worship. ‘The 
person who addresses them is the Messiah, as evi- 


|| his church and of the wor 


|to Christ; and in all parts to him in a m 


sages of this chapter. If the character here exhi- 
bited can, in any sense, as some think it may, be- 
long to the prophet, “ yet, in some parts,”as Bishop 
Lowth justly observes, “ it must belong exclusively 
fuller 
and more proper sense.” God having, in the last 
words of the preceding chapter, intimated by his 
prophet, that many of the Jews, notwithstanding 
the glorious deliverance from Babylon vouchsafed 
them, would be wicked, and foreknowing that he 
would cast them off for their wickedness, the Mes- 
siah here addresses his speech to the Gentiles, and 
invites them to hearken to those counsels and doc- 
trines which he foresaw the Jews would reject. 
The Lord hath called me from the womb—This, or 
the like expression, is used of Jeremiah, chap. i. 5, 
and of Paul, Gal.i. 15; butit was far more eminently 


‘true of Christ, who, as he was chosen to this great 


office of redemption from eternity, so he was sepa- 
rated and called to it before he was born, being both 
conceived and sanctified by the Holy Ghost in‘his 
mother’s womb, and sent into the worfd upon this 
errand. 

Verses 2, 3. He hath made my mouth like a sharp 
sword—As he hath made me the great Teacher of 
so he hath assisted 


. 


yo 


i 


dently appears from verse 6, and several other pas- by his Spirit, and made my word or doetrine uth > 
3 243 me 
* 


% 


*- 
ay 


The commission of the 


ISAIAH. 


Messiah to Jews and Gentiles. 


A. M. 3298. 3 And said unto me, f Thou art my 
hein servant, O Israel, in whom I will be 
glorified. 

4 » Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have 
spent my strength for naught, and in vain; yet 
surely my judgment ts with the Lorp, and 
‘my work with my God. 

5 ¥ And now, saith the Lorn? that formed me 
from the womb éo be his servant, to bring Jacob 


again to him,” Though Israel * be not ga- 4aP, Hons. 
thered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes ———— 
of the Lorp, and my God shall be my strength. 

6 And he said, *It is a light thing that thou 
shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes 
of Jacob, and to restore the ‘preserved of 
Israel: I will also give thee for a ‘light to the 
Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto 
the end of the earth. 


£ Chap. xlii. 1; Zech. iii. 8——s Chap. xliv. 23; John xiii. 
31; xv. 8; Eph. i. 6——) Ezek. iii. 19——t Or, my reward, 
Chap. x1. 10; Ixii. 11—— Verse 1. 


2 Or, That Israel may be 


gathered to him, and I may, &c.——* Matt. xxiii. 37——* Or, 
Art thou lighter than that thou shouldest, &c.——* Or, desolations. 
1Chap. xlil. 6; lx. 3; Luke ii. 32; Acts xiii. 47; xxvi. 18. 


and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged 
sword, killing men’s lusts, convincing, humbling, and 
converting their souls, and mighty. to pull down 
strong holds, and every high thing that exalteth it- 
self against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. x. 4, 5. 
In the shadow of his hand hath he hid me—He will 
protect me by his power from all mine enemies, 
until I have finished the work for which he sent me. 
And made me a polished shaft—Like~an arrow, 
whose point is bright and polished, and therefore 
pierces deeper. And said, Thou art my servant, 
O Israel—The person who is here called Israel, 
cannot, in any sense, be Isaiah. But, as the name 
of David is sometimes given to his successors, and 
particularly to Christ, Jer. xxx. 9; Ezek. xxxiv. 23; 
Hos. iii. 5, and the name of Isaac is given to his pos+ 
terity, Amos vil. 9; so here the name of Israel may 
not unfitly be given to Christ, not only because he 
descended from his loins, but also, because he was 
the true and the great Israel, who, in a more emi- 
nent manner, prevailed with God, as that name sig- 
nifies; of whom Jacob, who was first called Israel, 
was but a type. And as the name of Christ, the 
head, is sometimes given to his body, the church, as 
1 Cor. xii. 12, so it is not strange if, on the contrary, 
the name of Israel, which properly belongs. to the 
church, be given to Christ, the head of it. The words, 
however, may be rendered, T'hou art my servant, 
unto, in, or for Israel, that is, to bring them back 
unto me, from whom they have revolted; or Israel 
is he in whom I will be glorified by thee. 

Verse 4. T’hen I said—By way of objection; J 
have laboured in vain—Lord, thou sayest thou wilt 
be glorified by my ministry; but 1 find it otherwise. 
Thave spent my strength for naught—Without any 
considerable fruit of my word and works. “'The 
words,” says Vitringa, “ contain the complaint of the 
Son of God, concerning the small fruit of his mission 
to the Jews, and the small hope of establishing and 
successfully propagating his kingdom among them; 
like that which is attributed to the same great Teach- 
er. and his apostles, chap. liii. 1. But at the same 
time he supports himself with the hope, that he 
should obtain a glorious and dant fruit of his 
divine mission in the world ; fata his judgment, 
or right, was with God, and the reward of his work 

id up with him; who would take good care, ae- 

ding toyhis wisdom ad justice, that the proper 


244 
? 


and full recompense of his labour should be paid 
him.” According to this just exposition of the pas- 
sage, the latter clause of the verse agrees with the 
former, and the sense of both is briefly this: Though 
I see little or no fruit of my labour among the Jews, 
and meet with nothing but contempt, and reproach, 
and ill usage from them; yet God sees my fidelity 
and diligence in my work, and he will give judg- 
ment for me, and amply reward me in due time. 

~ Verses 5, 6. And now, saith the Lord—These are 
the words of the Father, addressing his Son, now 
become incarnate for the redemption of mankind ; 
that formed me from the womb—This refers to the 
human nature of Christ formed in the womb of the 
Virgin by the Holy Ghost; to bring Jacob again to 
him—To convert the wicked and apostate Israelites. 
Though Israel be not gathered—Be not brought to 
God by my ministry: or, according to the reading 
of the margin, ‘hat Israel may be gathered to him, 
and I may be glorious, &c. The word ON’, be 
gathered, implies that the Israelites were scattered 
from God, and divided among themselves, as they 
were, in a high degree, when Christ came into the 
world, having, as is said chap. lili. 6, turned every 


one to his own way, and therefore they needed to be 


gathered. It seems to be a metaphor taken from 
wandering sheep, which the good shepherd diligently 
secks and brings home to the fold, Yet shall I be 
glorious in the eyes of the Lord—According to this 
reading, preferred by our translators, the sense is, 
Though Israel, God’s own, and, at present, his only 
people, reject me, which will be a cause of great 
wonder and scandal, yet God will not despise me for 
the unsuccessfulness of my labours among them, 
but will honour and glorify me, both with himself 
and in the face of the world, in crowning my endea- 
vours with glorious success among other: people. 
And my God shall be my strength—To support me 
under this and all other discouragements and diffi- 
culties in the discharge of my office. And he—The 
Lord; said, It is a light thing—A small matter in 
comparison of what follows; that thou. shouldest 
raise up the tribes of Jacob—That remnant of them 
which shall survive all their calamities and desola- 
tions. J will also give thee for a light to the Gen- 
tiles—I will make thy labour effectual for the illu- 
mination, conversion, and salvation of the Gentiles 
in all parts of the world. This could not be said of 
3 


Gracious promises of 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


redemption to Israel. 


A. M. 3298. 7 Thus saith the Lorp, the Re- 


SS deemer of Israel, and his Holy One, 
™to*® him whom man despiseth, to him whom 
the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, 
»Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall 
worship, because of the Lorn that is faithful, 
and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall 
choose thee. 

8 Thus saith the Lorp, °In an acceptable 
time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation 
have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, 
Pand give thee for a covenant of the people, 


m Chap. lili. 3; Matt. xxvi. 67——* Or, to him that is de- 
spised in soul._— Psa. Ixxii. 10, 11; Verse 23.—— Psa. Ixix. 
13; 2 Cor. vi. 2. 


Isaiah with any colour of truth, and therefore must 
be understood of Christ, by whom it was literally 
and fully accomplished. The words, That thou 
mayest be my salvation, mean, that the Messiah 
should be the revealer, procurer, and giver of eternal 
salvation to the believing Gentiles. 

Verse 7. To him whom man despiseth—To Christ, 
to whom, in the days of his flesh, this description 
most truly and fully agreed, being the same in effect 
with that chap. liii. 3, for men, both Jews and Gen- 
tiles, among whom he lived, did despise him from 
their hearts; and the nation, of which He was a 
member, abhorred both his person and his doctrine ; 
and he was so far from being a temporal monarch 
that he came in the form of a servant, and was a 
servant of rulers, professing subjection, and paying 
tribute unto Cesar, and being treated by the rulers, 
both of the Jews and Romans, like a servant, being 
despitefully used and crucified, which was then a 
kind of punishment inflicted only on slaves or ser- 
vants. Kings shall see—Though fora time thou 
shalt be despised, yet after a while thou shalt be ad- 
vanced to such glory, that kings shall look upon thee 
with reverence: and arise—From their seats to 
worship thee. Because the Lord that is faithful— 
Because God shall make good his promises to thee. 
And he shall choose thee—And although ‘thou shalt 
be rejected by thine own people, yet God will mani- 
fest to the world that thou, and thou only, art the 
person whom he hath chosen to be the Redeemer 
of mankind. The words imply the wonderful pro- 
gress of the gospel from small beginnings; and 
show that the Author of it, from being the contempt 
of the great men of the world, should come to be 
the object of their adoration. 

Verse 8. Thus saith the Lord—God the Father 
unto Christ; In an acceptable time—Hebrew, ny3 
})S9, in the season of acceptance, as Bishop Lowth 
renders it, or, in a time of good-will, according to 
others: in that time when God shall, in a special 
manner, manifest his good-will to the sons of men; 
in the day of his grace and man’s salvation, that is, 
in the time of the gospel, which was, and is, the 
time of God’s peculiar good-will toward men, Luke 
ii. 14, In the days of thy flesh, when thou shalt 

3 


to °establish the earth, to cause to A. M. 3298. 
inherit the desolate hetitagesd Fh ag 

9 That thou mayest say ‘to the prisoners, Go 
forth ; to them that are in darkness, Show your- 
selves. ‘They shall feed in the ways, and their 
pastures shall be in all high places. 

10 They shall not "hunger nor thirst, * nei- 
ther shall the heat nor sun smite them: for 
he that hath mercy on them tshall 'eaa them, 
even by the springs of water shall he guide them. 

11 “And I will make all my mountains a way, 
and my highways shall be exalted. 


ae | 


P Chap. xlii: 6. © Or, raise wp—4 Chap. xlii.7; Zech. ix. 
12. rRev. vii. 16——* Psalm exxi. 6——! Psalm xxiii. 2. 
uChap. xl. 4. 


offer up prayers and supplications, with strong 
crying and tears, Heb. v.7; have [heard—Or, will 
I hear, thee—Though not so as to deliver thee from 
death, yet so as to support thee under thy sufferings, 
to give a blessed success to thy labours, and to crown 
thee with glory and honour. And in.a day of sal- 


effecting man’s redemption; have Ihelped—Or, will 
I help, thee—Namely, upon earth, till thy work be 
finished ; and preserve thee—Unto that eternal king- 
dom and glory which is prepared for thee. And 
give thee for a covenant of the people—To be the 
Mediator and Surety of that covenant which is made 
between me and all my people, that is, all penitent 
and believing persons, whether Jews or Gentiles. 
To establish the earth—To settle the church upon 
firm foundations, and compose the great differences 
in the world between God and man, Jews and Gen- 
tiles, Eph. ii. 13-16; as also to establish truth and 
righteousness upon earth, and subdue those lusts 
and passions which are the great disturbers of hu- 
man society: to do which things was the great 
design of God in sending his Son into the world. 
To cause to inherit desolate heritages—That deso- 
late places may be repaired and possessed: or to 
bring the heathen, who are in a desolate and forlorn 
condition, to be Christ’s inheritance, according to 
Psalm ii. 8. 

Verses 9-11. That thou mayest say—Namely, 
with power and effect, as when God said, Let there 
be light ; to the prisoners—To the Gentiles, who are 
fast bound by the cords of their sins, and taken cap- 
tive by the devil at his will. Go forth—Come forth 
to the light, receive divine illumination. 7T'hey shall 
feed, &c.—They shall have abundant provision in 
all places, yea, even in those which commonly are 
unfruitful, as are both common roads and high 
grounds. They shall not hunger, &c.—They shall 
be supplied with all good and necessary things, and 
preserved from a il occurrences and annoyances, 
as the Israelites y in the wilderness, by the man- 


of the cloud and adi a to 
and protection. For he 
| shall lead Mean -Gol, who hath magnified his merey 


740 a 


vation—In the time which I have appointed for the. 


na and other provision afforded them, and the ae * 


of the divine pres 
t hath mercy on ot 


‘ee 
‘ 


The Lord’s kindness 


12 Behold, * these shall come from 
far; and lo, these from the north 
and from the west; and these from the land of 
Sinim. 


13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O 


A. M. 3298, 
C, 706. 


earth; and break forth into singing, O moun- | 
tains: for the Lory hath comforted his people, | 


and will have mercy upon his afflicted. 
14 7 But Zion said, The Lorn hath forsaken 
me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. 


ISATAH. 


to his followers: 


15 *Can a woman forget her suck- A. % ape. 
ing child, 7 that she should not have 
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they 
may forget, > yet will I not forget thee. 

.16 Behold, °I have graven thee upon the palms 
of my hands; thy walls are continually before 
me. 

17 Thy children shall make haste; ‘thy de- 
stroyers and they that made thee waste shall go 
forth of thee. 


* Chapter xliii. 5, 6. y Chapter xliv, 23. z Chapter xl. 17. 
a Psa. ciii. 13; Mal. iii. 17; Matt. vii. 11. 


to them, will conduct them with safety and comfort. 
And I will make all mountains.a way—I will re- 
move all hinderances, and prepare the way for them, 
by levelling high grounds, and raising the low. 

Verses 12, 13., Behold, these shall come from far 
—My people shall be gathered from the most remote 
parts of the earth. He speaks here, and in many 
other places, of the conversion of the Gentiles, with 
allusion to that work of gathering and bringing 
back the Jews from all parts where they were dis- 
persed, into their own land. And these from the 
land of Sinim—Kither of the Sinites, as they are 
called, Gen. x. 17, who dwelt about the wilderness; 
or of Sin, a famous city of Egypt, which may be put 
for all Esypt; and that for all southern parts. And 
so he here mentions the several quarters of the 
world where the generality of the Jews were dis- 
persed; the north, which is everywhere named as 
the chief place of their banishment and dispersion, 
as Jer. xvi. 15; and xxxi. 8, and elsewhere; the 
west, the western countries and islands; and the 
south. Sing, O heavens, &e.—See note on chap. 
xliv. 28. For the Lord hath comforted his people 
—God hath now sent the long-desired consolation 
of Israel. 

Verse 14. But Zion said, &c.—This is an objec- 


tion against all these glorious predictions and promi- | 


ses. How can these things be true when the condition 
of God’s church is now so sad and desperate? Most 
commentators understand by Zion here, the Jewish 
Church, and suppose that the complaint which she 
is here represented as uttering, refers either to her 
desolate state when in Babylon, or to the time of 
her long dispersion and desolation in the days of the 
Messiah. But Vitringa is of opinion that the Chris- 
tian Church is rather intended, and that the time 
referred to is that of her cruel persecution under the 
Romans. Be it which it may, God here declares 
that he will show her mercy, and destroy her mighty 
oppressors, verses 24-26. 

Verses 15, 16. Can a woman forget her sucking 
child—God is often represented as bearing a fatherly 
affection toward his people, but here the comparison 
is raised higher, and he speaks of himself as having 
a tenderness for them, similar to that which a mother 
hath toward the fruit of her wo “ The image is 
common and frequent ; yet it is wrought up with so 
much Brace, .c! embellished with so, much elegance, 


246 
? 


THeb. from having compassion. bRom. xi. 29.——¢ Exod. 
xiii. 9; Cant. viii. 6——4 Verse 19. 


and expressed in such pathetic terms, that nothing 
can exceed it in beauty and force ; nothing can con- 
vey a stronger idea of the maternal, the more than 
maternal regard, which God hath for his people.” 
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee— 
The turn in this clause is more expressive than a 
volume. As if he had said, Earthly parents some- 
times are so unnatural. and monstrous; but do not 
entertain such unworthy thoughts of me. Behold, 
Ihave graven thee upon the palms, &c.—Mine eye 
and heart are constantly upon thee. “ This is cer- 
tainly an allusion,” says Bishop Lowth, “to some 
practice, common among the Jews at that time, of 
making marks on their hands or arms by punctures 
on the skin, rendered indelible: by fire or staining, 
with some sort of sign, or representation of the city 
or temple, to show their affection and zeal for it. It 
is well known that the pilgrims at the holy sepulchre 
get themselves marked in this manner with what are 
called the ensigns of Jerusalem. Maundrell, p. 75 ; 
where he tells us how it is performed: and this art 
is practised by travelling Jews all over the world at 
this day.” . See also Vitringa and Michaelis’s notes. 
Or the allusion may be merely to the common prac- 
tice of men, who use to put signs upon their hands 
or fingers, of such things as they especially wish to 
remember. Thy walls are continually before me 
—The ruins and desolations of my church are ai- 
ways in my thoughts, nor shall I forget or neglect 
to repair them, and grant her deliverance from her 
enemies, and protection at the proper time. 

Verse 17. Thy children—Or, as some, with canal 
propriety, render 7°32, thy builders ; 3 which render- 
ing is favoured by the next clause, where the de- 
stroyers are opposed to them, but the following verse 
favours the former interpretation: the sense, how- 
ever, is the same, for the church’s children are her 
builders; shall make haste—To repair thy ruins 
and desolations, and build thee up. T'hy destroyers, 
§c:, shall go forth of thee—Shall be separated and 
driven from thee, and so shall neither hinder nor 
annoy thee. But this rendering, shall go. forth of 
thee, says Bishop Lowth, “is very flat, after their 
zeal had been expressed. by their being her build- 
ers: and as the opposition is kept up in one part of 
the sentence, one has reason to expect it in the 
other.” He, ‘therefore, renders I8¥° J, shall pro- 
ceed, spring, or issue, from thee; namely, as thy 

3 


The calling of the 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


Gentiles foretold. 


A. M. 3298. 18 4 ° Lift up thine eyes round 
. about, and behold: all these gather 
themselves together, and come to thee. As I 
live, saith the Lorn, thou shalt surely clothe 
thee with them all, fas with an ornament, and 
bind them on thee, as a bride doeth. 

19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and 
the land of thy destruction, & shall even now 
be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, 
and they that swallowed thee up shall be far 
away. 

20 » The children which thou shalt have, ‘after 
thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine 


e Chap. lx. i Bros. xvii. 6——5 6 e's liv. 1,25 Zech. ii. 
4; x. 10. h Chap. Ix. 4 


ears, The place is too strait for me: Aaaes 3908. 
give place to me that I may dwell. oe 

21 Then shalt thou say in thy heart, Who 
hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my 
children, and am desolate, a captive, and re- 
moving to and fro? and who hath brought up 
these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where 
had they been? 

22 *Thus saith the Lord Gon, Behold, Twill 
lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my 
standard to the people: and they shall bring thy 
sons in their ® arms, and thy daughters shall be 
carried upon ¢heir shoulders. 


Rom. xi. ll, 12, &c. 
5 Heb. bosom. 


i Matt. ili. 95 Ixvi. 20. 


k Chap. Ix. 4; 


children, and reads the whole verse thus: -J'hey 
that destroy thee shall soon become thy builders ; 
and they that laid thee waste shall become thine 
offspring: the accession of the Gentiles to the 
church of God being properly considered as an ad- 
dition made to the number of the family and chil- 
dren of Zion. 

Verse 18. Lift up thine eyes round about—And 
behold numbers flocking unto thee from all quarters. 
All these shall gather themselves unto thee, &e.— 
Namely, the Gentiles... Thy church, O Zion, shall 
not only be restored and established, but vastly en- 
larged and adorned by an accession of converts 
from various nations; and come unto thee—To re- 
ceive instruction from thee, and to be incorporated 
with thee into one and the same church. Thou 
shalt clothe thee with them, &c.—Instead of being a 
disgrace, or a snare and occasion of sin to thee, (as 
the Gentiles formerly were, when they mixed them- 
selves with the Jews,) they shall be an honour and 
ornament, in respect of those excellent gifts and 
graces wherewith they shall enrich and adorn thy 
community. The addition of such numbers to the 
church shall complete her clothing, and make her 
appear comely and considerable. And bind them 
on thee as a bride doth—The LXX. read, repudncere 
avree w¢ Koouov vuuon, Thou shalt put them on thee 
as a bride her attire ; supplying, as Bishop Lowth 
thinks, a word that appears to be wanting to com- 
plete the sense. “Zion clothes herself with her 
children as a bride clothes herself—with what? with 
some other thing, certainly ;’ namely, her orna- 
ments, jewels, or rich dress. 

Verses 19-21. For thy waste and desolate places, 
&c.—He alludes to the land of Judea lying waste 
during the Babylonish captivity. Thus the church 
of God was in a waste, desolate, and barren state, 
till the coming of the Messiah, the introduction of 
the gospel, and the conversion of the Gentiles; and 
the land of thy destruction—Or, thy land of de- 
struction. He still alludes to Judea, thus character- 
ized, because it was devoted, and should be exposed 
to destruction, first by the Chaldeans, and again by 
the Romans, a lively emblem of the ruined state of 

3 


their church; shall even now be too narrow—To 
contain the multitude of converts that shall be made. 
The middle wall of partition that separated the 
Jews from the Gentiles shall be broken down, and 
the pale of the church shall be enlarged. The chil- 
dren which thou shalt have, &e. —Hebrew, ry boy *33, 
The children of thy or ity, or, barren and childless 
state. Those children which thou shalt have when 
thou art past the ordinary age and state of child- 
bearing, as Sarah in her old age was made the mo- 
ther of a most numerous posterity; to which he 
seems to allude: those children which shall be be- 
gotten to thee by the gospel when thou shalt be 
deprived of thine own natural children, or when 
thou shalt become barren as to the conversion of 
natural Jews; when the generality of the Jews 
shall cut themselves off from God and his true 
church, by their apostacy from him, and by their 
unbelief and rejection of their Messiah ; shall say 
again—Or rather, shall yet say, though for the pre- 
sent it be far otherwise, The place ts too strait for 
me, &c.—This is figuratively spoken, merely to sig- 
nify the great.enlargement of the church by the 
accession of the Gentiles. See chap. liv.1. Zhen 
shalt thou say in thy heart—Not without admira- 
tion, Who hath begotten me these—Whence, or by 
whom, have I this numerous issue? Seeing I have 
lost my children—Seeing it is not long since that I 
was in a manner childless? And am desolate— 
Without a husband, being forsaken of God, who for- 
merly owned himself for my husband, chap. liv. 5; 
Jer. xxxi. 32; a captive, and removing to and fro— 
In an unsettled condition, and not likely to bear and 
bring up children for God or myself. Who hath 
brought up these ?—The same thing is repeated in 
these words to express the miraculousness of 
this work, and the great surprise of the Jews at 
it: which shows that he speaks of the conversion 
of the Gentiles. 

Verses 22, 23. L will lift wp my hand to the 
Gentiles—I will call them to me; and set up my 
standard to the people—As generals do, to gather 
their forces together. And they shall bring thy 
sons—Those who shall be thine by aden, who 

247 


# 


The future'prosperity 


ISAIAH. 


of the church foretold. 


23 ! And kings shall be thy °nursing 
fathers, and their }° queens thy nurs- 
ing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with 
their face toward the earth, and ™lick up the 
dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am 
the Lorn: for "they shall not be ashamed that 
wait for me. 

24 4 °Shall the prey be taken from the 
mighty, or "the lawful captive delivered ? 

25 But thus saith the Lorn, Even the cap- 


A. M. 3298. 
B.C 


tives of the mighty shall be taken away, A. $A -aag8, 
and the prey of the terrible shall acm 
delivered: for I will contend with him that con- 
tendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. 

26 And I will » feed them that oppress thee 
with their own flesh ; and they shall be drunken 
with their own ‘blood, as with sweet wine: 
and all flesh * shall know that I the Lorp am 
thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the — One 
of Jacob. 


“1 Psa. Ixxii. 11; Verse 7; ‘Chap. lii. 15; 1x. 16——® Heb. 
nourishes.——"® Heb, princesses. ig; lxxii. 9; Mie. vii. 17. 
» Psa, xxxiv. 22; Rom. v. 5; ix. 33; x. 


© Matt. xii. 39; Luke xi. 21, 22. 11 Heb. the captivity of the 
just. 12 Heb. captivity. ——? Chap. ix. 20. 1 Rev. xiv. 20; 
xvi, 6.13 Or, new wine.—— Psa. ix..16; Chap. lx. 16. 


shall own God for their Father, and Jerusalem for 
their mother; in their arms—With great care and 
tenderness, as nurses carry young infants: the sense 
is, Even the heathen shall contribute to the increase 
and preservation of those children which shall be 
begotten to thee. And thy daughters shall be car- 
ried, &c.—As sick or infirm persons used to be car- 
ried, And kings shall be thy nursing fathers— 
Kings and queens shall have a sincere affection and 
tender regard unto thee and thy children. Which 
was in some sort fulfilled by Cyrus, Ahasuerus, 
and some few others of the Persian kings or queens; 
but much more truly and fully by those many kings 
and emperors of the Gentile world who, after the 
time of Christ, did both themselves embrace the true 
religion, and also provide for the reception and es- 
tablishment of it in their dominions. They shall 
bow down to thee, &e.—They shall highly reverence 
and honour thee, and shall most humbly and readily 
submit themselves unto thee. This was not verified 
in any of the Persian kings, but only in those kings 
or emperors who were converted to the Christian 
faith and church. And lick up the dust of thy feet— 
These expressions are borrowed from the manners 
of the eastern people in their prostrations and ado- 
rations, who bowed so low as to touch and kiss the 
ground. For they shall not be ashamed that wait 
for me—Their expectations shall not be disappoint- 
ed, but abundantly satisfied. 

Verses 24-26. Shall the prey be taken from the 
mighty—Here an objection is started against the 
forementioned promises, probably, 1st, Against the 
promise of the release of the Jews from their cap- 
tivity in Babylon, suggesting that it was a thing not 
to be expected: for, verse 24, they were a prey in 
the hands of the mighty, of such as were then the 
greatest potentates of the earth; and, therefore, it 
was not likely they should be rescued by force; yet 
that was not all, they were lawful captives. By the 
law of God, having offended, they were justly deli- 
vered into captivity. And by the law of nations, 

248 


being taken in war, they were justly detained in 
captivity till they should be ransomed or exchanged. 
So here was a double, or rather, treble impediment 
to their deliverance; the great power of the enemy, 
which kept them in bondage, and the justice of 
God, and the usage of nations, which pleaded against 
them. And yet their deliverance, however impro- 
bable, was effected by the mercy and power of God. 
But this passage, as appears from the context, has a 
further reference: it respects the deliverance of 
God’s church and people from their spiritual as well 
as temporal enemies. “God had promised very 
great and excellent things to his church; but to a 
person seriously considering the state thereof, and 
comparing it with the power of his enemies, and 
particularly its chief enemy, Satan, who held the 
nations in the darkness of ignorance and supersti- 
tion, a doubt would naturally arise, whether it could 
possibly be that this prey, so long possessed by 
Satan, could be rescued from him, so that he might 
be driven from his strong fort, and the rulers of the 
world, held in subjection by him, might be deliver- 
ed from their servitude. Isaiah resolves this doubt 
of the church, and teaches that it should certainly 
come to pass that Satan, this mighty one, should be 


}driven from his fort, his captives delivered, (verse 


25,) and the adversaries of the church perish by 
their mutual slaughter of each other.” Thus Vi- 
tringa, who observes that verse 26, I will feed them 
that oppress thee with their own flesh, &c., is to be 
“understood metaphorically, and refers to the intes- 
tine wars, by which princes and people, armed to their 
mutual destruction, plunge their destroying swords in 
each other’s bowels, and, as it were, feed upon each 
other’s flesh and blood.” See chap. ix. 20; Zech. xi. 
9; Rev. xvi.6. They shall bedrunken with their own 
blood as with new wine—I will make thine enemies 
destroy one another, and that greedily, and with de- 
light. This prophecy was remarkably fulfilled in 
the time of the Roman emperor, Dioclesian, to which 
it is thought by some particularly to refer. 


God vindicates his 


CHAPTER L. 


dealings with his people. 


CHAPTER L. 


‘1,) In the first three verses of this chapter, which seem to be connected with the preceding, God shows the Jews that they 
are justly charged with bringing all their troubles upon themselves by their sins, and that they were not to be imputed to 
any unkindness or weakness in God, it being evident that he was both able and willing to help them, if they had been ina 
Sit state to recewe his help. (2,) The Messiah relates, that he was appointed and qualified by God for the important office 


of preaching the gospel, 4. 


this office, as well as the greatest patience and constancy, amidst contumelies and injuries brought upon him, 5, 6. 


(3,) That he had shown the greatest readiness to undertake, and the greatest diligence to fulfil 


(4,) 


He shows that the ground of his constancy was his confidence in the divine assistance and approbation, amidst the calum- 


nies and contradictions of his enemies, 7-9. 
to trust in him, in their greatest difficulties and troubles. 
very things whereby they sought salvation, 11. 


rpHUS saith the Lorp, Where is 
* the bill of your mother’s divorce- 
ment, whom I have put away? or which of my 
»creditors is i¢ to whom I have sold you? Behold, 
for your iniquities ° have you sold yourselves, and 
for your transgressions is your mother put away. 
2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no 
man? “when I called, was there none to an- 


A. M. 3298. 
B. C. 706. 


(5,) He graciously addresses those who fear the Lord, and exhorts them 


(6,) Foretels to his adversaries destruction to arise from those 


swer? °Is my hand shortened at all, A. M. 3298. 

: B. C. 706. 
that it cannot redeem? or have I no ———— 
power to deliver? behold, ‘at my rebuke I ¢ dry 
up the sea, I make the "rivers a wilderness: 
‘their fish stinketh, because there is no water, 
and dieth for thirst. 


3 ‘I clothe the heavens with blackness, } and 
I make sackcloth their covering. 


a Deut. xxiv.1; Ver. iii. 8; Hos. ii. 2——»2 Kings iv. 1; 
Matt. xviii. 25.—¢ Chap. lii.-8. 4 Prov. i. 24; Chap. Ixv. 
12; Ixvi. 4; Jer. vii. 13; xxxv. 15. 


e Numbers xi. 23; Chap. lix. 1—— Psa. evi. 9; Nah. i. 4, 
& Exodus xiv. 21. h Joshua iii. 16.——i Exodus vii. 18, 21. 
k Exod. x. 21. 1 Rev. vi. 12. 


; NOTES ON CHAPTER L. 

Verse 1. Thus saith the Lord—God having, by 
his prophet, in the last three verses of the preceding 
chapter, comforted his people with an assurance of 
their deliverance from the tyrannical power of their 
enemies, here vindicates his justice in suffering them 
to be exposed thereto, showing that they were the 
causes of their own calamities. Where is the bill 
of your mother’s divorcement 2—God had espoused 
the Jewish Church, the mother of the individuals of 
that people, to himself, in a kind of matrimonial 
covenant, frequently mentioned or alluded to by the 
prophets ; but he seemed to divorce or cast them 
off when he sent them to Babylon, and afterward did 
wholly reject the generality of that nation from be- 
ing his people, and took the Gentiles in their stead ; 
- which great and wonderful change was foretold in 
the Old Testament, (as has been already often ob- 
served, and will be again,) and was accomplished in 
the New. And because God foresaw that this strange 
dispensation would provoke the Jews to murmur 
and quarrel with him for casting them off without 
sufficient cause, as indeed they were always prone 
to accuse him, and vindicate themselves, he ‘bids 
them produce their bill of divorce. For those hus- 
bands who put away their wives out of levity or pas- 
sion were obliged to give them a bill of divorce, 
which vindicated the wives’ innocence, and declared 
that the husband’s will and pleasure was the cause 
oi their dismission. Now, says God, produce your 
bill of divorce, to show that I have put you away of 
my own mere will, and on a slight oceasion, and 
that you did not first forsake me and go after other 
gods, and by that spiritual adultery violate the mar- 
riage covenant into which I-had taken you. Or 
which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you 
—Have I any creditors to whom I was obliged or 

3 


willing to sell you for the payment of a debt? Pa- 
rents, oppressed with debt, often sold their children, 
which, according to the law of Moses, they might do, 
till the year of release, Exod. xxi. 7. See also 2 Kings 
iv. 1; Matt. xviii. 25. But neither of these eases, 
says God, can be mine; Iam not governed by any 
such motives, nor am I urged by any such necessity. 
Behold, for your iniquities have you sold yourselves 
—Your captivity and your afflictions are to be im- 
puted to yourselves, and to your own folly and 
wickedness. . 
Verses 2,3. Wherefore, &c.—The general aecu- 
sation, delivered in the last words, he now proves by 
particular instances: When I came was there no 
man—How comes it to pass, that, when I sent to 
you by my servants the prophets, there was no man 
that regarded my message and offer of grace, and 
complied with my will? Whereby he implies that 
the generality of the Jews were guilty of gross infi- 
delity and obstinate disobedience, and therefore 
might justly be rejected. When Icalled them to re- 
pentance and reformation, there was none to come— 
None to come at my call, or to obey my commands. 
Is my hand shortened at all, &e.—What is the rea- 
son of this contempt and rebellion? Is it because 
you expect no good from me, but think I am either 
unwilling or unable to save you? Behold, at my 
rebuke I dry up the sea—At my word or command 
I can not only check its proud waves, but make its 
channel dry. Here, for a proof of his power, God 
appeals to the miracles he wrought in Egypt, at the 
Red sea, and at Jordan. J make the rivers a wil- 
derness—As dry and fit for travelling over as a wil- 
derness. I clothe the heavens with blackness—Or, 
T will, or can clothe, &e. What I once did in Egypt 
when [ drew thick curtains before all the heavenly 


lights, and caused an unparalleled and amazing 
249 


The Messiah shows 


ISATAH. 


his divine appointment. 


A.M. 3208. 4 4 ™The Lord Gop hath given 
__—_. me the tongue of the learned, that 
I should know how to speak a word in season 
to him that is ® weary: he wakeneth morning 
by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as 
the learned. . 

5 § The Lord Gop ° hath opened mine ear, 
and I was not ? rebellious, neither turned away 
back. 

6 °I gave my back to the smiters, and *my 


cheeks to them that plucked off the A. M. 3298. 
; : B. C. 706. 

hair: I hid not my face from shame 

and spitting. 

7 “| For the Lord Gop will help me: there- 
fore shall I not be confounded : therefore have *1 
set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall 
not be ashamed. r, 

8 ‘He is near that justifieth me: who will 
contend with me? Jet us stand together: who 
is }mine adversary? let him come near to me. 


m Exodus i. 11. n Matthew xi. 28. © Psalm xl. 6, 
7, 8. Matthew xxvi. 39; John xiv. 31; Philippians ii. 
8; Hebrews x. 5——4 Matthew xxvi. 67; xxvii. 26; John 


« Lamentations iii. 30.—S Ezekiel iii. 8, 9. 


xviii. 22,.—— 
tRomans viii. 32, 33, 34. 1 Hebrew, the master of my 
cause. i 


darkness to take place for three successive days, to 
the great terror of my enemies, so I can and will do 
still, when it is necessary to save my people. And 
therefore you have no reason to distrust me. And I 
make sackcloth their covering—I cover them with 
clouds as black as sackcloth. 

Verse 4. The Lord God hath given me, &¢e.— 
The second discourse of the fifth part_of Isaiah’s 
prophecies, according to Vitringa, begins here, and 
is continued to the seventeenth verse of the following 
chapter. God having, in the preceding paragraph, 
asserted his own power ; to manifest the unreasona- 
bleness of the infidelity of the Jews, and that it was 
without all excuse, he proceeds to show what excel- 
lent and powerful means he used to bring them to 
repentance and salvation. This and the following 
passages may be, in some sort, understood of the 
Prophet Isaiah, but they are far more evidently and 
eminently verified in Christ, and indeed seem to be 
meant directly of him. To understand them in this 
light seems to suit best with the context, for, accord- 
ing to this exposition, the same person speaks here, 
who is the. chief subject of the preceding chapter, 
and who has spoken in the foregoing verses of this 
chapter. There, indeed, he speaks as God, but here 
as man, being both God and man, as is abundantly 
evident from many passages, both-of the Old and 
New Testaments. By the tongue of the learned is 
meant, an ability of speaking plainly, convincingly, 
persuasively, and in all points, so as becomes a per- 
son taught of God, and filled with all divine and 
heavenly wisdom and knowledge. That J should 
know how to speak, &c., to him that is weary—That 
is, burdened with the sense of his sin and misery, in 
which case a word of comfort is most seasonable and 
acceptable. This was the principal design of Christ’s 
ministry, namely, to givé rest and comfort to the 
weary and heavy laden, according to what is said 
Matt, xi. 28, And all the doctrines, reproofs, and 
threatenings of Christ were directed to this end, to 
prepare men for receiving comfort and salvation. 
He wakeneth, namely, me, or mine ear, morning by 
morning—From time to time, and continually. He 
wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned--Kither, 
first, as learned men, or teachers, use to awaken 
their scholars to hear and learn-of them from time 
to time: or, rather, second, as those that are, or de- 


sire to be, learned, use to hear with all possible 
attention and diligence. ; 

Verses 5,6. The Lord hath opened mine ear— 
Hath given me a power and will to hear and receive 
his commands. And I was not rebellious—I readily 
did and suffered what he required of me. Neither 
turned away back—From hearing or obeying his 
will, how difficult. or dangerous soever the work 
might be to which he called me. He seems to al- 
lude to some of the former prophets, who had shrunk 
back, and fora time refused such work as God called 


‘them to, as Moses, Exod. iii. 11 ; Jonah, chap. :. 3, and 


others. J gave ny back to the smiters—I patiently 
yielded up myself to the will of those who smote 
me: I was willing, not,only to do, but to suffer the 
will of God, and the injuries of men: and my cheeks 
to them that plucked off the hair—Which was a 
contumely or punishment sometimes inflicted on 
malefactors, Neh. xiii. 25. hid not my face from 
shame—From any manner of reproachfui usage, but 
did knowingly and willingly submit myself there- 
unto; and spitting—Spitting in a man’s face was 
used in token of contempt and detestation. All 
these things were literally fulfilled in Christ, as is 
expressly affirmed in the gospels; but we read of 
no such things concerning Isaiah, and therefore it is 
most safe and reasonable to understand this passage 
of Christ, and the rather, because it is not usual with 
the prophets to commend themselves so highly as 
the prophet here commends the person of whom he 
speaks, 

Verses 7-9. For, or rather, but, the Lord God 
will help me—Though as man I am weak, yet God 
will strengthen me to go through my great and hard 
work. Therefore shall I not be confounded—There- 
fore Lassure myself of success in my undertaking, 
and of victory over all my enemies. «J have set my 
face like a flint—I have hardened myself with reso- 
lution and courage against all opposition. See the 
like phrase, Ezek. iii. 8,9, which Bishop Lowth 
translates as follows: “ Behold I have made thy face 
strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong 
against their foreheads: as an adamant, harder than 
a rock, have Imade thy forehead.” The expression, 
however, sometimes signifies obstinacy and impu- 
dence, as Jer. v. 3; Zech. vii. 12; but here a settled 
and immoveable purpose to persevere in well-doing 

3 


Judgments denounced 


CHAPTER LI. 


upon the self-confident. 


Se a TE ST Sd 


A. M. 3298, 


B. C. 706. 9 Behold, the Lord Gop will help | 


me; who is he thaé shall condemn 
me? “Jo, they all shall wax old as a garment ; 
*the moth shall eat them up. 

10 % Who is among you that feareth the 
Lorp, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that 


Y walketh in darkness, and hath no light ? ? let 


him trust in the name of the Lorp, = a 
and stay upon his God. pant eae 

11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that com- 
pass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the 
hight of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have 
kindled. * This shall ye have of my hand ; ye 
shall lie down ? in sorrow. 


wJob xiii. 28; Psa. cii. 26; Chap. li. 6. 
y Psa. xxiii. 4. 


x Chap. li. 8. 


22 Chron. xx. 20; Psalm xx. 7. a John ix. 19——» Psalm 


xvi. 4, 


He is near that justifieth me—Though God seems 
to be ata distance, and to hide his face from me; 
yet he is, in truth, at my right hand, ready to help 
me, and will publicly acquit me from all the calum- 
nies of mine adversaries; will clear up my righte- 
ousness, and show, by many and mighty signs and 
wonders, that I lived and died his faithful servant. 
Who is mine adversary? Let him come near to 
me—I challenge all my accusers to stand and appear 
before the Judge, and to produce all their charges 
against me: for I am conscious of mine own inno- 
cence, and I know that God will give sentence for 
me. Who is he that shall condemn me?—That 
dare attempt, or can justly do it? Lo, they all— 
Mine accusers and enemies; shall waz old as a gar- 
ment—Shall pine away in their iniquity: the moth 
shall eat them up—They shall be cut off and con- 
sumed, by a secret curse and judgment of God, com- 
pared to a moth, Hos. v. 12. 

Verses 10,11. Who ts among you that feareth the 
Lord?—He now turns his speech from the unbe- 
lieving and rebellious Jews, to those of them who 
were, or should be, pious. That obeyeth the voice 
of his servant—Of the same person of whom he 
has hitherto spoken, of Christ, who is called God’s 
servant by way of eminence, and to intimate that, 
though he was God, yet he would take upon himself 
the form of a servant. It is hereby signified, that 
the grace of God, and the encouragement and com- 
fort here following, belong to none but those that 
believe in and obey this great prophet of the church ; 
which was also declared by Moses, Deut. xviii. 15, 
compared with Acts iii. 22, 23. That walketh in 
darkness—Not in sin, which is often called darkness, 


but in misery, which the word also frequently signi- 
fies; that lives in a disconsolate and calamitous con- 
dition. And hath no light—No comfort nor prospect 
of deliverance. Let him trust in the name of the 
Lord, &e.—Let him fix his faith and hope in the 
amiable nature and infinite perfections, and especially 
in the merey and faithfulness of the Lord, declared 
in his word, and in his interest in God, who, by the 
mediation of this his servant, is reconciled to him, 
and made his God. Behold, all ye that kindle a 
Jire—That you may enjoy the light and comfort of 
it; you that reject the light which God hath set up, 
and seek for comfort.and safety in your own inven- 
tions: which was the common error of the Jews in 
all ages, and especially in the days of the Messiah, 
when they refused him, and that. way of salvation 
which he appointed, and rested on their own tra- 
ditions and devices, going about to establish their 
own righteousness, and not submitting themselves 
unto the righteousness of God. That compass your- 
selves with sparks—Of your own kindlmg. Dr. 
Waterland and Bishop Lowth translate this latter 
clause, “ who place, or heap the fuel around.” Walk 
in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye 
have kindled—Use your utmost endeavours to get 
comfort from these devices. J'his shall ye have 
of my hand, &c—This shall be the fruit of all, 
through my just judgment, that, instead of that com- 
fort and security which you expect by these means, 
you shall receive nothing but vexation and misery, 
which shall pursue you both living and dying; for 
the word 35w, here rendered lie down, is frequently 
used for dying, as Gen. xlvii. 30; Job xxi. 26, and 
elsewhere. 


| CHAPTER LI. 


We have in this chapter the second section of the second discourse of the fifth part of this book, containing an assurance, (1,) 


That God, who raised his church from nothing, will take care for her subsistence and comfort, 1-3. 
eousness and salvation designed for her, and offered in the gospel, arevery near and sure, 4-6. 


(2,) That the right- 
(3,) That the persecutors 


of the church are weak and dying creatures, 7,8. (4,) That the sume almighty power, which wrought miracles for her 
on former occasions, is still engaged for her deliverance and protection, 19-11. (5,) That God himself, the maker of the 


world, had undertaken both to comfort his people under, and deliver them out of their distress, 12-16. 
deplorable her case was, that of her persecutors should soon be worse, 17-23. 


(6,) That, however 
4 


251 


s 


Israel encouraged 


A.M. 3298, HEARKEN @to me, » ye that fol- 
_C. 706. : 

oo Miele low after righteousness, ye that 
seek the Lorp: look unto the rock whence ye 
are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye 
are digged. 

2 ° Look unto Abraham your father, and unto 
Sarah that bare you: ¢ for I called him alone, 
and ° blessed him, and increased him. 

3 For the Lorp £ shall comfort Zion: he will 
comfort all her waste places; and he will make 
her wilderness like Eden, and her desert & like 


ISAIAH. 


to trust in God. 


the garden of the Lorn ; joy and glad- aot ee 
ness shall be found therein, thanksgiv- ——_—— 
ing, and the voice of melody. 

4 “| Hearken unto me, my people; and give 
ear unto me, O my nation: > for a law shall pro- 
ceed from me, and I will make my judgment to 
rest ‘ fora light of the people. 

5 * My righteousness is near; my salvation 
is gone forth, }and mine arms shall judge the 
people; ™ the isles shall wait upon me, and ” on 
mine arm shall they trust. 


4 Verse 7.—- Rom. ix..30, 31, 32. © Rom. iv. 1,16; Heb. 
xi, 11, 12. 4Gen. xii. 1, 2.——e¢ Gen. xxiv. 1, 35.——f Psa. 
eii. 13; Chap. xl. 1; lii. 9; Verse 12. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LI. 

Verses 1, 2. Hearken unto me, &c—Here again 
he addresses his discourse to the believing and godly 
_ Jews, whom he describes as following after right- 
eousness—That is, earnestly desiring and diligently 
pursuing the justification of their persons, the sanc- 
tification of their nature, and practical obedience to 
God’s law ; for which blessings they sought the Lord 
—That is, sought an acquaintance and reconciliation 
with him, the manifestation of his favour, and the 
communication of his Spirit. These, his true peo- 
ple, he exhorts to look unto the rock whence they were 
hewn, &e.— To consider the state of Abraham and 
Sarah before God gave them Isaac, from whom Jacob 
and all his posterity sprang. He compares the bodies 
of Abraham and Sarah unto a rock, or pit, or quarry, 
out of which stones are hewn or dug; thereby im- 
plying, that God, in some sort, actually did that 
which John the Baptist said he was able to do, (Matt. 
ili. 9,) even of stones to raise up children unto Abra- 
ham; it being then as impossible, by the course of 
nature, for Abraham and Sarah, in such an advanced 
age as they then were, to have a child, as it is to hew 
one out of arock, or dig one out of-a pit. For J 
called him alone—Hebrew, 1M, one ; that is, when 
he was but one single person, without child or fami- 
ly, I called him from his country and kindred to fol- 


low me to an unknown land, where I promised that | 
I would multiply him exceedingly. And I blessed | 


him, and increased him—Namely, into a vast mul- 
titude, when his condition was desperate in the eye 
of reason. And therefore God can as easily deliver 
and raise his church when they are in the most for- 
lorn condition, and seem to be consumed, dead, and 
buried, so that nothing but dry bones remain of them, 
as is declared at large, Ezek. chap. xxxvii. 

Verse 3. Jor, &c.—The prophet, in these words, 
seems to be giving a reason why they should look 
unto, or consider, that famous example of Abraham 
and Sarah; namely, because they should find ‘the 
like wonder wrought on their behalf. Or the mean- 
ing may be, therefore, for the sake of Abraham and 


.. of that covenant which God made with him, and by 
~ which he promised to bless him and his seed for ever ; 


the Lord shall comfort Zion—His church, frequent- 


. ly, as we have seen, called by that name. He will 


252 


& Gen. xiii. 10; Joel ii. 3.——» Chap. ii. 3; xlii. 4. Chap. 
xlii. 6.——* Chap. xlvi. 13; lvi. 1; Rom. i. 16, 17.——! Psa. 
lxvii. 4; xeviii. 9.—™ Chap. lx. 9. » Rom. i. 16. 


make her wilderness like Eden—Although she may 
be waste and desolate like a wilderness or desert for 
a time, yet she shall be restored and made as pleasant 
and flourishing as the garden of Eden was. The 
expressions are figurative, and, according to Vitringa, 
“in their primary sense, refer to the state of Zion 
after their restoration from Babylon; in their second- 
ary and spiritual sense, to the redemption of the 
church by the Messiah, and the consequent bless- 
ings of grace.” See chap. xlix. 19, and lii. 9. 

Verses 4, 5. Hearken unto me, my people—Ye 
Jews, whom I chose to be my peculiar people, do not 
reject my counsel, which, I have told you, even the 
Gentiles will receive, nor forsake the mercies of 
which even they will partake. For a law shall pro- 
ceed from me—A new law, even the doctrine of the 
gospel. Iwill make my judgment to rest for alight 
—Judgment is here the same thing with law in the 
former clause, the word of God, or the evangelical 
doctrine, of which he saith, that he will make it to 
rest, that is, settle and establish it; whereby he may 
possibly intimate the stability and perpetuity of this 
light in the church, that it shall not be like the light 
of. the Mosaic dispensation, which was only to shine 
for a season, namely, wntil the time of reformation, 
(Heb. ix. 10,) when all those dark shadows were to 
vanish and give place to the Sun of righteousness, 
and to that kingdom and state that should never be 
moved. See Dan. ii. 44; Heb. xii. 26-28. Of the 
people—Hebrew, Tay, the peoples, not only you 
Jews, but people of all sorts and nations, who shall 
receive and walk in it. My righteousness is near— 
My salvation, the redemption of all my people, Jews 
and Gentiles, which is the effect of my righteous- 
ness, of my justice, faithfulness, or merey, which are 
all called by the name of righteousness in the Serip- 
tures, and all contributed to the work of man’s re- 
demption. My salvation is gone forth—Shall shortly 
go forth; my eternal purpose of saving my people 
shall speedily be fulfilled ; and mine arm, my power, 
shall judge the people—Kither, Ist, Shall destroy 
those who obstruct or oppose this work: or, rather, 
2d, Shall subdue the Gentiles to my authority, and rule 
them by my Word and Spirit. 7'he isles—The remote 
countries of the Gentiles; shall wait upon me—Shall 
expect this salvation from me, and from me only. 

3 --- 


The great happiness 


CHAPTER LI. 


of the godly. 


A. M. 3298: 


a alg Lift up your eyes to the heavens, 


~ and look upon the earth beneath : .for 
Pthe heavens shall vanish away like smoke, 
“and the earth shall wax old like a garment, 
and they that dwell therein shall die in like 
manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and 
my righteousness shall not be abolished. 

7 “1 *Hearken unto me, ye that know right- 
eousness, the people ‘in whose heart is my law ; 
‘fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye 
afraid of their revilings. 

8 For "the moth shall eat them up like a 
garment, and the worm shall eat them like 
wool; but my righteousness shall be for ever, 
and my salvation ‘from generation to genera- 
tion. 

9 4 *Awake, awake, Yput on strength, O 


arm of the Lorn; awake, “as in the eM. 9098 
ancient days, in the generations of ———-~ 
old. *Art thou not it that hath cut » Rahab, 
and wounded the ° dragon? 

10 Aré thou not it which hath ¢ dried the sea, 
the waters of the great deep; that hath made 
the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed 
to pass over ? 

11 Therefore * the redeemed of the Lorp shall 
return, and come with singing unto Zion; and 
everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they 
shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and 
mourning shall flee away. 

12 4 I, even I, am he ‘that comforteth you: 
who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid & of 
a man that shall die, and of the son of man 
which shall be made as grass ; 


Chap. xl. 26. P Psa. cil. 26; Matt. xxiv. 35; 2 Pet. iii. 
10, 12.—a Chapter 1. 9.——" Verse 1——* Psa. xxxvii. 31. 
* Matt. x. 28; Acts v. 41. «Chap. 1. 9. x Psa. xliv. 23; 
Chap. lii. 1——¥ Psa. xciii. 1; Rev. xi. 17. 


z Psa. xliv. 1. a Job xxvi. 12.——>Psa. Ixxxvii. 4; Ixxxix. 10. 
¢ Psa. Ixxiv. 13, 14; Chap. xxvik 1; Ezek.xxix. 3. 4d Exod. 
xiv. 21; Chap. xliii.16. € Chap. xxxv. 10. f Verses 3, 45 
2 Cor. i. 3. § Psa. exviii. 6. h Chap. xl. 6; 1 Pet. i. 24. 


Verse 6. Lift up your eyes to the heavens—Look 
up to the visible heavens above, which have continu- 


ed hitherto, and seem likely to continue; and look | 


upon the earth beneath—Which seems as fitmly 
established as if it would endure forever. T'he hea- 
vens shall vanish away like smoke—Which soon 
spends itself and disappears; and the earth shall 
wax old, &¢e.—Shall decay and perish, like a worn- 
out garment. 
in like manner—Shall be dissolved, as the heaven 
and earth shall be, 2 Pet. iii. 11. But my salvation 
shall be for ever, &c.—As it shall spread through all 
the nations of the earth, so it shall last through all 
the ages of the world, and, in its consequences, to all 
eternity. Y 

Verses 7, 8. Hearken, ye that know righteousness 
—Who not only understand, but love and practise it ; 
whose persons are justified, whose nature is renew- 
ed, and whose lives are. subject to my laws. These 
seem to be distinguished from those who are spoken 


of (verse 1) as following after righteousness. These | 
had attained what the others were only in pursuit of. | 


The people in whose heart is my law—Who are 
here opposed to the carnal Jews, that had the law 
written only on tables of stone. Compare 2 Cor. iii. 


3; Heb. viii. 10. Fear ye not the reproach of men | 


—The censures of your carnal countrymen, who 
load their believing and godly brethren with a world 
of reproaches; but let not these things discourage 
you: for the moth shall eat them up, &c.—-Those 
that reproach you shall be easily and soon destroyed, 
and so God will avenge your cause upon them, and 
deliver you from their injurious treatment; and the 
worm shall eat them like wool—Like a woollen gar- 


ment, which is sooner corrupted by moths, or such | 


creatures, than linen. h 
Verses 9-11. Awake, awake, &c.—The prophet, 
3 


And they that dwell therein shall die | 


by an elegant figure, addresses himself to God, to 
stir up and exert his power in behalf of his oppressed 


| people, as he did in former times, when he delivered 


them out of the Egyptian bondage. Awake, as in 
the ancient days—That is, act for us now as thon 
didst for our fathers formerly: repeat the wonders 
they have told us of. Art thow not it that cut Ra- 
hab—Egypt, so called, here and elsewhere, for its 
pride or strength. And wounded the dragon—Pha- 
raoh, the Leviathan, as he is called, Psa. Ixxiv. 13, 
14. Art thow not it that dried the sea—Art thou 
not the same God, and as potent now as thou wast 
then? That made the depths a way for the ran- 
somed, &¢e.—For thy people, whom thou’ didst re- 
deem and bring out of Egypt? Let thine arm be 
stretched out in our behalf; for it has done great 
things formerly in defence of the same cause, and 
we are sure it is neither shortened nor weakened. 
Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, 
&c.—These words express the persuasion of the 
prophet, that as the Lord did these great things for- 
merly, so he would certainly do the like again, See 
note on chap. xxxv. 10. 

Verses 12,13. J, even I, am he that comforteth 
you—* They prayed,” says Henry, “for the opera- 
tions of his power: he answers them with the conso- 
lations of his grace ; which may well be accepted as 
an equivalent. J, even J, he says, will do it: he had 
ordered his ministers to do it, chap. xl. 1; but, be- 
cause they cannot reach the heart, he takes the 
work into his own hands; he will do it himself. 
And those whom he comforts, are comforted in- 
deed.” | Who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid, 
&c.—How unreasonable and distrustful art thou, O 
my church, how unlike to thyself! How unsuitable 
are these despondences to thy professions and obli- 
gations! Afraid of aman thai shall die, &e.—Of a 

253 


* 


sl 
og 


Jerusalem encouraged 


ISAIAH. 


to trust in God. 


13 And forgettest the Lorp thy Ma- 
ker, ‘ that hath stretched forth the hea- 
vens, and laid the foundations of the earth ; 
and hast feared continually every day because 
of the fury of the oppressor, as if he 'were ready 
to destroy’? Fand where ‘is the fury of the op- 
pressor ? 

14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may 
be loosed, !'and that he should not die in the 
pit, nor that his bread: should fail. 

15 But I am the Lorp thy God, that ™ divided 


A. M. 3298. 
B 


the sea, whose waves roared: The A. x: 3298, 
B.C. 706. 
Lorp of hosts zs his name. ote 

16 And*"I have put my words in thy mouth, 
and °have covered thee in the shadow of my 
hand, ?that I may plant the heavens, and lay 
the foundations of the earth, and say unto 
Zion, Thou art my people. 

17 4% 1Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, 
which * hast drunk at the hand of the Lorn the 
cup of his fury; ‘thou hast drunken the dregs 
of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. 


c 

i Job ix. 8; Psa. civ. 2; Chap. xl. 22; xlii. 5; xliv. 24. 

1 Or, made himself ready. k Job xx. 7.—! Zech. ix. 11. 

m Psa. lxxiv. 13; Job xxvi. 12; Jer. xxxi. 35—— Deut. xviii. 
18; Chap. lix. 21; John iii, 34. 


° Chap. xlix. 2.——P Chap. Ixv. #7; Ixvi- 22. 4 Chap. lii. 
1 r JOD Xxi, 20s Jer. X5V-. Lo. ee s Deut. xxviil. 28, 
34; Psa. Ix. 3; Ixxv. 8; Ezek. xxiii: 32,34; Zech. xii. 2; 
Rey. xiv. 10. 


weak, mortal, and perishing creature. And forget- 
test the Lord thy Maker—Dost not consider the in- 
finite power of that God who made thee, and who 
will plead thy cause ; that hath stretched forth the 


heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth—And | 


therefore hath all the hosts and all the powers of 
both at his command and disposal. And hast feared 
continually every day—Hast been in a state of con- 
tinual alarm and disquietude ; because of the fury 
of the oppressor—It is true there is an oppressor, 


and he is furious, designing, it may be, to do thee a| 


mischief, and therefore it will be thy wisdom to be 
on thy guard against him: but thou art afraid of 
him, as tf he were ready to destroy—As if it were 
in his power to destroy thee in a moment, and he 
Were just now going to effect his purpose, and there 
were no possibility of preventing it. And where is 
the fury of the oppressor 2—What is become of the 
power and.rage of the Babylonians? Are they not 
vanished away? Are they not broken, and thou de- 
livered? He speaks of the thing as already done, 
because it should certainly and suddenly be 
done. 

Verses 14-16. The captive exile hasteneth that 
he may be loosed—From his. captivity, and may re- 
turn to his own country from which he is banished. 
And that he should not die in the pit—Die a prison- 
er, through the inconveniences and hardships of his 
confinement; nor that his bread should fail—The 
bread or provision allowed to keep him alive in prison. 
The general sense of the verse is, God is not slack, 
as you think, but makes haste to fulfil his promise, 
and rescue his captive and oppressed people from 
all their oppressions and miseries. And I have put 
my words in thy mouth—These great and glorious 
promises, which are in thy mouth, are not the vain 
words of man, a weak, inconstant, and unfaithful 
creature, but the words of the almighty, unchange- 
able, faithful God; and therefore they shall be 
infallibly accomplished. This is spoken by God to 
his church and people, whom he addresses, both in 
the foregoing and following verses. For God’s 
word is frequently said to be put into the mouths, 


not only of the prophets, but also of the people, as | 
chap. lix. 21; Deut. xxx.14, And have covered thee, | 


254 


&c.—Have protected thee by my almighty power. 
That Imay plant the heavens—Bishop Lowth reads, 
To stretch out the heavens: and lay the foundations 
of the earth—I have given thee, O my church, these 
promises, and this protection in all thy calamities, to 
assure thee of my care and kindness to thee, and 
that I will reform thee in a most glorious manner, 
and bring thee unto that perfect and blessed estate 
which is reserved for the days of the Messiah, which, 
in the language of Scripture, is termed the making 
of new heavens and a new earth, chap. lxv. 17; and 
Ixvi. 22, And say unto Zion, Thou art my people 
—That I may own thee for my people, in a more 
illustrious manner than I have done. 

Verse 17. Awake, awake—God having awoke and 
arisen for the comfort of his people, here calls on 
them to awake, as afterward, chap. lii.1. This is a 
call to awake, not so much out of the sleep of sin, 
though that also was necessary, in order to their 
being ready for deliverance, as out of the stupor of 
despondency and despair. Hebrew, ynn, rouse 
up thyself ; come out of that forlorn and disconso- 
late condition in which thou hast so long been. 
When the Jews were in captivity they were so over- 
whelmed with the sense of their troubles that they 
had no heart left to mind any thing that tended to 
their comfort or relief; and therefore when the. de- 
liverance came, they are said (Psa. exxvi. 1) to be 
like them that dream. The address may be applied 
to the Jerusalem, or Jewish Church, which was in 
the apostles’ time, which is said to be in bondage 
with her children, (Gal. iv. 25,) and to have been 
under the power of a spirit of slumber, Rom. xi. 8. 
They are called to awake and mind the things that 
belonged to their everlasting peace, and then the cup 
of trembling should be taken out of their hands, 
peace should be spoken to them, and they should 
triumph over Satan, who had blinded their eyes, and 
brought stupor insensibly upon them. Stand up— 
Upon thy feet, O thou who hast been thrown to the 
ground, Who hast drunk, §c., the cup of his fury 
—Who hast been sorely afflicted ; the dregs of the 
cup of trembling—Which strikes him that drinks it 
with a deadly horror ; and wrung them out—Drunk 
every drop Of 1t. 

3 


God will confound all 


CHAPTER LI. 


the enemies of his church. 


18 There is none to guide her 

~ among all the sons whom she hath 
brought forth ; neither is there any that taketh 
her by the hand of all the sons ¢hat she hath 
brought up. 

19 * These two things are come unto thee; 
who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and 
‘destruction, and the famine, and the sword: 
“by whom shall I comfort thee ? 

20 *' Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head 
of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they 
are full of the fury of the Lorn, the rebuke of 
thy God. 


A. M. 3298. 


21 4 Therefore hear now this, thou A. M. 3298. 
afflicted, and drunken, ¥ but not with cane 
wine : 

22 Thus saith thy Lord the Lorp, and thy 
God * that pleadeth the cause of his people, 
Behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup 
of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my 
fury ; thou shalt no more drink it again: 

23 But “I will put it into the hand of them 
that afflict thee ; ’ which have said to’ thy soul, 
Bow down, that we may go over: and thou 
hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the 
street, to them that went over. 


' Chapter xlvii. 9. * Heb. happened. Hebrew, breaking. 
4 Amos vii. 2. x Lam. ii. 11, 12. 


bivicied 17; Lam. iii. 15.—— Jer. 1. 34. a Jer. xxv. 173 
xxvi. 28; Zech. xii. 2.— Psa. lxvi. 11], 12. 


Verses 18-20. There i is none to guide her, &e.— 
When thou wast drunk with this cup, and couldest 
not direct or support thy steps, neither thy princes, 
nor prophets, nor priests, were able or willing to 
lead or uphold thee. T'hese two things are come 
upon thee—Those here following, which, although 
they be expressed in four words, yet may be fitly re- 
duced to two things, namely, desolation by famine, 
and destruction by the sword. Who shall be sorry 
for thee—Who is there left to take pity on thee, 
since thy children are all in as miserable a condition 
as thyself? See verses 18 and 20. By whom. shall 
I comfort thee—What human means of comfort is 
there left for thee ? 

Thy sons have fainted—They are so far from 
being able to comfort thee, as was said verse 18, 
that they themselves faint away for want of com- 
fort, and through famine. They lie-at the head 
of all the streets—Dead by famine, or the sword 
of the enemy; as a wild bull in a net—Those 
of them who are not slain are struggling for life. 
They are full of the fury of the Lord—“ The bold 
image of the cup of God’s wrath,” says Bishop 
Lowth, “often employed by the sacred writers, is 
nowhere handled with greater force and sublimity 
than in this passage. Jerusalem is represented in 
person, as staggering under the effects of it, desti- 
tute of that assistance which she might expect from 
her children, not one of them being able to support 
or lead her. They, abject and amazed, lie at the 
head of every street, overwhelmed with the great- 
ness of their distres; like the oryx entangled ina 
net, in vain struggling to rend it and extricate him- 


self. This is poetry-of the first order, sae: of 
the highest proof.” 

Verses 21-23. Hear, thou drunken, but not with 
wine—But with the cup of God’s fury, mentioned 
verse 17. T'hus saith the Lord—That is, Jehovah ; 
he that is able to help thee, and hath wherewithal to 
relieve thee; thy Lord—That hath an incontestable 
right to thee, and will not alienate it; thy God—In 
covenant with thee, and that hath undertaken to 
make thee happy; that pleadeth the cause of his 
people—As their patron and protector, who, though 
he hath been angry with, and hath chastised thee, is 
now reconciled to thee, and will maintain thy cause 
against allthine enemies. I have taken out of thy 
hand the cup of trembling—The bitter, intoxicating 
cup of my wrath ; thou shalt no more drink it again 
--No more lie under such judgments after thy pros- 
perity in the latter days, chap. lii.1. But J will put 
it into the hand of them that afflict thee—Compare 
chap. xlix. 26; Jer. xxv. 29; Rev. xviii.6. Which 
have said to thy soul, Bow down, &c.—-Lie down 
upon the ground, that we may trample upon thee. 
“A very strong and most expressive description of 
the ‘insolent pride of eastern conquerors, which, 
though it may seem greatly exaggerated, yet hardly 
exceeds the strict truth. See Josh. x. 24; Judg.i.7. 
The Emperor Valerianus, being, through treachery, 
taken prisoner by Sapor, king of Persia, was treated 
by him as the basest and most abject slave: for the 
Persian monarch commanded the unhappy Roman 
to bow himself down, and offer his back, on which 
he set his foot, in order to mount his chariot or horse, 
whenever he had oceasion.”—Bishop Lowth. 


WW 


CHAPTER LIL. 


The former part of this chapter is connected with the latter part of the preceding, the deliverance of the Jews fra Babylon 
being the subject of it, as emblematical of our redemption by Christ, and of the erection and salvation of the gospel church. 
(1,) The prophet addresses Zion in her state of bondage and oppression, and encourages her to expect and prepare for 


deliverance, which he promises her in the name of the Lord, 1-6. 
Jirst tidings of it would produce in the church and all its members, 7-10. 


(2,) He shows the great joy and exultation which the 
(3,) He exhorts all the people of God to avail 


Ye 255 


¥ 


$ 


Ww 
Where they had protection and sustenance, and’ 


Zion is encouraged 


ISATAH. 


to trust om the Lord. 


themselves of the opportunity offered them, and readily to exchange bondage for liberty, and to conduct themselves in a 


manner suitable thereto, 11, 12. 

subsequent enlargement and glory of his kingdom, 13-15. 
A.M, 3298. A WAKE, *awake, put on th 
elias A Mipenathe O yh ak on thy 
beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, *the holy 
city: for ° henceforth there shall no more 
come into thee the uncircumcised ‘and the 
unclean. 

2 °Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and 
sit down, O Jerusalem: ‘loose thyself from 
the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of 
Zion. . 

3 For thus saith the Lorn, # Ye have sold 
yourselves for naught; and ye shall be redeemed 
without money. Dass 

4 For thus saith the Lord Gop, My people 
went down aforetime into > Egypt to sojourn 


(4,) The Messiah is introduced, and exhibited in his humiliation and exaltation, and the 


there ; and the Assyrian. oppressed A. M, 3298. 
them without cause. a. 

5 Now therefore, what have I here, saith the 
Lorp, that my people is taken away for naught ? 
they that rule over them make them to howl, 
saith the Lorp ; and my name continually every 
day is ‘ blasphemed. > 

6 Therefore my people shall know my name: 
therefore they shall know in that day that I 
am he that doth speak : behold, itis To 

7 4 * How beautiful upon the mountains are 
the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that 
publisheth peace ; that bringeth good tidings of 
good, that publisheth salvation ; that saith unto 
Zion, ! Thy God reigneth! 


a 7 
“a Chap. li. 9, 17—— Neh. xi.1; Chapter xlviii.2; Matthew 
iv. 5; Rev. xxi. 2. “Chap. xxxv. 8; Ix, 21 ;. Nah. i. 15. 
4 Rev, xxi. 27.—¢ Chapter iii, 26; h. 23.—— Zech. ii. 7. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LII. 

Verses 1-3. Awake, awake, put on strength—God 
orders his church to do that which she entreated him 
to do, chap. li. 9. And because his word is with 
power, and what he commands he in certain cases 
effects, this is a prediction and promise what he 
should do, that she should awake or arise out of her 
low estate, and be strong and courageous. Put on 
thy beautiful garments--Thy sorrows shall be end- 
ed, and thou shalt be advanced in a glorious condi- 
tion. O Zion—O my church, very frequently called 
by the name of Zion or Jerusalem. TJ'here shall no 
more come unto thee—To molest, or associate them- 
selves with, and thereby to defile and corrupt thee ; 
the uncircumcised and unclean—Heathen and infi- 
dels, nor any others who are. unholy. Whereby he 
intimates, that there should be a greater reformation 
and more purity in the church than formerly there 
had been, which was eminently accomplished in the 
church and kingdom of Christ. Shake thyself from 
the dust—In which thou hast lain as a prisoner, or 
sat asamourner. Arise, and sit down—Upon thy 
throne. Or sit up, as the word *1w is rendered, Gen. 
xxvii. 19. Loose thyself, &e—The yoke of thy 
captivity shall be taken off from thee. Ye have sold 
yourselves—By your sins, into the hands of your 
enemies; for naught—Without any price or valu- 
able consideration paid by them, either to you or to 
your lord and owner. And ye shall be redeemed 
without money— Without paying any ransom. 

Verses 4-6. My. people went down into Egypt— 


therefore owed subjection to the king of Egypt. 


And yet when he oppressed them I punished him, 


severely, and delivered them out of his hands. And 

the Assyrian oppressed them—The king of Babylon, 

who is called the king of Assyria, (2 Kings xxiii. 
256 


% 
g Psa. xliv.12; Chap. xlv.13; Jer. xv. 13— Gen. xlvi. 
6; Acts vii. 14——i Ezekiel xxxvi. 20, 23; Romans ii. 24. 
k Nah. i. 15; Rom. x. 15,—! Psa. xciii. 1; xcvi. 10; xevii.1. 


29,) as also the Persian emperor is called, (Ezra vi. 
22,) because it was one and the same empire which 
was possessed, first by the Assyrians, then by the 
Babylonians, and afterward by the Persians. With- 
out cause—Without any real ground or eolour, by 
mere force invading their land, and carrying them 
away into captivity. Now therefore what have Ihere 


| —Why (speaking after the manner of men) do I 


sit still here, and not go to Babylon to punish the 
Babylonians, and to deliver my people? Or, What 
honour have I by suffering this injury to be done to 
my people? Thatmy peopleistaken away for naught 
—Were carried away captive by the Babylonians, 
without any provocation or pretence of right? They 
that rule over them make them to howl—By their 
tyrannical and unmerciful usage of them; and my 
name continually is blasphemed—The Babylonians 
blaspheme me, as if I wanted either power or good- 
will to save my people out of their hands. There- 
fore my people shall know my name—They shall 
have sensible experience of my infinite power and 
goodness in fighting for them. -J'hey shall know in 
that Way—When I shall redeem them; which work 
Was Vevtm by the return of the Jews from Babylon, 
and afterward carried on, and at last perfected, by 
the coming of the Messiah; that Iam he that doth 
speak—That these promises are not the words of a 
weak, or fickle, or deceitful man, but of him who is 
omnipotent, unchangeable, and a covenant-keeping 
God. 

Verse 7. How beautiful—How exceeding precious 
and acceptable; wpon the mountains—Of Judea, to 
which these glad tidings were brought ; are the feet 
of him that bringeth good tidings—Tidings, first, 
Of the release of the Jews from captivity in Baby- 
lon; and, secondly, Of the redemption and salvation 
of mankind by the Messiah. Thus most commenta- 

3 


; 


Joy of the church at the 


CHAPTER LII. 


tidings of deliverance. 


= — 8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the 
voice; with the voice together shall 
they sing: for dliey shall see eye to eye, when 
the Loap shall bring again Zion. 

9 4% Break forth into joy, sing together, ye 
waste places of Jerusalem: ™for the Lorp 
hath comforted his people, "he hath redeemed 
Jerusalem. 


10 ° The Lorp hath made bare his A. M. 3298. 
holy arm in the eyes of all the na- 2 aii 
tions: and Pall the ends of thagerth shall ge 
the salvation of our God. Ke ag 

11 4 2 Depart ye, depart. ye, go ye out from 
thence, touch no-unclean thing; go ye out of 
the midst of her; *be ye clean, that bear the 
vessels of the Lorv. 


™ Chapter li. 3——" Chapter xlviii. 20. 
P Luke iii. 6. 


° Psalm xcvili. 2, 3. 


4 Chap. xlviii. cae Jer.1. 8; li. 6, 45; Zech. ii. 6, 7; 2Cor. vi. 
; Rev. xvill. 4. r Lev, xxii. 2. 


tors interpret the prophet’s words. They are “a 
poetical description,” says Lowth, “of the messenger 
who first brought the good news of Cyrus’s decree 
for the people to return home, whom the watchmen, 
mentioned verse 8, are supposed to descry afar off 
from the tops of the mountains, making all possible 
haste to publish this happy news: a signal instance 
of God’s overruling providence, of the peculiar care 


he hath for his church. But this text is very fitly | 


applied by St. Paul to the first preachers of the gos- 
pel, (Rom. x. 15,) the very words importing good 
tidings of that peace and salvation whereby the king- 
dom of God was erected among men.” Indeed, true 
peace and salvation were procured for mankind, and 
are conferred upon them, only by Christ. And in 
his days, or from the time of his manifestation in the 
flesh, and entering upon his public ministry, God 


discovered and exercised his dominion over the| 


world far more eminently than he ever had done 
from the beginning of the world until that time. 
Accordingly, we may observe, those Psalms wherein 
we find that expression, T'he Lord reigneth, are by 
the generality of interpreters, both Jewish and Chris- 
ee expounded of the times of the Messiah; the 

eclaration being, in effect, the same that J ohn the 
Baptist, the messenger of Christ, and that Christ 
himself published, when they testified, The _king- 
dom of heaven is at hand. 

Verse 8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice— 
Partly to give notice to all people of these glad 
tidiags, and partly by way of exultation, to sing forth 
the praises of God for this glorious season and exer- 
cise of mercy. Ifwe consider this passage as refer- 
ring to the deliverance from Babylon; by the watch- 
men here, we must understand those prophets who 
prophesied at or after the time of that deliverance, 
such as Haggai and Zechariah: but, if the good 
tidings be interpreted of the publication of peace and 
salvation by the gospel, then by the watchmen its 
ministers are meant, and especially the apostles and 
evangelists, an other first messengers of Christ. 
For they shall see eye to eye—Those prophets that 
shall witness the release of the Jews from captivity 
shall see an exact agreement and correspondence be- 
tween the prophecy and the event whereby it is 
accomplished, between the promise and the per- 
formance. It may still be affirmed with more pro- 
priety, that the preachers of the gospel saw eye to 
eye when the Messiah was manifested in the flesh, 
and they saw his glory, the glory of the only begot- 

Vou. IIL. (17) 


ten of the Father, full of grace and truth, John i. 
14; when they saw with their eyes, looked upon, 
and their hands handled the word of life ; when the 
life was manifested, and they saw it and bore wit- 
ness, and could show unto others that eternal life 
which was with the Father, and was manifested 
uato men, 1 John i. 2. And being eye and ear wit- 
nesses of ‘the words and works of Christ, their testiz, 
mony became more certain and more valuable. Add 
to this, that true gospel ministers in general, and even 
ordinary Christians, who receive the Spirit of wis- 


dom and revelation, (Eph.i. 17,) have a more distinct - 


and clear view of the grace of God in Christ than 
the Old Testament saints could have. When the 


Lord shall bring ‘again Zion—When, God shall it 


complete the work of bringing his church out of _ 
captivity, which was begun at the return out of Baby- 
lon, and perfected by Christ's coming into the world. 
Bishop Lowth, however, reads the clause, en Je- 
hovah returneth to Zion; a translation which the 
Hebrew text will certainly bear. Thus the Chaldee: 
When he shall bring back his presence to Zion. 
“God is considered as having deserted his people 
during their captivity; and, at the restoration, as re- 
turning himself with them to Zion, his former habit- 
ation.” But in a much higher degree was God pre- 


sent in his church, when he was manifested in the 


Jlesh, and they could call him, Immanuel, God with us. 

Verses 9,10. Break forth into joy—Break forth in 
joyful praises; ye waste places of Jerusalem—That 
is, all parts of Jerusalem, for it was all in ruins, and. 
all parts of Judea, which lay desolate and waste du- 
ring the captivity: an emblem of the desolate and 
barren state of the church when the Lord, for her- 
sins, withdraws a: from her, "Por the. 
Lord hath comforted his people, &c. —They shall be 
restored to their former prosperity, and in the days 
of the Messiah to a far greater degree of holiness 
and happiness than the church of God ever before 
possessed. Zhe Lord hath made bare Hah ba 
—Hath discovered and put forth his gr wer, 
which, for a long time, did not appear to be exerted 
in behalf of his people. And all the ends of the 
earth shall see the salvation of our God—All na- 
tions of the world shall, with astonishment, behold 
the wonderful work of God; first, in bringing his 
people out of Babylon; and afterward, in their re- 
demption by Christ: 

Verses 11, 12. Depart ye, go ye out from thence— 
Out of Babylon into your own land, that there J 

257 3 


' ISAIAH. 


sufferings of the Messiah. 


A prediction of the : 
nae es, 12 For * ye shall not go out with 


——— haste, nor go by flight: ‘for the) 
Lorp will go before you; “and the God, of 
Israel will + be your reteward. 

13 “| Behold, *my servant shall * deal pru- 


Se 
* Exod. xii, 33, 39.—- Mic. ii. 18 =—" Num. x. 25; Chap. lviii. 
: ; Exod. xiv. 19. Heb. gather you up... ~ 
re oa ————— 
may meet with you, and. you, and. perform 
those further and greater things for you which I 
» have promised to do there. And this invitation. was 
the more necessary, ‘because God foresaw that a 
great number of the Jews would, upon worldly: con- 
siderations, ah. ae in those foreign countries in 
which they tled, and would. be very back- 
ward to r mm t ; e Holy Land. ‘Touch no wn- 


clean thing—Carry not along with you any of their 
su iti 
the vessels 


= 


idolatries. Be ye clean, that bear 
"Fie Lor: And especially you priests 
vites, who minister in holy things, and carry 
ie oly ale the temple, keep yourselves from 
a aor ag! shall not go out by flight—But 
urely, a 1d in triumph, “being conducted by your 
ee: captain, the Lord Of hosts. The God of Is- 
rael will bebaiir rereward—So that none shall be 


rn able either to. oppose you in your arch or to fall 


on you ‘the rear,» 
Ver "4 13. "Behold, my servant, &c. This is the 
beginning of a new prophecy, continued from hence 


to the end of the next chapter, which, as has been 
gasty observed by many, both ancient and modern 
rpreters, should have begun here. “The sub- 
i, of Isaiah’s prophecy, from the fortieth chapter 
inclusive, has hitherto been, in general; the deliver- 
ance of ‘the: people of God. This: ‘includes in it 
three distinct parts: the deliverance of the Jews 
from the captivity of Babylon, the deliverance of the 
Gentiles from their miserable state of ignorance and 
idolatry, and the deliverance of mankind from the 
captivity of sin and death. These three,subjects 
are subordinate to one another, and. the two latter 
are shadowed out under the image of the former. 
Cyrus is expressly named as the “immediate agent 
of God in effecting the first deliverance. A greater 
person is spoken of as the agent who is to effect the 
two latter deliverances, called the Servant,” the 
. Elect, of God, in whom his soul delighteth. "Now 
these three subjects have a very near relation to one 
another; for,as the agent who was to effect the two 
lattter deliverances, thatis, the Messiah,was to be born 
a Jew, wn particular limitations of time family, and 
other mstanees, the first deliverance-was neces- 
sary in the order of providence, and, according to 
the determinate counsel of God, to the accomplish- 
ment of theitwo latter deliverances; and the second 
deliverance was necessary to the third, or, rather, 
was involved in it, and made an essential part of it. 
This being the case, Isaiah has not treated the three 
subjects as quite distinct and separate, in a method- 


ical and orderly manner, like a philosopher or a lo-' 


gician, but has taken them i in their connective view; 
he has handled them as a prophetand a poet; he, 
os 258 


‘es 


dently, yye shall be exalted and ex- A. B.C. ae. 
tolled, and be very high. ss 

14 As many were astonished at thee; (his 
* visage was so marred more than any man, 


and his form more than the sons ofmen:): __ 
mle, 


* Chap. xlii, 1.——* Or, 
y Phil. ii. 9. 


iii. 10; Jer. xxiii. 5,. 
Chap. liii, 2, ‘3 


— SAL Ba 
hastellegorized the former, and, under the image of 
it, has shadowed out the two Jatt he has thrown 
them all together, has mixed one with another, has 
passed from this to that with rapid transitions, and 
has painted the whole with the strongest and boldest 
imagery. The restoration of the Jews from capti- 
vity, the call of the Gentiles, the ‘re ion by 
Messiah, have hitherto been handled interchange- 
ably and alternately. Babylon has hitherto been 
‘kept pretty much in sight, at ng same time that 
strong intimations of something greater have 
been frequently thrown in. here Babylon is at 
ence dropped, and hardly aired comes in ight again. 
The prophet’s views are almost wholly engrossed ~ 
by the superior part of his aphiect He introduces _ 
the Messiah as earing at first in the lowest | te 
of humiliation, Ww ich he had just touched upon be~ . 
fore, (chap. 1.5, 6,) and obviates the offence which . 
would be oceasioned by it, by declaring the import- » 
ant and necessary cause ‘of it; and i ae the” 


Biel 


glory which should follow it.” oe e 
Ty servant—That it. < is s ae en - 
of, is so evident, tha @ paraphrast, and,” 


other ancient, and sor 
derstand it directly nd tl 
have been volbinge hea ms verted to the ristian or 
faith by the evidence of this prophecy. ‘Shall de 46 A 
prudently—Shall manage the affairs of his kingd 
with admirable wisdom. Or, shall prosper, a Dae 
in the margin; and as the roe S*2u", here 0 
frequently rendered: which also agrees best : 
the following clause. And this intima tion capes * 
ing the future prosperity and navanctnelt 
Messiah, is fitly put, in the first place; to pre 
those scandals which otherwise si aris 
the succeeding passages, which d. lescri state o 
humiliation and deep affliction. S 
and extolled, and be very high—Here ‘are t h 
words signifying the same thing, to. express 
height and glory of his-exaltation. és 
erses 14, 15. As many were astons jaa “ihe 
At thee, O my servant: were struck w won 3 
his glorious endowments, at the Ricteicd nd. * 
power of his doctrine, and his miraculous wor : 
rather, at his humiliation. His visage*was 
marred, &c.—Christ, in respect of his birth, breed- 
ing, manner of life, ‘and outward cn i the 
world, was obscure and contemptible, a efore 
said to be a worm, and no man, a repro 
iand despised of the people, Psa, xxii. 6, f 
posed to all manner of affronts, indignities, and ¢ 
tumelies, from day. to day. His countena also 
was so marred with frequent watchings, fastings, 


and troubles, that he was thought to be mpely fifty 
(Te¥ iy 


octors, un- 


$ a 


i 


i 


The humiliation and 


CHAPTER Lill, — * 


Me 


ad 


ae 
* sufferings of the Messiah. 


A.M. pies 


i be 15 *So shall he sprinkle many na- 


. tions ; » the kings shall shut their 
mouths at him: for that © hich had not been 


2 Ezek. XXXVI. 25; Acts ii. 33; Heb. ix. 13, 14.——» Chap. an 


years old when he was but thirty, John viii. 57, and 
was further disfigured when he was buffeted, smitten | 


on the cheek, spit upon, and crowned with thorns, 
and met with other cruel and despiteful usages. So, 
' &c.—His exaltation shall be answerable to his humi- 
liation ; shall. he sprinkle many nations—Ist, With 
his blood, which is called the blood of sprinkling, 


Heb. xii. 24, that is, he shall justify them by his 


blood, as it follows, chap. liii. 11, which act is fre- 
_ quently expressed by washing, as. Psa. ‘li. 2, 7; 
Ezek. xvi, 9; Rev. 1.5. Or, 2d, With his word or 
doctrine ; which, being often compared to rain, or 
water, as chap. Ww. 2 11; Psa. Ixxii. 6, may be said 
to be sprinkl is said to be dropped, Deut. 
Xxxii. 2; Eze oa 16, and xxi. 2. This sense 
seems to be favoured by, the following words: or, 


; 3d, With his Spirit, represented under the emblem ‘themselves. Cm 
re , + * Pg fy € 
‘ > a « : ity # e ooh: 
™ * ° - 7 ° *” ; : : . J Ny oe ~ “ 
: a 4. . 4 “ w* 2s { ae 
. “o . An > ; r : Ss a 
“pe Pe a , ie a dies 
eat por ate Boa 
+ god CHAPTER LUI. Pew ge te ee 
Te ard things tea iS Sit of “Christ, in the Old Testament prophets, testified beforehand, were the a 
and thi ry that should follow, 1 Pet. i. 11; and that which Christ himself, when he expounded Moses and 
. 3 fae to be the dr t and scope of them all, was that Christ ought»to suffer, and then to enter into his 
glory, 2 f But nowhere, in all the Old Testament, are these two so plainly and fully prophesied of ‘as 
vas here in h hich divers pass 5 quoted and applied to Christ in the New Testament. We have # rn 
~ here, (1,) The reproach of Vout ‘sufferings, the meanness of his $ appearance, the greatness of his griefs and troubles, 


softs l the prejudice t thence conceived against ins tt 
+ 


for e sins of o fs, not for his own, 4-6, 8, 9, 11, 12; 


jand, in the days of the Messiah, to b 


re) ) The distinguished 
that he bore’his sufferings with perfect, invincible, and exem- 


told them shall they see; and that A. M. 3298. 
which they had not heard shall: they B. C. 706. 


consider. 


7, 23. Chap. lv.5; Rom. xv. 21; xvi. 25, 26; Eph. iii. 5, 9. 


of the sprinkling of water, Ezek. xxxvi! 25-27; 
and frequently compared to water in the Scriptures, 
oured out 
on all flesh, Joel ii. 28; and particular romised to 
such as shouild thirst r it, and. believe in Christ, 
John vii. 37, 38; Rev, xxi. 6, and xxii. 17. Kings 
shall shut. their mo  im—Shall be s ilent be- 
fore him, out of pr nd humility, reverence, and 
admiration of isdom, and an eager desire to 
hear and receive. counsels and oracles from his 
mouth; for that which had not been told them shall 
they see—They shall hear from his m th many ex- 


cellent doctrines, which will be new stran, re to 
them. And particularly, that oni doctrine, 


new to them, but strange and ineredible to o the Je 


our of his sufferings—that he suffered 


_ plary patience, 7; that, in making Faigle Te for our sins, he obeyed and honoured his Father, 6, 10; and that his suffer- 
issued in 4 own high exaltation, and the gw? pelrgncn of innumerable multitudes of mankind, 8, 10-12. 


Mee wo hath believed our ? ‘report 92 


» and to whom is? the arm. of 
the aperyeae * 2. ats 
2 For he shall grow up before ae a a 


tender plant, and as a root out of a 4M. be 
dry ground: “he hath .no form flor ~~ 
patielinead and when we shall see him, there 
is no beauty that we should desire him. 


* Or, doctrine.——* Hebrew} 


Rom. i. 16; 1 Gor. i. 18. 


we 
petted 19.5 * Chap. xig, de 


“NOTES ON CHAPTER LI 2 
alia “Who hath believed. our Pepokt ?—The 
prophet ha having, in the last'three verses of the former 


made a géneral report concerning the great 
tadehiert umiliation and exaltafion of the 
essiah, of which he intended to discourse more 
largely. in this chapter, thought fit, before he de- 
scended to particulars, to use this preface. Who, 
not only of the Genti es, but even of the Jews, will 
~ believe the truth of what I have said, and must 
further say? Few or none. The generality of 
them will never receive, nor belieye in, such a 
Messiah as this. Thus this place is expounded 
by Christ himself, John xii. 38, and by St. Paul, 
Rom. x. 16. And this premonition was highly 
3 


4 Chap. li lii. 14 ; Mark ix. 12. , 
nec , both to caution the ay" they 
neces not stumble at this stone, and to instruct 
the Gentiles that they should not be surprised 
nor seduced with their example. And to whkom— 
Hebrew, “> YY, because, or, in behalf of whom, 
‘namely, to deliver them from the guilt and do- 
minion of their sins, and other spiritual enemies; 
is the arm—That is, the power; of the Lord re- 
vealed?—This is only revealed, or display ed, for 
the deliverance of those who, with a lively’ and 
divine faith, believe the report: for the gospel is 
the. power of God unto salvation only to him that 
believeth, Rom. i. 16. 

Verses 2,3. For he shall grow up, &c.—And 
the reason Die the Jews will generally reiget 

259 : 


of the salvation of the Gentiles, which was not a 


five * 
” 


hata 


our people, the Jewish nation, shall look upon alt I 


* 

» 3 _ . ; . ae me 4 

The sufferings of the Messiah, WSR 5 and his “ais condemmation, A 
te 


a a aoa 3 °He is despised and rejected of | sions, he was bruised for our Thi 
———— men; a man of sorrows, and. fac-| ties ; a the chastisement_ of our 
quainted with grief: and 5 we *hid as . it were f was upon him; and with his * stripes § 
our faces from him ; he Wes ar and § a ellh ng ar hie 
esteemed him not. ee ee * 
4 % Surely ®he hath borne our grief, at 
carried our sorrows: yet we did em him 


se smitten of God, an aflited. al. tke 


] * 

5 But he was ° wounded *’ for our transgres- |) i a 

a 6; Chap. xlix. 7, 15, | 45 tp is ot = oxy * 
xxii. ix. ehid|| torn! pit iva 225 ; ¢ sates ti 

x 3 his face from amt STR Al rom him, see er i ——* Heb, bruise——! Psa < oe. 


or, from aT gab -. M Pe ie Ke 
28 5 Pet. ii. 


their Messiah i is, pecgiite ee not come tn Pee ‘for 
world with secular pomp, but he shall grow up, or; | men 
spring wp, out of the ground,) befor nae sul 
the unbelieving Jews, of whom he spake, the nd 
and that in the singular number, as Al fee were p dcom- © 
witnesses of his mean original; and there: fore de- passion, ) 

spised him,) as a tender plant, (small an incon-|| ti 
siderable,) and as a root; or branch, grows out 0 it sgraced 
dry, barren ground, whos productions pa ha to vaeathe by the judg- 
poor and contemptible. He hath no form, &e.— ete 3 Soe c te 
His bodily presence and condition in the world | i ut, & 

shall be mean and despicable. And when f 
him, there is no beauty, Sc. — Whe ae, th 


own sky why for the sake of sinfu 
| Sn Y he >| 
2 yet we : aa é ef, ople 


expecting to find incomparable beauty and majesty g 
in his countenance and demeanour, we shall be alto- because Be them, ae for e gu ae a 
gether disappointed, and shall meet with — nothing oursins, ’ which he had voluntarily taken 1 
esirable in him. .This the prophet speaks in the || self, and for the expiation of our sins, ” 
gen of the carnal and unbelieving Jews. There! hereby purchased. The chastiseme: + ahpt Z 
was a great deal of true beauty in him, the: beauty —Those: punishments by which our r re- 
of holiness, and the beauty of goodness, , enough || coneiliation to,God, was to be, pure inal, laid » 
to render him the desire of all nations’; but the|| upon him, by God’s justice, with his own consent. 
far greater part of those among whom he lived|| With his» stripes we are healed—By his sufferings _ 
and conversed saw none of this beauty ; ; for it|| we are saved from our ag aga from ale ' 
was spiritually discerned.» Observe, reader, carnal || effects. thereof. ; 
minds see no excellence in the Lord Jesus ; no- Verse 6, All ~ Allmankind! like sheep —Whie 
thing that should induce them to, desire an ac-|| are exceedingly. ap t to go as and lose ethem- 
quaintance with, or interest in him. Nay, he is|| selves; have e gone b simp nd from the 
not only not desired, but he is despised and rejected— way, of truth and duty; of wisdom, piety, and vi 
As one unworthy of the company and conversation || tue; of holiness’ and happiness. - e have turned 
of all men; despised as a mean inan, rejected as a|| every one to his own way—In general, to the way > 
bad man, a deceiver of the people, an impostor, a|| of sin, which may well be called a man’s own way, 
blasphemer, an associate of Satan. He was the because sin isnatural to us, inherent in us, born with 
stone which the builders refused; they would not|| us ; and, in particular, io those several paths which 
have him to reign over them. A man of sorrows— several ‘men “choose, according to their different 
Whose whole life was filled with, and, in a manner, || opinions and circumstances, And the Lord hath 
made up of, a succession of sorrows and sufferings ; |) laid—Hebrew, hath made to meet on him, as all the» 
and acquainted with grief—Who had €onstant ex-|| rivers meet in the sea. The iniquity of us all— 
perience of, and familiar converse with, grievous|| Not properly, for he knew no sin; but the insta 
afflictions. "And we hid, &ec.—We scorned to look || ment. of iniquity, as the word })p is frequently 
upon him; or we looked another way, and his suf-|| That which was due for all the sins of all man ind, 
ferings were nothing to us; though never sorrow || which must needs be so heavy a load, that if he had 
was like unto his sorrows. not been God as well as man he must have § 
Verses 4, 5. Surely he hath borne our griefs— || under the burden. 
Whereas it may seem an ineredible thing, that soex-|| Verse 7. He was oppressed—By the i rab} 
cellent and glorious, and so innocent and holy a per- || weight of his sufferings, and he was affli 
son should meet with this usage, it must be known || the most pungent pain and sorrow. Or, as - 
that his griefs and miseries were not laid upon him || brew 3y] 81 wal, is rendered by. Bishop Lowth 
260 : 3 


4 


> : Patel $y ° “ 


= Gicinnanes ef he ee Saat Lut. ~” Messiah's death and burial. 


= 
pes yet ™ he open 
a 


| not his mouth : he} for ° he was cut off out of the land i: im 3298. 


_ is brought as a lamb to the slat iter, | the: livi ving : for the transgression thas Lae 
and as a a sheep before her shearers ‘is dumb, : | my peo poe ° was he'stricken. 
| he opened not his mouth. ee. jE ts ba siti 


rade his grave with the wicked, and 
ot, ers the h in his 10 death: because he had done 
|| no no violence, neither was any® deceitinhis mouth. 


| Pet | Te Daniel six. 26-—_* Hebre w, was the stroke upon him. 
tress | Matt, xxvii. 57, 58, a= Heb. deaths ——11 Pet. ii. 22; 
: | P Job iii ii 5. « am 


: ie || tery ti eee his ere i: 


~his Iiraculous conan 


ene t Testi it rime to his not havin any wit- 
inst Go for ‘giving him up to ‘suffer for other nesses to ‘appear for him and give an account of his 


n’s sills, nor reviled r -s i 1 with- life and. aracter. This interpretation is preferred . 


e || by Bisho Lowth, who therefore renders the clause, 
i || And his manner of Ui ho would declare? Oth- 
t of our ne” Mag ife eth sala. agai grote Ww Calvin and Beza, think 
whol  seene of his unparalleled . phet had said, “Who can declare 
exempl tience | meek =k te how Siete, he sh val live and reign, or count the nume- 
ven-|| rous offspring that shall descend from him?” But, 


“not.to sa ees this idea i is muh more clearly ex 


nment || ter ation, is a ology, it does not appge r that 
eal! Christ’s su ee the ww veration, and ypu, seed, are ever used as sy- 
ms to be referable here. He was taken noni terms. ThéMforme? of these words, in 
by distress and judgment; that is, he’ was || the Hebrew, signifies the same with a generation 
. take tei life by o ppression, » Violence, and a}; of men, ip Ength, who are contemporaries ; ‘+ 
a or, as Bishop Lowth has i By| Gen. vill ; Judg-ii. 10; Psa. xev. 10, and cix. 1 
esstve j judgment he was taken off. In Acts’|| and yevea, in the LXX. , by which it is here rendered, 
where we find this passage quoted, the read- has most frequently Be st a “Therefore, I sup- 
ing of the LXXx. is*follo Tehosci:, Ev 77 TaTetvecet pose, » says Dr. Doddri “with Dr. Hammond, the 
Ps Kptolg ‘avrou xpon, In his humiliation his judgment || sense to be, ‘ Who can dedbibe the obstinate infidel- 
as taken away; thet a Leh te of humiliation || ity an barbarous injustice of that generation of 
hep oe. no julie a ; to take away a per-|| men, among whom he appeared, and from whom he 
n’s judgmen’ es * proverbi phrase for op- quifered such things?” For he was cut off—Name- 
eee 
. “Jesus hea i go fmbe form, _ though —By the wicked heals of those whom he came to 
Pilate was convinced of innocence, We scerffed a@||save: see Acts ii. 23. For the transgresston—Or, 
. person of so little importance that ae ‘would not be||as some render, "Dy pwon, By the transgression 
worth while to hazard any thing to preserve him.” || of my people was he str icken—Hebrew, 19 pai, the 
_ .'They who prefer the translation given in our text, || stroke was on him ; that is, he was stricken, was cru- 
4 -as Beza and many other cope tors do, think the cified and slain, by or through the wickedness of 
words refer to Christ’s being taken, by his resurrec- ||the Jews. The former, however, is doubtless the 
tion, from his confinement in the grave, (which they sells intended, for, as the angel testified to Daniel, 
suppose to be here called a prison, as it is termed a || (chap. ix. 24, 26,) the Messiah was to be cut off, not 
~ house, Job xxx. 23, and a pit, Psalm Ixix. 15,) and || for himself, but for the sins ayd salvation of man- 
from the judgment, or sentence, which had been ex- || kind. And this, though asserted verses 4-6, is here 
ecuted upon him: “agreeable to which Mr. L’En- || repeated as a doctrine that cannot be too frequently 
fant renders it, His condemnation was taken away || inculcated, or too much regarded; and to prevent 
by his very abasement ; that is, his stooping to death || men’s mistakes about, or stumbling at, the humilia- 
gave occasion to his triumph.” And who shall de-|| tion of Christ, as though he had suffered and died for 
e his generation—“ This is one of the many || his own sins. 
es of the Old Testament prophecies,” says Dr. || Verse 9, And he made his grave with the wicked 
ge, “in which it is not so difficult to find a || —And although he did not die for his own sins, but 
ly applicable to Christ, as to know which | only for those of mankind, yet he was willing to die 
r of several that are so. Many ancient, as || like a malefactor, or like a sinner, as all other men 
well as modern writers, have referred it to the mys- || are, and % be put into a graveas they use to be; 
261 


was any 
reading s 


> ,_o 


} pressed 1 4 5 et, verse 10 , which on this in- 
t 


as Dr. Doddridge explains it, || ly, by a violent death ; out of the land of the living. 


+: 
‘f 
5 - ‘ 


The atonement and its 


ISATAH. 


glorious consequences. © 


A. .M. 3298. 
Bo. 06. bruise him; he hath put him to grief: 
when thou shalt lel his’ soul * an offering 
for sin, he shall see his seed, *he shall prolong 
his days, and * the pleasure of ihe Lorp shall 
prosper in his hand. 

11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and 


shall be satisfied : * by his knowledge shall * my 


10 | Yet it pleased the Lorp tojrighteous ¥ servant 7 justify many ; A, M; 3298. 


C. 706. 
* for he shall bear their iniquities. 


12 »' Therefore will I divide him a portion 
with the great, ° and he shall divide the spoil 
with the strong; because he hath poured out 
his soul unto death: and he was “numbered with 
the transgressors ; and he bare the sin of many, 
and ° made intercession for the transgressors. 


Or, when his soul shall make is peng ——12 Cor. v. 21; 
1 Pet. ii. 24—— Rom. vi, 9. Ep 9; 2 Thess. i. 1. 
u John xvii. 3; 2 Pet. i. 3. x1 John ii. 1.—y Chap. xlii. 1 ; 


=e. 


which was a further degree of his humiliation. He 
saith, he made his grave, because this was Christ’s 
own act, and he willingly yielded up himself to death 
and burial. And that which follows, with the wicked, 
does not denote the sameness of place, asif he should 
be buried in the same grave with other malefactors, 
but the sameness of condition. But the words may 
be rendered, A grave was appointed for him with 
the wicked ; but he was with the rich at his death. 
Or, as Bishop Lowth reads it, His grave was ap- 
pointed with the wicked ; but with the rich man was 
his tomb. See his notes. “As our Lord was cruci- 
fied between two thieves, it was doubtless intended 
he should be buried with them. ‘Thus his grave 
was appointed with the wicked; but Joseph of 
Arimathea came and asked for his body, and Pilate, 
convinced that. he had committed no crime, readily 
granted Joseph’s request. 
rich at his death,’ that is, till his resurrection: and 
this took place contrary to the intention of his ene- 
mies, because he had done no violence, &c., for other- 
wise Joseph would scarcely have requested Pilate, 
and probably Pilate would not have consented, to de- 
liver up the body of. a crucified malefactor.”—Scott. 
But this latter clause may be connected with the fol- 
lowing verse, and rendered, Although he had done 
no violence, §c., yet it, pleased the Lord, &e. In 
this light it is considered by Bishop Lowth and 
many others. : 

Verses 10, 11. Zt pleased the Lord to bruise him 
—Al\though he was perfectly innocent, it pleased God, 
for other just and wise reasons, to expose him to 
sufferings and death. He hath put him to grief— 
His God and Father spared him not, though he was 
his only and beloved Son, but delivered him up for 
us all, to ignominy and torture, delivered him by his 
determinate counsel and foreknowledge, (Acts ii. 
23,) into the powerof those whose wicked hands he 
knew would execute upon him every species of 
cruelty and barbarity. W hen thou shalt make his 
soul an offering for sin—When thou, O God, shalt 
have made thy Son a sacrifice, by giving him up to 
death for the atonement of men’s sins. His soul is 
here put for his life, or for himself, or his whole hu- 
man nature, which was sacrificed, his soul being op- 
pressed with a sense of the wrath of God due to our 
sins, his body crucified, and his soul and body sepa- 
rated by death. Or, the words, OVS Mown ON 
wD}, may be rendered, vig or, if his soul shall 


Thus ‘he was with the | 


ms v. 18, 19. a Verses 4, 5—— Psa. ii. 8; Phil. ii. , 
© Colossians ii, 15——4 Mark xy. 28; Luke xxii. 37. 

> Take xxiii, 34; Rom. viii. 34; Heb. vii. 25; ix. 4; 
1 John ii. 1. 


make anoffering for sin, or, apropitiatory sacrifice : 
whereby it may be implied, that he did not lay down 
his life by compulsion, but willingly. He shall see 
his seed—His death shall be glorious to himself . 
and highly beneficial to others, for he shall have a 
numerous seed of believers, reconciled to God, and 
saved by his death. He shall prolong his days—He 
shall be raised to immortal life, and live and reign 
with God for ever. The pleasure of the Lord shall 
prosper in his hand—God’s gracious decree, for the 
salvation of mankind, shall be effectually carried on 
by his ministry and mediation. He shall see of the 
travail of his soul—He shall enjoy the comfortable 
and blessed fruit of all his hard labours and grievous — 
sufferings: and shall be satisfied—He shall esteem 
his own and his Father’s glory, and the salvation of 
his people, an abundant recompense. By his know- 
ledge—By the knowledge of, or an acquaintance . 
with himself, that knowledge whieh i is accompanied 
with faith, ‘love, and obedience to him; shall my 
righteous servant justify many—Shall acquit them 
that believe in and obey him from the guilt of all 
their sins, and save them from ‘the dreadful conse- 
quences thereof, Justification is here, as in most 
other places of the Scriptures, one or two excepted, 
opposed 1o condemnation : and Christ is said to jus- 
tify sinners, beeause he does it meritoriously, procur. 
ing justification for us by his sacrifice; as God the 
Father is commonly said to justify authoritatively, 


because he accepted the price paid by Christ for that 


blessing, and the pronouncing of the sentence of ab- 
solution is referred to him in the gospel dispensa- 
tion. For he shall bear their iniquities—For he 
shall satisfy the justice and law of God for them, by 
bearing the punishment ‘due to their sins; and there- 
fore, on the principles of reason and justice, they 
must be acquitted, otherwise the same debt would be 
twice required and paid. 

Verse 12. T'herefore will I—Namely, God the 
Father ; divide him a portion—This word portion 
(though there is nothing for it in the Hebrew) is 
properly supplied out of the next clause, where a 
word, which answers to it, rendered the spoil, i ‘is ex- 
pressed ; with the great—Or; ‘among the 
such as the great and mighty potentates of the 
world use to have after a short combat and a glorious 
victory. Though he be a very mean and ure 
person, as to his outward condition in the world, yet 
he shall attain to a greater pitch of “a ‘the 


ad 


“ 


4 


. ta 
ay 2 
| Enlargement of ihe church, CHAPTER LIV. by the accession of the Gentiles. 


greatest monarchs enjoy. He shail divide the spoil 


with the strong—The same thing repeated in other | 


words. The sense of both clauses is, I will give 
him great and happy success in his undertaking: he 
shall conquer all his enemies, and lead captivity cap- 
tive; and he shall set up and establish his kingdom 
among and over all the kingdoms of the world: see 
Eph. i. 20, &c.; and Phil. ii. 8,9. Because he hath 
poured out his soul unto death—Because he willingly 
laid down his life in obedience to God’s command, 
and in order to the redemption of mankind. And 


* 


he was numbered with the transgressors—He was 
willing, for God’s glory, and for man’s salvation, to 
be reproached and punished, like a malefactor, in the 
same manner and place with them, and between two 
of them, Mark xv. 27, 28. And made intercession for 
the transgressors—He prayed upon earth for all)sin- 
ners, and particularly for those that crucified him, and 
in heaven he still intercedes for them, by a legal de- 
mand of those good things which he purchased by the 
sacrifice of himself, which, though past, he continu- 
ally represents to his Father as if it were present. 


$ 


CHAPTER LIV. 


The great mystery of the obedience and passion of the Messiah having been set forth in the last chapter, the fruits and con- 
sequences of that obedience and passion, with respect to the church, are related in this, for’ the comfort of true believers. 


» Tt was there promised him that he should see his seed, and justify many, and that the pleasure of the Lord should prosper 


inhis hand; and here testimony is borne to the accomplishment of these promises. is here represented, (1,) That 
though the beginnings of the Christian Church were small, yet it should be greatly enlarged by the accession of many of 
the Gentiles to it, who had been wholly destitute of church privileges, 1-5. (2,) That though sometimes God might seem 


to withdraw from her, and suspend the tokens of his favour, yet he would return in mercy, and would not be wroth or con- 
tend with her any more, 6-10. (3,) That though for a while she was in sorrow, and under oppression, yet she should at 


length beadvanced to greater honour and splendour than ever, 11, 12. 


should flourish and prevail, 13, 14. (5,) That all attempts against the church should be baffled, and she should be preserved 


from the malice of her enemies, 14-17. 


A. Mi, a6. SING, *O barren, thou that didst 
pr eioatatas not bear; break forth into sing- 
ing; andecry aloud, thou ¢ha¢ didst not travail 


with child: for » more are the children of the 


desolate than the children of the married wife, 
saith the Lorp. 4 


aZeph. iii. 14; Gal. iv. 27,1 Sam. ii. 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LIV. 

Verse 1. Sing, O barren—The prophet, having 
largely discoursed of the sufferings of Christ, and of 
the blessed fruits thereof, among which one particu- 
larly promised was, that he. should have a numerous 
seed that should believe on him; and here, foresee- 
ing the accomplishment of this glorious promise, he 
breaks forth into this song of triumph, addressing 
his speech to the church, or spouse of God, or Christ, 
as is manifest from the following words, and espe- 
cially from verse 5, and from Gal. iv. 27, where it is 
so expounded. Some, indeed, understand this chap- 
ter of the flourishing condition of the Jewish Church 
and state after their return from Babylon; but the 
magnificent promises here following do so vastly 
exceed their condition at that time, that it must ne- 
cessarily be referred to the times of the gospel, in 
which all that is here said was, or will be, remarka- 
bly fulfilled. And therefore, as the foregoing chap- 
ter directly and literally speaks of Christ, so doth 
this of the church of Christ, or of the kingdom of 
the Messiah, of whom the ancient Hebrew doctors 
understood it. Now this church, consisting at first 
of the Jews, and afterward of the Gentiles, incorpo- 
rated with them into the same body, he calls barren, 

, 3 


s 


2 °Enlarge the place of thy tent, A, M. 3298. 
and let them stretch forth the curtains ° © 7° 
of thy habitations; spare not, lengthen thy 
cords, and strengthen thy stakes ; 

3 For thou shalt break forth on the right 
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall 


© Chap. xlix. 19,,.20.—# Chap. lv. 5; 1xi/9. 
because she had been so, comparatively speaking, 
before and until the’ coming of Christ ; few sincere 
converts having been brought forth to God by her 
ministry, either of Jewish or Gentile race. For 
more are the children of the desolate, &c—The 
Gentile world, or the church of the Gentiles, which 
in the times of the Old Testament was desolate, 
having neither husband nor children, doth now, un- 
der the gospel, bring forth unto God a far more 
numerous progeny than the church of the Jews, 
which had been married to God for many ages, until, 
by her apostacy from him, and from her Messiah, 
she provoked him to put her away. 

Verses 2; 3. Enlarge the place of thy tent—That 
it may be capable of receiving the Gentiles, who 
shall flock to thee in great numbers, and desire to 
associate themselves with thee. And let them— 
Those to whom that work belongs; stretch forth the 
curtains, &e.—The meaning is, the curtains must 
and shall be stretched out. Spare not—Fear not 
lest thou shouldest prepare more room than will be 
|, occupied ; for very large accessions are to be ex- 

pected. And strengthen thy stakes-——That. they 

may be able to support the great weight which the 
} tent, thus enlarged, shall be upon them. For thou 
263 


e < 


(4,) That knowledge, righteousness, and peace . 


bei 3 


Gracious promises of 


ISATAH. 


2 te tl inherit the Gentiles, and make the 
_ desolate cities to be inhabited. 

4 4 Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: 

neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not 

be put te shame: for thou shalt forget the shame 


of thy youth, and shalt not faivansbe the re-' 


proach of thy widowhood any more. 


5 ° For thy Maker is thy husband ; The ‘Lorp. 


of hosts zs his name; and thy Redeemer the 
Holy One of Israel: & The God of the whole 
earth shall he be called. 

6 For the Lorp "hath called thee as a 
woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a 


¢ Jer. iii. 14. ——f Luke i. a Be i xiv. 9; Rom. iii. 29. 
» Chap. lxii. 4——i Psa. xxx.5; Chap. xxvi. 20; ‘Ix: 10; 2 Cor. 


support and comfort. 


wife of youth, when thou wast ‘re- A. M. 3298. 
fused, saith thy God. ei a8 

7 } For a small moment have I forsaken thee ; 
but with great mercies will I gather thee. 

8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee 
for a moment; * but with everlasting kindness 
will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lorp thy 
Redeemer. 

9 For this is as the waters of 'Noah unto me: 
for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah 
should no more go over the earth; so have I 
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor 
rebuke thee. 


iv. 17——* Chap. lv. 3; Jer. xxxi. 3——! Gen. viii. 21; ix. 
11; Chap. lv. 11; Jer. xxxi. 35, 36. 


shalt break forth, & &c.—Thou shalt bring forth a 


multitude of children ; for the word y™, here ren- 


dered break forth, is commonly used of-any great 
and extraordinary propagation of living creatures, 
whether beasts or men; on the right hand and on 
the left—On every side, in all parts of the world. 
Or, thy children shall be so numerous that they can 
no longer be contained within narrow bounds. And 
thy seed—Thy spiritual seed, the members of the 
New Testament church, and especially the apostles 
and other ministers of Christ; shall inherit the Gen- 
tiles—Shall bring the Gentile world to the obedience 
of the faith ; and make the desolate cities to be in- 
habited—Shall cause those cities and countries 
which, in a spiritual sense, were desolate, being des- 
titute of all good, to be filled with members of the 
church. © 

Verses 4, 5. Thou shalt not be ashamed—As 
formerly, of the straitness of thy borders, and the 
fewness of thy children. how shalt forget the re- 
proach of thy youth—Thy barrenness in former 
times: so-great shall be thy fertility and felicity, that 
it shall cause thee to forget thy former unfruitful- 
ness and misery. And shalt not remember the re- 
proach of thy widowhood—That time and state when 
thou wast like a widow, disconsolate and desolate, 
deprived or forsaken of her husband, and having few 
orno children. For thy Maker—He who made thee 
out of nothing, and. therefore can fulfil all these 
promises, how improbable soever their fulfilment 
may appear; is thy husband—Will own thee for 
his spouse, and give thee proof of his conjugal affec- 
tion... The Lord of hosts—Who hath the sovereign 
command of all men and creatures, and therefore 
can subdue the Gentiles to thee, and can make thee 
to increase and multiply in so prodigious a measure, 
even in thy old age, notwithstanding thy barrenness 
in the days of thy youth, of which he speaks in the 
foregoing verse. The God of the whole earth shall 
he be called—The God and Father of all nations, 
Whereas formerly he was called the God of Israel 
only, and the Gentiles had no special relation to him, 
the time is now coming when he shall be called the 

264 


God of the Gentiles also, having admitted them into 
the same covenant relation to himself with the Jews, 
and the partition wall between Jews and Gentiles 
being broken down. See Zech. xiv.9; Rom. iii. 29 ; 
Eph. ii. 11-16. 

Verses 6-8. For the Lord hath called thee—To 
return and come again to him; as a woman for- 
saken—When thou wast like a woman forsaken 
by her husband, who had given her a bill of di- 
vorce; and grieved in spirit—For the loss of her 
husband’s favour and society, and for the reproach 
attending it; and a wife of youth—As affection- 
ately as a husband recalleth his wife whom he 
married in her and his own youth, whom, though 
he might on some provocation put away, yet he 
soon repents of doing it, and his affection for her 
reviving, he -invites ‘her to return to him; when 
thou wast refused—Though for a time thou wast 
refused and rejected by him; saith thy God—Je- 
hovah, who will again show himself to be thy 
God, and will renew his covenant with thee. 
For a small moment—For the space of some few 
years, as seventy years in Babylon, and some such 
intervals, which may well be called a small mo- 
ment, in comparison of God’s everlasting kindness, 
mentioned in the next verse: have I forsaken thee 
—Withdrawn my favour and help from thee, and 
left thee in thine enemies’ hands. But with great 
mercies—Suchas are very precious, and of long conti- 
nuance; will J gather thee—From allthe places where 
thou art dispersed, from all parts of the world. In 
a little wrath I hid my face from thee—I removed 
the means and pledges of my presence and kind- 
ness; but with everlasting kindness will I have 
mercy, &c.—With kindness to thee, and thy seed, 
through all succeeding generations, in time, and to 
all eternity, 

Verses 9, 10. For this is as the waters of Noah— 
This covenant of grace and peace made with thee- 
shall be as certain and perpetual as that which I 
made with Noah, that there should never be another 
flood of waters to drown the world. So have I 
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee--Name- 


Gracious promises of 


CHAPTER LIV. 


support and comfort. 


ae 10 For ™the mountains shall de- 
————. part, and the hills be removed ; * but 
my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither 
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, 
saith the Lorv that hath mercy on thee. © 

11 4 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and 
not comforted! behold, I will lay thy stones 
with ° fair colours, and lay thy foundations with 
sapphires. , 

12 And I will make thy windows of 
agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and 


all thy borders of pleasant stones. A 3: 

13 And all thy children shall be ——— 
Ptaught of the Lorp; and ‘great shall be 
the peace of thy children. 

14 In righteousness shalt thou be established : 
thou shalt be far from oppression ; for thou shalt 
not fear: and from terror ; for it shall not come 
near thee. 

15 “I Behold, they shall surely gather together, 
but not by me; whosoever shall gather together 
against thee shall fall for thy sake. 


m Psa. xlvi. 2; Chap. li.6; Matt, v. 18.— Psa. lxxxix. 33, 34. 
©] Chron. xxix. 2; Rev. xxi. 18, &c. 


P Chap. xi. 9; Jers xxxi. 34; John vi. 45; 1 Cor. ii. 10; 1 Thess. 
iv. 9; 1 John ii. 20———9 Psa. exix. 165. 


ly, so as I have been, or so as to forsake thee utterly. 
For the mountains shall depart, &¢—The mount- 
_ ains and hills shall sooner depart from their places 
than my kindness shall depart from thee. | Nay, the 
time will come when all the mountains shall de- 
part, and all the hills be removed, and even the 
whole earth, and all the works that are therein, shall 
be burned up, but then the covenant of peace between 
God and his church shall continue in the everlasting 
happiness of all the true and spiritual members of 
it. God will not cast off the Christian Church, as 
he cast off the Church of the Jews; the new cove- 
nant being established upon better and surer pro- 
mises than the old; see Heb. viii. 6,'7. Saith the 
Lord that hath mercy on thee—Who acts thus to- 
ward thee, not for thy merits, but through his own 
grace and mercy. 
' Verses 11,12. O thou afflicted, &c.—O thou, my 
church, which hast been in a most afflicted and com- 
fortless condition; behold, I will lay thy stones with 
fair colours, &c.—-I will make thee exceedingly 
beautiful and pure, stable and glorious. For, as 
Bishop Lowth justly observes, “these seem to be 
general images to express beauty, magnificence, 
purity, strength, and solidity, agreeably to the ideas 
of the eastern nations; and to have never been in- 
tended to be strictly scrutinized, or minutely and 
particularly explained, as if they had’each of them 
some precise moral or spiritual meaning. Tobit, in 
his prophecy of the final restoration of Israel, (Tob. 
xiii. 16, 17,) describes the New Jerusalem in the 
same oriental manner. ‘For Jerusalem shall be 
built up with sapphires, and emeralds, and precious 
stones; thy walls, and towers, and battlements, with 
pure gold; and the streets of Jerusalem shall be 
paved with beryl, and carbuncle, and stones of 
Ophir’ ” It must be well observed, however, that 
it is not any external pomp or worldly glory that i 
intended to be set forth in these verses, as is tient 
from many parts of Scripture, which assure us that 
Christ’s kingdom js of another nature, and that the 
outward condition of God’s church is, and; for the 
most part, will be, mean and afflicted in this world: 
but it is of a spiritual beauty and glory that these 
things are spoken, consisting in a plentiful effusion 
of excellent gifts, graces, and comforts upon the 
church, which, however, will be followed with eter- 


\ 


. 


* 


nal glory in heaven. We have a similar description 
of the church’s glory Rev. xxi. 11, &c. J will 
make thy windows of agates—Hebrew, 1273, “lapis 
pretiosus quasi scintillans dictus,” says Buxtorf; a 
precious stone, so called from its sparkling, One 
kind of these stones, according to Pliny, was trans- 
parent like glass. But some render the word 
crystal ; and the LXX., and some others of the an- 
cients, translate it jasper. The truth is, the proper 
signification of the Hebrew names of precious stones 
is not perfectly known to the Jews themselves. It 
may suffice us to know that this was some very 
clear, transparent, and probably sparkling precious 
stone. And all thy borders—The utmost parts or 
walls, of pleasant stones. The church is here evi- 
dently compared to a building, whose foundation, 
pavement, gates, and windows are all named. 

Verses 13, 14. All thy children shall be taught of 
the Lord--The church’s children, being born of 
God, shall be taught of God, and that not only out- 
wardly, by his word, but inwardly, by his Spirit. _ 
Our Lord, who quotes this passage, John vi. 45, ap- 
plies it to gospel grace, and represents it as having 
its accomplishment in all those that are brought 
savingly to believe in him. And great shall be the 
peace of thy children—lst, Inward peace, arising 
from clear discoveries of God’s love, and his recon- 
ciliation to us, and wrought by the Spirit of adop- 
tion, which is more abundantly given to believers 
under the gospel than under the law. 2d, Outward 
peace, safety, and happiness, which is more fully 
promised in the following verses, and which God, 
when he sees fit, will confer upon his church. Jn 
righteousness shalt thou be established—This king- 
dom shall be set up and established, not by injustice, 
fraud, or tyranny, as other kingdoms frequently are, 
but upon a righteous foundation, and by the exer- 
|cise of righteousness and holiness, which is the 
glory and felicity of any society. "how shalt be 
far from oppression—Kither by thine own govern- 
ors, or by foreign powers. Those that have op- 
pressed thee shall be removed; those that would 
oppress thee shall-be restrained; and therefore thou 
shalt not fear—Thou shalt neither have any just 
cause of fear, nor be given up to the torment of fear 
without cause. 

Verses 15-17. Behold, they shall gather together-— 

265 


An invitation to partake 


16 Behold, I have created the smith 
that bloweth the coals in the fire, and 
that bringeth forth an instrument for his work ; 
and I have created the waster to destroy. 

17 No weapon that is formed against thee 


A. M. 3298. 
B. C. 706, 


He, 
ISAIAH. : ' of conpe tse 
shall prosper; and every tongue that A. =f y 


shall rise against thee in judgment 

thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of 
the servants of the Lorn, * and their righteous- 
ness is of me, saith the Lorp. 


T Chap. xlv. 


It is true, some will combine, and make an attempt 
against thee. But not by me—As they will do this 
without any such commission from me as Senna- 
cherib and Nebuchadnezzar had, so they shall not 
have help in it, without which all their endea- 
vours will be in vain. Whosoever shall gather to- 
gether—To fight against, or persecute thee; shall 
fall for thy sake—Through that respect and love 
which I bear to thee. Or, before thee, as the He- 
brew may be rendered, so as thine eyes shall be- 
hold it. 

Behold, I have created the smith, &c.—Both 
the smith that makes warlike instruments, and the 
soldier that uses them, are my creatures, and totally 


Ls 


24, 25. 
fac Ss Se ae 
at my command, and therefore they cannot hurt 
you without my leave. J have created the waster, 
&c.—To destroy only whom and when I please. 
No weapon formed against theeshall prosper—As 
they cannot do any thing against thee without my 
leave, so J assure thee I will not suffer them really 
to injure thee; and every tongue, §c., shalt thou 
condemn—And I will deliver thee, not only from 
the fury of war, but also from the strife of tongues. 
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord— 
This blessed condition is the portion allotted them 
by me. And their righteousness—The reward of 
their righteousness; is of me--I give it, and I will 
continue it to them, 


CHAPTER LY. 
The prophet having discoursed largely of the humiliation and sufferings, and of the exaltation and glory of Christ, hs liii., 


and of the great enlargement of his church, through the accession of the Gentiles to it ; 


tion, in the name of. Jehovah, to all descriptions of perso 


here, (1,) Giwes a general invita- 
ns, however unworthy, to come and partake of gospel bless- 


ings, 1. (2,) He enforces the invitation by powerful arguments, 2-4. (3,) Promises that this invitation would be attended 


with success among the Gentiles, 5 
ness thereupon, 6-9. 


(5,) All this is ratified, and the efficacy of God’s word is asserted, 10, 11. 


(4,) Exhorts to repentance and reformation, giving assurance of mercy and forgive- 


(6,) The joy and exult- 


ation attending the exodus out of Egypt, or the deliverance of the Jewish captives from Babylon, are alluded to, as 


emblematical of the still greater gladness and felicity manifested by the first converts to Chriatiersign 12, 13. 


A. M. 3298. 


O, * every one that thirsteth, come 
B. C. 706. 


ee ye to the waters, and be that 
hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price. 


a John iv. 14; vii. 37; Rev. xxi. 6; xxii. 17. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LV. 

Verse 1. Ho, every one—Not only Jews, but Gen- 
tiles; that thirsteth—¥or the grace of God, and the 
blessings of the gospel; that desires them sincerely 
and earnestly, is active and diligent in the pursuit 
of them, and cannot be satisfied without enjoyin 
them; come ye to the waters—Where you may drink 
and be refreshed: eome and partake of the graces 


and comforts of God’s Spirit, frequently compared | 


to water in the Scriptures, and here designed by the 
other metaphorical expressions which occur in the 
next clause. — “al por hath no money—Even 
those who are oor in the world, and those 
who are most worthless and wicked, if they do but 
thirst, shall be welcome. 


Come ye, buy and eat—| 


' 


2 Wherefore do ye 'spend money for pak ig 
that which is not bread? and your — 
labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken 
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. 


b Matt. xiii. 41, 46; Rev. iii. 18.——1 Heb, weigh. 


That is, come and receive that which is freely offered 
to you, and which you shall as freely partake of, 
and enjoy as your own, as if you had bought and 
paid the full price for it. Buy wine and milk— 
Here put for all sorts of provisions, which are also 
We be understood of spiritual and gospel blessings, 

s is evident from the following words: as if he had 
said, These blessings shall not only refresh you, as 
water refreshes the thirsty, but they shall cheer you 
like wine, and nourish you like milk. 

Verses 2, 3. Wherefore do ye spend money—All 
your time, ‘and strength, and cost; for that which is 
not bread-—For those things which can never nourish 
or satisfy you, such as worldly goods or pleasures. 
Hearken diligently unto me—Unto my doctrine and 


f a 


é 


«wa 


eo 


eu. es 


. Fa ve 
ai 


Ay 


Pe "i 
Promises of pardon 


A. M. 3298. © 
B. C, 706. 


3 Incline your ear, and ° come 
unto me: hear, and your soul shall 
iar 4 and I will make an everlasting co- 
venant with you, even the *sure mercies of 
David. . 

4 Behold, I have given him for ‘a witness 
tothe people, a leader and commander to the 
people. ? 

5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou 


rd not, ‘and nations that knew not thee 
mere + 


CHAPTER LV. 


to the penitent. 


{shall-run unto thee, because of the A. M. 3298. 
Lorp thy God, and ‘for the Holy One aa 
of Israel; * for he hath glorified thee. 

6 47 1 Seek ye the Lorp while he may be 
found, call ye upon him while he is near: © 

7 ™ Let the wicked forsake his way,and * the 
unrighteous man "his thoughts: and let him 
return unto the Lorp, ° and he will have mercy 
upon him; and to our God, for *he will abun- 
dantly pardon. 


¢Matt. xi. 28, Chap. liv. 8; Ixi. 8; Jer. xxxii. 40. 
*2 fam. vii. 8; Psa. lxxxix. 28 ; Acts xili. 34. ——! John xvili. 
37; Rev.i. lk Jer. xxx.9; Ezek. xxxiv. 23; Hos. iii. 5; 
Dan. ix. 25——» Chap. lii. 15; Eph. ii. 11, 12.——4 Chap. lx. 5. 


a 
counsel; and eat ye that which is good—And not 
such things as, though they be called and seem to be 
good, yet really are evil and most pernicious to men. 
And let your soul delight itself, &c.—In this pleasant 
food of gospel enjoyments. Hear, and your soul 
shall live—Hearken:. attentively and obediently to 
my counsels, and your immortal souls shall not only 
be saved from perishing eternally, but shall be eter- 
nally blessed and happy. And J will make an ever- 
lasting covenant with you—That everlasting cove- 
nant of grace and peace which I made with Abra- 
ham and his seed. The sure mercies. of David— 
Even that covenant which was made first with 
Abraham, and then with David, concerning those 
glorious and sure blessings which I have promised 
to my people; one, and the chief, of which was the 
giving Christ to die for their sins. David here seems 
to be put for Christ the son of David. 

Verses 4,5. Behold, I have given him—-I have 
already appointed, and will, in due time, actually 
give the David last mentioned, even Christ, for a 
witness—To declare the will of God concerning the 
duty and salvation of men; to bear witness to the 
truth, John xviii. 37; to confirm God’s promises, 
and, among others, those which respect the calling 
of the Gentiles; to be a witness of both parts of that 
covenant made between God and men; to the people 
—Not only to my people of Israel, but to all people, 
Gentiles no less than Jews, as is evident from the 
following verse, from chap. xlix. 6, and divers other 
places; a leader and commander to the people—A 
sovereign prince, to give them laws and exact their 
obedience, and in case thereof to give them protec- 
tion and "rewards. Behold thou—O Messiah, of 
whom he spake verse 4, and to whom he now sud- 
denly turns his speech ; shalt call—Namely, to thy- 
self, and to the knowledge of thy truth, and thereby 
unto an acquaintance and fellowship with God; 
nation that thou knowest not—Or, rather, didst not 
know,-namely, with that special knowledge which 
implies approbation. And nations that knew not 
thee—That had but little knowledge of the living 
and true God, and no knowledge of the Messiah; 
shall run unto thee—Upon thy call, shall readily and | 
speedily come to thee, to receive instructions from 
thee, and to follow thee whithersoever thou shalt 

3 


k Chap. Ix.9 ; Acts 111. 13.—— Psa. xxxii.6; Matt. v.25; xxv 
11; John vii. 34; viii. 21 ; 2 Cor. vi. 1,2; Hebé iiia Ch. 
i. 16. 2-Heb. the man of ini uity. ”n Zech. viii. 17.—— Psa. 
exxx. 7; Jer. iii. 12.—* Heb. he will multiply to pardon. 


lead thems because of the Lord thy God—Because 
the Lord shall, by many evident and unquestionable 
tokens, manifest himself to be thy God, and thee to 
be his Son and faithful servant. .And for the Holy 
One of Israel—Because the God of Israel, the only 
true God, will highly honour thee by his singular 
presence with thee; by his almighty power accom- 
panying thy word, ‘and making it effectual for the 
conversion of an innumerable company, both of 
Jews and-Gentiles; and by confirming thy word 
with illustrious signs and: miracles, and particularly 
by thy resurrection and glorious ascension. These, 
and other similar considerations, were the arguments 
which convinced the Gentiles that Christ. was the 
true Messiah, and that the religion which he taught 
was the true ‘religion. 

Verses 6,7. Seek ye the Lord, sie aria dis- 
coursed of the office and work of Christ, and showed 
that he should call people and nations to himself and 
to God, the prophet now endeavours to os the 
people to hearken to his call, and to seek the Lord ; 
that is, to labour to get the knowledge of God’s will, 
and to obtain his grace and favour, neither of which 
could be obtained save in and through Christ. And 
this exhortation is general, like that verse 1, intend- 
ed for all nations, both Jews and Gentiles, implying 
that both of them had lost the favour and knowledge 
of God, and were gone astray from him. While he 
may be found—In this day of grace, while he offers 
mercy and reconciliation, which he will not always 
do: see Prov. i. 24, &c.; Luke xix. 44; 2 Cor. vi. 2. 
Call wpon him while he is near—Near to you by his 
gracious presence and his offers in his ordinances, 
and ready and desirous to receive you to mercy upon 
the following conditions. Let the wicked—Any 
wicked man, either Jew or Gentile ; forsake his way 
—His evil or wicked way; his sinful course or man- 
ner of life; called his way, as being natural, cus- 
tomary, and dear to him, and in opposition to God’s 
good way. Lethim cease to do evil, Isa. i. 16. Ob- 
serve well, reader, men’s seeking God i in the use of 
outward means, and éven the calling upon him in 
prayer, will do them no lasting good, unless this be 
attended with the reformati their lives; and 
thé unrighteous man his thoughts—The sinful de- 


‘sires, intentions, and purposes of his mind. Thus 


267 


The efficacy ’ 


ISAIAH. 


A. M. 3298. 


8 4 >For my shoals are not your 
B. C. 706. 


thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways, saith the Lorp. 

9 1For as the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, 
and my thoughts than your thoughts. 

10 For ‘as the rain cometh down, and the 
snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, 
but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth 
and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and 
bread to the eater : 

11 *So shall my word be that eile forth out 
of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, 
= 


but it shall accomplish that which 4, A. M. 3298, 
706. 

I please, and it shall reap in the 

thing whereto I sent it. A 

12 * For ye shall go out with j joy, and be led 
forth with peace: the mountains and the hills 

shall "break forth before you into singing, and 
«all the trees of the field shall clap their 
hands. , 

13 ¥ Instead of 7 the thorn shall come up the 
fir-tree, and instead of the brier shall come up 
the myrtle-tree: and it shall be to the Lorp 
@ for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall 

i 
not be cut off: 


- 


s Ch. 


u Psa. xévi. 12; 


_?2 Sam. vii. 19.—4 Psa. cili. 11.— Deut. xxxii. 2. 
liv. 9.—+ Chap. xxxv. 10; Ixv. 13, 14. 


xevili. 8; gs xiv..8; xxxv. 1,2; xli. 11. 


* 1 Chron. xvi. 
33,—Y Ch ap. xli. 19.—* Mic. vii. 4. 


@ Jer. xiii. 11. 


he strikes at the root of all sinful actions, and shows 
that the heart must be changed as well as the out- 
ward conduct. And let him return unto the Lord— 
As he departed: from God by sin,.so let him return 
to hint by sincere repentance and faith, productive 
of new obedience. By this he signifies, that a mere 
abstinence from wicked courses is not sufficient, 
without the exercise of the contrary graces and vir- 
tues. And to our God—To the God of Israel, who 
is, and has shown himself to be, a most merciful and 
gracious God; for he will abundantly pardon—He 
uses so many words and arguments ‘to encourage 
and lead them to repentance, because the persons 
here principally addressed had been guilty of idola- 
try, apostacy, and many other acts of gross wicked- 
ness, which he knew, when they came to themselves, 
and to have a serious sense of their sins, and of the 
just and holy nature and. law of God, would be an 
insupportable burden to their awakened consciences, 
and would make them ready to conclude that God 
would not pardon such horrible delinquencies; in 
consequence of which they would rather be driven 
from God, than induced to draw near to him, 

Verse 8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, 
&c.—My disposition and way differ vastly from 
yours. If any man injure you, especially if he do 
it greatly and frequently, you are slow and backward 
to forgive him. But I am ready to forgive all true 
penitents, how many, and great, and numberless 
soever their sins be; and my promises of mercy and 
pardon shall be infallibly made good to them: and 
therefore you need not fear to come to me, or ques- 
tion but you shall find merey and acceptance with 
me. 

Verses 10, 11. For as the rain cometh down— 
To water and refresh the. earth, and render it 
fruitful; and the snow from heaven—Which, in its 
season, contributes to the fertility of the earth, as 
weil as the rain; and returneth not thither— Name- 
ly, without effect, or immediately: it is not drawn 
up again as soon as it, comes down, but abides for a 
convenient time upon the earth, until it do that work 
for which it is sent, — it may give seed and 


bread, &c.—That it may bring forth store of bread- 
corn, both for men’s present supplies, and for seed 
for the next year. So shall my word be—My pro- 
mises concerning the pardon of the greatest sinners, 
and the redemption and salvation of mankind. Jt 
shall not return unto me void— Without success. It 
is an allusion to an ambassador who returns without 
despatching the business for which he was sent. J¢ 
shall accomplish that which I please—It shall have 
the desired effect; and it shall prosper, &e.—It 
shall certainly be fulfilled in the manner before.ex- 
pressed. 

Verses 12, 13. For, or therefore, you shall go out 
with joy—Ve shall be released from your bondage, 
because God hath promised, and will effect it. He 
alludes to their going out of Egypt, or to their re- 
lease a Babylon, which deliverances were em- 
blematical of the redemption of mankind, by Christ, 
from the power of sin and Satan. And be led forth 
—Or led onward, as Bishop Lowth renders 11731n, 
be conducted by the gracious and powerful presence 
of God, as the Israelites were in the wilderness ; in 
peace—Safely and triumphantly, without fear of be- 


enemies. 7J'he mountains and the hills shall break 
forth, &e.—There shall be a great and general re- 
joicing at your deliverance. For “ these are highly 
poetical images, to express a happy state, attended 
with joy and exultation.” Instead of the thorn shall 
come up the fir-tree—* These likewise are general 
poetical images, expressing a great and happy change 
for the better : the wilderness turned into a paradise, 
Lebanon into Carmel; the desert of the Gentiles 

watered- with the heavenly snow and rain, which 
Wail not to have their due effect, and becoming fruit- 
ful in piety and righteousness: or, as the Chaldee 
gives the moral sense of the emblem, ‘instead of the 
wicked shall arise the just, and instead of sinners, 
such as fear to sin.” ”—Bishop Lowth. In other 
words, The church shall be delivered from pernicious 
men and things, and replenished with sincere and 
serious believers, and with all sorts of divine graces 
and blessings. And it shall be to the Lord fora 


* 3 


of God’s word. 


ing retaken and brouglit back into slavery by your 


“a 


a 


Evhortat ions 


ee 


_ CHAPTER LVI. 


to holiness. 


name—This wonderful change shall bring much || and love to his people, unto 


honour to that God by whom it is wrought. 
everlasting s 


all sueceeding genera- 


For an'|| tions ; that shall not be cut off—Which shall never 
—For a monument, or evident and || be abolished, but shall always live and flourish in the 


glorious token of God’s infinite power, faithfulness, || minds and mouths of men. 


he 
4 Pm ‘ a 
& CHAPTER LVI. ¥ 
The former part ¥ this chapter seems to be closely connected with the preceding. After the exceeding great and precious 
promises of gospel grace there contained, typified by temporal deliverances, the prophet here, in the name of God, (1,) 


Gives a solemn charge to Jews and Gentiles to make conscience of their duty to God and man, as they hoped to have the 


benefit of these promises, 1, 2. 


a high charge against the rulers of the church, as ignorant 
enemies to come together, and destroy them, 9-12. 
THUS saith the Lorp,. Keep ye 

‘judgment, and do justice: * for 
my salvation is near to come, and my righteous- 
ness to be revealed. 

2 Blessed is the man ¢hat doeth this, and the 
son. of man ¢hat layeth hold on it ; » that keep- 
eth the sabbath from, polluting it, and keepeth 
his hand from doing any evil. 


A. M. 3298. 
B. C. 706. 


(2,) Encourages strangers of the Gentiles to unite themselves to the Jewish, or, rather, to 
the Christian Church, by assuring them that they should receive the blessings of the covenant of grace, 3-8, (3,) Exhibits 
, unfaithful, covetous, luxurious, and prof 


and calls their 


3 | Neither let *the son of thé 4.3 3208 
\stranger, that hath joined himself to or 
the Lorn, speak, saying, The Lorn hath ut- 
terly separated me from his people: neither let 
the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. 

4 For thus saith the Lorp unto the eunuchs 
that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things 
that please me, and take hold of my covenant; 


Or, equity—— Chap. xlvi. 13; Matt. iii. 2; iv. 17; Rom, iii. 
4 11, 12—— Chap. lviii. 13. ae 


© Deut. xxiii. 1; 2, 3,;) Acts vili. 27; x, 1, 2,34; xvii. 4; xvili. 
’ 73 1Pet.i.1% 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LVI. 

Verse 1. Thus saith the Lord—This verse, and 
the rest of this chapter, until verse 9, seems to be- 
long to the foregoing prophecy. From the consid- 
eration of God’s promises there made to the believ- 
ing Jews and Gentiles, he here urges them_to per- 
form their duty tohim. Aeep ye judgment and do 
justice—This phrase elsewhere generally signifies 
the duties which one man owes to another; but here 
it seems rather to signify the duties which men owe 
to God, as it is explained in the following verses. 
Accordingly, it might with propriety have been ren- 
dered, practise righteousness. For my salvation is 
near to come—That eminent salvation by the Mes- 
siah, so largely promised and insisted upon in the 
foregoing chapters. The Scriptures, it must be ob- 
served, often speak of things that are at a great dis- 
tance as if they. were present or at hand, Hab. ii. 3; 
James y. 8, 9; Rev. xxii. 20. And my righteousness 
to be revealed— What in the former clause he called 
salvation, he here calls righteousness, as being an 
evident demonstration of God’s righteousness, both 
in the fulfilment of his promises, and in the punish-| 
ment of sin, as also in the salvation of sinners, upon 
just and honourable terms. 

Verse 2. Blessed is the man—Any, or every man, 
not only Jews but Gentiles, or strangers, as it is ex- 
plained in the following verses. TJ'hat doeth this— 
That practiseth the judgment and justice, or the 
righteousness, mentioned verse 1. T'hat layeth hold 
on it—Or, that holdeth it fast, as pm may be 
rendered ; that is, resolute and constant in so doing ; 

3 


that not only begins well, but perseveres in well-do 
ing: that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it— 
That doth not profane or defile the sabbath, either 
by forbidden practices, or by the neglect of com- 
manded duties. The sabbath seems to be here put, 
as sacrifice is elsewhere, for the whole worship of 
God. And keepeth his hand from doing any evil— 
That conscientiously abstains from all evil and im- 
moral works. 

Verses 3-5. Neither let the son of the stranger— 
The Gentile, who by birth is a stranger to God, and 
to the commonwealth of Israel. . Z'hat hath joined 
himself to the Lord—That hath turned from dumb 
idols to the living God, and to true religion; speak, 
saying, The Lord hath separated me, &c.—For 
such shall. be as acceptable to me as the Israelites 
themselves, andthe partition wall between Jews.and 
Gentiles shall be taken down, and repentance and 
remission of sins shall be preached and offered to 
men of all nations. Netther let the eunuch say— 
Who is here joined with the stranger, because he 
was forbidden to enter into the congregation of the 
Lord, Deut. xxiii. 1., Under these two instances he 
understands all those, who, either by birth, or by any 
ceremonial pollution, were excluded from church 
privileges, and so he throws open the door to all 
true believers. Behold, Iam a dry tree—A fruitless 
tree, accursed by God with the curse of barrenness. 
For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs, &c.—That 
observe my commands, not by custom, or through 
force or fear, but by free choice, with love to them, 
and delight inthem. And take hold of my covenant 

269 


The Gentiles shall receive 


ISATAH. 


the blessings of the covenant. 


A. M. 3298. 


5 * ni x 
% Sos. 5 Even unto them will I give in 


“my house, and within my walls, a 
place ° and a name better than of sons and of 
daughters: I will give them an everlasting 
name, that shall not be cut off. 

6 Also the sons of the stranger, that join 
themselves to the Lorp, to serye him, and to 
love the name of the Lorn, to: be his servants, 
every one that keepeth the sabbath from pol- 
luting it, and taketh hold of my covenant ; 

7 Even them will I ‘bring to my holy moun- 


41 Tim. iii. 15. © John i. 12; 1 John iii. 1— Chap. ii. ry 
1 Pet... 1, 2.——s Rom. xii. 1; Heb, xiii. 15; 1 Pet. ii. 
h Matt. xxi. 13; Mark xi. 17; Luke xix. 46. 


—That steadfastly keep the conditions of my cove- 
nant. Even unto them will I give in my house, 
&c.—In my temple, an emblem of the Christian 


chureh; @ place, §c,, better than of sons and daugh-. 


ters—A far greater blessing and honour than that of 
having a posterity, even my favour, and my Spirit, 
and eternal felicity. 

Verses 6,7. The sons of the stranger that join 
themselves to the Lord—That with purpose of heart 
cleave unto him, as is said Acts xi. 23. ‘To love the 
Lord, to be his servants—To serve him out of love to 
him and to his worship. Z'hem will I bring to my 
holy mountain—To my house which stood upon 
mount Zion, including mount Moriah; and make 
them joyful—By accepting their services, and com- 
forting their hearts with the sense of my love; in 
my house of prayer—In my temple, in and toward 
which prayers are daily made unto me. Z"heir sa- 
rifices shall be accepted upon mine altar—They shall 
have as free access to my house and altar as the 
Jews themselves, and their services shall be as ac- 
ceptable to me. Evangelical worship is here de- 


scribed under such expressions as agreed to the wor- | 


ship of God which was then in use. My house 
shall be called a house of prayer for all people— 
Jews and Gentiles shall have equal freedom to my 
house, and shall there call upon my name. “The 
temple was originally designed for strangers as well 
as Jews, as a place to offer up their prayers to the 
Divine Majesty; which is sufficiently plain from the 
prayer of Solomon, at the dedication of it, though 
the number of proselytes was small till the time of 
the second temple. But there can be no doubt that 
this verse alludes particularly to the conversion of 
the Gentiles. This truth could not be told the Jew- 
ish people otherwise than by using terms taken from 


rites familiar to them, unless the nature of the Chris- 


tian dispensation had been previously explained ; a 
inatter evidently unfit for their information, when 
they were yet to live so long under the Jewish law. 
For though the prophets speak of the little value of 
their regard to the ceremonial law, they easily make 
themselves understood, that they mean, when it was 
observed without the moral law; which they de- 
scribe in the purity and perfection of the gospel. 
So admirable was this conduct, that while it hid the 
270 


tain, and make them joyful in my A.M. $208. 
house of prayer : £ their burnt-offerings 

and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon 
mine altar; for "my house shall be called a 
house of prayer ' for all people. 

8 The Lorp God * which gathereth the ao 
casts of Israel saith, ' Yet will I gather others 
to him, *besides those that are gathered unto 
him. 

9 4 ™ All ye beasts of the field, come to de- 
vour; yea, all ye beasts in the forest. 


. xi. 12.——! John x. 
eb, to his gathered. 


iMal. i. 11.—* Psa. cxlvii. 2; ;_Cha 
16; Eph 4. As 037.434. 25, 
m Jer, xii. 9. 


future dispensation it prepared men for it.’—Bishop 
Warburton’s Div. Leg. Upon the whole, the reader 
may observe, “ that the principal scope of this para- 
graph is to teach that all the privileges of the cove- 
nant of grace should be common to all, without dis- 
tinction of nation, state, or condition ;'that God would 
distribute to all believers, according to the measpre of 
their grace, equal gifts, as our Lord hath taught in 
the parable of the labourers in the vineyard, Matt. 
Xx. » 

Verse 8. The Lord which gathereth the outcasis 
—Who will gather-to himself, and bring into their 
own land, those poor Israelites ‘which are or shall be 
cast out of it, and dispersed in divers parts of the 
world; saith, Yet will I gather others to him—As 
there are some few Gentiles whom I have made pro- 
selytes and added to the Jewish Church, so I will 
make another and far more comprehensive gather- 
ing of the Gentiles, whom I will bring into the same 
church with the Jews, making both Jews and Gen- 
tiles one flock under one shepherd. 

Verse 9. All ye beasts of the field, come to devour 

—‘“ Here,” says Bishop Lowth, « manifestly begins 
anew section. The prophet, in the foregoing chap- 
ters, having comforted the faithful with many great 
promises of God’s favour to be extended to them, in 
the restoration of their ruined state, and of the en- 
largement of his church by the admission of the 
Gentiles, here, on a sudden, makes a transition to the 
more disagreeable part of the prospect, and toa sharp 
reproof of the wicked and unbelievers, and especially 
of the negligent and faithless governors and teach- 
ers, of the idolaters and hypocrites, who would still 
draw his judgments upon the nation; probably hay- 
ing in view the destruction of their city and polity 
by the Chaldeans, and perhaps by the Romans.” 
Vitringa, however, thinks the enemies of the Christian 
Church may be here pointed out, suchas the Goths, 
Vandals, Turks, and others, who committed great 
devastations upon it after it declined from the first 
faith, and became extremely corrupt; as is particu- 
larly specified in the next verses. It seems very evi- 
dent that: this is a prediction, either of Israel’s de- 
struction, or that of the fallen Christian Church, by 
their cruel enemies, who are often represented in 
Scripture under the emblem of ravenous beasts. 

3 


Reproof of careless 


CHAPTER LViI. 


and worldly ministers. 


Ne a ee ee a a eee Oe eee 


AM. see. 10 His watchmen are “blind: they 
———_ are all ignorant,.° they are all dumb 
dogs, they cannot bark ; * sleeping, lying down, 
loving toslumber, = * 

ll Yea, they are * greedy? dogs which *° can* 
néver have enough, and they are shepherds 


n Matt. xv. 14; xxiii. 16. 
or, talking in their sleep. 
i. 11. 
OO 
Thus Jeremiah, chap. xii. 7-9, [have forsaken my 
house, I have deserted my-heritage; I have given 
the dearly beloved of.my soul into the hand of her 
enemies. Come ye, assemble all the beasts of the 
Jield, come to devour. 

‘Verse 10. His—Israel’s, watchmen are blind— 
The priests, prophets, and other teachers; he men- 
tions only the teachers, because ignorance was most 
shameful in them; but hereby he supposes the gross 
ignorance of the people. They are all ignorant— 
Of God’s word and will, and of their own and the 
people’s duty, and of the true Messiah, and the na- 
ture of his kingdom. | 7"hey cannot bark—They are 
also slothful and negligent in instructing the people, 
and do not faithfully reprove them for their sins, 
nor warn them of their dangers, nor endeavour to 
keep them from errors and corruptions in doctrine, 
worship, and conversation, as they ought to do: 
sleeping, lying down, &c.—Minding their own ease 
and safety more than the people’s benefit. 


© Phil. iii. 2—— 8 Or, dreaming, 
4 Heb. strong of appetite. P Mic, 


that cannot understand: they all look . er 
to their own way, every one for his ———— 
gain, from his quarter. 

12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine; and we 
will fill ourselves with strong drink; ‘and to-mor- 


row shall beasthisday,and much moreabundant. 


5 Hebrew, know not to be satisfied. 
rPsa. x, 63° Prov. xxiii, 355 
1 Cor. xv. 32. 


4 Ezekiel xxxiv. 2, 3. 
hap. xxii. 13; Luke xii. 19; 


Verse 11. Yea, they are greedy dogs—Insatia- 
bly covetous: shepherds that cannot understand 
—Hebrew, that know not to understand; that do 
not care, or love, or desire either to understand the. 


| word of God themselves, or to make the people un- 


derstand it. They all look to their own way—They 
regard neither God’s glory nor the people’s good, 
but only the satisfaction of their own base desires. 
Every one for his gain from his quarter—In their 
several places and stations, as they have oppor- 
tunity. ; 

Verse 12. Come ye, say they—Unto their brethren, 
fellow-priests, or other jolly companions. We wiil fill 
ourselves—We will drink, not only to delight, but 
even to drunkenness, as the word signifies. And to- 
morrow shall be as this day, and much more 
abundant—Which shows their dreadful security 
and contempt of God, and. of his judgments, and 
their abandoning of all care of their own or the 
people’s souls. 


CHAPTER LVIL. 


Tn this chapter we have; (1,) A charge exhibited against the Jews, and probably also against apostate Christians, for their 
general wnconcern at the death of the righteous, who were removed to heaven from the impending calamities, 1,2; and for 
their divination, whoredom, profane derision of God and his people, hypocrisy, falsehood, treachery, and propensity to 
idolatries, and their alliances with heathen neighbours, 3-12. (2,) An intimation of God’s gracious purposes to pity their 
forlorn case, return their captivity, and re-establish their prosperity ; but never to give peace to the wicked, 13-21. 


A. M. 3298. 


B. C. 706. THE righteous perisheth, and no 


man layeth i¢ to heart: and 
2 merciful * men are taken away, ” none 


1 Heb. men of kindness, or, godliness ——* Psa. xii. 1; Mic. vii. 2. 


——= 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LVIL. 

Verses 1, 2. These two verses “ contain a kind of 
prelude to the distressful scene which is opened 
immediately after: for the prophet, designing to de- 
scribe the melancholy state of the adulterous church, 
to be chastised by the severe judgments of God, 
beholds, as it were in an ecstasy, the few pious and 
good men yet remaining in the church gradually 
falling off, and taken away, either by an immature 
or violent death: while there were but few who laid 
this matter to heart, and observed it as a presage of 
the judgment threatening the church. This stupid- 
ity he sadly deplores; immediately subjoining, how- 

3 


ae 


‘a 8 


considering that the righteous is A. Mi ae 
taken away ? from the evil #0 be 
come. 


>] Kings xiv. 13; 2 Kings xxii. 20,—? Or, from that which is evil. 


ever, an alleviation, to show that this complaint 
pertained not to the deceased, as having attained a 
happier lot, and as blessed in this respect, that they 
were taken away from the evils and calamities of 
their times.”—Vitringa. The following short para- 
phrase on the words will render their sense more 
apparent. The righteous perisheth—Just and holy 
men, who are the pillars of the place and state in 
which they live. And no man-layeth it to heart— 
Few or none of the people are duly affected with 
this’ severe stroke om. sign of God’s displeasure. 
Thus he shows that the corruption was general in 
the people no less than in the priests. And merciful 
27) 


Threatenings against 


ISATAH. 


the wicked. 


A.M. 3298. 2 He shall *enter into peace: they 
- shall rest in °their beds, each one 
walking * iz his uprightness. 
3 1 But draw near hither, ¢ ye sons of the sor- 
ceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. 
4 Against whom do ye sport yourselves ? 
Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and 
draw out the tongue? are ye not children of 
transgression, a seed of falsehood ; 


5 Inflaming yourselves * with idols * under every |; 


green tree, f slaying the children in the A. M. 3298. 
valleys under the clefts of the rocks? wa 

6 Among the smooth stones of the stream is 
thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to 
them hast thou poured a drink-offering, thou 
hast offered a meat-offering. Should I receive 
comfort in these ? 

7 © Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou 
set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to 
offer sacrifice. 


= 


7 Or, go in peace, Luke ii. 29.—* 2 Chron. xvi. 14.‘ Or, 
before hin ——4 Matt. xvi. 4——* Or, among the oaks, Chap. i. 29. 
2 Kings xvi. 4; xvii. 10; Jer. ii. 20. 


weet xviii. 21; xx. 2; 2.Kings xvi.3; xxiii. 10; Jer. vii. 
; Ezek. xvi. 20; xx. 26. Ezek. xvi. 16, 25,.——4 Ezek. 
sai 41. 


-—— 


sow Heber On wir, men.of benignity, or bene- 
ficence, the same whom he before called righteous: 
those whose practice it was, not only to exercise piety 
and justice, but also mercy and kindness; none con- 
sidering—None reflecting within himself, and laying 
it to heart; that the righteous is taken away from 
the evil—That dreadful calamities are coming on the 
church and nation, and that the righteous are taken 
away before they come. He shall enter into peace 
—The righteous man shall be received into rest and 
safety, where he shall be out of the reach of the ap- 
proaching miseries. Zhey—The merciful men; 
shall rest in their beds—In their graves, not unfitly 
called their beds, or sleeping-places, death being 
commonly called sleep in Scripture ; each one walk- 
ing in his uprightness—That walked, that is, lived, 
in a sincere and faithful discharge of his duties to 
God andmen. Vitringa thinks “the completion of 
this prophecy is to be sought in the latter end of the 
ninth, and in the following centuries; when the 
papal power greatly prevailed, and the corruption of 
the ges Was as great as the persecutions and 
troubles of the pious were many.” 

Verses 3,4. But draw near hither, &e.— The pro- 
phet proceeds to exhibit the church, totally corrupt 
as it was, the good men being extinct or dispersed ; 
so that they who remained of the pure seed of the 
church lay hid in solitary places, while the body of 
the church appeared like a dead carcass; not the 
true, but the idolatrous church.” Thus Vitringa, 
who understands this paragraph as describing the 
state of the church in the dark ages of popery. It 
seems, however, by many of the expressions which 
the prophet uses, that he is rather giving a descrip- 
tion of the corrupt state of the Jewish Church, be- 
fore the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans. 
Draw near hither—To God’s tribunal, to receive 
your sentence; ye sons of the sorceress—Not-by 
TM cation, but by imitation, those being frequently 
called men’s sons ‘that follow their example: the 
seed of the adulterer, &c.—Not the genuine children 
of Abraham, as you pretend and boast yourselves to 
be; your dispositions being far more suitable to a 
spurious brood than to Abraham’s seed. Against 
whom do you sport yourselves ?—Consider who it is 
that you mock and scoff at when you deride God’s 
prophets, (see chap. xxviii. 14, 22,) and know that it 

272 


ig not so much men that you insult, as God, whose 
cause they plead, and in whose name they speak. 
Are ye not a seed of falsehood—A generation of 
liars, whose practices contradict your professions, 
who deal deceitfully both with God and man? 
Verses 5, 6. Inflaming yourselves with idols— 


Hebrew, nin, being inflamed, or growing hot, 


after idols, as Dr. Waterland renders it. Lusting 
after them, and mad upon them, as the phrase is, 
Jer. 1.38. Fervent, both in making and in worship- 
ping them, as was observed chap. xliv. 12. -Under 
every green tree—Wherever you see an idol erected, 
which was commonly done in groves, or under great 
and shady trees, which defended the worshippers 
from the heat of the sun, and were supposed to strike 
them with a kind of sacred awe and reverence, 
Slaying the children—In the way of sacrifice to 
your idols, after the manner of the barbarous heathen ; 
in the valleys—Or, beside the brooks which run in 
the valleys; which was most commodious for such 
bloody work. He seems to allude to the valley of | 
Hinnom, in which these cruelties were practised, 
Jer. vii. 31. Under the clefts of the rocks—Which 
they choose for shade, or those dark vaults in rocks, 
which were convenient for idolatrous uses. Among 
the smooth stones, &c., is thy portion—Thou hast 
chosen for thy portion those idols, which were either 
made of those smooth stones, or were worshipped 
by the sides of brooks or rivers, where such smooth 
stones commonly he. They are thy lot—Thou hast 
forsaken me, and chosen idols. Thou hast offered 
a meat-offering—F¥or the devil is God’s ape, and 
idolaters use the same rites and offerings in the wor- 
ship-of idols, which God prescribed in his own 
worship. Should I receive comfort in these—Should 
I be pleased with such a people, and with such 
actions? “The Jews were extremely addicted to 
the practice of many superstitious and idolatrous 
rites, which the prophet here inveighs against. Of 
the worship of huge stones consecrated, there are 
many testimonies of the ancients. They were called 
Bacrvaot and Bairviza, probably from the stone which 
Jacob erected at Beth-el, pouring oil upon the top of 
it. The practice was very common in different ages 
and places.”—Bishop Lowth, who mentions divers 
instances of this foolish superstition. =a 
Verses 7, 8. Pig a lofty and high mountain—In 
3 


*-* 


Hypocritical idolaters, 


CHAPTER LVII. 


and their punishment. 


ene 8 Behind the doors also and the posts 
. C. 706. 
———— hast thou set up thy remembrance : for 
thou hast discovered thyself to another than 
me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy 
ped, and ®made thee a covenant with them; 
‘thou lovedst their bed 7 where thou sawest it. 
9 And * thou * wentest to the king with oint- 
ment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst 
send thy messengers far off, and didst debase 
thyself even unto hell. 


10 Thou art wearied in the arent e 3298. 


ness of thy way; !yet saidst thou then! sco 
not, There is no hope: thou hast found the 
*life of thy hand; therefore thou wast not 
grieved, , b 

11 And ™ of whom hast thou been afraid or 
feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remem- 
bered me, nor laid i¢ to thy heart? "have not 
I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest 
me not ? 


6 Or, hewed it for thyself larger than theirs. 
28; xxiii. 2-20.—’ Or, thou providest room, 
spectedst the king. 


iTizek. xvi. 26, 
8 Or, thou re- 


=. 
high places, which were much used for religious 
worship, both by the Israelites and heathen: hast 
thou set thy bed—Thine altar, as appears from the 
sacrifice mentioned in the next clause, where thou 
didst commit spiritual whoredom with idols. Be- 
hind the doors also and the posts—Behind the posts 
of the doors of thy ‘house ; hast thou set up thy re- 
membrance—That is, the images of their tutelary 
gods, or some monuments or tokens, placed there 
as memorials of them, in direct opposition to the 
law of God, which commanded them to write upon 
the door-posts of their houses, and upon their gates, 
the words of his law, Deut. vi. 9, and xi. 20, If they 
chose for them such a situation’as more private, it 
was in defiance of a particular curse denounced in 
the law against the man who should make a graven 
or a molten image, and put it ina secret place, Deut. 
xxvii. 15. For thou hast discovered thyself, &¢.— 
“The prophet describes their idolatry under the 
metaphor of a woman’s being false to her husband’s 
bed, verse 3. So he tells them that they had com- 
mitted spiritual adultery, when they went up to the 
high places to sacrifice, verse 7. That they had 
multiplied their idolatries, as an unchaste woman does 
her lovers; that they had broken their covenant 
with God, whom they had acknowledged to be their 
lord and husband, and made a new contract with 
idols to serve them.”—Lowth. Thou lovedst their 
bed where thou sawest ii—No sooner didst thou see 
the heathen idols, but thou wast enamoured with 
them, and didst fall down and worship them, like a 
lewd woman, who is inflamed with lust.toward al- 
most every man she sees. 

Verse 9. Thou wentest to the king, &c.—That is, 
the king of Assyria or Egypt, to whom the Israelites 
were very prone to seek, and trust, and send pre- 
sents. Hosea reproaches the Israelites for the same 
practice: They make a covenant with Assyria, and 
oil is carried into Egypt, Hosea xii.1. Thus the 
prophet passes from their idolatry to another sin, 
even to their carnal confidence in heathen princes, 
for which they are often severely reproved. These 
two sins indeed were commonly joined together ; 
tor they easily received idolatry from those kings 
whose help they desired. With ointment—With pre- 
cious ointment, particularly with balm, which was 


k Chap. xxx. 6; Ezek. xvi. 33; xxiii. 16; Hos. vii. 11; 
xii. 1—— Jer. ii. 25. ——® Or, living ——™ Chapter li. 12, 130 
1 Psa, 1. 21. ** 


parts, and sometimes sent as a present, Gen. xiiii. 11. 
And didst increase thy perfumes—Didst send great 
quantities thereof to them, to procure their aid. 
Didst send thy messengers far off—Into Assyria, 
which was far from Judea, or into Egypt. And didst 
debase thyself, &c.—Thou wast willing to submit to 
the basest terms to procure their aid. “It is well 
known, that in all parts of the East, whoever visits 
a great person must carry him a present. ‘It is ac- 
counted uncivil, says Maundrell, p. 26, ‘to visit in 
this country without an offering in hand. “All great 
men expect it, as a tribute due to their character and 


| authority ; and look upon themselves as affronted, and 


indeed defrauded, when the compliment is omitted.” 
—Bishop Lowth.) According to the interpretation 
of this part of the prophecy, adopted by Vitringa, 


\the king, in this verse,’: must mean the head of 


mystical Babylon, the pope, to whom indeed the 
particulars here very aptly pertain, as they who 
are acquainted with the history of that antichris- 
tian ruler will easily discern. See Revelation 
Xviii. 13. L m 

Verse 10. Thou art wearied with the greatness 
of thy way—Thou hast not eased, or relieved, but 
only tired thyself with all thy tedious journeys and 
laborious endeavours. © Yet sayest thow not, There 
is no hope—And yet thou didst not perceive that thy 
labour was lost, and that thy case was not mended, 
but made more desperate by these practices. Thou 
hast found the life of thy hand—Thou hast some- 
times found success in these ways; or, thou falsely 
supposest that thy hand is’ strengthened thereby. 
Therefore thou wast not grieved—Therefore tho« 
didst not repent of thy sin and folly herein, but didst 
persist and applaud thyself in such courses. 

Verses 11-14. Of whom hast thou been afraid, 
&c.—And what, or who are they, the fear of whom 
drives thee to these wicked and desperate practices? 
Are they not weak and mortal creatures, such 
wholly depend upon me, and can do nothing without 
me? The fear of my displeasure ought, in all rea- 
son, to outweigh all thy other fears and apprehen- 
sions, and deter thee from breaking that covenant 
whereby thou art engaged to me.» That thou hast 
lied—That thou hast dealt thus -perfidiously with 
me, and sought for such foreign assistances contrary 


of great price, was a commodity peculiar to those |!to my command. And hast not remembered me— 
3 


Vou. Il. ( 18 ) 


*“@ 


273 


Grod’s gracious purpose 


ISAIAH. 


to restore his people. 


SS e———e——~E=E—EEOEOOouomaamamomauoaoueeeeee ee SSS eer 


A. M. 3298. 


12 I will declare thy righteousness, 
B. C. 706 


‘and thy works; for they shall not 
profit thee. 

13 J When thou criest, let thy companies de- 
liver thee; but the wind shall carry them all 
away; vanity shall take them: but he that 
putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, 
and shall inherit my holy mountain ; 
~ 14. And shall say, ° Cast ye up, cast ye up, 
prepare the way, take up the stumbling-block 
out of the way of my people. 

15 For.thus saith the high and lofty One that 
inhabiteth eternity, ? whose name is Holy; 21 


dwell in the high and holy place, Asm, 208. 
rwith him also that ts of a contrite 

and humble spirit, ‘to revive the spirit of the 
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite 
ones. 

16 t For I will not contend for ever, neither 
will I be always wroth: for the spirit should 
fail before me, and the souls "which I have 
made. 

17 For the iniquity of * his covetousness was 
I wroth, and smote him: ¥I hid me, and was 
wroth, 7and he went on ?° frowardly in ° the 
way of his heart. 


° Chap. xl. 3: Ixii. 10.—» Job vi. 10; Luke i. 49.——9 Psa. 
Ixviii. 4; Zech. ii. 18.—— Psa. xxxiv. 18; li. 17; exxxviii. 6; 
Chap. Ixvi. 2. Psa. exlvii. 3; Chap. Ixi. 1. 


t Psa. Ixxxv. 5; ciii. 9; Mie. vii, 18. «Num. xvi, 22; Job 
xxxiv. 14;, Heb. xii. 9. x Jer. vi. 13. Y Chap. viii. 17; 
xlv. 15,——# Chap. ix. 13. 10 Heb. turning away. 


Hast forgotten all those great things which I have 
done for thee, and. all those promises which I have 
made to thee. 
me upon thy heart: hast not seriously and affection- 
ately considered what I am, how all-sufficient, faith- 
ful, and gracious: for-then thou wouldest not have 
distrusted or disobeyed me. Have I not held my 
peace, &c.—The Bishops’ Bible, published under 
Queen Elizabeth, translates the chaise thus: Js it 
not because I held my peace, and that of a long 
lime, therefore thou fearest me not? Sinners take 
encouragement to continuein sin, from God’s patience 
and long-suffering. J will declare thy righteousness 
—I will no longer be silent, but “ will show thee thy 
deserts, and give thee a view of thy deeds,which 
then will appear quite of another sort than what thy 
own self-conceit makes thee believe them to be.” 
For they shall not profit thee—These actions shall 
be of no real advantage, but quite the contrary. 
‘When thou criest—Namely, unto me for deliverance; 
let thy companies deliver thee—Expect it, not from 
me, whom thou hast forsaken and despised, but 
from those. foreign troops, to which thou hast sought 
and trusted for succour. But the wind shall carry 
them all away—They shall be so far from saving 
thee, that they shall not be able to deliver them- 
selves ; but shall be carried away suddenly and vio- 
lently by the blast of mine anger. Vanity shall take 
them—Their endeavours to help thee shall be vain 
and fruitless. But he that putteth his trust in me— 
Those that still depend upon me, and make. use of 
none Of those indirect means to preserve themselves ; 
shall possess the land—Shall be preserved in, or re- 
stored to, their own land, or shall have temporal 
blessings | as far as will be good for them; and shall 
inherit my holy mountain—Shall enjoy my favour 
and presence. in my temple: shall be blessed with 
the privileges of the chureh on earth, and brought 
at length to the joys of heaven. And shall say— 
Hebrew, and he shall say: or, and one shall say: 
God shall raise up one who shall say, with authority 
and efficacy, Cast ye wp, &c.—Make causeways, 
where it is needful, for the safe and easy passage of 
274 


Nor laid it to thy heart—Or, nor set } 


my people, and remove all things which may hin- 
der them in their return. — , 

Verses 15, 16. For thus saith the high and lofty 
One—The omnipotent and supreme Ruler of the 
universe; that inhabiteth eternity—Who is from 
everlasting to everlasting, without beginning of days, 
or end of life, or change of time; who only hath im- 
mortality, hath it of himself, and that constantly ; 
who inhabits it, and cannot be dispossessed of it ; 
whose name is Holy—Who is perfectly and essen- 
tially holy in his nature, his works, his words, and 
his ways; and therefore both can and will deliver 
his chureh and people, as he has promised to do, 
I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also, 
&c.—Although my throne is in the highest heavens, 
where nothing impure can have place, yet I do not 
disdain graciously to visit, and familiarly converse 
with, those sinners. of ma ankind, whose spirits are 
broken by affliction, and humbled under a sense of 
their sins, for which they were afflicted; which 
doubtless was the case with many of the Jews in the 
Babylonish captivity : whom, therefore, he here im- 
plies, that God would pity and deliver out of their 
distresses, as also all others in similar circumstances. 
To revive the spirit of the humble—To support and 
comfort them amidst their afflictions and troubles, 
of whatever kind. For I will not omg for ever 
—I will not proceed to the utmost severity with sin- 
fulmen. For the spirit should fail before me—For 
then their spirits would sink and die under, my 
stroke, and I should do nothing else but destroy the 
work of my own hands: therefore I consider their 
infirmity, and spare them. See Psa. lxxvili. 38, 39; 
and ciii. 9-14; which passages Bishop Lowth thinks 
contain the best and easiest explication of this 
clause. 

Verse 17, For the iniquity of his covetousness— 
The covetousness of the Jewish people, (here ad- 
dressed as one man,) who were eminently guilty of 
this sin before the Babylonish captivity, as is ex- 
pressly affirmed, Jer. vi. 13; and viii. 10; and they 
were still more addicted to it in the time of Christ, 
and previous to the destruction of their city by the 

{ ap*,)" >> 2 By 


. *- 


¥ 
s 
- 

x 


The troubled and unhappy 


” CHAPTER LVIIL. 


state of the wicked. 


A-M.3298. 18 I have seen his ways, and * will 
—— heal him: I will lead him also, 
and restore comforts unto him and to ° his 
mourners. 

19 I create ° the fruit of the lips ; Peace} peace 


“to him that-is far off, and to him that is near, 


a Jer. iii. 22.——> Ch. Ixi, 2——¢ Heb. xiii. 15——# Acts ii. 39; 


saith the Lorp; and I will heal him. A.M. 3298 
20 © But the npicked are like the tA? Se 18, 


troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters — 


cast up mire and dirt. 
21 ! There is no peace, saith my God, to the 
wicked. 


= 


e Job xv. 20 ; Prov. iv. 16—— Chap. xviii. 22. 


Eph. ii. 17. 


Romans ; Christ himself testifying, that the greatest 
professors of sanctity among them devoured widows’ 
houses, and, , for a pretence, made long prayers. But 
this sin is not mentioned exclusively of others, but so 
as to comprehend all those sins for which God was 
wroth, and smote them: covetousness, however, 
joined with a froward going on in the way of their 
own hearts, has been the characteristic sin of that 
people, in all ages, since the overturning of their 
commonwealth by the Romans. If Vitringa’s expo- 
sition of this chapter be adopted, this verse, must be 
understood of the avarice of the Church of Rome, 
manifested by her enormous exactions, and her in- 
famous trafic in indulgences, dispensations, and a 
variety of equally abominable practices, which, for 
many ages, have disgraced that church in the view of 
all intelligent and pious Christians. I hid me, and 
was wroth—I withdrew my favour and help from him, 
and left him in great calamities. And he went on 
frowardly—Y et he was not reformed by corrections, 
but in his distresses trespassed more and more, and 
obstinately persisted in those sinful courses which 
were most pleasing to the lusts of his own Goreng 
heart. 

Verse 18. Ihave seen his ways—I have taken no- 
tice of those evil ways in which he seems resolved 
to walk, and that he is neither reformed by mercies 
nor judgments ; and will heal him—Or rather, yet I 
will heal him: although I might justly destroy him, 
and leave him to perish in his own ways, yet, of my 
mere mercy, and for my own name’s sake, I will 
pity this people, turn them from their sins, and bring 
them out of their troubles. Which promise was 
partly fulfilled when God restored them from Baby- 
lon, and will be more, perfectly and evidently ac- 
complished, when he shall convert them to the 
Christian faith in the latter days. And restore com- 


forts unto him—Comforts as great as his troubles |} 


had been; and—Or rather, to wit ; to his mourners 
—To those who are humbled under God’s hand, and 


that mourn in Zion for their own,and other people’s 
sins, chap. Ixi. 2,33; and Ezek. ix.4; and for the 
calamities of God’s church and people, chap. lxvi. 10. 
The mourners here spoken of, Vitringa thinks, mean 
those true penitents, who lamented the scandals and 
offences of professing Christians in their times, under 
whom they grievously suffered, such as the Walden- 
ses, the Lollards, and others who, by the mercy of 
God, were rescued from the errors and corruptions 
of the fallen church, when the light of the Reforma- 
tion began to dawn. 

Verses 19-21. I create—I will, by my almighty 
power, in a wonderful manner produce; the fruit of 
the lips—Praise and thanksgiving, termed the fruit 
of the lips, Hos. xiv. 2; Heb. xiii. 15. God creates 
this fruit of the lips, by giving’ new subjects and 
causes of thanksgiving, by his mércies conferred on 
those among his people, who acknowledge and be- 
wail their transgressions, and return to him: Peace, 
peace, &c.—Here we have the great subject of 
thanksgiving, reconciliation with God, pardon and 
peace offered to them that are nigh, and to them that 
are afar off ; not only to the Jew, but also to the 
Gentile, as St. Paul more than once applies those 
terms, Eph, ii. 13,17. See also Acts ii. 39. The 
doubling of the word signifies the certainty and ex- 
cellence of this peace. But though this peace be 
freely offered to all without exception, yet all will 
not partake of it, for the wicked are like the trou- 
bled sea, &c.—Their minds are restless, being per- 
petually hurried with their own lusts and passions, 
and with guilt, and the dread of divine vengeance. 
There is no peace to the wicked—Though they may 
have as great a share of outward prosperity as the 
best men have, yet they have no share in this in- 
ward, spiritual, and everlasting peace. The forty- 
eighth chapter ends with the same declaration ; to 
express the exclusion of the impenitent and unbe- 
lieving from the benefit of the gpreering pro- 
mises. 


CHAPTER LVIL 


The prophet, having, in the preceding chapter, marked and censured divers miscarriages and corrupt practices of the apostate 
church, whether Jewish or Christian, is here commanded of God to proceed on the same subject, and still more fully to set 
their sins in order before them, 1. He therefore, (1,) Expostulates with them, in the name of God, on their hypocrisy, self- 


righteousness, and pride in their religious exercises, and especially in their fasting, 2, 3. 
unholy and malicious ends in view in that duty, and making it a cloak for their wickedness, 4, 5. 
(4,) Makes great and precious promises to those who should so keep them, 8-12, 


them how to keep fasts aright, 6, 7. 


(2,) Charges them with having 
(3,) He mstructs 


(5,) Makes the like promises to those who should sanctify the sabbath aright, 13, 14. 


275 


& 


ax ot 


Reproofs of hypocritical 


ISATAH. 


observers of fasts. 


& - 3298, 


ee RY aloud, spare not, lift up thy 


——— ™~ ‘voice like a trumpet, and show 
ray people their transgression, and the house of 
Jacob their sins. 

2 Yet they seek me daily, anil delight to 
know my ways, as a nation that did righteous- 
ness, and forsook not * ordinance of their 
God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice : 
they take delight in approaching to God. 

3 * Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and 
thou seest not? wherefore have we ” afflicted 
our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Be- 


1 Heb, with the throat Mal. iii. 14, 
Xxlii. 27. ? Or, things wherewith ye grieve athers. 
griefs. ¢ 1 Kings xxi. 9, 12. 


>» Lev. xvi. 29, 31; 
3 Heb. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LVII. 

Verse 1. Cry aloud—Be faithful, plain, and ear- 
nest in thy addresses, remonstrances, reproofs, and 
exhortations to and among my people; and spare 
not—Forbear not to speak whatsoever { command 
thee for their conviction and reformation. Lift up 
thy voice like a trumpet—Be not afraid to exert thy 
voice and spend thy strength in this work. Givean 
alarm which all may hear. Show my people their 
transgressions—Set their sins, all their sins, before 
them, in a true point of view, and with all their ag- 
gravations, especially the iniquities of their holy 
things, and the hypocrisy of their religious services, 
(verse 2,) that they may be Brewent to true repent- 
ance for them. 

Verse 2. Yet they seek me daily—They cover all 
heir wickedness with a profession of religion, from 
time to time resorting to my house, pretending to 
ask counsel of me, and to desire and seek my favour 
and blessing. And delight to know my ways-—-That 
is, either, lst, They seem to delight to know them, 
men being often said in Scripture to be or do that 
which they seem or profess to be or do: or, 2d, 
They really delight; for there are many men who 
take some pleasure in knowing God’s will and word, 
and yet do not conform their lives to them. As a 
nation that did righteousness—As if they really 
were a righteous people; and forsook not the ordi- 
nance, &c.—As if they were not guilty of any apos- 
tacy from God, or neglect of, or disobedience to, his 
precepts. T'hey ask of me the ordinances of justice 
—As if they desired and resolved to observe them. 
They delight—In appearance or reality; in ap- 
proaching unto God—In coming to my temple to 
pray to me, receive instruction, or offer sacrifices. 

Verse 3. Wherefore have we fasted, &c.—They 
complain of hard usage from God; that although 
they prayed, and fasted, and observed the rest of his 
ordinances, all which are comprehended under the 
title of fasting, all their labour was lost, and God 
neither delivered nor regarded them. Wherefore 
have we afflicted our soul—Defrauded our appetites 
With fasting, of which this phrase is used, Ley. xvi. 
29, and xxiii. 27, 29. Behold, in the day of your 

fast—In those solemn days of fasting which I have 
276 


hold, in the, day of your fast ye A.M. 3298. 
find pleasure, and exact all your *la- nero 
bours.? 

A * Behold, ye fast for strife and debate and 
to smite with the fist of wickedness: * ye shall 
not fast as ye do this day, to make your yoice 
to be heard on high. 

5 Isit *such a fast that Ihave chosen? *a® 
day for a man to afflict his soul? is zt to bow 
down his head as a bulrush, and ‘ to spread 
sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call 


this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lorn? 
oe 


4 Or, ye fast not as this day. 4 Zech, vii, 5.——® Lev. xvi. 
29. ® Or, to afflict his soul for a day. f Esth. iv. 3; Job ii. 
8; Dan. ix.3; Jonah iii. 6. 


appointed; or, in those times when I have called 
you, by the course of my providence, and counsels 
of my prophets, unto fasting, and weeping, and 
mourning, chap. xxii. 12; ye find pleasure, and ex- 
act, &c.—Or, as the words may be more significantly 
rendered, You Jind wherewithal to please yourselves, 
and are rigorous in grieving, or burdening, others: 
that is, You gratify your own: passions, especially 
your covetousness, and you oppress the poor, and 
so aré defective in the duties of justice and charity. 
By labours may be meant money gotten by labour, 
and lent to others, either for their need or the lender’s 
advantage. For labour is often put for the fruit of 
labour, as Deut, xxviii. 33; Isa. xlv. 14. But the 
Hebrew here, TOD xy, is literally, your griefs, 
namely, the things which cause griefs, which are 
grievous and burdensome to others, as either, Ist, 
Hard service required of servants above their 
strength, or beyond the time limited by God for their 
service, of which see Jer. xxxiv. 13-16: or, 2d, 
Debts, which they required, either with usury or 
with rigour and cruelty, when the general law of 
charity, or God’s particular law, enjoined the release, 
or, at least, the forbearance of them. See Neh. 
Vv. L, 2 

Verses 4, 5. Behold, ye fast Sor strife—Y our fasting 
days, wherein you ought, in a special manner, to im- 
plore the mercy of God, and to show compassion to 
men, you employ in injuring or quar g with 
your brethren, your servants, or debtors, or in con- 
triving mischief against them. Or the meaning is, 
that “their fasting increased their self- ‘retereee 
and excited them to fierce controversies or bitter re- 
sentments.” And to smite with the fist of wicked- 
ness—-It was “the cloak of, and commutation for, 
their exactions and oppressions of the poor, whom 
they most unjustly smote and abused for not com- 
plying in every thing with their inclinations.”—Scott. 
Ye shall not fast as ye do this day—Such a fast as 
this I cannot accept of as an act of worship, or bless 
as a means of grace. Toe make your voice to be 
heard on high—In strife and debate, or by way of 
ostentation. Is it such a fast that I have chosen?— 
That is, which I approve of, accept, or delight in, 
because we delight in what we freely choose. A 

3 


Instructions how to 


CHAPTER LVIII. 


keep fasts aright. 


6 Is not this the fast that I have 


A. M. 3298, 
. C. 706. : 
__—_—.. chosen? to loose the bands of wick- 


edness, to undo ° the heavy burdens, and * to 
let the 7 oppressed go free, and that ye break 
every yoke? 


= Neh. v. 10, 12——® Heb. the beni of the yoke. — Jer. 
xxxiv. 9, 7 Heb. broken. 


day for a man to afflict his soul—To keep himself 
low, or to chastise himself by depriving his body of 
food, as a means to produce inward sorrow for sin, 
and true humiliation of soul before God. The pro- 
phet seems to have delivered this discourse upon, or 
to have intended it for, some extraordinary day of 
humiliation, when it was usual for the prophets to 
give public exhortations to the people. Js it to bow 
down his head as a bulrush?2—Here the prophet 
notices those external gestures, postures, and signs 
of penitence, which the Jews of his time, and in 
after ages, (Matt. vi. 16,) joined with their hypocri- 
tical fasts. And to spread sackcloth and ashes under 
him—The Jews, to express their sorrow, made use 
of sackcloth and ashes two ways: Ist, Sometimes 
by putting sackcloth ‘upon their bodies, as 1 Kings 
xxi. 27; Psa. lxix. 11; and casting ashes upon their 
heads, 2 Sam. xiii. 19: and, 2d, By spreading sack- 
cloth under them, and lying down upon ashes, Esther 
iv. 3; Job ii.8. The intent of putting on sackcloth 
was to afflict the body by its unpleasing harshness, 
and the ashes were meant to represent their own 
vileness, as being but dust and ashes; and their lying 
on them to signify that they abhorred and were 
ashamed of themselves. Wilt thou.call this a fast? 
—Canst thou, upon rational grounds, believe or sup- 
pose it to be so? Surely it has nothing in it but the 
lifeless form, empty shadow, or dumb signs of a fast : 
nothing of deep humiliation appearing in it, or real 
reformation proceeding from it. Not that the pro- 
phet blames them for afflicting themselves by these 
external rites, for these are elsewhere commanded 
of God; but that which he condemns is their hypo- 
crisy in separating true humiliation from them, and 
contenting themselves with using these signs, while 
they stopped short of the thing signified by them. 
And an acceptable day to the Lord—A day that 
God wi prove of. Hebrew, jx. om, A day of 
acceptance, or that will turn to a good account on 
your behalf. 

erse 6. Isnot this the fast that Ihave chosen?— 
Or approve, as before, verse 5. Or ought not such 
a fast to be accompanied with such things as these ? 
He now proceeds to show the concomitants of a 
true fast; namely, to exercise works of justice and 
charity. To loose the bands of wickedness-—Name- 
ly, the cruel obligations of usury and oppression. 
To undo the heavy burdens—Hebrew, the bundles 
of the yoke, as in the margin; by which may possi- 
bly be intended bundles of writings, acknowledg- 
ments, bonds, mortgages, &c., which the usurers had 
lying by them. The former are thought to relate to 
unjust and unlawful obligations, extorted by force or 
fear, which the prophet would have cancelled: this | 

3 


7 Is it not ‘to deal thy bread to the A. cae: 
hungry, ak that thou bring the poor ———— 
that are ® cast out to thy house? when thou 
seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that 
thou hide not thyself from ! thine own flesh ? 


i Ezek. xviii. 7,16; Matt. x 
xxxi. 19.——! Gen 


35.—— Or, attignt: — Job 
ix: 14; Neh. v. 


latter, to just debts contracted through-poverty a’ 

necessity, the rigour whereof he would have abated. 
And to let the oppressed go free—Those grieved or 
vexed, whether by the griping of usury or the bonds 
of slavery, accompanied with cruel usage ; or those 


confined or shut up in prisons; and that ye break. 
every yoke—Namely, which is grievous; that you — 


free your dependants and servants, and all that are 
under your power, es all sorts of vexations and 
oppressions. 

Verse 7. Is it noe Newaely. the fast that pleases 
me. Having shown the evil they were to abstain 
from in order to keep an acceptable fast, namely, 
every species of cruelty, he here proceeds to speak 
of the duty that was required, namely, the exercise 
of every kind of mercy, as a necessary fruit of true 
repentance, Dan. iv. 27; Luke xix. 8. For there are 
two. parts of righteousness toward our neighbour ; 
one, to do wrong-to ho man; the other, to do good 
to all: which two must always go together, and never 
be separated from each other, especially in acts and 
seasons of humiliation. And, as under the evils here 
mentioned are comprehended all other evils what- 
soever, all which men must abstain from if they 
would give evidence of true humiliation and godly 
sorrow, so in the duties here spoken of are compris- 


ed all the duties, to the practice of which they ought 


to apply themselve as the effects of true repentance. 
To deal—The wor rd DD properly signifies fo divide, 
or to break into parts; thy bread to the hungry-— 


» 


5 


Bread is here put for all things necessary for the 


support of human life, any or every kind of food. 
And that thou bring the poor—Those that are not” 
but help- 


only needy, as to their present conditio 
less, and utterly unable to support themselves; that 
are cast out—Forced from their dwellings, deprived 
of house and harbour by the injustice of the power- 
ful, or by persecution for conscience’ sake, and who 
are thereby become wanderers, and have no abiding 
place; to thy house—That thou be hospitable, and 
make thy house a shelter to them, or provide lodging 
for them. When thou seest the naked—Those that 
either have no clothes, or are so poorly clothed that 
their clothing is not sufficient to preserve them from 
perishing by cold; that thou cover him—That thou 
give them raimént suited to these wants, James ii. 
15, 16. And that thou hide not thyself—That thou 
not only seek no occasion to excuse thyself, but that, 
out of compassion, thou apply thyself heartily and 
speedily to his relief; that thou be not like the priest 
and Levite, but like the good Samaritan, Luke x. 
31-35. From thine own flesh——Some restrain this 
to our own kindred, but this would confine our 
charity within too narrow a eompass, inasmuch as 
277 


Jef 


we safety and 
ee 


egos salvation break forth upon them! 


ie 


FF , 
“ee 
ae 


‘ep 


Promises to those who 


» ISALAH. 


keep the fasts aright 


—————— en 


ie 8 §™ Then shall thy light break 
: atta) forth as the morning, and thy health 


» shall spring forth speedily : te thy righteous- 
” ness ‘shall go before thee; *™the glory of the 
Lorp ® shall be thy rereward. 
9 Then shalt thou call, and the Lorp shall 
answer ; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here 
Iam. If thou take away from the midst of 
thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, 
and ° speaking vanity ;. 
10 And if thou draw out thy soul to the 


hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; A.M. 8. 
then shall thy light rise in obscusibf 
and thy darkness be as the noon-day : 

11 And the Lorn shall guide thee continu 
ally, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and 
make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a 
watered garden, and like a spring of water, 
whose waters } fail not. 

12 And they that shall be of thee ? sha. 
build the old waste places : thou shalt raise up 
the foundations of many generations; and thou 


m Job xi. 17——® Exod. xiv. 19; ‘Chap. lii. 12. ° Heb. shall 


Pils gather thee up. 


¢ Psa: ety, 2: 


ae Heb. droughts. 


11 Heb, lie, or, deceive. 
P Chap. Ixi. 4. - 


-_—— 


often, nay, perhaps most commonly, the necessities 
of others are greater than those of our own rela- 
tions; neither is it congruous, that the other words 
here should be taken in the greatest latitude, and 
this alone be confined within such narrow limits. 
Our Saviour teaches us to consider every man as.our 
neighbour: And surely we can look on no man but 
there we contemplate our own Jlesh ; and therefore 
it is barbarous, not only to tear, but not to love and 
succour him. Therefore feed him as thou wouldest 
feed thyself, or be fed; shelter him as thou wouldest 
shelter thyself, or be sheltered; clothe him as thou 
wouldest clothe. thyself, or be clothed, if in any of 
these respects thou wert in his circumstances. 
Verse 8. Then shall thy light—Matter or cause 
of rejoicing, break forth as the morning—Arise as 
certainly and speedily as in the morning the light 
arises out of darkness. It shall not only appear, but 
break, or dart\ itself forth, notwithstanding all ob- 


structions, as the sun breaks and pierces through a’ 


cloud. So ready is God to help his people when 
they are truly humbled! Thus quickly and clearly 
And thy 


health shall spring forth speedily—The recovery of 


4 


hy former prosperous condition. Another meta- 
phor to express the same thing. And-thy righteous- 
ness shall go before thee—To prepare thy way to 
Mrappiness ; ; ensuring to thee, O my 
chureh, the peculiar direction and care of thy God, 
and the favour and approbation of wise and good 
men; see Rom. xiv. 17, 18. Or manifold blessings 
shall be bestowed upon thee, upon all occasions, as 
the reward of thy righteousness. The glory of the 
Lord shall be thy rereward—The glorious presence, 
power, and providence of God shall protect and se- 
cure thee. . Thus the angel of his presence secured 
the Israelites when they came up out of Egypt. Or, 
the meaning may be, A glorious state shall sueceed 
this thy present calamitous condition. 

Ver. 9, 10. Then shalt thow call, &e.—They made 
great complaint, verse 3, that God took no notice of 
their services, which complaint he seems now to re- 
fer to, as if he had said, These conditions being ob- 
served, call upon me, and thou shalt see I will re- 
gard, Psa. xxxiv. 15. Zhe Lord shall answer—He 
will give an effectual demonstration that he hears 
thee. He shall say, Here I am—A phrase that sig- 

278 


nifies-a person to be ready at hand to help. Jf thou 
take away from the midst of thee—From among you; 
the yoke—All those pressures and grievances before 
mentioned. The putting forth of the finger— 
Done by way of scoff, or disdainful insulting ; and 
speaking vanity—Any kind of evil words. Bishop 
Lowth renders it, “‘ The pointing of the finger, and 
the injurious speech.” If thou draw out—Open, as 
when we open a store to satisfy the wants of the 
needy ; thy soul tothe hyungry—Thy affection, that i is, 
thy pity and compassion, to those in want of the ne- 
cessaries of life; and satisfy the afflicted soul—With 
a real, stidbstantial benefit, not contenting thyself with 
giving him merely kind words. For here the pro- 
phet expresses the work that is to be done, as in the 
former clause the affection wherewith it is to be 
done; otherwise it would only be what ihe Apostle 
James reproves, chap. ii. 15, 16. Then shall thy 
light rise in obscurity—See on:verse 8; and thy 
darkness be as the noon-day—In the very darkness 
of the affliction itself, thou shalt have comfort, Psa. 
exii. 4. There it shall be as the morning, still in- 
creasing, here as the noon-day, in its zenith, and 
height of perfection. - , 

Verses 11, 12, And the Lord shall guide thee— 
Namely, as a shepherd leads his sheep. He adds 
continually, to show that his conduct and blessing 
should not be momentary, or of a short continuance, 
but all along as it was to Israel in the wilderness. 
And satisfy thy soul in drought—Thou a have 
plenty, when others are in scarcity. And make fat 
thy bones—This may be spoken in opposition to the 
sad effects of famine, whereby the flesh is consumed 
away, that it cannot be seen, and the bones that were 
not seen, stick out. Thou shalt be like a garden— 
If thou ‘relieve the poor, thou shalt never be poor, 
but as a well-watered garden, always flourishing. 
Like a spring, whose waters fail not—Hebrew, de- 
ceive not, a metaphor which further signifies also the 
continuance of this flourishing state, that it should 
not be like a land-flood, or brooks, that are-soon dried 
up with drought. Thou shalt be fed with a spring 
of blessings, that will never fail. And they of thee 
—A remnant of thee, or rather, thy posterity, shall 
build the old waste places—The places which have 
long lain waste. Bishop Lowth renders it, The an 
cient ruins: If understood of the Jews roa 


Promises to those who 


CHAPTER LIX. 


- keep holy the sabbath. 


A. M. 3298. shalt be called, 


a ae The repairer of the 


breach, 'The restorer of paths todwell in. 


13 4 If ‘thou turn away thy foot from the. 


sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy 
day ; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of 
the Lorp, honourable ; and shalt honour him, 
not doing thine own Wayh nor & Aaging thine 


own pleasure, nor speaking thine own A, M. 3298. 
B. C. 706. 

words : eee 

14 * Then shalt thou delight thyself in the 
Lorp; and I will cause thee to * ride upon the 
high places of the earth, and feed thee with the 
heritage of Jacob thy father : * for the mouth of 
the Lorp hath spoken it. 


q ae lvi, 2—t + Job» xxii. 26. 


= 


s Deut. xxxii. 13; xxxiii. 29.——t Chap. i. 20; xl. 5; Micah iv 


from Babylon, the meaning is, that they should re- 
build Jerusalem and the temple, with the other cities 
and towns of Judea. The foundations of many gene- 
rations— Hither the foundations that were laid many 
generations ago, or that should continue for many 
generations yet to come. And thou shalt be called 
—That is, deservedly, and to thine honour, the re- 
pairer of the breach—Or, breaches ; for the word is 
put here collectively for those breaches which God’s 
judgments had made among them, by suffering their 
enemies to demolish their cities and:towns, and to 
destroy their state. The restorer of paths—Those 
paths that led from city to city, which, being now 
laid desolate and uninhabited, were grown over with 


grass and weeds; to dwell in—These aecommoda-. 


tions being recovered, their ancient cities: might be 
fit to be reinhabited.. According to Vitringa, who 
considers the whole of this and the preceding verse 
as being metaphorical, the meaning is, “ That from 
the city of God, (the spiritual Jerusalem,) flourish- 
ing in the manner above described, should go forth, 
those who should renew and restore the churches 
long laid waste, as immersed in thick darkness and 
superstition, and governed by faithless pastors, and 
so unworthy the name of the churches of God; and 
who should collect together, erect, and, build anew 


the foundations of those churches; that is, the 


heads of. Christian doctrine delivered by the pro- 
phets and apostles, which, though they had re- 
tained them in the confession of their faith, they 
had mixed with heterogeneous doctrines; so that 
they might be esteemed as wholly subverted and 
overthrown.” . ; 

Verse 13. If thou turn away—If thou take no un- 
necessary journeys, nor do any servile works on the 
sabbath day; or, metaphorically, if thou keep thy 
mind and affections disengaged, and free from secu- 
lar cares and concerns, and restrain thyself from 
whatever might profane it ; from doing thy pleasure 


on my holy day—¥From taking the liberty of doing 
what thou pleasest, without the control and restraint 
of conscience and the law of God; or from indulging 
thyself in the pleasures of sense and carnal delights ; 


and call the sabbath a delight—Not looking on the — 


duties of it as a burden and drudgery, but-performing 
them with cheerfulness,-and delighting in all its or- 
dinances and services; thé holy of the Lord—Or, 
to the Lord, that is, dedicated to him, consecrated to 
his service; honowrable--Namely, the chief of 
days, worthy of all honour, and therefore honoura- 
ble because holy: and shalt honour him—That is, 
The Lord, whose day it isy.not doing thine own 
ways—-Or works, or pursuing thy usual course of 
life, or thy worldly business ; nor speaking iin 
words—-The words that are thine own, in opposition 
to what God commands to be spoken ; words, pro- 
ceeding from the corruption of human nature, or the 
vanity of the human mind; or, not speaking words 
unsuitable to the work of the day, tending neither to. 
thy edification nor comfort. 

Verse 14. Then shalt thou. delight thyself in the 
Lord—This refers to the preceding verse, as if he 
had said, If thou wilt delight thyself in the sabbath, 
then thou shalt delight in the God of the sabbath, 
namely, in his goodness and faithfulness to thee, and 
in the assurance of his love and favour. JI will cause 
thee to ride, &c.—Thou shalt be above the reach of 
danger. And feed thee with the heritage of Jacob 
—Thou shalt enjoy the good of the land of Canaan,» 


seed, Gen. xxxv. 12. Or, figuratively understood, « 


| thou shalt enjoy temporal as well as spiritual bless- 


ings. The Lord will withhold. from thee no man- 
ner of thing which he sees to be for thy prosperity 
and happiness. For the mouth of the, Lord hath 
spoken it--The promise is sure, and shall infallibly 
be fulfilled, having proceeded from the mouth of him 
who cannot lie. , *~ 


CHAPTER LIX. 


The foregoing chapter contained a sevére reproof of the Jews, and, as some think, alsoof fallen Christians, for their hypo- 
crisy in pretending to make themselves accepted with God by fasting and outward humiliation, without true repentance ; 
while they still continued to oppress the poor, and to indulge their own passions and vices : with great promises, however, 


of God’s favour, on condition of their reformation, 


This chapter contains a more. general reproof of their wickedness. 


(1,) They are charged with obstructing God's favours to themselves by their iniquities ; their vain and mischievous devices ; 


their lying and deceit ; their bloodshed, violence, and injustice, 1-8, 
confession of their sins, and deplores their wretched state in consequence of them, 9-15. 


3 


(2,) The prophet makes, in their names, an ample 
(3,) God is represented as 
279 


5 


* 


which God promised as a heritage to Jacob and his — 


7 


Wickedness of : 


ee 


» ISAIAH. 


“_ 


the Jews reproved. 


--= 


appearing, in judgment and mercy, for the rescue of his people from this miserable condition, and that for his own name’s 
sake, 16-19. (4,) The coming of the Redeemer is promised, to convert both Jews and Gentiles to himself, and to give 
them a new covenant and law, which shallnever be abolished, 20,21. “As the chapter,” says Bishop Lowth, “is remark- 
able for the beauty, strength, and variety of the images with which it abounds, so is it peculiarly distinguished by the ele- 
gance of the composition, and the exact construction of the sentences.” : 


A. M. 3298. 


5, Oo roe. BEHOLD, the Lorp’s hand is *. 


“shortened, that it cannot save ; 


2 But your iniquities have separated between 
you and your God, and your sins ! have hid his 
face from you, that’ he will not hear. 


si, neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear : 
3.4 
>} 


bs 
: 


Bee For » your hands are defiled with blood, 


and your fingers with iniquity ; your lips have. 


» 


Te? lies, your tongue: hath muttered. per- 
A Vv i A 


ness. 


4 None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth 


» Numbers xi. 23; Chapter 1. 2. 
> Chap. 1. 15. 


1°Or, have made him hide. 
© Job xv..35; Psa. Vii. 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LIX: 

Verses 1, 2. Behold, the Lord’s hand is not short- 
ened—He is not grown weaker than in former times, 
but is as omnipotent as ever he was; neither his ear 
heavy—Or dull of hearing: he is not like your idol 
gods, that have hands and cannot help, and ears and 
cannot hear, But your iniquities have separated— 
Have been as a thick wall, between you and your 
God—And have set him ata distance from you, Prov. 
xv. 29. “The reason of the continuance of your 
calamities is not any want either of power in God 
to deliver you, or of goodness to hear your prayers: 
but your own iniquities make him astranger to you, 
interrupt the correspondence that used to be between 
God and his people, and ‘stop the course of his bless- 
ings.”—Lowth. 


» Verse 3. Your hands are defiled with: blood— 


' Here the prophet proceeds from a more general to 


“a 


a more particular charge against them. By blood, 


we are to understand, either murders and blood- 
‘shed, properly so called, or ways of injustice, ex- 
tortion, oppression, and cruelties, whereby men are 
deprived of a livelihood: hence, hating our brother 
is called murder, 1 John iii. 15, and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem murderers, chap. i. 21. And your fin- 
gers with iniquity--This is added to aggravate their 
sin; as if he had said, Not only your hands, but 
your fingers are defiled, and not the least part of you 
is free from injustice. Your lips have spoken lies— 
Not only properly so called, but perjuries, slanders, 
and false accusations: you have not only offered vio- 
lence to your neighbours by your hands, but circum- 
vented them by your lips. Your tongue hath mut- 
tered perverseness—Perverse words, or such as were 
contrary to God’s word and will. ‘When they could 
not, for shame, utter their malice against their neigh- 
bours aloud, nor dared to do it for fear of being con- 
victed of falsehood, and put to confusion, they mut- 
tered it secretly. 

Verse 4. None calleth for justice—None seek to 


redress these wrongs and violences; they commit | 


280 


* 


and A. M. 3298. 


for truth: they trust in vanity, B. C. 706. 


speak lies; © they’ conceive mischief, 
and bring forth iniquity. : 

5 They hatch *cockatrice’ eggs, and weave 
the spider’s web: he that eateth of their eggs 
dieth, and *that which is crushed breaketh out 
into a viper. > ' 

6 ‘Their webs shall not become garments, 
neither shall they cover themselves with their 
works: their works are works of iniquity, and 
the act of violence és in their hands: ; 


2 Or, adders ——* Or, that which is sprinkled is as if there brake 
> out @ viper. 4 Job-viil. 14, 15. 
A 


all rapines and, frauds with impunity; they trust in 
vanity—In vain and empty words, void of all consist- 
ency; or, in vain things, such as their idols were, 
often called vanity and nothing, 1 Cor. viii. 4; or in 
their own power, craft, and policy, whereby, laying 
aside justice, they oppressed others. And speak 
lies—This may refer to the judges, lawyers, and 
false prophets, who told them they should not go 
into captivity; as if he had said, They speak that 
which they know to be false. They conceive mis- 
chief, and bring forth, &c.—These two words} con- 
ceiving and bringing forth, denote the whole con- 
triving and. perfecting of their wickedness. 
Verses 5, 6.( They hatch cockatrice eggs—They 
contrive and’ execute wicked purposes and prac- 
tices, whereby sure -and sudden destruction is 
brought upon themselves and others. Of the cocka- 
trice, or basilisk, as it should rather be rendered, 
see on chap. xiv. 29. One kind is put for any 
venomous creature. The speech is proverbial, sig- 
nifying, by these eggs, mischievous’ designs, and 
by hatching them their putting them in practice. 
And weave the spider's web—Another proverbial 
speech, whereby is signified, both how by their 
plots they weaved nets, laid snares industriously 
with great pains and artifice, to entrap or entan- 
gle others; and also how their designs would 
come to nothing, as the spider’s web is soon 
swept away. He that eateth of their eggs—That 
converses and joins with them in their mischievous 
designs, and partakes of the fruits thereof; dieth— 
Is seduced~into destructive errors and vices, or 
involved-in ruin. And that which is crushed—In 
order that it may be eaten; breaketh out into a 
viper—A poisonous viper proceeds from it. The 
more any one partakes of their counsels, the 
more he is infected, such a deadly poison lies 
imbodied in them: Their webs shall not become 
.garments—Though they are finely wrought, yet 
they are too thin and weak to be of any use; 
that is, their contrivanees and deep designs shall 


™ 


The iniquitous CHAPTER LIX. state of the Jews. 
A. : co 7 ° Their feet run to evil, and they icon: -day as in the night; we are M, a) 


make haste to shed innocent blood: 
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity ; wasting 
and ‘destruction are in their paths. 

8 The way of peace they know not: and 
there is no * judgment in their goings: f they 
have made them crooked paths: whosoever 
_goeth therein shall not know peace. 

9 Therefore is judgment far from us, neither 
doth justice overtake us: © we wait for light, 
but behold obscurity ; for brightness, but we 
walk in darkness. . 

10 * We grope for the wall like the blind, and 
we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble 


© Proy. i.16; Rom. iii. 15—‘ Heb, breaking —— Or, right. 
£ Psa. exxv. 55 Prov. ii. 15. & Jer, viii. 15. 


in desolate places as dead men. 

11 We roar all like bears, and ‘mourn sore 
like doves: we look for judgment, but there is 
none; for salvation, but it is far off from us. 

12 For our transgressions are multiplied be- 
fore thee, and our sins testify against us: for 
our transgressions are with us ; and, as for our, 
iniquities, we know them ; 

13 In transgressing and lying against: ise 
Lorp, and departing away from our God, 
speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving 
and uttering *from the heart words of fa 
hood. 


h Deut. xxviii. 29; Job v. 14; Amos viii. 9——i Chap. 
14; Ezek. vii. 16— Matt. xii. 34. 


not advantage them. © Neither shall they cover 
themselves, &c.—Their works shall neither cover 
nor defend the actors. T'heir works are works 
of iniquity—Of injustice, whereby they grieve, 
vex, and injure their brethren. And the act of 
violence is in their hands—They exercise them- 
selves in all acts of violence and oppression. 

Verses 7,8. Their feet run to evil—This seems 
to be taken from Prov. i. 16; where see thé note. 
He had spoken of their hands, fingers, lips, tongues, 
&c., before, and now he speaks of their feet, to show 
that they were wholly set upon mischief. Their 
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity—-Their minds and 
hearts are wholly set upon committing wickedness, 
and doing injuries: they not only do evil, but do it 
deliberately. Wasting and destruction are in their 
paths--In what way or work soever they are en- 
gaged, it all tends to ruin and destruction. It isa 
metaphor taken from an overspreading torrent, or 
sweeping plague, or from beasts of prey, that tear 
and devour whatever comes in their way. T'he way 
of peace they know not—They live in continual con- 
tentions and discords, and break in pieces the very 
bonds of society. And there is no judgment—No 
justice, equity, faith, or integrity, which are the 
foundation of judgment; in their goings—In their 
conduct or actions. They have made them crooked 
paths—They have turned aside from the way of 
God’s commandments, which are a plain and straight 
way, into the crooked and winding paths of craft, 
subtlety, and selfishness. W, hosoever goeth therein 
shall know no peace—-Shall experience none. Who- 
soever shall do as they do, and be turbulent and per- 
verse as they are, will have as little peace within, or 
happiness without, as they have. 

Verses 9-11. Therefore is judgment far from us 
—Because we have no regard for justice or honesty, 
God will not plead our cause against our oppressors; 
neither doth justice overtake us—He does not defend 
our rights, nor avenge our wrongs; as if he had 
said, If we had executed judgment and equity among 
one another, they would not now have been far from 
us. We wait for light—In what sense the Hebrews 

3 


use the terms light and darkness, see before, on 
chap. lviii. 8,10. But behold obscurity—We are in a 
state of such thick darkness, that, which way soever 
we look, we see no hope of deliverance. We grope for 
the wall like the blind—As a blind man, that hath 
no other means of perceiving and distinguishi - 
jects than his hands, feels for the wall, from whence 
he expects either direction or a resting-place to lean 
on; so we expect salvation, as it were, blindfold, not 
taking direction from the prophets, but hoping to ob- 
tain it by our cries and fasts, though we continue in 
our sins; and therefore may be well said to grope 
after it. And, or rather, yea, we grope as if we had 
no eyes—As if we were stark blind; we stumble at 
noon-day—This denotes their exceeding blindness, 
as aman must néeds be exceedingly blind who can 
discern no more at noon-day than if it were mid- 
night. We.are in desolate places as dead men— 


dead, without hope of restoration. We roar lik 
bears, &c.—Thus he expresses the greatness of their 
anguish, which forced from them loud outcries an 
sorrowful lamentations. 
—See note on verse 9. 
Verses 12, 13. For our transgressions—The word 
yw, here used, 
namely, such as were wilfully committed against 
light and knowledge; rebellious sins. Are multi- 
plied before thee—They admit of no excuse; for 
they are committed before thee, and multiplied against 
thee, whereby thou art justly provoked to deny us 
all help. And our sins testify against us—The sins 
charged upon us are so many witnesses produced to 
prove our guilt. For our transgressions are with 
us—Are still unforgiven, and we lie under the divine 
wrath on account of them. As for our iniquities, 
we know them—We are convinced of them. Jn 
transgressing and lying, &c.—He now enumerates 
some of those particular sins which they profess 
themselves to bé convinced of; by which he does 
not mean the sins of some particular persons, or 
|some slight sins, but a general.defection and cor- 
|ruption of the whole bog. Transgressing here, 


3 


- 


signifies sins of a high nature, ' 


We look for judgment, &ee 


He compares their calamitous state sa that of men % h 
€ 


‘e- 


God's mercy 


- ISATAH. 


to transgressors. 


A. M. set 14 And judgment is turned away 

B. C. 706. as 
— backward, and yppstice standeth afar 

off: for truth is fallen in the street, and at bac 
cannot enter. 

15 Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth 
from evil *maketh himself a prey: and the 
Lorp saw i¢, and’ it displeased him that there 
was no judgment. 

16 4 'And he saw that there was no man, 


x 


5 Or, is, accounted mad.m—' Hebrew, it was evil in his eyes. 
1 Ezek. xxii. 30. 


and ™ wondered that there was no in- A. M. 3298. 
tercessor: ™ therefore his arm brought -< it 
salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it 
sustained him. 

17 ° For he put on righteousness as a breast- 


|plate, and a helmet of salvation upon his head;. 


and he put on the garments of vengeance 
for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a 
cloak. 


m Mark vi. 6. 


Psa. xevill. 15 Chap. Ixiii. baa a Igh vi. 
14, 17; 1 Thess v. 8. 


v 


and lying, seem to be ‘one and the ‘same thing, inas- 
muchas i in their transgressing the law of God, they 
broke their solemn engagement to God, made upon 
mount Sinai. Departing away from God—Tur n- 
ing from God to idols. «Speaking oppression, &c. 
—As it were, talking of little else one among an- 
other, but how to oppress their neighbours, and 
apostatize from God. Conceiving and uttering— 
That is, first contriving in their hearts false accusa- 
tions against their neighbours, and false worship, to 
the dishonour of God; laying the contrivances so 
that they might be effectual, and then witering 
them; from the heart—And when they dealt with 
men in ways of fraud, it was from the heart ; 

but when they spake with God, it was but from 
the lips. 

Verses 14, 15. And judgment is turned away 
backward—He speaks here of the sentences in 
courts of judicature, which were contrary to right 
and justice; as if he had said, God denies you 
justice, as you have denied it to others. And justice 
standeth afar off—Justice and judges are-at a great 
distance from each other; for truth is fallen—Truth 
is cast to the ground, and justice trampled under 
foot; in the street-—Even in public. And equity 
cannot enter—No such thing will be admitted in the 
courts. Yea, truth faileth-—-Truth is more than 
fallen, which he had said in the last verse; it fadleth. 
Tf it had been only fallen, it might have recovered 
itself again: but its failing denotes the loss of its 
very vitals; as being everywhere neglected, in the 
court, in the city, in the country; in inferior as well 
as superior ranks; in the streets, in the gates, in the 
markets, in the fairs; in all public places of com- 
merce: as if he had said, All things are amiss; nei- 
ther judgment, nor justice, nor truth is to be found 
among us; but fraud and deceit; yet none are trou- 
bled on account of it. And he that:departeth from 
evil—That separateth himself from evil things and 
evil persons, that will not be as vile as others; 
maketh himself a prey—Or, as Synwh is rendered 
in the margin, is accounted mad; is laughed at. 
Josephus tells us, that immediately before the de- 
struction of Jerusalem, it was a matter of scorn to 
be religious. The translators reach the meaning of 
the word by prey: the wicked, like wild beasts, en- 
deavouring to devour such as are not as bad as them- 
selves: where wickedness rules, innocence is op- 
pressed. For they that are simple and innocent are 


outwitted by the erafty and  frendiilemt: as not being 
willing, or rather, not daring to oppose fraud with 
fraud, but doing all things in sincerity. And the 
Lord saw it—Took notice of it; it was not hid from 
him. It is spoken of God after the manner of men. 
And it displeased him, &c:—As if he had said, If 
you would know why God is so angry with you, it 
is for such things as these ; the Lord observes them, 
and they are great evils in his eyes. 

Verse 16. And he saw there was no man—Namely, 
to intercede, which is understood from the follow- 
ing words; or no man to help in such a case, and to 
appear in the’ behalf of equity. See Ezek. xxii. 30. 
And wondered—Hebrew, T3ninw, was amazed, or 
astonished, an expression which denotes both God’s 
solicitude about their condition; and their stupidity, 
in not laying it to heart themselves, especially consi- 
dering that they had been a people well instructed, and 
yet, when under the guilt of such gross sins, should 
be no more solicitous to obtain pardon. Therefore, 
or, yet, his arm brought salvation unto him—That 
is, to his people; and his righteousness it sustained 
him—His justice; seeing there could be no justice 
found among them, he would avenge the innocent: 
himself. Since magistrates and societies for the re- 
formation of manners fail of doing their part, the one 
will not do justice, nor the other call for it, God will 
let them know he can effect it without them, and 
thus prepare his people for merey. And then the 
work of deliverance shall be wrought by the imme- 
diate influence of the divine grace on men’s spirits, 
and of the divine providence on theiraffairs. When 
God stirred up the spirit ef Cyrus, and brought his 
people out of Babylon, not by human wisdom nor 
power, but by the Spirit of the Lord, then his own 
arm brought salvation to them, which arm is not 
shortened now. 

Verses 17, 18. For he put on righteousness as a 
breast-plate—God, resolving to appear as.a man of 
war, puts on his armour; he calls righteousness his 
breast-plate, to show the justness of: his cause, as 
also his faithfulness in making good his promises. 
And a helmet of salvation wpon his *head—As the 
breast-plate is to defend the heart, whereby God sig- 
nifies the justness of his cause, and his faithfulness ; 
so the helmet is to defend the ‘head, the fountain of 
knowledge and wisdom, and therefore by this piece 

of armour God would have us to know that he can 
neither be deceived nor disappointed with regard to 
3 


ie 


Blessings promised CHAPTER LIX. through the Messiah * 
A. M. 3298. 18 P According to their § deeds; ac-}| Zion, and unto them that turn from — A.M. 3298, 
B.C. 706. C. 706. 


———— cordingly he will repay, fury to his 
adversaries, recompense to his enemies; to the 
islands he will repay recompense. 

19 2 So shall they fear the name of the Lorp 
from the west, and his glory from the rising of 
the sun.. When the enemy shall come in ‘like 
a flood, the Spirit of the Lorn shall ° lift up a 
standard against him. 

20 “| And ‘the Redeemer shall come to 


p Chap. Ixiii. 6. 


~§ Heb. recompenses. 
aw rR 


91 Psa. cxiii. 3; Mal. 
ev. xii. 15. 


— 


the execution of his designs, for the salvation of his 
faithful and obedient people; but will, without fail, 
carry them into effect. And he put.on the garments 
of vengeance—Or garments made of vengeance: as 
God is said,to put on the former for their sakes 
whom he would preserve, so he puts on these for 
their sakes whom he will destroy, namely, his peo- 
ple’s enemies. Was clad with zeal—For his own 
honour, and for his people’s welfare. The sum of 
all these expressions is, to describe both the cause 
and effect together; the cause was righteousness and 
zeal in God; the effect, salvation to his people, and 
vengeance on his enemies. According to their deeds 
—Hebrew, min3, recompenses, or deserts. That i is, 
he will recompense his adversaries with those effects 
of his fury that they have deserved. To theislands 
he will repay recompense—He will execute judg- 
ment on his enemies to the most remote parts of the 
earth. 

Verse 19. So shall they fear the name of the Lord 
—Worship the Lord; from the west—The western 
parts of the world. And. his glory—The glorious 
God ; 3 from the rising of the sun—The eastern parts. 
The sum is, the whole world shall fear and worship 
God, and make his name renowned, laying aside 
their idolatries: and it may be referred, 1st, To the 
deliverance of God’s people out of Babylon: men 
shall reverence and adore him when they shall hear 
how he hath delivered his people, and executed ven- 
geance on their enemies. Or, 2d, To the redemp- 
tion by Christ, and the calling of the Gentiles. See 
Mal.i. 11. When the enemy shall come in like a 
flood, &c.—When nothing seems able to withstand 
the enemies of God’s church, but they carry all be- 
fore them as‘a flood overruns a country, then God 
himself shall. give them a remarkable check, and 
visibly interpose in behalf of his oppressed people. 
The prophet, however, may be understood as speak- 
ing of Satan, the grand enemy of God’s church, and 
as signifying that at what time soever he or-his in- 
struments should make violent attacks on God’s 
people, and should endeavour to bear down all be- 
fore them, by an inundation of infidelity, impiety, 
and wickedness ; the Spirit of God would lift up his 
standard, and call together his. armies, to oppose 
these enemies’ progress, and subvert their cause. 
“There can be no doubt,” says Mr. Scott, “but the 
grand accomplishment of this prophecy is future: 

3 


ti; 


transgression in. Jacob, 
Lorp. 

21 ‘As for me, this is my covenant with 
tht, saith the Lory ; My Spirit that is upon 
thee, and my words which I have put in thy 
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor 
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the 
mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lorn, from 
henceforth and for ever. : 


saith the 


s Romans xi. 26, Hebrews viii. 


9Or, put him to flight. 
WW 5x. 16 


and as they, among whom iniquity so abounded, an-— 


tecedent to this happy change, are spoken of as the 
professed people of God, and are not accused of idol- 
atry, and as the Lord is represented as wondering 
that there was no intercessor among them, it is 
more natural to interpret it of corrupt and degene- 
rate Protestants, than either of the Jews, who are 
avowed enemies to Christianity, or of Papists, who 
retain the worship of images, saints, and angels.” 
‘Verses 20, 21. And, or, moreover, the Redeemer 
shall come to Zion~To Jerusalem, or to his church, 
often signified by Zion, namely, Christ shall come, 
of whom the apostle expounds it, Rom. xi. 26; the 
prophets usually concluding their promises of tem- 
poral deliverances with the promises of spiritual, 
especially such, of which the temporal were evident 
types. And unto them that turn from transgression, 
&c.—As he will come in the flesh, and tabernacle 
among his people; so he will come, by his Spirit, to 
those of them who turn from their sins unto God, 
(see John xiv. 15-23,) and wil? dwell in their hearts, 
(Eph. iii. 17,) so that they shall have Christ in them, 
the hope of glory, Col. i. 27; Christ living in them, 
Gal. ii. 20. 
I have promised to them that turn from their iniqui- 
ties. My Spirit that is’ upon thee—Namely, upon 
Christ: see chap. xi. 1-3. The Spirit promised to 
the church was first upon him, and from him, the: 
head, that precious ointment descends to the skirts 
of his garments.. And my word that Ihave put into 


thy mouth—Which thou hast uttered by virtue of my 


Spirit ; shall not depart out of thy mouth—But thou 
shalt continue to be the Word made flesh, the wis- 
dom of God incarnate, the great teacher of thy 
people, and the light of the world, till the consum- 
mation of all things. Nor out of the mouth of thy 
seed, &e.— But it shall dwell richly in them in all 
wisdom, capacitating them to teach, admonish, re- 
prove, rebuke, exhort, and comfort one another, 
speaking with grace in their hearts: from hence- 
forth and for ever—Always, even unto the end of 
the world; for the world being permitted to stand 
for the sake of the church, we may be sure that as 
long as it doth stand, Christ will have a church in it. 
Upon the whole, the meaning of this pr omise is, that 
God will give and continue his word and Spirit to 
his people, throughout all generations. Ist, There 
shall be some in every age, in whose hearts he will 


This is my covenant with them—What | 


‘= 


+ 


- 


Concerning the future 


ISAIAH. 


prosperity of the church. © 


—— 


work, and in whom he will dwell, and thus the Com- 


_ forter shall abide with the church for ever, John 


xiv. 16. 2d, The word of Christ shall always con- 
tinue in the mouths of the faithful, that is, there shall 
be some in every age who, believing with the heart 

righteousness, shall, with the tongue, make 


u 
Pe unto salvation: and there shall still be a 


seed to speak Christ’s holy language, and profess 
his holy religion. Observe well, reader, the Spirit 
and the word go together, and by them the church 


is upheld. The word in the mouths of our minis- 
ters, nay, in our own mouths, will not profit us, 
unless the Spirit work with the word, and give it 
efficacy to enlighten, quicken, renew, and comfort 
us. The Spirit, however, doth his work by the 
word, and in concurrence with it; and whatever is 
pretended to be a dictate of the Spirit must be tried 
by the Scriptures. On this foundation the church is 
built, stands firm, and shall stand for ever; Christ 
himself being the chief corner-stone. 


. 
CHAPTER LX. 


“ The subject of this chapter 1s the great increase and flourishing state of the church of God, by the conversion and accession 
of the heathen nations. to it ; which is set forth in such ample and exalted terms, as plainly show that the full completion of 
‘this prophecy is reserved for future times.” It is here promised, (1,) That the church should be marvellously enlightened 
with the knowledge and glory of God, 1,2. (2,) That it should be wonderfully enlarged by the accession of Gentile con- 
verts, 3-8. (3,) That these converts should be very serviceable to it, 9-13. (4,) Fhat rt should be in great honour and 
repute among men, 14-16. (5,) That it should enjoy perfect safety and profound peace and tranquillity, 17, 18. (6,) 


That, the members of it being all righteous, the glory and joy of it should be everlasting, 19-22. 


. “The state of the 


church,” says Vitringa, “is here exhibited in a perfection which approaches nearest to the divine, the most beautiful and 
glorious imaginable ; though we are yet to seek where or when the true exemplar of it may or shall be found.” 
'¢ ) 


A. M2088. ARISE, *shine ;! for thy light is 
prostate MOY come, and ’ the glory of the Lorp 
is risen upon thee. — 

2 For behold, the darkness shall cover the 


a Eph. v. 14." Or, be enlightened ; for thy light cometh. 


= 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LX. 

Verse 1. Arise, &c.—The prophet here addresses 
the church of God, which he supposes to be sitting 
sorrowful, and exhorts her to awake and arise from 
a state of darkness and. mourning, and enter into a 
state of light and happiness, “ now that her salvation, 
so long desired and hoped for, is at hand, and the 
divine glory is about to rise wpon her, and illuminate 
the nations and people who had hitherto sat in thick 
darkness.” See Vitringa. The reader will observe 
the exhortation is accommodated to the Jewish or 
Hebrew style, wherein, as by lying down is signi- 
fied a servile and calamitous condition, (chap. xlvii. 1,) 
so, by rising, and standing up, a recovery out of it 
into a free and prosperous state, as may be seen fre- 
quently. Shine—Discover thyself, as a luminary 
breaking forth from a dark night. Show thy native 
beauty: suffer thyself to be so strongly irradiated by 
the glory of the Lord, that thou mayest not only be 
enlightened, but mayest be able to enlighten others. 
For thy light is come—Thy flourishing and prospet- 
ous condition, an allusion to people’s rising, when 
after a dark night the light breaks forth upon them. 
And the glory of the Lord—Glorious light, grace, and 
salvation from the Lord ; or a bright display of the 
glory, that is, of the glorious attributes of the Lord ; 
or, the Lord of glory, Christ, is about to make him- 
self glorious, in some wonderful work, for thy salva- 
tion, Js risen upon thee—Like as when the sun, 
arising, spreads his light. everywhere, leaving no 

. 284 
-_, 


i 


earth, and gross darkness the peo- A. M. 3298. 
. B.C, 706. 
ple : but the Lorn’ shall arise ———— 


jupon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon 


thee... , 


> Mal. iv. 2. 
[SSS 
place dark. Thus-shall the church of God be fully 
illuminated in the latter days, and thus shall she 
shine for the perfect illumination of all : see 
chap. xi. 9; and Zech. xiv.'7. Inhis des n of 
this perfect state of the Christian Church, this evan- 
gelical prophet is here peculiarly eloquent, display- 
ing it “in the most splendid colours, and under a 
great variety of images, highly poetical, designed to 
give a general idea of its glories, when the fulness 
of the Gentiles shall come in, and the Jews 1 be 
converted and gathered from their dispe 3, and 
the kingdoms of this world shall become the king- 
doms of our God, and of his Christ.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Verse 2. or; behold, darkness shall cover the 
earth—Ignorance, idolatry, and all kinds of errors 
and vices; and gross darkness the people—Like 
that of Egypt; the most palpable blindness and in- 
fatuation as to divine things ; but the Lord—-Christ, 
the bright and morning-star, the day-spring from 
on high, or, rather, the Sun of righteousness, Rev. 
xxii. 16; Luke i.78; Mal. iv. 2; shall arise upon 
thee—By his gospel and his grace, bringing light to 
those that before sat in darkness, and-in the shadow 
of death; and his glory shall be seen upon thee— 
Shall be wonderfully conspicuous. “'The design of 
the Holy Spirit in this clause, as I suppose,” says Vi- 
tringa, “is to describe the state of the nations of the 
world, at the time when God should illuminate the 
church with this light, as if by a new advent of his 
Son, and a repeated manifestation of his divine king- 


The glorious ingathering 


CHAPTER LX. 


of the Gentiles to Christ. 


A. M. 3298. 


3 And the ° Gentiles. shall come to 
B. C. 706 


- thy light, and kings to the brightness 
of thy rising. 
4 “Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: 


all they gather themselves together, * they come. 
to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy | 


daughters shall be nursed at ¢hy side. 
5. Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and 
thy heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because 


= 


¢ Chapter xlix. 6, 23; ar, xxi. li Chapter, =m 18. 
~¢Chap. xlix. 20, 21, 22’; Ixvi. 12——f Rom. xi. 25.——? Or, 
noise of the sea shall be turned toward thee. 


T 


dom. Almost all the world should be found in a 
similar state of darkness to that wherein the Son of 


God found it at his first coming; and if we might) 


form any judgment from the state of things, from 
the darkness which now overspreads the earth, 
through the prevalence of -Popery, infidelity, and 
immorality, in the countries professing Christianity, 

and Mohammedanism and paganism in the other 
regions of the earth, we may reasonably conclude, 
that these words of the prophet, at the period alluded 
to, will not want their exact completion.” 

Verse 3. T'he Gentiles shall come to thy AS 
Or, shall be allured by thy light to come to thee, as 
travellers in a dark night, and out of their way, 
when a light discovers itself make to it ; so doc- 
trine of the gospel shall shine so, bright, and be made 
so conspicuous by preaching and miracles, that well- 
disposed heathen shall not only congratulate them 
that profess it, and wish them much joy, but shall 
rejoice to participate with them in their happiness. 
A plain prophecy this of the calling of the Gentiles, 
a promise of which was made to Christ, chap. xlix, 
6. And, or Yea, kings to the brightness of thy ris- 
ing—That is, the greatness and glories of the church 
shall attract the eyes of kings, and make them will- 
ing to become her proselytes. , Or, to add to thy 
lustre, thou shalt not only be honoured by the con- 
version of mean persons, but even of honourable 
pers es, yea, of kings, embracing the Christian 
faith, and submitting themselves to Christ’s sceptre 
and government: see chap. xlix. 23. 

Verses 4,5. Lift up thine eyes round about—Or, 
in a circle, into all parts of the earth.. He seems to 
refer to the apostles and disciples, with their succes- 
sors, carrying the gospel into all quarters of the 
world. And because it would be, as it were, a thing 
incredible, he bids them /ift up their eyes, as if they 
were to behold it in some vision, or upon some 
watch-tower in Jerusalem. See the like expression 
chap. xlix. 18. All they gather themselves together 
—He speaks of the coming in of all nations to embrace 
the gospel, and unite themselves to the Christian 
Church. Thy sons shall come from far—From the 
remotest parts, having heard the report of thee. 
And thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side— 
Shall be brought unto thee tenderly, as it were in 
persons’ arms, (chap. xlix. 22,) and shall have their 
education with thee from their infancy : there, where 

3 


Mie 


| 


fthe ? abundance of the sea shall be A.M. 3298. 
706. 

converted unto thee, the * forces of the 

Gentiles shall come unto thee. 

6 The multitude of camels shall cover thee, 
the dromedaries of Midian and & Ephah ; all 
they from “Sheba shall come: they’shall bring 

‘gold and incense; and they shall show forth 
the praises of the Biakh, ; 

7 All the flocks of * Kedar shall és gathered 


3 Or, wealth, Verse 11; Chapter lxi. 6.——s Genesis xxv. 4. 
hPsalm Ixxii. 10.——i Chap, lx. 6; Matt. ii. 11.—* Gen. 
xxv. 13; 


alone the sincere milk of the word is to be had, must 
the church’s newborn babes be nursed, that they 
may grow thereby, 1 Peteii.2. Then thou shalt see 
—With delight, the multitudes of thy children run- 
ning to thee; and flow together—As when two rivers 
meet, and, joining their waters, run sweetly together, 
as one and the same river. ‘This denotes the abun- 
dance of their united joys and delights. Or the _ 
words may mean, they shall flock together to behold 
such an amazing sight. And thy heart shail fear 
—Or stand amazed, to see such multitudes come to 
the Lord Christ; and be-enlarged—Both with joy 
and love. Because the cinadanes of the sea—The 
islands of the sea, the nations; shall be converted 
unto thee—Shall turn to thee in religion and affec- 
tion;, they that formerly so much hated thee shall 
now love thee. Or the sense is, The wealth and 
traffic of those who trade by sea, the riches of the 
merchants, shall be converted to thy use rather than 
to the use-of the owners thereof. The forces of 
the Gentiles shall come unto thee—Thou shalt not 
only have the wealth, but the strength of the nations 
to stand by thee, to protect thee, and aid thy endea- 
yours to evangelize the world. P 
Verses 6,7. The multitude of camels—The trea- 
sure that is brought upon camels. By these, ana 
such like figurative expressions in several verses of 
this chapter, is implied the coming in of all nations 
to Christ, and therefore they are brought in as pre- 
senting the chief commodities of their respectiv 
countries. The dromedaries—Otr, also, or, even th 
dromedaries ; which are a sort of lesser camel, so 
called from their swiftness in running. For it is 
said by the Arabs that they will run as far in one 
day as their best horses willdoin nine; and therefore 
they are chiefly used for riding: for which they are 
the more fit, because, as Pliny observes, they can 
endure the want of water four days together. Of 
Midian and Ephah—The Midianites and Ephahites 
were descended from Abraham, by Keturah, and 
dwelt beyond Arabia, where camels were very nu- 
merous, Judg. vii. 12.. All they from Sheba—A 
country in Arabia Felix, whose queen it was that 
came to visit Solomon, and her bringing gifts might 
be atype of this. They shall bring gold and in- 
cense—The principal commodities with which this 
country abounded, by which we are to understand 
whatever is precious, All the flocks of Kedar— 
285 


“i 


v% 


Great benefit to the church 


ISATAH. 


of the Gentiles’ conversion. 


Lat e. 48 together unto thee, the rams of Ne- 

istic baioth shall minister ‘unto thee : they 
shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, 
and /I[ will glorify the house of my glory. 


8 o are these that fly as a cloud, and as 


the doves to their windows? © 

9 ™Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the 
ships of 'T'arshish first, ® to bring thy sons from 
far, °their silyer and their gold with them, 
Punto the name of the Lorp thy God, and to 
the Holy One of Israel, 4 because he hath glo- 
rified thee. 


! Haggai il. 7, 9.——m Psalm Ixxii. 10; Chapter xlii. 43 ']i. 5. 
» Gal. iv. 26° Psa. Ixviil. _ Zech, xiv. 14.——? Jer. iii. 17. 
4 Chap. lv. 5—— Zech. vi., 


Arabia Petrea, or stony Arabia, the people inhabiting 
which being principally shepherds. T'hey shail 
come up with acceptance—They shall not now, as 
heretofore, be rejected. J will glorify the house of 
my glory—He alludes to the temple, but must be 
understood as intending the gospel church, built of 
living stones, of which the temple at Jerusalem, 
with all the splendour of its ornaments, and the 
whole multitude of ie scr and oblations, was 
but a typical or shadowy representation... 

Verse 8. Who are these that fly as a cloud— 
These metaphors import the number, as well as 
speed, of those that should be begotten by the apos- 
tles’ doctrine. “By this new crowd of believers 
hastening to the church,” Vitringa understands “ the 
Greeks and Asiatics, and those of the west groaning 


under the Ottoman empire, who, having long sat in, 


a state of ignorance and superstition, at this period 
shall be freed from their yoke, and hasten to the en- 


lightened church in multitudes, like a cloud, and 


with zeal and impetuosity, (like doves to their cotes 
or holes,) when once made acquainted with the won- 
derful change of things, and the ‘mighty works 
wrought by God for the deliverance of his people. 

The flight of doves, especially when they return 
»%0 their cotes, is remarkably swift and precipi- 
~ rate.” 

Verse 9. Surely the isles shall wait for me—The 
countries remote from Judea, and- especially the 
islands and continents of Europe, generally intend- 
ed by the term isles. And the ships—To convey 
them to me; of Tarshish first—Those that traffic 
by sea. In naming this, he implied all places that 
had commerce with other nations. - Concerning 
Tarshish, see note on chap. ii. 16. .To bring thy 
sons from far—From the most- distant countries; 
their silver and their gold with them—With all 
their treasure; unto the name of the Lord—To be 
presented to the Lord, and employed-for the ad- 
vancement of his glory, and the benefit of his church 
and people. Because he hath glorified thee—He 
will make thee honourable in the eyes of the world, 
and that especially by setting up the ministry of the 


=~“ the midst of <8 


° * a « 
4 


10 And* the sons of strangers shall A. M. 3298. 
build up thy walls, ‘and their kings ———— 
shall minister unto thee: for tin my wrath I 
smote thee, “but in my favour have, I had mer- 
cy on thee. 

11 Therefore thy sig x shall be open con- 
tinually ; they shall not be shut day nor night; 
that men may bring unto thee the * forces of the 
Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought. 

12 ¥ For the nation and kingdom that will 
not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations 
shall be utterly wasted. 


« Chap. 
¥y Zech. 


8 Chap. xlix.23; Rev. xxi. 24.—t Chap. lvii. 17.- 
liv. 7, 8.——* Rev. xxi. 25,——* Or, wealth, Vernet 
xiv. 17, 19; Matt. xxi. 44. 


Verses 10-12. And the sons of the stranger— 
Namely, such as were not Israelites born, but of 
Gentile race; and he puts sons of strangers, by a 
usual Hebraism, for strangers; shall build up thy 
walls—As Gentile prosélytes to the Jewish religion 
assistéd the Jews in repairing the walls of Jerusa- 
lem upon their return from captivity, so Gentile 
converts to Christianity assisted the apostles, evan 
gelists, and other ministers of Christ, who were of- 
Jewish extraction, in building and adorning the 
Christian Church: and for many ages its builders 
have been almost wholly of Gentilerace. And their 
kings shall minister unto thee—Kcclesiastical history 
affords us many instances of kings and princes that 
were great benefactors to her, among whom Con- 
stantine greatly excelled. Forin my wrath I smote 
thee, &c.—As I afflicted thee in mine anger, so out 
of my compassions I will abundantly bless thee. 
“The discourse here,” says Vitringa, “rises, and will 
continue to rise till the end of the section, that the 
blindest may discern spiritual’ things involved in 
these corporeal figures and emblems. It is not suf- 
ficient that the nations only, with their wealth and 
possessions, shall be added to the church, and per- 
form all requisite offices toward it, but kings and 
princes also shall come: nor shall they come alone ; 
a great retinue shall attend them: nor shalt instances 
of their approach be few and rare, but common and 
frequent; insomuch that the gates of the city shall 
be always left open to receive this continual acces- 
sion of kings and people.” The nation, &£c., that 
will not serve thee—Do offices of kindness. to thee, 
as the word 172)” is used chap. xix. 23, or, that will 
not submit to Christ’s sceptre; shall: perish—Shall 
not only be subdued to thee, but shall be destroyed 
by the sword, or famine, or pestilence, or some other 
of the divine judgments. Yea, those nations shall be 
utterly wasted—Shall, by the peculiar interposition 
of a righteous providence, be brought to desolation. 
“This, % says Lowth, “must relate to the latter days, 


‘as the ‘Scripture calls them, when the church shall 


become a great mountain, and break in pieces all 
the kingdoms of the earth, according to Daniel’s 
prophecy, chap. ii, 35, 44.” 

3 


y 


The reat honour 


CHAPTER LX, 


S, 


of the church. 


nme. 13 *'The glory of Lebanon shall 
B. C. 70 
come unto thee, the fir-tree, the pine- 
tree, and the box together, to beautify the place 
of my sanctuary; and I will make *the place of 
my feet glorious. 
14 The sons also of them that afflicted 
thee shall come bending unto. thee: and all 
they that despised ‘thee shall » bow them- 


selves down at the soles of thy feet; + and/| 
they shall call thee, The city of the Lorp,| 


¢ The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. gar 
15 % Whereas thou hast been for- 
saken and hated, so that no man went through 
thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a 
joy of many generations., hs 
16 Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gen- 
tiles, 7and shalt suck the breast of kings: and 
thou shalt know that °I the Lorp am. thy 
Saviour and sts Redeemer, the Mighty One of 
Jacob. 


% Chap. xxxv. 2; wi 19.—=]1 Chron. xxviii. 2; Psa. exxxii. 7, 
» Chap. xlix. 23; Rev. iii. 9. 


¢ Heb. xii, 22; Rev. xiv. 1. 
11; 12. 


Ixvi. 


4 Chap. xlix. 23; 
e Chap. xliii. 3.” 


ister e's 


Verse 13. ‘The glory of Lebanon shall come unto 
thee—As Lebanon furnished cedars, and other choice 
timber, for building and beautifying Solomon’s tem- 

ple, so shall different nations contribute what is most 
ae eat and suitable among them for supporting, 
establishing, enlarging, and adorning the church of 
Christ, here called the place of God’s sanctuary, 
with allusion to the temple, an eminent type of it. 
See note on Psa. xlvi. 4,5. And I will make the 
place of my feet glorious—The Christian Church, 
so called in allusion to the ark in the most holy 
place of the tabernacle and temple, where the divine 
glory, termed by the Jews the Shechinah, was wont 
to,appear between the wings of the cherubim, over 
the mercy-seal, which was, as it were, the footstool 
of that glorious symbol of God’s-presence.. ~ 

Verse 14. T'he sons of them that afflicted thee— 
Their posterity, or themselves, for it is the manner 
of the Hebrews so to speak; shall come bending unto 
thee—Humbling themselves as penitents, and thus 
manifesting their respect and reverence for thee. 
They shall acknowledge their former errors, or the 
errors of their fathers, and instead of being persecu- 
tors shall become proselytes. And all they that de- 
spised thee—As a poor, mean, insignificant, and de- 
spicable people; shall bow themselves down-at the 
soles of thy ‘feét—Shall prostrate themselves before 
thee as humble suppliants, or rather hefore Christ, 
the head, husband, and king of his church. And they 
shall call thee, The city of the Lord—They shall 
acknowledge thee to be so, and to be so called, both 
from the love that God hath to thee, and 
presence of God with thee. As there is no account 
of any thing like this happening to the Jews, that 
any people, who had before persecuted and afflicted 
them, came and made submission to them in such a 
suppliant manner as is here represented, this must, 
of necessity, be considered as a description, either, 
Ist, Of that change of things which was made in the 
Roman empire, when the highest powers in it, even 
the emperors themselves, became Christians, in con- 
sequence of which the heathen became suppliants to 
the Christians, whom they had before treated in the 
most vruel and barbarous manner: or, 2d, Of that 
still greater change which shall take place, in this 
respect, when the kingdoms of this world shall be- 
come the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, 
and he, will make his church’s enemies to come and 


oa 


he, 


worship, that is, to prostrate themselves before her 
feet, and to know that he has loved her, Rev. iii. 9. 

Verse 15. Whereas thou hast been forsaken— 
Both of God, as to outward appearance, and man; 
and hated—Either slighted and neglected, or suffer- 
ing actual miseries and slaughters; so that no man 
went through thee—Thy streets were left desolate, 
and thou wast in a manner depopulated.’ The state 
of the Christian Church, during the dark and perse- 
cuting ages of Popery, is here described, inlanguage 
borrowed from Jerusalem lying in desolation. J will 
make thee an eternal excellency—Being reformed 
from idolatry and other superstitions and abomina- 
tions, and thy members being enlightened with the 
truth, and regenerated by the grace of God, and 
thereby rendered wise and holy, thou shalt be bless- 
ed and exalted with continual tokens of the divine 
favour, and made a lasting and increasing blessing 
in the world. The Hebrew, ny N39, is literally, 
for a lifting up, or, an eccaltation, continually, or, 
for ever. A joy of many generations—Hebrew, 
Of generation and generation. The meaning is, 
that the church’s prosperity and happiness should 
be the rejoicing and comfort of many succeeding 
ages, or the mat f their great and continual re- 
joicing. Bishop Lowth translates this clause, J will 
make thee an everlasting boast, a subject of joy for 
perpetual generations. It cannot be said of the 
Jewish nation, since this was uttered, that it has in 
any degtee answered these characters: For after 
their restoration to their own land, they were first i < 
subjection to the Persians, afterward to the Macedo 
nians, the successors of Alexander the Great ; whose 
yoke ‘they had scarcely.shaken off, when they fell 
under the power of the Romans, who treated them 
with great severity, and at last destroyed them, to- 
gether with their city of Jerusalem, almost to an en- 
tire extirpation. So that we are compelled ‘to look 
for the accomplishment. of this. prophecy. in the 
Christian Church, the perpetual excellences of which 
far exceed those of the Jewish, and in the glorious 
privileges. and. blessings of the religion of Christ, 
which are indeed, and.will be, the joy of many gene- 
rations. 

Verses 16, 17. Thou shalt also suck the milk of 
the Gentiles—A. metaphor taken from ehildren draw- 
ing nourishment from the breast. The sense is, that 
the. church should draw, or receive, the. wealth of 

287 


“« ed 
‘ 


"ES 


The everlasting glory 


A.M, 293. 17 For brass Ewwill bring gold, and 


a _ for irom I will bring’ silver, and for 


~- wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also 


2 


make thy officers peace, and thine exactors 
sness. 
iolence shall no more be heard in thy 
land, wasting nor destruction within thy bor- 
ders ; but thou shalt call {thy walls open 
and thy gates Praise. 


f Chap. xxvi. 1——# Rey. xxi. 23 ; xxii. 5. . 


nations, and the riches and power of kings, and 
whatever is most excellent; and that it should come 
freely and affectionately, as milk flows from the 
breast of the mother. And thou shalt know—Name- 
ly, shall experience; that I the Lord—Hebrew, Jeho- 
vah; am thy Saviour—That I have undertaken to 
save, and that I do and will save thee; the mighty 
One of Jacob—Not only of the literal, but also, and 
especially, of the spiritual Jacob, or Israel: as if he 
had said, These things will certainly be accomplish- 
ed, for he is the mighty God, and so is able ; and the 
God of Jacob, and so is obliged by covenant with, 


and relation to them, to deliver and protect his peo- 


ple. For brass I will bring gold, &c.—Here we 
have the effect of the preceding promise: Thy pov- 
erty shall be turned to riches; all things shall be al- 
tered for the best: it is an allusion to the days of So- 
lomon, when gold was.as plentiful as brass. If these 
words be considered as intended to be taken literal- 
ly, it is sufficiently evident that they are not applica- 
ble to Jerusalem, which was never so enriched, after 
it was rebuilt, as to have greater riches than the Jews 
possessed before the wars which they waged with 
the Babylonians; nor was their state happier. And 
after Herod the Great, they were in a much worse 
condition, Judea being reduced to a province of the 
Roman empire, and governed pillaged by the 
deputies or vicegerents of the emperors. Therefore 
all this is undoubtedly spoken of the Christian 
Church and of spiritual riches, namely, the privileges 
and blessings of the gospel. J will also make thy 
officers peace—That is, men of peace, loving, meek, 


and friendly. This was far from being the case with 
- the Jews after their return out of captivity; for, 


though those who “i first set over them, after 
their return, namely, Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, and 
others, governed them peaceably and mildly, yet it 


was not so in the following times; and after their 
high-priests took upon them the government, they 
grievously plundered and oppressed the people, and 


contended with one another with the most outra- 
geous and cruel discord, as appears from Josephus, 
the Jewish historian. _But' the governors of the 
Christian Church, that'is, of that church which only 
deserves the name of Christian, have been, and al- 
ways will be, mild and gentle, and men of peace and 
clemency. exactors—Or rulers, as Dr. 
Waterland renders }w1). Righteousness—Most 
righteous, as before peace was put for peaceable. ' 
Verse ig Piotence shall no more be heard, &¢.— 
= 9 288 


ISAIAH. 


oY 


and joy of the church. 


19 The & sun shall bo o more thy rt : os 
light by day: neither for brightness ———— 
shall ‘the moon give light unto thee: but the 
Lorp shall be unto thee an Elan light, 
and ® thy God thy glory: 

20 ‘Thy sun shall no more go down; neither 
shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lorp 
shall be thine everlasting light, and the i of 
ao mourning shall be ended. *% 


h Zech. ii. 5.——i Amos viii. 9. 


Neither the threats and triumphs of those that do 
violence, nor the outcries and complaints of those 
that suffer it, shall be heard again, but every man 
shall peaceably enjoy ‘his own. Wasting nor de- 
struction—Of persons or possessions, anywhere 
within thy borders—Thou shalt be secure from vio- 
lence and injustice at home, and from invasion and 
war from abroad. But thou shalt call thy walls Sal- 
vation, &c.—They shall be safe and able to defend 
thee; thou shalt be as safe as salvation itself can 
make thee. And the protection and security, which 
God by his providence shall afford thee, shall be to 
thee continual matter of praise and thanksgiving. 
This verse, and what follows to the end of the chap- 
ter, seems to relate chiefly to that peaceable and hap- 
py state which the church shall-enjoy in the Jatter 
days. 

Verses 19, 20: The sun shall be no more thy light, 
&c.—The light of the sun and moon shall not be at 
all esteemed in comparison of the spiritual light of 
the church, which shall be so glorious as to eclipse 
all the light formerly enjoyed by. her, the divine 
glory and majesty illuminating her much more 
brightly than the luminaries of heaven illuminate 
and adorn the theatre of nature. Or, as Lowth in- 
terprets the clause, “ God’s favour and the light of 
his countenance shall give her greater comfort and 
lustre than the light of the sun and moon doth to the 
world.” . Every reader must, perceive that the pas- 
sage is metaphorical, and it is here introduced to 
give the church assurance of comfort, as the preced- 
ing was to assure her of safety; so that God will 
not only’be a shield, but a swn to her, Psa. 1xxxiv. 
11.) Lhe Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting 
light—Christ shall scatter all thy darkness and ig- 
norance, enlightening and comforting thee with the 
doctrines of the gospel, and the graces of his Spirit , 
and these blessings shall be everlasting, not waxing 
and waning, and suffering eclipses and settings, as 
the sun and moon do, but shall be constant, without 
shadow or change; and thy God thy glory—Always 
giving thee reason to glory in him; or, thy relation 
to him, and interest in him, as thy God, shall be thy 
gréatest honour. Thy sun shall no more go down, 
&c.—Thy light and comfort shall be no more with- 
drawn. “If the church, under the economy of the 
external and typical covenant, saw only a temporary 
light, and underwent various changes of its state, at 
this time it shall rejoice for a long season with un- 
changed light, in a much more constant and happy 

3 


¥ 


a 9 


i, 


The everlasting glory a 


CHAPTER LXI. 


, 
and joy of the church. 


— 


A. M. 3298. 


k 
A.M. 3208. 21 * Thy people also shall be all 


righteous: | they shall inherit the 
land for ever, ™the branch of my planting, 
"the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. 


* Chapter lii. 1; Revelation xxi. 27-1! Psalm xxxyii. 11, 22; 
Matt. v. 5. 


state””. The days of thy mourning shall be ended 
—The prosperity and happiness of the church shall 
be perpetual and. uninterrupted. Hebrew, 10>w, 
shall be recompensed, that is, Thy days of rejoicing 
shall abundantly recompense all thy days of mourn- 
ing. Observe, reader, “Jesus Christ is the eternal 
Sun and Light of his church, illuminating and sane- 
tifying it by his Spirit, filling it with his glory, and 
prospering its whole state by his PEnpidence, for the 
end of eternal joy. (See Rev. xxii. 5.) Who will 
say that the church has ever yet enjoyed this bless- 
ing of divine providence and grace, in the full extent 
which is here marked out by the prophet ?”—Vi- 
tringa. 

Verses 21,22. Thy people shall be all righteous— 
Through righteousness imputed to them, Rom. iv. 
3-8; 23, 24; implanted in them, Eph. iv. 22-243 and 
practised by them, 1 John iii.7; in other words, 
through the justification of their persons, the. reno- 
vation of their nature, and their practical obedience 
to God’s law. “It was proper,” says Vitringa, 
“that the prophetic discourse, big with such excel- 
lent promises, should set forth the quality of the 
citizens of this blessed city; for so many and excel- 
lent privileges cannot belong to any but to suchas are 
fitted for these times by divine grace. The prophet 
therefore teaches that the inhabitants of this city 
should be all righteous ; where there can be no 
doubt that the righteousness of faith is meant; of 
living faith, purifying the soul, sanctifying the affec- 
tions, abounding in charity, and never separated 
from true holiness: so that they who are called 
righteous here are the same who are elsewhere 
ealled holy.” See the following parallel passages, 
chap. iv. 3, and xxxiii. 24, and xxxy. 8, and lii. 1; 
Zech. xiv. 20,21. They shall inherit the land for 
ever—They shall for ever be continued as God’s pe- 
culiar people; the branch of my planting—Born 
again of my Spirit, created in the Messiah, wnto 
good works, Eph. ii. 10; broken off from the wild 
olive, and grafted into the good olive ; transplanted 
out of the field into MR nursery ; that, being now 


22 ° A, little one shall become a A. M. 3298. 
. C. 706. 

thousand, and a small one a strong 

nation: I the Lorp will hasten it in 


- 
time. - 7% 


cic at 


m Chap. i, 3; Matt. xv. 13; John xv. 2—"Chap. xxix. 235 
v.11; Eph. ii. 10. © Matt. xiii. 31, 32. 


be removed into his paradise in he that I may 
be glorified—By the good fruit which they bear. 
A little one shall.become a thousand—Rather, this 
should be rendered, A little nwmber shall become a 
thousand. Though their beginning be very small] 
and contemptible, and the members of the church 
very few, yet shall they greatly multiply, and in- 
crease into many hundreds of thousands and millions. 
ThusDaniel describes the kingdom of Christ asastone, 
which, in process of time, be¢omes a great mount 
ain, and fills the whole earth, which will be verified 
at the proper season, as it follows. “I the Lord will 
hasten it in his time—Namely, in.due time, the time 
that. I have appointed; as if he had said, Let not 
this be doubted, because I have undertaken it, to 
whom nothing is difficult. Indeed this has been al- 
ready accomplished in a considerable degree by the 
great progress the gospel has made. Never were 
means more unlikely employed to effect any pur- 
pose, never was there a stronger opposition; yet the 
gospel prevailed, and multitudes of both sexes, in 
different, countries, became obedient to the faith, and 
looked upon it as their greatest glory. Vitringa, 
who closes his comment on this chapter with some 
excellent remarks, tending to show that it. particu- 
larly refers to some future glorious state of the 
church, which will take place after the conversion 
of the Jews, and the coming in of the fulness of the 
Gentiles, concludes with the following important 
observation: “ However, all our care and endeavour 
should be to condulifbureelves in a manner worthy 
of so high a hope; and we should so form our lives 
and manners as rather to regard things present than 
future ; neglecting no duty of a true citizen of the. 
spiritual Jerusalem, whereof we now profess our- , 
selves members; that-the expectation of the future 
may not deprive us of those blessings and privileges 
which God offers at present to all those who seri-’ 
ously and sincerely seek them; in the mean time 
humbly and earnestly interceding with him that his 


kingdom may come.” 4 


planted in God’s garden on earth, oa might shortly 


CHAPTER LXI. 
- In this chapter we =. (1,) The appointment and qualifications of the Messiah for his work, accordin ‘Mie c: three offices of 


prophet, priest, and king, 1-3. 
the glories and blessings of the gospel church, 4-9. 


Vor. Ii. ( 19 ) 


(2,) Under the figure of the Jews repairing thetr cities, assisted 


peculiar relation to God, their distinguished and durable honowr and prosperity, and their direction by God, 
(3,) The triumph of Jews and Christians: in God, ws his conferring 


righteousness, salvation, holiness, and comfort, are represented, 10, 11, 


Gentiles, of their 
e represented 


289 ‘ 


o~* 


7 


wv? 


¢ 
- 


. 


tent, the humble, and poor in spirit ; 


m | prophecy of the 


_ ISATAR. 


advent of the Messiah. 


- om or THE * Spirit of the Lorp God is 
Beatie upon me; because the Lorp 
> hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto 
the meek; he hath sent me °to bind up the: 
broken-hearted, to proclaim “liberty to the cap- 
tives, and the opening of the prison to them that 

dre. bound ; 

2 °To proélaim the accapants year of the 


a Chap. xi 2; Luke iv. 18; John i. 32; iii. 34.——» Psa. xly, 
St ¢ Psalm exlvii. 33 Chap. vii. 15.4 Chapter xlii. 7; 
Jer. xxxiv. 8. © Lev. xxv. 9. 


Lorp, and f the day of vengeance of A. ey 
our God; ® to comfort all that mourn ; ‘ 

3 To dppata unto them that mourn, in Zion, 
hto give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of 
joy for mourning, the ‘garment of praise for the 
spirit of heaviness; that they might be called 
Trees of righteousness, ‘The planting of the 
Lorp, * that he might be glorified. 


f Chap. xxxiv. 8; lxiii.4; Ixvi.14; Mal. iv. 1, 3 ; 2'Thess. i. 
7, 8, 9.—s Ch Chap. lvii. 18; Matt. v. 4,——* Psa. xxx. 11. 
i Chap. 1x21, John xv. 8. 


10 Bio tines Sa 
NOTES ON CHAPTER LXI. 

Verse 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me—To 
qualify me for effecting what is foretold and pro- 
mised in the foregoing chapter. As Christ has ap- 
plied this passage to himself, (see Luke ‘iv. 16,) and 
assured us that it was fulfilled in him, we may, with 
the utmost reason, conclude that he is here intro- 
duced by the prophet in his own person, and not 
that the prophet speaks of himself, as some havé 
thought. Because, or rather, for, the Lord hath 
anointed me—Hath commissioned me with authority, 
qualified me with gifts, and set me apart, for the im- 
portant offices here mentioned. Prophets, priests, 
and kings, among the Jews, were usually appointed 
and set apart to their several offices, as we have re- 
peatedly seen, by anointing them with oil, which 
ceremony was used by the express command of 
God, and was intended to show, not only that the 
persons so anointed were called to, but were, or 
should be, qualified for, these offices, with suitable 
gifts and graces. But the anointing of Christ, who’ 
was to sustain offices incomparably more important, 
and productive of infinitely greater effects, was of 
another nature, he being anointed, not with external 
and corruptible oil, but with the eternal Spirit of 
the incorruptible God, which qualified him for every 
part of the great work to which he was called, be- 
yond all others that were before him. Which Spirit 
he had without measure, John iii. 34; and therefore 
is said (Psa. xlv. 7; Heb. i. 9) to be anointed with 
the oil of gladness above his fellows. . To preach 
good tidings—Namely, tidings of salvation, of par- 
doning mercy, of prornns grace, and of eternal 
glory ; unto the meek—Or, poor, as the words are 
rendered by the LXX., whom the evangelists fol- 
low, Luke iv. 18; Matt. xi.5; namely, to the peni- 
to whom the 
tidings of a Redeemer, and of salvation through 
him, are indeed good tidings, faithful sayings, and 
worthy of all acceptation, These, and even the 
poor, as to worldly circumstances, are best disposed 
to receive the gospel, Jam. ii. 5; and then it is likely 
to profit them when it is received with meekness, as 
it ought to be. This relates to Christ’s prophetic 
office. To the broken-hearted—To give re- 
lief and comfort to persons burdened and distressed 
with a sense of the guilt and power of their sins, and 
of the wrath of God, to which they are obnoxious. 


It is a metaphor taken from surgeons binding up| 


¢ 290 


wounds: see chap. i. 6. This relates to Christ’s 
priestly office, his blood being the true expiation of 
sin, and the procuring cause of pardon and peace to 
the guilty. Yo proclaim liberty to the captives— 
Namely, liberty from the dominion and bondage of 
sin and Satan, of the world and the flesh, and from 
the slavish, tormenting fear of death and hell. This 
appertains to his kingly office. And those whom 
he, who is exalted to be a prince, as well as a Sa- 
viour, makes free, are free indeed ; not only dis- 
charged from the miséries of captivity and bondage, 
but advanced to all the immunities and dignities ‘of 
citizens. This is the gospel proclamation, and it is 
like the blowing of the jubilee trumpet, which pro- 
claimed the great year of release, Ley. xxv. 9, 40; in 
allusion to which, it’ is here called the acceptable 
year of the Lord; the time in which men should 
find acceptance with God, which is the origin of 
their liberties: or, it is called the year of the Lord, 
because it publishes his free grace, to his own glory; 
and an acceptable year, because it brings glad 
tidings to us; and what cannot but be very accept- 
able to those who know the capacities and necessi- 
ties of their own souls. 

‘Verses 2, 3. And the day of vengeance of our God 
—Namely, on those who reject or neglect these gra- 
cious offers of mercy and salvation: they shall not 
only be left in their captivity, as they deserve to be, 
but shall be dealt with as enemies. We have the 
gospel summed up, Mark xvi. 16, where that part 
of it, he that believeth shall be saved, proclaims the 
acceptable year of the Lord to those that will ac- 
cept it; but the other part, he that believeth not shall 
be damned, proclaims the day of vengeance of our 
God ; that vengeance that he will take on those that 
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
2 Thess. i.8; sée also Heb. x. 27-30; Matt. xxiv. 
21; Rev. xviii. 1. The clause seems to have an es- 
pecial reference to the time in which God punished 
the unbelieving and disobedient Jews by the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem, and the unparalleled calamities 
that came upon their nation. We find Christ, in se- 
veral of his discourses, threatening them with the 
judgments of God for their rejecting him. And he 
calls the destruction of Jerusalem the days of ven- 
geance, Luke xxi. 22, the very expression made use 
of here. To comfort all that mourn—Kither on ac- 
count of their sins, or their sufferings, or the desola- 
tions and miseries of the spiritual Zion, his church ; 

( 19* ) 


Gracious promises 


A. M. 3298. 


\. M.3208. 4 4 And they shall ' build the old 


. wastes, they shall raise up the former 
ésobitions, and they shall repair the waste ci- 
ties, the desolations of many generations. ° 

5 And ™strangers shall stand and feed your 
flocks, and the sons of the alien. shall be your 
ploughmen and your vine-dressers. 

6 *But ye shall be named the Priests of the 


CHAPTER LXI. 


made io Israel. 


Lorp: men shall call you the Minis- A.M, 3298. 
ters: of our God: °ye shall eat the i Set. 
riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall 
ye boast yourselves. 

7 9’ For your shame ye shall have double: 
and for confusion they shall rejoice in their por- 
tion: therefore in their land they shall possess 
the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them. 


= SS eee ee eS ee 


1 Chap. xlix. 8; lviii, 12; Ezek. xxxvi. 33-36.——™ Eph. 
y ite 12 


ll. 


and who, mourning, seek to him, and not to the 
world, for comfort. He not only provides comfort 
for them, and proclaims it, but he applies and be- 
stows it by giving them the Comforter. There is 
enough in him to comfort all that mourn, whatever 
their afflictions or sorrows may be; but this comfort 
is sure to them that mourn in Zion, that is, that sor- 
row after a godly sort, and apply by faith and prayer 
to God in Christ for relief and consolation. 7'o.ap- 
point unto them beauty—Or rather, ornament, (as 
the Hebrew 185 more properly signifies,) for ashes. 
Bishop Lowth renders the clause, To give them a 
beautiful crown instead of ashes ; the oil of glad- 
ness instead of sorrow; observing, “In times of 
mourning the Jews put on sackcloth, or coarse and 
sordid raiment; and spread dust and ashes on their 
heads: on the contrary, splendid clothing, and oint- 
ment poured on the head, were the signs of joy.” 
The oil of joy—Which makes the face to shine, in- 
stead of that mourning which disfigures the counte- 
nance, and makes it unlovely. This oil of joy the 
saints have from that oil of gladness with which 
Christ himself was anointed above his fellows. The 
garments of praise—Such beautiful garments as 
were worn on thanksgiving days, instead of the spi- 
rit of heaviness. Hebrew, 973, contraction, dim- 
ness, or obscurity; “open joys,” says Henry, “ for 
secret mournings. Zion’s mourners keep the spirit 
of heaviness to themselves, and weep in secret; but 
the joy, with which they are recompensed, they are 
clothed with, as with a garment, in the eyes of others.” 
Observe, reader, where God gives the-otl of joy, he 
gives the garment of praise. Those comforts which 
come from God dispose the heart to, and enlarge 
the heart in, thanksgivings to God. That they 
might be called trees of righteousness—That they 
might be righteous persons, deeply rooted by faith 
in the ground of gospel truth, solid and firm in ‘sin- 
cerity, fortitude, and patience; ornaments to God’s 
vineyard, and bringing forth fruit suitable to the soil 
wherein they are planted. T'he planting of the 
Lord—Planted by that holy Lord who, being him- 
self holy and righteous, would plant none but such: 
see on chap. 1x.21. That he might be glorified— 
Namely, by the fruit they bear; for herein is our 
heavenly Father glorified, that we bring forth much 
fruit. 

Verses 4,5. They shall build the old wastes—See 
on chap. Wiii, 12. As this is evidently to be under- 


2 Exod. xix.6; C 
v. 10. 


p. 1x.17; Ixvi. 21; 1 Pet. ii.5, 9; Rev, i. 6; 
© Chap. Ix. 5, 11, 16. P Chap. xl. 2; Zech, ix. 12. 


the establishment of Christianity in the world should 
repair the decays of true religion, of genuine piety 
and virtue, which had been at a very low ebb, not 
only in the Gentile nations, which were all idola- 
trous, but also among the Jews, for many centuries. 
By the ministry of John the Baptist, of our Lord, 
and his apostles, many thousands. of spiritual wor- 
shippers were raised up to God in Judea, and the 
adjacent parts; and when the ministers of the word 
were sent into the Gentile countries, the cities and 
provinces which had been as a wilderness, overrun 
with briers and thorns, became as Eden, and the 


‘deserts like the garden of the Lord: truth and grace, 


wisdom and piety, godliness and righteousness, with 
joy and gladness, were found therein, thanksgiving 
and the voice of melody, chap. li.3. And strangers 
—Namely, Gentiles, such as were not of the natural 
race of the Jews, but Gentile converts; shall stand 
—Ready to be at thy service ; and feed your flocks— 
The: churches, with-the word of God.' And the 
sons of the alien--The same with the strangers 
before mentioned, or their successors; shall be 
your ploughmen, &e—-Shall manage the whole 
work of God’s spiritual husbandry. See 1 Corin. 
ili. 6-9. 
Verses 6,7. But ye shall be named the Priests, 
&c.—The whole body of you shall now be as near 
to God as the priests were formerly, and shall be a 
royal priesthood, I Pet. ii. 9. “This is most certainly 
true of all the faithful under the gospel; hence they 


‘have also their spiritual sacrifices, Rom. xii. 1; Heb. 


xiii. 15, 16; 1 Pet. ii. 5, Ye shall eat the riches of 
the Gentiles—Partake of their plenty ; and in their 
glory shall ye boast--You shall be highly advanced 
by the addition of all that is glorious in them. The 
LXX. render it, ev to TA8Tw avTwr Varnacdgaeade, you: 
shall be wonderful, or the objects of admiration, 
through their riches; that is, by the glory whieh 
they shall bring to you, namely, in riches, parts, 
learning, chap. Ix. 5,11. For your shame ye shall 
have double—Honour; ‘though you have been little 
accounted of among the Gentiles, yet now you shall 
be highly esteemed by them ; you shall have double 
damages. See on chap. xl.2. They shail rejoice 
in their portion—Namely, of honour, which God 
will give them. It is a repetition of that which is 
asserted inthe formerclause. T'herefore, or, rather, 
because, they shall possess the dowble—Because of the 


doubling of their portion; everlasting joy shall beun- . 


tood of gospel.times, the meaning seems to be, that | to them—Joy that shall continue long here, and shall 
3 291 


s 


ISAIAH. 


* 


made to Israel. 


Gracious promises 
A.M. 3298. 8 For 21 the Lorp love judg- 
B.C. 706. 


ment, * I hate robbery for burnt- 
offering ; and I will direct their work in truth, 
*and I will make an everlasting covenant with 
them. 

9 And their seed shall be vidi among the 
Gentiles, and their offspring among the peo- 
ple: all that see them shall acknowledge them, 
‘that they are the seed which the Lorp hath 
blessed. 

10 "I will greatly rejoice in the Lorp, my 


9 Psa. xi. 7.——" Chap. i.:11, ]3.——* Chap. lv. 3.——t Chap. 
Ixy. 23. 4 Hab, ili. 18 x Psa. cxxxii. 9, 16, 


soul shall be joyful in my God; for A.M. M, 3208. 
*he hath clothed me with the gar- Se 
ments of salvation, he hath covered me with the 
robe of righteousness, ¥ as a bridegroom 1 deck- 
eth himself with ornaments, and as a bride 
adorneth herself with her jewels. 

11 For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, 


and as the garden causeth the things that are 


sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord Gop 
will cause 7 righteousness and * praise to spring 
forth before all the nations. 


¢ 


y Chap. xlix. 18; Rev. xxi. 2. 
z Psa, Ixxii. 3; Ixxxv. 11. 


1 Heb. decketh as a priest, 
a Chap. lx. 18 ; Ixii. i on 


be everlasting hereafter. The meaning of this pre- 
diction seems to be, that though the first Christians 
should. have a large share of shame or ignominy 
thrown upon them, yet their descendants should, in 
return, receive a double share of honour and glory. 
This accordingly came to pass: Christianity, from 
being considered as the greatest infamy, and being 
loaded with the greatest shame, came into the high- 
est repute when Constantine became emperor, and 
received the highest honours that could possibly be 
paid, and was, as it were, loaded with glory, riches, 
and honour.” 

Verses 8, 9. For I the Lord love judgment—I will 
do them right, for I love justice in myself, and in 
them that practise it. J hate robbery for burnt- 
offerings—1 hate all things gotten by injustice, 
though they be for sacrifice. As God will not ac- 
cept of that which cost nothing, so much less of that 
which is the effect of rapine and oppression. And 
I will direct their work in truth—I will lead them 
so, that they shall do all things in sincerity. They 
shall do good works with good intentions, and to 
good ends: they shall love truth, and walk in truth, 
and serve God in spirit and truth. Iwill make an 
everlasting covenant with them—Though they have 


broken covenant with me, yet I will renew my an- | 
cient covenant made with their fathers, confirmed | 


with the blood of the Messiah ; and it shall be ever- 
lasting, never to be abrogated. And their ‘seed 
shall be known among the Gentiles—That is, emi- 
nently ; a promise of the increase of the church: 
such shall be their prosperity and multiplying, that 
they shall be known abroad by their great increase: 
or else the meaning is, the church shall have a seed 

f the Gentiles ; whereas the church has been con- 
fined to one corner of the world, now it shall remain 
in one nation alone no more, but shall fill all the na- 
tions of the earth. All shall acknowledge they are 
the seed which the Lord hath blessed—Such shall 
be the visible characters of God’s love to them, and 
of God’s grace in them. 

292 


as 


Verse 10. Iwill greatly rejoice in the Lord—This 
is spoken-in the’ person of the church, wherein she 
thankfully acknowledges God’s kindness to her in 
the fore-mentioned promises. My soul shall be joy- 
fulin my God—The expression here is varied, but 
the sense is the same with that in the former clause. 
He hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, 
&c.—With salvation as with a garment, and with 
righteousness as witha robe: the salvation that God 
will work for me will render me as beautiful and 
considerable as they.are that are clothed with the 
richest garments. As the bridegroom decketh him- 
self with ornaments—Hebrew, Wd JAD" {ANS, as the 
bridegroom decketh himself with a priestly crown ; 
so Bishop Lowth translates it, obserying that it is 
“an allusion to the magnificent. dress of the high- 
priest when performing his functions, and particu- 
larly to the mitre, and crown, or plate of gold on 
the front of it, Exod. xxix. 6. The bonnet or mitre 
of the priests also was made, as Moses expresses it, 
‘for glory and for beauty, Exod. xxviii. 40. It is 
difficult to give its full force to the prophet’s meta- 
phor in another language: the version of Aquilaand 
Symmachus comes nearest to it: w¢ vyuoro Lepa- 
TEVOMEVOY orepavy,” as a bridegroom exercising the 
priest’s office in a crown. 

Verse 11. For as the earth bringeth forth, &e.— 
By this and the other metaphor here used, the 
church shows, not only the revival and résatution 
of her blessings, after they had been, as it were, 
dead and lost in the winter of affliction, but the great 
plenty and abundance of them that should spring 
forth and flourish: what had been as a wilderness 
should be as a paradise, referring to the effects of 


-God’s grace and bounty. So the Lord will cause 


righteousness—That is, his great work of salvation ; 
and praise—As the natural product and fruit of it ; 
to spring forth—To break out and appear; before 
all nations—These things will not be done in a cor- 
ner, but will be eminently pone in the sight 
of all the world. 

3 


4 


¢ 


The great honour and 


CHAPTER LXII. 


ea ’ 


27 


glory of the church. 


CHAPTER LXII. 


In this chapter, by the typical intercession of Isaiah, and his ‘fellow-prophets, for the prosperity and happiness of the Jews, 
after their captivity in Babylon; are represented the glories of the Christian Church, procured by the intercession of Jesus 
Christ.and his ministers and disciples. .Here are, (1,) Earnest intercessions for the church’s vindication, enlargement, 


and prosperity, 1, 6, 7. 


men, 2. Highly prized, dearly loved, closely united with, and delighted in by God, 3-5. 


(2,) In answer to these, it is. promised that the church should be rendered honourable before 


Happily furnished with faith- 


ful ministers, and with means of grace, and other necessary comforts, 6, 8, 9. Redeemed from captivity, privileged with 
the enjoyment of Christ'and his salvation, and renowned as the saved, sanctified, and never-forsaken people of God, 


10-12. 
a oe froR Zion’s sake will I not hold my 
hist peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I 
will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go 
forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof 
as a lamp that burneth. 

2 *And the Gentiles shall see thy righteous- 
ness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt 
be called by a new name, which the mouth of 
the LorD shall name. : | 


2 Chap. Ix. 3——» Ver. 4, 12; Chap. Ixv. 15. 


© Zech. ix. 16. 
4 Hos. i, 10; 1 Pet. li. 10. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LXII. 

Verses 1, 2. For Zion’s sake—Namely, the church’s 
sake, Zion and Jerusalem being both put for the 
church, Heb. xii. 22. Will I not hold my peace—It 
appears from the last verse of the preceding chap- 
ter, that this is immediately connected with it, and 
these may be considered as the words of the pro- 
phet, or, as Vitringa thinks, of a prophetic choir, 
representing the whole body of the ministers of God, 
and, among these particularly, the apostles and 
evangelists, at the beginning of the gospel; declaring 
that they will not be silent, tid the righteousness of 
the church, that is, its redemption, (alluding to the 
redemption of the Jewish Church from Babylon,) 
shall go forth as brightness, &c.—That is, till the 
kingdom of God shall be most brightly and com- 
pletely revealed. Others, however, think that the 
prophet speaks here as the type of Christ, and in his 
name, and that Christ is to be considered here as de- 
claring his resolution not to cease interceding for the 
church until it should be freed from the obloquy and 
reproach, the vexations and persecutions of the Jews 
and heathen; until its righteousness should be 
placed in a clear light, and all those crimes which 
were falsely charged on the Christians by their ene- 
mies, (namely, respecting their nightly assemblies, 
their killing of infants, and drinking their blood, 
their promiscuous lust, &c.,) should be undeniably 
confuted. For when the assemblies of the Chris- 
tians came to be held openly, and in the day-time, 
and were frequented by greater numbers, all these 
calumnies were proved to be false. And when Con- 
stantine came to the empire, especially when he 
came to have the sole command, the-Christian reli- 
gion was raised out of its state of obscurity, was 
placed in a true and conspicuous point of view, ard 
freed from the unmerited reproach that had been 
cast upon it, And the Gentiles shall see thy right- 

3 


3 Thou shalt also be ° a crown of = there 
glory in the hand of the Lorn, and ————_ 
a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. 

4 4Thou shalt no more be termed ° For- 
saken; neither shall thy land any more be 
termed ‘ Desolate: but. thou shalt be called 
'Hephzi-bah, and thy land ? Beulah: for the 
Lokp delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be 
married. 


£Chap. liv: 1——? That is, My 


e Chap. xlix. 14; liv. 6. 
2Thatis, Married. 


delight is in her. 


eousness—Thy innocence with respect to the things 
laid to thy charge, and the blamelessness, usefulness, 
and the holiness of thy, members. Or, they shall ac- 
knowledge that God has justly honoured thee, and 
thereupon shall join themselves to thee. And all 
kings thy glory—Those that.were wont to scorn 
thee, shall now be taken up with the admiration of 
thy glory. And thow shalt be called by a new name 
—Not the seed of Abraham, or the children of Israel, 


‘but the people and children of God; or by the name 


mentioned verse 4. Which the mouth of the Lord 
shall name—Thou shalt be brought into a new state, 
far more glorious than formerly, whereof God shall 
be the author. Or, thou shalt be called by another 
name, as it is expressed chap. Ixv. 15.. A name, the 
honour whereof shall make thee famous; ye shall 
be called Christians, 

Verse 3. Thou shalt be a crown of glory—Or, a 
beautiful crown, as Bishop Lowth renders niwy 
naxan. The expression is meant to set forth the dig- 
nity of her state. In the hand of the Lord—Pre- 
served and defended by God’s hand. And a royal 
diadem—The same thing with the former for sub- 
stance. Or the royal priesthood, whereof the apos- 
tle speaks, 1 Pet. ii. 9, In the hand of thy God—Or 
palm, or grasp, as*|23 ought rather.to be rendered. 
The meaning is, that the Christian Church should 
become glorious in the hand of the Lord, that is, 
under ‘his protection and blessing, and that God 
would hold it fast in his hand, figuratively speaking, 
and in the very palm of it, as what was extremely 
dear and precious in his sight, so that none should 
take it from him. 

Verses 4, 5. Thou shalt no more be termed For- 
saken—As a woman forsaken by her husband. Nei- 
ther shall thy land be termed Desolate—Neither 
shall thy places of worship be empty, and thine ordi- 
nances of service be unfrequented. He alludes to 


293 
2 


The church shall be furnished 


ISATAH. 


with faithful ministers, Fc. 


A. M. 3298. 
B. C. 706. 
———\ virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee: 


and % as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, 
so & shall thy God rejoice over thee. 

6 YJ »I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O 
Jerusalem, which shall-never hold their peace 
day nor night: tye that make mention of the 
Lorp, keep not silence, 

7 And give him no ‘rest, till he establish, 


5 For as a young man mazrrieth a|jand till he make Jerusalem ‘a praise ms x 3298 


C. 706 


in the earth. 

8 § The Lorp hath sworn by his right hand, 
and by the arm of his strength, °Surely I will 
no more ‘give thy corn ¢o be meat for thine 
enemies; and the sons of the strangers shall 
not drink thy wine, for the which moe hast 
laboured : 

9 But they that. me gathered it shall eat it, 


3 Heb. with the joy of the Behdoghoine ¢ Chap. Ixv. 19. 
b Ezek. iii. 17; xxxili. 7: 4 Or, ye that are the LORD'S r re- 


membrancers. 


5 Heb. silence—~i Chap. Ixi,11; Zeph. iii. 20. 
® Heb. If I give. 


— Deut, xxviii. 31, &c. ; Jer. v.17. 


the desolation of J paak during the Babylonish cap- 
tivity. But thou shalt be called Hephzi-bah—My 
delight is in her; a new name, agreeing with her 
new condition; and thy land, Beulah—Married, 
agreeing to her new relation. Whereas she was in 
a desolate condition,she shall now be as a’woman 
well married, to the great improvement of her state. 
And thy land shall be married—Thou shalt see the 
increase of thy children again in the land, as the fruit 
of thy married condition, who, by_reason of thy 
being forsaken of thy husband, were, in a manner, 
wasted and decayed: and this refers to the great 
enlargement of the church in the gospel days. Or, 
thy land shall be possessed, as 9y3n may be properly 
rendered, and so the expréssion answers to desolate. 
Thou shalt be no more desolate, but possessed. - For 
as a@ young man. marrieth a virgin—In whom he 
takes great delight, and whom he exceedingly loves; 
so shall thy. sons marry thee—That is, they shall 
live with thee, and take great delight in thee. For, 
as Lowth justly observes, “the word marry is not 
to be taken strictly, for it ‘would be improper to say 
that children married their mother.” Thus the LXX., 
aTw kaTolKnoxaty ot vio.c8, so shall thy sons dwell naiih 
thee. Bishop Lowth, however, instead of sons, ren- 
ders 7:33, thy builder, or creator, altering or disre- 
gading the Hebrew points. This emendation, it 
must be acknowledged, would clear the prophet of 
‘the impropriety of using a similitude, which implies 
that Jerusalem was guilty of incest in marrying her 
sons; and at the same time would add not only 
grace but force to the whole yerse, which, so altered, 
runs thus: For,as a young man marrieth a virgin, 
so-shall thy Creator marry thee. And as the bride- 
groom, &c.—The former interpretation, however, 
which ‘has the sanction of the LXX., and which the 
present pointing of the Hebrew requires, seems pre- 
ferable. In thefirst clause, As @ young man mar- 
th a virgin, Sir John Chardin, in his MS. note on 
A. place, considers the , prophet as expressing him- 
self according to the custom of the East, which was, 
and is, “ for youths, that were never married, always 
to marry virgins; and widowers, however young, 
to marry widows.” See Harmer’s Observ., xiii. 
p. 482. 
” Verses 6,7. Ihave set watchmen, &c.—The word 
Tv21w, thus rendered, signifies properly those 
priests and Levites who kept watch day and night 
about the temple, and is from them applied to the 
spiritual watchmen and ministers of the Christian 


294 ye 


Church. They-are said to be set upon the walls of 
the spiritual Jerusalem, in allusion to sentinels 
placed upon the walls of besieged cities, from whence 
they have an extensive prospect, that ‘they may ob- 
serve and give notice of. the motions of the enemy. 
Which shall never hold their peace day nor night-- 
There shall be a vigilant, faithful, and diligent min- 
istry, willing to endure hardships, and constant in 
their work of teaching and warning the people, or of 
interceding for them, which constancy is intimated 
here by day and night. Ye that make mention of 
the Lord—That is, that are his servants, and acknow- 
ledge your relation to him as such: see chap. XXvi. 
13. Here especially are meant his servants in ordi- 
nary, his remembrancers, as the word My2IDn 
may be properly translated, either such as put God 
in remembrance of his promises, or such as make 
the Lord to be remembered, putting his people in 
mind of him. Keep not silence—As if he had said, 
Since God, by his peculiar goodness and-care of his 
church, hath appointed watchmen to be placed upon 
its walls, that they may constantly watch for its 
safety, therefore do you, who are intrusted with 
this office, perform your parts diligently, and inter- 
cede continually with him, that he would graciously 
fulfil the magnificent promises which he has made 
to it. In the command here given, not to keep si- 
lenee, Bishop Lowth.thinks there is an allusion to. 
the manner in which watches are kept in the East. 
“ Even to this day,” says he,“ they are performed 
by a loud ery, from time to time, of the watchmen, 
to mark the time, and that very frequently, and in 
order to show that they themselves are constantly 
attentive to their duty.” “'The watchmen in the 
camp of the caravans go their rounds, erying, one 
after another, ‘ God is one; he is merciful,’ and often 
add, ‘ Take heed to yourselves. >» Tavern. Voyage. 
de Perse, lib. i. chap-x. And give him no rest-- 
Persevere, and be importunate in your supplications. 
Observe, reader, fervency and importunity in prayer 
are very acceptable to God, as implying the sincere 
and earnest desire of the person praying for the 
blessings which he asks: see Luke xi. 5-10; and 
xviii. 1-7. Till he establish, &¢.—Till he so settle 
his church on sure foundations, and enlarge its bor- 
ders, that it shall become a blessing to all nations, 
and all nations shall praise him for it, Psa. Ixvii. 3,4; 
or that it may be praised, and become renowned and 
famous in the eyes of the whole world. : 
Verses 8,9. Zhe Lord hath sworn by his right 
3 


The further glory 


ms] 3206. and praise the Lorp; and they that 
——___ have brought it ee re shall drink 
it tin the courts of my holiness. 

10 { Go through, go through the gates} ™ pre- 
pare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up 
the highway; gather out the stones; "lift up 
a standard for the people. 

11 Behold, the Lorn hath proclaimed unto 


CHAPTER LXII. 


of the church. 


the end of the world, °Say ye to the 1 oe 
daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salva- 

tion cometh ; behold, his ? reward is with him, 
and his 7 work before him. 

12 And they shall call them, The holy peo- 
ple, The redeemed of the Lorn: and thou 
shalt be called, Sought out; A ae ‘not for- 
saken. 


1 Deut. xii. 12; xiv. 23, 26; xvi. 11, 14.——m™ Chap. xl. 3; Ivii. 
14. n Chap. xi. 12. 


° Zech. ix. 9; Matt. xxi. 5; John xii. 15.—p Chap. xl. 10; 
Rev. xxii. 12-—? Or, recompense.——1 Verse 4. 


hand—* Lifting up the hand was a ceremony used 
in swearing, Deut. xxxii. 40; Ezek. xx. 5,15. And 
here God swears by that very hand which used to 
be held up at the taking of an oath; that is, he swears 
by his power and might,.as it follows, that the ene- 
mies of his people should not interrupt that peace 
and plenty which he should give them, but that they 
should quietly enjoy his blessings with hearts full 
of thankfulness for them. This must relate to some 
happier condition than the Jews enjoyed after their 
return from captivity, when their enemies frequently 
invaded them, and, at last, the Romans destroyed 
both their temple and nation."—Lowth. The pas- 
sage is undoubtedly metaphorical ; and is to be. un- 
derstood of the free and undisturbed enjoyment of 
the spiritual blessings of religion, which God will 
grant the Christian Church in the latter days: and 
“the oath which ushers in this promise proves that 
it will be exactly. and punctually performed.” See 
Joel ii. 24; and iii. 18; Jer. xxxi. 12; Zech. ix. 17. 
The expressions in the next verse, particularly in 
the latter part of it, allude to the ordinances of the 
law, which required the people to spend their first- 
fruits, and other hallowed things, at the temple, in a 
thankful acknowledgment to God for his blessings, 
Deut. xii. 11; and xiv. 23, 26. 

Verse 10. Go through the gates—Namely, the 
gates of Babylon, which shall be thrown open, that 
those confined in that idolatrous city may leave it 
with freedom, and return to the land of Israel. In 
other words, for the expressions are metaphorical, 
let all obstructions be removed out of the way of the 
heathen, that they may have free liberty to bid adieu 
to their idolatries and vices, and come to, and unite 
themselves with, the Christian Church. Or, the 
words-»may be considered as a command given to 
the ministers and ‘friends of the church to go forth 
through Zion’s gates, to invite the nations of the 
earth to turn to God, and join themselves to his peo- 
ple; and, in order thereto, as far as possible, to pre- 
pare their way plain before them, as it follows; or 
to endeavour to win them over by their pure doc- 
trine, their holy lives, and benevolent actions. The 
expressions are twice doubled, to give them the 
greater emphasis: Gather out the stones—Let no 


rock of offence, or stone of stumbling, remain in the 
way. As ifhe had said, Go to and fro, and remove 
every scandal and impediment, and make plain paths 
for their feet, Rom. xiv. 13. Lift up a standard— 
An allusion to generals, who usually set up their 
standards that the soldiers may know whither to re- 
pair from ‘all quarters:.see chap. xlix.22. Thus is 
Christ held forth in the preaching of the gospel. 

Verses 11, 12. The Lord hath proclaimed unio 
the end of the world—Hath commanded his gospel 
to be preached to every creature: or hath sent forth 
his messengers into all parts of the-world, in order 
to the conversion of Jews and Gentiles. Say ye to 
the daughter of Zion—That is, to Jerusalem, or the 
church. Behold, thy salvation cometh—Kither the 
time of it is come, or rather the person that effects 
it, thy Saviour. Behold, his reward is with him— 
That is, he has it in his power, and is ready to re- 
ward his faithful servants; and his work before him 
—The work necessary to be wrought in and upon 
his people, to make them his people, the work of re- 
generation and sanctification. And they shall cail 
them—Or, they shall be called ; the holy people—A 
people peculiarly holy, cured of their inclination to 
idolatry, and all other sins, and consecrated to God 
only. The redeemed of the Lord—So redeemed as 
none but God could redeem them ; and redeemed to 
be his, the bonds whereby other lords held them in 
subjection being broken, that they might be his ser- 
vants. And thou shalt be called, Sought owt—Or 
one found that was lost, Ezek. xxxiv.16. Or rather, 
sought to, or sought for, that is, one in great esteem 
and request ; one that the Gentiles shall seek to join 
themselves to, so as to be one church with thee. Or, 
one cared for, namely, by God, whom he hath, out 
of infinite love, gathered to himself. A city not ‘for- 
saken—The meaning is, that they should thus 
esteem the gospel church, that she should be ac- 
costed with such salutations as these are, the holy 
people, the redeemed of the Lord,-&e. Vitringa 
thinks that the first completion of this prophecy is to 
be sought for in the times of the Emperor Constan- 
tine; but it is probable that it has a further reference 
to some’ great and future reformation and restoration 
of the church. 

295 


Description of a 


ISAIAH. 


mighty Conqueror 


CHAPTER LXIII. 


The fifth and last discourse of the fifth part of Isaiah’s prophecies, according to Vitringa, is contained in this and the fol- 
lowing chapters, which, with the two preceding, he considers as being explanatory of the prophecies contained in the great 


and important discourse from chapter 51st to the 60th inclusive. 


And, as the three last chapters contain a description of 


the glorious state of the church in the latter days, when it shall be enlarged by the conversion of the Jews, and the fulness 
of the Gentiles ; so now the prophet comes to describe the day of vengeance, mentioned chap. Ixi. 2. We have in this chapter, 
(1,) A dialogue between the prophet, or the church, and Christ, in which the latter is represented as returning in triumph 
from the slaughter of his enemies, 1-6. (2,) A devout meditation upon God’s former mercies to Kis people, 7-9. (3,) On 
their rebellions and provocations, followed both by God's judgments and mercies, 10-14. (4,) An humble and earnest prayer 
to God that he would appear for them in their present distress, pleading his pay their relation to him, their desire toward 


him, and the insolence of their enemies, 15-19. 


A. M3208. yore as this that cometh from 
RAL Sie Edom, with dyed garments from 


Bozrah? this that is ' glorious in his apparel, 


1 Heb. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LXIITI 

Verse 1. “The very remarkable -passage,” says 
Bishop. Lowth, “with which this chapter begins, 
seems to be in a manner detached from the rest, and 
to stand singly by itself; having no immediate con- 
nection with what goes before, or with what follows, 
otherwise than as it may pursue the general design, 
and stand inits proper place in the order of prophecy. 
It is by many learned interpreters supposed, that Ju- 
das Maccabeus and his victories make the subject of 
it. What claim Judas can have to so great an 
honour will, I think, be very difficult to make out; 
or how the attributes of the great person introduced 
can possibly suit him. Could Judas call-himself the 
Announcer of righteousness, mighty to save? Could 
he talk of the day of vengeance being in his heart, 
and the year of his redeemed being come ? or that 
his own arm wrought salvation for him? Besides, 
what were the great exploits of Judas in regard to 
the Idumeans? He overcame them in battle, and 
slew twenty thousand of them. And John Hyrca- 
nus, his brother Simon’s son ahd successor, who is 
called in to help out the accomplishment of the 
prophecy, gave them another defeat some time af- 
terward, and compelled’ them, by force, to become 
proselytes to the Jewish religion, and to submit to 
circumcision: after which they were incorporated 
with the Jews, and became one people with them. 
Are these events adequate to the prophet’s lofty pre- 
diction? Was itso great an action to win a battle 
with considerable slaughter of the enemy; or to 
force a whole nation, by dint of the sword, into Ju-| 
daism? Or was the conversion of the Idumeans, 
however effected, and their admission into the church 

of God, equivalent to a most grievous judgment and 
destruction, threatened in the severest terms ? 

“TY conclude that this prophecy has not the least 
relation to Judas.Maccabeus. It may be asked, to 
whom, and to what event, does it relate? I can only 
answer, that I know of no event in history to which, 
from its importance and circumstances, it can be 
applied ; unless, perhaps, to the destruction of Jeru- 
salem and the Jewish polity ; which, in the gospel, 
is called, the coming of Christ, and the days of 
vengeance, Matt. xxiv. 16-28; Luke xxi. 22. But, 


» 296 » 


travelling in the greatness. of his A. 6 3208. 
strength? I that speak in gcsan a 
ness, mighty to save. 


decked. 


though this prophecy must have its accomplishment, 
there is no necessity of supposing that’it has been 
already accomplished. There are prophecies which 
intimate a great slaughter of the enemies of God and 
his people, which remain to be fulfilled; these in 
Ezekiel, chap. xxxviii., and in the Revelation of St. 
John, chap. XX., are called Gog and Magog. This 
prophecy of Isaiah may possibly refer to the same or 
the like event. We need not be at a loss'to deter- 
mine the person who is here mtroduced, as stained 
with treading the wine-press, if we consider how 
St. John, in the Revelation, has applied this image 
of the prophet, Rev. xix. 13, 15, 16. =, chap. 
XXIV.” 

Who is this, &e.—Either the prophet, as in some 
vision or ecstasy, or the church, makes inquiry, and 
that with admiration, who it is ‘that appears in such 
a habit or posture, verse 1, and why, verse 2; that 
cometh from Edom—That is, Idumea, the country 
where Esau, sometimes called Edom, dwelt. It is 
here put for all the enemies of God’s church, as it is 
also chap. xxxiv. 5, 6, where see the notes. “The 
Idumeans,” it must. be observed, “joined with the 
enemies of the Jews in bringing on the destruction 
of Jerusalem, in the time of the captivity, for which 
they were severely reproved by the prophets, and 
threatened with utter destruction, which accordingly. 
came to pass; the prophets, therefore, generally ap- 
ply the name of this people to signify any invete- 
rate and cruel enemy, as in this place. But the 
words Edom and Bozrah may be taken in the ap- 
pellative sense, to denote ingeneral, a field of blood, 
or a place of slaughter ; the word Edom/signifying 
red, and Bozrah a vintage, which, in the prophetic- 
al idiom, imports God’s vengeance upon the wick- 
ed.”—Lowth. With dyed or stained garments— 
Thus Christ is described Rev. xix. 13, where also 
he is represented as taking vengeance on his ene- 
mies. The LXX. render it epudyua warttor, “redness 
of garments. This that is glorious—Or magnifi- 
cent, as Bishop Lowth renders it; in his apparel, 
travelling—Marching on, in the greatness of his 
strength—Like a general marching in triumph at the 
head of his army, and carrying tokens of victory 
uponhisraiment, J that speak in righteousness— 


A mighty Conqueror and 


CHAPTER LXIil. 


his conquests des:~ibed. 


x - = 2 Wherefore * art thou red in thine 


———— apparel, and thy garments like him 
that treadeth in the wine-fat ? 

3 [have ” trodden the wine-press alone} and 
of the people ¢here was none with me: for I 
will tread them in mine anger, and trample 
them'in my fury, and their blood shall be 
sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain 
all my raiment. _ 

A For the ° day of vengeance is in my heart, 
and the year of my redeemed is come. 

5 *And I looked,-and ° there was none to 
help; and I'wondered that there was none to 


uphold: therefore mine own farm A. M. 3298. 
brought salvation unto me: and my Sg 
fury, it upheld me. 

6 And-I will tread: down the people in mine 
anger, and ® make them drunk in my fury, and 
I will bring down their strength to the earth. 

7 4 Twill mention the loving-kindnesses of the 
Lorp, and the praises of the Lorp, according 
to all that the Lorp hath bestowed on us, and 
the great goodness toward the house of Israel, 
which he hath. bestowed on tiem according: to 
his mercies, and according to the multitude of 
his lov. g-kindnesses. 


b Lam. i. 15; Rev. xiv. 19, 20;- xix. 15, 
© Chap. xxxiv. 8; lxi. 2. 


aRev. xix. 13. 


4 Chap, xli. 28; lix. 16. 
Chap. lix. 16. 


© John xvi. 32.— Psa. xeviii. 1 ; 
& Rev. xvi. 6. 


I the Messiah, who never promise any thing but 
what I will faithfully perform, and who do and will 
always truly execute justice: mighty to save—Per- 
fectly able to effect the promised redemption of my 
people, whatever difficulties and oppositions may lie 
in the way of it, and to accomplish their full salva- 
tion. Bishop Lowth renders the clause, J who pub- 
lish, or announce righteousness, and am mighty to 
save, observing, that a MS. has 1299n, with’the de- 


monstrative article added, giving greater force and. 


emphasis to the expression, T'he, Announcer of 
righteousness. 
Verses 2-4. Wherefore art thou red, &c—The 


dialogue is continued, and the prophet orthe church,, 


having inguired concerning the person, now inquires 
why his habit has been thus sprinkled and stained. 
I have trodden the wine-press alone—I have de- 
stroyed the enemies of my people, I have crushed 
them as grapes are crushed; this being a usual me- 
taphor to describe the utter destruction of a people, 
Psa. xliv. 5; Rev. xiv. 19, 20; and the ease -with 
which God can do it, which is no more than to crush 
a bunch of*grapes. This exactly agrees with what 
_ is said of Christ Rev. xix. 15, T'hat he treadeth the 
wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty 
God. Bishop Lowth has observed, that “there is an 
energy and sublimity in this description, which is 
not to be paralleled in any language.” And of the 
people there was none with me—I have delivered my 
people, and destroyed their enemies by my own 
power, without any human help. Thus he destroy- 
ed the Assyrians, chap. xxxvii. 36. Thus he infatu- 
ated the Babylonians, and opened the two-leaved 
gates for Cyrus, chap. xlv. 1. Thushe divided the 
sea and Jordan before Israel of old, and overthrew 
Jericho, and the kings and nations of Canaan. It is 
true he often makes use of instruments in conquer- 
ing, whether the temporal or spiritual enemies of his 
people; but he needs them not; and when ‘he em- 
ploys them, they act by commission and authority 
derived from him, and by strength which he commu- 
nicates to them. For J will tread, &c.—Or, rather, 
I trod them in mine anger, and I trampled them in 
mine indignation, and their blood—Hebrew, Nn), 
3 , 


robur eorum, their strength ; Bishop Lowth renders 
it, their life-blood was sprinkled on my garments. 
For the day of vengeance—The day designed and 
appointed by me, wherein to take vengeance on the 
enemies of my church, is, or rather, was, in my 
heart—So that I could not forget nor neglect to exe 
cute it: see notes on chap. xxxiv, 8, and Ixi. 1. And 
the year of my redeemed—The year appointed for 
their redemption, is or was come—Though it seemed 
to tarry, and his people might be ready to give up al. 
hope of it, it came at last, and did not disappoint their 
expectations. 

Verses 5, 6. I looked, and there was none to help 
—“Things were come to that extremity, that there 
was no appearance of succour by any human means. 
Those who, by their office and character, ought t» 
have stood up.in defence of oppressed truth and 
righteousness, even they, contrary to what might 
have been justly: expected, betrayed so good _a cause, 
or had not the courage to defend it. So that it was 
time for God to interpose, and to appear in defence 
of his own honour and people.” Therefore my own 
arm, &¢,—See note on chap. lix. 16. And my fury, 
it upheld me—Or, my zeal rather, namely, against 
the adversaries of'my church, and for the deliver- 
ance of my people: Iwas resolved to vindicate my 
own honour, and my concern for my people made 
me go through with the undertaking in spite of all 
opposition. Thus God says, Zech. viii. 2, I was 
jealous for Zion with great fury. God’s arm signi- 
fies his strength and power, and his zeal sets his 
power on work. And I will tread down—The 
LXX. render it, xarexarnoa, I have trodden down the 
people in mine anger. So'also the vulgar Latin 
which translation agrees better with the contex 
where Christ is described as ha his garments 
already stained with the blood of his enemies. And 
made them drunk in my fury—“ God’s judgments 
are often represented by a cup of intoxicating liquor, 
because they astonish men, and bereave them of 
their usual discretion.” See the note on chap. li. 17. 

Verse 7. “The remaining part of this chapter” 
'says Bishop Lowth, “with the whole chapter follow- 
ing, contains a penitential confession and supplica- 

, 297 


* 


God’s great mercies 


ISAIAH. 


to Israel his people, 


A. M. 3298. 


Lee 8 For he said, Surely they are my 


. people, children that will not lie: so 
he was theif Saviour. 


9 In all their affliction he was afflicted, ‘and 
the angel of his. presence saved them » * in his 


h Judg. x. 16; Zech. ii. 8; Acts ix. 4. i Exod. xiv. 193 
xxiii. 20, 21) xxxili. 14; Mal. iii. 1; Acts xii. 11.——* Deut. 
vi, 7, 8 ——! Exod. xix. 4; Deut. i. 31; xxxii. 11, 12;, Chap. 
Se 
tion of the Israelites in their present state of disper- 
sion; in which they have so Jong marvellously sub- 
sisted, and still continue to subsist, as a people; cast 
out of their country, without any proper form of 


civil polity or religious worship; their temple de-, 


stroyed, their city desolated, and lost to them; and 
their whole nation scattered over the face of the 
earth ; apparently deserted and cast off by the God 
of their fathers, as no longer his peculiar people.” 
‘Vitringa has nearly'the same views of this section 
of the prophet’s discourse. He supposes that it per- 
tains to the present Jews and their posterity, during 
this their dispersion, and that when they shall see 


that wonderful display of God’s power, which will) 


hereafter be made in the destruction of the Papal 
church and tyranny, they will be converted to the 
Christian religion. Ina view to this, he considers 
the prophet as here introducing a company of them, 
who represent the first-fruits at the beginning of this 
great work of grace, deploring the blindness and 
hardness of their nation, and with the utmost humili- 
ty turning themselves to God, and praying for that 
complete conversion of their people which is to fol- 
low the coming in of the fulness of the Gentiles, 
See Rom. xi. 25, 26. 

I will mention the lovingk-indness of the Lord— 
Those penitent Jews, in whose name the prophet is 
supposed to speak, being convinced themselves of 
the truth of Christianity, begin here to intercede for 
the rest of their brethren, still remaining in that state 
of blindness and darkness under which the nation 
had long groaned. “ They begin with acknowledg- 
ing God’s great mercies and favours to their nation, 
and the ungrateful returns made for them on their 
part; that by their disobedience they had forfeited 
his protection, and caused him to become their ad- 
versary. But now, induced by the memory of the 
great things he had done for them, they address their 
humble supplication to him for the renewal of his 
mercies. They beseech him to regard them in con- 
sideration of his former loving-kindness; they ac- 
knowledge him for their Father and Creator; they 
confess their. wickedness and hardness of heart; 
they entreat his forgiveness, and deplore the misera- 
ble condition under which they had so long suffered. 
The whole passage-is in the elegiac form, pathetic 
and elegant, and probably designed as a formulary 
of humiliation for the Israelites, in order to their 
conversion.” A few remarks on some of the ex- 
pressions used therein may tend to place them in a 
clearer point of view. 

Verses 8,9. For he said—Namely, within him- 
self, of old, when he made a covenant with our 

298 


love and in his pity he redeemed A. M, 3208, 
them ; and 'he bare them, and carried - 
them all the days of old. 

10 But they ™rebelled, and "vexed 3 is Holy 
Spirit: ° therefore he was ‘turned. to sbe their 


xlvi, 3, 4——" Exod. xv. 24; Num, xiv. 11; Psa. Ixxvili. 56; 
xcv. 9.—" Psalm Ixxviii. "40 ; Acts vii. 61; Eph. iv. 30. 


° Exod. xxiii. 21. 


fathers, and brought them out of Egypt; Surely they 
are my people—In covenant with me: though they 
are unworthy of me, yet I cannot but look wpon » 
them as my people. Children that will not lie— 
That will keep my covenant; that will not deal 
falsely with me, to whom they are under.such un- 
speakable obligations. This is spoken by God, after 
the manner of men, who are always apt to hope the 
best concerning their children, even though, in times 
past, they may have been réfractory and disobedient. 
So he was their Saviour—Namely, on these hopes. 
and conditions he undertook to be their Saviour: 
or, he alone was their Saviour. ,When there was 
none to save, none to uphold, then he saved them. 
In all their affliction he was afflicted—When there 
was a necessity of correcting them, in order to their 
amendment, he hada compassionate sense of the 
evils which they suffered: see Deut, xxxii. 36; 
Judges x. 16; Psa. evi. 44,45. And the angel of his 
presence saved them—From the house of bondage, 
through the Red sea, and in the wilderness. .The 
same angel that conducted them in all their journeys, 
and brought them into Canaan, as Capiain of the 
Lord’s host, (Josh. v. 15,) even.the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who ‘appeared to Moses in the bush, (Exod. 
ill. 2-6, compared with Acts vii. 35,) in whom God’s 
name was, Exod. xxiii. 20, 21. Whom the Jews 
tempted in the wilderness, for they tempted Christ, 
1 Cor. x.9; and who was ‘the spiritual rock that 
followed them, typified ,by the natural rock cleft to 
afford them water: who was before Abraham, John 
viii. 58, and before all things, Col. i.17: see note on 
Exod. xxiii. 20, 21: called the angel, messenger, or 
mediator of the covenant, Mal. iii. 1; and here the 
angel of his presence ; and his presence, Exod. xxxiii. 
14, as appearing continually before his face to inter- 
cede for his church. In his love and in his pity he 
redeemed them—This shows the ground of his kind- 
ness: they were astubborn, superstitious, idolatrous 
people, yet Christ’s love and pity saved them not- 
withstanding. And he bore them, and carried them 
—dAs a father his child, or an eagle her young ones; 
he carried them in the arms of his power, and on the 
wings of his providence: see notes on Deut. i. 31; 
and xxxii. 10-12; and chap. xlvi.4. And this he 
did all the days of old, for many ages past; from 
the days of Abraham or Moses; from their bondage 
in Egypt to their settlement in Canaan, and through 
their succeeding generations. And this his ancient 
kindness is thus mentioned to induce him to con- 
tinue it, and still to uphold, protect, and preserve his 
church till he should bring her to his Father. _ 
Verse 10. But they rebelled—Revolted from him, 
“3 


The humble prayer 


CHAPTER LXIII. 


of the captive Jews. 


a ns 


A, M. 3298. enemy, and he fought against them. 
___ 11 Then he remembered the days 
of old,» Moses, and his people, saying, 
Where is he that ? brought them up out of 
the sea with the * shepherd of -his flock? 
‘where is he that put his Holy Spirit within 
him ? 

12 That led them by the right hand of Moses 
*with his glorious arm, ‘dividing the water 
before them, to make himself an everlasting 
name ? 

13 * That led. them though the deep as a 
horse in the wilderness, that they should not 
stumble ? 


14 As Precast goeth down into the be M. 3298, 
valley, the Spirit of the Lorp caused ‘cei 
him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, “to 
make thyself a glorious name. . 

15 4 * Look down from heaven, and behold 
Yfrom the habitation of thy. holiness and of thy 
glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, ° the 
sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies 
toward me? are t a restrained ? 

16 * Doubtless thou art our Father, though 
Abraham >be ignorant of us, and Israel 
acknowledge us not: thou, O Lorp, art our 
Father,.tour Redeemer; thy name is from 
everlasting. 


P Exod. xiv. 30; xxxii. 11,12; Num. xiv. 13, 14, &c.; Jer. ii.6. 
? Or, peek as Psa. Ixxvii. 20,4 Num; xi. 17, 25.; Neh. 
ix. 20; Dan. iv. 8; Hag. ii. 5" Exod. xv. 6.— Exod. XIV. 


ri Josh. iii. 16. Psa. evi. 9. a2 Sam. vii. 23. ‘ 


x Deut. xxvi. 15; Psa. lxxx. 14.——Y Psa. xxxiii. 14. Or, 
the multitude. % Jer. xxxi. 20; Hos. xi. 8. 2 Deut. xxxii. 6; 
1 Chron. xxix. 10; Chap. lxiv. 8——> Job xiv. 21; Eccles. ix. 5. 


* Or, our redeemer from everlasting is thy name. 


and, as it were, took up arms against him, many in- 
stances of which we find in their history; and vered, 
or grieved, his Holy Spirit—With their unbelief 
and murmuring, and continual proneness to idolatry, 
as well as by their repeated acts of obstinacy and 
disobedience. Therefore he was turned to be their 
enemy—Withdrew the tokens and evidences of his 


love and favour ; and fought against them—By one | 


judgment after another, both in the wilderness, and 
after their settlement in Canaan. 

Verses 11- o Then, or yet, he remembered the 
days of old— 
gant figure, as recollecting with himself what he had 


done for his people, and using that as a motive Why | 


he should still own and defend them. The same 
argument is used by Moses: see the margin. Mo- 


ses and his people—Or, what great things he had | 


done for them by Moses. Where is he that brought 
them out of the sea—That divided the sea for them ? 
Here God speaks of himself as in the former clause ; 
and dividing the sea being one of the greatest mira- 
cles he ever wrought for his people, it is therefore 
mentioned, with peculiar propriety, by way of en- 
couragement to them in their sore troubles, as in- 
deed it frequently is. With the shepherd—Or shep- 
herds, as the margin reads it; of his flock—That is, 
Moses and Aaron. That put his Holy Spirit within 
him—That gave his Spirit, the spirit of wisdom and 
courage, as well as of prophecy, to Moses and the 
seventy elders, to furnish them with gifts and graces 
for the great work of governing his people. That 
led them by the right hand of Moses—Namely, by 
the power that God gave him. With his glorious 
arm—Or, that arm wherewith God gained to himself 
so much glory, being always present to the assist- 
ance of Moses, Deut. iv. 34. Dividing the water 
before them—The Red sea, and also Jordan. To 
make himself an everlasting name—With reference 
both to his power and providence: that he might be 
glorified, and that everlastingly, upon this account. 
That led them through the deep—Between those 
vast heaps of waters, that stood up as a wall on each 


“God is here represented by an ele-| 


side of them: As a@ horse in the wilderness—Or 
plain, as the word rendered wilderness is some- 
times taken; namely, with as much safety as a 
horse traverses the plain ground, or with as much 
ease as a horse is led by the bridle. T'hat they 
should not stumble—That is, though the sea was but 
newly divided, yet the ground was so dried and 
smoothed by the wind which God sent, that it was, 
as it were, prepared before them. As a beast, &¢.— 
As a beast goes down to his pasture; or as a camel, 
or such like beast of burden, travels through a cham- 
paign country, so the Spirit of the Lord conducted 
the people of Israel into the promised land of rest 
and security. 

Verses 15, 16. Look down from heaven—In this 
excellent and pious prayer of the first-fruits of the 
converted Jews, in which they entreat God; for his 
grace and mercy, to behold them with an eye of 
compassion, they argue both from the goodness of 
his nature, and from the greatness of the works which 
he had formerly done for them. God sees every- 
where and every thing; but he is said to look down 
from heaven, because there is his throne, whereon he 
reigns in majesty. Behold, &c.—Not barely see 
and look on, but behold, with regard and respect, 
thy poor people. Where is thy zeal?—What is 
become of that love which of old would not let thee 
suffer thy people to be wronged? And thy strength? 
—That power of thine manifested in those great acts 
which thou didst perform for thy people? The 
sounding of thy bowels—This is spoken of God after 
the manner of men. The meaning is, where are 
thy tender compassions.and merciés which thou for- 
merly showedst toward us? and which thy servants 
have compared to the affection that a mother bears 
to her children? ‘Are they restrained ?—Or, canst 
thou be thus ‘straitened? An expostulation that 
agrees well with the next verse. Doubtless thou 
art our Father—Our only hope is in the relation we 
have to thee, that thou hast vouchsafed to call thyself 
our Father: we, therefore, as thy children, expect 
tofind in thee the bowels and compassions of a father. 

299 


The humble prayer 


ISATAH. 


of the captive Jews. 


17 O Lorp, why hast thou ° made 
us to err from thy ways, and “ hard- 
ANG our heart from thy fear? °* Return for thy 
servants’ sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. 
18 ‘'The people of thy holiness have possessed 


A. M. 3298. 
& C. 


¢ Psa, exix. 10,—4 Chap. ae 10, with John xii. 40; Rom. ix. 
18 © Num. x. 36; Psa. xc. 13. 


Though Abraham be ignorant of us—Though he, 
who was our father after the flesh, bé dead, and so 
ignorant of our condition. And Israel acknowledge 
us not—Though Jacob, who also was our father, 
should disown us because of our degeneracy. 7J'hov, 
O Lord, art our Father—Thou art neither unac- 
quainted with our state, nor wilt disown thy relation 
to us, but wilt continue to act the part of a father and 
redeemer to thy people. Thy name is from ever- 
lasting—Thy gracious and merciful nature and 
attributes are eternal and unchangeable. 

Verse 17-19. O Lord, why hast thou made us to err 
—Suffered us to err; from thy ways—Thy com- 
mandments. And hardened our heart fromthy fear— 
That is, the fear of thee? Why hast thou withdrawn 
thy grace, and left us to our own hardness of heart? 
See on chap. vi. 10. Return for thy servants’ sake 
—Be reconciled to us for the sake of our godly pro- 
genitors, Abraham, Isaac, &c.; namely, for the sake 
of thy promises made: to them; or rather, for our 
sakes, that little remnant who are thy servants: see 
Psa. xe. 13. The tribes of thine inheritance—W hat 
will thine enemies say if thou suffer us, thy people, 
to perish, or thine inheritance, the land of Canaan, 
to remain an eternal desolation? 
thy holiness—The people.set apart for thy service, 
distinguished from other people, and consecrated 
to thee ; have possessed it—Namely, thine inherit- 
ance, mentioned in the former clause; but-a litile 
while—In comparison of the time promised, which 
was for ever. So the Jews commonly understood the 
grant made them of the land of Canaan.. They had, 
however, possessed it about fourteen hundred years, 
but this they thought a little while. Our adversa- 
ries have trodder down thy sanctuary—The temple, 
called the sanctuary, from its being dedicated to 


The people of 


az but a little while: £our adver- A. M. 3298, 
: . B,C. 706, 
saries have trodden down thy sanc- 


tuary. 
19 Weare thine: thou never barest rule over 
them; °they were not called by thy name. 


a 


£ Deut. vii. 6; xxvi. 19; Ch. Ixii. 12; Dan. viii. 24,— Psa. xxiv. 


5 Or, thy name was not called wpon them, Chap. Ixv. 1. 


God. This their adversaries, the Babylonians, had 
trodden down, or rather, as the prophet foresaw, 
would tread down. “If we understand this\of the 
devastations made by the Romans under Titus, and 
by the Mohammedans since, the phrase is exactly pa- 
rallel to the words of Christ, Luke xxi. 24, Jerusalem 
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles.” We are 
thine—We continue so; we aré in covenant with 


‘thee, which they never were, and thus it is an argu- 


ment they use to induce God to have compassion 
upon them. TJ'hou never barest rule over them— 
Not in that manner thou didst overus. They were. 
not called by thy name—Neither owned thee, nor 
were owned by thee. Some translate this last verse 
thus: “ We have been for a long time as those over 
whom thou didst not bear rule, and who were not 
called by thy name.” “Thou hast rejected us alto- 
gether, and dost disregard us as if we had never had 
any relation to thee, nor ever were called thy peo- 
ple ; which sense agrees very well with the present 
condition of the Jewish nation, that hath continued 
for many ages without king, or prince, or sacrifice, 
as the Prophet Hosea forétold, Hos. iii. 4.”—Lowth, 
“There is no doubt,” says Vitringa, “but that the 
calamity of the external state of the Jewish people 
is here described. If you compare this description 
with the repetition of the same calamity, verses 10, 
11 of the next chapter, you will have no doubt that 
these words pertain to the Jewish people, banished 
as they are, and have been for a long time, from the 
land which, in comparison of this tedious exile , they 
possessed but a little while; their sanctuary and 
holy city being possessed and trodden down by their 
bitterest enemies; so that they are in such a state 

as to seem like people who never were -the chosen 
and peculiar people of God.” 


CHAPTER LXIV. 
Here the prayer begun in the preceding chapter is continued, in the name of the church and people of the Jews, languishing 


and disconsolate under the long rejection they at present suffer. 


(1,) They express an earnest wish that God would 


show lumself as visibly in favour of his ancient people as he did when he came down upon mount Sinai, amidst. thunder, 


and lightning, and_tempests, that shook heaven and earth, and testified his presence, 1-3. 
yormerly done, and was always ready to do for his people, 4, 5. 
worthy of God's s favour, and that they had deserved the judgments under which they now suffered, 6, 7. 
themselves to the mercy of God as a father, and submit themselves to his sovereignty, 8. 


(2,) They plead what God had 
(3,) Confess themselves to be sinful, and utterly un- 
(4;) They refer . 
(5,) They represent the very 


deplorable condition they were in, and earnestly pray for the pardon of sin, and the turning away of God's anger, 9-12, 


300 


The confession 


CHAPTER LXIV. 


of the Jews. 


A. M. 3298. 


tee O THAT thou wouldest *rend the 


-heavens, that thou wouldest come 
down, that » the mountains might flow down 
at thy presence,’ : 

2 As when ‘the melting fire burneth, the fire 
causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name 
known to thine adversaries, that the nations 
may tremble at thy presence ! 

3 When © thou didst terrible things which we 
looked not for, thou camest down, the moun- 
tains flowed down at thy presence. 


4 4 For since the beginning of the A. ia on 
world 4 men have not heard, nor per- ue 
ceived by the ear, neither bath the eye *seen, O 
God, besides thee, what he hath prepared for 
him that waiteth for him. 

5 'Thou meetest him that  rejoiceth and 
worketh righteousness, ‘ those that remember 
thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for 
we have sinned ; £ in those is continuance, and 
we shall be saved. 

6 But we are all as an unclean thing, pd all 


a Psa. exliv. 5.—?Judg.v.5; Mic. i. 4! Heb. the fire 
of meltings. © Exod. ‘xxxiv. 10; Judg, v. 4,5; Psa. Ixviii, 8 
Hab. iii. 3, 6. ° : 


2 Or, seen a god heediad thee, 
© Acts x. 35.1 Chap. xxvi. 8. 


4 Psa. xxxi. 19; 1 Cor. ii. 9. 
which doeth so for him, &c. 
& Mal. iii. 6. 


— 


NOTES ON CHAPTER, LXIV, 

Verses 1, 2. O that thou wouldest rend the heavens 
—This God is said to do, or to bow the heavens, and 
come down, when hé gives a very signal display of 
his power. ) It is a metaphor taken from men who, 
when they would resolutely and effectually help a 
person in distress, break through every opposition 
and obstacle. . That the mountains might flow 
down, &c.—Or, melt; that all impediments might 
be removed out of the way. There seems to be an 
allusion to God’s coming down upon mount Sinai 
in those terrible flames of fire, Judg. v. 4,5. As 
when the melting fire burneth—Come with -such 
zeal for thy people that the solid mountains may be 
no more before thee than metal that runs, or water 
that boils by the force of a vehement fire; to make 
thy name—That is, thy power ; known to thine ad- 
versaries—That thine enemies, who are also the 
enemies of thy people, may know thy power, and 
that thy name may be dreaded among them. 

Verses 3, 4. When thou didst terrible things— 
This may relate to what he did first in Egypt, and 
afterward in the wilderness; which ave looked not 
for—Such things as we could not have expected; 
the mountains flowed down—See Exod. xix. 18; 
Deut. xxxii. 22; Psa. xviii. 7, with the notes. But 


Lowth proposes another interpretation, which he | 


thinks agrees better with what follows, namely, 
When thou shalt do terrible and unexpected thing 
avhen thou shalt come down, (and visibly interpose 
for the deliverance of thy people,) the mountains 
shall melt at thy presence. For since the beginning 
of the world, &c.—* The methods of thy dispensa- 
tions, whereby thou wilt fulfil thy promises made to 
thy people, are beyond any thing we can think or 
conceive.” Bishop Lowth translates this verse, 
more agreeably both to the Hebrew and the LXX., 

thus: For “never have men heard, nor perceived, 
by the ear; nor hath eye seen a God besides thee, 
who doeth such things for those that trust in him. % 
Some of the Jewish doctors have understood this 
passage of the blessings belonging to the days of the 
Messiah; and to them the apostle applies it, 1 Cor. 
ii. 9. Others extend it to the glories, of the world to 
come. Of both these it may be truly said, that from 
the beginning of the world men have not, either by 

3 


| 


thy providence.” 


hearing or'seeing ; or, as the apostle, adds, by any 
reasonings or conceptions of their own minds, come 
to the full knowledge of them. None have seen or 
heard, or can understand, but God himself; and so 
far as he has been, and i is, pleased to reveal it by his 


Spirit, what the provision is, which is made for the 
present and future felicity of holy souls ; 
translation here expresses it, of those that wait for 


or, as our 


him, namely, inthe way of duty; that sincerely and 


| earnestly desire, and live in the daily and ardent ex- 
| pectation of, the salvation he hath promised. them. 


The apostle has it, that love him; to show that as 


|none can wait ir. him who do not love him, so all 
that Jove him will wait for him. 


Verse 5. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, &.— 
“Thou preventest, with the blessings of thy good- 
ness, those that take pleasure in the ways of thy 
commandments, and live under a continual sense of 
Behold, thou art wroth—Or 
greatly angry; for, or because, we have sinned— 
Have been guilty of many and great offences, where- 
by we have provoked thy heavy displeasure. In 
those—Those ways of thine, thy ways of mercy, in 
which we have remembered thee; is continuance— 
Or, perpetuity ; or, in those thou art ever to be 
found; and we shall be saved—At last, though thou 
art wroth, and we have sinned. “'The mercy of the 
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting on them that 


s, || fear him,” Psa. ciii. 17. He always waits to be gra- 


cious, ¢ and through all ages meets his worshippers in 
his ordinances. This seems to be the sense of this 
obscure passage; at least it will bear this sense; and, 
as it is in perfect consistency with the general 
tenor of the Scriptures, it is certainly safer to admit 
it, unless a better can be proposed, than to have re- 
course to any mere conjectural alterations of the 
Hebrew text. 

Verses 6,7. We are all as an unclean thing—Or, 
unclean person, as $20 equally signifies. He seems 
to allude to persons unclean through the leprosy, 
which was the highest degree of uncleanness among 
the Jews. He means that the body of the people 
were like one under a ceremonial pollution, who was 
not admitted into the courts of the tabernacle; or 
like one labouring under some loathsome disease. 
We are all, by sin, not only become olnoxious to 

1 


The pacertat 


ISATAH. 


of the Jews. 


i eg * ourrighteousnesses are as filthy rags; 
————. and we all do’ fade as a leaf; and our 
iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. 

7 And * there is none that calleth upon thy 
name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of 
thee : for thou hast hid thy face from us, and 
hast >consumed us, * because of our iniquities. 

8 1 But now, O Lorp, thou aré our Father ; 
we are the clay,” and thou our potter; and we 
all are” the work of thy hand. 

9 “I Be not °wroth very sore, O Lorp, nei- 


be- A.M. 3298. 


ther remember iniquity for ever: 
B. C. 706, 


hold, see, we beseech re: Pwe are all 
thy people. 

10 Thy holy- cities are a widens Zion is a 
wilderness, 4 Jerusalem a desolation. 

11 * Our holy and our beautiful house, where 
our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire : 
and all * our pleasant things are laid waste. 

12 * Wilt thou refrain thyself for these chings, 
O Lorp? * wilt thou hold thy penne, and afflict 
us very sore ? 


4 Phil. iii. 99 ——i Ps, xc. 5, 6 ——* Hos, vii.7.——* Heb. melted, 
4*Heb. by the hand, as Job viii. 4—! Ch. ]xiii. 16——™ Ch. xxix. 
16; xlv.9; Jer. xviii. 6; Rom. ix. 20, 21. n Hph. ii. 10, 


o Psa. Ixxiv. 1,2; xxix. 8.——P Psa. lxxix. 13-——4Psa. Ixxix. 1. 
"2 Kings xxv. 9; Psa. lxxiv. 7; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 19.——* Ezek, 
xxiv. 21, 25.—+t Chap. xlii. 14. u Psa, Ixxxill. 1. 


God’s justice, but odious to his holiness. “'The pro- 
phets frequently borrow their images from the re- 
ceived customs and spiritual ceremonies of the na- 
tions among which the distinction between things 
clean and unclean makes no small figure; and under 
these images they frequently describe moral defects 
and religious offences, as in the present passage.” 
And all our righteousnesses, or, justifications, are 
as filthy rags—As r ags, which cannot cover us; as 
Jilthy rags, “which would only defile us, ‘With re- 
spect to the Jews, he refers to all those external cere- 
monies and-services wherein they placed merit, and 
whereby they hoped for justification, Rom. x. 3, at 
the same time that they neglected moral duties, and 
were guilty even of very gross violations of God’s 
holy law. Micah, who lived at the same time, 
speaks in the same manner, chap. vii. 2-4. But 
the prophet’s declaration is ‘true, if considered as 
comprehending the best works and actions that 
can be performed by any of mankind; for all our 
works have so great an alloy of imperfection, that 
they cannot justify us before a holy and just God; 
see Psa. exliii. 2; Rom. iii. 19, 20; Gal. ii. 16. 
And our iniqutties, like the wind—A wind that 
withers both leaves and fruit, or that sweeps away 
all before it; have taken us away—Out of our 
own land, and from all our privileges and bless- 
ings, and scattered us abroad through all the earth; 
or from God’s favour, into a state of condemnation 
and wrath. And there is none—Or, yet there is 
none, that is, few: they are not to be discerned 
among the multitude; that calleth upon thy name— 
That call upon thee as they ought, as Jacob, Moses, 
and David did. This shows the universal depravity 
and apostacy of the Jewish people at the time re- 
ferred to; that-stirreth up himself to take hold on 
thee—On thy power, truth, and love by faith; that 
uses fervency and importunity in prayer to recover 
thy favour, which has been withdrawn from us, and to 
obtain the removal of the various and heavy calami- 
ties with which we are oppressed. For thou hast 
consumed us—Hebrew, 131)0n, hast melted us ; our 


sins have kindled such a fire of thy wrath against 


us that we are melted with it. 

Verses 8,9. But now, O Lord, thou art our Fa- 
ther—Notwithstanding all this, thou art our Father, 
having both created and adopted us; therefore pity 

302 


us thy children; we are the clay, and thou our pot- 
ter—We are in thy hands as clay in the hands of 
the potter: thou canst form us, and dispose of us as 
thou pleasest. And we will not quarrel with thee, 
however thou art pleased to deal with us. We are 
all the work of thy hands-—Therefore forget us 
not, forsake us not, but spare, and preserve, and 
save us.. Be not wroth with us very sore—But let 
thy anger be mitigated by the clemency and com- 
passion of a father. Neither remember iniquity for 
ever—Thou hast been angry with us a long time, be 
not so forever. Behold, §c. we are thy people— 
Thy peculiar people, chap. lxiii. 19. Another argu- 
ment to enforce the former petition. 

Verses 10-12. Thy holy cities—Zion and Jeru- 
salem, mentioned immediately after; or other cities 


also in the land of Judea besides these two; called 


holy, because God had his synagogues in them, in 
which he was worshipped, Psa. Ixxiv. 8. — Zion is 
a wilderness, &c.—Utterly waste: not only the 
ordinary citics, but Zion and Jerusalem themselves 
are in a state of ruin and desolation. Our holy 
and beautiful house—Our temple. Not only our 
principal, cities, but even. our temple, which we 
thought sacred and inviolable, in which we glo- 
ried, because it was thine, and our fathers’ house, 
and ours: ,the place where thy holy service was'per- 
formed, and thy glory and presence were wont to be 
manifested. Where our fathers praised thee—They 
do not presume to mention themselves, having been 
every way so very abominable; but put the Lord in 
mind of their fathers, many of whom were his faithful 
servants, having praised him there. Is burned up with 
jire—This relates to the burning of the temple by 
the Romans, who made an entire destruction of it, 
according to our Saviour’s prediction, Matt. xxiv. 2. 
And all our pleasant. things are laid waste—Not 
only the pleasant land, but all that was magnificent, 
ornamental, or desirable in Jerusalem, or any other 
city, town, or place. Wilt thou refrain, or, contain, 
thyself for, or, at, these things—Wilt thou behold 
them unmoved, as an indifferent spectator? Wilt 


thou neither show thy compassion toward thy ser- 


vants, nor thy resentment toward thine enemies? 
Wilt thou hold thy peace—Wilt thou be as one that 
regards not? And afflict us very sore—And persist 
to afflict us in thy continued hot displeasure ? 

3 


The former idolatries 


CHAPTER LXV. 


of the Jews. 


CHAPTER LXV. 


This chapter contarns a aefence of God’s proceedings in regard to the Jews, with reference to their complaint in the chapter 


preceding. 


God is introduced declaring that he had called the Gentiles, though they had not sought him; and had re- 


jected his own people for their refusal to attend his repeated call, 1,2; for their obstinate disobedience, their idolatrous 


practices, and detestable hypocrisy, 3-7. 


That, nevertheless, he would not destroy them all; but would preserve a rem- | 
nant, to whom he would make good his ancient promises, 8-10. 


Severe punishments are threatened to the apostates, 11— 


16. And great blessings are promised to the obedient in a future and glorious state of the church, that is, the Christian 


Church, 17-25. 


*AM sought of them that asked 
not for me ; Iam found of them 
that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, 
unto a nation ¢hat » was not called by my name. 

2 °I have spread out my hands all the day 
unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a 
way that was not good, after their own 
thoughts; : 


A. M, 3298. 
B. C. 706. 


“aRom: ix. 24, 25, 26,30; x. 20; Eph, ii. 12, 13.——> Chap. 


Ixvi..17; Lev. xvii. 5, 


3 A people “that provoketh me. to eh oy 
anger continually to my face ; “that 
serttipath: in gardens,. and burneth incense 
upon altars of brick ; 

4 Which remain among the graves, and 
lodge in the nionuments, * which eat swine’s 
flesh, and * broth of abominable things is in 
their vessels ; 


1 Heb. upon eink. — Deut. xviii. 


“-lsiii. 19. ¢ Rom. x. 21,——4 Deut, xxxii. 21. © Chap. i. 29; |) 11.—— teed Ixvi. 17; Lev. xi. 7. SOR bape 
NOTES ON CHAPTER LXV. shia i nee Sane meaning is, in a way that is 
Verse 1. That in the primary sense of this text||very bad. After their own thouzhis—Or, as it is 


it is a prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles, 
upon the rejection of the Jews, for their contempt 
and crucifying of Christ, cannot be doubted by any, 
who will not arrogate to "themselves a greater ability 
to interpret the prophecies of the Old Testament 
than St. Paul had, who, Rom. x. 20, expressly so in- 
terprets it, and applies. it; which shows the vanity of 
the Jews in their other inferpretations of it. Zam 
sought—Hebrew, *nw17), literally, diligent inquiry 
is made after me; or, I am diligently inquired of. 
Vitringa renders it, “Quesitus sum cum effectu ;” 
I am sought so as to be found. The LXX. read, 
eudarne eyevn nv, L ammade manifest, or, made known, 
as Bishop Lowth translates it; to them that asked 
not for me—That in times past made no inquiry after 
meé; J am now found by them that formerly sought 
me not. 
whole nations, by the preaching of my gospel, to 
behold me, and that with importunity, reiterating my 
calls and entreaties; and this I did unto a nation 
not called by my name, with which I was not in co- 
venant, and which did not profess any relation to 
me. ‘The prophet speaks of what was to take 
place some hundreds of years afterward, as if it 
were a thing already done, to signify. the cer- 
tainty of it. 

Verse 2. I have spread out my hands—This is 
applied to the Jews, Rom. x.21. J have stretched 
out my hands, Ihave used all means to reduce them; 
I have stretched out the hands of a passionate ora- 
tor, to persuade them; of a liberal benefactor, to 
load them with my benefits: this I have done conti- 
nually, in the whole course of my providence with 
them. Toa rebellious people—Yet they are a re- 
bellious people. St. Paul expounds it by Aaov arev- 
Savra, kat avtiAeyovra, A people not persuaded, not 
believing, or, not obeying ; but gainsaying, or, con- 
tradicting the word and will of God. Which walk- 
eth in a way that is not good—Less is expressed 

3 


I said, Behold me, behold me—tI invited | 


elsewhere expressed, after the imaginations of their 
hearts ; a usual phrase to describe sin, especially in 
the matter of God’s worship. The Prophet Jere- 
miah expresses sin in this manner many times. 
Verses 3, 4. A people that provoketh me to anger 
—That the Jews are the people here intended, is 
without question: the prophet, speaking of the eall- 
ing of the Gentiles, upon their rejection, enumerates 
some of their sins which were the causes thereof: 
for though their crucifying of Christ was the sin 
which. was the principal or proximate cause, yet 
God visited on that generation their iniquities and 
the iniquities of their fathers together; they having, 
by the act of rejecting and crucifying their Messiah, 
filled up the measure of their sins. Continwally to 
my face—With the utmost impudence, not taking 
notice of my omnipresence and omniscience. J'hat 
sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth, &c.—Directly 
contrary to the divine rule. “These are instances,” 
says Bishop Lowth, “of heathenish superstition, 
and idolatrous practices, to which the Jews were im- 
moderately addicted before the Babylonish captivity. 
The héathen worshipped their idols in groves: 
whereas God, in opposition to this species of idol- 
atry, commanded his people, when they should 
come into the promised land, to destroy all the 
places wherein the Canaanites had served their gods, 
and in particular to burn their groves with fire, Deut. 
xii. 2,3. These apostate Jews sacrificed upon altars 
built of bricks; in opposition to the command of 
God, with regard to his altar, which was to be of un- 
hewn stone, Exod: xx. 25. Or it means perhaps that 
they sacrificed upon the roofs of their houses, which 
were always flat, and paved with brick or tile, or 
plaster of terrace ; an instance of this idolatrous 
practice we find 2 Kings xxiii. 12, where it is said 
that Josiah beat down the altars- that were on the 
top of the wpper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings 
of Judah had made. See also Zeph. i. 5.” Whe 
303 


God’s gracious promise 


~ ISATAH. 


of restoration. 


A. M. 3298. 


0. 100? ‘Which say, Stand by thyself, 


. come not near to me; for I am holier 
than thou. These are a smoke in my * nose, 
a fire that burneth all the day. . 

6 Behold, ‘it is written before me: *I will 
not keep silence, !but will recompense, even 
recompense into their bosom, 

7 Your iniquities, and ™ the iniquities of your 
fathers together, saith the Lorn, ® which have 


bh Matt. ix. 11; Luke v. 30; xviii. 11; Jude 19.——8 Or, anger. 
i Deut. Xxxil. 345 ’ Mal. iii. 16.— Psa. 1. 3 


remain among the graves, and lodge in the monu- 
ments—Or, as Bishop Lowth renders ‘it, Who dwell 
in the sepulchres and lodge in the caverns, for the 
purposes of necromancy, (or, the art of revealing 
future events by communications with the dead,) 
and divination ; to obtain dreams and revelations: 
another instance this of heathenish superstition, 
which the Latin poet describes as follows: 


—___—__—_—“ Hue dona sacerdos 

Cum tulit, et cesarum ovium sub nocte silenti 

Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit ; 

Multa modis simulacra videt volitantia miris, 

Et varias audit voces, fruiturque Deorum 

Colloquio, atque imis Acheronta affatur Avernis.” 
Vira. AdN., vii. 86. 


“ Here in distress th’ Italian nations come, 
Anxious to clear their doubts, and learn their doom: 
First, on the fleeces of the slaughter’d sheep, 
By night the sacred priest dissolves in sleep ; 
When, in a train, before his slumb’ring eye, 
Thin airy forms and wondrous visions fly, 
He calls the powers who guard the infernal floods, 
And talks inspired, familiar with the gods.” 
Pirr. 


Which eat swine’s flesh—“Which was expressly 
forbidden by the law, Lev. xi. 7; but among the 
heathen was in principal request in their sacrifices 
and feasts. Antiochus Epiphanes compelled the 
Jews to eat-swine’s flesh, as a full proof of their re- 
nouncing their religion, 2 Mac. vi. 18; and vii. 1. 
And broti of abominable things—For lustrations, 
magical arts, and other superstitious and abominable 
practices.”—Bishop Lowth. 

Verses 5, 6. Who say, Stand by thyself, come not 
near to me—Though they were so exceedingly 
guilty, yet they pretended to singular sanctity, so 
that they would not suffer others to come near or 
touchthem. The reader will observe that the crime 
of hypocrisy is here decried, and every one that is 
acquainted with the gospels will easily see that the 
character of the Pharisees and their followers is 
drawn in this passage; see Luke xviii. 10. And 
there cannot be a more lively description of spiritual 
pride and hypocritical arrogance than it gives us. 
For I am holier than thou—Thus they esteemed 
themselves holier than others, though all their holi- 


burned incense upon the mountains, 4. * og 
°and blasphemed me upon the hills : 
therefore will I measure their former work into 
their bosom. i 

8 ¥ Thus saith the Lorn, As the new wine 
is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy 
it not; for ?a blessing zs in it: so will I do for 
my servants’ sake, that I may not destroy them 
all. hoy 


1 Psa. Ixxix. 12; Jer. xvi. 18; Ezek. xi. 21.——™Exod. xx. 5. 
nBzek. xviii. 6, © Ezek. xx. 27,:28.——? Joel ii. 14. 


commanded, Of these God saith, These are a 
smoke in my nostrils, a Jire that burneth qll the 
day—That is, a continual provocation to me: as 
smoke is an offence to our noses. Behold, it is writ- 
ten before me—They may think I take no notice of 
these things, but I will as certainly remember them 
as princes remember the things which, in order that 
they may not forget. them, they record in writing. 
And they shall know that I take notice of, and will 
remember them; for I will not keep silence—That 
is, I will not long neglect the punishment of them, 
though for a while I have delayed it, like aman who 
restrains his wrath, for some wise reasons which are 
best known to himself, Psa. 1. 21; but will recom- 
pense into their bosom—My punishment of them 
shall be severe and certain, but yet it shall be just, 
and not greater than their sins have merited. 

Verse 7. Your iniquities, and the iniquities of 
your fathers together—-Yea, and when I reckon 
with them, I will punish them, not only for their 
personal sins, but for the sins of their parents, which ° 
they have made their own, by imitation. Which 
have burned incense uponthe mountains—There per- 
forming to idols that homage which I commanded 
them to pay unto me; or, if any of them pretend it 
was to me they performed that service, though be- 
fore an image, yet it was in a way and place in 
which I expressly forbid them to worship me, having . 
appointed the place where, and the manner how, I 
would be worshipped. And blasphemed me upon 
the hills—Dishonoured instead of glorifying me, by 
worshipping me in a way which I had not appoint- 
ed, and which they learned only from idolaters. 
Therefore will I measure their former work, &¢e.— 
I will not only punish the late sins that they have 
committed, but the former sins of this kind, which 
those that went before did practise, and they have 
continued in. 

Verses 8-10. T'hus saith the Lord—These words 
may be conceived as a gracious answer from God to 
the prophet, pleading God’s covenant with Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Israel. To this God replies, that 


‘he intended no such severity as the utter destruc- 


tion of the whole nation; that the unfaithfulness of 
men should not make his promise to the ancient pa- 
triarchs of none effect, Rom. iii. 3; that his threat- 
ening should be made good upon the generality of- 
this people, whose vine was of Sodom, and of the 


mess lay in rituals, and those too such as God never || fields of Gomorrah, Deut. xxxii. 32. ‘As the new 


304 


Punishments threatened 


CHAPTER LXV. 


to the apostates. 


A. M. 3298. 


fmt. Soe 9 And I will bring forth a seed out 


’ of Jacob, and out of Judah an in- 
heritor of my mountains: andmine ‘elect shall 
inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there. 
10 And * Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and 
*the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie 


down in, for my people that have A. M. 3298 

B. C. 706. 

sought me. peta ree 

Il 4 But ye are they that forsake the Lorn, 

that forget * my holy mountain, that prepare “a 

table for that * troop, and that furnish the drink- 
offering unto that ° number. 


4 Verses 15, 22; Matt. xxiv. 22; Rom. xi. 5,7.——* Chapter 
XXXxlil. 9; xxxv. 2.—+* Josh. vii. 24, 26; Hos. ii. 15. 


u Fizek. xxiii. 41; 1 Cor. 
5Or, Mi 


eni. 


' Chap. lvi. Ma pe 13; Verse 25. 
.—+* Or, Gad. 


wine is found in the cluster, &e.—As in a vineyard, 
which is generally unfruitful, there may be some 
vine that brings forth fruit; or as in a vine that is 
full of luxuriant branches, that bring forth no fruit, 
there may be here and there a bunch that contains 
good grapes, and as to such, the gardener bids his 
servants destroy it not, for there is in them what 
speaks God’s blessing. So—So (saith God) will I 
do for my servants’ sake, that I may not destroy 
them all—Namely, for the sake of my servants, 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Iwill bring a seed out 
of Jacob—A small number, which shall be as a seed, 
from whence others shall spring, Rom. ix. 27-29, 
And out of Judaa—God further promises to bring 
out of Judah an inheritor of nis mountains—That 
is, of the country of Judea, which was mountainous. 
God calls them Ais mountains, because he had chosen 
that. country before all others. Though this may 
first refer to the return of the Jews out of the cap- 
tivity of Babylon into their own land, yet, according 
to this whole prophecy, it must ultimately respect 
their restoration to the land of Canaan, after their 
conversion to Christianity. And mine elect shall 
inherit it—My chosen ones, namely, such as should 
embrace Christianity, termed by St. Paul, the election 
of grace, (Rom, xi. 5-7,) who, in consequence of 
repentance toward God, and faith in Jesus of Naza- 
reth as the true Messiah, should become, with the 
Gentile Christians, a chosen generation, a royal 
priesthood, aholy nation, a peculiar people, to offer 
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ. And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks— 
After they are restored, as mentioned above, to their 
own land. Sharon was a place of great fruitfulness 
for pastures. It was become like a wilderness, but 
God here promises that it should again be a place 
for the flocks.. And the valley of Achor a place, 
&c.—Achor was a valley to the north of Jericho, 
opposite to the town of Ai, where Achan was put to 
death, and which was remarkably fertile, Josh. vii. 
26. For my people that have sought me—Lest the 
wicked, idolatrous Jews should apply this promise 
to themselves, God here limits it to the people who 
should seek him, that is, should turn to him in true 
repentance and faith, and seek his favour. That the 
words have the force of such a limitation appears 
from what follows. 

Verse 11. But, &c.—The prophet now returns to 
address his discourse to the sinners and apostates, 
whom he had reproved and threatened, (verses 2, 3,) 
and renews his charge against them for forsaking 
the Lord, separating themselves from his worship, 

Vou. IIT. ( 20) 


and polluting themselves with idolatry, the most 
shameful and abominable in his sight. Ye are they 
that forsake the Lord—Let not any of you that are 
idolaters and covenant-breakers think that these 
promises belong to you: you are apostates from 
God’s fear and love, his worship and service, and 
have neither part nor lot in this matter; that forget 
my holy mountain—My temple and worship, a figure 
of the Christian Church. That prepare a table, 
&c.—As God had altars, which are sometimes called 
tables, (see Ezek. xli. 22,) so they prepared altars 
for their idols. By preparing a table here, however, 
seems rather to be meant the feasts they made upon 
their sacrifices, in imitation of what the true God 
had. commanded his people, Deut. xvi. 14, 15; for 
that troop—A troop of idols, worshipped by the 
heathen ;-and furnish the drink-offerings unto their 
number—God had appointed drink-offerings, asa 
sort of homage to be paid to him; and these people 
paid this homage to their idols. The words gad 
and ment, the former of which is rendered troop 
here, and the latter nwmber, are thought by many 
commentators to be the names of certain idols. ‘The 
LXX. render the former word 7a daiyoriw, the demon, 
or devil, and the latter ry rvyn, fortune. Or, accord- 
ing to the copy St. Jerome seems to have used, they 
have translated gad, fortune, and meni, demon. 


| Not to mention the opinion of other learned men, 


Dr. Waterland and Bishop Lowth suppose that gad 
means the sun, and meni, the moon. ‘And it seems 
very probable that the moon, at least, is meant by 
one of these names, being generally worshipped 
throughout all the East, and termed the queen of 
heaven, and afterward by the Greeks under the 
name of Hecate. The idolatrous Jews erected al- 
tars to this fancied goddess on the tops of their 
houses, or-near their doors, and in the corners of 
their streets, or in groves, and offered to her incense, 
cakes baked with oil and honey, and drink-offerings 
of wine, and other liquors. And it appears to have 
been usual among the Greeks from the most ancient 
times, to spread in the evening a table-covered with 
dainties, in the highways, in honour to her. But it 
is of no consequence to us what these objects of 
idolatrous worship were; nor have we any cause to 
regret, that the inspired penmen have not deigned 
to inform us, but have, “chosen rather that the 
memory of the knowledge of them should be utter- 
ly abolished. And God be praised, that they are so 
totally abolished that we are quite at a loss to know 
what, and what sort of things they were.”—Schmi-~ 
dius, quoted by Bishop Lowth. 

305 3 


Punishments threatened 


x ag eg 12 Therefore will I number you to 
——"". the sword, and ye shall all bow down 


to the slaughter: * because when I called, ye 
did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear ; 
but did evil before mine éyes, and did choose 
that wherein I delighted not. 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop, Behold, 
my servants shall eat, but ye shall’ be hungry : 
behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be 
thirsty ; behold, my. servants shall rejoice, but 
ye shall be ashamed : 


14 Behold, my ise shall sing for joy of 


x2 Chron, xxxvi. 15, 16; Prov. i.24; Chap. lxvi. 4; Jer. vii. 
13; Zech. vii. 7; ‘Matt, xxi, 34-43.——y Matt. viii. 12; Luke 
xiii. 28. —*Heb. breaking. 


ISATAH. 


to the apostates, 


heart, but ye shall ery for sorrow of + aes: 
heart, and ¥ shall howl for ® vexation — 
of spirit. 
15 And ye shall leave your name” for a curse 
unto * my chosen: for the Lord Gop shall slay 
thee, and ° call his servants by another name: 
16 ° That he who blesseth himself in the 
earth, shall bless himself in the God of truth ; 
and ¢ he that sweareth in the earth, shall swear 
by the God of truth ; because the former trou- 
bles are forgotten, and because- they are hid 
from mine eyes. 


2 Jer, xxix. 22; Zech. viii. 13——4 Verses 9,:22, patch Chap. 
Ixii. 2; Acts xi. 26. Psa. Ixxii. 17; Jer. iv. 2—4 Deut. 
vi.. 13; Psa. lxiii. 11; Chap. xix. 18; xlv, 23; Zeph. i. 5. 


Verse 12. Therefore will I number you to the 
sword—“ Here the allusion to meni, which signifies 
number, is obvious.” And you shall all bow down to 
the slaughte/@-As you have bowed: down to idols, 
which are my enemies, I will make you bow down to 
your enemies’ swords ; because when I called— 
Namely, by my prophets, you did not answer by 
doing the things that I enjoined. But did evil before 
mine eyes—Y ou sinned deliberately, choosing sinful 
courses, the things which I hated. It must be ob- 
served here, that though the Jews, in the time of 
Christ and his. apostles, (the: period, it seems, refer- 
red to,) were not guilty of such idolatries as those 
above mentioned, yet, as they manifested the same 
spirit of rebellion, perverseness, and enmity to God, 
he therefore threatens that he would number thenr 
to the sword, as criminals ordered for execution, 
which he accordingly did, sending the Roman armies 
to desolate their country, lay their cities level with 
the ground, and almost extirpate their whole nation. 

Verses 13-15. Behold, my servants shall eat, but 
you shall be hungry, &c.—I will make a great dif- 
ference between my faithful servants and‘such un- 
believersas youare. This promise the Lord fulfilled 
in aremarkable manner before the destruction of 
Jerusalem by the Romans. In consequence of the 
direction given by Christ to his disciples, (Matt. 
xxvi. 15,) when they observed the Roman armies 
approaching toward Jerusalem, they left the devoted 
city and’ fled to the mountains, an opportunity for 
doing which being given them by the special provi- 
dence of God. For after the Romans, under Cestius 
Gallus, made their first advance toward Jerusalem, 
they suddenly withdrew again in a most unexpected, 
and, indeed, impolitic manner; at which Josephus 
testifies his surprise, since the city might then have 
been easily taken. By this means they gave, as it 
were, a signal to the Christians to retire ; which, out 
of regard to their Lord’s admonition, they did, some 
to Pella, and others to mount Libanus, and thereby 


not only preserved their lives, but obtained a supply | 


of all their wants; while, in the mean time, the un- 
believing and disobedient Jews, who had rejected 
and crucified their Messiah, pertinaciously seeking 


to defend themselves in the city, were overwhelmed 
with the greatest calamities that ever came upon any 
people, and perished with hunger and thirst, the 


‘sword of their enemies, and mutual slaughters, in 


the greatest anguish and despair, crying, as itis here 
said, for sorrow of heart, and howling for vexation 
of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a 
curse unto my chosen+-That is, to the Christians. 
They shall use your name as examples of the emi- 
nent wrath of God upon sinners; or, as Vitringa 
reads it, Ye shall leave your name for an oath to 
my chosen ; explaining the meaning to be, “That the 
punishment and calamity of these apostates should 
be so remarkable, that.in the forms of swearing men 
should take their example from the severity of the 
divine judgment inflicted upon them, and from their 
miserable state ; saying, ‘If I knowingly and wilfully 
deceive, may as great calamities happen to me as have 
happened to those wicked and apostate Jews.” See 
Jer. xxix. 22. For the Lord shall slay thee—For you 
shall not perish by an ordinary hand, but by the 
hand of the Lord God. Your destruction shall be 
most extraordinary. The prophet may either allude 
in this expression to the total abolition of the Jewish 
economy, or to the prodigious slaughter made of 
that people by one dreadful massacre after another, 
especially during the siege of Jerusalem; and shall 
call his. servants by another name—God himself 
shall consider your very name as infamous and ac- 
cursed, and will not suffer his people to be called by 
it. They shall not be called Jews or Israelites, but 
Christians. See note on-chap. Ixii. 2. 

Verse 16. That he who blesseth himself in the 
earth—In any part of the world, for God shall have 
servants out of all nations, that shall be dignified 
with this new name; shall bless himself in the God 
of truth—That is, in his name ; shall renounce every 
species of idolatry, and invoke and praise the true 
God alone. They shall have recourse to, and trust 
in, him alone, for blessing and happiness, and for a 
supply of all their wants. Observe, reader, it is of 
great consequence what that is which we bless our- 
selves in, and which we most please ourselves with. 
Worldly people bless themselves in the abundance 

( 20" ) ; 


Blessings promised 


CHAPTER LXV. 


to the obedient. 


A. M. 3298. 17 {J For behold, I create *new hea- 
B. C. 706. 

vens and a new earth: and the for- 
mer shall not be remembered, nor 7 come into 
mind. 

18 But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that 
which I create: for behold, I create Jerusalem 
a rejoicing, and her people a joy. 

19 And ‘I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy 


in my people: and the ® voice of weep-. A. va wh 
ing shall be no more heard in her, nor 
the voice of crying. 

20 There shall be no more thence an infant 
of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his 
days: for the child shall die a hundred years 
old: * but the sinner being a hundred years old 
shall be accursed. 


Ixvi: 22; 2 Pet. iii. 13; Rev. xxi. 1——? Heb. 


¢ Chap. li. 16; 
: come upon the heart. 


which they have of this world’s goods, Psa. xlix. 18; 
Luke xii. 19; but God’s servants bless themselves in 


him, as a God all-sufficient for them. And he that | 


sweareth, &c.—By him also they shall swear, and 
not by any creature, or any false god. To his judg- 


ment they shall refer themselves, from whom every | 


man’s judgment proceeds. _ Both in prayer and 
praise, and in every act of homage and worship, 
they shall give honour to him as the God of truth— 
Hebrew, Amen, which some understand of Christ, 
who is himself the Amen, the faithful and true wit- 
mess, and in whom all the promises are yea and 
amen. In him we must bless ourselves, and by him 
we must swear unto the Lord, and covenant with 
him. Some read it, He that is blessed in the earth 
shall be blessed in the true God; for Christ is the 
true God and eternal life, 1 John v. 20. And it was 
promised of old, that in him should all families of 
the earth be blessed. Because the former troubles 
are forgotten—Namely, the troubles of the church. 
They shall see that what God hath promised he hath 
also fulfilled, and that he hath put an end to the 
troubles of his people, the remembrance of which 
shall be swallowed up in their present comforts. The 
chief reason of this is assigned in the next verse. 
Verses 17-19. For behold, I create new heavens, 
&c.—I will tell you yet a more admirable thing: I 
am about wholly to change the state, not only of my 
people, freeing them from the afflictions and trou- 
bles by which they have been oppressed, but also of 


the world, bringing a new face upon it; sending my. 


Son to institute a new economy and worship, and 
raise up a new church; and pouring out my Spirit 
in a more plentiful manner; which new state shall 
continue until a new heaven and anew earth ap- 
pear, in which shall dwell nothing but righteous- 
ness, 2 Pet. iii. 13; Rev. xxi. 1. And the former 
shall not be remembered—That state of things shall 
be so glorious, that the former state of my people 
shall not be noticed in comparison of it. But be 
you glad and rejoice for ever—You that are my 
people. Though you cannot rejoice with that de- 
gree of joy which will attend the fruition of such a 
good, yet be glad and rejoice with the rejoicing of 
hope, for the thing is,certain, and what I have already 
begun to do. Nor let your present state, nor the 
discouragements you have from seeming, improba- 
bilities, prevent your joy; for it is not a work to be 
performed in an ordinary way, or by an ordinary 
power, but by that almighty and creating energy 
3 


£ Chap. Ixii. 5.——s Chap. xxxv. 10; li.11; 
b Kecles. viii. 12, 


Rev. vii..17; xxi. 4, 


‘ 


which produces’ and brings into being what before 
had no existence. For behold, I. create Jerusalem 
—Namely, the gospel church; @ rejoicing—That is, 
a cause and source of joy, because of the light and. 
grace, the wisdom, holiness, and happiness that shall 
be possessed by its members, the pure doctrine which 
shall be held and professed, and the excellent disci- 
pline which shall be maintained in it; and her peo- 
ple ajoy—They shall not only rejoice, but be rejoiced 
in: those. that sorrowed with the church shall re- 
joice with her. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem— 
The prosperity of the church shall be a rejoicing to 
God himself, who has pleasure in the prosperity of 
his servants; and joy in. my people—Taking com- 
placency in the work of my grace wrought in them, 
and in the works of righteousness wrought by them. 
And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard— 
Such promises, many of which are to be found in 
the Scriptures, must either be understood in a com- 
parative sense, meaning they shall suffer no such 
misery as formerly, or as signifying only some long 
or eminent state of happiness ; unless they be re- 
ferred to another life, in which case’ they may be 
taken strictly, as signifying a perpetuity and perfec- 
tion of joy and happiness. 

Verse 20. There shall be no more thence an in- 
fant of days, &ce.—There shall be no untimely or 
premature deaths, either of infants and children, who 
do not grow up to man’s estate, or of old men, who 
do not live out the full term of life. For the child 
shall die, &c.—This should rather be translated, 
For he that dies a hundred years old shall die a 
child: and the sinner that dies a hundred years 
old shall be (that is, shall be deemed) accursed, 
or cut off by the justice of God for his crimes. 
Thus “the prophet describes this renovation of the 
world as a paradisiacal state, and such as the patri- 
archs enjoyed before the flood, when men commonly 
lived nearly a thousand years. So he that died at 
a hundred years of age would have been jooked 
upon as dying in the age of childhood, and be judg- 
ed to have been cut off in the beginning of his years, 
as a punishment for some great sins he had com- 
mitted.”—Lowth. It is justly observed here by Mr. 
Scott, that “the event alone can certainly determine 
whether this is meant literally or figuratively; but 
it is evident that the universal prevalence of real 
Christianity would so terminate wars, murders, con- 
tentions, idleness, intemperance, and licentiousness, 
as greatly to lengthen out the general term of man’s 

307 


The great glory of 


ISAIAH. 


the Messiah’s kingdom. 


A.M. B208. 21 And ‘they shall build houses and 
————. inhabit them ; and they. shall plant 
vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. 

22 They shall not build, and another inhabit ; 
they shall not plant, and another eat: for * as 
the days of a tree are the days of my people, 
and ! mine elect * shall long enjoy the work of 
their hands. 

23 They shall not labour in vain, ™ nor bring 
forth for trouble ; for * they are the seed of the 


i Lev. xxvi. 16; Deut. xxviii. 30; Chap. lxii.8; Amos ix. 14. 
k Psa, xcii. 12.——! Verses 9, 15,——® Heb. shall make them con- 
tinue long, or, shall wear out. 


life. Many diseases which now destroy thousands 
and tens of thousands in the prime of life, and com- 
municate distempers to succeeding generations, 
would, in that case, scarcely be heard of any more; 
and thus the human constitution would soon. be 
much mended, and children would generally come 
into the world,:more vigorous and healthy than they 
can do while vice so greatly prevails. What. God 
may further intend in this matter we cannot deter- 
mine.” Vitringa’s view of the passage seems. to 
have been, that “ there shall be no violent or punitive 
death in this. holy city, but that all the inhabitants 
being holy, all shall die full of days and happy, and 
shall have, as it were, a foretaste, pledge, and earnest 
of life eternal, in their long and happy life below.” 

Verses 21-23, They shall build houses and in- 
habit them—The prophet here describes another 
privilege of the church in these happy days. They 
shall enjoy blessings.the very reverse of the curses 
denounced on the disobedient, Deut. xxviii. 30. 
They shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit of 
them, See note on chap. Ixii. 8: They shall not 
plant and another eat—Which might happen, either 
through their enemies seizing the fruits of the trees 
they planted, or through their own premature death 
before those fruits were brought to perfection. For 
as the days of a tree are the days of my people-- 
Not like the fading of a leaf, to which our present 
frail state is often compared, but their age shall equal 
the duration of the trees planted by them; yea, of 
the oaks, the most long-lived of trees, supposed to 
last about a thousand years, being five hundred years 
growing to full perfection, and as many decaying; 


blessed of the Lorn, and their off- 4 M. 3298. 

B. C. 706. 

spring with them. Presa dear 

24 And it shall come to pass, that ° before they 

call, I will answer; and while they are yet 
speaking, I will hear. 

25 The ? wolf and the lamb shall feed to- 
gether, and the lion shall eat straw like the 
bullock : 4 and dust shall be the serpent’s meat. 
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy 
mountain, saith the Lorn. 


m Degieonomy xxviii. 41; Hosea ix. 12——" Chapter Ixi, 4 
oPsalm xxxii. 5; Daniel ‘ix. 21.—P Chapter xi. 6, 7, 9 
4 Genesis lil. 14. ; ; 


“which,” says Bishop Lowth, “seems to be a mode- 
rate and probable computation. » The LXX. trans- 
late this clause, yap ta¢ nuepac Te Fvde tye Cane ecovrat 
au nuepat te Aas ws; As the days of the tree of life 
shall be thedaysof my people. They shall not labour 
in vain—As those do who do not enjoy the fruit of, 
their labour ; nor bring forth-Beget and bring forth 
children ; for trouble—Those that shall give them 
trouble by their bad conduct, or by the poverty and 
misery in which they shall be involved; for they 
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, &c.—There 
is a blessing entailed upon them. by descent from 
their ancestors, which their offspring with them 
shall partake of; who shall be a comfort to them, 
and-whom they shall have the happiness to see 
walking in the truth. 

Verse 24. Before they call I will answer— Be- 
hold here,” says: Vitringa, “‘a desirable blessing, the 
truest seal of divine favour and paternal love. The 
closest conjunction of heaven and earth, that is, of 
God and men, is expressed in this verse ; seeing that 
God declares he will abundantly and immediately 
satisfy the desires of his people, which desires are 
here supposed to be just and conformable to his will ; 
and that he will be of such goodness as of his own 
accord to prevent their requests, and even answer 
their prayers before they utter them.” 

Verse 25. The wolf and the lamb shall feed to- 
gether—Concerning the metaphorical sense of these 
expressions see chap. xi. '7, and xxxv. 9. But since 
the renovation here spoken of extends to the whole 
creation, the words may imply the correcting the 
noxious qualities of fierce or venomous creatures. 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


This chapter is a continuation of the subject of the foregoing, and many of the expressions in it are nearly the same with 
those there used. If it relate at all to the different state of the good and bad among the Jews, at their return out of cap- 
tivity, yet it chiefly respects the rejection of the Jews in the days of the Messiah, the conversion of the Gentiles, and the 
erection of the kingdom of Christ in the world. The first verse of the chapter is applied by Stephen (Acts vii. 49, 5C) 
to the dismantling of the temple by the planting of the Christian Church, which may serve as a key to the whole chapter. 
We have here, (1,) The contempt which God puts wpon ceremonial services in comparison of moral duties, and an intima- 
ton of his purpose shortly to put an end to sacrifices and the whole temple service, and to reject those that adhered to them, 

308 


The wickedness and 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


hypocrisy of the Jews. 


14. (2,) The salvation which God would, in due time, work for his people, delivering them out of the hands of their 
oppressors, 5; speaking terror to the persecutors,6; and comfort to the persecuted, with a wonderful accession of the 
Gentiles to them, and abundant satisfaction therein, 7-14. (3,) The terrible vengeance which God would bring upon the 
enemies of his church and people, 15-18. (4,) The happy establishment of the church upon large and swre fowndations, its 
constant attendance on God, and triumph over its enemies, 19-24. 


A. M. 3298. THUS saith the Lorp, * The hea- 
B. C. 706. ' 
——— ven zs my throne, and the earth 


is my footstool: where is the house that ye 
build unto me? and where is the place of my 
rest? : 

2 For all those things hath my hand made, 
and all those thing's have been, saith the Lora: 


a] Kings viii. 27; 2-Chron. vi. 18; Matt. v. 34, 35; Acts 
vii. 48, 49; xvii. 24.——> Chap. lvii. 15; lxi. 1. ¢ Psa, xxxiv. 
18 ; li. 17. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LXVI. 

Verses 1, 2.. Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is 
my throne—That is, the throne of my glory and 
government; the place where I most manifest my 
power, and show myself in my majesty: Hence we 
are taught to pray, Our Father which art in heaven. 
And the earth is my footstool—Or, a place on which 
I set my feet, (Matt. v. 35,) overruling all the affairs 
of it according to my will. Where is the house 
that ye build me?—Can there be a house built that 
will contain me, who encompass and fill heaven and 
earth? and where is the place of my rest ?—Where 
is the place wherein I can be said to rest in a proper 
sense? The ark was indeed called God’s footstool, 
and the place of his rest, in a figurative sense, be- 
cause there God manifested himself, though in de- 
grees much beneath the manifestations of himself in 
heaven: but properly God hath no certain place.of 
rest, and especially no temple built by man can be a 
place of rest for him. For what satisfaction can 
the Eternal Mind take in a house made with men’s 
hands? What occasion has he, as we have, for a 
house to repose himselfin, who fainteth not, neither 
is weary; who neither slumbers nor sleeps? Or, if 
he had occasion, he would not tell us, Psa. 1. 12. 
For all those things hath his hands made—Heaven 
and all its courts, earth and all its borders, and all 
the hosts of both. And all these have been—Have 
had their beginning by the power of God, who was 
infinitely happy from eternity before they existed, 
and therefore cannot be benefited by them. Or, as 
the clause may be rendered, all these things are: 
they still continue upheld by the same power that 
made them; so that owr goodness extendeth not to 
him. Vitringa is justly of opinion that “this dis- 
course is directed to the hypocrites, who, despising 
the gospel of the Son of God, after they had made 


the temple a den of thieves, were yet zealous to re-, 


pair and adorn it. They did not consider that a 
new economy being established, no earthly and ma- 
terial temple could be acceptable to Him whose 
throne was in heaven, and who everywhere found 
the place of his rest in the humble and contrite 
heart.” “ The Jews,” says Bishop Lowth, “valued 
themselves much upon their temple, and the pomp- 


but to this man will Flook, * even to A. M, 3298, 

‘ ; . B.C. 706. 
him that is poor’and of a contrite ———— 
spirit, and ¢ trembleth at my word. ’ 

3 °He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a 
man}; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he fcut 
off a dog’s neck; he that offereth an oblation, 
as tf he offered swine’s blood ; he that *burneth 


4 Ezra ix.4; x.33; Prov. xxviii. 14; Verse 5. ¢ Chap. i.11. 
“4 Or, kid ——f Deut. xxiii. 18 ——* Heb. maketh a memorial of, 
ev. li. 2. \ 


ous system of services performed in it, which they 
supposed were to be of perpetual duration ; and they 
assumed great confidence and merit to themselves 
for their strict observance of,all the externals of 
their religion. And at the very time when the judg- 
ments denounced in verses 6, 12 of the preceding 
chapter were hanging over their heads, they were 
rebuilding, by Herod’s munificence, the temple in a 
most magnificent manner. God, therefore, admo- 
nishes them, that the Most High dwelleth not in 
temples made with hands; and that a mere external 
worship, how diligently soever attended, when ac- 
companied with wicked and idolatrous practices in 
the worshippers, would never be accepted by him, 
This their hypocrisy is set forth in strong colours, 
which brings the prophet again to the subject of ths 
former chapter; and he pursues it in a differen: 
manner, with more express declarations of the new 
economy, and of the flourishing state of the church 
under it; the increase of which he shows is to ba 
sudden and astonishing-” 

But to this man will I look—But though I regara 
not the magnificence and splendour of ‘a temple 
built with human hands, nor any ornaments that are 
or can be bestowed upon it, nor the pomp and.show 
of the ceremonies and services performed in it, or 
connected with it; and though I reign on a throne 
in majesty in the highest heavens, and fill. both 
heaven and earth with my glory, yet will I look 
with a favourable eye to him that hath.a broken and 
contrite spirit—Whose heart is subdued to the will 
of God, and who is poor and low in his own eyes; 
and that trembleth at my word—Who trembles 
when he hears my threatening words, and receives 
every revelation of my will with reverence. Such 
a one is a living temple of God, (chap. lvii. 15,) and 
of infinitely more value in his sight than the most 
sumptuous edifice that can be raised by the art or 
power of man, though it should be adorned in the 
most costly manner with gold and silver, and pre- 
cious stones. 

Verse 3. He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a 
man—Without this humble and devout temper of 
mind, killing an ox for a burnt-offering is no more 
acceptable to God than if a man offered his son in 

309 


The future happiness 


ISATAH. 


of God’s people. 


A. M. 3298. incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yea, 
B. C. 706. : 
._— they have chosen their own ways, 
and their soul delighteth in their abominations. 
4 LT also will choose their ° delusions, and will 
bring their fears upon them; & because when I 
called, none did answer; when I spake, they 
did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, 


3 Or, devices. & Prov. i. 24; Chap. lxv. 12; Jer. vii. 13. 


and chose that in which I delighted A. M. 3298. 
a By B. C: 706. 
5 “| Hear the word of the Lorn, ye that 
tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated 
you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said, 
' Let the Lorn be glorified: but * he shall ap- 
pear to-your joy, and they shall be ashamed. 


h Verse 2. Chap. v.19. 2 Thess. i. 10; Tit. ii. 13. 


sacrifice to Moloch. ‘“ God here shows that the ex- 
ternal ritual worship, offered to him by hypocrites 
and wicked persons, void of faith and virtue, was no 
more estimable in his sight than the material temple 
above spoken of; but that he was as much offended 
by the ritual worship of the impure, as by the most 
grievous crimes perpetrated against the immediate 
commands of the law, and particularly under the 
new economy, after the promulgation of the law of 
liberty, and the perfect and true sacrifice offered by 
Christ to expiate the sins of the world. The decla- 
ration is most important, but will-not be understood 
unless by those who are well acquainted with the 
interior part of religion.” See-Vitringa. 
it may be observed, gives (Prov. xv. 8) a short but 
full commentary on the whole verse: T'he sacrifice 
of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. 
that sacrificeth a lamb. as if he cut off a dog’s neck 
—Namely, in order to sacrifice it. This animal was 
held in the greatest abhorrence by the Jews, inso- 
much that the very price of a dog was forbidden to 
be brought into the house of the Lord, Deut. xxiii: 
18. The comparison shows God’s detestation. of 
ceremonial performances from persons destitute of 
true piety. He that offereth, §c., as if he offered 
swine’s blood—Which, being one of the principal 
sacrifices which the heathen offered to their idols, 
was in a particular manner abominable to God. He 
that burneth incense as if he blessed an idol—As 
if he honoured an idol with gifts and “presents. 
From hence it is plain.that the prophet is not here 
reflecting upon idolatrous worship, but formal wor- 
ship; for to say, He that burneth incense to an idol 
is as he that blesseth an idol, would be only to say, 
He that blesseth an idol, blesseth an idol; that is, it 
would be saying nothing. But he is reflecting upon 
those who, in a formal way, and not in spirit and in 
truth, worshipped the true God, and by acts which 
he had appointed. God, by the prophet, declares 
that these men’s services were no more: acceptable 
to him than murder, idolatry, or the most horrid 
profanation of his name. Yea, they have chosen 
their own ways—They live as they list; they persist 
in their wicked. practices, and yet expect to recom- 
mend themselves to my favour by their ceremonial 
observances. And their soul delighteth in their 
abominations—Taking pleasure in their sins, and 
showing their contempt of my authority and enmity 
to my holiness, as much as their fathers did when 
they were mad upon their idols. 

Verse 4. I also will choose their delusions—I will 

310 


Solomon, | 


He’ 


punish them in their own way, and set those over 
them as teachers who shall govern them by their 
traditions instead of my word. Or, Iwill suffer false 
Christs and false prophets to deceive them, Matt. 
xxiv. 24; John v. 43. And I will bring their fears 
|wpon them—This was exactly fulfilled when, as they 
crucified Christ for fear of the Romans, (John xi. 
48,) that very sin was punished with their utter de- 
struction by the Romans. Because when I called 
—Because when, by my servants, I called you to 
repentance, to bring forth fruit worthy of repent- 
ance, and to believe in my Son, your true Messiah ; 
none did answer—Very few yielded obedience. He 
evidently speaks of the calls to repentance, and the 
invitations to believe in Christ, given them by John 
the Baptist, Jesus himself, and his apostles and evan- 
gelists: When I spake they did not hear—God 
accounts that those do not hear who do not obey 
his will. 

Verse 5. Hear, &c——-The prophet here, forbear- 
ing to proceed in denouncing judgments against the 
hypocrites and formalists among the Jews, now 
turns his discourse to such as feared God, whose 
religion is described by their trembling at his word, 
as in verse 2. Such apostrophes, or diversions of 
his speech to other persons, we had chap. 1. 10, and 
li. 1,7. The same addresses, it must be observed, 
belong not to saints and presumptyous sinners. It 
is highly probable, as Vitringa supposes, that the 
apostles and other disciples and followers of Christ, 
who embraced. the gospel, who were the seed of the 
first church, and were to constitute that spiritual 
temple which God had determined to build and in- 
habit upon the abolition of the material temple, are 
here addressed and comforted by God, on account 
of the contempt, hatred, and excommunication of 
them by their brethren among the. Jews and Pha- 
risees. See Jolin xvi. 2. Your brethren—By na- 
tion, or by an external profession of religion; though 
false brethren, that cast you out—That cast you out 
of their synagogues, cast you out of their city, and 
some of you out of the world; for my name’s sake 
—For your adherence to my law; said, Let the 
Lord be glorified—Thinking they did God good 
service, John xvi.2. Or, we may understand it as 
spoken in defiance of God; as if he had said; You 
say God will be glorified in your deliverance. Let 
him be glorified then. Let him make speed and 
hasten his work, chap. v. 19. . Thus they derided 
Christ, Let him deliver him since he delighted in 
him. But he shall appear to your joy, &e—There 

3 


Judgments on the 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


6 A voice of noise from the city, a 


A. M. 3298. 
~ voice from the temple, a voice of the 


B. C. 706 


Lorp that rendereth recompense to his enemies. 
7 “{ Before she -travailed; she brought forth ;, 


will come a time, which is at no great distance, when 
God will come forth, and let them know his judg- 
ment concerning their unjust and violent proceed- 
ings. Then you shall have joy, and they shall be 
ashamed, 2 Thess. i. 6-8. This was fulfilled when, 
upon the signal given of Jerusdlem’s approaching 
destruction, the hearts of the Jews failed them for 
fear: but the disciples of Christ, whom they hated 
and persecuted, lifted up their heads with joy; 
knowing that their redemption drew nigh, Luke 
xxi. 26.- 

Verse 6. A voice of noise from the city, &c.—This 
is an expression of a prophetical ecstasy, in which 
the prophet hears the noise of the ruin of the city 
and temple sounding in his ears. This voice of 
noise comes not from the city only, but from the 
temple, wherein these formalists had ‘so much glo- 
ried, and reposed so much confidence. There is a 
noise of soldiers slaying, and of the poor people 
shrieking or crying out. A voice of the Lord—Not 
in thunder, which is sometimes>called the Lord’s 
voice, but that rendereth recompense to his enemies— 
Thus he expresses the destruction of the Jews by 
the Roman armies, asa thing at that time doing. 
Some think this prophecy was fulfilled, partly at 
least, in the prodigies which, according to Josephus, 
in his history of the Jewish wars, (lib. vii, cap. 12,) 
preceded the destruction of Jerusalem: that the 
eastern gate of the temple, which was of solid brass 
and very heavy, and was scarcely shut in an evening 
by twenty men, and was fastened by strong bars and 
bolts, was seen, at the sixth hour of the night, opened 
of its own accord, and could hardly be shut again: 
that before the setting of the sun, there were seen 
over all the country chariots and armies fighting in 
the clouds, and besieging cities: that at the feast of 
pentecost, as the priests were going into the inner 
temple by night, as usual, to attend their service, 
they heard first a motion and noise, and then a voice, 
as of a multitude, saying, Let us depart hence ; and, 
what he reckons as the most terrible of all, that one 
Jesus, the son of Ananus, an ordinary country fel- 
low, four years before the war began, and when-the 
city was in peace and plenty, came to the feast of 
tabernacles, and ran crying up and down the streets 
day and night, A voice from the east, a voice from 
the west, a voice from the four winds, a voice against 
Jerusalem and the temple, a voice against the bride- 
grooms and the brides, a voice against all the peo- 
ple. The magistrates endeavoured by stripes and 
torture to restrain him; but he still cried with a 
mournful voice, Wo, wo to Jerusalem! This he 
continued to do for seven years and five months to- 
gether, and especially at the great festivals; and he 
neither grew hoarse nor was tired, but went about 
the walls and cried with a loud voice, Wo, wo to the 
city, and to the people, and to the temple! and, as 

3 


enemies of God. 


before her pain came, she was deliver- A308. 
ed of a man-child. —_—_— 

8 Who hath heard such a thing? who hath 
seen such things? shall the earth be made to 


he added at last, Wo, wo also to myself! it happen- 
ed that a stone from some sling or engine immedi- 
ately struck him dead. It may be proper to remark 
here, that there is not a more creditable historian than 
Josephus, who relates these things, and who appeals 


+ to the testimony of those who saw and heard them. 


But, as Bishop Newton observes, it may add some 
weight to his relation,-that Tacitus, té"Roman his- 
torian, a heathen, also gives usa summary account 
of the same occurrences. He says, “ There happen- 
ed several prodigies... Armies were seen to engage 


‘In different parts of the sky—glittering arms appear- 


ed—the temple shone by the sudden fire of the 
clouds—the doors of the temple were suddenly 
thrown wide open—a voicé, more than human, was 
heard, that the gods were departing, and, at the same 


‘time, a great motion as if departing.” See Tacilus’s 


Hist., book v. page 217, in Lipsius’s edition. 

Verses 7, 8. Here begins a new paragraph of the 
prophet’s discourse, containing a description of the 
sudden and great increase of the Christian Church, 
upon God’s rejecting the Jews, and destroying their 
temple and worship: “the very destruction of the 
Jewish polity making way for the reception and 
spread of the gospel, inasmuch as it abated that op- 
position which the Jewish ‘zealots all along made to 
its progress ; and the abolishing the Jewish worship 
contributed very much to the abrogating the law of 
Moses, and burying it with silence and decency.” 
See Rom. xi. 11, and Lowth. This paragraph, how- 
ever, is not unconnected with what precedes. “It 
is,” as Vitringa observes, “ another consolatory ar- 
gument, directed to those who reverenced the word 
of Jehovah, and formed the true Zion, taken from 
the rapid and wonderful increase of the church 
among the Gentiles, superior to all human thought, 
all expectation. For when in the former section 
Isaiah had done two things ; first, had predicted the 
calling of the Gentiles, (chap. Ixv. 1,) and then the 
punishment of the ungodly, and such as rejected the 
gospel; in this section, after he had repeated the in- 
dignation conceived by God against the hypocrites 
and those who did not obey the gospel, he in the 
same manner comforts the pious Jews, from the un- 
expected event of the most wished-for success of 
the calling of the Gentiles, who, joined with them 
in one body, should form one church, and inherit the 
earth.” Before she travailed she brought forth— 
The church is represented here as a travailing wo- 
man, the mother of all true believers: see chap. liv. 1; 
Gal. iv. 26. The whole verse is expressive of a great 
and sudden salvation which God would work for his 
church, like the delivery of a woman, and that before 
her travail, and without pain, of a man-child. It 
undoubtedly refers to the introduction of the gospel, 
and its rapid and unexpected progress. Who hath 
heard such a thing ?—The prophet here calls either 

311 


Glorious eae herine 


A. M..3298. bring forth in one day? or shall a 
3B. ©. 706. ation be born at once? for as-soon as 
Zion travailed, she brought forth her children. 

9 Shall I bring to the birth, and not * cause 
to bring forth? saith the Lorn: shall I cause to 
bring forth, and shut the womb ? saith thy God. 

10 | Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad 
with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy 
with ‘her, all ye that mourn for her: 


*Or, beget.——® ‘Or, brightness — Chap. xviii. 18; Ix. 5. 


ISATAH. 


| fied with the breasts of her consola- 


of the Gentiles. 


11 That ye may suck, and be satis- A. Mi, 3308. 


tions; that ye may milk out, and, be delighted 


with the ’ abundance of her glory. 


12 For thus saith the Lorn, Behold, 'I will 
extend peace to her like a river, and the glory 
of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then 
shall ye ™suck, ye shall be borne’ upon her 
sides, and be dandled upon her knees. 


m Chap. lx. 16. n Chap, xlix. 22 ; Ix. 4. 


to the whole world, or to such as feared God among 
the Jews, to admire his stupendous work of provi- 
dence and grace, in the sudden erection and wonder- 
ful enlargement of the gospel ‘church. Who hath 
seen. such things ?—Who hath witnessed such an 
extraordinary event? Shall the earth be made to 
bring forth in one day, or shall a nation, &e.—* The 
suddenness of this event is as surprising as if the 
fruits of the earth, which are brought to perfection 
by slow degrees, should blossom and ripen all in one 
day. And-the fruitfulness of this spiritual increase 
is as wonderful as if a whole nation were born at 
once, or by one woman.” for as soon as Zion 
travailed—As soon as the fulness of time came for 
erecting the gospel church; she brought forth. her 
children—In great multitudes, without pain or diffi- 
culty, no inauspicious circumstance occurring to 
prevent their birth: see Acts ii. 41; and iv. 4. 

Verse 9. Shall I bring to the birth—Shall I dis- 
appoint and render abortive a design of which I 
myself was the author, when every thing is ripe for 
execution, and the effect just ready to be produced ? 
Shall I begin a work and not perfect it? Shall I 
cause to bring forth, and shut the womb—That 
there should not be a continual succession of con- 
verts in allages? Zion shall not bring forth once 
only, but. she shall continue to be fruitful: her 
womb shall not be shut: she shall every day bring 
forth more and more children, and my presence shall 
be with my church to the end of the world, Thus 
the prophet still carries on the comparison between 
the natural and the spiritual birth. 

Verses 10,11. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem—Let all 
that wish her well congratulate her for the favours 
God hath conferred upon her, and particularly let 
the Gentiles rejoice with the Jewish Church, for her 
advancement shall redound to their benefit. Thus 
Moses, (Deut. xxxii. 43,) referring probably to the 
very events here predicted by Isaiah, Rejoice, O ye 
nations, with his people; for he will avenge the blood 
of his servants, and will render vengeance to his 
adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land and 
to his people. Be glad with her, all ye that love-her 
-—All that Jove God love the churcli of God, lay its 
interests very near their hearts, and heartily espouse 
its cause. And they that have a sincere affection 
for it have acordial sympathy with it in all the cares 
and sorrows of its militant state.. They mourn for 
Zion in her afflictions and troubles: her grieyances 
excite their sorrows; and if she be in distress, their 


harps are hung on the willows. But here Jerusalem 
is represented as having great cause for rejoicing ; 
the days of her mourning are at an end, and she is 
comforted according to the time in which she. hath 
seen adversity. And of course all her friends, who 
sympathized with her in her sorrows, are here in- 
vited to join with her in her joys, because they are 
to participate in those blessings from which her joys 
are derived. That ye may suck—Or, because ye 
shall suck: and be satisfied with the breasts of her 
consolations--The word of God, the covenant of 
grace, especially the promises of that covenant, gos- 
pel ordinances, and all the opportunities of attend- 
ing on God, and conversing with him, are breasts of 
the church’s consolations. In these her comforts 
are laid up, and thenee they are drawn by faith and 
prayer. From these breasts,’ therefore, we must 
suck by an application of the promises of God to 
ourselves, and a diligent attendance on his ordi- 
nances; and with the consolations which are drawn 
thence we must be satisfied, and not be unsatisfied 
though we have a very small share of earthly com- 
forts. That ye may be delighted with the abun- 
dance of her glory—It is the glory of the church 
that she hath the Lord for her God; that to her per- 
tains the adoption and the service of God ; and with 
the abundance of this glory we must be delighted. 
We must take more pleasure in our relation to God, 
and communion with him, than in all the delights.of 
the sons and daughters of men. Whatever is the 
glory of the church must be.our glory and joy, par- 
ticularly her purity, unity, and increase. 

Verses 12, 13. For, behold, I will extend—Or am 
extending, peace to her—That is, all good; like a 
river—That runs ina constant stream, still increasing 
till it is swallowed up in the ocean. The gospel 
brings with it, wherever it is received in its power, 
peace, which proceeds forward like a river, supply- 
ing the souls of believers with all good, and making 
them fruitful as.a river doth the lands through which 
it passes: such peace as the springs of this world’s 
comforts cannot send forth, and the dams of the 
world’s troubles cannot stop or drive back; such a 
river of peace as will carry us to the ocean of bound- 
less and endless bliss. And the glory of the Gentiles 
like a flowing stream—Gentile converts shall come 
pouring into the church, and shall swell the river of 
her peace and prosperity ; ; for they shall bring their 
glory with them; their wealth and honour, their 
power and interest shall all be devoted to the Lord, 

; 3 


God’s vengeance on the 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


enemies of his church. 


13 As one whom his mother com- 
— forteth, so will I comfort you; and 
ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. 

‘14 And when ye see ¢his, your heart shall 
rejoice, and ° your bones shall flourish like an 
herb: and the hand of the Lorp shall be known 
toward his servants, and his indignation lows 
his enemies. 


A. M. 3298. 


15 4? For behold, the 
will come with fire, and with his 
chariots like a whirlwind, to render his an- 
ger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of 
fire. 

16 For by fire and by ‘his sword will the 
Lorp plead with all flesh: and the slain of the 
Lorp shall be many. 


Lorp A.M. 3298, 
C. 706. 


° Ezek. xxxvii. 1, &c. 


and employed for the good of the church. Then 
shall ye suck—Ye Jews also. When you see such 
crowding for a share in those comforts, you shall be 
the more solicitous, and.the more earnest and dili- 
gent to secure your share; not through a fear lest 
you should have the less, because others come in 
such multitudes to partake of them, for Christ has 
enough for all, and enough for each; but their zeal 
shall provoke you to a holy jealousy. Ye shall be 
borne upon rer sides—Compare chap. lx. 4, where 
see the note. Those that are joined to the church 
should be treated thus affectionately. The great 
Shepherd gathers the lambs in his arms, and earries 
them in his bosom; and so must the under shep- 
herds, that young converts may not be discouraged. 
As one whom his mother comforteth, &c.—That is, in 
the most tender and compassionate way. So will 
I comfort you—I will not only use rational argu- 
ments to comfort you, such as‘a prudent father uses 
toward his child in distress, but I will manifest to- 
ward you such tender affections and compassions, 
as a loving mother feels toward her afflicted infant. 
And ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem—In the fa- 
vours bestowed on the church, which you shall par- 
take. of; and in the thanksgivings offered by the 
church, which you shall concur with. 

Verse 14. And when ye see this—To what a happy 
state the church is restored; your heart shall reé- 
joice—The peace of the church, and the extension 
of the kingdom of Christ, are always causes of real 
joy to such as fear God. And your ‘bones shall 
flourish like an herb—The bones that were dried 
and withered, the marrow of them being quite ex- 
hausted, shall recover a youthful strength and vigour, 
and shall flourish like an herb in the spring, whose 
verdure and beauty i in the winter were concealed in 
the root hid in the earth. In other words, you Jews 
shall recover your ancient strength and glory, and 
be renewed in as wonderful a manner as if dry, 
withered bones should recover their youth and moist- 
ure: or, as if the dead bones in a charnel-house 
should be united with sinews, clothed again with 
flesh and skin, and should have life and vigour in- 
fused into them. Then shall be effected that resur- 
rection of the dry bones spoken of by Ezekiel, chap. 
xxxvil. 1, &c., for that vision relates to the resto- 
ration of the Jewish nation, after it had Jain for many 
ages in a dead, hopeless condition. In like manner 
St. Paul calls the receiving of the Jews into the 
church, life from the dead, Rom. xi. 15. And the 

3 


= 


P Chap. ix. 5; 2 Thess. i, 8——4 Chap. xxvii. 1. 


hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants 
—The power, protection, and influence of God shall 
be made manifest for, and upon, all such as truly 
serve and obey him. And his indignation toward 
his enemies—But the wicked shall experience a quite 
contrary dispensation, Psa. i.4. As God’s hand shall 
be upon and toward such as fear him, to cover, bless, 
and influence them, so his indignation shall in that 
day be showed toward those of your nation who have 
manifested themselves to be his enemies. 

Verses 15, 16. For, behold, &c.—Here the proper 
comes more particularly to show the nature of that 
indignation which should be exercised toward God’s 
enemies. The passage; it must be observed, is meta- 
phorical, “ exhibiting God as about to take vengearice 
on the enemies of his church, under the figure of a 
commander and warrior, as well as of a judge, armed 
at all points, severely to punish those who have pro- 
voked his indignation: see chap. Ixiii. 1, &c.; Rev. 
xviii..8; and xiv. 20. Some suppose that this pas- 
sage refers to the general judgment ; but it is rather, 
according to the whole tenor of this prophecy, to be 
referred to the judgments of God upon the rebellious 
Jews, and upon the antichristian enemies of the 
church.” The Lord will come with fire—With 
terrible judgments: an allusion possibly to the fire 
with which enemies use to consume, places brought 
under their power. And with his chariots—Like 
the general of a victorious army. With a whirlwind 
—With a sudden sweeping calamity, that, like a 
whirlwind, shall destroy all before it. To render 
his anger with fury—That is, with fervour; for fury, 
properly taken, is not in God, chap. xxvii.4: But 
God, at certain times, executes judgment more se- 
yverely than at others. And his rebukes—By rebukes 
he means’ punishments, for it is said God will exe- 
cute them with flames of fire—They had contemned 
the rebukes of the law, now God will rebuke them 
with fire and sword. . For by fire, &c., will the Lord 
plead with all flesh—God at first pleads with sinners 
by word, but if he cannot so prevail, he will plead 
with them in a way by which he. will overcome ; 
by fire, pestilence, and blood. ‘Thus he threatens to 
do with all flesh, that is, with all sinners continuing 
in sin, and especially with the impenitent and unbe- 
lieving Jews, who, being favoured with the oracles 
and ordinances of God, held the truth in unrighteous- 
ness, and abused their extraordinary privileges to 
their greater condemnation: see Rom. ii. 8, 9. And 
the slain of the Lord shall be many—Those whom 

313 


The establishinent 


ISAIAH. 


of ‘the church. 


A. M. 3298. 


B. G. 706. 17 * They that sanctify themselves, 


and purify themselvés in the gar- 
dens ®behind one ¢ree in the midst, eating 
swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and the 
mouse,’ shall be consumed together, saith the 
Lorp. 

18 4 For I know their works and their thoughts: 
it shall come, that I will gather all nations and 


r Chap. Ixy. 3. 6 Or, one’ after another. - 


tongues; and they shall come, and A, M. 3298. 
see my glory. hie 
19 sAnd I will set a sign among them, 
and I will send those that escape of them 
unto the nations, ¢o T'arshish, Pul, and 
Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and 
Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not 
heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; 


5 Luke i li. 34, 


God should cause to be slain. This was awfully ful- 
filled in the destruction brought on the Jews by the 
Romans for crucifying the Messiah ; no fewer than 
eleven hundred thousand, according to Josephus, 
perishing in the siege of Jerusalem, and at least three 
hundred thousand more during the war; not to men- 
tion the vast numbers that perished in caves, woods, 
wildernesses, common sewers, of whom no account 
could be taken; and the great slaughter made of 
them afterward in the wars waged against them by 
Adrian, when fifty of their strongest fortresses were 
razed, and nine hundred and eighty-five of their 
noblest towns were sacked, and consumed by fire. 
See note on Deut. xxviii. 62. 

Verse 17. They that sanctify themselves, &c.— 
“Behold,” says Vitringa, “the reason of the great 
severity above mentioned, namely, a base and abo- 
minable departure from. God, represented under a 
certain kind of idolatry and detestable superstition, 
of all others the most odious and contrary to the in- 
stitutions of the ancient religion.” It is evident the 
passage is to be understood figuratively, like those in 
verse 3, and in chap. Ixv: 3, 4, 11, on which see the 
notes. And purify themselves. in the gardens— 
- There were several sorts of lustrations, or purifica- 
tions, used among the heathen, from whence the Jews 
learned their idolatrous customs, some of which were 
performed by washings, for which purpose they had 
fountains in their sacred groves and gardens. Behind 
one tree—The word tree is not in the Hebrew. The 
words are IM Ns, achar achad, which may signify, 
after the manner of achad. Or, as Bishop Lowth 
renders it, after the rites of achad ; observing, “the 
Syrians worshipped a god called Adad, whom they 
held to be the highest and greatest of the gods, and 
to be the same with Jupiter and the sun: and the 
name Adad, says Macrobius, signifies one, as like- 
wise does the word achad, in Isaiah. Many learned 
men, therefore, have supposed, and with some pro- 
bability, that the prophet means the same pretended 
deity. But whatever the particular mode of idolatry 
might be, the general sense of the verse is perfectly 
clear.” It is.plainly a reproof of the wicked. Jews 
for the many idolatries and superstitions of which 
they were guilty, and which are here set forth in 
figurative language, borrowed from the abominable 
practices to which many of the Jews were addicted 
in Isaiah’s time; who privately, in enclosed gardens 
which were not exposed to view, performed: the 
heathen lustrations, sacrificed in the heathen man- 
ner, and to their gods, and eat meats which were 

. 814 


prohibited by the law as unclean, although in public 
they pretended to be true Jews, or strict observers 
of the law. Eating swine’s flesh—Forbidden, Ley. 
xi. 7; Deut. xiv. 8. And the abomination—Other 
abominable meats forbidden, to the Jews; and the 
mouse—The word which we translate mouse being 
nowhere found but Lev. xi. 29; 1 Sam. vi. 4, 5, 11, 
18, and here, some think it is not that creature which 
we call a mouse, but rather signifies some serpent. _ 
Be this as it may, the sense evidently is, that God 
would not only destroy the open and gross idolaters 
and superstitious persons, but all those who made no 
conscience of yielding obedience to the law of God 
in such things as seemed to them of a trivial nature, 
and in which they easily might have yielded obedi- 
ence. The Lord here assures them that they should 
all perish together. Observe, reader, in the day of 
final judgment, the idolatrous pagan or Papist, and 
the ungodly Protestant, shall fare alike. For no man 
can reasonably imagine that either baptism, or a pro- 
fession of Christianity,.can save a man from God’s 
wrath without holiness, any more than circumcision, 
and the being reputed a member in the Jewish 
Church. 

Verses 18-20. For I know their works and their 
thoughts—Of idolatry, superstition, and other wick- 
edness. The word know not being in the Hebrew, 
some apply the ellipsis thus: J have observed their 
works, &c. Others consider the clause as a ques- 
tion, and read, Should I endure their ian &e.? 
No: it shall come, that I will gather, &¢—My 
threatened judgments shall come upon them, and I 
will gather all nations and tongues to see my glori- 
ous holiness and justice manifested in their punish- 
ment. Or the sense may be, Because. I know and 
will no longer bear with their works, therefore 7¢ 
shall come to pass that I will cast them off, and then 
I will gather all nations, &c.—That is, take the 
Gentiles to be my people in their stead. This sense 
of the clause agrees well with what follows. And 
they shall see my glory—My oracles, my holy insti- 
tutions and ordinances, which hitherto have been 
locked up in the church of.the Jews, and have been 
their glory, shall be published to the Gentiles, Psa. 
xevii.6; and chap. xl.5. And.J will set a sign 
among them—It is agreed by all, that this is a pro- 
phecy concerning the conversion of the Gentiles. 
By a sign here some understand an ensign, as the 
word )s signifies Psa. Ixxiv. 4, which is a mili- 
tary sign, to gather people together, to which; as-is 
promised chap. xi. 12, the Gentiles aa “seek. 


Constant attendance of the 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


church upon God.’ 


‘¥. _— tand they shall declare my glory 
ee among the Gentiles. 

20 And they shall bring all your biethten 
"for an offering unto the Lorp, out of all 
nations, upon horses, and in chariots, and in 
‘litters, and.upon mules, and upon swift 
beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith 
the Lorp, as the children of Israel bring an 


t Mal. i, 11. " Rom. xv. 16.——’ Or, coaches. x Exodus 
xix. 6; Chapter lxi. 6; 1'Peter ii. 9; Revelation i. 6. 


offering in a clean vessel into the A. M. 3298. 
house of the Lorp. Paphos 

21 And I will also take of them for * priests 
and for Levites, saith the Lorp. 

22 For as ¥the new heavens and the new 
earth, which I will make, shall remain before 
me, saith the Lorn, so shall your seed and 
your name remain. 


y Chap. Ixv. 17; 2Pet. iii. 13; Rev. xxi. 1. 


The preaching of the word seems to be intended, 
accompanied with miracles called signs, or followed 
by some distinguishing providence, whereby they 
should be preserved from the common destruction. 
And I will send those that escape of them unto the 
nations--Those few Jews who, being converted to 
the Christian faith, escaped the national impenitence 
and unbelief, and the common destruction of the 
nation; and many of them, the apostles in particu- 
lar, shall be employed in all parts of the world, for 
the conversion of others, Matt. xxviii. 19; Acts xiii. 
46. Tarshish, Pul, Lud, and the other places here 
mentioned, are intended to signify the different 
quarters of the world into which the gospel would 
be sent. And they shall declare my glory among 
the Gentiles—The glorious riches. of my grace in 
Christ. And they shall bring all your brethren, &c. 
—The apostles and gospel ministers thus sent abroad 
shall bring the converts of the Gentiles, who are your 
brethren in Christ, (Gal. iii. 28,) Abraham’s spiritual 
seed; for an offering unto the Lord—Who will have 
no more offerings of bullocks, or rams, or lambs, but 
will have men and women, reasonable oblations, 
Rom. xii. 1. He will particularly have the offering 
up of the Gentiles, which shall be acceptable, being 
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Rom. xv. 16. Upon 
horses and in chariots, &c.—That is, by every me- 
thod of conveyance then in use. To my holy mount- 
ain, Jerusalem—That is, to the Christian Church, 
typified by Jerusalem.- As the children of Israel 
bring an offering in a clean vessel—These con- 


verted Gentiles shall be a holy people, and therefore | 


acceptable to God. 

Verse 21. J will also take of them for priésts and 
for Levites—God will find among the converted 
Gentiles those who, though they are not of the tribe 
of Levi, yet shall do the true work of the priests and 
Levites. They shall minister in holy things, preside 
in the religious assemblies, teach the people, and 
bless in the name of the Lord. They shall be-stew- 
ards of the mysteries of God, as the priests and Le- 
vites were under the law; angels or messengers of 
the churches, pastors overseeing and feeding their 
several flocks, elders, presbyters, or bishops, giving 
themselves to the word of God and prayer, (Acts 
vi. 2-4,) and wholly occupied in these holy duties. 
The apostles were all Jews, and so were the seventy 
disciples ; the great apostle of the Gentiles was him- 
self a Hebrew of the Hebrews. But when churches 

3 


were planted among the Gentiles, they had ministers 
appointed them who were, of themselves, elders in 
every church, Acts xiv. 23; Titus i. 5; which made 
the ministry to spread the more easily, and to be the 
more familiar, and, if not the more venerable, yet 
the more acceptable. God saith, J will take, not all 
them, though they are all, ina spiritual sense, made 
to our God kings and priests, but of them, that is, 
some of them. It is God’s work to choose ministers, 
by qualifying them for, and inclining them to, the 
service, as well as to make ministers, by giving them 
their commission. J will take them—That is, I will 
admit them, though Gentiles, and will accept of them 
and their ministrations. This is a great honour and 
advantage to the Gentile Church, as it was to the 
Jewish Church, that God raised up of their sons for 
prophets, and their young men for Nikaeirshen; Amos 
lind 

Verses 22, 23. For as the new heavens, &c.—The 
new state of the church to be raised up under the 
Messiah ; shall remain before me—Unalterable. As 
the gospel dispensation is to be continued till the end 
of time, and not to be succeeded by any other ;. as it 
shall therefore remain, because it is before me, under 
my eye, my care, and special protection ; so shall 
your seed and your name remain—A seed of minis- 
ters, a seed of Christians. As one generation of both 
passeth away, another generation shall. come, and 
thus the name of Christ, with that of Christians, 
shall continue on earth while the earth remains, and 
his throne as the days of heaven! The gates of hell, 
though they fight against the church, shall not pre- 
vail against it, nor wear out the saints of the Most 
High: for there shall be a daily succession of true 
believers. for the upholding of it; for, if believers 
could fail from the earth, the church, made up of 
them only, as the true members of it, must fail also. 
And from one new-moon to another, &c.—In the 
gospel church there shall be as constant and settled 
a course of worship, (though of another nature, ) as 
ever was in the Jewish Church. This is: described 
in expressions suited to the Old Testament dispensa- 
tion, to show that, though the ceremonial law should 
be abolished, and the. temple service at an end, yet 
God should.be still as regularly, statedly, and accept- 
edly worshipped as ever. . Heretofore the Jews were 
only obliged to appear three times in a year at the 
place of God’s public worship, but, saith the prophet, in 
the gospel church people shall worship from one new- 

315 


Triumph of the church 


A.M. 3298. 23 And “it shall come to pass, 
———_ _ that ° from one new-moon to another, 
and from one sabbath to another, *shall all 
flesh come to worship before me, saith the 
Lorp. 


2 Zech, xiv. 16.——® Heb. from new-moon to his new-moon, and 
from sabbath to his sabbath. 


moon to another, and from one sabbath to another— 
They shall be perpetually employed in serving and 
glorifying him, although in different ways. Their 
state shall be one continued festival. And whereas, 
under the former dispensation, the Jews only were 
bound to attend God’s worship at the great feasts, 
and of them only the males; now, under the new 
dispensation, all: flesh, Gentiles as well as Jews, 
women as well as men, shall come and worship 
before God—That is, shall worship in his pre- 
sence, though not in his temple at Jerusalem, but in 
religious assemblies dispersed all over the world, 
which shall be to them as the tabernacle of meeting 
was to the Jews: God will in them record his name; 
and, though but two or three come together, he will 
be in the midst of them, will meet and bless them: 
Verse 24. And they shall go forth—Namely, those 
who had joined themselves to the communion of 
the church spoken of in the preceding verses; and 
look wpon the carcasses of the men that have sinned 
against me—Meaning chiefly the unbelieving Jews 
who rejected Christ and his gospel, including, how- 
ever, all impenitent sinners, and especially all the 
enemies and persecutors of God’s truth and people. 
By looking upon their carcasses is meant beholding 
the dreadful vengeance taken onthem. This is here 
represented in figurative language. The misery is 
described by an allusion to the frightful spectacle of 
a field of battle covered with the carcasses of the slain, 
which lie rotting upon the ground, full of worms, 
crawling about them, and feeding on them. It seems 
the Lord, by his prophet, first intends to set forth the 
dreadful temporal calamities that should come upon 
the Jews, in the destruction of their city and nation 
by the Romans; in which destruction, as has been 
intimated in the note on verse 16, not less than 
between two and three millions, first and last, were 
cut off by the sword, famine, and pestilence. But 
when it is added, for their worm shall not die, nei- 
ther shall their fire be quenched, it is certain ‘the 
punishment of the wicked in the world to come is 
chiefly intended. These words, it is well known, 
are applied by our Saviour, (Mark ix. 44,) to express 
the everlasting punishment of the wicked in Gehen- 
na, or hell, so called, in allusion to the valley of 
Hinnom, the place where the idolatrous Jews celé- 
brated that horrible rite of making* their children 
pass through the fire, that. is, of burning them in sa- 
crifice to Moloch ; concerning which place see note 
chap. xxx. 338. “ Our Saviour,” says Bishop Lowth, 
“expressed the state of the blessed by sensible 
images; such as paradise, Abraham’s bosom, or, 
which is the same thing, a place to recline next. to 


ISAIAH. 


over its enemies. 


24 And they shall go forth, and look A. M, 3298. 

/ B, C. 706. 

upon the carcasses of the men that he bitter => 
have transgressed against me: for their ° worm 
shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched ; 


and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. 


a Psa. Ixy. 2.—— Verse 16. © Mark ix, 44, 46, 48. 


Abraham at table, in the kingdom of heaven; (see 
Matt. viii. 11; John xiii. 23;) for we could not possi- 
bly have any conception of it, but by analogy from 
worldly objects: in like manner he expressed the 
place of torment under the image of Gehenna; and 
the punishment of the wicked by the worm, which 
there preyed on the carcasses, and the fire, which 
consumed the wretched victims. Marking, how- 
ever, in the strongest manner, the difference between 
Gehenna and the invisible place of torment; namely, 
that in the former, the suffering is transient; the 
worm itself, that preys on the body, dies: whereas, 
in the figurative Gehenna, the instruments of punish- 
ment shall be everlasting, and the suffering without 
end; for there the worm dieth not, and the fire is 
not quenched. , ‘ ey 

“These emblematical images, expressing heaven 
and-hell, were in use’ among the Jews before our 
Saviour’s time; and, in using them, he complied 
with their, notions. Blessed is. he that shall eat 
bread in the kingdom of God, says the Jew to our 
Saviour, Luke xiv. 15.. And;in regard to Gehenna, 
the Chaldee paraphrast renders everlasting, or con- 
tinual burnings, by the Gehenna of everlasting fire. 
And before this time the son of Sirach (vii. 17) had 
said, The vengeance of the ungodly is fire and 
worms.. So likewise the author of the book of Judith: 
‘Wo to the nation rising up against my kindred: 
the Lord Almighty will take vengeance on them in 
the day of judgmenit, putting fire and worms in their 
flesh? chap. xvi. 17, manifestly referring to the same 
emblem.” . 

And they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh— 
Hebrew }ixv4, an execration, as Dr. Waterland ren- 
ders it. “Christ the Lord,” says Vitringa, “in 
passing his judicial sentence on false Christians and 
wicked persons, will say, Go, ye cursed, or execrated, 
into eternal fire. That evil will be added to their 
state of pain, and a condemning conscienée. Sepa- 
rated from the blessed and glorious communion of 
God and the saints, cast into the deepest state of 
misery, they will be exposed to the reproach, igno- 
miny, contempt, and execration of angels and saints,” 
(say rather of devils and condemned spirits,) “ suf- 
fering the punishment of their. pride, arrogance, 
tyranny, cruelty, injustice, crimes, hatred of the 


truth, persecutions, by which things in this life, 


fighting against God, and afflicting his saints, they 
knowingly and willingly provoked. his displeasure. - 
These are the ends. of the two opposite kinds of men, 
the pious. and the ungodly, in which, after various 
preparatory judgments of God, the fates of all-ages, 
as well’as our own fates, will be terminated, and in 


4 


Conclusion of the 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


prophecy of Isaiah. 


which this divine book of the great Prophet Isaiah 
also terminates. May our lot be with the saints, 
with those who reverence God and love the truth; 
with the humble, the meek, the merciful, and those 
that persevere in good works to the end of life, 
through the grace of our great Lord, Saviour, and 
Judge, Jesus Christ, who will distribute these bless- 
ings according to the will of his Father.” 

This eminent divine concludes his very learned 
commentary on this incomparable prophecy with 
the following devout prayer and thanksgiving, with 
which the author of this work, adopting his words, 

3 


4 


also closes his observations thereon. “ Influenced 
by which hope, and prostrate before his throne, I re- 
turn, with the most profound humility, my sincerest 
thanks to God the Father, in his Son Jesus Christ, 
by the Spirit, for the grace and light wherewith he 
hath favoured me, his unworthy servant, during my 
comment on this book; earnestly requesting from 
his grace and mercy that, pardoning the errors into 
which I have ignorantly fallen, he would render this 
work, of whatever sort it is, conducive to the glory 
of his great name, the benefit of the church, and the 


consolation ofthe pious.” Amen! 
317 
2 
a 
4 
* ° . 
ts 
. ? > 
e i 
- ‘ « 
: 
~ > 
7 % 
La 
“ 
~ 
=: 
9% 


$.&4 
eens ) 
2 i * ‘ye. . ' ; 
r % ~ Ps Se r 
* | b . f w b. 
» THE BOOK eae 
a x “i ie 6s « 
| # or” *, | 
: ' am, | al pe * ols ' a abe 
P ROPHET* JERE MI AH hk. 
y Binsaeetcae hs en h8) eo a ct ae 
a 
Bite . Ewe « 
ARGUMENT. »* » od J -. & 7 


JeremiaH was of the sacerdotal race, being ‘the son of Hilkiah, one of the priests, who! dwelt at 
Anathoth, a city in the tribe of Benjani situate, according to Jerome, about thepeaiies dye of’ 4 
Jerusalem. He was appointed ‘to the prophetic office from his mother’s womb, at , 
the exercise of it when very young; namely, in the thirteenth year of Josiah’s rei year of — 
the world 3375, and six hundred and twenty-nine years before ee ‘He continued to pr hesy 
more than forty years; namely, till after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, which hap- 
pened in the year of the world 3416, and he died, as is generally believed, in Esypt, two years” 
afterward ; into which country, after the desolation of Judea, he followed the remnant ofthe Jews.’ 
In the course of his ministry he met with great difficulties and opposition from his countrymen of 
all degrees, whose persecution and ill usage sometimes wrought so far upon his mind, as to draw 
from him some expressions, in the bitterness of his soul, which many have thought it difficult to. 
reconcile with the sacredness of his prophetic office ; but which, when duly Me pepe be found” 
to demand our pity gether than censure. He was certainly a man of unblemished piety, and con- 
scientious integrity ; a warm lover of his country, whose miseries’ he pathetically deplores ; and 
so affectionately attached to his countrymen notwithstanding their injurious treatment of him, that 
he chose rather to abide with them, and undergo all hardships in their ¢ pall, an separately 
to enjoy a state of ease and plenty, which the favourof the king of Babylon would have secured to 
him. The time and manner of his death are very uncertain. “The current trpditiol inden, among 
the Jews and Christians is, that he wa stoned to death by the Jews of Tahpanhes, offended by his 
warm and continual remonstrances against their idolatrous practices: but this acgdiant, thoweh not 

_ improbable, considering the temper and disposition of the parties\eoncerned, is not, hOwever, abso- 

 lutely to be relied on. If true, their wickedness did not long pass wit. reward ; for, ina 
few years after, those Jews were miserably destroyed by the Babylonian armies, which invaded ie 
Egypt, according to the prophet’s prediction, chap. xliy. 27, 28. . ‘ 

Jeremiah being ordained, as we find, chap. i. 5, to prophesy, not only to the Jews, but also Monee * 
nations ; to go to all to whom God should send him, and to speak whatsoever he commanded him; he 
accordingly not only uttered prophecies against God’s chosen people, but also against the Egyptians, — 

» the Philistines, the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Idumeans, the Syrians, and other vation i 4 
a more particular manner, against the Babylonians. The prophgcig® against these foreign nations 
are placed’ by themselves, beginning at the 46th chapter. ‘The foregoing, chapters relate.to the 
Jews, being reproofs of their wickedness, exhortations to repentance, amd denunciations od’s 


come under subjection to the Chaldeans, and be carried captives to Ba 
annexed, that after the expiration of just seventy years, they, should. be r 
tivity, and come back again to their own country. © There are likewise some 
particular persons, as against Pashur, Shallum, Jehoiakim, Coniah, H M ; 

also some concerning the coming of Christ, the calling of the Gentiles to ‘4 
God ; and of the new covenant which God would make with Israel. With the propheeies is i q 
-spersed the history of some affairs, particularly of the treatment Jeremiah with fromthe J 
and of the taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, As to the style and genius of this 
writing, the character given theredf by an acknowledged itic, a character to which every 
of discernment will heartily subscribe, is as follows: «Jeremiah is by no means wanting, e 
in elegance or sublimity, although, generally speaking, iWericr to Tsaiah in both» me has 
objected to him a certain rusticity in his diction, of which I must confess I do not discover 7 


i 


smallest trace. His thoughts, indeed, are somewhat less elevated, and he i only more | 
and diffuse in his sentences ; but the reason of this may be, that he is mostly taken up with the 
318 3 
. ' » 


é . 
~ x% % 
— 


é 


2 ‘ : 
. "General title tothe — © ©» CHAPTER I. book of Jeremiah. 


: os ~ >. . 
gentler passions of grief and pity, for the expression of which he has a peculiar talent. This is 
most eae the Lamentations, where th passions altogether predominate ; but it is often 
visible also in his prophecies, in the former part of the-book more especially, which is principally 
; the middle is for the most part historical ; b e last part, consisting of six chapters, is 
cals and contains several oracles. distinctly marked, in which this prophet falls very 
the lofty style of Isaiah. But of the whole book of Jeremiah it is hardly the one half 


which I look upon as poetical.” Lowth, de sacra, Poesi, Hebrworum, Prelec. xxi. 
J a7! 4 
a” Oe s * tes a 


oe 


m - a. _ ait 


~ 


ee Fi tags wet! CHAPTER I. . 

In this chapt : Dhich forms an entire section by itself, we have, (1,) A general inscription or title gs book ; with the 
time of the continuance of Jeremiah’s public ministry, 1-8, (2,) His call to the prophetic office, his modest. objection 

against itanswered, and bia, ait commission given him for the execution of it, 4-10.- (3,) The visions of an almond- 
tree and, a,seething-pot, sig ufying the approaching ruin of Judah and Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, 11-16. (4,) En- 
coummeement given him to go on undauntedly in his work, in an assurance of God’s presence with him, 17-19. 


P 5 a. : 
words of Jeremiah the son of 3 It me also in the days of Jehoia- A. M. 3375. 


A. M. 3375 
2°. o ih * , ilkiah, of. the priests that were || kim the son of Josiah king of Judah, BY CAP: 
*in Anath h the land of Benjamin : ¢ unto the end of the eleventh:year of Zedekiah 


e word of the Lorp came in the ||the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the car- 
days of Josiah the'son of Amon king of Judah, ||rying away of Jerusalem captive °in the fifth 
¥in the thirteenth year of his reign. : month. . LPs 


a Joshua xxi..18 5 1 Chronicles vi. 60 ; Chapter xxxii. 7, 8, 9. |} © Chapter xxi py Chapter lii. 12, 15.——e 2 Kings 
ic 


> Chap. xxv. 3, xxv. 8, 


Oe 
~ . 5- NOTES ON CHAPTER I. , al » by the joint efforts of such a prince and such a pro- 
Verses 1,2. The words of Jeremiah—That is, i phet, both young, and likely to continue long to be 
sermons or prophecies, the contents of which he re- || useful, such a complete reformation would have been 
ceived-from G ns he might declare m unto effected, as would, have prevented the ruin of the. 
. the people, and h are_ comprised in thi ok || church and state. But, alas! it proved quite other- 
undér his name. . See on Isa. ii/1. The son of Hil- || wise: and their united labours, with respect to the 
kiah—Some h supp this to haye been Hil-| genera of their countrymen, only served to ag- 
kiah the high-priest, hy whom the book of the law || gravate their guilt and accelerate their destruction. 
was found in the temple, in the reign of Josiah ; but Verse’3. It came also—Namely, the word of the 
for this opinion there is no better ground than his || Lond, as verse 2; in the days of Jehoiakim—Called 
being of the same name, which was not an uncom- at first by Josiah, Eliakim, 2 Kings xxiii. 34. It 
on One among the Jews; whereas, had he been in |/must be observed, that Jehoahaz; who reigned before 
Pr, ee high-priest, he would doubtless have been || him, (2 Kings xxviii. 8,) and Jehoiakim, who sue- 
ntioned by that distinguishing title,and not put || ceeded him, are not mentioned here, because each 
upon a level with the priests of an ordinary and in- || of them reigned only three months, and could hardly 
- ferior class. Besides this, Hilkiah dwelt at Anathoth, || be said to be established in the government. Unto 
indeed one of the cities allotted to the || the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah—The — 
priests, but not the place of residence of the high- meaning is, that he prophesied not only during the 
“priest, ath always lived at Jerusalem. It may be |/reigns of Josiah and Jehoiakim, but.also during the 


obs heré, that Jeremiah, being of the family of || whole reign of Zedéekiah, which was eleven years: 
been ee of the people even || unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive—That 
‘the extraordinary office || great event of which he had so often prophesied. 
; rophesying whom th d of the Lord || He continued, indeed, to prophesy after that, (chap. 
came—Not* mmission to pro-|| xl. 1,) but the computation of the time is here made 
phes bate he things themselves |/to end with that event, because it was the accom- 
which h hy oad , the days of Josiah— || plishment of many of his predictions: and from the 
T but good king, who, in the twelfth year || thirteenth year of Josiah to the captivity was just forty 
" eigny began a work of reformation, applying || years. It is Observed from Dr. Lightfoot, that as 
If with all’sincerity and diligence to purge Ju-|| Moses was forty years a teacher of the Israelites in 
' dah erusalem of the groves, the images, and || the wilderness, till they entered into their own land ; 
the high places, 2 Chron. xxxiv. 3. Now the very || Jeremiah was so long a teacher in their own land 
next year was this young prophet seasonably raised || before they were sent into the wilderness of the 
— assist and encourage the young king in that |) heathen: and he thinks that therefore a special mark 
good work. And it might have been expected that, his set upon the last forty years of the iniquity of 
. a = 319 
4 
e . 


* 
» * 


» * 
ae 


. 


_» Jeremiah’s call to 


A. M. 3375, 


JEREMIAH. 


ae Fy — 


the prophetic office. 


4 % Then the word of the Lorp 
~ came unto me, saying, 

5 Before I ‘formed thee in the belly #I 
knew thee; and before thou camest forth out 
of the womb I * sanctified thee, and I ! ordained 
thee a prophet unto the nations. . 

6 Then said I, ‘Ah, Lord Gop! behold, I 
cannot speak: for I am a child. 

7 But the Lorp said unto me, Say not, I ama 
child: for thou shalt go to all that I shallsend thee, 
and whatsoever command theethou shalt speak. 


B. C. 629. 


fIsa. xlix. 1, 5. § Exod. xxxiii. 12, 17. h Luke i. 15, 
41; Gal. i. 15.——" Hebrew, gave. i Exod. iv. 10; vi. 12, 30; 
Isa. vi. 5.——* Num, xxii. 20, 38; Matt. xxviii. 20.—! Ezek. 
ii. 6; iii. 9; Verse 17. 


SSS FS 


Judah, which Ezekiel bore forty days, a day-for a 
year, because, during all that time, they had Jere- 
miah prophesying among them, which was a great 
aggravation of their impenitency. 

Verses 4,5. Then the word of the Lord came 
unto me—With a satisfying assurance, to himself, 


that it was the word of the Lord, and not a delusion. 


Before I formed thee in the belly—That is, the 
womb., Having spoken before on the time of his 
call, he now speaks of the manner of it. J knew thee 
—That is, I had thee in my view, or approved thee 
as a fit minister for this work, in the same*sense as 
it is said, Acts xv. 18, Known unto God are all his 
works from the foundation of the world; he con- 
templated the plan of them, and approved it in his 
mind, before he created and brought them into being. 
I sanctified thee—I set thee apart in my counsel for 
executing the office of a prophet. We have exam- 
ples of a similar designation with that mentioned 
here, in John the Baptist and St. Paul, as the reader 
will see if he consult the texts referred to in the 
margin. And ordained thee a prophet unto the na- 
tions—He speaks thus to Jeremiah, not to the other 
prophets, because he stood in need of gréater en- 
couragement than they, both in respect to the tender- 
ness of his years, and the difficulties which he was 
to encounter. And ordained thee a prophet to the 
nations—To other nations besides the Jews. 

Verse 6. Then said I, Ah, Lord God, &c.—He 
modestly excuses himself from a consideration of 
the weight of the work, and the tenderness of his 
age, as in the next expression. Behold, I cannot 
speak; for I am a child—We cannot infer from 
this, that Jeremiah was within the years of what is 

_ properly called childhood. For-he might call him- 

lf a child by way of extenuating his abilities; as 
Solomon calls himself a little child, 1 Kings i. 7, 
although at that time he was married, and must have 
been at least twenty years of age. And the word 
child, or youth, is elsewhere used of those who were 
arrived at the first years of manhood. 

Verses 7, 8. But the Lord said unto me, &e.— 
God refuses to accept of his excuse, and renews his 
commission to him to execute the prophetic office. 
Thus God refused to accept the excuse of Moses, 

320 


1/20; Acts xxvi..17; Heb. xiii. 6. 


8 ‘Be not afraid of their faces: for A. M. 3375. 
™I am with thee to deliver thee, saith cil 
the Lorp. 

9 Then the Lorp put forth his hand, and 
"touched my mouth. And the Lorp said 
unto me, Behold, I have *put my words in thy 
mouth. 

10 ?See, I have this day set thee over the 
nations and over the kingdoms, to 4 root out, and 
to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, 
to build, and to plant. ot 


m Exod. iii. 12;, Deut. xxxi. 6, 8; Josh. i. 5; Chap. xv. 
0 Isa. vi. 7. oTsa. i 16; 
4 Chap. xviii. 7; 2 Cor. 


Chap. v. 14——P 1 Kings xix. 17. 
x. 4; 5. 


made on a like occasion. See &xod. vi. 30; and vii. 
1,2. Thou shalt go to all th it I shall send thee— 
This is not so much a comraand as a promise: as 
much as to say, I will enable thee, notwithstanding 
thy youth, to go with proper boldness to those to 
whom I send thee, and to declare my commands 
with that dignity and precision wherewith they ought 
to be uttered. Be not afraid of their faces: for f 
am with thee, &c.—The style of God’s commission 
to his prophets and messengers commonly runs 
in these words, I am with thee, (see the margin,) 


importing that God, who sent them, would enable 


them to discharge the office he had committed to 
them, and would give them strength -proportionable 
to the work in which they engaged. To reprove 
the faults of all persons, of the high as well as the 
low, the rich as well as the poor, with that plain- 
ness;and impartiality which, the prophets used, re- 
quired a more than ordinary degree of courage, as 
well as of prudence, for which cause the promise of 
God’s presence with them was particularly necessary, 
to encourage them in the discharge of their duty. 


Verses 9, 10. T'hen the Lord put forth his hand, 


and touched my mouth—This appeared to the pro- 
phet to be done in his vision; whereby he was 
taught that the divine help. should go along with 
him, that the gift of utterance should be bestowed 


upon him, and that he should be able to declare the 


divine commands in a proper spirit and manner: 
compare Isa. vi. 7; and li. 16. Behold, I have put 
my words in thy mouth—By the ceging of this sym- 
bolical action in his vision, and the hearing of these 
words, Jeremiah could mot, but be assured that he 
should be able to speak in the proper language of a 
prophet, or with words becoming his office, and that 
he should have that firmness and boldness given him 
which were necessary for the purpose. Jeremiah 
does not indeed equal Isaiah in eloquence of speech, 
but he seems to have been no way inferior to him in 
firmness of mind. See, Ihave this day set thee over 
the nations—Namely, to speak to them in my name, 
for this is all that is meant here by being We oo: 
them. To root out and to pull down, &c.—In the 
style of Scripture the prophets are said to do what 


they declare shall be done ; and therefore Je 
y i ; 
¢”* = 
vd e 

* ' 


¢ 


: 


CHAPTER I. 


re 
+ « 


» ’ ! 
almond tree and seething-pot. 


11 | Moreover the word of the Lorn 
came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what 
seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an al- 
mond-tree. | . : 

12 Then said the Lorp unto me, Thou hast 
well seen: for Iwill hasten my word to per- 
form it. 

13 And the word of the Lorp came unto me 
the second time, saying, What seest thou? And 
I said, I see *a seething-pot; and the face 
thereof is ?toward the north. 


aE 


A. M. 3375. 
B. C. 629. 


14 Then the Lorp said unto me, A, M. 3375 
Out of the * north an evil ° shall break 


forth upon all the inhabitants of the land. * 


15 For lo, I will tcall all the families of tha 
kingdoms of the north, saith the Lorn; and 
they shall come, and they shall "set every om 
his throne at the entering of the gates of Jeru: 
salem, and against all the walls thereof rouns 
about, and against all the cities of Judah. 

16 And I will utter my judgments against 
them touching all their wickedness, *who have 


r Ezek. xi. 3,7; xxiv. oe 
‘s Chap. iv. 6; vi. 1. 


2 Heb. from the face of the north. 
3 Heb. shall be opened. 


.t Chap. v. 15; vi. 22; x. 22; xkv. 9. 


j u Chap. xxxix. 3; xliii. 
x Deut. xxviii. 20; Chap. xvii: 18. 


10. 


= = 


is here said fo root out, &c., becausé he was author- 
ized to make known the purposes of God, and be- 
cause the events here mentioned would follow in 
. * ‘ . 
consequence of his prophecies. See Isa: vi. 9; and 
Bishop Newton on the Prophecies, vol. 1. 

Veises 11; 12. Moreover the word of the Lord 
came unto me—Probably at the same time, and in 
the same vision, wherein he was first appointed to 
his office; saying, What seest thou—Here, by sym- 
bolical representations, the meaning of which God 
immediately interpreted, future things were’ present- 
ed to his view. This method of instruction or in- 
formation sinks deeper into the mind, and leaves a 
more lasting impression there, than any mere words 
can do; and-therefore the prophets frequently re- 
ceived communications from God in this way.. And 
I said, I see a rod, of an almond-tree—Namely, 
which had leaves, and possibly blossoms on it, like 
Aaron’s rod; otherwise the prophet could. not so rea- 
dily have discerned of what kind of wood it was. 
The almond-tree is one of the first that wakes and 
rises from its winter repose, flowering, in the warm 
southern countries, in the month of January, and 


‘by March bringing its fruits to maturity. From this 


circumstance, which is mentioned by Pliny, lib. xvi. 
cap. 42, it is supposed to have received its name, 
pw, shaked, as being intent, and, as it were, on the 
waich to seize the first opportunity of emitting its 
buds and blossoms:. which is the proper sense of the 
verb, from which that noun is derived.. A branch 
of this,tree, therefore, with buds or leaves, and 
blossoms upon it, was a proper emblem to denote 
God’s hastening the execution of the predictions 
which he declared by this prophet, who lived to see 
most of his prophecies fulfilled. There is also in 
the oitgiliat a remarkable paranomasia, or affinity 
In nd, bet shaked, an almond-tree, and 
shoked, hastening, which makes the words more 
striking than they can possibly be in any. transla- 
tion. For not only the nature of the ve pele 
but the yery sound of the Hebrew word, which sig- 
nifies it, denoted God’s hastening to fulfil the pro- 
phecies which Jeremiah uttered by his directions. 
Thou hast well seen—Or, thou hast seen and judged 
right. Hebrew, neg niun, Thou hast done well 
to see, that is, in seeing so. For I will hasten my 
Vor. TIL. y C3) : 


cd 


aword—Literally, I will act like the almond-trse 
respecting my word; namely, my word of threat- 
ening, against Judah and Jerusalem, to perform it. 

Verse 13. I see a seething-pot—Or, a pot boiling. 
The steam of this boiling pot represented God’s 
judgments, which are. often compared to a fire, as 
the afflictions of Israel were to a smoking furnace, 
Gen. xv. 17. And the face thereof was toward the 
north—The steam was represented to the prophet as 
raised by a fire, or driven by a wind coming from 
the north. Thus interpreted, the pot or caldron 
denoted Judea or Jerusalem, expressed by the same 
figure, Ezek. xi. 3,'7, and xxiv. 3. But the Hebrew 
MND¥ 13D 139, seems to be more exactly rendered 
by Blaney; T'he face thereof is turned from the 
north, or, as it is expressed in the margin, from the 
face of the north.’ For it appears from the next 
verse, that the evil was-to come from the north; and 
therefore the steam, which was designed for an em- 
blem of that evil,;must have issued from that quarter. 
According to this interpretation, the pot denoted the 
empire of the Chaldeans, lying to the north of Ju- 
dea, and pouring forth its multitudes like.a thick 
vapour, 

Verses 15, 16. For lo, [ will call—Or, I am upor 
calling, or, about to call; all the families of the 
kingdoms of the north—By these seem to be meant 
the different nations who were subject to Nabopo-) 
lassar and Nebuchadnezzar, and who served in their 
armies, such as the Medes, Armenians, Chaldeans, 
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, and Syrians. . The 
kings of Assyria were formerly troublesome to the 
Jews, chiefly under Ahaz and Hezekiah; but they 
do not seem to be spoken of here, but only those 
people who, from the thirteenth year of Josiah, when 
Jeremiah had this vision, grievously harassed Judea, 
until the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, to 
whom the kings of the north were either tributaries 
or auxiliaries. And they shall set. every one his 
throne, &¢.—To set up a throne in, or over, any 
place, denotes taking full possession of it, as appears 
from ,chap. xliii. 10, and xlix..388: but, by hrones 
here, seats, pavilions, or tents pitched, may be in- 
tended; and so this prophecy was fulfilled when the 
city was taken by Nebuchadnezzar: see chap. xxxrx. 
3. And I will utter my judgments against then— 

321 3 


ay 


B. C. 629). * 


Diwine protection 


JEREMIAH. 


promised to Jeremiah. 


A. M. ee forsaken me, 


hi 


i and lave burned in- 
_——. cense’unto other gods, and worshipped 
the works of their own hands. 

17 @ Thou therefore ¥ gird up thy loins, and 


arise, and speak unto them all that I command. 


thee: *be not dismayed -at their faces, lest I 
* confound thee before them. 
18 For behold; I have made thee this day *a 


y-1 Kings xviii. 46; 2 Kings iv. 29; ix. a: Job xxxviii. 3; Luke 
xii. 35; 1 Pet. i. 13. 


defenced city, and an iron pillar, and A. “4 at 
brazen walls against the whole land, co 
against the kings of Judah, against the princes 
iherenf against the priests es and eppect 
the people of the Jand. 

19 And they shall fight against mi ‘bot they 
shall not prevail against thee; » for 1 am with 
thee, saith the Ludtin} to alii thee. 


z Exod, iii. 12; Verse 8; Ezek. ii. 6 ——*Or, break to pieces, 
2Jsa. I. 7; Chap. vi. 27; xv. 20.—» Verse 8, 


Namely, against the Jews, for this is spoken of them, 
and not of the kings or people, mentioned in the 
foregoing verse; touching their wickedness—Then 
I will no longer speak unto them by my prophets, 
whose threatenings they,have disregarded; but the 
judgments which I will bring upon them shall de- 
clare their wickedness, and the vengeance due unto 
them for it. ; 
Verse 17. Thou therefore gird up thy loins— 
Prepare to do the work to whieh I call-and appoint 
thee. For, it being the custom of the eastern peo- 
ple to wear long garments, which they girded about 
their loins when any business required great activity 
or expedition; by thus speaking the Lord enjoins 
his prophet to use all possible vigour and intention 
of mind as well as of body, that he might execute, 
with diligence and despatch, the office which God 
had assigned him. And arise—Another expression 
of the same meaning. And speak all that I com- 
mand thee—Hebrew, shall command thee. Be not 
dismayed at their faces—Discover no fear, and con- 
ceal no message; lest I confound thee—The Hebrew 
verb is the same in both parts of the sentence, which 
may be literally rendered thus: Be not confounded 
at their faces, (namely, when thou appearest in 
their presence,) lest I confound. thee before them. 
God exhorts him not to be dismayed at the scoffs 
and ill treatment he should meet with from hardened 


sinners, especially from those who thought their 
power and authority set them above reproof, and 
would bear them out in whatsoever they did: see 
‘Ezek. xi. 6. He tells him it is better to bear the re- 
proaches of men than the reproofs of God, who 
would call -him to a strict account how he discharged 
his duty. 

Verses 18,19. For I have made thee this day a 
defenced city—That is, from this day I will so de- 
fend thee that they shall be’no more able to hurt thee 
than they would_be if thou wast in a strongly-forti- 
fied and impregnable city. And brazen walls— 
Which cannot be broken or battered down with any 
force. Against the whole land, against the kings, 
&c.—All its inhabitants in general ; intimating that, 
though men of all degrees should set themselves 
against him, yet God would support him against 
them all, and would carry him through his work, al- 
though his troubles would not only be great, but 
long, extended through several kings’ reigns. And 
they shall fight against thee—Shall oppose thee, and 
manifest much hostile hatred against thee; but they 
shall not prevail—They shall not heal, by all 
their devices, to shorten thy days, or to prevent thy 
executing the charge given thee. For J am with 
thee, to deliver thee—I will show my power in pro- 
tecting and delivering thee out ofall thy troubles, when 
thy adversaries shall become a prey to their enemies. 


CHAPTER II. 


iy 
This and the four following chapters contain a solemn remonstrance against the wickedness of the Jews, calls to repentance, 
and threatenings of ruin if they remained obstinate and impenitent. The sin with which they are most particularly charged 
here is idolatry, -forsaking their own God, the‘true God, for other and false gods. It is urged, (1,) That their conduct 


was extremely ungrateful to God, who had been so kind to their nation, 1-8. 


(2, ) That it was without a, precedent even 


gamong the heathen, who had only idols for their gods, 9-13. (3,) That by their alliances with the Egyptians and Assy- 
rians, and imitation of their idolatries, they had disparaged and ruined themselves, 14-19. (4,) That hereby they had 


broken their covenant engagements, and degencrated from their good beginnings, 19-21. 


(5,) That their wickedness was 


too manifest to be concealed, and too bad to be excused, they having wilfully, obstinately, and indefatigably persisted in it, 


22-25, 33-36. 


mingled the most unnatural murder of their children, 34. 


322 : 


“a2 


(6,) That they had shamed themselves by trusting to idols, which could not help them, 26-29, 37.  (7,) 
That they contemned the rebukes of providence, and even God naar 30-32. 


(8,) That, with their idolatry, they had 
: eg Se: 
» . ® 3 
( ‘ 


hs 


The Lord’s controversy 


CHAPTER II. 


with his people. 


A. M, ag 


; 
baer e NP OREOY ER, the word of the 


Lorp came-to me, saying, 

2 Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, 
Thus saith the Lorp; I remember ‘thee, the 
kindness of thy * youth, the love of thine es- 
pousals, when thou wentest after me in the 
wilderness, in a land that was not sown. 

3 ¢Israel was holiness unto the Lorp, and 
“ the first-fruits of his increase : 
him shall offend ; evil shall ° come be them, 
saith the Lorp. 


4 Hear ye the word of the Esa: O house 


@ all that devour | 


of Jacob, and all the families of the AM B35. 
B. C. 629. 
house of Israel : 

5 Thus saith the Lorn, f What iniquity have 
your fathers found in me, that they are gone far 
from me, ® and -have walked after vanity, and 
are become vain ? : 

6 Neither said they, Where is the' Lorn that 
* brought. us up out of the land of Egypt, that 
led us ahrough ‘the wilderness, through a land 
of deserts and of pits; through’a land of drought, 
and of the shadow of death,through a land that no 
man passed through, and where no man dwelt? 


2 Or, for thy sake. a aeaiin xyis 8, 22, 60; xxiii. 3, 8, 19; 
Hos. ii. 15. + Deut. ii. ¢ Exod. xix. 5, 6——4 James i. 
18; Rev. xiv. 4. 


Mic. vi. 3. 


e Chapter xii. 14; f Tsaiah v. 4; 
Hos. 


&2 Kings xvii. 15; J b Isa. Ixiii. 9,11, 13; 
xiii. 4. i Deut. viii. 15; xxxii. 10. 


Chapter 1. 7. 


NOTES, ON CHAPTER II. 

Verse 1. Moreover, the word of the Lord came 
wnto me—The discourse begun here is continued to 
the end of the fifth verse of the next chapter. In it 
God professes to retain the same kind and merciful 
disposition toward his people which he had mani- 
fested in their earlier days.. He expostulates with 
them on their ungrateful returns for his past good- 
ness, and shows that it was not want of love in him, 
but their own extreme and unparalleled wickedness, 
which had already subjected, and would still subject 
them, to calamities and misery. He concludes with 
a pathetic address, exhorting them to return to him, 


with an implied promise of acceptance; and laments, 


the necessity he was under, through their continued 
obstinacy, of giving them further proofs of his dis- 
pleasure. See Blaney. 

Verses 2,3. Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem 
—TIn the most publie parts of the city, that all may, 
hear; saying, Thus saith the Lord—i deliver his 
message, and not my own. I come to you witha 
commission from God, and speak in God’s name. J 
remember thee, &c. I remember my first kindness 
to thee, when I delivered thee out of Egypt; (see 
Hos. ii. 15;) and espoused thee to myself, to be my 
own peculiar people. The covenant which God 
made with the Israelites, at mount Sinai, is com- 
monly represented under the metaphor of a mar- 
riage contract. Upon this account idolatry is repre- 
sented as spiritual adultery, because it is the same 
degree of unfaithfulness to God which an adulteress 
is guilty of in respect of her husband. . When thou 
wentest after me in the wilderness—Out of that 
love and affection that thou didst manifest to me in 
following my conduct. Or rather, when thou wast 
led by me through the wilderness, and I took such 
care both to protect and provide for thee, and that 
by a train of miracles; in a land that was not sown 
—Or, as Houbigant reads it, in an uncultivated land. 
Israel was holiness to the Lord—A people dedicated 
to God; and the first-fruits of his increase-—Or, as 
the first-fruits. As the first-fruits are holy to God, 
so was Israel. All that devour, or rather, devoured, 
him—For it refers to the time past, not to the future ; 

3 
* 


and so.the following words: all that were injurious 
to him ; shall, or, did, offend—Were obnoxious and 
liable to. punishment, as if they had devoured holy 
things, Prov. xx. 25. | Evil shall come, rather, came, 
upon them—Some evil was inflicted on them from 
the Lord, who was always wont to ‘stand forth for 
the vindication of his péople; as upon the Egyptians, 
Amalekites, Sihon, Og, the Midianites, Canaanites, - 
and others, as the four last books of Moses abundant- 
ly testify. 

Verses 4-6. Hear, O house of Jacob, &c.—The 
prophet. here directs his discourse to the twelve 
tribes, as he does afterward, chap. iii. 14, &e. For 
the captivity of the ten tribes was not so total but 
that there were some Israelites still remaining in the 
land among the Assyrian colonists. What iniquity 
have your fathers found in me?—That is, what in- 
justice or unfaithfulness in not performing my part 
of the Sinai covenant? J'hat they are gone far 
from me—Far from the love and fear of me, and 
from obedience to my laws; far from my worship 
and service; and have walked after vanity—Have 
followed after vain idols, incapable of affording them 
either protection or help. And are become vain— 
In their imaginations, Rom. i. 21,22; fools, as sense- 
less.as the stocks or stones, of which they made - 
their idols. Neither said they, Where is the Lord ? 
—They made no inquiry after him, took no thought 
about their duty to him; nor expressed any desire to 
recover his favour; that brought us up out of the 
land of Eeypt?—Working such a deliverance for 
us as had never been wrought for any people. T’hat 
led us through the wilderness—Conducting and sus- 
taining our whole nation in that barren desert for 
the space of forty years, by almost incessant mira- 
cles; through a land of deserts and pits—Through 
desolate and dangerous places; through a land of 
drought—W here we had no water but by a miracle ; 
and of the shadow of death—Houbigant renders it, 
where death threatened us. A barren and deadly 
land, where no man could live; bringing forth 
nothing that could support life, and therefore where 
nothing but death could be expected ; and, besides, 
possessed by great numbers of venomous and de- 

323 


. ¥ 


%, 


ta 


The ingratitude of the Jews 


A. M. 3375. 
B. 


plentiful country, to eat the fruit 
thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye 
entered, ye ‘defiled my land, and. made my 
heritage an abomination. 

8 The priests said not, Where is the Lorp? 
and they that handle the ™law knew me not: 
the pastors also transgressed against me, "and 
the prophets prophesied by Baal;and walked 
after things that ° do not profit. 

9 Wherefore ? I will yet. plead with you, saith 


ae 


JEREMIAH. 


was without a precedent. 


7 And I brought you into * aj/the Lorp, and“ with your children’s ie es. 


children will I plead. | hana 
10 For pass *over the isles of Chittimyand see ; 
and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, 


|and_see if there be such a. thing. 


11 * Hath a nation changed their gods, whch 
are *yet nogods? ‘but my people have 
changed their glory for " that which doth not 
profit. 

12 * Be astonished,O ye hae at this, and be 
horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saiththe Lorp. 


2 Or, the land of Carmel——*Numbers xili. 27; xiv. 7, 8; 
Deut. viii. 7, 8, 9——! Lev. xviii. 25,-27, 28; Num. xxxy. 
33, 34; Psa. Ixxviii. 58, 59; evi. 38; Chap. iii. -1; xvi. 18, 
™ Mal. ii. pt 7; Rom. ii. 20. = Chap. xxiii. 13. 


structive creatures, such as scorpions, serpents, &c., 
and where we were exposed to the attacks of many 
enemies. 'A land that no man passed through—As 
having in it no accommodation for travellers, much 
less for habitation. 

_ Verses 7, 8. And I brought you into a plentiful 
country—Hebrew, into the land of Carmel. Car- 
mel was so fertile a part of Judea, that the word from 
thence. came to be used to express a fruitful place in 
general. Canaan was as one .great, fruitful field, 
Deut. viii. 7. When ye entered, ye defiled my land 
—By your sins, especially by your idolatries, Psa. 
cvi. 38; that sin being greatly aggravated by this 
circumstance, that the people theréby renounced 
God’s authority in that very land into which he had 
brought them, by a train of unparalleled wonders, 
and the propriety of which he had reserved to him- 
self, though he had graciously bestowed upon them 
the use of it: see Lev. xxv. 23. The priests said 
not, Where ts the Lord 2—That race of men, whom 


whom I appointed to the important office of instruct- 
ing others in the knowledge of me and their duty, 
(see Mal. vii. 6, 7,) were ignorant or-regardless of it 
themselves, And this was the principal cause of 
that degeneracy of manners which prevailed among 
the people. T'he pastors also transgressed against 
me—By pastors here, distinguished from the priests 
and prophets, are meant the kings, princes, and 
chiefs of the nation; for the word pastor is used in 
the prophets for a magistrate, as well as for a teacher 
of the people, and ecclesiastical governor. And the 


prophets prophesied by Baal—Gaye forth prophe- | 


cies in the name of Baal, with a view to recommend 
him asa god. Or, they that should have taught the 
people the true worship of God, were themselves 
worshippers of, and advocates for, Baal, and. drew 
others from God to the worship of ‘that idol; and 
walked after things that do not profii—Namely, 
after idols; things that could not possibly do them 
any service, but were sure to bring ruin upon them 


}] 


It appears from hence, that all orders and degrees | 
324 


¢ 


Hab. ii. 18.—p Ezek. xx. 35, 36; _Mic. vi. 2. 


°Verse 11; 
4 Exod. A 8; Lev. “xx. 5. 3 Or, over teeaaee ic. iv. 5. 
§ Psa. exv, 4; Isa. xxxvil. 19; Chap. xvi., 20. t Psa. cvi. 20; 


Rom, i. 23. « Verse 8. x Isa, i. 2; Chap. vi. 19. 


of men in authority had contributed to that general 
corruption. of manners, whereof Terenas’ com- 
plains. 

Verse 9. ._Wherefore I will yet silent with you— 
By my: prophets, and by my judgments, as I pleaded 
with your fathers, that you may be left without ex- 
cuse. And-with your children’s childven will I 
plead—According to the tenor of the law, wherein 
God threatens to visit the sins, particularly the sin 
of idolatry, of the fathers upon the children, unto the 


| third and fourth generation. 


| that are more rude and barbarous. 
I exalted to the honourable office of ministering to |) 


me in holy things, neither inquired after me, nor} 
cultivated any acquaintanee.or intercourse with me. | 
And they that handle the law knew me.not—They, || 


‘did; nor can, do th 


i 


Verses 10, 11. For pass over the aide of Chittim 
—The neighbouring isles and peninsulas, which lay 
west of Judea, meaning especially the countries of 
Greece and Macedonia, and the islands and conti- 
nents of Europe insgeneral; the countries that were 
more polite amd learned. And send unto Kedar— 
To Arabia, and the countries to the east and south, 
as the others lay to the west and north: send to them 
And consider 
diligently—As-a matter well worth your attention ; 
and see if there be such a thing—As if he had said, 
If you search from east to west, from south to north, 
you will find no instance of apostacy from the-ob- 
jects of their worship like this of yours. Hath a 
nation changed their gods ?—The gods worshipped 
by their forefathers? or shown a disposition to 
change them? Which are yet no gods?—But mere 


| imaginary beings, or images made by men’s hands, 


or the creatures of the living and true God. But 
my people have changed their glory, have relin- 
quished the worship of the infinite and eternal Je- 
hovah, their Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, Re- 
deemer, Friend, and. Father, to whom they owe 
their all, and whose worship and service, favour and 
protection, were their greatest glory. For that 
which doth not profit—For those idols which never 
any good; that have no es- 
sence or power; and of which mens must necessa- 
rily be ashamed. 

Verses 12, 13. Be astonished, O. ye odinaintine at 
this—A pathetical expression, in the poetic style, 
signifying that the wickedness of these apostates 


. from God was so great, that the very inanimate 


creatures, could they. be sensible of it, might well 
3 
+ 


‘ 


% a 
Judgments upon the Jews CHAPTER II. for forsaking the Lord. 
A, M, 3375. 13 For my people have committed |) 15 *'The young tiotke roared upon A. M, 3375. 
B. C. 629. B. C. 629. 


two evils; they have forsaken me, the 

¥ fountain of living waters, and hewed them:out, 

cisterns,.broken cisterns, that can hold no water. 

14 4 Js Israel 7a servant? is he a home-born 
slave ? i is he * spoiled? 


him, and ° yelled, and they made his 
land waste: his cities are burned without in- 
habitant. 

16 Also the children of Noph and > Tahapanes 
* have broken the crown of bess head. 


y Psa. xxxvi.9; Chap. xyii. 13; xviii. 14; John iv. 14. —2 Ex. 
iv. 22. “Heb. become a spoil ? a[sa. i. 7; Chap. iv. 7. 


5Heb. gave out their voice——» Chap. xlili. 7, 8, 9. ——5 Or, 
feed on thy crown, Deut. xxxiil. 20 ; Isa. vui. 8. 


stand amazed at it: that the heavens might be af- 
frighted to behold it, and the celestial bodies with- 
draw their light and influences from that part of the 
world where such enormities were practised. 
“Such rhetorical apostrophes import the unusual- 
ness, and likewise the indignity, of the things spoken 
of; implying them to be such that, if men take no 
notice of them, the elements themselves will testify 
against such practices.’—Lowth. See note on Isa. 
1.2. For my people have committed two evils— 
Two remarkable evils, ingratitude and folly: they 
have acted contrary both to their duty and to their 
interest; they have forsaken me, the fountain of 
living waters—In whom they had an abundant and 
constant supply of*all that comfort and relief they 
stood in need of, and had it freely; and hewed them 
out cisterns—Have had recourse to creatures, and 
to schemes of their own devising ; to gods of their 
own making, for relief in their necessiti¢s, for de- 
liverance out of, or support and comfort in, their 
troubles. Broken cisterns—False at the bottom, 
and leaky, so that they can hold no water—They 
have acted as foolishly as persons would do who 
should reject the waters of a clear, perpetual spring, 
to drink is aie, received in cisterns, which 
could neither be so sweet nor so wholesome as that 
of pure springs; and not only so, but should betake 
themselves to such cisterns as, being broken, could 
old no water, or none for any length of time, and 
therefore could give them no assurance of finding 
any upon having recourse to them. God may, in- 
deed, be justly compared to-a perpetual spring, as 
he is the fountain or origin of all good things; the 
author and giver of all blessings, both spiritual and 
temporal, from whom all good gifts are derived, as 
from an inexhaustible source; see Psa. xxxvi.' 9. 
“And wherever else men place their happiness, 
whether in false religions, or in the uncertain com- 
forts of worldly blessings, they will find themselves 
as wretchedly disappointed as those who expect to 
find water in broken cisterns or conduits. Hereby 
is strongly set forth the folly of the Jews in re- 
nouncing the worship of the true God, and their 
dependance upon him, and betaking themselves to 
the worship of idols, and the alliance and protecnon 
of idolaters. »_Lowth. 

Verse 14. Is Israel a servant? is he a home-born 
slave?—Is he of a condition to be delivered as a 
prey tohis enemies? Is he of those people whom 
God regards as slaves and strangers? These inter- 
rogations imply, and havVe the force of, a negative. 
As’ if he had said, Is not Israel the son, the chosen 
and peculiar people of God? Why then hath the 

3 


. . 


Lord treated him as a common slave, and given him 
up into the power of tyrannical lords and masters ? 
The sense is, God redeemed Israel from the bondage 
of Egypt, and adopted him to be his son, Exod. iv. 
22. So that the servitude he now undergoes, and 
his being made a prey to so many foreign enemies, 
cannot be owing to his birth, or primitive condi- 
tion, but must be imputed to his sins, of which his 
alavery i is the consequence. Compare Isa. 1. I, and 
li. 3. 

Verses 15, 16. The young lions roared upon them 
—Lions, in the figurative style of prophecy, denote 
powerful princes and conquerors; see chap. 1. 175. 
where the king of Assyria is mentioned as one of 
those lions which had devoured him, and Nebuchad- 
nezzar as another. If we consider the prophet as 
speaking here of what was past, by the young lions 
he probably means the kings of Syria and Assyria, 
who laid the country waste, not only of the ten 
tribes, but also Judah and Benjamin; and carried 


| the Israelites into captivity; see Isa. i.'7. But the 


words [755 11Nw’ are more properly rendered, 
The young lions shall roar upon him ; and so may 
be understood of Pharaoh-necho, king of Egypt, and 
Nebuchadnezzar, whose successive hostilities against 
the kingdom of Judah were foreseen by the pro- 
phet, and are probably here foretold. It is true, the 
following verbs of this verse .are in the past time, 
but the context favours interpreting them of the fu- 
ture.’ Nor is it ‘unusual for the prophets to speak of 
events yet to come, and foreseen by them, as if they 
had been already: accomplished. They made his 
land waste, his cities are burned, &c.—That Jere- 
miah speaks here of the future, and not of the past, 
appears from this: that in the.time of Josiah, when 
this prophecy was uttered, the country was not in 
the condition here described; the land had not been 
reduced to desolation, nor the cities burned with 
fire; but the determination of the Lord was past, 
and the prophet clearly foresaw that these calamities 
would come. Also the children of Noph, §c., have 
broken the crown of thy head—By the children of 
Noph and Tahapanes are meant the Egyptians, these 
being the two principal cities of Egypt, called by 
heathen writers Memphis and Taphanes, or Daphne 
Pelusice. “This no doubt alludes,” says Blaney, 
“to the severe blow which the nation received in a 
capital part, a on good King Josiah was defeated 
by the Egyptians, and slain in battle ; or when, af- 
terward, upon the deposition of Jehoahaz, the glory 
of the monarchy was debased, by its being changed 
into a tributary and dependant kingdom, 2 Kings 
xxiii. 29-34, and 2 Chron. xxxv. 20. 
325 


: + 


* 


— ALM. 3 ay 


+, 


rs 


Judgments upon the Jews 


JEREMIAH. 


for forsaking the Lord. 


ews 17. Hast thou not procured this unto 


Lorp thy God, when “he led thee by the way ? 


18 % And now what hast thou to do ° in the 
way of Egypt, to drink the.waters of f Sihor? 
or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, 
to drink the waters of the river ? 

19 ‘Thine own * wickedness shall correct thee, 
and thy backslidings sha!l reprove thee: know 


¢Chapter iv. 18——4 Deut. xxxii.-10, *Isaiah xxxw], 2. 
f Josh, xill. re g Isa. iit. 9; Hos. v. v. 5,——h Ex, xix. 8; Josh. 


Verse 17. Hast thou not Se this unto thy- 
self ?2—Are not all these calamities owing to thy sins, 
thy known and wilful sins? By their sinful, con- 


federacies with the nations, and especially their con- 


formity to them in their idolatrous customs and 
usages, they had made themselves very mean and 


contemptible, as all those do that have made a pro- 


fession of religion, and afterward throw it off. 
Nothing now appeared of that which, by their con- 
stitution, made them both honourable and formidable, 
and therefore the neighbouring nations neither re- 
spected nor feared them. But this-was not all: 
they had provoked God to give them up into the 
hands of their enemies, who, after becoming a 
dreadful scourge to them, at last subdued them, and 
overturned their government. And thus they 
brought their miseries upon themselves, in forsaking 
the Lord thzir God, in revolting from. their alle- 
giance to him, and so throwing themselves out of 
his protection; for protection and_allegiance go to- 
gether. When he led thee, &c. ‘ee yy Hya 
p79, at the time, the very time, he was lead- 
ing thee by the way. ‘Then, when. he was leading 
thee on to a happy peace and settlement, and thou 
wast arrived at the very borders of it, thou didst 
draw back, and forsake thy guide. We may observe 
here, that although Josiah was a very pious prince, 
and exerted himself to the utmost to. restore the 
worship of God, breaking down the altars and 
groves, and beating the graven images into. powder, 
&c., 2 Chron. xxxiv., xxxv., nevertheless, from the 
complaints of Jeremiah, and his reproofs of their 
idolatry, it sufficiently appears that the people were 
far from being reformed. 

Verse 18. And now what hast thou to do,'&e.— 
“The kings of Egypt and Assyria were the most 
potent monarchs in the neighbourhood of Judea; 
and according as either of these was the stronger, 
the Jews made their court to him, and desired his 
assistance. This is expressed by drinking the wa- 
ters of Sihor, an Egyptian river, which some sup- 
pose, and Dr. Waterland renders, the Nile; (see 
note on Isa. xxii. 3;) and of the Euphrates, ealled 
here the river, by way of uae. The expres- 
sions allude to verse 13, where human assistance 
are styled broken cisterns, and opposed to God, wh 
by reason of his all-sufficiency, is called the ‘fountain 
of living waters. To drink of the waters of these 
rivers might possibly allude, further, both to the 

326 


a ig 


thing and bitter, that thou_hast for- 


‘Syriac, and Vulgat 


therefore and see that it is an evil A.M. 3375. 

. C, 629. 
saken the Lorp thy God, and that my fear is 
not in thee, saith the Lord Gon of hosts. 

20 For of old time I have broken thy yoke, 
and burst thy bands; and "thou saidst, I will 
not 7 transgress; when ‘upon every high hill 
and under every green tree thou wanderest, 
k playing the harlot. 


xxiv. 18; Judg. x. 16; 1 Sam. xii. 10.——7 Or, serve——i Deut. 


| xii. 2; Ifa. lvii. 5, 73; Chap. iii. 6——* xd, xxxiv. 15, 16. 


strong propensity which the Israelites had to return 
to Egypt, and that which they showed for adopting 
the idolatrous worship of these countries. For the 
Egyptians worshipped the water, and particularly 
that of the Nile’? See Div. Leg., vol. iii., and 
Calmet. a . 

Verse 19. Thy own wickedness shall correct thee 
—The miseries that your own sins have brought 
upon you, one would suppose, might be sufficient to 
reclaim you from your evil courses, and induce you 


| to return to God, by a sincere repentance, Hos. ii. 7. 


Know therefore—Upon the whole matter; and see 
that it is an evil thing that thou hast jh Bs the 
Lord thy God—F¥or that is the thing that makes 
thine enemies enemies indeed, and, thy friends 
friends in vain. The sense of the clause is, Call to 
mind what thou hast found by experience, and re- 
fleet. seriously upon it, and thou canst not but be 
convinced how, dear the forsaking of God hath 
cost thee. And that my fear—Or, the fear of 
me ; or, that thou hast not my fear in thee, saith 
the Lord—Consider this well, for it is the ground 
of all thy sin and suffering, in order that thy cor- 
rection may not end in thy utter ruin. This whole 
discourse of Jeremiah is a kind of pleading, wherein 
the prophet maintains the cause of God against his 
people. 

Verses 20, 21. For of old time I have broken thy 
yoke—That is, I have delivered thee from the bond- 
age ee tyranny that thou wast under, of old time, 
in Egypt; as also divers ‘times~ besides, See the 
book of Judges. And burst thy bands—Alluding 
either to the bands and fetters with which prisoners 
were wont to be bound, chap. xl. 4, or those bands 
wherewith yokes were usually fastened upon the 
necks of beasts. And thow saidst, I will. not 


‘transgreéss—When the deliverance was fresh, thou 


didst form good resolutions. This translation is ac- 
cording to the marginal reading of the Masoretes; 
but in the Hebrew text, confirmed by the LXX., 
we read 3)3}'S 89, J will not 
serve, namely, Jehovah. According to this read- 
ing, which seems very just and unexceptionable, 
and is approved by Houbigant and Dr. Waterland, 
the meaning of the passage is, that even after the 
Jews had been freed, by God, from their Egyp- 
tian. ‘bondage, and admitted into an immediate 
covenant and alliance with him, they had been 
guilty of the utmost ingratitude in refusing obe- 


The wickedness of the Jews was 


CHAPTER I. 


ae Se 21 Yet I had ! planted thee a noble 
———— vine, wholly a right seed: how-then 


art thou turned into ™the-degenerate plant of 
a strange vine unto me ? 

22 For though thou "wash thee an nitre, 
and take thee much soap, yet ° thine iniquity is 
marked before me, saith the Lord Gop. 

23 » How canst thou say, I am not polluted, 


+ 


I have not gone afier Baalim? See oe Br; 
thy way ‘in the valley, know what ——— 
thou hast done: ® chou art. a swift dromedary 
traversing her ways: 

24 *A® wild ass used to the wilderness, 
that snuffeth up the wind at “her pleasure ; 
in her occasion who can turn her away? 
all they that seek her will not weary them- 


i “ : — 

1 Exod. xv..17; Psa. xliv. 2; Ixxx..8; Isa. v. 1, &c, 5 dx: 215 P Prov. xxx. 12.——4Chap. vii. 31— 8 Or, O swift drome- 
Matt. xxi. 33; Mark xii. 1; Take Xx. 9. Sepak Deut. XXxii. 32 ; dary. ¥ Job xxxix. 5; Chap. xly. 6. °Or, O wild ass, &e. 
Isa. i. 21; v. 4.——2 Job ix. 30.— Deut. xxxii. 34; Job xiv. eb. taught. 11 Heb. the desire of her heart. 12 Or, 
17; Hos. xiii. 12. reverse it. 


dience to the divine law, and particularly in respect 
to the prohibition of idolatry. When wpon every 
high hill, and under every green tree, &c—Al- 
luding to their worshipping their idols upon the 
hills, and under: the trees; thow wanderest, play- 
ing the harlot—Worshipping false gods. As idol- 
atry is frequently called whoredom in the Scripture 
language, so the prophet describes the Israelites un- 
der the image of a strolling harlot, seeking for lovers 
wherever she can, without any shame. Yet I plant- 
ed thee a noble vine—Hebrew, the vine of Sorek ; 
concerning which see note on Isa. v. 2. Israel is 
here compared to a shoot, or branch, taken from a 
generous or good vine, and transferred to another 
soil, where it degenerates. Wholly a right seed— 
Without any mixture; the offspring of those true 
believers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and the laws 
which I gave thee, and the means of grace which I 
afforded thee, were sufficient to have made thee 
fruitful in every good’ work. How then art thou 
turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine? 
—That is, one which has degenerated from the na- 
ture of the vine whence it was taken, and bears 
worse fruit than that did. The constitution of the 
Israelitish government, both in church and state, was 
excellent; their laws righteous, and all their ordi- 
nances instructive, and very significant; and there 
Was a generation of good men among them, when 
they first settled in Canaan.’ For we learn, Josh. 
xxvi. 31, that Jsrael served the Lord, and kept close 
to him, all the days of Joshua, and of the elders that 
outlived: Joshua. They were then wholly a right 


seed, likely to replenish the vineyard they were. 


planted in with choice vines: but it proved other- 
wise; the very next generation knew not the Lord, 
nor the works that he had done, Judg. ii. 10, and 
they grew worse and worse, till they became the de- 
generate plant of a strange vine—The very re- 
verse of what they were at first. Their constitution 
was now quite broken, and there was nothing in 
them of that good which one might have expected 
from a people so happily formed; nothing of the 
purity or piety of their ancestors; but their vine 
was, according to Moses’s prediction, as the vine of 
Sodom. 


Verse 22. For though thou wash thee with nitre, 
&c.—Though thou shouldest use ever so many 
methods of washing away thy sins, such as the rites 
of expiation prescribed by the law, or practised by 

3 °° 


‘ \ . ‘ ’ : : 
idolaters; though thou shouldest insist ever somuch 


too manifest to be concealed. 


_ 


upon thy own innocence and righteousness, yet the | 


marks or stains of thy sins will always appear in 
the sight of God, till they are done away by his par- 


doning mercy, exercised toward thee in consequence © 


of thy repentance and reformation. “The nitre 
here mentioned is not what we call niire, or sali- 


petre, but ‘a native salt of a different kind, distin- 


guished among naturalists by the name of natrum, 
or the nitre of. the ancients. It is found in abun- 
dance in Egypt, and in many parts of Asia, where it 
is called soap-earth, because it is dissolved in water, 
and used like soap in washing.”—Blaney: 

Verses 23, 24. How canst thou say, I am not pol- 
luted 2—With what face canst thou go about to ex- 
cuse thyself, or deny what is so evident, and so truly 
charged upon thee? see verse 20. I have not gone 
after Baalim—The word is plural, because meant 
to comprehend all their idols; being a name usually 
given to severak of them, as Baal-peor, Num, xxv. 
3; Baal-zebub, 2 Kings j. 16. Because- they had 
the temple, and sacrifices offered therein, &c., they 
still persuaded themselves that they worshipped the 
true God, though they’ joined their idolatries with 
his worship. Thus the Papists, though they make 
use of idols in their worship, yet pretend they are 
not idolaters. See thy way in the valley—Whether 
of Hinnom, (where they burned their children in 
sacrifice,) or in any valleys where thou hast been 
frequent in thy idolatriesy Know what thou hast 
done—Look on, and consider thy ways. Thou art 
a swift dromedary, traversing her ways—Or, as a 
swift dromedary. The prophet compares their fond- 
ness for a variety of idols to the eagerness with 
which, in the time of breeding, the swift dromeda- 
ries are wont to traverse the plain, and run to and 
fro in every direction. “And the impossibility of 
restraining one of those fleet animals, when hurried 
away by the impetuous call of nature, is represented 
as a parallel to that unbridled lust and eagerness 
with which the people of Judah ran after the grati- 
fication of their passion for idolatry, called spiritual 
whoredom.”—Blaney. A wild ass—Or, as a wild 
ass ; used to the wilderness—Another similitude, 
forthe more lively description of the same thing. 
That snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure—This 
should rather be rendered, When she snuffeth up 
the wind in her lust; meaning the time when the 
female asses seek the males by the wind, smelling 

327 


, 


* 


. 


~ * i 
* ed 


The Jews shamed themselves 


JEREMIAH. 


by trusting to idols. 


A. 4 vat selves’; in her month they shall find 


= (Beh ae 

25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and 
thy throat from thirst : but ‘thou saidst, 1° There 
isno hope: no; for I have loved ‘strangers, 
and after them will I go. — 

26 As the thief is ashamed when he is found, 
so is the house of Israel ashamed ; they, their 
kings, their vandle and their priests, and their 
prophets, 


27 Saying to a stock, Thou art my Ap Mi S875: 
father; -and to a stone, Thou hast ——— 
1 brought me forth: for they have turned ~* ¢heir 
back unto me, and not their face: but in the time 
of their “trouble they will say, Arise, and save us. 

28 ‘But-* where are thy gods that thou hast 
made thee? let them arise, if they ¥ can save 
thee in the time of thy '* trouble: for * accord- 
ing to the number-of thy cities are thy gods, O 
Judah. , 


sChap. xviii. 12——13 Or, is the case desperate? Deut. 
xxxii. 16; Chap. iii. 13.—"* Or, begotten me.—1* Heb. the 
hinder part of the neck. * 


a= 


uJudg. x. 10; Psa. Ixxviii. 34; Isa. xxvi. 16.——* Deut. 
xxxli. 37; Judges x. 14. y Isaiah xlvy. 20.——16 Hebrew, evil. 
z Chap..xi. 13. 


afar off. In her oecasion—When she is de- 


b ears down all opposition. All that seek her will 


» not weary themselves—They will not bestow their 


Jabour in vain, but will let her. take her course, and 
“wait their time and opportunity for taking her. 
her month they shall find her—Hebrew, nv7n2, 
which Blaney renders, when her heat is over ; or, 
in her renewal, deriving the noun-from the verb 
win, to renew. .“ That is,” says he, “ when. the 
heat is abated, and she begins to come about again 
to the same state as before the fit came on. The 
LXX. seem so to have understood it: ev ty rarewwoe 
avrn¢e evpyosow vavtnv, ‘when she is humbled, they 
shall find her.’ And’perhaps it was designed to in- 


sinuate to the Jews, by way of reproaeh, that they | 


were less governable than even the brute beast, 
which, after having followed the 


for a little time, would cool again, and return quietly 


home to her owners: but the idolatrous fit in them | 


seemed never to abate, nor to suffer the people to 


return to their duty. Or else it may mean, that | 


when their affairs took a new turn, and became ad- 
verse, then would be the time when, being humbled, 
they would again have recourse to the true God, 
who alone could save them.” The expression, in 
her month, is explained in thé margin of our ancient 
Bible to mean, when she is with foal, an interpreta- 
tion which many commentators follow. Thus Henry: 
“They that seek her will have a little patience till 
she is big with-young, heavy, and unwieldy; and 
then they shall find her, and she cannot outrun 
them.” And he thus applies it: “The time will | 
come when the most fierce will be tamed, and the | 
most wanton will be manageable:, when distress and 
anguish come upon them, then their ears will be 
open to discipline; that is the month in which you 
may find them.” Psa. exli. 5, 6. . 

Verse 25. Withhold thy foot from being unshod, 
&c.—“ Do not wear out thy shoes, or sandals, and 
expose thyself to thirst and weariness in under- 
taking long journeys, to make new alliances with 
idolaters.” Thus Lowth, and many other expositors. 
“ But I rather take it,” says Blaney, “ to bea warn-. 
ing to beware of the consequences of pursuing the 
courses they were addicted to: as if it had been 
said, Take care that thou dost not expose thyself, by 

328 


In| 


ent of appetite’ 


s of the male; who can turn her away,?2—She || 


| 


thy wicked ways, to the wretched condition of going 
into captivity unshod, as the manner is represented 
Isa, xx. 4; and of serving thine enemies in hunger, 
and in thirst, and in want of the necessaries of life,” 
Deut. xxviii. 48. But thou saidst, There is no hope 
—The language of desperate sinners, who are re- 
solved to continue in their wickedness, in spite of 
every reason that can be offered to the contrary. 
No; for I have loved strangers—Strange gods, 
idols; and after them will I go—The Jews pro- 
bably did not really speak-in this manner, pit 
they acted thus: this, the prophet signifies was the 
language of their conduct. By their actions *hey 
professed that idolatry which they denied with éaeir 
mouths. ; ; 

Verses. 26-28. As the thief is ashamed—As the 
thief has nothing to say for himself, but is perfectly 
confounded when he is taken in the very act, so the 
house of Israel hath no manner of plea wherewith 
to defend or excuse their idolatry. They, their 
kings, their princes—Whose duty it was to have 
restrained. them from such practices by their, au- 
thority; their priests, and their prophets—Who 
ought to have set them a better example, and 
have given them better instruction. Saying to a 
stock, Thou art my father—Giving the title of 
father, which belongs to God, as the sovereign Cre- 
ator and Preserver of all things, (see chap. iii. 19,) 
to’senseless images, made of wood and stone. They 
did not, indeed, think themselves to, be created or 
made by these images, but’ thus they addressed the 
gods whom they thought to be present in the con- 
secrated images. But as there was in fact no such 
deity residing in the image, but it was a mere 
nothing, a fiction of the idolaters, their worship in 
reality centred in, or went no higher than, the 
image itself.’ For they have turned their back 
unto me—A token of contempt and aversion; and 
not their face—Which they turn wholly toward 
their idols. But in the time of their trouble—A 
time which is approaching; they will say, Arise, 
and. save us—As they did formerly; see the mar- 
gin. When they prove, by experience, the vanity 
of their idols, and their own folly in relying on 
things that cannot help or save them, and in reject- 
ing me, then they will apply to me for relief and 
aid. But where are thy gods?—Thy idols, the 


e t 


The Jews contemned the CHAPTER II. BI of God. 
. ‘ : ~ ? ; 
A. M. 3375. 29 * Wherefore will ye plead with }jland of darkness? wherefore say my A. M. 3375. 


B. C. 629. : : 
———— me? ye all have transgressed against 


me, saith the Lorn. 

30 In vain have I *smitten your children; 
they receive no correction: your own sword 
hath ° devoured your prophets, like a destroying 
lion. , 

31 O generation, see ye the word of the Lorn. 


4Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a 


people, 7 We & are lords; ‘we will Oa 


come no more unto thee? 
.32 Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a 
bride her attire? yet my otic 5 have forgotten 
me days without number. 

33 Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love ? 
therefore hast thou also a, ones 
thy ways. 


a Verses 23, 35.—> Isaiah i. 5; ix. 13;- Chapter v. 9. 
©2 Chron. xxxvi. 16; Neh. ix. 26; Matt. xxiii. 29; Acts vii. 
52; 1 Thess, ii. 15. . ‘ 


4 Verse 5. 17 Heb. We have. dominion.——® Psa. xii: 4. 

f Deut. xxxii: 15. & Psa. evi. 21; Chap. xiii. 25; Hos. 
4 vilie 14. 

Svar See 


gods of thy own making? Let them arise—From | 


the places where they are fixed; if they can save 
thee in the time of thy trouble—In thy great distress, 
when thou art in such need of-help. For accord- 
ing to the number of thy cities are thy gods—For 


thou hast a sufficient number of them, every country | 


and city having its peculiar deity, imitating the hea- 
then, who, according to Varro, had \above thirty 
thousand gods. Make trial, if any, or all of them 
together, can help thee. 


Verses 29, 30. Wherefore will ye plead with me? | 


—Why do you insist upon your innocence? See 
verse 35. Why do you lay claim to my former 
promises, as if you had not forfeited your title to 
them by your sins? In vain have I smitten your 
children—That is, the children or people of Judah. 
They had been under divine rebukes of many kinds, 
whereby God designed to bring them to repentance, 
but it was in vain: they did not answer God’s end in 
afflicting them; their consciences were not awaken- 
ed, nor their hearts softened and humbled, nor were 
they induced to seek unto God by repentance and 
prayer. They received no correction—Though they 
were corrected, yet they would not be instructed 
and reformed. They did not receive, that is, they 
did not submit to, or comply with, the correction ; 
but in their hearts fretted against and opposed the 
Lord. Observe, reader, it is a great loss thus to lose 
an affliction. Your own sword hath devoured your 


prophets—You are so far from receiving and im- 


proving by God’s chastisements, that you take 
away the lives of those prophets who, in God’s 
name, reprove you, and call you to repentance. 
Thus Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada, was put to 
death in the reign of Joash, 2 Chron. xxiv. 20, 21. 
See also 1 Kings xix. 1, 10; Neh. ix. 26; Matt. 
xxiii’ 30-37. 

Verses 31, 32. O generation—O wicked genera- 
tion; see ye the word of the Lord—Consider what I 
say to you from the mouth of God. Have I been a 
wilderness unto Israel?—Have ye not been plenti- 
fully provided for by me? Have I been backward 
in bestowing favours upon you? Have [I not ac- 
commodated you with all necessaries? A land of 
darkness—Hebrew, 43s) 78, rendered by the 
Vulgate, terra serotina, a land backward or late in 
producing its fruits. Our translation of the clause, 
however, a land of darkness, seems preferable, as 


darkness is often used to denote calamity a 
tréss: see chap. xiii. 16; Isa. v. 30, and v 
“The meaning of the passage,” says Blaney, 
Have I been wanting to you, while ye have be 


nnder my guidance, in providing you with good. 


things, or have, I brought you unto the gloom o 

trouble and distress?” Wherefore say my. people, 
We are lords, &c.—We are our Own masters, and 
will no more acknowledge thee as Lord over us, 
nor obey thy laws. This was the language, proba- 
bly, not of the lips, but of the hearts and lives of the 
idolatrous Jews, who would not return to the wor- 
ship and service-of the true God. Can a maid for- 
get her ornaments—How seldom is it, and unlikely, 


| that a maid should forget her ornaments? or a bride 


her attire2—On which her thoughts and affections 
are placed? Yet my people have forgotten me— 
Their chief glory and ornament, on whose favour 
and: protection they were wont justly to value them- 
selves; and whereby they were distinguished from 
all other nations. Such was the folly and wicked- 
ness of God’s ancient people; called by his name, 
rescued from bondage and misery by his power, en- 
riched with all temporal and spiritual blessings by 
his bounty, and guarded as the apple of his eye. 
Strange infatuation and weakness this, we are ready 
to exclaim, of the Jews! But are not multitudes of 
persons called Christians equally weak and foolish? 
Do not things of very small worth, and short dura- 
tion, frequently occupy their thoughts, and even 
possess their hearts; things of as little value as the 
ornaments which vain women delight in, while 
things of the highest excellence and greatest ne- 
cessity, things far superior to every visible and 
temporal object, such as salvation, grace, and glory, 
God, and Christ, and heaven, are overlooked and neg- 
lected? Reader, is not this thy practice? does not thy 
conscience accuse thee of this wickedness and folly ? 

Verses 33, 34. Why trimmest thou thy way to 
seek love—* The prophet,” says. Lowth, “alludes to 
the practices of common harlots, who deck them- 
selves, and use all inveigling arts, that they may 
recommend themselves to their gallants: in like 
manner,” the prophet intimates, “the Jews tried all 
methods to gain the friendship and assistance of 
foreign idolaters, who are called their lovers:” see 
chap. iii. 1, and xxii. 22. Houbigant’s translation of 
this verse is, “ Why dost thou strew thy way, that 

329 


* e 


Fearful consequences 


JEREMIAH. 


of disobeying God. 


A. M. 3302. 34 Also in thy. skirts is found * the) 


- blood of the souls of the poor inno- 
cents: I have not found it by secret search, 
but upon all these. 

35 T+ Yet thou sayest, Because I am inno- 
cent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Be- 
hold, * I will plead with thee, ? because thou say- 
est, I have not sinned. 


—- 


36 “Why gaddest thou about. so SM. 9902: 
much to change thy way? "thou also ———— 
shalt be ashamed of Egypt, °as thou wast 
ashamed of Assyria. : 

37 Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and 
? thy hands upon thy head: for the Lorp hath 
rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not pros- 
per in. them, +: 


_) Psalm cvi. 38; Chapter xix. 4.——1® Hebrew, digging. 
iVerses 23, 29.——* Verse 9.——! Prov. xxviii. 13; 1 John 
i. 8, 10. 


mVerse 18; Chap. xxxi. 22; Hos. vy. 13; xii. 1. 0 Isa. 
xxx. 3; Chapter xxxvii. 7. °2 Chron. xxvili. 16, 20, 21. 
p2 Sam. xiii. 19. : 


thou mayest find lovers; and teachest thy ways 


to thy companions?” The original word, rendered |, 


trimmest, ‘10.N, properly means, to make good, 
right, or agreeable. Noldius expounds the clause, 
“Why dost thou justify thy ways, or insist upon thy 
innocence?” And the French interpret the verse, 
“Why wouldest thou justify thy conduct, to enter 
into favour with me? so long as thou hast taught to 


others the evil which thou hast done; and while, 


(verse 34) in thy skirts,” &c. Alsoin thy skirts ts 
found the blood of the souls, &c.—This would he 
better rendered, Also in thy skirts is found the blood 
of poor and innocent persons, for by souls is meant 
persons; and by the blood being found in their 
skirts, the prophet means their committing murders 
and oppressions, secretly, perhaps; but their guilt 
was as manifest as though the blood of the persons 
slain had been found sprinkled upon their garments. 
The LXX. render the clause ev rare yepot.os evpeSnoav 
ayata puyov adowr, in thy hands have been found 
the blood of innocent souls, or persons. 
ficing of their little children to their idols, as well 
as their oppressing and murdering of adult persons, 
is intended to be comprised here.. I have not found 
at by secret search—The LXX., with whom all the 
ancient versions agree, render the clause #« ev diopvy- 
uacw evpov avtec, I have not found them in digged 
holes, or ditches, but. upon all these. The LXX. 
and Syriac render 7x 43 Dy, here, upon every oak. 
“The meaning of which,” says Blaney, “is this: In 
the law it is commanded, (Lev. xvii. 13,) that the 
blood of animals killed in hunting should be cover- 
ed with dust, in order, no doubt, to create a horror 
at the sight of blood. In allusion:to this command, 
it is urged against Jerusalem, (Ezek. xxiv. 7,) that 
she had not only shed blood in the midst of her, but 
that she had set it upon the top of a rock, and pour- 
ed it not upon the ground to cover tt with dust ; that 
is, she had seemed to glory in the crime, by doing 
it in the most open and audacious manner, so as to 
challenge God’s vengeance, In like manner it is 
said here, that God had not discovered the blood 
that was shed in holes under ground, but that it was 
sprinkled upon every oak before which their inhu- 
man sacrifices had been performed.” 

Verses 35, 36. Yet thou sayest—Or interrogative- 
ly, Darest thou say? Hast thou the impudence to 
affirm it? Because I am innocent—Clear of this 
whole charge ; surely his anger shall turn from me 

330 


Their sacri-> 


—Shall not break out against me, Isa. v.25. Be- 
hold, I will plead with thee—I will proceed in my 
judgment against thee ; because thou sayest, J have 
not sinned—Because thou continuest to justify thy- 
self, as if I had no cause to be angry with thee. 
Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy 
way ?—That is, thy actions. Why hast thou re- 
course to so many different expedients for relief ? 
Why dost thou seek auxiliaries anywhere rather 
than cleave to me? Or act like those adulterous 
women, whose love is never fixed, but sometimes 
set on one, sometimes on another. This is rendered 
by the Vulgate, ‘‘ How vile art thou become, chang- 
ing or repeating thy ways!” Continuing still to 
seek new succours from strangers, though thou hast 
been so often deceived! Egypt now shall fail thee, 
as Assyria has done before. Blaney renders this 
last clause, “ By means of Egypt also shalt thou be 
put to shame; even as thou hast been put to shame 
by Assyria.” “The people of Judah,” he observes, 
“seem to have courted the assistance of foreign na- 
tions, by a sinful compliance with their idolatrous 
customs. . But this measure had already failed them, 
and they had been disappointed in their expectations 
from Assyria in the time of King Ahaz, who, as we 
read 2 Chron. xxviii. 16-21, called upon the king of 
Assyria to help him in his need; but he distressed 
him only, instead of helping him. In the same man- 
ner, also, it is here prophesied they would be served 
by the Egyptians, whose alliance would only disap- 
point them, and make them ashamed of having 
trusted to so ineffectual a support; and it turned out 
accordingly.” See chap. xxxvii. 7,8. 

Verse 37. Yea, thou shalt go forth from him— 
The ambassadors thou sendest to Egypt shall return 
with disappointment and confusion; and their hands 
on their heads—C€ondoling the desperate condition 
of their people. Or, T'hou shalt go forth from hence, 
namely, into captivity, inva strange land. And thy 
hands upon thy head—As Tamar went forth from 
her brother Amnon, her garments torn, and hei 
hands upon her head, insulted and despised, and in 
the greatest grief and misery; and Egypt, on which 
thou reliedst, shall not be able: to prevent it, or to 
rescue thee out of captivity. Fer the Lord hath 
rejected thy confidences—Hath refused to give suc- 
cess to them, or hath rejected thee for thy confi- 
dences; or he disapproves thy confidences, namely, 


| all thy dependances and refuges, which thou seekest 


God’s great readiness 


CHAPTER III. 


to receive Israel again. 


out of him. And thou shalt not prosper in them— 
They shall not stand thee in any stead, nor give thee 
any satisfaction. As there is no counsel or wisdom 
that can prevail against the Lord, so there is none 
that can prevail without the Lord. -Some read it, 
The Lord hath rejected thee for thy confidences ; 


him as to-trust in his.creatures, nay, in his enemies, 
when thou shouldest have trusted in him only, he has 
abandoned thee to that destruction from which thou 
thoughtest thus to have sheltered thyself; and then 
thou canst not prosper, for none ever either harden- 
ed himself against God, or estranged himself from 


that is, because thou hast dealt so unfaithfully with || God, and prospered. 


CHAPTER III. 


After the reproofs and ihecdiésings contained in the preceding chapter, we have, in this, gracious and pressing invitations 
given the Jews to return'to God, notwithstanding the multitude and greatness of their provocations. It ,is here shown, 
(1,) How wicked they had been, and how well they had deserved to be quite abandoned, and yet how ready God was to re- 
ceive them into his favour wpon their repentance, 1-5. (2,) How their impenitence and persisting in sin were aggravated 
by the judgments of God upon Israel, of which they had been spectators, and by which they ought to have taken warning, 
6-11. . (3,) Great encouragements'are given, both to the Jews and to the ten tribes, already carried captive into Assyria, 
to return to God by repentance and faith, from a consideration of the great mercy which God had in store for them; from 
the relation of a husband, in which he was still ready to stand to them, and the.many gracious promises he had made 
them, 12-19. _(4,) The charge is renewed against them for their dpostacy from God, and the invitation to repent and re- 
turn to him is repeated, and words are put into their mouths preper to be used in their addresses to God upon their return, 


20-25. 


A. M. 3392, 


ir HEY ‘say, If a man put away 


his wife, and she go from him, 
and become another man’s, *shall he return 
unto her again? shall not that.» land be great- 
ly polluted ? but thou hast ° played the harlot 
with many lovers; ‘yet return again to me, 
saith the Lorp. 


2 Lift up thine eyes unto ° the A. M. 3392. 
B, C. 612. 
high ‘places, and see where thou 
hast not been lain with. ‘In the ways hast 
thou sat for them, as the Arabian in the 
wilderness; £ and thou hast polluted the 
land with thy whoredoms, and with thy wick- 
edness. 


1 Heb. Saying.—— Deut. xxiv. 4.——> Chap. ii. 7——¢ Chap. 
ii. 20; Ezek. xvi. 26, 28, 29.——4 Chap. iv.1; Zech. i. 3. 


© Deut. xii. 2; Chap. ii, 20. Gen. xxxviii. 14; Prov. xxiii. 
28; Ezek. xvi. 24, 25.——-s Chap. ii.7; Verse 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER Il. ; 

Verse 1, They say—That is, men use to say; If 
aman put away his wife—Or give her a bill of di- 
vorce, Deut. xxiv. 1; and she go from him—In con- 
sequence thereof ; and become another man’s—En- 
gage herself to. another; shall he return unto her? 
—He cannot take her again according to the law, 
Deut. xxiv. 1-4. Or, rather, will a man do such a 


thing? If the law were not against it, would any | 


man be inclined to take such a woman again? Cer- 
tainly not, Such playing fast and loose with the 
marriage-bond would be a horrid profanation of that 
ordinance, and would greatly pollute the land. Thus 
they had reason to expect, that God would refuse 
ever to take them again to be his people, who had 
not only been joined to one strange god, but had 
played the harlot with many lovers. Af we had to 
do with a man like ourselves, after such provocations 
as we have been guilty of, he would be implacable, 
and we might despair of his ever being reconciled 
to us again. But he is God and not man, and there- 
fore he. adds, Yet return again to the—N. amely, 
forsaking all those other lovers; which invitation 
3 


implies a promise, that he would receive them upon 
their repentance and reformation. 

Verse 2. Lift up thine eyes—Do but look and 
consider whether I charge thee wrongfully or not; 
unto the high places—The places of thy spiritual 


| whoredoms or idolatries, their false gods being gene- 


rally worshipped upon the hills and mountains, 2 
Kings xxi. 3... Thy idolatries have been so frequent 
that thou canst scarcely show a place where some 
false god has not been worshipped. Jn the ways 
hast thou sat for theem-——To allure passengers. Thus 
the fondness of the people for idolatry is compared 
to the wantonness of a harlot, wir lies in wait for 
men as for her prey; or, as the Arabian hides him- 
self in the desert, to rob and spoil the unwary 
traveller. “The Arabs,” says Sir John Chardin, in 
a manuscript quoted by Harmer, “ wait for caravans 
with the most.violent avidity, looking about them on 
all sides, raising themselves upon their horses, run- 
ning hither and thither, to see if they can perceive 
any smoke, or dust, or tracks on the ground, or any 
other marks of people passing along.” And with 
thy wickedness—Not only with thy idolatries hast 
331 


r 
a 
God’s great readiness JEREMIAH. to receive Israel again. 
A. M. 3392. . 3. Therefore the "showers have been || spoken and done evil things as thou yee eee 
B.C. 612. » 612, 


withholden, and there hath been no 

latter rain; and thou hadst a ‘ whore’s forehead, 
thou refusedst to be ashamed. 

4 Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, 

My father, thou art * the guide of ! my youth? 

5 ™ Will he reserve his anger for ever? will 

he keep i¢ to the end? Behold, thou hast 


hLev. xxvi. 19; Deut. xxviii. 23,24; Chap. ix. 12; xiv. 4. 
i Chapter v. 3; vi. 15; viii. 12; Ezekiel iii. 7; Zeph. iii. 5. 
k Prov. ii. 17. 


thou polluted the land, but with all thy other wicked | 
courses. 

Verse 3. Therefore the showers have been with- | 
holden—Namely, by me, according to my threaten- 
ing, Lev. xxvi. 19;, Deut. xxviii. 23, 24; that is, a 
drought was sent upon their land, either as a punish- 
ment of their wickedness, public sins bringing pub- 
lic judgments, or as an aggravation of it, in which | 
case the clause ought to be read, 7'hough the showers, 
&c.; that is, notwithstanding the great drought, 
whereby thou hast been chastised, thou hast not been | 
brought to repentance ; and there hath been no latter | 
rain—Though the latter rain hath been withheld as 
well as the former: concerning which two seasons | 
of rain, see notes on Deut. xi. 14, and Prov. xvi. 15. | 
Thou hadst a whores forehead—Notwithstanding 
all this, thou didst still remain impudent and obsti- 
nate, as one ashamed of nothing. “'The general | 
import of the passage is, that though God had be- 
gun, in some degree, to chastise his people, as he | 
had threatened, with a view to their reformation, his | 
chastisements had not produced the desired effect, 
for they continued as abandoned as before, without 
showing the least sign of shame or remorse.”— 
Blaney. 

Verses 4, 5. Wilt thou not from this time—Name- 
ly, that I have .withholden showers, this time of 
conviction and correction; now that thou hast been | 
made to see thy sins, and to smart for them, wilt 
thou-not forsake them and ‘return to me, saying, al 
will go and return to my first .tusband, for then it | 
was better with me than now? Or from this time | 
that thou hast had so kind an invitation to return, 
and an assurance that thou shalt be well received. 
Wilt thou not cry unto me, My father ?—Wilt thou 
not, as a child, humble thyself, and call upon me, 
whom thou hast greatly provoked, and own me 
as a father, for such I have been to thee?, Psa. ciii. 
13; Mal. i. 6, and iii. 17. Wilt thou not beg pardon 
for thy undutiful carriage toward me, and hope to 
find in me the tender compassion of a father toward 
a returning prodigal? Wilt thou not come and 
make thy complaints to me as to a father, and con- 
fide in me for relief and succour? how art the 
guide of my youth—The husband who didst espouse 
me, and become my guide in the days of my youth: 
alluding to the time when their manners had not 
‘been corrupted by idolatry. Though thou hast gone 
after many lovers, wilt thou not at length remember 
33% 


| 


couldest. = n-th natal 
6 § The Lorp said also unto me in the days 
of Josiah the king, Hast thou seen that which 
"backsliding Israel hath done? she is ° gone 
up upon every high mountain, and under 
| every green tree, ‘and there hath played the 
harlot. 
SE 


'Chap. ii. 2; Hos. ii. 15——™ Psa, Ixxvii. 7, &e.; ciii. 9; 
Isa. lvil. 16; Verse 12. 4 Verses 31, 14; Chap. vii. 24. 


© Chap. il. 20. 


—— 


the love of thine espousals, and return to the hus- 


| band of thy youth? Or the relation of a father may 


rather be referred to; as if he had said, Wilt thou 
not remember and lay to heart under whrous eye and 
care thou wast brought up, and who was the guide 
of thy inexperienced years? In our return to God, 
we ought thankfully-to remember that he was our 
guide when we Were young in years, in the way of 
comfort; and we must faithfully covenant that he 
shall be our guide from henceforward in the way of 
duty, and that we will follow his guidance, and give 
ourselves up to his government. Will he reserve 
anger for ever?—Surely he will not, for he hath 
proclaimed his name, gracious andmerciful. They 
seem to be the words of the people reasoning thus 
with themselves, for their encouragement to return 
|to God. Repenting sinners may encourage them- 
selves with this, that though God chide, he will not 
always ehide; though he be angry, he will not keep 
his anger do the end; but though he cause grief he 
will have compassion. Behold, thou_hast spoken, 


| &c.—Or, as Blaney translates the clause, “Behold, 


thou hast spoken and done; thou hast wrought 
wickedness, and hast prevailed. » These are the 
words of God, or of the prophet speaking i in God’s 


|| name, reminding them of, and reproving them for, 
|| their long and obstinate continuance in idolatry and 


other sins. The prophets had endeavoured to dis- 
suade them from persevering in their evil courses, 
_ but their arguments had no weight with them; “they 
continued to do as: they had ‘said, or resolved they 
carried their wicked thoughts into execution; in 
spite of all that was urged to the contrary.” 

Verse 6. Then the Lord said unto me— Here 
begins an entire new section, or distinct prophecy, 
which is continued to the end of the’ sixth chapter 
It consists of twodistinet parts. The first part con- 
tains a complaint against Judah for having exceeded 
the guilt of her sister Israel, whom God had already 
cast off for her idolatrous apostacy, verses 6-12, 
The prophet is hereupon sent to announce to Israel 
the promise of pardon upon her repentance, and the 
hopes of a glorious restoration in after times, which 
‘are plainly marked out to be the times of the gospel, 
when the Gentiles themselves were to become a 
part of the church, verses 12-21. In the second 
|| part, which begins chap. iv. 3, and is prefaeed with 
an address to the people of Judah and’ Jerusalem, 
exhorting them to prevent the divine ar by 


‘ 


The aggravated wickedness 


CHAPTER III. 


~ | 
> e Y 
‘ ay _ = 


and snflerilfents of Judah, 


aX +4 7 ? And I said after she had: done 


——____ all these things, Turn thou unto me. 
But she returned not. _And her treacherous 
“sister Judah saw Zz. 

8 And I saw, when * for all the causes where- 
by backsliding Israel,committed adultery, I had 
* put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; 
‘yet her treacherous sister Judah feared. not, 


but went and played the harlot also, A. M, 3392. 
r : B.C. 612. 
9 And it came to pass, through the ————. 
* lightness of her whoredom, that she “defiled 
the land, and committed adultery with * stones 
and with stocks. 
10 And. yet for all this, her treacherous sister 
Judah hath not turned unto me ¥ with her 
whole heart, but ° feignedly, saith the Lorp. 


P2 Kings xvii. 13.—4 Ezek. xvi. 46; xxiii. 2, 4. t Ezek, 
xxlii. 9.——=s 2 Kings xvii. 6, 18.—t Ezek. xxiii. 11. 


|? Or, fame. 


«Chapter ii, 7; Verse 2. * Chapter ii. 27. 


¥ 2 Chron. xxxiv. 33; Hos. vii. 14. 3 Heb. in falsehood. 


a timely repentance; the Babylonian invasion is 
clearly and fully foretold, with all the miseries which 
it would be attended with; and the universal and | 
incorrigible depravity of the people is represented 
at large, and pointed out as the justly provoking: 
cause of the national ruin. 

In the days of Josiah the king—This date of the 
prophecy, or sermon, must be particularly observed, 
in order to the right understanding of it. .It was 
delivered in the days of Josiah, who began a blessed | 
work of reformation, in which he was hearty; but 
the people were not sincere in their compliance with 
it. To reprove them for that, and warn them of the | 
consequences of their hypocrisy, is the scope of that | 
which God here declares to the prophet, and which 
he delivers to them. Hast thou seen what back- 
sliding Israel hath done—The case of the two 
kingdoms of Israel and Judah is here compared, the | 
ten tribes that revolted from the throne of David 
and the temple at Jerusalem, and the two tribes that 
adhered to both. The distinct history of these two. 
kingdoms is given us in the two books of the Kings; | 
by referring to the notes on which the reader will | 
be enabled the better to understand this paragraph, 
and many other parts of this prophecy. When God 
asks, Hast thoy seen what Israel has done? he re- | 
fers to the prophet’s acquaintance with that history, | 
for as he lived between sixty and seventy years after | 
Israel was carried into captivity, he could not other- 
wise see what they had done. She hath gone up 
upon every high mountain, &c.—See note on chap. 
ii. 20. They had openly, and-almost with common 
consent, apostatized from the worship appointed by | 
God, insomuch that all their kings proved wicked | 
and idolatrous: and no marvel, since from the time | 
of their defection from the kingdom of David, they | 
worshipped God by the golden calves at Dan and 
Beth-el, and hence easily proceeded from worship- 
ping by the medium of images, to worship images | 
themsvlves, and other false and imaginary deities. 

Verse 7. After she had done all these things— 
For which she might justly have been abandoned ; , 
I said, Turn thou unto me—Namely, and I will re- | 
ceive thee. Though they had forsaken both the 
house of David and the house of Aaron, who both | 
had their authority from God without dispute, yet | 
God sent his prophets among them to call them to. 
return to him, that is, to the worship of him only, not 
insisting so much upon their return to the house of 
David as to that of Aaron. We do not read that’! 

; 3 ‘ * 


Elijah, that great prophet, ever mentioned their re- 
turning to the former, but only to the faithful service 
of the true God. It is serious and genuine piety 
that God regards more than any ritual observances, 
whether with respect to matters civil or religious. 
But she returned not—Which God observed, and 
With which he was much displeased; and her trea- 
cherous sister Judah saw it—A sister, because de- 
scended from the same common stock, Abraham and 
Jacob; and as Israel had the character of a back- 
slider, so Judah is called treacherous, because, 
though she professed to keep.close to God when 
Israel had backslidden, and adhered to the kings and 
priests that were of God’s own appointing, yet she 
proved treacherous, false, and unfaithful toher profes- 


| sion and promises, as is stated in the following verses. 


Verse 8. And I saw—As if he had said, That 
which others discerned not, I saw perfectly ; namely, 
both her hypocrisy and her incorrigibleness, notwith- 


| standing what had befallen Israel, whose correction 


should have instructed and reformed her. When 
for all the causes—The various idolatries and other 
sins, for which J had given her—That is, Israel; a 
bill of divoree—Delivered her up into the hands of 
the Assyrians, and thereby taken from her the title 
of being my church; yet her sister Judah feared 
not—Was neither afraid of giving me offence, nor 
of the like punishment; but went and played the 
harlot also—Was forward enough to worship any 
idol that was introduced, and to join in any idola- 
trous usage, although she had seen the judgment of 


| God executed upon Israel before her eyes. 


Verses 9, 10. And ‘through the lightness of her 
whoredom— By this phrase,” says Blaney, “I take 
to be meant, that she was not_nice in the choice of 
the objects, but was ready to prostitute herself to 
all that came in her way; that is, she eagerly fell in 
with all kinds of idolatrous.worship indisecriminate- 
ly, descending so low as to images of wood and 
stone.” That she defiled the land—Brought the 
whole land under the guilt of idolatry. © Yet for all 
this—Though God saw what she did, and though 
she saw the shameful idolatry of Israel, and what 
she had suffered ; yet Judah hath not turned unto 
me, &¢.—When they had.a good king that would 
have reformed the nation, they did not heartily eon- 
cur with him in that good work. In the reigns of 
Manasseh and Amon, who were disposed to idolatry, 
the people were so too, and all the country was cor- 
rupted by it, none fearing the ruin which Israel, by 

333 


Gracious promises 


JEREMIAH. 


to the penitent. 


+ 


11 And the Lorp said unto me, 
? The backsliding Israel hath justified 
herself more than treacherous Judah. 

12 “| Go and proclaim these words toward 
*the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding 
Israel, saith the Lorp;, and I will not cause mine 
anger to fall upon you: for I am ” merciful, saith 
the Lorn, and I will not keep anger for ever. 


A. M. 3392. 
B. C. 612. 


13 ° Only - acknowledge thine. in- A. M. 3392. 
iquity, that thou hast transgressed is 
against the Lorp thy God, and hast 4scat- 
tered thy ways to the ° strangers funder every 
green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, 
saith the Lorp. \ 

14 Turn, O backsliding wnflaay saith the 
Lorp; ®for Tam married unto you: and I 
ee 


2 Ezek, xvi. 51; xxiii, 11——* 2 Kings xvii. 6—° Psa. Ixxxvi. 


igs xxviii. 13——* Verse 2; Ezek. xvi. 15, 24, 25.——® Chap. 
25.——f Deut. xii. 2. ¢ Chap. Xxxi. 32; Hos. ii. 19, 20. 


153 cil. "6,9; "Verse 5. ¢ Ley. xxvi. 40; Deut. xxx. 1, 2; 


this sin’ had brought on themselves. God therefore 
tried whether they would manifest a different spirit 
and conduct under a good king, but the evil disposi- 
tion was still the same, and they returned not to the 


Lord with all their hearts, but feignedly—They | 


were forced indeed to an external compliance with 
Josiah, who went further in destroying idolatry than 
the best of his predecessors had done, joined with 
him in keeping a very solemn passover, and in pro- 
fessing to renew their covenants with God, 2 Chron. 
xxxiv. 32, and xxxv. 17; but they Were not sincere 
in all this, nor were their hearts right with God. 
For which reason God, at that very time, said, will 
remove Judah out of my sight, as I have removed 
Tsrael, (2 Kings xxiii. 27,) because Judah was not 
removed from their sin by the sight os Isracl’s re- 
moval from: their land. ° 

Verse 11. And the Lord said unto. me, &e. _'The 
ease of these’sister kingdoms is here compared, and 
judgment given upon the comparison. Israel hath 
justified herself more than Judah—Hebrew, np7¥ 
wi, hath justified her soul: so the LXX. edicaiwoe 
rnv puynv, and the Vulgate. The meaning is, that 
of the two, Judah was the more guilty, because, 


though Israel’s sins wereGnore numerous, and their | 


idolatry had continued longer, yet in Judah that and 
other sins were more heinous, because Judah had 
sinned against greater light, and would not take 
warning by that desolation which God had brought 
upon the whole kingdom of Israel. Observe, reader, 
this comparative justification stood Israel in little 
stead. It will little avail us to say we are not so 
bad as others, when yet we are not really good our- 
selves. And God’s judgments upon others, if they 
be not. the means of our reformation, will help’ to 
aggravate our destruction. The Prophet Ezekiel 
makes the same comparison between Jerusalem and 
Samaria, that Jeremiah here makes between Judah 
and Israel, nay, and between Jerusalem and Sodom, 
and Jerusalem is represented as beirig the worst of 
the three. See Ezek. xxiii. 11; and xvi. 48. 
Verses 12, 13.° Go, and proclaim these words to- 
ward the north—“ The sin of the ten tribes being 
attended with more favourable circumstances than 
that of Judah, the prophet is commanded to call 
them to repentance with promises of pardon. In 
order to this he is bid to direct his speech northward, 
that 1s, toward Assyria and Media, whither the ten 
tribes had been carried away captive, which coun- 
tries lay north of Judea.” And say, Return, thou 
334 


backsliding Israel—Repent of thy backélidings, re- 
turn to thy allegiance; come back to that good way 
out of which thou hast turned aside. And T will 
not cause mine anger to fall upon you—Namely, 
more grievously than it has already fallen,’ or for 
ever; for otherwise his anger lay heavy upon them 
at this time. Observe, reader, God’s anger is ready 
to fall on sinners, as a lion falls on his prey, and, 
there is none to deliver. But if they repent, it shall 
be turned away, for he is merciful, and will not 
keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine ini- 
quity—Own thyself in‘a fault; and thereby take 
shame to thyself, and give glory to God. Confess 


‘and forsake thy sins; for he that confesseth and for- 


saketh shall find mercy. 'This will aggravate the 
condemnation of sinners, that the terms of pardon 
and peace were brought so low, and yet they would 
not come up to them. Sinner, if the prophet had 
bid thee do some great thing, wouldst thou not have 
done it? How much more when he saith, Only ac- 
knowledge thine iniquity. ‘Phe Hebrew, Jay ys, is 
properly, Know thine iniquity, that is, in order to 
thy acknowledging and forsaking it. We must call 
our sins to mind, consider the “number, greatness, 
and inexcusableness of them, that we may conceive 
a proper hatred to them, and sorrow for them, and 
thereby, and through faith in the divine mercy and 
grace in Christ, may obtain pardon and deliverance 
from them. T'hat thou hast transgressed against 
the Lord thy God—Against the infinite and eternal 
Jehovah, who had taken thee to be his peculiar peo- 
ple, and was in covenant with thee as thy,God. And 
hast scattered thy ways to the strangers—To other 
gods, to idols, running hither and thither to worship 
them. The phrase is taken from the lewdness of 
common. harlots, who promiscuously. prostitute 
themselves to all comers: see Prov. xxx. 20. The 
clause may be rendered; Thou hast wandered 
among strangers, or strange gods; that is, thow hast 
not repaired, or had recourse, to one strange god, but 
many; wader every green tree—Alluding to the 
heathen performing the ceremonies of their idola- 
trous worship in groves, or under large spreading 
trees. And ye have not obeyed my voice—So that 
your sin is not a sin of ignorance, but of obstinacy, 
for you shut your ears against my counsels, pent by 
my prophets for reclaiming you. 

Verse 14.. Turn, for I am married ‘unto yeast 
am in covenant with you, and this” covenant, not- 
withstanding all your unfaithfulness, I am ready to 

3 


Gracious promises 


CHAPTER III. 


to the penitent. 


s rf ti will take you one of a city, and two 
——_— of a family, and I,will bring you to 
Zion : zi, sa? 

15 And I will give you ‘pastors according to 
my heart, which shall * feed you with know- 
ledge and understanding. 


16 And it shall come to pass, when ye be 


multiplied and increased in the land, A. M. 3392. 
in those. days, saith the Lorn, they Sean 
shall say no more, The ark of the covenant 
of the Lorn: ! neither shall it * come to mind: 
neither shall they remember it.; neither shall 
they visit i¢ ; neither shall * that be done any 
more. 


h Rom. xi. 5.—i Chap. xxiii. 4; Ezek. xxxiv. 23; Eph. iv. 11. 
k Acts xx. 28. i. © 


———— 


*Heb. come upon the heart.— 
magnified, 


lIsa. Ixv. 17. 5 Or, it be 


renew with you. Hebrew, 23 ‘ndy2, which Bla- 
ney translates, J have been a husband among you ; 
observing, that God hereby “ means to remind them 
that he had fulfilled the,covenant on his part, by pro- 
tecting and blessing them, as he had promised when 
he engaged to be their God: and therefore, as they 
had never any reason to complain of him, he urges 
them to return to their duty, and promises, in that 
ease, to be still kinder to them than before.” I will 
take you one of a city, &e.—Some interpret these 
words thus: “J will receive you, though there should 
be but one froma city willing to return, and two 
from a province, or tribe.” This prophecy was ac- 
complished in the letter, after the edict of Cyrus, when 
several of the Israelites returned to Palestine, but 
only by little and little, and, as it were, one by one. 
But undoubtedly it was intended to be understood 
chiefly, in a spiritual sense, of their conversion to 
Christianity, and their reception into the gospel 
church, into which they partly have been, and pro- 
bably hereafter in greater numbers will be admitted, 
“not all at a time, or in a national capacity, but seve- 
rally, as individuals, here and there one.” See Isa. 
xxvii. 12. ¢ 

Verse 15. J will give you pastors according to 
my heart—This is likewise an evangelical promise, 
(compare chap. xxiii. 4,):implying that under the 
happy times here foretold all governors, both civil 
and ecclesiastical, should faithfully discharge their 
trust, in duly governing -and. instructing the people 
committed to their charge ; and that all in authority 
should answer the character which God gives of 
David, namely, that he was a man after his own 
heart, whereas, at the time when Jeremiah lived, the 
princes, the priests, and prophets were the ringlead- 
ers in seducing the people, and enticing them to 
idolatry : see chap. ii. 8, and Lowth. “Those are 
pastors after God’s own heart,” says Henry, “that 
make it their business to feed the flock; not to feed 
themselves and. fleece the flock, but to do all they 
can for the good of those that are under their charge; 
that feed them with wisdom and understanding— 
That is, wisely and understandingly, as David fed 
them, in the integrity of his heart and by the skit- 
fulness of his hands, Psa. \xxviii. 72. Those that 
are not only pastors, or rulers, but teachers, must 
feed them with the word of God, which is wisdom 
and understanding, and is able to make us wise unto 
salvation.” 

Verse 16. And when ye be multiplied—That is, 
when the kingdom of the Messiah shall be set up, 

3 


and there shall be a vast increase of the members of 
the church by the accession of the Gentiles: for that 
the days of the Messiah are here intended, the Jew- 
ish masters themselves acknowledge; they shall say 
no more, The ark, &c.—The ark is here put for all 
the legal ceremonies, being, with the rites connected 
with it, the chief part thereof. The sense is, that 
whole worship, with all the rites and ceremonies 
belonging to it, shall wholly cease, Christ being 
come, who was the substance of what the ark and 
all other rites did but shadow out for atime. “Here,” 
says Blaney, “ God comforts the Jews with an as- 
surance that, though. upon ‘their return to him they 
might not find themselves in possession of exactly 
the same privileges as they had before, they should 
be no losers, but should reccive ample indemnifica- 
tion, so as to leave them no just cause of regret. The 
ark of the covenant*was the visible seat of God’s re- 
sidence among his people; it was therefore the 
object of their boast; but after the destruction of the 
first temple they had it no more. But, to compen- 
sate this loss, they are told, in the next verse, that 
Jerusalem should be called the throne of Jehovah, to 
which, not the Jews only, but all nations should re- 
sort. By Jerusalem is probably meant the Christian 
Church : see Gal. iv. 26; Rev. xxi. 2,3. The greater 
privileges of this latter would, of course, supersede 
all boast on account of those which had belonged to 


the Jewish Church at any time.” 


Neither shall it come to mind—Hebrew, no 81 
a5 Sy, which Blaney renders, Nor shall it be the 
delight of their heart ; namely, as it formerly was, 
observing, that several passages of Scripture where 
the same phrase occurs show this to be the import 
of it. What value the Israelites set upon the ark, 
and how much they were attached to it, appears 
from many parts of their history. Neither shall they 
remember it—They shall forget the less in contem- 
plation of the greater benefit. Neither shall they 
visit it—Or care for it;.as Blaney translates 11p5°, 
which often signifies to look after a thing, which has 
been long lost or neglected, with a wish or design to 
recover or restore it. In this sense God is said to 
have visited his people, Exod. iii. 16; Luke i. 68; 
that is, he again showed that he concerned himself 
about them, And so it is said of the’ people, Isa. 
xxvi- 16, O Lord, in trouble have they visited thee ; 
that is, they, who before neglected thee, in their 
affliction turned their thoughts and desires toward 
thee. Neither shall that be done any more—It shall 
be no more in use; neither shall men trouble their 

335 


iy: 


many of the heathen shall be brought to worship the | 


ee 


Gracious promises i JEREMIAH. to the penitent. 


4. 302. 17 At that time they shall call Jeru- 
salem the throne of the Lorp; and 
all the nations shall be gathered unto it, ™ th the 
name of the Lorp, to Jerusalem: neither shall 
they" walk any more after the ® imagination 
of their evil heart. 
18 In those days °the house of Judah shall 
walk 7 with the house of Israel, and they shall 


mJsa. lx. 9——" Chap. xi. 8.——* Or, stubbornness. © Isa, 
xi. 13; Ezek. xxxvii. 16-22; Hos. i. 11, 7 Or, to. P Verse 
12; Chap. xxxi. 8——1 Amos ix. 15.——® Or, caused. your fa- 


thoughts about it, or mention it. The Hebrew, 8) 
ny Mwy", is literally rendered by the LXX., «a: # roun- 
Syoerat ett, Nor shall it be made any more. So also 
the Vulgate, nec fiet ultra. The ark, once lost, was | 
never to be made again, or restored: and for a good | 
reason, which immediately follows; because, instead | 
of the ark, Jerusalem itself, that is, the Christian | 
Church, was to become the seat of God’s residen¢e. 
It is probable that this great variety of expressions | 
is used, not only to show that the ceremonies of the 
law of Moses should be totally and finally abolished, | 
never to be used any more, but that it would be with 
difficulty that those who had been so long. wedded | 
to them would be weaned from them; and that they | 
would not quite relinquish them till their holy city |) 
and holy house should both be levelled with the 
ground. 

Verse 17. At that time—Of reformation, dtopSaceac,* 
emendation, (Heb. ix. 10,) when things should be} 
put into a better state by the coming of the Messiah ; 
they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord—| 
Instead of the ark, the Christian Church, typified by | 
Jerusalem, shall be the place of God’s special resi- / 
dence, power, and glory; where he will rule and | 
act, and display his glory, in and.by his word and} 
ordinances, and especially in and by the Messiah. | 
And all the nations shall be gathered unto it—Not | 
only the Jews and Israelites, but many of all nations: 


true God, and to embrace the Christian faith. To | 
the name of the Lord—Which shall be both mani- | 
fested and called upon in his church, as formerly at | 
Jerusalem. Neither shall they walk, &c.—Both | 
Jews and Gentiles shall now conform themselves to | 
the will of God. The word nin, here rendered 
imagination, is derived from a root that signifies zo | 
see, and is sometimes applied. to the judgment, and | 
sometimes to the affections. Here it may compre- 
hend both: they shall neither follow their own cor- 
a judgment nor affection, but wholly the word of 
Go 

Verse 18. Jn those days the house of Judah, &c. 
—Judah and Israel shall be happily united ; the en- 
mity that was between them shall be taken away, 
and they shall walk one with another, in a friendly 
manner, in the ways of God. This implies their 
being incorporated in one body, by one spirit, under 
Christ their head, and that without distinction of na- 
tions. This reunion of Israel and Judah, and their 

336 


come together out of the land of ? the A. M, 3392. 
north to ¢ the land that I have ® given dl 
for an inheritance unto your fathers. 

19 But I said, How shall I put thee among 
the children, and give thee ‘a ° pleasant land, 
a goodly heritage of. the hosts of nations? 
and I said, Thou shalt~call me, * My father ; 
and shalt not turn away | from me. 


F to possess—— Psa. evi. 24; Ezek. xx. 6; Dan. viii. 9; 
6, 41, 45. ° Heb. land of desire. 10 Heb. a heritage of 
a or, ‘beauty. ——* Isa. lxiii. 16——"* Heb. from after me. - 


joint participation of the blessings of the Messiah’s 
kingdom, is elsewhere foretold. See the margin. 
And they shall come together out of the land of the 
north—Namely, out of their captivity; to the land 
that Ihave given them—That is, the land of Canaan. 
Both Assyria and Chaldea fell into the hands ef Cy- 
rus, and his proclamation extended to all the Jews 
in all his dominions. And therefore we have reason 
to think that many of the house of Jsrael came with 
those of Judah out of the land of the north; though 
at first there returned but forty-two thousand, of 
whom we have an account, Ezra ii., yet Josephus 
saith, (Antig., lib. xi. cap. 4,) that some years after, 
under Darius, Zerubbabel went and fetched up above 
four million of souls to the land that was given for 
an inheritance to their fathers. And we never Tread 
of such animosities and enmities between Israel and 
Judah as had been formerly.. And the happy coa- 
lescence between Israel and Judah in Canaan was a 
type of their union, and that of Jews and Gentiles in 
the gospel church, when, all enmities being slain, 
they should become one flock under one shepherd. 
It may also be implied in these words,as many’com 
mentators think is expressly declared in many other 
passages of the ancient prophets, that in the latter 
days the Jews and Israelites, after their conversion 
to Christianity, shall actually return from their se- 
veral dispersions to dwell, as a nation, in their own 
land. 

Verse 19. But I said—Namely, within ‘myself, 
God is here represented as deliberating with himself, 
after the manner of men, in what way he- might, 
consistently with his divine attributes, reeeive the 
Jewish people into his favour, and admit them into 
the Christian Church. How shall. put thee among 
the children, and give thee a pleasant land?—How - 
can it be consistent with my divine holiness and 
justice to receive such a rebellious people into my 
favour, to own them for my children, and restore 
them to the possession of that goodly inheritance 
which I gave to their fathers. Judea is elsewhere 
called a pleasant land, the glory of all lands, and 
the land which God had espied out for his chosen 
people: see Dan. viii. 9; and xi. 16,45; Ezek. xx: 6. 
A goodly heritage of the hosts of nations—The He- 
brew, D1 NN2¥ 733, is literally, the glory of hosts, 


or, multitudes of nations, that which they esteem 


glorious, a phrase of the same import with 
quoted from Ezekiel. the glory of all. 


TOW 
. This 
a . 


° 
- 


Gracious promises CHAPTER III. Py 
A.M. 3392. 20 9 Surely as a wife treacherously || 22 *Return, ye backsliding children, . vf ee. 


Pied departeth from her ™ husband, so 


* have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house 
of Israel, saith the Lorn. 

21 A voice was heard upon " the high places, 
weeping and supplications of the children of 
Israel: for they have perverted their way, and 
they haye forgotten the Lorn their God. 


and ¥1 will heal your backslidings. basal 
Behold, we come unto thee ; for thou art the 
Lorp our God. ie 

23 * Truly in vain is salvation hoped for 
from the hills, and from the multitude of 
mountains: * truly in the Lorn our God is the 
salvation of Israel. 


12 Heb. friend. ——Isa. xlviii. 8; Chap. v. 11.—" Isa.-xv. 2. 


x Verse 14; Hos. xiv. 1. 


pleasant land, and —, of the hosts of nations, is 
here to be taken figuratively, for the Christian Church 
and the,privileges of the gospel covenant. And the 
condition of adoption into the former, and of enjoy- 
ing the latter, are expressly stated by Christ and his 
apostles to be the same as are here prescribed, 
namely, true faith in God, as Our Father, our recon- 
ciled Father in Christ, (which faith is always pre- 
ceded by the repentance required, verse 13,) and 
uniform obedience for the time tocome. Thou shalt 
call me, My Father, and shalt not turn away from 
me—On these conditions I will put thee among the 
children. 

Verses 20, 21. Surely, as @ wife treacherously 
departeth, &e. —This may be rendered, As a woman 
is not faithful to her husband, or, her friend, as the 
Hebrew 7p) signifies. Here God returns to the car- 
nal Israelites ; so that the Jewish doctors seem to be 
right in calling the. spirit of prophecy an abrupt 
spirit. So have you dealt treacherously with me— 
God, by thus reminding the Israelites of what they 
had formerly been, endeavours to bring- them to re- 
pentance and new obedience for the time to come. 
A voice was heard, &c.—Here the prophet, foresee- 
ing that some of them would at length be brought 
to true repentance for all their misdoings, represents 
them as bewailing themselves wpon the high places, 
the scenes of their former idolatries. Compare 
chap. xxxi. 9, and'].4; Zech. xii. 10. Or,.as some 
think, he alludes to the usual practice of praying 
“upon ‘the: tops of houses in great calamities, Isa. xv. 
3; and xxii. 1; Jer. vii. 29. For they have perverted 
their way y—This i is that which they lament: for this 
they bemoan themselves. T'hey have forgotten the 
Lord their God—Of this they were now sensible, and 
for this they were humbled, as being the first step 
toward their apostacy. Observe well, reader, 1st, 
Sin is the perverting of our way ; it is turning aside 
to crooked paths, and perverting that which is right. 
By it we embarrass ourselves, and bring ourselves 
into trouble and misery. 2d, Forgetting the Lord 
our God is at the bottom of all sin: if men would 
remember God, and their obligations to him, and 
consider that. his eye is upon them, they would not 
transgress as they do. 3d, Prayers and tears well 
become those whose consciences tell them that 
nc have perverted their way and forgotten their 

Verse 22. Here begins a dialogue between God 
and his people, wherein he offers gracious terms of 

Vor. Il. ( 22) 


y Hosea vi, 1; xiv. 4——? Psalm exxi. 1, 2——@ Psalm 
Pe MBs Oe 


pardon to them, and they make sincere professions 
of obedience to him. Return, ye backsliding—Or 
revolted, children—Return to me, and to my wor- 
ship and service; return to-your duty. God is in- 
troduced as saying this upon hearing the weeping 
and supplications of the Israelites, acknowledging 
their sin, and humbling themselves for it. And I 
will heal your backslidings—Y our revolts, or apos- 
tacies : I will take away the guilt of them, and save 
you from a refractory and revolting disposition. God 
heals our backslidings by his pardoning mercy, his 
composing peace, and his renewing grace. Behold, 
we come unto thee—We readily and cheerfully obey 
thy command, and comply with. thy invitation. It 
is an echo to God’s call; an immediate, speedy an- 
swer, without delay; not we will come hereafter, 
but we do come now; We need not take time to ¢on- 
sider of it. For thou art the Lord our God—Words 
expressing the strongest inducements to return to 
God imaginable, because God had an undoubted right 


jto them and their services, was willing to accept 


them, and able to save them, Isa. lv. 7; chap. xiv. 
22. Not only this latter part of the verse, but what 
follows, to the end of the chapter, is spoken of in the 
name of the Israelites, accepting the divine invita- 
tion, acknowledging the vanity of their misplaced 
trust, and professing the deepest contrition and shame 
for their misconduct. Itis a description, not of what 
was really done by the Israelites in general, but of 
what was necessary to be done in order to their re- 
gaining God’s favour; and of what he foresaw would 
actually be done by such of them as should believe 
on the Messiah, when he came, and receive the pri- 
vileges and blessings of the new covenant. 

Verse 23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for 
from the hills—From idols worshipped on hills and 
mountains. It is a continuation of that form of con- 
fession begun verse 22, drawn up with a reference 
to the present state of the idolatrous Israelites ; 
wherein they express their abhorrence of those idols 
which they worshipped upon the hills and moun- 
tains, and declare their firm resolution of adhering 
to, and depending upon, the Lord their God. There 
being nothing in the original of this clause for salva- 
tion is hoped for, it has been differently interpreted 
by learned men. The LXX. render it, ovtwe eve pevdoc 
noav ot Bavot, Kacy dvvagic tov opewr, Truly the hills 
and the power of the mountains were for alie. And 
the Vulgate nearly to the same sense, Vere mendaces 
erant colles, et multitudo montium, Truly the hilis 

337 


to the penitent. nF 


Gracious promises rh JEREMIAH. 


to the penitent. 


A.M. 3392. 24 >For shame hath devoured the 
B. C. 612. 

—_——— labour of our fathers from our youth ; 
their flocks and their herds, their sons and their 
~ daughters. ‘ 

25 We lie down in our shame, and our confu- 


> Chap. xi. 13 ; Hos. ix. 10. 


be 


were liars, and the multitude of mountains ; that 
is, they were deceitful: they promised what they 


did not perform. ‘To the same purpose the Syriac.. 


Blaney renders the verse, “ Surely the hills are lies; 
the tumult of mountains: surely in Jehovah our God 
is the salvation of Israel.” “The péople,” he’ ob- 
‘serves, “acknowledge that the hills, the places sacred 
to idolatrous worship, and the tumultuous rites with 
which that worship was accompanied, (see 1 Kings 
xviii/ 26, 28,).were mere impostures, deceivitig and 
disappointing those that trusted in thém; whereas 
Jehovah was indeed the author of salvation to his 
people.” 

Verses 24, 25. For shame hath devoured the la- 
bour of our fathers—That is, the fruit of their labour, 
yy’, which properly signifies labour and toil, being 
here put by a metonymy for the substance acquired 
by toil; that is, their labours have been followed by 
disappointment and shame; they have not reaped 
the expected. fruit of them. Or sin, which causes 
shame, especially the sin of idolatry, has brought all 
our calamities upon us, the loss of our goods and 
substance; the dispersion of oir families and nearest 
relations, and all the other miseries of our captivity: 


sion covereth us : -° for we have sinned A. M. 3392. 
. +. B.C. 612. 

against. the Lorp our God, we and 

our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, 


|jand “have not obeyed the voice of the Lorp 


our God. 


= ¢ Ezra ix, 7.—4 Chap. xxii. 21, 


all these evils, which we and our forefathers have 
felt, are the effects of our idolatry, of which we are 


|| now heartily ashamed, and which had brought shame 


and confusion upon us. Blaney renders nwan, (which 
we translate shame,) that thing of shame; meaning 
the idol which they worshipped, called by the same 
name, chap. xi. 13; Hos. x. 10; “and with good 
reason,” says he, “ because, in return for all the ex- 
pense and pains bestowed upow it, it only frustrated 
the hopes of its votaries, and, as it follows in the 
next verse, left them mortified with disappointment, 
and overwhelmed with disgrace, for having deserted 
the service of a Being that could have'saved them, 
in pursuit of’ so vile and worthless an object.” We 


| lie down in our shame—Being unable to bear it. 


Our confusion covereth us—On account both of our 
sins and sufferings. Sin hath laid us under such re- 
bukes of God’s providence, and such reproaehes of 
our own consciences,as surround us and fill us with 
shame. ‘These expressions, which set forth the 
greatness of their repentance and sorrow, are taken 
from those who cast themselves down upon the 
ground, and cover themselves with dust. or ashes, 
out of grief and anguish of mind. 


CHAPTER IV. 


The first two verses of this chapter seem to be closely connected with the preceding, being directed to Israel, the ten tribes, by 
~way of reply to their compliance with God’s call, encouraging them to keep and execute their resolution, 1, 2. The rest 
of the chapter concerns Judah and Jerusalem. (1,)/They are called to repent and reform their conduct, 3, 4.  (2,) They 
are warned of the approach of Nebuchadnezzar and his forces against. them, compared to devouring lions, to a blasting 
east wind, flying clouds, whirlwinds, and eagles ; that they should besiege their cities, dispirit their governors, and punish 
them for their sins, 5-18. (3,) The prophet most pathetically laments over their, folly and wickedness ; and the dreadful 
ravage, confusion, desolation, and despair, which should be occasioned by the Chaldean army, 19-31. — £ 


se ibe TF thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the 
———— ~ Lorp, * return unto me: and if thou 


wilt put away thine abominations out of = - “¥ 
my sight, then shalt thou not remove. ———— 


Chap. iii. 1, 22; 


Joel ii. 12. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verse 1. If thou wilt return, O Israel, return un- 
to me—Israel having promised repentance in the 
latter part of the preceding chapter, they are here 
directed what sort of a repentance it must be; that it 
must not be hypocritical and feigned, but real and 
hearty ; not deferred to another time, but immedi- 
ate, without any delay ; the words being. not im- 
properly interpreted, as they are by many, Jf thou 
wilt return, return now. Repentance, if it be de- 
layed from time to time, is seldom ever put in exe- 
“ 338 


cution ; and therefore there cannot be a more useful 
admonition than to put our good resolutions imme- 
diately in practice. Blaney, who considers the clause 
as being principally intended to assure them “ that 
upon their conversion they should be accepted and 
received again into the bosom of God’s church, from 
which they had before apostatized,” translates itvery ~ 
literally, thus, “ If thou wilt turn again, O Israel, saith 
Jehovah, unto me shalt thou return.” And if thou 
wilt put away thine abominations—Thine evil _prac- 
tices, and especially thiné idolatries, as the word 
(2) > 


An exhortation 


CHAPTER IV. : 


2 
* 
to repentance, 


A. M. 3392. 2 > And thou shalt swear, The 
B. C. 612. , , mt” 
——— Lorp liveth, ° in truth, in judgment, 


and in righteousness ; “and the nations shall 
bless themselves in him, and in him shall they 
® glory. 

3 “| For thus saith the Lorp*‘to the men of 
Judah and Jerusalem, Break up’ your fallow 
ground, and £ sow not among thorns. C 

4 »Circumcise yourselves to the Lorp, and 
take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men 
of Judah and inhabitants of" ; Jerusalem ; ; Test 


my fury come forth like fire, and burn ©) ve cd 
that none can quench 7, because of ‘ 
the evil of your doings. 

5 Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jeru- 
salem; and say, Blow ye’ the trumpet in the 
land: cry, gather together, and say, ' Assemble 
yourselves, and let us go into” the defenced 
cities. - 

6 Set up the standard Esehand Zion: ? retire, 
stay not: for I will bring evil from the = north, 
and a great ? destrbction’ 


— 


» Deut. x..20; Isa. xlv. 23; Ixv.16; Chap. v.2; Zech. viii, 8. 
©Isa, xlvili: inert Gen. xxii. 18; Psa. kxxii. 17; Gal. iii. 8. 
Isa. xlv.. 25; 1 Cor. i. 31.— ~f Hos. x. 12——£ Matt. xiil. 7, 22. 


Dxpw commonly signifies: out of my sight—He- 
brew, °59, from before me: though God’s eye be 
everywhere, and therefore, as is implied, idols are 
nowhere to be admitted, either in ‘public or private, 
vet the expression particularly relates to the place 
of his more immediate presence, as their land and 
the place of his solemn worship. Then shalt thou 
not remove—Thou shalt be restored to thine ancient 
inheritance, and shalt be established in the peaceable 
possession of it. As if he -had said, Jf thow wilt re- 
move thy idols, thou shalt not be removed: ‘The 
Hebrew, 2137 87), may be properly rendered, T'hen 
thou shalt no? wander, that i ig, be an unsettled, fugi- 
tive, and vagabond people. “In the former part,” 
says Houbigant, “the conversion oftheir morals is 
spoken of; in the latter, the stability of their re- 
public.” 

Verse 2. And thou shalt swear, &c.—In aii a 
solemn oath, thou shalt appeal, not to dead and 
vain idols, but to Jehovah, the living and trie God. 
This is put here for the whole worship of God, ac- 
knowledging and owning God as the only God, 
which is strongly expressed by this act: see Isa. 
xlviii. 1, and Ixv. 16. Jn truth—In sincerity, know- 
ing that the matter of the oath is strictly true; in 
judgment—Deliberately, advisedly, and reverently, 
the occasion ‘being great and important; in right- 
eousness—That none be injured by it, that the things 
We engage to do, or to see done, be both lawful and 
possible, arid that we look to the performance of our 
oaths. And the nations shall bless themselves in 
him—This shall’be a means of inducing the heathen 
nations to turn to the true God, and embrace the 
same way of worship. ‘They shall think themselves 
happy to be incorporated with thee, that it may be 
with them according to the promise, Gen. xii. 3. 
And in him shall they glory—Whereas before they 
gloried in their idols, they shall now glory in Jeho- 
vah alone. This is evidently ‘ ‘a prediction of gos- 
pel times, when the heathen should join with the 
Israelites in paying all solemn acts of worship and 


devotion to the true God only, and in ascribing all 


honour and glory to him, and to his only Son, the 

Messiah, in whom all the nations were to be blessed.” 

Verses 3, 4. For thus saith the Lord—The pro- 
3 


—— — 


DDeut. x. 16; xxx.6; Chap. ix. 26; Col. ii, 11; Rom. ii. 
28,. 29. i Chap. viii. 14— Or, strengthen. Chap. iw 
13, 14, 15% vi. 35 22. 2 Heb. breaking. _ 


Judah and Jerusalem, and exhorts them. to repent- 
ance and reformation in metaphorical language. 
Break up your fallow ground, &e.—That is, purge 
and purify the field of your hearts, by godly sorrow 
for your sins, and hatred. to them; prepare your 
hearts for receiving the seed of the divine word, by 
making them soft, tender, and pliable, fit to believe 
and obey it. And sow not among thorns—Eradicate 
the lusts and vices, the corrupt principles and dispo- 
sitions, habits and practices, which, unless rooted 
out, will effectually choke the good aed of truth and 
grace, and prevent the growth of piety and virtue in 
your souls. iteuthdibe yourselves to the Lord— 
Put away your corruptions; mortify your vicious 
inclinations and passions: the same thing with the 
former, expressed in: other words. Take away 
the foreskin of your heart—Let your repentance 
and renovation be inward in your soul and spirit, 
and not merely outward in your flesh ; lest my fury 
come forth like fire—Which it is now ready to do, 
as that fire which came forth from the Lord, and 
consumed the sacrifices; and burn that none can 
quench it—Which wrath i is not only fierce and con- 
suming like fire, but unquenchable; because of the 
evil of your doings—Which is the thing that kindles 
the fire of God’s wrath against us. Observe, reader, 
that which is to be dreaded by us more than any 
thing else, in time or eternity, is the wrath of God 
kindled against us by the evil of our doings, for it is 
the spring and bitterness of all present miseries, and 
will be the quintessence and perfection of everlast- 
ing misery. And the consideration of the imminent 
danger we are in of falling and perishing under this 
wrath, should awaken us with all possible care to 
saitctify ourselves to God’s glory, and to see to it 
that we be sanctified by his grace. 

Verses 5,6. Blow ye the trumpet-—-The Lord, be- 
ing now ‘about to bring enemies upon them, speaks 
in martial language, warning them of the nature of 
their approaching judgment. It is the beginning of 
a new discourse, in which the prophet describes the 
|| dreadful preparations of war, such as blowing a 
trumpet, and setting up a standard, for the assem- 
| bling men together, in order to their leaving the 
339 


phet now addresses himself to the inhabitants of 


a: 


% 
>. 
The desolations 


A. M. 3392. 


7 'The lion is co up from his 
B. C. 612. 


thicket, and ™the destroyer of the 
Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from 
his place ®to make thy land desolate} and thy 
cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant. 

8 For this °gird you with sackcloth, lament 
and howl: for the fierce anger of the Lorp is 
not turned back from us. . 

9 And it shall come to pass at that. day, saith 
the Lorn, that the heart of the king shall perish, 


and the heart of the princes; and the priests shall | 


be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder. 
10 Then said I, Ah, Lord Gop! ? surely 
thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jeru- 


JEREMIAH. _ 


————— ee SS 


_ coming upon Jerusalem. 


salem, ‘saying, Ye shall have peace; A. M. 3392. 
whereas the. sword reacheth unto the = 
soul ; 

11 At that time shall it be said to this people 
and to Jerusalem, *A dry wind of the high 
places in the wilderness toward the daughter of 
my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, — 

12 Even %a full wind from those places shall 
come unto me: now also * will I * give sentence 
against them. fp en 

13 Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and * his 
chariots shall be asa whirlwind: * his horses are 
swifterthaneagles. Wountous! forwe arespoiled. — 

14 .O Jerusalem, * wash thy heart from wick- 


12 Kings xxiv. 1 ; Chap. v.6; Dan. vii. 4 ——™ Chap. xxv. 9. 


; 2 Thess. ii. 11.——4 Chapter v. 12 ; xiv: 13. 
zek. xvii. 10; Hos. xiii. 15. 


» 2Isa. i. 7; Chapter ii. 15: Isaiah xxii. 12; Chapter vi. 26. 
~ Pp Ezekiel xiv 


t Chap. li. 1; 


3 Or, a fuller wind than those-—— Chapter i. 16——* Hebrew, 
utter judgments.—— Isaiah v. 28. « Deuteronomy xxviii. 49 ; 
Lam. iv. 19; Hos. viii. 1; Hab. i. 8. x Isaiah i. 16; James 
iv. 8. 


open country, and retiring with their families and 
goods into the defenced cities, both for their own 
safety, and that they might maintain those garrisons 
against the power of the enemy. Retire, stay not 
—Make haste away. J will bring evil from the 
north—{ ain about to bring a great destruction upon 
you from Chaldea. 
Verses 7,8, The lion is come up from his thicket 
—Nebuchadnezzar, so ealled from his fiereeness and 
strength, shall come up from Babylon, where his 
chief seat is, as lions are principally among. the 
thickets of the. forests, in coverts, Babylon being 
remote and little known to the Jews, they did not 
expect trouble to arise from thence. T'he destroyer 
of the Gentiles—Or, rather, the nations; is on his 
way--Is already on his march: another, description 
of the same person, who is so. called, because God 
had given, not only Judea, but all the neighbouring 
countries, into his hands. 7'o make thy lands deso- 
late—With a resolution to do so, and with power to 
effect his purpose. For this.gird you with sack- 
cloth—Put on the habit of mourners. It is intended 
to express the dreadfulness of the approaching cala- 
mity. J.ament and howl—You will do so when the 
cry is made through the kingdom, Arm, arm. Then 
all will be seized with terror, and put to confusion. 
For the fierce anger of the Lord—Which makes 
the army of the Chaldeans thus fierce and powerful ; 
is not turned back from us—--Is not appeased, but 
still burns against us. The LXX., with whom the 
Syriac and Vulgate agree, read ag’ yor, from you. 
Verse 9, At that day the heart of the king shall pe- 
rish—Both his wisdom and his courage: despairing 
of success, he shall have no spirit to do any thing, 
and if he had, he would be at a loss what to do; 
and the heart of the princes—His privy counsellors, 
who ought to animate and advise him, shall be as 
much at a loss, and as much in despair as he. And 
the priests shall be astonished—Shall be in such a 
consternation that they shall have no heart to exe- 
cute their office, and therefore not likely to put spirit 


‘ deceived by their false prophets. 
to prophecy studied only to speak pleasing things 


false prophets, that had nothing but visions of peace 
for them, shall be thrown into the greatest amaze- 
ment imaginable, seeing their own guilty blood ready ~ 


'to be shed by that sword, of which they had fre. 


quently told the people there was no danger. 

Verse 10. Then said; I, Ah, Lord God !—The 
Hebrew word, Aha, is a word expressive both of 
admirationand lamentation. Surely thou hast great- 
ly deceived this people—Hast suffered them to be . 
These pretenders 


to the people, and sooth them up in their impeni- 
tency and carnal security ; and thou hast, in thy just 
judgment, given them up to follow these delusions: 
compare 2 Thess ii. 11, 12. Saying, Ye shall have 
peace—The word peace here comprises all good, 
signifying that all things should go on’ prosperously 
with them; whereas the sword reacheth unto the 
soul—Whereas the sword is at the door, not only 
to take away the comforts of life, but even life itself. 
Verse 11, At that time—When that calamity com- 
mences; shall it be said to this people and to Jeru- 
salem—There shall be tidings brought both to the 
country and city ; A dry wind of the high places— 
“The prophet here describes the Chaldean army 
coming up for the destruction of Judea, under the 
metaphor of a hot, pestilential wind, which sweeps 
away multitudes in a moment, blasts: the fruits of 
the earth, and spreads desolation everywhere around. 
The passage, like that in the .preeeding verses, is 
spirited and sublime; but it loses a good deal of its 
elegance in our version. Houbigant renders jt thus: 
‘Behold, a wind hangs over the mountains of the 
deserts; behold, it shall come upon’the daughter of 
my people, but not to fan or to cleanse, verse 12, 
A mighty wind shall come from thence upon her, 
and then at length will I declare my judgment con- 
cerning them, or her, verse 13. Behold, as clouds 
it shall hang over ; its chariots shall be as a whirl- 
wind, its horses swifter than eagles”” &¢c. See 
Lowth and Dodd. : 


into the people. ‘The prophets shall wonder—The|| Verses 14, 15. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart—O 
340 ~ 


ah 


yy 


The prophet laments over the 


CHAPTER IV. 


* ’ 
I 


folly and wickedness of the people. 


A. M. 3392. edness, that thou mayest be saved. 
———.. How long shall thy vain thoughts 
lodge within thee ? 

15 For a voice declareth ¥ from Dan, and 
publisheth affliction from:-mount Ephraim. 

16: Make ye mention to the nations; behold, 
publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come 

_* from a far country, and give out their voice 

against the cities of Judah. 

17 * As keepers of a field, are they against her 
round about ; because she hath been’ rebellious 
against me, saith the Lorp. % “ 


18 »'Thy way and thy doings have ge Ritlacarg 
procured these ¢hing:s unto thee ; this ~~ 
is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because 
it reacheth unto thy heart. 

19 | My ° bowels, my bowels! I am pained 
at 'my very heart; my heart maketh a noise 
in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou 
hast heard, O my soul, the a” of the trum- 

| 
pet, the alarm of war. 

20 * Destruction upon destruction is .cried ; 
for the whole land is spoiled : suddenly are °my 
tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment. 


y Ch. viii. 16.——* Ch, v. 15.——*2 Kings xxv. ], 4,—— Psa. 
evii. 17; Isa. li. 1; Chap, ii. 17, 19— Isa. xv. 5; xvi. 11; 


ye inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, 
cleanse your inward parts; not your hands only, as 
hypocrites do, but your hearts; James iv..8; from 
wickedness—Namely, from all filthiness of flesh 
and spirit, 2 Cor. vii. 1. See note on Isa. i. 16. 
That thou mayest be saved—As the means to pre- 
vent the judgments that are impending. How long 
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee?—Hopes of 
safety by the help of foreign forces, Or any other 
such means, while thou contimuest in the practice of 
thine idolatries and other sins. The reformation of 

a corrupt state is absolutely neCessary in order to its 
» salvation. There is no other way of preventing 
the divine judgments, or turning them away when 
we are threatened with them, but putting away the 
sins by which we have procured them to ourselves. 
And no reformation is saving, but that which reaches 
the heart and makes it new. And it is made new by 
the washing of regeneration, and the renovating 
power of the Holy Ghost; or, by the exercise of 
repentance toward God, and that faith in him and 
his word which is productive of new obedience. 
For a voice declareth from Dan—For, lo! a sound 
of devastation comes from Dan; lo! a tumult is 
heard fromthe mountains of Ephraim.—Houbigant. 
As if he had said, It isthigh time to repent, because 
reports succeed reports of the enemy’s swift ap- 
proach toward you. Dan, being the most northern 
part of Judea, was first invaded by the Chaldean 
army, which did not march directly through Meso- 
potamia and Arabia Deserta into Judea, because of 
the vast. sandy deserts which lay in the way, but 
took a compass, and passed over the Euphrates at 
Thapsacus, which lay far northward of Judea, and 
thence marched through Syria: so that, of course, 
the rumour of the enemy’s approach was first heard 
from Dan. And the evil tidings still increased as 
the army marched forward toward Jerusalem, by 
the way of mount Ephraim. 

Verses 16, 17. Make ye mention to the nations— 
Tell the nations that now inhabit the cities of the ten 
tribes, that the Chaldean army is approaching, that 
they may provide for their own safety. Behold, 
publish against Jerusalem—Let her be made ac- 
quainted with what is coming upon her. Let her 
have notice beforehand; that she may be warned. 

3 


| xxi. 3; xxii.4; Chap. ix.1, 10; Luke xix. 42.- 


—§ Heb. the walls 
¢ Chap. x. 20. 


of my heart—4 Psa. xlii: 7; Ezek. vii. 26. 


gr" 


That watchers come from a far country—That i ial 


soldiers from Chaldea, that will watch all opportuni 
ties to do mischief. By watchers, some think, are 
meant those scouts who usually precede an army, 
and announce its approach, whom Cesar, in his 
Commentaries, calls antecessores, or antecursores. 
But. Blaney and others are of opinion that besiegers 
are intended, placing sentinels round thé city to pre- 
vent any from coming in or going out, and keeping 
the place in continual alarm by shouts of war. As 
keepers of the field, &e.—Those couriers ore 

the Chaldean army will be as diligent in their ob- 
servation of Judah and Jerusalem, or those besiegers 
will as strictly watch her on all sides, as the keeper 
of a field watch the cattle, or the vineyards and 
fruits thereof, under their care. “As in the East,” 
says Sir John Chardin, in'a MS. note on this place, 
quoted by Harmer, “ pulse, roots, &¢., grow in open 
and unenclosed fields, when they begin to be fit to 
be gathered, they place guards; if near a great 
road, more ; ‘if distant, fewer, who place themselves 
in and round about. these grounds, as is practised in 
Arabia,” chap. v. obser. 15. 

Verse 18. Thy way and thy doings—Thy man- 
ner of life, and particularly thy idolatries ; have pro- 
cured these things unto thee—Have been the causes 
of this thy grievous affliction, of bringing such a 
bitter enemy against thee, which hath reached unto 
thy very heart. “Whatsoever happens to you,” 
says Jerome on the place, “happens by your own 
fault, who have turned the sweet goodness of God 
into bitterness, and have compelled him, however 
unwilling, to rage against you.” 

Verses 19, 20. My bowels, &c.—Or, as Dr. Water- 
land renders it, My bowels, my bowels! I am pain- 
ed at the centre, or in the midst, of my heart; my 
heart is tumultuous within me! - It is an exclama- 
tion of the prophet, moved beyond measure at the 
calamities coming on his country, in being made the 
seat of war, and utterly ruined by ahostile invasion: 
which was so strongly represented to him in his 
vision, that he, as it were, saw the army of Nebu- 
chadnezzar before his eyes, and the destruction and 
desolation made by it, heard the noise of the trum- 
pets, the shouts of the soldiers, the outcries and 
lamentations of his countrymen, and the groans of 

341 


iesof , 


’ > a 
The prophet laments over the 


A. M. 3392. 
B. 


wild ard, and hear the sound of the trum 


pet 2" * 


22 For my penis is foolish, they 1 have not | 
known me; they are sottish children, and they Ig 


have none andetstanding ; ‘f they @re wis 


do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. 


23 £1 beheld the earth, and lo, i¢ was h with: 
out form, and void ; and the. heavens, and they 
had no light. ; 


. . 


, f Rom. xvi. 19.——4 Isa. xxiv. 19.——"Gen. i. 2. 


the wounded and dying. And “the calamities de- 
scribed are presented to.the mind in such lively 
colours,the images are so crowded, and arranged with 
_so much art, and the breaks and apostrophes are so 
& animated, that we seem to be involved in the same 
scene of misery with the 0 ”—Bishop Lowth’s 
9th and 17th Prelec. “I cannot hold my ec 
am so troubled I cannot forbear’ my comp 
Because thou hast heard, O my soul, &c.—I have 
heard in the spirit of prophecy ; the ‘calamity will 
as certainly come as if I now heard the trumpet 
sounding. Destruction upon destruction—Dr. Wa- 
terland reads, Breach upon breach, ox, destruction 
dashes upon destruction ; one-sad’ calamity, like 
Job’s messengers, treading upon the heels of an- 
other. First, good Josiah is slain in battle; within 
Ag ee months after, his son and successor, Jehoahaz, 
deposed by the king of Egypt; within two or 
three years after, Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusa- 
lem and took it, and from thence forward was con- 
tinually making descents on the land of Judah with 
his armies, during the reigns of Jehoiakim; Jeconiah, 
and Zedekiah, till, about nineteen years after, he 
completed their ruin by the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem. For the whole land is-spoiled—-This is more 
particularly described verses 23-26. Suddenly are 
my tents spoiled—The enemy makes no more of 
overthrowing my stately cities than if he were over- 
turning tents made of curtains. 

Verses 21, 22, How long shall I see the standard, 
&c.—This dreadful war continued a great while, not 
in the borders, but in the bowels of the country; 
for the people were very obstinate, and would not 
submit to, but took all opportunities of rebelling 
against, the king of Babylon, which did but lengthen 
out and aggravate the calamity, as Jeremiah did not 
fail to warn them it would do. Had they taken his 
advice, and yielded sooner, their country would have 
escaped the utter destruction which came upon it. 
But God, as a punishment for their sins, suffered 
them to be infatuated. For. my people is foolish— 
Some commentators have considered these words, 
as well as those preceding, as being spoken by God, 
in answer to the prophet’s complaints of his grievous 
vision, to show that such sad images were presented 
to him, because, on account of the people’s obstinacy 
and wickedness, it was necessary that they should 
feel the effects of his just anger, even until Jerusa- 
lem should, be levelled with the ground. But the 

342 


JEREMIAL. PN ae * fay and wickedness of the people. 


21 How long shall I see the oe 24 


ry” 


iy sor the mountains, and 4. M; os | 
and all the h %. 
- adhe 

and.Jo, there wasmo man, 
d Fall irds = heayens were 
fled. 


“A 
26 I beheld, ¥ lo,t thes frnitfa place was a 
derness; and all the cities ther 


lj. they ti a 


moved li 
925 “I beb 


as 
broken down at the presence of the igates . 
by his fierce angers Ke ‘ y ‘ 


, t Isagyy. 25.5 Exzck. Sse pos 


passage ‘seems to ‘suit the prophet. 
speaking here as 


authority topreach to this people ave no 
known ne Raye not known ena * 
in whose name the p aks. — ool- 
indeed, who, calling ee @s people, — 

and having the advantage of nai acq 4 
Ww neem, yet have not known x on ? 

tisk ildren—Stupid and sense ont ae . 
Gritropartdiag Tey cannot siete ie, See 
truth and falsehood, good and evil ; ot diseern 
the mind of God, either in his word or rin his provi- 
dence ;' they do not understand what their true inte- 4 
rest is, nor on which side it lies. They arewiseto 
do evil—To plot mischief against, the quiet of the 
land ; wise to contrive the gratification of their lusts, 
and then to eee g alliate their conduct; but to 
do good they have 0 knowledge—No contrivance, 
no application of mind; they know not how to. make 
a good use either of the ordinances or providences 
of God, nor how to bring about any design for the 
good of. their country., They are perfect strangers 
to the obligations of religion and virtue, and never 
show any quickness of thought but when they are 
contriving to bring about some mischief. 

Verses 23-26. I beheld the earth, and lo, it was 
without form and void—* The images under which 
the prophet here represents the approaching desola- 
tion, as foreseen by him, are sich as are familiar to the 
Hebrew poets on the like-oceasions.” See note on 
Isa. xiii. 10, and Bishop Lowth, De Sac. Poesi Heb., 
Prel. ix. “But the assemblage is finely made, so as 
to delineate altogether a most striking and inter 
ing picture of a ruined country, and to justify what 
has been before observed of the author’s happy 
talent for pathetic description. The earthis brought 
back, as it were, to its primitive state of chaos and 
confusion; the cheerful light of the heavens is with- 
drawn, and succeeded by a dismal gloom; the moun- 
tains’ tremble, and the hills shake under dreadful 
apprehensions of the Almighty’s - displeasure ;‘ a 
frightful solitude reigns all around ; not a vestige to 
be seen of any of the human race ; even the birds 
themselves have deserted thé fields, unable to find 
any longer in them their usual food. The face of. 
the country, in the once most fertile parts of it, now 
overgrown with briers and thorns, assumes the 
dreary wilderness of the desert. The cities and 
villages are either thrown dowmand demolished by 


MP; hs 
j i $f 


The depolationa 


‘He 


2% For thus hath the Lor. 
The le land shall be ‘des 
yet will | Tit make a full end. sits 
28 .For this ™ shall the earth 
heavens above» be ck: ‘be 
spoken i, I haye purposed i¢ 
repent, neither will I turn back Raphi. 
a city shall io for the: noise of 
rsemen 


‘A. M. 3392, 
C, 612. 


aren - a 


xxiii. 19; Chap. 


sae i .. 
es. aaret IV. 


, city shall be 


do? 'Thoug 
son, though thou deckest thee with, ornaments 


coming upon Jerusalem. 


and not aman A M. 3392. 
B. G. 612. 


» pr 


0. And when thou art spoiled, what wilt Ta 


éll therein. 
ch thou clothest thyself with crim- 


gold, ®though thou rendest thy ° face with 
a Bee vain’ shalt thou make thyself fair ; 
he ova will despise thee, they will seek thy 
life 
31 gi I have heard a voice as of a woman 
a 


p2Kings ix. 30; Ezek. xxiii. 40. see eyes.——4 Chap. 
xxii. 20, 22; Lam. i. 2, 29. 


= = 


ra ty) Or oruilfbts into ruins of their 
own ac nt of being inhabited.” isin: 
“Vv WI n ll end—That 
is, 8 entat neither shall the*punish- 


apor' may * " 


ment su stop here: but it rather 
¢ to be wong of comfort, signifying that they 
ould fot’ be utterly destroyed, but that, it» the 


oni of judgment, God would remember mercy, 
and preserve a remnant: accordingly; in fact, after 
seventy years’ captivity, he hrougnt a remnant back 
again into their own land. 

Verses 28, 29. For this shall the earth mourn, 
&c.—More expressiond to set forth the dreadfulness 
of the judgment* he makes the elements to person- 

te mourners. A*’d the heavens above be black— 
Under sad calamities every ing looks dismal; even 
the heavens themselves do’ nat seem to shine with 
their usual brightness. Because Ihave spoken it, I 
have purposed it, &c.—Blaney, following the LXX,, 
changes alittle the order of the words, and reads, 
“T have spoken, and do not repent: I have purposed, 
and will not recede from it.” God’s purpose of de-, 
livering up the Jews into the hands of Nebuchad- 
nezzar was irreversible, because he foresaw that the 
greatest part of them would continue impenitent, 
and that it would be expedient and necessary, in or- 
der to their being humbled and brought to repent- 
ance, that they should be carried‘ into captivity. 
Otherwise the removal of judgments, either those 
inflicted or threatened -to be inflicted, is promised 
dee repentance, to which God frequently exhorted 
se Jews by his prophets. The whole city shall 
flee—The inhabitants of all ranks and qualities shall 
seek to escape the fury of the Chaldean army, chap. 
xxxix.4. They shall go into thickets—Kither upon 
the report of the coming of their enemies, the pro- 
phet hereby, as it were, deriding their confidence, 
or rather at the approach of their vast armies: for 
they were closely besieged before they fled, as ap- 
pears 2 Kings xxv. 4. Such a consternation there 


shall be upon them, that they shall run into every. 


hole to hide themselves; thus Manasseh was taken 
among the thorns, 2 Chron. xxxiii.11. The He- 
brew is; 3y3 12, they shall go into the clouds}; 
meaning, probably, dark places on the tops of hills, 
reaching, as it were, to the clouds, or among the 
cloudy shades of trees and groves that usually grew 
there. ‘The LXX. render it, evcedvoav evg ra ondaia, 


they entered into the caves; adding, kai ete ta akon 
expvByoav, they were hid in the groves. And climbed 


up upon the rocks—Namely, to save their lives. _ 


Every city shall be forsaken—There shall be an 
utter desolation, their cities being quite deserted, and 


none left to inhabit them. 
Verse 30. And when thou art spoiled—W hen this 


destruction shall come upon thee, which is very near ; 
what wilt thou» do2?—When thou, O daughter of 
Zion, art besieged by the Babylonians, what course 
wilt thou take? Asif he had said, Thy condition 
will be desperate. T'"hough thou clothest thyself, &c. 
—The prophet proceeds ina kind of insulting speech, 
in which he, as it were, upbraids them with their 
pride and false confidence. With crimson, or scar- 
let. Though thou deckest thyself with ornaments 
&c.—Though thou superinduce those ornaments, or 
jewels of gold, that may render thy attire the most 
rich and splendid. Though thow rendest thy face 
with painting—The Hebrew is, Though thou rendest 
thine eyes, &c. “This alludes to the custom of 
the eastern ladies, who, esteeming large eyes beau- 
tiful, make use of stibiwm, a sort of black paint, which 
is laid upon the eyelids with a pencil, and being of 
an astringent quality, partly contracts the eyelids, 


jand partly, by the contrast of colour, tends to en- 


large the appearance of the white part of the eyes. 3 
—Blaney. See Bishop Lowth’s note on Isa. iii. 16. 
Dr. Durrell has remarked, that the Ethiopians, to this 
day, paint their eyebrows with antimony mixed 
with moist soot. See Ludolphi, Hist. Ethiop., lib: 


‘vii.cap.7. In vain shalt thou make thyself fair—The 


prophet carries on the idea wherewith he began, re- 
presenting Jerusalem under the figure of a harlot, 
dressing herself up to captivate lovers; seeking, by 
the finery of her dress and other allurements, to en- 
gage their affections, but in vain: so, he signifies, it 
should be with them; all the arts they had made use 
of'to engage the Egyptians, or other foreigners, to 
assist them against the Chaldeans, should stand them 
in no stead; nay, those very allies of theirs w ‘ould 
join with their enemies. 

Verse 31. For I have heard a voice of a woman 
in travail—Here Jerusalem is very pathetically de- 
scribed by the character of a woman under the pangs 
of her first child-bearing; when her pains as well as 
her fears are usually greatest. Such, saith the pro- 
phet, shall be the anguish of Jerusalem, bewailing 

343 


i 


. 


— . ve 


Ps. 


The corrupted state 


JEREMIAH. 


of the people. 


A. M. 330: 3392. in travail, and the anguish as of her 
je ~ that bringeth forth her first child; the 
voice of the daughter of Zion, that. bewaileth 


herself, that * spreadeth her hands, A. M.3392. 
: . ©. 612. 

saying, Wo is me now! for my soul 

is wearied because of murderers, 


v { 


Mew visa. i. 15; 


Lam. i. 17. 


the loss of her children by the devouring sword of 
the Chaldeans, and in vain imploring comfort and 


assistance. That spreadeth her hands, &e.—Spread-. 


ing out the hands is the gesture of one displaying the 
helplessness of her condition, and imploring the aid 
of others. : 


} J 
“ Ingemit, et duplices tendens ad sidera palmas, 
Talia voce refer-——_——___.”" 
‘ Vira Aan,, I. 1.97. 
“Struck with unusual fright, the Trojan chief, 
With octapgead hands and eyes, invokes relief. & 
‘ ‘ ‘.¢ Dryven. 
4 


CHAPTER 'Y. , % 


In this shine which intermixes awful threatenings with sharp reproofs, to render them the more a. we have, (1,).A 


list of the most notorious sins of ‘the Jews ; injustice and falsehood, 1; hypocrisy and perjury, 2 
ignorance and profligacy, 4,5; 2dolatry and adultery, 7, 8 ; 


* 


; incorrigibleness, 33 
treacherous apostacy from, and impudent defiance of, God, 


11-13 ; want of his fear, notwithstanding repeated calls to it, 20-24 ; vidlence and oppression, 25-28 ; combination f 


priests pee prophets, who ought to have been reformers, to debauch the nation, 30, 31. 


that God would certainly and fearfully inflict, 9, 29 ; 


(2,) A list of terrible judgments 


that, according to this prophet’s predictions, the Chaldeans should 


waste the country, 14-17 ; besiege and destroy their aes 6,10; slay or carry the people into captivity, but not, utterly 


destroy them, 10, 18. 
RUN ye to and fro through the 


_ streets of Jerusalem, and see now, 
and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, 
if ‘ye can find a man, if there be any that 


A. M. 3392. 
B.C. 612. 


executeth judgment, that seeketh the _ M.: sa 
B.C. 6 
truth ; ¢ and I will pardon it.» Dagsieetteae 
2 ‘And ‘though they say, ° The Lorp liveth; 
surely they ‘ swear falsely. 


a Ezek. xxiic 30.—» Gen. xviii. 23, &c.; Psa. xii. 1. _ 


© Gen, xviii. 26.—# Tit. i. 16. € Chap. iv. 2——f Chap. vii. 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 

Verse. Run ye to and fro, &c.—In this chapter, 
which seems ‘to be a continuation of the preceding 
discourse, God justifies the severity of the judgments 
denounced in the foregoing chapter. ‘The expres- 
sions are strong, but not to be taken strictly in the 
letter, signifying only the extreme degeneracy of 
the times; and the great want of justice and piety in 
Jerusalem. And see now and know, &c.—Search 
here-and there, and in every part of the city. The 
words, saith the Lord, should be supplied ; for it is 
plain that the first and second verses are the words 
of God. In verse 3 the prophet speaks, and goes 
on to verse 7, where God speaks again. And seek 
in the broad places thereof—The word 7MIN7, 
thus. rendered, means, no doubt, the market-places, 
and other spacious areas, where citizens used to 
meet to do business with each other. Jfye can find a 
man—Namely,a man fearing God, and working right- 
eousness.. Ifthere be any that emecuteth judgment 
—That in the magistracy rightly administers justice. 
That seeketh the truth—Any one among the com- 
monality that deals faithfully and uprightly. The 
universal corruption of manners was such, that a 
man might walk the streets of Jerusalem long enough 
before he, could meet with any one that was truly 
religious. And I will pardon it—Namely, the city 
of Jerusalem. The strong expressions of this verse, 

344 


< 


if they were taken strictly, would imply that Jeru- 
salem was now worse than Sodom, in the days of Lot: 
for, in offering pardon to Sodom and Gomorrah, God 
came no lower than ten, but, according to the literal 
meaning of these expressions, he promises to pardon 
Jerusalem if there should be one righteous man 
found. But it seems evident that, as we have inti- 
mated above, they are not to be taken in so strict a 
sense, as if, in so great a City, there was not one 
good man ; for certainly the prophet could not be 
reckoned among the number of the wicked, and 
there were besides, Baruch his disciple, and Ebed- 
melech, and, without doubt, some others that were 
truly pious.. So that the meaning can be no more 
than that there were very few good men compared 
with the number of the wicked. | 

Verse 2, And though they say, The Lord liveth, &c. 
—Though, when they swear, they use the common 
form of an oath, and say, The Lord liveth, or, as the 
Lord liveth, or, by the living God. Surely, or rather, 
nevertheless, they swear falsely—That is, either, 1st, 
They are not sincere in the profession they make of 
respect to God, but are false to him ; they honour him 
with their lips, but their hearts are far from him, nor 
have they any proper conviction or sense that he lives 
and sees’ them, Gen. xvi, 13, 14. Or, 2d, Though 
they appea: to God only, they’make no conscience 
of calling him to witness a lie: though they do not 

3 


‘ 


All conditions of the people 


3 O Lor», ‘are not *thine eyes 
| upon the truth? thou hast * stricken 
them, but they -have not grieved; thou ‘hast 
consumed them, but ‘they have refused to re- 
ceive correction: they have made their faces 


A. M. 3392. 
B. 


harder than a rock; they have refused to return. || 


4 Therefore I said, Surely these are poor; 


they are foolish : for * they know not the way} 


of the Lorn, nor the judgment of their God. 

5 I will get me unto the great men, and will 
speak unto them; for !they have known the 
way of the ee and the judgment of their 
God: but these have altogether ™ broken the 
yoke, and burst the bonds. 

6 Wherefore ™a lion out of the forest shall 
slay them, ° and a wolf of, the ? sehen: shall 


CHAPTER V. 


had corrupted themselves. 


spoil them, ?a leopard shall watch over A. Me a 
their cities: every one that goeth out ———— 

thence shall.be torn in pieces: because their 
transgressions are many, and their backslidings 
? are increased. 

7 4 How shall I pardon thee for this? thy 
children have forsaken me, and ¢sworn by 
them * that are no gods: * when I had fed them 
to the full, they then committed adultery, and 
assombledd themselves by Lis in the harlots’ 
houses. 

8 * They were as fed horses in the morning : 
every one “neighed after his neighbour’s wife. 

9 *Shall I not visit for these things? saith 
the Lorn: ¥and shall not my soul be avenged 
on such a nation as this ? 


= 


&2Chron. xvi. 9.—H Isa, i.5; ix. 133 3,Chap. i 1.30, iChap. 
vii. 28; Zephaniah iii. ee Chapter, vii. 8. Mic. iii. 1. 
a Psalm i li. 3. « Chapter iv. © Psalm civ. 20; Hab. i. 8; 
Zeph: ii. 3——+" Or, deserts. 


P Hos. xiii. 7.——~* Heb. are strong. 4 Jos. xxiii. 7; Zeph. 
1.0; * Deut. xxxii. 21 ; Galatians i iv. 8.——*' Deut. xxxii. 15. 
t Ezek. xxii. 11. a Chap. xiii. 27. = Verse 29 ; Chap. ix. 9, 
y Chap. xliv. 22. 


+ 


swear by idols, they forswear themselves, whieh is' 
no less an affront to Jehovah, as the God of truth, 
than the other is to him, as the only true God. 

Ver. 3-5. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth 


—Dost thou not approve of truth and faithfulness ?. 


And dost thou not search men’s hearts, and clearly 
discern their real dispositions from their hypocritical 
pretences? Thou hast stricken them—With one 
affliction after another ; but they have not grieved— 
They have remained insensible as stocks or stones : 
they have not been humbled, and made truly peni- 
tent. Thou hast consumed them—Not chastised 
them lightly, but wasted them by several enemies: 
but they have refused to receive correction—To ac- 
commodate themselves to, and answer thy design 
in, correcting them. They have not been instructed 
or amended by it. J'hey have made their faces 
harder than a rock, &e.—They have been obstinate 
and impudent in their evil practices, and have wil- 
fully rejected thy counsel, and disregarded thy judg- 
ments. Therefore I said, These are poor, &e.— 
I thought at first, says the prophet, that such insen- 
ibility and want of concern respecting the duties of 
religion could be only charged upon the, rude and 
ignorant vulgar, who, through the ignorance and 
poverty of their parents, were not sufficiently in- 
structed when young, and afterward had neither 
leisure nor opportunity of learning their duty. J 
will get me to the great men—And see if I can find 
them better acquainted with, and regardful of, the 
providence and word of God. For—I thought, 
surely they have been better educated, and have had 
all opportunities and means of instruction and im- 
provement, and therefore they must have known the 
way of the Lord, &c. But thesé have altogether 
broken the yoke, &c.—These are more refractory 
than the others; no law of God is able to hold them. 
Verse 6. Wherefore a lion, &e.—Nebuchadnezzar 
and the Chaldean army are here pointed at under 
3 


the metaphor of beasts of prey, of three kinds: being 
powerful, courageous, and violent as a lion ; rapa- 
cious, greedy, and devouring. as a wolf; and swift, 


lively, and active as a leopard. 'The word nay, 


rendered ‘evenings in the text, is translated deserts 
in the margin of our Bibles, which probably is the 
sense here intended. 
sive plains, or unenclosed commons, seem to be 
meant, which were used only for sheep-walks and 
pasturage, and were, of course, most likely to be in- 
fested with wolves.”—Blaney. 

Verses 7-9. How shall I pardon thee for this 2— 
How canst thou expect that the holy God, the right- 
eous Governor and Judge of the world, should con- 
nive at, or bear with, such iniquitous conduct in his 
intelligent and accountable creatures. He appeals 
to themselves, whether they can think it consistent 
with his justice to let such enormous offences as he 
mentions go unpunished. Thy children—Thy 
people, both in city and country; have forsaken me 
—Have apostatized from my worship and service ; 
and have sworn by them that are no gods—Have 
made their appeals to them, as if they were omni- 
scient and their proper judges. ‘This is here put for 
all acts of religious worship which are due to God 
only, but with which they honoured their idols, 
thereby robbing God of his essential attributes, and 
ascribing them to creatures of their own fancy. 
When I fed them to the full—Gave them ‘temporal 
blessings in abundance ; then they committed adul- 
tery—Such is the natural effect of unsanctified pros- 
perity. Shall Inot visit for these things ?—Do not 
such crimes as these call for some remarkable judg- 
ments as their chastisement? Can you yourselves 
suppose that Jehovah, whose name is Holy and Jea- 
lous, will let them go unpunished? Shall not my 
soul be avenged? &¢c.—God’s anger and vengeance 
signify, in Scripture, the execution of his justice, the 
effects of which are as terrible against obstinate sin- 


“ And those wide and exten- 


The profligacy of 


JEREMIAH. 


the people described. 


A M, 3302. 10 §*Go ye up upon her walls, 
——__—_ and destroy; *but make not a full 


end: take away her battlements ; for they are 
not the Lorp’s. 

11 For ” the house of Israel and the house of 
Judah have. dealt very treacherously against 
me, saith the Lorn. 

12 ° They have belied the Lorp, and said, 
4 J¢ is not he; neither shall evil come upon us; 
® neither shall we see sword-nor famine: 

13 And the prophets shall become wind, and 
the word zs not in them: thus shall it be done 
unto them. 

14 Wherefore thus saith the Lorp God of 
hosts, Because ye speak this word, ‘ behold, I 
will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this 
people wood, and it shall devour them. 

15 “| Lo, I will bring a nation upon you 


—— 


4 from far, O house of Israel, saith the ad A a 
Lorn: ‘it is a mighty nation, it 7s\an : 

ancient nation, a nation whose language thou 
knowest not, neither understandest what they 


say. 


16 Their quiver is as an open sepulehre, they 
are all mighty men. 


_ 17 And they shall eat up thy # harvest, and 


thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters 
should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and thy 
herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig- 
trees: they shall empoverish thy fenced cities, 
wherein thou-trustedst, with the sword. 

18 Nevertheless, in those days, saith the Lorn, 
I ¥will not make a full end with you. 

19 And it shall come to pass, when ye shall 
say, !Wherefore doeth*the Lorp our God all 
these lire unto us? then shalt thou answer 


* Chap. a xix. 8.— 2 Chap. iv. 27; Vans 18. — Chap. iil. 
hron. xxxvi. 16; Chap. iv. 10. 4Tsa, xxvill. 15. 


e Chap. =, 13. * Chap. i. 9.——8 Deut. xxviii. 49; Isa. v. 26; 


= 
Chap. i. 15; vi. 22. Isa. xxxix. 3; Chapter iv. 19.——‘ Lev. 
xxvi. 16; Deut. xxviii.31, 33.=— Chap. iv. 27-——— Deut. xxix. 
24, &e.; 1 Kings ix. 8, 9; Chap. xiii, 225 xvi. 10. 


aa 


RRS ST eS 


ners as if they proceeded from the highest resent- 
ment. 


Verses 10-13. Go ye up upon her walls, &e—Ye 


Babylonians, go, execute my vengeance on, them ; 
_ and destroy—I commission you not only to take the 
city, but to make havoc of its inhabitants... But make 
not a full end—Leave a remnant. Thus he sets 
bounds to the destroying sword, beyond which it 
must not go. Take away her battlements—Lay her 
fortifications level with the ground. For they are 
not the Lord’s—I disown them, and take away my 
protection from them. For the house of Israel and 
the house of Judah—The, two tribes of Judah and 
Benjamin, as well as the ten ; have dealt very trea- 
cherously—Have acted perfidiously beyond measure. 
They have belied the Lord—Given the lie to his 
threatenings in the mouth of his prophets: or have 
disbelieved and denied his providence, justice, and 
power, and his government of human affairs, ascrib- 
ing his judgments to chance or fortune, or mere 
second causes. And have said, It is not he—He- 
brew, x17 89, “not he :” that is, he hath not spoken, 
or he will not do as the prophets have threatened in 
his name ; or, he hath no hand in these affairs. Thus 
the wicked are represented as speaking, Psa. xciv. 7, 
“The Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of 
Jacob regard it.” Neither shall we see sword or 
famine—The dreadful judgments which the pro- 
phet speaks of shall not befallus. And the prophets 
shall become wind—A proverbial expression, imply- 
ing that the prophecies of the prophets were vain, 
and to no purpose; and that all their threats should 
come to nothing. And the word is not in them— 
That is, the word of true prophecy ; the prophets’ 
words are not from God. » T'hus shall it be done 
unto them—Nay, the very evils which they denounce 
upon others shall happen to themselves. So said 
the infidels. 
346 


Verses, 14-18. Wherefore, thus saith the Lord 
God of hosts—The prophet now, in the name of 
God, answers the blasphemous speeches of these 
infidels, ascribing to Jehovah that power and supre- 
macy which were calculated to give his words the 
greater influence. Because you speak this word— 
because these scoffers express themselves in this 
manner; I will make my words in thy mouth fire, 
&c.—Thy words shall take effect, and thy predic- 
tions begin to be accomplished suddenly and unex- 
pectedly, irresistibly and fiercely, (as fire is wont to 
kindle upon and consume dry wood,) to their utter 
overthrow and ruin. |They shall be but fuel to my 
wrath, which shall be executed upon them by the 
Chaldean army., J will bring a nation upon you 
from far—The prophet, in the two following verses, 
“marks out the Chaldeans by their distance; by 
their power and valour ; by their antiquity ; by their 
language, unknown to the Jews; by their arms, their 
might, and their cruelty.” And they shall eat up 
thy harvest—In the field; and thy bread—In.the 
house ; which thy sons and thy daughters should eat 
—Necessary for the sustenance of thy own offspring. 
They shall consume all, leaving thee no supports of 
life, but bringing an utter famine upon thee, Here 
is a plain allusion to the predictions of Moses, Deut. 
xxvili.49-51. They shall eat up thy flocks and thy 
herds—Out of which thou hast taken sacrifices for 
thine idols. They shall eat up thy vines and thy 
Jig-trees—They shall leave thee no part of the pro- 
duce of thy vineyards or fields. They shall empo- 
verish thy fenced cities, &c,—After besieging, they 
shall take and destroy thy cities, though defended by 
highand strong walls; whereinthoutrustedst—Forthe 
protection of the country; slaying the garrisons and 
inhabitants thereof with the sword, and leaving them 
desolate. See this also-foretold, Deut. xxviii, 52. 

Verse 19. And when ye shall say, =_ 


The profligacy of 


CHAPTER V. 


the people described. 


49 on them, Like as ye have ™forsaken 

me, and served strange gods in your 
land, so “shall ye serve strangers in a land that 
as not yours. ‘ 

20 4 Declare this in ey: house of Jacob, and 
publish it in Judah, saying, 

21 Hear now chi O ° foolish people, and 
without ?understanding ; which have eyes, and 
see not; which have ears, and hear not: 

22 Pear ye not me? saith the Lorn: will 
ye not tremble at my presence, which have 
placed the sand for the 4 bound of the sea by a 


perpetual decree, that it cannot pass A; M. 3392. 


C. 61 
it: and though the waves thereof : 


toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; 
though they roar, yet can they not pass over 
it? 

23 But this people hath a revolting and a 
rebellious heart ; they are revolted and gone. 

24 Neither say they in their heart, Let us 
now fear the Lorp our God, * that giveth rain, 
both the * former and the latter, in his season : 
‘he reserveth unto us the appoimted weeks of 
the harvest. 


m Chap. ii. 13—® Deut. xxviii. 48—— Isa. vi. 9; Ezek. xii. 
2; Matt. xii. 14; John xii. 40; Acts xxviii. 26; Rom. xi. 8. 
3 Heb. heart, Hos. vii. 11.—? Rev. xv. 4. 


aJob xxvi. 10; xxxviii. 10; Psalm civ. 9; Proverbs viii. 29. 
r Psa, exlvii.8; Chap. xiv. 22; Matthew v. 45; Acts xiv. 17. 
8 Deut. xi. 14; Joel 11, 23.—t Gen. viii. 22. 


+ — 


doeth the Lord our God all these things?2—Those 
that fall under the severity of God’s judgments are 
apt to think so favourably of themselves, as to won- 
der why they should be singled out for examples of 
the divine vengeance, and of terror to others.. And 
particularly the Jews were very apt to think them- 
selves innecent, however guilty they were, and to 
contend they did not deserve the punishments in- 
flicted on them; and that this severe proceeding was 
not consistent with those many gracious promises 
which God had made to their nation. Z'hen shalt 
thou answer them, &c.-—God doth not execute these 
judgments upon you without cause. All his pro- 
Mises were made to you, to be fulfilled upon ‘condi- 
tion of your obedience, which, when you withheld, 
you had reason to expect that his threatenings, in- 
stead of his promises, as he had repeatedly warned 
you, would take effect. Like as ye have forsaken 
me—lI only retaliate upon you yourown conduct: you 
have forsaken me, therefore I forsake you. You, in 
that good land which I gave you, have served strange 
gods, to whom you owed nothing; as being, indeed, 
the work of your, own hands, or mere imaginary: 
beings that had no existence; so will I make you to 
serve strange masters and lords ¢z a land that is not 
yours—And where you shall not be able to call any 
thing yourown. You have loved strangers, and to 
strangers you shall go. Or, as some paraphrase the 
words, “ As you have refused to have me for your 
God, your Master, and your King, you shall have’ 
other kings and masters in a strange land, and shall 
experience the difference between my dominion and 
that of these severe and.tyrannical masters.” 
Verse 21. Hear this, O foolish people—Ignorant 

and imprudent, as blind to your interest as to your 


duty ; and without understanding—Hebrew, 354 ["N), 
and there is no heart, or without heart, stupid and | 
regardless of all counsel, wisdom, and common sense. 
Which have eyes and see not, &c.—Wilfully blind, | 
and obstinately deaf, who will neither see nor hear | 
the word, will, or works of God; of which he gives 
two instances i in the two following verses. | 
Verses 22-24. Fear ye not me? saith the Lord— 
He ascribes their stupidity and foolishness to their 
want of the fear of God. As if he had said, If you! 
S ‘ 


would but call to mind God’s almighty power, and 
your own weakness, and keep an awe of him upon 
your minds, you would be more observant of his 
commands, and be afraid to disobey them. Which 
have placed the sand for the bound of the sea—Who 
need not place rocks or walls to keep it in; but can 
give an effectual check to it by a little despicable 
sand. “The keeping of the waters within bounds, 
so that they cannot overflow the earth, is often men- 
tioned in Scripture as an immediate effect of God’s. 
overruling power and providence. For water being 
specifically lighter than earth, by the common laws 
of gravitation it should rise above it, and overfiow it. 

And then the adjusting the proportion of the tides, 
that they rise no higher, to the prejudice ofthe lower 

grounds, is another remarkable instance of God’s 
special providence.”—Lowth. . But this people are 
more ungovernable than the unruly-waves of the sea: 
they have.a revolting and a rebellious heart—They 
have not only revolted from me and gone back, but 
they continue obstinate, and will not return. They 
persist in their evil courses, and are determined so to 
do: they are gone quite away, and are irreclaimable. 
Neither say they in their heart—They are so care- 
less that they never trouble themselves about any 
thing of the kind; orare so obdurate that they never 
lay it to heart, nor consider that it is God, who dis- 
poseth of all things according to his own pleasure, 
both in the great deep and on‘dry land. Let us now 
fear the Lord our God—Or, worship and obey him ; 
all acceptable service to God being both performed 
in his fear, and proceeding from it. That giveth 
rain—Without which the earth could produce no 
fruits. By this the true God is distinguished from 

all false gods, chap.'xiv. 22; and in this appears not 
only his power in appointing and preparing it, (Psa. 
exlvii. 8,) and his sovereignty in withholding it, 

| (Amos iv. 7;) but his general goodness in bestowing 
|| it, (Deut. xxviii. 12,) and his special providence in 
distributing it according as there is need. As in the 
former instance God shows how insensible his peo- 
ple were of his power and glorious greatness in 
taming such an unruly element as the sea; so here 
he further sets forth their inattention to, and disre- 
gard of, his providence and goodness ; implying that 

347 


The profligacy of 


JEREMIAH. 


the people described. 


A. M. 3302. 
B.C. 612. ; : 
————. away these things, and your sins have | 


withholden good things from you. 

26 For among my people are found wick- | 
ed men: * they *lay wait, as he that 
setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch 
men. 

27 As a *cage is full of birds, so are their 
houses full of deceit: therefore they are become 
great, and waxen rich. 

28 They are waxen ¥ fat, they shine: yea, 
they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they 


25 “Your imiquities have turned |) judge not? the cause, the cause of the A. M. 3392. 


fatherless, * yet they prosper ; and the. ——_—" 
right of the needy do they not judge. 

29 Shall I not visit for these things ? saith 
the Lorn: shall not my soul be avenged on 
such a nation as this? . 

30 4 °A wonderful and ° horrible thing is 
committed in the land ; 

31 The prophets acon ‘falsely, and the 
priests 7 bear rule by their means; and my 
people ° love to have it so: and what will ye 
do in the end thereof? 


~ “Chap. iii. 3. 4 Or, they pry as fowlers lie in wait. x Prov. 
41 87s) Babe 1. “15. © Or, coop. Y Deut. xxxii. 15. 
2Isa. i. 23; Zech. vii. 10.—— Job xii.6; Psa, Ixxiii/ 12; Chap. 


xil. 1.—— Verse 9 ; Mal. iii. 5 ——® Or, Astonishment and filthi- 
ness. © Chap. xxiii. 14 ; Hos. vi. 10. 4 Chap. xiv. 14 ; xxiii. 
25, 26; Ezek. xiii.6. + _0r, take into hisrss hands--—eMic. ii. li. 


they were grown so stupid, unfeeling, and obstinate, 
that they neither stood in awe of him for his great- 
ness, nor feared to offend him for his goodness. 
“The vicissitudes of seasons, of cold and heat, of 
drought and moisture, so wisely fitted for the growth 
of the fruits of the earth, and other uses of human 
life, are so remarkable a proof of the being and at- 
tributes of God and his providence, as to be obvious 
to the meanest capacity, and on this account they 
are frequently insisted on by the inspired writers.” 
—Lowth. Concerning the former and latter rain, 
see note on Deut. xi. 14; and 'Prov. xvi. 15. He re- 
serveth, ¢c., the appointed weeks of the harvest— 
He gives seasonable harvests, according to his ap- 
pointment. The sum is: the prophet would let 
them know what a foolish as well as wicked thing it 
was to set themselves against that God who kept, as 
he still keeps, the whole order of nature at his dis- 
posal, governing and changing it as he sees men 
behave toward him. 

Verses 25-29. Your iniquities have turned away 
these things—See note on chap. iii, 3. For among 
my people are found wicked men—I need not search 
for such among the heathen nations, for they are 
easily found among them that are called by my 
name. They lay wait, &c.—They use all the arts 
of fraud and cunning, that they may overreach 
others, and make a prey of them and their sub- 
stance. They set a trap, they catch men—Such a 
trap did Jezebel lay for Naboth, 1 Kings xxi. 9, 10. 
Such a one was that conspiracy of more than forty 
men against Paul, Acts xxiii. 18-15. As a cage is 
full of birds, &c.—As in the foregoing words they 
were compared to a hunter, or a fowler, who takes 
beasts or birds in snares; so here, carrying on the. 
same similitude, he deseribes their houses as cages 


( 


|| full of birds, that j is, of goods gotten by robbery and 


fraudful arts. They are waxen fat, they shine— 
Or, so fat that they shine. By living at ease, and 
bathing themselves in all the delights of sense, ‘they 
look so fair and gay that every body admires them. 
Yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked—* They 
exceed the common instances of injustice and op- 
pression, and make no conscience of enriching them- 
selves with the spoils of the fatherless, and those who 
have most need of their charity and kindness.”— 
Lowth. ‘ Waterland renders the clause, “ Yea, they 
have exceeded all expression of wickedness ; or, 


have been wicked beyond expression,” ‘Shall I not 


visit, &c.—See note on verse 9. 

Verses 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is 
committed—So stupendous a crime, that it is beyond 
the apprehension of man to conceive, much more to 
express, its greatness; and so abominable, that a 
man ought ever to loathe the thoughts of it. What 
this is, we have in the next verse; in the land—That 
is, this land, which aggravates the greatness of the 
wonder that such a thing should exist in such a 
land! The prophets prophesy falsely, &e.—Both 
priests and prophets agree to speak pleasing things 
to the people, thereby to keep up their interest and 
authority with them. And my people love to have 
it so—They are well enough pleased to be thus mis- 
led. If the prophets and priests will let them alone 


|in their sins, they will give them no disturbance in 


theirs. They loye to be held and governed by a 


| loose rein, and like those rulers very well that will 


not restrain their lusts, and those teachers that will 
not reprove them: see note on Isa. xxx. 10. And 
what will ye do in the end thereof—And what can this 
end in, but a total corruption of manners? The con- 
sequence of which must be the utter ruin of the state. 


CHAPTER “VI. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A representation of the invasion of Judea, and the besieging of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, 
1-6. Of their spoiling the country and murdering the inhabitants, 9,11, 12; and spreading terror and consternation 


. 


Jerusalem is exhorted 


CHAPTER VI. 


to prepare for war. 


among them, 21, 26. 
ting judgment upon them: 


them, but without success, 8, 16, 17. 

irreclaimable, 21, 27-30. 
A. % 3392. O YE children of Benjamin, ga- 
B. C. 612. 

ther yourselves to flee out of the 

midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in 
Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in * Beth-hac- 
cerem: "for evil appeareth out of the north, 
and great destruction. 

2 I have likened the daughter of Zion to a 
‘comely and delicate woman. 

3 The shepherds with their flocks shall come 


(2,) An account of those sins of Judah and Jerusalem, which provoked God to bring this desola~ 
their oppression, 7; their contempt of the word of God, 10-12 ; 
and the treacherous villany of the priests and prophets, 13, 14; 
while they hypocritically, but in vain, multiplied their sacrifices, 15-20. 


their universal covelousness, 
their impudence in sin, and obstinacy against reproof 
(3,) Earnest admonitions to reformation given 


God, faithfully warning them, tries them for a time, and at last gives them up as 
= 


junto her ; ° they shall pitch their tents A. M. 3292. 
612. 

Jagainst-her round about; they shall 

feed every one in his place. 

4 *Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let 
us go up °at noon. Wo unto us! for the day 
pool away, for the shadows of the evening are 
stretched out. 

5 Arise, and let us go by bike: and let us 
deotibg her palaces. 


4 Neh. iii. 14.——» Chapter i. 14; iv. 6. 


1 Or, dwelling at 
home, ‘ 


©] Kings xxv. 1,4; Chap. iv. 17——4 Wein li. 27; Joel iii. 9. 
-  €Chap. xv.8 


a —- ee. - 


—_— 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 


Verse 1. O ye children of Benjamin, &c.—The | 


prophet proceeds in his remonstrances, rebukes, and 
faithful warnings to the disobedient /Jews. A great 
part of Jerusalem stood in the tribe of Benjamin, 
Josh. xviii. 28; on which account, and because Jere- 
miah, being of Anathoth, was of that tribe, and pro- 
bably lived therein, the inhabitants are here address- 
ed by the name of the children of Benjamin, and 
are directed to leave the city, which God. was about 
to destroy, and to take refuge in the mountains. 
Blow the trumpet in Tekoa--One of those cities 
which Rehoboam built, 2 Chron. xi. 6, twelye miles 
from Jerusalem. Set up a sign of fire—A beacon; 
in Beth-haccerem—A village between Tekoa and 
Jerusalem, built upon a mountain, situate in the way 
which led from Chaldea to Jerusalem. As the word 
signifies the house of the vineyard, it was probably 
at first some high tower, built among the vineyards, 
for the keepers of them to watch in, and that it af- 
terward became a village of some note. The design 
of such signals of war as the prophet here mentions, 
is generally to assemble men together in order to 
their mutual defence; but, as he knew it was utterly 
in vain to attempt any thing of that kind, he seems 
only to have meant that by these means general no- 
tice should be given of the enemies’ approach, that 
the people might disperse, and escape from danger 
and destruction. For evil appeareth, &e—See note 
on chap. i. 14. Dr. Waterland reads this verse, 
“ Haste away’ the children of Benjamin out of, &c., 
and set up a signal in Beth-haccerem; for mischief 
threateneth out of the north.” 

Verses 2, 3. I have likened, &c._—There — 
nothing for woman in the Hebrew text, and the word 
m3, here rendered comely, frequently signifying a 
pasture, a sheep-fold, and a habitation, the verse is 
translated different ways by learned men. Houbi- 
gant and several others. read it and the next verse 
thus: “I have likened the daughter of Sion to a 
pleasant pasture, whither the shepherds, with their 
flocks, come to feed: they have pitched their tents 
near * and they feed round it, every one in his 


place.” According to this reading, in which Sion is 
likened to a rich pasture, the shepherds and their 
flocks that come together to take possession of it, 
and eat it up, mean the Chaldean generals and their 
armies, who should. possess themselves of Judea and 
Jerusalem, with as much ease as shepherds lead 
their flocks into a fresh and open pasture, and should 
enrich themselves with the spoil thereof. This is 
certainly a very easy and probable sense of the pas- 
sage. Blaney, however, prefers rendering the word 
m3 habitation ; and, taking the verb *7"797 to. signify 
here, not, J have likened, but, I have destroyed, (a 
sense which it sometimes bears,) he reads the pas- 
sage, “ The habitation, even the delightful one, have 
I doomed to destruction, the daughter of Sion. The 
shepherds, with their flocks, shall come to her. And 
they shall pitch their tents against her round about.” 
“Jerusalem,” he observes, “is in like manner called 
simply 713, the habitation, Isa. xxvii. 10. And it 
seems entitled to the name by way of eminence, as 
the chief residence both of Israel and the God of 
Israel. Accordingly, speaking of the very desola- 
tion here intended, the psalmist says, They have de- 
voured Jacob, and laid:waste his dwelling-place, 
1703, Psa. Ixxix. 7. It is also called God’s habitation, 
Exod. xv. 138; 2 Sam. xv. 25, &c. And, with respect 
to the epithet annexed, the delightful one, Jerusalem 
is frequently spoken of in terms that show it to have 
been, in a very eminent degree, the object of delight 
both with God and man.” 

Verses 4; 5, Prepare ye war against her—The 
prophet now drops the metaphor, and tells them in 
plain terms whom he means by the shepherds 
namely, warriors. ‘These seem to be the words of 
God giving a commission to the Chaldeans, by his 
prophet, to make war upon Jerusalem. Arise, and 
let us go up at noon, &c.—“ The alacrity and eager- 
ness with which the Chaldeans should undertake 
and execute the commission with which they. were 
charged, are described in these and the following 
words in a beautiful vein of poetry. Though it was 
late in the day before they received their orders, 
they are for beginning their march immediately ; 

349 


The invasion of 


JEREMIAH. 


Judea foretold. 


SS ee 


. 3392, 
6.2. 


6 4 For thus hath the Lorp of 
hosts said, Hew ye down trees, and 
> cast a mount against Jerusalem: this is the 
city to be visited ; she is wholly oppression in 
the midst of her. 

7 * As a fountain casteth out her waters, so 
she casteth out her wickedness: ® violence and 
spoil is heard in her; before me continually is 
grief and wounds. — 


8 Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest hmy’ 


soul % depart from thee ; lest I make thee deso- 
late, a land not inhabited. 


9 4 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 4, M. 3392. 
They shall thoroughly glean the rem- ee 
nant of Israel as a vine: turn back thy hand 
as a grape-gatherer into the baskets. 

10 ‘lo whom shall I speak, and give warn- 
ing, that they may hear? Behold, their ‘ ear 
is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken : 
behold, * the’ word of the Lorn is unto them a 
reproach; they have no delight in it. 

11 Therefore I am full of the fury of the 
Lorp; 'I am weary with holding in: I will 
pour it out ™upon the children abroad, and 


= 


3'Or, ste out the engine of shot. 5 Psa. lv. |) Paice be loosed, or, disjointed, —i Chap. vii. 26;, Acts vii. 
9, 11; Chapter xx. 8; Ezek. vii. 11, 23.——» Ezek. xxii. 18; Exodus vi. 12.——k Chapter xx. 8.1 Chapter xxix. 9. 
Hos. ix. 12. aha. ix. 2]. F 
= = ees 


and though it was night before they got to the place, 
they are unwilling to put off the assault till morn- 
ing."—Blaney. Let us destroy her palaces—And 
make ourselves masters of the wealth -contained in 
them. This was the motive that influenced them, 
and produced such eagerness. The end they had 
in view was not that they“ might fulfil God’s coun- 
sels; but that they might enjoy the spoils of all the 
stately palaces and rich houses of the nobles and 
great ones: Rerhy, however, God served his own 
purposes. 

Verses 6,7, For thus hath the Lord of hosts said 
—To the Chaldeans: God would have the Jews to 
know, that they have not so much to do with the 
Chaldeans as with him; that they are his rod to 
scourge them for their sins. And thus God is said 
to hiss for, or hist, those whom he would employ in 
such work, Isa. v. 26; vii. 18. And he styles himself 
the Lord of hosts, to show that it is in vain-to con- 
tend in battle with them whom he sent forth, and 
would be, as it were, the captain of their hosts. Hew 
down trees, &c.—That is, to be employed in the 
siege:,see Deut. xx. 19, where the same word is 
used as here. Cast wp a mount—Throw up one 
continued trench, as a mount, round about it. This 
is the city, &c.—The Hebrew may be literally ren- 
dered, She is a city to be visited—That is, a proper 
object of punishment, the reason of which follows 
in the next words. As a fountain casteth out her 
waters, &c.—A metaphor, to express how natural 
all manner of wickedness was to her, how full she 
was of it, and how incessant in it. Violence and 
spot heard in her—I hear the continual com- 
plaints of those that groan under the oppression that 
they suffer, being cruelly used and spoiled in her., 

Verse 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, &¢e.— 
Take warning by the many threatenings and judg- 
ments I have denounced against thee; amend thy 
ways and doings, lest; if thou persist-in thy wicked- 
ness, Ibe utterly alienated from thee; and I cast off 
all bowels of compassion toward thee, and give thee 
up ‘to ruin and desolation. This threatening God 
fulfilled afterward, when he suffered the city and 
nation to be utterly, ruined and destroyed by Nebu- 
chadnezzar: but it still received a further comple- 

350 


tion, in that final desolation brought upon them by 
the Romans, under Titus Vespasian. 

Verse 9, T'hey shall thoroughly glean—As if he 
had said, Come, ye.Chaldeans, into my vineyard; 


collect the vintage; gather even to the very last 


grapes; the remnant of Israel as a vine—The pro- 
phet, by this, seems to express, that all the remains 
of the Israelites, who had escaped when the main 
body of them had been carried into captivity by the 
Assyrians, and who had taken refuge in Judea and 
Jerusalem, should also be carried away into captivity 
by the Babylonians. Turn back thy hand, &e— 
That is, begin the work of gathering or gleaning 
anew: return again after the first time, and pick up 
those few inhabitants that were left before, and carry 


| them also into captivity. Thus the Chaldeans did, 


as may be seen chap. lii. 28-30. 

Verse 10. To whom shall I speak and give warn- 
ing ?—I cannot find out. any that will so much as 
give me a patient hearing, much less will any take 
warning. I cannot speak with any hope of success. 
Behold, their ear is uncircumcised—A figurative 
expression, not unfrequent with the prophets, signi- 
fying the rejecting of instruction; as an uncircum- 
cised heart signifies an obstinate and rebellious will. 
As if he had said, Their mind is unbelieving and 
carnal, and therefore not disposed to hearken to the 
voice of God. . Nay, they are not only deaf to it, but 
prejudiced against it; and they cannot hearken—— 
Namely, because they are resolved they will not. 
Behold, the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach 
—-Both the reproofs and the threatenings of it are 
so; they consider themselves as wronged and af- 
fronted by both, and resent plain dealing as they 
would the most causeless slander and calumny. 
They have no delight in it-—More is implied than 
expressed; they have an antipathy to it, their hearts 
rise against it; it exasperates them, and inflames 
their passions; and they are ready to fly in the face 
of their reprovers. 

Verses 11, 12. T'herefore I am full of the fury 
—nhn Ax, the anger, or wrath, as it should rather 
have been rendered ; of the Lord—An expression 
which is to be understood of that divine justice which 
is worthy of God, and which inflicts most heavy, 

3 


The invasion of 


CHAPTER VI. 


Judea foretold. 


4% coe 3392. upon the assembly of young men to- 

~ gether: for even the husband with the 
wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is 
full. of days. 

12 And "their houses shall be tur hed unto 
others, with their fields and wives together: for 
I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants 
of the land, saith the Loro. 

13 For from the least of them even unto the 
greatest of them every one zs given to ° covet- 
ousness; and from the prophet even unto the 
priest every one dealeth falsely. 


ra 


» Deut. xxviii. 30; Chap. viii. 10. 
10; xiv. 18; xxiii. 11; Mice. iii. 5, 11. 
xiii. 10._ 


Isa. Ivi. 11 ; Chap. viii. 
»Chap. vill. 11; Ezek. 


14 They have? healeda alsothe*hurt A. M. 3392. 
B..C, 612. 

of the daughter of my people slightly, ———— 
4 saying, Peace, peace ; when there is no peace. 

15 Were they ashamed when they had com- 
mitted abomination? nay, they were not at all 
ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore 
they shall fall among them, that fall: at the 
time that I visit them they shall be cast dows, 
saith the Lorp. 

16 Thus saith the Lorp, Stand ye in the 
ways, and see, and ask for the ‘old paths, 
where is the good way; and walk therein, and 


* Heb. bruise, or, breach.—4 Chap. iv. 10; xiv. 13; xxiii. 17, 
Chap. iil. 3; vill. 12. S Isa. vili. 20; Chap. viii. 15; Mal. 
iv. 4; Luke xvi. 29. 


and yet most just, punishment on the obstinately 
wicked, after having a long time waited for their re- 
pentance. I am weary with holding in—Or, as the 
words may be rendered, J have laboured to hold it 
in. They are the words of the prophet, who was 
unwilling to declare to the people the avenging jus- 
tice which was ready to fall upon them. J will pour 
it out--The word in the Hebrew, ]5v’, is imperative, 
Pour it owt: God, as it seems, commanding his pro- 
phet not to delay to denounce his, judgments, about 
to be inflicted on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, of all 
ages andorders. The prophets are said to do things, 
when they declare God’s purpose of doing them, as 
hath been observed on chap. i. 10; wponthe children 
abroad—Or, in the streets, where they are wont to 
play: the sword of the merciless Chaldeans shall 
not spare them, chap. ix. 21. ‘The children perish 
in dhe calamity, which the sins of their fathers have 
procured. And upon the assembly of young men— 
Who meet together for diversion or conversation. 
The husband with the wife shall be taken—One sex, 
as well as the other, shall be'a prey to the enemy. 
Theaged with him that is full of days—From hence 
it appears, says Blaney, that the word, {p1, here and 
elsewhere rendered aged, “means Suly a man that 
has passed a certain time of life, which may be con- 
sidered as his zenith, so as from thenceforth to be 
upon the decline. In contradistinction to whom is 
placed one who is arrived at what is esteemed the 
full period of human life; in respect to which the 
patriarehs, Abraham, Isaac, David, and Job, are said 
to have died full of years, or days. See the same 
distinction made Isa. lxv. 20.” No age or condition 
shall escape. And their houses shall t be turned unto 
others, &¢e.—According to the threatening denounced 
by Moses, Deut. xxviii. 30. 

Verses 13-15. For, fromthe least of them, &e.— 
Old and young, rich and poor, high and low, those 
of all ranks, professions, and employments; every 
oneis given to covetousness—-Greedy of filthy lucre; 
and this made them oppressive, for of that evil, as 
well as others, the love of money is the bitter root. 
Nay, and this hardened their hearts against the word 
of God and his prophets: they were the covetous 
Pharisees that derided Christ, From the prophet to 

3 


the priest, every one dealeth falsely--Not only in 
speaking false things, but, as the Hebrew, “pe nwy, 
signifies, doing falsehood ; acting a lie; that is, 
playing the hypotnite ; keeping up an outward form, 
or appearance, of piety, and desiring to be accounted 
righteous, when, before God, they were abominably 
wicked. T'hey have healed also the hurt, §c., slight- 
ly—Skinning, over the wound, and never searching it 
to the bottom ; applying fenitives, soothing speeches, 
when there was need of corrosives, or sharp. re- 
proofs, which might have brought them to a true 
sense of the danger of their condition: encouraging 
them in their sins, and carnal security, by promising 
them peace and safety when they were on the brink 
of ruin and destruction. So that the ministry of 
these priests and prophets, instead of, proving a 
blessing, became a real curse to them. Were they 
ashamed, &c.—Nothing is-a greater sign of an incor- 
rigible temper than being past shame. Such the pro- 
phet tells us was the character of the generality of 
the Jews at this time: their hearts were sohardened 
that they were not at all ashamed, neither could they 
blush.. Nay, it seems they even gloried in their 
wickedness, and openly confronted the convictions 
that. should have humbled and brought them to re- 
pentance.. This is thought by some to refer especi- 
ally to the priests and prophets, who had soothed 
the people in their sins, with false hopes of peace, 
and yet were not ashamed of their deceit and treach- 
ery; no, not when the event disproved and gaye the 
lie to their promises. Therefore shall they fall 
among them that, fall—They shall. have their por- 
tion with those whom. they have deceived and de- 
stroyed. ee 

Verses 16, 17. Stand ye in the ways, &c.—He 
now turns his speech to the people, and gives them 
counsel; by a metaphor taken from travellers, who, 
being in doubt of their way, stand still, and consider, 
whether the direction, which they have. received 
from some false guide, be right or not. Ask for the 
old paths—Inquire in what way the patriarchs, the 
judges, the kings, and prophets of former times 
walked, and imitate their practices. And ye shall 
find rest for your souls—You will find peace with 
God, will be safe under his protection, and in conse- 

351 


? 
‘ 


The people are warned 


JEREMIAH. 


of approaching calamity. 


A. na ye shall find * rest for your souls. But 
they said, We will not walk therein. 
17 Also I set “watchmen over you, saying, 
Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they 
said, We will not hearken. 
18 4 Therefore hear, ye nations, ‘and know, 
O congregation, what is among them. 
19 * Hear, O earth: Behold, I will bring evil 


21 Therefore thus saith the Lorp, A. M. 3392. 
Behold, I will lay stumbling-blocks be- 2 © ©!” 
fore this people, and the fathers and the sons to- 
gether shall fall upon them; the nigweay and 
his friend shall perish. - 

22 Thus saith the Lorp, Behold, a people 
cometh from the °north country, and a great 


nation shall be raised from the sides of the 


upon this people, even the fruit of their /earth. 


thoughts, because they -have not hearkened’ 
unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it. 

20 *'T'o what purpose cometh there to me 
incense *from Sheba,_and the sweet cane 
from a far ‘country? » your burnt-offerings 
are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet 
unto me. 


' Matt. x1. 29. “Isa, xxi: 11; lviii. 1; Chap, xxv. 4; Bask, 
iii. 17; Hab. ii. 1. x Isa. i. 2.-—¥ Prov. i. 31. 2 Psa; xl. 
Gra ty 95 Isa. ah W xvi, 3; Amos Vv. 21; Mic. vi. 6, &e. 


_23 They shall lay hold on bow and spear; 
they are cruel, and have no mercy ; their voice 
dyoareth like the sea; and they ride upon. 
horses, set in array as men for war against thee, 
O daughter of Zion. 

24 We have heard the. fame thereof: our 
hands wax feeble: * anguish hath taken hold 


aIsa. 1x. 6.—® Chap. vii. 21.——¢ Chap, i..15; v. 15; x. 22; 
1. 41, 43.——4 Isaiah v. 30, e * Chapter i iv. 313, xi, 21; 5 xix. 
3. ‘ 


aT, 


quence thereof will have comfort and satisfaction in 
your own minds. See Matt. xi- 28, 29: But they 
said, We will not walk therein—If they did not say 


so in express words, yet such was the language of | 


their actions: though the prophets had directed them 
into the right way, and though they knew others had 
experienced it to be so, yet they would not be per- 
suaded to walk in it, but deliberately refused the 
blessings offered them. Also I set watchmen over 
you-—I gave you prophets, as so many watchmen, to 
warn you of. the evils that threatened you. And 
they faithfully discharged their duty, admonishing 
you of your sins, and, giving you faithful warning 
of the judgments they would bring upon’you ; say- 
ing, Hearken to the ‘sound of the trumpet—That is, 
to the warning given you of approaching danger. 
It was customary, in those days and countries, to | 
have continually watchmen placed on high towers, 
or on hills, who observed the country all round, to | 
prevent any sudden hostile invasion, by giving early 
notice of any appearance thereof by sound of trum- 
pet. “So the prophets, who were the observators of 
the manners of the people, and who had early notice 
from God what evils were coming, unless prevented 
by repentance and amendment ‘of life, are called 
watchmen.” 

Verses 18, 19. Therefore hear, ye nations— 


The very heathen are called upon to take notice of 
thodflthreatenings and denunciations of God’s wrath 
against the Jews, lest they should think that the ca- 
lamities which were soon to fall upon that people 


earth—God’s people, meant, it seems, by the word 
congregation, in the former clause; and the heathen 
nations are justly equivalent to the earth. Behold, I 
will bring evil wpon this people—The Chaldean ar- 
my, Withall the direful effect of it; even the fruit of 
their thoughts—They may thank themselves for 
what. is coming upon them, being the fruit of their 
contrivances and sinful imaginations. As they have 
sown, so shall they reap. They thought to strengthen 
| themselves by their alliances with foreigners, which 
they formed independent of me, and in opposition 
\to my express prohibition, and by having recourse 
to various species of idolatry, and other supersti- 
tions; and these-very things will bring ruin upon 
them. 

Verse 20. To what purpose—incense from Sheba? 
—Sheba was a part of Arabia Felix, and famous for 
its spices and perfumes, Isa. ix. 6. Her 8 She pro- 
phet reproves the hypocrisy of the Jews, who sought 
to cover their inward corruption by the external 
shows of religion; which the prophets often declare 
to be of no. value, when they do not ei from a 
devout mind. See chap. vii. 21, 225 Isa. i. 11. And 
the sweet cane froma far country—Respecting 
which, see on Isa. xliii: 24. A far country seems 
equivalent with Sheba before mentioned, whose 
queen is said, Matt. xii. 42, to have come from the 
uttermost parts of the earth, namely, from the south- 
erm extremity of the peninsula of Arabia, which, 
with respect to Judea, was a far country, and at the 
extreme parts of the earth, or bordering upon the 


had happened by chance, and not by the ‘appoint- || ocean on the south. 


ment cf that God whom they had dishonoured and ||. 


Verses 21-26. Behold, I will lay stumbling-blocks 


refused to obey; and know, O congregation—Of Is- || before this people—I will suffer such things to be 
rael, namely, the general assembly of the people at ||laid in their way as shall be the occasion of their 


Jerusalem; what is among them—Rather, what T || destruction. 
have decreed against them. God would have all||by which they shall fall. 


Or, I will bring calamities upon them, 
The neighbour and his 


the world to know that the judgments which were || friend shall perish—Men of all sorts and condi- 


coming on the Jews had been foretold by him, and || tions. 


inflicted for the punishment ‘of their sins. 
352 


Behold, a people cometh, &c.—The Chal 


Hear, ©|| deans are here again described, as in chap. v.15; a 
3 


The people are warned 


CHAPTER VI. 


«4 


of approaching calamaty. 


A. M. 3392. of us, 
B.C. 612 ail. 
25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by 
the way; for the sword of the enemy and fear 
ds on every side. 
26 4 O-daughter of my people, ‘gird thee 
with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes: 
hmake thee mourning, as for an only son, 


and pain, as of a woman in 


Chapter iv. 8——s Chapter xxv. 34; Mic. i. 10.—» Zech. 
xii. 10. . 


most bitter lamentation : for the eee AME sane 
shall suddenly come upon us. ip cae 

27 I have set thee for a tower and ‘a fortress 
among my people, that thou mayest know and 
try their way. . 

28 *'They are all grievous revolters, } walk- 
ing with slanders: they are ™brass and iron ; 
they are all corrupters. 


i Chapter i. 18; xv. 20.—*Chapter vy. 23.——! Chapter ix. 4. 
m Ezek. xxii. 18. * - 


distant nation, violent, cruel, armed with bows and 
spears, and well mounted. A great nation fromthe 
sides of the earth—Or rather, from the coasts, ends, 
or extremities of the earth, as Dr. Waterland reads 
it. Their voice roareth like the sea—The shouts 
of hostile armies are fitly compared to the waves 
of the sea, which dash upon the shores with a great 
noise. And they ride upon horses—Of which there 
was a great scarcity in Judea, which was one reason 
that induced the Jews to enter into alliances with 
Egypt, that they might be furnished with horses 
from thence. We have heard the fame thereof-- 
The prophet personates the people, and describes 
the-very great consternation which Judah and Jeru- 
salem should be in, upon the approach of this formi- 
dable enemy. Our hands wax feeble—We have no 
heart to make any resistance; anguish hath taken 
hold of us—We are in an extremity of pain, like that 
of a woman in travail. Go not forth into the fields, 
&c.—Thus he expresses the great danger that would 
be everywhere. O daughter of my people, &c.— 
Here the prophet calls upon them to lament the deso- 
lations that were coming upon them; as if he had 
said, Hear thy God calling thee to weeping and 
mourning, and answer his call. Gird thee with 
sackcloth-—Not only put on sackcloth for a day, but 


gird it on thee to be worn constantly. Wallow thy- || 


self-in ashes—Lie down among them; use all the 
tokens of the deepest mourning, and most bitter 
lamentation ; and that not forced, and for show, but 


with the greatest sincerity, as parents mourn for an| 


only son, and think themselves comfortless because 
they are childless. The expression, as for an only 
son, Was proverbial among the Jews, to denote the 
greatest grief. For the spoiler shall suddenly come 
upon us——Though he is not come yet, he is coming ; 
the decree is gone forth, let us therefore meet the 
execution of it with a suitable sadness. 

Verse 27. I have set thee for a tower, &c.—Ac- 
cording to this reading, God speaks here by way of 
encouragement to the prophet, and tells him he had 
made him a fortified tower, that he might be safe, 
notwithstanding all the attempts of the wicked 
against him. But Lowth, with some others, thinks 
that “the sense would be plainer if the words were 
translated thus: J have set thee (in) a watch-tower, 
and (in) a fortress ;” that is, God tells the prophet 
that he hath placed him as a watchman in a high 
tower, or fortress, to take an account ofthe peo- 
ple’s behaviour, and to warn them accordingly. 
That thou mayest know and try their way—That is, 

Vo. III. ( 23 ) 


their actions and manners, and how they stand af 
fected toward God and his word; that thou mayest 
bring their whole conduct under thy strict observa- 
tion and scrutiny, as refiners do metals. Hereby the 
prophet is encouraged to reprove them more freely, 
and with authority, because God promises to defend 
him from injury, and would give him‘prudence to 
see what was amiss, and undauntedness to oppose 
it. It may be proper to observe here, that this 
latter clause of the verse favours the sense in which 
the LXX. and the Vulgate have taken the preceding 
clause. They render the word }1n3, which we 
translate a tower, doxysactny, probatorem, a prover, 
or trier, which Blaney interprets thus: “J have ap- 
pointed thee the office of an assay-master among my 
people, as to the gold thereof; that is, to try what. is 
in.them of genuine worth and excellence, which, 
like pure gold, will stand the utmost test.” Dr. Dodd 
considers the passage in the same light, observing, 
“The prophet in these verses evidently takes his 
ideas from metals, and the’ trial of them; and the 
verbs in the latter clause of this verse, referring to 
such trial, manifestly require something correspond- 
ing in the preceding part. But what has a tower 
and fortress to do with the trying of metals? In 
this view the reader will agree with me, that the 
passage is rendered much more properly in some of 
ihe versions, and indeed more agreeably to the 
Hebrew, I have given, or established, thee as a 
strong prover, or trier of metals among my people 
that thou mightest know, &c.” 

Verses 28, 29. They are all grievous revolters— 
Obstinate and refractory ; walking with slanders— 
Making it their business to detract from thee andthe 
other prophets. Blaney translates the clause, They 
are all of them the dross of revolters, passing with 
a fraudulent currency ; an interpretation for which 
he assigns plausible reasons. T'hey are brass and 
iron—They have basely degenerated. It appears, 
upon trial, that they have: nothing in them of.the 
purity of silver or gold, but their impudence resem- 
bles brass, and their obstinacy iron. They are all 
corrupters—Hebrew, DVnwn, corrupting, or adul- 
terating ; or, a8 Blaney renders it, instruments of 
adulteration, alluding to brass and iron, or any base 
metals, being used to adulterate the pure silver. 
The bellows are burned, &c.—All methods to purify 
and amend them are ineffectual. All the expressions 
to the end of the chapter are metaphorical. The 
lead is consumed of the fire—Before the use of 
quicksilver was known, the refiners used aie to 

353 


% 


The people exhorted JEREMIAH. to repentance. 


- 


a . ae 29 'The bellows are ey the leadis || 30 ™ Reprobate® silver shall sen A. M- _ 
: consumed of the fire; the founder melt- || call them, because the Lorp hath re- : 
eth.in vain: forthe wicked are not plucked away. || jected them. 4 


nJsa, i. 22. i ; we 5 Or, refuse silver. 


separate the silver from the other substances mixed || hered so closely, that all endeavours and pains used 
with it. Thus Pliny, Nat. Hist., lib. xxxi. sec. 31, || to purge them away and get clear of them proved 
“Excoqui (argentum) non potest, nisi cum plumbo || ineffectual ; so that, as it follows in the next verse, 
nigro, aut cum vena plumbi.” J'he founder melteth || nothing remained but to.throw them aside, as metal 
in vain—Or, as Houbigant reads it, heapeth wp fire || disallowed, and cried down by authority; counter- 
invain. For.the wicked are not plucked away—Or || feiting silver, but not capable of being brought to the 
rather, The dross of iniquity is.not purged away. || sterling standard, See Blaney. In-other words: 

The word Dy, meaning here, it seems, the base in- || As base money is refused by every one, because it 
gredients among the metals; that is, the bad princi-|| cannot bear the touchstone ; so should these hypo- 
ples and habits, which prevailed so much, and ad- |} crites and evil-doers be rejected both by God and man. 


CHAPTER VII. i a } 


A new prophecy begins here, and is continued on to the end. of the 10th chapter. . In it the prophet inveighs against the vices of 
Judah and Jerusalem, particularly their hypocrisy, and-false confidence in their, religious principles and ceremonies ; deliver- 
ing also some threats against Edom, Moab, Ammon, and the people of Arabia. See chap. ix. 26. In this chapter he, (1,) 
Shows them, that while they continued in their sins, unreformed, practising injustice, oppression, murder, perjury, and 
idolatry, their having God's temple and ordinances among them would'do them no service, 1-11. (2,) Warns them that, 
for their obstinacy, God would quickly render Jerusalem and Judea as desolate as Shiloh was, where ‘the tabernacle long 

» continued, and as the land of Israel, 12-15. (3,) Forbids Jeremiah to pray for them, because they were so set on idolatry, 
16-20. (4,) Declares that none of their sacrifices would be regarded while they continued disobedient to the common laws 
of morality, 21-28. -(5,) Denownces utter desolation, on account of their idolatries and impicties ; and threatens to multt- 
ply their slain as they had multiplied their sins, 29-31. : 


5 wea (THE word that came to Jeremiah || word of the Lorn, all ye of Judah, 4 «a 
apeieba from the LorD, saying, that enter in at these gates to Mee 


2 *Stand in the gate of the Lane's house, || the Lorp. 
and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the || 3 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, the God of 


— rad 


a Chapter || xxvi. 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. Verse 2. Stand in the gates of the Lord’s house 
Verse 1. The word of the Lord, &c.—The date || —Namely, the east gate of the temple, which led di- 
of this new sermon is not precisely marked, but it is || rectly to it, where he delivered this discourse, before 
probable it was delivered not long after the prece-/| all the people who entered there. And proclaim 
ding one, and on the following occasion. “Besides || there this word—Proclaiming signifies both the au 
the prophets who were commissioned to announce || thority by which he spake, and, the divulging of 
the approaching calamities of Judah and Jerusalem, |} what he spake plainly and boldly. And as it wasin 
there were others who took upon themselves to||so public a place, namely, at the entrance of the 
flatter. the people with opposite predictions. ~ They || court of the people, not of that of the priests, that 
taught them to look upon such threats as groundless, || he uttered this prophecy, so possibly it might be 
since God, they said, would have too much regard |) at one of the three feasts, when all the males from 
to his own honour, to suffer his temple to be pro-|| all parts of the country were to appear before the 
faned, and the seat of his holiness tobe given up into|| Lord in the courts of his house. In that case he 
the hand of-strangers. Jeremiah is therefore com-|| would have many collected together to preach to, 
manded openly to reprove the falsehood of these as- || and that was the most seasonable time to admonish 
sertions, and to show, by an example in point, that || them not to trust in their privileges. 
the sanctity of the place would afford no security to|| Verse 3. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God 
the guilty; but that God would assuredly do by his|| of Israel—As creatures, we are all bound to regard 
house at Jerusalem what he had done unto Shiloh;|| the Lord of hosts; as members. of the visible 
and cast the people of Judah out of his sight as he|| church, the God of Israel ; what he said to them he 
had already eget the people of Israel for their|| says to us; and it is much ‘the same with that-which 
wickedness,”’—Blaney. John the Baptist said to those whom he baptized, 
354 ( 23* ) 3 


Promases to 
pa 


A. M. 3404. Tsrael, 
B. C. 600, 


dwell in this place. 

A ¢ Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The 
temple of the Lorp, The temple of the Lorp, 
The temple of the Lorn, are these. 

5 For if ye thoroughly amend:your ways and 
your doings; if ye thoroughly ‘execute judg- 
ment between a man and his neighbour ; 

6 Jf ye oppress not the stranger, the father- 
yo and the widow, and shed not innocent 


CHAPTER VII. 


the truly penitent. 


> Amend your ways and||blood in this place, * neither walk 4. M. 3404. 
your doings, and I will cause you to |/after other gods to your hurt; 


C. 600. 


7 *'Then will I cause you to dwell in this 
place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, 
for ever and ever. 

8 J Behold, ® ye trust in ‘lying words, that 
cannot profit. 

9 * Will ye steal, murder, and commit adul- 
tery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto 
Baal, and ' walk after’ other gods whom ye 
know not ; 


b Chapter xviii. 11; xxvi. 13.—° Mie. iii. 11.——4 Chapter” 


xxii. 3, © Deut. vi. 14; viii. 19; xi. 28; Chapter xiii: 10. 
f Deut. iv. 40. 


Matt. iii. 8,9. Bring forth fruits meet for repent- | 


ance, and think not to say, within yourselves, We 
have Abraham for our father. Amend your ways 
and your doings—This implies that there had been 
much amiss in their ways and doings, but it was a 
great instance of the goodness of God to them, that 
he gave them liberty to amend, showed them wherein 
and how they must amend, and promised to accept 
them upon their amendment. And TI will cause you 
to dwell in this place—Namely, quietly and peacea- 


bly. _ You shall not go into captivity, but a stop. 


shall be put to that which threatens your expulsion. 
Observe, reader, reformation is the only way, and 
a sure way to prevent ruin. 

Verse 4. Trust ye not in lying words—Do not 
flatter yourselves with an opinion that you can be 
safe and happy onany other terms than those which 
God points out. Saying, The temple of the Lord, §c., 
are these—As much as to say, God hath placed his 
name here, verse 10, and chose these stately build- 
ings as the place of his peculiar residence, and what 
reason is there to believe that he will evér forsake it, 
and give it up tobe destroyed by strangers and idol- 
aters? Thus, chap. xviii, 18,they express their con- 
fidence that the law would not perish from the 
priests, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word 
from the prophet. And Micah iii. 11, they are said 
to lean on the Lord, saying, Is not the Lord among 
us? No evil can come upon us. These were the 
lying words on which they trusted, and against trust- 
ing in which the prophet here solemnly cautions 
them. The Targum intimates that the reason of the 
three-fold repetition of the words, 7'he temple of the 
Lord, was, because every Jew was obliged to visit 
the temple thrice a year. But it seems more likely 
that they are thus repeated, to express the confident 
and reiterated boasts of the temple, which were in 
the people’s mouths, and their extreme vehemence 
and unreasonable presumption. . 

Verses 5-7. For if ye thoroughly amend your 
ways, &c.—In these verses the prophet tells them 
particularly what the amendment was which was 
necessary that they might escape destruction. It 
must be a thorough amendment, a universal, con- 
tinued, persevering reformation 5 ‘hot partial, but en- 


(& Chapter iii. 18——4 Verse 4—i Chapter v. 31; xiv. 13. 
k] Kings xviii. al; Hos. iv. 1; Zeph-i. 5—! Exodus xx. JG 
Verse 6. 


tire; not hypocritical, but sincere; not wavering, 
but constant. They must make the tree good, and so 
make the fruit good; must amend their hearts and 
thoughts, and so amend their ways and doings. In 
particular; Ist, They must be honest and just in all 
their dealings. They who had power in their hands 
must thoroughly execute judgment between a man- 
and his neighbour, without partiality. They must 
not, either in judgment, or in matters of contract, 
oppress the'stranger, the fatherless, or the widow— 
Nor countenance or protect those that did oppress 
them, nor refuse to do them right when they sought 
for it. They must not shed innocent blood—And with 
it defile the temple, the city, and the land wherein 
they dwelt. 2d, They must keep close to the wor- 
ship of the true God only, neither walking after other 
gods, nor hearkening to those that would draw. them 
into communion with idolaters. T'hen will I cause 
you to dwell in this place, &c.—Upon this condition 
I will establish and fix you in this land for ever and 
ever—That is, from age to age, and you shall possess 
it, as your fathers did before you, from the days of 
Joshua until now. 

Verses 8-11. Behold, ye trust in lying words— 
Uttered by your ‘false ‘prophets, who promise you 
peace, and sooth you up in your impenitence. 
Will ye steal, murder, &e.—Jeremiah does not 
charge them with the transgression of the ritual law 
of Moses, but with the breach of the weightier mat- 
ters of the moral law. Thus the prophets showed 
the Jews a more excellent way of serving God than 
by relying upon external ceremonies of their wor- 
ship, which might have prepared their minds for the 
reception of the gospel. And come and stand be- 
fore me, &c.—Will ye be guilty of the vilest immo- 
ralities, even such as the common interest, as well 
as the common sense, of mankind must repro- 
bate? Will ye swear falsely?—A crime which 
all nations have always held in abhorrence? Will 
ye burn incense to Baal?—A durghill deity, that 
sets up asa rival with the great Jehovah ; and, not 
cotitent with that, will you walk after other gods 
too, whom ye know not—And by all these crimes put 
a daring affront upon the Lord of hosts? Willyou 
exchange a God, of whose power and goodness you 

355 


Calamities threatened 


10 ™And come. and stand’ before 
me in this house, ! which” is called 
by. my name, and say, We are delivered to do 
all these abominations ?° 

11 Is °this house, which is called by my 
name, become a ? den of robbers in your.eyes ? 
Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lor. 


A. M. 3404. 
B. C. 


m Ezekiel xxiii. 39! Hebrew, ‘whereupon my name is called. 
0 Verses 11, 14,30; Chapter xxxii. 34; xxxiv. 15. ° Isaiah 
vi. 7.——? Matt, xxi. 13; Mark xi. 17; Luke xix. 46. 


JEREMIAH. 


upon the impenitent. 


12 But go ye" now unto ‘my place ee 
which was in Shiloh, *where I set 
my name at the first, and see * what Tdid to 
it for the wickedness of my people Israel. 

13 And now, because ye have done all these 
works, saith the Lorp, and I spake unto you, 
trising up early and apenleis but ye heard 


4 Josh. xviii. 1; Judg. xviii. 31. r Deut. xii. 11. —— 1 Sam. 
iv. 10, 11; Psa. ixxviil. Wr Bo xxvi. 6-2 Chron. xxxvi. 


115; Verse 25; Chap. xi. 


have had such long experience, for gods of whose 
ability and willingness to help you know nothing ? 
And when you have thus done the most you can to 
affront and insult the infinite and eternal Jehovah, 
your creator and preserver, your governor and 
judge, will you have the effrontery and impudence 
to come and stand before. him in, this house, which is 
called by his name, and in which his name is called 
upon, under a pretence of worshipping and serving 
him—stand before him ‘as servants, waiting his 
commands, as suppliants, expecting his favour? Will 
you act inopen rebellion against him, and yet rank 
yourselves among his subjects, among the best of 
them? By this it would seem you think that either 
he doth not discover, or doth not dislike your wicked 
practices ; 
highest indignity possible upon him. It is as if 
you should say, We are delivered to do all these 
abominations—If they had not,the face to say this 
in so many words, yet their actions spoke it aloud. 
God had many times delivered them, as they could 
not but acknowledge, and had been a present help to 
them when otherwise they must have perished. By 
these means he designed to bring them to himself; 
by his goodness to lead them to repentance; but 
they, resolving notwithstanding to persist in their 
abominations, said, in effect, in direct contradiction to 
God’s true intent, in showing them this kindness, 
that he had delivered them to put them again into a 
capacity of rebelling against him. Will ye, says the 
prophet, interpret. the deliverances God hath for- 
merly vouchsafed you, as so many licenses to com- 
mit new crimes? Or, do you think, when you offer 
your propitiatory sacrifices, that they will wipe away 
the guilt of all your’past offences, and that you may 
securely return to your former wicked practices, 
having such a certain and easy method of obtaining 
pardon? Is this house, §&c., become aden of robbers 
in ‘your eyes ?—Do you think it was built, not only 
to be a rendezvous of, but a place of shelter-to, the 
vilest malefactors; who perform an outward service 
to mé there, that they may continue the more se- 
curely in their sins? Mark well, reader, those that 
think to excuse themselves in unchristian practices, 
with the Christian name, and sin the more boldly 
and securely, because there is a sin-offering pro- 
vided, do in effect. make God’s house of prayer a den 
of thieves ; as the priests did in Christ’s time, Matt. 
xxi. 13. But could they thusimpose upon God? no, 
Behold, I have seen it, saith the Lord—Have seen 
the real iniquirae 
356 


to imagine either of which is to put the |. 
| here by Jeremiah. 


rough the counterfeit and dissem-, 


bled piety. Though men.may deceive one another 
with the show of dévationg yet they cannot deceive 
God. 

Verse 12. But go ye now to Shiloh—Shiloh was 
the place where, upon the first coming of the Israel- 
ites into Canaan, the tabernacle,-in which was the 
ark of God’s presence, was set up; and there it con- 
tinued for a long space of time, even until the days 
of Samuel. It was during this period that the Israel- 
ites, as a punishment of the iniquitous and scanda- 
lous lives of the priests and people, received that sig- 
nal defeat from the Philistines, when the ark of God 
was taken, as related 1 Sam. iv. 10, &c., the pathetic 
description of which disaster, given by the psalmist, 
Psa. Ixxviii. 60-64, has caused it to be generally be- 
lieved, that an allusion to it was likewise designed 
“ But a due consideration of the 
context,” Blaney thinks, “ will lead us rather to con- 
clude that the prophet refers to amore recent event, 
the. vestiges of which were still fresh to be seen. 


| Shiloh was in the tribe of Ephraim, and this place, 


once so favoured and sanctified by God’s particular 
residence, had shared the fate of the rest of the king- 


/ dom of Israel, and was become a scene of misery 


andruin. This they might literally go and see at 
present; and this, says God, have I done because of 
the wickedness of my people Israel. In which words 
Israel, meaning the ten tribes, is acknowledged to 
have been God’s people no less than Judah; and 
Shiloh, it is observed, had once enjoyed the same 
privileges, which now belonged to the temple at Je- 
rusalém; But as God spared not Shiloh, but made it 
the victim of his wrath, so he says he ‘would do to 
Jerusalem and her tem ple; and would cast off Judah 
for their wickedness from being his people, in like 
manner as he had already cast off their brethren, 
whom he distinguishes by the name of the children 
of Ephraim,” 

Verses 13-15, And now, because ye have done all 
these works—Kither the same, or ‘as bad, or worse 
than Israel did when the tabernacle was at Shiloh; and 
particularly those mentioned verse 9. And I spake 
unto you, rising up early, &e.—A metaphor taken 
from persons who, being diligent in their - business, 
are wont to rise up early; as if he had said, I not 
only spoke to you by my prophets, but they, in my 
name, made all possible haste, and used all possible 
diligence to ‘reclaim you, continually and carefully 
preventing you with remonstrances; employing with 
all possible attention severity and softness, promises 
and threats; but all to. no purpose. Therefore, &e 


An enumeration of the 


CHAPTER VIl. 


sins of Jerusalem. 


4M. y not; and I “called you, but ye an- 
swered not; Phar, 

14 Therefore will I do unto ¢his nouse, which is 
called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto 
the place which I gave to you, and’ to your 
fathers, as I have done to * Shiloh, 

15 And I will cast you out of my sight, ¥ as 
I haye cast out all your brethren, 7 even the 
whole seed of Ephraim. 

16 Therefore * pray not thou for this people, 
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither 


— 


make intercession to me: 
not hear thee. ithe. 

17 % Seest thou not what they do in the 
cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 

18 °'The children gather wood, and° the 
fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead 
their dough, to make cakes to the ? queen of 
heaven, and to ¢ pour out drink-offerings unto 
other gods, that they may provoke me to 
anger. 

19 © Do they provoke me to anger? saith the 


= 


> for I will. A. M. 3404. 
: B: C. 600. 


«Proverbs i, 24; Isa. Ixy. 12; lIxvi. 4. x] Samuel iv. 10; 
Psa. Ixxvili. 60; Chap. xxvi. 6.—Y 2 Kings xvii. 23. z Psa. 
Ixxviii. 67, ; 


aExod. xxxii. 10; Chap. xi..14; xiv. 11. b Chapter xv, 1. 
© Chap. xliv. 17, 19. 2 Or, frame, or, workmanship of heaven. 
4 Chap. xix. 13. © Deut. xxxii. 16, 21. 


—Because you have added this, your obstinate re- 
jecting of all admonitions and warnings, to the rest 
of your provocations, will Ido unto this house, which 
is called by my name—This sumptuous temple, of 
which you boast, and in which you trust for pro- 
tection and preservation; the place which I gave to 
you and to your fathers—Upon condition of your 
obedience, Psa. cv. 44, 45, and therefore may justly, 
upon the breach of the condition, take from you 
again; as I have done to Shiloh—See verse 12. 
And I will cast you out of my sight—Y ou shall have 
my presence with you and watchful eye over youno 
more; butI willsend you into captivity to Babylon, 
as I did your brethren into Assyria. See on 2 Kings 
xvii. 6-18. He terms the Israelites their brethren 
here, to remind them that they both proceeded from 
the same stock; and therefore had no reason.to ex- 
pect but they should) both fare alike, seeing their 
sins were alike: even the whole seed of Ephraim 
—The ten tribes, called often by this name, because 
the tribe of Ephraim was the most numerous and 
potent of them all, and Jeroboam, their first king, 
was of that tribe. 

Verse 16. Therefore pray not thou for this people 
—God had :been wont to suffer himself to be prevail- 
ed with to spare his people by the mediation of his 


servants, as of Moses, Exod. xxxii. 11, 14; Num. | 


xiv. 19,20; but now he will admit of no iiterces- 
sion. See also chap, xv. 1; Ezek. xiv..20; Nothing 
but a universal reformation, which God foresaw 
would not take place, could preserve the Jews from 
that captivity and desolation which he had threaten- 
ed to bring upon'them. This decree of God todestroy 
them, unless they repented and were reformed, being 
irreyocable, the prophet is forbid to interpose by his 
prayers for the reversing of it. But'still he might 
beseech God not to proceed to an utter destruction 
of his people; but, in remembrance of his covenant 
with Abraham and his seed, might spare a remnant, 
and accordingly we find he did pray to that effect, 
chap. xiv. 7-9. . 

Verses 17-19. Seest thou not what they do in the 
cities of Judah—Thou canst not pass along the 
streets, but thou must needs be an eye witness of 
their abominations, committed openly and publicly 


in the face of the sun, without either shame or fear; 
and in the streets of Jerusalem—In both city and 
country. This intimates both that their sins were 
evident and could not be denied, and that the sinners 
were impudent and would not be reclaimed: they 
committed their wickedness even in the prophet’s 
presence and under his eye} he saw what they did, 
and yet they did it; which was an affront to his 
office, and to God, whose minister he was, and bid de- 
fiance to both. The children gather wood—Here 
God shows how busily they were employed, from 
the youngest to the oldest, for their idolatry. Every 
one in the family did something toward it. To 
make cakes to the queen of heaven—That is; the 
moon, either in an image, or in the original, or both. 
They worshipped-her probably under the name of 
Astarte, or Ashtaroth, being in love, it seems, with 
the brightness with which they saw the moon walk, 
and thinking themselves indébted to her for her be- 
nign influences, or fearing her malignant ones, Job 
xxxii. 26. The worship of the moon was. much in 
use among the heathen nations, and, as appears from 
chap. xliv. 17-19, many of the Jews were so attached 
to it, that they could not be reclaimed from it: no, 
not when destruction had come upon their country 
for that and other species of idolatry. We may ob- 
serve, that the word n34n, here rendered queen, may 
signify regency, as Blaney translates it, and there- 
fore may include the whole, host of heaven: but 
queen is the more common and proper signification 
of the word, and most probably here means the moon 
only: they, however, worshipped the sun and stars 
also. .T'hiat they may provoke me to anger—Which 
is the direct tendency of their sin, though they may 
not propose to themselves such an end in the com- 
mitting it. Do they provoke me to anger 2—Do they 
think to grieve me, and trouble my infinite and eter- 
nal mind, as if they could hurt me by their wicked- 
ness? They are.deceived: I am without passion, 
and can be without their offerings. Do they not pro- 
voke themselves, &c.—Will they not themselves feel 
the hurt, and reap the fruits of their conduct? Will 
not.the arrow which they shoot against heaven re- 
coil upon their own guilty heads? Will not their 
sins turn at last to their own utter confusion? 
357 


The people obeyed not God, 


JEREMIAH. 


nor received his correction. 


A. M, 3404. Lorn: do they not provoke them 

B. C. 600. 4 * 

selves to the confusion of their own 
faces ? ~ 

20 Therefore thus: saith the Lord Gop ; Be- 
hold, mine anger and my fury shall be suis 
out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, 
and upon the trees of the field, and upon shin 
fruit of the Ron and it shall burn, and 
shall not be quenched. 

21 4 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, the God 
of Israel; * Put your burnt-offerings unto your 
sacrifices, and eat flesh. 

22 £For I spake not unto your fathers, nor 
commanded them in the day that I brought 
them out of the land of Egypt, ° concerning 
burnt-offerings or sacrifices : . 

23 But this thing commanded I them, saying, 

» Obey my voice, and ‘ I will be your God, and 
yesh shall be my people: and walk ye in all the 


ways that I have commanded you, A. M. 3404. 

B. C, 600. 

that it may be well unto you. 

24 * But they hearkened not, nor inelined 

their ear, but 7 walked in the counsels and in 

the ‘imagination of their evil heart, and *went™ 
backward, and not forward. 

25 Since the day that your fathers came ala 
out of the land of Egypt unto this day, I have 
even "sent unto you all my servants the pro- 
phets, ° daily rising up early and sending them : 

26 » Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor in- 
clined their ear, but * hardened their neck: 
‘they did worse than their fathers. 

27 Therefore *thou shalt speak all these 
words unto them; but they will not hearken 
to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but 


|| they will not answer thee. 


28 But thou shalt say unto them, This is a 
nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lorp 


€ Isaiah i, 11; Chapter vi. 26; Amos v, 21; Hosea viii. 13, 
61 Sam. xv. 22; Psa. li. 16,17; Hos. vi. 6. 5’ Heb. concern- 
ing the matter 9 '__h Exod. xv, 26; Deut. vi. 3; Chap: xi. 4, 7. 
i Exod. xix. 5; Lev. xxvi. 12. K’ Psa. Lxxxi. 11; Chap. xi. 8. 
1 Deut. xxix. 19; Psa. Ixxxi. 12, - 


4Or, stubbornness.—® Heb. were:-——™ Chap. ii. 27, 32, 335 
‘Hosea iv. 16. 4 2Chron. xxxvi. 15; Chap. xxv. 4; xxix. 19- 
° Verse 13,—p Verse 24; Chapter xi. 8; xvii. 23; 


ed 


4 Nehemiah ix. 17, 29; Chapter xix. 15,——" Chapter 


| § Ezekiel ii. 7. 


Verse 20. Therefore thus. saith the Lord—And 
what he’saith he will not unsay, nor can all the 
world withstand its execution. Hear it therefore 
and tremble. Behold, mine anger.and my fury shall 
be poured out upon ihis place—As the flood: of wa- 
ters was poured upon the old world, or the shower 
of fire and brimstone upon Sodom ; ‘since they will 
provoke me, let them feel the effects of their con- 
duct. They shall soon find, Ist, 'That there is no es- 
caping this deluge of wrath, either by fleeing from 
it, or fencing against it. Itshall be poured out on this 
place—Though it be a holy place, the Lord’s house. 
It shall reach both man and beast—Like. the plagues 
of Egypt; and, like some of them, shall destroy the 
trees of the field and the fruit of the ground— 
Which they had designed and prepared for Baal, and 
of which they had made cakes to the queen of heaven. 
They shall find, 2d, 'That there is no extinguishing 
it: it shall burn and shall not be quenched—Prayers 
and tears, forms and ceremonies of worship, and 
ritual observances of whatever kind, shall then avail 
nothing, to prevent that total destruction which it 
shall produce. 

Verses 21-28. T’hus saith the Lord of ‘hosts, the 
God of Israel—And let Israel hear when their God 
speaks—Put your burnt-offerings unto your sacri- 
Jices, and eat flesh—The burnt-offerings, after they 
were flayed, were.to be consumed wholly upon the 


altar, Lev. i. 9; whereas, in the sacrifices of. the| 


peace-offerings, only the fat was to be burned upon 

the altar; part of the remainder belonging to the 

priests, and the rest being the portion of the offerer, 

to be eaten with his friends in a kind of religious 

feast. But here the prophet tells the Jews that they 
358 


may eat the flesh of their burnt-offerings as well as 
that of their peace-offerings ; that he was equally re- 
gardless.of the one and the other, and would have 
nothing to do with them; and that he would never 
accept offerings from people of so disobedient and 
refractory a disposition; that to be acceptable to him 
they must be presented with an humble and obedi- 
ent mind. “'This leads plainly to the interpretation 
of the next verses, which are by no means to be, taken: 
separately, as if God had not required burnt-offerings 
and sacrifices at all; but that he did not insist so 
much upon them as on obedience to the commands 
of the moral law; or, at least, that the former de- 
rived all their efficacy from the latter.” . See note on 
1 Sam. xv. 22. “Sacrifices,” says Dr. Waterland; on 
this passage, “ which were but part of duty, are here 
opposed to entire and universal obedience. Now the 
thing which God required, and chiefly insisted upon, 
was universal righteousness, and not partial obedi- 
ence, which is next to no obedience, because not per- 
formed upon a true principle of obedience. God 
does not deny that he had required sacrifices: but 
he had primarily and principally required obedience, 
which included sacrifices and all other instances of 
duty as well as*that: and he would not accept of 
such lame service as those sacrifices amounted to; 
for that was paying him part only in lieu of the 
whole. Or we may say, that sacrifices, the out-awork, 
are here opposed to obeying God’s voice; that is, 
the shadow is opposed to the substance, apparent 


‘duty to real hypocrisy, and empty show to sincerity 


and truth. Sacrifices separate from true holinéss, 

or from a sincere love of God, were not the service 

which God required; for hypocritical services are 
3 


/ 


The wickedness of 


CHAPTER VII. 


the children of Judah, 


A. M-3404. their God, * nor receiveth ° correction : 

: ~ “truth is perished, and is cut off from 
their f@fath. 

29 “| * Cut off thy hair, O° Jerusalem, ‘e 
cast if away, and take up a lamentation on 
high places; for the Lorp hath rejected and 
forsaken the generation of his wrath. 


30 For the children of Judah have done evil 
in my sight, saith the Lorn: ¥ they have set’ 


their abominations in the house which is called 
by my name, to pollute it. 

31 And they have built the * high aiaisae of 
Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of 


t Chap. v. 3; xxxii. 33: 5 Or, instruction. "Chap. ix. 3. 
x Job i. 20; Isaiah xv. 2; Chapter xvi. 6; xlviii, 37; Mic. i..16. 
¥ 2 Kings xxi: 4,7; 2 Chron. xxxill. 4, 5, 7; Chapter xxiii. 11; 
xxxii. 34; Ezek. vii. 20; vill. 5; Dan. ix. 27. 


* —t 


Hinnom, to *burn their sons and their A. M. 3404. 
daughters i in the fire; > which: I com- ee 
manded ¢hem not, neither 7 came ‘ into soy 
heart. 

32 9 Therefore, behold, °the days come, 
saith the Lorp, that it shall no more: be called 
Tophet, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom, 
but The valley of Slaughier: Mor they shall 
bury in Tophet, till there be no: place. 

33 And the ° carcasses of this people shall be 
meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the 
beasts of the earth ; and none shall fray thenr 
away. 


22 Kings xxiii. 10 ; Chap. xix, 53 xxxil. 36. a Psa. evi. 38. 
b Deut. xvii. 3. 7 Heb. came it upon my heart. © Chap.. xix. 
6.—4 2 Kings xxiii. 10; Chap. xix. 11; Ezek. vi. 5. © Deut. 


xxvili. 26; Psa. Ixxix. 2; Chap. xii. 9; xvi. 4; xxxiv. 20, 


no services, but abominations in his sight: he ex- 
pected, he demanded, religious devout sacrifices; 
while his people brought him only outside compli- 
ments, to flatter him; empty formalities, to affront 
and dishonour him. 'These were not the things 
which God spake of, or commanded: the sacrifices 
he spake of were pure sacrifices, to be offered up 
with a clean and upright heart. Those he required, 
and those only he would accept of as real duty and 
service.” 

Verse 29. Cut off thy hair, O Jerusalem—This 
was commonly practised in the time.of great sorrow 
and mourning. And Jerusalem is here addressed as 
a woman in extreme misery, and exhorted to take 
upon her the habit and disposition of a mourner, and 
to bewail the calamities which were fallen upon her. 
But some have observed that the Hebrew word 773, 
which we translate barely the hair, signifies some- 
thing more, namely, votive, or Nazarite hair; and 
they think the prophet alludes to the law concern- 
ing Nazarites, (Num. vi. 9,) whereby it was ordered 
that, if-any one should die near them, they. should 
immediately shave off their hair. They suppose, 
therefore, the sense here is, that so many would be 
killed in Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, that if there 
were any Nazarites in the’ city, they would be all 
obliged on that account to shave off their hair: by 
which is signified that a great number of the-inhabit- 
ants would be slain. And take up alamentation on 
high places—Or, for the high places, as some read 
it; namely, where they had worshipped their idols, 
and offered their sacrifices, there they must now be- 
moan their misery. Or the words may, as some 
suppose, be intended to signify the cries and la- 
mentations of the watchmen, who were placed on 
high towers and on hills, to observe the country 
around ; and who are represented as seeing, on this 
occasion, scenes of calamity and slaughter on every 
side, and continually fresh subjects of alarm. For 
the Lord hath rejected the generation of his wrath 
—This sinful generation, ato have so highly pro- 
voked him. ‘As God is said to reject or cast off his 

3 ; 


people when he gives them up into the hands of 
their enemies, so he is said to choose them again at 
their restoration from captivity, Isa. xiv. 1. ° 

Verses 30, 31. They have set up their abomina- 
tions, &c.—They have set up images and altars for 
idolatrous worship even in my temple, and the courts 
near it. This seems to be spoken of what was done 
in the times of Manasseh, or Amon, 2 Kings xxi. 4,7; 
2 Chron. xxxiil.4. And they have built the high 
places of Tophet—To burn their sons and their 
daughters in the fire. Concerning this unnatural 
and cruel custom of burning their children, by way 
of sacrifice to Moloch, which was derived from the 
Canaanites, see notes on Ley. xviii. 21; 2 Kings 
xxiii. 10; Isa. xxx. 33, Which I commanded them 
not—But, on the contrary, expressed the greatest 
detestation of it, and forbade it under the severest 
penalties: see Lev. xx. 1-5. The words are spoken 
by the figure called metosis, by which a great deal 
less is expressed than is implied ; a way of speaking 
frequent'in Scripture. Thus, Deut. xvii. 3, God, 
speaking of the worship of the host of heaven, adds, 
Which I have not commanded, meaning, which I 
expressly forbade. So God, reproving the idolatry 
of the Jews, says, Isa. Ixv. 12, They choose things 
wherein I delighted not, that is, which I utterly ab- 
horred.. And Jeremiah (chap. ii. 8) calls, idols, 
things that do not profit, meaning, that their wor- 
ship was not only insignificant, but likewise ex- 
tremely wicked and destructive. Thus St. Paul 
expresses the vilest sins, by calling them things 
which are not convenient, Rom. i..28. 

Verses 32-34. It shall be no more called Tophet, 
but The valley of Slaughter—King Josiah first of all 


| defiled this place, as the text speaks, 2 Kings xxili. 


10; that-is, polluted it by burying dead bodies in it, 
by casting filth into it, and scattering there the dust 
and ashes of the idols which he had broken to pieces 


and burned. And afterward, when great numbers 


died in the siege of Jerusalem, and the famine ‘that 

followed upon it, it beeame a common burying- place 

of the Jews: see chap. xix. 6. _Whereby was ful- 
359 


Even the dead . 


JEREMIAH. 


shall be disturbed. 


Ao aus. 34 Then will I cause to ‘ cease from’ 
——___—. the cities of Judah, and from the streets 


of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice 
‘i 


f Isa. xxiv. 7,8; Ch. xvi. 9; xxv. 10; xxxiii.11; Ezek. xxvi.13; 


filled that prophecy of Ezekiel, chap. vi. 5, I 
will lay the dead carcasses of the children of Is- 
rael before theiridols. They shall bury in Tophet 
till there be no place—Till it be entirely filled, and 
there be no vacant place left. The Vulgate reads. 
this clause, “'They shall be buried in Tophet, because 
there shall be no place,” which reading Houbigant 
approves. “The time shall come when there shall 
be so great a slaughter in Jerusalem, that, the graves 
being insufficient to bury the dead, they shall be 
forced to throw them into Tophet, and leaye them 
without interment. This prediction received its last 
and perfect completion in the war of Nebuchadnez- 
zar against the Jews, and that of the Romans against 
the same people. Josephus informs us, that in this 
latter war an infinite number of dead bodies were 
thrown over the walls, and left in the valleys round 
the city; insomuch, that Titus himself, beholding 


of gladness, the voice of the bride- A.M. ose. 
groom, and the voice of the bride: ———-~ 


for & the land shall be desolate. 


Hos. ii. 11 ; Rev. xviii. 23.8 Lev. xxvi. 33; Isa. i. 7; iii. 26. 


this spectacle, could not help lifting up his hands to 
heaven, and calling God to witness that he had no 
part in these inhuman practices.” In chap. xix., 
Jeremiah “repeats the same threatenings with more 
latitude and force; declaring that Tophet shall be- 
come the lay-stall of Jerusalem, and that Jerusalem 
herself shall be reduced to the condition of Tophet; 
that is.to say, polluted and filled with dead bodies.” 
And in chap. xxxi. 40, he calls it the valley of the 
dead bodies. Then will Icause to cease the voice 
of mirth, &c.—All kinds and degrees of mirth shall 
cease, all places shall be filled with lamentation and 
wo, their singing shall be turned into sighing, and 
they shall lay aside all things. that are for the com- 
fort of human society. The voice of the bridegroom, 
and the voice of the bride—Persons will have no en- 
couragement. to marry when they see nothing but 
ruin and desolation before their eyes. 


it 


. CHAPTER. VILL. | 
The prophet proceeds in this chapter both to magnify and to justify the destruction that God was bringing upon his people ; 


to show how grievous it would be, and yet how righteous. 


(1,) He represents the judgments coming as being so very ter- 


rible, that, notwithstanding the infamy of their dead bodies being given to the fowls and beasts, many would prefer death to 


life, 1-3. 


(2,) He shows the astonishing stupidity and obstinacy of this people, who neither regarded God’s 


acles, pro- 


vidences, nor their own consciences, but, an the face of desolating judgments, persisted in their wicked practices, without 
fear or shame, 4-12. (8,) He describes the great confusion and consternation into which the invasion of the Chaldeans 
would throw the whole land, 13-17. (4,) The prophet himself bitterly bewails their miserable and hopeless state, 18-22. _ 


A. M. 3404. 


that time, saith the Lorn, the 
B. C, 600. At 4 eal 


~~ shall bring out the bones of the 
kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, 
and the-bones of the priests, and the bones of 
the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants 
of: Jerusalem, out of their graves: 

2 And they shall spread them before the sun, 


and the moon, and all the host of A.M. 3404. 
heaven, whom they have loved, and ———— 
whom they have served, and after whom they 
have walked, and whom they have sought, and 
“whom they have worshipped: they shall not 
be gathered, » nor be buried; they shall be for 


° dung upon the face of the earth. 


a2 Kings xxiii. 5; Ezek. viii. 16.——> Chap. xxii. 19. 


¢2 Kings ix. 36; Psa. Ixxxiii. 10; Chap. ix. 22; xvi. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. ‘ 

Verses 1, 2: At that time, &c.—The first three 
verses of this chapter properly belong to the pre- 
eeding, and ought not to have been separated from 
it. They shall bring out the bones of the kings of 
Judah—* The Chaldeans shall regard neither the 
living nor the dead. They shall put the living to 
death without remorse; and shall break open and 
defile the tombs of the dead, in hopes of findin 
riches deposited there. They shall cast them out of 
their sepulehres, and leave them upon the ground, 
without staying to collect them together, and replace 
them.” We learn from Josephus ( Antiq., lib. 7, cap. 

360 


ult.) that King Solomon laid up vast treasures in his 
father’s sepulchre, which remained untouched till 
the pontificate of Hyrcanus, who, on a public emer- 
gency, opened one of the cells, and took out at once 
three thousand talents of silver. And afterward 
Herod the Great opened another cell, out of which 
he also took considerable wealth. That it was no 
uncommon practice at the sacking of cities to open 
the monuments of the great, and scatter their bones 
abroad without concerning themselves to cover them 
again, the learned reader may see in Horace’s 16th 
Epod.1.13. And they shall spread, or expose, them 
before the sun and the moon, &c.—The tals which 


The prophet reproves the people 


CHAPTER VIII. 


for their persevering transgressions. 


A. M. 3404. 3 And ‘death shall be chosen ra- 
———— ther than life by -all the residue of 
them that remain of this‘ evil family, which 


remain in all the places whither I have driven. 


them, saith the Lorn of hosts. 

4 S| Moreover, thou shalt say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lorp ; Shall they fall, and not 
arise? shall he turn away, and not return ? 

5 Why then is this people of Jerusalem ° slid- 
den back by a perpetual backsliding? ‘they 
hold fast deceit, § they refuse to return. 


6 *Thearkened and heard, but they saneaes 
spake not aright: no mian repented __——— 
him of his wickedness, saying, What have I 
done? every one turned to his course, as the 
horse rusheth into the battle. 

7 Yea, ithe stork in the heaven knoweth her 
appointed times ; and * the turtle, and the crane, 
and the swallow, observe the time of their 
coming ; but 'my people know not the judgment 
of the Lorn. 7 

8 How do ye.say, We are wise, ™ and the law 


4 Job iii. 21, 22; vii.ll5, 16; Rev. ix. 6. e Chapter vii. 24. 
£ Chap. ix. 6.——£ Chap. v. 3. 


they have worshipped, but which shall not be able 
to help them in their misery. Whom they have 
loved, served, walked after, sought, worshipped— 
The prophet multiplies words to express their extra- 
ordinary zéal in the service of their idols, and to 
ridicule the folly and madness of their idolatry. And 
they shall not be gathered, &t.—The bones which 
shall be thus scattered about shall not be gathered 
again, or laid up in their sepulchres. 

Verse 3. And death shall be chosen rather than 
life—Not through a lively and well-grounded hope 
of happiness in another life, but through an utter 
despair of any ease in this life. It denotes’the ex- 
tremity of misery, when men have no comfort left 
wherewith to alleviate their calamities, or ‘render 
their lives tolerable. This appears by the next 
words to be spoken chiefly of the miseries which 
those should suffer who should survive the siege, 
and either flee or be carried captive into divers 
countries 

Verses 4-6. Moreover, thou shalt say, &c.—The 
prophet is here directed to set before the Jews the 
unreasonableness and folly of their impenitence, 
which was the thing that brought this ruin upon 
them. And he represents them as the most stupid 
and senseless people in the world, that would not be 
made wise by any of the methods which infinite 
wisdom took to bring them to aright mind. Thus 
saith the Lord, Shall they fall and not arise?—If 
men happen to make a false step and fall to the 
ground, do they not endeavour immediately to rise 
again?. Shall he—Shall.any traveller; turn away 
—Namely, out of his right road, and. not return into 
it when he is informed of his error? Why then is 
this people slidden back by a perpetual backsliding ? 
—Having fallen into sin, why do they not endeavour 
to rise again by repentance? Having missed their 
way, and being clearly shown that they have, why 
do they not correct their error and return into it? 
It is “an expostulation,” says Lowth, “implying that 
men are seldom so far gone in wickedness as not to 
be touched with some remorse: for their evil doings, 
and make some general resolutions of aniendment:” 


but the Jews were “guilty of one perpetual apos- 


' tacy, as if they could deceive God by their hypo- 

critical pretences, without taking: any steps toward 

a reformation.” They hold fast deceit, they refuse 
3 


threatened judgments. 


h2 Pet. iii. 9.——i Isa. i. 3-——* Cant. ii. 12.——! Chap, v. 4, 5. 
m Rom. ii. 17. 


to return—They have turned aside into a false way, 
away in which they promise themselves prosperity, 
but which will bring them to ruin; their error is 
demonstrated to them, and yet they refuse to relin- 
quish it: they hold it fast, and proceed forward to 
destruction: I hearkened and heard, &c.—These 
also are the words of .God, expressing himself after 
the manner of men, who are wont to look and listen 
diligently after the things they are very desirous of. 
Thus God represents himself as waiting and look- 
ing continually to see marks of the people’s repent- 
ance, that he might show them mercy, and avert his 
But they spake not aright 
—I neither heard'a word nor saw an action which 
manifested any sorrow for their apostacy, or any in- 
clination to return to their duty and allegiance. No 
man repented him, saying, What have I done ?— 
None of them did so much as take the first step to- 
ward repentance; they did not even examine into 
their conduct, and call themselves to an account for 
their actions. Every one turned to his course, &e. 
—Proceeded on in his accustomed way, committing 
all wickedness without restraint. p 

Verse 7. Yea, the stork knoweth her appointed 
times—Of going and returning; the turtle and the 
crane, &c., the time of their coming—The proper 
season for changing their climate. Taught by natu- 
ral instinct, they change their quarters as the temper 
of the air alters, removing to a warmer climate when 
the winter approaches, and returning when the 
spring comes on; but my people knew not the judg- 
ment of the Lord—Understand neither their duty 
nor their happiness; they apprehend not the mean- 
ing either of God’s mercies or judgments, nor how 
to accommodate themselves to either so as to answer 
God’s intention therein. They know not how to 
improve the seasons of grace which God affords 
them when he sends them his prophets; nor how 
to make use of the rebukes they are under when 
his voice cries in the city. They discern not the 
signs of the times, (Matt. xvi. 3,) nor are aware how 
God is dealing with them, They know not the law 
which God has preseribed them, though it be written 
both in their hearts and in their books. 

Verse 8. How do ye say, We are wise?—As if he 
had said, These things considered, where is your 
wisdom? you see the very fowls of the air are not 

361 


Judgments threatened 


JEREMIAH. 


A. ‘ pony of the Lorn és with us? Lo, certainly 
: ‘in vain made he 2; the pen of the 
scribes és in vain. 

9 » The? wise men are ashamed, they are dis- 
mayed and taken: lo, they have rejected 
the word of the Lorn ; and *? what wisdom zs 
in. them ? 

10. Therefore ° will I give their wives unto 
others; and their fields to them that shall in- 
herit them: for every one from the least even 
unto the greatest is given to ? covetousness, from 
the prophet even unto the priest every one deal- 
eth falsely. 


11 For they have “healed the hurt of the’ 


daughter of my people slightly, saying, * Peat. 
peace; when there is no peace. 


12. Were they ‘ashamed when they A. ahs 3404, 


upon the _— 


600. 
had committed abomination ?. nay, 


they were not at all ashamed, neither could 
they blush: therefore shall they fall among them 
that fall: in the time of their visitation they, 
shall be cast down, saith the Lor, 

13 %4I will surely consume them, saith the 


Lorn: there shall be no grapes * on the vine, - 


nor figs on the " fig-tree, and the leaf shall fade; 
and the things that I have given them shall. 
pass away from them. 

14 Why do we sit still? * assemble at roa 
and let us enter into the defenced. cities, and let 
us be silent there: for the Lorp. our God hath, 
put us to silence, and given us ¥ water of ° gall to 
drink, because we have sinned against the Lorp. 


1 Or, the false pen of the scribes worketh for falsehood, Isa. x. 1. 
0 Chap. vi. 15. 2 Or, Have the been ashamed, &c. 3 Heb. 
the wisdom of what thing. eut. xxviii. 30 ; Chap. vi. 12; 
Amos v. 11; Zeph. i. 13.——P rice Ivi. 115 Chap. vi. 13. 


4 Chap. vi. 14.——" Ezek. xiii. 10——s Chap. iii. 3; vi. 15. 
*Or, in gathering I will consume. t Isa_.v. }, de. 5 Joel i. 7. 
wMatt. xxi. 19; Luke xiii. 6, &c.——* Chap. iv. 5—— Chap. 
ix. 15; xxiii. 15. © Or, ‘poison. . 

a 


so stupid as you are. He speaks not merely to the 
princes and priests, but to the whole body of the 
people. And the lawof the Lord is with us—They 
were wont to boast much of the law, as well as of 
the temple, chap. xviii. 18; Rom. ii. 17-23. Lo, 


certainly in vain made he it--For any use you} 


make of it, you might as well have been without it. 
As if he had said, It is to no purpose for you to boast 
of your wisdom and skill in the knowledge of God’s 
law, if you do not govern your lives by its direc- 
tions; otherwise it was written and delivered to you 
in vain. Zhe pen of the scribes is vain—Neither 
need it ever have been copied out by the scribes. 
“The title of scribe, as applied to the skill of tran- 
scribing or interpreting the law, is first given,” in 
the Scriptures, “to Ezra, (Ezra vii. 6,) who was not 
merely a copier of the law, but likewise an explainer 
of the difficulties of it, Neh. viii. 1-13; and it is 
likely none made it their business to write copies of 
the law but those who were well versed in the study 
of it, which would best secure them from commit- 
ting mistakes in their copies; hence the word, in the 
New Testament, signifies those who were learned 
in explaining the law, and answering the difficulties 
arising concerning the sense of it.”—-Lowth. 

Verse 9. The wise men are. ashamed—That is, 
they have reason to be so, who have not made a bet- 
ter use of their wisdom, and reduced their know- 
ledge to practice. They are confounded and taken 
—aAll their wisdom has not served to keep them 
from those courses that will issue in their ruin. 
They shall be taken in the same snares that others 
oi their neighbours, who have not pretended to so 
much wisdom, are taken in, and filled with the same 
confusion. Those that have more knowledge than 
others, and yet provide no better than others for 
their own souls, have reason to be ashamed. They 
have rejected the word of the Lord—They would 
not be governed or re in their conduct by it, 

2 


would not act as it directed them, nor comply with 
their duty as there set forth ; and what wisdom is in 
them?—None to any purpose: none. that will yield: 
them comfort in life, support in death, or boldness at 
the day of final accounts: none that will be found: 
to their praise. when God shall bring every work 
into judgment, how much soever it may exalt them 
in their own opinion in the present world. 

Verses 10-12. Therefore will I give their wives 
unto others—See on chap. vi. 12; and their fields to 
them that shall inherit, or possess, them—For the 
word inherit is sometimes taken for any sort of pos- 
session. See Psa. xxxii. 8. So Israel is called the 
Lord’s inheritance, chap. x. 16, and elsewhere. The 
expression, however, implies that their fields should 
not only be taken possession of by the victorious 
Chaldeans, should be ravaged and stripped of their 
crops and cattle, but that these their enemies should 
possess their fields as their own, and acquire a pro- 
perty in them which they should transmit to their 
posterity. For every one is given. to covelousness, 
&c.—For the elucidation of this and the two follow- 
ing verses, see notes on chap. vi. 13-15. 

Verse 13. There shall be no grapes on the vine— 
A figurative expression, to signify that there should 
be none of them left. And the leaf shall fade, &c. 
—As both leaves and fruit wither and fade when a 
tree is blasted or killed, so will I utterly deprive this 
people of all the blessings Thad given them, of those 
which are for use, as well as those which are for, 
ornament. 

Verses 14,15. Let us enter into the defenced cities 
—In these verses the prophet seems to turn to and 
address his countrymen by way of apostrophe ; and, 
as one of the people that dwelt in the open towns, . 
advises those that were in the like situation to retire 
with him into some of the fortified cities, and there 
wait the event with patience ;*since there was no- 
thing but terror abroad, and the noise of the enemy 

3 


Judgments threatened 


—_ fe 15 We 7 looked for peace, but no 

—__— good came’; and for a time of health, 
and behold, trouble ! 

16 The snorting of his horses was heard from 
* Dan; the whole land trembled at the sound 
of the neighing of his ’strong ones: for they are 
come, and have devouted the land, and ° all that 
is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein. 

17 For -behold, I will send serpents, ‘cocka- 


CHAPTER VIII. 


upon the people. 
ee 


trices, among you, which will not be A. * ae 
* charmed, and they shall bite you, Boh 
saith the Jinan 

18 7 When I would cotaftint m 
sorrow, my heart zs faint 7in me. 

19 Behold the voice of the cry of the daugh- 
ter of my people * because of them that dwekt 
in “a far country: 2s not the Lorp in Zion ? 
is not her King in her? Why have they ° pro- 


If against 


% Chap. xiv. 19. 
® Heb. the fulness thereof. 


a Chap. iv. 15.—— Judg. v. 22; Ch. xlvii. 3. 
¢ Psa. lviii. 4,5; Eccles: x. 11. 


who had already begun to ravage the country. By 
this the prophet signifies, that when the Chaldeans 
should come, there would be no hope of safety left 
but in fleeing to fortified places, and that none would 
dare to stay in'the open-country. He speaks of the 
thing as already present, because it was soon to hap- 
pen, and it was represented to him, in his vision, as 
already present. Lét us be silent there, for the Lord 
hath put us to silence—This may mean, that God 
had suffered the forces of the king of Judah to be so 
diminished that they were not able to defend the 
country and open towns, but must of necessity keep 
themselves cooped up in their fortified cities, and 
leave the country to be ravaged everywhere by the 
Chaldeans. And given us water of gall to drink— 
Hath brought us into grievous calamities for the 
punishment of our sins. We looked for peace—We 
were willing to believe the false prophets, who fore- 
told prosperous times. Fora time of health—Or, 
for a time in which we should be cured ; that is, for 
a time of peace, in which we might recover our 
strength. 

Verse 16. The snorting of his horses was meen 
from Dan—Dan was situated in the northern ex- 
tremity of Palestine, on the side whence the Chal- 
deans were to come against Jerusalem. Accordingly, 
Grotius observes, after Jerome, that Nebuchadnezzar, 
having subdued Phenicia, passed through the tribe 
of Dan in his way to J udea: When the enemy 
therefore was advanced so near, it was time for the 
people of Judah to take the alarm, and to provide for 
their own safety. The whole land, trembled ut the 
neighing of his strong ones-—-The word 1 72x, here 
rendered strong ones, signifies horses in, several 
places, and is so rendered here by Dr. Waterland, 
(see Judges v. 22; chap. x!vii. 3,) and is so under- 
stood by the LXX. By the whole land trembling 
is meant the inhabitants, being terrified at the vast 
number of horses that were in the Chaldean army, 
the neighing of which they heard; which struck 
them with great dread, as they had few or no horses 
in Judea to oppose tothem. For they have devoured 
the land, and all that is in it—All the fruits, and 
all the forage, they have devoured or taken away. 
It is to be observed, that the prophet speaks of it as 
already done, because it was so represented to him 
in his vision, The city, and those that dwell therein 
—Both town and country are laid waste before them, 


and not only the wealth, but the inhabitants of both |, 


3 


i 


® Heb. because of the country of them that are far 


j eet li 
4 Isa. xxxix. 3. © Deut. xxxii..21; Isa. i. 4. 


are taken or destroyed. Jerusalem is here chiefly 
meant by the city, for, though the taking of other 
cities was attended with a slaughter of the inhabit- 
ants, the sacking of Jerusalem was the greatest of 
all their calamities, as being the metropolis, and the 
richest and most populous of all their cities. 

Verse 17. For behold, I send serpents, §c., which 
shall not be charmed—Such enemies as you shall 
not be able.to soften by any entreaties you can use. 
That some persons possessed ‘the faculty of render- 
ing serpents harmless, is a fact too well attested by 
historians and travellers to admit of contradiction : 
but by what means this effect was produced is not 
quite so clear. Pliny speaks of certain herbs w hich, 
being carried about, prevented the bite of serpents, 
Nat. Hist., lib. xx. sec. 16, lib. xxii. sec. 25. Others 
tell surprising, but not altogether incredible stories, 
of the influence of musical sounds. See Shaw’s 
Travels, p. 429; and Sir John Chardin’s MS., cited 
by Harmer, chap. viil. 14. In this same MS. the 
author remarks, that “those who know how to tame 
serpents by their charms are wont commonly to 
break out their teeth; and supposes this to be alluded 
to, Psa. lviii. 6, Break their teeth, O God, in their 
mouths.” But whatever were the methods com- 
monly practised to charm serpents, the enemies of 
the Jews.are here compared to such serpents as were 
not to be mollified nor disarmed by any of those 
means. They shall bite you, saith the Lord—Ses 
Blaney, and note. on Psa. Iviii. 5. 

Verses 18, 19. When I would comfort myself, &c. 
—‘When I would apply comfort to: myself, my 
heart misgives me: I find great reason for my fears, 
and none for my hopes.” Blaney translates the 
verse, sorrow is wpon me past my remedying ; my 
heart within me is faint. They seem to be the 
words of the prophet, who had endeavoured to com- 
fort himself in his trouble by acquiescing in the will 
of God; but the miseries coming on his countrymen 
continually occurring to his mind in all their hor- 
rors, and aggravations, deprived him of all comfort, 
and rendered him inconsolable. Behold the voice 
of the cry—The bitter cries and lamentations, which 
methinks [hear ; of the daughter of my people—To 
whose welfare I cannot be indifferent ; because of 
them that dwell in a far country—Namely, their 
enemies the Chaldeans, who were coming against 
them. But the words may be rendered more agree- 
ably to the Hebrew thus, The voice of the cry of the 

363 


The prophet laments the fate 


A. M. 3404. yoked me to anger with their graven 
— images, and with strange vanities ? 

20 The harvest’ is past, the summer is ended, 
and we are not saved. ~ 


JEREMIAH. 


of the daughter of his people. 


at 


ple am I hurt; I am £ black; asto- A.M, 3404. 
nishment hath taken hold on me. ——1— 

22 Is there no * balm in Gilead ; is there no 
physician there? why then is not'the health of 
the daughter of my people * recovered? 


_ 


21 ‘For the hurt of the daughter of my peo- 


£ Chap. iv. 19; 


—. 


ix. 1; xiv. 17.—8 Joel ii. 6; Nah. ii. 10. 


b Gen. xxxvii. 25; xliii. 11; Ch. xlvi..11; li. 8- 


9 Heb. gone up. 


daughter of my people from a land afar off. Com- 
pare Isa. xxxiii. 17, where the phrase in the original, 
Mm pn ys, is the same. Thus interpreted, the 
words express the doleful complaints of the Jews-in 
their state of captivity, as if God had quite forsaken 
and disowned them. In this light many commenta- 
torsunderstand the prophet. He “anticipates,” says 
Blaney, “in his imagination, the captivity of his 
countrymen in Babylon, @ far country ; and repre- 
sents them there as asking, with a mixture of grief 
and astonishment, if there was no such being as 
Jenova, who presided i in Zion, that he so neglected 
his people, and suffered them to continue in such a 
wretched plight. Upon this complaint of theirs, 
God justly breaks in with a question on his part, and 
demands why, if they acknowledged such a protect- 
or as himself, they had deserted his service, and by 
going over to idols, with which they had no natural 
connection, had forfeited all title to his favour.” 
Why have they provoked me to anger?—Some 
translators, to render the sense more evident, supply 
here the words, satth God ; for it is evident that it is 
God, and not the prophet, who speaks here, telling 
them that their sins were the cause of his for- 
saking them; and that as they provoked him to 
anger by their idolatries, so he would no longer 
defend them. 

Verse: 20. The harvest is past, &c.—Here the 
prophet speaks again in the name of the people, or, 
rather, represents the people besieged in Jerusalem 
complaining on account of the length of the siege. 
Their false prophets had amused them with vain 
hopes of deliverance, and they had expected the 
Egyptians to come to their relief; but now the 
harv est and the summer were past, and yet there was 
no appearance of succour or deliverance coming to 
them. Jerusalem began to be besieged in the winter 
of the year, but was not taken till the end of the 
summer of the following year, 

Verses 21, 22. For the hurt of the daughter of my 
people am I hurt, &c.—These are the words of the 
prophet, lamenting the miserable condition of his 
country. ‘The Hebrew is more literally rendered, 
For the breach of the daughter of my people am I 
broken, that is, heart-broken: or, as Houbigant ren- 
ders it, J am wounded with the wound of my people, 
Iam black—I look ghastly, as those who are dying. 
Astonishment hath taken hold on me—I am so stupi- 
fied that I know not what to do, or which way to 

364 


turn. Js there no balm in Gilead—Balm, or r bal: 
sam, is used with us as a common name for many 
of those oily, resinous substances, which flow spon- 
taneously, or by incision, from certain trees or plants, 
and are of considerable use in medicine and surgery, 
being good, as physicians inform us, to soften, as- 
suage, warm, dissolve, cleanse, dry up, and purge. 
The Hebrew word here used, 8, is rendered by the 
LXX., pyri, and interpreted resin by the ancients 
in general. For this balm, resin, or turpentine, as 
the word might be rendered, Gilead was famous 
from very ancient times. See Gen. xxxvii. 25, 
where we find Joseph was sold to Ishmaelite mer- 
chants, who came from Gilead, and carried it, with 
sweet spices, into Egypt. This made many physi- 
cians and surgeons to resort to Gilead. "The prophet 
applies this metaphorically to the state of the Jews, 
which was all over corrupted, (compare Isa. i. 6,) and 
represents God: as asking whether there have been 
no methods used to heal these mortal wounds and 
distempers ? or, if there have, how it comes to pass 
they should have so little success? As if he had 
said, Whence comes it that the wounds of my peo- 
ple have not been healed and closed? Have means 
of healing been wanting? Spiritual medicines or 
physicians? Have I not sent you prophets, who 
have admonished, warned, and instructed you? 
Have I not given you time, and furnished you with 
helps sufficient to enable you to return to your duty ? 
Why then are not your spiritual disorders cured ? 
Doubtless it is your own fault: it is because you 
would not make use of the remedies provided, nor 
follow the prescriptions of the physicians. Thus we 
may apply the words spoken concerning Babylon, 
chap. li. 9, to the present case: we would have healed 
Babylon, but she is not, or rather, she would not, be 
healed. 'The words may likewise be understood of 

a temporal deliverance. As if he had said, Is this 
people so forsaken both of God and men, that there 
is no remedy left to effect their deliverance? Are 
there no salutary means within reach, or no persons 
that know how to apply them, for the relief of my 
country from those miseries with which it is afflicted ? 
Observe, reader, if sinners die of their wounds, their 
blood:is upon their own heads. The blood of Christ 
is balm in Gilead, his Spirit is the physician there: 
both are sufficient, all-sufficient, to effect a perfect 
cure; so that they might have been healed, but 
would not. 


in: ; 3 


The prophel’s lamentation 


CHAPTER IX. 


5) 
Sor the sins of the people. 


CHAPTER IX. 


: : : h : 
Jeremiah continues his lamentation over the Jews ; and, (1,) Expresses his-great grief for the miseries impe 
and his detestation of the sins which brought these miseries wpon them, 1-11. 


their approaching destruction, 9-16. 


over them, 


(2,) He justifies Godin the greatness of 


(3,) He calls upon others to lament their miserable condition, 17-22. (4, ) He shows 


them the folly and vanity of trusting in their own strength or wisdom, or the privileges of their circumcision, or any thing 


but God only, 23-26. 


A. M. 3404, 


; 8 T Uy 
HoC.600 THAT ®* my head were waters, 


ta Svinte a and mine eyes a fountain of tears, 
that I might weep day and night for the slain 
of the daughter of my people! 

2 O that I had in the wilderness ‘a lodging- 
place of wayfaring men; that I might leave 
my people, and go from them! for » they 


1 Heb. Who will give my head, &c. @Tsa. xxii, 4; Chap. iv. 
19; xill. 17; xiv. 17; Lam. ii. 11; ili. 48. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 

Verse 1. O that my head, &c.—The prophet sym- 
pathizes with the calamities of his people, as before, 
chap. i. 19; viii. 21; and thereby excites them to a 
sense of their own misfortunes, that they might 
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God. 
The passage is a fine instance of the pathetic, 
wherein Jeremiah so much excels.. That I might 
weep day and night for the slain, &c.—For the 
multitudes of his countrymen that he foresaw would 
fall by the sword of the Babylonians. When we 
hear of great numbers slain in battles and sieges, 
we ought not to make a light matter of it, but to be 
much affected with it; yea, though they be not of 
the daughter of our people—For of whatever people 
they are, they are of the same human nature with us; 
and there are so many precious lives Jost, as dear to 
them. as ours to us, and so many precious souls gone 
into eternity. 

Verse 2. O that I had in the wilderness, &e—- 
The prophet here wishes that he had alodging-place, 
or tent, such as travellers in this country were wont 
to lodge in when they travelled over the deserts, 
professing that he would rather pass his days in 
such a habitation in some desert place, than at Jeru- 
salem, which was filled with wicked men. That I 
may leave my people and go from them—Not chiefly 
beeause of the ill usage he met with among them, 
but rather because his righteous soul was vexed 
from day to day, as Lot’s was in Sodom, with the 
wickedness of their conversation, 2 Pet. iii.'7, 8. It 
made him evén weary of his life to see them disho- 
nouring God and destroying themselves. Time was 
when the place where God had chosen to put his 
name, there were the desire and delight’of good men. 
David, in the wilderness, longed to be again in the 
courts of God’s house; but now Jeremiah, in the 
courts of God’s house, (for there he was when he 
said this,) wishes himself in a wilderness! Those 
have made themselves very vile and very miserable, 
that have made God’s people and ministers weary 
of them, and desirous to get from among them. It 
may not be improper to observe here, that “ travel- 
lers in the East are not, nor ever were, accommo- 

3 


be all adulterers, an assembly of A Ae 
treacherous men. Reba 
3 And © they bend their tongues ike their 
bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the 
truth upon the earth; for they proceed from 
evil to evil, and they ‘know not me, saith the 
Lorp. 


¢ Psa. Ixiv. 3; Isa. lix. 4,13715—4 1 Sam. 
ii. 12; Hos. iv. 1. 


> Chap. v. 7, 8. 


aoe 


dated at inns on the road, after the manner of the 
European nations. In some places indeed there are 
large public buildings provided for their reception, 
which they call caravansaries; but these afford 
merely a covering, being absolutely without furni- 
ture; and the traveller must carry his own provisions 
and necessaries along with him, or he will not find 
any. Nor are even these empty mansions always 
jto be met with; so that if the weary traveller at 
night comes into a town where there is no caravan- 
sary, Or mavdoxe.ov, as it is called Luke x. 34, he 
must take up his lodging in the street, unless some 
charitable inhabitant will be pleased to receive him 
into his house, as we find Judg. xix. 15. And if he 
passes through the desert, it is well for him if he can 
light.upon a cave, or a hut, which some one before 
him may have erected for atemporary shelter. And 
this last is what I conceive to be here meant by 
Toms 1D, a solitary and not very comfortable 
situation, but yet preferable to the chagrin of living 


| continually in the society of men of profligate man- 


ners.”—Blaney. For they be all adulterers—The 
/expression seems here to be metaphorical, imply- 
‘ing that they were apostates from God, to whose 
/ service they were engaged by the most solemn cove- 
nant, like that which obliges a wife to be faithful 
to her husband. See note on chap. ii. 2; and com- 
pare Matt. xvi. 4; James iv. 4. 

Verse 3. They bend their tongues like their bow 
‘—With a great deal of craft, their tongues are fitted 
for lying, as a bow which is bent is for shooting. 
Thus the psalmist compares the tongue toa bow and 
words of calumny and falsehood to arrows, Psa. .x1v. 
3,4. But they are not valiant for the truth—They 
use their tongues in defence of lies rather than of 
the truths of God; and, in the administration of jus- 
tice, they have not courage to stand by an honest 
cause that has truth on its side, if greatness and 
power be on the other side. ‘Truth is fallen in the 
land, and they dare not lend a hand to help it up, 
| Isa. lix. 14,15. They proceed from evil to evil— 
From one sin to another, and from one degree of 
sin to another. They every day grow more bold in 
their wickedness, because they escape punishment: 

365 


A 


God’s judgments 


JEREMIAH. 


against Jerusalem. 


A. M. 3404. 


4 ° Take.ye heed every one of his 
B. C, 600. 


2 neighbour, and trust -ye not in any 
brother: for every brother will utterly sup- 
plant, and every neighbour will f walk with 
slanders. 

5 And they will ° deceive every one his neigh- 
bour, and will not speak’the truth: they have 
taught their tongue to eak lies, and weary 
themselves to commit iniquity. 

6 Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit ; 
through deceit they refuse to know me, saith 
the Lorp. 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
Behold, ¢ I will melt them, and try them ; * for 
how shall I do for the daughter of my people? 

8 Their tongue is as an arrow shot out ; it 


speaketh deceit : one speaketh * peace- A. M. 3404 
ably to his neighbouf With his mouth, Capi. 
but ‘in heart he layeth ° his wait. 

9 4 ' Shall I not visit them for na things 3 2 
saith the Lorn: shall not my soul be avenged 
on such a nation as this ? 

10 For the mountains will I take up a weep- 
ing and wailing, and ™ for the ® habitations of 
the wilderness a lamentation, because they are 
“burned up, so that none can pass through 
them; neither can men hear the voice of the 
cattle: ®both™ the fowl of the heavens and the 
beast are fled; they are gone. 

11 And I will make Jerusalem ° heaps; and 
Paden of dragons; and I will make the cities 


of Judah ° desolate, without an inhabitant. 


¢ Chap. xii. 6; Mie. viii 5, 6——? Or, friend —t Chap. vi. 
28. * Or, enock. & Isa. i. 25; Mal. ini. 3.—— Hos. xi. 8. 
1Psalm xii.2; cxx, 3; Verse 3. k Psalm xxviii. 3; 
4 Heb. in the midst of him. 5 Or, wait for him. 


Weeks 


1 Chapter v. 9, 29. Chapter xii. 4; xxiii. 10; Hos. iv. 3. 
S Os pastures. 7 Or, desolate. 8 Heb. from the fowl even to, 
4 Chap. iv. 25. ° Isaiah xxv. 2.——P Isaiah xiii. 22 ; 
taite, 13; Chap. x. 22. ® Heb. desolation. 


and they enrich themselves by their evil deeds, and 


so become formidable, defending and maintaining | 


their wickedness by fresh acts of wickedness. And 
they know not me, saith the Lord—And where men 
have not the true knowledge of God, what but evil 
can be expected from them? Observe, reader, men’s 
ignorance of God is the cause of all their bad con- 
duct one toward another. 

Verses 4-6. Take ye heed every one of his neigh- 
bour—Or, of his friend, as ny rather signifies; of 
him who pretends friendship to him, or whom he 
has befriended. And trust ye not in a brother— 
Against whom you must stand as much upon your 
guard as if you were dealing with a stranger, For 
every brother will utterly ‘supplant—Will deceive, 
overreach, and take all possible advantage of his 
nearest relation; and every neighbour—Or friend, 
rather, as before; will walk with slanders—Will 
not care what ill he says of another, though never 
so false. The Hebrew, 157° 5°35, is properly, will 
go about asa detracter, or calumniator, namely, 
carrying slanders with him from house to house. 
This is a strong description of the falsehood and 
calumny which universally prevailed among them. 
And weary themselves to commit iniquity—They 
are so inclined and enslaved to iniquity, that they 
not only commit it when they can do it easily, but 
when the commission of it is attended with difficul- 
ty; for they take more pains to carry on their ill 
designs than the practice of truth and integrity 
would cost them. Thy habitation is in the midst 
of deceit—-That is, all about thee are addicted to if, 
therefore stand upon thy guard. They are God’s 
words to the prophet. If all around us are false 
and deceitful, it conceris us to beware of them, and 
to be wise as serpents, T'hrough deceit they refuse 
to know me, saith the Lord—“The knowledge of 
God, which is true religion, is incompatible with the 
practice of any wickedness. And therefore it is 

366 


natural enough for those that are resolved at all 
events to abide in theirevil courses, to endeavour, if 
possible, to divest themselves of all religious princi- 
ples, which, if insufficient to restrain, will be sure at 
least to be very troublesome ‘to them. > 

Versés 7,8. Behold, I will melt them and try them 
—I will cast them into the furnace of affliction, that 
I may purify them from their dross. See note on 
chap. vi. 29, 30, and on Isa. i. 25. For how shall I 
do, &c.—I have tried all other means, and they have 
proved ineffectual. Their tongue is as an arrow, 
&c.—It was compared to a bow bent, verse 3, plot- 
ting and preparing mischief; here it is an arrow 
shot out, putting in execution what they had pro- 
jected. Dr. Waterland renders the words, as a 
sharp, or killing arrow; tt speaketh deceit—They 
speak what they do not mean, that they may more 
easily deceive the credulous: they speak fair when 
they mean to destroy, as the next words explain it. 

Verses 10,11. For the mountains will Itake up a 
weeping —“ These words,” says Houbigant, “as they 
now lie, must belong either to Jeremiah or the daugh- 
ter of Zion; and yet it follows in the next verse, 
And I will make, which are the words of God: 
therefore this verse should be rendered, by a slight 
alteration of the text, ‘Take ye up a weeping and 
wailing on the mountains, a lamentation in the dwell- 
ings of the wilderness; for they are desolate, be- 
cause there is no tr aveller; nor is the voice of cattle 
heard in them; both the ‘fowl of the heavens and 
the beast. are ‘fled? » The prophet laments that 
general desolation which he sees coming upon the 
whole land, and which would involve all the parts 
of it, both high and low, in one common destruction. 
Y will make Jerusalem "heaps—Of rubbish, and lay 
it in such ruins that it shall be fit for nothing but to 
be aden of dragons—Or serpents, as the word "In 
frequently signifies, or such creatures as are usually 
| found in ruins or desolate places. r 


ve 


> 


God’s judgments 


CHAPTER IX. 


against the Jews. 


A. M. 3404. 


q . ‘ 
B.C. 1% I 4 Who és the wise man, that 


may understand this? and who is he 
to whom the mouth of the Lorp hath spoken, 
that he may declare it, for what the land perish- 
eth and-is burned up like a wilderness, that 
none passeth through ? 

13 And the Lorp saith, Because they have 
forsaken my law which I set before.them, and 
haye not obeyed my vee: neither walked 
therein ; 

14 But have * walked after the? 10 jmagination 
of their own heart, and after Baalim, * which 
their fathers taught them : ; 


—_—— 


15 Therefore thus saith the Lorp A. en 
of hosts, the God of Israel ; Behold, 

I will ‘feed them, even has people, with 
wormwood, and give them water of _ gall to 
drink. 

16 I will * scatter them also among the hea- 
then, whom neither they nor their fathers have 
known :.¥ and I will send a sword after them, 
till I have consumed then 

17 4 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, Cpanies 
ye, and call for 7the mourning women, that 
they may come ; and send for cunning women, 


| that they may come : 


’ 4 Psalm evii. 43; Hosea xiv. 9.—r" Chapter iii. 17; vii. 24. 
‘°Or, stubbornness.——* Gal. i. 14. +t Psa. Ixxx. 5. 4 Chap. 
vill. 14; xxiii. 15; Lam, iii. 15, 19. 


Verses 12, 13. Who is the wise man—Or, Is there 
not a wise man, who understands this?—Is there 
none of you so well acquainted with the will of God 
and the methods of his providence, as to be able to 
declare the reasons why he has given such severe 
instances of his anger against this land? The ques- 
ion implies, that there are none, or very few, that 
consider common calamities in the cause of them, 
but rather impute the divine chastisements to chance, 
not seeing the hand of God in them. And the Lord 
saith, Because they have forsaken my law, &e.— 
Here God himself declares the reasons of his judg- 
ments by the mouth’of his prophet. 

Verses 15, 16. I will feed them, §c., with worm- 
wood—See on Deut. xxix. 18. The word rendered 
wormwood heré, it seems, had better be rendered 
wolfsbane, as signifying an herb which is not only 
“bitter and nauseous, but also noxious. And give 
them water of gall to drink—Or juice of hemlock, as 
some read it; some other herb that is poisonous as 
well as distasteful. By these expressions is signified 
not only a scarcity of meat and drink, but the most 
grievous calamities. I will scatter them also among 
the heathen—They have been corrupted by their in- 
timacy with heatheridolaters, with whom they min- 
gled themselves, and whose works they learned, and 
now they shall lose themselves among those through 
whom they lost their virtue. Whom neither they 
nor their fathers have known—They set up gods to 
worship, which they had not known, strange gods, 
new gods, Deut. xxxii. 17; and now God will scatter 
them among those people whom they had not known, 
those with whom they can claim no acquaintance, 
and from whom therefore they can expect no favour. 
The nations to the east, beyond the Euphrates and 
Tigris, seem to be chiefly meant here, whom the 
Jews knew little or nothing of before they were car- 
ried into captivity among them. And from that time 
to this the Jews have been scattered among those 
people. They are now also scattered through almost 
all the nations of the earth; so that this prophecy 
has received its full accomplishment in the most lite- 
ral sense; for they have indeed been scattered among 


x Lev. xxvi. 33; Deut. xxviii. 64.—Y Lev. xxvi. 33; fie: 
xliv. 27; Ezekiel Sar VX %2 Chron. xxxyv. 25 ; Job iii. 
Eccles. xii. 5; Amos v. 16; Matt. ix. 23. 


4 


those whom neither they nor their fathers had 


known. And what deserves highly to be remarked 
is, that among none of these nations have they at- 
tained to any share of supreme power, but have 
always lived among them upon courtesy or suffer- 
ance. And Iwill send a sword after them, &e.— 
A judgment threatened by Moses in case of their dis- 
obedience, Lev. xxvi. 23, and fulfilled upon several 
of the Jewish captives in Egypt and elsewhere. 
Verse 17. Consider ye, and call for the mourning 
women—Consider the evil'circumstances you are in, 
which call for mourning and lamentation: and since 
you yourselves are not sufficiently affected with the 
dangers that threaten you, send for those women 
whose profession it isto mourn at funerals, and upon 
other sorrowful occasions, and let their lamentations 
excite true sorrow in you. The prophet seems here 
to compare the Jewish state to a person dead, and 
going to be buried, and therefore calls upon the peo- 
ple to send for those who used to be hired to make 
lamentations and wailings at funerals. The reader 
will observe, “it was an ancient custom of the He- 
brews, at funerals, and on other like occasions, to 
make use of hired mourners, whose profession it Was 
to exhibit in public all the signs and gestures of im- 
moderate and frantic grief, and by their loud out- 
cries and doleful songs to excite a real passion of 
sorrow in others. Women were generally employed 
in this office, either because it was an office more suit- 
able to the softness of a female mind, or because the 
more tender passions being predominant in that sex, 
they succeeded better in their parts; nor were there 
ever wanting those artists well instructed in the dis- 
cipline of mourning, and ready to hire out their la- 
mentations and tearson any emergency. It was the 
chief éxcellence of other arts to ‘imitate nature ; it 
was likewise esteemed so in this; their funeral 
dirges, therefore, were composed in imitation of 
those which had been poured forth by genuine and 
sincere grief, Their sentences were short, queru- 
lous, pathetic, simple, and unadorned; somewhat 
laboured indeed, because they were composed in 
metre, and to be sung to the pipe, as we learn from 
367 


The vanity of trusting 


A. M. 3404. 


18 And let them make haste, and 
C. 600 


- take up a wailing for us, that *our 
eyes may run down with tears, and our eye- 
lids gush out with waters. 

19 For a voice of wailing is heard out of 
Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly con- 
founded, because we have forsaken the land, 
because ” our dwellin ve cast ws out. 

20 Yet hear the wo the Lorn, O ye wo- 
men, and let your ear receive the word of his 
mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and 
every one her neighbour lamentation. 

21 For death is come up into our windows, 
and is entered into our palaces, to cut off ° the 
children from without, and the young men 
from the streets. 


JEREMIAH. 


in aught but God. 


22 Speak, Thus: saith the Lorp, A.M. 3404. 
Even the carcasses of men shall fall 
4as dung upon the open field, and as the 
handful after the harvest-man, and none shall 
gather them. 

23 % Thus saith the Lorn, ® Let not the wise 
man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty 

man glory in his might, let not’ the rich man 
glory in his riches : 

24 But flet him that glorieth, glory in this, 
that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I 
am the Lorp which exercise. loving-kindness, 
judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: 
® for in these things I delight, saith the Lorn. 

25 | Behold, the days come, saith the Lorp, 
that I will punish all them which are cir- 


a Chap. xiv. 17. —— Lev. xviii. 28; xx: 22——¢ Chap. vi. 11. 
4 Chap. viii. 2; xvi. 4. © Eccles. ix. 11. 


£1 Cor. i. 31; ny: x. 17.——4 Mice. vi. 8; vii. 18.—_— Rom. 
i. 8, 9——"4 Heb. visit upon. 


Matt..ix. 23; and from Homer,” where, speaking of 
Hector’s funeral, he says, 


Tlapa & evoav aowdsc, 
Opnvav eLapyec, orTe covoeccar aodyy, 
Oc pev ap’ eOpynveor, emt de cevaxovto yuvatces. 


Iniap, 2. 720. 


A melancholy choir attend around, 

With plaintive sighs, and music’s solemn sound ; 
Alternately they sing, alternate flow 

Th’ obedient tears, melodious in their wo. 

See Pop's In., book xxiv. verse 900. 


Jerome tells us, in his comment on this verse, that 
the practice was continued in Judea down to his 
days; “That women, at funerals, with dishevelled 
hair, and naked breasts, endeavoured, in a modu- 
lated voice, to unite others in lamentation with 
them.” Frequent allusions to this custom are to be 
met with in Scripture, particularly 2 Chron. xxxv. 25, 
where the singing men and singing women are said 
to have made it a constant rule, after King Josiah’s 
death, to commemorate that excellent prince in all 
their future dirges or lamentations, as one in whom 
the public in general had sustained an irreparable 
loss. Such were the mourners, mentioned Eccles. 
xii. 5, and said to go about the streets; and those 
whom Amos calls, nN *y417, skilful of lamentation ; 
Amos v. 16. And such no doubt were the minstrels 
and the people making a noise, oxdov Sopvbsuevor, 
whom our Saviour found in the house of the ruler of 
the synagogue, whose daughter was just dead ; who, 
St. Mark says, wept and wailed greatly, «Aaovrag 
kat adadalovrac moAda, Mark y. 38. There are espe- 
cially several traces of this custom to be met with in 
the prophets, who frequently delivered their predic- 
tions of approaching calamities in the form of fune- 
ral dirges. The poem before us, from verse 19 to 
22, is both an illustration and confirmation of this, 
and worthy of the reader’s frequent perusal, on ac- 
368 


| cumcised in heart.” 


count of its affecting pathos, moral sentiments, and 
fine images; particularly in verse 21, where death 
is described in as animated a prosopopeia as can be 
conceived. See Lowth’s Prelec., Calmet, and Blaney. 

Verses 23, 24. Let not the wise man glory in his 
wisdom—Let not men value themselves on account 
of their wisdom, strength, or riches, which are things 
in themselves of a very uncertain continuance, aud 
such calamities are coming, (see verses 25, 26,) in 
which they will stand the owners of them in very 
little stead. The only true, valuable endowment is 
the knowledge of God, not as he is in himself, which 
is too high an attainment for poor mortals to pretend 
to, but with respect to his dealings with men; to 
have a serious sense of his mercies to the penitent, 
of his judgments to the obstinate, and of his truth 
and integrity, in making good his promises and 
threatenings to both. Itis in the exercise of these 
attributes God chiefly delights; and it is by these he 
desires to make himself known tothe world; and he 
that forms a just and lively apprehension of God, 
chiefly with regard to these his pérfections, will al- 
ways demean himself suitably toward him. Judg- 
ment and righteousness are often equivalent terms, 
but here the former seems to denote God’s severity 
against the wicked, and the latter his truth, justice, 
or holiness. See Lowth. -Upon the whole, all other 
wisdom is vain and dangerous, except that which 
has God himself for its object, and teaches us to de- 
spise ourselves, to be humbled beneath his mighty 
hand, and to glory in him alone. 

Verses 25, 26. Behold the days come, &e.—Blaney 
translates these two verses, “Behold, the days are 
coming, saith Jehovah, that I will punish all the ecir- 
cumcision with the uncireumcision ; Egypt, &e., and 
all those that have their coast insulated, those that 
dwell in the wilderness: for all the nations are 
uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel is uncir- 
The Greek word axpobvora, 
which properly means uncircumcision, is several 

3 


An earnest dissuasive from the 


CHAPTER. X. 


practice of heathen idolatry. 


AM, 3404, cumcised with the uncircumcised ; 
== 26 Egypt, and J Judah, and Edom, 


and the children of Ammon, and, Moab, and } 


all that are “in the * utmost corners, that 


— 


i = 


12 Heb. cut. off into corners; or, having the corners of ‘their hain 
polled. 


— 


dwell in the wilderness: for all these A. : Std. 
nations are: uncircumcised, and all = 
the house of Israel are | uncircumcised in the 
heart. 


——— 


k Chapter xxv, 23; six 32, ie, xxvi! 41; Ezek: xliv.'7; 
_Rom. ii. 28, 29, 


times used by St. Paul for the persons who are un- 
circumcised, as mepcroun, circumcision, is put for 
persons circumcised. See Rom. ii. 26, 27, and iii. 
30. Because the Jews valued themselves so much 
upon their eircumcision, God here: tells.them that, 
when he should send his judgments abroad into. the 
world, they should find nomore favour than those 
that were. not circumcised ; and, accordingly, in 
mentioning the heathen rations ‘whom he would 
punish, he places Judah among them, because. they 
were, in effect, uncircumcised as wellas the heathen, 
contenting themselves with the outward sign of cir- 
cumcision in the flesh, without seeking that internal 
cireumcision, which is of the heart and spirit, and 
the purification and holiness signified thereby. ‘By 
those that have their coast insulated, as Blaney ren- 
ders one of the clauses of verse 26, he supposes the 
Arabians are designed, which he thinks may be 
fairly concluded from the connection in which the 


same words, AND °yy¥p, stand with the context, in ! 


chap. Xlix. 32. Concerning the precise meaning, 
however, of these words, he justly observes, “ inter- 


as signifying persons ¢ 


preters ‘differ. very sroet gcd represent, them. 
~ other people, by 


being thrust into. a remote corner; in which light 


‘the translators of our Bible appear to have consider- 


ed them, when they rendered them in the text, All 
that are in the ulmost corners, and .in the margin, 
cut off into corners. But all the ancient versions 
understand them as expressing the peculiar manner 
in which the Arabians cut the hair of their heads or 
beards,” expressed also in otr marginal reading; 
which reading, Dr. Durel says, ought doubtless to be 
received into the text; the Arabs, who are meant, he 


| thinks, by this periphrasis, being accustomed to cut 


their hair. short, particularly about the crown of the 
head ; and in respect to their beards, leaving only a 
tuft of hair growing about their chins; a practice 
which was forbidder to the Jews, Ley. xix. 27. But 
itjseems much more probable that the words have a 
respect to the peninsular form of the country, sur- 
rounded on all sides by the sea, excepting only the 
isthmus to. the north; and thus almost insulated, or 
cut off, from any other land. 


\ 


CHAPTER X. 


The isiest part of this chapter contains an earnest dissuasive from the practice of heathen idolatry, setting forth the vanity 
of idols in comparison with. the true God, 1-16. . And this doubtless was designed by way of precaution to the Jews, 
against the time of their removal out of their own land, to dwell among idolaters, as. predicted, 17, 18. The prophet, in 
the name of Jerusalem, laments the completion “of her ruin, and humbly supplicates the intervention of God's mercy, 


19-26. 


A; M3404. FAR. ye the word which the Lorp 
Bae TN speaketh unto you, O house of 
Israel : 


— 


‘, 


2 Thus saith the Lorp, * Learn A. M, 3404. 
C. 600. 

not the way of the heathen, and 

be not ree A at the signs ‘of heaven ; for 


a Leviticus 


—— = 


xviii. 3; xx. 23, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X, 

Verses 1,2. Hear ye the word, &c,—The prophet 
continues his remonstrances and exhortations to Ju- 
dah. He said, at the conclusion of the preceding 
chapter, that the Lord would. punish, without dis- 
tinction, all the ungodly and unrighteous Jews, as 
wellas Gentiles. He here informs them that if they 
would avoid this vengeance of the Lord they must 
quit their idolatries and: other impieties, and have 
nothing to do with the superstitious practices of the 
Gentile nations... Learn not the way of the heathen 
—Their manner of life or customs. And be not dis- 
mayed at the signs of heaven—*'The Chaldeans, 
among whom the Jews were destined to live in cap- 

Vou. Tf. ( 24.) 


Blaney, 


tivity, were caaiitlaty addicted to astrology, and 
attributed to the heavenly bodies a considerable in- 
fluence over human affairs.. This naturally tended 
to beget a religious dread and awe of those objects, 
from whence so much good or evil was supposed 
to be derived, The sun, moon, and planets are said 
indeed to have been set in the ‘firmament Sor signs, 
Gen. i. 14, But hereby is meant, that they should 
serve, as natural marks, to distinguish, by their peri- 


odical revolutions and appearances, the various times 


and seasons; which, however, is a very different 
use from that of prognosticating future cxanlent or 
causing an alteration in the fortunes of men.” 


369 3 


The practice of 


JEREMIAH. 


idolatry ridiculed. 


T 

x. 3404. -the heathen ‘are dismayed at them. 

___._ 3 For the ‘customs of the people 
are vain: for .» one cutteth a tree out of the 
forest, the work of the hands of the workman, 
with the axe. ' 
_A They deck it with silver and with gold; 
they ° fasten it with nails and with. hammers, 
that it move not. ; 
‘5 They are uptight as the. palm-tree, ¢ but 
speak not: they must needs be ® borne, because 
they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for 


A. 
B. 


1 Heb. statutes, or, ordinances are vanity.— Isa. xl..19, 205 
xliv. 9, 10, évc.; xiv. 20. ¢ Isa. xli. 7; xlvi. 7.——4 Psalm 
exv. 53 exxxv. 16; Hab. ii. 19; 1 Cor, xii. 2. © Psa. cxv. 7; 
tsa. xlvi. 1, 7. 3 ' 


5 


‘they cannot do evil, neither also is A, M, 3404. 
it in them to,do good. 4 Fide 

6 Forasmuch’ as there is none ®like unto 
thee, O Lorn; thou art great, and thy name 
is great in might. 

7 » Who would not fear thee, O' King of ‘na- 
tions? for ?to thee. doth it appertain: foras- 
much as ‘among all the wise men of. the 
nations, and in all their kingdoms, there’is none 
like unto thee. — fit Partin Oe 

8 But they. are %altogether ‘brutish and 


f Isaiah .xli. 23——s' Exodus xv. 11; Psalm- Ixxxvi. .8, 10. 
h Revelation xv. 4. 2 Or, it liketh thee——i Psalm Ixxxix. 6. 
3 Heb. in one, or, at once. k Psalm. exv. 8; Isa. xli. 29; Hab. 
ii. 18; Zech. x. 25; Rom. i: 21, 22. 


.* 


Verses.3-5. One cutteth down a tree, &c.—The 
prophet here exposes the folly of men’s worshipping 
the work of their own hands, by arguments similar to 
those which are used by Isaiah, chap, xliv. 10-20; 
where see the notes. They are upright,&c.— They are 
likethe trunk of the palm-tree—Houb. “ They are in- 
flexible, immoveable, fixed, without action or motion, 
like the drunk of a tree: a comparison which ad- 
mirably suits the ancient statues. seen-in Egypt and 
elsewhere, before the art ‘of sculpture attained the 
perfection which it afterward did in Greece.”—Cal- 
met. Dr. Waterland’s translation of this verse is, 
They areof just proportion, as a pillar, but they 
speak not; carried they must be, for go they cannot. 
Be not afraid of them—They can do you no more 
harm than the signs.of heaven could do. The hea- 
then worshipped some idols in order that they might 
do them good, and others, that they might do them 
“no harm: but God tells them here, that as they can- 
not do evil, so neither és it in them todo good...See 
note on Iga. xli. 23... They can neither punish nor 
reward; they can neither hurt their enemies nor 
help their friends. | By this the true God will be dis- 
tinguished from idols, in that he alone can foretel 


things to come, and he alone can reward or punish. 


Verses 6, 7. Forasmuch as there is none like unto 
thee—This verse would be bétter rendered, O Lord, 
thou art.great, so that there is none like unto-thee, 
and thy name is great, because of thy might. Who 
would not fear thee?—Rather, who would not re- 
verence, or stand in awe of thee? | For to thee doth 
it appertain—That is, as some interpret the phrase, 
To thee dothit appertainto be fearedand reverenced ; 
:to thee fear and: reverence are due. The Hebrew, 
however, may be rendered, Who would not fear thee 
when he shall come, or draw near to thee? accord- 
ingly Blaney translates the verse thus: Who will 
not fear thee, O king of nations, when he shall ap- 
proach wnto thee? Forasmuch as among all the 
wisest of the nations, and in all theirtkingdoms, 
there is none like unto thee—On the clause; among 


the wisest of the nations, he observes, “'These words 
may signify, either all those nations which were 


most distinguished for the cultivation and improve- 


ment of their rational faculties; or else those sage 


370 


individdals among them, from whose learning and 
philosophy-some better notions of God and religion 
might have been expected than from the rude and 
illiterate vulgar. And yet the fact was, that all their 
boasted wisdom and knowledge had failed of leading 
them to an object of worship, in any degree corre- 
sponding with the infinite perfections and majesty 
of the divine nature.” ; 

’ Verse.8. But they are altogether brutish—Or, alt 
alike brutish.. They that make images, saith the 
psalmist, Psa, exv. 8, are like unto them, equally stu- 
pid and insensible. "he. stock is a doctrine of vani- 
ties—Or lies. The use of images in worship is 
grounded on a false and foolish opinion, that God is 
like the work of men’s hands, and that images have 


} some divine power lodged within them, and in this 


opinion it has a direct tendency to confirm the igno- 
rant. Hence an image is called by Habakkuk, A 
teacher of lies. Instead of the stock, &c., Dr. Wa- 
terland reads, Vain institutions! very wood! Blaney, 
in consistency with his interpretation of; the 7th 
verse, given above, renders this, But they, when they 
approach, (namely, to worship,) are stupid. and sot- 
tish, the very wood itself being a rebuker of vanities. 
On which he observes, “The contrast is thus strong- 
ly marked between the true God; and the objects of 
heathen superstition. The servants of the former, 
when they approached him in their devotions, could 
not but be impressed with a reverential awe of a 
being so transcendently glorious. But those who 
drew near to worship the latter, manifested the 
greatest’ stupidity, in not discovering what was so 
obvious to common apprehension, the gross unwor- 
thiness of the objects to-;which their adorations were 
addressed.” On the: latter clause, The very wood 
itself, &c., he remarks, “'The true meaning and 
force of this passage seem to have escaped the notice 
of all. the commentators. 0%, (which our transla- 
tors render. doctrine,) properly signifies rectifying, 
or correcting, a false notion by just reproof; and 
by vanities are meant idols, so called from their 
being of no real use or advantage to those who had 
recourse to their assistance. And this unprofitable- 
ness of the idol, the very dull and senseless-matter, 
says the prophet, out of which it was formed, is ca- 
‘( 24" ) nt ge), 


A 


The message to the 


CHAPTER X. 


tdolatrous nations 


—t— 


A. M. 2404. foolish : 
B. C. 600. 

vanities. 
9 Silver spread into plates is brought from 


é 


Tarshish, and ! gold from Uphaz, the work of 


the workman, and of the hands of the founder: 
blue and purple is their clothing : oo are all 
* the work of cunning men. 

10. But the Lorn is the ‘ true God, hes is ° the 
living God, and an? everlasting ? King: at his 


the stock is a doctrine of 


wrath the earth shall tremble, and A. M..3404. 
the nations shall not be able to abide *% 
his indignation. 

11 ° Thus shall ye say unto them, ¢ The gods 


>) 
that have not made the heavens and the earth, 


even ‘they shall perish from the earth, and 
from under these heavens. 

12 He *hath made 
he hath * established tl 


oe earth by his power, 
ve world by his eee 


"Dan. x. 5.—— Psalm exv. i ——+ Heb. God of truth, Psalm 
xxxi. 5, o} Timothy vi. \17:-——8 Hebrew, King of eternity. 
P Psalm x. 16. 


,> 


pable of pte ASN But the. rebuke, strictly 
speaking, is not.directed to the idol, but to those who 
had not sense to perceive, that all the efforts of hu- 
man art could never change an inanimate log of 
wood into an animated being, possessed of power 

and intelligence far surpassing those of the person 
from whom its origin was derived. ‘There are, there- 
fore, an energy and pointedness in this short sen- 
tence, at least equal to whatever has been said on 
the same subject by the most spirited’ writer, 
whether sacred or profane. 
raillery of the Roman satirist in those, celebrated 
lines, olim truncus eram, &c., cuts with greater se- 
verity.” See note.on Isa, xliy. 12, &c. 

Verse-9. Silver spread into plates—To cover the 
images, and make them appear as if made of massy 
silver ; is brought from Tarshish—A port of Spain, 
to which the merchants of Tyre and Sidon traded ; 
of which place see note on Isa. ii.16, And gold from 
Uphaz—The Syriac, Chaldee, and Theodotion read, 
from Ophir, which Bochart supposes to -be here 
meant; namely, Ophir in India, near Zeilan; a place 
famous for gold.. Blue and purple are their clothing 
—“ The splendour and magnificence of dress seem, 
among the ancients, to have consisted very much in 
the richness of the colours; the art of dying which 
to perfection, was esteemed a matter of great, skill, 
being known and ‘practised by very few. The ex- 
cellence of the Tyrian purple is celebrated by both 
sacred and profane authors. And the blue, which 
from many passages of Scripture we find to have been 
in great request, was also imported from remote coun- 
tries-as an article.of elegant and expensive luxury.” 
They are all the work of cunning men— If, in the 
preceding verse, the. insignificance of the idols was 
argued from the vile and perishable matter out of 
which they were composed ; the same is inferred in 


this from their being indebted to the art and labour || 


of man for all their costly ornaments, their splendid 
outward show. In short, ‘he whole of them, says the 
prophet, internal and external, is the work of skilful 
men. Upon what ground then could the thing 
formed pretend to a nature nw»re excellent than its 
former ?”—Blaney. 

Verse 10. But the Lord—Hebrew, Jehovah, is the 
true God—A very different being from these idols: 
He ws the living God—Images are dead and sense- 
less things; but Jehovah is life itself, and the author 

. 8 : 


Not: even the keen 


| 


i 


a 


av 


6 In the’ Chaldean language.——1 Psa. xevi. 5: Verse 15; 
Isa. ii. 18; Zech. xiii. 2——* Gen, i. 1, 6,9; ees, CXXXV1. 5, 
6; Chap. ‘li, 15.——+t Psa. xeiii. 1. 


, 


and fountain of life and understanding; and. all 
creatures that. live, live in.and by him. And an 
everlasting King—The absolute monarch over all 
creatures, their owner and ruler, having an incon- 
testable right both to command and to dispose of 
them. >And the counsels of his kingdom were from 
everlasting, and the continuance of it will be to ever- 
lasting. He is the king‘of eternity. ‘The idols whom 
they call their kings’ are but of yesterday, and will 
soon be‘abolished ; and the kings of the earth, that . 
set them up to be worshipped, will themselves be in 
the dust shortly ; but the Lord shall reign for ever, 
thy God; O Zion, unto*all generations. 'At his 
‘wrath the earth shall tremble—Even the strongest 
and stoutest of the kings of the earth, nay, the earth 
itself, as firmly as it is fixed, when he pleases, is 
made to quake, and the rocks to tremble.’ “And the 
| nations, though they join together to contend with 
him, and unite their force against him, shall be found 
utterly unable, not only to resist, but even to abide 
his indignation. 

Verse 11. Thus shall ye say unto then—* This 
verse is in the Chaldee language, and it appears here 
as akind of parenthesis. Houbigant thinks that the 
most probable reason why it is here inserted in the 
Chaldee, and not in the Hebrew, is, that Jeremiah 
prescribes to the Jews what they shall answer in 
living among idolaters, and using the Chaldee lan- 
guage; hereby prescribing that they should be the 
captives of the Chaldees.”—Dodd. The gods that 
have not made the heavens and: the earth—And 
therefore they are no gods, but the usurpers of the 
-honour due to him only who did make them ; shall 
perish from the earth, &c.—Shall perish of course, 


because they are vanity, formed of ‘perishing mate- 
rials;‘and shall perish by his righteous sentence, 
because they are rivals with him who made all things, 
Here the prophet foretels that there’shall be a final 
period put to idolatry. God hath already blotted out 
the names of many of the heathen idols, as an ear- 
nest of the utter destruction of the-rest in his due 
time. 

Verses 12, 13. He hath made the earth, &c.--Here 
fullows a noble and lofty description of God’s power 
and providence, whéreby ke sets forth his infinite © 


pre-eminence above all the dead and senseless idols 

of the world.” When he uttereth his voice, &c.— 

When he gives the word of command, and signifies 
371 


The prophet laments 


A. M. 3404. and "hath stretched out the heavens 

B. C. 600 fl ip tieitlied 

by his discretion. 

13 * When he uttereth his voice, there is a 
7 multitude of waters in the heavens, and ¥ he 
causeth: the vapours to ascend from the ends 
of the earth; he,maketh lightnings ° with rain, 
and ‘br eves forth the wine out of his trea- 
sures. 

14 * Every man. °is S bratish in his rhe 
ledge: every founder is confounded by~ the 
graven image: ° for his molten image ?s false- 
hood, and there is no breath in them. 

15 They are vanity, and the work of errors: 
in the time of their. visitation ¢ they shall 
perish 


— 


2; Isaiah xl. 22.——* Job xxxviii. 34. 
7 Or, noise. y Psa, cxxxv..7. 8 Or, for rain.—— Chap. li. 
, 18. ° Or, is more brutish than ‘to know. a Prov. xxx. 2. 
bIsa. xlii. 17; xliv. 11; xlv. 16. ¢ Hab. ii..18.——4 Verse 11. 
e Psa. xvi. 55 "Ixxiii: 263 exix. 575 Chap. li.-19; Lam, iii. 24. 


u Job ix.8; Psalm civ. 


his will and pleasure: see Job xxxviii. 34. Or, when 
he sends forth his thunder, called in Scripture the 
voice of God, the clouds immediately precipitate in 
torrents of rain, which, coming upon the ground 
that was scorched with heat before, not only cools 
and refreshes it, but renders it fruitful in-all kinds of 
vegetable productions. He maketh lightnings with 
rain—And as he causes the vapours to ascend up in 
clouds from every quarter of the earth, so he joins 
two contrary things together, ordaining great flashes 
of lightning to break forth with the rain; the. latter, 
by its moisture, preventing the ill effects that might 
otherwise proceed from: the heat of the former. 
And bringeth forth the winds out of his treasures— 
As there is oceasion for them, directing them all in 
such measures, and for such uses, as he. thinks fit. 
In other words, “He makes great and mighty winds 
to come from unknown places and causes, as if he 
brought them out ofa hidden treasure, or.repository, 
where they had been laid up till he had occasion for 
them.”—Lowth. 

Verses 14, 15. Every man is brutish in his know- 
ledge—This i is spoken of the makers of idols, whose 
skilfulness as workmen made them foolish enough 
to attempt to make gods, and who afterward acted 
still more foolishly in worshipping them, when they 
knew they were but the work of their. own hands. 
The founder is confounded by the graven image— 
Or, ashamed, as w'37 signifies. For it can afford 
no ‘help, nor do any good, to those who worship it ; 
and therefore is a disgrace to the workman who 
pretends to make it a god, that could hear the prayers 
offered to it, and send help to its worshippers. His 
molten image is falsehood—That is, those are no 
less deceived who expect help. from a molten 


‘image, than they who expect it from a false, lying | 


man. . They are the work of errors—The making 

of them .is owing to men’s erroneous notions of 

the nature of God. Jn the time of their visitation | 
372 


JEREMIAH. 


* 


the ruin of Jerusalem. 


16 ° The portion, of Jacob is not so 3404, 
like them’: for he'is the former of all ——’—— 
things; and ‘ Israel is the rod of his inherit- 
ance: © 'The Lorp.of hosts is his name. » 

17 4 "Gather up ‘thy wares out of the land, 
O ?° inhabitant of the fortress. < . 

18 For thus saith the Lorp; Behold, I will 
‘sling out the inhabitants of the land at this 
once, and will distress them: that they may 
find it so. . 

~ 19° ! Wo is’ me for my hurt my, aourid is 
grievous : but I said, ™ Truly id is a . grief, 
and" I must bear it. 

20 ° My tabernacle is spoiled,’ ant all my 
cords are broken: my children are gone forth 


— 


f Deut. xxxii. 9; Psa, Ixxiv. 25 Isa. xlvii. 4; li. 15; liv. 
5; Chap. xxxi. 35; xxxii. 18; 1, 34-——» Chap. vi. r: Ezek. 
xii. 3.——!° Heb. inhabitress. 11 Sam. xxv. 29 ; Ch. xvi. 13. 
k Ezek. vi. 10,1! Chap. iv, 19; viii. 21; ix. 1—* Psalm 
Ixxvii. 10.— Mice. vii. '9.—— Chap. iv. 20. 


they shall perish—The, time will come when God 
will execute vengeance upon idolaters, and utterly 
destroy their idols. 

Verse 16. T'he portion of Facob is not like them 
—There is no ¢omparison between, senseless idols 
and the great Creator of all things, who has chosen 
the posterity of Jacob for his peculiar people, and 
has promised to be their God, and that they should 
always have an especial interest in his favour, if 


they continued steadfast in their worship-of, and 


obedience to, him. The rod of his inheritance—Is 
an expression taken from the first diyision of the 
land of Canaan, when.the inheritance of each tribe 
and family was meted out with a line or rod. 

Verses 17,18. Gather up thy wares, &c.—That is, 
as some explain it, “ Collect to Jerusalem-all that you 
have valuable in the country ; flee thither for refuge 
with your best effects; for the enemy will soon ex- 
tend himself over all your land, and render it deso- 
late.” - Or, rather, .the prophet, returning to. his 
former denunciations against Jerusalem, warns her 
to. move her effects, and prepare for going into cap- 
tivity ; for, though she thought herself secure, as 
dwelling in a place.of great-strength and well forti- 
fied, yet her enemies should prevail and take it: 
compare Ezek. xii. 3. Behold, I will.sling out the 
inhabitants..at this once—I will, at. one stroke, re- 
move the whole. body of this people out of their 
native country: see } Sam, xxv. 29. And. J will 
distress them that they may find it so—Or, that they © 
‘may find my threatenings to be true, This implies, 
that though they had been often saved by God’s 
providence from hostile attacks, they would, how- 
ever, on this occasion, find it otherwise. _ 

Verses 19, 20. Wo is me for my hurt—The pro- 
phet here again pathetically laments the overthrow | 


_ of his country,.and, either in his own person or in that 


of his country, bewails the plundering and-desola- 
‘tion of the cities and houses, as if they were so 
3 


e 


The way of man CHAPTER X. ts not in himself. 
4 i ee of me; and they are not: there is|| 22 Behold, the noise of the bruit is A. M, 3404. 


none to stretch forth my tent any 
more, and to set up my curtains. 

21 For the pastors are become, brutish, ail 
have not sought the Lorn: therefore they shall 
not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scat- 
tered. 


come, and a great commotion out of 


|| the ? north country, to make the cities of Faas 


desolate, and a 4 den of dragons. 

23 4 O Lorp, I know that the * way of man 
is not in himself: i¢ 2s not in man that walk- 
eth to direct his steps, 


P Chap. i. 15; iv. 6; v.15; vi 22. 


many shepherds’ tents, to which he compares-them, 
verse 20... But I said, This is a grief, and I must 
bear it—Blaney thinks the prophet here -suggests 
motives of patience and consolation to his country, 
in regard to the evils that were’ coming upon her, 
putting the words of this and the following verses 
into her mouth, and making her observe, first, That 
her affliction, though great, would yet be found tole- 


rable; secondly, That she had less reason to com- 


plain of what she suffered, as it was no other than 
might have been expected from the misconduct of 
those who had the direction of her affairs, verse 21; 
and, lastly, That she was not without hope in the 
mercy of God, who, upon the humble supplication of 
his people, might be moved to mitigate their chas- 
tisement, and to turn his hand against the heathen 
that oppressed them, verse 24. My children are 
gone from me, and are-not, &c.—My inhabitants 
are gone into ‘captivity,a and. will return hither no 
more, so that they are the 'same fo me as if they 
were dead. T'hereis none to set up my curtains— 
They will never be able to contribute any thing to 
the restoration of my former state. 

Verses 21, 22. For the pastors are become brutish 
—The prophet pursues the foregoing metaphor, and 
says, that the reason why the tents are destroyed, is 
because the shepherds, meaning the governors, both 
civil and ecclesiastical, had, like so many brute crea- 
tures, forgotten God ‘and ‘their dutyto him, and 
thereby engaged the people committed to_ their 
charge in idolatry, and in all manner of wickedness, 
which had ended in ruin to themselves and their 
flocks. And have not sought the Lord—Have nei- 
ther made their peace with him nor addressed their 
prayers to him; they have had no eye to him and 
his providence in their management of affairs, have 
neither acknowledged the judgment nor expected 
the deliverance to come from his hand. ~ Observe 
well, reader, those are brutish people that do not 
seek the Lord, that live without prayer and without 
God in the world: they are unworthy of the name 
of rational beings. But-the state of a people is in- 
deed deplorable when their pastors, that should feed 
them with knowledge and understanding, are them- 
selves thus brutish.. And what is the consequence ? 
Therefore they shall not prosper—None of their 
attempts for the publie safety shall succeed: . How, 
indeed, can those expect to prosper who do not take 
God along with them in their ways?- And when 
the pastors are brutish, what else can be expected 
but that all their flocks should be scattered ? for if 
the blind lead the blind both will fall into the ditch. 
Behold, the noise of the bruit is come—The word 

3 


4 Chap. ix. 1].——* Prov. xvi. 1; xx. 24, . 


bruit here signifies noise; or rumour, which is the 


meaning of the Hebrew, nyinw. “This is explained 
in the following clause .to be that of the tumultuary 
invasion of the country by the Chaldeans from the 
north, of which notice had been repeatedly given. 
Blaney translates the verse, Hark! a noise! Be- 
hold, it advanceth, even a great commotion from 
the north country. To make the cities of Judah a 
desolation, a dwelling-place for dragons. 

Verse 23. O Lord, I know, &e.—The prophet 
now turns to God, and addresses himself to him, 
finding it to little purpose to speak to ‘the people. 
It is some comfort to poor ministers, that, if men will 
not hear them, God will; and to him they have 
liberty of access at all times. Let them close their 
preaching with prayer, as the prophet here does, and 
then they will have no reason to complain that they 
have laboured in vain. That the way of man is not 
in himself—The prophet must here be considered as 
acknowledging the superintendence and dominion 
of the divine providence; that by it, and not by 
their own will and wisdom, the affairs both of na- 


tions and-particular persons are directed and govern- 


ed. His words in this verse, taken in connection 
with the following, may be thus paraphrased: Thy 
providence, O Lord, superintends all events; all 
that happens comes to pass through thy permission 
or appointment. It is not in man to hinder that 
which has been once resolved on in thy decrees. 


| We know, therefore, that, it is not in our power to 


divert those judgments which are coming upon us, 
but thou canst moderate and limit them as thou 
pleasest. If, then, it be thy will that we should feel 
the awful effects of thy justice, chastise us, but 
spare our weakness; correct us, but with judgment, 
not in thine anger, &c. 'Theodoret applies this to 
Nebuchadnezzar, and explains the passage thus: 
“We know, O Lord, that the prince whom thou 
sendest against us comes not without thy orders ; 
that the success of his arms, and the good fortune 
of his enterprise, proceed only from thee: but de- 
liver us, O Lord, from this terrible enemy; and if 
we have merited chastisement, may we receive it at 
thy hand. Punishus as a father, and notas a judge.” 
The words, however, are applicable to us all, as well 
as'to Nebuchadnezzar and the Jews. We are not 
at our own disposal, nor able to direct our own way 


_by our own wisdom, either in matters temporal or 
| spiritual. 


Nor are we at liberty to choose what line 
of life we please, or to ensure to ourselves the sue- 
cess and prosperity we may desire. We are under 
God’s government, and at his disposal, and have con- 
tinual need of his direction, and of the influence of 
373 


God reminds the Jews of 


pur 2 


JEREMIAH. 


a 


his covenant with their fathers. 


24 O LorD, *corréct me, but with 
judgment ; not in thine angcy lest thou 
" bring me to'nothing. Z 

25 * Pour out thy fay upon the heathen." that 


A. M. 3404. 
B. CG. 600: 


Psa. vi. a xxxvili. 1; Chap. xxx. 11.—™ Heb. diminish me. | 


€ Psa. lxxix. 6. 


his grace, without which we shall certainly err from 
the right way, and shall neither choose nor per- 
form what’ is truly and lastingly good, = for our 
happiness. 

Verse 24. O Lord, correct me—~I io not éntirely 
deprecate all chastisement; I know we deserve cor- 
rection, and am willing to accept it; persuaded that 
it is necessary for our purification and amendment; 
but let it be with judgment—Thatis, in measure, with 
moderation, and in wisdom ; not more than is neces- 
sary; not. in thine anger—How severe soever. the 
correction be, let it come from thy love, and be~de- 
signed for our good, and made to work for good; 
not to bring us to nothing, but to bring us to thyself. 
Let it not be according to the desert of our sins, but 
according to the designs of thy grace. Blaney justly 
observes here, that the word"v2w, translated judg- 
ment, “ properly signifies, that calm and dispassion- 
ate Judgment, which stands opposed :to the hasty 
sallies of anger and furious revenge. And, though 
the latter cannot actually exist in God, it is some- 
times, however, nominally attributed to him, when- 
‘ever the effects of his displeasure are so violent as 
to stop nothing short-of utter ruin; although such a 
proceeding may be justifiable upon the most solid 


NE —————————— 


know thee not, and upon the families A. M. 3404. 
‘that call not on thy name: for they : 
have eaten up Jacob, and *devoured him, andcon- 
sumed him, and have made his habitation desolate. 


“Job xviii, 21; 1 Thess. iv. 5; 2Thess. i. 8.——* Chap. . 


vili. 16. ; q 
eee SSS eee 
principles of reason and equity. . As, therefore, to 
punish with anger, implies an unrelenting rigour 
and severity ; so, to correct with judgment, admits 
the use of such moderation as is consistent with the 
sinner’s personal’ safety, while it promotes his re- 
formation.” ue 

Verse 25. Pour out thine indignation. sipon the 
heathen, &c.—Let thy justice be made known, by 
bringing an exemplary punishment upon the Chai- 
deans and their allies, (see chap. i. 15,) who do not 
acknowledge thy providence, but ascribe all their 
‘successes to their idols: for they. have eaten up Ja- 
cob, &c.—See note on chap. vi. 3.° This prayer, it 
must be observed, did: not proceed from a spirit of 
| malice or revenge in the prophet, nor was it intend- 
ed to prescribe to God on whom he should execute 
his judgments, or in what order; but, Ist, It is am 
appeal to his justice ; as if he had said, Lord, we are 
a provoking people, but are there not other nations 
that are more so?, And shall we only be punished ? 
2d, It is a prediction of God’s judgments upon all 
the impenitent enemies of his church and kingdom. 
If judgment begin thus at the house of God, what 
shall be the end of those that sh ol not his gospel ? 
1 Pet; iv. 17. 


‘ 


CHAPTER XI. ) Lay 


In this chapter God, (1,) Reminds the’ Jews of the covenant which he had made with their fathers, and in which obedience to 
his laws had been enjoined under a'curse, and enforced as the evidence of their peculiar relation to him, and the ground of 


his giving them possession of Canaan, 1-7. 


(2,) He charges it upon them that, in succession to their fathers, and in con- 
federacy among themsélves, they had obstinately refused to obey him, 8-10. 


(3,) He threatens to punish them with utter 


fuin for their disobedience, especially for their idolatry, assuring them that their idols should not save them, nor their pro- 


phets pray. for them, 11-14. 


(4,) He justifies his proceedings herein, they having brought all this mischief upon them- 


selves by their own folly and obstinacy, 15-17. (5, ) He discovers to Jeremiah a plot against his life, laid by his » fellow- 
citizens of Anathoth, on account-of which he prays against them, and ‘predicts their rwin, 18-23. 


A. M. 3396, 
B. C. 608. 
——— from the Lorp, saying,’ 


2 Hear ye the words of this covenant, and 


(THE word that came to Jeremiah || speak unto the men of Judah, and to Se M. 


3396. 


the inhabitants of Jerusalem ; “ew 


3 And say thou unto them, Thus saith the 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI. 

Verse 1. The word that came to Jeremiah, &ce.— 
At what time the prophecy, contained in this and the 
following chapter, was communicated to the prophet, 
is not expressed ; but Blaney and many othersassign it 
to the latter part of the reign of Josiah, “ when the peo- 
ple, who, in the eighteenth year of that prince, had 
solemnly engaged to perform the obligations of the 
divine covenant, may be supposed to have relapsed, 
in course of time, into their former disregard and 
neglect. The prophet, therefore, is sent to recall 

374 


in 


them to their duty, by proclaiming the terms of the 
covenant, and rebuking them shorply for wavie: he- 
reditary disobedience. He 

Verses 2-5. Hear ye the words of this covenant— 
God speaks here chiefly to Jeremiah, but seems, at 
the same time, to address, together with him, all 
those pious persons who were like-minded with him, 
and who reproved the wicked manners of the peo- | 
ple. The covenanthere spoken of was the covenant 
of the law of God, delivered by Moses, to which the. 
people had frequently promised obedience. And 

3 


The Jews are charged 


CHAPTER XI. 


with disobedience to God. 


* Cursed be the 
man that obeyeth not the words of 
this covenant, 

A Which I commanded your aaah in the day 
that I brought them forth out of the land of 
Egypt, ° from the iron furnace, saying, * Obey 
my voice, and do them, according to all which 
I command you: so shall ye be my people, and 
I will be your God: 

5 That I may perform the ‘oath which I 
have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a 
land flowing with milk and honey, as i¢ is this 
day.- Then answered I, and said, ' So be it, 
O Lorn: » 

6 Then the Lorp bal unto me, Proelaimn all 
these words in the cities of Judah, and in the 


&. M..3396. Lorp God of Israel ; 
_ B.C. 608 


streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye * ee meee 
the words of this covenant, °and do 
them. > 

.7 For I earnestly pivotoctid unto your Gabe 
in the day that I brought them up out of the 
land of Egypt, even unto this day, ‘ rising early 
and protesting, saying, Obey my voice. 

8 & Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear. 


but walked every one in the ?imagination of 


their evil heart: therefore I will bring upon 
them all the words of this covenant, which I 
commanded them to do; but they did them 
not. : =) ~ at 

9 And the Lorp said unto me, ‘ A conspiracy 
is found among the men of Judah, and among 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 


a Deut. xxvil. 26; Gal. iii. 10. » Deut. iv. 20; 1 Kings | 
viii. 51. Lev. xxvi. 3, 12; Chap. vii. 23. @ Deut. vii. 12; 
13; Psa. ev. 9, 10. 1 Heb. ‘Amen, Deut. XxVii. 15-26. 


= 


} XXXV. 15. 
g Chap. v vii. fiat Chap. iii. 17; vii. Bary 14. —? Or, stub- 
bornness. i Ezek. xxiiv 25; Hos. vi. 9. ’ 


speak unto the men of Judah, &¢.—Lay the tenor | 
of the covenant before them; and say, Cursed he 
the man that obeyeth not, &Cc. —Deut. XXVii. 26, it is, | 
Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of 
this law to do them: and all the people shall say, | 
Amen. ~The people’s saying Amen, testified their 
assent, and made the law a covenant; but they had, 
besides this, formally and explicitly coverianted with 
God, Exod, xxiv. 3-7, with religious rites and cere- 
monies, used in stipulations, and afterward consent- 
ed that God should punish those that violated that 
covenant, Deut: xxvii. 26. Which I commanded, &c. | 
—Which law, (that you by your restipulation made 
a formal Covenant,) I, who am the Lord, and so have 
a sovereign power to lay laws upon my creatures, 
commanded your fathers’; in the day that I brought 
them from the. iron furnace—And thus obliged 
them to obedience before I laid my law upon them. | 
The use of tlie tron-furnace being to melt and purify | 
metals, it was a proper representation of that state 
of sore affliction in which the péople of God were 
for many ages in Egypt. Saying, Obey my voice, &c. 
—For which kindness I required no more of them 
but a gentle service to me, in obeying my voice, as 
to the things “of this law which I gave them in 
charge ; so shall ye be my people, &c.—Nor did I 
only lay my commands upon them, but also encour- 
aged them to obedience, by my gracious promise, | 
that if they would obey they should be a people 
whom I would peculiarly protect and bless. 
may, or, rather, might (for he refers to the time past) 
perform the oath, &c.—As if he had said, I required | 
their obediénce for their own good : for Thad sworn 
to their fathers, that I would give their posterity a 
land abounding with plenty of all good things, upon 
condition of their obedience. TI have performed that 
oath; I have brought them into such a land, and 
showed myselffaithful to them. Then ausbered js 
So be it, O Lord—God having ended his speech, the 


That I 


prophet says, Amen, as God had commanded, Deut. 
3 


|| XXvii. 26 ; either asserting the truth of what God had 


said, or expressing his desire that the people would 
do according to their covenant, or even assenting to 
the curse as just and Feaaonable: 

Verses 6-8. Proclaim all these words in the cities 
of Judah, &c.—That all may hear, for all are con- 
cerned; saying, Hear ye the words, -&c., and do 
them—Let it be thy work to call upon this people, 
not’ only to hear, but to do the things which I have 
commanded them, and which they have engaged to 
do, For I earnestly protested—Hebrew, in protest- 
ing T protested ;.a way of speaking by which the He- 
brews expressed the seriousness and earnestness 
wherewith any thing was done: by protesting, he 
means the same with charging and solemnly enjoin- 
ing, with promises annexed to obedience, and threat- 
enings denounced in ease of disobedience. This, God 
says, he had done with a great deal of patience and 
diligence, even from the time:that this people were 
brought by him out of the land of Egypt. to the 
present period. Yet they obeyed not—And, because 
they were resolved not to be subject to God’s com- 
mandments, they would not so much as incline their 
ears to them, but walked every one in the imagina- 
tion of his evil heart, following their own inventions ; 
and each one acting as his faney or humour led him, 
both in their devotions and in their conversations. 
Therefore I will bring upon them all the words of 
this covenant—That is, all the threatenings contain- 
ed in it. Observe, reader, the words of God’s co- 
venant shall not fall to the ‘ground. If we do not by 
our obedience qualify ourselves for the blessings of 
it, we shall, by our disobedience, bring ourselves un- 
der the curses of it. 

‘Versés 9-11. And the Lord said, A conspiracy ts 
found, &e.—Namely, by him whose eye is upon the 
hidden works of darkness. There is a combination 
formed among thém against God and religion, a dan- 
gerous design to overthrow the government of Jeho- 
vah, and to bringin counterfeit deities. In other words, 

“375 


Judgments threatened 


JEREMIAH. 


against the Jews. 


A. M, 3396. 

B. ©: 88 iniquities of their forefathers, which 
vefused to hear my words ; and they went.after 
other gods to serve them: the house of Israel 
and the house of Judah have broken my cove- 
nant which I made with their fathers. 

11 9% Therefore thus saith the Lorp, Behold, 
I will bring evil upon them which they ‘shall 
not be able 3 to escape ; and ! though they shall 
cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them. 

12 Then shall the cities of Judah and inha- 
bitants of Jerusalem go, and ™cry unto the 
gods unto whom they offer incense: but they 
shall not save them at all in the time of their 
‘trouble. 

13 For according tothe number of thy “cities 
were thy gods, O Judah; and according to the 
number of the streets‘of Jerusalem have ye set 


10 They are turned back to: * the’ 


up altars to that *shameful thing, ohne 
even altars to burn incense unto Baal. _ 

14 Therefore ° pray not thou for this people, 
neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I 


will not hear ¢hem. in. the time that they cry 


unto'me for their ° trouble. 

15 » What’ hath. my beloved to do in my 
house, seeing she hath 4 wrought lewdness with 
many, and ‘the holy flesh is passed from 
thee? ®when thou doest evil, then. thou. *re 
joicest. 

16 The Lorp called thy: name, bthot green 
olive-tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: with the 
noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire 
upom it, and the branches of it. are broken. 

17 For the Lorp of hosts, ® that planted thee, 
hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil 


of the house of Israel and of hes house of 


« Ezek. xx. 18.—®* Heb. to go forth of. 1 Psa. xviii. 41 ; 
Prov. 1. 28; Isa. i. 15; Chap. xiv..12; Ezek. viii. 18; Micah 
iil. 45 Zech. vii. 13-——™ Deut. Xxxli. 37, 38. 4Heb. evil. 
a Chapter i il. 28. 5 Heb. shame, Chapter iii. 24; rd ix. 10. 
2 Exod. xxxil. 10} ) Chap. vii. 165) xiv. 11; 1 John v. 1 


Au sorts of people have been alike disobedient, as if 
they had conspired together to break my law. Th ey 
are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers 
—They made some steps toward a reformation inthe 
former part of the reign of Josiah, but now they have 
agreed to turn back to their former idolatries. 
Therefore behold; I will bring evil upon them, &c. 
—The evil of punishment for the eyil of sih, which 
they shall not be,able to’-escape by .any eva- 
sion whatsoever. Let’ us remember, those who 
will: not submit to God’s government, shall, not. be 
able to escape-his wrath. . Evil pursues sinners, and 
entangles them in shares, out of which they cannot 
extricate themselves. And though they shall cry 
unto me, I will not hearken—God will not hear 
them crying to: him in their adversity, who refuse to 
hear him speaking to them in their prosperity. 

Verses 12-14. Then shall the cities of Judah cry 
unto the gods, &c.— When great calamities threaten 
men, their fears suggest all possible ways, of seeking 
for succour.., Thus, when the Jews found them- 
selves forsaken of God, they betook themselves to 
idols, but found all such applications vain, and to no 
purpose: 
to the number of thy cities were thy gods, &c.—See 
note on chap. ii. 28. Ye have set up altars to that 
shameful thing—Hebrew, nw, bosheth, shame, ‘so 
called,because it was what they had cause to be 
ashamed of, and what would certainly bring them to 
shame and confusion. 
Therefore pray not thou for this people—See note 
on chap. vii. 16, 

Verse 15; What hath my beloved to do in my 
house, &e.— Why doth this, my chosen and pecu- 
liar people, as they love to ‘eall themselves, make 


their appearance before me in.my house, since they | 


376 


see 2 Chron, xxviii. 23. For according | 


See note on chap. iii. 24. 


| 6 Heb. evil—p Psa. 1:16; -Isa. is 11, &¢——"Heb, What 
is to my beloved in my house——4 Ezekiel xvi. 25. —* Haggai 
ii, 12, 13, 14; Titus i.°15:——® Or, when thy evil is —— Prov. 


ii, 14. t Psalm ii. 8; 
Chap. ii. 21, 


Romans. xi. 17,——" Isaiah v. 2; 


have gone a whoring after several idols of the na- 
tions round about them, and thereby have disowned: 
me, and broken the marriage contract:that'was be- 
tween us? See note on chap. ii..2. “God calls the 
Jews his beloved people, because they called them- 
selves so, and because they were still beloved for 
their fathers’ sake, Rom. xi. 18; and he would not 
cast them off utterly, for the sake of the covenant 
he had made with their progenitors.,—Lowth. And 
the holy flesh is passed from thee—* The flesh of 
thy sacrifices, which thou offerest up to me as an 
atonement for thy sins, does not. at all profit thee, 
being rendered unacceptable to me through thy 
many and great provocations, in the commission of 
which thon continuest without remorse.”—Lowth. 
But the words are. rendered by some, The flesh of 
my sanctuary shall pass from thee, and may mean, 
that the parts of the victims, which by the Mosaic 
law were the portion of the priests, should not be 
given to.them, since the temple would be destroyed. 
According to this interpretation the prophet must 
be considered as addressing the priests, of whom 
there were, without doubt, many in Jerusalem. 

When thou doest evil, thou rejoicest—Thou gloriest 
in thy wickedness, Or, at a time when thou offend- 
est most against my laws, thou exultest, and behavest 
as if thou didst every thing that is right. 

Verses 16,17. The Lord hath called thy name, A 
green olive-tree—Perhaps Jeremiah here alludes to 
Hos. xi. 7, where Israel is compared to an olive-tree. 
The Jewish nation, which, in its flourishing state, is 
often compared by the sacred writers to a vine, is 
also sometimes compared to an olive-tree; chiefly 
because of the fruits of holiness and righteousness 
which God might justly have expected from them, 
after all the care and pains he had bona upon 


Judgments threatened against 


CHAPTER XI. 


the men of Anathoth. 


eee Judah, which they have done against 

; . themselves to provoke me to anger in 
offering incense unto Baal. 

18 4 And the Lorp hath given me know- 
ledge of it, and I know it: then thou showedst 
me their doings. Ce 

19 But I was like a lamb or an ox that is 
brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that 


* they had devised devices against me, saying, | 


Let us destroy ® the tree with the fruit pth Leg 
thereof, * and let us cut hua off from ———~ 
*the land of the living, that his name may be 
no more remembered. 

20 But, O Lorn of hosts, that. judgest. right- 
eously, that *triest the reins and the heart, let 
me see thy vengeance on them : for unto thee 
have I revealed my cause. _ 

21 Therefore thus saith the Lorn of ‘the men 


8 Heb. the stalk with his bread. y Psalm 


z Psa. xxvii. 18; exvi.9; exlii. 5. 


x Chap. xviii. 18. 
lexxiil. 4. 


— 


them to make them fruitful. . Fair, and of a goodly 
JSruit—Amiable and serviceable, pleasant to the eye, 
and good for yielding food. With the noise of a 
great tumult he hath kindled a-fire upon it, &e.— 
The words nvm yp, here rendered the noise of a 
great tumult, occur Ezek. i. 24, and are there ex- 
plained to be mim p2; like the voice of a host. 
Here they undoubtedly signify the confused mur- 
mur, noise, and tumult of the Chaldean army, com- 
ing to desolate Jerusalem and its dependances with 
fire and sword, described under the image of an, 
olive-tree, whose branches are cut down that they 
may be burned, or which is burned as it stands; its 
branches, or lofty boughs, as Va ea more properly 
signifies, meaning the priests and princes. or the 
Lord that-planted thee—And expected fruit from 
thee in vain; hath pronounced evil against thee— 
Hath passed a condemnatory sentence upon thee, 
and marked thee out for destruction. For the evil 
of the house of Israel and the house of Judah—The 
evil of whose heinous sins shall now be followed 
with the evil of most dreadful punishments: 

Verses 18,19. And the Lord hath given me know- 
ledge of it, &c.—This relates to the ill designs which 
the men of Anathoth had contrived against the pro- 
phet, which he here saith God had revealed to him. 
See the following verses.. But I was like a lamb or 
an ox, &c.—A proverbial speech, expressing a false 
security, or insensibility of danger. Dr. Waterland, 
in agreement with the Vulgate, Bochart, and Houbi- 
gant, réads this clause, But I was like a gentle 
lamb; and Blaney, For I was like a tame lamb 
that is led to the slaughter. But Lowth justly ob- 
serves, we, may very well admit of the common 
translation. For the word Mos" here used, certain- 


ly frequently signifies an ox, and the disjunctive 


particle, supplied by or, is elsewhere often under- 
stood, though not expressed. The meaning here is, 
that the prophet would have met with a fate similar 
to that of a slaughtered lamb or ox, if God had not 
revealed to him the designs of his enemies, Many 
commentators suppose that Jeremiah here speaks of 
his own sufferings as figurative of those of the Mes- 
siah. “All the. churches agree,” says St. Jerome, 
“that these and the following words.respect. Jesus 
Christ and his passion. It was against his life that 
they formed their designs: he was the true lamb, 
meek and innocent. . Jeremiah is here a figure of 
the “> Saviour; he here suffers from his bre- 


| his doctrine. 


a] Sarh, xvi. 7; 1 Chron. xxviii. 9 ; Psa. vii. 9; Chap. xvii, 10; 
»xx. 125 Rev, 21. 23. 


thren, and represents; in his person, him who was a 
man of grief, and tried by all sorts of afflictions.” 
Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof—Let 
us not only put an end to his prophesying, but to 
his life. The Hebrew is literally, Lét us destroy 
the tree (or the stock) with the bread thereof; and 
bread, it must. be-observed, is sometimes used for 
the corn of which bread is made, as chap. v. 17. 
The meaning then is, Let us destroy the prophet and 
We have no other mention of this 
conspiracy but this here. "It is, however, very plain, 
both from.this verse and what follows, that the men 
of Anathoth (which was Jeremiah’s own town): 
were offended at his prophesying, and had conspired 
to kill him. 

Verse 20. But, O Lord, thou judgest righteously 
—It is matter of comfort to us, when. men deal un- 
justly with us, that we have a God to go to, who 
doth and will plead the cause of injured innocence, 
and appear against the injurious. God’s justice, 
which is a terror to the wicked, is a comfort to the 
godly.” That triest the reins and the heart—That 
perfectly knowest what isuin man, that discernest 
his most secret thoughts, desires, and designs. Let 
me see thy vengeance on them—'That is, do justice 
between me and them in such a way as thou pleasest. 
“ When men continue implacable in their malice,” 
says Lowth, “we may lawfully expect and desire 
that God will plead our cause, and judge us accord- 
ing to our righteousness. (For the bringing wicked 
men to condign punishment tends both to the mani- 
festation of God’s glory and the good government 
of the world. And to pray against our, enemies in 
this sense, namely, not for the satisfying our private 
resentments, but the setting forth of God’s justice, 
is.not contrary to the spirit of Christianity. So St. 
Paul prayed against Alexander the copper-smith, 2 
Tim. iv. 14.” It must be observed, however, that, 
according to the Hebrew text here, the words are 
merely a prediction; TMD J2p3 Mw, being lite- 
rally, I shall. see thy vengeance on them; that is, I 
foresee it, and predict it, though I lament they 
should-have given occasion for it. 

Verse 21. Thus saith the Lord of the men that 
seek thy life—That are combined to kill thee; say- 
ing, Prophesy not in the name of the Lord—The 
meaning is, that those men of Anathoth threatened 
that they would kill him if he did not cease to pro- 
phesy such things as he did in the name of the Lord, 

377 


The prophet’s complaint to God, 


4 1s 3396. of Anathoth, ° that seek thy life, say- 
"ing, ° Prophesy not in the name of 

the Lorn, that thou die not by our hand: 
22 Therefore thus saith the. Lorp of hosts, 
Behold, I will ° punish them: the young men 


JEREMIAH. 


- of the success of the ungodly. 


shall die by the sword ; their sons and A. 4 ose. 
their daughters shall de by fammei! —___ 

23 And there shall be no remnant of them: 
for I will bring evil upon the men of eeeh, 
even “the year of their visitation. 


» Chap. xii. 5, 6—— Isaiah xxx. 10; Amos ii. 12; vii. 13,16; 
Micah ii. 6. - 


° Heb, visit upon. 


4 Chapter xxiii. 12; xlvi. 21; xlviii. 44; 
1.275 Luke xix. 44, 


a ——— 


namely, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, 
the desolation of Judea, and the carrying away of 
the people into captivity. For if he had spoken 
falsely in the name of the Lord, and promised them 
peace and prosperity, they would have heard him 
prophesy gladly: they were thus exasperated at 
him, and opposed his prophesying, because he told 
them those truths which they had no vt to hear. 
This passage sufficiently shows that Jeremiah is to 
be understood in the literal sense here, which, how- |} 
ever, does not-by any means forbid our considering 
him in ‘this instance as a’ type of Christ, and pre- 
figuring, by his sufferings, those of the Redeemer of 
mankind. It manifests also the usage which the 
prophets generally met with from their own coun- 
trymen, who became their enemies because they 


told them the truth. The people of their own towns, || 


even their friends and relations, could not bear to 
hear the solemn warnings which they gave them, 
and the prediction of those judgments which were 
coming upon them for their sins. 

Verses 22, 23. Therefore thus saith the Lord, 
Behold, I will punish then—Hebrew, D1 soy 7p, 


I will visit, namely, this their wicked conduct, wpon 
thent ;. T will inquire into it, and reckon with them for 
it. The young men shall die by the sword—Though 
they be young priests, not men of war, their sacred 
office shall. be no protection to them. .Z'heir sons 
and their daughters shall die by famine—Which is 
a more grievous death than that by the sword, Lam. 
iv, 9. Thus two of God’s four sore judgments 
would overwhelm their town in destruction, which 
‘should be so entire that there should be no.remnant 
of them—None to be the seed of another generation : 

they sought Jeremiah’s life, and therefore their lives 
shall be taken: they ‘wished to destroy him, root 
and branch, that his. name might be no more remem- 
bered, and therefore there shall be no remnant of 
them: and herein the Lord is righteous. ‘Thus evil 
Would be brought wpon them, even the year of their 
~visitation—And that would be evil sufficient, a re- 
compense according to their deserts. Such is the 
consequence of opposing the truth and cause of God, 

and his servants in the execution of their office! Such 
is the deplorable condition of those that have the pray- 
ers of good ministers and good people against them! 


CHAPTER XI. : 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The prophet's humble complaint to God, of the success that the ungodly had wn their wicked prac- 
tices, 1, 2; and his appeal to God concerning his own integrity, with a prayer that God would, for the sake of the public, 


bring the wickedness of. the wicked to an end, 3, 4. 
troubles, warning him to prepare for greater, 5, 6. 


(2,) God’s rebuke to the prophet for his uneasiness at the present 
(3,) A sad lamentation over the deplorable, desolate, and disappointed 
condition to which the sins of the Jews would quickly reduce them, 7-13. 


(4,) An intimation of mercy to God’s people in 


a denunciation of wrath against their enemies, who helped forward their affliction ; but with a promise that, if they would 
at last join themselves with the people of God, they should have a share with them in their privileges, 14-17. 


A. M. 3396. 


RIGHTEOUS * art thou, O Lorn, 
B. C, 608, 


pte 2 when I plead with thee: yet ‘let 
me talk with thee of thy jadgments : > Where- 


fore doth the way of the wicked pros- i” es 3396. 
pet? wherefore are all they happy asl 
that deal very treacherously ? 


—= 


a Psa. li. 4——1 Or, let me reason the case with thee. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. 

Verse 1. Righteous art thou, O Lord—The pro- 
phet, being about to inquire into the reasons and 
-meaning of some of the divine dispensations, first 
recognises -a truth of unquestionable certainty, 
namely, that God is righteous, that is, just.and holy 
in all his ways. 
temptations wherewith he was assaulted, to envy 
the prosperity of the wicked, before he begins to 

378 


Thus he, arms himself against the | 


Bib xii. 6; xxi.7; Psa. xxxvii. 1, 35; xxiii. 3, &e. ; Loe! v. 
28 ; Hab. i. 4; ‘Mal. iii. 15. 


plead with God concerning it. And, in imitation of 
him, when we are least able to understand the intent 
of the divine counsels and proceedings, we must still 
resolve to retain just thoughts of God, and must be 
confident of this, that he never did and never will 
do the least wrong to any of his creatures; that even 
when his judgments are wnsearchable as a great 
deep, and altogether unaccountable, yet his righteous- 
ness is as conspicuous and immoveable as the great 
3 


The prophet’s repeat to God 


CHAPTER XII. 


concerning his own integrity. 


A. M. 3396. 2 Thou hast. planted them, yea, they 
B.C. 

- have taken root: *they grow, yea, 
they bring forth fruit: °thou ar¢ near in their 
mouth, and far from their reins. 

3 But thou,.O Lorn, ¢knowest me: thou 
hast seen me, and ° tried my heart ? toward 
thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, 
and prepare them for ‘ the day of slaughter. 

4 How long shall ¢ the land mourn, and the 
herbs of every field wither, ® for the wickedness 
of them that dwell therein? ‘ the beasts are con- 


sumed, and the birds; because they * or 
said, He shall not see our last.end. §=£—— 

5 4 If thou hast run with the footmen, and 
they have. wearied ‘thee, then how canst thou 
contend with horses? and if in the land of 
peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied 
thee, then how wilt thou do in ¥ the swelling of 
Jordan ? 

6 For even 'thy brethren, and the house of 
thy father, even they have dealt treacherously 
with thee; yea, ‘they have called a multitude 


? Heb. they go on,—— Isa. xxix. 13; Matt. xv.8; Mark vii..6. 
4 Psa, xvii. 35 exxxix. 1. ° Chap. xi. 20. 3 Heb, with thee. 
* James v. 5. s Chap. xxiii.'10 ; Hos, iv. 3. b Psa. cvii. 34. 


i Chap. iv. 35; vii. 20; ix. 10; Hos. iv. 3——* Josh. iii. 15; 
1 Chron. xii, 15; Chap. xlix. 19; 1. 441 Rhatien ix. 4; xi. 
19, 21.—+ Or,’ they cried after thee fully. 


mountains, Psa. Xxxvi. 6. Yet let me talk with thee 
of thy judgments—Not by way of accusing thee, but 
for my'own satisfaction concerning thy dispensa- 
tions in the government of the world. Wherefore 
doth the way of the wicked prosper 2—Why are their 
designs‘and projects successful? Why ar'e all they 
happy that deal very treacherously ?—Why are the 
‘affairs.and families of the perfidious and unjust in a 
prosperous ‘state? Why dost thou permit this? 
What end of thy righteous government is to be an- 
swered by it? By all they, he means many of them, 
and is thought. to have spoken thus with a special 
reference to the priests-at Anathoth, who had con- 
spired against his life. The prosperity of the wicked 
hath, in all ages, been a mystery, and hath served to 
furnish infidels with an objection against the provi- 
dence of God, and, upon that account, hath been a 
source of temptation to many of God’s people. 

Verses 2,3. Thou hast planted them—In a rich 
soil, by thy. power: they have taken root ; they grow 
—Their prosperity.seems to be confirmed and settled 
by thy providence. Thou art near in their mouth, 
and far from their reins—They talk of thee, and 
profess piety, but do not believe in and obey thee 
’ from their hearts; the true character this of hypo- 
crites, who, ‘according to Isaiah, honour God with 
their mouths, but their hearts are far from him, Isa. 
xxix. 13. But thou, O Lord, knowest me—As if he 
had said, Thou knowest, O Lord, it is otherwise with 
me: I am maligned; and my life is hunted after, 
though my heart is upright before thee, and I have 
been faithful in declaring to the people that, and only 
that, which thou didst reveal to me: yet itis for this 
they seek my life. Pull them out like sheep, &c.— 
Or rather, as Dr. Waterland and Houbigant translate 
the clause, “ Thou wilt separate them as sheep to be 
sacrificed, and set them apart for the day of slaugh- 
ter2? 

Verse 4. How long shall the land mourn?—As it 
doth under thy judgments inflicted upon it; for the 
wickedness of them that dwell therein—Lord, shall 
they themselves prosper, who ruin all about them? 
The wickedness of the people is here represented as 
having brought a great calamity upon the land, under 
which all living creatures, even the beasts of the 
earth, and the fowls of heaven, as well as the human 


race, were now suffering grievously. This calamity 
was a long drought, or want of rain, which happened, 
| it seems, in the latter end of J osiah’s, and the begin- 
ning of Jehoiakim’s reign. It is.mentioned chap. 
| lil. 3; and viii. 13; and ix. 10, 12; and more fully 
afterward, chap.'xiv.” Some of its effects are here 
noticed ; namely, that the herbs of every field were 
withered, and the beasts and birds consumed. If 
they would have been brought to repentance by this 
lesser judgment, the greater would have been pre- 
vented. Because they—The wicked men; said, 
| He shall not see our last end—Namely, Jeremiah, 
whom these abandoned Jews threatened to kill, as 
if they were not willing he should see the fulfilling 
of his prophecies concerning the calamities to come 
.on Judea. ‘Not that they Heligeed what he predicted 
would really come to pass, but they spake thus ina 
sareastical manner, as much as to say, Be it so, that 
the calamities which thou denouncest against us ‘sh all 
come upon us, yet we will take care that thou shalt 
not have the pleasure of seeing them fulfilled upon us. 

Verses 5, 6. If thou hast run with the footmen— 
Here God speaks, and applies a proverbial expres- 
sion to the prophet’s circumstances, the import of 
| which is, that if men find themselves unable to con- 
_tend with a less power, it is in vain for them to strive 
with a greater. This sentence, being applied to the 
prophet’s case, implies that, if he was so impatient 
that he could not bear the ill usage of his neighbours 
at Anathoth, how would he be able to undergo the 
hardships he must expect to meet with from the 
great men at Jerusalem, who would unanimously 
set themselves against him. And if in the land of 
peace—Where there is little noise or peril; then 
how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan—The 
sense may be the same as in the foregoing sentence, 
though differently expressed. As if he had said, If 
thou art exposed to such persecutions in thy own 
country, and among thy own kindred, who are more 
peaceable, what must thou expect when those in 
power at Jerusalem shall combine against thee? 
whose rage shall be as great ‘and terrible as when 
Jordan suddenly overflows the neighbouring fields 
with violence; and obliges all to seek their safety by 
flight, there being no way of standing against the im- 
petuous torrent. Or, by the swellings of Jordan, 

. 379 


A lamentation over the 


JEREMIAH. 


» 


prospective state of the Jews. 


A. M. 3 


be eae: after thee: ™ believe them not, though 


they speak ° fair words unto thee. 

7 4 I have forsaken my house, I have left my 
heritage ; I have given °the dearly beloved of 
my soul into the hand of her enemies. 


8 My. heritage is unto me as a lion in the 


9 My heritage is unto me. as a % u gee. 
* speckled bird, the birds round about < 
are against her; come ye, assemble all tho 
beasts of the field, 1° come® to devour. <i 
10 Many ° pastures haye destroyed ? my vine- 
yard, they have 4 trodden my portion under fovt, 


forest; it “crieth® out against me: therefore ||they have made my ” pleasant portion a deso- 
have I hated it. late wilderness. 

m Proverbs xxvi. 25.——® Hebrew, good things——® Hebrew, 1? Or, cause them to come-——" Isaiah lvi. 9; Chapter vii. 33. 
the love. 7 Or, yelleth. ® Heb, giveth out his voice. © Or, || ° Chapter vi. 3.—p-Isa. v. 1 5. a Isa. Ixiii. 18.- —t'Heb 
having talons. portion of desire. 
may be meant the invasion of the country by the || will shortly give it up to utter desolation. Shave | 


Chaldeans. ‘Thus the words are understood by Bla- 
ney, who observes upon them as follows: “The 
ravages of war and hostile invasions are often repre- 
sented i in Scripture under the image of a river rising 
rapidly above. its banks, and carrying all before it. 
To these inundations Jordan was very subject ; and 
on such oceasions,as we are told, (Maundrell’s T'ra- 
vels, p.81,) several sorts of wild beasts, which are wont 
to harbour among the trees and bushes by the river 
side, are forced out of their coverts, and infest the 
neighbouring plains. This circumstance’ is particu- 
larly alluded to by the prophet, (chap. xlix. 19,) and 
seems to have been ‘here in his view. For among 
all the dire effects incident to a country from the 
approach of a foreign enemy, this is not one of the 
least formidable, that evil-minded persons, within the 
state, are-imboldened to throw off all legal restraints, 
and, taking advantage of the general confusion, 

openly commit the most daring outrages on their 
fellow-citizens, not only with impunity, but, often 
under -a pretence of zeal for the public welfare. 
Silent leges inter arma, is a well-known adage ; and 
the prophet found it verified to his cost, when even 
the authority of the king himself, as we learn from 
the following history, (chap. xxxviil. 4, 5,) was_ in- 
sufficient to protect him from the malice of his per- 
secutors.” Even thy brethren—The priests of 
Anathoth; and the house of thy father—Who ought 
to have protected thee, and pretended to doso; even 
they have dealt treacherously with thee—Have been 
false to thee, and, while they pretended friendship, 
have secretly conspired and devised evil against thee. 
Yea, they have called a multitude after thee—Have 
endeavoured to bring thee under popular odium, to 
incense the common people against thee, and, raising 
a mob upon thee, to expose thee to their rage. Or, 

as the words may be rendered, They have pursued 


thee with a great cry, as acommon malefactor. The) 


sense is, Their former behaviour plainly shows that 
thou canst not reasonably depend on them for that 
countenance and support which,a man naturally 
looks for from his friends and relations against the 
hostilities of strangers. 

Verse 7. I have forsaken my house—My temple, 
where I had placed my name. I have already with- 
drawn my favourable regard and presence from it, 
and shall withhold those manifestations of my power 
and goodness, which I have been wont to make to 
the people who come thither to worship me, and I 

380 


left. my heritage—The whole body of my people, 
with respect to my special providence over them and 
care of them, which have been such that, in com- 
parison. with them, I might seem to neglect ‘all other 
countries. I have given the dearly beloved of my 
soul, &¢.—That is, that nation, which was once my 
dearly beloved, precious in my sight, and honour- 
able above any people ; into the hands of her ene- 
mies—I have determined to deliver her into their 
power, and they shall tyrannise over, oppress, and 
enslave her at their pleasure. God terms the Jew- 
ish nation his dearly beloved here, to aggravate their 
sin in returning him hatred for ide love, and their 
folly and misery in throwing themselves out of the 
favour of one who had such a kindness for them, 
and was mighty to protect and save them. 

_ Verses 8, 9. My heritage is unto me as a lion in 
the forest—Those that were my lambs and sheep, 

following me, their chief shepherd, and the guidance 

of those prophets and pastors whom I set-over them, 

are become like lions in the forest roaring against 
me, and rending and tearing the prophets whom I 

send unto them, and who speak to them in my name. 
Jt—-My heritage ; crieth out against me—They blas- 

pheme my name, oppose my authority, and bid de- 
fiance to my justice. Therefore have Ihated it— 
My disposition and conduct are changed toward 
them, and my heart is alienated from them, because 
their temper and behaviour are altered, and their 
hearts and ways alienated from me. My heritage 
is._unto me as a speckled bird—Colorata, id est, 
foedata sanguine, died or sprinkled with the blood 

of her prey. So R. Salomon interprets the words 
pay wy, here used. Or, as some read it, Avis digi- 
tata, a bird with talons: so the margin; that is, a 
ravenous bird, uncis unguibus in predam volans, 

says Buxtorf, flying on its prey with crooked claws. 
The meaning is, My people are become wild and 
savage, and, like a speckled, rapacious bird, are only 
fit for prey and deeds of violence. And as all the 
rest of the birds flock about such a one, and are 
ready to pull it in pieces; so have. stirred up all the 
enemies of my people to annoy them on every side; 
compared, in the next clause, to so many beasts of 

prey. See chap. ii. 15; Isa. lvi. 9. y 

Verses 10, 11. Many ‘pastures have destroyed my 

vineyard—Many eaters, or dévourers, as Dr. Wa- 

terland translates 3°29 ('y", by which the Chaldee 

Paraphrast understands the generals of the Chaldean 

3. 


God's mercy to his people, 


CHAPTER XII. 


and wrath against their enemies. 


A. M. 3396. 


“11 They have made it desolate, and 
C.. 608. 


being desolate * it mourneth unto me ; 
the whole land is made desolate, because * no 
man layeth i¢ to heart. . 

12 The spoilers are come upon. all high places 
through the wilderness: for the éword of the 
Lorp shall devour from the one end of the land 


even to the other end: of the land: no flesh | 


shall have peace. 
13 t They. have sown wheat, but shall reap 
thorns : ris have put themselves to pain, bt 


4 


shall not profit; and ™ they shall be 4, Biase. 
. 608. 

ashamed of your revenues because. of 

the fierce anger of the Lorp. 

14 7 Thus saith the Lorp against all mine 
evil neighbours, *that “touch the inheritance 
which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; 
Behold, I will * pluck them out of their land, 
and pluck out the house of Judah from among 
them. 

15 And it shall come to pass, after that I 
have plucked them out I will return, and have 


t Verse 4. Isa. xlii. 25. =—t Lévit. et 16; Deut. xxviii. 
2 38; — vi. 15; Hag. i. 


u Zech, ii. 8. x Deut, xxx. 3; Chap. xxxii. 37. 


23 °Or, yes 
; ¥ Ezek. xxviii. 25. 


army, an interpretation which seems to be justified 
by the two following verses: though some explain 
it of the rulers of the Jews, who, by their wicked 
government, and. equally wicked example, had ru- 
ined their country. God calls Judea his vineyard 
and pleasant portion, because of the care he took to 
cultivate and improve it, and of the fruit he might 
justly have expected from it: see note on. chap. xi. 
16. Being -desolate, it mourneth unto me—Unto 
God ; that is, lying ina neglected and doleful condi- 
tion, it becomes a sad spectacle to me, and makes a 
sort of silent complaint, begging to be restored to its 
former prosperity. Because no man layeth it to 
heart—The principal cause of this great judgment 
is, that the people do not see and acknowledge my 
hand in the calamities they feel, nor humble them- 
selves under. them, but remain in general unaffect- 
ed, stupid, and obstinate. 

Verses 12, 13. 7'he spoilers—The Chaldean sol- 
diers, described by the metaphor of a full avind of 
the high places, chap. iv. 11; are come upon all high 
places—Have made themselves masters of all the 
natural fastnesses'and artificial fortresses in the 
country. ‘The prophet, as usual, speaks of a thing 
as already done, which was very shortly to be done. 
For the sword of the Lord shall devour—Thus 
those people are called, whom God excited to invade 
Judea, as a punishment of the Jews for their sins: 
they were the Lord’s sword: from one end of the 
land even to the other—The numerous army of the 
invaders shall disperse themselves through the whole 
country, penetrating into every corner of it. No flesh 
shall have peace—No rank or order of men shall be 
exempt from the calamity, or able to enjoy any 
tranquillity. TZ'iey—Namely, the inhabitants of the 
land; have sown wheat, but shallreap thorns—Have 
taken much pains, and been at much charge, but all 
shall turn to their prejadice... It is a proverbial ex- 
pression, signifying men’s loss of time and labour; 
or rather, their receiving only vexation and injury 


as the fruit of those efforts from which they ex-| 


pected great advantage. It is here applied to the 

fruitless and destructive endeayours of the Jews to 

save themselves from the evils that threatened them, 

by courting the assistance and alliance of idolaters. 
shall be ashamed of your revenues—Or, in- 
3 


crease, as TID ANIIN should rather be rendered: it 
alludes to the reaping of thorns, mentioned in the 


‘former part of the verse, as if he had said, You shall 


be ashamed of the small and inconsiderable returns 
you make of all your pains and labours: because 
of the fierce anger of the Lord—Which shall make 
all your designs abortive. 

Verses 14, 15. Thus saith the Lord, Lhasa or 
concerning, “all mine evil néighbour’-—By these are 
meant the Moabites, Ammonites, Idumeans, and 
Philistines ; against whom Jeremiah prophesies, 
chap. xlvii., xlviii., xlix.; and Ezekiel, chap. xxv. 
These are called’ evil neighbours, because of the 
spite .and ill-will which they showed toward the 
Jews on all occasions: that touch the inheritaice, 
&ce.— Who lie near to, and border upon, Judea: 
Behold, I will pluck them out, &c,—These people 
were accordingly wasted and spoiled, and part of 
them. carried into captivity by the Babylonians. 
And pluck out the house of Judah, &¢.—Many of the 
Jews were carried captive; or went for safety into 
those neighbouring countries, before the general 
Babylonish captivity, chap. xv. 4,and xi. ll. Of 
these Jews some were carried captive, together with 
the natives of those countries, by the Chaldeans af- 
terward: others went down into Egypt. See chap. 
xliii., xliv.- Here is-foretold the restoration of the 
Jews from their several dispersions. Compare chap. 
xxxii. 37; Ezek. xxviii. 25, 26. This promise was 
partly fulfilled in the time succeeding the Babylonish 
captivity, Psa, exlvii..2; but will be more fully ac- 
complished at the final restoration of that nation, 
when the fulness of the Gentiles will likewise be 
brought into the church, which is foretold. in the 
words of the next verse. And after that I have 
plucked them out—In justice for the punishment of 
their sins, and in jealousy for the honour of Israel; I 
will return—Will change my way, and have com- 
passion on them—Though, as being heathen, they 
can lay no claim to the mercies of the covenantmade 
with Abraham and his seed, yet they shall have 
benefit by the compassions of the Creator, who will 
look upon them as the work of his hands. And will 
bring them again every man to his heritage—Thus, 
after Jeremiah had threatened severe judgments 
upon several countries, he concludes with a general 


The prophet’s vision 


JEREMIAH. 


of the linen girdle. 


“ oi compassion on them, * and will bring 
ae them again, every man to his heritage, 

and everyman tohisland. 

16 And it shall come to pass, if they will dili- 

gently learn the ways of my people, *to swear 

by my name, The Logp liveth; as they taught 


z Amos ix. 14, 


a Chap. iv. 2. 


promise of their return from their captivity in the 
latter days; which promise probably relates chiefly 
to their conversion under the gospel. 

Verses 16, 17.. If they will diligently learn the 
ways of my people—If they will leave their idola- 
tries, and learn of my people who lived among them 
to be worshippers of me the true God, and to swear 
by my name, The Lord liveth—That is, pay that 
homage, which they owe to the Divine Being, to me, 
the living and true God: as they taught my people 
to swear by Baal—As they drew in my backsliding 
people to join with them in the service of idols. 
Then. shall they be built,in the midst of my people 
—They ‘shall have a portion among my people. 
The acceptance of the believing Gentiles is here 
clearly intimated, and their union with the church 


my people to swear by Baal; then 4. of oi 
shall they be » built in the midst of eee 
my people. 

17 But if they will not ° asboy,) I will utterly 
pluck up. and ‘destroy that ihr saith the 


Lorp. 


\ b Eph, ii. 20, 21; 1 Pet. ii. 5. ¢ Isa. lx. 12. 


of God, the middle wall of partition being thrown 
down. Concerning the actual accomplishment of 
this prophecy, see Eph. ii. 13-22. But if they will 
not obey, I will, utterly pluck up, &e.—But as for 
those, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, that shall 
continue in their idolatrous and superstitious prac- 
tices, or that shall reject the Messiah, and continue 
in unbelief and disobedience, I will, utterly destroy 
that people. Thus Isa. lx. 12, The nation and 
kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish: 

yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted. .Those 
that will not be ruled by the grace of God, shall 
be ruled by the justice of God. And if disobedi- 
ent nations shall be destroyed, much more shall 
disobedient churches, from i better things are 
expected. 


CHAPTER XII. 


This chapter contains a single and distinct prophecy, which, under two symbols, a linen girdle left to ‘rot, and all vesses 
being filled with wine, foretels the utter-destruction that was destined to fall wpon the whole Jewish nation, including the 
individuals of every rank and denomination, 1-14. An exhortation to humiliation and Fepentance is subjoined, 15-21. 
And the cause of all the evils is assigned in the general corruption and profligacy of manners that prevailed without pros- 


pect of amendment, 22-27. 


The particular:mention of the joint downfall of the king and queen, 28, seems to justify the 


opinion which ascribes this prophecy:to the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim, whose fate, and sled of his a is m 


like manner noticed together, chap. xxii. 18. 


oat M. le » FHUS, saith the Lorp unto me, Go 
and get thee a linen girdle, and 
put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water. 
2 Sol got a girdle, according to the word. of 
the Lorp, and put 7¢ on my loins. 


‘NOTES ON CHAPTER XIII. 

' Verses 1,2. Thus saith the Lord unto me—The 
prophet here begins a new discourse. Go and get 
thee a girdle, &c.—“ God explains, at verse 11, what 
was meant by the symbol of the girdle, or sash, 
worn about the loins, namely, his people Israel, 
whom he redeemed of old, and attached to himself 
by a special covenant; that as a girdleserved for an 
ornament to the wearer, so they should be subservi- 
ent to the honour and glory of his name. But it is 
added, They would not hear, oy conform to his in- 
tentions ; therefore, being polluted with the guilt of 
their disobedience, they were, in that state, and on 
that very account, ‘to be carried into captivity ; con- 
formably to which the prophet was commanded not 
to put the girdle in water, that is, not to wash it, but 

382 


Babylon, Psa. exxxvii. 1. 


3 And the-word of the Lorp came A. a oo 
unto me the second time, saying, ——— 

A 'Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is 
upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and 
hide it there in a hole of the rock. — 


to leave it in that state.of filthiness which it had con- 
tracted in wearing.” So J got the girdle, according . 
to the word of the Lord—That is, according to God’s 
command. And put it on my loins—Used it as God 
directed me, not disputing the reason why God com- 
manded me “to do such a thing. 

Verse 4. Arise, go to Euphrates—God command- 
ed the prophet to go and hide the girdle on the bank 
of the Euphrates, to signify ‘that the Jews should be 
carried captive over that river, called the waters of 
In the margin of our an- 
cient English Bibles, it is observed, that, “because 
this river Perath, or Euphrates, was far from Jeru- 
salem, it is evident that this was done in a’vision. i 
And the generality of the best commentators have 


‘been of this opinion ; it not being probable that the 
3 


The prophet’s vision 


CHAPTER XIII. 


of the linen girdle. 


A.M. 3102. 5 So I went, and hid it by Euphra- 

B. C, 602. 

____—_ tes, as the Lorp commanded me. 

6 And it came to pass after many days, that 
the Lorp said unto me, Arise, go to Euphrates, 
and take the girdle from thence, which I com- 
manded thee to hide there. 

7 Then [ went to Euphrates, and digged, and 
took the girdle from the place where I had hid 
it: and behold, the girdle was ena cl it was 
profitable for nothings 

8 Then the word of the Lorp came unto me, 
saying, 

9 Thus saith the Lorp, After this. manner 
-* will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great 
pride of Jerusalem. : 

10 This evil people, which refise to hear my 
words, which > walk in the imagination of 


their heart, and walk after other gods, A. M. 3402, 
B. C. 602. 

to serve théta, and to worship them, 

shall even be as this girdle, which is good for 

nothing. 

11 For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a 
man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the 
whole house of Israel and the whole house of 
Judah, saith the Lorn: that ° they might 
be unto me for a people, and ‘for a name, 
and for a praise, and for a glory; but they 
would not hear. 

12 4 Therefore thou shalt speak unto thet 
this word; Thus saith the Lorp God of Israel, 
Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and. 
they shall say unto thee, Do we not certainly 
know that every bottle shall be filled with 
wine ? 


——, 


> Chap. ix..14; xi.8; xvi. 12. 


" atbev, xxvi. £9. 


L Or, stubbornness. © Exod. xix. 5--—4 Chap. xxxiii. 9, 


prophet should have been sent twice upon a journey 
of such considerable length and difficulty, to the very 
great loss of his time, merely upon the errands here 
mentioned, namely, to carry the girdle to the Eu- 
phrates, and to fetch it back, when, it seems, every 
purpose would have been answered altogether as 
well if the transaction had been represented in 
vision. Several things, it must be observed, are re- 
Jated in res as: actually done, which yet were 
certainly only performed in visions. One instance 
we -have chap. xxv. 15-29, where Jeremiah is 
commanded to take a cup of wine in his hand; and 
to cause several kings and nations, there enumerated, 


to drink of it: for it would be a perfect‘absurdity to, 


believe that he actually went round to all those kings 
and nations, and made them drink of the contents of 
his cup. And yet he makes no more distinction in 
this latter case, than in that now before us, between 
_ mental and bodily action. Another remarkable in- 
stance we have Gen. xv. 5, where the text says, that 
God brought Abraham forth abroad, and bid him 
tell the. stars; and yet it appears, by a subsequent 
verse, that the sun was not then gone down. Indeed, 
in all these cases, and in many more that might be 
mentioned of a similar kind, it made no difference 
as to the end God had in view, whether the transac- 
tions related were visionary or real; for either way 
they served equally to represent the events which it 
was God’s pleasure to make known. See apa 
and Blaney. 

Verse 9. After this manner will I mar the srhile 
of Judah, &c.—Or, as some translate the verse, 
“ Will I mar the glory of Judah, and the great honour 
of Jerusalem.” I will bring down their pride and 
stubbornness, by making them slaves and vassals to 
strangers, Lam. v. 8,13: Or, alluding to the trans- 
action about the girdle, “I will transportthem beyond 
the Euphrates; I will hide them in Babylon, as in 
the hole of a rock, whence they cannot come out. 
They shall be marred in ‘the midst of the nations, 

3 


without temple, without sacrifice, without priests, 
without external worship. I will humble their pre- 
sumption, and teach them to ackowledge and adore 
my mercy.” “ 
Verse 11. For as the girdle cleaveth to-the loins 
of a man—Here God shows the prophet why he 
commanded him, to put the girdle about’ his loins. 
So have I caused—Rather, had I caused ; to cleave 
unto me the house of Israel—I had betrothed them 
to myself in righteousness, and: entered into a mar- 
riage covenant with them, that they might cleave to 
me.as a wife cleaveth to her husband. By the laws 


|I gave them, the prophets I sent among them, and 


the favours which, in my providence, I showed them, 
I brought them near to myself, and allowed them 
access to me, and intercourse with me, above every 
other nation. That they might be unto me for a 
people—A peculiar people; that they might have the 
honour of being called by my name; and for a 
praise and a glory—That I might be glorified by 
their showing forth my power, goodness, and faith- 
fulness, and all my other glorious perfections to the 
world, so that I might be honoured and praised 
through them. 

Verse 12. T'herefore—Because the end intéteted 
by my goodness has not been answered upon them ; 
thou shalt speak unto them this word—Thou shalt 
show them the destruction coming upon them by 
another emblem. T'hus saith the Lord, Every bot- 
tle shall be filled with wine—God’s judgments. are 
often represented under the figure of a eup full of 
intoxicating liquor: see this metaphor pursued at 
large, chap. xxv. 15, &c. To the same purpose God 
tells them here that as they have all sinned, so 
should every one have his’share in the punishment. 
And they shall say unto thee, &e.—“ God, who knew 
the profaneness of their hearts, foretels the reply 
they would make to this threatening, that, taking it 
in a literal sense, they would make a jest of it, as if 
the words were intended to encourage intemperance, 

383 


Affectionate exhortation 


JEREMIAH. 


to repentance. 


“A. M. ag 13 Then shalt thou say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lorn, Behold, I will 
fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the 
kings that sit upon David’s throne, and the 
priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem, °* with drunkenness. 

14 And fI will dash them ? one against an- 
other, even the fathers and the sons together, 
saith the Lorp: I will not pity, nor spare, nor 
have mercy, * but destroy them. 

15 % Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: 
for the Lorp hath spoken. 


e Isa. li..17, 21; 
? Heb. a man against his brother. 
Josh. vii. 19. 


lxiii. 6; Chap. xxv, 27; li. 7—— Psa. ii. 9. 
3 Heb. "from destroying them. 


16 £& Give glory to the Lorp your orgie 
God, before he cause ® darkness, and 
before your feet stumble upon the dark moun- 
tains, and while ye ‘ look for light, he turn it 
into * the shadow of death, and make it gross 
darkness. 

‘17 But if ye will not al it, my soul shall 
weep in secret places for your pride; and !mine 
eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears, 
because the Lorn’s flock is carried wen cap- 
tive. . 

18 Say unto, ™the king and to the queen 


h Isa. v.30} viii. 22; Amos viii: 9,——i Isa. lix. 9, ——* Psa. 
xliv. 19. ! Chapter ix. 1; xiv. 17; Lament. i.2,16; ii. 18. 
m2 Kings xxiv. 12; Chap. xxii. 26. 


for either they did not or would not understand the 
drift of them.” Thus Lowth. But Blaney thinks 
their answer, Do we not know, &c., implies that, by 
a wilful mistake, they construed his words as “meant 
to tell them of a plentiful vintage that was coming 
on, which would fill all their wine-vessels ; and of 
this they claimed to be as good judges as he, from the 
promising appearance of the vineyards. 
said, Do you tell us this as a piece of news, or a su- 
pernatural discovery? Is it not evident to us as 
well as to you? The prophet is therefore directed 
to deal more plainly with them, and to tell them that 
the wine he meant was not stich as would exhilarate, 
but suchas would intoxicate; being no other than 
what would be poured out of the wine-cup of God’s 
fury, tothe subversion of all ranks and orders of 
men among them.” 

Verses 13, 14. Behold, I will fill all the inhabit- 
ants with drunkenness—There is a wine of astonish- 
ment and confusion, Psa. lx. 3, With that wine, 
saith God, I will fill all orders of persons, kings, 
priests, prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem. And J.will dash them one against another— 
I will permit an evil spirit of strife and: division to 
arise among them, as Judges ix. 23,so that they shall 
be set oné against another, fathers against their sons, 


and sons against. their fathers,.and family against 


family ; so that, having no union among themsélves, 
or friendly co-operation, they shall become an easy 
prey to their enemies. Thus I will confound and 
destroy them, as earthen vessels are broken to pieces 
when they are dashed one against another. ‘The 
words allude to the earthen bottles which were to be 
filled with-wine, verse 12. J will not pity nor.spare, 
but destroy, &c.—For they will not pity, nor spare, 
nor have mercy, but destroy one another: see Hab. 
ii. 15,16. Therefore let them not presume upon my 
mercy, for lam resolved to show them no mercy, 
put to bring them to utter ruin, unless a thorough 
ref.rmation take place. 4 
Verses 15-17. Hear ye, &c.—The prophet pro- 
ceeds to. give them good counsel; which, if it had 
been taken, the desolation and destruction threat- 
ened would have been prevented. Be not proud— 
384 


As if they ||m 


Pride was one of the sins for Which God had a con- 
troversy with them, verse 9. Let them mortify and 
forsake this and their other sins, and God will let 
fall his controversy with them. Give glory to the 
Lord your God—Glorify God by an, humble con- 
fession of your sins, by submitting yourselves to him, 
humbling yourselves under his word, and under his 
ighty-hand ; before he cause darkness—Before he 
bring upon you the night of affliction, even his great 
and heavy judgments. Light is the emblem of joy, 
and happy times are expressed by bright and plea- 


sant days. On the contrary, calamities and troubles 
are represented by night and darkness, when every 
thing looks melancholy and: dismal. d before 


your feet stumble, &c.—Before the time come when 
ye shall be forced.to flee by night unto the moun- 
tains for fear of your enemies. _Or,;more generally, 
before you find yourselves overtaken by the pursu 
ing judgments of God, notwithstanding all your 
endeavours to outrun and escape from: them. And 
while ye look for light—That is, for relief and com- 
fort; he turn it_into the shadow of death—Involve 
you in most dismal and terrible calamities, out of 
which you shall be utterly unable to extricate your- 
selves. But if ye will not hear—Will not submit to 
and obey the word, but continue to be refractory ; 
my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride— 
Your haughtiness, stubbornness, and vain confidence; 
and mine eye shall weep sore, &¢e.—Not chiefly, 
nor so much, because my relations, friends, and 


neighbours are involved in trouble and distress, but 


because the Lord’s flock—His people, and the sheep 
of his pasture; are carried away captive—Observe, 
reader, that should always grieve us most by which 
God’s honour suffers, and the interest of his kingdom 
is weakened. 

Verse 18. Say unto the king and queen—That is, 
to Jehoiachin, called also Coniah, and his mother, 
who were carried captives to Babylon at the first 
coming of Nebuchadnezzar; see chap. xxii. 26; 2 
Kings xxiv.12. Some indeed suppose that Zedekiah 
and his mother are intended, which does not appear 
so probable.. Humble yourselves—By true repent- 
ance, and so both give glory to God, and set a good 

ry 


An awful message to the 


= 


CHAPTER XIII. 


anhabitants of Jerusalem 


A. M. 3402. Humble yourselves, sit down: 

B. C. 602. 

your * principalities shall come down, 
even the crown of your glory. 

19 The cities of the south shall be shut up, 
and none shall open ¢hem: Judah shall be car- 
ried away captive all of it, x shall be wholly 
carried away captive. 


20 Lift up your eyes, and behold them * that 


come from the north: where is the flock that 
was given thee, thy beautiful flock ? 
21 What wilt thou say when he shall ‘punish 


—° Chap. 


* Or, head-tires. 


2 Ch. vi. 22.——® Heb. visit upon. 
vi. 24.——P Chap. v. 19; xvi. 10. 


example to your subjects; and sit down—Sit down 
and consider what is coming; sit:\down and lament 
your condition. For your principalities shall come 
down—The honour and power by which you value 
yourselves, and in which you confide, even the crown 
of your glory—For when you are led away captive, 
where will the badges of your power and pre-emi- 
nence be then ? Blessed be God, there.is a crown 
of glory which shall never come down, and which 
they who humble themselves before God, in true 
repentance, shall in due time inherit. 

Verses 19-21. The cities of the'south, &c.—The 
cities of Judah, which lay in the southern part of 
Canaan, shall be straitly besieged by the enemy, so 
that there shall be no going in and out; or shall be 
deserted by the inhabitants. Or, as some think, the 
cities of Egypt are intended, from whence the Jews 
expected succour. These should. fail them, and they 
should find no access to them. Lift-wp your eyes, 


&c.—He speaks as if their enemies were. even then. 


upon their march, nay, so near, that if they did but 
lift up their eyes and look, they might see them com- 
ing. Where is the flock that was given thee?—He 
speaks to the king, representing him under the idea 
of a shepherd, and the people under that of a flock. 
Or rather, as the pronouns are feminine, he address- 
es the daughter of Judah, that is, the city or state. 
“ What wilt thou say, when the Lord shall demand 
of thee an account of the'people committed'to thy 
trust? -What wilt thou answer when the sovereign 
monarch shall see dissipated, diminished, weakened, 
destroyed, thy beautiful flock,” or, as JNINDN {Ry 
rather signifies, the flock of thy glory. Inthe multi- 
tude of people, says Solomon, ts the king’s honour. 
What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee?— 
Thou wilt have nothing to say, but be wholly con- 
founded, when God shall visit thee by this sore 
judgment: Or, when Nebuchadnezzar’s army, sent 
by God, shall visit thee. For thou hast taught them 
to be captains, &c.—Houbigant renders it, “Since 
thou hast made them expert against thee, and hast 
drawn them upon thine own head;” and Blaney, 
more literally, “Seeing it is thou that teachest them 
to be rulers in chief over thee.” “Thou hast fre- 
quently called them to thy succour, and taught them 
the way to thy country, whereof they dreamed not 
Vou. II. ( 25 ) 


for 


 luded to. 


thee? for thou hast taught them fo A. M. 3402 
. C. 602. 

be. captains, and as chief over thee: 

shall not ° sorrows take thee, as a woman in 

travail ? 

22 % And if thou say in thy heart, » Where- 
fore-come these things upon me? For the 
greatness of thine iniquity are ¢thy skirts dis- 
covered, and thy heels * made. bare. ; 

23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the 
leopard his spots? then may ye also do 0 good, 
that are 7.accustomed to do evil. 


q Isa. ili. 17; xlvii. 2, 3; Ver. 26; . Beek: xvi. 37, 38, 39; Nah. 
ii. 5. -8'Or, shall be ‘violently taken away. 7 Heb: tang. 


before; and not only thus, but by soctniileting 
crimes upon crimes, and filling up the measure of 
thine iniquity, thou hast drawn down the vengeance 
of heaven, and put thyself in the power of the Chal- 
deans.” See Calmet. Some have understood fhe 
alliances, contracted heretofore with the Assyrians 
by Ahaz, and the conduct of Hezekiah toward the 
ambassadors of the king of Babylon, to be here al- 
“But I rather think,” says Blaney, “ that 
the wicked manners’ of the people are principally 
designed; which put them out of the protection of 
Almighty God, and rendered them an easy conquest 
to any enemy that came against them. Thus they 
taught their enemies to oppress, and to be lords over 
them; against whom, but for their own faults, they 
might have maintained their security and independ- 
ence.” 

Verse (22. If thou say, W herefore come these 
things upon me?—Hypocrites will rarely confess 
their own shame and God’s righteousness, but are 
ready to expostulate with him, and to inquire why 
he hath dealt so with them, as if he had treated them 
unjustly. But, saith God, For the greatness of thine 
iniquity are thy skirts discovered, &c.—That is, 
thou art carried into captivity, stripped and bare, 
without covering to thy nakedness ; it being the bar- 
barous custom of conquerors, in ancient times, to 
treat their captives with such indignities in conduct- 
ing them to ‘the place of their intended residence : 
see note on Isa. iii. 17; and Nahum iii. 5. Lowth 
thinks the words may also allude to the punishment 
that used to be inflicted upon common harlots and 
adulteresses, which was to strip them naked, and ex- 
pose them to the eyes of the world: and thus God 
threatened he would deal with Jerusalem, upon ac- 
count of her spiritual fornication. 

Verse 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, &c. 
—The word Cushi, here rendered Ethiopian, often 
signifies Arabian, in the Scriptures ; Ethiopia being, 
by ancient writers, distinguished into Eastern (the 
same With Arabia) ‘and Western Ethiapia. But here 
an inhabitant of the latter, that is, of Ethiopia proper- 
ly so called, seems evidently to be meant, the people 
of that country, which lay south of Egypt, being 
much more remarkable than the Arabians for their 
black colour. Itseems hardly necessary to observe 

by) 


A grievous drought JEREMIAH. and Famine foretold. 
A. M. 3402. refore wil E h A. M, 3402. 
ha site 24 Therefore will I scatter them || thy face, that thy shame may appear. A.M, 3402. 


as the stubble that passeth away oi 
the wind of the wilderness. 

25 *'This is thy lot, the portion of thy mea- 
sures from me, saith the Lorn; because thou 
hast forgotten me, and trusted in * falsehood. 

26. Therefore ® will I discover. thy skirts upon 


27 I have seen thine adulteries, and 
thy *neighings, the lewdness of thy whore- 
dom, and thine abominations ¥on the hills 
in the fields. Wo unto thee, O Jerusalem! 
wilt thou not be made clean? * when shall 
it once be? : 


‘1 


r Psa. i. 43 Hos. xiii. 3. 
x. 14. 


5 Job xx. 29 ; Psa. xi. o— Ch. 
« Verse 22; Lent 1 Re Ezekiel xvi: “37 5. xxiii.29 ; 


—— 


Hos. ii. 10.—* Chap. v. 8——y Isa. Ixv. 7; Chap. ii. 20; iii. 
2, 6; Deeks vi. 13, at Heb. after when. yet? 


to the reader, that Jeremiah does not intend to ex- 
press here the absolute impossibility of a change 
taking place in the principles and practices of the 
ignorant and wicked. ‘'To suppose this, would be 
to contradict the whole tenor of his writings, and 
to render insignificant and absurd all his invitations 
to xrepentance. Nay, it appears from the last verse 
of this chapter that he did not suppose the reforma- 
tion even. of this people to be an absolute impossibili- 
ty. We are therefore to understand this as a pro- 
verbial expression, which, like many others in Serip- 
ture, is not to be taken in ‘the strictness of the letter ; 
the prophet designing only to express the extreme 
difficulty of a moral change in habitual sinners, and 
particularly in those presumptuous and obstinate sin- 
ners of Israél to whom his discourse is directed, »_ 
Dodd. 

, Verses 24,25. Therefore will I scatter then— 
Separate them fronrone another, and disperse them 
abroad in that strange and remote country to which 
they are carried captive; as the stubble, or chaff, 
rather, that passeth away by the wind—That is dis- 
sipated and carried far away by a fierce wind: he 
adds, of the wilderness, to render the declaration the 
more emphatical, the chaff being more easily and 
effectually scattered by the wind in an open place, 
where there are no houses, T'his is the portion of 


thy measures from me—What thou wilt receive of 
my hand; because thou hast forgotten me—The fa- 
vours I have bestowed upon thee, and the obligations 
thou art underto me: of these thou hast no sense, 
no remembrance; and trusted in falsehood—In 
idols, in an arm of flesh, in the self- flatteries of a de- 
ceitful heart. 

Verses 26, 27. Therefore will Idiscover thy skirts 
—tLay thee open to shame and disgrace. See on 
verse 22. Ihave seen thine adulteries—Thy idola- 
tries; thy inordinate desire after strange gods, which 
thou hast been impatient to gratify: thy neighings— 
A metaphorical expression taken. from horses neigh- 
ing to each other; thelewdness of thy whoredoms— 
Thy impudence and unsatiableness in the worship 
of idols, on the hills, in the fields, upon the high’ 
places. Wo unto thee, O Jerusalem—Miserable art 
thou, and greater miseries await thee, as the fruit of 
such practices. Wiltthou not be made clean?—The 
prophet here expresses, in the strongest manner, his 
desire for the repentance and reformation of this 
people. The original, my nD, When once? is re- 
markably emphatical. The aposiopesis, as it is 


‘called, or form of speech, by which, through a 


vehement affection, the. prophet suddenly breaks 
off his discourse, :is remarkably beautiful and ex- 


pressive. 5 


CHAPTER XIV.. 


It is probable that the prophecy contained in this and the following chapter was delivered not long after the foregang, namety, 


in the beginning of Jehoiakim’s reign, since. the subject matter of it seems to agree well with this, season. 
phet foretels great distress that should be caused in Judah by a long drought, 1-6. 
makes a confession of sins, and supplicates the divine mercy, 7-9. 
(4,) Jeremiah complains of false prophets, who amused the people with contrary predictions ; but 
whom God disclaims, threatening both them, andthe people who listened to them, with sword and famine, 13-18. 


tion to, punish, 10-12. 


(1;)' The pro- 
(2,) In the name of the people he 
(3,) God will not be entreated, but declares his resolu- 


The 


. prophet renews his supplications in the people’s name and behalf, 19-22, 


A. M. 3403, 


(THE word of the Lorn that came to 
B. C. 601. 


Jeremiah concerning 'the dearth. 


2 Judah mourneth, and * the gates A.M. 3403. 


thereof languish; they are ” black ae 


1 Heb. the words n the dearths, or, restraint. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIV. 
Verse 1. The word of the Lord concerning the 
dearth—Hebrew, niyan 737 Oy, respecting the 
matters of the restraints, that is, the drought, when 


the showers were restrained, or, as Moses and Solo-! 


e 


asa. iii. 26——® Chap. viii. 21. 


mon express it, when the heaven was shut up, and 
there was no rain. See Deut. xi. 17; 1 Kings vii. 
35. Thus the LXX., rep. rae abooaitie concerning 
the want of rain. So also the Chaldee and Syriac 
versions: and thus our translators understand the 
( 25* ) rt ee 


, 


The prophet, in the people’s name, 


CHAPTER XIV. 


_ makes a confession of sins. 


A. M. 3403. unto the ground ; 
B. C, 601. 


and °the cry of 
Jerusalem is gine up., 

3 And their nobles. have sent their little ones 
to the waters: they came to the pits, and found 
no water; they returned with their. vessels 
empty ; they were ‘ashamed and confounded, 
*and covered their heads. é 

4 Because the ground is chapt, for there was 
no rain in the earth, the ploughmen ‘were 
ashamed, they covered their heads. é, 

5 Yea; the hind also calved in the field, and 
forsook z¢, because there was no grass. 


6 And ‘ the wild asses: did stand in A. M. a8 
the high places, they snuffed up the ——_—~ 
wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because 
there was no grass. 

7 7 O Lorn, though our iniquities testify 
against. us, do thou i¢ & for thy name’s sake: 
for our backslidings are many ; we have sinned 
against thee. 

8 »O the hope of Israel, the Saviour thereof 
in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a 
stranger in the Jand, and asa wayfaring man 
that turnefh aside to tarry for a roe 


¢ 1 Sam, v. 12.——4 Psa. xl. 14. 


© 2 Sam. xv. 30. 


3 


word, chap. xvii. 8, rendering it, not dearth, as here, 
but drought: a calamity which, however, produced 
a dearth or famine, similar, it seems, to that in the 
time of Elijah. At what precise time this great 
drought took place, we are not informed in the re- 
cords of history: nor whether it be the same with 
that of which an intimation is given chap iii. °3, 
where see the note. That it was a calamity very 
incident to the land of Israel, and applied as a pun- 
ishment of sin, appears from many parts of the Old 
Testament. The effects of it are described in the 
next five verses in, very elegant and moving lan- 
guage, and afterward earnestly deprecated. 

Verse 2. Judah mourneth—The people of Judah 
and Jerusalem, here considered collectively, and re- 
presented as a mother oppressed with grief for the 


miseries which have come upon her children, And 


the gates languish; they are black—“-They are in 
deep mourning:” so Blaney, who observes, “ The 
gates of cities, being places of public resort, where the 
courts-ef justice were held, and other common busi- 
ness transacted, seem here to be put for the persons 
_ Wont to meet there ; in like manner as when we say, 

he court is in mourning,’ we mean the persons 
that attend the court. So that by this passage we 


tg “are to understand, that all the persons who appeared 


“in public were dejected, and put on black, or mourn- 
ing, on account of the national distress. » And the 
cry of Jerusalem is gone up—Namely, to heaven: 
That is, the ery of the inhabitants of Jerusalem; of 
their sin and trouble, but not, as it seems, of their 
confessions, prayers, ‘and supplications: 

Verses 3-6. And their nobles, &c.—This scarcity 
of water afflicted not poor persons only, who had 
not such means of supplying their necessities as the 
vich; but the greatest among them, who sent their 
little ones, (or inferiors, as TA VY, seems here 
rather to signify,) to the places made to receive and 
retain water; who, finding none, returned with their 
vessels empty, like persons ashamed, and troubled 
upon seeing their expectations frustrated. Jerusa- 
lem, it must be observed, was supplied with water 
by two lakes, or Pools, termed the.upper pool, and 
the lower pool ; Isa, vii. 3; and xxii. 9; from which 
the water was conveyed by pipes or ‘conduits, for 
the use of the city. Because the ground is chapt— 

2 


Hebrew, Nn, broken, bruised, turned into dust. 
The ploughmen— The husbandmen, as "728, pro- 
perly signifies; were ashamed—Disappointed in 
their hopes of reaping fruit from their labours. 
They covered their heads—An expression of great 
affliction and mourning. The hind also calved and 
forsook it—The hinds are loving creatures, and as 
all creatures, by a natural instinct, love their young, 
so the hinds especially; but their moisture being 
dried up, they had not milk for them, but were 
forced to leave them, and to run hither and thither 
to seek grass to eat. And the wild asses, &c.— 
The wild asses, wanting water, got upon the high 
places, or cliffs, where the air was cooler and its 
current stronger than in lower places, and their 
sucked in the wind; and this, it is said, they did 
like dragons, which are reputed to delight in cool 


‘places, and are said by Aristotle and Pliny to stand 


frequently upon high places imbibing the cool] air. 
Their eyes did fail; &c.—They languished, or pined 
away for want of food; in which case the’ natural 
splendour of the eyes, which» is very great in wild 
asses, grows dull or languid. 

Verse 7. O Lord; &c.—The prophet, having de- 
scribed their misery both in its cause, the drought, 
and the effects produced thereby, here applies him- 
self to God, who alone could remove it, confessing 
that their many and great sins and backslidings had 
well deserved to be thus severely scourged. Though 
our iniquities testify against us—That thou art 
righteous in what thou hast done, and make it evi- 
dent that we have merited the most dreadful judg- 
ments thy wrath can inflict; yet do thou it—Do 
thou what we stand in need of; give us rain, though 
not for our sake; we deserve no such kindness from 
thee, yet for thy name’s sake; for the sake of thy 
word and promise, by which thou, engagest to hear 
the prayers of thy people in their distress, Psa. 1. ° 
15, and for thine honour and glory. 

Verses 8,9. O the hope of Israel—That is, the 
object of Israel’s hope; the Being in whom alone 
thy people Israel have been wont to hope, or in 
whom they have just reason to hope; the Saviour 
thereof in time of trouble—Who hast formerly been 
their Saviour in their distresses, and who alone canst 
save them in such times of trouble as thou hast now 

387 


The afflictions and 


A. M. 3403. 


9 Why shouldest thou be as a man 
B. C. 601. 


astonished, as a mighty man ‘ that 
cannot save? yet thou, O Lorn, ‘art in the 
midst of us, and ? we are called by = name ; 
leave us not. 

10 { Thus saith the Lorp unto this people, 
'T hus have they loved to wander, they have 
not refrained their feet, therefore the Lorp doth 
not accept them ; ™ he will now remember their 
iniquity, and visit their sins. 

11 Then said the Lory unto me, ® Pray not)||- 
for this people for their good. 

12 ° When they fast, I will not hear their cry; 
and ? when they offer burnt-offering and an 
oblation, I will not accept them; but ¢I will 
consume them by the sword, and by the famine, 
and by the pestilence. — 

13 %* Then éaid I, Ah, Lord Gop! behold, 
the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see 
the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I 
will give you ? assured peace in this place. 

14 Then the Lorp said unto me, * The pro- 
phets prophesy lies in my name: ‘I sent them 


JEREMIAH. 


desolations of the land. 


not, neither have I commanded them, A. M. 3403. 
neither spake unto them: they pro- Neal 
phesy unto you a false vision and divination, 
and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their 
heart. 

15 Therefore thus saith the Lorp concerning 
the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I 
sent them not, “yet they say, Sword and famine 
shall not be in this land; By sword and famine 
shall those prophets be conmunerd ; 

16 And the people to whom they prophesy 


shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, 


because of the famine, and the sword; vanil 
they shall have none to bury them, them, their 
wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters: for I 
will pour their wickedness upon them. 

17 % Therefore thou shalt say this word unto 
them; ¥ Let mine eyes run down with tears 
night and day, and let them not cease: * for the 
virgin daughter of my people is broken with a 
great breach, with a very grievous blow. 

18 If I go forth into *the field, then behold 
the slain with the sword | and _ if I enter into 


i Tsaiah lix. 1. k Exodus xxix. 45, 46; Levit. xxvi. 11, 12. 
? Heb. thy name is called upon us, Dan. ix. 18, 19. Chap. ii. 
23, 24, 25.——™ Hosea viii. 13; ix. 9. n Exodus xxxii. 10; 
Chap. vii. 16; xi. 14. © Prov. i. 28 ; Isa. i. 15; lviii. 3; Chap. 
xn 1; Ezek. viii. 18; Mic. iii. 4; Zech. vii. 13. 


brought them into; why shouldest thou be as a 
stranger in the land?—That is, as one who, having 
no permanent interest in the land, is little concerned 
for its welfare; and as a.wayfaring man, &c.—As 
a traveller who enters a‘place to stay only for a. 
night, and never inquires, nor takes'any care about 
the affairs of it. Why shouldest thou be as aman 
astonished—“ As a man void of counsel:” so Hou- 
bigant. Oras one in such disorder, through some 
great emotion of mind, that he is able to do nothing. 
As a mighty man, &c.—As a mere man, who, though 
mighty, yet in many cases cannot save; or who, 
through some fear or surprise, is incapacitated. to 
make use of his strength. Yet thou, O Lord, art in 
the midst of ws—Of the whole land, according to 
thy declaration, Num. xxxv. 34, J the Lord dwell 
among the children of Israel. 

Verses 10-12. Thus saith the Lord, &c.—Here 
God returns an answer ‘to the complaints and ex- 
postulations of the prophet, contained in. the eight 
preceding verses. They have loved to wander— 
They have been fond of their idols; and despising 
the divine succour, have run after that of strangers, 
and they have persisted in their sinful courses, not- 
withstanding all counsels. Therefore the Lord doth 
not accept them—He will not accept their own pray- 
ers or humiliations, nor thine intercessions on their 
behalf, but will punish them according to their 
deserts. When they fast, I will not hear—It is 

388 


P Chap. vi. 20; vii. 21, 22.——4 Chap. ix. 16—* Chap. iv. 10, 
5 Heb. peace of truth. s Chap. xxvil. 10.—+t Chap. xxii. 21, 
xxvil. 15; xxix. 8. «Chapter v. 12, 13. x Psalm Ixxix. 3. 
yChap. ix. 1; xiii..17; Lam.i. 16; ii. 18. 2 Chap. viii. 21, 
a Wzek. vii. 15. 


likely a public fast had been appointed upon occa- 
sion of this drought, as there was in a like’ case in 
the Prophet Joel’s time. But Iavill consume them 
by the sword, famine, and pestilence—Thus God 
threatens to add to the drought three sore judgments, 
ordinarily accompanying one another, both in Ni 

threatenings and in the execution of them. 

Verses 13-16. Ah, Lord God! Behold the pro- 
phets, &c.—See note on chap. iv. 10. Thus saith 
the Lord—And what he saith he will assuredly 
make good; ‘By the sword and famine shall those 
prophets be consumed—They shall fall first by those 
very judgments, with the hopes of an exemption 
from which they have flattered others. And the 
people shall be cast out in the streets, &e—The 
people contributed to their own delusions, and rea- 
dily hearkened to such false prophets as confirmed 
them in. their. evil ways: God therefore justly 
threatens to punish them, because they were un- 
willing to know the truth. 

Verses 17,18. Therefore thou shalt say this word 
unto them—ither, 1st, The word spoken above ; the 
threatenings denounced in the last two verses against 
the false prophets and the people, the deceivers and 
the deceived: or, 2d, As the passage is generally in: 
terpreted, and as our translators have understood it, 
the words following, namely, the prophet’s Jament- 
ation and prayer. Let mine eyes run down with 
tears—As if he had said, However insensible you are 

a) 


The prophet renews his supplications 


CHAPTER XIV. 


in the people’s name and behalf. 


* % 3403. the city, then behold them that are)}|and the iniquity of our fathers: for An M. 3403, 


~ sick with famine! yea, both the pro-||* we have sinned against thee. 


phet and the priest ‘go about into a land that 
they know not. 

19 >Hast thou sient rejected Judah ? hath 
thy soul loathed Zion? Why hast thou smit- 
ten us, and ° there is no-healing for us? ¢ we 
looked for peace, and there is no good; and for 
the time of healing, and behold trouble ! 

20 We acknowledge, O Lorn, our wickedness, 


*Or, make merchandise against a land, and men acknowledge it 
not, Chap. v. 13,——> Lam. v. 22.——* Chap. xv. 18.—4 Chap. 
vill. 15. 


of your own condition, yet God commands me to 
bewail those calamities which I foresee are coming 
upon you. For the virgin daughter of my people 
—That is as dear to me as a daughter to her father ; 
is broken with a great breach—Much greater than 
any she has yet sustained. The dissolution of a 
government, or body politic, is called a breach, by 
way of allusion to the breaking or digjointing the 
limbs of a human body. The prophet speaks as’ if 
he already saw the miseries attending the invasion 
of the country by the Chaldeans. Jf I go forth into 
the field, &c.—Multitudes lie dead in the field, slain 
with the sword; and in the city multitudes lie dy- 
ing for want of food: doleful spectacle! Yea both 
the prophet and the priest—Namely, the false pro- 
phets, who flattered the people with their lies, and 
the wicked priests, who persecuted the true pro- 
phets, are now expelled their country, and go about 
into aland they know not-——Either as prisoners and 
captives, whithersoever their conquerors lead them ; 
or, as fugitives and vagabonds, wherever they can 
find shelter. Some understand it of the true pro- 
phets, Ezekiel and Daniel, who were carried to 
Babylon with the rest.» But as the Hebrew word 
here used, 17d, properly signifies; to go about on ac- 
count of traffic, or, merchandise, the sense of the 
clause may be, “'The prophet and the priest carry 
on a trade against the land, and acknowledge it not.” 
That is, they deceive the people with lying divina- 
tions for the sake of gain, and whem accused of it, 
will not own their guilt. Blaney renders it, They 
go trafficking about the city, meaning, “They go 
about with their false doctrine and lying predic- 
tions, as pedlers do with their wares, seeking their 
own gain,” and take no knowledge—That is, “ pay 
no regard to.the miseries in which their country is 
involved, but act as if they were totally insensible 
of them.” ; 

Verses 19-22. Hast.thou utterly rejected Judah? 
—The prophet again returns to God, and expostu- 
lates with him, humbly imploring mercy for his peo- 
ple, which shows that he did not understand God’s 
words to him, (verse 11,) as an absolute prohibition 
to pray for them. . Hath thy soul loathed Zion ?— 
Which was formerly thy delight, and the place thou 
didst choose for thy special residence. Why hast 
thou smitten, &c.—That is, So smitten that there is 

3 


C. 601. 


21 Do not abhor ws; for thy name’s sake, do 
not disgrace the throne of thy glory: fremem- 
ber, break not thy covenant with us. 

22 ® Are there any among * the vanities of the 
Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the hea- 
vens give showers? ‘Art not thou he, O Lorp 
our God’? therefore we will wait upon thee: for 
thou hast made all these things. 


~, © Psalm evi. 6; Dan. ix. 8.——f Psalm Ixxiv. 2,20; evi. 45. 


& Zech. x. 1, 2.——» Deut. xxxii: 21—— Psa, exxxv. 7; exlvii. 
8; Isa. xxx. 23; Chap. v: 24; x. 13. 


no healing—Wounded us past recovery; none else 
can, and thou wilt not heal us. We looked for peace, 
&c.—All our hopes and expectations have been frus- 
trated. We acknowledge our wickedness—The ac- 
cumulated guilt of our land; and the iniquity of our 
fathers—Which we have~ imitated, and therefore 
are justly punished for it. We do not cover 
our ‘sin, in which case we know we should not ob- 
tain mercy; we confess it, and hope to find thee 
faithful and just in forgiving it. Do not abhor us— 
Hebrew, yen bw, do not despise,or reject us. What 
he deprecates is” ‘the judgments. come already, and 
further coming on the people, the famine, sword, and 
pestilence, with the drought, under the sad effects of 
which they at present laboured ; and he prays for 
their removal or prevention in these words, in which 
he implies, that the love of God to a people is the 
source of all the good which they can expect, and his 
wrath the source of all evil that can befall them. To 
enforce his petition he pleads, 1st, God’s honour: For 
thyname’s sake—That name ofthine on which we call, 
and by which we are called; thy nature and attributes; 
let not these suffer an eclipse; let it not be said or 
thought by the heathen that thou art either unable or 
unwilling to protectand save thy people. Do not dis- 
grace the throne of thy glory—The temple, with the 
ark in it, the especial symbol of thy presence, termed 
(chap. xvii. 12,) aglorioushigh throne fromthe begin- 
ning. Let not the desolations of it give occasion to 
idolaters to reproach him that used to be worshipped 


there, as if he wanted power or inclination to protect it ; 


Or, as ‘if the gods of Babylon had been too strong for 
him: 2d, He pleads God’s promise and covenant 
with Israel: Remember, break not thy covenant with 
us—“'Thou hast promised to be our God, and that 
we should be thy people, chap. xi. 4; that is, That 
thou wouldst take us under thy protection. We have 
indeed forfeited all our title to thy promises by our 
sins, yet we beseech thee still to remember the rela- 
tion we bear to thee.” Are there any among the 
vanities of the Gentiles—The vain idols, the imagin- 
ary beings, which have no existence save in the fan- 
cies of their worshippers, or the gods made by men’s 
hands; that can give rain? or can the heavens give 
showers?—Without thy providence. Are showers 
purely owing to natural causes? Dost thou not di- 
rect when and where they shall fall? The giving 
389 


Wo wWitercession shall be accepted 


JEREMIAH. 


in behalf of this people. 


rain in its season is anargument for God’s providence, 
often insisted upon in the Scriptures: see note on 
chap. v..24.. And the prophet, imploring from God 
a removal of the drought, argues from the impossi- 
bility of obtaining relief in any other way, neither 


the heathen idols, nor the clouds, without God’s will, 
being able to give rain. Art not thou, he, O Lord 
our God?—Namely, that givest it. Therefore we 
will wait upon thee—For this blessing, and for the 
supply of all our other wants. 


CHAPTER XV. 


In this chapter, (1,) God replies to the preceding- supplications, by declaring that. not even the intercession of his favoured 
servants, Moses and Samuel, should divert him. from executing his purpose of vengeance against Judah; which is de- 


nounced in terms of great severity, 1-9. 


and is assured of special protection while his enemies should be ruined, 10-14. 


(2,) Jeremiah complains to God of his continued struggle with his persecutors, 


(3,) He complains that notwithstanding 


his sincerity; fidelity, and diligence, in the discharge of his prophetical office, and his delight in God’s word and will, he 


had very little comfort in his work, 15-18. 


(4,) Assurances of protection, security, and aid in the discharge of his office 


are renewed to him, on condition of obedience and fidelity on lis part, 19-21. 


A. M. 3403. 


(THEN said the Lorp, unto’ me, 
B. C. 601. 


*'Though » Moses and ° Samuel 
stood before me, yet my mind-could not be to- 
ward this, people: cast them out of my sight, 
and let them go forth. 

2 And it shall come to pass, if they say unto 
thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou 
shalt tell them, Thus saith the Lorp; 4 Such 
as are for death, to death; and such as are for 
the sword, to the sword; and such as are for 
the famine, to the famine; and such as are for 
the captivity, to the captivity. 


4 Ezekiel xiv. 14.— Exodus xxxii. 11,12; Psalm xcix. 6. 
©] Samuel vil. 9. 4 Chapter xiii. 11; Ezek. v. 2,12; Zech. 
xi, 9. Lev. xxvi. 16.——1 Heb. ‘families. £ Chap. vii. 33 ; 
Deut. xxviii. 26. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XV. 

Versel. Then said the Lord unto me, &¢e.—This 
is the Lord’s answer to the fervent prayers of Jere- 
miah, contained in the last four verses of the pre- 
ceding chapter. Though Moses and Samuel stood 
before me—By prayer or sacrifice to reconcile me to 
them; yet my mind could not be toward this people 
—Yet I could not be prevailed with to admit them 
into favour. “ As God had forbidden Jeremiah before || x 
to intercede for them, because it would be to no pur- 
- pose; so here he declares, that he would not admit 
the prayers of any others, though eminent favourites, 
in their belialf. Moses obtained pardon for the people 
after their sin in making the golden calf, Ex. xxxii. 
34; and again, after their despising the promised 
land, Num. xiv. 20, \Samuel’s intercession prevailed 
for their deliverance out of the hands of the Philis- 
tines, 1 Sam. vii. 9. And these two persons are men- 
tioned together, as remarkably prevalent by their 
prayers, Psa. xeix. 6,8. But here God says, that if 
these very persons were alive, and in that near at- 
tendance to him which they formerly enjoyed, (for 
that is the import of the phrase, 70 stand before 
him,) yet even their prayers should not avert his 

390 


3 And | will © appoint over: them een 
four kinds, saith the Lorp: the ———— 
sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and ‘the 
fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, 
to devour and destroy. 

4 And *I will cause them to be & rrp into 
all kingdoms of the earth, because of » Manas- 
seh the son of Harekinh king of Judah, for 
that which he did in Jerusalem. _ 

5 For‘ who shall have pity upon thee, O Jeru- 
salem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who 
shall go aside *to ask, how thou doest ? 


? Heb. Iwill give them for a removing.— Deut. xxvilj. 25 ; 
Chapter xxiv, 9; Ezekiel xxiii. 46— 2 Kings xxi. 11, &c. ; 
xxill. 26; xxiv. 3, 4.——i Isaiah li. 19 ——° Hebrew, to ask of 
thy peace. 


judgments from his people. 2 Lowth, Cast them 
out of my sight—Declare that they shall be cast out, 
as that which is in the highest degree odious and 
offensive; or tell them to come no more to me with 
their supplications, but to go out of my sanctuary. 
A strong declaration of determined displeasure. 
Thus the Lord dismisses them with a severity where- 
of we have few a in Scripture. See Ezek. 
xiv. 14, 16. 

Verses 2-5. If they say unto thee, Whither shall 
we go forth?—If they ask thee what thou meanest 
by going forth, and whither they shall go: thow 
shalt tell them, Such as are for death to death, &e.— 
In general, You shall go forth, saith God, to ruin and 
destruction; but shall not be all destroyed in one 
and the same way, but every one shall perish in that 
way which God hath appointed :*some shall be de- 
stroyed by the pestilence, (for that is here to be un- 
derstood by death, Rev. vi. 8, it being death without 
visible means,) others shall be destroyed by famine, 
others by the sword of the enemy, others shall go 
into captivity; but one way or other on aaa 
part of you shall be consumed. And I will a 
over them four kinds—Namely, of destroyers 


God's judgments 


CHAPTER XV. 


against Judah.» 


A.M. 3103. 6 *'Thou hast forsaken me, saith 


the Lorn, thou art ! gone backward: 


therefore will I stretch out my hand against || 


thee, and destroy thee ; ™Tam weary with re- 
penting. 

7 And I will fan them with a fan in the gates 
of the land; I will bereave them of 4 chilatrenis 


k Chapter i ii. 13.—! Chap. vii. 24.—™ Hos. xiii. 14. = On, 
whatsoever is dear. 4 Isa. ix. 13; Chap. v. 3; Amos iv. 10, IT. 


I will destroy my people, since ® they A. bong 
return ‘not from their ways. ——. 

8 Their widows are increased to me above the. 
sand of the seas: I have brought upon them 
* against the mother of the young men a spoiler 
at noon-day: I have caused im to fall upon it 
suddenly, and terrors upon the city. 


5 Or, against the mother city a young man spoiling, &c., or, against 
the mother and the young men. 


sword to slay—And those that are. slain by it shall 
not enjoy the common rites of burial, but their car- 
casses shall be left a prey to the dogs, the birds, and 
the wild beasts, which last shall both tear their liv- 
ing bodies and their dead carcasses.. And I will cause 
them to be removed into all kingdoms, &c.—Though 
the body of the people were removed into Baby- 
lon, yet it is more than probable that many of them 


became voluntary exiles to avoid the miseries which | 


‘they saw coming upon their country. And, without 
doubt, the king of Babylon removed them into seve- 
ral kingdoms belonging to.his large empire. These, 
it must be observed, are the very words of Moses, 
(Deut. xxviii. 25,) where he threatens the Israelites 
with a general dispersion over the world, which 
threatening received ifs completion, in part, by the 
Babylonish captivity, but more perfectly after the 
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. | Because 
of Manasseh—In idolatry and other abominations he 
exceeded all the kings that preceded him: see 2 Kings 
xxi. 7-11. In his time the public worship of God 
was wholly suppressed, and idolatry introduced into 
the very temple; the law of God was likewise quite 
laid aside, and, in a manner, forgotten, as appears by 
the surprise Hilkiah was in when he found the ori- 
ginal copy of the law in the house of the Lord. So 
that his sins filled up the measure of the Jews’ ini- 
quities ; and therefore, notwithstanding the reforma- 
tion wrought afterward by Josiah, the Lord turned 
not from the fierceness of his wrath kindled against 


Judah: see 2 Kings xxiii. 26, and xxiv. 3, 4. It must | 


be observed, however, that it Was not merely for his 
sins, or the sins of his times, that God so dreadfully 
punished the Jews’ in the days of Jehoiakim and Ze- 
dekiah; but it was also, and especially because they 
imitated the wicked example which Manasseh had 
set them, the reformation effected by Josiah being 
only partial, and of not long continuance. For who 
shall, or, who will, have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem 
—Thy sins-render thee unworthy of pity, and all 
that see the calamities brought upon thee will ac- 
knowledge them to be just.. Who will go aside, &c. 
—Who will be so much concerned for thee as to step 
a little out of his way to inquire after thee; a com- 


mon instance of respect between persons in any de- 


gree acquainted. Rather they that pass by will insult 
over thy calamities. 

Verses 6,7. Thou hast forsaken me, thou art gone 
backward-—God here, by more expressions of the 
same import with many that we have before met 
with, declares his steady resolution to destroy them 
for their apostacy from him; and represents him- 


self as an angry prince or parent, that had frequent- 
ly been. provoked by a subject or child whom he 
had often resolved to punish, but out of his clemency, 
or upon the mediation of others,- had altered his 
mind, and resolved to spare him; but afterward had 
met with so many fresh provocations that his pa- 
tience was quite.tired out, and he was determined 
to bearnolonger. J will fan them with a fan—Not 
a purging fan, to separate the chaff from them, but 
a scattering fan, to disperse and scatter them to all 
the winds, as Ezekiel expresses it, Hzek. v.12. In 
the gates of the land—He alludes toa man standing 
in the gate of his thrashing-floor to fan and eleanse 
his corn. J will deprive them of children—The 
words, of children, are not in the Hebrew, and are 
unnecessarily supplied: it may as well be of any, 
or all their comforts and good. things. J will de- 
stroy my people—The privilege they claim of being 
my people shall not protect them while they go on 
in their sinful courses.. 

Verse 8. Their widows are increased above the 
sand of the seas—A hyperbolical expression. The 
prophet still speaks of things to come as if present. 
In Jehoiakim’s time we read of no great number of 
widows, but they were exceedingly multiplied when 
the city was besieged and taken in Zedekiah’s time. 
Thave brought upon them against the mother, &e. 
—Blaney renders this and the next clause, J have 
brought against their mother a chosen one, spoiling 
at noon-day ; I have caused to fall upon her sud- 
denly an enemy and terrors. By the mother here 
we are to understand Jerusalem, the mother-city, as 
she is termed in the margin, against which Nebu- 
chadnezzar, the spoiler, was sent, and who came, 
not secretly, as a thief by night, ‘put openly, with 
an army at noon-day. “Nebuchadnezzar might be 
called a chosen one,” says Blaney, “as being selected 
by God to be the instrument and executioner of his 
vengeance. In the margin of our Bibles, m2 is 
rendered a young man; and this also would very 
properly characterize the same person. For Jose- 
phus (Contra Apion, lib. i.) cites from Berosus, the 
Chaldean historian, a passage to the following pur- 
port: that ‘Nabopollassar, king of Babylon, hearing 
that the provinces of Egypt, Celo- -Syria, and Phe- 
nice had revolted, and being himself infirm through 
age, sent a part of his forces ‘under his son Nebu- 
chadnezzar, then in the prime of youth, ovre ere ev 
naucta, by whom those provinces were again re 
duced” This was the expedition to have been 
undertaken by him in the third mene of Jehoiakim, 
king of Judah, in the course of which, after having 

391 


JEREMIAH. 


of hi hard lot. 


-The prophet complains 
A. M. 3403. 9 °She that hath borne seven lan- 


na guisheth: she hath given up. the 


ghost ; ‘Pher sun is gone down while i¢ was 
yet day: she hath been ashamed and con- 
founded: and the residue of them will I de- 
liver to the sword before their enemies, saith 
the Lorp. 

10 “2 Wo is me, my mother, that thou Selot 
borne me a man of strife and a man of conten- 
tion to the whole earth! I have neither lent on 
usury, nor men have lent to me on usury ; 


yet every one of them doth curse me. A, M.3403. 

11 The Lorp said, Verily it shall--° 
be well with thy remnant; verily ® Iwill cause 
*the enemy to entreat thes well in the time of 
evil and in the time of affliction. 

12 Shall iron break the northern iron and the 
steel ? 

13 Thy substance and thy treasures will I 
give to the § spoil without price, and ¢hat-for all 
‘thy sins, even in all thy borders. 

14 And I will make thee to pase with thine 


ol Sam. ii. 5.——P Amos viii. 9.——4 Job iii. 1, &c. ; Chapter 
xx. 14 


6 Or, I will entreat the enemy for thee-—* Chap. XXxix. ted 12; 
xl, 4, 5. Psa. xliv. 12; Chap. xvii. 3.- { 


first defeated the Egyptian army-at Carchemish, he 
laid siege to Jerusalem, -todk and plundered it, 
carrying away much spoil and many captives to 

Babylon. aM 
xxiv. 1: 

Verse 9. She that hath borne seven languisheth— 
Seven is put for many, (see 1 Sam. ii: 5,) and the 
multitude of the inhabitants of- Jerusalem, the 
mother-city, is here alluded to; the prophet pursu- 
ing the metaphor of the former verse, and describing 
the mother-city under the figure of a woman that 
had been fruitful, but was now become feeble, and 
bore no children. He means that the people of Ju- 
dah, which had been very numerous, were now 
greatly diminished. Her sun is gone down while it 
was yet day—In the midst of her prosperity she is 
reduced to this state of misery, being of a sudden 
overwhelmed with the greatest calamities, when she 
might have expected a long continuance of happi- 
ness. The expression is extremely strong, and de- 
notes a sudden change. from the highest dignity to 
the lowest abasement. She hath been ashamed.and 
confounded—The judgments of God oppressed and 
confounded a part of the Jews before their captivity. 
And the residue of them—The remainder of them, 
saith God, shall be destroyed by the sword of the 
enemy. 

Verses 10, 11. Wo is me, my mother—The. pro- 
phet here complains of the opposition he met with 
from his countrymen for speaking unweleome truths. 
Thou hast borne me a man of contention to the 
whole earth—Or, whole land, rather. I am the ob- 
ject of common hatred; every body takes occasion 
to quarrel with me, because I speak truths which 
they do not.like to hear. J have neither lent upon 
usury, &¢c.—“The Jews were forbidden to take 
usury of their brethren, (Deut. xxiii. 19,) especially 
of the poor, (Exod. xxii. 25,) which was thought so 
great an oppression that it made the man who was 
guilty of it hated and cursed by every one. . The 
prophet says that he had never done this, and yet 
every body was his enemy, only for delivering those 
messages which he had received from God. ” The 
Lord said, 4d it shall be well with thy remnant 
—The latter ds of this verse expound the for- 
mer: for by Nw; remnant, or residue, is meant the 
remnant. of days that Jeremiah had to live. Verily, 

392 


See chap. xlvi. 2; Dan. i. 1-3; 2 Kings, 


Iwill cause the enemy to entreat thee well—I will 
by my providence so order it that how cruelly and 
severely soever the enemy may deal with thy coun- 
trymen, yet they shall use thee kindly when they 
shall take the city. This was accordingly fulfilled: 
the Chaldeans, when they took. Jerusalem, and ¢ar- 
ried the inhabitants of the land into captivity, treated 
Jeremiah with great kindness, giving him his choice 
to go where he pleased, and bestowing gifts upon 
him, as we read chap. xxxix. 11, and xl, 3, 4. 

Verse 12.. Shall iron break the northern iron ?— 
The northern iron is the hardest of any. “It is 
here,” says Blaney, “justly supposed to denote, in 
a primary sense, that species of hardened iron, or 
steel, called in Greek yaAvy, from the Chalybes, a 
people bordering on the Euxine sea, and conse- 
quently lying to the north of Judea, by whom the art . 
of tempering steel is said to have been discovered. 
| Strabo speaks of this people as known in former 
times by the name of Chalybes, but afterward call- 
ed Chaldei, and mentions their iron mines, lib. xii. 
p. 549.. These, however, were a different people 
from the Chaldeans who were united with the Baby- 
lenians.” “ The words, if applied to Jeremiah, im- 
port thus much, that, as common iron cannot con- 
tend for hardness with the northern. iron, or with 
steel, so the opposition which the Jews made against 
him should be easily vanquished and disappointed, 
because the Lord was with him to save him, verse 
20. If the words relate to the Jews, as the follow- 
| ing verses plainly do, the sense is, that the Chaldeans 
coming from the north would be as much too hard 
for them to engage with, as the. northern iron was 
superior in strength to the common metal of that 
kind.”—Lowth. But perhaps the expression is not 
merely metaphorical: it is not unlikely that the 
Babylonians had their armour from the Chalybes, 
and that therefore it was made of iron much harder, 
and of much better proof, than that of which the 
jermour of the Jews was formed. . 

Verses 13, 14. Here God turns his speech from 
the prophet to the people. T'hy substance and thy 
treasures will I give to the spoil—All thy riches and 
precious things shall be spoiled: there shall be no 
price taken for the redemption of them. For all 
thy sins in all thy borders—All parts of the coun- 


| try, even those which lay most remote, had contr’- 
3 


The prophet complains 


CHAPTER XV. 


of his hard lot, « 


es ~_ enemies ‘into a land which thou 
knowest not: for a " fire is kindled in 
mine anger, which shall burn upon you. 

15 4 O Lorp, *thou knowest: remember 
me, and: visit me, and Yrevenge me of my per- 
secutors ; take me not away in thy long-suffer- 
ing > bitoni that * for thy sake I have. suffered 
rebuke. 


16 Thy words were found, and I did A. ui 3403, 
B,C. 601. 
*eat them ; and » thy word was unto 
me the joy ina rejoicing of my heart : for "Tam 
called by thy name, O Lorp God of hosts. 

17 °I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, 
nor rejoiced ; I sat alone because of thy hand: 
for thou hast filled me with indignation. 

18 Why is my ‘pain penpeinel, and my wound 


«t Chap. xvi. 13; xvii. 4. 
3.—y Chap. xi. 20; xx. 12. 
1,3; Rev. x. 9, 10, 


« Deut. xxxii. 22.——* Chap. xii. 
2 Psa. lxix. 7——@ Ezek. iii. 


“ee 
»b Job-xxiii. 12; Psalm exix. 72, 111. —" Hebrew, thy name 


is called upon me. © Psalm i. 1; xxvi. 4, 5. 4 Chapter 
xxx. 15. 


a 


buted to the national guilt, and all shall be brought 
to account. And I will make thee to pass with thine 
enemies, &c.—They shall stay in their own country 
till they see their estates and all their property ruin- 
ed, and then they shall be carried into captivity, to 
spend the remains of a miserable life in slavery. 
And all this is the fruit of God’s wrath; for a.fire, 
says he, is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn 
upon you—And, if not extinguished in time, will 
burn to eternity. + 

Verses 15, 16. O Lord, ins knowest—Thou 
knowest my sincerity, how faithfully I have declar- 
ed thy will: or, thou knowest my sufferings, how 
wickedly my enemies act toward me. It is matter 
of comfort to us, that, whatever befalls us, we have a 
God to go to, before whom we may spread our case, 
and to whose omniscience we may appeal, as the 
prophet here does. «Remember me, and visit me— 
Think upon me for good, and visit me with thy love, 
while this people are visited with thy wrath. Re- 
vengé me—Or, rather, Vindicate me, from my per- 
secutors, as the Hebrew, ‘9719 °4 COpin, may be 
properly rendered: give judgment: against them, 
and let that judgment be executed so far as is neces- 
sary for my vindication, and to compel them to ac- 
knowledge that they have done me wrong: see note 
on chap. xi. 20. Take me not away in thy long- 
suffering—While thou exercisest long-suffering to- 
ward my persecutors, and forbearest to vindicate my 
cause and defend me, let them not prevail to take 
away my life. Or, as some understand his words, 
Though I am a sinner, and deserve to be punished 
as such among the Jews, yet exercise toward me 
patience and long-suffering, and let me not be taken 
away into captivity. now that for thy sake [have 
suffered rebuke—Lord, remember that my reproach, 
and all that I suffer, is for thy sake, because I have 
faithfully declared thy truth, and defended thy 
honour and glory. Thy words were found, and I 
did eat them—The words which, from time to time, 
thou didst reveal to me, were by me readily receiv- 
ed, meditated upon, and inwardly digested. ae 
thy word was unto ine the joy, §c., of my heart— 
That is, either, Ist, Though some-of thy words were 
very dreadful, and foretold the ruin of my country, 
which is very dear to me, and in the ruin of which 


I cannot but have a deep share, yet, because they 
proceeded from thee, I was glad to hear them, and 
be thy instrument to communicate them to thy peo- 


ple, all my natural affections being swallowed up in 
zeal for thy glory. Or, 2d, Thy word of commis- 
sion, by which I was made thy prophet, was at first» 
very grateful and pleasing to me; and I was glad 
when thou didst, at any time, reveal thy will to me, 
and authorize and enjoin me to make it known to 
the people. For though the execution of this office 
was not attended with any secular advantages, but, 
on the contrary, exposed me to contempt and perse- 
cution; yet, because I was thereby serving and glo- 
rifying thee, and doing good, I was glad to be so 
employed, and it was my meat and drink to do thy 
will, For I am called by thy name, O Lord God | 


‘of hosts—L became a prophet by thy authority, and 


am, thy messenger, and thou, the Lord of hosts, art 
able to protect me. 

Verses 17, 18. I sat. not in the assembly of the 
mocker. s—Or, of those that make merry, as pnw 
is elsewhere rendered : sce chap. xxx. 19, and xxxi. 4. 
Jeremiah soon found that the joy which he had con- 
ceived in being called to the prophetic office, and 
favoured with extraordinary communications from 
God, was turned into heaviness, God continually’ fill- 


‘ing his mouth with dreadful messages, and his pro- 


phecies containing nothing but terrible denunciations 
of wrath against a sinful people. Hence his whole 
prophetical life was to him atime of sorrow and soli- 
tude, a time when he sat alone mourning and “weep- 
ing, in secret, for the indignation of God, revealed 
to him against his people; nor rejoiced—I did not, 
with the deriders and scorners. of thy word, give a 
loose to joy and mirth at a time when thy severe 
judgments were denounced, and when the most 
dreadful calamities hung over the country. Because 
of thy hand—God’s hand may be understood of his 
judgments, which, being denounced by the prophet, 
might be resembled to a hand stretched out, and just 
ready to strike; or else of the prophetical impulse 
which was strong upon Jeremiah, and, in a manner, 
forced him to be the messenger of evil tidings. God’s 
judgments, as they were represented to the prophets, 
often raised such dreadful ideas in their minds as 
affected them in an extraordinary manner, especial- 
ly if their threatenings concerned their own country, 
or the church of God. |W. hy is my pain perpetual, 
&c.—These seem evidently to be we ene of Je- 
remiah, complaining of the har nich God had 
put upon: him, continually filling his mouth with 
such bitter words of evil against the people as ex- 
393 


The propnet is encouraged 


JEREMIAH. 


by promises of protection. 


A. M. 34¢ 3403. incurable, which refuseth to be heal- 


- ed? wilt thou be altogether unto me 


“as a liar, and £ as waters that ® fail ? 

19 % Therefore thus saith the Lorp, * If thou 
return, then will I bring thee again, and thou 
shalt »stand before me: and if thou ‘take 
forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as 
my mouth: let them return unto thee; but 
return not thou unto them. ; 


20 And I will make thee unto this A. ae sas: 
people ‘a fenced brazen * wall: and ——— 
they shall fight against thee, but they shall 
not prevail against thee: for I am with thee 
to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the 
Lorp. 

21 And I will deliver thee out of the hand’ of 
the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the 
hand of the terrible. 


— 


¢ Chapter i i 18, 19.——f Job vi. 15, &c. 8 Heb. be not sure. 


& Zech. iil. 7. 


"re 


posed him ‘to their most implacable rage, so that his 
misery seemed like an incurable wound, attended 
with excruciating pain, for which there was no rem- 
edy but patience. Wilt thou be altogether to me as 
a liar, and waters that fail 2—No, I know thou wilt 
not. God is not a man that he should lie. . The 
fountain of life will never be to his people as waters 
that fail. The sense is, “’Thou hast promised to be 
my defence against mine enemies; and wilt thou al- 
together deceive me? like little brooks, which are 
dried up in summer, when they are most wanted, 
and so disappoint the thirsty traveller: see Job vi. 
15. The prophet here sets down the perplexities he 
laboured under, by reason of the opposition he con- 
tinually met with from ungodly men, in the execu- 
tion of his office; just as the psalmist relates the 
misgivings of his mind» when he was under great 
troubles and temptations. But then presently he 
checks such thoughts, calls to mind God’s gracious 
promises, and encourages himself to rely upon him. 
And the like encouragements are recorded in the 
following verses of this.chapter.”—Lowth. 

Verses 19-21. Therefore thus saith the Lord—In 
these verses we have God’s gracious answer to the 
preceding expostulation. Though the prophet be- 
trayed much human frailty in his address, yet God 
vouchsafed to answer him’ with good and comforta- 
ble words, for he knows our frame. Jf thou return— 
Namely, from thy diffidence and distrust in my 
providence and promises; then will I bring thee 

a 


h Verse 1.—— Ezek. op 26; xliv. 23k Chap. i oF 18; vi. 27. 
1 Chap. xx. ag: 


again, and thou shalt stand before me—I will re- 
store thee to the former favour thou hadst with me, 
and thou shalt be my prophet, to reveal my mind to 
the people. And if thou take the precious from the 
vile—H{ thou separate the precious truths of God 
from the vile fancies of men; or rather, if thou 
preach so.as to distinguish good and bad men from 
each other, encouraging the good, and reproving the 
wicked, then I will continue thee as my prophet, to 
speak in my name; and thou wilt answer the cha- 
racter of a true prophet, whose office it is to utter the 
words that God puts into his mouth, without adding 
thereto, or diminishing from them. "Let them return 
unto thee; &c.—He here charges the prophet to keep 
his ground, and not to go over to wicked men; but 
to use his endeavour to reduce them to that obedi- 
ence which he yielded to God. And I will make 
theeunto this people a fenced wall—Which the storm 
batters and beats violently upon, but cannot shake; 
and they shall fight against thee—They will still 
continue their opposition ; but they shall not prevail 
—Namely, to drive thee from off thy work, or to cut 
thee off from the Jand of the living. For Iam with 
thee to save thee—And I have wisdom and power 
enough to deal with the most formidable enemy. 2 
will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked—The 
wicked Jews; and out of the hand of the terrible— 
The power of the terrible Chaldeans, into whose hands 
thou shalt come, but shalt be preserved from any harm 
by the workings of my providence in thy favour. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


The prophecy which begins here is continued to the end of the 18th verse of the next chapter. Nor is there any reason to 


suspect its being out of its proper place, but that it was delivered, as well as those of the preceding chapters, toward the 


beginning of Jehoiakim’s evil reign. 


that were about to fall upon all the inhabitants of the land, both old and young, 1-4. 


(1,) The prophet is forbidden to marry or beget children, because of the judgments 


(2,) For the like reasons, he is 


commanded not to join with any of his neighbours, either in their mourning, or in their convivial mirth, 5-9. (3,) He 


’ shows that t 


alamities were the effect of their apostacy and disobedience, for which God would drive them into exile, 


cand give them no Pe till he had fully requited their wickedness, 10-18. But, (4,) Their future restoration is : inter 


mediately foretold, 14, 15 ; as is'also the conversion of the Gentiles, 19-21. 


394 


=e 


3 


The Lord’s directions 


CHAPTER XVI. 


to the prophet. 


A. M. 3403. 


B. C. 601. THE word of the Lorp came also 


unto me, saying, 

2 Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither 
shalt thou have sons nor daughters in this place. 

3 For thus saith the Lorp concerning the 
sons and concerning the daughters that are 
born in this place, and concerning their mothers 
that bare them, and concerning their fathers 
that begat. them in this land: 

4 'They shall die of * grievous deaths; they 
shall not be. lamented ; neither shall they be 
buried; but they shall be * as dung upon the 
face of the earth: and they shall be consumed 
by the sword, and by famine; and their 4 car- 


«Chapter xv. 2.—> Chap. xxii. 18, 19; xxv..33. ¢ Psalm 
Ixxxiii. 10; Chap. viii, 2; 1x. 22.——4 Psa. lxxix. 2; Chapter 
vil. 33; xxxiv. 20. e Kzek. xxiv. 17,22, 23. 1 Or, mourn- 
ing feast. 


casses shall be meat for the. fowls of ae 
heaven, and for the beasts of the earth, ——__— 

5 For thus saith the Lorn, ® Enter not into 
the house of ‘mourning, neither go to lament 


nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my 


peace from this people, saith the Lorp, even 
loving-kindness and mercies. 

6 Both the great and the small shall die in 
this land: they shall not be buried, ‘neither 
shall men lament for them, nor &cut themselves, 
nor "make themselves bald for them : 

7 Neither shall men ? tear themselves for them 
in mourning, to comfort them for the dead ; 
neither shall men give them the cup of con- 


f Chapter xxii. 18.—— Lev. xix. 28; Deut. xiv. 1; Chapter 
xli. 5; xlvii. 5. —— Isa. xxii. 12 ; Chap. vii. 29. 2 Or, break 
bread for them, as Ezek. xxiv. 17; Hos. ix.4; Deut. xxvi. 14; 
Job xlii. 11. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVI. 

Verses 1-4. The word of the Lord came, &c.— 
Here begins a new discourse, wherein God forbids 
Jeremiah to marry, principally with a view to show 
the miseries of parents, and the confused and ruin- 
ous state of things in Judea. “Fruitfulness was 
promised as a blessing under the law, Deut. xxviii. 4, 
but ceased to be:so in such difficult times as ‘were 
coming upon the Jewish nation. For parents could 
not promise to themselves any comfort in their chil- 
dren, who must be exposed to the many miseries 
that attend a hostile invasion and a conquering 
army.”—Lowth. They shall die of grievous deaths 
—Hebrew Dxdnn *n199, mortibus egritudinum, id 
est, egerrimis, Buxtorf. Literally, of deaths of sick- 
nesses, that is, very sorrowful deaths; meaning, Bla- 
ney thinks, epidemical disorders, (such as the pes- 
tilence,) terminating in death. It, no doubt, however, 
also includes death by the sword and by famine. 

Verses 5, 6. Enter not into the house of mourning 
—Or, of a mourning feast, according to the reading 
in the margin, the word n77>, occurring also Amos 
vi. 7, and. being there rendered a banquet. The 
sense seems to be, Do not go to comfort such as 
mourn for any friends or relations dead; their feast- 
ings on those occasions being upon a consolatory 
account: those that dieare most happy. For Ihave 
taken away my peace from this people—That is, I 
have. put a full period to their prosperity, and deprived 
them of every thing wherewith they might comfort 
themselves and one another; even loving-kindness 
and mercies—These shall be shut up and restrained, 
which are the springs from whence all the streams 
of comfort flow to mankind. Both the great and 
the small shall die in this land—The land of Ca- 
naan that used to be called the land of the living. 
They shall not be buried, &e.—So many of all ranks 
and ages shall die that men shall have no time to 
bury them, or there shall not be a sufficient number 
left alive to bury the dead. Neither shall men la- 
ment for them—Nor shall men have leisure, through 

3 . 


their own miseries, to lament.for the miseries of 
others. Or their own calamities shall be so great 
that they will render them insensible to the calami- 
ties of others. | Nor cut themselves, &c.—The law 
expressly forbade the Israelites tomake any cuttings 
in their flesh at funeral obsequies, Lev. xix. 28; 
Deut.xiv. 1. Notwithstanding which prohibition, this 
practice seems to have been adopted by the Jews, 
among other heathenish customs. Shaving of the 
head also was a usual expression of mourning, chap. 
vii. 29. , 

Verse 7. Neither shall men tear themselves for 
them—According to this translation the phrase al- 
ludes to another expression of immoderate grief, 
which consisted in tearing their flesh with their nails. 
But according to the marginal reading, the sense is, 
Neither shall men break bread for them ; alluding 
to the mourning-feast, mentioned verse 5. So the 
LXX., ov py KAacdn aptoc.ev Tevet avTwr eve MapakAn- 
ow ext teOvyxore, “bread shall by no means be broken 
in their mourning, for consolation concerning the 
dead.” So also the Vulgate. As to the custom al- 
luded to, Jerome informs us, in his commentary on 
this place, that “it was usual to carry provisions to 
mourners, and to make an entertainment, which sort 
of feasts the Greeks call wepidecmva, and the Latins 
parentalia.” 'The origin of which custom undoubt- 
edly was, that the friends of the mourner, who came 
to comfort him, (which they often did in great num- 
bers, as we learn from John xi. 19,) easily conclud- 
ing, that a person so far swallowed up of grief, as 
even to forget his own bread could hardly attend to 
the entertainment of so many guests, each sent in 
his proportion of meat and drink, in hopes to prevail 
upon the mourner, by their example and persuasions, 
to partake of such refreshment as might tend to re- 
cruit both his bodily strength and his spirits. To this 
custom Tobit is thought to refer when, among other 
exhortations to his son, he directs him to pour out 
his bread on the burial of the just. See Blaney. It 
must be observed, that among the Hebrews all things 

395 


The calamities of the people 


JEREMIAH. 


in consequence of their sins. 


A. M. 3403, solation to ‘drink for their father or 
B. ©. Ol for their mother. : 

§ Thou shalt not also. go into the house 

of feasting, to sit with them to eat and to 
drink. 
. 9 For thus saith the Lorp of hosts, the God 
of Israel; Behold, *I will cause. to cease out 
of this place in your eyes, and in your days, 
the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, 
the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of 
the bride. s 

10.9 And it shall, come to pass, when thou 
shalt show this people all these words, and 
they shall say unto thee, ! Wherefore hath the 
Lorp pronounced all this great evil against 
us? or what is our iniquity ? or what is our sin 
that we have committed against’ the Lorp our 
God? 

11 Then shalt thou say unto them, ™ Because 
your fathers have forsaken me, saith the Lorn, 
and have walked after other gods, and have 


. 7 

i Proverbs xxxi. 6, 7.——* Isaiah xxiv.°7, 8; Chapter vii. 34; 
xxv. 10; Ezekiel xxvi. 13; Hosea ii. 11; Revelation xviii. 23. 
I Deut. xxix. 24; Chapter v.19; xiii. 22; xxii.8.——™ Deut. 
xkix. 255 Chap. xxii. 9. 


‘them, and have forsaken me, and 


served them, and have “worshipped A. M, 3403, 
B. C. 601. 
have not kept my law; 

12 And ye have done. "worse than yout 
fathers; for, behold, ° ye walk every one after 
the 3 Pe of his evil heart, that they 
may not hearken unto me: 

13 » Therefore will I cast you out of this land 
4 jnto a land that ye know not, neither ye nor 
your fathers; and there shall ye serve other 
gods day and night; where I will not show you 
favour. 

14 4 Therefore behold, the * dai come, saith 
the Lorn, that it_shall no more be said, The 
Lorp liveth, that brought up the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt; 

15 But, the Lorn liveth, that brought up the 
children of Israel from the land of the north, 
and from all the lands whither he had driven 
them: and *I will bring them again into their 
land that I gave unto their fathers. 


» Chapter vii. 26. © Chapter xiii. 10. —— Or, stubbornness. 
P Deut. iv. 26, 27, 28; xxviii. 36, 63, 64, 65,——4 Chap. xy. 14, 
Isaiah xliii. 18; Chap. xxiii. 7, 8.-—*Chap. xxiv. 6; xxx. 3; 
XXxli. 37 


eaten were called bread. Neither shall men give 
them the cup of consolation for their father, &c.— 
They were also wont, on these occasions, to send 
wine, or some other cheering liquor to drink, that 
they might forget their sorrows. This is called here 
the cup of consolation. Sir John Chardin, in one of 
his MSS. tells-us, that “the oriental Christians still 
make banquets of the same kind, by a.custom de- 
rived from the Jews; and that the provisions spoken 
of in this verse were such as were wont to be sent to 
the house of the deceased, where healths were also 
drunk to the survivers of the family.” God here tells 
the Jews by his prophet, that the time should. come, 
when so many should die, and so fast, and the rest 
should be so much upon the brink of the grave, that 
they should have neither leisure nor heart for using 
these ceremonies. 

Verses 8,9. Thou shalt not also go into the house 
of feasting —God not only forbade his prophet to go 
into houses of mourning, but forbade him also to go 
into houses where people were wont to.eat and drink 
on joyful occasions, because it would be unseasona- 
ble, and would not agree with the afflictive dispensa- 
tions of Providence that were coming on the land 
and nation, God-called aloud for weeping, mourn- 
ing, and fasting, because he was coming forth 
against them in his judgments, and it was time for 
them to humble themselves before him. And it well 
became the prophet, who gave them the warning,,to 
give them an example of taking the warning him- 
self, and complying with it; and so to make it ap- 
pear that he did himself believe what he declared to 
them. For, behold Iwill cause to cease the voice 

396 


of mirth, &c.—In the approaching time of general 
desolation, all the solemn seasons of mirth and glad- 
ness shall cease, as well public as private. The so- 
lemn feasts, which were always observed with great 
expressions of joy, shall be no more celebrated, nor 
shall nuptial solemnities and other private occasions 
of rejoicing be any longer observed. 

Verse 13. There shall ye serve other gods day 
and night—The opportunities of frequenting the 
public worship of the.true God shall be taken from 
you, as a just judgment upon you for your neglect 
of his service in your own country; and you shall 
be exposed to the peril of being seduced by the Chal- 
deans to the worship of idols: see Deut, iv. 28, and 
xxviii. 36, where Moses utters a similar prediction. 
Compare also 1 Sam. xxvi. 19. 

Verses 14,15. Therefore, behold the days come, 
saith the Lord, &c.—The particle {29 seems to he 
very improperly rendered therefore here. It evi- 


|dently sometimes signifies notwithstanding, or ne- 


vertheless ; see note on Isa. xxx. 18, and sometimes, 
yet surely, as chap. v. 2, of this propheey; which 
sense agrees well with the scope of this place, and 
connects this verse with the words foregoing. And 
so it seems it should be rendered, chap. xxx. 16, and 
xxxii. 36. Blaney, however, thinks that both in this 
verse and in all these passages, as also chap. xxiii. 7 
and Hos. ii. 14, it more properly signifies, after this. 
Accordingly, he translates this clause, after this, be- 
hold the days come, saith Jehovah, &c., observing, 


“that this notice of-a future restoration was here in- 


serted on purpose to guard the people, during their 
exile, from falling into idolatry through despair, by 
3 


The conversion of 


CHAPTER XVI. 


the Gentiles foretold. 


-A. M. 3403. 


B. C. 601 16 “| Behold, I will send for many 


‘fishers, saith the: Lorp, and they 
shall fish them; and after will send for many 
hunters, and they shall hunt them from every 
mountain, and from every hill, and out of the 
holes of the rocks. 

17 For mine “eyes are upon all their ways: 
they are not hid from my face, neither is their 
iniquity hid from mine eyes. 

18 And first I will recompense their iniquity 


and their sin * double ; because ¥ they A.M ook SP. 
have defiled my lind, they have ——* 
filled mine inheritance with the carcasses of 
their detestable and abominable things. 

19 O Lorp, 7 my strength and my fortress, 
and *my refuge in the day of affliction, the’ 
Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends 
of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers 
have inherited lies, vanity, and ¢hings'® where- 
in there is no profit. 


' Amos iv. 2; Hab. i. 15. " Job xxxiv. 21; Proverbs vy. 21; 
xv. 3; Chap. » XXxil. 19.——* Isa. xl..2; Chap. XVil. 18. 


y Ezekiel xliii. 7, 9. z Psalm xviii. 2. a Chapter xvii. 17. 
bIsa. xliv..10 ; Chap. ii. 11; x..5. 


ian them see oy had still a prospect of recover- 
ing God’s wonted favour and protection.” To which 
may be added, that he probably intended also, in thus 
sweetening the dreadful threatenings preceding with 
this comfortable promise, to prevent such as were 
pious among them, or should be brought. to repent- 
ance by these terrible calamities, from being swal- 
lowed up of overmuch sorrow. Jt shall no more be 
said, &c.—The bringing of Israel out of the Egyp- 
tian bondage shall not be so much spoken of and 
celebrated as their deliverance from their captivity in 
Babylon. In fact, the latter was in several respects 
more remarkable than the former. Their deliver- 
ance from the power of the king of Egypt was ex- 
torted from him by terrifying miracles, which scarce- 
ly brought him to a compliance ; but their deliver- 
ance from their captivity in Babylon was voluntarily 
granted them by Cyrus, a far greater king than the 
king of Egypt, and attended by a decree extremely 
honourable to them. 

Verses 16-18. Behold, Iwill send, &c.—This may 
be better rendered, But now I will send, &c.—Be- 
cause here. the prophet returns to denounce threat- 
enings; many fishers, and they shall fish then— 
“Jt is common with the sacred writers to represent 
enemies and oppressors under the metaphors of 
fishers and hunters, because they use all the me- 
thods of open force and secret stratagem to make 
men their prey.” By these two characters the same 
enemies-are probably meant, namely, the Chaldeans, 
who should take different methods, one after an- 
other, to destroy them; besieging them in their 
cities, and taking them like fish, enclosed in a net; 
and afterward pursuing the scattered parties from 
place to place, till they got them into their hands ; 
so that one way or other, few, if any, would be suf- 
fered to escape. Compare Isa. xxiv. 17, 18, where 
it is in like manner foretold, that those who escaped 
from one danger should fall by another. See Bla- 
ney. For mine eyes are upon all their ways—I 
mark all their sins, though they commit them never 
so secretly, and palliate them never so artfully. 
They have not their eyes upon me; have no regard 
to me, stand in no awe of me: but I have mine eye 
upon them, and neither they nor any of their ways 
are hid from me. J will recompense their iniquity 
double—Not double to what it deserves, but double 
to what they expect, and to what I have done for- 

3 


merly. Or, I will recompense it abundantly; they 
shall now pay for their long reprieve and the divine 
| patience they have abused; because they have de- 
filed my land—By their idolatry, blood, cruelty, and 
other sins; Rave filled mine inheritance with the 
carcasses of their detestable things—Their ‘idols, 
which are elsewhere called carcasses, not only be- 
cause they were without life, but also because of 
their filthiness and hatefulness in the sight of God: 
see Lev. xxvi. 30; Ezek. xliii.'7,9,. Or the words 
may be explained of the human sacrifices which 
were offered to idols. 

Verses 19, 20. O Lord, my strength—To support 
and comfort me; my fortress—To protect and shel-_ 
ter me; and my refuge in the day of affliction—To 
whom I may flee for deliverance and consolation ; 
the Gentiles, the nations, shall come to thee from the 
ends. of the earth—The prophet, shocked at the 
apostacy of Israel, and concerned for God’s honour, 
here comforts himself by looking forward to the 
time when even the Gentiles themselves should be- 
come sénsible of the absurdity of their hereditary 
idolatry, and be converted to the acknowledgment 
of the one living and true God: and this remarkable 
and desirable event he predicts, the more emphati- 
cally to demonstrate the unreasonableness and folly 
of forsaking him for idols. And shall say—That is, 
the Gentiles shall say, Surely our fathers, our an- 
cestors, have inherited lies, vanity, &e—And did 
not receive the satisfaction they promised themselves 
and their children; we are now sensible of the folly 
and deception of their idolatrous worship, by which 
they were cheated to their ruin, and therefore we 
will entirely and for ever renounce it, and in all our 
wants address ourselves to the true God as our only 
refuge and protection. Shallaman make gods unto 
himself ?2—Thus the prophet represents the Gentiles, 
when enlightened by the truth,asreasoning with them- 
selves. Shall aman be so ignorant and foolish; so 
perfectly void of reason. and discernment, as to make 
gods to himself, the creatures of his own fancy, the 
work of his own hands, which are really no gods ? 
Can-a man be so infatuated, so entirely lost to hu- 
man understanding, as to expect any divine blessing 
or favour from that which pretends to no divinity 
but what it first received from him? ‘Observe, reader, 
that reformation is likely to be sincere and durable 
which results from a rational conviction of the gross 

397 


The prophet describes the 


JEREMIAH. 


pants attachment to idolatry. 


AM: 3403.. 20 Shall a man make gods unto 
ernee himself, and ° they are no gods ? 


21 Therefore behold, I will this once cause 


a 
them to know, I will cause them to A.M. 3403. 
. C. 601. 
know my hand and my might; and : 
they shall know that ‘my name is * The Lorp. 


¢ Isa. xxxvil. 19; Chap. ii. 11; Gal. iv. 8.——4 Exodus xv. 3; 


absurdity which there is in sin, and the service of 
Satan. 

Verse 21. Therefore I will this once—Or, as 
nxt Coyal may be rendered, at this time, as the 
same expression is rendered, 2 Sam. xvii. 7. Cause 
them to know my hand and my might, &c.—* The 
time alluded to is undoubtedly that when the gospel 
was to be preached to, and embraced by, the Gen- 


Ch. xxxiii. 2; Amos v. 8—* Or, JEHOVAH, Psa. lxxxiii. 18. 


tiles; when God promises that he would make such 
a display of his mighty power as should amply con- 
vince them of the truth of his existence and divinity. 
They shall know that my name is Jenovan—A name 
which implies absolute and necessary existence, the 
real source and origin of all perfection ; and they 
shall know it by the blessings which shall, from my 
providence, be derived to them. ”—Blaney. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
In this chapter, (1,) The prophet describes the attachment of the people of Judah-to idolatry, and foretels the fatal conse- 


quences, 1-4. 


(2,) He contrasts the accursed condition of him that rests his trust on man, with the blessedness of one that 
trusts in God; and illustrates both by apt.and lively comparisons, 5-8. 
false and wicked, God can detect, and will finally punish, its wiles and deceits, 9-11. 


(3,) He shows, that, be the human heart ever so 
(4,) He acknowledges that sure 


salvation comes from God, and from him only, 12-14. And, (5,) Complaining of those that scoffed at his predictions, he 


prays for the divine countenance and support against them, 15-18. 


(6,) The prophet, in the name of God, delivers a dis- 


tinct prophecy relative to the strict observance of the sabbath day, which he was sent to proclaim aloud in all the 
gates of Jerusalem, as a matter which concerned the conduct of each individual, and the general wa begin of the 


whole, 19-27. 


THE: sin of Judah zs written with 
a *pen of iron, and with the 
‘point of a diamond: i¢ is » graven upon the 
table of their heart, and upon the horns of your 
altars ; 
2 Whilst their children remensber their altars 


A. M. 3403. 
B.C, 601. 


and their ° groves by the RH trees A. aM nha. 
upon the high hills. ais ated- 

3 O my mountain in the field, ay will give 
thy substance and all thy treasures to the spoil, 
and thy high places for sin, throughout all pony 
borders. 


aJob xix. 24.——! Heb. nail— Prov. iii. 3; 2 Corinthians 
iii. 3. 


¢ Judg. iii. 7; 2 Chron. xxiv. 18; xxxiii. 3, 19; Isa. i, 29; xvii. 
8; Chap. ii. 10, —ni Chap. xv. 13. : 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVII. 

Verses 1,2. The sin of Judah is written with a 
pen of iron—Many of the Jews, though living in the 
habitual commission of the grossest crimes, were, 
nevertheless, self-righteous, and thought they did not 
deserve that God should enter into judgment with 
them in any such way as Jeremiah foretold he would 
do. Wherefore, said they, hath the Lord pronounced 
allthis great evil against us? | What is our iniquity ? 
What is our sin? chap. xvi. 10. Here the prophet 
tells them their sin was too plain to be denied, and 
too bad. to be excused: that it was written in indeli- 
ble characters, not only before God, to whose ommni- 
science it lay continually open, but in their own 
hearts and consciences ; as if written with a penof 
tron, or an engraving instrument, or the point of a 
diamond ; ; instruments employed to make durable 
inscriptions on hard substances, As if he had said, 
Their sins are as manifest, and the remembrance of 
them as durable, as the memorable actions which 
have been engraven on pillars of stone, or tablets of 
brass, to give them notoriety, and preserve them 

398 


from oblivion. The expression, it is graven wpon 


| the table of their hearts, may also be intended to 


signify the rooted affection which they had to sin, 

especially to the sin of idolatry ; that it was woven 
into their very nature, and was as dear to them as 
that is to us, of which we say, Jt is engraven on our 
hearts. In like manner, their idolatrous altars and 
other monuments of their, heathenish superstitions, 
were undeniable tokens of the corrupt inclinations 
of their hearts, which were altogether estranged 
from God and his true worship. © Or their sin might 
be said to be engraven on the horns of their altars, 

because the blood of the sacrifices which they offered 
to their idols was sprinkled there, or because their 
altars had some inscription upon them, declaring to 
what idol each altar was consecrated. Whilst their 
children remember their altars—This shows how. 
inveterate they were in this sin of idolatry, remit 
taught it to their children. 

Verses 3, 4. O my mountain in the field—By this 
expression the prophet is thought, by many inter-— 
preters, to intend the temple, which stood on a moun- 

3 


He is cursed who 


CHAPTER XVII. 


trusts in man. 


4. And thou, even * thyself, shalt 
discontinue from thy heritage that I 
gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine 
enemies in * the land which thou knowest not : 
for ‘ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, 
which shall burn for ever. 

5 “1 Thus saith the Lorp; Cursed be the 
man that trusteth in man, and maketh * flesh 


A. M. 3403. 
B. C. 601 


his arm, and whose heart departeth A. M. 3403 
from the Lorp. oe 

6 For he shall be ‘like the heath in the desert, 
and ‘shall not see when good cometh; but 
shall-inhabit the parched places in the wilder- 
ness, !in a salt land and not inhabited. 

7 ™Blessed is the man that trusteth in the 
Lorp, and whose hope the Lorp is. 


. xv. 14. Isa. 
hap. xlvill. 6. 


» Heb. in thyself ——® Chap. xvi: 13.— Cha 
xxx, 1,25 xxxi/ 1.——" Isa. xxxi. Coe 


k Job xx. 17. 1 Deut. xxix. 23.——™ Psalm ii. 12; xxxiv. 8; 
exxv. 1; exlvi. 5; Prov. xvi. 20; Isa. xxx. is. 


tain, called elsewhere, the mountain of the Lord’s 

house, (Isa. ii. 2,) and ‘the holy mountain. And this, 
as being the principal part of Jerusalem, is under- 
stood as being put, by way of synecdoche, for the 
whole city. Michaelis paraphrases it thus: “O Je- 
rusalem, which hast long been situate on my chosen 
mountain, and surrounded by a most fertile country, 
the land of Canaan.” But Cocceius thinks that the 
Jewish people are hereby enigmatically compared 
with the rest of the world, as a mountain situated in 
the midst of a level plain, and distinguished with a 
glory which did not belong to the world in general. 
Andit must beacknowledged that nations and princes 
of great power and. eminence are often figuratively 
called mountains, in regard to their strength and ele- 
vation: see chap. li. 25; Isa. xli.. 15; Zech. iv. 7. 
Judah, therefore, in general, as well as Jerusalem in 
particular, may be here styled God’s mountain, as 
having bee chosen by him, and thereby raised to a 
degree of elevation above all other people: see a 
confirmation of this interpretation, chap. xxxi. 23. 
J will give thy substance, and all thy treasures, to 
the spoil—Both the products of the country, and the 
stores of the city, shall be seized by the Chaldeans. 
Justly are men stripped of that with which they have 
served their idols, and which has been made the 
food and fuel of their lusts. And thy high places for 
sin—You have worshipped your idols on the high 
places, and now they shall be given fora spoil 5 in 
all your borders—See note on chap. xv. 13. Observe, 
reader, what we make an occasion of sin, God will 
make a matter of spoil; for what comfort can we 
expect in that wherewith God is dishonoured? And 
thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thy herit- 
age—Shalt intermit the occupation of thy land, as 
the word 0»2v, here used, signifies, Exod. xxiii. 11. 
The prophet undoubtedly alludes to the seventh 
year of release, enjoined by Moses, Deut. xv. 1, 
which law the Jews hada long time neglected 
out of covetousness, and. refused to observe, even 
after a solemn engagement to the contrary, chap. 
xxxiv: 8, &c. So here the passage implies, that 
since they would not release their land nor their 
servants in the sabbatical years, as God had enjoined 
them, he would dispossess them of the inheritance 
which he had given them, and the land shall enjoy 
her sabbaths, according to the prescription of the 
law: see Lev. xxvi. 34. And I will cause thee to 
serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest 
not—As a punishment for thy compelling thy ser- 

3 


| grounded hopes for the future. 


vants to serve thee in thy own land, when I enjoined 
thee to set them at liberty. For ye have kindled a 
Jire in mine anger, &c.—By your idolatries and 
other sins you have increased my wrath to such a 
fire that it shall burn for a long time in terrible judg- 
ments upon you in this world, and shall burn all 
such as remain impenitent for ever, in the world to 
come. 

Verses 5, 6. Cursed be the man that trusteth in 
man—Who places that confidence in the wisdom 
or power, the kindness or faithfulness.of any man or 
number of men, which ought to be placed in God 
only ; that is, miserable is the man that doth so, for 
he leans upon a broken reed, which will not only 
fail him, but will run into his hand and pierce it. 
It must be observed, however, that the prophet de- 
nounces this curse here chiefly with respect to the 
confidence which.the Jews placed in the assistance 
of the Egyptians and their other allies, when threat- 
ened by the Chaldeans. And maketh flesh his arm 
—Trusts for support or aid in a mere mortal man, 
termed flesh, to show his weakness and frailty, in 
opposition to the power of the almighty and immor- 
tal God. And whose heart departeth from the Lord 
—As the hearts of all do who put their trust in man. 
They may perhaps draw nigh to God with their 
mouths, and honour him with their lips, but really 
their hearts are far from him. for he shall be like 
the heath in the desert—Hebrew, Wy like the 
tamarisk, as some render the word, virgultum tenwe, 
humile, fragile, says Buxtorf, a small, low, and 
weak shrub. Sapless and useless; he shall be barren 
of solid comfort for the present, and destitute of well 
And shall not see 
when good cometh—Shall not partake of any good ; 
but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilder- 
ness—From whence he can derive no profit or con- 
solation ; in a salt land, &c.—Barren and unfruitful, 
Deut. xxix. 23; Judges ix.45. Observe well, reader, 
they that trust in their own righteousness and 
strength, and think they can be saved without the 
merit and grace of Christ, thus make flesh their arm, 
and their souls cannot prosper either in graces.or 
coinforts; they can neither produce the fruits of 
acceptable ‘obedience to God, nor reap the fruits of 
saving blessings from him, but dwell in a dry land. 

Verses 7, 8. Blessed is ‘the man that trusteth in 
the Lord—That lives in continual obedience to him, 
and relies entirely upon him for every blessing he 
wants for his body or soul, for himself or others 

' 399 


God alone knows the 


JEREMIAH. 


wickedness of the heart. 


"A. M.3403. 


8 For he shall be "as a tree planted 
B.C. 601. 


by the waters, and ¢hat spreadeth out 
her roots by the river, and shall not see when 
heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green ; and 
shall not .be careful in the year of * drought, 
neither shall cease from yielding fruit. 

9 7 The heart zs deceitful above all things, 
and desperately wicked : who can know it? 


n Job viii. 16; Psa. i. 3.——* Or, restraint —— 1 Sam. xvi. 7; 
1 Chron. xxviii. 9; Psa. vii. 9; cxxxix. 23, 24; Prov. xvii. 3; 
Chap. xi. 20; xx..12; Rom. viii. 27; Rev, ii.23. 


SS 


10 I the Lorp °search the heart, A. M. 3403. 

B. C. 601. 

Itry the reins, Peven to give every ————~ 

man according to his ways, and according to 
the fruit of hes doings. 

11 As the partridge ‘sitteth on eggs, and 
hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, 
and not by right, ¢shall leave them in the 
midst of his days, and at his end shall be *a fool. 


P Psalm Ixii. 12 ; Chapter xxxii. 19; Romans ii. 6——* Or, 
gathereth young which she kath not brought Sorth,——4 Psa. lv, 23. 
r Luke xii. 20. 


who, under God, are dependant upon him; and 
whose hope the Lord is—Who makes the Lord’s 
favour the good he hopes for, and his power the 
strength he hopes in.’ Trusting aright in the Lord 
necessarily implies walking closely with him, and 
not departing from him’in heart. For it is naturally 
impossible that any one should.repose confidence in 
another for any thing which had been promised un- 
der a condition, without a consciousness in himself 
that he had, at least in some good measure, complied 
with the condition upon which it was promised. 
For he shall be like.a tree planted, &e.—He shall 
be prosperous and successful in his counsels and 
undertakings. He may be compared toa tree planted 
in a fertile soil, on the bank of a river, to which it 
extends its roots, and from which it derives .abun- 
dance of sap and nourishment. And shall not-see 
when heat cometh—Ov gobySncera orav eA0n Kavja, 
say the LXX., shall not fear when heat cometh. 
They follow the reading of the Hebrew text, which 
is to be preferred before that of the margin. And 
shall not be careful in the year of drought—Shall 
not be solicitous for fear it should lack moisture ; 
that is, in a time when the leaves of trees standing 
on dry mountainous places are parched and withered, 
it shall retain its verdure, and eontinue to yield its 
fruit.- Blaney translates the clause, “ And it is not 
sensible when heat cometh ; but its leaf is green, and 
in a year of drought it is without concern ; nor doth 
it decline bearing fruit.” 

Verses 9, 10. The heart is deceitful above all 
things—This passage, considered in connection with 
what precedes, may be understood in two points of 
view: Ist, As assigning a reason why we should not 
trust in man;, namely, because he is not only weak 
and frail, and therefore may want power to help us 
in our necessities and distresses, but is also false 
and deceitful. Or, 2d, As giving us a caution to take 


care lest we deceive ourselves in supposing we trust’ 


in God when really we do not}; this being a thing 
respecting which our own hearts are very apt to 
deceive us, as appears by this, that our hopes and 
fears are wont to rise or fall, ‘according as second 
gauses appear to be favourable or adverse. Butitis 
true in the general, that there is greater wickedness 
in our hearts, by nature, than we ourselves are 
aware of, or suspect to be there. Nay, and it is a 
common mistake among mankind to think their own 
hearts a great deal better than they really are. 
The heart of man, in his corrupt and fallen state, is 
400 


false and deceitful above all things; deceitful in 
its apprehensions of things, calling evil:good and 
good evil, putting false colours upon things, erying 
peace to those to whom peace. does not belong, and 
cheating men to their own ruin; deceitful in the 
hopes and promises which it excites and nourishes, 
and in the assurances which it gives. And desper- 
ately wicked—-Hebrews S811 W3s), literally, and des- 
perate, or, as Blaney renders it, it is even past 
all ‘hope ; who can know it? That is, “humanly 
speaking, there is no possibility that any one should 
trace it through all its windings, and discover what 
isat the bottom of it.”.. In short, it is unsearchable 
by others, deceitful with reference’ to ourselves, and 
aboininably wicked ; so that neither can a man 
know his own heart, nor can any one know that of 
his neighbour. J the Lord search the heart—I am 
perfectly acquainted with it, and with all the wick- 
edness that lodges in it: all its thoughts, counsels, 
and designs, however secret ; all its intentions, affec- 
tions, and determinations lie open to my inspection : 
and my piercing eye penetrates into its inmost re- 
cesses. J try the reins—To pass a true judgment 
on what I discern, and to give every thing therein 
its true character and due weight. I try the heart, 
as the gold is tried, whether it be standard weight 
or not; or, as the prisoner is tried, whether he be 
guilty or not. And this judgment, which I make of 
the hearts, is in order to my passing a true judg- 
ment upon the man, even to give to every man ac- 
cording to his way ys—According to the desert and 
tendency of them; life to those that have walked in 
the ways of life, anid death to those that have per- 
sisted in the paths of the destroyer ; and according 
to. the fruit of his doings—The effect and in- 
fluence which his doings have had on others; or 
according to what is determined by the word of 
God to be the fruit of men’s doings, blessings to the 
obedient, and curses to the disobedient. 

Verse 11. As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and 
hatcheth them not—Or rather, as the words s 37 
a4 may be more literally rendered, hatcheth eggs 
which she did not lay ; so he that getteth riches, 
and not by right—That is, not in'a due, regular 
manner, by the blessing of God upon honest endea- 
vours, but by arts of knavery and injustice; shall 
leave them in the midst of his days—Though he 
may make them his hope, he shall not have joy in 
them, nor the true and lasting possession of them ; 
but they shall be soon taken from him, or-he from 

. 3 


The prophet prays to God, 


CHAPTER XVII. 


and complains of his enemies. 


27 A glorious high throne from 
the beginning is the place of our 
sanctuary. 

13 O Lorp, ‘the hope of Israel, t all that for- 
sake thee shall be ashamed, and they that 
depart from me shall be "written in the earth, 
because they have forsaken the Lorn, the 
* fountain of living waters. 

14 Heal me, O Lorp, and Ishallbe healed; save 
me, and I shallbe saved? for ¥thou ar¢ my praise. 


A. M. 3403. 


15 4 Behold, they say unto me, A. M. 3403, 
= Where is the word of the Lorn? 2% % 
let it come now. 

16 As for me, ?I have not’ hastened from 
being a pastor ° to follow thee: neither have I 
desired the woful day; thou knowest: that 
which came out of my lips was right before thee. 

17 Be.not.a terror unto me: thou art my 
hope in the day of evil. 

18 ° Let them be confounded that pewctite 


——— a 


Chap. xiv. 8.——t Psalm Ixxiii. 27 ; Isaiah i. 28. « Luke 
x. 20. x Chapter ii. 13.—y Deuteron. x. 21; Psalm cix. 1; 
exlviii, 14. 


ane MI 19; Ezekiel xii. 22; Amos v.18; 2 Peter iii. 4. 
a Chap. ‘5 Heb. after thee. > Chap. xvi. 19. ¢ Psa. 
XXXV. ot re 145 lxx, 2. 


them. And at his end'shall be a fool-—That is, he 
shall evidently appear such. He was indeed a fool 
all along, and doubtless his conscience often told 
him so; but at his end his folly will be manifest to 
allmen. Bochart, with a great deal of learning, 
contends that “7p, here rendered partridge, is not 
that bird, nor any one known in these parts. Blaney 


gives it the Hebrew name kore, observing, “ that}, 


it is a bird which frequents the mountains, and is of 
no great value, as’ may be learned from 1 Sam. 
xxvi. 20. Here it is said to sit-upon and hatch the 
eggs of bitds of another species.. This want of dis- 
tinction is common to many sorts of birds; and the 
partridge i is no way remarkable for it. But where it 
_ isso done, the young ones, when fledged, are sure 
to’ forsake their supposititious dam, and to join with 
those of their own feather; in which circumstance 
the point of comparison seems to lie.” 

Verse 12, A glorious high throne, &c.—< As in 
the preceding verses was set forth the vain depend- 
ance of him who seeks to advance himself by indi- 
rect methods; so here we are taught the solid foun- 
dation which he builds upon who has recourse to 
the divine blessing, and seeks to recommend. him- 
self to the favour of that Being, to whom Israel was 
taught to look up for support, and whose kingdom, 
from all eternity, ruleth over all.” The temple at 
Jerusalem, where God manifested his special pre- 
sence, where his lively oracles were lodged, where 
the people paid their homage to their sovereign, and 
whither they fled for refuge in distress, was the 
place of their sanctuary, and might properly. be 
termed a glorious high throne. It was a throne of 
holiness, which made it glorious; it was God’s 
throne, which madevit truly high. »And it was the 
honour of Israel that God set up his throne among 
them. Jeremiah may mention this here partly as a 
plea with God to show mercy to their land in hon- 
our of the throne of his glory ; and partly as an 
aggravation of the sin of the people, in forsaking 
God, though his throne was among them, and 
so profaning his crown and the place of his sanc- 
tuary. 

Verse 13. O Lord, the hope of Israel—That is, 
He in whom alone thy true Israel can hope; all 
they that forsake thee shall be ashamed—Those 
who forsake thy law and that rule which thou hast 

Vou. THT, | ( 26.) 


given them, whereby to direct their conversation, 
will sooner or later ‘be ashamed of such their disobe- 
dience. Or, as Lowth paraphrases the words, 
“Thou hast given many gracious promises to thy 
people, to encourage them to trust in thee; and 
they that forsake their interest in thy goodness will 
find all other expectations fail and disappoint them ;” 
and they that depart from me—From my love and 
service, says God, and their reliance.upon me, shall 
be written in the earth—Shall have no portion be- 
yond the earth, on which they-set their affections. 


‘Or, their names and memories shall be soon extinct, 


like words written in the dust: they shall not be re- 
gistered among my people, nor shall their names be 
recorded in the book of life. The expression seems , 
to allude to registers kept of the members of cities 
or corporations, the privileges of which none can 
pretend to but they who have their names entered 
in such registers; because they have forsaken the 
Lord, the fountain of living waters—The only cer- 
tain relief and comfort of any people, the fountain 
and origin of all.the good they can hope for. See 
note on chap. ii. 13. 

Verse 14. Heal me, O Lord, &c.—Most interpret- 
ers understand the prophet as addressing God here 
in his own behalf. He represents himself as a per- 
son wounded, or si¢k, either with.a sense of the dis- 
honour done to God by the sins of the people, or 
with their reproaches poured upon himself, and he 
begs of God to. heal him, God only having power to 
do it. Save me, for thou art my praise—It is from 
thee only that I expect relief and comfort in all my 
troubles: and as I acknowledge that all the bless- 
ings I enjoy come frorn thee, so it is to thee I re- 
turn all thanks and praise. 

Verses 15-18. Behold, they say unto me—Scof- 
ing at me, as if I had denounced threatenings in thy 
name, without any order or direction from thee: 
Where is the word of the Lord?—Like the scoffers, 
mentioned by St. Peter, 2 Pet. iii. 4, saying, Where 
is the promise of his coming? This has been the 
practice of all wicked men, hardened in their sinful 


|| courses, and resolved to go on in them: they put the 


evil day far from them, and scoff at all denuncia- 
tions of divine wrath. Let it come now—So said 
these scoffers, daring the vengeance of God, and 
challenging him to execute the judgments he had 


e 401 


The due observance of 


“we 
JEREMIAH. 


<< 


the sabbath enforced. 


7. “3 a me, but “Jet not me be confounded : 
A RS then be dismayed, but let not me 
be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, 
and ° destroy ®. them with double destruction. 

19 4 Thus saith the Lorp unto me; Go and 
stand in the gate of the children of the people, 
whereby the kings of Judah. come in, and by 
the which they go out, and in all ‘the gates of 
Jerusalem ; 

20 And say unto them, f Hear ye the word of 
the Lorn, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, 
and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter 
in by these gates: 

21 Thus saith the Lorn; # Take heed to 
yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath 
day, nor bring 7¢ in by the gates of Jerusalem; 


22 Neither carry forth a, burden A.M, 3403. 
out of your houses on the sabbath 
day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye 
the sabbath day, as I * commanded your 
fathers. 

23 1 But they ee: not, neither inclined 
their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they 
might not hear, nor receive instruction. _ 

24 And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently 
hearken unto me, saith the Lorp, to bring in 
no burden through the gates of this city on the 
sabbath day; ‘but hallow the sabbath day, to do 
no work therein ; 

25 * Then shall there enter.into the gates of 


‘this city kings and princes sitting upon the 


throne of David, riding in- chariots and on 


4 Psalm Xxv. 2. 6 Hebrew, break them with a double: breach. 
e Chap. xi. 20.— Chap. xix. 3; xxii, 2——s Num. xv. 32; 


Neh. xiii. 19. h Exod. xx. 8; xxiii. 12; xxxi.'13; Ezek. xx 
12.——i Chap. vii. 24, 26; xi. 10.——* Chap. xxii. 4. 


threatened. As for me, I have not hastened, &c. 
—Dr. Waterland translates this clause, “ But as for 
me, I have not forced or intruded myself upon thee 
for-a pastor.” ‘To the same sensé the Geneva trans- 
lation interprets the words. According to which 
reading the prophet solemnly appeals to God that 
he had not intruded himself into the office of a pro- 
phet, nor had been desirous of an employment that 
foreboded so much evil to others, and ‘brought a 
great deal of trouble upon himself. The words in 
the Hebrew, however, are literally as our trans- 
lation expresses them, and may be paraphrased 
thus, “As I did-not seek the office of a prophet, 
so when thou wast pleased to call me to it I did 
not decline it.’ The LXX, render it, eyo de & 
exoTiaca KaTaKoAsSuv omiw o#, I have not been 
weary of following thee. Neither have I desired 
the woful day—Namely, the day of the accom- 
plishment of his prophecies. Though, when it 
came, it would prove him to have. been a true pro- 
phet, which they had questioned, and would be the 
avenging of him upon his persecutors, and therefore, 
on those accounts, he might have been tempted to 
desire it; yet, as it would be a woful day to Jeru- 
salem, he deprecated it, and could appeal: to God 
that he wished it might never come. That which 
came out of my lips was right before thee—That 
is, it exactly agreed with what I had received from 
thee. Be not a terror unto me—Amidst all the 
terrors, with which mine adversaries threaten me, 
let me still find comfort in thee; and let not any ap- 
prehension of being forsaken by thee be added to 
my other fears. Let them be confounded, &e.— 
See notes on’ chap. xi. 20, and xvi. 18. 

Verses 19-24. Thus saith the Lor, Go, &c.— 
Here we evidently have a distinct prophecy, which 
the prophet was commanded to deliver most proba- 
bly soon, if not immediately, after the foregoing. 
Stand in ‘the gate of the children of the people—By 
which it seems is meant ite gate most frequented by 

a - 


the people; being that nearest the palace, where the 
kings of Judah held their most solemn courts of ju- 
dicature, or by which. they ordinarily went out of 
the city, and returned into it. And say, Hear ye the 
word of the Lord, ye kings of Judah—The word 
of the Lord equally concerns the highest and the 
lowest, the greatest princes as well as the meanest 
subjects. Thus saith the Lord, Take heed to your- 
selves—The Hebrew is, Take heed to your‘ souls, in- 
timating that the sanctification of the sabbath is an 
important thing, wherein the welfare of men’s souls 
is concerned.- Neither carry forth a burden, &e.— 
See notes on Neh. xiii. 15-22. Neither do ye any 
work—Servile work was forbidden to be done upon 
their solemn festivals, Lev. xxiii. 8, 35, much more 
upon the sabbath days. But hallow ye ‘the sabbath 
day—“ The sabbath was instituted asa sign or token 
of God’s covenant with his people, Exod. xxxi. 13, 
and the observance of it was the distinguishing 
character of a Jew, whereby he declared himself to 
be a worshipper of the true God, who made heaven 
and earth, and ordained the sabbath day as.a memo- 
rial of the creation. ‘So that forthe Jews to profane 
the sabbath, was in effect to renounce their share in 
God’s covenant. 7 

Verses 25-27. Then shall there enter diigo the gates 
of this city, &e.— From’ hence it appears, ” says 
Lowth, “that the judgments denounced against Je- 
rusalem, at least as far as they threatened the city 
with utter. destruction, were not irreversible. And 
from Jeremiah’s advice to Zedekiah, chap. xxxviii. 
17, it may be concluded, that if the king had heark- 
ened to that counsel, the city would not have been 
destroyed, and he himself might have continued a 
tributary king under Nebuchadnezzar. It is true, 
that in several other chapters of this prophecy, God, 
upon foresight of the Jews’ impenitence, pronounces 
a peremptory sentence upon them. See note on 
chap. iv. 28.” From the land of Benjamin—See 
notes on chap. i. 1; vi. 1. ae Srom the plan ane 

( 26* 


Parable of the marred 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


vessel of the potter. 


A. M. 3403. 


B. C. 601 horses, they and their princes, the 


~ men of Judah, and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem : and this city shall remain for ever. 
26 And they shall come from the cities of Ju- 
dah, and from ' the places about Jerusalem, and 
from the land of Benjamin, and from ™the 
plain, and from the- mountains, and from * the 
south, bringing burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, 
and meat-offerings, and incense, and bringing 


— 


° sacrifices of praise, unto the house A. M. 3403. 
B. C. 601. 
of the Lorp. einen Fees 
27 But if ye will not hearken unto me tc 
hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a 
burden, even entering in at the gates of Jeru- 
salem on the sabbath day ; then ? will I kindle 
a fire in the gates thereof, 1 and it shall devour 
the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be 
quenched. . 


) Chap. xxxii; 44; xxiii. 13——m Zech. vii. 72 Zech. vii. 7. 
o Psa. evil. 22; exvi. 17. + ; 


P Chap. xxi: 14; xlix. 27; Lam. iv.11; Amos i, 4, 7, 10,123 ii. 
2, 5-——4 2 Kings xxv. 9; Chap. lii. 13. 


Srom the mountain— These divisions of the coun- 
try belonging. to the.tribe of Judah may. be found, 
Josh. xv. 21, 33, 48; and these, together with the 
tribe of Benjamin, made up the whole kingdom of 
Judah, when taken separate from the kingdom of 
Israel, or of the ten tribes. See the same enumera- 
tion chap. xxxii. 44.” Bringing burnt-offerings 
and sacrifices, &c.—The sum of these three verses 
is, that if they would sanctify the Lord’s sabbath, ob- 
serving also all the other parts of God’s law, which 
are doubtless included, they should either continue 
in, or be restored unto, their ancient, civil, and eccle- 
siastical state. Their city and temple should be pre- 
served ; they should have kings and princes in their 


former order and splendour, and men should come 
from all parts of the country bringing their usual sa- 
crifices and offerings to the temple, and those of all 
sorts. But if you will not. hearken unto me—Here 
the Lord denounces a threatening the reverse of the « 
former promise, which should be executed upon 
their acting contrary to the duty to which, that pro- 
mise was annexed. God would destroy their city 
by fire ; their highest and noblest structures should 
be burned down, and though the hand of the enemy 
should do this, yet God should order them to do it; 
so that it should be a fire of his kindling, and there- 
fore should not be likely to be quenched till it had 
effected the purpose for which God appointed it, 


CHAPTER XVIII. ; 
In this chapter, (1,) The prophet is shown, under the type of a potter, God's absolute power over nations and kingdoms, te 


regulate and alter their condition at his own discretion, 1-10. 


(2,) He is directed to exhort the people to avert the evil 


threatened them by repentance and reformation; and, upon their refusal, to charge them with the guilt of unprecedented 
revolt, and to foretel their destruction, 11-17. (3,) They’ conspire against ‘him, and he protests against their unmerited 
and ungrateful persecution of him, and calls for justice against them, 18-23. 


A. M, 3419. [THE word which came to Jeremiah 
B. C. 605. ‘ 
from the Lorp, saying, A 
2 Arise, and go down to the potter’s house, 
and there I will cause thee to hear my words. 


3 Then I went down to the potter’s A. M, 3418. 
house; and behold, he wrought a work ———— 
on the ! wheels. 


4 And the vessel * that he made of clay was 


1 Or, frames, or, seats. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVIII. 

Verses 1-4. The word which came to Jeremiah, 
&c.—We have here the beginning of a new discourse 
of Jeremiah, which, if introduced in its proper place, 
as we have reason to think it is; was probably also, 
as well as the foregoing, delivered in some part of 
the first three years of Jehoiakim’s reign. Arise, 
and go down to the potter’s house—Some well-known 
place where pots were made; and there I will cause 


thee to hear my words—I will further reveal my 
mind to thee, that thou mayest make it known to. 
this people.. God has frequently condescended to, 
teach us his will. by very familiar and striking 


2 Or, that he made was marred, as clay in the hands of the potter. 


the heavenly vision. - And beholdhe wrought a work 
on the wheels—Hebrew, (*33N7 4y, literally, wpon 
the stones. Thus also the LXX., ex tov Ader, 
“There can be no doubt,” says Blaney, “that the 
machine is intended on which the potters formed 
their earthen vessels; and the appellation, ov Avdox, 
the stones, will appear very proper, if we consider 
this machine as consisting of a pair of circular stones 
placed one upon another like millstones ; of which 
the lower was immoveable, but the upper one turn- 
ed upon the foot of a spindle or axis, and had motion 
communicated to it by the feet of the potter sittingat 
his work; as may be learned from Ecclus. xxXviil. 


images. Then I went, &c,—Not being disobedientto 29. Upon the top of ll stone, which was 


The prophet directed to exhort 
A. M. 3419. marred in the hand of the so 
B. C. 605. 

~— he ? made it again op Yexcel; as 


ke it. 


seemed good to the potter to 


5 Then the word of the Lorp ene: to me, | 


saying, > 
6 O house of Israel, * cannot Ido with you 
as this potter? saith the Lorn. Behold, as 


the clay is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in my | 


hand, O house of Israel. 

7 At what instant I shall speak concerning a 
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to ° pluck 
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: 

8 “If that nation against whom I have pro- 
nounced, turn from their evil, *I will repent of 
the evil that I thought to do unto them. 


the people to repentance 


9 cme at what instant I shall speak A-M. 3419 
concerning a nation, and concerning es 
a kingdom, to build and to plant it ; 

10 If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not 
my voice, then I will repent of the good, where- 
with I said I would benefit them. 

11 % Now therefore go to, speak to the men 
of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 
saying, Thus saith the Lorp; Behold, I frame 
evil against you, and devise a device against 
you: freturn ye now every one from his evil 
way, and make your ways and your doings 
good. 

12 And they said, * There is no bioe' but 
we will walk after our own devices, and we 


4 


3 Heb. returned and made. aTsaiah xlv. 9; Romans ix. 20,21. 
. > Isa, Ixiv. 8 ¢ Ch. 1.10. 4 Wzek, xviii. 21 ; xxxiii. 11. 


© Chap. xxvi. 3; Jonah iti. 10+— 2 Kings xxvii. 13 ; Chapter 
vil. 3; XX. 55 xxvi. 13; xxxv. 15.—s Ohap. Ii. 25. 


flat, the clay was placed, which the potter, having 
given the stone the due velocity, formed into shape 
with his hand.” And the vessel that he made of 
_ clay—Hebrew, 1nN3, as clay, that is, while it was 
yet clay, was. marred, was spoiled in the potter’s 
hand, so that he did not think, fit to go on with his 
design, as to the form of the vessel, but turned the 
same clay into a vessel of another form, as he judged 
best. Nothing can more strongly represent the ab- 
solute dominion God has over us than this image of 
the potter fashioning his clay into what form or ves- 
sel he pleased. 


Verse 6. Cannot I do with you as this potter 2— | 


Have I not as absolute an authority and power over 
you? Nay, God has an infinitely clearer title to do- 
minion over us than the potter has over the clay, 
for the potter only gives the clay its form; whereas 
we have both matter and form from God. As the 
work of his hands, made and preserved by him, and 
yet moreas sinners redeemed by him, we are entire- 
ly in ‘his hands, at his disposal, and he has an 
undoubted right to do with us what he pleases. 
But as a being infinitely holy, just, and gracious, 
in all his conduct toward his intelligent, free, and 
immortal offspring, he acts by fixed rules of per- 
fect equity and infinite goodness. He frequently 
dispenses: favours, indeed, to individuals, families, 
and nations, in a way of sovereignty, but never 
punishes by arbitrary power. Strong is his hand, 
and high is his right hand, (Psa. lxxxix. 13,) but, 
as it there follows, justice and judgment are the ha- 
bitation of his throne. He asserts his absolute power, 
and tells us whathe might do; but at the same time 
assures us that he will act asa merciful and righteous 
judge. i 

Verses 7, 8. At what instant Ishall speak concern- 
ing @ nation, &c.—God speaks thus concerning na- 
tions and kingdoms in his word, and by his prophets 
and ministers. Thus he told Jeremiah, chap. i. 10, that 
he had set him over the nations, to root out and pull 
down—That is, to declare they should be rooted out 
and pulled down, or to make known the divine pur- || 


poses, concerning them. Jf that nation, against 
whom I have pronounced, turn, §c., I will repent, 
&c.—Repentance. in man produces repentance in 
God. The threatenings of God being conditional, 
when they are suspended by his long-suffering and 
mercy, or prevented by the amendment of the per- 
sons against whom they are denounced, he is said, in 
Scripture, torepent; not thatthe phrase implies that 


there is any change in him, but that there is achange 
in us; and that his conduct toward us, provided his 
| denunciations were not conditional, is the same as if 


he repented or changed his mind. But the reader is 
desired to see what is said on this, subject, Gen. vi. 6. 

Verses 9,10. If I shall speak concerning a nation 
to build and to plant—That is, To advance and es- 
tablish all the true interests of it; if it do evil in my 
sight, &c.—If it lose its piety and virtue, and become 
profane and vicious ; then will I repent of the good, 
&c.--I will not proceed with the good work which 


_I was performing in its behalf, but it shall be inter- 


mitted; and what favours were further designed it 
shall be withheld. Thus God changed his purpose 
concerning Eli’s house, 1 Sam. ii. 30; and hurried 
Israel back into the wilderness, when he had brought 
them within sight of Canaan; and thus he rejected 
those lost sheep of the house of Israel who refused 
to embrace the gospel, notwithstanding the general 
promises he had made to that people, and even after 
he had sent his Son to seek and save them. In like 
manner neither can any particular Christians, nor 
Christian churches, lay any claim to God’s general 
promise of preserving and finally saving them, any 
further than they keep close to that rule of faith and 
manners which he hath prescribed to them in the 
New Testament. 

Verses 11, 12. Now therefore speak to the wil 1 of 
Judah—The Lord now commands his prophet to 
make a particular application of the more general 
doctrine which he had before delivered. Thus saith 
the Lord, Behold, I frame evil against you—I have 
a work upon the wheel, which, when finished, will 
effect your ruin; it is therefore your wiedom now to 

3 


Terrible judgments 


A. M, 3419. will every one do the imagination of 
B. ©. 65. his evil heart. 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lorn; * Ask ye 
now among the heathen, who hath heard such 
things: the virgin of Israel hath done ‘ a very 
horrible thing. 

14 Will a man leave * the snow of Lebanon 
which cometh from the rock of the field? or 
shall the cold flowing waters that-come from 
another place be, forsaken ? 

15 Because my- people hath forgotten * me, 


h Chapter ii. 10; 1 Cor. v. 1——i Chapter v. 30.—+ Or, my 
fields for-a rock, or, for the snow of Lebanon? shall the-running 
waters be forsaken for the strange cold waters ? k Chap. ii. 13, 
325 iiij21 5 xiii. 25; xvii. 13.. 


return from your evil ways, and make your doings 
good. And they said, There is no hope—Thou dost 
but labour in vain in talking tous. We will walk 
after our own devices—We will proceed forward in 
our old course; and we will every one do the imagin- 
ation of his evil heart—It cannot be supposed that 
they would call the imaginations of their hearts 
evil; nor does the prophet. mean that they actual- 
ly expressed themselves in these words; but this 
was the language of their conduct. They gave evi- 
dent proof that they were determined to continue in 
their sins. 

Verses 13, 14. Ask ye now among the heathen— 
Such an apostacy as you are guilty of (see verse 15) 
is not to be paralleled among the heathen. Compare 
chap. ii. 10. Who hath heard such things—When 
did people ever behave toward their idols, which yet 
were no gods, as my people have behaved toward 
me? The virgin of Israel—That people who were 
dedicated to me as a chaste virgin, have since cor- 
rupted themselves, and gone a whoring after idols. 
Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon, &c.—“ The 
two similitudes in this verse are evidently designed 
to illustrate the unnatural and absurd conduct of the 
Jewish nation in deserting their own God, and adopt- 
ing the superstitions of a strange idolatry, in prefer- 
ence to the good old paths which God had ordained 
for them to walk in. As to the first, Lebanon, it 
must be observed, was the highest. mountain in Is- 
rael, lying to the north of it, and having its summit 
almost always covered with snow; from the white- 
ness of which it is supposed to have derived its 
name.” See Ancient Univ. Hist. vol. i. book i. p. 570, 
fol. ‘The same circumstance is also recorded by Taci- 
tus, Hist. lib.v,¢.6. “Praecipuum montium Libanum 
erigit, mirum dictu, tantos inter ardores opacum fid- 
umque nivibus.” If we follow the translation in our 
text, the sense is, Itis as strange and unreasonable 
for men to forsake the true God for idols, as it would 
be for a thirsty traveller to forego the cold refresh- 
ing streams that come in his way, flowing from the 
melting snows of Lebanon, or the clear waters issu- 
ing from a pure spring, in order that he might drink 
of the stagnant waters of some muddy pool. But, it 
is to be observed, the words a man, and which 

3 


CHA PT ER XVII. 


.- are threatened. 


PTel< = 


they have burned incense to lvanity, A.M. 3419. 
and théy have caused them to stumble aca 
in their ways from the ™ ancient paths, to walk 
in paths, ina way not cast up; , 

16 To make their land "desolate, and a per- 
petual ° hissing ; every one that passeth thereby 
shall be astonished, and wag his head. : 

17 PI will scatter them ‘as’ with an east 
wind before the enemy ; * I will show them the 
back, and not the face, in the day of: their 
calamity. 


ws Chapter x. 15; xvi. 19. m Chapter 'vi. 16. n Chapter 
xix. 8; xlix. 135 1.13. ©] Kings ix. 8; Lamentation ii. 15. 
Micah vi. 16.——» Chap. xiii. 24.4 Psa. xlviii. 7 Chap. 


ll. 27. 


cometh, are not in the Hebrew, but supplied by our 
translators, and considerably alter the sense, which 
literally; is, Will the snow of Lebanon cease from the 
rock of the field?) That is, Will it cease to flow, &c. 
And by the rock of the field, may be meant the rocks 
on the level ground on the very top of Lebanon; 


from which the snow, being melted, flowed down into 


the vales at the bottom of the mountain. Or, shall 
the cold overflowing waters, running down, fail? 
The Vulgate translates the verse to exactly the same 
sense, “ Nunquid deficiet de petra agri nix Libani; 
aut evelli possunt aque, erumpentes frigid, et de- 
fluentes?” And the LXX. to nearly that sense, My 
exAenpsow amo TeTpag fact, y yiwv amo Te Acbave; pn 
exkAwn vdwp Bata ave depomevov; Shall the breasts 
(that is, the springs) fail from the rock, or snow from 
Lebanon? Shall water, borne along violently by the 
wind, turnaside? The sense of the verse seems to be, 
that the Jews ought no more to have failed in their ad- 
herence to the true God,.and his service, than the snow 
on mount Lebanon, or the waters which flow from that 
mountain into the fields under it, ever fail; in other 
words, That, as the works of nature preserve their 
order, and fail not of answering the ends for which 
they were appointed; so the Jews ought not to have 
failed of performing their duty to, and showing forth 
the praises of, Him who chose them to be his pecu- 
liar people, and conferred singular privileges upon 
them in order to these very ends, ; 
Verses 15-17. Because my people have forgotten 
me—T he fountain of living waters ; have forgotten 
what I am in myself, and what I have been, and am 
still ready to be to them; have lost their knowledge 
of me, and their remembrance of what I have done 
for them; they have burned incense to vanity—To 
vain idols, the products of men’s vain imaginations, 
and serving no good purpose whatever; and they 
have caused them to stumble, &c.—* The worship 
of idols hath perverted them from following the old, 
beaten track, plainly set forth in the law of Moses, 
and in the examples of former ages; (see chap. Vi. 
16 ;) and hath engaged them in such new and untried 
ways of worship as will end in their ruin.”—Lowth. 
To make their land desolate—Though the Jews did 
not practise idolatry and other sins with this view, . 
405 


The prophet offers 


JEREMIAH. 


prayer unto God. 


: M. 3419, 
Cc 


A 18 4% Then said they, * Come, and 
B. C. 605. 
ae 


ae against Jere- 
miah ; ‘for the law not perish from the 


priest, nor counsel fone wise, nor the word 
from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him 
5 with the tongue, and let us not give heed to 
any of his words. 

19 Give heed to me, O Lorp, and hearken 
to the voice of them that contend with me. 

20 "Shall evil be recompensed for good? for 
*they have digged a pit for my soul. “ Remem- 
ber that I stood before thee to speak good 
for them, and to turn away thy wrath from 
them. 

21. Therefore ¥ deliver. up their children to the 


famine, and ° pour out their blood by A. ae mao. 
the force of the sword; and let their. 
wives be ~bereaved off their children, and be 
widows; and Jet their men be put to death ; 
let their young men be slain u by. the sword in 
battle. 

22 Let a cry be heard from their houses, bifhatn 
thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them: 
for * they have digged a pit to take me, and hid 
snares for my feet. 

23 Yet, Lorn, thou knowest all their SBiutiset 
against me 7 to slay me: * forgive not their ini- 
quity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight, 


|but let them be overthrown before thee; deal 


thus with them in the time of thine anger. . 


8 Chap. x1. 19, tLev. x. 11; Mal. ii. 7; John vii. 48, 49. 
5 Or, for the tongue, —' Psalm cix. 4, 5. x Psalm xxxv. 7; 
lvii. 6; Verse 22. , 


~ for they wished nothing less: than the desolation of 
their country; yet they acted as if they wished it, 
and God had sufficiently warned them it was an of. 
fect which would follow upon, their'conduct. And a 
perpetual hissing—To be hissed at. perpetually by 
way of insult and scorn, by those who pass by. J 
will scatter them as with an east wind, &e.—The 
east wind, being dry and blasting, is commonly used 
to express the calamities of war, and such like wasting 
judgments. But the words may perhaps be more 
intelligibly rendered, As the east wind the stubble, 
so will I scatter them before the enemy. And I will 
show them the back and not the face—I will manifest 
the same aversion from them which they have shown 
from me; I will not favour but be against them. The 
metaphor is taken from the custom of kings and prin- 
ces, whichis, to turn their backs on, or go away from, 
those supplicants whose petitions they will not grant. 
Verse 18. T'hen said they, Come, &c,—Namely, 
after they had heard from Jeremiah what God had 
ordered him to say to them concerning their destruc- 
tion; for this seems to be understood. Let us devise 
devices against Jeremiah—Letus accuse him of be- 
inga false prophet ; for the law shall not perish from 
the priest, &c.—For his threatenings plainly contra- 
dict God’s promises made to his people. “They seem 
to have been incensed against him on much the same 
ground as the Jews, in aftertimes, were. against our 
Saviour and his apostles. They had persuaded them- 
selves, that God had intended for them a perpetual 
establishment; and would accordingly provide them 
witha constant succession of men, in all departments, 
to preserve and maintain the general welfare; name- 
ly, priests to direct in all matters of law and religion ; 
wise statesmen to manage their civil concerns; and 
prophets to make known to them the immediate will 
of God on all important and extraordinary occasions. 
Upon this presumption they inferred, that Jeremiah, 
who foretold the contrary, was a false prophet, and, 
as such, they determined to punish him.”—Blaney: 
Let us smite him with the tongue--Let us calumni- 


¥ Psalm cix. 9,10.——® Heb. pour them_out——* Verse 20. 
7Heb. for death. a Psalm xxxv. 4; cix. 14; Chapter x1.'20; 
xy. 15. 


ate and disparage him, traducing him as an enemy 
to his country. Let us accuse him of crimes against 
the state, and by that means take away his life; then 
all his prophecies will die with him. In the margin 
we read, for the tongue, which may signify, “Let us 
punish him for. his malignant speeches.” . “ But I 
rather’ think,” says Blaney, “we should render it, 
Let us smite him on the tongue, that is,on the offend- 
ing part; alluding to a very significant mode of in- 
flicting punishment, by directing it to that particular 
member which had the most. ifamediate share in the 
offence, although here it may possibly carry this ge- 
neral import only, ‘ Let us punish him so as effectu- 
ally to silence him.’ ” 

Verses 19-23. Give heed to me, O Lord—The 
people had determined not to give heed to any of 
his words, (verse 18,) nor to admit any of his com- 
plaints, nor take the least notice of his grievances; 
therefore he appeals to God, as an impartial judge, 
that would hear both sides, as every judge ought to 
do. It is a matter of comfort to faithful ministers 
that, if men will not give heed to their preaching, 
yet God will give heed to their praying. And heark- 
en to the voice of them that contend with me—Hear 
what they have to say against me, and for them- 
selves, and then make it appear that thou sittest wpon 
the throne judging right. Shall evil be recompensed 
for good ?—And shall it go unpunished ? Wilt not 
thou recompense me good for that evil? see 2 Sam, 
xvi. 12. “To render good for good,” says Henry, 
“is human, evil for evil is brutish, good for evil is 
Christian, but evil for good is devilish ; ; it is so very 
absurd and wicked a thing that we cannot think but 
God will avenge it.” They have digged a pit for 
my soul—That is, They have laid snares for me as 
for a wild beast; for pits are digged for wild beasts 
to fall into, that so they may be taken, Therefore 
the sense is, They have formed a design : against my 
life, and that not in a generous way, by an open as- 
sault, against which I might have had an opportunity 
of defending myself; but in a base, panne clan- 


Parable of the 


earthen vessel. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


destine way. Such was the evil they did or devised 
against him. But see how great the good was which 
he had done for them: Remember, he says, that I 
stood before thee to speak good for them—That is, in 
the execution of my prophetical office, I always in- 
terposed, with my prayers, in their behalf, to avert 
those judgments which, by thy command, I de- 
nounced against them. Therefore deliver up their 
children, &c.—Since they are thus incorrigible, I 
shall not any more intercede for them, but let those 
calamities of famine and sword, with which thou 
hast threatened them, overtake them. Let a cry be 
heard from their houses, &c.—When they are unex- 


pectedly assaulted by a troop of their enemies, that 
come to plunder and destroy them. Yet Lord, or, 
rather, For Lord, thou knowest all their counsel 
against me, to slay me ; orgive not their iniquity, , 
&c.—Compare chap. xi. 205 xv. 153 Psa. lix. 53, on 
which passages see the notes. Although it redounds 
to the glory of God’s justice that incorrigible sinners 
should meet with exemplary punishment; yet these 
strong imprecations are not to be considered as the 
effusions of an unholy zeal, but as simple prophecies, 

in which light, we have shown, in our commentary 
on the Psalms, many similar expressions occurring 
there are to be-considered. 


4 CHAPTER XIX. 
In this chapter, (1, ) Under the type of breaking a potter's vessel, Jeremiah, in the presence of the elders, priests, and people, 


foreshows the ruin and desolation of Judah and Jerusalem, ore their nse 1-13. 


the court-of the temple, 14, 15. 


it ted . THUS saith the Lorn, Go and ‘get 
eteetliek~ es a potter’s earthen bottle, and take 
of the ancients of the people, and of the an- 
cients of the priests ; 


2 And go forth unto * the valley-of the son of | 


Hinnom, which is by the entry of ! the east 
gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall 
tell thee. 

3.> And say, Hear ye the word of the Lorn, 
O/kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem; Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, the God 
of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this 


1 Heb. 
2 Kings 


a Joshua xv. 8; 2 Kings xxiii. 10; Chapter vii. 31. 
the sun gate. wan Chap. xvii. 20. ——¢ ] Sam. iii. 1l; 
xxi. 12. 

x 


(2,) He repeats the like denunciations in 


place, the which ait ate heareth, A. M. 3399. 
B.C. 605. 
his ears shall ¢ tingle. pease hee 

4 Because they “have forsaken me, and have 
estranged this place, and have burned incense 
in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor 
their fathers have known, nor the kings of 
Judah, and have filled this place with ° the 
blood of innocents} 

5 €'They have built also the high places of 
Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt-offer- 
ings unto Baal, * which I commanded not, nor 
spake 7¢, neither came i¢ into my mind: 


4 Deut. xxviii: 20.; Isa. lxv. 11; Chap. ii. 13, 17, 19; xv. 6; 
xvii. 13. e2 Kings xxi. 16 ; Chap. iat Chap. vil. 31, 
325 xxxii. 35.——5 ‘Lev. xviii. 21. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIX. 
Verses 1, 2. Go and get a potter’s earthen bottle— 
The meaning of this emblem is fully explained in 
the subsequent verses ; and indeed the whole chapter 
requires littke more comment than a reference to the 
passages inthe margin. And take of the ancients 
of the people—Or, take with thee some of the an- 
cients,&c. By these, men of reputation and eminence 
are meant, probably such as were members of the 
Sanhedrim. And of the ancients of the priests— 
The heads of the four and twenty courses: sce 1 
Chron. xxiv. 4. Such were the most proper to be 
witnesses of those things which the prophet was 
about to say and do. And go unto the valley of the 
son of Hinnom—A most noted valley, to the east of 
Jerusalem ; which is by the entry of the east gate—By 
which men entered into the temple; from whence 
they had a prospect of the valley of Hinnom, which 
lay south-east of the temple, Josh. xv. 8. The He- 
brew is MOI Www, the gate Harsith, which some 
interpret, the dung gate, mentioned Neh. ii. 13; 
3 


others, the potters’ gale; the potters’ field being near 
the temple: see Zech. xi. 13. 

Verses 3-5. Say, Hear, §c., O kings of Judah— 
See note on chap. xvii. 20. Behold, I will bring 
evil upon this place—That is, upon Judah and Jeru- 
salem, so surprising and so dreadful that whosoever 
heareth, his ears shall tingle—The very report of it 
shall astonish the hearers. Because they have es- 
tranged this place—F'rom me, should be supplied to 
make the sense clearer; the meaning, it seems, be- ~ 
ing that, by their worshipping other gods, and com- 
mitting all sorts of crithes, they had caused God not 
to look any longer upon their city and country as 
his, but quite foreign from him. Or, as some inter- 
pret the expression, They had strangely abused, 
and alienated from their intended purposes both Jeru- 
salem, the holy city, and the temple, God’s holy 
house, which were designed for his honour and the 
support of his kingdom among men. And have fill- 
ed this place with the blood. of innocents—Of the 
children sacrificed to Moloch; see note on chap. ii. 

407 


Judah's desolation 


JEREMIAH. 


3 
is predicted. 


A.M. 3390. 6 Therefore, behold, the days come, | 


3. 6.5, saith the Lorn, that this place shall 


no more be called Tophet, nor *'The valley 


of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of 
Slaughter. 

7 And I will make void the counsel of Judah 
and Jerusalem in this place; ‘and I will cause 
them to fall by the sword before their enemies, 
and by the hands of them that seek their lives: 
and their * carcasses will I give to be meat for 
the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of 
the earth. 

8 And I will make this city ! desolate, and a 
hissing: every one that passeth thereby shall 
be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues 
thereof. 

9 And I will cause them to eat the ™ flesh of 
their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and 
they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend 
in the siege and straitness wherewith their ene- 
mies, and they that seek their lives,” shall 
straiten them. 


h Josh. xv. 8.—' Lev. xxvi. 17; Deut. xxviii. 25. Psa. 
Ixxix. 2 ;) Chap. vii. 33; xvi. 4; xxxiv. 20. Chap. xviii. 16; 
xlix. 13 51. 13-——m Levit. xxvi. 29; Deut. xxviii. 53; Isa. ix. 
20; Lam, iv. 10. 


10 "Then shalt thou. break the A.M. 3399 
bottle in the sight of the men ~~ bala 
go with thee, - - 

11 ‘And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lorp of hosts; ° Even so will I break this 
people and this city, as ove breaketh a potter’s 
vessel, that cannot ? be made whole again : and 
they shall Pbury ¢hem in Tophet, till there be 
no place to bury. 

12 Thus will I do unto this place, saith the 
Lorp, and to the inhabitants thereof, and even 
make this city as Tophet : 

13 And the houses of Jetasslene and ‘the 
houses of the kings of Judah, shall be defiled 
das the place of Tophet, because of all the 
houses upon whose * roofs they have burned in- 
cense unto all the host of heaven, and * have 
poured out drink-offeri ings unto other gods. 

14 Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither 
the Lorp had sent him to prophesy ; and he 
stood in ‘the court of the Loro’s house ; and 
said to all the people, 


. Chapter li. 63, 64.——° Psalm ii. 9; Isaiah xxx. 14; Lam. 
iv. 2.——? Heb: be healed. P Chapter Vii. 32.——# 2 Kings 
xxiii. 10.—".2 Kings xxiii. 12; Chapter xxxii. 29; Zeph. i, 5. 
8 Chapter vii. 18. -t 2 Chron. xx. 5. : 


34; and Isa. xxx. 33. . They have built also, rather, 
they have even built the high places of Baal—For 
the same sin is here expressed which was mentioned 
in the latter part of the foregoing verse, and the co- 
pulative particle, vau,.is sometimes used by way of 
explication ; to burn their sons with fire unto Baal— 
From this, as well as from some other places, it is 
plain that they slew and burned human victims to 
Baal, as well as to Moloch, if these two names 
were not promiscuously given, as some suppose they 
were, to one andthe same idol. Which Icommand- 
ed not, &c.—It seems from this that there were not 
wanting some who maintained that human ee 
were pleasing to God. 

Verses 6-9. Therefore, behold, the days :come— 
Andvare at no great distance ; that this place shall no 
more becalled Tophet, &c.—In Joshua’s time it was 
called The valley of the son of Hinnom; in after ages, 
it had the name of Tophet, from the noise of drums 
and -tabrets sounding: there while children were 
burning. Here it is foretold that it should have a 
new name and be called, T'he valley of Slaughter. 
See note.on chap. vii. 32, 33. J will make void the 
counsel, &c., in this place—They shed innocent 
blood in this place, and in this place God would dis- 
comfit them, and cause their blood to be shed by the 
hands of the Chaldeans. And TI will cause them to 
eat the flesh of their sons and daughters—A terrible 
judgment threatened by Moses, Deut. xxviii. 53; and 
actually fulfilled in the siege of Jerusalem. See 
Lam. iv. 10. , 

Verses 10-18. Then shalt thow break the bottle, 

408 


| &c.—This was intended to be a symbolical repre- 


sentation of the ruin threatened against them, used in 
order to strike the beholders more powerfully than 
mere words could do.» Of such symbolical actions 
as these there are several instances in the Scriptures. 
Thus saith the Lord, Even so will I break this 
people—That is, as Jeremiah breaketh the bottle: 
That cannot be made whole again—That is, the 
ruin of Jerusalem shall be an utter ruin: no hand 


| can repair it but his that broke it; and if they return 


to him, though he has torn, he willheal. In fact, 
Jerusalem was so utterly destroyed by the Chalde- 
ans that there was little left'standing of it. ‘So that 
after their captivity they were obliged to build a new 
city in the place of the former. And they shall bury 
them in Tophet--These words are omitted by the 
LXX.; till there be no place to bury—Till there is 
no room to bury more; for the meaning is, that the 
whole valley of Tophet should be so filled with dead 
bodies, that there should be no room to lay any more 
there ; by which is expressed the greatness of the 
slaughter. And even make this city as Tophet—A 
place of slaughter. And the houses of Jerusalem 
shall be defiled as Tophet—Namely, polluted with 
dead bodies. Because of the houses upon whose 
roofs they have burned incense—The houses of the 
Jews were built with flat roofs, Deut: xxii. 8, and 
there they dedicated altars to the host of heaven, 
where they could have a full view of them, 

Verses 14, 15. He stood in the court of the Lord's 
house—The great court, called the outer court, Ezek. 
xlvi. 21, supposed to be the same with the new court, 

. 8 


Jeremiai smitten 


CHAPTER XX. 


~ by Pashur. 


oro 15 Thus saith the Lorv of hosts, 
———— the God of Israel ; Behold, I will bring 


upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil 


that I have pronounced against it, se 
because "they have hardened their ———— 
necks, that they might not hear my words. 


u Chapter vii. 


26; xvii. 23. 


= 


mentioned 2 Chron. xx. 5, as having been built since 
Solomon’s time. And said to all the people—Con- 
firming, and probably repeating to them, who had 
not heard it, what he had said to the ancients in the 
valley of Tophet. Thus saith the Lord of hosts— 
Who is well able to make his words good; J will 
bring upon this city, and upon all her towns—All the 
cities of Judah and Benjamin aré meant which ac- 
knowledged Jerusalem for their metropolis, and were 
subordinate to her, -All the evil that I have pro- 


nounced against it—As if he had said, Flatter not 
yourselves with a conceit that God will be better to 
you than his word. Whatever you may suppose ta 
the contrary, the execution of the divine threaten- 
ing will fully answer the prediction, and the former 
will be found, by experience, to be as terrible as the 
latter represents it to be; because they have harden- 
ed their necks—And would not bend them to the 
yoke of God’s commands; and would not hear his 
words—W ould not heed and yield obedience to them. 


CHAPTER XX. 


( > 
We have in this chapter, which is a continuation of the foregoing, (1,) An account of Jeremiah’s being beaten and imprison- 
ed by Pashur, captain of the temple ; against whom, on his release, he pronounces a terrible sentence, and also against 
his friends, foretelling their being carried away captives with all Judah unto Babylon, where Pashur, and all that be- 


longed to.him, should die in exile, 1-6. 


(2,) The prophet complains of the mockery of his enemies, and their malicious 


attempts to hurt him; but professes his trust, that God would still defeat their purposes and avenge his wrongs; and 
celebrates his deliwerance with a song of praise, 7-13. (3,) He bitterly laments his being born to a life of so much sorrow 


and disquietude, 14-18. 


A. M, 3399. OW Pashur the son of * Immer 
B. C. 605. ; ° 

ae the priest, who was also.chief 
governor in the house of the Lorn, heard that 


\ 


A. M. 3393, 


Jeremiah prophesied these things. 
res Prog BS: “BLO. 605. 


2 hen Pashur smote Jeremiah 
the prophet and put him in the stocks that 


a] Chron. 


xxiv. 14, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER! XX. 

Verse 1. Pashur the son of Immer—Pashur was 
not: the immediate son of Immer, but of Melchiah; 
as is expressly mentioned 1 Chronicles ix. 12, 
and hereafter, chapter xxi. 1. Immer was one of 
his predecessors, and head of the sixteenth sacer- 
dotal class, 1 Chron. xxiv. 14. Pashur was not high- 
priest, as some of the ancients have thought, but only 
captain, or overseer of the temple. In this capacity 
he had power to arrest and put in prison the false 
prophets, and those who caused any disturbance in 
‘the temple. This matter is further explained, by 
Blaney, thus: “The priests being distributed, by Da- 
vid, into twenty-four courses, under as many heads 
of families, and each of these courses officiating by 
turns in the temple service ; the heads. of each course 
were governors of the sanctuary’; or, according to 
our translation, of the house of God. The meaning 
then will be, that these heads of the courses had not 
only the chief ordering of the service of the sanc- 
tuary, but were invested also with authority, at least 
within the precincts of the temple, to maintain peace 
and good order,there. These persons I consider as 
being the same with those who in the New Testa- 
mentare styled apy:eperc, chief priests, being next in 
dignity and power to the high-priest. Pashur, it 
seems, was the head of the course of Immer. So 


that, if the course of Immer was at that time upon 
duty, Pashur was at the same time the acting ruler or 
eommander in the temple. And this I conceive to 
be implied in the words here used,1°3, implying his 
authority to command, and 7°p3, that he was then in 
the exercise of it; and by virtue of that authority he 
took upon him to punish Jeremiah as a disturber of 
the peace. I have given this officer, or magistrate,” 
(namely, ia his translation,) “the military title of 
commanding officer, because it was usual to consider 
the temple as a kind of garrison, held by high-priests 
under military subordination. And for this reason, 
no doubt, we find him called by the name of cparnyo¢ 
Ta eps, captain of the temple, Acts iv. 1, and v. 24, 
26. In Luke xxii. 52, captains, cparnyot, are spoken 
of, in the plural number ; which may perhaps be thus 
accounted for. -As,on the great festivals, not only 
the priests of the ordinary course, but the whole 
body of priests, were called upon to assist in the sa- 
crifices; so on account of the multitudes that flocked 
to the temple at these times, the guards were also 
necessarily doubled, and, of course, a greater number 
of captains were on constant duty; and many, if 
not all these, came to assist in apprehending Jesus, 
as on aservice which might be esteemed hazardous, 
on account of the number of his disciples,” 

Verse 2. Then Pashur smote Jeremiah, &¢.—He 

409 


Jeremiah predicis 


JEREMIAH. 


the Babylonish captivity. 


A. M. 3399. 
B. C. 605. 


were in the high gate of Benjamin, | 
which was by the house of the Lorn. 

3 And it came to pass on the morrow, that 
Pashur brought forth Jeremiah . out of the 
stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The 
Lorp hath not called thy name Pashur, but 
1Magor-missabib. ; 
4. For thus saith the Lorp, Behold, I will 
make thee a terror to' thyself, and to all thy 
friends: and they shall fall by. the sword’ of 
their enemies, and thine eyes shall. behold 7¢: 
and I will give all Judah into the hand: of the 
king of Babylon, and he shall carry them cap- 
tive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the 
sword. 

5 Moreover I ° will deliver all the strength of 
this city, and all the labours thereof, and all the 


precious things thereof, and all the A. M. 3200. 
treasures of the kings of Judah will ———— 
I give into the hand of their enemies, which 
shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them 
to Babylon. 

6 And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in 
thy house, shall go into captivity: and thou 
shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt 
die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and all 
thy friends, to whom thou hast ° prophesied 
lies. , ayes " 

7 %.O Lorp, thou hast, deeeived me, and I 
was "deceived: ¢ thou art stronger than I, and 
hast prevailed: °I am in derision daily, every 
one mocketh me. 

8 For since I spake, I cried out, I cried vio- 


lence and spoil; because the word of the Lory 


+~——— 


1That is, fear round about, Psa. xxxi. 13; Verse 10;.Chap. 
Vi. 255 xivi. 63) xlix. 29, b2 Kings xx. 17; xxiv. 12-16; 
xxv. 13, &e.; Chap. ui. 24. 


¢ Chapter xiv. 13, 14; xxviii. 15; xxix. 21——? Or, enticed. 
4 Chapter i. 6, 7. ¢ Lamentation iii. 14.——f Chapter vi. 7. 


thought, no doubt, that Jeremiah’s speaking so plaih- 
ly of the overthrow of Jerusalem; and of the mise- 
ries which should befall it, deserved that he should be 
arrested and put in confinement, to prevent his. 
speaking thus freely: and accordingly he treats him > 
as they treated, or rather, ought to have treated, the | 
false prophets. And put him in the slocks—The | 
word 35779n, here translated the slocks,is rendered | 
the prison by Houbigant, and the house of correc- | 
tion by Blaney. 
chap. xxix. 26, and 2 Chron. xvi. 10, in both which 
places it is rendered simply a prison, and is men- 
tioned as a punishment due to, or inflicted on, one 
who assumed the character of a prophet, without a 
proper call, or was presumed to have behaved un- | 
becomingly as such. The word which properly 
signifies the stocks, is 10: see Job xiii. 27, and xxxiii. 
11. It is very natural to understand here that Pa- 
shur, having caused Jeremiah to be beaten, or 
scourged, ordered him into confinement afterward ; 
from whence he released him the next day. ; 
Verses 3-5. Jeremiah said, The Lord hath not 
called—Rather, doth not call thyname Pashur ; but 
Magor-missabib—That is, Terror on every side, or, 
Terror to all around, as the name is explained in 
the next verse. God’s giving him this name, signi- 
fies his changing the circumstances or condition of 
the person so named, agreeably to the meaning of 
the name given him, or that he would render him such 
ashe called him. So when God called Abram by the 
new name of Abraham, he assigns the reason, “ For 
a father of many nations have I made thee,” Gen: 
xvii. 5. I will deliver all the strength of this city— 
All its wealth, the word jon, here used, being fre- 
quently translated treasures :'see Prov. xv. 6; Ezek. 
xxii. 25. It may also include whatever strengthened 
and defended it, especially the men of war; and all 
the eabours thereof—Or, all the workmanship there- 
of; that is, all the fruit of the people’s labours; all 
410 


It occurs twice besides, namely, | 


their fine buildings, or whatever its artifieers had 
erected with labour and cost; and all the precious 
things thereof—Whatever was valuable in the eyes 
of the greatest persons among them ; will I give into 
the hands of their enemies-——The Babylonians shall 
spoil and make a prey of them all. ' 
Verse 7. O. Lord, thou hast decetved me, &¢.— 
This is avery harsh and improper translation of the 
prophet’s words, nds) 73n‘nd, which properly and 
literally signify, Thou hast persuaded me, and I 
was persuaded. Some, to make the sense more 
clear, supply a few words, and make the whole sen- 
tence stand thus; O Lord, thou hast persuaded me to 
carry thy commands to thy people, and I was per- 
suaded: thou art stronger than I, and hast prevail- 
ed—That is, “It was sore against my will, that’ I 


\undertook the prophetic office, which I would gladly 


have declined, chap. i.6. But thy commands and in- 
spiration did, in a manner, constrain me to it.” The 
occasion of-the words was this: “The prophet had 
met with a large share of ill usage, from an ungrate- 
ful people, in return for the faithful discharge of his 
prophetic office. Under these his calamitous cireum- 
stances he looks up to God, and appeals to him, the 
searcher of hearts, as his witness, that it was not 
through any ambition of his own that he had enter- 
ed upon that invidious office ; nor had he taken vpon 
him, of his own accord, to reprove his countrymen: 
but he had done all in pure obedience to the divine 
command. He would gladly have declined the office, 
but God would not suffer him: wherefore, hereupon 
he-says, speaking to the Almighty, Thou hast per- 
suaded me, &c. 'The passage carries in it a lively 
idea of the prophet’s great modesty, ahd profound 
humility, in not affecting high things or shining 
offices; but submitting, however, to the burden of 
them, in obedience to the will of God.” See Water- 
land’s Script. Vind., part iii. page 84. 
Verses 8, 9. Mor since I spake, I cried out, I cried 
pao Ry 3 


“xvii. 5: 


- been shut up in my bones. 


Power of God’s word. 


CHAPTER XX. 


The prophet praises God. 


A.M. 3399. 


was made a reproach unto me, an 
B. C. 605. P Ome, and 


a derision, daily. 

9 Then I said, I will not make mention of 
him, nor speak any more in his name. But his’ 
word was in my heart as a & burning fire“shut 
up in my bones, and I was weary with forbear- 
ing, and "I could not stay. 

10 4} For I-heard the defaming of many, 
fear on every side. Report, say they, and we 
will report it. °AIL* my familiars watched for 
my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be 
enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and 
we shall take our revenge on him. 


| 


11 But ' the Lorn is with me as a A. M. 3399. 
B. C. 605. 
mighty terrible one: therefore my per- 
secutors shall stumble, and they shall not ® pre- 
vail; they shall be greatly ashamed; for they 
shall not prosper: ¢heir * everlasting confusion 
shall never be forgotten. 

12 But, O Lorn of hosts, that °triest the 
righteous, and seest the reins and the heart, 
P let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto 
thee have I opened my cause. 

13 Sing unto the Lorp, praise ye the Lorp: 
for “he hath delivered the soul of the poor from 
the hand of evil-doers. 


& Job xxxii, 18,19; Psa. xxxix. 3. Job xxxii. 18; Acts 
i Psalm xxxi.'13.——? Heb. every man of my peace. 
lv. 13, 14; Luke xi. 53, 54. 


k Job xix. 19; Psa. xli. 95 


violence and spoil—Or, rather, as Houbigant ren- 
ders it, For since I spake, and cried against ini- 
quity, and denounced desolation, the word of ,the 
Lord, &c.—Blaney’s translation is nearly to the 
same sense: For as often as I speak, whether I.cry 
out against injusticé or proclaim devastation, the 
word "of Jehovah is turned against me into matter 
of reproach and derision continually. The prophet 
means that, upon account-of declaring what God 
had revealed to him, he was reckoned an enemy to 
his country, and a false prophet. Then I said— 
Namely, within myself, for he did not. speak this to 
any one; J will not make mention of him—Or, of it, 
namely, the word of God, or the message God had 
appointed him to deliver; nor speak any more in 
his name—I resolved no more to, declare what God 
had revealed to me concerning the calamities which 
he was about to bring on Judah and Jerusalem. But 
his word was in my heart as a burning fire—It 
glowed inwardly, and must have vent: I found my- 
self so pressed in spirit, felt such a burning. ardour 
Within my breast, such an immediate and powerful 
impulse of the prophetic spirit constraining me to 
speak, that I could no more be easy without execu- | 
ting God’s commands, than if a burning fire had | 
The conviction of his 
own mind that he ought to speak, his zeal for the 
glory of God, his indignation at the sins of the peo- 
ple, and his compassion for their souls, would not 
suffer him to rest, or allow him to forbear declaring 
God’s message. 

Verses 10,11. For [heard the defaming of many 
—The slanderous, injurious reports that were raised 
concerning me; fear on every side—Hebrew, ma- 
gor-missabib ; as if he had said, The name given to 
Pashur would have suited me; fear, or cause for 
fear, was on every side -of ‘me. “These. words are 
found verbatim in the original, (Psa. xxxi. 13,) where 
the sense of them seems to be exactly the same as 
here, namely, from the slanderous reports raised 
upon him, he had reason to apprehend some. evil 
design against his life, as well from treacherous 
friends as from open enemies. Report, say they, 
&c.—This seems to be spoken of the enemies of the 

3 


1 Chapter i 8, 19. Chap. xv. 20; xvii. 18.——* Chapter 
xxiil. 40.——° Chap. xi. 20; xvii. 10. P Psa, liv. 7; lix. 10. 
q Psa. xxxv. 9,10; cix. 30, 31. 


prophet, exciting one another to accuse him of be- 
ing in the interest of the Babylonians against his 
country. Blaney joms this clause with the pre- 


| ceding, thus:. Report ye terror all around, and we 


will report it? all my familiar friends watch for 
my halting; perhaps, say they, he may be drawn 
aside, so that we may prevail against him, and we 
may take our revenge of him. But, &c.—The pro- 
phet, having given vent to his painful apprehensions 
in the. preceding gloomy reflections, begins here to 
rise above his fears, and to encourage himself in his 
God. The Lord is with me—Is on my side, to take 
my, part against my enemies, and to defend me from 
their malicious designs upon me; as a mighty and 
terrible one—Mighty to defend, support, and-save 
me, and ¢errible to confound and avenge me of them! 
The Lord had said to him, when. he first undertook 
the prophetic office, (chap. i. 8,) Be not afraid of 
their faces: forI am with thee to deliver thee. This 
promise he now recollects, and» confiding in the 


| power, love, and faithfulness of God to make it good, 


he concludes that though he had many enemies who 
pursued after his life, he should be protected, and 
they should fail of accomplishing their wicked pur- 
pose. T'herefore my persecutors shall stumble—In 
their ways of violence, and not prevail against me. 
They shall be greatly ashamed—Of what they 
have done, or shall be brought to shame for it. 
Their everlasting confusion—That is, their igno- 
miny and disgrace; shall never be forgotten—They 
shall not forget it themselves, but it shall be to them 
a constant and lasting vexation whenever they think 
of it; and others shall not forget it, but it shall leave 
upon them an indelible reproach. 

Verses 12, 13. But, O Lord, that triest the right- 
eous—That triest their faith and patience, in order 
to the farther purification of their souls, and the in- 
crease of these and all their other graces; or, who 
takest cognizance of them, and of every cause in 
which they are interested; and who dost not judge 
in their favour with- partiality, but searchest the 
reins and the heart; let me see thy vengeance on 
them—See note on chap. xi. 20. For wnto thee have 
I opened my cause—As to a just judge, who wilt not 

411 


JEREMIAH. 


- 
because of his troubles. 


Jeremiah laments 
A.M. 3399. 14 9 *Cursed be the day wherein 


B. C. 605. 
——** [was born: let not the day wherein 


my mother bare me be blessed. 

15: Cursed be the man who brought tidings to 
my father, saying, A man-child is born unto 
thee ; making him very glad. 

16 Aga let that man be as the cities. which 
the Lorp ‘overthrew, and repented not: and 


let him thear the cry in the morning, re pee 
and the shouting at noon-tide ; oda 

17 “Because he slew me-not from the womb, 
or that my mother might have been my grave, 
and her womb éo be always great with me. 
18 * Wherefore came I forth out of the womb 
to ¥ see labour and sorrow, that my days should 
be consumed with shame ? 


t Job iii. 3; Chap. xv. 10.——+ Gen. xix. 25..——t Ch. xviii. 22. 


fail to. do me justice. Sing unto the Lord—The 
prophet here rises higher, from prayer to praise. 
The clouds of darkness and doubt which enveloped 
his mind are dispersed, and his complaints silenced 
and turned into thanksgivings. He has now an 
entire confidence in that God whom (verse 7) he 
was distrusting, and stirs up himself to praise that 
name which he had almost resolved (verse 9) no 
more to make mention of. ‘And it was. the lively 
exercise of faith in the word and.promise of God 
that made this happy change in his mind, that scat- 
tered the gloom which surrounded it, and turned his 
sorrow into joy. For he hath delivered the soul of 


the poor, &c:—He means especially himself, his) 


own poor soul: he hath delivered me formerly when 
I was in distress, and now of late out.of the hand of 


Pashur; and he will continue to deliver, 2 Cor. i. 10; |The falling upon a wrong cause, instead of the right, 


fromthe hand of evil-doers—So' that they have 


not yet gained, and will not be able to gain, their | 


ends. 
Verse 14. Cursed be the day, & 


<c.—If the reader || 


be surprised at this'sudden change of the prophet’s | 


discourse, from joyful thanks for deliverance to bit- 
ter complaints, he must observe that the ordgr of 
time is not strictly observed in the srdonenieti- 
tings, nor does the discourse always go on ina regu- 
Jar series. 


not follow that they were pronounced immediately 
after it. 
is very evident the order of time is not kept 
is not unlikely that these words of complaint were 
uttered ‘before the foregoing, which are expressive 
of confidence in God and gratitude for deliverance ; 


namely, at a time when his sense of present evils, || 


or his prospect of those just at hand, produced in 


Therefore, though these complaints.are | 
placed immediately following a thanksgiving, it does 


In the following chapters of Jeremiah, it | 
3 and it | 


his mind the most pungent grief and the greatest | 


perturbation. They represent, it seems, the melan- 
choly thoughts which oppressed him while he was 
struggling with the malice of his énemies, and, as 
Lowth justly observes, are to be considered, not as 
expressions of indignation and malice, but rather of 
mourning and sorrow, or, as a lamentation written 
ina poetical strain, like a Lessus, Nenia,or mournful 
ditty, such as the mourning women used to sing, 
(see note on chap. ix. 17,) wherein strong poetical 
figures were wont to be used, and all the circum- 

stances brought in, which were calculated to raise the 
passions, but. which it would be extremely wrong to 
interpret ina strict and literal sense. The expres- 
sions here used are so similar to those in Job. iii., 

412 


« Job iii. 10, 11. 


x Job iii, 20.— Lam. iii. 1. 


that they seem to have been borrowed from thence ; 
and the reader is referred to the notes on that chap- 
ter for our views of them. Bishop Lowth’has cited 
other similar instances of grief, discharging itself in 
invectives and bitter wishes against objects equally 
blameless and undeserving’ with those which our 
prophet has singled out. Among the rest is the fol- 
lowing exclamation in David’s celebrated lament- 
ation over Saul and Jonathan, 2 Sam. i. 21, “Ye 
mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither 
rain upon you, nor fields of offering.” Upon which 
the bishop thus descants: “All which if you were 
to bring to the standard of cool and dispassionate 
reason, what could appear more absurd? But, if 
you have an eye to nature, and the ordinary ‘flow 
of the passions, what more ‘genuine, more exact? 


though a fault in logic, is sometimes an excellence 
in poetry ; because the leading principle i in the for- 
mer is right reason, in the latter it is passion.”— De 
Sacr. Poes. Heb. Pralect. 23, Let not the day, 
wherein my mother bare me be blessed—Let it not 


|be celebrated with those good wishes and expres- 


sions of joy which are. wont to be used on birth- 


| days. 


Verses 15-18. Cursed be the man, &¢.—As in the 
forms of rejoicing upon.a birth- day they blessed 
eyery person and thing concerned in the birth, and 
said, Blessed be the womb that bare thee, and. the 
like, and he that broughtthe joyful news was always 
rewarded, so in the ‘forms of sorrow for the mise- 
rable they used quite the contrary expressions. Let 
that man be as the cities, &c.—Namely, Sodom and 
Gomorrah ; let him be looked upon as a sad spec- 
tacle. Let him hear the cry in the morning, &c.— 
By these expressions he means the cries, shouts, 
and noises that enemies make when they break in 
upon a place in a hostile manner. Because he slew 
me not, &c.—Or, because I was not slain; from the 
womb. Wherefore came I forth to see—That is, to 
experience ; labour and sorrow ?—WSeeing being fre- 
quently put to express any sensation. As if the 
prophet had said, “I speak thus in the bitterness of 
my soul; when I consider how much better it would 


| have been that I had never been born, or that I had 


given up the ghost immediately on my birth, than 
to lead a life of continual sorrow and misery.” 
These various expressions show us ‘to what a height 
the tide of perturbation swelled at this time in this 
good man’s heart, and what need we have to pray 
to be delivered from the power of our own passions 


The word of the Lord 


CHAPTER XXI. 


iz against Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


From the first two verses of this chapter we learn that the predictions and warnings contained in it were delivered in answer to 
a message sent by King Zedekiah, when Nebuchadnezzar was, coming to make war against him. By this circumstance, 
and others of a similar kind, it evidently appears that the prophecies and discourses of this book are not placed therein in 
the same order in which they were delivered, for there are several chapters after this which concern Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, 


and Jeconiah, who all reigned ‘before. Zedekiah. 
phet, to desire him to inquire of the Lord for them, 1, 2. 


We have here, (1,)’ The message which Zedekiah sent to the pro- 
(2,) In answer to that message, Jeremiah, in the name of God, 
JSoretels the certain and inevitable ruin of the city, and the fruitlessness of their attempts for its preservation, 3-7. 


(3,) 


-He advises the people to make the best they could of their situation, by surrendering themselves to Nebuchadnezzar in due 


time, 8-10. 


(4,) He advises the king and his family to repent of their wickedness, and execute just judgment, and, not to 


trust to the strength of Jerusalem, which should certainly be destroyed, 11-14, 


A. M. 3414. 


THE word which came unto Jere- 
B. C. 590. 


Seba miah from the Lorp, when King 

Zedekiah sent unto him * Pashur the son of 
Melchiah, and » Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah 
the priest, saying, 

2 © Inquire, I pray thee, of the Lorp fot US 
for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh 
war against us; if so be that the Lorp will 
deal with us according to all his wondrous. 
works, that he may go up from us. 

_3 9 Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus 
shall ye say to Zedekiah : 

4 Thus saith the Lorp God of Israel; Be- 
hold, T will turn back the weapons of war that 


are in your hands, wherewith ye fight . * st 
against the king of Babylon, and 

against the Chaldeans, which besiege you 
without the walls, and ‘I will assemble them 
into the midst. of this city. 

5 And I myself will fight against you with an 
* outstretched hand and with a strong arm, 
even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. 

6 And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, 
both man and beast they shall die of a great 
pestilence, 

7 And afterward, saith the Lorn, ‘I will de- 
liver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, 
and the pers and such as are left in this city 


= 


* Chapter xxxviii. 1——» 2 Kings xxv. 18; Chapter. xxix. 25; 
xxxvii. 3. 


. Chapter xxxvii. 3 7, 4Jsaiah xiii. 4. © Exodus vi. 6. 
_£ Chap. XXXVii. WW; 0.9.15 6 55 hii. 9. : 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXII. 


Verse l. The word which came to Jeremiah, when | 


King Zedekiah sent unto him—The occasion of Ze- 
dekiah’s sending the message here mentioned to 
Jeremiah, has, by some commentators, been. con- 
founded with that in chap. xxxvii. “ But I think,” | 
says Blaney, “they are clearly and undeniably dis- | 
tinct one from the other. From the reply given to 
that in chapter xxxvii., it is manifest that the Chal- 
deans, who had been besieging Jerusalem for some 
time had already raised the siege, and were gone to | 
meet the Egyptian army, leaving the Jews. in great | 
hopes that they. would never return again. But the 
terms of this message seem to imply, that the king 
of Babylon had but just commenced his hostilities 
against Judah, of which Zedekiah informs the pro- 
phet, as of a matter that might not yet have come to 
his certain knowledge; and desires him to intercede 
with God, that he would divert the storm by some 
such extraordinary interposition as he had been 
wont to manifest in favour of his people. The an- 
swer likewise takes no notice of any siege or ope- 
rations past ; but simply regards the future, which it 
isdeclared should end unhappily, because God would 
take an active part against the inhabitants of Judah, 
and would deliver both their city, and also the king 
and his people, into the hands of their merciless 
enemies. The time of this transaction, therefore, I 
conceive to be the ninth year of Zedekiah, previous 
to the siege of Jerusalem, which began in the tenth 
month of that year.” 
3 


4 


os 


sp Verse: 2, iy ef Tp Seay sihea ‘of the Lord ‘ica us 
—As Zedekiah was not one of the best, so he was 
not one of the worst of the kings of Judah. Having 
somg reverence for God, he sends the prophet to in- 
quire of him. -Or, as the word w, signifies, to seek 


or apply to God by prayer and supplication: see 


Isa.lv. 6. Jf so be the Lord will deal with us, &c. 
—lIf he will show his wonderful power, in giving us 
a total deliverance from the hands of our enemies, 
the Chaldeans. If they had attended to the predic- 
tions of the prophets they would not: have made this 
inquiry of Jeremiah ; for all the things which had 
happened to them already, had been predicted by 
the prophets. But perhaps they flattered themselves 
that all God’s threatenings w vould not be executed ; 
or that they had been executed already, in great 
numbers of them being carried into captivity, first in 
the reign of Jehoiakim, and afterward in that of Je- 
hoiachin. 

Verses 4-7, Behold, Twill turn back the weapons, 
&c.—Instead of doing execution upon your enemies, 
they shall hurt yourselves, and. be the occasion of 
your own destruction. ‘God will as visibly appear 
against you as if a miraculous wind were to drive 
back your own darts and arrows, and turn them up- 
on yourselves. And Imyself will fight against you 
—By the executioners of my wrath, the sword, the 
famine, and the pestilence. I will plainly appear on 
your enemies’ side, by the success I will give to their 
arms. And I will smite the inhabitants of this city 
—I the Lord will do it, and it shall evidently appear 

413 


Prophecy concerning 


JEREMIAH. 


fe 


the house of #£ 


- my ae from the pestilence, from the sword, 
——— and from the famine, into the ere 
of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into 
the hand of their enemies, and into the hand 
of those that seek their. life: and he shall smite 
them with the edge of the sword; % he shall not 
spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy. 

8 4 And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus 
saith the Lorp; Behold, I set before you the 
way of life, and the way of death. 

9 He that ‘abideth in ‘this city shall die by 
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pesti- 
lence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to the 


Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall, A. % es 
live, and * his life shall be unto him 
for a prey. 

10 For I have !set my face against this city 
for evil, and not for good, saith the Lor: ™ it 
shall be given into the hand of ‘the-king of 
Babylon, and he shall * burn it with fire.” 

11 And touching the house of the gc. 590. 
king of Judah, say, Hear ye the word. ———— 
of the Lorn; 

12 O house. of David, thus saith the Lorp; 
° Execute ? judgment ? in the morning, and de- 
liver hin that is spoiled out of the hand of the 


$= te 


& Deuteron. xxviii. 50; 2 Chron. xxvi. 17.4 Detteron. xxx. 
19. ‘Chap. xxxvili, d, 17, 18.—- Chap. xxxix. 18 ;. xlv. 5. 
Lev. xvii. 10; Chap. xliv. 11; Amos ix. 4. 


m Chapter xxxviii. 3. » Chapter xxxiv. 2,22; xxxvii. 10; 
xxxviil. 18, 23; lii. 13. © Chapter xxii. 3; Zechariah vii. 9. 
1 Heb. Judge. P Psa, ci. 8. 


to be my work; both man and beasts Even the 
beasts shall perish, both those that are for food, and 
those that are for service in war. They shall die 
of a great pestilence—Which shall rage within the 
walls, while their enemies are encamped about them. 
Though the walls and gates of Jerusalem may for a 
time keep out the Chaldeans, they cannot keep out 
God’s judgments. His arrows of. pestilence can 
reach those that think themselves safe from other 
arrows. And I. will, deliver Zedekiah, &c.—The 
king himself, and all the people that escape the 
sword, famine, and pestilence, shall fall into the 
hands of Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldeans. And 
he shall smite them with the edge of the sword— 
Zedekiah himself was not put-to death, but carried 
to Babylon, where he died: see chap. xxiv. 5. But 
his sons and his great men were slain by the com- 
mand of Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Kings xxv.7,8. “It is 
common in all writers to express that indefinitely 
which is true of the greater part of the persons con- 
cerned.”—Lowth. He shall not spare, neither have 


pity nor mercy—These three synonymous terms. 


are used by way of emphasis, to express the severe 
revenge the Babylonians would take of them. .The 
inhabitants of Jerusalem must indeed have been 
sensible at last, that they could: expect little or no 
mercy, since they had rebelled three times against 
the king of Babylon. 
Ver. 8-10. And unto this people thou shalt say, &c. 
—By the civil message which the king sent to Jere- 
miah it appeared that both he and the people began 
to have respect for him; but the reply which God 
obliged him to make was sufficient to erush that little 
respect, and to exasperate them against him more 
than ever. Behold, I set before you the way of life, 
and the way of death—Both the law and the pro- 


phets had often set before them life and death in 


another sense ; life, if they would obey the voice of 

God; death, if they should persist in disobedience, 

Deut, xxx. 19. But they had slighted that way of 

life which would, have made them truly happy ; to 

upbraid them with which the prophet here uses 

similar expressions, which signify; not as those of 
41 


Moses, a fair- proposal, but a melancholy dilemma, 
advising them, of two evils, to choose the least. And 
that lesser evil, a shameful and wretched captivity, 
is all the life now left for them to propose to them- 
selves. He that abideth in this city—And trusts to 
it to secure him; shall die by the sword—Without 
the city; or by the famine, or pestilence within it. 
But he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans 
—Giving up his vain hopes of safety in the city, and 
bringing his spirit down to his condition ; shall live 
—God had declared it 'to be his purpose to give up 
Judea and the neighbouring countries to the domi- 
nion of the Chaldeans: so they who would comply 
with his declared will should have their lives spared, 
the rest ‘should be destroyed as fighting against God. 
And his life shall be unto him for a prey—That is, 
he shall save his life-with as-much difficulty and 
hazard as a prey is taken from the mighty: he shall 
escape but very-narrowly. Or, he shall think him- 
self a considerable gainer by escaping with his life 
in so general a destruction. For Ihave set my face 
against this city—To lay it waste and not to protect 
it; for evil—Which shall have no good mixed with 
it, no mitigation, or merciful allay; and, therefore, 
you have no way of safety, but begging quarter of 
the Chaldeans, and surrendering yourselyes prison- 
ers of war. In vain did Rabshakeh persuade the 
Jews to do this, while they had God for them, Isa: 
xxxvi. 16. But it was the best course they could 
take now, God being against them. 

Verses ‘ML, 12. And touching the house of the king 
of Judah, &e. —The house of Zedekiah, the court, 
or those who were magistrates. Hear ye the word 
of the Lord—These, how great soever; are not ex- 
cused from the common obligations which lie upon 
all to listen to and obey the revelations of the divine 
will. Execute judgment in the morning—Do it dili- 
gently, do it quickly, and do not delay to do justice ° 
upon appeals made to you, and tire out your poor 
petitioners as you have done. Those :magistrates 
that would fill their places well, and do their duty, 
must rise early. This is so expressed because it was 
usual for kings and judges to sit for the administra- 

3 


> 
> 


The prophet’s message 


AM. ~y oppressor, lest ma fury go out like fire, 
B.C. 5 
and burn that none can quench .22, 
because of the evil of your doings. 
13 Behold, 41 am against thee, O ? inhabit- 


ant of the valley, and ‘fock of the plain, saith. 


the Lorn; which say, * Who shall come down 


CHAPTER XXII. 


to the king of Judah. 


against us? or who shall enter into lat 

B. C. 590. 

our habitations ? ed Rented 

14 But I will *punish you according to the 

‘fruit of your doings, saith the Lorp: and I 

will kindle.a fire in the forest thereof, and tit 
shall devutth all Sarde round about it. 


4 Ezekiel xiii. 8—*Heb. inhabitress——t Chapter xlix. 4. 
. skins visit upon. 


t 2 Chronicles xxxvi. 19; 


hap. lit. 13. 


tion of justice ina morning. Lest my fury go out 
like fire—Many commentators have been of opinion 
that this prophecy, from the 11th verse, belongs to 
the same. subject with chapter xxii. and: relates 
to the time of Jehoiakim. And from these words, 
lest my fury, &c., they infer, that it was antecedent 
to the prophecy at the beginning of the chapter, and 


to that peremptory decree published against the 


king’s house, mentioned verse 7 of this chapter. 
“But I cannot. help thinking,” says Blaney, “ that 
this latter part.is but a continuation of the same pro- 
phecy with which the chapter begins; for the house 
of David was still to be visited with more calamities 
than those which had befallen it in the days of Je- 
hoiakim: And how peremptory soever, the decree 
may sound, (verse 7,) we must remember the rule 
laid down concerning such decrees,. (chap. xviii. 
7, 8,) none of which, it seems, are irreversible on the 
condition of a change of conduct. And, though God 
-may well be supposed to know when no such ground 
of reversal will take place, yet it is agreeable to the 
justice of his providence repeatedly to admonish 
sinners of the means by which his judgments may 
be avoided, that they may have none to blame but 
themselves when the threatened vengeance over- 
takes them.” 


city in the prophetical writings. 


Verses 13, 14. Behold, I am against. thee, O in- 
habitant of the valley, and rock of the plain—A de- 
scription of Jerusalem, which was built in part upon 
the rocky mountain of Zion, but a. great -part of it 
was in the valley; and the higher mountains about 


mount Zion made that mountain itself, in compari- 


son with them, to appear asa valley. Which say, 
Who shall come down against us ?—They confided 
in the strength of their situation, as the Jebusites, the 
ancient inhabitants of the place, had formerly done. 
“Yet how many times,” says Bishop Newton, “ was- 
Jertisalem taken, though it was a very strong place 


‘and wonderfully fortified, both by nature and art! It 


was taken by Shishak king of Egypt, by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, by Antiochus Epiphanes, by Pompey, by 
Socius, and Herod, before its final destruction by 
Titus.” J will kindle a ‘fire in the forest thereof— 
The word forest is often metaphorically taken for a 
“See chap. xxii. 7; 
Ezek. xx. 46; Zech. xi. 1. Orit may mean. the fo- 
rest of Lebanon, or their houses made of wood cut 
out of that forest, especially those of thé royal fami- 
ly, or their idolatrous groves. And it shall devour 
all things round about it—And this fire shall not 
end in the destruction of this city, but shall totally 
destroy all the adjacent country. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Tn this chapter we have, (1,) An address to the king of Judah, his servants-and people, recommending an inviolable adhe- 
rence to right and justice, as the only means of establishing the throne, and preventing the-ruin of both prince and people, 


1-9. 


tyrannical oppresstons, and his miserable end foretold, 13-19. 


(2,) The captivity of Shallum 1s declared to be irreversible, 10-12. 


(3,) Jehoiakim is severely reproved for his 
(4,) His family is threatened with a continuance of the hike 


calamities ; the fall and bedibiat of his son Jeconiah are explicitly set forth, and the perpetual mee of his seed from 


the throne, 20-30. 


HUS saith the Lorp; Go down 
to the house of the kins of Judah, 
and speak there this word, 


A. M. 3395. 
B. C. 609. 


2 And say, * * Hear the word of the A, M. a, 
Lorp, O king of Judah, that sittest 
upon the throne of David, thou, and thy ser- 


a” 2 Chap. 


- NOTES ON CHAPTER XXII. 

Verses 1, 2. Thus saith the Lord—The prophecy 
which follows to clap. xxiii. 9, was evidently deliver- 
edin the reign of Jehoiakim; for it speaks of his 
rmmediate predecessor as already gone into captivi- 
ty, and foretels the death of Jehoiakim himself. Bla- 
ney thinks it followed immediately after what is said 


xvii. 20. 


in the xixth and xxth chapters to have passed in the 
temple precincts, from whence, as from a higher 
ground, he supposes the prophet is ordered to go 
down to the house of the king of Judah. Hear, §c., 
Oking of Judah—Namely, Jehoiakim, (verse 18,) 
who was established upon the throne by the king of 
Egypt, in the place of Jehoahaz, in the year of the 
415 


Destruction threatened 


JEREMIAH. 


A.M, 3305. vants, and thy people that enter in 
—_—— by these gates: 

3 Thus saith the Lorp; » Execute ye judg- 
ment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled 
out of the hand of the oppressor: and * do no 
wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the 
fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent 
blood in this place. ~~ 

4 For if ye do this thing indeed, “then shall 
there enter in by the gates of this house kings 
sitting ‘upon the throne of David, riding in 
chariots, and on horses, he, and his servants, 
andhis people. 

5 But if ye will not hear these words, °I 
swear by myself, saith the Lorn, that this house 
shall become a desolation. 


_For thus saith the Lorp unto the A. M. 
ing’s house of Judah; Thou art 
Gilead unto me, and the head of Leban 
yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, and 
cities which are not inhabited. 

7 And I will prepare destroyers against thee, 
every one with his weapons: and they shall cut 
down ‘thy choice cedars, * and cast them into 
the fire. 

8 And many nations shall: pass by this city, 
and they shall say every man to his neighbour, 
h Wherefore hath the Lorp done thus unto this 
great city? 

9 Then they shall answer, ? Because they have 
forsaken the covenant of the Lorp their God, 
and worshipped other gods, and served them. 


> Chap. xxi.-12,* Verse 17. oat Chap. xvii, 25,——1 Heb. 
for David upon his dete! ¢ Heb. vi. 13, 17. 


f Isa. xxxvii. 24.8 Chapter xxi. 14.—h Deut. Xxix. 24, 25; 
1 Kings ix. 8, 9——/ 2 Kings xxii. 17; 2 Chron. xxxiv. 25. 


world 3394, according “ Archbishop Usher. That 
sittest on the throne of David—Thus the prophet 
puts-him in mind of the promises God had made to 
David’s family, if they would live in obedience to his 
will, 1 Kings viii. 25. Thou, and.thy servants, and 
thy people—Thy courtiers and other officers, who 
attend continually on thee, comprehending likewise 
all the people of the city: all whom this word of the 
Lord concerned; that enter in by these gates— 
Namely, the gates of the palace, whereby they went 
in to the king. The king was evidently at the gate 
of his palace, with his principal officers, when Jere- 
miah presented himself before him. 

Verses 3-5. Thus saith the Lord, Execute ye 
judgment, &c.—That is, administer justice to all 
your subjects. The stranger, the fatherless, and the 
widow are particularly named, as persons who have 
the fewest friends, and therefore are the most ex- 
posed to the tyranny, injustice, and oppression of 
the great. And do no wrong, do no violence, &¢e.— 
Compare verse 17, where we find Jehoiakim charged 
with these sins. For i if ye do this thing indeed—If 
ye will, not in pretence, but reality, do what is just 
and right to every one, and see that inferior magis- 
trates, acting under you do so too; then shall there 
enter, &c.—See the note on chap. xvii. 25, where, 
instead of the gates of this house, the text reads, the 
gates of this city.. And the context here shows, that 
the prophecy is directed, not only to the king’s court 
in particular, but likewise to the whole city of Jeru- 
salem, one part of which was called the city of Da- 
vid; and the whole looked upon as a royal city, and 
the place of their king’s residence. Kings sitting 
upon the throne of David, &c.—There shall then be 
a succession of kings, and that uninterrupted, reign- 
ing in Judah, of David’s line, kings who shall enjoy 
a perfect tranquillity, and live in great state and dig- 
nity. But if ye will-not hear these words—That is, 
if ye will not so hearas to obey them. Jswearby 
myself, saith the Lord—That is, L resolve absolutely 
upon it; for God is not in Scripture said to swear, 

416 


| 


unless as speaking after the manner of men, and ac- 
cording to the actions of men ; so that whenever this 
expression is employed, it is only to. signify, that 
God would not revoke the thing spoken of, but that 
it should be immutable. Here, therefore, it. implies 
that the sentence pronounced should certainly be 
executed, and that nothing could reverse it but the 
people’s sincere repentance, which condition is ex- 
pressed in the foregoing part of the verse. See Heb. 
vi. 17. This house shall become a desolation—This 
palace of the kings of Judah shall fare no better than 
other habitations in Jerusalem, sin as certainly ef- 
fecting the ruin of the houses of pringes as those of 
mean men. 

Verses 6-9. For thus saith the Lord ont or, con- 
cerning, the king’s house: Thou art Gilead unto 
me,- §&c.; yet surely, &e—*Though thou wert 
never sO precious in my sight, as valuable for riches 
and plenty as the fat pastures of Gilead, and thy 
buildings as beautiful for their stateliness as the tall 
cedars of Lebanon, yet unless thy princes and peo- 
ple reform, thou shalt. become nothing but ruin and 
desolation.” Thus Lowth. But Blaney translates 
the verse, Gilead art thou through me, O swmmit of 
Lebanon; surely I will make thee a desert, cities 
not inhabited. Whieh, he interprets as follows. 
“Lebanon was the highest mountain in Israel, and 
was therefore an apt emblem of the reigning family 
advanced to the highest rank of dignity in the state. 
Gilead was the richest and most Sortie part of the 
country. The meaning then is plainly this, By my 
providence thou art not only supreme in rank, but 
hast been rendered exceedingly wealthy and flou- 
rishing. But the same power that raised will like- 
wise be exerted in reducing thee to the lowest state 
of indigence and distress.” And I will prepare— 
Hebrew, "nw 7p, I will sanctify destroyers against 
thee—That is, I will solemnly appoint and set them’ 
apart for the work of destroying thee. And they 
shall cut down thy choice cedars—Having compared 
the king’s palace, or the city of Jerusalem, to-Leba- 

3 


“10 4 Weep ye not for * the dead, 
neither bemoan af but weep sore 


him ‘that goeth away: for he. shall return 
no more, nor see his native country. 

11 For thus saith the Lorp touching ™ Shal- 
lum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which 
reigned instead of Josiah his father, "which 
went forth out of this place ; He shall not return 
thither any more: 

12 But he shall die in the place whither they 
have led him captive, and shall see this land 
no more. 

13 4 ° Wo unto him that buildeth his house 
by npebianences, and his chambers by 


k2 Yoho xxii. 20.—! Verse 11.—"1 Chronicles iii. 15 ; 
2 Kings xxiii. 30. n 2 Kings xxiii. 34. ° 2 Kings xxili. 35 ; 
Ver. 18.—>» Lev. xix: 13 ; Deut. xxiv. 14,15; Mice. iii. 10; Hab. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


to be irreversible. 


wrong ; ?¢hat useth his neighbour’s A. M. 3395. 
service without wages, and giveth him 
not for his work ; 

14 That saith, I will build me a wide house 


and *large chambers, and cutteth him out 


3 windows; and '7¢ is ceiled with or and. 
painted with vermilion. 

15 Shalt thou reign, because thou oleae thy- 
self in cedar? ‘did not thy father eat and 
drink, and do judgment and justice, and then 
‘at was well with him ? 

16 He judged the cause of the poor and needy ; 
then i¢ was well with him: was not this to 
know me? saith the Lorn. 


3 Or, my win- 
* Psalm exxvill. 2; Isaiah 


11.9; James v. 4. 2 Hebrew, through aired. 
dows. 42 Kings xxiii, 25. 
iii. 10, 


non, verse 6, pursuing the metaphor, he threatens to 
destroy them and their most beautiful edifices by the 
Chaldean army. And many nations—Persons of 
many nations; shall pass by this city, &e.—Namely, 
when on their travels; and they shall say, Where- 
fore hath the Lord done thus unto this great city— 
They who have heard that. this had been a very 
strong, rich, and, populous city, and that it had been 
called the city of God, and the place of his especial 
residence, would be astonished to find it, through his 
judgments, a scene of ruin and desolation, and would 
Inquire how such an effect came to be produced. 


Thus was fulfilled that threatening of Moses, Deut. 
xxviii. 37, that God would make the Jews an as- 
tonishment to other nations. See likewise 1 Kings 
ix. 8. Then shall they answer—Some shall an- 
swer, or they shall answer one another. The reason 
is so obvious that it shall be ready in every man’s 
mouth. Because they have forsaken the covenant 
of Jehovah their God; have revolted from their al- 
legiance to him, and from the duty which they had 
solemnly covenanted to perform, and worshipped 
other gods and served them—In contempt of him; 
and therefore he gave them up to this destruction. 
Verse 10. Weep ye not for the dead—This seems 
to be spoken of King Josiah, killed in battle with the 
Egyptians: see-2 Kings xxiii. 29, 30, concerning 
whom the prophet here says that he was rather to be’ 
rejoiced over than lamented, since, by being taken 
soon out of life, he escaped the terrible evils which 
came upon his country. But weep sore for him 
that goeth away, for he shall return no more— 
Namely, Jehoahaz, who was carried captive into 
Egypt by Pharaoh-necho, and never more returned 
to his country. He is called Shallwm in the next 
verse, but in all other places Jehoahaz. It seems 
probable that Shallum was his name‘before he as- 
cended the throne, and that he changed it for Je- 
hoahaz, as his brothers Eliakim and Mattaniah also 
assumed the names of Jehoiakim and. Zedekiah on 
_the like occasion, 2 Kings xxiii. 34; xxiv. 17. 
Verses 13-16. Wo unto him that buildeth his 
Vou. IIL. ( 27) 


‘and prospered in all that he put his hand to. 
3 


house by unrighteousness, &e.—“ The prophet pro- 
ceeds to denounce God’s judgments against Jehoia- 
kim, (see verse 18,) who, it seems, built himself a 
stately palace in those calamitous times, and took 
no care to pay the wages of the workmen; but main- 
tained his own luxury by the oppression of those 
who were to live by their labour: a crying sin, and 


too common among the great men of the world, se- 


verely prohibited both in the Old and New Testa- 
ment.”—Lowth.. See Deut. xxiv. 14,15; James v. 
4, That saith, I will build me a wide house and 
large chambers——Hebrew, comm nwoy, cham- 
bers to. the wind ; that is, exposed, or open, to wind 
on every side. They used to enjoy the cool air in 
these chambers; the windows being so placed that 
they might receive the wind from whatever quarter 
itcame. Shalt thou reign because thou closest thy- 
self in cedar?—Will a house, finely adorned and 
furnished, be a fortress and defence to thee against 
thy enemies, that come to deprive thee of thy king- 
dom?, Did not thy father eat and drink, and do 
justice, &e.—Did not Josiah live, and enjoy comfort 
in life ax well as thou dost, though he did not in- 
dulge himself in such delicacies, and had not such 
magnificent apartments? Did he not live in suffi- 
cient plenty, and in a state suitable to his character, 
and yet strictly observed justice, both in his private 
and public capacity, and not betake himself to such 
sordid methods of injustice and oppression for the 
support of his grandeur? He did no wrong to any 
of his subjects, never oppressed them, or put any 
hardship upon them, but was careful to preserve to 
all their just rights and properties. Nay, he not only 
did not abuse his power for the support of wrong, 
but used it for the maintaining of right; he judged 
the cause of the poor and needy—Was ready to hear 
the cause of the meanest of his subjects, and do them 
justice ; and then it was well with him--The bless- 
ing of God was upon him as the reward of his 
justice and integrity, He was comfortable in him- 
self, and was useful to and respected by his subjects, 
Was 
417 


The miserable end 


JEREMIAH. 


ba, 0: 17 *But thine eyes and thy heart 

: " are not but for thy covetousness, and 
for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, 
and for ‘ violence, to do itz. 

18 Therefore thus saith the Lorp concerning 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; 
* They shall not lament for him, saying’, * Ah. 
my brother !. or, Ah sister! they shall not la- 
ment for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his 
glory ! 


* Ezekiel xix. 6. 4 Or, incursion——t Chapter xvi. 4, 6. 
"1 Kings xiii. 30. 


4 


“19 * He shall. be *buried with the A.M. 3395, — 


burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth - 
beyond the gates of Jerusalem. 

20 §J Go up to Lebanon, and ery ; and lift tg 
thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the pear: 
for all thy lovers are destroyed. 

21 I spake unto thee in-thy ® prosperity ; but 
‘thou saidst, I will not hear.. ¥ This hath been 
thy manner from thy youth, that thou — 
not my voice. 


| 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6; Chap. xxxvi. 30. fe Fulfilled, B. C. 599. 


° Heb. prosperities. y Chap. ii. 7; iii. 25; vil. 23. 


not this to know me, saith the Lord ?—Did he not 
hereby make it appear, that he rightly knew, wor- 
shipped, and served me, and consequently was 
known and owned by me? Observe, reader, the 
right knowledge of God implies the doing our duty 
to our fellow-creatures, as well as to God, particu- 
larly that duty which our place and station in the 
world require us to perform. 

Verse 17, But thine eyes and thy heart are not 
but for thy covetousness—They are for that, and for 
nothing else. For thiscause Jehoiakim is compared 
to a lion, by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. xix. 6. Ob- 
serve, reader, in covetousness the heart walks‘after 
the eyes, Job xxxi. 7; it is therefore called the lust 
of the eye, 1 John ii. 15: and the eyes and the heart 
are then for covetousness. when the aims and affec- 
tions are set’ upon the wealth of this world; and 
when they are‘so the temptation is strong to fraud, 
oppression, and all manner of violence and villany, 
even, as it is here said, to shed innocent blood. 

Verses 18,19. They shall not lament for him, say- 
ing, Ah my brother! &c.—‘'The prophet here repeats 
part of the funeral ditty or song which the public 
mourners used to sing.at funerals, (see note on chap. 
ix. 17, and xx. 14, and compare 1 Kings xiii. 30,) 
signifying, that neither Jehoiakim, nor his queen or 
family, should be buried with those solemn lament- 
ations with which the memory of his. predecessors, 
particularly that of his father, had been honoured : 
see 2 Chron. xxxv. 25. Saying, Ah Lord! or, Ah 
his glory !—That is, how is his glory departed and 
vanished! another burden or chorus of the funeral 
song. He shall be buried with the burial of an ass 
—None attending him to his grave, none mourning 
over him. Or, the-meaning is, he shall have no 
burial: for the carcasses of asses are not buried. 
Drawn and cast forth, &c.—The expression seems 
to be taken from the custom of dogs to draw about a 
carcass before they tear and devour it. Jehoiakim, 
having been advanced to. the kingdom by Pharaoh- 
necho, king of Egypt, 2 Kings. xxiii. 34, followed 
the fortune of that king, and upon the conquest of 
Egypt by the Chaldeans, chap. xlvi. 2, after three 
years’ reign, was taken prisoner by Nebuchadnezzar, 
and put into irons, Dan. i. 2; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6. But 
afterward, it seems, the king of Babylon released 
him and made him a tributary king. - After three 

418 


years’ obedience, however, Jehoiakim rebelled, in 
confidence of assistance from Egypt. Soon after 
which Nebuchadnezzar’s army overran Judea, be- 
sieged Jerusalem, and probably took Jehoiakim pri- 
soner in some sally that he made upon them, and 
killed him, and then cast out his dead body into the 
highway, denying him-the common rites. of burial : 
see 2 Kings xxiv. 1-6. Accordingly, he is said to 
have slept with his fathers, but not to have been 
buried with them: see also eee ale lib. x. 
cap. 7, 8. 

Verse 20. Go up to Lebanon, ane cry, &¢.—The 
‘verbs here. being in the feminine gender, the city of 
Jerusalem, or the land of Judea, seems to be ad- 
dressed and called upon- ironically to go to the tops 
of the high mountains, and to the frontiers of the 
country, and cry aloud for help to the neighbouring 
powers, but in vain, since all those who had any in- 
clination to favour her, the Egyptians in particular 
were themselves disabled and.crushed by the arms 
of. Nebuchadnezzar. Cry from the passages—He- 
brew, DM yn, from the borders, or rivers, which 
are the bounds of your country. For the word sig-- 
nifies, not only the fords, or passages of a river, but 
the parts along each bank, and the confines or ex- 
tremities of a country. For all thy lovers are de- 
stroyed—Or broken, as 12) signifies: all thy for- 
eign allies, whose friendship and assistance thou 
hast sought, and whom .thou hast courted; by com- 
plying with their idolatries, are humbled. 

Verse 21. I spake unto thee in thy prosperity— 


| Spake by my servants the prophets, in reproofs, 


admonitions, counsels; but thow saidst, I will not 
hear—Didst manifest by thy conduct that thou 
wouldest not obey. Such is too often the effect of 
prosperity. It puffs men up with pride and high-mind- 
edness, and makes them despise the word of God, 
thinking themselves too wise to stand in need of 
advice, and therefore they defer attending to it, till 
they are in extremities, when it becomes of little or 
no benefit to them. The word mw, however, . 
which we translate prosperity, properly signifies 
securily, and may be spoken of the false security in 
which the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem lived 
in times when they were threatened with the most 
grievous Calamities, and which had been denounced 
to them by the prophets, from the time of Hezekiah, 
( 27 ) t ind 


CHAPTER XXII. 


with the like calamity. 


Py threatened 
“AN ss, 22 The wind shall eat up all 7 thy 


= pastors, and * thy lovers shall go into 
- captivity : surely then shalt thou be ashamed 
and confounded for all thy wickedness. 

23.0 %inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest 
thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou 
be when pangs come upon thee, »the pain as 
of a woman in travail ! 

24 As I live, saith the Lorn, ¢ though Coniah 
the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah ¢ were the 
signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck 
thee thence ; 

25 ° And T will give thee into the hand of 
them that seek thy life, and into the hand of 
them whose face thou fearest, even into the 
hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and 
into the hand of the Chaldeans. 


26 f And I will cast thee out, and A.M.3395. 
thy mother that bare thee, into an- sata ae 
other country, where ye were not born; ana 
there shall ye die. 
| 27 But to the land whereunto: they 7 desire to 
| return, thither shall they not return. 

28 Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? 
| ts he ®a vessel wherein zs no pleasure? where- 
fore are they cast, out; he and his seed, and are 
cast into a land which they know not? 

29 »O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of 
the Lorp. 

30 Thus saith the Lorn, Write ye this man 
‘ childless, a man ¢ha¢ shall not prosper in his 
days: for no man of his seed shall ‘prosper, 
* sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling 
any-more in Judah. 


z Chapter xxiii. L. a Verse 20.—* Hebrew, inhabitress. 
> Chap. vi. 24.——° 2 Kings vi. 8, 24; 1 Chron. iii. 16; Chap. 
xxxvil. 1. 4 Hag. ii. 23. e Chap. xxxiv. 20, 2 Kings 
xxi. 15; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10. ; 


on account of the idolatries and various other acts 
of wickedness of their kings and people; who never- 
theless continued in their vices without any amend- 
ment. This hath been thy manner from thy youth 
—From thy being first formed into: a‘people. 
the margin. 

Verse 22: The wind shall eat up all thy pastors 
—Thy kings, princes, priests, and false prophets, who 
have presided over thy civiland religious affairs, shall 
be destroyed by my judgments, as plants are blasted 
by winds. God’s judgmentsare often compared to a 
scorching and blasting wind. . Thy lovers shall go 
into captivity—Thy allies shall themselves be made 
captives by the Chaldeans, and shall not be able to 
preserve themselves, much less to give any assist- 
ance to thee. 

Verse 23. O inhabitant of Lebanon—O thou 
that inhabitest the city which for pleasantness and 
delight may be compared to Lebanon. Or he al- 
ludes to the stately buildings of Jerusalem, else- 
where compared to the tall cedars of a forest: see 
note on chap. xxi. 14. That makest thy nest in 
the cedars—Who livest in houses built of cedars. 
How gracious shalt thou be—Or rather, how humble, 
or suppliant, wilt thou be, when pangs come upon 
thee—Those pangs of affliction which shall sudden- 
ly oppress thee, whereas before thou wast too proud 
to hearken to any advice that was offered. The He- 
brew, *A3N1 Hn, is rendered by Buxtorff, quam gra- 
tulaberis tibi, How wilt thou gratulate thyself when 
pangs, &c., understanding it as spoken ironically. 

Verses 24-28. As I live, saith the Lord, though 
Coniah were the signet, or, rather, the ring, wpon 
my right hand—By Coniah he means Jehoiachin, 
whose name was Jeconiah, 1 Chron. iii. 16, (for all 
Josiah’s sons had two names, and so had his grand- 
child Jeconiah,) here, in contempt, called Coniah; 
yet would I pluck thee thence—Though he were 

3 ° 


See 


7 Heb. lift up their mind, Chap. xliv. 14——# Psa, xxxi. 12; 
Chap. xlviii. 38; Hos. viii. 8—— Deut. xxxii. 1; Isaiah i. 2. 
xkxiv. 1; Micah i. 2——i 1 Chronicles iii. 16, 17; Matt. i. 12. 
k Chap. xxxfi. 30. 


never so near and dear to me, as dear as a signet, or 
ring, which every man keeps safe, yet his wicked- 
ness would make him forfeit ‘all my favour toward 
shim. ~“ The ring was anciently worn as a mark of 
sovereignty. When Alexander was dying, he gave , 
his ring to Perdiccas, thus, as it were, marking him 
out for his successor.” And I will cast thee out, and 
thy mother that bare thee—We are informed, (2 
Kings xxiv. 15,) that Nebuchadnezzar carried away 
Jehoiachin, that is, Jeconiah or Coniah, to Babylon, 
and his mother, and his wives, &c. Js this man 
Coniah a despised broken idol, &e.—Blaney renders 
the verse more literally, thus: “A contemptible, 
broken idol is this man Coniah? Or a vessel. in 
which none delighteth ? Wherefore are they cast 
forth, he and his seed, and thrown upon a land which 
they knew not 2”. Asif he had said, “ Would any one 
have:thought that this man, who was invested with 
royal dignity, dhould ‘be rendered no better than a 
broken image of royalty, a mere potsherd, utterly 
contemptible and useless ?” 

Verses 29, 30. O earth, &e.—The word earth, or 
land rather, as Y* may be properly rendered, is 
repeated three times. by way of emphasis, to engage 
the deeper attention. The prophet speaks to the 
land of Judea, which he commands to write down 
the following prediction, that it might be remember- 
ed by. them, and the truth of it be thereby made 
manifest. Write ye-this man childless—Hebrew, 
“yy, solitary, deprived, destitute. The LXX. ren- 
der it exkypvxrov a’dpwrov, an ejected, or expelled 
man; aman that shall not prosper in his days— 
This latter clause seems explanatory of the former ; 
and that again is further explained in the following: 
“For no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon 
the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.” 
That Jeconiah had children appears both from this 
verse and verse 28; but according to this hase. 

419 


4, Mis 


Threatenings against JEREMIAH. careless pastors, §c. 


no man of his seed sat upon the throne of Da-|| but yet the same toall intents and purposes of public 
vid. This seems the true exposition of this passage, || life, for he was to be the last of his ‘race that should 
which has been considered as attended with conside- || sit upon the throne of David; and his descendants 
rable difficulty. “I cannot,” says Blaney, “agree || were no more to. figure as kings, but to be reduced 
with the generality of commentators, who suppose || to the rank and obscurity of private persons. And 
that God hereby declares it as a thing certain; and, as |/in.this sense the prophecy was actually fulfilled ; 
it were, orders it to be inserted among the public || for, allowing Zerubbabel, who is called governor of 
acts of his government, that Jeconiah should die |} Judah, (Hag. i. 1,) to have been a lineal descendant 
absolutely childless. Other parts of Scripture posi- || of Jeconiah, yet he could not be said to sit upon the 
tively assert him to have had children, 1 Chron. iii. || throne_of David, and reign, or rule, in Judah, seeing 
17, 18; Matt. i. 12. Both verse 28, and the subse- || he was but a provincial governor, a mere servant of 
quent part of this verse, imply that he either had, || the king of Persia, in whom the sovereignty resided ; 
or should have, seed. But the historians and chroni- || nor were any of those persons kings who afterward 
clers of the times are called upon, and directed to || reigned in Judah, even of the family of David, until 
set him down childless; not as being literally so, |! the time of Christ.” 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


In this. chapter we have, (1,) Threatening of just punishment to careless princes, or pastors of the people, 1, 2, (25) Pro- 
mises of future blessings ; of the return of the Jews from captivity, and of happier limes under better governors and 

. pastors ; of the glorious establishment of the Messiah’s kingdom ; and of the subsequent restoration of all the dispersed 
Israelites, to dwell once more in their own land, 3-8. (3,) Jeremiah testifies the horror he felt within him on contempla- 
ting the wickedness of the priests and. prophets of Judah, and the vengeance which God was about to execute. upon them, for 
the corruption which had been diffused through the whole land, by the influence of their evil doctrine and example, 9-15. 
(4,) He. exhorts the people not to listen to the words-of the prophets that prophesied of peace, when evil was determined, and 
would infallibly take place; and charges those prophets with speaking from themselves, and not from the divine commis- 
sion, 16-22. (5,) God asserts his omnipresence and omniscience ; and reproves the audaciousness of the false prophets, 
who affected to place their own idle dreams on a level with the all-powerful and efficacious word of divine revelation ; de- 
claring himself against the several species-of those impostors, 23-32. (6,) He requires all sorts of persons to desist from 
an indecency in common use, of styling his word a burden ; and threatens severely to punish those who, in defiance of 
this command, should continue to cast such a slur upon it, 33-40. : : 


A. M. 3405. O *be- unto the pastors that de- || will visit upon you the evil of your A. M.3405, 
B. C. 599. s B. C. 599. 
Sta Seca d stroy and scatter the sheep. of || doings, saith the Lorp. verter rab 
my pasture! saith the Lorn. 3 And °I will gather the remnant of my 


2 Therefore thus saith the Lorp God of || flock out of all countries whither I have driven 
Israel against the pastors that feed my people ; || them, and will bring them again to their folds ; 
Ye have. scattered my flock, and driven them || and they shall be fruitful and increase. 
away, and have not visited them: "behold, I)| 4 And I will set up ‘shepherds over them, 


a Chapter x. 21; xxii. 22; Ezekiel xxxiv. 2——> Exodus || ¢ Chap. xxxii. 37; Ezek. xxxiv. 13——4 Chap. iii. 15; Ezek. 
xxxii. 34. Xxxiv. 23. ra0 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIII. the care of my people, though they do not faithfully 

Verse 1. Wo be unto the pastors—Or, as ‘17 is by || execute their trust. God calls them his people, his 
some rendered, Alas for the pastors! or, Ho the || flock, the sheep of his pasture, with respect to the 
pastors! . For it may be a particle of calling, as the || ancient_covenant which he had made. with their 
LXX, and Syriac represent it, and not of commina- || fathers. They are said to have fed this people, be- 
tion, as in our translation. The word pastors com- || cause it was their duty to have done so. Ye have 
prehends both civil and ecclesiastical governors: see || scattered my flock—Namely, by acts of violence and 
note on chap. ii. 8. This acceptation of the word || oppression, driving them from their places to seek 
agrees with the prophet’s complaint elsewhere, that || more safe and quiet abodes. Or, instead of looking 


their rulers, as well as their priests and prophets, || after them, you have suffered them to.be dispersed, 
‘were rather corrupters than reformers of the peo- | and through your ill example they have gone astray 
ple’s manners. And the Messiah himself, whose | to idolatry, and that, with your other sins, has brought 
coming is foretold, verse’ 5, for the rectifying of || upon them their expulsion from their own land and 
these disorders, was both a king and a priest. a general dispersion. Behold, I will visit upon you 
Verses 2-4, Therefore thus saith the Lord against || the evil of your doings—Will deal with you as your 
the pastors that feed my people—That undertake || sins have deserved. They would not visit the flock 
420 Se. 


- 


The Messiah 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


is promised. 


4, M. 3405. which shall feed them : and they shall 
599. 

———— fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither 

shall they be lacking, saith the Lorp. 

5 | Behold, ° the days come, saith the 
Lorp, that I will raise unto David a righteous 
Branch, anda King shall reign and prosper, 
f and shall execute. judgment and justice in the 
earth. 

6 *In his days Judah shall be saved, and 


Israel "shall dwell safely : and ‘this A.M. 3405. 
is his name whereby he shall be Viet 
called, } THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS. 

7 Therefore, behold, *the days come, ‘saith 
the Lorn, that they shall no more say, The 
Lorp liveth, which brought up the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt ; 

8 But, The Lorp liveth, which brought up and 


———as 


© Isa. iv. 25 xi. 1; xl. 10, 11; Chap. xxxiii. 14, 15,16; Dan. 
ix. 24; Zech. iii. 8; vi 12; John i i. 45,—_f Psa. Ixxii. 2; Isa. 
Xxxil. rh 18; ix. 7. 


in the way of duty, and therefore ‘God will visit 
them in a way of vengeance. And I will gather 


the remnant of my flock—Though there be but a. 


remnant of my flock, a little remnant left, that has 
narrowly escaped destruction, I will gather that 
remnant ; will find them out wherever they are, and 
will find out ways and means to’bring them back 
out of all countries whither I have driven them. 
It was the justice of God for the sins of their shep- 
herds that dispersed them, but the mercy of God 
shall gather them when the shepherds that betrayed 
them are cut off. And being brought to their former 
habitations, as sheep to their folds, there they shall 
be fruitful, and increase in numbers. 
set up shepherds over them—Who shall make it 
their business, not only to rule, but also to feed them, 
namely, with knowledge and. understanding. T'hey 
shall fear no more—As they formerly did, when 
they were continually exposed to the oppressions of 
their rulers at home, or the invasions and assaults 


of their enemies from abroad; but they shall be | 
preserved in peace and safety, and none of them | 
shall be lacking.. 'Though the times may have been | 


long bad with the church, it does not follow that 
they will be always so. Such pastors as Zerubbabel 
and Nehemiah, though they did not live in such 
pomp as Jehoiakim and Jeconiah lived in, nor made 
such a figure, were as great blessings to the people 
as the others were plagues to them. The) peace and 
prosperity of the church are not connected with, 
much less do they depend upon, the pomp of her 
rulers. 

Verses'5, 6. Iwill raise unto David a righteous 
branch—The house of David seemed to be quite 
sunk and ruined by the threatening pronounced 
against Jeconiah, (chap. xxii. 30,) that none of his 
seed should ever’ sit upon the throne of David: but 
here we have a promise which effectually secures 
the honour of the covenant made with David, not- 
withstanding. that threatening ; for by it his house 
will be raised out of its ruins to a greater lustre than 
ever, and shine brighter than it did even in the days 
of Solomon. We have not so many prophecies of 
Christ in this book as we had in that of the Prophet 
Isaiah. But here we have a very illustrious one. 
Of him, doubtless, the prophet here speaks, and of 
no other person. Even the Jewish doctors, as well 
as Christian interpreters, understand this as a pro- 


And I will | 


& Deuteron. _xxxill. 28; Zech. xiv. 11.— Chap. xxxii, 37. 
i Chapter xxxiii. Licht Gor. i. 30.—+ Heb. Jehovah-tsidkenu. 
* Chap. xvi. 14, 15. 


\ 
+ 


phecy of the Messiah, who is called the branch, Isa. 
iv. 2, and liiis 2; and the man the branch, Zech. iii. 
8. -And here he is termed the righteous branch, not 
only because he himself was righteous, but. because 
he. makes his people righteous ; and a king that 
shall reign and prosper—Not like kings that now 
were of the house of David, going backward in all 
their affairs, but one that shall set up a kingdom in 
the world, which shall be victorious over all opposi- 
tion; one to whose hands the good pleasure of the - 
Lord shall be committed, and under whose care and 
management it shall prosper; one who shall execute 
judgment and justice in the -earth—All the world 
over, Psa. xevi. 18. The present kings of David’s 
line were unjust and oppressive, and their affairs 
therefore did not prosper ; but this king shall break 
the usurped power of Satan, institute a perfect rule 
of ‘holy living, and in due time make all the world 
righteous. In his days—That is, under his domi- 
nion, when his kingdom shall be set up and establish- 
ed upon earth; Judah shall be saved, &c.—The 
people of God, typified by Judah and Israel, shall 
be saved with a spiritual and eternal salvation, a sal- 
vation from the guilt and power of sin, into the 
favour and image of God here, and into the kingdom 
of his glory hereafter. At which kingdom, till they 
arrive, God will be a special protection to them, their 
refuge and strength, and very present help in trouble ; 
so that they shall dwell safely—Confiding in the 
care of their strong helper, and preserved in perfect 
peace. And this is his name whereby he shall be 
called—Namely, by his people, and by God; the 
name whereby he shall be known, and which shall 
at once be descriptive both of his person and office, 
Tue Lorp, Hebrew, Jnnovan oUR- RIGHTEOUSNESS— 
Though of the seed of David according to the flesh, 
he shall indeed be Jesovan, God in human nature, 
and OUR RIGHTEOUSNESss; namely, justifying us by 
his merits, sanctifying us by his Spirit, and directing 
us in every part of our duty by his. doctrine and ex- 
ample; the end of the law for righteousness to’ 
every one that believeth in him with a faith that 
worketh by love. 

Verses 7, 8. Therefore, behold, the flat ys come, 
saith the Lord—Here the prophet ’proceeds to fore- 
tel one very important, although remote, consequence 
of God’s raising up the .righteous branch to David, 
namely, the great salvation which should thereby 
421 


The prophet deplores 


A.M. 3405. which led the seed of the house’ of 
B.C" Israel out of the north country; !and 
from all countries whither I had driven them; 
and they shall dwell in their own land. 

9 “| My heart within me is broken because of 
the prophets ; ™all my bones shake; I am like 
a drunken man, and Jike a man whom wine 


JEREMIAH. 


the priests’ wickedness. * 


hath overcome, because of the Lorp, oe Si. 
and because of the words of his ho- ———— 
liness. 


} 10 For the land is full of adulterers ; for ° be- 


cause of *swearing the land mourneth; ? the 
pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and 
their °course*is evil, and their force is not right. 


a 


lJsaiah xliii. 5,6; Verse 3.——® Hab. iii. 16.— 
7,8 35 ix. 2. 


come to the Jews in the latter days of their state, 
which should be so illustrious as far to outshine their 
‘deliverance out of Egypt. That they shall no more 
say, The Lord liveth, &e.—These words we had 
before, chap. xvi. 14, 15, where see ‘the note. But 
here the passage seems to. point more plainly than 
it did there to, the days of the Messiah, and to com- 


pare, not so much the two deliverances themselves, |. 


giving the preference to the latter, as the two states 
to which the church should grow after those deliver- 
ances. About four hundred and eighty years after 
they were come out of Egypt, Solomon’s. temple 
was built, ‘1 Kings vi. 1; and at that time that nation, 
which was .so wonderfully brought out of Egypt, 
was gradually arrived to its height. And four hun- 
dred and ninety years (seventy weeks) after they 
came out of Babylon, Messiah the Prince set up the 
gospel temple, which was the greatest glory of that 
nation that was so wonderfully brought out of Baby- 
lon: see Dan. ix. 24; 25. . Now the spiritual glory 
of the second period of that nation, ‘especially, as 
transferred to the gospel church, is much more ad- 
mirable and illustrious than all the temporal glory 
of the first period of it, in the days of Solomon ;- for 
that was no glory, compared with the glory which 
excelleth. -Add to this, the prophet, it seems, also 
foretels a second gathering of the Jews from their 
dispersions, namely, one that should take place after 
the coming of the Messiah, and -the ruin of their 
city and country by the Romans, and therefore yet 
future. Now this work of God, whenever it shall 
be effected, including, as it undoubtedly will, their 
conversion to Christianity, and perhaps, also, their 


restoration to their own land, will assuredly appear | 


so wonderful as greatly to outshine every former de- 
liverance wrought for that people, and therefore may 
well put-every other out of remembrance. St. Paul 
calls this restoration of them, life from the dead, 
(Rom. ix. 25,) meaning that it would be a miracle 
as surprising as the resurrection of a multitude of 
dead bodies. 

Verse 9. My heart within me is broken—This 
seems to be the beginning of a new discourse against 
the false prophets, with whom afterward the priests 
are joined. The first word of it in the Hebrew, 


13'N3)9, is rendered by the Vulgate, Ad prophetas, 


To the prophets, as if it were the title of the follow- 

ing prophecy. In this Jeremiah describes the terror 

and concern which were upon him when he consi- 

dered the horrible sin of these prophets in pretending 

a divine mission when they had received none, and 
422 


n Chapter v. 


P Chapter ix. 10; “xii. 4. 


© Hosea iv. 2, 3.——? Or, cursing.- 
3 Or, violence. 


in uttering as messages from God what were really 
their own inventions, and in direct Opposition to 
every thing God had spoken. And he declares that, 
upon a view of their guilt, and of the-evils they 
were bringing on themselves and their country, 
he was in trouble and agitation, like that of a man 
who had lost his reason through intoxication. 

Verse 10, For the land is full of adulterers—Un- 
der this term, which properly respects those who 
violate the marriage-bed, persons offending by any. 
species of uncleanness are comprehended, as also 
such as by fraud and falsehood circumvented others, 
and tempted them to join in the commission of those 
illicit actions which implied breach of faith‘and duty 
toward God. Because of swearing the land mourn- 
eth—By swearing ‘here, it seems, isnot only meant 
false swearing, or perjury, but also profane and idle 
swearing, or taking the name of God invain. Com- 
pare this verse with Hos. iv. 2. The Hebrew word, 
nx, signifies indifferently swearing or cursing. 
The Jewish forms of adjuration, used in their courts 
of justice for the discovery ofthe truth, had usually 
an imprecation joined to them; and the prophet’s 
words here may import, that men ventured to for- 
swear themselves, and incur the imprecation implied 
in an oath, rather than discover the truth in cases 
wherein they were called upon to be witnesses. 
The land is said to mourn when it is afflicted with 
drought, barrenness, or any other uncommon cala- 
mity. And the swearing here spoken of is repre- 
sented by the prophet as one of those crying sins for 
which God had visited the nation with these and 
other severe judgments. And the sins here men- 
tioned, which abounded so much among the people, 
were in a great measure owing to the bad example 
and corrupt doctrine of the priests and prophets. 
See verses 11-15. The pleasant places, or the 
pastures, of the wilderness—Or, of the plain, as the 
words may be properly rendered; are dried up— 
The wrath of God is extended to all places, whether 
more or less inhabited. See note on chap. xii. 4. 
And their course is evil, &e.—This ‘seems to be in- 
tended of the prophets and priests, to whom this 
discourse is chiefly directed, (see verses 9-11,) and 
it implies that they not only erred in single acts, but 
that the whole course.of their actions was evil, and 
particularly their power, rule, and government. For 
they both made use of ill arts to establish their au- 
thority over the people, and they employed it, not 
for the bettering, but rather for the corrupting of 
their manners. . oe a) 

3 


The prophet predicts — 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


God’s vengeance. 


11 For ‘both prophet and priest are 
~ profane; yea, *in my house have I 
found their wickedness, saith the Lorp. 

12 * Wherefore their way shall be unto them 
as slippery ways in the darkness: they shall 
be driven on, and fall therein: for I * will bring 
evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, 
saith the Lorp. 

13 And I have seen ‘folly ‘in: the prophets 
of Samaria; “they prophesied in Baal, and 
*caused my people Israel to err. 

14 I have seen also in the prophets of Jeru- 
salem ®a horrible thing: ¥ they commit adul- 
tery, and * walk in lies: they *strengthen also 


A. M, 3405. 
B.C 


the hands of evil-doers, that none doth A. M, 3405. 
. C. 599. 

return from his wickedness: they are 

all of them unto me as » Sodom, and the inha- 

bitants thereof as Gomorrah. 

15 Therefore thus saith the Lorn of hosts con- 
cerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them 
with ° wormwood, and make them drink the 
water of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusa- 
lem is "profaneness gone forth into all the land. 

16 Thus saith the Lorn. of hosts, Hearken 
not unto the words of the prophets that pro- 
phesy unto you: they make you vain: “they 
speak a vision of their own heart, and not out 
of the mouth of the Lorp. 


@ Chapter vi vi. 13; vili. 10; Zeph. iii. 4- 
xi. 15; xxxii. ae ; "Ezek. vill. 11; xxili. 39. 
Prov. iv. 19; Chabier xiii. 16.——t Chapter xi. 23. 
absurd thing. eb. unsavoury. : 


* Chapter vil. 30; 
Ss Psa. xxxv. 6; 
4 Or, an 


x Isaiah ix. 16. 


«Chap. ii.8. 6 Or, filthiness —¥ Chap 
xxix. 23, z Verse 26. 4 Hzekiel xiii, 23. + Deut. xxxil. 
32; Isaiah i. 9, 10. © Chap. vill. 14; ix. 15. T Or, hypoc- 


risy——4 Chap. xiv. 14; Verse 21. 


Verses 11, 12. For both the prophet and the, priest 
are profane—The priests, by their formality and 
hypocrisy, profaned the ordinances of God which 
they were appointed to administer; and the pro- 
phets, by their lies; false doctrine, and corrupt prac- 
tice, profaned the word of God, which they pretend- 
ed to deliver... Yea; in my house have I found their 
wickedness, saith the Lord—Even in my temple, 
where they assemble under a pretence to worship 
and do me honour, they say and do many things 
contrary to my law, and are guilty of various acts 
of profaneness and immorality. Such profaners of 
things sacred were formerly Hophni and Phinehas. 
Wherefore their way shall be as slippery ways—In 
which they shall not walk with any steadiness, safe- 
ty, or satisfaction: or they shall fail and miscarry in 
all their designs. e “ 

* Verses 13, 14. I'have seen—Rather, I saw, name- 
ly, formerly, before I Gast them out of their own 
land; folly—Hebrew, nan, stupidity, infatuation. 
The UXX. render it, avounwara, iniquities, or unlaw- 
ful actions, and the Vulgate, fatuitatem, sottishness.; 
in the prophets of Samaria—That is, in those that 
belonged to the ten tribes, whose chief city was Sa- 
maria.. They prophesied in Baal—Pretending they 
had their relations from Baal, they caused the peo- 
ple of that kingdom to err—That is, they seduced 
them from the worship and service of the true God 
to idolatry. I have seen also in the prophets of Je- 
rusalem a horrible thing—Yebrew, NW yw, a thing 
to be detested, an abomination. He compares the 
sins of the prophets of Samaria with those of the 
prophets of Jerusalem, and pronounces the sins of 
the latter to be more enormous, because they pro- 
nounced their false prophecies in the name of the 
true God, and pretended that he was the author of 
all their impostures: the wickedness of their lives 
also reflected great dishonour upon his name and 
religion. Compare chap. iii. 11. They commit 
adultery—See chap. xxix, 23. And walk in lies— 
Utter what they themselves have feigned, and call 
their inventions divine visions, and use all manner 


‘while ‘they put on the garb of piety. 


of deceit and fraud. T'hey strengthen also the 
hands of evil-doers—They confirm men in their 
evil ways, both .by their own bad example, and by 
promising them peace and security, notwithstanding 
their wicked conduct and ungodly deeds, See verse 
17; and Ezek. xiii. 22. T'hey are all of them unto 
meas Sodom—Sce Deut. xxxii. 32; Isa.i. 10; Ezek. 
xvi. 46-48. 

Verse 15. Therefore thus saith the Lord concern- 
ing the prophets—The priests also, and all ecclesias- 
tical guides, are included. Behold, Iwill feed them 
with wormwood—Will afflict them with most bitter 
calamities. For from the prophets of Jerusalem is 
profaneness gone forth—Or, hypocrisy, which seems 


‘rather to be the meaning of 753m, the word here 


used. Certain it is, that this was a vice they were 
generally addicted to. These false prophets affected 
to be looked upon as pious, while they indulged 
themselves in various acts of wickedness; and as 
this could not be totally concealed, the people took 
example from them, and indulged themselves in vice, 
The Jewish 
nation continued much in this habit even to the times 
of Christ, as is sufficiently evident from what is said 
of the Pharisees in the New Testament. 

Ver. 16,17. Thus saith the Lord, Hearken not unto 
the words of the prophets—People are under no re- 
ligious obligation to hear what is contrary to the re- 
vealed will of God, or to obey those.who enjoin 
things which that does not require. They make you 
vain—Or rather, they deceive you, as the words may 
be properly rendered: or they make you trust to 
and undertake vain things. “The inhabitants of Je- 
rusalem were fed by these false prophets with the 
vain hopes of being able to drive the Babylonians 
from their walls, and raise the siege of the city ; 
yea, and of shaking off the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar 
entirely, and being quite free for the future. They 
speak a vision of their own heart—A pretended 
vision which they have framed themselves. They 
say still—That is, they persist to say; wnto them 
that despise me—That are destitute even of my fear, 

423 


The people warned against 


JEREMIAH. 


believing the false prophets. 


17 They say still unto them that 
’ despise me, The Lorp hath said, 
® Ye shall have peace ; and they say unto every 


one that walketh after the imagination of his | 


own heart, f No evil shall come upon you. 

18 For ¢ who hath stood in the counsel of 
the Lorn, and hath perceived and heard his 
word? who hath marked his watt and heard 
it? : 
19 Behold, a * whirlwind of the Lorp is gone 
forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: .i 
shall fall grievously upon the head of the 
wicked. 

20 The ‘anger of the Lorp shall not return, 
until he have executed, and till he have per- 


formed the thoughts ‘of his heart: * in, 4. Re StS. 
the latter days ye shall consider it 
perfectly. 

21 11 have not sent these ‘prophets, yet they 
ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they pro- 
phosieds y 

22 But if they had ™ stood in my counsel, and 
had caused my people to hear my words, then 
they should have " turned them from their eri 
way, and from the evil of their doings. . 

23 Am 1a God at hand, saith the Lonp, and 
not a God afar off? 

24 Can any °hide himself in secret slades 
that I shall not see him? saith the Lorp. _ Do 
not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lorn: 


e Chap. vi. 14; vili. 11; Ezek. xiii. 10; Zech. x. 2. POr, 
stubbornness, Chapter xiii. 10.——! Mie. iii. 11.—s Job xv. 8; 
1 Cor. ii. 16, ° Or, secret.— Chap. xxv. 32; xxx. 23. 


i Chap. xxx. 24. Gen. xlix. 1——! Chap. xiv. 14; xxvii. 
15; xxix. 9.——™ Verse 18. u Jer. xxv. 5——® Psa. cxxxix. 
ne "Amos ix. 2; 3.——P 1 Kings viii. 27; Psalm exxxix. 7. 

\ 


and therefore slight my authority, and violate my 
commands; The Lord hath said, Ye shall have 
peace— Whereas, in truth, I have said the contrary, 


and have assured them, There is.no peace to the. 


wicked—Thus they both make me to patronise sin, 
and to contradict myself. 

Verse 18. For who hath stood in the counsel of 
the Lord2?—These are either the words of God ex- 
pressing that none of these pretended prophets knew 
any thing of his designs, as he had not revealed them 
unto them, and they could not otherwise know 
them; or else they are to be understood as the words 
of these false prophets, who, among other things, 
told the people, that God’s counsels were not to be 
absolutely known ; and that therefore neither Jere- 
miah, nor the rest of the prophets, who foretold the 
destruction of Jerusalem, were informed more than 
others of what God intended to do. 

Verses 19, 20. Behold,.a whirlwind of the Lord is 
gone forth with fury—A severe judgment of God, 
that shall resemble,a whirlwind for the sudden and 
utter destruction that it shall bring. The same word, 
myo, is elsewhere translated a storm. It is called a 
whirlwind of the Lord, both to denote the greatness 
of it, and to signify that it should come forth from 
God, and be of hissending. Jé shall fall grievously 
upon the head of the wicked—Whatever these. flat- 
tering teachers may assert to the contrary. . Blaney 
translates the verse, Behold, the whiriwind of Jeho- 
vah! it goeth for th hot, even a@ settling whirlwind ; 
(so he translates Sonn, which we render, griev- 
ous,) upon the head of the wicked it shall settle. And 
he observes, “The hot, scorching wind, blowing 
from the south, (see note on chap. iv. 11, 12,) is evi- 
dently here alluded to, that blows, not with a tran- 
sient blast, but exerts a continued force upon the 
head of the unfortunate traveller till it has effectual- 
ly destroyed him ;” an emblem this of the consuming 
and insupportable wrath of God. T'he anger of the 


Lord shall not return—The prophet speaks of the’ 


judgment as of a messenger, which should not return 
424 


till it had done its errand, and executed what God 
had resolved it should effect. Jn the latter days ye 
shall consider, &c.—Though you. will not now be- 
lieve it, but flatter yourselves with vain hopes, yet 
hereafter, when it shall be too late, you shall consider 
it perfectly, that is, when this judgment hath over- 
taken you; you shall fully believe and understand 
that God did indeed bring it upon you, for the pun- 
ishment of your sins. 

Verses 21,22. Ihave not sent these prophets, yet 
they ran—'They were always ready to bring you 
pleasing tidings as from me, though I had given 
them no commission so to do, or revealed any thing 
to them. But if they had stood in my counsel— 
Been made acquainted by me with my will and plea- 
sure; and had caused my people to hear my words 
—And not their own conceits and inventions; then 
they should have turned them from their evil way— 
This was the design’ of all God’s messages’ by his 
prophets, and therefore all true prophets made this 
their principal aim. And the giving encouragement 
to men to continue in their sinful courses, or ina 
state of carnal security, is often. mentioned asa aniark 
of a false prophet. 

Verses 23, 24. Am J a God at hand and not a God 
afar off 2—Do these, false prophets imagine that I 
am only a God in some particular places, and that I 
cannot see or know things done privately, or at a 
distance from the place where they suppose me to 
be? Do they think to impose upon me, or .vent 
their own dreams in my name, and I not discover 
them? As if either distance or secrecy could place 
any thing out of the reach of my power and know- 
ledge. Atheism, or ignorance of God, is generally 
the foundation of a wicked life. Men think God does 
not see, or does not regard them and their actions, 
and will not call them to an account for them, and 
therefore they go on in their trespasses, By a God 
at hand; some understand, in heaven: as if he had 
said, Do you think my eyes are limited like yours; 
so that I cannot see men’s practices though at a dis- 

3 


The false prophets 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


are reproved, 


A. M. 3405. 25 I have heard what the prophets 
B. C. 599. cars 

said, that prophesy lies in my name, 
saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. 

26 How long shall this be in the heart of the 
prophets that prophesy lies? yea, they are pro- 
phets of the deceit of their own heart ; 

27 Which think to cause my people to. forget 
my name by their dreams which they tell every 
man to his neighbour, as their fathers have 
forgotten my name for Baal. 

28 The prophet ' that hath a dream, let him 
tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let 


him speak my word faithfully. -What is the} 


chaff to the wheat? saith the Lorn. es 
29 Is not my word like as a fire? poder 
saith the Lorp; and like a hammer that 


breaketh ‘the rock in pieces ? 


30 Therefore behold, 'I am against the pro- 
phets, saith the Lorn, that steal my words 
every one from his neighbour. 

31 Behold, I am against the prophets, saith 
the Lorp, “that use their tongues, and say, 
He saith. Aoueey"? 

32 Behold, I am against them that prophesy 
false dreams, saith the Lorp, and do tell them, 
and cause my people to err by their lies, and by 


“4 Judg, iii. 7; viii..33, 34——° Heb. with whom is. ™ Deut. 


xviil: 20; Chap. xiv. 14, 15.—1! Or, that smooth their tongues. 


tance from the place of my peculiar and glorious 
residence? Others interpret the particle with re- 
spect to time; Am I a god of yesterday, like thé 
idols? Am notI the Ancient of days? the eternal 
God, of whose majesty, omniscience, and omnipre- 
sence you ought to have been sensible?’ Can any 
hide himself in secret places—Can any man hide his 
projects or intentions, his thoughts or desires, his 
words or works, that I shall not see them? Surely 
not. No arts or concealments can hide any man’s 
practices or even the counsels of his heart from the 
eye of God, nor in any respect deceive his judgment 
of them. Do not I fill heaven and earth, namely, by 
my essential presence, as well as: by my universal 
providence? Am I not continually present, and con- 
tinually active through all parts of the universe ? 
As Iam above all, sol am through all, and in all, 
Eph. iv. 6. ; 

Verses 25-27. Ihave heard what the prophets say, 
&e.—I am perfectly acquainted with what these pro- 
phets, have thought and said, though they think I 
take no notice of it, and so continue to act the same 
counterfeit part over again. Saying, Ihave dreamed 
—I have had a divine vision, or have received in- 
formation from God in a dream. This, it appears, 
the false prophets often pretended, when they had 
received nothing of the kind. - How long shall this 
be in the heart of the prophets?—How long shall I 
bear with them while they prophesy the deceit of 
their own hearts? while they utter, for prophecies, 
that which they have feigned or devised themselves ? 
Will they never see what an affront they put upon 
me, what an abuse they put upon my people, and 
what judgments they are preparing for themselves ? 
To cause my people to forget: my name. by their 
dreams, &¢c.—They act as if they designed to draw 
my people off from worshipping and serving me, 
and from all regard to my laws and ordinances and 
to the true prophets. Indeed, their palming upon 
the people counterfeit revelations, and fathéring their 
own fancies upon divine inspiration, was the ready 
way to bring all religion into contempt, and make 
men turn atheists and infidels. 

Verses 28, 29. The prophet that hath a dreamlet 
him tell a dream—Or, as some render it, let him 


tellit as adream. Let him lay no more stress upon 
it than men do upon’ their dreams, nor expect any 
more regard to be paid to it. Or, he that pretends to 
have amessage from God, either by dream, or vision, 
or voice, or otherwise, let him declare it. And he 
that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully 
—Let him speak it, as truth; so some read the 
clause; let him keep close to his instructions, and 
you will soon perceive a vast difference between the 
dreams which the false prophets tell, and the divine 


oracles which the true prophets deliver, and will 


easily discern which is of God and which is not. 
Those that have spiritual senses exercised will be 
able to distinguish. Jor what is the chaff to the 
wheat—There is as much difference between my 
will and their dreams, as there is between the chaff 
and the wheat. ‘Is not my word like fire ?—Quick 


and powerful, capable of trying men as metals are 


tried in a furnace, and ready to burn up that which 
will not bear the trial. And like a hammer that 
breaks the rock in pieces—As a hammer breaks to 
pieces the hardest rock, so is my word, when pro- 
perly applied, able to break the hardest and most ob- 
stinate heart, and to beat down the confidence of ths 
most hardened sinner. 

Verses 30-32. Behold, Iam against the prophets 
that steal my words, &e.—“ That imitate the true 
prophets, speaking in my name, as they do, and 
saying, Tus saith the Lord, (see verse 31,) and 
using their words, but applying them to their own 
purpose: or, it may be, adding their own inventions 
to them.” So Lowth. ‘Others paraphrase the verse 
thus, “That conspire together what to say to deceive 
the people, and to steal what they say one from an- 
other.” Or,perhaps the meaning rather is, That utter, 
as revelations made to themselves, things which they 
have learned, and, as it were, stolen from others. 
That use their tongues, &e.— That take their own 
tongues, as Blaney renders it, and say, He (the 
Lord) hath said. “The phrase of taking their own 
tongue,” he observes, “is, I-think, very easily to be 
understood of those who; without any inspiration, 
took upon them to deliver messages to the people, 
and pretended that they came from God.” J am 
against them that prophesy false dreams—False 

425 


God's punishment 


JEREMIAH. 


of the disobedient. 


Me ad68. their lightness ; yet I sent them not, 

©. °° “nor commanded them : therefore they 
shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lorn. 

33 9] And when this people, or the prophet, or 
a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is tthe 
burden of the Lorp ? thou shalt then say unto 
them, What burden? "I will even forsake you, 
saith the Lorp. 

34 And as for the prophet, and the priest, and 
the people, that shall say, The burden of the 
Lorp, I will even punish. that man ~ his 
house. 

35 Thus shall ye say every one to his neigh- 
bour, and every one to his brother, What hath 
the Lorp answered? and, What hath the 
Lorp spoken ? . 

36 And the burden of the. Lorp shall ye 
mention no more: for every man’s word shall 


be his burden ; for ye have. perverted A. M. 3405. 
the words of the living God, of the a ial 
Lorp of hosts our God. 

37 Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What 

hath the Lorp answered thee? and, What 
hath the Lorp spoken ? 
- 88 But since ye say, The burden of the 
Lorn; therefore thus saith the Lorp; Because 
ye say this word, The burden of the-Lorp, and 
I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shall not say, 
The burden of the Lorp: 

39 Therefore behold, I, even I, x will utterly 
forget you, and YT will {braid you, and the 
city that I gave you and your fathers; and cast 
you out of my presence : 

40 And I will bring * an everlasting reproach 
upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall 
not be forgotten... 


* Zeph. iii. 4. —t Mal. i. 1——" Verse 39. 


12 Hebrew, 


x Hos, iv. 6.——y Verse 33,——# Chap. xx. 11> 


visit upon. 


— 


things, under the notion of revelations made to them 

‘in their sleep. And cause my people to err—To 
wander from the right way; by their-lies, and by 
their lightness—By their groundless assertions, their 
folly, their rashness and inconsistency with them- 
selves: or, by the flatteries of their preaching, sooth- 
ing men up in their sins, and by the looseness -and 
lewdness of their conversation encouraging them to 
persist in.them. Yet I sent them not, &c.—They 
are not my messengers, nor is what they say 
my message. Therefore they shall not profit this 
people at ali—All the profit they aim at communi- 
eating is to make the people easy, but they shall not 
be able to do even that ;. for my providences will be 
such as will fill them with painful apprehensions 
and distressing fears. Some read the clause, They 
do not profit this people, considering the words as 
implying more than they express, namely, that these 
false prophets not only did the people no good, but 
did them a great deal ofhurt. Observe, reader, none 
can expect God’s blessing upon their ministry who 
are not called and sent of Ged. And those that cor- 
rupt the word of God, while they pretend to preach 
it, are so far from edifying the church, that they do 
it the greatest mischief imaginable. 

Verse 33. When this people; or the prophet, §c., 
shall ask thee, &e.—“ The remaining part of this 
chapter is directed against those who called the word 
of God, spoken by the true -prophets, a purDEN; by 
way of reproach ;. meaning that it always portended 
evil, and never good ;” the word xwn, a burden, 
generally signifying a calamitous prophecy. See 
note on Isa. xiii. 1. “Ahab intended to cast the 
same slur on the Prophet Micaiah when he repre- 
sented him as one that never prophesied good con- 

426 


= 


cerning him, but evil, 1 Kings ‘xxii. 8.” The false 
prophets, who said, Peace, peace, it seems, derided 
the true prophets, ’ whose ‘predictions were full of 
threatenings, as if God’s messages were a burden 
which they were weary of hearing ; and made a jest 
of these words, Te burden of the Lord, with which 
God’s prophets sometimes prefaced their prophecies. 
Upon this account God forbade the use of that ex- 
pression, as in the following verses. See Lowth. 

Verse 36. For every man’s word shall be his bur- 
den— You shall be made severely to account for your 
loose and profane speeches, wherewith you deride 
and pervert the words.and messages of God himself. 
Or, “Every man‘shall have most reason to regard 
his own word as hurtful and prejudicial to him. For 
the words of God were delivered with a salutary 
tendency, to warn sinners of the danger of their situ- 
ation, and to call them to repentance. Those, there- 
fore, who made a right use of them would have no 
cause to complain. But those who despised and 
rejected them perverted that which should have 
been for their wealth into an bay? of falling.”— 
Blaney. 

Verse 39. Therefore, behold, I will utterly hie 
you—The Vulgate renders this clause, Propterea 
ecce ego tolam vos portans, Therefore, behold, I 
will take you away removing you, (taking the verb 
mw), nashah, in the sense of XW), nasa, as words of 
alike sound are often of a promiscuous signification, ) 
which makes the sense more pertinent to the fore- 
going verses. ‘The LXX. interpret the clause to the 


/same purpose, Ava rero dé eyw Aanbave kat pacow Yuag, 


&e. Therefore, behold I take y 
down, or, dash you, to the ground, 
I gave to you and to your fathers. 


sie po cast you 
and the city which 


The vision of the 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


good and bad figs. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


This chapter belongs to the beginning of Zedekiah’s reign, probably to the first year of it, the vision contained in wt being 
dated from the carrying away of Jeconiah, and the people with him, into captivity, as from an event which happened but a 


little before. 


Here, under the type of good and bad figs, God represents to Jeremiah the different ways in which he would 


deal with the people already gone into captivity, and Zedekiah, and his subjects that were left behind; showing favour and 


kindness to the former in their restoration and Pe-essaieenente 


destruction, 1-10. 


HE *Lorp showed me, and be- 

hold, two baskets of figs were set 
before the temple of the Lorn, after that Nebu- 
chadrezzar » king of Babylon had carried away 
captive ° Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of 
Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the car- 
penters and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had 
brought them to Babylon. 

2 One basket had very good figs, even like 
the figs that are first ripe: and the other basket 
had very naughty figs, which could not be 
-eaten, ' they were so bad. 


A. M. 3406. 
B. C. 598, 


but pursuing the latter with judgments unto their utter 


3 Then said the Lorp unto me, A. M. 3406. 
What seest thou, Jeremiah? and I ask ta 
said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the 
evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten, pei are 
so evil. 

4 4 Again the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

5 Thus saith the Lorn, the God of Israel ; 
Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge 
?them that are carried away captive of Judah, 
whom-I have sent out of this place into the 
land of the Chaldeans for ¢heir good. 


2 Amos vii. 1, 4; viii. 1.—— 2 Kings xxiv. 12, &c. ; 2Chron. 
xxxvi. 10. 


¢ Chap. xxii. 24, dc. ; xxix. 2. 1 Heb. for badness.——? Heb. 
the captivity. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIV. 

Verse 1. Zhe Lord showed me—Probably in a 
vision; and behold two baskets of. figs—Such as 
used to be offered up for first-fruits ; were set before 
the temple of the Lord—Hebrew, a1), appointed, 
offered according to law, as Blaney renders the 
word; that is, they were brought and placed before 
the temple for an offering of first-fruits, as the law 
vhad directed. After Nebuchadnezzar had carried 
away captive Jeconiah—Concerning which, .see 2 
Kings xxiv. 11-16. This was in the eighth year of 
Nebuchadnezzar’s reign. With the carpenters and 
smiths—Or, the artificers and armorers, as Blaney 
translates the words; the former, wn, being “a 
general name for any handicraftsman, wh ether rik. 
ing in wood or metal;” but the latter, 1200, from 
1D, to shut in, or enclose, meaning properly, “the 
armorers who made the coats of mail"which enclose 
the body. And it is reasonable to presume that the 
king of Babylon would be solicitous to carry all 
these off, with intent, not to employ them in his own 
service, but to prevent the Jews, who were left be- 
hind, from furnishing themselves with arms. in case 
of arevolt.” 
_ Verse 2. One basket had very good figs—Dr. 
Shaw speaks of three sorts of figs; the first of which 
he calls “boccore, (being those here spoken of,) 
which come to maturity toward the middle or latter 
end of June; the second, the kermez, or summer 
fig, which ripens seldom ‘before August ; and the 
third, the winter fig. This is usually of a much 
longer shape, and dark complexion than the kermez, 
hanging and ripening upon the tree even after the 
Jeaves are shed; and, provided the winter proves 
temperate, is gathered as a delicious morsel in the 
spring.”—Shaw’s T'ravels, p. 370, fol. The doctor 
thinks a the latter sort were those which our | 


Saviour expected to find on the fig-tree at the time 
of the passovér-in March, Matt. xxi. 19; Mark xi. 13. 
See Blaney. 

Verses 5-7. Thus saith the Lord God of Tsrael— 
Here the Lord explains the parable of the good figs, 
the figs first ripe. These represented the pious 
captives who were sent first into captivity, as if 
they had been first ripe for rnin; but who should 
prove first ripe for mercy, and their captivity should 
help to ripen them. Among thése were Daniel and 
his companions, and also Ezekiel. The calamities 
inseparable from a state of captivity were calculated 
to humble them, and bring them to repentance, and 
it seems had that good effect: while those who 
escaped being carried away became more and more 
hardened in sin. Like these good figs so will I ac- 
knowledge then—Namely, for my people, and will 
favour them accordingly. “The Jews, who were 
left-in. their own country,” says Lowth, “thought 
themselves better beloved of God than their brethren 
who were carried away captive. To check this vain 
confidence, God promises to show the latter particu- 
lar_signs of his favour in a strange land, and to show 
distinguishing marks of his displeasure upon the 
former: see chap. xxix. 17. For I will set mine eyes 
upon them for good—To order every thing for the 
best, that all the circumstances of the affliction may 
concur to the answering of the great intention of it. 
Accordingly we find that many of these, Daniel and 
his companions, for instance, found great esteem and 
honour during their captivity. And I will bring 
them again to this land—Some' of them probably 
returned before the end of the captivity, some at the 
end of the seventy years. “They were sent abroad,” 
says Henry, “for improvement awhile under a severe 
discipline; but they shall be fetched back, When 
they have gone through their trial there, to their 

427 


Prediction concerning 


JEREMIAH. 


the king of Judah. 


A. M. 3406, 


6 For I will set mine eyes upon 
B. C. 598. 


them for good, and ¢I will bring them 
again to this land: and °I will build them, and 
not pull them down; and I will plant them, 
and not pluck them up. 

7 And I will give them fa heart to know me, 
that I am the Lorp: and they shall be § my 
people, and-I will be their God: for they, shall 
return unto me? with their whole heart. 

8 4 And as the evil ‘figs, which cannot be 
eaten, they are-so evil; surely thus saith: the 
Lorp, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Ju- 


of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, 
}and * them that dwell in the land of Egypt: 


dah, and his princes, and the residue A. ACs 


9 And I will deliver them *to 'be removed 
into. all the kingdoms of the earth for their 
hurt, ™ ¢o be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt 
"and a ents, 3 in all places whither I shall drive 
them.. 

10 And I will send the sword, the famine, and 
the pestilence, among them, till they be con- 
sumed from off the land that I gave unto them 
and to their fathers. 


4 Chapter xii. 15; xxix. 10. Chap: xxxii. 41; xxxill. 7; 
xiii. 10,—! Deuteron. xxx. 6; Chap. xxxii. 39; Ezek. xi. 19; 
xxxvi. 26, 27.—£ Ch. xxx. 22; xxxl. 33 5 xxxii. 38. Sse Chap. 
xxix. 13.—i Chap. xxix, 17. 


k Chap. xlii.; xliv. 3 kc for removing, OY, eaciive. 
' Deut. xxviii. 25, 37; 1 Kings ix. 2 Chron. vii. 20; Chap. 
xv. 4; xxix. 18; xxxiv. 17—— "Pe poy 13, 14.— Chap. 
xxix. 18, 22. 


Father's house.” 


phorical expressions. is, I will prosper them, and 
provide for them. And it may be understood, both 
of the prosperous estate God would give them in the 
land of their captivity, where they should both build 


houses and increase their families, (see chap. xxix. | 


5,6,) and also of the blessings he would confer upon 
them and their posterity, after their return to their 
own land, ibid: verse 10. And he engages to prepare 
them for the temporal blessings which he designed 
for them, by conferring spiritual blessings upon 
them. It is this that would make their captivity for 
their good: this would be both the improvement of 
their affliction and their qualification for deliverance. 
I will give them a heart to know me—I, who at first 
commanded light to shine out of darkness, will shine 
into their hearts, to give them the knowledge of my 
glory; even that true and saving knowledge of me 
which is eternal life ; which is always productive of 
faith in, and love to, me, 1-John iv. 7,8; of obedi- 
ence to my will, 1 John ii. 3,4; and a conformity to 
mine image, 2 Cor. iii. 18. They shall become ac- 
quainted with me in a higher degree, and to a better 
purpose, than formerly; and shall.learn more of me 
by my providences and grace in Babylon than they 
had learned by my oracles and ordinances in Jeru- 
salem. Mark well the expression, reader, J will give 
them a heart to know me; not only the mind, but 
the heart; not only the understanding. and judg- 
ment, but the will and ‘affections are concerned in 
the true knowledge of God, which does not consist 
in mere notions and speculations, but implies the 
exercise of all spiritual graces and the practice of all 
divine virtues. And this knowledge is the superna- 
tural gift of God, communicated by the Spirit of 
wisdom and revelation, Eph. i. 17. The mere na- 
tural and unenlightened man has it not: for God and 
divine things knoweth no man but by the Spirit of 
God, 1 Cor. ii. 11, 14: see also 1 John v. 20. And 
they shall be my people—I will own them for my 
people as formerly, as well in the discoveries of my- 
self to them, as in my acceptances of their services, 
and my gracious pppreane’ in their behalf. And 
2 


And I will build them, and not | 
pull them down, &e.—The. meaning of these meta- | 


I will be their God—They shall have liberty to own 
me for their God, both in their prayers and praises 
offered to me, and their expectations from me. For 
they shall return unto me with their whole heart— 
They shall be so thoroughly changed in heart and 
life that they shall make my will their rule, and my 
glory their end, in all their intentions, affections, and 
actions, and my service their chief and most delight- 
ful business from day to day.. This follows upon the 
former: for they that have a heart to know God 
aright will not only turn to him, but turn with their 
whole heart: while those who are eitherlukewarm in 
their services, or formal and hypocritical in their reli- 
gion, may be truly said to be unacquainted with him. 
Verses 8-10, As the evil figs—so will I give Ze- 
dekiah—Or rather, so will I make Zedekiah, as jos 
should be rendered here, and-as the same verb is 
rendered chap. xxix. 17. And them that dwell in 
the land of Egypt—Whither, it is probable, many 
of the, Jews had fled upon the coming, orthe report 
of the coming,.of the king of Babylon: see chap. 
xliii., xliv. J will deliver them to be removed into 
all the kingdoms, &e.—The Lord, by his prophet, 
uses the words of Moses, wherewith to express those 
tremendous judgments which he designed to bring 
upon this wicked prince and people, as well because 
the Jews had, or professed to have, great reverence 
for that man of God, how little soever they had for 
Jeremiah, as to let them see that what the Lord here 
threatened, and soon would bring to pass, was but an 
accomplishment of what he foretold by Moses should 
befall them in case of their disobedience, by which | 
predictions they ought to have taken warning. ‘Jo 
be a reproach, and a proverb, and a taunt—To be 
made a jest of and. a by-word: see Dan. ix. 16. And 
acursein all places whither I shall drive them— 
Men shall use this phrase as a form of execration, 
“God make thee like Zedekiah, and those who re- 
mained with him ;” compare chap. xxix, 22. On the 
contrary, to make a man a blessing, implies that his 
name should be mentioned as a signal instance of 
God’s favour: see Gen. xlviii. 20; Zech. viii. 13. 
Till they be consumed from off the land—My judg- 
ments shall follow them so closely that neither they 
R 3 


The Jews are reproved 


CHAPTER XXV. 


Sor their impenitence. 


nor any of their posterity shall ever enjoy any pos- 
session or property in their own country. This seems 
to be spoken of those miserable remains of the Jews 


who, when the rest were carried into captivity, were, 
either by secreting themselves, or some other means, 
left in the desolated country. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


an tnis chapter, which seems to come next in succession to chap. xxii., xxiii. (1,) The prophet reproves the Jews jor thew 
disregard of the divine calls to repentance, 1-7. (2,) He foretels their subjugation, together with that of the neighbouring 
nations to the king of Babylon. for seventy years, and the fall of the Babylonish empire at that period, 8-14. .(3;) The 
same is foreshown under the symbol’ of the cup of God’s wrath, with which Jeremiah is sent, probably in a vision, unto 
divers nations, to make them drink of it, to their utter subversion, 15-29. (4,) The like prophecy is the third time re- 


peated in a strain of sublime and poetic imagery, 30-38. 


4 = THE word that came to Jeremiah 
ph concerning all the people of Ju- 
dah *in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son 
of Josiah king of Judah, that, was the first year 
of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; 

2 The which Jeremiah the prophet spake 
unto all the people of Judah, and to all the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, 

3 >From the thirteenth year of 

______. Josiah the son of Amon king of 
Judah, even unto this day, that is the three and 
twentieth’ year, the word of the Lorp hath 


come unto me, and I have spoken 35 - 
unto you, rising early and speaking; ——“—“ 
* but ye have not hearkened. 

4 And the Lorp hath sent unto you all his 
servants the prophets, ‘rising early and send- 
ing them; but ye have not hearkened, nor in- 
clined your ear to hear. 

5 'They said, ° Turn ye again now every one 
from his evil way,~and from the evil of your 
doings, and dwell in the land that the Lorp 
hath given unto you and to your fathers. for 
ever and ever : 


* Chap. xxxvi. 1.—— Chap. i. 2——¢ Chap. vii. 13 ; xi.7, 8, 10; 
xiil. 10) 11; xvi. 12; xvii. 23; xviii. 12; xix. 15; xxii. 21. 


dChapter vii. 13, 25; xxvi. 55 xxix. 19. e2 Kings xvii. 13; 
Chap. xviii. 1L; xxxv. 15; Jonah iii. 8. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXV. Gs. 

Verse 1. The word that came to Jeremiah in 
the fourth year of Jehoiakim—It is probable this re- 
velation was made to.the prophet in the early part 
of that year; for the defeat of the Egyptians at Car- 
chemish, and the subsequent taking of Jerusalem, 
are both placed in the same year: but from. verse 9 
it appears that Nebuchadnezzar had but just entered 
upon his expedition when the Lord sent this word 


to Jeremiah, and had not yet ¢arried into execution’ 


any of those designs for which God there says he 
would take andsend him. The reader will observe, 
the fourth year of Jehoiakim was seven years and 
some months before Jeconiah was carried into cap- 
tivity, as appears from 2 Kings xxiii. 36, and xxiv. 
8-15, and eighteen years before the taking of the 
city and the more general. captivity ; which shows 
that this prophecy was delivered at least six or seven 
years before that in the preceding chapter. TJ'hat 
was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar—That is, ac- 
cording to the Jewish mode of computing his reign, 
from the time of his being associated with his father 
in the empire before he set out. on his Syrian expe- 
dition. But the Babylonians do not reckon his reign 
to have begun till two years after, upon his father’s 
death. 

Verses 2, 3. Which Jeremiah spake to all the peo- 
ple of Judah—That is, the word which he spake 

3 


concerned them all, and he spake it to as many of 
them as he met with in any public assembly at Jeru- 
lem or elsewhere. Irom the thirteenth year of Jo- 
stah—In which year, as we read, chap. i. 2, Jere- 
miah began to prophesy ; Josiah reigned thirty-one 
years, 2 Kings xxii. 1; so that, taking in the thir- 
teenth year, he prophesied nineteen years during the 
life of Josiah, to which the four years of Jehoiakim’s 
reign being added, make the number twenty-three. 
These twenty-three years, says the prophet, I have 
been a preacher to you, and I have not been negligent 
in my work, but, like men that rise early in the morn- 
ing to despatch their business, I have been attentive 
and laborious in the discharge of. my prophetic 
office. 

Verses 4-7. And the Lord hath sent unto you all 
his servants, &c.—Nor am I the only prophet whom 
the Lord hath sent you, and whom you have ne- 
glected and despised. God hath sent you many 
more, and you have despised as many as he hath 
sent. ‘This contempt of the Lord’s messengers is 
made the proximate cause of God’s wrath coming 
upon this people, till there wasno remedy, 2 Chron. 
xxxvi. 16. They said; Turn ye again now, &c.— 
The substance, both of their and my sermons, hath 
been to persuade you to abandon those sinful courses, 
wherein you have lived, and which you might have 
amended, by virtué of that grace which God did not 

429 


The prophet predicts JEREMIAH. the Babylonish captivity. 
. M. 3397. ; f i b A. M. 3397. 
ae ery 6 And go not after other gods to || chadrezzar the king of Babylon, ® my i 


~ serve them, and to worship them, and 
provoke me not to anger with the works of your 
hands; and I will do you no hurt. 


7 Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith | 


the Lorn; that ye might ‘ provoke me to anger 
with the works of your hands to your own 
hurt. 

8 Y Therefore.thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
Because ye have not heard my words, 

9 Behold, I will send and take £ all the fami- 
lies of the north, saith the Lorp, and Nebu- 


servant, and will bring them against 
this land, and against’ the inhabitants thereof, 
and against all these nations round about, and 
will utterly destroy them, and ‘make them an 
astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual de- 
solations. 

10 Moreover 11 will take from. them the. 
k voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the 
voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the 
pride, 1the sound of the millstones, and the 
light of the candle. are 


f Deut, xxxii. 21; Chap. vil. 19; xxxii, 30.—s Chap. i. 15. 
h Chapter xxvii. 6; “sili. 10; Isa. xliv. 28; xly. 1; Chap. xl. 2. 
i Chap. xviii. 16. 


eee 


deny you. We have not differed in our doctrine, to 
the practice of which you have also been encour- 
aged, both by them and me, with an assurance from 


God, that, if you obeyed it, you should enjoy this | 


good land which the Lord promiséd, and gave to you 
and your fathers, and which you have now possessed 
for many ages. And go not after other gods— 
Though the Jews were guilty of many other sins, 
yet their most heinous sin was idolatry, as it was a 


direct renouncing of God’s authority, who had, by 


so many miracles of mercy, set them apart for him- 
self and his own service, and had bestowed so many 
signal privileges and blessings upon them. And 
provoke me not with the works of your hands—By 
worshipping, as gods, the images which your own 
hands have made, or with any works which are con- 
trary tomylaw, And I will do you no hurt—You 
shall yet enjoy your own landand prosper. Yet ye 
have not hearkened unto me—Ye heard me, and 
other the Lord’s prophets, thus speaking to you, but 
you have not obeyed; that ye might provoke me, 
&c.—As if you had disobeyed with a design to in- 
cense me against you; to your own hurt—For the 
sinful actions of men do not affect or injure me, but 
are to the hurt of those who do them, 

Verses 8, 9. Therefore, because ye have not heard 
—That is, because ye have not hearkened to, nor 
obeyed my words, Behold, I will send and take all 
the families of the north, &c.—All those kings 
whose territories lie northward of Judea, and par- 
ticularly Nebuchadnezzar, who, in this work, shall 
be my servant; and will bring them: against this 
land, &c.—I will lead, as commander in chief, thém 
and their armies up against this people; and I will 
deprive you of all hopes of safety from your alliances 
with other nations, for the king of Babylon shall first 
subdue them. See 2 Kings xxiv.7. And will ut- 
terly destroy them, and make them an astonishment 
—Will make these countries, and their inhabitants, 
the objects of men’s scorn and reproach. See note 
on chap. xxiv.9. And a perpetual desolation—It is 
often observed, that the Hebrew word cy, here 
rendered perpetual, does not always imply eternity, 
or perpetuity, in a strict sense; but is sometimes 


1 Heb. I will cause to perish from them —— Isa. xxiv. 7; Chap. 
vii. 34; xvi. 9; Ezek. xxvi. 13; Hosea ii. 11; Rev. xviii. 23, 
k Eccles. xii. 4. 


taken for such a duration as had a remarkable period 
to-conclude it.. Thus it is said of a servant, in.acer- 
tain case, Exod. xxi. 6, That he shall serve his 
master for ever—Which the Jews interpret as mean- 
ing, “till the next jubilee.” So here the sense of the 
word is to be restrainéd to the period of seventy 
years, mentioned verse 11. 

Verse 10. Moreover, Iwill take from them the 
voice of mirth, &e.—See the note on chap. vii. 34; 
xvi9. The sound of the millstones and the light 
of the candle—There shall be no longer any marks 
of trade carried on, even respecting the common ne- 
cessaries, of life, such as the grinding of corn; and 
there will be no use of candles, where the inhabitants 
are dispersed and destroyed; nor will there be occa- 
sion for such illuminations as are usual on festival 
solemnities, in the time of general desolation, verse 
11. See the like expressions used, Rev. xviii. 22; 
where we may observe that St. J ohn exactly follows 
the Hebrew text; whereas the LXX., in this place, 
instead of the sound of the millstones, read oopyy 
uvpe, the smell of ointment.- From which, and seve; 
ral other places of the New Testament, it. appears 
that the apostles and evangelists’ did not implicitly 
follow the Greek translation, but only when they 
thought it consistent with the original, text. See 
Lowth. Mr. Harmer has an excellent observation 
on this place, which the reader will be glad to see. 
“The time for grinding their cornis inthe morning; . 
which consideration makes the prophet’s selecting 
the noise of millstones, and the lighting up of can- 
dles, as cireumstances belonging to inhabited places, 
appear ina view which no commentators, that [have 
examined, have taken any notice of. Iam indebted 
to Sir J ohn Chardin’s MS: for the knowledge of this 
fact. It informs us that ‘in the East they grind their 
corn at break of day; and that when one goes out in 
a morning, he hears every where the noise of the 
mill, and that it is the noise that often awakens peo- 
ple” It has been commonly known that they bake 
every day; and that they usually grind their corn 
as they.want it; but this passage informs us, that it 
is, the first work done in a morning, as well as that 
this grinding of their mills makes a considerable 

3 


The destruction of Babylon 


CHAPTER XXV. 


foretold by the Srophes 


A.M. 3397. 11 And this whole-land shall be a 

B. C. 607. ‘ : 

desolation, and an astonishment ; and 
these nations shall serve the king of Babylon 
seventy years. 

12-4 And it shall come to pass, 
——_— _™when ?seventy years-are accomplish- 
ed, that I will *punish the king of Babylon, 
and that nation, saith the Lor», for their ini- 
quity, and the land of the Chaldeans, Pima 
will make it perpetual desolations. 


Beginning 
B. C. 606. 


13 And I will bring upon that land A. Me 3307 
all my words which I have pronounced 
against it, even all that is written in this book, 
which Jeremiah hath prophesied against. all the 
nations. ; 

14 °F or many nations ? and great kings shall 
4serve themselves of them also: ‘and I will 
recompense them according to their deeds, and 
according to the works of. their own hands. 

15 4 For thus saith the Lorp God of Israel 


m 2 Chronicles xxxvi. 21,22; Ezra i. 1; Chapter xxix. 10; 
Daniel ix. 2. » Beginning B.C. 606, 2 Kings axe 5 ending 
B. C. 536, Ezra. i. 1.——* Hebrew; visit upon. 


noise, and attracts every ear; and as the lighting up 
of candles begins the evening, there is an agreeable 
contrast observable in these words, I will take front 
thee, §c., the sound of millstones and the light of 
the candle. And their whole land shall be a desola- 
tion—Gloomy shall be the silence of the morning, 
melancholy the shadows of the evening ; no cheer- 
ful noise too animate the one,no enlivening ray to 
soften the gloom of the other. Desolation shall every 
where reign. A land may abound with habitations, 
and furnish an agreeable abode, where the voice of 
mirth is not heard; none of the songs, the music, 
and the dances of nuptial solemnities; but-in the 
East, where no millstones are heard in the morning, 
no light seen in the evening, it must be a dreary, dis- 
mal solitude,”—Chap. iv. obs. 4. Seealso chap. iii. 
obs. 18. 

Verse 11. These nations shall serve the king of 
Babylon—That is, Nebuchadnezzar and his succes- 
sors, collectively considered; seventy years—“ This 
period of the nation’s servitude must be computed 
from the defeat of the Egyptians at Carchemish, in 
the same year that this prophecy was given, when 
Nebuchadnezzar reduced ‘the neighbouring nations 
of Syria and Palestine, as well as Jerusalem, under 


his subjection. This was near two years before the | 


heathen chronologers in general begin his reign, his 
father being still living. After his father’s death, ac- 
cording to Ptolemy’s canon, he reigned forty-three 
years; Ilverodamus, or Evil-merodach, his son two, 
Neriglissar. four, and Nabonadius, supposed to be 
Belshazzar, the grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, seven- 
teen; to which, if we add two years of Darius the 
Mede, who is said, Dan. ix. 1, to-have been made 
king over the realm of the Chaldeans, we shall find 
the nations to have continued all that time, nearly 
seventy years, in subjection, more or less, to the king 
of Babylon. Butafter the accession of Cyrus, who put 
an end to the Babylonish monarchy, the nations 
could serve the king of Babylon no longer, because 
there was no longer a king of Babylon to serve ; for 
the kings of Persia were never called kings of Baby- 
lon; but Babylon became itself-a subject and de- 
pendant province, under a subordinate governor, and 
began from that instant to experience, in some de- 
gree, those divine visitations which terminated at 
length in what is so justly called, in the next verse, 


n Isa. xili. 19; xiv. 23; xxi. 1, &c.; xlvii. 1; Chap. 1. 3, 13, 
23, 39, 40, 45; li. 25, 26. ° Chap. 1. 9; li. 27, 28.—p Chap; 
1, 41; li. 27-——4 Chap. xxvii. 7.—— Chap. 1. 29 ; li. 6, 24. 


perpetual desolations?’—Blaney. See notes on chap. 


xxix. 10; and Ezrai. I. 

Verses 12-14. When seventy years are accom- 
plished, I will punish the king of Babylon—“ God 
often punishes the persons whom.he makes instru- 
ments of his vengeance upon others for those very 
things which-they did by his: appointment, because 
their intention was merely to’carry on their own 
ambitious and cruel purposes, and not at all to fulfil 
God’s will, or advance his glory. So that the evil 
they did was altogether their own, and the good 
that was brought out of:it was to be ascribed solely 
to God.”—Lowth. See notes on Isa. x. 5-7. And 
that nation for their iniquity—For their pride, am- 
bition, luxury, tyranny, and cruelty, as well as for 
their various idolatries, which, after Daniel’s inter- 
pretation of Nebuchadnezzar’s dreams, and the mira- 
clesswrought by the God of Israel, in favour of 
Shadrach and his. companions, not to mention. the 
testimony borne to the true religion by many other 
pious Jews, were greatly aggravated, and without 
all excuse. And.the land of the Chaldeans, and 
make tt perpetual desolations—Chaldee was not re- 
duced to desolation immediately upon the taking of 
Babylon, and the conquest of the country by the 
Medes and Persians, but.its power was then broken, 
and the sources of its prosperity greatly diminished, 
and by degrees the country was turned into a soli- 
tude. Of the steps whereby this was effected, see 
notes on Isa. xiii, 19-22, and chap. 1. 40. All that 
is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophe- 
sied against all nations—Those prophecies are 
meant which are to be found all together from chap. 
xlvi. to chap. li. inclusively ; and which the LXX. 
have introduced in this- place. . For many nations, 
§c., shall serve themselves of them also—Namely, 
the nations and kings who were confederates with 
Cyrus. Houbigant renders the clause, For powerful 
people, and mighty kings, shall reduce even those 
nations to servitude, and 30, &c. And Blaney to 
nearly the same sense, thus: For of them, even of 
these, shall many nations and great kings exact ser- 
vice; and I will render, &c. 

Verses 15, 16. Thus saith the. Lord, Take the 
wine-cup of this fury, &e.— Those circumstances 
which constitute the good and evil of human life are 
often represented in Scripture as the ingredients of 


431 
> 


The cup of God’s wrath 


JEREMIAH. 


presented to the nations 


A. M, 3397. unto me ; Take the *wine-cup of 

: ’ this fury at my hand, and cause all 
the nations, to whom I send-thee, to drink it. 

16 And * they shall drink, and be moved, and 
be mad, because of the sword that I will send 
among them. 

17 Then took I the cup at the Lorn’s hand, 
and made all the nations to drink, unto whom 
the Lorn had sent me : 

18 To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, 
and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, 
to make them “a desolation, an astonishment, 
a hissing, and *a curse; as 7¢ is this day; 


8 Job xxi. 20; Psalm Ixxv. 8; Isa. li. 17; Revelation xiv, 10. 
tChap. li. 7; Ezek. xxiii. 34; Nah. iii.J1——" Verses 9, H. 
* Chap. xxiv. 9.——Y Chap. xlvi. 2, 25. z Verse 24. 


19 ¥ Pharaoh king of Egypt, and A. 4 ll 
his servants, and his princes, and all —— 
his people ; 

20 And all *the mingled people, and all the 
kings of *the land of Uz, "and all the kings 


of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, 


and Azzah, and Ekron, and ° the remnant of 


Ashdod, 

21 @ Edom, and ° Moab, and the children of 
f Ammon, 

22 Andall the kings of * Tyrus, ane all the 
kings of .Zidon, and the kings of the: ‘isles 
which are beyond the * sea, 


a Job i. 1. 
xlix. 7. 
xlvii. 4. 


> Chap. xlvii. 1, 5, 7——* Isa.-xx. 1.——4 Chap. 
¢ Chapter xlviil. 1. f Chapter xlix. 1——gs Chap. 
* Or, region by the sea-side. b Chap. xlix..23. 


== 
a cup, which God, as master of a feast, mixes up, and 
distributes to the several guests as he thinks fit. 
Hence, when our Saviour asks James and John, 
whether they were able to drink of the cup whichhe 
was to drink of, he means, whether they had resolu- 
tion and patience to undergo the like sufferings as 
his Father had allotted-for him. And in the like 
sense he prays, Jf it be possible let this cup pass 
Srom me. Accordingly, by this image of the wine-) 
cup of God’s wrath, we are to understand those 
dreadful judgments’ which an incensed God was 
about to inflict on the objects of his displeasure... And 
Jeremiah the prophet, who announced them, is.con- 
sidered as acting the part of a cup-bearer, carrying 
the cup round to those who were appointed to drink 
of it; the effects of which were to appear in the in- 
toxication, that is, the terror and astonishment, the 
confusion and desolation, that should prevail among 
them. eaneth See notes on Psa. xi. 6, and Ixxv. 
8; Isa. li. 21. 

Verse 4: Then took I the cup Iti is not to be im- 
agined that Jeremiah went round in person to all the 
nations and kings here enumerated, with a cup of 
wine in his hand, but, doubtless, what is here related 
passed in a vision, in which it was represented to his 
view. This, either by writing, or by some special 
messenger, he communicated to the several kings 
and nations to which God ordered him to publish it. 
Or, he himself actually did what. is figuratively de- 
signed, that is, he publicly announced the judg- 


121: 


ments of God severally against them,:as we find in 
the chapters mentioned in the note on verse 13. 
’ Verses 18-21. T'o wit, Jerusalem and the cities 


thereof—The Jews are mentioned first, because Je- 
remiah, as well as the rest of the prophets, was in 
the first place sent to them, and they were to have 
the greatest share in the judgments denounced. As 
it is this day—This clause speaks of the desolation 
of Judah and Jerusalem; when all that Jeremiah 
had foretold against them was fulfilled ; and therefore 
must have been added either by Baruch, his amanu- 
ensis, or else by Ezra: or whoever it was that col- 
lected Jeremiah’s prophecies into one volume, who, 
432 


_ 


——»= 
= : 


it is likely, added the fifty-second chapter. Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt--Whose army Nebuchadnezzar 
overcame before he.took Jerusalem. And all the 
mingled people--Or, intermingled, as Blaney trans- 
lates 25M, joining the expression with the preceding 
verse, and understanding thereby. all the foreigners 
resident in Egypt, who had, by intermarriages, form- 
ed connections with the Egyptians. St. Jerome 
takes the word in the same sense. ~Our translators, 
however, seem to have understood by it a mixture 
of several nations, dwelling either upon the coasts of 
the Mediterranean, or of the Red sea. And all the 
kings of the land of Uz—This was the country of 
Job ; but concerning its situation different opinions 
are entertained. It was most probably on the con- 
fines of Idumea, if not a part of it. "The daughter-of 
Edom is said to dwell in the land of Uz,:Lam. iv. 
see note on Job i: 1. ‘Those who were leaders, 
or governors of different tribes or families, seem to 
have had the name of kings: they are now called 
emirs. And all the kings of the Philistines—The 
princes of the different districts, or cities, into which 
Philistia was divided, namely, Ashkelon and Azzah, 
&e. And the remnant of Ashdod—Or Azotus, 
which had been very much ruined by two sieges in 
which it was, taken, the one by Tartan, the Assyrian 
general, mentioned Isa. xx. 1; the other by Psammi- 
tichus,. king of Egypt, who retook it after the longest 
siege that had even been known in those times: 
Herodot. lib. ii.c, 157. The prophecy respecting the 
Philistines is contained in chap. xlvii. Ldom—Or 
rather, And Edom—As the LXX. Syr. and Vul. read, 
with seven MSS. For the prophecies concerning 
Edom, Moab, and the Asineenees see chap. xlviii. 
and xlix. 1-22, 

Verses’ 22-24. And all the kings of Tyrus and 
Zidon—The nobles, or chief men of eaeh city, seem 
to be meant by kings here, for neither of these cities 
had more than one kin g. "And the kings of the isles, 
which are beyond the sea—Cyprus, &¢., which Ne- 
buchadnezzar subjected. Or, as the Hebrew, sn 
mn 13y3, is rendered in the margin, The region 
by the sea-side. For that ‘x, rendered isle inthe 

een 


The prophet foreshows 


CHAPTER XXV. 


their utter subversion. 


4M. 3397. 23 i Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, 
~ and all ‘that are in the utmost 
comers, 


24 And ‘all the kings of Arabia, and all the, 


kings of the ' mingled people that dwell in the 
desert, 
25 And all the kings of Zimri, and all the 
kings of ™ Elam, and all the kings of the Medes, 
26 ® And all the kings of the north, ‘far and 


near, one with another, and all the ‘A. M. 3397. 
kingdoms of the’ world, which are fe: en 
upon the face of the earth: ° and the king of 
Sheshach shall drink after them. \ 
27 ‘Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus 
saith the Lorp of hosts, the God of Israel ; 
? Drink ye, and 4be drunken, and spew, and 
fall, and rise no more, because of the sword 
which I will send among sath 


i Chapter. xlix. 8. 5 Hebrew, cut off into corners, or, having 
the corners of the hair polled, “gee 1x. cu 4 xix. 32. 
& 2 Chron. ix. 14. 


1. 37; Ezek. xxx. 5.——-™ Chap. 
© Chap, li. 41.—pP Hab, ii. 16. 


7 


1 Verse 20; Chap. xlix. 31; 
xlix. 34, o Chapter 1. 9. 
4 Isa. li. 21; lxiii. 6. 


text, does not always signify an island, properly so 
called, is manifest from many passages. Dedan, 
and Tema, and Buz—A person called Dedan was 
descended from Abraham by Keturah, Gen, xxv. 3. 


Probably he founded the city Dedan ; which, how- 


ever, in process of time, seems to have been anniex- 
ed to Edom: see chap. xlix.8; Ezek. xxv. 13. 'e- 
ma was one of the sons of Ishmael, Gen. xxv. 15, 
and a city, or district, called after him, was situate 
near the mountains which separate’ Arabia from 
Chaldea.—An. Univ. Hist., vol. vii. p. 230, fol, Buz 
was the brother of Uz, Gen.~xxii. 21; and_ settled, 
most probably, in his ‘neighbourhood. Elihu, the 
wisest of Job’s friends, was.a Buzite, Job xxxii. 2. 
And all that are in the utmost- corners—Or, all 
that have the coast insulated, as Blaney translates 
it: see note on chap: ix. 26. These, he supposes, to 
be the inhabitants of the peninsula of Arabia, espe- 
cially those situate toward the bottom, or narrow 
part of it. And all the kings of Arabia—“ The 
whole country to which we give the general name 
of Arabia seems to have been thrown, in Scripture, 


into two great divisions, one of which is called pro-j, 


perly n29y, Arabah, the other 1p, Aedem, ac- 
cording to their respective situations; Arabah, sig- 
nifying the west, as Kedem does the east. Each 
of these had their subdivisions; the first, compre- 
hending that which geographers have distinguished 
by the name of Arabia Petrea, and also, perhaps, 
those parts along the western coast of the Red sea 
bordering upon Egypt. The other part, called Ke- 
dem, eomprehended Arabia Felix, and Arabia De- 
serta ; the former of which the Scripture seems to 
have distinguished by the name of nxd *y1¥p, those 


that have their coast insulated, mentioned in the |, 


preceding verse ; and the latter in this verse, by the 
mingled race of those that dwell in the desert, 
meaning such as inhabited the great desert country, 
lying between Mesopotamia and Palestine. These 
may have been so called from the manner of in- 
habiting the desert promiscuously and in common, 
without any fixed property or abode, settling, for a 
time, where they found pasture, and then removing 
with their flocks to another place; or, from their 
being made up of people of different descents.” 
—Blaney. 

Verses 25, 26. All the kings of Zimri-—Those de- 
scended from Zimran, one of Abraham’s sons, by 

Vor, TL. ( 28 ) 


Keturah; all of whom he sent to settle in the east 
country, Gen. xxv. 2, 6. It is probable that these 
descendants of Zimran were the same that Pliny 
mentions among the inhabitants of Arabia, by the 
name of Zamareni. And-all the kings of Elam— 
Namely, of Persia, .And all the kings of the Medes 
—Who were descended from Madai, the son of Ja- 
phet. The Medes and Persians were commonly 
confederates and partakers of the same prosperity 
or adversity. And ail the kings of the north far 
and near—“ By the kings of the north that were 
near, the kings of Syria are-probably meant: see 
chap. xlix. 23. Those that were afar off may mean 
the Hyrcanians and Baetrians, who are reckoned in 
Xenophon’s Cyropedia, lib. i.,among them that'were 
subjected or oppressed by the king of Babylon, and 
perhaps others besides of the neighbouring nations 
that were compelled to submit to the Babylonian 
yoke: All these lay to the north of Judea, and 
at.a great distance.” And all the kingdoms of the 
world, &¢.—It is justly observed by “Blaney, that 
this must be understood with ‘a limitation to’ that 
part of. the continent with which the Jews had some 
correspondence, or acquaintance; just as Iaca » 
ovxeyevn stands for the whole Roman empire, Luke 
ii. 1. “The ambition, of a prince like Nebuchad- 
nezzar, who aimed at universal monarehy, could not 
but.occasion great confusion and distress, both among 
those who felt, and among those who dreaded, the 
power of his arms.” And the king of Sheshach 
shall drink after them-—Here the speech of Jeho- 
vah is resumed, which was broken off at the end of 
verse 16. That Sheshach means Babylon, appears 
clearly from chap. li, 41. “ But, among the reasons 


that have been assigned for this name,” says Bla- 
ney, “I have met with none that I think satisfactory. 

2, signifies to subside, and sink down; and may 
perhaps allude to the low situation of Babylon, which 
did not derive its strength from being built, like 


many other great cities, upon the heights of a rock. 
but stood upon a large flat, or plain, cowering, as it. 
were, amidst the waters that surrounded it, and by 
which it was rendered in some parts inaccessible to 
an enemy.”. 

Verses 27-29. Drink ye and be drunken—The im- 
perative ishere put for the future: see the like mode 
of speaking, Isa. ii. 9; vi. 9; xxiii. 16. ‘The cup being 
metaphorically put for calamity, to be drunken with 

433 


The like prophecy 


A.M. 3397. 28 And it shall be, if they refuse to 
———— take the cup at thy hand to drink, 
then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lorp of hosts; Ye shall certainly drink. 

29 For lo, *I begin to bring evil on the city 
S which * is called by my name, and should ye 
be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be un- 
punished : for * I will call for a sword upon all 
the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lorn of 
hosts. - 

30 Therefore prophesy thou against them all 
these words, and say unto them, The Lorp 
shall “roar from on high, and utter his voice 
from *his holy habitation; he shall mightily 
roar upon ¥ his habitation; .he shall give 7a 
shout, as they that tread the grapes, against 


JEREMIAH. 


a third time repeated. 


A. M, 3397, 


all the inhabitants. of the - earth. 
B C. 607. 


31 A noise shall come even to the 
ends of the earth; for the Lorp hath *a con- 
troversy with the nations, > he will plead with 
all flesh; he will give them ¢hat are wicked 
to the sword, saith the Lorp. 

32 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, Behold, 
evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and °a 
great whirlwind shall be raised up from the 
coasts of the earth. 

33 ¢ And the slain of the Lorp shall be at 
that day from one end of the earth even unto 
the other end of the earth: they shall not be 
¢ lamented, ‘ neither gathered, nor buried ; they 
shall be dung upon the ground. 


t 34 4 & Howl; ye shephortis; and cry; and 


t Proverbs xi.-31 ; Chapter xlix. 12; Ezekiel ix. 6; Obadiah 
16; Luke xxiii. 31; 1 Peter iv. 17.——® Heb. upon which my 
name is called Daniel ix. 18, 19. t Ezekiel xxxviii. 21. 
uTsaiah xlii. 13; Joel iii. 16; Amos i.-2. x Psalm xi. 4; 
Chap. xvii. 12. \ 


y1 Kings ix,'3 ; Psalm exxxii. 14, aah Isaiah xvi. 9; Chap. 
xlviil: 33. 2 Hosea ‘iv. 1; Micah vi. 2——» Isaiah Ixvi. 16; 
Joel iii. 2. © Chap. xxiii. 195 xxx. 23, —4 Isaiah Ixvi. 16. 
© Chap. xvi. 4, 6— Psa. lxxix. 3; Chap. vil. 2; Rev. xi. 9. 
s Chap. iv. 8; vi. 26. 


eae fh- care 


it, and fall, &c., must signify extreme calamity, or de-| 


struction. If they refuse to take the cup, &e.—* If 
they either do not believe thy threatenings, or dis- 
‘regard them, as thinking themselves sufficiently 
provided against any hostile invasion, thou shalt let 
them know that the judgments denounced against 
them are God’s irreversible decree,” which shall cer- 
tainly be executed, and that it will be in vain for 
them to hope to escape the threatened ruin. “For 
lo, I bring evil on the city called by my name, &c. 

ate Judgment often begins at the house of God, for 
the correction of his people, and to be a warning to 
others; but the heaviest strokes of it are reserved for 
the ungodly: :? see Lowth, and chap. xlix.12; 1 Pet. iv. 
17,18. And should yebe utterly unpunished 2-No: if 
this be done in the green tree, what shall be done 
in the dry? If they that have some good in them 
smart so severely for the evil that is found in them, 


can they expect to escape that have worse evilsand no. 


good found among them? If Jerusalem be punished 
for learning idolatry of the nations, shall not the na- 
tions be punished of whom they learned it? No doubt 
they shall; for, says the Lord, I will call for a sword 
upon ‘all the inhabitants of the earth—For they 
have helped to corrupt the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

Verses 30-33. The Lord shall roar from on high 
—Shall manifest his anger from heaven. God speaks 
by his judgments, and ‘those, when they are very 
terrible, may be fitly compared to the roaring of a 
lion, which strikes a consternation into those that 
hear it. He shall mightily roar upon his habitation 
—He shall pronounce and execute a terrible judg- 
ment upon his temple, the place on earth which he 
hath chosen for his residence: see 1 Kings viii. 29. 
He shall give a shout as they that tread the grapes 
—That is, He shall utter his voice before his army, 
as Joet expresses it, chap. ii. 11. Like a leader or 
general, he shall encourage them to give the onset 


434 * 


upon their enemies, which is usually performed with 
a shout, as great as that which the treaders of grapes 
use at the time of the vintage. (A noise shall come 
to the ends of the earth—The report of these calami- 
ties and confusions shall reach the most distant 
countries. For the Lord hath a controversy with 
the nations—God enters into. judgment with men for 
their impieties, as being so many injuries to his ho- 
nour, for which he demands satisfaction, Hos. iv. 1; 
Micah vi. 2. He will plead with all flesh—Namely, 
with fire and sword, as Isaiah expresses it, chap. 
lxvi. 16. He will give the wicked to the sword—His 
quarrel with men is for their wickedness, for their 
contempt of him, of his authority over them, and 
kindness to them, They have provoked him to an- 
ger, and thence comes all this destruction. Behold, 
evil shall go forth from nation to nation—As the cup 
of God’s wrath goes round, every nation shall have 
its share, and take its turn, because one doth not take 
warning, by the calamities of another, te repent and 
reform. A great whirlwind shall be raised up, &c. 
—The Chaldean army shall come like a hurricane, 
raised in the north, and thence carried forward with 
incredible fierceness and swiftness, bearing down all 
before it. God’s vengeance is often compared to a 


whirlwind, and is here said to come from the coasts, 


or sides of the earth, because Chaldea was, at that 
time, thought to be one of the most remote regions. 
And the slain of the Lord, &c.—Multitudes shall fall 
by the sword of the merciless Chaldeans, so that the 
dead shall be everywhere found, here. termed, the 


slain of the Lord, because slain by commission from 
him, and sacrificed to his justice. They shall not be 
lamented—They shall fall in such great numbers 
that the usual funeral rites and lameritations shall not 
be paid them, and many of them will lie unburied. 

Verses 34, 35. Howl, ye shepherds, and cry—The 
imperative is here also put for the future: | see ver. 27. 

( 28* ) 


God threatens to destroy 


——- = 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


the cety and ae 


7 - or wallow. yourselves in the ashes, ye 
—_+——— principal of the flock: for 7 the days 
of your slaughter and of your epee are 
accomplished; and ye shall om like * a Paint 
sant vessel. 

35, And ° the shepherds shall have no way to 
flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape. 

36 A voice of the cry of: the shepherds, and a 
howling of the principal of the flock, shall be 


Reak8 for the Lorp hath spas - M 3397. 


. 607. 
their pasture. 


37 And the peaceable habitations are cut 
down because of the fierce es of _ the 
Lorp. — 

38 He hath Gieikon » his covert, as the lion: 
for their land is *° desolate because of the fierce- 
ness of the oppressor, and because of his — 
anger. 


<i 


7 Hebrew, your ae for = — Hebrew, a vessel of 
esire 


9° Heb. flight shall aes from the Shepherds, and escaping from, 
Pal 


&c., Amos 1i. 14..—— Psa. lxxvi. 2.——"° Heb. a desolation. 


Shepherds are here the same with kings, princes, 
or generals. In pursuance of’ the same metaphor, 
by the principal of the flock’ are meant the great 
and rich men of each. nation. Though such are 
wont to be the most courageous and secure, yet of 
these it is foretold, that their hearts should so fail 
them that they should howl, and cry, and wallow in 
ashes. Seeing themselves utterly unable to make 
head against the enemy,.and seeing, their country, 
which they had the charge of, and for the protection 
and prosperity of which they were concerned, in- 
evitably ruined, they should abandon themselves to 
despair, sorrow, and lamentation. For the days of 
your slaughter, §c., are accomplished—The time 
fixed in the divine counsel for the slaughter of some, 
and the dispersion of the rest, is fully come. And 
ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel—Ye shall be 
utterly destroyed, as a crystal glass when it is dash- 
ed against the ground. The shepherds shall have 
no way to flee, &e.—The enemy will be so nume- 
rous, so furious, so sedulous, and the extent of their 
army so vast, thatlit will be impossible to avoid fall- 
ing into their hands. 


Verses 36-38. A voice of the cry of the shepherds 
—Those are great calamities indeed that strike such 
a terror upon great men, and put them into this 
mighty consternation. For the Lord hath spoiled 
their pasture—In which they fed their flock, and out 
of which they fed themselves; the spoiling of this 
makes them ery out thus. Carrying on the meta- 
phor of a lion roaring, the prophet alludes to the 
great fright into which shepherds are put when they 
hear a roaring lion coming toward them, and find 
that neither they nor their flocks can escape. And 
the peacéable habitations are cut down—Those that 
used to be quiet and not molested, who had long 
dwelt in peace and safety, shall now be exposed to 
all the calamities of war, and shall be thereby de- 
stroyed ; or, those that used to be peaceable, and not 
to molest any of their neighbours, nor give provoca- 
tion to any, shall yet not escape. This is one of the 
direful effects of war, that even those that are most 
harmless, and inoffensive, often suffer hard things. 
Blessed be God, there is a peaceable habitation above 
for all the sons of peace, which is out of the reach of 
fire and sword. 


CHAPTER XXVEI. 
In this chapter; (1,) by God's direction, Jeremiah faithfully warns the assembled Jews that, if they did not speedily repent 


and reform, their city and temple should be destroyed, 1-7. 


(2,) Being on this account prosecuted for his life, by the 


priests and false prophets, he boldly avows the divine authority for what he had done, and. his good mtent in doing it, and 


warns them that, if they murdered him, it would bé at their peril, 8-15. 


' (3,) By the prudence of the civil rulers he is 


protected, (as Micah had been by Hezekiah,) even while King Jehoiakim murdered Urijah, who was less bold, 16-24. 


re M. nk [ the beginning of the reign of 
-___— ~~ Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVI. 

Verse 1. In the beginning of the reign of Jehoia- 
kim, &c.—The preceding chapter is dated in the 
fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim, but ascribed, 
with probability, to the early part of that year.’ This 


chapter is dated in the beginning of the same reign. | 


Hence it has been concluded, that this must have 
preceded the former in order of time. “ But the con- 
‘ 3 


of Judah came: this word from the’ = ike eof 
Lorp, saying, 


clusion,” says Blaney, “ will not hold, if we consider 
that, (chap. xxviii. 1,) the beginning of, Zedekiah’s 
reign is expressly declared to mean the fourth year 
and the fifth month of it. 'The same therefore may 
be the case here,” and this chapter may be allowed 
to speak of events subsequent to those of the fore- 
going one, though taking place immediately after 
them. 
435 


A conspiracy against 


JEREMIAH. 


the life of the prophet. 


A. M.3397, 


2 Thus saith the Lorn; Stand in 
Bac. Or.” 


“the court of the Lorn’s house, and 
speak unto all the cities of dudgh, which come 
to worship in the Lorn’s house, all the words 
that I command thee to speak unto thems 
° diminish not a word: 

3 “If so be they will hearken, and turn every 
man from his evil way,that I may * repent me 
of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them 
because of the evil of their doings. 

4 And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lorn, ‘If, ye will not hearken to me to 
walk in my law, which I have set before you, 

5 To hearken’to the words:of my servants 
the prophets, § whom I sent unto you, both 
rising up early, and sending them, but ye have 
not hearkened ; 

6 Then will I make this house like ™ Shiloh, 
and will make this city ‘a curse to nell the na- 
tions of the earth. 

7 So the priests and the mete and all the 


people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in 


the house of the Lorp. 


8 % Now it came to pass, when A. M. 3397. 
Jeremiah had made an end of speak- es ta 
ing all that. the Lorp had commanded him to 
speak unto all the people, that the priests and 
the prophets and all the people took him, say- 
ing, Thou shalt surely die. 

9 Why hast thou prophesied. in the name of 
the Lorn, saying, This. house. shall be like 
Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without 
an inhabitant? And all the people were ga- 
thered against Jeremiah in the house of the 
Lorp. 

10 When the princes of Judah aa these 
things, then they came up from the king’s 
house unto the house of the. Lorp, and sat 
down *in the entry of the new gate of the 
Lorv’s house. 

11 Then spake the priests and the prophets 
unto the princes and to all the people, saying, 
2'This man is worthy to die; * for he hath pro- 
phesied against this city, as ye have ‘heard with 
your ears. 

12 % Then’ spake jon unto all the 


Ce EEE ee 


a Chap. xix. 14. » Ezek. iii. 10; Matt. Xxviil. 20.—°* Acts 
xx. 27.——1 Chap. xxxvi. 3: e Chap. xvili. 8; Jonah iii. 8, 9. 
f Lev. xxvi. 144 Deut. xxviii. 15.——S Chap. vii. 13, 25; xi. 7, 


Verses 2,3: Stand in the court of the Lord’s house 
-—The great court where both men and women ordi- 
narily worshipped, says Dr. Lightfoot, when they 
brought no sacrifice; for when they did so, they 
were to bring it into the inner court, otherwise.called 
the court of Israel, or of the priests, as the same 
learned author has observed in his treatise concern- 
ing the templeservice. And speak unto all the cities 
of Judah—Here it is evident that 1p, cities, are put 
for their inhabitants; and we may conjecture from 
hence, that this transaction passed at oneof the great 
festivals, when the people of Judah were assembled, 
out of all their cities, to worship at Jerusalem. All 
the words that I command thee—Not in the least va- 
rying from them, either to please men or to save 
thyself harmless. Diminish not a word—Either out 
of fear, favour, or flattery: declare not only the 
truth, but the whole truth, and give them faithful 
warning. ‘Thus must all God’s ambassadors keep 
close to their instructions, and neither add to, nor di- 
minish from, the word of the truth of the gospel, 
put must faithfully make known the whole counsel 
of God. If so be they will hearken and turn, &e.— 
Not that God was ignorant of their obstinacy, or did 
not foreknow that they would harden their hearts, 
and remain impenitent; yet it was for the glory of 
his justice, mercy, and holiness, to afford’them both 
time for, and the means of, repentance. And he did 
give them time, for it was at least six years after this 
before the captivity of Jehoiakim, and seventeen be- 

436 


h] Samuel iv. 10, 11; Psalm Ixxviii. 60 ; Chapter vii. 12, 14. 
isa. lxv.15; Chap. xxiv, 91 Or, at th he door——* Heb. ‘The 
judgment of death is Sor this man. k Chap. xxxvili. 4. 


fore that of Zedekiah took place ; and as for means, 
God favoured them not only with such as were ordi- 
nary, but such as were extraordinary, namely, with 
the ministry of this prophet. 

Verse 7. So the priests and the prophets—Namely, 
the false prophets ; they who pretended to be pro- 
phets, though they had received no divine commis- 
sion. And all the people—Who were present at 
that time ; heard Jeremiah, &c., in the house of the 
Lord—That is, “In the court before the Lord’s 
house. - The outer courts, being holy ground, and 
dedicated to God’s worship, are called by the name 
of the temple. So the treasury, where Christ 
preached, is called the temple, (John viii. 20,) though 
it stood in the outer court of it. And St. Paul is said 
to have entered into the temple, Acts xxi. 26, &c.; 
that is, into the court of the temple, and the Jews to. 
have laid hold on him there.”—Lowth. 

Verses 8-10. T'he priests and prophets took him, 
&c.—As a disturber of the government, and a dis- 
courager of the people from defending their country 
against the enemy, in prophesying that the temple and 
city of Jerusalem should become adesolation. When 
the princes of Judah heard these things—That is, 
the king’s counsellors, or chief officers.of the state, 
who were also members of the great court of the 
sanhedrim, first instituted Num, xi. 16, and revived 
by Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. xix. 8, They came and 
sat in the entry of the gate, &c.—This was built by 
Jotham, as we read 2 Kings xiii, 35, The dnpedigett 


- 


The prophet’s life CHAPTER XXVI. in great jeopardy. 
A. M. 3397. princes, and to-all the people, saying, upon yourselves, and upon this city, a i 


B. C. 607. 
—__— The Lorp sent me to prophesy 


against. this house and against this city all the 
words that ye have heard. 

13 Therefore now 'amend your ways and 
your doings, and obey the voice of the Lorp 
your God; and the Lorp will ™ repent ‘him 
of the eyil that he -hath pronounced against 
you. aah 
14 As for me, behold, "I am in your hand : 
do with me °as seemeth good and meet unto 
you: 

15 But know ye for certain, that if ye put me 
to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood 


1 Chap. vii. 3——™ Verses 3, 19.——" Ch. xxxviii. 5. Heb. 


|land, and spake to all the assembl 


and upon the inhabitants thereof: for ——_— 
of a truth the Lorp hath sent me unto you to 
speak all these words in your ears. 
16° Then said the princes and all the people 
unto the priests and to the prophets ; This man 
is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken: to us 
in the name of the Lorp our God. ~ 
17 ° Then rose up certain of the elders of the 
y of the peo- 
ple, saying, 
18 ? Micah: the Morasthite prophe-  ¢, ¢07. 
sied in the days of Hezekiah king of 
Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, 


‘ 


© Acts v. 34. p Mic..i. 1. 


7 
as it is good and right in your eyes 


reader will observe a great similarity between the 
conduct of these priests and‘false prophets toward 
Jeremiah, and that of the priests, the scribes, and 
Pharisees toward Jesus Christ, of whom -Jeremiah 
was a type: see particularly Mark xiv. 58; Matt. 
xxvi. 61. - ] 

Verses 13-16. Amend your ways, and the Lord 
will repent, &c.—It appears. here again that God’s 
determination to give up Jerusalem to destruction 
was conditional: see note on chap. xviii. 7-10. If 
the people had repented of their sins, and reformed 
their conduct, their ruin would have been prevented, 
and they would have enjoyed a continuance of peace 


and prosperity. As for me, behold I am in your | 


hand—I have neither any power, nor can make any 
interest to oppose you; do with me as seemeth good 
in your sight—I am content even to lose my life, if 
God be pleased to permit you to take it. But know 
ye for certain, &c.—Be fully assured ; if you put 
me to death~-Who, as you well know, am not guilty 
of any crime; ye shall surely bring innocent blood 
upon yourselves, and upon this city, &e.—You may 
think that by killig the prophet you will defeat the 
accomplishment of the prophecy, but you will find 
yourselves wretchedly deceived: such an act will at 
once greatly add to your guilt, and aggravate your 
ruin. Their own. consciences could not but tell 
them that if Jeremiah was (as certainly he was) sent | 
of God to bring them this message, it was at their 


utmost peril if they treated him for it as a malefac- | 


tor. For ofa truth the Lord hath sent me unto you, 
&c.—Such is Jeremiah’s justification of himself. He 
reduces all to this, that God had sent him; and his 
adversaries were able to make no reply. “If God 
hath sent me, you can have nothing to say against 
me.” It is upon this that he is declared innocent in 
the followirifrerse, This man is not worthy to die 
—Which was the sentence pronounced by the’ 
princes and all the people: for the people, who be- 
fore were forward to condemn him, now, upon hear- 
mg his apology, were as forward to acquit him. 
Verses 17-19. T'hen rose up certain of the elders 
—HEither the princes before. mentioned, or the more | 


|| intelligent men of the people, stood up, and put the 


assembly in mind of a former case, as is usual with us 
in giving judgment, the wisdom of our predecessors 
being a direction to us. The case referred to is that 
of Micah, the book of whose prophecies we have 
among those of the minor prophets. “ Was it thought 
strange that Jeremiah prophesied against this city 
and the temple? Micah did so before him, even in 
the reign of Hezekiah, that reign of reformation, 


/verse 18. Micah said as publicly, as Jeremiah had 


now spoken tothe same purpose, Zion shall be 
ploughed like a field—The buildings shall be all de- 
stroyed, so that nothing shall hinder but it may be 
ploughed ; Jerusalem shall become heaps—Of ruins ; 
and the mountain of the house—On which the tem- 
ple is built ; shall be as the high places of the forest 
—Overrun with briers and thorns. This Micah not 
only spoke, but wrote, and left it upon record, chap, 
iii, 12. Now did Hezekiah. and.all Judah put hin 
to death 2?—Did the people come together in a body 
to accuse Micah, and demand sentence against him, 
as they had now done in the case of Jeremiah? Did 
they and their king make an act to silence him, or 
take away his life? No: on the contrary, they took 
the warning he gave them. Hezekiah, that renowned 
prince, set a good example before his. successors ; 
for he feared the Lord, as Noah, who, being warned 
of God of things not seen as yet, was moved with 
fear. He besought the Lord—To turn away the 
judgment threatened, and to be reconciled to them ; 
and he found it was not in vain to do so; for the 
Lord repented him of the evil—Returned in mercy 
to them, and even sent an angel, who routed the 
army of the Assyrians that. then threatened to de- 
stroy Jerusalem. These elders conclude, that it 
would be of dangerous consequence to.the state if 
they should gratify the importunity of the priests 
and prophets in putting Jeremiah to death ; saying, 
Thus we might procure great evil against our souls 
—Observe, reader, it'is well to deter ourselves from 
sin, with the consideration of the mischief we should 
certainly do to ourselves by it, and the irreparable 
damage we should thereby. bring upon our own souls. 


Urijah 1s condemned 


JEREMIAH. 


and put to death. 


A. M. 3397. saying, Thus saith the Lorn of hosts ; 
—_—_— + Zion shall be ploughed like a field, 
and Jerusalem shall become: heaps, and the 


mountain of the house , s high places of a 
forest. : 


19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Ju- 
dah put him at all to death? *did he not fear 
the Lorp, and besought ‘the Lorp, and the 
Lorp ‘repented him of the evil which he had 
pronounced against them? * Thus might we 
procure great evil against our souls. . 

20 And there was also a man that prophesied 
in the name of the Lorn, Urijah the son of 
Shemaiah of Kirjath-jearim, who prophesied 
against this city and against this land, accord- 
ing to all the words of Jeremiah : 


21. And when Jehoiakim the king, 
with all his mighty men, and all the 
princes, heard his words, the king sought to put 
him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was 


A. M, 3397. 
B. C. 607. 


| afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt ;) 


22. And Jehoiakim the king sent’ men into 
Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, 
and certain men with him into Egypt. 

23 And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, 
and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king ; who 
slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body 
into the graves of the > common people. 

24 Nevertheless, "the hand of Ahikam the 
son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they 
should not give him into the hand of. the people 
to put him to death. 


4 Mic. ifi. 12.——* 2'Chron. xxxii. 26; 
L 


4 Heb. the face of the 
ORD. i 


Ss Exod. xxxii. 14; 2 Sam. xxiy. 16. 


t Acts v. 39..—® Heb. sons of the people. 
14; Chap. xxxix. 14. 


U2 Kings xxii 12, 


Verses 20-23. And there was also a man—There 
are three different opmions respecting the following 
passage. The first ascribes it to an opposite party, 
who, by a contrary precedent to the foregoing, urged 
the condemnation of Jeremiah, a precedent in which 
the speaking such words as he had spoken was ad- 
judged treason. But against this view of the pas- 
sage it is objected that such a transition of the speakers 
would have had some mark of distinétion prefixed. 
Others suppose that this instance was alleged by the 
same persons that adduced the former, and With an 
intent to mark the different consequences that had 
~ ensued, and to caution. the people and government 
against taking another step of a similar kind, and 
thereby adding sin to sin, As if he had said, Heze- 
kiah, who-had‘protected Micah, prospered ; but did 
Jehoiakim, who slew Urijah, prosper? No: they 
all saw the contrary: one prophet had been slain 
already, let them not fill up the measure of national 
iniquity by slaying another. But Blaney thinks the 
least exceptionable opinion is, “that the elders con- 
cluded their speeches verse 19,and that the writer 
of the narrative goes on here to observe, in his own 
person, that notwithstanding the precedent of Micah, 
there had been a later precedent in the present reign, 


which might have. operated very unfavourably to | 


the cause of Jeremiah, but for the influence and au- 
thority of Ahikam the son of -Shaphan, which was 
exerted to save him.” 

Who prophesied against this city, §c., according 
to all the words of Jeremiah—The prophets of the 
Lord agreed in their testimony, and one would have 
supposed that this circumstance should have caused 
their word to be regarded. And the king sought to 
put him to death—Being, with his courtiers, greatly 
exasperated against him on account of the faithful 
testimony which he bore, and the true predictions of 
approaching judgments which God ‘commissioned 
him to utter. But when Urijah.heard it, he was 
afraid, and fied—In this, it seems, he was faulty, 

‘ 


and that- through the weakness of his faith: he was 
too much under the power of that fear of man which 
brings a snare, and did not sufficiently confide in the 
power of God to protect him in the faithful execution 
of his office. And Jehoiakim sent men into Egypt, 
&ce.—One would have thought Jehoiakim’s malice 
might have been satisfied with driving him out of 
the country ; but they are blood-thirsty that hate the 
upright, Prov. xxix. 10. It was the life, the precious 
life, that Jehoiakim hunted after, aud nothing less~ 
would satisfy him. So implacable is his revenge, 
that he sends a party of soldiers into Egypt, (there 
being a strict alliance between him and Pharaoh- 
nechoh,) some hundreds of miles, and they bring 
him back by force of arms unto Jehoiakim, who slew 
him with the sword—Some think; even with his own 
hands, but this appears improbable. Neither did 
even this satisfy the king’s insatiable malice, but he 
loads the body of the good man with infamy, would 
not allow it the decent respects usually and justly 
paid to the. remains of persons of distinction, but cast 
it into the graves of the common people—As if he had 
not been’a prophet of the Lord. Thus Jehoiakim 


| hoped both to ruin Urijah’s reputation with the peo- 


ple, that no heed might be given to his predictions, and 
to deter others from prophesying in like manner: 
but in vain. Jeremiah bears the same testimony. 
There is no contending with the word of God. Herod 
thought he had gained his point when he had cut 
off John the Baptist’s head, but found himself de- 
ceived when, soon after, he heard of Jesus Christ, 
and said in a fright, This is John the Baptist ; he is 
risen from the dead. ier 

Verse 24. Nevertheless, the hand Pininam, Fc., 
was with Jeremiah—Both he and his father Shaphan 
were chief ministers undér Josiah, 2 Kings xxii. 


12-14. And the brothers of Ahikam, Gemiariah, 


Elasah, and Jaazaniah were considerable men in 

those days, with Ahikam, and members of the great 

council; Jer. xxix. 3; Ezek. viii. 11, So Ahikam 
3 


Fs 


* 


The prophet declares 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s sovereignty. 


made use of his interest with them to deliver Jere- 
miah from the danger that threatened him. Thus 
God wonderfully preserved Jeremiah, though he did 
not flee as Urijah did, but stood his ground. | Ordi- 


nary ministers may use ordinary means, provided 
they be lawful ones, for their preservation ; but they 
that have an extraordinary mission may expect an 


ae heed y protection. 


* © 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


Ambassadors having come to Zedekiah from the kings of Edom, Moab, and other neighbouring nations, probably to solicit 
him to join with them in a confederacy against the king of Babylon, Jeremiah is here ordered to put bands and yokes about 
his neck, and to send them afterward to the before-mentioned kings, declaring the sovereignty of Nebuchadnezzar and his 
successors to be of divine appointment, and promising peace andxprotection to such as submitted quietly, but menacing 


evil in case of resistance, 1-11. 


A like admonition is delivered to Zedekiah, advising lim not to expose himself and his 


people to certain ruin, by listening to the suggestions of false prophets, and revolting from the service of the king of 


Babylon, 12-15. 


The priests and all the people are also warned not to give credit to the false prophets, who taught them 


to expect a. speedy restoration of the vessels which had been carried to Babylon together with Jeconiah. Instead of which 
it is foretold, that the remaining vessels inthe house of God, and in the king’s house at Jerusalem, should be carried after 
the other, and should not return till the appointed period of Judah's captivity was at an end, 16-22. 


A. M. 3408. 


B. C. 596. [N the beginning of the’ reign of 


Jehoiakim the son of Josiah *king 
of Judah came: this word unto Jeremiah rade 
the Lorp, saying, - 

2 Thus ‘saith the Lorp to me; Make thee 

‘bonds and yokes, » and put them upon thy neck, 

3 And send them to the king of Edom, and to 
the king of Moab, and to the king of the Am- 
monites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the 
king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers 
which come to Jerusalem unto Zeackieh king 
of Judah ; 


4 And command them ?to say unto, A. M, 2408, 
their masters, Thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts, the God of Israel ; Thus pba ye say 
unto. your masters 5 

5 °I have made the earth, the man sad the 
beast that are upon the ground, by my great 
power and by my outstretched arm, and ¢ have 
given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me. 

6, ° And now have I given all these lands into 
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Baby- 
lon, ‘my servant ; and & the beasts of the field 
have I given him also to serve him. 


2 Verses 3,12, 19,20; Ch. xxviii. 1. 
said.——» Chap. xxviii. 10, 12 ; 
Eos concerni: 


1 Or, hath the LORD 
So Ezek. iv. 1; xii. 3; xxiv. 3. 
ng their masters, saying. 


¢ Psa. exv.15; exlvi. 6; Isa. xlv. 12—4 Psa. exv. 16; Dan. 
iv. 17,25, 32. © Chap. xxviii. 14. £ Chap. xxv. 9; xhii. 10; 
Ezek. xxix. 18, 20. —- Chap. xxviii. 14; Dan. ii. 38. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVII. 

Verse 1. In the beginning of thereign of Jehoia- 
kim—Instead: of Jehoiakim here, Dr. Waterland, 
Houbigant, Blaney, and many. others, read Zede- 
kiah, because it is difficult, if not impossible, to re- 
concile the common reading with what follows. 
Lowth also, in his commentary upon the place, gives 
it as his opinion, that “the least forced way of solv- 
ing the difficulty is, to say that Jehoiakim has crept 
into the text by the negligence of the scribes, (who 
might have their eyes fixed upon the beginning of 
the last chapter or section,) instead of Zedekiah. 
This emendation is confirmed by comparing this 
verse with the 3d, 12th, and 20th verses of this chap- 
ter, and with the beginning of the next. ‘Such little 
verbal mistakes must be allowed by all impartial 
readers to have sometimes happened in transcribing 
the Holy Scriptures, as well as in other books, and 
may easily orrected, by comparing the suspect- 
ea reading with other parts of the sacred text, which 
admit.of no difficulty or uncertainty.” . 

Verses 2,3. Make thee bonds and yokes, &c,—The 
prophets were frequently ordered to foreshow future 
events by actions as well as by words. Thus Isaiah 
was commanded to go naked and barefoot, Isa xx. 3. 


Ezekiel, in like manner, was ordered to prophesy 
by signs; Ezek. iv. 1; xii. 3; and xxiv. 17-19. In 
making these yokes, putting them upon his neck, 
and fastening them on with bands, Jeremiah was in- 
tended to be a type both to his own people, and also 
to the people afterward mentioned, that they should 
be brought under subjection to the king of Babylon. 
And send them to the king of Edom, &c.—These 
nations were near to the Jews, and their princes had 
their ambassadors resident at J erusalem. "They were 
also some of those countries which God had declared 
that he had given into the hand of the king of Baby- 
lon: see chap. xxy. 21,24. By the hand: of the 
messengers, &c.—The business of these messengers 
seems to have been, to engage Zedekiah to join ina 
league with the nations from which they came, 
against the king of Babylon. 

Verse 6. I have given all these lands into the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar—“ God. is: the sole lord 
and proprietor of the world; and, by virtue of his 
absolute sovereignty and dominion, has a right to 
give the kingdoms of the earth to whomsoever he 
pleases, Dan. iv. 17, and he exercises this authori- 
ty changing times and seasons, by removing 
kings, and setting up kings, Dan. ii. 21. The king 

439 p 


A prophecy of Judah’s 


A. M. 3408. 


7 » And all nations shall serve him, 
B. C. 596. 


and his son, and his son’s son, ‘ until 
the very time of his land. come: ‘and then 
many nations and great kings shall serve them- 
selves of him. * : 

8 And it shall come to pass, thatthe nation 
and kingdom which will not servé the same 
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that 
will not put their neck under the yoke of the 
king of Babylon, that nation will I punish, 
saith the Lorp, with the sword, and. with the 
famine, and with the pestilence, until I have 
consumed them by his hand. , 

9 Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, 
nor to your diviners, nor to your * dreamers, nor 
to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which 
speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the 
king of Babylon : 

10 ! For they prophesy a lie unto you, to re- 
move you far from your land; and that I should 
drive you out, and ye should perish. 

11 But the nations that bring their neck under 
the yoke of the king of anclng: and serve him, 


JEREMIAH. 


subjection to Babylon. 


those will I let remain still in their A.M, 3408. 
own land, saith the Lorp; and they wi 
shall till it, and dwell therein. 

12 1 spake also to ™Zedekiah ‘king of 
Judah according to all these words, saying 
Bring your necks under the yoke of the king 
of Babylon, and serve him ‘and his people, 
and live. 

13 * Why will ye die, thou and thy people, 
by the sword, by the famine, and by the 
pestilence, as the Lorp hath spoken against 


‘the nation that will not serve the king of 


Babylon-? 

14 Therefore hearken not unto the words of 
the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye 
shall not serve the king of Babylon ; for they 
prophesy ° a lie unto you. 

15 For I have not sent them, saith the Lorn, 
yet they prophesy # a lie in my name; that I 
might drive you out, and that ye slight perish, 
ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you. 

16 Also I spake to the priests and to all 
this people, saying, Thus saith the Lorp ; 


» 2 Chronicles xxxvi. 20.—i Chap. xxv. 12; 1.27; Dan. v. 26. 
hap. xxv. 14.—3 Heb. dreams. "1 Verse 14, 


of Babylon, my servant—One whom I have, made 
use of as an instrument to execute my purposes in 
inflicting punishment on many nations: see note 
on chap. xxv. 9. And the beasts of the-field have I 
given him—This is a hyperbolical way of speaking, 
to signify the most ample authority and dominion. 

Verses 7,8. All nations shall serve him, his son; 
and his sons son—His son was Evil- mérodach, and 
his son’s son Belshazzar, in whom his kingdom ‘end- 
ed. Then the time of reckoning with his land came, 
when the tables were turned ; and many nations and 
great kings—Incorporated in the empire of the Medes 
and Persians, served themselves of him. The na- 
tion, §c., that will not put their neck under the yoke 
of the king of Babylon—That will not submit to 
that servitude, represented by the yoke, mentioned 
verses 2,3; will [punish with the sword, &e.—With 
‘one judgment after another, until they are wasted 
and ruined. Nebuchadnezzar was very unjust and 
barbarous in invading the rights and liberties of his 
neighbours, and. forcing them into a subjection to 
him ; yet God had just and holy ends in view in per- 
mitting it, namely, to punish those nations for their 
idolatry and gross immoralities. They that would 
not serve the God that made and preserved them, 
were justly made to serve their enemies that sought 
to ruin them. 

Verses 9-11. Hearken not ye to your prophets, 
nor to your diviners—These nations, it must be ob- 
served, had their prophets as well as the Jews, or 
rather persons that pretended to foretel future events | 
by consulting the stars, by dreams, and various arts 


n Ezek. xviii. 31.——° Chap... 
* Heb. in a lie, or, lyingly. 


m Chap, xxviii. 1; xxxvili, 17. 
xiv. 14; xxiii. 21; xxix, 8, 9. 


of divination; and they, to please their patrons, 
flattered them with assurances that they should not 
be brought into subjection and servitude by the king 
of Babylon. By these means they designed to ani- 
mate them toa vigorous resistance: and though they 
had no ground for such an expectation, they hoped 
hereby to do themservice. But Jeremiah here tells 
them, that it would prove to their destruction; for 
by resisting they would, provoke the conqueror to 
dealseverely with them, to remove them from their 
land, and to drive them out into a miserable captivi- 
ty, in which they should be buried in Oblivion, and 
perish. But the nations that bring their neck under 
the yoke, &c.—That, upon the first summons, or 
without making any ‘hostile opposition, shall yield 
themselves subjects to the king of Babylon, shall 
continue in their own country and possessions, being 
only made tributaries to that king. 

Verses 12, 13. I spake also to Zedekiah, &c.— 
What the prophet here says to Zedekiah has a par- 
ticular weight in it, because he was made king of 
Judea by Nebuchadnezzar, and had taken an oath 
to be faithful to him, and never to resist his authori- 
ty. Why will ye die, thou and thy people?—That 
is, why wilt thou wilfully ruin, not ba the pe but 
thy people, by the sword, the famine the pesti- 
lence? by which judgments the Lord hath declared, 
that all nations who will not willingly yigld to the 
king of Babylon shall be destroyed. 

Verses 16-18. Also J spake to.the private and to al. 
this people—The prophet, being God’s true servant, 


spared none, but ueere faithful warning to all sorts 
3 


'* 


Zedekiah warned against 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


trusting in false prophets 


i, 08 3408. Hearken not: to the words of your 

- prophets that prophesy unto you, say- 
ing, Behold, ” the vessels of the Lorn’s house 
shall now shortly be brought again from Baby- 
lon: for they prophesy a lie unto you. 

17 Hearken not unto them; serve the king of 
Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city 
be laid waste ? 

18 But if they be prophets, and if the: word 
of the Lorn be with them, let them now make 
intercession to the Lorn of hosts, that the ves- 
sels which are left in the house of the Lorn, 
and in the house of the king of Judah, and at 
Jerusalem, go not to Babylon. 

19 4%: For thus saith the Lorn of hosts 4 con- 
cerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, 


A. 
B. 


and concerning the bases, and con- A. M. 3408. 
. 596. 

cerning the residue of the vessels that 

remain in this city, 

-20 Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
took not, when he carried away * captive Jeco- 
niah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from 
Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of 
Judah and Jerusalem ; 

21 Yea, thus saith the Lorp of heist the God 
of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in 
the bts of the Lorn, and in the house of the 
king of Judah and of Jerusalem; 

22 They shall be ‘carried to Babylon, and 
there shall they be until the day that I * visit 
them, saith the Lorp; then " will I bring them ™ 
up, and restore them to this place.) 


P2 Chron. xxxvi. 7, 10; Chap. xxviii. 3; Dan. i. 2——4 2 Kings 
xxv. 13; Chap. lii. 17, 20, 21. ——r2 Kings xxiv. 14, 15; Chap. 


xxiv. 1. 82 Kings xxv. 13; 2Chron. xxxvi. 18,—+t 2 Chron. 
xxxvil. 21; Chap. xxix. 10; xxxii. 5. u Ezra i. 7; vii. 19. 


of persons, to take heed of being deceived by the 
false prophets, who undertook to foretel that the 
vessels of the temple, carried away in the time of 
Jehoiakim-and his son Jeconiah, (of which we read 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 7, 10,) should be brought back again 
to Jerusalem in a short time: see chap. xxviii. 3. 
Hearken not unto them—Believe them not, but ac- 
quiesce in God’s providence with respect to you, and 


be content to be subject to the king of Babylon, that |) 


so. your lives may be given you for aprey. Where- 
Sore should this city be laid waste?—If you do not 
comply with God’s will in this‘instance, your city 
will certainly be-destroyed, and why should you 
pull down such a judgment upon your own heads? 
But if they be prophets, &c.—If they be true pro- 
phets, and have any power ‘with God, instead of 
forételling the bringing back of the vessels carried 
away, let them apply to him in prayer to prevent 
the carrying away of the vessels that yet remain, 
whether in the house of the Lord, or in the king’s 
house, or in Jerusalem, which can be done no other 
way than by pleading with God to turn away his 
wrath, and not proceed in inflicting those sore judg- 
ments which he is most certainly bringing upon 


A 


you. 


Verses 19-22. Thus saith the Lord concerning 
the pillars, &c.—These were all parts of the temple, 
or vessels used init: see 1 Kings vii. And all the 
nobles, &c.—Concerning the persons and things 
which the king of Babylon carried away, see 2 
Kings xxiv. 13-15. Yea, thus saith the Lord—The 
prophet enlarges the divine threatening, and repre 
sents it as extending to all other vessels of value in 
the houses of the king, the nobles, or more wealthy 
citizens. T'hey shall be carried to Babylon, and 
there shall they be—See an historical‘account of the 
fulfilment of this prophecy, 2 Kings xxv. 13-16; 
and 2 Chron. xxxvi. 18; and that they abode in 
Babylon till the end of the captivity, appears from 
Dan. v. 2, where we read of Belshazzar’s sending 
for them, to drink wine in at his fatal feast; wntid 
the day that I visit them—That is, until the expira- 
tion of the time of the Jewish captivity, which was 
seventy years. Then will I restore them to this 
place—Of the fulfilling of which part of the pro- 
phecy we have an account Ezra i. 7-9. -So punc- 
tually was Jeremiah’s prophecy in this place fulfilled, 
and so exactly does one part of holy writ agree 
with another, which are irrefragable proofs of the 
divine authority of the sacred Scriptures, 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


In the foregoing chapter Jeremiah had charged those prophets with speaking lies who foretold the speedy breaking 
of the yoke of the king of Babylon, and the speedy return of the vessels.of the sanctury; now here we have his con- 


test with a particular prophet upon those heads. 


(1,) Hananiah, in contradiction to Jeremiah, pretends to foretel 


that, within two years, the Babylonish yoke should be broken, and the vessels which had been carried to Babylon 


by Nebuchadnezzar, together with all the captives, should within that time be restored, 1-4. 


(2,) Jeremiah con- 


sents to allow of Hananiah’s pretensions to the character of a true prophet, in case his prediction should be accom- 


plished, 5-9. 


(3,) Hananiah, in confirmation of what he had foretold, breaketh off the yoke from Jeremiah’s neck, 


10, 11. -(4,) Jeremiah is ordered to declare, that the king of Babylon’s yoke, instead of wood, should be made of 
iron, 12-14, (5,) He foretele the death of Hananiah within the year; and he dies accordingly two months after, 


15-17. 
3 > 


441 


False prophecy 


JEREMIAH. 


of Hanamah. 


3468. 
596. 


A. M. ND *it came to pass the same 

Bac. 
> shaman year, in the beginning of the 
reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth 
year, and in the fifth month, that Hananiah 
the son of Azur the prophet, which was of 
Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the 
Lorp, in the presence of the priests, and of all 
the people, saying, 

2 Thus speaketh the Lionin of hosts, the God 
of Israel, saying, I have broken * >the yoke of 
the king of Babylon. 

3 ° Within ! two full years will I bring again 
into this place all the vessels of the Lorn’s 
house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
took away from this place, and carried them to 
Babylon. 
~4 And I will bring again to this place Jeco- 
niah the ‘son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with 
all the ? captives of Judah, that went into Ba- 
bylon, saith the Lorn; for I will break the 
yoke of the king of Babylon. 

5 4. Then tha ptonhet Jeremiah said unto 


the Prophet Hananiah in the pre- 5k M. a, 
sence of the priests, and in the pre- — : 

sence of all the people that stood in the house 
of the Lorn, 

6 Even the Prophet Jeremiah ‘said, thaiees: 
the‘Lorp-do so: the Lorp perform hy words 
which thou hast prophesied, to bring again 
the vessels of the Lorp’s house, and all that 
is carried away captive, from Babylon into 
this' place. 

7 Nevertheless, bar thou now this word that 
I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the 
people; vo 

8 The prophets that have been before me and 
before thee of old, prophesied both against many 
countries, and against great kingdoms, of — 
and of evil, and of pestilence. | 

9.°'The bial which prophesieth of peace, 
when the word of the prophet shall come to 
pass, then shall the prophet be nowt, that the 
Lorp hath truly sent him. 

10 4 Then Hananiah the prophet took the. 


a Chapter xxvii. 1— Chanter xxvil. 12, 
Xxvil. 


© Chapter 


1 Heb. two years of i a} Kings i. 36. 


* Heb. captivity.- 
e Deut. xviii. 22. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Verses 1-4, And it cante to pass the same year— 
Namely, the same in which the preceding prophecy 
was delivered; for the words manifestly refer to the 
time specified at fhe beginning of the foregoing 
chapter, and confirm the conjecture there made, that 
Jehoiakim is put there, by a mistake in the copies, 
for Zedekiah: see note on chap. xxvi. 1, where the 
fourth year of Jehoiakim’s reign is termed the be- 
ginning of it. Hananiah the son of Azur the.pro- 
phet—That is, a pretended prophet. Being of Gibeon, 
a city belonging to the priests, it is probable he was 
a priest as well as Jeremiah; spake unto me in the 
house of the Lord—Delivered publicly, and solemn- 
ly, and in the name of the Lord, what he wished to 
be considered as a true prediction; im the presence 
of the priests and of the people—Who probably 
were expecting to have some message from Heaven. 
In delivering this feigned prophecy, Hananiah de- 
signed to confront and contradict Jeremiah. His 
prediction is, that the king of Babylon’s power, at 
least over Judah and Jerusalem, should be speedily 
broken; that within two full years the vessels of the 
temple should be brought back,. and Jeconiah, and 
all the captives that were carried away with him, 
should return; whereas Jeremiah had foretold that 
the yoke of the king of Babylon should be bound 
on yet faster, and that the vessels and the captives 
should not return for seventy years. 

Verses 5-9. T'he Prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: 
the Lord do so!—Thereby expressing his hearty 
concern for the good of his nation, and wishing that 
God would repent him of the evil wherewith he 

“442 


nos 


had threatened them by his ministry; for such an 
affection had he for them, and so truly desirous was 
he of their welfare, that he would have been content 
to lie under the imputation of being a false prophet 
so that their ruin might have been prevented. Ne- 
vertheless, hear thou now this word—As if he had 
said, The word which I am about to speak concerns 
thee, and not thee alone, but all the people, therefore 
do thou mark it well, and let- them observe it also. 
The prophets that have been before me and before 
thee—Namely, Joel, Amos, Hosea} Micah, Zepha- 
niah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and others ; prophesied 
both against many Conunea and great kingdoms, 
&c.— Jeremiah offers. two reasons in defence of his 
own prophecies, and against those of Hananiah. 
1st, That many other prophets agreed with him in 
prophesying evil against the Jews, and other neigh- 
bouring countries; whereas Hananiah, being single 
in his predictions, nothing but the perfect answering 
of the event to them could give him the authority 
of a true prophet. 2d, That, considering the gene- 
ral corruption of the people’s manners, it was highly 
probable that God would punish their iniquities. 
To this the Jews add a third explication of the 
words, namely, that when any prophet foretold peace 
and prosperity, (namely, unconditionally and abso- 
lutely, as Hananiah here did,) his prophecy must 
certainly be fulfilled to prove him to be a true pro- 
phet; whereas, when a prophet foretold evil, which 
was Jeremiah’s case; the event might be suspended by 
the repentance of the persons coneerned.”—Lowth. 
Verses 10-14. T'hen Hananiah took the yoke from 
off Jeremiah’s neck—Thus it appears. that Jeremiah 
3 


Jeremiah predicts 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


Hananiah’s death. 


4M, ee. f yoke from off the Prophet Jeremiah’s 
neck, and brake it. 

11 And Hananiah spake in the presence of 
all the people, saying, Thus saith the Lorn; 
Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchad- 
nezzar king of Babylon * from the neck of all 
nations within the space of two full years. And 
the Prophet Jeremiah went his way. ; 

12 | Then the word of the -Lorp came unto 
Jeremiah the prophet, after that Hananiah the 
prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck 
of the Prophet Jeremiah; saying, 

13 Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith 
the Lorp; ‘Thou hast broken the yokes of wood ; 
but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron. 

14 For. thus saith the Lorp of hosts, the 


God of Israel; »I have put a yoke A. M. 3408 
of iron upon the neck of all these sete 
nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon; and they shall serve him : 
and iI have given him the beasts of the field 
also. | 

15 4 Then said the Prophet Jeremiah unto 
Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; 
The Lorp hath not sent thee; but * thou 
makest this people to trust in alie. 

16 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; Behold, 
I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: 
this year thou shalt die, because thou hast 
taught ! rebellion ? against the Lorn. 

17 So Hananiah the prophet died g, c. 596. 


the same year in the seventh month. ————— 


f Chap. xxvii. 2——§ Chap. xxvi, 7.— Deuteron. xxviii. 48 ; 
Chap. xxvii. 4, 7. ‘Chap. xxvii. 6. _ 


wore this yoke, agreeably to the command given 


him by God, as a symbol of that subjection to the’ 


king of Babylon to which he admonished the Jews 
and other neighbouring nations to submit, in order 
that they might prevent the extreme evil which 
would otherwise fall upon them: and this yoke Ha- 
naniah took off the prophet’s neck, and broke it, by 
way of a symbolical. sign that the Jews, and these 
other nations, should be freed from the Babylonian 
yoke within two years. And the Prophet Jeremiah 
went his way—Quietly and patiently, knowing that 
it would answer no good end to contend with one 
whose mind was heated, and in the midst of the 
priests and people that were: violently set against 
him. Doubtless he expected that God would soon 
send a special message to Hananiah, and he would 
gay nothing tillhe receivedit. Itis often our wisdom 
and duty to yield to violence, to bear revilings with 
patience, and to retreat rather than contend. _ T'hen 
the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah—To rati- 
fy and confirm the prophecy he had lately uttered; 
saying, Go and tell Hananiah, Thou hast broken 
the yokes of wood, &e.—Which were light and easy ; 
but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron—Such 
as no human strength can break; that is, thou shalt 
bring a heavier and more grievous yoke upon them 


k Chap. xxix. 31; Ezek. xiii. 22.——! Deuteron. xiii. 5; Chap. 
xxix. 32:——3 Heb. revolt. ~ 


than they otherwise would have had, by persuading 
them not to submit to Nebuchadnezzar. 

Verses 15-17. Then said Jeremiah, Hear now, 
Hananiah—Jeremiah, being a second time confirm- 
ed in the truth of. what he had foretold, and having 
likewise a special revelation relating to this false 
prophet, comes and calls him by his name, and tells 
him his doom, that he should die within a year, be- 
cause he had taught rebellion against the Lord— 
Had taught people to believe and trust to what was 
false, contradicting God’s will revealed by Jeremiah, 
and encouraging and exciting the people to hold out 
against Nebuchadnezzar, and not quietly to yield to 
this dispensation of God. “Thus, as Hananiah had 
limited the accomplishment of his prophecy to the 
space of two years, to gain credit with the people 
by such a punctual prediction, so Jeremiah confines 
the trial of his veracity to a much shorter time, and 
the event, exactly answering to the prediction, evi- 
dently showed the falsehood of Hananiah’s pre- 
tences.”,—Lowth. So Hananiah died the same year 
in the seventh month—Two months after he had 
uttered this false prophecy, as appeareth from verse 
1. So dangerous a thing it is for those who speak 
in the name of God to teach people contrary to his 
revealed will! 


’ CHAPTER XXIX. é 
In the preceding chapter we had Jeremiah’s contest with a false prophet, face to face; here is:another, carried on by 
letters. In the letter which Jeremiah wrote to the captives in Babylon, 1-3, (1,) He directs them how to make 
. their captivity as easy as they could, 4-7. (2,) He cautions them to give no credit to their false prophets, who pro- 
mised them a speedy relief, 8,9. (3,) He assures them that, after seventy years, the Lord would mercifully re- 


store them to their own land, 10-14. 


(4,) He foretels that those Jews who remained in Canaan-should, after mani- 


fold grievous disasters, be brought captives to Babylon, 15-19. (5,) He foretels the ruin of two false prophets at 
Babylon, who, by their bad example and flattering seductions, encouraged them to wickedness, 20-23. In resent- 
ment, Shemaiah, a false prophet ¢ Babylon, wrote to the priests at Jerusalem, to persecute Jeremiah as a villain 
or madman, 22-29 : and thereby drew upon himself and family a prediction of ruin by Jeremiah, 30-32. 


3 


443 


The prophet’s samdructions 


A. x. mee 


» Now these are the words of the let- 
B. 


a S ter that Jeremiah the prophet 
sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the 
elders which were carried away captives, and to 
the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the 
people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried 
away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon ; 

2 (After that * Jeconiah the king, and the 
queen, and the 1 eunuchs, the princes of Judah 
and Jerusalem, and the carpenters; and the 
smiths, were departed from Jerusalem ;) 

3 By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, 
and Gemariah the son of  Hilkiah, (whom 
Zedekiah king of Judah sent. unto Babylon 
to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,) saying, 


JEREMIAH. 


to the captives in Babylon. 


4 Thus saith the Lorpof hosts, ihe = um ony 
God of Israel, unto all that are carried 
away captives, whom I have caused to be car- 
ried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon ; 

5 » Build ye houses, and dwell in them ; and 
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them ;. 

6 Take ye wives, and beget sons and daugh- 
ters; and take wives -for your sons, and give 
your daughters to husbands, that they may 
bear sons and daughters; that ye may be in- 
creased there, anid not diminished. 

7 And seek the peace of the city whither I 
have caused you to be carried away captives, 
*and pray unto the Lorn for it: for in the 
peace thereof shall ye have peace. 


a 2 Kings xxiv. 12, &c. ; Chapter xxxii. 26; xviii. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIX. 

Verse 1. Now these are the words of the letter— 
Hebrew, 1507 1935, the words of the book, or wri- 
ting, as both the LXX. and the Vulgate translate it. 
Although this title announces but one, Blaney gives 
it as his opinion that this chapter undeniably con- 
tains the substance of two writings sent at differ- 
ent times, which, he says, “is evident from com- 
paring verse 28 with verses 4, 5, and that the dis- 
tinction between them is at the end of verse 20. 
For inthe first the prophet exhorts the captives to 
accommodate themselves to their present circum- 
stances, under an assurance that their captivity 
would last to the end of seventy years; after which 
period, and not before, God would visit and restore 
them. And to prevent their listening to any false 
suggestions that might flatter them with hopes of a 
speedier return, he informs them: of what would 
happen to their.brethren that were left behind at 
Jerusalem, for whom a harder fate was reserved 
than for those that had been carried away. After 
this, finding, as it should seem, upon the return of 
the messengers, the little credit the first message had 
met with, he sends a second to the same persons, 
denouncing the divine judgments against three of 
their false prophets, by whose influence chiefly the 
people had been prevented from hearkening to his 
good advice.” The time when one or both of these 
written declarations of the divine will was sent to 
Babylon is not known, but it is thought to have been 
at the beginning of Zedekiah’s reign. By the resi- 
due of the elders, Lowth thinks that the remnant of 
the members of the Sanhedrim is intended, who 
were carried away captive in the third year of Je- 
hoiakim’s reign, (Dan. i: 8,) or in Jeconiah’s cap- 
tivity, (see 2 Kings xxiv. 14,) many of whom might 
die by the hardships they suffered in their transport- 
ation, These, being persons of authority, were 
more likely to influence the rest of the people, and 
induce them to hearken to the prophet’s advice. 
Houbigant, however, not content with this interpret- 
ation, renders it, Unto the principal elders, Instead 

444 


1 Or, chamberlains.—— Verse 28, ¢ Ezra vi. 10; 1 Tim. ii. 2. 


of prophets, here the LXX. read pevdompodnrac, false 
prophets: but the Chaldee understands by the word 
| the scribes or doctors of the law; while others again 
think that Ezekiel, (carried away with Jeconiah,) 
| Daniel, and other prophets of the captivity, may be 
meant. 

‘Verses 2, 3. After ‘that seconiayt and the queen, 
&c.—By. the queen is meant Jeconiah’s mother: see 
2 Kings xxiv. 12-15, where an account is given of 
this captivity. And the eunuchs—Or court-officers, 
as Dr. Waterland renders it; and the princes of 
Judah and Jerusalen—Men of authority and influ- 
ence among the people. Bythe hand of Elasah, 
&c.—Zedekiah having some occasion to send two 
messengers to Babylon, Jeremiah; knowing that as 
there were false prophets at Jerusalem who fed the 
people with hopes of a speedy return, so there were 
some with them in Babylon, writes and sends the 
following prophecy by these two messengers, to 
quiet the people’s minds, disturbed by these false 
prophets, and excited to vain hopes, for which there 
was no ground at all. 

Verses 4-7. Thus saith the Lord, Build ye houses, 
and plant gardens, &e.—It appears by the advice 
which the prophet here gives, that many of the cap- 
tive Jews neglected to cultivate and plant the places 
allotted to them about Babylon; because they were 
not willing to bestow cost and pains for the advan- 
tage of others; since they flattered themselves that 
they were soon to return into Judea: and therefore 
Jeremiah here admonishes them that their continu- 
ance in their captivity would be long enough for them 
‘their sons and their grandsons, to enjoy the fruit ol 
their labours there ; and that, therefore, if they re- 
garded their own ease and accommodation, they should 
set about making the places of their captivity as con- 
venient and agreeable to them as they could. And 
seek the peace of the city, &e.—Pray and desire, and 
do all that lies in your. power, tbat Babylon may en- 
joy peace, and remain in safety, because you your- 
selves must be partakers of its prosperity oradversity, 
as it is appointed Dy God for you to remain-there 


* 


Jeremiah cautions the people 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


against the false prophets. 


A. M. 3406. 


BO toe 8 4 For thus saith the Lorp of 


hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your 
prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst 
of you, “deceive you, neither hearken to your 
dreams which ye cause to be dreamed. 

9 * For they prophesy ? falsely unto you in 
my name: I have not sent them, saith the 
Lorp. 
Bc. 598, LO “f For thussaith the Lorn, That 
after f seventy years be accomplished 
at Babylon I will visit you, and perform my 
good word toward you, in causing you to return 
to this place. 

11 For I know the thoughts that I think to- 
ward you, saith the Lorp, thoughts of peace, 


A. M. 3406. 


and not of evil, to give you'an 3 ex- 
yap vee B. C. 598. 


pected end. - wen 

12 Then shall ye call upon me, and ye 
shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken 
unto you. 

13 And "ye shall seek me, and find me, 
when ye shall search for me ' with all your 
heart. 

14 And *I will be found of you, saith the 
Lorp: and I will turn-away your captivity, 
and ‘J will gather you from all the nations, 
and from all the places whither I have driven 
you, saith the Lorp; and I will bring you 


again into the place whence I caused you to be 


carried away captive. 


——a 


~ 4 Chap. xiv. 14; xxiii. 215 xxvii. 14,15; Eph. v. 6. e Verse 
31. 2 Heb. in a lie. £2 Chron. xxxvi. 21,22; Ezra i.1; 
Ch, xxv. 12; xxvii. 22; Dan. ix. 2—* Heb. end and expectation. 


seventy years. The word peace here, as elsewhere, 
signifies safety-and plenty ofall things, Observe here, 
reader, it is the duty of all private persons to sub- 
mit to the government that protects them, and to 
pray for the prosperity of it: see Ezra vi. 10; 1 Tim. 
ii. 1, 2. And if the governing powers are persecu- 
tors or enemies to the truth, it must be left to God to 
execute upon them the judgments he has denounced 
against tyrants and oppressors ; which judgments the 
Jews expected that God would execute upon Baby- 
lon in due time, Psa. cxxxvii. 8,9. 

Verse 8. For thus saith the Lord of hosts—The 
prophet continues to speak by the authority of God; 
Let not your prophets, §c., deceive you-—Suffer not 
yourselves to be deluded by them. While we have 
the word of God, by which to try the spirits, it is our 
own fault if we be deceived; for by it we may be di- 
rected. Neither hearken to your dreams which ye 
cause to be dreamed—The LXX. render this clause, 
KGL fl QAKSETE ElC TA EVUTVIA ULOY, a vel euynviaticde, 
hearken not, or attend not, to your dreams which 
you dream. 'Thus also the Vulgate. Blaney, how- 
ever, prefers translating the words, Neither hearken 


ye to your dealers in dreams, whom ye cause to 
dream; observing, “ These dreamers might be said | 


to be made, or encouraged, to dream, by the easy 
credit given to their impostures, and the reputation 
and respect they thereby acquired.” 
thought it probable that those who interpreted 
dreams (which sort of people abounded in Babylon) 
used to interpret all the dreams of Jews, on which 


they were consulted, to signify their speedy return | 


to their own country ; as they knew that this was 
what the Jews earnestly wished for, and would be 
glad to hear, and consequently be induced to consult 
these interpreters the more frequently ; ; who therein 
found their profit. — 

Verses 10-14, After seventy years be accomplish- 
ed at Babylon—Hebrews, 13” Dryaw nx?) *2, 
literally, At the mouth of the ‘accomplishment of 
pereny pare, “And as the mouth of a river, me-! 


Some have) 


| 


& Dan. ix. 3—* Lev. xxvi. 39, 40; Deut. xxx. 1. 4 rae 
xxiv. 7.— Deut. iv. 7; Psalm xxxii. 6; xlvi. 1; Isaiah lv. 
' Chap. xxiii. 3,8; xxx. 3; xxxii. 37. 


taphorically, denotes the extremity of its course, 
where it discharges its waters into the sea; so, by a 
farther metaphor . drawn from hence, ‘D9 seems to 
denote being at the full end of a certain period or 
limited course of time, where it is just going to lose 
itself in, and mix with, the ocean of eternity. Here. - 
therefore we are to understand that, ‘at the very in- 
stant of, or immediately upon, the completion of 
seventy years,’ the restoration of the Jews should 
take place.”—Blaney. These seventy years of the 
captivity, it appears, are to be computed from the 
fourth year of Jehoiakim, which, in the Scripture 
account, is the first year of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign : 
see note onchap. xxy. 1. Iwill visit you and per- 
form. my good word--My promise, in causing, 
rather, of causing you to return, &¢.—-There were 
but few, comparatively speaking, of those captives 
that returned in person into their own country, 
Ezra iii. 12.. Therefore, this promise was chiefly 
fulfilled. in their posterity; and it is common in 
Scripture to speak of blessings bestowed upon the 
children, as if they had been actually fulfilled to their 
progenitors. For I know the thoughts that I think 
toward you--And God’s works agree exactly with his 
thoughts; for he doeth all things according to the 
counsel of his own will. Thoughts of peace, or 
good, and not of evil—Even that which seems evil 
is designed for. good, and will at last appear to have 
actually wrought for good: to give you an expected 
end--Hebrew, Mp FN, literally, to give you 


|| an end and eapectation, or, as Blaney translates it, 


to make your latter end even an object of hope: 
see chap. xxxi. 17. Then shall ye call wpon me— 
That is, when you place your hope in me only, and 
that with assurance, and not wavering; and f will 
hearken unto you-—A sure token of God’s favour 
chap. xxxiii. 3, as his rejecting men, and casting 
them off, is expressed by his hiding his face and re- 


|| fusing to hear their prayers, chap. xiv. 12 ; Lam. iii. 


8, 44. And ye shall seek me and find me—According 
to my promises made Lev. xxvi. 40-45; Deut. xxx. 
445 


Calamaties threatened. 


JEREMIAH. 


. for the sins of the people. 


. ath 


A. M. 3406. 15 J Because ye have said, The 
Lorp hath raised us up prophets in 
Babylon ; 

16. Know that thus saith the Lorp ‘of the 
king that sitteth upon the throne of David, 
and of all the people that dwelleth in this city, 
and of your brethren that are not gone forth 
with you into captivity ; 

17 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; Behold, 
I will send upon them the ™ sword, the famine, 
and the pestilence, and will make them like 
2 vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil. 

18 And I will persecute them with the sword, 
with the famine, and. with the Ces and 


m Chapter xxiv. 10.—® Chap. xxiv. 8. 0 © Deut. Xxviil. 25; 
2 Chron: xxix. 8; Chap. xv. 4; xxiy. 9; xxxiv, 17. 


2,3; Psa. xxxii.6. When ye shall search ‘fom me 
with all your heart—Observe, reader, in seeking 
God, we must search for him, that we may find him; 
must search for directions in seeking him, &c., for 
encouragements to our faith and hope: we must 
continue, and take pains in seeking him, namely, in 
seeking his favour, hisimage, and communion with 
* him; and this we must do with our heart—-That is, 
in sincerity and uprightness, and with all our heart, 
that is with vigour and fervency, putting forth all 
that is within us in prayer: and those who thus 
seek God shall find him, and know, by experience, 
that he is their bountiful rewarder, Heb, xi. 6, for 
he never said to such, Seek ye me in vain. , 
Verse 15. Because ye have said, &e.—The LXX. 
have transposed this verse, and placed it “ where,” 
says Blaney, “it undoubtedly ought to stand,” 
immediately before verse 21; “this emendation,” 
says he, “I have adopted, as by it a due order and 
connection are restored, both in the place from 
whence the verse is removed, and in that to which 
it is transferred, a sufficient proof of its authenticity.” 
The Lord hath raised us up prophets in Babylon 
—This is meant of the false prophets who foretold 
nothing but peace and prosperity. The reader will 
easily observe how properly this sentence, as Blaney 
has just observed, would follow verse 20, and precede 
verse 21, and how well it would connect with both. 
Verses 16-19, Thus saith the Lord of the king 
and all the people, &c.—See chap. xxiv. 8-10; that 
dwell in this city—Namely, the city of Jerusalem, 
which is the city spoken of. » I will make them like 
vile figs—Rather like sour figs, that cannot be eaten 
—The meaning is, I will deal with them as men deal 
with bad figs.. They have made themselves vile and 
hateful, and I will use them accordingly. This re- 
fers to the vision, chap. xxiv., and the prophecy 
. which we had there upon it. “And J will deliver 
themto be acurse, &c.—A more severe punishment is 
denounced upon these than upon those of the two 
former captivities; because though warned by the 
example of Jehoiakim and Jeconiah, who suffered 
heavily for’ their perfidy, they yet again, a third 
446 


° will deliver them to be removed to A. M. ne. 
all the kingdoms of the earth, *to be 

Pa curse, and an astonishment, and a hissing, 
and a reproach; among all the nations whither 
I have driven them: 

19 Because they have not hearkened to my 
words, saith the Lorn, which 21 sent unto 
them by my servants the prophets, rising up 
early and sending them; but’ ye would not 
hear, saith the Lorn. 

20 4 Hear ye therefore the wokd of the Lorn, 
all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from 
Jerusalem to Babylon : 

21 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, the God of 


«Hebrew, for a curse-—Pp Chapter xxvi. 6; pgs xiii. 18. 
4 Chap. xxv. 4; xxxii. 33. 


time, broke the faith which they had pledged to the 
king of Babylon in the name of God, and despised 
all the admonitions and counsels of Ged by Jere- 
miah, as is observed in the next verse. 

Verses 20-23. Hear all ye of the captivity whom I 
have sent, &c.—These phrases, I have sent, I have 
driven, &c., should be well observed by us. There 
isno evil or punishment in cities or nations, but, who- 
ever be the instruments in bringing it on, God is the - 
author of it. Thus saith the Lord of Ahab and of 
Zedekiah—Of these two persons we read no more 
in holy writ. That they pretended to be prophets, 
and to reveal God’s will, although he had not called 
them to any such office, nor had made known his 
will to them, and that ‘therefore they had abused 
God’s name, we learnin this verse, and that they came 
toa miserable end we find in verse 22. He shall 
slay them before your eyes—As persons that dis- 
turbed the minds of the Jews, his subjects, and made 
them unwilling to submit to his government, by 
giving them hopes of a speedy deliverance from un- 
der it: see verses 7,8. And of them shall be taken 
up a curse—That is, an imprecation shall be used, 
namely, The Lord make thee like Zedekiah, &c.,’ 
or, May thou meet with punishment similar to that 
which these persons met with. Whom the king of 
Babylon roasted in the Jire—Casting persons into 
the fire was a punishment used in that country, as 
appears from the history of Shadrach and his com- 
panions, Dan. iii. There was likewise in use a way 
of roasting persons by a gentle fire, to make them 
die by a more lingering death, such as Antiochus 
practised upon the seven brethren, 2 Mac. vii. 5. 
The word here properly denotes this sort of punish- 
ment. Because they have committed villany in 
Israel, &c.—The Jewish rabbins, as Grotitis here 
observes, have a traditionary notion, that these were 
the two elders who attempted the: chastity of Su- 
sannah ; the story of which they think to be true in 
part, though not altogether such as it is represented 
in the Greek. Some translate the words, Because 
they uav committed villany, or, evil in Israel, and 
HAD committed adullery, &e. ae them 


__ 2 a ee 


The false prophets 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


are to be destroyed, 


ore 3606 Israel, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, 
; and of Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, 
which prophesy a lie unto you in my name; 
Behold, I will deliver them into the hand: of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall 
slay them before your eyes; 

22 * And of them shall be taken up a a curse 


by all the captivity of Judah which are in: 


Babylon, saying, The Lorp make thee like 
Zedekiah and like Ahab, * whom the king of 
Babylon roasted in the fire ; 

23 Because ‘they have committed villany in 
Israel, and have committed adultery with their 
neighbours’ wives, and have spoken lying 
words in my name, which I have not com- 
manded them; even I know, and ama witness, 
saith the Lorp. 

24 7 Thus shalt thou also peal to Shemaiah 

:he ® Nehelamite, saying, 

25 Thus speaketh the Lorp of hosts, the God 


of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent letters |} 


in thy name unto all the people that are at 
Jerusalem, “and to Zephaniah the son of 
Maaseiah the priest, and to all the priests, 
saying, 

26 The Lorp hath made thee priest in the 
stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be 


® Gen. xlviii. 20; Isa. xv. 15.——* Dan. iii. 6——t Ch. xxiii. 14. 
*Or, u 2 Kings xxy.18; Ch. xxi. 1. x Ch. xx. 1. 


* officers in the House of the Lorp, A. M. 3406. 
.C. 598. 
for every man that ts ¥ mad, and 
maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest 
= put him in prison, and in the stocks.’ 

27 Now therefore why hast thou not reproved 
Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a 
prophet to you ? 

28 For therefore he sent unto us in Baby- 
lon, saying, This captivity is long : * build ye 
houses, and dwell in them ; and plant gardens, 
and eat the fruit of them. 

29 And Zephaniah the priest read this letter 
in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet. 

30 4% Then came the word of the Lorp unto 
Jeremiah, saying, 

31 Send to all them of the captivity, saying, 
Thus saith the Lorp concerning Shemaiah 
the Nehelamite ; Because that Shemaiah hath 
prophesied unto you, ° and I sent him not, and 
he caused ‘you to trust ina lie: 

32 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; Behold, 
I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and 
his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell 
among this people; neither shall he behold 
the good that I will do’ for my people, saith the 
Lorp; because he hath taught ‘rebellion 
against the Lorp. 


z Chap. xx. 2. a Verse 5. 
¢ Chap. xxviii. 16——® Heb. revolt. 


y 2Kings ix.11; Acts xxvi. 24. 
6 Chap. xxviii. 15, 


as assigning the cause why Nebuchadnezzar had 
roasted these persons alive, namely, because they 
had committed adultery, it being a custom among 
some of the eastern nations, and they suppose also 
among the Babylonians, to punish that crime in the 
most severe manner. 

Verses 24-28. Thus shalt thou speak to Sh eaiah 
the Nehelanite—Or, the dreamer, as the word 
~obnpn is rendered in the margin: see verse 8. The 
termination, however, rather shows it to be a word 
expressing Shemaiah’s family or country, and we 
find such a place as Helam mentioned, 2 Sam. x. 16, 
17. The prophet, it seems, was commanded to send 
this message to Shemaiah after the messengers who 
delivered the forementioned writing to the captives 
at Babylon were returned home, who brought along 
with them Shemaiah’s letter, mentioned in the fol- 
lowing verse. Because thou hast sent letters to 
Zephaniah, (see chap. xxi. 1,) saying, The Lord 
hath made thee priest—Shemaiah directs his letter 
to Zephaniah in the first place, as being next in or- 
der to the high-priest, and therefore called the se- 
cond priest, chap. li. 24, and tells him that God has 
appointed him to supply the place of the high-priest, 
being probably absent at that time, who was either 
Azariah, or Seraiah his son. But who then, it may 
be asked, was Jehoiada? “Perhaps,” says Blaney, 

3 + 


“he was one that had been superseded in his office 
of second priest, for being remiss in his duty; and 
therefore Zephaniah may have been here reminded 
of him, by way of intimation that, as they had been 
both appointed for the same purposes, so Zephaniah 
might expect the same fate as his predecessor, if he 
copied the example of his negligence. ‘The secona 
priest officiated as substitute of the high-priest, in 
case of absence or indisposition, and perhaps was 
always invested with subordinate authority.” That 
ye should be officers, §c., for everyman that is mad, 
&c.—The prophets and inspired persons were often 
accused of madness, or of being possessed with an 
evil spirit, by their enemies. See the margin. For 
therefore, rather, because, he sent unto usin Babylon 
—See verse 5. 

Verse 32. He shall not have a man to dwell 
among his people, &ce.—None of his posterity shall 
remain to see my people restored to their own land 
again. See verse 11. Because he hath taught re- 
bellion—Or, prevarication, as Blaney translates 10, 
observing, “It properly signifies a declining, or 
turning aside from the straight path, the path of 
truth and right. Here, and chap. xxviii. 16, it means 
the presumption of uttering, as a revelation from 
God, what the man who uttered it knew to be not 
so.” 

447 


The deliverance of Israel J EREMIAH. 


i CHAPTER XXX. 


This and the following shailles contain general promises of God’s mercy to the Jews, and assurances that he inoistad 
never forget the covenant which he had made with their fathers. These promises were partly fulfilled in their 
restoration under Cyrus, but were more fully to be accomplished in the times of the Messiah, and by the gracious 
terms of that new covenant which he would establish with the spiritual Israel. In‘ this chapter, (1,) After a short 
preface, in which the prophet is commanded to commit.to writing the matters revealed to him, it is promised that 
Israel and Judah should be delivered from captivity, and restored to their own land, though they were now in 
great distress and terror, 1-7; and though their enemies were very strong, 8, 9. (2,) They are encouraged to 
confide in the divine assurances of restoration and protection; though other nations should be utterly destroyed, 
10, 11; though all means of relief should long appear as cut off; though God had justly punished them; and 
though’ their case seemed utterly desperate, 12-17. (3,) It is promised that after their restoration they should have 
a happy settlement; their cities and temples should be rebuilt, 18; their numbers increased, and their religious 
ordinances observed, 19, 20; their government established, especially in the hands of Christ, and God’s covenant 


Srom the Babylonish yoke. 


with them renewed, 21, 22; and their enemies destroyed, 23, 24. 


A. M. 3410. 


PPHE word that came to Jeremiah 
B. G. 594. 


from the Lorp, saying, 

2 Thus speaketh the Lorp God of Israel, 
saying, Write thee all the words that I have 
spoken unto thee in a book. 

3 For lo, the days come, saith the Lorn, that 
*T will bring again the captivity of my people 
Israel and Judah, saith the Lorn: ¥and I will 
cause them to return to the land that I gave to 
their fathers, and they shall possess it. 

4 {| And these are the words that the Lorp 


spake concerning Israel, and con- A aa 
sag Judah. ps ins 

5 For thus saith the Lorn; We have heard 
a voice of trembling, } of ‘fon and not of 
peace. 

6 Ask ye now, and see whether 2a man 
doth travail with child? wherefore do I see 
every man with his hands on his loins, © as'a 
woman in travail, and all ‘faces are turned into 
paleness ? 

a : Alas! ! for that day 4 is great, © 0 that none 


2 Verse 18; Chap. xxxii. 44; Ezek. xxxix.25; Amos ix. 14, 15. 
> Chap. xvi. 15.——" Or, there is fear and not peace. ~ 


4 Joel ii. 11, 31; 


2 Heb. a male. © Chapter iv. ‘al; 3 Vi. 24. 
¢ Dan, xii. 1. 


Amos v. 18; Zeph. i. 14, &e, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXX. 

Verse 1. The word that came to Jeremiah, &c,— 
“There is no particular date annexed to this pro- 
phecy, whereby to ascertain the precise time of its 
delivery, but it may not unreasonably be presumed 
to have followed immediately after the preceding 
one, in which the restoration of the people from 
their Babylonish captivity 1s in direct terms foretold. 
From hence the transition was natural and easy to 
the more glorious and general restoration that was 


to take place in a more distant period, and was de- | 


signed for the ultimate object of the national hopes 
and expectations. Both events are frequently thus 
connected together in the prophetic writings, and 
perhaps with this design, that when that which was 
nearest at hand should be accomplished, it might 
afford the strongest and most satisfactory evidence 
that the latter, how remote soever its period, would, 
in like manner, be brought about by the interposi- 
tion of Providence, in its due season.”—Blaney. 
Verses 2, 3. Thus speaketh the Lord, Write thee 
all the words that I have spoken, &c.—The follow- 
ing words contain a promise of the restoration of 
God’s people. These God commands to be commit- 
ted to writing for the use of posterity, to be a support 
to the Jews, an encouragement to them -to trust in 
God, and a proof of his prescience and overruling 
providence when the event foretold should be brought 
about. J will:bring again the captivity of my peo- 
ple Israel and Judah—The people that returned 
from Babylon were only, or at least chiefly, the peo- 


ple of Judah, who had been carried away captive by 
Nebuchadnezzar ; but here it is foretold, that not the 
captivity of Judah only should be restored, but that 
of Israel also, or of those ten tribes that were carried 
away before by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria; and 
who still remain in their several dispersions, having 
never returned, at least in a national capacity ; but 
the terms of this prophecy entitle us to expect, not 
an obscure and partial, but a complete and universal, 
restoration, when God will manifest himself, as for- 
merly, the God and patron of all the families of Is- 
rael, not of afew only. The reunion also of Judah 
and Israel, after their restoration, seems to be here 
clearly foretold. 

Verses 4-7. And these are the words that the + 
spake—And which God ordered to be written: and 
those promises, which were written by his order, are 
as truly his word as the ten commandments, which 
were written with his finger. We have heard a 
voice of trembling—Such a one as discovers great 
fears and apprehensions of impending evils. Ask ye 
now and see, &e.—Make diligent inquiry, and ask 
every one, whether they ever knew or heard of any 
such thing as a man’s travailing with child? Where- 
fore then do I see every man with his hands on his 
loins—As if he were going to bring forth, and felt all 
the pains of a woman in travail? ‘Alas! Sor that 
day is great—The word day in Scripture often 
comprehends a succession of time, in which a whole 
series of events is transacted: so it here containsthe 
whole time of the siege and taking of Tomar the 


Israel is exhorted 


CHAPTER XXX. 


to trust in the Lord. 


2 


= var is like it: it is even the time of 
Jacob’s trouble, but he shall be saved 
out of it. 

8 For it shall come to pass in 008 pre saith 
the Lorp of hosts, that I will break his yoke 
from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, 
and strangers shall no more serve themselves 
of him: 

9 But they shall serve the Lorp their God, 
and ‘ David their king, whom I will ¢ * raise up 
unto them. 


f Isaiah lv. 3, 4; Ezekiel xxxiv. 23; xxxvii. 24; Hosea iii. 5. 


& Luke i. 69; Acts ii. 30; xiii. 23. 


“| 


10 4% Therefore Y feaieahou nit, O A. M. 3410, 
my servant Jacob, saith the Lorn ; woah oka 
neither- be dismayed, O, Israel: fo lo, I on 
save thee from afar, and thy seed ‘from the 
land of their captivity ; and Jacob shall return, 


‘and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none 


shall make him afraid. 

11 For I am with thee, saith the Lorp, to 
save thee: * though I make a full end of all 
nations whither I have scattered thee, } yet will 
I not make a full end of thee: but I will cor- 


hIsa. xli. 13; xlili.5; xliy. 2; Chap. xlvi. 27, 28.—i Chap. 
i. 18,—— Amos ix. 8.——! Chap. iv. 27. 


destruction of the city and temple, and the carrying 
away of the people captive. This is described as a 
time of great tribulation, in which it was’ an earnest 
of the day of judgment, the great and terrible day 
of the Lord. 

Verses 8,9. It shall come to pass in that day—In 
the day when Jacob shall be saved out of all his 
troubles, verse 7. The phrase that day often denotes 
an extraordinary or remarkable time for some signal 
events of Providence: see Isa. iv. 2.. That I will 
break his yoke from off thy neck—This promise was 
in part fulfilled when Cyrus set the Jews free from 
the Babylonish yoke, and gave them liberty to return 
to their own country. And strangers shall no more 
serve themselves of him—In this latter part of the 
sentence the Jewish state, or rather that of Israel 
and Judah, is spoken of in the third person, him ; in 
the foregoing part in the second person, thy neck. 
But they shall serve the Lord their God—They 
shall live in subjection and obedience to the one liv- 
ing and true God, and to David their king—That is, 
the Messiah, who is often called by the name of 
David in the prophets, as the person in whom all the 
promises made to David were to be fulfilled. See 
the margin. 
storation, the Jews and Israelites “should no more 
fall under the dominion of foreigners, but be govern- 
ed by princes and magistrates of their own nation, 
independent of any but God and David their king. 
But this was not the case with the Jews that returned 
from Babylon. They then indeed had a leader, Ze- 
rubbabel, one of their own nation, and also of the 
family of David. But both the nation and their leader 
continued still in a state of vassalage and the most 
servile dependance upon the Persian monarchy. 
And when the Grecian monarchy succeeded, they 
changed their masters only, but not their condition ; 
till, at length, under the Asmonean princes, they 
had, for a while, an independent government of their 
own, but without any title to thename of David. At 
last they fell under the Roman yoke, since which 
time their situation has been such as not to afford 
the least ground to pretend that the promised resto- 
ration has yet taken place.- It remains, therefore, to 
be brought about, in future, under the reign of the 
Messiah, emphatically distinguished by the name of 
David; when every particular circumstance predict- 

Vou. III. ( 29 ) 


Here it is promised that, after this re- || 


ed concerning it will, no doubt, be verified by a dis- 
tinct and unequivocal accomplishment.”—Blaney. 
Whom I will ratse up unto them—An expression - 
elsewhere used by the holy writers when they speak 
of the coming of Christ. See the margin. Hence 
this prophecy must be considered as implying the 
conversion of the Jews'to the Christian faith, God, 
according to his promises, having constituted Christ 
the Prince and the Saviour to whom every knee 
must bow, and whom every tongue must confess. 
“Verses 10, 11. Fear thou not, O my servant Ja- 
cob—As if God had utterly forsaken thee or cast thee 
off. See the margin. For, lo, J will save thee from 
afar—I will restore you from your captivity, though 
you should be dispersed into the most distant coun- 
tries. And though this be not accomplished in the 
Jews of the present age, it shall be. made good to 
their posterity, who are beloved for. their fathers’ 
sake, as St. Paul speaks, Rom. xi. 28. And Jacob 
shall be in rest and quiet, &c:—Shall enjoy peace 
and safety. Though Imake a full end of all na- 
tions whither Ihave scattered thee—Such as the Assy- 
rians, Chaldeans, Egyptians; yet will I not make ‘a 
full end of thee—The Jews to this day continue a 
remarkable monument of the truth and immutability 
of God’s promises. Where now are all the nations 
which carried them into captivity, and:trod them 
under foot? ‘All, all are perished ; their kingdoms 
overturned, their laws and languages abolished, their 
very names, as nations, extinct; not the least foot- 
steps remaining of their having ever been a people: 
for God had determined to make a full end of them. 
But the people of the Jews, though carried into cap- 
tivity, slain by the sword, destroyed by pestilence 
and famine, and every other method of destruction, 
do yet remain a people: under all the revolutions 
and changes of kingdoms, languages, and. people, 
they still exist unmixed; and, though for their hem- 
ous sins they are scattered abroad among all nations, 
they still preserve their name, language, and most of 
their ancient ceremonies and customs, for God has 
promised not to make a full end of them. But Iwilt 
correct thee in measure—Or, according to judgment, 
as 09v99 signifies, that is, with discretion, not more 
than thou deservest, nay, not more than thou canst 
well bear. God’s afflicting his people is in a way of 
correction, and that correction is always moderated, 
449 


Israels adversaries 


i i adits rect thee. ™in measure, and will not 
_——™ leave thee altogether unpunished. 
12 For thus saith the Lorn, ® Thy bruise is 
incurable, and thy wound is grievous. ' 
13. There is none to plead thy cause, * that 
thou mayest be bound up: ° thou hast no heal- 
ing medicines. 


14 ? All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they 


seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with 
the wound ‘of an.enemy,. with the chastise- 
ment * of .a cruel one, for the multitude of thine 
iniquity ; * because thy sins were increased. 

15 Why ‘ criest thou for thine affliction? thy 
sorrow zs incurable for the multitude of thine 
iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I 
have’ done these things unto thee. 


JEREMIAH, 


to be spuwed. 


16 Therefore all they that devour A.™, 3410, 
thee “shall be devoured ; and all thine ran ail 
adversaries, every one of them, shall go into 
captivity ; and they that spoil thee shall be a 
spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give 
for a prey. — 

17 * For I will restore health unto thee, and I 
will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the Lorn; 
because they call thee an Outcast, saying, This 
is Zion, whom no man seeketh after. - 

18 % Thus saith the Lorp, Behold, I will 
bring ‘again the captivity of Jacob’s.tents, and 
“have mercy on his dwelling-places; and the 
city shall be builded upon her own ‘heap, 
and the palace shall remain after the manner 
thereof. ; 


m Psalm vi. 1; Isaiah xxvii. 8; Chapter x. 24; xlvi. 28. 
n2 Chron. xxxvi. 16; Chap. xv. 18. * Heb.. for binding up, 
or, pressing ——® Chap. vii. 22. P Lam. i. 2.——4 Job xiii. 
243. xXvL 93: xix, Ih, 


and always proceeds from love. And will not.leave 
thee altogether unpunished—As thou art ready to 
think I should do beeause of thy relation to me. -Ob- 
serve, reader, a profession of religion, though never 
so plausible, will be far from securing to us im- 
punity in sin. God is no respecter of persons, but 
will show his hatred of sin. wherever he finds it, 
and he always hates it most in those that are nearest 
to him. ~ ; 
Verses 12-15. Thy bruise is incurable—In all hu- 
man appearance. The state that the Jews should be 
in would, be so miserable that it would be incurable 
from any hand except that of God. There is none 
to plead thy cause—There is none that, by the re- 
formation of their lives, or their intercessions with 
God, endeavour to avert his displeasure. Or, as the 
words may be rendered, There is none to judge thy 
cause, none that knows the true nature of thy mala- 
dy, or what medicines are proper to be applied to it. 
Their calamitous state is compared to a distempered 
body; (see verse 17, and chap. viii. 22; Isa. i. 5, 6;) 
and the false prophets, instead of applying proper 
remedies, have healed thy wound slightly. Or the 
words may mean, There is none to intercede for thee 
with thy victors and oppressors. | All thy lovers have 
. forgotten thee—All the nations whose alliance they 
had solicited, and whose idolatries they had imitated, 
and who had professed much friendship for them, 
had neglected and forgotten them, and desired no 
farther connection with them. They seek thee not 
—Seek not thy welfare, but abandon thee to ruin. 
For I have wounded thee with the wound of an ene- 
my, &¢.—Thy iniquities have provoked me to punish 
thee with that severity which appears like cruelty, 


and as if I had declared myself an-utter enemy to 


thee. Why criest thou for thine affliction?--Why 
shouldest thou expostulate with me, as if I had dealt 
unjustty with thee, whereas, if thy condition seem 
desperate, it is owing to thine own iniquities, which 


— 


« Exod. 
xxiii. 22; Isaiah xxxiii. 1; xli.11; Chap. x. 25——* Chapter 
xxxiii. 6. y Verse 3; Chap. xxxiii. 7, 1I- z Psa. cii. 13. 
4Or, little hill. . 


r Job xxx. 21.——S Chap. v. 6. Chap. xv. 18.- 


have still been increased with new aggravations of . 
guilt. ah ‘ bin 
Verses 16, 17. T'herefore—Or rather, yet surely, 
as 127 should be rendered; (see note on chap. xvi. 
14;) all they that devour thee shall be devoured— 
The Egyptians, Philistines, Midianites, Ammonites, 
Edomites, Syrians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, and others, 
who have afflicted and oppressed you, shall be extir- 
pated, while you shall be restored and re-established. 
See note on verse 11. Though God chastises his 
own people with severity, according to the nature 
and quality of their faults, yet he does it so as never 
utterly. to destroy them. The Assyrians, who afflict- 
ed Israel and Judah, were so destroyed by the Baby- 
lonians, Medes, and Persians, that mention is no 
more made of their empire. The monarchy of the 
Chaldeans, who destroyed. Jerusalem, and carried 
the Jews into captivity, was overthrown by the Per- 
sians, and never recovered itself. The empires of 
the Persians and Egyptians were destroyed by Alex- 
ander. The Grecian, or Syro-Macedonian kingdom, 
which, especially under Antiochus Epiphanes, eru- 
elly persecuted them, was destroyed by the Romans. 
And the. Roman empire, powerful as it “was, after 
being made the instrument of bringing greater ca- 
lamities on the Jewish nation than they had ever suf- 
fered from any other power, was broken to pieces by 
the incursions of the northern nations on the one 
hand, and by the Saracens and Turks on the other. 
But the Jewish people, who have repeatedly appear- 
ed to be almost destroyed and annihilated in their 
dispersions, have reappeared, and sprung up again, 
as it were, from theit ashes, and become as numerous 
and powerful as before, - re) 
Verses 18-22. Behold, I will bring again the cap- 
tivity of Jacob’s tents—The expression alludes 
the ancient custom of dwelling in tents. This pro- 
mise was, in some degree, fulfilled under Zerubbabel. 
And the city shall be builded upon her own heap— 
29* ) ae ome 


Prosperity of the Jews 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


after their captivity. 


A.M. 3410.. 19 And * out of them shall proceed 

- thanksgiving and the voice of them 
that make merry: ° and I will multiply them, 
and they shall not be few; I will also glorify 
them, ard they shall not be small. 

20 'Their:children also shall be:* as aforetime, 
and their congregation shall be established before 
me, and I will punish all that oppress them. 

21 And their nobles shall be of themselves, 


‘and their governor shall proceed from the | 


midst of them; and I will * cause him to draw 
near, and he shall approach unto me: for who 


is this that engaged his heart to ap A. ot. S410. 


C. 594. 
proach unto me? saith the Lorp. 


22 And ye'shall be my people, and I will be 
your God. 

23 % Behold, the & whirlwind of the Lorp 
goeth forth with fury, a > continuing whirlwind: 
it shall ° fall with pain nee the- head of the 
wicked: 

24 The fierce anger of the Lorp shall not 
return, until he have done it, and until he have 
performed the intents of his heart: >in the lat- 
ter days ye shall consider it. 2 


aqsa. xxxv. 10; li. ll; Chap. xxxi. 4, 12, 13; xxxiii. 10, 11. 
» Zech. x. 8. ©Tsa, i, 26.4 Gen. xlix. 10. e-Numbers 
xvi. 5. 


f Chap. xxiv. 7; xxxi. 1, 335 xxxii. 38; Ezek. xi. 20; Xxxvi. 
28; xxxvii. 27. -€ Chapter xxlil. 19, 20; XXY. 32, 5 Heb. 
cutting. © Or, remain. h Gen. xlix. 1. ‘ 


Upon-her ruins,which were cleared away, that new 
houses might be built. 
main—Rather, the palace shall be inhabited; after 
the manner thereof—By 3s, here rendered palace, 
Dr. Waterland and some others understand the tem- 
ple, and render the clause, The temple shall stand, 
or, abide after the manner thereof. Their children 
also, and their congregation, &c.—Their church and 
commonwealth shall be restored to their former state. 
Or rather, His children and his congregation, as 
Blaney translates it; that is, Jacob’s children and 
congregation, the pronouns both in this and the fol- 
fowing verse being in the singular number. .. And 
their nobles shall be of themselves—Hebrew, 11:90, 
is literally, his prince, or, his mighty one, shall be 
ofhim. And his governor shall proceed from: the 
midst of him—Some understand this of Zerubbabel, 
who, by the permission of Cyrus, had the govern- 
ment over the Jews whom he led into Judea to 
rebuild Jerusalem and the temple. Others interpret 
it of the Messiah, who, they think, is plainly marked 
out by the two names of Prince, or Mighty One, 
and Governor, in this verse. Thus the Targum un- 
derstands it. J will cause him to draw near, &e.— 
Says the Lord; that is, “he shall have a near at- 
tendance upon me; for I will make him a priest as 
well as a king,” according to the prophecy in Psa. 
ex. 4. For who is this that engaged his heart, &c. 
—Who is there so entirely devoted to my service as 
the Messiah? The words in the original, 47 $17" °D, 


And the palace shall re-| 


who is this, &e., have the emphasis which cannot be 
expressed in another language, and are spoken by 
way of admiration. See Lowth. Blaney translates 
the verse, “ And his prince shall be of his own race, 
and his governor shall go forth out of the midst of 
him ; and I will draw him that he may come near 
unto me; for who is he that hath set his heart to 
draw near unto me? saith Jehovah.” Ye shall be 
my people, &c.—Y ou shall continually adhere to my 
religion and worship, and I will take you into my 
favour, and under my protection. 

Verses 23, 24. Behold, the whirlwind of the Lord 
goeth forth with fury—Rather, with anger, the word 
fury being manifestly improper when applied to 
God. ‘These two verses occur with some slight va- 
riations, chap. xxiii. 19, 20, where see the note. Jn 
the latter days ye shall-consider it— The latter days 
here may signify the time to come; but they com- 
monly imply the times of the gospel, that being the 
last dispensation, and what should continue till the 
end of the world. Thus understood, the words im- 


| port,“ When all these evils are come upon yon, 


which God has, threatened for your disobedience, 
and particularly for your heinous crime of reject- 
ing the Messiah, and you have found the denuncia- 
tions verified in: the several captivities you have 
undergone, then you will understand the import 
of this and several other prophecies, and the event 
will perfectly instruct you in their meaning.”— 
Lowth. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 
This chapter contains the second and third parts of the prophecy begun in the preceding chapter, embellished with a 


variety of beautiful scenes and images. 


promises them a speedy restoration of their privileges and happiness, 1-5. 


(1,) God here announces the renewal of his ancient love for Israel, and 


(2,) Watchmen, or heralds, are repre- 


sented as proclaiming on mount Ephraim.the arrival of the joyful day ; summoning the people to reassemble once 
more in Zion; and promulging, by special command, the glad tidings of snlenition which God had accomplished 


for them, 6, 7. 


and relieve their infirmities, and to provide them with all necessary accommodations by the way, 8, 9. 


(3;) God himself declares his readiness to conduct home the remnant of Israel, to compassionate 


(4,) The 


news is carried into distant lands; and the nations are summoned to attend to the display of God’s power and 


3 


451 


f. 


A speedy restoration 


= 


JEREMIAH. 


promised to Israel. 


goodness in rescuing his people from their stron 


enemies; and supplying them with all good things, 10-14. 


(5,) Rachel, bewailing the loss of her children, is comforted, and assured her sorrow for them shall be\at an end, 
15-17. And Ephraim, lamenting his past disobedience and obstinacy, acknowledging that he had been justly 


chastised, and praying earnestly to be converted, is accepted-as a-child, and brought home again, 18-20. 


(6,) The 


virgin of Israel is exhorted to hasten the preparations for her return, and encouraged with the prospect of 


having a. signal miracle wrought in her favour, 21, 22. 


(7,) The ‘vision closes with a promise that the divine 


blessing should again rest upon the land of Judah, and that God's people should once more dwell there, cultivating it 


according to the simplicity of ancient institutions, and fully discharged from every want, 23-26. 


(8,) Several » 


gracious promises are annexed by way of appendix to the vision: That God would be as diligent to restore as he 
had ever been to destroy them; and would not any more visit the offences of the fathers upon. the children, 27-30. 
That he would make with them a better covenant than he had made with their forefathers, 31-34. That they 
should continue his people by an ordinance as firm and lasting as that of the heavens, 35-37; and that Jerusalem 
should again be built, enlarged $ in its extent, and secure from future desolation, 38-40. 


A. M. 3410. 


T *the same time, saith the Lorn, 
B. C. 594, 


> will I be the God of all the 
families of Israel, and they shall be my people. 
2 Thus saith the Lorp, The people which 
were left of the sword found grace in the wil- 
derness; even Israel, when °I went to cause 
him to rest. 


‘ 


3. The Lorp hath appeared ! of old A. M. 3410, 
unto me, saying, Yea, ‘I have loved 
thee with ° an averldating love: therefore * with 
loving-kindness have I f drawn thee. 

4 Again *I will build thee, and thou shalt 
be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again 


a Chapter xxx. 24.—> Chapter xxx. 22.——¢ Num. x. 33; 
Deut. i. 33 ; Psa. xev. 11; Isaiab xiii: 14-—t Heb. from afar. 
4 Mal. i. 2, 


||-20; Judg. xi. 34; Psa. exlix. 3. 


be adorned with thy » tabrets,* and shalt go 


e Romans xi. 28, 29.—* Or, have I extended lovi 
tinto thee-——! Hosea xi. 4 —€ ‘Chap. xxxili. 7.——b 
* Or, tioalorela} 


-kindness 
xod. xv. 


‘NOTES ‘ON CHAPTER XXXI. 

Verse 1. At the same time, saith the Lord— 
Namely, in the latter days, mentioned chap. xxx. 24. 
I will be the God of all the families of Israel—Not 
of the two tribes only, but of all the tribes; not of 
the house of Aaron only and the families of Levi, but 
of all the families. And they shall be my people— 
I will favour them, and do them good, and they shall 
be subject to, and shall worship and obeyme. “This 
second part of the prophecy,” says Calmet, “ princi- 
pally respects the return of the ten tribes. And I 
have shown, ina particular dissertation, that not only 
Judah, Benjamin, and Levi, but also the twelve tribes 
returned into their own country.” Doubtless, many 
individuals of the ten tribes returned with the Jews 
from Babylon, having been incorporated among 
them in the several places where they were settled ; 
yet this seems to have been only a very partial ac- 
complishment_ of this prophecy, which, as Blaney 
observes, “ points out circumstances that certainly 
were not fulfilled at the return of the Jews from the 
Babylonish captivity, nor have hitherto had their 
completion.” But, in the latter days; when the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles are brought in, all Israel shall 
be saved; for, as Isaiah and St. Paul testify, there 
shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob. - Isa. lix. 19; Rom. 
xi. 26-29. See note on chap. xxx. 10. 

Verse 2. The people that were left of the sword 
That sword of Pharaoh with which he cut off the 

male children as soon as they were born, and that 
sword with which he threatened to cut "them off 
when he pursued them to the Red sea. Found grace 
in the wilderness—Though in the wilderness, where 
they seemed to be lost and forgotten, as these latter 
Jews and Israelites were now in a strange land, yet 
they found grace in God’s. sight, were owned, and 


£ 


+ 


highly honoured by him, and blessed with wonder-. 
ful instances of his peculiar favour. And he went 
to. cause them to rest—Went before them ina pillar 
of cloud, to mark out the places for them where they 
should pitch their tents, and conducted them to the 
land that he had provided for them. ‘And after such 
evidences of his kindness to them, why should they 
doubt of the continuance of his favours ? 

Verses 3,4. The Lord hath appeared of old unio 
me—The, prophet here personifies the Jewish na- 
tion, the people spoken of in the foregoing verse, 
who are introduced as calling to mind how God, in 
times of old, had manifested himself to the fathers 
of their nation, and appeared for their deliverance. 
Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love— 
These are evidently the words of God addressed to 
Zion or Jerusalem. As if he had said, The mercies 
I promised you, as a nation, when I’made a cove- 
nant with your fathers, shall never fail. My love 
was not a temporary love, manifested merely to a 
single generation, but it is‘an everlasting love, and 
will continue through all generations. Therefore 
with loving-kindness have J drawn thee—I have 
shown my benignity toward you, by taking all op- 
portunities, of doing you good, and preventing you, 
by acts of grace and goodness, to draw you to my- 
self, as your God, from all the idols to which you 
had turned aside. I have ever dealt graciously with 
them who fear me, and who hope in my mercy, and 
will always continue so todo. Again I will build 
thee, O virgin of Israel—“ Thy inhabitants shall be 
again restored to thee, who shall rebuild their cities 
and habitations that lay desolate during the time of 
their captivity.” Perhaps the Jews have the title of 
virgin of Israel bestowed upon them to imply that, in 
consequence of their repentance and reformation, 
“they should be washed from the stains of their 

3 


Glad tidings 


make merry: - 

5 iThou -shalt yet plant vines upon the 
mountains of Samaria: the “planters shall 
plant, and shall eat them as common things. 
' 6 For there shall be a day, that the watch- 
men upon the mount Ephraim shall. cry, 
* Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion. unto the 
Lorp our God. 


CHAPTER XXXI. be 


St a NAR a ROS EPC I. ante talaga ini a 
gece forth in the dances of them that For thus saith the Lorp ; } Sing Ay M9410. 


of salvation. 


with gladness for Jacob, and shout ~ hi te 


among the chief of the nations: publish ye, 
praise ye, and say, O Lorp, save thy people, 
the remnant of Israel. 

8 Behold, I will bring them ™ from the north 
country, and ™ gather them from the coasts of 
the earth, and with them the blind and the 
lame, the woman with child and her that tra- 


1 Isaiah lxv. 21; Amos ix. 14, “Heb. profane them, Deut, 


xx. 6;_ xxviii. 30. 


k Isa. ii. 35 Mic. iv, 2——1 Isa. xii. 5, 6+—™ Chap. iii. 12, 18; 
‘xxiii, 8 ——" Ezek. xx. 34,41; xxxiv. 13. 


former idolatries, so often compared to whoredom in 
~ the Scriptures."—Lowth. Thow. shalt again be 
adorned with thy tabrets—* All the signs, both of 
religious and civil joy, shall be restored to thee.” 
‘That it was usual for the women of Israel to go forth 
with tabrets and dancing in times of public rejoicing 
and prosperity, see Exod. xv. 20; Judges xi. 34; 
1 Sam, xviii. 16. These times were now to be re- 
newed. 

Verse 5. Thou shalt yet plant vines—Building 
and planting are commonly joined together ; wpon 
the mountains of Samaria—Samaria, being the me- 
tropolis of the ten tribes, seems to be put for the king- 
dom of Israel, as it is distinct from that of Judah. 
According to which interpetration the mountains of 
Samaria are equivalent to the mountains of Israel, 
and therefore the words imply, that the deliverance 
here spoken of should extend to Israel as well as 
Judah. The planters shall plant, and shall eat 
them as common things—After they have planted 
them they shall eat the fruits thereof, according to 
the promise contained in the parallel texts, (Isa. Ixv. 
21; Amos ix. 14,) whereas, God had threatened as a 
curse, that, in case of their disobedience, when they 
had planted their vines, another should eat the fruit, 
Deut. xxviii.30. The verb 155n, translated, eat them 
as common thing's, alludes to the law that forbade the 
fruit of any young trees to be eaten till the fifth year 
of their bearing. For the first three years they were 
to be considered: as in a state of uncircumcision or 
uncleanness. In the fourth year the fruit was holy 
to the Lord. But after that time it became free for 
the owner’s use, Lev. xix. 23-25. See also Deut, xx. 
6; and xxviii. 30 ; where the same verb is used for 
eating of the fruit of a plantation without restraint. 
Here, therefore, a promise is given directly opposite 
to the above-mentioned threat, namely, That the per- 
sons who planted the vineyards on the hills of Sa- 
maria should not be compelled to give up the fruit 
of their labours to others, but should themselves re- 
main in the land, and enjoy the produce of their 
plantations unmolested. 

Verses 6,7. For there shall be a day, that the 
watchmen ‘shall ery—By the watchmen are meant 
God’s prophets, or the ministers of his word, giving 
notice of his dispensations, and calling upon men to 
act suitably underthem. The first reference may 
be to the leaders and teachers of the Jews, returning 
from Babylon, or to the general summons through- 


| them with suitable accommodations, 


out all the ten tribes, for which Ephraim is put, 


|to.repair to Jerusalem, and join themselvés to 


the true church, from which they had been so long 
separated ; but, doubtless, in the full completion of 
the prophecy, by watchmen the preachers of the 
gospel-are to be understood. ‘The phrase, crying 
upon mount Ephraim, ‘alludes to, the custom of per- 
sons that had to publish any proclamation ascend- 
ing to the top of some high hill, from whence. their 
voice might be heard a great. way off. See Judges 
ix. 7; 2 Chron. xiii. 4; Isa. x]. 9. The phrase, Arise 
ye, let us go wp to Zion, &c., alludes to the Jewish 
custom of going in companies to Jerusalem at their 
three annual festivals. Lor thus saith the Lord, Sing 
with gladness, &c.—When ye see some dawning of 
these blessed times, express your joy for the restora- 
tion of Jacob’s posterity in the most public manner 
that can be; and shout among the chief of the na- 
tions—Namely, among the most potent nations from 
whence you are to be gathered. Or, persons belong- 
ing to the chief nations of the earth are here called 
upon to congratulate the Israelites on their restora- 
tion to their own land, and their conversion. to the 
church of God, as Moses predicted, Deut. xxxii. 43, 
and the apostle exhorts, Rom. xv. 10, Rejoice, ye 
Gentiles, with his people; for when the promises 
made to the fathers are accomplished, the Gentiles 
shall glorify God for his mercy ; as it is written, 
For this cause will I confess to thee among the Gen- 
tiles, and sing unto thy name, Rom. xv. 8. Publish 
ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord, save thy people— 
Publish these good tidings with the highest expres- 
sions of praise and glory to Ged; and likewise pray 
that he, who hath begun so gicrious a work, would 
proceed and complete it. 

Verses 8,9. Behold, Iwill bring them fromthe north 
country—Here God himself undertakes to conduct 
home the remnant of his people from the eccuntries 
through which they had been scattered; and the 
promise relates to the ten tribes, as well as to those 
of Judah and Benjamin; for Assyria and Media, 
whither they were removed, lay north of Judea as 
well as Babylon. And the following words speak of, 
a general restoration of this people from their seve- 
ral dispersions; and with them the blind and the 
lame, &c.—God will compassionate their infirmities, 
and will conduct them with all imaginable care and 
tenderness, and furnish the feeble and indigent of 


The = 


453 


The nations challenged 


JEREMIAH. 


to witness Go@s goodnese 


A. M. 3410. vaileth with child together : 
sof company shall return thither. 
9 ° They shall come with weeping, and with 

> supplications will I lead them; I will cause 

them to walk ? by the rivers of waters in a 

straight way, wherein they shall not stumble : 


a great 


for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my | 


4 firstborn. 
10 4 Hear the word of the rhein O ye na- 


tions, and declare 7¢ in the isles afar A. M, 3410. 
off, and say, He that scattered Israel Bond 
* will gather him, and keep er as a ehiepheid 
doth his flock. 

11 For *the Lorn hath redeemed Jacob, and 
ransomed him * from the hand of him that was. 
stronger than. he. 

12 Therefore they shall come my ‘sing m 
“the height of Zion, and shall flow together to 


© Psalm exxvi. 5, 6; Chap. 1. 4. 5 Or, favours, Zech. xii. 10. 
P.Jsa. xxxv. 8; xliii: 19 ; xlix. 10, 11. 4 Exod. iv. 22. 


ah 


alludes to the care and conipanil which God mani-| 


fested in conducting his people, of all ages and con- 
ditions, through the wilderness, compared to the care 
with which a parent or nurse carries a tender child, 
Deut. i. 31. ‘See also Isa. xl. 11, and xlix.-10. T'hey 
shall come with weeping—The LXX. translate the 
words, Ev cAav0uo eSndtorv, Kat ev mapaxdyoe avato 
avec, they went forth with weeping, but with com- 
fort will I bring them back ; which sense agrees 
exactly with the words of Psa. exxxvi. 5, 6, which 
was composed upon occasion of the return from cap- 
tivity, He that sows in tears-shall reap in joy: he 
that goeth forth weeping, shall come again with re- 
joicing. » Our translation, however, is much more 
agreeable to'the original words, and is also confirm- 
ed by chap. ili. 21, where we read, A voice was heard, 
weeping and supplications of the children of Israel ; 
the prophet speaking upon the same subject, and in 
the same words here used. See also chap. 1. 4, where 
it is-said; Zhe children of Israel and Judah shall 
come together, going and weeping, and seek the 
Lord their God. All which words imply, that the 
Jews and Israelites, at the time of their general re- 
storation, shall have their joy tempered ‘with tears 
of repentance for their former miscarriages ; which 
is more fully expressed Zech. xii. 10, where God 
promises to powr upon them the spirit of grace and 
supplication. I will cause them to walk by the rivers 
of waters—So that they shall not be afflicted with 
thirst, or the want of any accommodation in their 


journey. The words allude to God’s miraculously, 


supplying the Israelites with water in the wilder- 
ness. See noteson Isa. xxxv. 6,7, and xli. 17, 18, and 
xlix. 10.. In a straight way wherein they shall not 
stumble—This phrase is an allusion to God’s leading 
the Israelites through the Red sea, and afterward in 
the wilderness. . See Isa. Ixiii. 13, ‘and xi. 16. For 
I am a father to Israel—The remembrance of 
former connections is here mentioned as the motive 
of God’s returning favour to Israel. And Ephraim 
is my firstborn—Ephraim is often, as here, equiva- 
lent to Israel, especially when Israel denotes the ten 
«tribes as distinct from Judah. He is termed the first- 
born among the tribes of Israel; because the birth- 
right which Reuben had forfeited .was conferred 
upon the two sons of Joseph, of whom Ephraim had 
the precedence. “The reader will observe, that all 
this was but imperfectly verified in the return of the 


‘version and restoration. 


rIsa. xl-11; Ezek. xxxiv. 12, 13, t4—* Isa. xliv, 23 ; xlviii. 
20.—+ Isa. xlix. 24, 25. « Rzek. xvii. 23 5 xx. 40. 


those who were made partakers of the gospel of 
Christ, in the miracles, in the preaching of the apos- 
tles, in the. free grace and pardoning mercy of the 
Redeemer. 3 

Verses 10, 11. Hear the word of the Lord, O yena- 
tions, &c.—This apostrophe, or turning to the hea- 
then nations, was, as it were, the prelude of calling 


‘them to the knowledge of the true God. This cail- 


ing of them was certainly never effected by the Jews 
in the way and to the degree it was by the apostles 
of Christ and their disciples; who gained thousands 
more to Christianity than ever the Jews did to Juda- 
ism. Here the prophet calls upon the Gentiles, not 
the Jews, to hear the word of the Lord, and to pro- 
claim or make it known; and the event has proved 
that he did not do.this but by the direction of the Di- 
vine Spirit, since the Gentiles were far more ready 
to hear and obey the word of God by. Christ, and to 
receive his divine doctrine, and propagate it, than the 
Jews were. Declare it in the isles afar off—The 
Jews, as we have repeatedly seen, called all the 
countries islands to'which’ they went by sea. He 
that scattered Israel, &c.—He that caused Israel to 
be carried away captive into various countries, and 
dispersed them over the face of the earth, will gather 
them into one body or. people, Isa. xi. 12; xxvii. 12 ; 
liv. 7. And keep him as a shepherd does his flock— 
As God’s care over his people is often compared to 
that of a shepherd, so the office of the Messiah is de- 
scribed under the same character, Isa. xl. 1M, and 
particularly with respect to the Jews, after their con 
For the Lord hath redeem- 
ed Jacob, §c., from him that was stronger than he 
—From those who by subtlety and power conquer- 
ed him, and detained him captive; an emblem of 
that redemption which Christ obtains for us by van- 
quishing the devil, called ihe strong one, Matt. 
xii. 29. ‘ 
Verses 12-14. They shall sing in the height of 
Zion—By the height of Zion is meant the temple, 
built upon a hill adjoining to mount Zion, and it is 


here to be taken metaphorically, as it frequently is 


in the writings of-the prophets, forthe church, which 
is compared, by Christ, to a city sel on a hill, as be- 
ing remarkable for the excellence of its laws ‘and i in- 
stitutions, and the piety and virtue of its genuine 
members. And shall flow to the goodness of the 
Lord, &c.—Spiritual blessings are here, as ead 


i from Babylon, but was fully made good in described under the emblems of Saks “p) an 
454 


Israel shall rejoice, 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


and Rachel be comforted. 


A. oy 34l0. *the goodness of the Lorn, for 

. wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and 
for the young of the flock and of the herd: and 
their soul shall be as a ¥ watered garden; * and 
they shall not sorrow any more at all. 

13 Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, 
both young men and old together: for I will 
turn their mourning into joy, and will com- 
fort them, and make them rejoice from their 
sorrow. 

14 And I will satiate the soul of the priests 
with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied 
with my goodness, saith the Lorn. 


aA A. M. 3410. 


15 §|'Thus saith the Lorp; rl 


voice was heard in » Ramah, lamenta- 
tion, and bitter weeping; Rachel weeping for 
her children refused to be comforted for her 
children, because ° they were not. 

16° Thus-saith the Lorp; Refrain thy voice 
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: for 
thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lorn; 
and “ they shall come again from the land of the 
enemy. 

17 And there is hope in thine end, saith the 
Lorp, that thy children shall come again to 
their own border. 


x Hos. iii. 5——- Isaiah lviii. 11. Isaiah xxxv. 10; lxv. 19; 
Revelation xxi, 4. 


a Matthew ii. 17, 18.—— Josh. xviii. 25. ¢ Genesis xlii. 13. 
a Verses 4, 5; Ezrai. 5; Hos. i. 11° 


a 


plenty. And their soul shall be as a watered gardén 
—Refreshed and fertilized by the truth:and graée of. 
God. And they shall not sorrow any more at all— 
Hebrew, iy TaN Don Nn, They shall not'add, 
or, continue, yet to grieve. The LXX. render it, 
Ov TeLvacovoty ETL, They shall not hunger any more ; 
and so the Vulgate. Then shall the virgin rejoice, 
§&c., both young men and old—There shall be signs 
of a universal joy, in which all ages) shall unani- 
mously join.. The expressions in the next verse 
allude to that plentiful provision that was made 
for the temporal support of the priests under the 
law, which is here put metaphorically for that pleni- 
tude of blessings which are to be sie ee under the 
gospel. 

Verses 15-17. Thus saith the ieee A voice, &c. 
—Here “the scene of this prophecy changes, and 
two new personages are successively introduced, in 
order to diversify the subject, and to impress it more 
strongly on the mind of the reader. 
Rachel, who in these verses is represented as just 
rising from the grave, and bitterly bewailing the loss 
of her children, for whom she looks about in vain, 
but none are to be seen. Her tears are dried up, 
and she is consoled with the assurance that they are 
not lost for ever, but ‘shall in time be brought back 
to their ancient borders.” The passage is strongly 
figurative, but not difficult of interpretation, as the 
reader will perceive by what follows: A voice was 
heard in Ramah—Ramah was a city of Benjamin, 
(see Judg. xix. 13,) near which Rachel, the mother 
of Joseph and Benjamin, was buried. She is here, 
in a beautiful figure of poetry, represented as come 
forth out of her grave, ‘and, as chief mourner on so 
sad an occasion, lamenting bitterly for the loss of 
her children, none.of whom presented themselves 
to her view, being all either slain or gone into exile. 
In this way.the prophet sets forth the lamentations, 
in and about Jerusalem, at the time of the several 
captivities mentioned chap. lii. 15, 28-30. The 
evangelist indeed applies these words to Herod’s 
massacre of the infants at Bethlehem and its envi- 
rons, Matt. ii. 17,18. But the context here plainly 
shows, that this massacre could not have been the 

. oo 


The first is’ 


direct and immediate object of the prophecy, (see 
the following note,) but the prophet’s words so well 
suited the occasion that the evangelist, with great 
propriety, observes their congruity therewith. He 
must however be understood just as if he had said, 
The circumstances of this affair were such that the 
words of Jeremiah, though spoken with a different 
view, may well be accommodated to this event. 
‘And this is as much as can be allowed with respect 
to several passages of the New Testament, where 
the words of the Old Testament were said to be 
fulfilled. See Matt. ii. 16; Acts i. 16-20, &c.; and 
Blaney. Its observable, that the Vulgate and Chal- 
dee understand the word, 707, ramah, not as a 
proper name, but as an appellative, and translate it, 
in excelso, on high, or, aloud ; according to which 
the sense will be, A voice ts heard on high, or aloud, 
lamentations, weepings; of Rachel bewatling her 
children, and refusing to be comforted concerning 
them, because they are not. Refrain thy voice from 
weeping, and thine eyes from tears—Set bounds to 
thy sorrow, repress and moderate thy inordinate 
and excessive grief; for thy work shall be rewarded 
—That } is, it will appear thou hast not brought forth 
children in vain, nor shalt thou be deprived of the 
satisfaction of seeing the welfare of thy children, 
which is the parent’s reward for her pain in bring- 
ing them into the world, and her care and attention 
in providing for their support and education ; for 
they shall come again from the land of the enemy. 
Thus the text interprets itself. But if the massacre 
at Bethlehem had been primarily designed here, with 
what propriety could it have been said, how could 
it have been affirmed, that they should return from 
the land of the enemy, or, as in the next verse, 
should come again to their own border? ‘The 
words JANN mMpn wv, rendeted here, There is 
hope in thine end, may be translated, Z"here is hope, 
or expectation, to thy posterity ; that is, though these, 
of the present age do not experience a return from 
eaptivity, yet their posterity shall enjoy that bless- 
ing. This promise was particularly fulfilled with re- 
spect to the tribe of Benjamin, as well as that of 
Judah, in their return under Cyrus. See Ezra i. 5. 
455 
| 


» 


y 


Ephraim, upon repenting; 


A. M, 3410. 


18 4 I have surely heard Ephraim 
B. C. 594 


bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast 
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock 
unaccustomed to the yoke: ° turn thou me, 
and I shall be turned ; for thou aré the Lorp 
my God. 

19 Surely ‘ after that I was ihaed, I repent- 
ed; and after that I was aes I smote 


* Lamm. Vv. 21. —! Deut. “xxx. 2.—s Deut. xxxii. 36; Isa. lxiii. 


JEREMIAH. 


shall find mercy. 


upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, A: anon 
even contador because I did bear 
the reproach of my youth. 

20: Is Ephraim my dear son ? is he a pleasant 
child? for since I spake against him, I do ear- 
nestly remember him still: ®therefore my : 
bowels ®are troubled for him; "I will surely’ 
have mercy-upon him, saith the Lorp. 


15; Hos. xi. 8.——® Heb. sound.—_h Isa. lvii. 18; Hos. xiv. 4. 


Verse 18. J have ten heard Ephraim, &e— 
Here, still further to diversify the subject, and give 
it the greater force, the other personage referred to 
in the preceding note is introduced. Ephraim, re- 
presenting the ten tribes, is brought forward, lament- 
ing his past undutifulness with great contrition and 
penitence, and professing an earnest desire of amend- 
ment. And “these-symptoms of returning duty 
are no sooner discerned in him than God acknow- 
ledges him once more a8 a darling child, and resolves 
to receive him with mercy.” The passage is intend- 
ed to show the change necessary to be wreught in the 
hearts of the Israelites, in order to their obtaining 
this restoration from captivity, according to the con- 
ditional promises made of old to this people. See 
Ley. xxvis 40, 41.. Previously to -his conferring this 
great benefit upon them, God must hear them be- 
moaning themselves, or bewailing their mis¢érable 
state, and the sins which had brought them into it, 
acknowledging that the chastisements which they 
had suffered had not been more or greater than their 
sins had justly merited, and praying earnestly for 
mercy and deliverance. T'how hast chastised me, 
and I was chastised—Or, instructed by thy disci- 
pline, as 1DIN may be properly rendered. As a bul- 
lock unaccustomed to the yoke—Whereas before I 
Was as an untamed bullock, or heifer, that is not to 
be managed but by stripes and’ cor rections. Turn 
thou.me, ‘and I shall be turned—Do thou turn my 
heart by thy preventing and renewing grace, and 
then I shall be -effectually reformed, Lam. v. 21. 
“Sometimes the Scripture ascribes. the whole work 
of man’s conversion to God, because his grace is 
the first and principal cause of it. But yet, to make 
it effectual, man’s concurrence is necessary, as ap- 
pears particularly from chap. li. 9, where God says, 
We would have healed Babylon, and she is not 
healed; that is, God did what was requisite on his 
part for her conversion, but she refused to comply 
with his call. To the same purpose he speaks to 
Jerusalem, (Ezek. xxiv. 13,) J have purged thee, 
and thou wast not purged.” 

Verse 19. Surely after that I was turned, I re- 
pented—After I was enlightened and impressed 
with a due. sense of my duty, and of the many de- 
viations from it of which I had been guilty, and 
after my will was subjected to the will of God, I 
straightway became.a true penitent, and expressed 
my repentance by all the outward and inward signs 
of an unfeigued sorrow for, and hatred to, my past 
conduct, And after. that I was instructed—Re- 
456 
= ; 


specting my sin and folly, in forsaking the fountain 
of living waters for the broken cisterns that could 
hold no. water; I smote upon my thigh—Through 
the most poignant grief and concern, and with in- 
dignation against myself. IJ was ashamed, yea, even 
confounded—At my own stupidity and frowardness, 
and could neither with any confidence look up to 
God, nor with any comfort reflect upon myself; be- 
cause I did. bear the reproach of my ‘youth—The 
burden of my former sins lay heavy upon my mind, 
and I became sensible that-all the calamities and re- 
proaches I had undergone were the due deserts of 
my offences. Ephraim smote upon his thigh, as the 
publican upon his breast. We find, both in the 
Holy Scriptures, and other ancient records, smiting 
on the thigh mentioned as an expression of great 
surprise and concern. Thus God commands. Eze- 
kiel to cry.and howl, on account of the sword that 


‘should be upon his people, and to smite upon his 


thigh. We find the same custom noticed by Homer, 
Iliad xvi. 1. 124. 


avrap AylAdeve 
Mypw mrAntapevocg TatpoAna mpwoeeurev. 


Divine Achilles view’d the rising flames, 
And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims, 
Arm, arm, Patroclus! Pore. 


It is also noticed by Xenophon, Cicero, and others. 
The meaning is, when Ephraim was made sensible 
of his sinfulness he showed marks of real contrition. 
Verse 20. Js Ephraim my dear son? Is he, &ce.— 
These questions are designed to be answered in the 
affirmative, as appears from the inference, there- 
fore my bowels are moved for him. It seems that, 
to suit the idiom of our language, and fully to express 
the sense of the original, the particle not ought to 
have been supplied, and, the clause to have been 
read, Js not Ephraim my.dear son? Is he not a 
pleasant child? That is, is he not one that I have” 
set my affections on, as a parent does upon a child 
in whom he delights? ' Thus Dr. Waterland, Lowth,. 
and many others interpret the words. Houbigant, 
however, defends the common reading, and thinks 
that God means to deny that Ephraim was his son, 
in order to show him that his bowels were moved 
toward him solely through free mercy, and not on 
account of any merits or deservings of his people. 
For since I spake against him—Or, of him, as the 
same phrase in the original is translated chap. xlviii. 
27. Ido earnestly remember him still—Eveyr since 
I have so severely reproved and chastised him, my” 
3 


The captives shall CHAPTER XXXI. surely be restored. 
ae. .21 Set thee up way-marks, make || 22 | How long wilt thou *go A.M. 3410. 


thee high heaps: ‘set thy heart to- 
ward the highway, even the way which thou 
wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn 
again to these thy cities. 


iChap. 1]. 5——* Chap. ii. 18, 23, 36. 


about, O thou’ !backsliding daugh- *° °* 


ter? for the Lorp hath created a new thing 
in the earth, A woman shall compass a 
man, 


1 Chap. iii. 6, 8, 11, 12, 14, 22. 


thoughts toward him have been thoughts of peace. 
I have a fatherly kindness and affection for him. 
Therefore my bowels are troubled for him—Or, 
yearn over him, as Joseph’s bowels yearned toward 
his brethren, even when he spake roughly to them. 
Observe, reader, when God afflicts his people, yet 
he does not forget them; when he casts them out 
of their land, yet he does not cast them out of his 
sight; nor out of his mind. Even then, when God 
is speaking against us, yet he is acting for us, and 
designing our good in all; and this is our comfort in 
our affliction, that the Lord thinketh upon us, though 
we have forgotten him. When Israel’s afflictions 
extorted a penitent confession and submission, it is 
said, (Judg. x. 16,) his soul was grieved for the 
misery of Israel: for he always afflicts with the 
greatest tenderness, It was his compassion that 
mitigated Ephraim’s punishment, (Hos. xi. 8, 9,) My 
heart is turned within me, &c., and now the same 
compassion accepted Ephraim’s repentance, and. in- 
duced God tosay, J will surely have mercy upon him. 
Verse 21. Set thee up way-marks—* These words 
are a call to Israel to prepare for their return. The 
word ry, rendered way-marks, means stone pil- 
lars, and WN, translated heaps, from 7, a 
palm-tree, probably signifies tall-poles, like palm- 
trees, or, perhaps, made of palm-trees; both set up in 
the roads, at certain distances, for the traveller’s di- 
rection, and extremely necessary for those who had 
to pass wild and spacious deserts.”—Blaney. Set 
thy heart toward the way which thow wentest—Mind 
well the way that the Assyrians and Babyloniais 
carried thee captive, for thou shalt return the same 
way. Turn again—That-is, Return to thine own 
country; O virgin of Israel—See note on verse 14. 
Turn again to these thy cities—The expression is 
doubled for the greater certainty of the event. 
Verse 22. How long wilt thou go about—Or, go 
out of the right way, or follow thine own imagina- 
tions, O thou backsliding daughter—Thou that 
didst formerly revolt from thy sovereign Lord, and 
decline from his worship and service, going after 
idols, and seeking help from foreign nations, instead 
of applying to him for it; and who now seemest to 
‘ loiter when God calls thee to return homeward out 
of a strange country. ‘The expression is often used 
of Israel, or the ten tribes: see chap. iii..6-12: and 
of Judah and Israel together, ibid., verses 14, 22; 
both being comprehended under the title of the vir- 
gin of Israel, in the foregoing verse. For the Lord 
hath created, or doth create, a new thing in the 
earth, a woman shall compass.a man—It is diffi- 
cult to say, with any certainty, what this obscure 
passage means. Several ancient Jews expounded 
it of the Messiah, and most Christian interpreters utl- 
derstand it of the miraculous conception of the child 
3 


Jesus in the womb of the virgin. “Taking the words 
in this sense they properly import,” as Lowth justly 
observes, “a new creation, and such as is the imme- 
diate work of God. And that.such a prophecy con- 
cerning the conception of Christ may not be thought 
to come in hére abruptly, it is to be observed, that 
as the coming of the Messiah is the foundation of the 
promises, both of the first andsecond covenant; so it 
contains the most powerful arguments to persuade 
men to obedience: and the covenant, of which Christ 
was tobe the Mediator is plainly foretold and described 
in the 31st and three following verses of this chapter.” 
Blaney, however, thinks the original words, 72p3 
931°22°Dn, cannot by any construction be brought 
to imply any such thing as the miraculous concep- 
tion above mentioned. “ Admitting,” he says, “that 
the word 3310 may signify shall encompass, or, 
comprehend in the womb, and that 733, instead of az 
adult, or, strong man, (which the word genérally 
means, ) may also signify a malechild ; yet the words, 
all taken together, still import no more than that @ 
woman shall conceive, or contain, a male child: but 
this is nothing new or extraordinary, and therefore I 
presume it not the sense intended.” Being of opin- 
ion that the word, which we translaté compass, or en- 
compass, May signify to cause to turn about, or re- 
pulse, he renders the clause, “A woman shall put 
to the rout a strong man,” judging it to be a prover- 
bial form of speech, denoting, “'The weaker shall 
prevail over the stronger,” an expression equivalent 
to, one shall chase a thousand. Now this, says he, 
it must be confessed, is in itself new and unusual 
and contrary to the ordinary course.of nature ; and 
accordingly it is ascribed to the interposing power 
of God, who is said therein to create a new thing, 
or, in other words, to work a miracle. Interpreting 
the passage in this sense, he explains its connection 
with the context as follows: “ The virgin of Israel 
is exhorted not to turn aside, or decline the invita- 
tion given her to return, as she might, perhaps, be 
disposed to do through dread of the power of ene- 
mies, who would oppose her deliverance. For her 
encouragement she is told, that she had no reason 
to be apprehensive of the superior strength of any 
enemies, since God would work a miracle in her 
favour, and enable her, though apparently weak, to 
overcome and prevail against all their opposition.” 
By an interpretation nearly allied to this, many un- 
derstand the passage as being a promise that the 
Jewish Church in its time, and afterward the gospel 
church, should prevail over all its enemies; though 
comparing the fewness and weakness of the church’s 
members with the multitude of her enemies, and the 
greatness of their power, it seemed as strange ‘a 
thing as for a woman to prevail against a strong and 
mighty man, 
457 


, 


Great prosperity promised 


JEREMIAH. 


to the land of Judah. 


e. oP. 23 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, 
———— the God of Israel; As yet they shall 
use this speech in the land of Judah and in the 
cities thereof, when I shall bring again their’ 
captivity ; ™ The Lorn bless thee, O habitation’ 
of justice, and " mountain of holiness. 

24 And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and 
° in all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, 
and they that go forth with flocks. 

25 For I have satiated the weary soul, and E 
have replenished every sorrowful soul. 

26 Upon this I awaked, and beheld ; and my 
sleep.was sweet unto me. 

27 “I Behold, the days come, saith the Lorp, 


that ?I will sow the house of Israel he ete 
and the house of Judah with the seed =——— 
of man, and with the seed of beast. 

28 And it shall come to pass, that like as I 
have 4 watched over them, * to pluck up, and to 
break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, 
and to afflict ; so will I watch over them, *to 
build and to plant, saith the Lorn. 

29 4 ‘In those days they shall say no more, 
‘The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the 
children’s teeth are set on edge. - 

30 " But-every one shall die for his own ini 
quity : every man that eateth the sour Brape, 
his teeth shall be set on edge. 


—_ 


m Psa. exxii. 5, 6,'7, 83 Isa. i. 26. n Zech. viii. 3. © Chap. 
xxxiil. 12, 13.—p Ezekiel xxxvi. 9, 10, 11; Hosea ii. 23; 


Verses 23-25. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the 
God of Israel—These prophecies of the restoration 
of the Jews are ordinarily prefaced with these two 
attributes of God, the one of which asserts his power 
to do the thing promised; the other, his goodness 
to his people; as yet, or, yet again, they shall use 
this speechin the land of Judah, and in the cities 
thereof, &c.—Three things the prophet here foretels, 
Ist, That the cities which had. formerly been the 
habitations of unjust, cruel, and bloody men, should 
become the habitations of men who should do justice 
to all. 2d, That the city which stood upon mount 
Zion, and, had formerly been a habitation of idola- 
ters and other unholy persons, should become a 
place in which men should, in-a due and holy-man- 
ner, worship and serve the true God. 3d, That 
they should be so famous, both for justice and holi- 
ness, that men would take notice of it, and wish 
they might be blessed on that account: so that as 
they had, for their sins, been made a curse and pro- 
verb, so, upon their reformation, they should be 
for a blessing. And there shall dwell in Judah, 
§c., husbandmen—This verse is not only intended 
to express that the country should be inhabited, as 
well as the cities, after their return from captivity, 
but to set. forth their peaceable and happy state at 
that time. For I have satiated, or, J will satiate, 
the weary soul—I will comfort them after their sor- 
rows and afflictions, and will give them abundance 
of ease and plenty. 

Verse 26. Upon this I awaked, &c.—These words 
afford a plain proof that the preceding revelations 
had been made to the prophet in a dream, or vision. 
And my sleep was sweet unto me—The vision which 
I had seen was so agreeable to me that it gave me 
as great satisfaction and comfort as men usually 
feel when they have been refreshed with an undis- 
turbed and sweet sleep, 

Verses 27, 28. I will sow the house of Israel—Un- 
der the captivity the land lay desolate, without man 
and beast, chap. xxxiii. 12; but here it is promised 
' that it should be again inhabited and_ replenished 
with both, And like as I have watched over them 

458 


Zech. x. 9.——4 Chapter _xliv. 27.——* Chapter i..10; xviii. 7. 
s Chap. xxiv. &——' Ezek. xviii. 2, 3-——" Gal. vi. 5, 7. 


to pluck up, &c.—I will show the same care and 
diligence in restoring them as I have formerly done 
in destroying them, according to the promise made 
to them upon their repentance and reformation. 
See chap. xviii. 7-10. 

Verses 29, 30. They shall say no more, The 
fathers have eaten a sour grape, &c.—*God had 
often declared that,he would visit the sins of the 
fathers upon the children, and had particularly 
threatened to execute judgment upon the present 
generation for the idolatries and other sins of their 
forefathers. See note on Exod. xx. 5, and chap. xy. 
4. This gave occasion to the proverb. mentioned 
in this verse, which they that were in captivity ap- 
plied to their own case, as if the miseries they en- 
dured were chiefly owing to their fathers’ sins: see 
Lam. v. 7; Ezek. xviii. 2; but when this judgment 
should be removed, then there would be no further 
occasion to use this proverb, as Ezekiel there speaks.” 
But every one shall die for his own iniquity, &c. 
—-These national judgments ceasing, every one shall 
suffer only for his own. faults. “This promise,” 
says Lowth, “will be remarkably verified when 
God shall cease to visit upon the Jewish nation that 
imprecation which they laid upon themselves by the 
crucifixion of Christ, his blood be upon us, and wpon _ 
our children.” It was the opinion of Bishop War- 
burton, that the punishment of children for the ini- 
quity of their parents, was to supply the want of 
the sanction of a future state, which he supposed 
was very obscurely, if at all, revealed under the 
Mosaic dispensation. “For,” says he, “while a 
future state was kept hid from the Jews there was 
an absolute need of such a law to restrain the more 
daring spirits by working upon. their instinets. But 
when a doctrine was brought to light which held 
them up, and continued them after death, the objects 
of divine justice, it had then no further use, and was 
therefore reasonably to be abolished, with the rest 
of the Jewish laws peculiar to the Mosaie dispensa- 
tion.” But it may be inquired here, Do not children 
still suffer for the sins ‘of their parents in the only 
|eense in which they ever did, namely, in all na- 

3 


‘Promises of the restoration 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


‘ 
and happiness of Israel. 


i ee ee ee eee" 
——erere—eseseO60GOW0WbhC (Sess 


A. M. 3410. 


ee 31 4 Behold, the * days come, saith 


the Lorp, that I will make a new 
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the 
house of Judah: 

32 Not according to the covenant that I made 
with their fathers, in the day that I took them 
by the hand to bring them out of the land of 
Egypt; which my covenant they’ brake, 7 al- 
though I was a husband unto them, saith the 
Lorp: | 


«Chap. xxxii. 40; xxxili. 14; Ezek. xxxvii..26; Heb viii. 8- 
125% WS paz, ¥ Deut. i. 31" Or, should I have continued 
a husband unto tiem ?. z Chap. xxxii. 40. 


33 7 But this shall be the covenant A. M. 3410. 
that I will make with the house of ”° °°* 
Israel; After those days, saith the Lorn, *I 
will put my law in their inward parts, and 
write it in their hearts; ’ and will be their God, 
and they shall be my people. 

34 And they shall teach no more every man 
his neighbour, and every man his brother, say- 
ing, Know the Lorp: for °they shall all 
know me, from the least of them unto the 


Psalm xl. 8; Ezekiel xi. 19,20; xxxvi. 26, 27} 2 Cor. iii. 3. 
> Chap. xxiv. 7; xxxii. 38. Isa. liv. 13; John vi. 45 ; 1Cor. 
li. 10; 1 John i ii. 26. 


tional calamities, and in that poverty and reproach, 
and those bodily afflictions, which the vices of their 
parents entail upon them ? . 

__ Verses 31, 32; Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord—The latter days, or the times of the gospel, 
are here intended, as is evident from the. apostle’s 
applying the following promises to those times, and 
quoting this whole passage as a summary of the 
covenant of grace, Hebrews viii. 8-10. J will 
make a new covenant with the-house of Israel and 
the house of Judah—The benefits of this covenant 
were first offered to the Jews; as being the comple- 
tion of that covenant. which God had made with 


their fathers, Acts iii. 26, and. xiii. 46; but those. 


benefits were actually, conferred only on the spirit- 
ual seed of Abraham, or the imitators of Abraham’s 
faith, the true /srael of God, on whom peace is and 
shall be, Gal. vi. 16, and with whom only this new 
covenant is made. In other words, Israel and 
Judah stand here for the true people or church of 
God, especially the gospel church: and the cove- 
nant here promised to be made with them is said to 
be new, not because it was so as to the substance of 
it, for it was made with Abraham, Gen. xvii. '7, and 
with the Israelites, Deut. xxvi. 17, 18; but, upon 
many other accounts, especially the following :—1st, 
It was new, considered as a testament, confirmed 
by the actual death of the testator, which did not 
take place till gospel times. 2d, It was revealed 
after a new manner, more fully and particularly, 
plainly and clearly. 3d, It contained no such mix- 
ture of temporal promises as when first made with 
the Jews. 4th, The ceremonial law was no part of 
it, as it was to the Jews, who were obliged to ap- 
prove themselves God’s people, bya strict observ- 
ance thereof. 5th, The publication of it was ex- 
tended to the Gentiles as well as the Jews, which 
was not the case with the Mosaic covenant. 6th, 
The influences of the Divine Spirit, attending the 
publication of it, are conferred more largely under 
this than under the old covenant, distributing 
to believers a greater measure and variety of 
gifts and graces, to enable them to comply with 
the terms, and fulfil the demands of it. Not ac- 
cording to the covenant made with their fathers 
—Differing from it in the circumstances above men- 
tioned, and in others declared afterward: in the 
3 


day when I took them by the hand, &c.—The cove- 
nant which God made with the Jews, when they 
came out of the land of Egypt, was on his part the 
law which he gave them from Sinai, with the pro- 
mises annexed ; on their part, (which made it a for- 
mal covenant ) their promise of obedience. to it. 
This covenant God says he made with them when 
they were a weak and ignorant people, the care of 
whom he took upon himself, and led them as‘a parent 
leads his feeble child by the hand. Which my core- 
nant they brake—This covenant they are said to have 
broken, not because of every defect, or failure in 
their obedience, for in that sense, through the gen- 
eral depravity and weakness of human nature, they 
could not but break it; (see Rom. iii.,20; Gal. iii. 10, 
11;) but because of their gross and wilful sins often 
repeated and continued in without repentance, and 
more especially by their idolatry, compared to 
whoredom, which broke the marriage covenant be- 
tween God and them, and caused him to divorce 
them, and-to say, Lo Ammi, You are not my people: 
Although I was a husband io them—This their 
covenant-breaking was aggravated by God’s kind- 


‘ness to them and care of them, who, as he stood re- 


lated.to them in the character of a husband, so he 
had always manifested to them such love as is but 
faintly shadowed forth by. that of the most affection- 
ate husband to his wife, and had given them no 
temptation to go a whoring from him. 

Verses 33, 34. T'his shall be the covenant that I 
will make with the house of Israel—That is, with 
those who are Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile, 
John i. 47, who are Jews inwardly, Rom. ii. 29, by’ 
the circumcision of the heart and spirit, spoken of 
and promised by God, Deut. xxx. 6. Iwill put my 
law in their inward parts, &c.—In the times of the 
gospel God’s law is not abrogated and made void ; 
for Christ came not to destroy the law, but to fulfil 
it: but it is written in the hearts of God’s true Is- 
rael by the finger of his Spirit; and they become 
obedient to it from their secret approbation of it as 
holy, just, and good, and from the delight they take 
in it after the inward man. But it may be asked, 
How was this peculiar to this new covenant ? Did 
not God of old write his law on the hearts of his 
people? Did not David and others, the servants of 
God, of whom we read in the Old Testament, serve 

40u 


! * . 
God's cootlon mercy 


JEREMIAH. 


“with the nouse of Israel. 


A.M. 3410. greatest of them, saith the Lorp: 
= for.?I will forgive their iniquity, and 
I will remember their sin no more: 
‘35 4 Thus saith the Lorn, °* which giveth 
the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances 
of the moon and of the stars for a light by 
night, which divideth ‘the sea when the 
waves thereof roar; The Lorp of hosts is 
his name: 
36 >If those ordinances depart .from before 
me, saith the Lorn, then the seed of Israel also 


shall cease from being a nation be- A.M. 3410 
\ B.C, 594. 
‘fore me for ever. a 

37 Thus saith the Lorn; ‘If heaven above 
can be measured, and the foundations of the 
earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off 
all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, 
saith the Lorn. 

38 4] Behold, the days come, saith the Lorn, 
that the city shall be built to the Lorn * from 
the tower of Hananeel unto-the gate of the 
corner. 


4 Chap. xxxil. 8; 1. 20; Mic. vii. 18; Acts x. 43; xili. 39; 
Romans xi. 27. ment Genesis i i. 16; Psalm xxii. 5, 17; 
2, 36, 375; exix: 89. 


f Isa. li. 15.——S Chap. x. 16.— Psalm exlviii. 6 Isa. liy. 


God, out of a principle of love and delight in-his 
law? We must answer, Undoubtedly they did, and 
the law of God was, in a measure, written in their 
hearts; but this was not through the virtue of the 
Mosaic dispensation, but through the grace of this 
new covenant, revealed and communicated, though 
but obscurely and partially, even under that dispen- 
sation. 


and the gospel: the law shows man his duty, the 
gospel brings the grace of regeneration, by which 


his duty. All who, during the time of the Mosaic 


dispensation, attained salvation, were saved by virtue | 


of this new-covenant; but this was not then evident- 
God so generally and largely given as it has been 
under the gospel.’ And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbour—This must not-be so in- 
terpreted as if under the gospel there should be no 
more need of ministerial teaching, for Christ himself 
sent out his apostles to preach; nor yet as if there 


should be no further need of brethren in Christ teach- | 
ing one another, for the contrary is commanded, | 
_ called o: Ywlouevor, the saved, (Acts ii. 47,) who, by 
|, embracing the faith of Christ, should escape those 
| terrible judgments that should be inflicted upon the 


Col. iii. 16. This expression-only signifies the great 
increase of divine .knowledge, especially of the 
knowledge of the being and attributes of the one 
living and true God, and of the relations in which he 
is pleased to stand to his people, which is the know- 
ledge here chiefly intended. For they shall all 
know me, from the least unto the greatest—Even the 
least of them, who have an interest in this new co- 
venant, and are ingrafted into the good olive, and 
partake of the fatness of the root, even babes in 
Christ, and much more they who have arrived at 
the measure of the stature of his fulness ; shall all 
savingly know me, and have eternal life in and by 
that knowledge. For I will forgive their iniquity, 
&c.—Here God represents the free pardon of all 
their sins-as being the root and foundation of this 
grace, and of all the privileges and blessings of this 
new covenant. 

Verses 35-37.. Thus saith the Lord, who giveth 
the sun for alight by day—All the acts hére men- 
tioned are suchas manifest the divine, almighty 


The principal design of the prophet here is | 
evidently to express the difference between the law | 


} 


| 
| 
1] 


power of him who is the Lord of all the hosts of the | 


460 


Ixxxix. || 9, 10; Chap. xxxiii. 20.——i Chap. xxxiii. 22. * Neh. iii. 1; 
Zech. xiv. 10. . ’ 

_—— - ee 

creation: Which divideth, or, who did divide, the 


sea—Namely, as the words are generally interpreted, 
the’ Red sea, to give the Israelites passage. The 
original words, however, 37 p37, which occur Isa. 


li. 15, where they are translated: as here, are by 


Bishop Lowth rendered, who stilleth the sea,asense 


| which accords better with the words immediately 


following, whenithe waves thereof roar—Thatis, even 
when the waves are most tumultuous, and roar most 


dreadfully, he, with infinite ease, quiets them, and 
| produces a perfect calm. 
the heart of man is changed, and he is enabled to do |, 


In this gense the same 
word is interpreted verse 2 of this chapter, and also 
chap. 1. 34. If these ordinances—Hebrew, "pnn, 
these appointnients respecting the heavenly bodies 


_.and their motions and uses ; depart from before me 
ly exhibited; neither was the renewing grace of | 


—Be altered or suspended in their operations; then 
shall the seed of Israel cease from being a nation, 


| &c.—Thus God makes the continuance of the laws 
of nature a pledge of the continuance of Israel as a 
| people. 


The prediction implies, Ist, That God 
would preserve a remnant of them in the country to 
which they were led captive, and would restore them 
to their own land; 2d, That there should be another 
remnant of them, at ‘the beginning of the gospel, 


main body of that nation ; and 3d,That Providence 
would still preserve them in a body distinct from all 
other people in the world, in order to their eonver- 


| sion in God’s due time. To this place St. Paul, speak- 


ing of the conversion of the Jews in the latter times, 
seems to refer when he says, The gifts and calling 
of God [to the Jews] are without repentance, Rom, 
xi. 29. Ifheaven above can be medsured, &c.—If 
the height and extent thereof can be ascertained by 
men, which is impossible, J will also cast off all the 
seed of Israel, &c.—That is, I will never cast them 
all off—a promise which the apostle, (Rom. xi. 1, 2,) 
proves to have been made good by God, notwith- 
standing the rejection of the great body of that people. 

Verses 38-40. Behold, the days come, that the city 


|| shall be built to the Lord—Or, for the Lord, name- 


ly, for his use and service. Bianey renders it, Un- 

der the direction of the Lord, from the tower of Ha- 

naneel, &¢c.—* Here follows a description of the cir- 
3 


The king of Judah 


—— 


CHAPTER XXXII 


‘ ry 
imprisons Jeremiah. 


A. M, 3410. 


1 : 
rae 39 And 'the measuring line shall 


yet go forth over against it upon the 
hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath, 
40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies, 
and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the 


brook ‘of Kidron, ™unto the corner A. 1 agg 
of the horse-gate toward the east, 

* shall be holy unto the Lorn; it shall not 
be plucked up, nor thrown down any more 
for ever. 


. 1 Ezek. xl. 8; Zech. ii. 1——™ 2 Chron: xviii. 15; 


Nehemiah iii. 28, 0 Joel iii. 17. 


cumference of a new city to be built on the site of Je- 
rusalem ; but that it does not mean the city which was 
rebuilt after the return of the, Jews from the Baby- 
lonish captivity is evident from two principal cireum- 
stances; first, because the limits are here extended 
farther, so as to include a greater space than was 
contained within the walls at that time; and second- 
ly, it is here said, that it should never be razed or de- 
stroyedany more. This new city, therefore, must be 
referred to those after-times when the general re- 
storation of Israel is appointed to.take place.” Thus 
Blaney, with whom many other commentators,agree. 
That this prophecy “was notfulfilled,” says Dr. Dodd; 
“from the return out of Babylon to the days of 
Christ, we are assured from sacred history ; where 
we read that mount Goath, or Golgotha, (which 
word in Hebrew signifies the heap of Gotha,) was 
situated without Jerusalem. The same may be said 
of the valley of dead bodies and-of the ashes, name- 
ly, the valley of Hinnom, so des¢ribed, from its havy- 
ung been made a common burying place, and a re- 
ceptacle for the rubbish and filth of the city. “As 


to Gareb we know nothing certain. We-may also 
add, that the last clause of this chapter, it shall not 
be plucked up, §c., any more for ever, cannot refer 
to the Jerusalem which was rebuilt after the captivi- 
ty, and, which was plucked up and thrown down by 
the Romans. We must necessarily recur, there- 
fore, either to some future building of that city, or 
to the church of Christ, against which we are assured 
the gates of hell shall never prevail,” and which is 
elsewhere called the city of God, and the new Jeru- 
salem. Taking, the passage in this mystical sense, as 
a description of the church, in its most enlarged and 
perfect state, in the latter days, we can be at no loss 
to explain the clause in the last verse which ex- 
presses that all-parts.of the city, even the valley of 
Hinnom, and all the fields, unto. the brook Kidron, 
§c., shall be holy unto the Lord. For, undoubtedly, at 
this time the church shall be thoroughly purged from 
all corruption, both with regard to the doctrine taught 
in it, and the principles and practices of its: mem- 
bers, who shall all be both well instructed in divine 
things, and truly holy in their hearts and lives. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


Tr this chapter, which has no connection with the preceding, we have an account, (1,) Of Jeremiah’s imprisonment for 


foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of King Zedekiah, 1-5. 


(2;) Of an order he received 


from God to purchase a field in Anathoth, and of his executing the order in due form, and delivering the writings 


to Baruch to be kept safely, in token of God’s purposing to restore the rights of possession in the land, 6-15. 


(3,) 


Ina prayer he acknowledges God's infinite greatness and power, and the wonders of his goodness to Israel, with 
the ungrateful and coniumacious behaviour of that people, which had brought the present calamities upon them ; 
and concludes with an humble representation of the paper circumstances of his country, notwithstanding that he 


had been commanded to make the foregoing purchase, 16-2 


(4,) In reply, God asserts his own all-sufficiency ; 


and then goes on to avow his resolution to give up the site & _ be taken and burned by the Chaldeans, because of 


the many and great pr ovocations which had been given him, 26-35. 


(5,) He promises, however, in time to reassem- 


ble his people, and bring them back to their own land, to enter into covenant with them anew, and-to promote their 
welfare ; so that the oma though given up to desolation at present, should flourish again, and possessions be once 


more bought and sold, as in former times, 36-44. 


HE word that came to Jeremiah 
from the Lorp *in the tenth 
year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was 


36. M. yong 


2 For eh the king of Babylon’s a be tks 
army besieged Jerusalem : and Jere- - 
miah the prophet was shut up ?in the court of the 
prison, which was in the king of J udah’s house. 


the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar. 


a2 Kings xxv. 1,2; Jer. xxxix. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXII. 

Verse 1. The word that came to Jeremiah—As 
the date of the following transaction and prophecy 
is here stated to have been in the tenth year of Zede- 
kiah’s reign, while the Chaldeans invested the city, 

3 


> Neh. iit. 25; Ch. xxxiii. 1; xxxvii. 21; xxxviii. 6; xxxix. 14. 


|| and Jeremiah was confined in ‘thee court of the prison, 


it must have been after the Egyptians had retreated 
back to their own Jand, and the Chaldeans had re- 
newed the siege a second time. Jeremiah at the 


beginning, it seems, of the siege foretold to Zedekiah 


461 


he F 


s 


Destruction of Jerusalem 


| JEREMIAH. 


4 


Soretold by the prophet. 


A.M. 3415. 3 For Zedekiah king of Judah had 
BO. 589. hut him up, saying, Wherefore dost 


thou prophesy, and say, 'Thus saith the Lorn, 
° Behold, I will give this city into the hand of 
_ the king of Babylon, and he shall take it ; 


4 And Zedekiah king of Judah ¢ shall not | 


escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but 
shall surely be delivered into the hand of the 
king of Babylon, and shall speak with him 
mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold _ his 
Oye: car, 

5 And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and 
there shall he be ° until I visit him, saith the 


Lorn: ‘though ye fight with the A. M, 3415 
Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper. 2 eal 

6 § And Jeremiah said, The word of the 
Lorp came unto me, saying, 

7 Behold, Hanameel, the son of Shallum 
thine uncle, shall come unto thee, saying, Buy 
thee my field that 7s in Anathoth: for the ® right 
of redemption is thine to buy ét.. 

S So Hanameel mine uncle’s son came to me 
in the court of the prison, according to the word 
of the Lorp, and said unto me, Buy my field, 
I pray thee, that ts in Anathoth, which is in 
the country of Benjamin: for the right of in- 


= 


¢ Chap. xxxiv. 2,——4 Chap. xxxiv. 3; xxxviii. 18, 23; xxxix. 


53 ‘lit 9, 


that the city should be taken, and the king sent cap- 
tive to Babylon, chap. xxxiv. 1,7. The king, or his 
princes rather, irritated at his freedom, put him in 
prison, or, at least, in the court of the prison, which 
was in the palace, And it was in this place that the 
transaction here recorded happened. As Nebuchad- 
nezzar came to besiege Jerusalem in the ninth year 
of Zedekiah, it is probable Jeremiah had now been 
confined a year or more in prison. The siege, it 


may be observed, lasted from the tenth month of | 


that year to the fourth month of the eleventh ‘year 
of that king’s reign. 

Verses 3-5. Jeremiah was shut up in the court of 
the prison—He was afterward put in the dungeon, 
chap. xxxvil. 16; and xxxviii. 6. But now he was 
not under so severe a restraint. Compare verses 26 
and 28 of that chapter. For Zedekiah had shut him 
up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy and say, 
&c.—This refers to the prophecy recorded chap. 
xxxiv. 2, &c., the particulars there mentioned being, 
in order of time, before the passages related ‘in this 
chapter. We nowhere read that Zedekiah himself 
immediately commanded Jeremiah to be imprisoned : 
he seems rather to have been favourable to him, and 
to have been averse to his confinement; but God 
accounts princes to do that which their ministers or 
subordinate magistrates do with their connivance, or 
without their prohibition. Behold, I will give. this 
city, §c., and Zedekiah shall not escape—Jeremiah 
prophesies that both the city and the court should 
fall into the hands of the king of Babylon: for God, 
whose city it was, ina peculiar manner would put 
it out of his protection, and give it into their hands; 
that, though Zedekiah should attempt to make his 
escape, he should be overtaken, and brought as a 
prisoner into Nebuchadnezzar’s presence, to his great 
confusion and terror, he having made himself par- 
ticularly obnoxious to him by breaking his faith with 
him; that he should hear the king of Babylon pro- 
nounce his doom, and see with what fury and indig- 
nation he should look upon him, his eyes, as it. is 
expressed, beholding Nebuehadnezzar’s eyes. He 
further prophesies that Zedekiah should be carried to 


Babylon, and continue a miserable captive there’ 


462 


e Chap. xxvii. 22.——! Chap. xxi. 4; xxxiii. 5.6 Lev. xxv. 
. 24, 32; Ruth iv. 4 


until God should visit him—That is, till God should 
put an end to his life by a natural death, as Nebu- 
chadnezzar had long before put an end to every 
comfort of his life by putting out his eyes. And, 
lastly, he foretels that_all their attempts to force the 
besiegers from their trenches would be ineffectual ; 
for though they should fight with the Chaldeans, 
they should. not prosper. For prophesying thus, 
that is, for bearing testimony to the truth, and giving 
them faithful warning of impending judgments, he 
is imprisoned. - 
Verses 6-8. T'he word of the Lord came unto me 
—“Jeremiah, after having just informed us why he 
was put in prison, returns to his design, and tells us 
that God had advised him, probably in a dream or 
vision, that Hanameel, his cousin, should come to 
him with the offer of a field in Anathoth ; the right 
of redeeming whereof wasinhim, Jeremiah might 
have given up his right, as not being in a situation 
to make the purchase ; but, understanding from the 
revelation of the Lord, that this affair had a mystical 
reference, and that he ought to accept the offer of 
his cousin, he purehased the field, as is afterward 
related, with the. full process and. meaning of the 
affair.’-—Dodd. The field » being in Anathoth, near 
Jerusalem, was consequently at this time actually i in 
the possession of the Chaldean army. And the de- 
sign of God in directing Jeremiah to purchase it was 
to signify, that though Jerusalem was now besieged, 
and the whole country was likely to be laid waste, 
yet the time should come when houses, and fields, 
and vineyards should be again possessed in that 
land, verse 15. As God appointed Jeremiah to con- 
firm his predictions of the approaching destruction 
of Jerusalem by his own practice in living unmar- 
ried, so he now appointed him to confirm his predic- _ 
tions. of the future restoration of Jerusalem by his 
own practice in purchasing this field. The Roman 
historian, Florus, relates, as a great instance of the 
bravery of the Roman citizens, that in the time of 
the second Punic war, when Hannibal besieged 
Rome, and was very near making himself master of 
it, afield, on which part of his army lay, being offered 
for sale at that time, was presently purchased, in a 
7 


v 


The prophet cshates a field 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


. Fv, 


2 


at Anathoth by order of God. 


£s+. 


. ¥ fais heritance és thine, and the redemption 
——— is thine; buy i¢ for thyself. Then J 
knew that this was the word of the Lorn. 

9 And I bought the field of Hanameel mine 
uncle’s son; that was in Anathoth, and » weigh- 
ed himi the money, even 1 seventeen shekels of 
silver. 

40 And I * subscribed t 
at, and took witnesses, 
money in the balances. 

11 So I took the evidence of the purchase, 
both that which was sealed according to the 
law and custom, and that which was open: 

12 And I gave the evidence of the purchase 
unto ‘Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of 
Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine 
uncle’s son, and in the presence of the * wit- 
nesses that subscribed the book of the purchase, 
before all the Jews that sat-in the court of the 
prison. 

13 § And I charged Baruch before them, 
saying, 

14 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Take these évidences, this evidence of 


e evidence, and sealed 
d weighed him the 


the purchase, both which is sealed, A. M. 3415. 
. 589. 

and this evidence which is open ; eal 

put them in an earthen vessel, ea they may 

continue many days. . * 

15 For thus saith the Lorn of an the God 
of Israel; Houses and fields. and vineyards 
‘shall be possessed again in this land. 

16 % Now when I had delivered. the evidence 
of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Noo 
I prayed unto the Lorp, saying, 

17 Ah Lord Gop! behold, ™ thou hast made 
the heaven and the earth by thy great poweby 
and stretched-out arm, and oe is nothing 
3 too hard for thee: ; 

18 Thou showest °loving-kindness unto thou- 
sands, and recompensest the iniquity of the 
fathers into the bosom of their children after 
them: the Great, ?the Mighty God, 4 the 
Lorp of hosts, zs his name ; 

19 * Great in counsel, and mighty in * work: 
for thine ‘eyes are open upon all the ways of 
the sons of men; ‘to give every one accord- 
ing to his ways, and according to the fruit of 
his doings : : 


© Gen. xxiii. 16; Zech. xi. 12. 1 Or, seven shekels and ten 
pecs of silver. 2 Heb. wrote in the book. i Chap. xxxvi. 4. 

Isa. vili..2,—! Ver. 37, 43.—™ 2 Kings xix. 15. o Gen. 
xviii-14; Verse 27; Luke i. 37. 


© Hxodus xx, 6; xxxiv. 7;.Deut: v. 9, 
4 Chap.-x. 16. + Isaiah xxviii. 29, 
Psa. xxxiii. 13 ; Prov. v. 21, 


3Or, hid from thee. 
10. P Isaiah ix. 6. 
*Heb. doing —— Job xxxiv. 21 ; 
Chap. xvi, 17.——* Chap. xvii. 10. 


firm belief that the Roman valour would raise the 
siege, lib. ii. cap.6. And have not we much more 
reason to venture our all upon the word of God, and 
to embark in Zion’s interests, which will undoubt- 
edly be the prevailing interests at last ? 

Verse 9. I weighed him the money—In ancient 
times all money was paid by weight, a custom still 
used in several countries; even seventeen shekels of 
silver—A sum which, in our money, is not mueh 
above forty shillings; a small price for a field or 
piece of ground. It must be considered, however, 
“that the quantity of land is uncertain, and that 
the circumstances of the times must have greatly 
tended to lessen the value of land. The field in 
question was at the time of the purchase in the ene- 
my’s possession ; and the purchaser well knew that 
he or his heirs had’no chance of entering upon it till 
after the expiration of the seventy years’ captivity. 
Besides, the seller, it is likely, was in the immediate 
want of the money, and could get no one-else to pur- 
chase in the precarious situation things were in. He 
might therefore be glad to take what the prophet, 
who, doubtless, was not rich, was able to give, and who 


would not have thought of making the purchase at || 


any rate had he not acted under the divine direction 
for a special purpose. »__Blaney. 

Verses 10-14. I subscribed the evidence, and sealed 
it—I wrote down an account of the transaction in a 
book. The method it appears then in use among 

3 


the Jews when any purchase was made was, tha; 
the purchaser, as well as those who sold, testified his 
consent by some writing’ signed before witnesses. 
I took the evidence, both that which was sealed and 
that which was open—The open, or unsealed writing, 
was either a copy of the sealed one, or else a certifi- 
cate of the witnesses, in whose presence the deed of 
purchase was signed and sealed. I gave the evidence 
of the purchase unto Baruch—* Baruch was a scribe 
by profession, and it may be concluded that the at- 
tendance of such a one, skilled in the forms of law, 
was necessary on’ those occasions, both to draw up 
the writings and to officiate in the character ofa 
notary public. And to his custody, as being a pub- 
lic officer, the custody of the title-deeds was intrust- 
ed.” Icharged Baruch, to put them in an earthen 
vessel—To preserve them from fire and moisture. 
It was common with the ancients to put their writings 
into earthen vessels. Origen found at Jericho a 
version of the Scriptures hid in an earthen pot. 
That they may continue many days—When hid 
under ground for greater security, to be produced 
when the land should be reinhabited. 

Verses 16-22. When I'had delivered the evidence, 
P prayed unto the Lord—What he prayed for we 
learn in the following verses: by which it appears 
that he was not without some doubts and Perpley, 
ities in this business. And though he yielded 
ready and absolute obedience to God's command, 

463 


> "nl & 


The prophet bewails 


20 Which hast set signs and. wori- 
ders in the land of Egypt, even unto 
this day, and in Israel, and among other_men ; 
and hast made thee "a name, as-at this day ; 


A. M. 3415. 
C. 689, 


21 And *hast brought forth thy people, 


Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, 


-and with wonders, and with a strong hand, 


and with a stretched-out arm, and with great 
terror 5 

22 And hast given them this land, which 
thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, 

a land flowing with milk and honey ; 

23 And they came in, and’ possessed it; but 
“they obeyed not thy voice, neither, walked 
in thy law; they have done nothing of all 
that thou commandedst them to do; therefore 


J 7 sched 


the state of Jerusalem. 


thou hast cauied all this evil to come A. M. 3415. 
upon them: : bo heat 

24 Behold the ° mounts, they are come unto 
the city to take it; and the city *is given into 
the hand of the Chaldeans, that fight against 
it, because of the sword, and of the famine, 
and of the pestilence: and what thou hast 
spoken is come toepess 5 and behold, thou 


|| seest 2¢. 


25 And thou hast said unto me, O Lord Gop, 
Buy thee the field for money, and. take wit- 
nesses; ° for ° the city is given into the hand 
of the Chaldeans. 

26 “| Then came the word of the Lorp unto 
Jeremiah, saying, 

27 Behold, I am the Lorp, the 4 God of all 


u Exod.ix. 16; 1 Chron. xvii. 21; Isa. lxiii. 12; Dan. ix. 15. 
x Exod. vi. 6; 2 Sam. vii. 23; 1Chron. xvii. 21; Psa. exxxvi. 
11, 12.——y Exod. iii. 8, 17; Chap. xi..5. 


« Neh. ix. 26; Chap. xi. 8; Dan. ix. 10-14——‘ Or, engines 
of shot, Chap. xxxiii. 4. a Verses 25, 36.—— Chap. xiv. 12. 
® Or, though: © Verse 24. 4 Num. xvi. 22. 


yet he prays for a clearer revelation of his meaning 
in the matter. Saying, Ah Lord God! &c.—He 
begins his prayer with an acknowledgment of God’s 
infinite power, made manifest in his works, both of 


_creation and providence, whereby he shows himself 


wonderful in his mercies, and terrible in his judg- 
ments. It is observable that God himself makes 
use of these instances to confirm his people’s faith in 
his ability to do whatever he pleases, chap. xxvii. 5. 
And the servants of God are. often -represented in 
holy writ as giving God such names and titles, and 
ascribing to him such attributes, as'were calculated 
to strengthen their faith in prayer. And there is 
nothing too hard for thee—Hebrew, 72 > xbar x, 
too wonderful Sor thee, or, hidden from thee, as some 
render the clause: that is, out.of the reach of thy 
wisdom and power'to bring to pass. Thou showest 
loving-kindness unto thousands, and recompensest, 
&c.—This name.God gave himself, Exod. xxxiv. 7; 
Deut. v. 9, 10, where see the notes; and concerning 
the latter clause, the note on chap. xxxi. 29, 30. 
The great, the mighty God, the Lord of hosts—The 
God of infinite majesty, of boundless power, and of 
universal dominion, and therefore worthy of all ado- 
ration and praise, of all reverence and fear, of all 
subjection and obedience. Great in counsel, and 
mighty in work—Who art infinitely wise in ordering 
all events, and powerful in putting thy decrees in 
execution. . Thine eyes are openupon all the ways, 
&c.—Beholding the evil and the good, and that not 
as an unconcerned spectator, but as an observing 


judge ; to give every one according tohis ways—To 


reward or. punish men according to their actions, 
and the principles from which they proceed. Who 
hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt— 
Who didst wonders of justice in the land of Egypt, 


which remain, if not in the marks, yet in the me-||° 


morials of them, wnto this day. And in Israel— 

‘Anz wroughtest wonders of mercy in Israel, bring- 

ing them out of Egypt through the Red sea, raining 
464 


down manna upon them, and quails from heaven, 
and fetching water out of the rock for them; and 
among other men—And hast also done many won- 
drous works in other places, by which thou hast 
made thyself a glorious name. fie 

Verses 23-25. And they came in and possessed it 
—In the former two verses he acknowledges God’s 
goodness to Israel, here he owns his truth and faith- 
fulness in bringing them into the land which he had 
promised them. But they obeyed not thy voice— 
Having borne testimony to God’s power, wisdom, 
and faithfulness, he comes now to own his justice, 
confessing that this people for whom he had done 
so much, had very ill requited him. They have 
done nothing dat all that thou commandedst them, &c. 
—They have not only broken some particular laws, 
but thy whole law. Therefore thou hast caused all 
this evil, &c.—Therefore thou art righteous in bring- 
ing these judgmentsupon them. Behold the mounts 
—The ramparts raised against the walls for placing 
battering engines on, and engines to cast weapons 
against the defenders, or for the purpose of making 
a general assault and taking the city. And the city 
is given—Is ready to be given; intothehand of the 
Chaldeans, because of the sword, &e.—Such is the 
havoc ‘that the sword, the famine, and the pesti- 
lence make among the people, that they cannot 
make head against the besiegers; -but must be over- 
come by them. And thow hast said unto me, Buy 
thee the field for money—In this posture of. affairs, 
when the city, and the country round about it, are in 
the power of the enemy, thou hast commanded me 
to make this purchase, which I have no prospect of 
ever enjoying. As if he had said, Lord! expound . 
thy meaning to me, why thou shouldest set me 
to make purchases for thine enemies to possess. 

Verses 26-35. Then came the word of the Lord 
unto Jeremiah—To this difficulty of Jeremiah, be- 
tween what was commanded him, and the prospect 
of its being, not only useless, but disadvantageous to 

3 


Jerusalem, for her sins, 


CHAPTER XXXII 


again threatened with ruin. 


_- Ton - = 


A.M. 3415. flesh : 


ej . 
B. C. 589. is there = thing too hard 


for me? 

28 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; Behold, 
‘I will give this city into the hand of the Chal- 
deans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon, and he shall take it : 

29 And the Chaldeans, that fight against this 
city, shall come and ® set fire on this city, and 
burn it with the houses, "upon whose roofs 
they have offered incense unto Baal, and poured 
out drink-offerings unto other gods, to provoke 
me-to anger. 

30 For the. children of Israel and the chil- 
dren of Judah ‘have only done evil before me 
from their youth: for the children of Israel 
have only provoked me to anger with the work 
of their hands, saith the Lorp. 

31 For this city hath been to me as.’a pro- 
vocation of mine anger and of my fury from 


the day that they built it even unto * Mt 3415, 
this day; ‘that I should remove it te 
from before my face, e a a 

32 Because of all the evil of the children of 


Israel and of the children of Judah, which 


they have done to provoke me to-anger, ! they, 
their kings, their princes, their priests, and their 
prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inha- 
bitants of Jerusalem. — ~ 

33 And they have turned unto me the ® back," 
and not the face: 


have not hearkened to receive instruction. 
34 But they °set their abominations in the 
house which is called by my name, to defile it. 
35. And they built the high places of Baal, 
which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, 


to ? cause their sons and their daughters to pass , 


through the fire unto * Molech; * which I com- 


© Verse 17, Verse 3.——s Chap. xxi. 10; xxxvii. 8, 103 
lii. 13. —— Chap. xix. 13.——~i Chap. ii. 7; iii. 25; vii. 22-26 ; 
xxii. 21; Ezek. xx. 28. 7 Heb. for my "anger-——-2 Kings 
xxiii. 27, xxiv. 3. 


1 Isa. i. 4,6; Dan. ix. 8: 8 Heb. neck. m Chap. ii. 27; 
Vil, 24,——— Chap. vii. 13. © Chap. vil. 30; xxiii, 11; Ezek. 
vill. 5, 6. » Chapter vii. 31; xix. 5——4 Leviticus xviii. 21; 


1 Kings x1, 33.—" Chap; vii. 31. 


him, the Lord answered, Behold, I am the God of 
all flesh--Of all men: is anything too hard for me? 
—The difficulties which thou thinkest are not to be 
surmounted are not difficulties to me, who can do 
all things, and have the lives and actions of men 
wholly at my disposal. Therefore, thus saith the 
Lord—The Lord now proceeds to confirm again 
the predictions so frequently given, concerning both 
the destruction and the restoration of Jerusalem ; 
and to explain more fully the reasons of his conduct 
toward the Jews and Israelites. The Chaldeans, 
that fight against this city shall burn it—Thou 
judgest right: this city shall be taken, and that by 
this very army of Chaldeans which now besieges it ; 
who shall destroy it by fire; with the houses, wpon 
whose roofs they have offered incense, &c.—As if he 
had said, In the execution of my vengeance I shall 
not act by absolute’ power, but as a just and right- 
eous judge, vindicating the honour of my violated 
laws. For they have polluted their houses by idol- 
atrous worship upon the roofs of them, openly and 
publicly, in contempt of my authority, and defi- 
ance of my justice. Jor the children of Israel and 
Judah have only done evil before me, &c.—If they 
had offended me only by some particular acts 
of sin, or by omitting their duty in only some few 
instances, or but for a short time, I might have been 
thought to act with severity toward them; but 
from the time they first began to be a nation they 
have only provoked me to anger with the works of 
their hands—Passing from one course of sin, and 
from one species of idolatry, to another. For this 
city hath been a provocation of mine anger, &c.— 
The conduct of its inhabitants has been generally 
and long provoking: they began betimes, and have 
Vou. II. ( 30 ) 


continued in the commission of the most daring 
wickedness from age to age. From the day that 
they built it—Or, that it was built, the verb person- 
al being often used for the impersonal. _ Solomon 
completed the building of Jerusalem, having greatly 
enlarged and beautified it with the temple and other 
stately buildings, and he afterward greatly defiled 
it by idolatry, the sin here spoken of. See 1 Kings 
xi. 7, compared with 2 Kings xxiii. 13. And, ex- 
cept in David’s time, the worship of God could 
hardly be said to be preserved pure through the en- 
tire reign of anyone king. That I should remove it 


. from before-my face—As if they had pursued these 


idolatrous practices on purpose to provoke me to de- 
stroy the city, and to cast its inhabitants out of it. 
As nothing can be more easy than for people tokeep 
close to the divine rule, as to external acts of 
worship, so nothing is more provoking to God than 
their not doirig so. And yet nothing has been more 
rarely done in any nation; as if men had set them- 
selves to bid defiance to a jealous God. Because of 
all. the evil of the children of Israel—Still God 
makes their destruction to be of themselves, provok- 
ing him to that wrath which he executed upon them. 
They, their kings, their princes, &e.—The whole 
head was sick, the whole heart faint. Al orders of 
men were so corrupted that there was no hope of 
their reformation oramendment. T'hey have turned 
unto me the back and not the face—They have be- 
haved themselves contemptuously toward me, like 
men who, when they are admonished or instructed, 
instead of looking toward those who instruct or ad- 
monish them, turn their backs upon them: see nate 
on chap. ii. 27. Whough I taught them, rising up 
early, &c.—Their sin would not have been so great 
465 3 


though I taught them, 
“rising up early and teaching them, yet they 


The Lord promises to gather 


» JEREMIAH. 


the Jews after their dispersion. 


— 
— 


A. “a pane. manded them not, neither came it 
into my mind, that they should do 
this abomination, to cause Judah to sin. 

36 9 And now therefore thus saith the Lorn, 
the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof 
ye say, *It shall be delivered into the hand of 
the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the 
famine, and by the pestilence ; 

37 Behold, I will.‘ gather them out of all 
countries, whither I have driven them in mine 
anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; 
‘and I will bring them again unto this place, 
and I will cause them “to dwell safely. » 

38 And they shall be * my pennies and I. will 
be their God : 

39 And I will ¥ give them one heart and one 


way, that they may fear me ° for ever, - Mm. 3415, 
for the good of them, and of their — 
children after them : 

40 And 71 will. make an evenlnlliil cove- 
nant with> them, that°I will ‘not tum away 
*° from them, to do them good ; but *I will put 
my fear in their hearts, that sp shall not ay 
part from me. 

Al Yea, °I will rejoice over them to do them 
good, and © I will plant them in this land 2 as- 
suredly with my whole heart and with my 
whole soul. 

42 For thus saith the Lorn; ¢ Likeas I have 
brought all this great evil upon this people, so 
will I bring upon them all the oe that I have 
promised them. 


5 Verse 24. 
xxxi. 10; Ezekiel xxxvii. 21. 4 Chapter xxili. 6; xxxiii. 16. 
x Chap. xxiv. 7; xxx. 22; xxxi. 33.——Y Chap. xxiv. 7; Ezek. 
xi. 19; 20. 


t Deuteron. xxx. 3; Chap. xxiii. 3; xxix. 14; 


° Heb. all days. 2 Isaiah lv. 3; Chap, xxxi, 31.——?° Heb. 
from after them. @ Chap. xxxi. 33.45 b Deut. xxx. 9; Zeph. 
ui. 17. © Chap, xxiv. e. XXXL 28 ; Amos ix. 15, pote Heb. 
in truth, or, stability ——4 Chap. xxxi. 28, 


and heinous if I, by my prophets, had not so con- 
tinually instructed and reproved them; and they as 
stubbornly refused to hearken to the instruction, and 
‘to be amended by the reproofs. They. set their 
abominations—Their idols, which, above all things; 
the jealous God abhors; in thehouse which is called 
by my name—That is, in the temple, which was or- 
dinarily called the house of the Lord. This they 
did under some of the idolatrous kings. And they 
built the high places of Baal, &e.—See the notes on 
chap. xix. 5, 6, where all the clauses of this verse 
are explained. 

Verses 36-39. Now therefore, &c.—In this and the 
following verses God returns an answer to the pro- 
phet’s expostulation, versé 25. Or the words may be 
thus translated, But now, notwithstanding, [all this,] 
thus. saith the Lord ; concerning this city, whereof 
ye say, It shall be delivered into the hand, &c.— 
Many of the Jews now-began to see that the Chal- 
deans would certainly take the city, and they became 
as much dispirited as before they were full of courage. 
By the sword and by the famine, &c.—The famine 
and pestilence, as well as the sword, seemed.to fight 
for the king of Babylon, by the great havoc they 
made of the besieged, which rendered the taking of 
the city so much easier. Behold I will gather them 
out.of all countries, &c.—See notes on chap. xxiii. 
3, 8, and xxix. 14. J will bring them again, §c., 
and cause them to dwell safely—Though the city 
shall be taken, and the people shall go into captivity, 
yet they shall not be utterly lost, for I will gather 
them again, and they shall dwell here in quietness 
and safety as formerly. It is justly observed, how- 
ever, by St. Jerome, in his notes on the place, that 
this promise, taken in its full extent, was not made 
good to those that returned from captivity, because 
they were frequently infested with wars, as well by 
the kings of Syria and Egypt, as by the rest of their 
neighbours, as appears from the history of the Mac- 

466 


cabees } and were finally subdued and destroyed by 
the Romans. And they shall be my people, &e.— 
See note on chap. xxiv. 7, and xxx. 22. And I will 
give them one.heart and one way—When the ten 
tribes set up a distinct kingdom from that of Judah, 
they stood. divided, not only in their civil interests, 
but also. in respect to their religious worship. These 
distinctions, God here says, he would entirely abol- 
ish, so that Israel and Judah should be united, and 
become one nation and one church, living under the 
same civil government, and using the same forms of 
divine worship, equally acknowledging and serving 
the one, living and true God. That they may fear 
me for ever—That they may worship and obey me in 
truth, as a people that have a real reverence for and 
fear of offending me; for the good of them and of 
their children—Which will be for the great advan- 
tage and happiness-of them and their posterity as 
long as they shall continue so to do. This promise, 
in its full sense, will not be accomplished till the ge- 
neral conversion of Judah and Israel to Christianity, 
and their restoration and reunion in the latter days. 
See notes.on chap. iii. 18, and xxx. 3. 

Verses 40-44, And I will make an everlasting 
covenant with them—-The Jewish covenant, even 
with respect to the ceremonial ordinances contained 
in it, is sometimes called an everlasting covenant: 
see Gen. xvii. 13; Lev. xxiv. 8; Isa. xxiv. 5; be- 
cause those ordinances were to continue for a long 
succession of ages ; but when this expression is ap- 
plied to the gospel covenant, there is a peculiar em- 
phasis contained in it, implying that it should never 
be abolished, or give way to any other dispensation. 
That Iwill not turn away from them to do them 
good—This clause manifestly shows, that this pro- 
mise relates to those Jews and Israelites that should 
embrace the gospel, and become Jews inwardly, and 
Israelites indeed ; for, as to others, God did turn 
away from doing. them good, when their city was 

8 


(308 


; 


Judah's captivity 


A.M. 3415: 
PO. 889. .. : i 
this’ land, f whereof ye‘ say, It is de- 


solate without man or beast; it is given into 


the hand of the Chaldeans. 
44 Men shall buy fields for money, and sub- 
scribe evidences, and seal them, and take wit- 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


to be turned. 


43 And ° fields shall be bought in || nesses in &the land of Benjamin, and A. M. 3415. 


. B.C. 589. 
in the places about Jerusalem, and in 


the cities of ‘Judah, and in the cities of the 
mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and 
in the cittes of the south : for »'I will cause their 
captivity to return, saith the Lorp. | 


© Verse 15.—f Chap: xxxiii. 10. 


& Chap. xvii. 26. Chap. xxxiii. 7, 11, 26. 


taken by Titus, and so many myriads of them per- 
ished by the sword, faniine, and pestilence. But I 
will put my y fear into their hearts—My Spirit shall be- 
get in them a true reverence for, and genuine, loving 
fear of me, producing obedience tomy laws, subjec- 
tion to my authority, and perseverance in my ways, 
so that they shall not depart from me. Some justly 
infer from this declaration, that when once the body 
of the Jews shall. be converted, they shall never 
again apostatize from God. Yea, J will rejoice over 
them to do them good—I will not only do them good, 
but will take pleasure therein. And I will plant 
them, &c., assuredly, with my whole heart—With a 
true and lasting affection. Like as I have brought 
all this great evil, &c.—They shall find me as true 
to my promises as to my threatenings. See ‘chap. 


xxxi. 28. And fields shall be bought in this land, 
&c.—So that it was not without good reason that I 
sent Hanameel unto thee, verse 8. It was to assure 
thee that, though at present the Chaldeans shall pre- 
vail against Jerusalem, and the Jews shall be carried 
into captivity, and shail neither buy nor sell here, 
yet fields shall be bought here again. Men shall 
buy and sell, and seal evidences in all parts of 
this land, whereof you say, in despair, [¢ is deso- 
late without man or beast—Having no hope of 
the land being ever inhabited by your nation again. 
For I will cause their captivity to return, saith 
the Lord—The return of their captivity under Cy- 
rus shall be an earnest of those ‘greater blessings 
which I will bestow upon them at their general 
restoration. 


‘CHAPTER XX XIII. 


This chapter contains a prophecy, hicks though applicable, in some parts, to the restoration lef the Jews from Baby- 
lon, cannot, however, be so applied upon the whole, for reasons already touched upon in the notes on chap. xxx. and 


XXXi. 


(1,) God here reveals his gracious purpose of healing the wounds of Jerusalem, restoring the captivity both 


of Israel and Judah, forgiving their sins, and distinguishing them with such blessings as to strike the astonished 
. nations with fear and trembling, 1-9. (2,) He foretels that the land, whose desolation they deplored, should ‘again 
flourish with multitudes both of men and cattle, 10-13. (3,) He confirms his former promise of establishing a 
kingdom of righteousness in a branch of the house of David, and rendering it perpetual, together with the priest- 
hood of the sons of Levi, 14-18. (4,) He declares his covenant, in this respect, with David and the Levites, to be as 
sure as the covenant of day and night, 19-22. And, (5,) To remove the reproach of having cast off those families 
whom he had once distinguished by his choice, he renews his protestations of infallibly restoring the seed of Jacob, 


‘and of appointing the seed of David to rule over them for ever, 23-26. 


A. os my 


7 . \V[OREOVER the word of the 


Fal: Ws O08 Lorp came unto Jeremiah the 
second time, while he: was yet * shut up in the 
court of the prison, saying, 


2 Thus saith the Lorp the » maker A. M. 3415. 
thereof, the Lorn that formed it, to abs 
establish it; 1The° Lorp is his name: 

3 ‘Call unto me, and I .will answer thee, and 


*Ohap. xxxii. 2, 3.——? Isa.’ xxvii. 26! Or, JEHOVAH. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIII. 

“Verse 1.' The word of the Lord came unto Jere- 
miah the second time—Scee note on chap. xxxii. 2. 
Jeremiah being forced out of the temple, God fol- 
lows him to the prison, and there reveals his mind 
to him once and again. The wickedness of the 
Jews in persecuting the prophet could not make 
God’s promises of no effect respecting mercy to be 
shown to the people after the captivity; which pro- 
mises, though made before, are here confirmed a 
second time. 

3 


¢ Exod. xv. 3; Amos v. 8; ix.6.—4 Psa. xci.15; Ch. xxix. 12. 


Verse 2. T'hus saith the Lord, the maker thercof 
—That is, as many interpreters understand it, of the 
city of Jerusalem, a figure of that church spoken of 
before: see chap. xxxii. 36, 44, compared with the 
4th, 6th, and 9th verses of this chapter. Blaney, 
however, renders the clause, Thus saith Jehovah 
the doer of it, Jehovah the framer of it, who also 
disposeth it, considering the pronoun 7 as referring 
to the thing which God here says he is about to do. 

Verse 3:.Call unto me, and Iwill answer thee— 
An expression manifesting God’s favour and loving 

467 


ba 3 


“ 
4, 
et 


God’s gracious purpose 


JEREMIAH: 


concerning his people 


A. M. 3415. show. thee great and ? mighty things, 
B. C. 589 ; 
which thcu knowest not. 


4 For thus saith the Lorp, the God of Israel, 


concerning the houses of this’ city, and- con- 
cerning the houses of the kings of Judah, 
which are thrown down by °the mounts; and 
by the sword ; 

5 They come to fight with the Chaldeans, 
but it is to fill them with the dead bodies of 
men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in 
my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have 
hid my face from this city. 

6 Behold, *I will bring it health and cure, and 
I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the 
abundance of peace and truth. 


7 And *I will cause the captivity A. M. 3415 
of Judah and the captivity of Israel rales 
to return, and will build them, ‘as at the 
first. 

8 And I will * cleanse them from all their ini- 
quity, whereby they have sinned against me; 
and I will ' pardon all their iniquities, whereby 
they have sinned, and whereby they have 
transgressed against me. “ 

9 ™And it shall be to me a name of joy, a - 
praise, and an honour, before all the nations 
of the earth, which shall hear all the good that 
I do untothem : and they shall ® fearand trem- 
ble for all the goodness and for all the: petepenity: 
that I procure unto it. 


2 Or, hidden, Isa. xlviii. 6.- ° Chap. xxxii. 24.——_f Chapter 
xxxii. 5. —§ Chapter xxx. 17. > Chapter xxx. 3; xxxii, 44; 
Verse 11. i Isa. i, 26; Chap. xxiv. 6; xxx. 20; xxxi. 4, 28; 


xlii..10.—\ Ezek. xxxvi. 25; Zech, xiii. 1; Heb. ix. 13, 14. 


0 Tsaiah lx, 5. 


| 1 Chap. xxxi. 34; Mie: vii. 18.— Isa. Ixii. 7; ‘Chap. xiii. 11. 


kindness ; that he was ready to ae with the first 
intimations of his servant’s desires. Compare chap, 
xxix. 12, God, by thus directing his discourse to 
Jeremiah, not only signified his kindness toward 
him, but likewise the affection he still bore to his 
people, for whom this prophet so earnestly inter- 
ceded, and whose welfare he had so much at heart. 
And show thee great and mighty things—That is, 
give thee a clear and full prospect of them. He- 
brew, 2) M973, great and abstruse; or, hidden 
things, as some render the words ; which thou know- 
est not—And canst not know without further reve- 
lation, meaning, probably, not only what related to 
the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivi- 
ty, but likewise. the blessings to be conferred upon 
them in the times of the Messiah, 

Verses 4,5. Thus saith the Lord concerning the 
houses of this city—Not excepting those of the kings 
of Judah, thrown down by the mounts—Namely, by 
the battering engines placed upon the mounts, which 
were raised against: the walls of the city ; and by the 
sword—By the violence of,war. The Hebrew word 
generally rendered sword may mean any instru- 
ment of iron, and particularly such as were used in 
demolishing any building. It is rendered a mat- 
tock by our-translators, 2 Chron. xxiv. 6, and aves, 
Ezek. xxvi.9. They come to fight with the Chal- 
deans—Most interpreters understand this as spoken 
of the Jews sallying forth against the’ Chaldeans, to 
beat them off from the siege, which they attempted 
to do in vain, and to their own destruction, only thus 
filling the houses of Jerusalem with the dead bodies 
of their men, who died of the wounds received from 
the Chaldeans in making those sallies. And the 
verse is. thought to come in by way of parenthesis, 
between the fourth and sixth, to show that at pre- 
sent God would not prosper any efforts that were 
made for the defence of the city, though he would 
restore it hereafter to ifs former splendour. 

Verses 6-8. Behold, I will bring, it health and 
cure—The latter part of this verse expounds the 

468 


former, for, by health and cure, the prophet means 


peate and truth, or, stability. Blaney renders it, J 


will make it, namely, the city or state perfectly 
sound and whole. The disturbed and calamitous 
state of the nation being compared to wounds and 
sickness, (see chap. viii. 21,22, and xxx. 17,) the 
restoring of it to a peaceful and prosperous state is 
fitly called its health and cure. And will build them 
as at the first—When they, by repentance, do their 
first works, God will, by their restoration, manifest 
toward them his ancient mercies and loying-kind- 
nesses. He willnot only cause their captivity to re- 
turn, as is expressed, in plain words, in the former 
clause, but will re-establish them in the possession 
of their civil and religious privileges, and hereby pro- 
mote both their virtue and happiness. And. I will 
cleanse them from all their iniquity—I will make 
them pious and holy, as well as virtuous and happy ; 
and I will pardon all their iniquities—Will not im- 
pute their past sins any longer to them as I have 
done, but will remit the further punishments to 
which for sin they were liable. ; 

Verse 9. And it shall be to me a praise and an 
honour—Jerusalem thus rebuilt, and Judah thus re- 
established, shall be to my glory before all the na- 
tions. In other words, it is foretold here that God’s 
especial providence over the Jews, in restoring their 
city and temple, and re-establishing them In their 
own land, should be taken notice of by the heathen 
world, and should cause them to give glory to that 
God whom the Jews worshipped: see Ezra i. 2;and 
vi. 12, Or, as the words may imply, This renewed 
nation shall.be as much a reputation to religion as. 
formerly they were a reproach to it. - This promise, 
however, has been much more signally fulfilled in 
the Christian Church, to which the heathen resort- 
ed, as to the seat and temple of truth, than it has yet 
beenin the J ewish.. And they shall ‘fear and trem- 
ble for the goodness that I do untoit—These sur-. 
prising effects of my goodness shall produce an as- 


‘tonishmest like that which arises from fear. Or, 


Restoration to prosperity CHAPTER 


." 


XXXII. promised to Israel. 


AM. 3415. 10 J Thus saith the Lorp; Again 


———— there shall be heard in this place, 
°which ye say shall be desolate without man 
and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, 
and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are deso- 
late, without man, and without inhabitant, and 
without beast, 

11 The voice of joy, and the voice of glad- 
ness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice 
of the bride, the voice of them that shall say, 
4 Praise the Lorn of hosts: for the Lorp is 
good; for his mercy endureth for ever: and of 
them that shall bring ‘the sacrifices of praise 
into the house of the Lorn, For ‘I will cause 
to return the captivity of the land, as at the 
first, saith the Lorp. 

12.4 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts; * Again 
in this place, which is desolate without man 


and without beast, and: in all the cities A. M. 3415. 
thereof, shall be a habitation of shep- - itabaned 
herds causing their flocks to lie down. 

13 "In the cities of the mountains, in the cities 
of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in 
the land of Benjamin, and in the places about 
Jerusalem, and in-the cities of Judah, shall the 
flocks * pass again under the hands of him that 
telleth them, saith the Lorn. 

14 Y Behold, the days come, saith the Lorn, 
that 7I will perform that good thing which I 
have promised unto the house of Israel and to 
the house of Judah. : 

15 4 In those days, and at that time, will I 
cause the * Branch of righteousness to grow up 
unto David; and he shall execute judgment 
and righteousness in the land. 

16 ° In those days shall Judah be saved, and 


© Chap. xxxii. 43.——p Chap. vii. 34; xvi. 9; xxv..10; Rev. 


xviii; 23.—4 1 Chron. xvi. 8, 34; 2 Chron. v. 13; vil. 3; Ezra 
iii. 11; Psa. exxxvi. 1; Isa. xii. 4——" Lev. vii. 12; Psa. evii. 
22; cxvi. 17. 


* 


the meaning is, They shall fear to engage against a 
nation so beloved and favoured by me, Exod. xv. 
14-16. \ 
- Verses 10,11. Again there shall-be heard in this 
place which ye say shall be desolate—See note on 
chap. xxxii. 43; the voice of joy and the voice of 
gladness—The contrary to what takes place in the 
times of captivity and desolation. The voice of 
them that shall say, Praise ye the Lord, for the 
Lord is good, &c,—We read, (Ezra iii.11,) that those 
who returned from captivity used this very hymn. 
And of them that shall bring the-sacrifice of praise 
into the house of the Lord—Such as was wont to be 
‘offered upon any great deliverance. See Lev. vii. 
12; Psa. evii. 22, and exvi. 17. The Hebrew, n°820 
mn, is literally, of them that bring praise, or, 
thanksgiving, there being nothing for the word 
sacrifice. ‘This, however, is called by St. Paul, the 
sacrifice of praise, even the fruit of our lips, (Heb. 
xiii. 15,) to distinguish it from the oblations com- 
manded by the law, which consisted of the fruits of 
the ground, or of the flock and herd. The sum of 
this verse is, that those who were carried into cap- 
tivity should return, and, upon their return, should 
be in their former state as to civil transactions, mar- 
rying and giving in marriage; and, as to religion, 
should publicly praise the Lord with holy and spi- 
ritual joy, as they had been wont to do iu the best 
and most prosperous times of their commonwealth, 
which was fulfilled, as we see, Neh. xii. 27-40. 
Verses 12, 13. Againin this place shall be a habi- 
tation for shepherds, &c.—See chap. 1. 19; Isa. xv. 
10. In those places which were desolate, without 
man and beast, there should be flocks and herds of 
sheep and goats, which the shepherds should take 
eare of asin former times. And in the cities of Ju- | 


s Verse 7. * Isa. Ixv. 10; Chap. xxxi. 24; 1.19. « Chap. 
xvii. 26 ; xxxil. 44. x Levit. xxvii. 32. y Chapter xxiii. 5 5 
xxxi. 27, 31. 2 Chap. xxix. 10. a Isa, iv. 2; xi.1; Chap. 


xxiii. 5.——> Chap. xxiii. 6, 


‘dah shall the flocks pass again under the hands of 


him that telleth them—Namely, so as to keep ac- 
count of them, as they were wont to do, both morn- 
ing and evening in those countries. Virgil alludes 
to the same custom, when he says, Hel. iii., Bisque 
die numerant ambo pecus, alter et hedos ; Twice 
each day they count my goats and sheep. See Lev. 
xxvii. 32, where DAWN NNN, passing under thé rod, 
means their being numbered, the shepherds striking 
every sheep with his rod, or crook, as it passed out 
of the fold, and so counting them; and the expres- 
sion here made use of, m9 “1 4y, wader the hand 
of him that numbers them, seems to signify the same 
thing. 

Verses 14-16. Behold, the days come that I will 
perform that good thing, &c—The Lord’s word is 
not yea and nay: he cannot lie, or repent. ‘There 
shall come a time when he will verify every good 
word which he hath spoken to, or concerning, his 
people. Jn those days will I causé'the Branch of 
righteousness to grow up to David—The kings they 
had hitherto had of the line of David were most of 
them unrighteous men ; but God here promises that 
after the captivity they should have a branch of Da- 
vid that would execute judgment and righteousness 
in the land, for the protection and ‘government of 
those that feared him. Ifthis passage point at all to 
Zerubbabel, who was a good man, a descendant of 
David, and, though not a king, aruler of the Jews, 
after their return from Babylon, and who governed 
with equity and not as Jehoiakim had done ; yet it 
can only refer to him as a type of the Messiah, the 
branch out of the stem of Jesse, Isa. xi. 1; the branch 
of the Lord that was to be beautiful and glorious, 
Isav iv. 2; and the righteous branch that was to be 
raised up unto David, as he is described chap, xxiii 

469 


we 

Prediction of the kingdom 
tate Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and 

,. this is the name wherewith she shall | 
be called, >The Lorn our Righteousness. 

17 4 For thus saith the Lorn ;, ¢ David shall 

“never ° want a man to sit upon the throne of the 
house of Israel ; 

18 Neither shalt the priests the Levites want | 
a man before me to 4 offer _burnt-offerings, and | 
to kindle meat-offerings, and to do sacrifice con- 
tinually. 


JEREMIAH. 


and priesthood of the Messiah. 


19 “| And the word of the Lorp = vss Bee 
came unto Jeremiah, saying, Shain 

20 Thus saith the Lorn; ° If -ye can break 
my covenant of the day, and my covenant of 
the night, and that there should not be day and 
night in their season ; 

21 Then may also ‘ my covenant be broken 
with David, my servant, that-he should not have 
a son to reign upon his throne; and with the 
Levites the priests, my ministers. .— 


Ses 

3 Heb. Jehovah-tsidkenu.——* Heb. There shall not be cut off 
from David. © 2 Samuel vii. 16; 1 Kings ii. 4; Psa. Iexxix. 
29, 36; Luke i. 32, 33. 


\ 


4 Romans: xii. 1; xv. 16; 1 Peter ii. 5,9; Revelation i. 6. 
€ Psalm Ixxxix. 37; Isaiah liv. 95 Chapter xxxi. 36; Verse 26. 
f Psalm Ixxxix. 34. ‘ 


5, a passage exactly similar to this, and undoubtedly 
meant of the same person. “See the notes on these 


passages. In those days shall Judah be saved; &¢e.— 
If a temporal salvation be here at all intended, it. 
must be, not that which the Jews enjoyed for a short 
season under the government of Zerubbabel, a de- 
liverance and protection from, or security against 
their enemies, which was very imperfect, and fre- 
quently interrupted; but that more perfect salva- 
tion, peace, and prosperity, which they shall enjoy 
in the latter‘days, after their conversion to Christian— 
ity, and restoration to their own land, according to 
the predictions contained in this and the thrée pre- 
ceding chapters. But a spiritual and eternal salva- 
tion undoubtedly is chiefly intended here, as well as 
in the parallel passage, chap. xxili.6. And this is 
the name wherewith ye shall be called, T'he Lord 
our righteousness—According to this reading it is | 
here foretold, that the name which properly belongs | 
to the Messiah shall be given to Jerusalem, that is, 
to the church; “to signify,” says Lowth, “ that it is | 
in a peculiar manner dedicated to_him, he having 
chosen it for the place of his residence, (see Ezek. | 
xlvili. 35,) and that all the righteousness of the faith- 
ful, both their justification and sanetification, is de- 
rived from him. This seems,” adds he, “to be the | 
genuine sense of the words, as may appear to any 
that will compare the original phrase here, 19 7p’, | 
with Isa. lxii. 4, 12, where it is said of Zion, T'how 
shalt be called "Hephzibah, or, my delight is in her, 

and sought out,a city not forsaken. “Nor is there 
any greatér impropriety in giving the name Jeho- 
vah toa city, than in calling an altar Jehovah-nissi, 

that is, Jehovah my banner, (Exod. xvii. 15,) and Je- 
hovah-shalom, Jehovah peace, (Judg. vi. 24,) in to- 
ken that the Lord was the author of those mercies 
of which the said altars were designed to be monu- 


ments. So the servants of God, are described as 
having his name written upon their foreheads, Rev. 
iii. 12; xiv. 1 but several interpreters, particularly 
Huetius, and our learned Bishop Pearson, (in his 
Exposition of the Creed, p. 165,) render the words 
thus: He that shall call her [to be his peculiar peo- 
ple] is the Lord our righteousness.” Thus also Dr. 
Waterland and others. But Blaney, who renders 
the last clause of chap. xxiii.6, T'his is the name by | 


which Jehovah shall call him, Our Ricureousness, | 
470 


franglates this, And this is he whom Jehovah shalt 
call Our Rieutrousness, judging that the 7 in 77, 
rendered her, is not the feminine pronoun affix, but 
the masculine, after the Chaldee form. 

Verses 17,18. For thus saith the Lord, David 
shall never want a man, &c.—It is very evident 
that the prophecies in these verses were not fulfilled 
in the Jews after the Babylonish captivity ; for, from 
that time to the coming of Christ, David was without 
a successor of his family sitting upon the throne of 
Judah or Israel. Nor have they been fulfilled in 
them since, for, from the destruction of Jerusalem 
by the Romans to the present time, they have nei- 
ther had a king nora regular priesthood belonging 
to their nation.. There can therefore be no doubt 
that Jeremiah here foretels the kingdom of the Mes- 
siah, and the priesthood, or ministry rather, to. be 
established by him, by which a pure and spiritual 
oblation should be offered in every place where a 
chureh should be formed. for him, (see Mal. i. 11,) 
and not at Jerusalem and in Judeaonly. “As the 
Jewish priesthood, in the. family of Aaron, is ex~ 
tinct, and hath been exercised neither in Jerusalem 
nor in any other place for seyenteen centuries, it 
follows,” says Calmet,.“that these promises ean re- 
spect only the eternal priesthood of Jesus Christ, 
exercised by himself, and by his ministers, in the 
Christian Church from the beginning, and which 
shall continue to the end of time.” Nor is it unu- 
| sual for God in the Old Testament to express pro- 
mises relating to, and to be fulfilled under, the gos- 
pel, by terms proper to the Old Testament. See 
Isa. xix. 19; lvi. 7; lxvi. 23. And as the prophets 
often describe the Christian worship by representa- 
tions taken from the temple service, so the apostles 
prove the rights and privileges belonging to the 
ministers of the gospel from the prerogatives given 
to the Jewish priesthood. See Rom. xv. 16; 3 1 Cor. 
ix. 13,14. , 

Verses 20, 21. If you can break my covenant of 
the day and of the night—Called the ordinances of 
the day and night, chap. xxxi. 35, 36. Then may 
also my covenant be broken with David and with 
the. Levites—A: promise this, that the kingdom of 
Christ and a Christian ministry shall continue in the 
church to the end of time. And as his kingdom 
shall have no end, (Luke i. 32, 33,) the ~~ 


Promises renewed of 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


ind? 


the restoration of Israeu. 


A.M. 3415. 
B. C. 539, 


22 As *the host of heaven cannot 
be numbered, neither the sand of the 
sea measured: so will I multiply the seed of 
David, my servant, and the Levites that minis- 
ter unto me. 

23 “{ Moreover the word of the Lory came-to 
Jeremiah, saying, , 

24 Considerest thou not what this people 
have spoken, saying, * The two families which 
the Lorp hath chosen, he hath even cast them 
off? thus they have. despised my people, that 


es ee ee 


& Gen. xiii. 16; xv. 5; xxii. 17; Chap. xxxi. 37.——» Verses 
21, 22.——' Verse 20; Gen. viii. 22. 


they should be no more a nation be- 4: M. 3416. 
fore them. ) be in 
25 Thus saith the Lorp; If ‘ my covenant 
be not with day and night, and if I haye not 
* appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 
26 ''Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, 
and David my servant, so that I will not take 
any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for ™I will cause 
their captivity to return, and’ have mercy on 
them. . 


k Psalm lxxiv..16, 17; civ. 19; Chap. xxxi. 35,'36——! Chap. 
xxxi, 37.—® Verses 7, 11; Ezra ii. 1. 


also be construed as extending to. the eternal state, 
in which, as Christ shall reign in glory for ever, so 
his saints shall be priests unto God, and reign for 
ever with him. 

Verse 22. As the host of heaven cannot be num- 
bered, &c.—The former promise respected the sta- 
bility, this the enlargement of the church, the mem- 
bers of which are here-termed the seed of David, 
as they are elsewhere often called the seed of Abra- 
ham, being the imitators of the faith of Abraham 
and David. Or they may be termed the seed of 
David, because they are the seed of Christ, who is 
sometimes called David in the writings of the pro- 
phets; (see chap. xxx. 9,) and whose seed and whose 
Levites are multiplied in the multiplying of Chris- 
tians and of faithful ministers under the gospel, 
which are the blessings here promised. 

Verses 24-26. The two families which the Lord 
hath chosen—“ It is plain from verse 26,” says Bla- 
ney, “that the two families here meant are those of 
Jacob and David, though some have supposed the 
two kingdoms of Israel and Judah, others the royal 
and sacerdotal families of David and Levi, to be in- 
tended.” Hehath even cast them, off—The words 
are spoken by those unbelieving Jews who thought 
God would never restore them to their former con- 
dition, nor give them again a king of the seed of 


= 


promise. J'hus they have despised my people, &c.— 
Thus, saith God, they have spoken in a reproachful 
and ,degrading manner of my people, as if they 
should never be a nation again, having rulers of 
themselves anda ministry. Jf my covenant be not 
with day and night, &c.—If I have not appointed 
the “vicissitudes of day and night, and of summer 
aud Winter, upon which the seasons of the year and 
the fruitfulness of the earth depend ; then will I cast 
away the seed of Jacob—Then will I finally, and 


-for ever, abandon the body of the Jews and Israel- 


ites; and David my servant—Namely, the seed of 
David, all persons lineally descended from him, so 
that none of them shall ever hereafter reign over Israel 
and Judah. The sum of these verses is plainly this, 
that a restoration of them to their own land should 
as certainly succeed their captivity as the day suc- 
ceeds the night, or summer. follows winter. God 
had as certainly ordained the one as the other, and 
would as certainly have mercy on his people as he 
would certainly continue the revolutions. of the hea- 
venly bodies. And in showing this mercy he would 
take care that one of the seed of David should be 
their ruler: which has been, and still more fully 
shall be, fulfilled in the Messiah, who shall always 
as certainly govern his church, whether consisting 
of converted Jews or Gentiles, as there will always 


David, thus indirectly accusing him of a breach of || be a church on earth to be governed: 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


“In this chapter we have two distinct profhecies. 


The first, dated at the time when Nebuchadnezzar was engaged in carry- 


ing on the siege of Jerusalem, and of Lachish, and Azekah, announces to Zedekiah the taking and burning of Jerusalem, 


and his own captivity, peaceful death, and honourable interment, 1-7. 


The second prophecy, delivered after the Chaldeans 


had broken off the siege and were gone to. meet the Egyptian army, coming to the relief of Jerusalem, reproaches the people 
of Judah for their perfidious and inhuman behaviour to their brethren, whom they had released from bondage according to 


the law; but on thinking all danger from the enemy over, had compelled to resume their former servitude. 


For this God” 


threatens to let loose upon them at once the sword, the pestilence, and the famine; and to deliver them up to the vexations 
of the Chaldeans, their cruel enemies, who should return, take, and burn their city, and reduce their country to a solitary 


waste, 8-22. 


“ 


471 


* 
Captivity of Zedekiah © 


JEREMIAH. y 


and the Jewish nation. 


A. M. 3415. 


(THE word which came unto Jere- 
B. C. 589, 


miah from the Lorp, * when 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his 
army, and all the kingdoms of the earth } of 
his dominion, and all the people fought against 
Jerusalem, and ‘against all the cities: thereof, 
saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorp, the God of Israel; 
Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and 
tell him, Thus saith the Lorp; Behold, “I 
will give this city into the hand of the king of 
Babylon, and ¢ he shall burn it with fire : 

3 And-° thou shalt not escape out of his hand, 
but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his 
hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes 
of the king of Babylon, and ? he shall speak 
with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to 
Babylon. . 


4 Yet hear the word of the Lorn, A) M. 3415. 
O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus ” °°? 
saith the Lorp of thee, Thou shalt not die by 
the sword : i Ral 

5 But thou shalt die in peace: and with ‘ the 
burnings of thy fathers, the former kings which 
were before thee, &so shall they bum edours 
for thee; and * they’ will lament thee, saying, 
Ah lord! for I have pronounced the word, saith 
the Lorp. ae 

6 Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these 


‘words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jeru- 


salem, ‘ 

7 When the king of Babylon’s army fought 
against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of 
Judah ‘that were left, against. Lachish, and 
against Azekah: for ‘these defenced cities re- 
mained of the cities of Judah. 


a2 Kings xxv. 1, &c.; Chap. xxxix. 1; lii, 4 ——» Chap. i. 15. 
2 Heb. the dominion of his hand. ¢ Chap. xxi, 10; xxxil.3,-28. 
4 Chap. xxxii. 29; Verse 22. e Chap. xxxil. 4. 


2 Heb, his mouth’ shall speak to thy mouth——t 2 Chron. xvi. 
14; xxi. 19.——+ Dan. ii. 46-—— Chap. xxii. ¥8— 2 Kings 
xvili. 13; xix: 8; 2 Chron. xi. 5, 9. ; 


= 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Verse 1. The word which came unto Jeremiah 
from the Lord, when Nebuchadnezzar, §c., fought 
against Jerusalem—The siege was begun. in the 
ninth year of Zedekiah, the tenth month and tenth 
day of the month, which answers to the latter end 
of our December. See chap. lii. 4. Blaney thinks 
the prophet received this revelation a month or two 
after the siege was begun, or toward the latter end 
of Zedekiah’s ninth year; namely, during the in- 
terval between the raising the siege of Jerusalem by 
Nebuchadnezzar and his return to*that city, after 
having repulsed the king of Egypt, who was coming 
to the succour of Zedekiah, chap. xxxvii. 5. Jere- 


miah, it appears, was not at this time in prison: see | 


verses 4, 14, 15, of that chapter.. And against all 
the cities thereof—The lesser cities of Judea, which 
were subject to Jerusalem, as their metropolis, called 
elsewhere the daughters of Judah by way of dis- 
tinction from the mother city. 

Verses 2-5. Behold, I will give this city into the 
hand of the king of Babylon, and thou shalt not es- 
cape, &c.—This prophecy, which threatened the 
king in particular, as well as the city and nation in 
general, so much displeased Zedekiah that he shut 
up Jeremiah in prison. See notes on chap. xxxil. 
2-5, where the same things are related that occur 
here. Dut thow shalt die in peace—Namely, by a 
natural death. The king of Babylon took him, killed 
his sons before his eyes, then put out his eyes, and 
bound him with chains, (chap. xxxix. 7,) but did not 
put him to death, as we here learn. With the burn- 
ing of thy fathers, §c., so shall they burn odours for 
thee—It was customary among-the Jews, at the fu- 
nerals of their kings, especially of those whose 
memories they honoured, to prepare a bed of spices, 
of which they made a perfume by burning them, and 

472 


therein to deposite the body of the deceased prince: 
see 2 Chron. xvi. 14, and xxi. 19. And they will la- 
ment thee, saying, Ah lord !—In these, and the fore- 
going words, God promises Zedekiah an honourable 


‘interment, and suitable to his quality ;a favour he 


did not vouchsafe to Jehoiakim, chap. xxii.18. 
Verse 7. When the king of Babylon fought 
against Lachish and against Azekan—See 2 Kings 
xviii. 18; xix. 8. These two cities were not far from 
Jerusalem, and had ‘been fortified by Rehoboam, for 
the defence of his kingdom, 2 Chron. xi.9. After 
that Zedékiah had made a covenant with the people 
to proclaim liberty, &e.—“ By the law. of Moses, 
(Exod. xxi. 2; Deut. xv. 12,) the Israelites were not 
allowed to detain their brethren of the Hebrew race 
in perpetual bondage, but were required to let them 
go free after having served six years. This law 
had, it seems, fallen into disuse; but King Zedekiah, 
upon the approach of the Chaldean army, whether 
from religious motives, or a political view to employ 
the men who were set free in the service of the war, 
engaged the people in acovenant to act conformably 
to the law; and they released their brethren accord- 
ingly, But no sooner were their fears abated, by 
the retreat of the Chaldeans, than, in defiance of 
every principle of religion, honour, and humanity, 
they imposed the yoke of servitude anew upon those 
unhappy persons. Archbishop Usher computes the 
ninth year of Zedekiah’s reign to have been the sab- © 
batical year, and supposes that, on this account, the 
covenant of general release was entered into at the 
beginning of that year. But the sabbatical year, 
which was every seventh year from that in which 
the Israelites entered into the possession of the land 
of Canaan, had nothing at all to do with the release 
of servants. In the year of sabbath they were only 
restrained from sowing their ground, and pruning 
3 


The Jews reproved for their 


» CHAPTER XXXIV. 


behaviour to their brethren. 


A.M. 3415.. 8 Yo This is the word that came 
unto Jeremiah from the Lor», after 


that the King Zedekiah had made a covenant 


with all the people which were at Jerusalem, to 


proclaim * liberty unto them ; 

9 } That every man should let his man-ser- 
vant, and’every man his maid-servant, being 
a Hebrew or a Hebrewess, go free; ™ that none 
should-serve himself of veo to wit, of a Jew 
his brother. 

10 Now when all the princes, and all the peo- 
ple which had entered into the covenant, heard 
that every one’should let his man-servant, and 
every one his maid-servant, go free, that. none 
should serve themselves of them any more, then 
they obeyed, and let them go. . 

11 But “afterward they turned, and caused 
the servants and the handmaids, whom they 


k Exodus xxi. 2; Leviticus xxv. 10; Verse 14.—! Neh. v. 11. 
mJey. xxv. 39-46. . Verse 21; Chap. xxxvii. 5. 


had let go free, to return, and brought 4. M. 3415. 
B. C: 589. 

them into subjection for servants and 

for handmaids. 

12 4 Therefore the word of the Lorp came 
to Jeremiah from the Lorp, saying, 

13 Thus saith the Lory, the God of Israel ; 
I made a covenant with your fathers in the day 
that I brought them forth out of the land of 
Egypt, out of the house ‘of bond-men, saying, 

14 At the end of seven years, let ye go every 
man his brother a Hebrew, which ? hath been 
sold unto thee ; and when he hath served thee 
six years, thou shalt let him go free. from thee ; 
but your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither 
inclined their ear. 

15 And ye were * now turned, and had done 
right in my sight, in’ proclaiming liberty every 
man to his neighbour; and ye had ? made a 


° Exod. xxi. 2 ; xxiii. 10; Deut. xv. 12——3 Or, hath sold hime 
self. 4 Heb. to-day. P 2 Kings xxiii. 3; Neh. x. 29. 


——————— 
their vineyards. But every seventh year, from the 
beginning of their service, the Hebrew bond-slaves 
were to be discharged. Six years were they to 
serve, and in the seventh they were to go out free. 
Only the fiftieth year, or year of jubilee, was also to 
be a time of general release, Lev. xxv. 39-41. ‘ But, 
that the sabbatical year was so, I see not the least 
reason to conclude, but quite the contrary. ”—Blaney. 
Verses 10,11. Now when all the princes, &c., 
heard—This verse is better translated by Blaney and 
others thus, And all the princes hearkened, or, con- 
sented, and ‘all the people who entered into'covenant to 
let every one his bondman, and every one his bond- 
avoman go free, and not to exact service of them any 
more, they hearkened, I say, and let them go.. That 
is, they conformed to the obligations of the cove- 
nant, which they had entered into at the instigation 
of their prince. But afterward they turned, and 
brought them into subjection, &c.—Namely, upon 
the advance of the Egyptian army, which caused 
Nebuchadnezzar to raise the siege of Jerusalem. 
When they thought themselves safe from their ene- 
mies, as if they had also got out of God’s hand, they 
repented of their repentance, and returned to their 
old oppressions. Now this was not only a contempt 
of the divine law, as if it were of no force at all, but 
they might either keep it or break it as they thought 
fit; but it was a contempt of the covenant which 
they had, in a very solemn manner, (see verses 18- 
20,) made with him, and of that wrath which they 
had imprecated upon themselves in case they should 
break that covenant. It was jesting with God Al- 
mighty, as if he could be imposed on by fallacious 
promises, which, when they had gained their point, 
they would think themselves no longer obliged by. 
Jt was lying to God with their mouths, and flatter- 
ing him with their tongues. It was likewise a con- 
tempt of the judgments of God, and setting them at 
3 


defiance; as if when once the course of them was 
stopped a little, and interrupted, they would never 
proceed again, nor be revived: whereas, reprieves 
are so far from being pardons, that if they be abused 
thus, and sinners take encouragement from them to 
return to sin, they are but preparatives for heavier 
strokes of divine vengeance. 

Verses 13, 14. I made a covenant with your fa- 
thers, saying, At the end. of seven years—This is the 
literal translation of M iw yaw yp 5 but the im- 
port of the phrase is, iz the course of the seventh 
year ; or, within the term of seven years, as Dr. 
Waterland renders it.. ““The seventh year was the 
year of release, (Deut. xv. 9,) consequently servants 
were to continue in service but six years, and at the 
beginning of the seventh were to be let go free; ibid. 
verse 12. And the words mean no more, as appears 
by a like form of speech, Deut. xiv. 28, where it is 
said, At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth 
all the tithe of thy increase that year: which is to 
be explained by chap. xxvi. 12, where every third 
year is called the year of tithing. So Christ is said 
to rise again after three days, Mark viii. 31, which 
is elsewhere- explained by his rising the third day. 
But your fathers hearkened not unto me—Their 
worldly profit swaying more with them than God’s 
command. It appears from hence, that the law, re- 
quiring them to let their servants go free after six 
years’ service, had been violated by the Jews forages 
before the captivity, as the law respecting the sab- 
batical year had also been. 'The consequence was, 
that the servants had, by long disuse, lost the benefit 
of the gracious provision which God, in his law, had. 
made for them, for this trespass of them and their 
fathers God now justly delivered them into servitude 
to strangers. 

Verses 15-17. And yewere now sepeasillad is, re- 
formed in this particular; and had done right in my 

473 


” 


Various calamities threatened 


4. M. 3415. covenant before. me ‘in the house 

___—. which is-called by my name: 

16 But ye turned and * polluted my name, 
and caused every man his servant, and every 
man his handmaid, whom he had set at liberty 
at their pleasure, to return, and brought them 
into subjection, to be unto you for servants and 
for handmaids. 

17 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; Ye have 


not hearkened unto me; in proclaiming liberty, 


every one to his brother, and every .man to his 
neighbour : * behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, 
saith the Lorn, * tothe sword, to the pestilence, 
and to the famine; and I will make’ you 


4 Chapter vii. 10. 
r Exodus xx. 7; Leviticus xix. 12. 
James ii. 13. 


5 Hebrew, whereupon my name is called. 
5 Matt. vii.2; Gal. vi. 7; 


JEREMIAH. 


as a punishment for sin. 


Sto be “removed into all the king- 
doms of the earth. ne caren 
18 And I will give the men that haye trans- 


A. M, 3415. 
B. C. 589. 


‘gressed my covenant, which have not performed 


the, words of the covenant which they had made 
before me, when *they cut'the calf in viene 
and passed between the parts thereof, © © 

19 The princes of Judali, and the princes of 
Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all 
the people of the land, which passed’ between 
the parts of the calf; 

20 I will even give them into the hand of 
their enemies, and into the hand of them 
that seek their life: and their ¥ dead bodies 


' Chapter xxxii. 24, 36.——® Heb. for a removing. « Deut. 
xxviii. 25, 64; Chap. xxix. 18. * Gen. xv. 10, 17.——y Chap. 
Vils 83.3 xvi. XIX. 7. P 


sight—In proclaiming liberty to your servants. And 
yehad made a covenant before me—Had entered 
into solemn engagements in my presenee-and temple 
to that purpose. This.was probably such a covenant 
as Josiah and all the people had made formerly, 
‘(2 Kings xxiii. 2, 3,) whereby they obliged them- 
selves to serve God, and obey his laws in general, 
and this concerning giving freedom to their servants 
in particular. But ye turned—Declined from these 
good beginnings; and polluted my name—That is, 
profaned it, in swearing, or solemnly promising in 
and by it, to do that which you have not done. Cer- 
tainly, whoever uses the name of God, by way of 
sanction to his promises, that the greater confidence 
may be placed in them, and afterward does not per- 
form them, profanes or pollutes the name of God. 
Therefore, behold I proclaim liberty for you to the 
sword, &c.—I now declare that I give free commis- 
sion and liberty to my sore judgments, the sword, 
the famine, and the pestilence, to invade and destroy 
multitudes of you. See chap. xxxii. 24, 36. The 
expressions here used import, that these calamities 
come upon men by direction and commission from 
God, as the executioners of his justice. And to be 
removed into all the kingdoms of the earth—'Those 
of you who escape destruction shall be dispersed 
through different nations, where you shall learn by 
experience how great are the hardships and miseries 
attendant on a state of servitude. See note on chap. 
xxiv. 9. 

Verse'18. When they cut the calf in twain, and 
passed between the parts—In order to ratify the 
covenant, they killed a calf, or young bullock, which 
they cut in two, and placing the two parts at some 
distance from each other, they passed between them ; 
signifying by this rite that they consented to be served 
_ in the like manner, in case they violated their part 
of the covenant. We learn from the Holy Serip- 
tures, and from heathen authors, that the same or 
similar ceremonies were in use in making and rati- 
fying covenants and treaties in ancient times. In 
this way Abraham’s covenant with God was con- 

474 


firmed, Gen. xv. 10. And, according to Livy, lib. 
i. cap. 24; and lib. xxi.cap. 45, rites of a similar 
kind were‘in use among the old Romans; as we find 
from Homer they were also among the Greeks. Thus 
he tells us, when they had entered into a solemn 
agreement with the Trojans to put an end to the 
war, by the single combat of Paris and Menelaus, at 
the. pouring out of their wine upon their sacrifice, 
they made the following imprecation upon those 
who should not observe their part of the treaty, 
Iliad, iii, 1, 298. 


Ormotepot Mporepot VTE opkia THunveLay, — 
Q6e od’ eyxedaroc: yapadic peat, we ode oLvoc, 


“So may their blood who first the league confound, 
Shed, like this wine, distain the thirsty ground.” 
Pore. 
Verses 19-22. The princes of Judah, &c., (see 
chap. xxix. 2,) the ewnuchs—The officers belonging 
to the court; the priests and all the people which 
passed between the parts of the calf—Assenting to- 
the solemn and awful imprecation, Let us in like 
manner be cut in pieces if we do not perform what 
we now promise. J will even give them into the 
hand of their enemies, &e.—God does not here 
threaten all the Jews, but those only who had first 
made, and then broken, this solemn covenant, and 
thereby falsified their engagements, and dealt trea- 
cherously with him. The king and nobles, and 
great courtiers, as well as the people, he would give 
into the hand of their enemies, who sought, not their 
wealth only, or their service, but their lives: and 
who should obtain what they sought; and, not con- 
tent therewith, should leave their dead bodies lying 
unburied upon the face of the earth, a loathsome 
spectacle to all mankind, and an.easy prey to the 
fowls of the heaven and the beasts of the earth. Thus: 
doth the Lord execute justice, without respect of 
persons, on all that do wickedly, and who will nei- 
ther be won by his mercies, nor be brought to obey 
him by a.dread of his wrath. Behold, I will com- 
mand, and cause them to return to this ——_ 


The Jews reprovew 


» CHAPTER XXXV. 


for their disobedience. 


A. M. 3415. 
ners shall be for meat unto the fowls of 


——_.—— the heaven, and to the beasts of the 
earth. 

21 And Zedekiah king of Judah and his 
princes will I give into the hand of their 
enemies, and into the hand of them that 
seek their life, and into the hand of the 


+ Chapter xxxvii. 5, 1k——@ Chap. xxxvii, 8, 10.» Chapter 


king of Babylon’s army, ? which are A. M. 3415. 
B. C. 589. 
gone up from you. ee 
22 * Behold, I will command, saith the Lorn, 
and cause them to return. to this city ; and they 
shall fight against it, » and take it, and burn it 
with fire: and ¢ I will make the cities of Judah 
a desolation without an inhabitant. 


XXxVlli. 3 ;. xxxix. 1, 2,8; lii. 7, 13. © Chap. ix. 11; xliv. 2, 6. 


ly, the king of Babylon’s army, which had departed 
for a season, having gone to meet the army of the 
king of Egypt. I will put it into their hearts to re- 
turn, saith the Lord, to the siege, and they shall leave 
it no more till they have taken the city, and burned 
it with fire, and made the whole country desolate. 
The motions of armies are under the government of 
Divine Providence, they are all at God’s command ; 
when he bids them come they come, and they shall 
certainly effect what he hath determined to be done. 
When we come to chapter xxxix. we shall read of 
the fulfilment of this prophecy. Observe here, reader, 
Ist, As an humble confidence in God is a hopeful 
presage of approaching deliverance, so security in 


sin is asad omen of approaching destruction. 2d 
When judgments are removed from a people before 
they have done’their work, and leave them unhum- 
bled and unreformed, they do but retreat to come 
on again with so much the greater force; for when 
God judges he-will overcome. 3d, It is just with 
God to disappoint those expectations of mercy which 
his. providence Had excited, when we disappoint 
those expectations of duty which our professions, 
pretensions, and fair promises had given cause for. 
If we repent of the good we had promised, God will 
repent of the good he had purposed. The froward 
are an abomination to the Lord. With the froward 
he will show himself froward. 


CHAPTER XXXvV. 


In this chapter, (1,) The prophet sets before the Jews, as an aggravation of their disobedience to God, the obedience of the 
Jamily of the Rechabites to the commands which were left them by Jonadab, their ancestor, and shows how they persevered 
in that obedience, and would not be induced to decline from it, 1-11. (2,) With this he aggravates the disobedience of the 


Jews to God, and upbraids them with their contempt of his precepts, 12-15. 
(4,) He assures the Rechabites of the blessing of God, because of their 


avould fall upon them for this disobedience, 16, 17. 

dutiful behaviour to their father, 18, 19. 
hs = 3398. "THE word which came to Jeremiah 

.C. 606. , 3 
at from the Lorn, in the days of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, 
saying, 

2 Go unto the house of the * Rechabites, and 
speak unto them, and bring them into the house 
of the Lorp, into one of » the chambers, and 
give them wine to drink. 


(3,) He foretels, that the judgments of God 


) 


3 Then I took Jaazaniah the son A. M. 3398. 
of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, ee 
and his brethren, and all his sons, and the 
whole house of the Rechabites ; 


_4 And I brought them into the house of the 
Lorp, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, 


the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was 
by the chamber of the princes, which was 


a 2 Kings x. 15; 1 Chron. ii. 55. 


_ > 1 Kings vi. 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXV. 

Verse 1. The word which came unto Jeremiah in 
the days of Jehoiakim, &c.—-Here we have another 
evidence that the prophecies of this book are not 
placed in that order wherein they were delivered, 
for all the intermediate prophecies from chap. xxvi. | 


belong clearly to the reign of Zedekiah ; and conse- 
quently are posterior to this chapter and the next, |, 
which are dated in the reign of Jehoiakim, together 
with chap. xlv., which is closely connected with the 
latter of these two chapters. This may most pro-|, 
bably be referred to the fourth year of Jehoiakim’s | 
reign, when Nebuchadnezzar, having beaten the 


i 


king of Egypt’s army at Euphrates, (see chap. xlvi. 
2,) marched toward Syria and Palestine, to recover 
those provinces again which the king of Egypt had 
conquered, in which expedition he laid siege to Je- 
rusalem. ‘ 

Verses 2-4. Go to the house of the Rechabites— 
“'The Rechabites, as may be collected from verse 7, 
were not of thé children of Israel, but strangers of 
another race that dwelt among them. From 1 Chron. 
ii. 55, they appear to have been Kenites, a people 
originally settled in that part of Arabia Petra which 
was called the land of Midian. At what time Re- 
chab lived, who gave his name to the family, is not 

475 


The Jews reproved 


JEREMIAH. 


3 by the Rechabites. 


A.M, 3898. above the chamber of Maasciah the 
B. ©. 60°. son. of Shallum, ° the keeper of the 
? door : . 

5 And I set before the sons of the house of the 
Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I 
said unto them, Drink ye wine. 

6 But they said, We will drink no wine: - for 
4Jonadab the son of Rechab our father com- 
manded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, 
neither ye, nor your sons for ever : 

7 Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, 
nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all 
your days ye shall dwell in tents; ° that ye 
may live. many days in the land where ye 
be strangers. 


8 Thus have we obeyed the voice A. ee. 
of Jonadab the son of Rechab our - 
father in all that he hath charged us, to drink 
no wine all our days; we, our ayy. our ans, 
nor our daughters ; 

9 Nor to build houses for us to dwell in: 
neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor 
seed : : 

10 But we have dwelt in tents, and have 
obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab 
our father commanded us. , 

11 But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon came up into the land, that 
we said, Come, and’ let us go to Jerusalem for 
fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for 


© 2 Kings xii. 9; xxv. 18; 1 Chron. ix. 18, 19.1 Heb. threshold, 


¢ Exod. xx. 12; Eph: vi. 2, 3. 


42 Kings x. 15. 


or, vessel. 
‘ 


certain, nor whether he was the immediate father, or 
remote ancestor of Jonadab ; for the word son often 
denotes nothing more than a lineal descendant. But 
it is most likely that the Jonadab here spoken of, as 
having dictated a rule of living to the Rechabites, was 
the same person of whom mention is made 2 Kings 
x. 15. For that this latter was a man of considera- 
ble eminence is manifest from the respect shown 
him by Jehu; and his being taken along with that 
prince to witness his zeal for the honour of the true 
God, shows him to have been a man of right and 
religious principles. The institutions he left with 
his posterity bespeak a principal concern for the 
purity of their morals, which he might rightly sup- 
’ pose would be less liable to be corrupted whilst they 
adhered to the simplicity of their ancient usages, 
than if they adopted the refinements of modern luxu- 
ry.» He, therefore, enjoined them not only to abstain 
from the use of wine, but to live as the patriarchs did 
of old, and as many of their countrymen, the Scenite 
Arabs, continue to do at this day, without any fixed 
habitations or possessions, far from the society of 
cities, in the open country, feeding their flocks, and 
maintaining themselves by the produce of them.”— 
Blaney. And bring them into the house of the Lord 
—TInto one of the chambers adjoining to the temple. 
By this it appears that the Rechabites were not idol- 
aters, for it was not lawful for such persons to come 
within the precincts of the temple. J brought them 
into the chamber of the sons of Hanan—The cham- 
bers adjoining to the temple, of which there were 
several, were. for the use of the priests and Levites, 
during the time of their ministrations. "They were 
also used as repositories for laying up the holy vest- 
ments, and vessels, and whatever stores were neces- 
sary for the daily sacrifices, and the other parts of 
the temple service. T'he son of Igdaliah, aman 
of God—That is, as this name usually imports, a pro- 
phet, or one who had been employed upon a divine 
commission. Which was by the chamber of the 
princes—The chamber where the princes, or the 
members of the sanhedrim, or great council, used to 
476 


assemble. Above the chamber of Maaseiah, the 
keeper of the door—That is, one of the keepers; for 
there were several Levites appointed to that office, 
both to open and shut the gates of the temple in due 
time, and likewise to attend at them all day, for pre- 
venting any thing that might happen tothe prejudice 
of the purity, or safety of that holy place. Some 
of these officers had likewise the custody of the holy 
vessels. 

Verses 5-7. I set before the sons of the Rechabites 
pots full of wine, &c.—In obedience to God’s com- 
mand, (verse 2,) and“that the prophet might have 
full proof of their fixed resolution to adhere to the 
injunction of their progenitor Jonadab, which no 
temptation could prevail with them to violate. But 
they said, We will drink no wine—They perempto- 
rily refused, and all agreed in the refusal, The 
prophet knew very well they would refuse, and 
therefore when they did so, urged them no further. 
or Jonadab, our father, commanded us, saying, 
Ye shall drink no wine—Concerning the probable 
reasons of this command, and of those in the follow- 
ing verse, sce note on verse 2. 

Verses 8-11. Thus have we obeyed the voice of 
Jonadab our father—We have conformed ourselves 
to his injunctions, and governed our lives by them, 
during the space of nearly three hundred years. 
But when Nebuchadrezzar came, §c., we said, 
Come, let us go to Jerusalem—The Rechabites ap- 
pear to have retired within the walls of Jerusalem 
upon the hostile approach of Nebuchadnezzar and 
his army, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, Calmet, 
indeed, supposes it was not till the latter end of Je- 
hoiakim’s reign that the Rechabites were driven into 
the city for shelter, grounding his opinion upon its 
being said in this verse, that they entered it for fear 
of the army of the Chaldeans, and of the army of 
the Syrians, and comparing this with 2 Kings xxiv. 
2, where the Lord is said to have sent bands of the 
Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, against Judah 
to destroy it. “But this reasoning,” says Blaney, 
“ will not hold, for, Ist, Nebuchadnezzar might have 

3 


7 


God blesses the Rechabites for 


=: 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


2 
their obedience to their father. 


A, M, 3308. fear of the army of the Syrians: so 

: * we dwell at Jerusalem. 

12 4 Then came the word of. the Lorp unto 
Jeremiah, saying, 

13 'Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Go and tell the men of Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not ‘ receive 
instruction to hearken to my words? saith the 
Lorp. 

14 The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, 
that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, 
are performed; for unto this day they drink 
none, but obey their father’s commandment : 
8 Smeg eiesenting I have spoken unto you, 

» rising early and speaking ; but ye hearkened 
not unto me. 

15 ‘I have sent also unto you all my ser- 
vants the prophets, rising up early and send- 


ing them, saying, * Return ye now A. M. 3398. 

every man from his evil- way, and. ate EP 

amend your doings, and go not after other gods 

to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land 

which I have given to you and to your fathers ; 

but ye have not inclined your ear, Nor cheareene 
unto me. 

16 Because the sons of Jonadab the son of 
Rechab have performed the commandment 
of their father, which he commanded them ; 
but this people hath not hearkened unto 
me: 

17 Therefore thus saith the Lorp God of 
hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring 
upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem all the evil..that I have pro- 
nounced against.them ; | because I have spoken 
unto then, but they. have. not heard; and 


€ Chap. xxxii. 33—= 2 Chron.. xxxvi. 15.—— Chap. vii. 13 ; 
xxv. 3.— i Chap. vil. 25; xxv. 4. 


k Chap. xviii. 11; xxv. 5, 6. 1 Proverbs i. 24; 
Ixvi. 45 Chap. vii. 13, 


Isa. Ixv. 12; 


been, and most probably was, joined by the Syrians 
in his first expedition against Jerusalem, after the 
defeat of the Egyptians at Carchemish, which 
brought on the submission of Syria. And, 2d, Ne- 
buchadnezzar does not appear to have come in per- 
son a second time, at least till after Jehoiakim was 
taken prisoner, and his generals had closely invested 
Jerusalem.” So we dwell at Jerusalem—Having 
retired to Jerusalem upon the Chaldean invasion, 
they were forced to continue there during the siege 
of the place. In such an extraordinary case, they 
did not think themselves obliged to a strict observ- 
ance of the injunction of Jonadab respecting dwell- 
ing iu tents, because all human laws admit of an 
equitable construction, and may be superseded in 
cases of necessity, or when the observance of them 
is attended with such great inconveniences as the 
lawgiver himself, if he could have foreseen them, 
would probably have excepted. 
Verses 12-16. Then came the word of the Lord 
unto Jeremiah—As the trial of the constancy, of the 
Rechabites was only intended for a sign, so now we 
have the application of it made by God himself. 
Tell the men of Judah, Will ye not receive instruc- 
tion? &c.—Will nothing enlighten or affect you? 
Will nothing prevail to make you sensible of your 
sin and duty? You see how obedient the Rechab- 
ites are.to their father’s commandment; but you have 
not hearkened unto me—Though it might have been 
more reasonably expected that my people should 
have obeyed me, than that the sons of Jonadab 
should have obeyed him. Thus the Rechabites’ ob- 
servance of their father’s charge to them is made 
use of by God as an aggravation of the disobedience 
of the Jews to him: and the aggravation was cer- 
tainly very high. For, Ist, The Rechabites were 
obedient to one that was but a man like themselves, 
3 


and had only the wisdom and power of a man, and 
was only the father of their flesh; but the Jews were 
disobedient to the infinite and eternal God, that had 
an absolute authority over them, as the father of 
their spirits.. 2d, Jonadab was long since dead, and 
was ignorant of his posterity, and could neither take 
cognizance of their disobedience to his orders, nor 
give any correction for it; but God lives for ever to 
see how his laws are observed, and is in readiness 
to punish all disobedience. 3d, The Rechabites 
were probably seldom or never put in mind of their 
obligations to their progenitor;-but God often sent 


| his prophets to his people, to remind them of, and 


excite to, their duty to him, yet they would not 
comply with it. ‘This is insisted on. here as a great 
aggravation of their disobedience, verses 14, 15. 
4th, Jonadab had not conferred, nor could confeér, 
any such favours on his seed as God had bestowed 
on his people, nor had laid them under any such 
obligations, from duty and interest, to obey him, as 
God had laid Israel and Judah under to observe his 
laws. 5th, God did not oblige his people to so much 
hardship, and to such instances of self-denial and 
mortification, as Jonadab enjoined to his seed, anid yet 
Jonadab’s orders were obeyed, and God’s were not. 

Verse 17. -T'herefore thus saith the Lord, Be- 
hold, &c.—Because they have not obeyed the pre- 
cepts of my word, I will therefore perform the 
threatenings of it. J will bring upon Judah, &e.— 
Namely, by the Chaldean army; all the evil that I 
have pronounced against them—Both in the iaw 
and. in the prophets; because I have spoken unto 
them, and called unto them—'Tried all ways and 
means to convince and reduce them; spoken by 
my word, called by my providence, and both in or- 
der to the same. end; and yet all to no purpose: 
| they have not heard nor answered. 

477 


Jeremiah is directed 


JEREMIAH. 


' to record his prophecies. 


Ai Mi 2398, I have called unto them, but they 

B. C. 606 
=" have not answered. 

18 | And Jeremiah said unto the house of the 
Rechabites, Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, the 
God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the 
commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept 


2 Heb. There shall not a man be cut off from Jonadab 


all his precepts, and done according A. me, B08, 
unto all that he hath commanded you : 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lorn of hosts, 
the God of Israel ; * Jonadab the son of Rechab 
shall not want a man to ™stand before me 
for éver. . 


the son of Rechab to stand, &e,——™ Chap. xv. 19. 


Verses 18, 19. Jeremiah said unto the house of 
the Rechabites, &c.—Mercy is here promised to the 
family of the Rechabites for their steady and unani- 
mous adherence to the laws of their house. Though 
it was only for the shaming of Israel that their con- 
stancy was tried, yet, being unshaken, God takes 
occasion from it to tell them that he had blessings in 
reserve for them. Jonadab shall not want a man 
to stand before me for ever—* The meaning of this 
promise,” says Blaney, “ in its full extent, seems to 
be, not only that the race of Jonadab should never 


fail or be extinct, but that some of the family should 
ever be found among the worshippers of the true 
God. For to stand in the presence of a prince, im+ 
plies an attendance, in some degree, upon his person 
and service. So the queen of Sheba, speaking. of 
Solomon’s court, says, Happy are thy men, happy 
are these thy servants, which stand continually be- 
fore thee, 1 Kings x.8; and therefore, to stand before 
God, must denote at least the privilege of treading 
his courts, and of worshipping him: among: the train 
of his chosen servants and people.” 


CHAPTER XXXVI. aT 


In this chapter we have an account of another expedient tried, but tried in vain, to awaken and reform this heedless and re- 


fractory people. 


(1,) By divine appointment a roll of a book is provided, and Jeremiah causes Baruch to write therein 


all his preceding prophecies, 1-4. (2,) Baruch, by Jeremiah’s order, reads this roll to all the people publicly on a fast 


day, 5-10. 


(3,) The princes are informed of it, and send for Baruch, who reads the roll before them, at the contents of 
which they are greatly alarmed, and advise Jeremiah and Baruch to hide themselves, 11-19 


. (4,) They acquaint the kink 


with these things, who sends for the reall, and having heard a part of it read, he cuts it in pieces and burns it, 20-26. 
(5,) God commands Jeremiah to write it anew, and to denownce the judgments of God against King lene, 27-31. 


(6,) Baruch writes a new copy, with additions, 32, 


ANP it Came to pass in the fourth 
alee tec year, of Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiah king of Judah, ¢hat this word. came 
unto Jeremiah from the Lorn, saying, 

2 Take thee a “roll of a book, and ” write 


A.M. 3398. 
B. C. 606, 


aJsa, viii. 1; Ezek. ii. 9; Zech, v. 1— Chap. xxx. 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Verse 1. And it came to pass, &c.—Jeremiah here 
inserts a history of some things which related to, or 
had a connection with, his prophecies; (as we find 
Isaiah did with regard to his;) and, accordingly, we 
are here informed how they came to be written, 
namely, by the express order of God, that they might 
stand upon record before the things foretold cameto 
pass; so that there might be no room to say he had 
never prophesied such and such things, or that the 
prophecies were made after the things they pretend- 
ed to foretel had happened. Jn the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim this word came unto Jeremiah—It is un- 
certain whether what is related in this chapter hap- 
pened during the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, (for the city was besieged in the fourth year 
of Jehoiakim, 2 Kings xxiv. 1,2,) or after the siege, 

478 


therein all the words that I have A. M. 3398. 
spoken unto thee against Israel, and ae. 
against Judah, and against: ° all the nations, 
from the day I spake unto thee, from the days 
of “ Josiah, even unto this day. 


¢ Chap. xxv. 15.——4 Chap. xxv. 3. 


when Jehoiakim was escaped from the hand of Ne- 

buchadnezzar. It seems probable from what follows, 

particularly from verse 9, that it happened at or near 
the end of the fourth year, when Nebuchadnezzar 

was retired. For Jeremiah says nothing of the siege, - 
and he orders Baruch to read his prophecies before 

an assembly of the people who had come to Jerusa- 

lem out of their cities, verse 6, which certainly i im- 

plies that Jerusalem was not then i in a state of siege. 

See Calmet. 

Verse 2. Take thee a roll of a book—Compare 
Isa. viii. 1; Ezek. ii. 9; Zech. v. 1. The ancient 
manner of writing was upon long scrolls of parch- 
ment, which they afterward rolled upon sticks, On 
these words it is remarked by Harmer, (vol. iv. chap. 
7, obs. 122,) “Many things were rolled up, mueh in 
the shape of an ancient Jewish manuscript, which 

38 


Jeremiah directs Baruch 


CHAPTER XXXVI. > 


- 
to read them publicly. 


A. M. 3398, 3 °It' may be that the house of 
— Judah will hear all the evil which I 
purpose to do unto them; that they may ‘ re- 
turn every man from his evil way; that I may 
forgive their iniquity and their sin. 

4 Then Jeremiah * called Baruch the son of 
Neriah: and » Baruch wrote from the mouth 
of Jeremiah all the words of the Lorn, which he 


had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book. 


e Verse 7; Chapter xxvi. 3——f Chap. xviii. 8; Jonah iii. 8, 
& Chap. xxxii. 12.) 


yet were not fit to write upon; the words then in 
this, and some other similar cases, may be under- 
stood to mean, Take thee a roll, or volume, fit to be 
made a book of, fit to be written on.” And write 
therein all the words that Ihave spoken against Is- 
rael and Judah—Jeremiah prophesied against Israel 
as wellas against Judah, chap. ii.4; iii. 12,14; xxiii, 13; 
xxxii.30. The kingdom of Israel was indeed destroyed 
by Shalmaneser, before the time of Jeremiah ; but yet 
the prophet was ordered to reprove their sins, both 
to make the justice of God appear in punishing them 
so severely, and withal to warn the Jews by their 
example. Besides, there were some remains of 
these tribes still left, who joined themselves to the 
tribe of Judah. And against all the nations—See 
chap. xxv. 15,16. From the day I spake unto thee, 
from the days of Josiah—Namely, all, the revela- 
tions which he had had from God for twenty-two 
years last past; for he began to prophesy in the thir- 
teenth year of Josiah, who reigned thirty-one years, 
so that he prophesied eighteen years during Josiah’s 
life, and this was the fourth year of the reign of Je- 
hoiakim, his successor. God would have his pro- 
phecies recorded, that there might. be a memorial of 
them, that so the truth of them might appear when 
God should bring them to pass; the time of which 
now drew near. 

Verse 3. Jt may be that the house of Judah will 
hear, &¢c.—That is, will hearken, and lay to heart, 
all the evil, §c., that they may return, &c.—Blaney 
translates the verse, “ Peradventure the house of Ju- 
dah may hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto 
them, so as to return every one from his evil way, 
and I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.” See 
the like expression, verse 7; chap. xxvi.3; Ezek. 
xii. 3; Am. v. 15; in which places God is introduced 
as speaking after the manner of men, and using such 
methods as, in human probability, might be most 
likely to prevail: compare chap. viii. 6. These, and 
expressions of the like kind, sufficiently indicate that 
God’s foreknowledge of future events lays no re- 
straint on the will of man, nor takes away the liberty 
of human actions. That Imay forgive their iniquity 
and their sin—Forgiveness of sin in Scripture some- 
times signifies the acquitting of a sinner from the 
ovligation sin had laid him under to eternal death ; 
sometimes the remission of a temporal punishment: 
it may here be understood as comprehending both, 
tnough itis probable the latter is principally intended. 

3 


5 And Jeremiah commanded Ba- A. M. 3398. 

ruch, saying, I am shut up, I cannot — 
go into the house of the Lorn: 
6 Therefore go thou and read in the roll, 
which thou hast written from my mouth, the 
words of the Lor» in the ears of the people in 
the Lorp’s house upon ‘the fasting day: and 
also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Ju- 
dah that come out of their cities. 


» Chapter xiv, -1.— Leviticus xvi. 29; xxiii. 27-32; Acts 


xxvii. 9. 


Verse 4. Then Jeremiah called Barueh—Baruch 
was the most faithful disciple’ of this prophet: he 
served him as long as he lived in the capacity of his 
secretary, and never left him till his death. And Ba- 
ruch wrote fromthe mouth of Jeremiah all the words, 
&c—We need not ask how Jeremiah could remem- 
ber all the prophecies that he had prophesied, for 
twenty-two years before, considering who it was 
that commanded him to put them in writing. . God 


| undoubtedly brought them to his remembrance, 


otherwise it would have been impossible for him to 
have recollected them all. The Spirit of God dic- 
tated to Jeremiah, and he to Baruch. 

Verses 5, 6. Jeremiah commanded Baruch, say- 
ing, I am shut wp—It is not said, that “he was shut 
up in prison” at this time: but barely that Ae was 
shut up, or confined, as Wy signifies, that is, under 
some- such confinement, or restraint, as precluded 
his going to the house of the Lord... Therefore go 
thou.and read in the roll, §c., upon the fasting day 
—Noet the day of the yearly fast, mentioned Lev. 
xxiii. 27, but on a day appointed for a national fast, 
of which we read more, verse 9, proclaimed by Je- 
hoiakim, probably to avert the calamity hanging over 
them from the Chaldeans, or from the drought. And 
it was undoubtedly because of the concourse of peo-. 
ple which the prophet knew would then be in the 
temple that he chose that day, when some would be 
present from all parts of Judah. It was the opinion, 
indeed, of Archbishop Usher and Dean Prideaux, 
that the roll was twice read by Baruch in the tem- 
ple, and.that the first reading was on the tenth day 
of the seventh month, being the great day of atone- 
ment, in the fourth year of King Jehoiakim. .“ But 
this,’ says Blaney, “I am persuaded is a mistake ; 
and that the reasons urged by the latter of those two 
learned men, in support of this hypothesis, are by 
no means conclusive. I see no good reason for eon- 
cluding that the roll was read publicly in the temple 
more than once; nor does Josephus, wlio speaks of 
its being read in the ninth month of the fifth year, 
(Antiquities, lib. x. cap: 6,) give the least hint of its 
having been read before; if it had been, I think 
we might naturally expect to be informed how 
it was received by those who heard it the first time, 
as well as by those who heard it the second. From 
the utter silénce on this head, the contrary may be 
presumed, and’ we may fairly conjecture the case to 
have been pretty nearly as follows. Toward the 

474 


- 


\ 
- 


in the ears of all the people. 


The reading. of the roll e JEREMIAH. 
A.M. 3398. 7 *Tt may be ‘they will present 


JC: 606 ‘ame 
BG: 006. their supplication before the Lorp, 


and will return every one from his evil way « 


for great is the anger and the fury that the 
Lorp hath pronounced against this people. 

8 And Baruch the son of Neriah did accord- 
ing to all that Jeremiah the prophet command- 
ed him, reading in the book the words of the 
Lorp in the Lorn’s house. 

B. c.606, 9 And it came to pass in the fifth 

year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah 
king of Judah, in the ninth month, that 
they proclaimed a fast before the Lorn to all 
the people in Jerusalem, and to all the peo- 
ple that came from the cities of Judah unto 
Jerusalem. 

10, Then read Baruch in: the:book the words 
of Jeremiah in the house of the Lorp, in the 


chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the, 


scribe, in the higher court, at- the A. M. 3398. 
entry | of the new gate of the Lorn’s 22% 
house, in the ears of all the people. 

11 4% When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, 
the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book 
all the words of the Lorn, 

.12 Then he went down into the king’s house, 
into the scribe’s chamber: and Jo, all the 
princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and 
Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan 
the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of 
Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, 
and all the princes. 

13 Then Michaiah declared unto them all the 
words that he had heard, when Baruch read the 
book in the ears of the people. 

14 Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the 
son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the 
son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thy 


_ © Verse 3.——' Heb. their supplication shall fall. 


2 Or, door.—! Chap. xxvi. 10. 


latter end of Jehoiakim’s fourth year, after. Nebu- 
chadnezzar had replaced him on the throne, and had 
left the city, it is possible that both king and people, 
freed from former apprehensions, began again to in- 
dulge their wicked inclinations; and therefore Jere- 
miah was ordered to lay before them at once all the 
evils that still threatened them, and from which no- 
thing but speedy repentance could protect them. In 
consequence of this charge, he caused Bartch to 
write a collection of all his prophecies, and to have 
them-in readiness to read at a fit-opportunity. Per- 
haps the collection was not fully completed before 
the fifth year was already begun; but the season 
pitched on, as most convenient for reading this tre- 
mendous publication, was the day on which the peo- 
ple should assemble to deplore, before God, the ca- 
lamity with which he had visited them just twelve 
months before. Accordingly, at that time Baruch 
read openly in the temple what he had written, and 
the immediate consequences of such reading are 
here related at large.” 

Verses 7, 8. It may be they will present their sup- 
plications—Hebrew, min 1355 toninn ban, perad- 
venture they may prostrate themselves in supplica- 
tion before Jehovah ; or, more literally, their suppli- 
cation may fall before Jehovah, which, undoubtedly, 
says Blaney, “respects the humble posture of the 
supplicant in presenting it :” see note on verse 3. In 
the subsequent part of the verse, the words anger 
and fury (or, wrath, as M:N, should rather be ren- 
dered) are put by a metonymy for the effects of 
them, namely, the heavy judgments which, in con- 
sequence thereof, Jehovah had denounced against 
this people. We learn from this verse that prayer 
and reformation are the most likely means that can 
be used to turn away God’s wrath when it is ready 
to fall upon a sinful nation. 

480 


| was open to all the people. 


Verses 9, 10. In the fifth year, &c., they proclaimed 
a fast—“It was customary among the Jews to pro- 
claim anniversary fasts upon certain days,in memo- 
ry of some great calamities which had befallen them 
at that time. . Of this kind were the fasts of the fourth, 
fifth, seventh, and tenth months, mentioned Zech. 
vii.5, and viii. 195 the first instituted in remembrance 
of the city’s being taken by Nebuchadnezzar; the 
second in memory of the temple’s being. burned i in 
that month; the third for the murder of Gedaliah ; 
the fourth in memory of the siege which then began, 
Then read Baruch the words of Jeremiah, in the 
house of the Lord—It has been before observed, that 
by the house of the Lord is meant all that is included 
within the sacred precincts of the temple; not only 
the sanctuary, or house properly so called, but all 
the out-buildings, and the courts around, both the 
inner, court of the priests, and the outer court, which 
In the chamber of Ge- 
mariah the scribe-—This chamber was undoubtedly 
in the great outer court, either close to, or over the 
gateway of the eastern gate; so that if he read, as is 


‘supposed, from a window, or baleony, he would be 


heard by the concourse of people that came flocking 
into the court through that gate: see chap. xxvi. 10. 

Verses 11-15. When Michaiah, the son of Sha- 
phan, had heard, &¢e.—Shaphan’s family were all 
great men at court: see note on chap. xxvi. 24; 
he went down into the king’s house, &e.—It is un- 
certain whether this Michaiah went to make this re- 
lation. to the princes, who sat in. the secretary’s 
chamber, as a piece of news only, or out of a mali- 
cious design to aecuse the prophet and Baruch, as 
persons guilty of a seditious practice, in what they 
had done. Then Michaiah declared unto them all 
the words that he had heard—That is, the substance 
of all the words, &c.; for none can imagine that a 

3 


The princes are alarmed at 


A! M. ong hand the roll wherein thou hast read 

in the ears of the people, and come. 
So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in 
his hand, and came unto them. ° 

15 And they said unto him, Sit down now, 
and read it in our ears. So Baruch read i¢ in 
their ears. 

16 Now it came to pass, when they had heard 
all the words, they were afraid both one and 
other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely tell 
the king of all these words. 

17 And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us 
now, How didst thou write all these words at 
his mouth ? 

18 Then Baruch answered them, He pro- 
nounced all these words unto me with his 


CHAPTER XXXVL - 


+ & 
the reading of the roll. 


mouth, and I wrote ¢hem with ink A. 9 3398, 
B. C. 606. 

in the book. 
19 Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go 


| hide thee, thou and Pathoveise and let no man 


know where ye be. 

20 4 And they went in to the king into the 
court, but they laid up the roll in’ the chamber 
of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words 
in the ears of the king. 

21 So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the rol] : 
and. he took it out of Elishama the scribe’s 
chamber. “And Jehudi read it in the ears of 
the king, and in the ears of all. the panded 
which stood beside the king. 

22 Now the king sat in ™ the wiftter-house 
in the ninth month: and there was a fire 


itt —— 


m Amos 
ee 
hearer could remember every word. Therefore 
all the princes sent Jehudi, &c.—That is, all the 
princes who at that time sat there in council sent a 
messenger with-a command to Baruch to appear be- 
fore them, and to bring the roll which he had read 
in the ears of the people. “And they said, Sit down 
nowandread it. So Baruchreadit—The courage of 
Baruch isadmirable ; he was now before the council, 
in the king’s house ; ‘the substance of the prophecies 
was, to threaten heavy judgments to the king, and 
court, and all the people; and the king, as appears by 
all history, was of a vindictive spirit, and a persecu- 
tor of God’s prophets ; and yet Baruch is not afraid, 

but reads the prophecy in their ears. 
Verses 16-19. When they heard all the words— 


It is hardly to be imagined that all these counsellors |. 


would sit still till they had heard all. the prophecies 
read which Jeremiah had uttered for the last twenty- 
two years; but all signifies many, or, the substance 
of all his prophecies. They were afraid both one 
and other—That is, they were all of them afraid. 
The judgments denounced were so terrible as to 
make the ears of them that heard them tingle. Je- 
remiah had now been above twenty years.a prophet 
to this people, and doubtless had been in great es- 
teem for eighteen years of that time, while Josiah 
was alive, and they could not but observe that his 
prophecies had been often accomplished. They 
were, therefore, it seems, afraid that they should see 
these fulfilled also. And they asked Baruch, say- 
ing, Tell us now, How didst thou write all these 
words 2—This seemed a reasonable question, con- 
sidering they were the substance of what he had 
Seen prophesying for so many years. ‘The matter 
seemed strange to the princes, the prophets not 
being used to study and write their discourses, but 
- to preach them extempore. Baruth answered, He 
pronounced all these words, and I wrote them, 
&c.—This could not but add to the princes’ fear 
that these prophecies would be accomplished, for 
they must needs conceive that, without a special 
Vow. I. ( 31) 


ili. 15, 


influence of God, it would have been a thing i impos- 
sible that Jeremiah should have calléd to mind all 
that he had spoken at sundry times for so many 
years. Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go 
hide thee, thou and Jeremiah—They thought it 
their duty to acquaint the king'with the matter, and 


yet were unwilling that Jeremiah and Baruch should ; 


feel the effects of his displeasure. 

Verse 20. And they went in to the leitagp into the 
court—* They were before, it is said, verse 12, in 
the king’s house, that is, in ‘the exterior precinets of 
the palace, where were apartments and offices 
fitted up for the principal officers of state, and for 
the attendants of the court. But, from what j is here 


.said, there was an interior body of building for the 


king’s personal. residence, ranged, as is the fashion 
of the great houses of the East at this day, round an 
open court, or quadrangle, and containing apartments 
separately appropriated for summer and winter use.” 
—Blaney. But they laid up the roll, &c.—They 
were obliged by their office, as counsellors to the 
king, to acquaint him with what they heard, which 
might be prejudicial to him and his nation; and in- 
deed this. was the very end for which God com- 
manded the enrolling of these prophecies, that both 
the king and his counsellors, together with all the 
people, might take notice of them; but they did not 
carry. the book with them, but laid it up in the secre- 
tary’s chamber. 

Verse 22. Now the king sat in the winter-house 
—The princes and great men had distinct houses, 
or apartments, fitted for the several seasons of the 
year, Am. iii. 15. Jn the ninth month—Which an- 
swers to the latter end of our November and part of 
December. And there was a fire on the hearth 
burning before him—Hebrew, n>y29 1329 NNT AN", 
et focus coram ipso ardebat, Buxtorff: literal] 
And a hearth, or, fire-pan was burning before hin 
Thus the LXX., kai ecyapa rupoc Kara Tpocwrov avrov: 
and a pan of fire before him. To the same pur- 
pose the Vulgate, et posita erat arula oe co 

481 


#e 


rel 

? The roll destroyed ‘ 
eet PIRES 

= M. $398. on the hearth burning before. him. 
~~" 23 And it came to pass, that when 
Jehudi had. read three or four leaves, he cut it 
with the penknife, and cast ¢¢ into the fire that 
was on the hearth, until all the roll was con- 
sumed in the fire that was on the hearth, 

24 Yet they were not afraid, nor ™ rent their 
garments, neither the king, nor any of his 
servants. that heard all abece words. 


n.2 Kings xxii. 11; Isa.xxxvi. 225 xxxvii. 1. 


plena prunis, There.was set before him a little 
altar, or fire-pan, full of burning coals. -The 
reason of this phraseology we have in the account 


which Lightfoot gives us from Maimonides, namely, 


that chimneys were not admitted at Jerusalem by 
reason of the smoke. And Mr. -Harmer tells us, 
(chap. ili. obs. 24,) that Sir John Chardin, in his MS. 
notes, supposes that the fire which was burning. be- 
fore Jehoiakim was a pan of coals; and: cites a 
passage from him, which says, in French, “This was 
just as persons of quality warm themselves i in winter 
in Persia, and particularly in Media, and wherever 
there is no want of wood. The manner in which 


they sit will not allow them to be near a chimney: | 


in these places, therefore, of the East, they have 
great brasiers of lighted coals.” - Harmer. likewise 
informs us, that “the fires used. at Aleppo, in the 
lodging rooms, are of charcoal in pans; and that 
pans of coals are the fires which are. often made 
‘use of in winter in Egypt.” It may be observed 
further here, that this description of Jehoiakim sit- 
ting in‘his winter-house, in the ninth month, with a 
pan of fire before him, answers to Dr. RusseP’s ac- 
count, who says, that the most delicate in those 
countries make no fires till the end of November. 
How long they continue the use of them he does 
not say: but we learn from other sources, that in 
Judea they are continued far into the spring: see 
John xviii. 18. | 

Verse 23. When Jehudi had read three or four 
leaves—Hebrew, 11, rolls, or sérolls, for their 
books, as we have observ ed, consisted of several pieces 
of parchment rolled upon each other. Dr. Water- 
land renders the word columns, and Blaney, sections, 
observing that to-render it leaves, “seems rather to 
carry an eye to the books of modern times, than to 
suit that ancient mode of writing.” The word pri- 
marily signifies doors, that open and shut, and 
therefore is properly enough put for distinet and 
separate rolls, or parts of those prophecies which, 
being delivered at different times, and having a re- 
lation to different subjects, have each a proper be- 
ginning and ending of its own Houbigant reads, 
pages, which he says, “ were the same ‘with those 


now found in the parehments called, ‘The Volumes | 


of the Synagogue,’ in which the parchments are 

not sewed one beneath another; for if this were the 

case, the volume would only have one page, whuse 

beginning would be at the top, and its end at the 
482 


JEREMIAH. 


by King Jehoiakim. 


25 Nevertheless Elnathan and De AM. ee. 
laiah and.Gemariah had made inter> —— 
cession to the: king that he would not burn the 
roll: but he would not hear them.. __ 

26 But the king commanded Jerahmeel the 
son ‘of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of 
Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to 
take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the pro- 
phet : but the Lorn hid them. 
SSS ee 

3 Or, of the king. 


bottom of the parchment ; but. the- parchments are 
sewed one to another on their sides, and are read by 
unfolding the volume either to the right or left ; so 
that there are as many pages as there are ‘pateh- 
ments.” He cut it with a penknife—Hebrew, wns 
“pon, the knife of the scribe.. It seems the imple- 
iments for writing were lying on the table before the 
king, ready for the scribe’s or secretary’s use, in case 
there was any call for writing orders, or despatehes. 
Among these was the knife he used, either for cut- 
ting the pen when necessary, or for making erasures. 
And cast into the fire wntil all the roll was. con- 
sumed—Not considering or not regarding its con- 
taining a revelation of the will of God, and a divine 
message to him in particular: a piece this of as 
daring impiety as a man could easily be guilty of, 
and a most impudent affront to the God of heayen! 

Verse 24. Yet they were not afraid—No, not 
those princes that trembled at the word when they 
heard, it the first time, verse 16. The fear with 
which they were then seized quickly wore off, or 
else they durst not discover it in the king’s presence, 
who showed no concern himself. Nor rent their 
garments—A custom observed among tlie Jews at 
the hearing of any dreadful news; netiher the king 
nor any of his servants that heard, all these words 
—How different was the spirit of this king and his 
courtiers from that of his father Josiah, who, when 
he heard the words of the law read to him by Sha- 
phan the scribe, both rent his clothes and wept be- 
fore the Lord in the deepest humiliation and dis- 
tress, persuaded that great was the wrath about to be 
poured upon the nation; and yet the parts of the 
law read to him were certainly neither so particular, 
nor so immediately adapted to the present state of 
affairs in the country as the ConisaRe of this roll 
were. 

Verses 25, 26. Nevertheless, Rtwathan, Delaiah, 
and Gemariah had made intercession, &¢.—These 
three princes appear to have had a greater dreed of 
God upon their hearts than the rest, for, so-far as 
they durst, they interposed and besought the king 
not to burn, the roll; but he would not hear to 
their advice ; so far from it that he gives orde 
apprehend both Jeremiah and Baruch. Bul the 
Lord hid them—God by his providence kept them 
both out of their hands, directing them to such a 
place of recess as the king’ s messengers could not 
find out. —,. 

( 31* ) 14 o 


7 


Jeremiah is commanded to 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


write the prophecies again, 
. } ' 


——+ 
Pk, S200. 27 4 Then the word of the Lorp 
- came to Jeremiah, after that the king 
had burned the roll, and the ‘words which 
Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, 
saying, haat 
28 ‘Take thee again another roll, and write 
in it all the former words that were in the 
first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah 
hath burned. - 


— 


29 And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king} 


of Judah, Thus saith the Lorp; Thou hast 
burned this’ roll; saying, Why hast thou writ- 


ten therein, saying, The king’ of - Babylon’ 


shall certainly come and. destroy this land, 
and shall cause to cease from thence man and 
beast 2 : 


30 Therefore thus saith the’ Lorn, of Jehoi- 


© Chap. xxii. 30.—P Chap. xxii. 19. 


— 


Verses 27-29. Then the word of the Lord came 
to Jeremiah, &c.—Jeremiah now receives orders to 
write in another roll the same words that were writ- 
ten in that which Jehoiakim had burned. Observe 
well, reader, though the attempts of hell against 
the word of God are very daring, yet not one tittle 
of it shall fall-to the ground; nor shall the unbelief 
of man make the truth of God of none effect.- Its 
enemies may prevail to burn many of the: Bibles 
which contain it, yet they cannot abolish the word 


of God; they can neither extirpate it, nor defeat. the | 


accomplishment of it. And thou shalt say to Jehoi- 
akim—Or, of Jehoiakim; as Dy is translated, verse 
30; for this command seems to have been given to 
Jeremiah during the time of his confinement. T'how 
hast burned this roll, saying, Why, &¢e.—We learn 
here what was the cause of the king’s anger; Jere- 
miah had’ prophesied, that the king of Babylon 
should come and take Jerusalem, and Jay the coun- 
try waste, which was fulfilled within six years after 
this, and more fully stillin eighteen years. 

Verses 30,31. He shall have none to sit on the 
throne of David—That is, none that shall be king 
any considerable time; Jeconiah, his son, was set 
up, but kept his throne only three months, and left 
none to succeed him in a direct line. And his dead 
body shall be cast out—See note on chap. xxii. 19. 
And I will punish him and his seed, &c.—Even his 
seed and his servants shall fare the worse for their 
relation to him: for they shall be punished, not in- 


ed 
akim king of Judah ; ° He shall have A,M. 3399. 
none to sit upon the throne of David: am 
and his dead ‘body shall be ? cast out in the day 
to the heat, and in the night tothe frost. 

31 And I will * punish him and his seed and 
his servants for their iniquity ; and I will bring 
upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil 
that I have pronounced against them; but they 
hearkened not. 

32 4 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and 
gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah ; 
who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah 
all the words of the book which 'Jehoiakim 
king of Judah had burned in the fire: and 
there were added besides unto them many “like 
words. : 


* Heb. visit upon, Chap. xxiii. 34.——® Heb. as they. 


deed for his iniquity, but the sooner for their own. 
And as to the people, God threatens that they should 
feel what they were not willing to hear, even all the 
evil which God by his prophet had pronounced 
against them. 'Though the roll, the copy of the di- 
vine decree, was burned, the original remained, which 
should again be copied out after another manner in 
bloody characters. There is no escaping Ged’s 
judgments by striving against ‘them. Who ever 
hardened his heart against God and prospered 2 
Verse 32. T'hen took Jeremiah another roll—Here 
we are shown, that wicked men gain nothing by op- 
posing themselves to the revealed. will of God, how 
ungrateful soever it may be to them, but the addition 
of guilt to their souls, and the increase of divine 
wrath; God’s counsels shall stand, and what he 
speaks shall most certainly be accomplished. Here 
is another roll written, with additional threatenings, 
confirming what God had before said. T'here were 
added unto them, besides, many like words—Blaney 
translates the clause, And there was a further addi- 
tion made unto them of many words of the same 
sort, “From hence we may infer,” says Lowth, 
“that God’s Spirit did not always endite the very 
form of words which the holy writers have’ set down, 
but, directing them in general to express his sense in 
proper words, left-the manner of expression to them- 
selves. From whence proceeds that variety of style 
which we may observe in the Scriptures, suitable to 
the different genius and education of. the writers.” 


CHAPTER XXXVI *. - ‘ 


In this chapter we have, (1,) Certain preliminary facts related, tending to fix the time and occasion of Zedekiah’s second 
message to Jeremiah, 1-5. (2,) God suggests an answer, foretelling the retreat of the Egyptians, and the return of the 
Chaldean army, who should take and burn Jerusalem, 6-10. (3,) During the absence of the Chaldeans, Jeremiah, 


3 


483 


_ Zedekiah sends to Jeremiah, 


JEREMIAH. 


and requests his prayers. 


altempting to quit the city and retire to his own country possessions, is seized upon for a deserter, and thrown into a dun- 


geon, 11-15. 


(4,), The king sends for and consults him; and, being entreated by the prophet not to remand him to his 


former prison, is prevailed upon to change the place, and to abate the rigour, of his confinement, 16-21. 


A. us hog 


a AND King * Zedekiah the son of 


wie Ree Josiah reigned instead of Coniah 
the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar, 
king of Babylon, made king in the land of 
Judah. . 

2 » But neither he, nor fo servants, nor the 
people of the land, did hearken unto the words 
of the Lorp, which he spake ! by the Prophet 
Jeremiah. 

B.c.590, 3 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehu- 

cal the son of Shelemiah, and ° Ze- 
phaniah the son of Maasciah the priest to the 
Prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the 
Lorn our God for us. 

4 Now Jeremiah came in and went out 
among the people: for they had not put him 
into prison. 

5 Then ¢ Pharaoh’s army was come forth out 


a2 Kings xxiv. 17; 2Chronicles xxxvi. 10; Chap: xxii. 24. 
6 2 Chron. xxxvi. 12, ‘14. 1 Heb. by the hand of the prophet. 
¢ Chap. xxi. 1,2; xxix. 25; lili: 24 


of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans A. M. 3414. 
that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings ee 
of them, they departed from Jerusalem. 

6 “| Then came the word of the Lorp unto 
the Prophet Jeremiah, saying, ’ 

7 Thus saith the Lorn, the God of Israel ; 
Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, ‘ that 
sent you unto me to inquire of me; Behold, 
Pharaoh’s army, which is come forth to help 
you, shall return to Egypt into their own land. 

8 © And the Chaldeans shall come again, and 
fight against this city, and take it, and burn it 
with fire. 

9 Thus saith the Lorp; Deceive not ? your- 
selves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely de- 
part from us: for they shall not depart. 

10 » For though ye had smitten the wholt 
army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, 


42Kings xxiv. 7; Ezekiel xvii. 15. e Verse 11; Cha ter 
xxxiy. 21. £ Chapter xxi. 2.——® Chap. xxxiv, 22.——* Heb. 
souls. h Chap. xxi. 4, 5. s ' ; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVIL. . 

Verses 1, 2. Zedekiah, whom Nebuchadrezzar 
made king—See 2 Kings xxiv. 17; 2 Chron. xxxyi. 
10, where is related the history of Zedekiah’s succes- 
sion. He was but a tributary king, having taken an 
oath of homage to the king of Babylon. He was a 
feeble and irresolute prince, and although not so bad 
as many of his predecessors, yet he had but little 
true piéty or virtue. Neither he nor his servants, 
g¢c., did hearken unto the words of the Lord— 
Though they saw in his predecessor the fatal conse- 
quences of contemning the word of God, and though 
it had already begun to be fulfilled, yet they did not 
take warning, nor give any more heed to it than 
others had done before them. 

Verses 3-5. Zedekiah sent Jehucal the son of She- 
lemiah—This man came in the place of Pashur, 
who, together with Zephaniah, brought the former 
message from Zedekiah; saying, Pray now unto the 
Lord our God for us—Wicked men of all ranks are 
desirous, in their distresses, of the prayers of those 
whose counsels and admonitions they never regard 
while they are in prosperity, which is a plain evi- 
dence of their acting contrary to the convictions of 
their own consciences. Now Jeremiah came in and 
went out among the people—That is, he was not yet 
put in prison as he afterward was: see verse 15; 
chap. xxxii. 2. Jerasalem also, for the present, was 
at liberty, for Pharaoh’s army was come forth out of 
Egypt, &¢c.— Zedekiah, contrary to the oath that he 
had given to Nebuchadnezzar, made an alliance with 
the king of Egypt, and contracted with him for assist- 
ance against the king of Babylon; whereupon. the 

484 


king of Egypt sent an army to his relief: see Ezek. 
xvii..15; which obliged the Chaldeans to raise the 
siege of. Jerusalem, that they might go and fight this 
army.’—Lowth. During this time, it seems, it was 
that Zedekiah sent to desire the prophet to pray for 
them. 

Verses 7-10. Pharaols army, which is’ come 
forth to help you, shall return—They shall be dis- 
comfited by the Chaldeans, and forced to retreat 
without affording you any assistance: see 2 Kings 
xxiv.'7. And the Chaldeans shall come again—They 
shall return, renew the siege, and prosecute it with 
more vigour than ever. And take it and burn it 
with fire—The sentence passed upon Jerusalem shall 
be executed, and they shall be the executioners : see 
chap. xxxiv. 22. Deceive not yourselves, &c.—In 
vain did the Jews rejoice in Pharaoh’s coming to 
help them: in vain did they flatter themselves that 
the army of the Chaldeans would be routed; for, 
(as God was against them,) had this even been the 
case, had they smitten, as God here tells them, the 
whole army of the Chaldeans, so that there remained 
but wounded men among them, yet would they have 
been sufficient to have taken and laid low ‘the proud 
city of Jerusalem. For, when God will take away, 
who shall rescue ?—In vain, therefore, if God be our 
enemy, is all our power and policy; in vain do we 
endeavour to strengthen ourselves by riches and 
great friends, and to build our nest on high; for we 
can never be safe, but in the favour, and under the 
protection of the Almighty. And we may observe 
further, that whatever instruments God has deter- 
mined to make use of, in any service for him, whe- 


a 


Jeremiah is arrested, 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


and put in prison. 


A.M. 3415. and there remained but * wounded 

men among them, ye¢ should they 
rise up every man in his tent, and burn this 
city with fire. ' 

11 4.‘ And it came to pass, that when the 
army of the Chaldeans was ‘broken up from 
Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh’s army, 

12 Then Jeremiah went’ forth out of Jeru- 
salem to go into the land of Benjamin, § to 
separate himself thence in the midst of the 
people. 

13. And when he was in the gate of Benja- 
min, a captain of the ward was there, whose 


® Heb. thrust through——i Verse 5. * Heb. made to ascend. 
® Or, to slip away from thence in the midst of the people. 


2rd 


name was Irijah, the son of Shele- 
miah, the son of Hananiah; and he ———— 
took Jeremiah the prophet, savings Thou E. 


away to the Chaldeans. as 

14 Then said Jeremiah, It is ° false; I fall 
not away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened 
not. to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and 
brought him to the princes. 

15 Wherefore the princes were wroth with 
Jeremiah, and smote him, * and put him in pri- 
son in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for 
they had made that the prison. 

16 4] When Jeremiah was entered into !the 


Ui 


6 Heb. falsehood, or, a lie——* Chap. xxxviii. 26-——! Chapter 
XXXVUl. 6. 


ther of mercy or judgment, they shall accomplish 
that for which they are designed, whatever i incapa- 
city they may lie under, or be reduced to. ' 

Verse 12. Then Jeremiah went forth, §c., to go 
into the land of Benjamin—Jeremiah, having no fur- 
ther revelation from God to communicate, and know- 
ing the city would soon be taken, resolves to go to 
his own country to Anathoth. . To separate himself 
thence, &c.—The Hebrew, Dyn pn2 Dw pond, 
is rendered by Houbigant, “That he might have 
there,a possession for himself with the people;” by 
Dr Waterland, “To take rents from thence,” &c.; 
and by Blaney, “To receive a portion thereof’ among 
the people.” “This,” says the last-mentioned cri- 
tic, “seems a more natural interpretation of the 
words, than to understand them, as our translators 
seem to have done, of the prophet’s withdrawing 
himself, or slipping away, (as it is expressed in the 
margin,) for fear of being shut up again in the city, 
on the renewal of the blockade. For the case ap- 
pears to have been this, Jeremiah had been cut off 
from his patrimony in the land of Benjamin, by the 
Chaldeans having been masters there. But, upon 
their retreat, he meant to return, with a view of 
coming in for a share of the produce of the land 
with the rest of his neighbours. For that he was 
likely to want somé means for his support is evident 
from his having been obliged to be subsisted in pri- 
son afterward upon a public allowance.” 

Verses 13,14. When he was in the gate of Ben- 
jamin—The gate leading toward the country of 
Benjamin; Irijah, the son of Hananiah—Probably 
of that Hananiah whose death Jeremiah had fore- 
told, ch. xxviii. 17; took Jeremiah the prophet—Ap- 
prehended him as one who was about to desert. the 
city, and fall off to the Chaldeans; the ground of 
which accusation was the prophet’s having foretold 
that the Chaldeans should take the city, and exhort- 
ed the Jews to submit to them. Then said Jere- 
miah, It is false—Though, as the Lord’s prophet, 
he had faithfully revealed his will, and foretold the 
calamity that was about to come upon the nation, by 
means of the Chaldeans, this did not prove that he 
took their part, for at the same time he gave advice | 

3 


—- 


both to the king and people how they might, in some 
measure at least, escape the judgments he had. de- 
nounced against ‘them ; nor had he now any design 
to flee to the Chaldeans ; so far from it, that; when 
the city was taken, and the captain of the guard gave 
him his choice, either to go along with him to Baby- 
lon, or to go back to Gedaliah, whom the king of 
Babylon had left as deputy ‘governor in Judea, he 
chose rather to go.and live under Gedaliah’s govern- 
ment in a poor condition, than to enjoy protection 
and plenty in an iddlatrouscountry. But he heark- 
ened not unto him—The captain of the ward would 
not believe him, but carried him before the princes. 

Verse 15. Wherefore the princes were wroth— 
These princes seem to have been much more hostile 
to the prophet than those that were in the time of 
Jehoiakim, (see chap. xxxvi. 19,) for they proceed 
here merely upon the captain’s information, and, 
treating him.as guilty, without any proof, cruelly 
cause him to be beaten, though entirely innocent, 
and put into a most miserable dungeon. Jn the 
house of Jonathan the scribe—“'There is nothing 
extraordinary,” says Blaney, “in making the dwell- 
ing-house of a great man a prison, according to 
either the ancient or modern manners of the East: 
see Gen. xxxix. 20; even.in the royal palace itself 
we find there was a prison, chap. xxxii. 2.” © Mr. 
Harmer (chap. viii. obs. 37) quotes the following pas- 
sage from a MS. of Sir John Chardin:—“ The east- 
ern prisons are not public buildings erected for that 
purpose; but a part of the house in which their eri- 
minal judges dwell. As the governor and provost 
of a town, or the captain of the watch, imprison 
such as are accused in their own houses, they set 
apart a canton of them for that purpose, when they 
are put into these offices, and choose for the jailer 
the most proper person they can find of their domes- 
tics.” Thus Mr. Harmer thinks that Jonathan’s 
house became a prison in consequence of his being 
a royal scribe, or, as we should term him, secretary 
of state. 

Verse 16. When Jeremiah was entered into the 
dungeon—Hebrew 37 12 5x, into. the house of 
the pit, ditch, or lake; and into the cabins—Or, 

485 


ad 


The king sends 


JEREMIAH. 


Sor the prophet. 


\ M. 3415. dungeon, and into the 7cabins, and/acainst thy servants, or against this A.M. $415 
we 589 eae : ° y d g B. C. 589 


_ Jeremiah had remained there many 
days ; wy 
17 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took 
him out: and the king asked him secretly in 
his house, and said, Is there any word from the 
Lorn? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, 
said he, thou shalt be delivered into. the hand 
of the king of Babylon. . 
18 Moreover, Jeremiah said unto King Zede- 
kiah, What have I offended against thee, or 


people, that ye have put me in prison ? 

19 Where are now your prophets which pro- 
phesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon 
shall not come against you, nor against this 
land? Salah 

20 Therefore, hear now, I pray thee, O my 
lord the king: *let my supplication, I pray thee, 
be accepted before thee; that thou cause me 
not to return to the house of Jonathan the 


‘scribe, lest I die there. 


7 Or, cells, 


cells, as NVINN signifies. “From comparing this 
place with chap. xxxviii. 6, it seems likely that this 
dungeon was a deep pit, sunk perpendicularly like a 
well, in the middle court or quadrangle, around 
which the great houses were built; and that in the 
sides of it, near the bottom, were scooped niches, like 
the cabins of a’ship, for the separate lodgment of the 
unfortunate persons who were let ‘down there. 
Hence also. it may be, that the same word here ren- 
dered dungeon is frequently put for the grave; the 
ancient repositories of the dead being often con- 
structed with niches, in the same manner in which 
the bodies were placed, separately. Accordingly we 
read, Isa. xiv. 15, Yet thow shalt be brought down to 
the grave, tothe sides of the pit, 2 ‘nav 4x. How 
long Jeremiah was forced to remain in this misera- 
ble place is not said, but it seems from ver. 19, that it 
was until the Chaldean army was returned to the 
siege. Se 

Verse 17. Then Zedekiah the king sent and took 


him out—When the-.vain hopes with which they | 


had fed themselves, and on the ground of which they 
had re-enslaved their servants, were ‘all vanished 
away, then they were ina greater consternation than 
ever: and then the king sent, in all haste, for the 
prophet, to see if he could give him any hope of 
their deliverance. ‘When the Chaldeans were with- 
drawn, he only sent to desire the prophet to pray for 
him, but now, the city being again invested, he sent 
for him to consult him: thus gracious will men be 
When pangs come upon them! He asked him se- 
cretly in his house—Being ashamed to be seen in his 
company: Js there any word from the Lord ?—That 
is, Hath God revealed any thing to thee concerning 
what will be the issue of the return of the Chaldean 
army to the siege of the city? Canst thou give us 
any hopes that they will again retire 2 What need 
had Zedekiah to make this inquiry, when God, by 
this prophet, had so often revealed his will to him 
in this matter?. Observe, reader, those that will 
not hearken to God’s admonitions when they are in 
prosperity, would be glad of his consolations when 
they are in adversity; and expect that his ministers 
should then speak words. of peace to them. But 
how can they expectit ? what have they to do with 
peace? Jeremiah said, There is, for thou shalt be 
delivered into the hand. of the king of Babylon— 
486 


+ 


8 Heb. let my supplication fall. — 


Here we have an instance of that freedom and firm- 
ness of mind which belong to them who truly live 
in the fear of God, and put their trust in him. Je- 
remiah’s life and comfort are'in Zedekiah’s hands, 
and he has now an important petition to present to 
him; and yet, having this opportunity, he tells him 
plainly that there is a word from the Lord, but no 
word of comfort to him, or his people; but that de- 
struction awaits them: see the difference between his 
spirit and that of Zedekiah. ‘Though a king, Zede- 
kiah dares not run the, risk of offending his courtiers, 
who were his subjects and servants, while the .:0- 
pliet dares denounce the king’s ruin to himselt not 
knowing but such integrity might cost him hiy life. 
If he had consulted with flesh and blood, he would 
have given the kinga plausible answer, and not have 
told him the worst at this time, especially as he had 
so, often told it him before. But Jeremiah was one 
that ‘had obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, 
and would not, to obtain mercy of man, be unfaithful 
either to God, or to his prince, or to his people; he 
therefore tells him the truth, and the whole truth, 
which to know would be a kindness to the king, in 
order that, being forewarned of the approaching 
calamity, he might be the better prepared forit. 
Verses 18-21. Moreover Jeremiah said, What 
have I offended against thee—What law have I 
broken? What injury have I done to thee, or thy 
people, or government, that ye have put me in pri- 
son—Have put me into the pit or dungeon, asa male- 
factor of the worst kind? Where are now your 
prophets—That is, your-false prophets? Surely the 
event has now convinced you, how much they have 
deceived you: for you see the siege renewed, and the 
city in imminent danger.of being taken. Here we 
see Jeremiah’s confinement in the dungeon had not 
broken his spirit, or diminished either his zeal or 
courage in delivering God’s message: he still speaks 
with the greatest boldness, and as one having au- 
thority. No doubt he would have been willing, 
had God called him to it, to seal his testimony 
with his blood: nevertheless, having so fair an op- 
portunity to obtain relief, he thought it his duty to 
embrace it, and therefore, with great humility and 
submissiveness, and in a most respectful manner, 
presents his supplication, not indeed for an entire 
deliverance from restraint, which, asi 


< 


% 4 
x 
f 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


# 


desire the prophet’s death. 


The princes and people 
A.M. 3415. 21 Then Zedekiah the king com-| 
B. C. 589 


manded that they should commit 
Jeremiah ™iuto the. court of the. prison, and 
that they should give him daily a piece of 


mChap. xxxii. 2; xxxviii. 13, 28. 


| 


bread out of the bakers’ street, ® until re 3415.5 
all the bread in the city were spent. 


| Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the 


prison. . 


- ™ Chap. » xxxviil. 95 Tih 6. 


not have been unreasonable to ask; but: for a less 
cruel treatment. 
they should commit Jeremiah into the court of the 
prison—A more agreeable place of confinement; 
and that they should give him daily a piece of bread, 
&c.—Namely, out of the public stock, (for the prison 
Was within the precincts of the court,) in order that 
he might not die for want. Until all the bread of 


Then Zedekiah convmanded that | 


the city was spent—Till th the famine forced the sa 
to surrender, chap. lii, 6. . This was the king’s first 
order, but ‘afterward it was reversed, by the i impor- 
tunity of the princes and great men, chap. Xxxviii. 6, 
when Jeremiah was again thrown into the dungeon. 
Though after that he was released from that place, 
and returned to his former confinement, ibid. 
verse 28. 


CHAPTER XXXVIIL : 


Lhas chapter contains the last transaction in which Jeremiah was prophetically concerned before the taking of Jerusalem. 
(1,) The princes of Judah, offended with Jeremiah for repeating to the people, who visited him in the court of the prison, 


the message he was charged.with, chap. xxi. 9, 10, caused him to be cast into a deep and miry dungeon, 1-6. 
melech obtains an order from the_king, and takes him out.of it, 7-13. 


(2,) Ebed- 
(3,) The king consults with him in private ; ‘he 


seeks to persuade the king to give himself up to the king of Babylon’s officers, as the only means of safety 'y to himself, and 


’ of preserving the city from destruction, 14-23. 


(4,) The king assures to him his life, but requires him not to divulge the 


secret of his con erence to the princes, who i m wire about it, but receive an evasive answer; and Jeremiah remains in the 
> 


court of the prison, 24-28. 


HEN Shephatiah the son of Mat- 
role tan, and Gedaliah the son of 
_ Pashur, and * Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and 

> Pashur the son of Malchiah, °* heard the words 
- that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the people, 
saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorn, ¢ He that remaineth 
in this city shall die by the sword, by the fam- 
ine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth 
forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall 
have his life for a prey, and shall live. 


AM. ails. 
B.C. 5 


3 Thus saith the Lorp, ° This city A. M. 3415. 
. C. 589. 
shall surely be given into the hand 
of the king of Babylon's army, which’ shall 
take it. 

A Therefore the prinées said unto the king, 
We beseech thee, ‘let this man be put to death : 
for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of 
war that remain in this city, and the hands of 
all the people, in speaking such words unto 
them: for this man seeketh not the ' welfare of 
this people, but the hurt. 


a Chapter xxxviil. 3.——> Chapter xxi. 1.——* Chapter xxi. 8. 
4 Chapter xxi. 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Verse 1. Then Shephatiah, &¢.—Here are four 
of the great men, counsellors or chief officers to Ze- 
dekiah, named, of whom we have no further mention 
in holy writ; nor do they deserve to have much in- 
quiry made after them. Some of them were sent by 


Zedekiah to Jeremiah to inquire concerning the) 


event Of the siege, chap..xxxvii. 3, and xxi. 1-9. 
© The answer which Jeremiah returned by them to 
the king, he afterward published to the people; 
which was the occasion of the new troubles recorded 
in this chapter."—Lowth. The fact seems to have 
been, that, as he was now removed into a little freer. 
air than he had been in, his friends, or such as had a| 
_destre 10 see him, came to him, and being inquisitive 


“concerning the issue of the siege, he could not but 
3 


= en sla 
e Chapter xxi. 10; xxxii, 3.——f Chapter xxvi. 11——" Heb. 
peace, ~~ 


tell them what ha knew of the mind of God, and advise 
them the-best way he could for their safety. Some of 
them, it is likely, went to these princes, and informed 
them of what they had heard from the prophet. 
Verses 2-5. T'hus saith the Lord, He that goeth 
forth to the Chaldeans shall live—This had been 
the. constant tenor of this prophet’s prophecies. 
The crime of which he was. now accused, seems to 
lie in this, that in such a time of danger he should 
repeat this prophecy, and also advise the people 
to leave the city, and go out to the Chaldeans, 
telling them that if they did so, though the city 
would be lost, yet they should save their lives, which 
might induce some to desert their posts. This they 
interpret to be not seeking the welfare of the people, 
but their hurt; though, indeed, their welfare was 
487 


” 


+ 
fi 
Fediiton is cast into a 


JEREMIAH. 


deep and miry os 


A. M. 3415, 


on ee “B'Then' Zedekiah the king said, 


Behold, he is in your hand: for the 
king is not he that can do any thing against 
you. » 

6 & Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him 
into the dungeon of Malchiah the son ? of 
Hammelech, that was in the court of the pri- 
son: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. 
And in the dungeon there was no water, but 
mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire. 


& Chap. xxxvii. 21.——? Or, of the king. 


that alone which he sought, knowing that there was 
no other way for them to save their lives, but by 
submitting to the Chaldeans. The great men, how- 
ever, would not believe it; for they would not form 
their judgments on the revelations which God had 
been pleased to ‘make of his will, but were deter- 
mined to judge of their safety from what they wish- 
ed. Hence, for any one not to be of their opinion 
was, to be an enemy to the state. TJ"herefore the 
princes said unto the king—See chap. xxxvi. 12, 21; 
We beseech thee, let this man be put to death—His 
crime deserves ho less a punishment ; for‘ he weak- 
eneth the hands of the men of war—By making them 
despair of success. 7T'hen the king said, Behold he 
is in your hand—At your disposal; I give him 
up into your power. Though Zedekiah was con- 
vineed that Jeremiah was a prophet sent of God, yet 
he had not courage toown this conviction, but weak- 
ly yielded to the violence of his persecutors. or 
the king is not he that can do any thing against you 
—He speaks as one who did not dare, in such diffi- 
cult times, to contradict the great men about him. 
Blaney renders the clause, “ For the king can carry 
no point in competition with you ;” observing, “The 
king evidently speaks this in disgust.with the princes 
for endeavouring to frustrate his clemency. He 
had once rescued Jeremiah out of their hands, and 
taken him under his royal protection. But his 
prerogative, he tells them, was likely to avail but 
little when opposed by their obstinate.and repeated 
importunities. 'The power was in reality theirs and 
not his.” 

Verse 6. T'hen they took Jeremiah and cast him 
into the dungeon of Malchiah—A place of much the 
same nature with that mentioned chap. xxxvii. 16, 
but in another prison. And they let down Jeremiah 


with cords—It seems there was no passage into this. 


dungeon by stairs, and, as it was deep, they were 
obliged to let him down in this manner. So Jere- 
miah sunk in the mire—Which was in the bottom 
of this pit. Josephus asserts that he sunk up to his 
neck in it, and adds, that their intention in putting 
_ him into so foul a place was, that he might perish in 
it, Antiq., lib. ix. cap, 10." It has been thought by 
some, that during his abode in this loathsome place 
he composed the melancholy meditations contained 
in the third chapter of his Lamentations; but this 
seems highly improbable. 

488 


7 % ™ Now when Ebed-melech the A. a 3415 
Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which = 
was.in the King’s house, heard that they had 
put Jeremiah in the dungeon; the king then 
sitting in the gate of Benjamin ; 

8 Ebed-melech went forth out of the king’s 
house, and spake to the king, saying, 

9 My lord the king, these men have done 
evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the 
prophet, whom they have cast into the dun- 


h Chap. xxxix, 16. 


Verses 7-9. Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian 
—Or Cushite, as the Hebrew is. His country seems 
to be mentioned to let us know that this prophet of 
the Lord found more kindness from a stranger, who 


} was a native heathen, than from his own country- 


men; one of the eunuchs which was in the king’s 
house—That is, one of the court officers. It is pro- 
bable that the princes had put Jeremiah into this 
miserable place privately, but by some means the 
report of what they had done providentially reached 
this officer’s ears. The. king then sitting in the gate 
of Benjamin—Namely, to hear the complaints of the 
people, and to administer justice ; the courts for that 
purpose being usually held in the gates of the city. 
Ebed-melech went forth and spake tothe king—The 
zéal.as well as courage of this good officer was-very 
remarkable. He did, not stay till the king returned 
to his house, but went to him as he was sitting in 
the gate administering justice, where doubtless he 
was not alone, but was. probably attended by some 
of those very princes who had thrown Jeremiah into 
the dungeon: Ebed-melech, however, was not afraid 
of them, but complains openly to the king of their 
cruelty to Jeremiah, saying, My lord the king, these 
men have done evil in all that they have done to Je- 
remiah—They deal unjustly with him, for he had 
not deserved any punishment at all, and they deal 
barbarously with him, so as they used not to deal 
with the vilest malefactors. And he is like to die— 
Hebrew, nnn nD", he will die upon the spot ; for 
hunger, for there is no bread—That is, as some in- 
terpret the clause, “'There was no need for those 
who desired his death to put him into so filthy and 
loathsome a place’; since, if he had continued in the 
court of the prison, he must have died through ‘the 
famine which threatens the city. 'The words, how- 
ever; are more literally rendered, When there is no 
longer any bread in the city. Ebed-inelech supposed 
with reason that when the bread failed, Jeremiah 
must perish with hunger in the dungeon ; for he 
would be of course neglected, and not have it in his 
power to make those shifts for subsistenee which 
persons at liberty might avail themselves of. Such 
was. the compassion which the stranger had for the 
Lord’s prophet, whom his own countrymen would 
have destroyed! And God, who put these senti- 
ments of pity and benevolence into Ebed-melech’s 


|| heart, afterward recompensed him by delivering hime 
; ) be ae 


>, 


+ 


Jeremiah is released 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


, % 
from the dungeon. 


A. M. 3415. 


B. C. 589. geon; and *he is like to die for 


hunger in the place where he is: for 
there is no more bread in the city. 

10 Then the king commanded Ebed-melech 
the Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty 
men * with thee, and take up Jeremiah the 
prophet out of the dungeon, before he die. 

11 So Ebed-melech took the men with him, 
and went into the house of the king under the 
treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and 
old rotten rags, and let them down by cords 
into the dungeon to Jeremiah. 

12 And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian» said 
unto Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts 
and rotten rags under thine arm-holes under 


“Heb. he will die.——* Heb. in thy hand.——' Verse 6. 


the cords. And Jeremiah did Ke, pte 3415, 


13 'So they drew up Jeremiah with ae 
cords, and took him up out of the dungeon : and 
Jeremiah remained * in the court of the prison. 

14 4 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took 
Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the °* third 
entry that is in the house of the Lorn: and 
the king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a 
thing; hide nothing from me. 

15 “Then Jeremiah said unto -Zedekiah, If I 
declare i¢ unto thee, wilt thou not surely put 
me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt 
thou not hearken unto me ? 

16 So Zedekiah theking sware secretly unto 


|Jeremiah, saying, As the Lorp liveth, ! that 


kChap. xxxvii. 21. 5 Or, principal. 1 Isa, lvii. 16. 


from death when the city was taken, chap. XXxix, 


15, 16. But how remarkable it is, that in the whole 
city of Jerusalem no person was found, save. this 
Ethiopian, to appear publicly, as the rriend and ad- 
vocate of the prophet in his distress! Thus is the 
justice of God vindicated in giving up this people 
into the hands of their enemies, when there was 
not a single ‘person of their nation willing to 
hazard his life or character in the cause of God, to 
save the life of one who had been known among 
them for a true prophet between twenty and thirty 
years. 

Verses 10-13. T'hen the king commanded, &c¢.— 
The king, who alittle while ago durst do nothing. 
against the princes, has now his heart wonderfully 
and suddenly changed, and will have Jeremiah re- 
leased in defiance of them; ordering no fewer than 
thirty men, and those probably of the life-guard, to 
be employed in fetching him out of the dungeon, 
lest the princes should. raise a party to oppose it. 
So Ebed-melech took the men—He lost no time, but 
immediately went about this good work, and used as 
much tenderness as despatch in accomplishing it ; 
going into the king’s house and fetching thence old 
soft rags and pieces of cloth, to be put under the pro- 
phet’s arm-holes, to prevent the cords, wherewith he 
was to be drawn up, from hurting him. This cir- 
cumstance, trivial as it may appear, is here particu- 
larly noticed and recorded to the honour of this pious 


' Gentile ; for God is not unrighteous to forget any 


work or labour of love which is shown to his people 
or ministers; no, nor any circumstance thereof, 
Heb. vi. 10. Observe, reader, those that are in dis- 
tress should not only be relieved, but relieved with 
compassion and marks of respect, all which things 
will be remembered, and will be found to a good 
account, in the day of final recompense. 

Verse 14. Then Zedekiah sent, &c.—Here we 
have an account of the honour which the king did 
the prophet after he was fetched out of the dungeon: 
he sent for him to advise with him privately what 
measures it would be best to take in the present ca- 
lamitous state of public affairs. The interview took 


place in the third entry in, or leading toward, or 
adjoining to, the house of the Lord. Dr. Lightfoot 
explains this of the third passage or gate which lay 
between the king’s palace, where the prison was, 
and the temple, whither the king now retreated for 
fear of the Chaldean army. And the king said, 1 
will ask thee a thing—Hebrew, 127 *38 Dxw, Tam 
asking thee a word, namely, of ‘prediction, counsel, 
or comfort, @ word from the Lord, chap. xxxvii. 17. 
Whatever word thou hast for me, hide it not from 
me—Let me know the worst. He had been plainly 
told what would be the issue of the measures they 
were pursuing; but, like Balaam, he asks again, in 
hopes to get a more pleasing answer; as if God, 
who is in one mind, were altogether such a one as 
himself, who was in many minds. 

Verse 15. Then Jeremiah said, If I declare tt 
unto thee, wilt thou not surely pul me to death ?— 
“The prophet had so much experience of the un- 
steadiness of the king’s temper, of his backwardness 
in following good counsel, and want of courage to 
stand by those that durst advise him well, that he 
might, with good reason, resolve not to venture his 
life to serve a man that was in a manner incapable 
of being directed. . And although God had showed 
him what would be the effect of his advice, if it were 
followed, (verse 17,) yet it doth not appear that he 
had commanded him to make this known to Zede- 
kiah.”—Lowth. And if T give thee counsel, wilt 
thou not hearken unto me 2—Rather, wilt thou heark- 
en unto'me? Which is undoubtedly the sense in- 
tended, unless.we translate the words, as some do, 
without an interrogation, thou wilt not hearken unto 
me. So Jeremiah might well conclude from the 
king’s former behaviour, for he had often been ad- 
vised by him, but would never take his advice, and 
the prophet knew the same would be the case still, 
that the king would be overruled by a corrupt court 
and his own aversion to change his state as a king 
to the state of a prisoner. 

Verse 16. The king sware, As the Lord liveth, that 
made this soul—That is, who gave me my life and 
thee thine, and who, as he is the autlior, so he is the 

489 


~ 


Jeremiah advises the king 


JEREMIAH. 


to surrender to the Chaldeans ~ 


A 4 aed. made us this soul, I will not put thee 
26°" to death, neither will I give thee into 
the hand of these men that seek thy life. 

17 Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus 
saith the Lor», the God of hosts, the’ God of 
Israel ; If thou wilt assuredly ™ go forth ® unto 
the ae of Babylon’s princes, then thy soul 


shall tive, and this city shall not be burned with’ 


fire; and thou shalt live and thy house. 
18 But if thou wilt not. go forth to the king 
of Babylon’s.-princes, then shall this city be 


given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they: 


shall burn it with fire;-and °thou shalt not 
escape out of their hand. 

19 And Zedekiah the king said unto Jere- 
miah, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to 
the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their 
hand, and they ’-mock me. 

20 But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver 


m 2 Kings xxiv. 12——" Chapter xxxix. 3——° Chap. xxxii. 4; 
xxxiv. 3; Verse 23.—P 1 Sam. xxxi. 4. 


thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice A. M. 3415. 
of the Lorp, which I speak unto a 
thee: so it shall bé well unto thee, and thy 
soul shall live. 


21 But if thou refuse to go forth, thie is the 


word that the Lorp hath showed me.. ~ 

22 And behold, all the women that are left in 
the king of Judah’s house shall be brought 
forth to the king of Babylon’s. -princes, and 
those women shall say, ° Thy friends have set 
thee on, and have prevailed against thee: thy 
feet are sunk in the mire, and they are turned 
away back. 

23 So they shall bring out all thy wives and 
«thy children fo the Chaldeans: and .* thou 
shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be 
taken by the, hand of the king of Babylon, 
and .7thou shalt cause ‘this city to be oa 
with fire. 


4 Chap. xxxix. 65 xi. 10.— Verse 


® Heb. Meno thy ace. 
‘ is 7 Heb. thou shalt burn, ke = 


preserver, of our life and being: who may uphold 
or take them away as and when he pleases. J will 
not put thee to death, &c.—Zedekiah. says nothing 
to the prophet as to obeying his counsel, but he gives 
him the security of his oath that he would neither 
himself slay him, by giving an immediate command 


from himself for his being slain, nor surrender him, 


up into the hands of those princes who, he perceived, 
sought his life. 

Verses 17,18. T'hen said Jeremiah, Thus saith 
the Lord—Here we have the good advice which 
Jeremiah gave him, with the reasons why the king 
ought to take it; reasons drawn, not from any pru- 
dence or politics of his own, but in the name of the 
Lord, the God of hosts, and God of Israel. If 
thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of Baby- 
lon’s princes—Those mentioned chap. xxxix. 3, and 


submit thyself to them; then thy soul shall live— | 


That is, thou shalt live; and this city shall not be 
burned, &c.—Thou shalt save the city from destruc- 
tion by fire, and thy wives and children from suf- 
fering a violent death. It must be observed that 
Nebuchadnezzar was not now in person at the siege 
of Jerusalem, but at Riblah in Syria, chap. xxxix. 5, 9. 
His army was commanded by his generals; and it is 
to them, here termed princes, that Jeremiah counsels 
Zedekiah to go forth, and through them to submit 
himself to the king, by whom he had been established 
on the throne. But if thou wilt not go forth, &e.— 
As he had before used exhortations and promises, so 
here he uses warnings and threatenings to prevail 
with the king to take that course. by which alone he 
could preserve Jerusalem, and himself, and family 
from ruin. 
Verses 19, 20. Zedekiah said, I am afraid of the 
Jews, &c.—The sense seems to be, that he was 


afraid lest the Chaldeans, when he had given him- 


490 


self up to them, should deliver him into the hands 
of those Jews who had. fallen to them, and they 
should insult over and deride him, as being obliged 
at last to do what he had blamed, and, if he had been 
able, would have punished them for doing. Thus 
the Vulgate, Solicitus sum propter Judeos, qui trans- 
fugerunt ad Chaldes: ne forte tradar in manus 
eorum et illudant mihi. He was conscious he had 
acted a base part in violating the oath of homage and 
fidelity which he had given to the king of Babylon, 
and that he was considered by many of the Jews, 
especially by those who had gone over to the Chal- 
deans, as having ruined his country by his impolitic 
measures. Thus he was more concerned for his 
honour than for his life, and the lives of his wives 
and children, and the safety of the whole city... And 
thus often great persons are more patient of death 
than of reproach and dishonour. But Jeremiah said, 
They shall not deliver thee—The Chaldeans will 
not do.so base an acf, but deal with thee as with a 
prince. God foresees all possible events, and what 
would be the consequence of the several counsels 
men propose to themselves. Obey, I beseech thee, 
the voice of the Lord: so it shall be well with thee 
—Let not thy fears, therefore, respecting the treat- 
ment thou wilt meet with, be a temptation to thee to 
disobey the command of God: for if thou doest as 
thou art advised to do, thou shalt live—Though not 
in that splendour in which thou now livest, yet in a 
much more comfortable state than if the city be taken 
by storm. 

_ Verses 21-23. But if thou refuse, this is the word 
that the Lord hath showed me—Namely, what fol- 
lows in the next two verses. Behold, all the women 
that are left in the king of Judah’s house—The 
king’s wives, his daughters, and the other women 
that belong to the king’s court and family, shall be- 

3 


Jeremiah’s advice to the king. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


, -* 
The prophet still in prison. 


A. M. 3416. 24 4 Then said Zedekiah: unto 
. ~ Jeremiah, Let no man know of these 
words, and thou shalt not die. _ 
25 But if the princes hear that I have talked 
with thee, and they come unto thee, and say 
unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou 
hast said unto the king, ‘hide it not from us, 
and we will not put thee to death; also what 
the king said unto thee: - 
26 Then thou shalt say unto them, *I pre- 
sented my supplications before the king, that 


he would not cause me to return * to 
Jonathan’s house, to die there. _—— 
27 Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, 
and asked him: and he told them according to 
all these words that the king had commanded. 
So ®they left off speaking with him; for the 
matter was not perceived. 

28 So “Jeremiah abode in the court of the 
prison untit the day that Jerusalem was 
taken: and he was there when Jerusalem 
was taken. 


s Chap. xxxvii. 20.—+ Chap. xxxvil. 15.—*® Heb. they 


were silent from him. “ Chap. xxxvii. 21; xxxix. 14. 


= 
come a prey to the chief officers of the king of Baby- 
lon’s army. And those women shall say, Thy friends 
have set thee on, &c.—They shall tell thee that, for 
these thy calamities, thou mayest thank thy heark- 
ening to thy priests and false prophets; (called in 
the Hebrew the men of his peace, because they 
soothed up the king with the promises of peace ;) in 
other words, those very women shall then reproach 
thee for having suffered thyself to be insnared by 
the ill advice of thy friends, and brought under in- 
superable difficulties. 
feet are sunk in the mire—Thou art plunged into 
calamities from which thou canst not extricate thy- 
self. And they are turned away back—Even thy 
friends, by following whose counsel thou art brought 
into these snares and troubles, forsake thee in thy 
distress, every one shifting for himself, And thus 
shall a greater evil come upon thee than that which 
thou fearest, and the fear of which makes the unwill- 
ing to comply with the will of God concerning thee. 
So shall they bring out all thy wives, &¢.—The pro- 
phet partly repeats and partly enlarges on the argu- 
ment advanced in the former verse, with a view to 
prevail on the king to strrender himself to the Chal- 
deans. He urges, that if he would not do it, not 
only himself but his wives.and childrem also would 
fall into his enemies’ hands, and that their reflection 
upon him, for the misery he had brought upon them 
and his country, would be-no small peernration of 
his affliction, 

Verses 24-27. Then said Zedekiah, Let no man 
know of these words, &c.—Keep what has passed 


between us secret, and I will keep my promise to| 
These words sufficient- || 


thee of preserving thy life. 


They will say to thee, Thy | 


ly show that Zedekiah stood in fear of his courtiers. 
This is the righteous judgment of God, that those 
who will not sanctify the’ Lord of hosts in their 
hearts, and make him’ their fear, shall fear men, 
whom to fear is to be in a state of ignoble and mise- 
rable bondage. But if the princes hear, &c.—It 
was hardly possible that Zedekiah should ‘have this 
private discourse with. Jeremiah, but some or other 
of his courtiers should come fo the knowledge of it. 
But here we see in what a state of miserable subjec- 
tion this poor prince was to them, in that he could 
discourse to nobody, but they must come and in- 
quire what he had said. Thou shalt say, T present- 
ed my supplication, &c.—Jeremiah had been for- 
merly kept prisoner in Jonathan’s house, chap. 


-xxxvii. 15. But the last time he was imprisoned 


was in the dungeon of Hammelech, verse 6 of this 
chapter: a place which, perhaps, might at this time 
be put tosome other use. . 7'hen came all the princes 
to Jeremiah—As the king suspected, so it came to 
pass: his private discourse with the prophet trans- 
pired, and all the princes then at court came and 
inquired of Jeremiah what was the substance of it. 
And he told them according to all that the king had 
commanded—He told them part of the truth, but 
not all, concealing from them the advice which he 
had given to the king, with relation to the questions 
he had proposed to him. For a man is not bound 
in all cases to discover the whole truth, particularly 
to those who have no right to the knowledge of it, 
which, in this case, these princes had not. So the 
matter was not perceived—The princes never got 
to know what was the principal subject of the king’s 
conference with the prophet. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


This chapter contains an account, (1,) Of the taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldean army, after eighteen months siege, 1-8. 
(2,) Of the flight of Zedekiah, and the particulars of his punishment, after he was taken and brought before the king of 


Babylon, 4-7. 


(3;) Of the burning of the city, and removal of the people, a few of the poor only excepted, 8-10. 


(4,) Of 


the release of Jeremiah, and the kindness wherewith he was treated, in consequence of a special. charge from Nebuchad- 
nezzar, 11-14. ‘(5,) The piety of Ebed-melech is rewarded with a se vf personal safety amidst the a public 


calamities, 15-18. 
3 


491 


Jerusalem is taken, 


JEREMIAH. 


and Zedekiah slain. 


SS TT SS EN AERTS SN 


A. M. 3416. 


a N the *ninth year of Zedekiah 


king of Judah, in the tenth month, 
came paae, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and 
all his army against ‘pimaleny, and they be- 
sieged it. 
B. C. 588. 2 And in the placa year of Zede- 
kiah, in the fourth month, the ninth 


das, of the font the city was brolien up. 


3.» And all the princes of the king of Baby- 


lon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even 
Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab- 
saris, Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all the 
residue of the princes of the king of Babylon. 

4 4° And it came to pass, that when Zede- 
kiah the king of Judah saw them, and all the 
men of war, then they fled, and went forth 
out: of the city by night, by the way of the 
king’s garden, by the gate betwixt the two 
walls: and he went out the way of the plain. 

5 But the Chaldeans’ army pursued: after 
them, and- overtook Zedekiah in the plains 
of Jericho: and when they had taken him, 
they brought him up to’ Nebuchadnezzar. king 
of Babylon to ° Riblah in the land of Hamath, 
where he } gave judgment upon him. 


6 Then the king of Babylon slew A. M. 3416. 
the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before °° °**: 
his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the 
nobles of Judah. 

7 Moreover ‘ he put out Zeedekiah’s eyes, and 
bound him * with chan to carry him to 
Babylon. : 

8 -7& And the Chaldeans burned. the king’s 
house, and the houses of the people, with fire, 
and brake down the walls of Jerusalem. 

9 »'Then Nebuzar-adan the * captain‘ of the 

guard carried away captive into Babylon the 
remnant of the people that remained in the 
city, and those that fell away, that fell to him, 
with the rest of the people that remained. 
10 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the 
guard left of the poor of the people, which had 
nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them 
vineyards and fields ° at the same time. 

11-4 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
gave charge concerning Jeremiah ®to Nebu- 
zar-adan the captain of the guard, saying, 

12 Take him, and.’ look. well to him, and do 
him no harm; but do unto him even as -_ 
shall say unto ‘hss! 


22 Kings xv. 1-4; Chapter lii. 4-7, > Chapter xxxviii. 17. 
©2 Kings xxv. 4; Chap. hi. 7; &e. 4 Chap. xxxii. 4; xxxvill. 
18, 23. e2 Kings xxiii. 33. 1 Heb. spake with him judg- 
ments, Chap. iv. 12. € Ezekiel xii. 13, compared with Chap. 
XXxli. 4. 2 Heb. with two brazen chains, or, fetters. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER. XXXIX.° 

Verses 1-3. In the ninth year of Zedekiah, &ce.— 
See notes on 2 Kings xxv. 1-4. And all.the princes 
of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the 
middle gate—Or, the gate of the centre, as Blaney 
translates it, observing, “The city of Jerusalem 
stood upon two hills, Zion to the south, and Acra to 
the north, with a deep valley between them. The 
gate of the centre, as the term seems plainly to im- 
port, was a gate of communication in the middle of 
the valley between the two parts of the city, some- 


times called the higher and the lower city. The || 


Chaldeans entéred the city on the north side by a 
breach in the walls, and immediately rushing for- 
ward, and posting themselves 'in this gate, in the 
very heart of the city, they became ‘thereby masters 
at will of the whole. Zedekiah, with his troops, 
perceiving this, fled out of the opposite gate on the 
south side.” Even Nergal-sharezer, Samgar- 
nebo, &c.—It was customary among the Chaldeans 
to give the names of their idols, as an additional 
title or mark of honour, to persons of distinction: 
see note on Isa. xxxix. 1. Nergal was the name of 
an idol worshipped by the Cuthites, 2 Kings xvii. 
30. Nebo was a Babylonish deity, Isa. xlvi. 1. 
Verses 4-10. They fled by the gate betwixt the 
two walls—Betwixt the wall and the outworks, or 
492 


g 2 Kings xxv. 9; Chapter xxxviii. 18; lii. 13—— 2 Kings 
xxv. 11 ;, Chapter lil. 15.—* Or, chief marshal. 4 Heb. chief 
of the executioners, or slaughtermen, and so verses 10,11; Gen. 
XXxvil. 26. 5 Hebrew, in that day. © Heb. by the hand of. 
7 Heb, set thine eyes upon him. 


betwixt the old wall of the city and the new one 
which Hezekiah built, of which mention is made 2 
Chron. xxxii. 5. See note on 2 Kings xxv, 4. Bla- 
ney thinks it probable that between these two walls 
there might be a private postern through which the 
king and his followers might slip out unperceived 
by the besiegers, who surrounded the city, and un- 
doubtedly kept a strict watch on the principal gates. 
The Chaldean army pursued, &c.—For an illustra- 
tion of this and the five following verses, see notes 
on 2 Kings xxv. 5-12. 

Verses ‘IL, 12.. Now Nebuchadrezzar gave charge 
concerning Jeremiah—He had undoubtedly been 
informed of the advice which Jeremiah had given, . 
both to the king and people, to submit themselves 
to his authority: which advice, if it had been taken, 
would have prevented the charge and labour of so 
long a siege, and the bloodshed that attended it. 
Saying, Take him and look well to hin—Through 
this order of the king of Babylon, God fulfilled his 
promise made chap. xv. 11, J will cause the enemy 
to treat thee well in the day of evil. Jeremiah had 
been faithful to his God as a prophet, and now God 
approves himself faithful to him, and the promise 
he had made him. Now he is comforted, according 
to the time wherein he had been afflicted, and sees 
many fall on each hand while he is safe. Thefalse 

 & 


The prophet is released, 


CHAPTER XL. 


and treated with kindness. 


aoe Sale, 13 So Nebuzar-adan the captain of 

———- the guard sent, and Nebushasban, 
Rab-saris, and Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, and 
all the king of Babylon’s princes ; 

14 Even they sent, ‘and took Jeremiah out 
of the court of the prison, and committed him 
*unto Gedaliah the son of ! Ahikam the son 
of Shaphan, that he should carry him home : 
so he dwelt among the people. 

15 4 Now the word of the Lorp came unto 
Jeremiah, while he was hut up in the court 
of the prison, saying, 

16 Go and speak to ™Ebed-melech the, Ethi- 


i Chapter xxxviii. 28.——* Chapter xl. 5. —! Chapter xxvi. 24. 
m Chap. xxxviii. 7, 12, 


prophets fell by those jodimett which ey affirm- 
ed would never come, (chap. xiv. 15,) which made 
their misery the more terrible to them. The true 
prophet escaped those judgments which he said 
would come, and that made his escape the more 
comfortable to him. ‘The same persons-who were 
the instruments of punishing the persecutors, were 
the instruments of relieving the persecuted; and 
Jeremiah did not the less prize his deliverance, be- 
cause it came by the hand of the king of Babylon, 
but saw thereby more of the hand of God in it. 
Verses 13; 14. Nehbuzar-adan sent and took Jere- 
miah out of the court of the prison—Where he was 
when the city was taken, chap. xxxviii. 28; and 
committed him unto Gedaliah—Namely, after he 
had been carried out of Jerusalem with the rest of 
the captives as far as Ramah: see chap.: xl. 1-5, 


Observe here, reader, a king of Israel and his princes | 


put the Lord’s prophet in prison, and a heathen king 
and his princes took him out! God’s people and 
ministers have often.met with fairer and kinder 
treatment among strangers and infidels than among 
those who call themselves of the holy city. St. 


h 


opian, saying, Thus saith the Lorp A. M. 3416. 
of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, had 
»T will bring» my words upon this city for evil, 
and not for good; and they shall be accom- 
plished in that day before thee. 

17 But I will deliver thee in that day, saith 
the Lorp: and thou shalt not be given into 
the hand of the men of whom thou art 
afraid. 

18 For I will surely deliver thee, and thou 
shalt not fall by the sword, but ° thy life shall 
be for a prey unto thee: » because thou hast 
put thy trust in me, saith the Lorn. 


2 Daniel ix. 12. 


o Chap. xxi. 9; xlv. 5.——P 1 Chron. v. 20; 
Psa. xxxvii. 40. 


Paul found more favour and justice with King Agrip- 
|pa than with Ananias the high-priest. But we shall 
‘meet with a more full account of Jeremiah’s release, 
and of the kind treatment he received from the 
| Chaldeans, in thenext chapter. : 

Verses 15-18. The word.of the Lord came to 
Jeremiah when he was in the court of the prison— 
These words give us to understand that this and 
‘the next three verses respect a matter which took 
place before the things related in the preceding’part 
of this chapter, namely, the kindness which Ebed- 
}melech showed to Jeremiah in his distress. Here 
God commissions his prophet to promise him a re- 
compense for that kindness.. He had relieved @ pro- 


|phet in the name of a prophet, and he is here 


assured he shall receive a prophet’s reward. This 
message was delivered to him immediately after he 
had shown that mercy to Jeremiah ; but it is‘men- 
tioned here after the taking of the city, to show 
that, as God was. kind to Jeremiah at that time, so 
he was to Ebed-melech for his sake; and it was a 
special favour to both, as they no doubt accounted it, 


that they were not involved inthe common calamities. 


CHAPTER XL. 


In this, and the four following chapters, we have an account of the fate of those few Jews that were left in Canaan, after 


their brethren were carried into captivity to Babylon. 


And it is a very mournful story. For, though at first there was 


some prospect of their doing well, they soon appeared to be as obstinate in sin as ever, unhumbled and unreformed, till, all 
the rest of the judgments threatened, Deut. xxviii., being executed upon them, that which completes the threatenings there 
mentioned, recorded in the last verse of that dreadful chapter, was also accomplished. The Lord shall bring thee into Egypt 
again. In this chapter we have, (1,) Aymore particular account of Jeremiah’s discharge, and his settlement with Geda- 


liah, whom Nebuchadnezzar had made governor of the poor Jews, 1-6. 
the neighbouring countries to Gedaliah, and their agreeable condition with him, 7-12. 


(2,) The great resort of the fugitive Jews from 
(3,) Gedaliah 1s informed of a 


treacherous design formed against his life by Ishmael, a Jewish prince, instigated by the king of the Ammonites, but does 


not credit the information, 13-16. 
3 


493 


Nebuzar-adan’s kindness 


A. a 3416. 


(THE word that came to Jeremiah 
B. C: 588, 


eae 0 from the Lorp, * after that Nebu- 
zar-adan the captain of the guard had let him 
go from Ramah, when he had taken him being 
bound in ? chains among all that were carried 
away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which 
were carried away captive unto Babylon. 

2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah; 
and ” said unto him, The Lorp thy God hath 
pronounced this evil upon this place. 

3 Now the Lorp hath brought i, and done 
according as he hath said: ° because ye have 
sinned against the Lorn, and have not obeyed 
his voice, therefore this ee is come upon you. 

4 And now, behold, T loose thee this day from 
the chains which *were upon thyhand. ‘If it 
seem good unto thee to come with me into. Ba- 
bylon, come ; and °I will look well unto thee : 
but if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into 
Babylon, forbear: behold, ° all the land is before 
thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient 
for thee to go, thither go. 

5 Now while he was not yet gone back, he 


JEREMIAH. 


to the prophet. 


said, Go back also to Gedaliah the 4 iM. ale 
son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, —— 

f whom the king of Babylon, hath made go- 
vernor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with 
him among the people: or go wheresoever it 
seemeth convenient unto thee to go. So the 
captain of the guard gave him victuals and a 
reward, and let him go. “ 

6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the 
son of Ahikam to" Mizpah; and dwelt with 


| him among the people that were left in the land. 


‘7 7 ‘ Now when all the captains of the forces 
which were inthe. fields, even they and their 
men, heard that the king of Babylon had made 
Gedaliah the~son of Ahikam governor in the 
land, and had committed unto him men, and 
women, and children, and of * the poor ‘of the 
land, of them that were not carried away cap- 
tive to Babylon ; 

8 Then: they came to. Gedatial to Mizpah, 
‘even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Jo- 
hanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and 
Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of 


a Chapter xxxix. 14. 1 Or, manacles. 
© Deut. xxix. 24,25; Dan. ix. 11. 
4 Chap. xxxix. 12. 


+ Chapter 1. 7. 
2.Or, are upon thy hand. 
3 Heb. Iwill set mine eye upon thee. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XL. 

Verse 1. T'he word which came to Jeremiah, &ce. 
—This relates to the prophecy recorded chap. xlii. 
7, which was occasioned by the story that here fol- 
lows concerning Ishmael’s conspiracy against Geda- 
liah, After that Nebuzar-adan had let him go from 
Ramah—After Jeremiah was taken out of the court 
of the prison, he was carried, probably by mistake, 
expressly contrary to Nebuchadnezzar’s orders, 
among the other prisoners to Ramah, a city in the 
tribe of Benjamin near Gibeon. Here, it seems, 
the mistake was discovered, and the prophet was 
discharged by the special order of the Court. 

Verses 2-4. The captain of the guard said, The 

“Lord thy God hath pronounced this evil, &e—Al- 
though each of the Gentile or heathen nations wor- 
shipped its peculiar god or gods, yet they did not 
reject or deny the gods of other nations ; and there- 
fore the captain of the guard speaks here to Jere- 
miah of Jehovah as his God, and the God of the 
Jews, and attributes all. the calamities which had 
befallen, this people to the indignation of this their 
God against them, because they had not obeyed and 
served him as they oughttohave done. This seems 
a much more probable interpretation of Nebuzar- 
adan’s words than to understand them as expressive 
of his faith in the living and true God, of whom it 
is likely he knew little or nothing. And now, be- 
hold, I loose thee this day, &e.—This captain of the 
guard, like a faithful servant, remembers his prince’s 
orders about the prophet, and offers to him greater 

494 


e Gen, xx. 15.—f 2 Kings a 22. Chapter ‘xxxix. 14. 
h Judges xx. 1; 1 Sam. vii. 5, 6; 1 Kings xv. Lr pabiiermece 
xxv. 23,——* Chapter xxxix. 10. seeee) Chap. xli. 1 


favour than to any of the other prisoners. With 
respect to them, he uses the power which conquest 
had given him over them, and they must go whither 
the king of Babylon pleased to send them; but he 
gives Jeremiah liberty to choose whether he would 
go along with him to Babylon, or stay in his own 
country, assuring him that if he would go to Baby- 
lon he would take particular care of him. _ 

Verses 5,6. Now while he was not yet gone back— 
Hebrew, 21 xb yy, while he would not yet re- 
turn, he ‘said; &c.—The prophet seems to have been 
in doubt at first what course to take. The Chaldee 
reads the clause, Jf thou wilt not abide [here] go 
back to Gedaliah, understanding the verb 21w” as if 
it were derived from 2w, to abide, words of a like 
sound having often a promiscuous signification. 
This Gedaliah was a person of considerable interest 
and authority. So the captain of the guard gave 
him victuals and a reward—It was by the particular 
order of Nebuchadnezzar that the prophet was used 
in this kind manner. TJ'hen went Jeremiah unto 
Gedaliah to Mizpah—A town in the confines of 
Judah and Benjamin, where Gedaliah fixed his re- 
sidence, being a place of note in the times of the 
judges, ’and afterward rebuilt by King Asa, See a 
margin. 

Verses 7-10. Now when all the captains of the 
forces heard, &c., they came to Gedaliah—By the 
taking of J ertsalem the Chaldeans made a complete 
conquest of Judea; whereupon that part of the 
Jewish army which had _— destruction dis 

3 


The Jews repair 


CHAPTER XL. 


to Gedaliah. 


we sais. Ephai the Netophathite, and Jeza- 


oe Tat the son t. a Maachathite, they 
and their men. 

9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son 
of Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, 
saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell 
in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and 
it shall be well with you. : 

10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, 
*to serve the Chaldeans, which will come unto 
us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer-fruits, 
and oil, and put ¢iem in your vessels, and dwell 
in your cities that ye have taken. 

11 Likewise when all the Jews that were 
in Moab, and among the Ammonites, and in 
Edom, and that were in all the countries, 
heard that: the king of Babylon had left a 
remnant of Judah, and that he had set over 
them Gedaliah the son of ictal the son of 
Shaphan ; 

12 Even ail the eos bes peer out of all 
aa whether they were driven, and came to 


the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto A. M. 3416. 
Mizpah, and pattlered wine and <acke 
summer-fruits very much. 

13 { Moreover, Johanan the son of Kareah, 
and all the captains of the forces that were in 
the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah. 

14 And said unto him, Dost thou certainly 
know that ™ Baalis the king of the Ammonites 
hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah ®to 
slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam 
believed them not. 

15 Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake 
to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me 
go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son 
of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: 
wherefore should he slay thee, that all the Jews 
which are gathered unto thee should be scatter- 
ed; and the remnant in Judah perish ? 

16 But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said 
unto Johanan ‘the son, of Kareah, Thou shalt 
not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of 
Ishmael... 


4 Heb. to stand before, Deut. i. 38. 


’ 


persed themselves into several parts of the country. 
And Gedaliah sware unto them—They might rea- 
sonably suspect that the Chaldeans would have a 
jealous eye upon any conflux of people to Jerusa- 
lem, especially military men, and therefore might 
be somewhat suspicious of him, who was the Chal- 
dean deputy governor; the securing them from fears 
on that account was the cause of Gedaliah’s giving 
them this voluntary oath; saying, Fear not to serve 
the Chaldeans—The same advice Jeremiah had for- 
merly given. to the Jews, chap. xxvii. 11. As for 
me, I will dwell at Mizpah, to serve the Chaldeans 
—I keep my residence here, a place upon the fron- 
tiers, that I -may be ready to obey any orders that 
the king of Babylon sends me by his servants.. But 
ye, gather ye wine, and summer-fruits, and oil— 
But do you live in the country, and gather such 
fruits as the country affords, and do not fear being 
spoiled of them; but do as ye used to do in the times 
of the greatest peace and security. Wine and oil 
are here put by a metonymy for grapes and olives. 
It was now about the month of August, which was 
the proper season for gathering in the summer-fruits 
in that country. . 

Verses 11,12. Likewise when all the Jews that 
were in Moab, &c.—Probably, upon the king of 
Babylon’s first invading Judea, many fled, and more 
as he proceeded in his conquests, 
country ; and it is likely, at the taking of the city, 
many escaped and fled into different countries, as 
they had opportunity, or judged this or that country 
would be the safest place of refuge. Some, there- 
fore, fled to- Moab, some to Ammon, some to Edom, 

3 
z 


overrunning the’ 


i 


va Chap. xli. 10. 5 Heb. to strike. thee-in soul? 


and some to other countries; but when they heard 
that the king of Babylon had appointed a governor _ 
over the country of their own nation and religion, 
they returned, and, there being few people Jeft in 
the: land, which was of itself wonderfully fruitful, 
they gathered a great quantity of grapes and other 
summer-fruits, such as it produced. 

Verses 13-16. Johanan the son of Kareah came 
to Gedaliah, &c.—They had been withhim before, 
verses 8, 9, but. now they come to discover to hima 
conspitacy formed against his life. And said, Dost 
thou certainly know, &c.—Or, rather, Dost thou not 
know, &¢c.; (which is evidently the sense intended, ) 
that the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael to 
slay thee ?—The king of the Ammonites had con- 
certed this matter with Ishmael, with a design to— 
make the Jews, who still remained in their own 
country, his vassals: see chap. xli: 10. But Geda- 
liah believed them not—Not being credulous, or of a 
suspicious temper. Zhen Johanan spake to. Geda- 
liah secretly—Finding that Gedaliah took little no- 
tice of what-he had spoken to him in the presence 
of the other captains, he goes to him secretly, and 
offers him his service to prevent the stroke designed 
against him, suggesting to him, that if he did not va- 
lue his own life, yet he ought to consider in what a 
destitute condition the people would be, in case he 
should be cut off: they were at present but a small 
remnant, and if that calamity should happen, even 
this remnant would also perish. But Gedaliah said, 
Thou shalt not do this thing, for thou speakest 
falsely of Ishmael—Gedaliah shows in this instance 
more of that charity that ¢hinks no evil, than of that 

495 


bad 


Gedaliah and others 


JEREMIAH. 


slain at Mizpah. 


prudence and discretion which became a chief magis- 
trate. He ought to have been particularly on his 
guard against one, concerning whose mischievous 
_ designs he had received such information ; but, alas! 


he placed too great confidence in the fidelity of those 
about him, and this proved ruinous, both to himself 
and to the poor people whom he was appointed to 
govern and protect. 


CHAPTER XLI. 


The black Bode that appeared to be gathering in the foregoing chapter here bursts in a dreadful s storm. (1,) Gedaliah, and 
“all the Jews that were with him, are barbarously. slain by Ishmacl, and a pit is filled with their dead bodies, 1-3, 9. (2,) 
Eighty devout men who were going to bewail the ruins of Jerusalem and the temple are drawn in by Ishmael, and all, 


except ten, are likewise murdered, 4-8. 
ried off toward the country of the Ammonates, 10. 


(3,) The people that escape the sword are taken prisoners by Ishmael, and car- 
(5,) By the courage and conduct of Johanan, though the death of the 


slain is not revenged, yet the prisoners are recovered, and he, now becoming their commander in chief, anu to carry 
them into the land of Egypt, to avoid the resentment of the Chaldeans, 11-18. 


AMM. 3416. 


OW it came to pass in the seventh 
B. C. 588. N ce 


gine Aa} month, * that Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed 
royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men 
with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam to Mizpah; and there-they did eat 
bread together in Mizpah. 

2 Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, 
and the ten men that were with him, and »smote 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan 
with the sword, and slew him, whom the king 
of Babylon had made governor over the land. 


a2 Kings xxv. 25 ; Chap. xl. 6, 8——» 2 Kings xxv. 25. 


3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews, A. M. 3416. 
that were with him, even with Geda- sali 
liah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were 
found there, and the men of war. . 

4 And it came to pass the second day after he 
had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it, 

5 That there came certain from Shechem, 
from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore 
men, ° having their beards shaven, and their 
clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with 
offerings and incense in their hand, to bring 
them to “the house of the Lorn. . 


rs xv. 2.——4 2 Kings XXv. 
Sam. i. 


¢ Lev. xix. 27,28; Deut. xiv. 1; 
Ce ta 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLI. 

Verse 1. Now, in the seventh month—Answering 
partly to our September, and partly to October; two 
months after the taking of Jerusalem. The murder 
of Gedaliah gave occasion to the fasts of the seventh 
month, which the Jews observed after their return 
from captivity, Zech. vii. 5,8,19. Ishmael the son 
of Nethaniah—The same Ishmael that came to Ge- 
daliah, chap. xl. 8, 9, and to whom he sware protec- 
tion; of the seed royal—Being of the family of 
David, he supposed he hada greater right to the 
government than Gedaliah, and therefore seems to 
have borne him a grudge: on which account he was 
the fitter instrument for the king of the Ammonites 
to make use of; and the princes of the king, even 
ten men with him—Some of the chief officers of 
state belonging to Zedekiah. These, undoubtedly, 
brought a great number of others with them in their 
retinue, or else they could not have made such a de- 
struction as they did. 

Verses 3,4. Ishmael also slew all the Jews and the 
men of war—That is, all that joined in opposing 
him, and in assisting Gedaliah: for several of the 
commanders, as well as the greater part of the peo- 
ple, were still left alive, as appears by the sequel of 
the story. And on the second day after, §c.,no man 
knew it—That is, no man who lived at any consider- 
able distance from Mizpah, for Ishmael undoubtedly | 

496 ‘ 


# 


used every means in his power to keep this slaugh- 
ter secret, lest the news of it should’ reach the ears 
of some of the Chaldean commanders, and so ‘he 
should be prevented from making his escape. 
Verse 5. T'here came fourscore men, having their 
beards shaven, &c.—“ These were tokens of great 
mourning, by which these persons expressed their 
grief for the destruction of Jerusalem and the tem- 
ple. Such expressions of sorrow were forbidden to 
be used at funeral obsequies, Lev. xix. 27, 28; but 
might be lawfully used upon other mournful occa- 
sions. With offerings and incense to bring them to 
the house of the Lord—Some understand this as if 
devout persons brought their oblations to the place 
where the altar formerly stood, which they looked 
upon as consecrated ground ; a custom, they think, 
countenanced by the words of Baruch, chap, i. 10, 
where the exiles at Babylon are supposed to send 
money to buy offerings for the altar of the Lord, 
after that Jerusalem was taken and burned. Others 
by the house of the Lord understand an altar or 
place of worship erected by Gedaliah at Mizpah; in 
imitation of that which was formerly set up there by 
Samuel, which place continued to be a proseucha, or 
place of worship, in after times, as appears from 
1 Mac. iii. 46. There were many such sanctuaries or 
places of worship, both in Judea and elsewhere, 
among the Jewish dispersions. ”_Lowth, — 


——. 


3 ‘ 


Those who escape the sword 


CHAPTER XLI. 


taken prisoners by Ishmael. 


A. M. 3416. 


B. C. 588 6 And Ishmael the son of Netha- 


~ wiah went forth from Mizpah to meet 
them, ‘weeping all along as he went: and it 
came to pass, as he met them, he said unto 
them, Come to Gedaliah the son‘of Ahikam. 

7 And it was so, when they came into the 
midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Ne- 
thaniah slew them, and cast them into the 
midst of the pit, he, and the men that were 
with him. 

8 But ten men were found among them that 
said unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have 
treasures in the field; of wheat, and of barley, 
and of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and 
slew them not among their brethren. 


-cast all the dead bodies of t 


“9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael had -= es 
men, 
whom he had slain *because* of Gedaliah, 
was it ‘which Asa the king had made for 
fear of Baasha king of Israel: and Ishmael 
the son of Nethaniah filled it with them that 
were slain. : 

10 Then Ishmael carried away captive all the 
residue of the people that were in Mizpah, ® even 
the king’s daughters, and all the people that re- 
mained in Mizpah, ® whom Nebuzar-adan the 
captain of the guard had committed to Geda- 
liah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son 
of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and 
departed to go over to. ‘the Ammonites. 

= 


1 Heb. in going and weeping. 2 Or, near Gedaliah. 3 ‘Heb. 


by the hand, or, by the side of Gédaliah. 


Verses 6-8, And Ishmael went forth to meet them, 
weeping all along as he went—As if he sympathized 
with them, and bewailed, as they did, the desolations 
of Jerusalem. He appears to have been a-complete 
hypocrite. As he met them he'said, Come to Geda- 
liah—He inyites them to the new governor for pro- 
tection, as if he had been one of his courtiers and 
friends, and by these arts conceals his bloody design 
against them. And when they came into the midst 
of the city—Whence they could not easily escape; 
Ishmael slew them—Though they had giyen him no 
provocation, and indeed, as it seems, were entire 
strangers to him. And, no doubt, he took the offer- 
ings they had brought, and converted them to his 
‘own use: for he that did not. hesitate to commit such 
a murder certainly would not scruple to commit sa- 
crilege. And cast them into the midst of the pit— 
The words, and cast them, are not in the Hebrew, 
which is literally, slew them in the midst of the pit. 
So also the LXX., ecgakev avrove ec to gpeap. The 
Complutensian edition, however, supplies xac eve- 
6adev, and cast them, which accords with the reading 
of the Syriac. The Vulgate renders the clause, in- 
terfecit eos Ismael circa medium laci: Ishmael slew 
them about the middle of the lake, or, pool; and 
Blaney reads, Ishmael massacred them at the pit. 
He and the men that were with him—Hired, it seems, 
to assist him in this bloody work. But ten men were 
_ found that said, Slay us not, for we have treasures, 
&c.—He slew seventy of them, but the remaining 
ten pleading for their lives, and urging that they had 
estates in the country of corn, oil, and honey, his 
covetousness prevailed over his cruelty, and he 
spared their lives, to become master of their pro- 
perty. 

Verse 9. Now the pit was it which Asa had made, 
&ce.—The word +)3, here and elsewhere rendered 
pit, frequently signifies, a cistern, basin, or, reser- 
voir; a large place made for receiving rain-water ; 
which seems to be the meaning of the word here. 
This pit, or reservoir, Asa, who built and fortified 

Vou. Il. ( 32 ) 


£}) Kings xv. 22; 2 cee xvi, 6.8 ae xliii: 6 —— Chap. 
1, 7.——? Chap. xl. 1 


Mizpah, at the time he was at war with Baasha king 
of Israel, caused to be mille in the midst of the city, 
in order that the people might not be in want of so 
necessary an article as water in case of a siege. 
Reservoirs of this kind were much in use in Pales- 
tine, as Jerome tells us, in his commentary upon 
Amos iv. 7, 8. And Josephus testifies the advantage 
of them to the besieged when he tells us that, when 
Masada was reduced to the greatest distress for want 
of water, it was relieved by a fall of rain in the 
night, which filled all the reservoirs, Antiq. lib. xiv. 
cap. 14. Each private family seems also to have had 
one of these reservoirs for its own use. Drink. ye 
every one the waters of his own cistern, 12, his 
pit, or, reservoir, says Rabshakeh to the people of 
Jerusalem, Isa. xxxvi. 16. 

Verses 10-13. Ishmael carried away captive all 
the residue of the people—All that he did not slay: 
see note on verse 3; and among the rest Zedekiah’s 
daughters, who had been left to the care of Gedaliah, 
when his sons were slain. These, it seems, being 
recovered by Johanan, were taken with him into 
Egypt, where they perished among the other Jews. 
And Ishmael. departed to go over to the Ammonites 
—Probably intending to make a present of the cap- 
tives he was taking with him, to Baalis king of Am- 
mon, by whom he had been instigated to the murder 
of Gedaliah. But when Johanan, and all the ca 
tains heard, &c.—It would have been well if Joha- 
nan, when he gave information to Gedaliah of Ish- 
mael’s treasonable design, had stayed with him; for 
he and his captains, and their forces, might have 
been a life-guard to him, and a terror to Ishmael, and 
so have prevented the mischief, without the effusion 
of blood. They took all the men, and went to fight 
with Ishmael—Upon receiving notice of the murders 
he had committed, and which way he had gone, they 
pursued him, and found him by the great waters 
that are in Gibeon—Called the pool of Gibeon, of 
which we read 2 Sam. ii. 18. Now when all the peo- 
plewhich were with Ishmael—Namely, the ag cap- 

497 


Recovery of the prisoners. 


JEREMIAH. 


They dwell in Chimham. 


A. M. 3416. 


11 9 But when Johanan the son 
B. C. 588. “ 


of Kareah, and all ‘the captains of 
the forces that were with him, heard of all 


the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah | 


had done, 

12 Then they took all the men, and went to 
fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and 
found him by | the great waters that are. in 
Gibeon. 

13: Now it came to pass, that when all the 
people which. were with Ishmael saw Johanan 
the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were with him, then they were 
glad. 

14 So all the people that Ishmael had car- 
ried away captive from Mizpah cast about 
and returned, and went unto Johanan the: son 
of Kareah. 

15 But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped 


Se 


from Johanan with eight men, and 4; wal os 
went to the Ammonites. 

16 Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, 
and all the captains of thé forces that were 
with him, all the remnant of the people whom 
he had recovered from Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he had 
slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty. 
men of war, and the women, and the children, 
and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again 
from Gibeon : 

17 And they departed, and dwelt i in the habit- 
ation of ™ Chimham, which i is by Bethle-hem, 
to go to enter into Egypt. ~ 

18 Because of the.Chaldeans: for they were 
afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son . of 
Ahikam, "whom the king of Babylon made 
governor in the land. 


k Chap. xl. 7, 8, 13——1 2 Sam. ii. 13. 


tives whom he was taking into the land of the Am- 
monites; saw Johanan, §c., they were glad—As 
they might well be, to see a probability of. escaping 
out of the hands of the bloody man who had slain 
so many of’ their brethren: and they presently 
found an opportunity to wheel about, and come over 
to Johanan and his captains, Ishmael not attempting 
to detain them, but readily quitting his prey to save 
his life. * 
Verses 16-18; T'hen took Johanan and the cap- 
tains, all the remnant of the people, &c.—It would 


have ‘been a happy thing, if Johanan, when he had. 


rescued the captives, would have sat quietly down 
with them, in-the land of Judah, and governed them 


peaceably as Gedaliah did; but, instead of that, he is | 


for leading them into the land of Egypt, as Ishmael 
would have led them into the land of the Ammon- 
ites; so that, though he got the command of them 
in a better way than Ishmael did, yet he did not use 
it much better. Gedaliah, who was of a meek and 
quiet spirit, was a great blessing to them ; but Joha- 
nan, who was of a fierce and restless disposition, 
seems to have been permitted to get the command 
of them for their hurt, and to complete their ruin, 


m 2 Sam. xix. 37, 38" Chapter x1. 5. 


—» 


even after they were, as they thought, redeemed. 
Thus did God still walk contrary to them, and 
thus, did evil still pursue this sinful people. And 
they departed and dwelt in the habitation of Chim- 
ham—The same parcel of ground, probably, that 
David gave to Chimham, the son of Barzillai: see 
2 Sam. xix. 38-40, Here Johanan made his head- 
quarters, steering his course toward Egypt, either 
from-a personal affection to that country, or an an- 
cient national confidence in the Egyptians for help 
in distress. Because of the Chaldeans—As the per- 
son, whom Nebuchadnezzar had made governor in 
the land, was slain, it was not unreasonable for them 
to think that Nebuchadnezzar would consider the 
murder of him as an affront done to himself; and 
though Johanan had-no hand in that villanous act, 
yet he did not know, but the king of Babylon, being 
unacquainted with all the parties among the Jews, 
might look upon all that remained i in the country as 
guilty, and might revenge the murder of his deputy 
governor upon them all, He therefore chooses for 
them a habitation, from whence they might, in a 
short time, go down into Egypt, which was Joha- 
nan’s design, as we shall read in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER XLIL 


In this chapter, (1,) Johanan and the other captains of the poor Jews in Canaan solicit Jeremiah to pray for God's direction, 


respecting the course they should take, solemnly engaging to follow it, 1-6. 
them to remain in Judea, assuring them that there only they would be safe and prosperous, 7-12. 


from going to Egypt, as what would ruin them, 13-18. 


(2,) By God’s order Jeremiah encourages 
(3,) He dissuades them 


(4,) He admonishes them that their dissimulation, in thus con- 


sulting God, when they were determined to follow their own will, would be punished with destruction by the sword, faunine, 


ig pestilence, 19-272. 
( 498 


( 32* ) | 


Jeremiah directs the Jews 


CHAPTER XLII. 


to remain in Judea. 


» fete . THEN all the captains of the forces, 
“and Johanan the son of Kare- 
ah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all 
the people from the least even unto the greatest, 
came near, 

2 And said unto Jeremiah the prophet, ? Let, 
we beseech thee, our supplications be accepted 
before thee, and. pray for us unto the Lorp 
thy God, ever for all this remnant; (for we 
are left but °a few of many, as dhitie eyes do 
behold us :) 

3 That the Lorn thy God may show us “the 
way wherein we may walk, ive the sii: that 
we may do. 

4. Then Jeremiah the a said unto them, 
I have heard you ; behold, I will pray unto the 
Lorp your God according to: your words ; and 
it shall come to pass, that * whatsoever thing 


the Lorp shall answer you; I will declare iz! 


unto you, I will keep nothing back from you. 
5 Then they said to Jeremiah, * The Lorp 
be a true and faithful witness between us, if 


we do not even according to all things AM, 3416, 
for the which the Lorp thy God | geen 
send thee to us. 

6 Whether it be gocd, or whether it be-evil, 
we will obey the voice of the. Lorp our God, 
to whom ‘we ‘send thee; " that it may be well 
with us, when we obey the voice of the Lorp 
our God. 

7 J And it came to pass after ten days, that 
the word of the Lorn came unto Jeremiah. 


8 Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, 


arid all the captains of the forces which were 


with him, and all the people font the least” 


even to the greatest, 

9 And said unto them, Thus saith the Lorn, 
the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to 
present your supplication before him ; 

10 If ye will still abide in this land, thén 
‘will I build you, and not pull you down, and 
I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for I 
‘repent me of the evil that I have done unto 
you. . 


2 Chapter xl. 3 13,5 xli. 11.1 Or, Let our maestiontion fall || 


before thee. bv] Sam. vil. 8; xii. 19; Isa. xxxvii. 4; James v. 


16. © Lev. xxvi. 22. a Ezra viij. 21. 
Ce ee a eee ee ee eee 
NOTES ON CHAPTER XLII: 

Verses 1-3. Then all the captains, and all the 
people—That is, both those captains, and many of 
the people ; came near and said unto Jeremiah— 
Who was probably carried away with the other cap- 
tives by Ishmael, and rescued by Johanan ; Let, we 
beseech thee, our supplications be accepted before 
thee—Thus these men, though wretched hypocrites, 
yet address the prophet with great respect and reve- 
rence, and in words which implied that they thought 
themselves unworthy to be permitted to ask any fa- 
vour of him. Probably the evidence they had had 
so lately of his being-a true prophet of the Lord, by 
the accomplishment of all that he had foretold 
against both the city and temple, might in some mea- 
sure oceasion their showing him such respect. And 
pray for us, that the Lord may show us the way 
wherein we may walk—* It is the constant method 
of hypocrites to pretend an absolute submission to 
the will of God till that will is found to run counter 
to their inclinations or interest.”—Lowth. 

Verses 4-6. Then Jeremiah said, I have heard 
you, &c.—That is, I will do for you what you desire. 
Twill pray unto the Lord your God—They called 
the Lord Jeremiah’s God: here Jeremiah calls him 
their God, both to remind them of God’s relation to 
them, and of their duty toward him. And whatso- 
ever thing the Lord shall answer, I will declare—I 
will be faithful in giving you an account of what 
God shall reveal to me to be his will concerning you. 
Then they said, The Lord be a true and faithful 
witness, &c.—The words of this and the following 

3 


© 1 Kings xxii. 14——f ] Sam. iii. 18; Acts xx. 20.— 2é Gen. 
xxxi. 50.—" Deut. vi. 3; Chapter vii..23,.——i Chap. xxiv. 6; 
Xxxi. 28 ; xxxiii. 7,——k Deut. xxii: 36; Chap. xviii. 8 


—= 


versé  diply a perfect oath, the form of which lies in 
appealing to God as a witness of the sincerity of the 
hearts of those that swear, for a security to those to 
whom the oath is given: which also includes a se- 
eret challenging of God to take vengeance upon 
those that give that security, if they should not act 
according to their promise. The thing. these men 

promise. is, that they would perfectly obey God’s © 


will, whether agreeable or disagreeable to them. 
_And they further declare they were convinced that 


their prosperity and happiness entirely depended 
upon their complying with God’s will, adding, That 
it may be well with us, &c. 

Verses 7-10. And it came to pass after ten days— 
Thus long they were held in suspense, perhaps to 
punish them for their hypocrisy, or to show that 
Jeremiah did not’ speak of himself nor what he 
would; for he could not speak when he would, but 
was obliged to wait for instructions; the word of the 
Lord came unto Jeremiah—Namely, the word men- 
tioned, chap. xl. 1, to which the contents of the last 
two chapters, and ‘the preceding part of this, are but 
an historical preface. Then called he Johanan, and 
all the captains, &c.—What the Lord had revealed 
to him he declared publicly, both to the captains and 
to all the people, to those in the lowest as well as ~ 
to those in the highest station; and that fully and 
faithfully as he had received it. Thus saith the 
Lord, the God of Israel—If Jeremiah had been de- 
sired to direct them by his own prudence,_probably 
he could not have determined what to advise them 
to, the case being certainly difficult: but what he has 

499 


The Jews assured of safety 


11 Be not afraid of the king of 
Babylon, of whom ye are afraid ; be 
not afraid cf him, saith the Lorn: ! for I am 


with you, to save you, end to deliver you from} 


his hand. 

12 And ™I will show mercies unto you, that 
he may have mercy upon you, and.cause you 
to return to your own land. 

13 But if ®ye say, We will not dwell in this 
land, neither obey the voice of the Lorp your 
God, 

14 Saying, No; but we will wo into the land 
of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear 
the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of 
bread: and there will we dwell: 

15 And now therefore hear the word of the 
Lorp, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the 
Lorn of hosts, the God of Israel ; If ye ° wholly 
set P your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to 
sojourn there ; 


JEREMIAH. 


upon remaining in Judea. 


16 Then it shall come to pass, tat A.M. 3416. 
the sword, ‘which ye feared, shall — ~~ 
overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and 
the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shall fol- 
low close after you there in Egypt; and there 
ye shall die. 

17 ? So shall it be with all the men that set 
their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; 
they shall die * by the sword, by the famine, 
and by the pestilence : and * none of them shall 
remain or escape from the evil that I will bring 
upon them. 

18 For thus saith the Lorp of. bell thie God 
of Israel; As mine anger and my fury hath. 
been * poured forth upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem ; so shall my fury be poured forth 
upon you, when ye shall enter into Egypt: 
and “ye shall be an execration, and an asto- 
nishment, and a curse, and a reproach ; and ye 
shall see this place no more. 


1Jsa. xliii.5; Rom. viii. 31——™ Psa. evi. 45, 46. 
xliv. 16. © Deut. xvii. 16; Chap. xliv. 12, 13, 14. 
ix. 51.——4 Ezek, xi. 8. —-* Heb. shall cleave after you. 


n Chap. 
P Luke 


to advise is, that which the Lord God of Israel, to} 


whom they had sent him, directed to be said. Ifye 
will still abide in this land—That is, If you will 
give up all thoughts of going into the land of Egypt, 
and abide where you are, or in any part of Judea un- 
der subjection to; and in the protection of, the king 
of Babylon, into whose power I have given you; 
then will I build you, &e.—Then will I see to your 
security and prosperity, and make you a happy peo- 
ple, For I repent me of the evil, &c.—I am satisfied 
with the punishment which your nation hath under- 
gone, and now, if you do not destroy yourselves by 
new acts of disobedience, I will change the course 
of my providence toward you. God is said in Scrip- 
ture to repent when he alters the outward methods 
of his providence toward any people or individual: 
see note on Gen. vi. 6. 

Verses 11,12. Be not afraid of the king of Babylon 
—As if he had said, I know what you are afraid of; 
you fear lest the king of Babylon should send a force 
against you and utterly root you out, because one of 
your nation hath murdered his viceroy Gedaliah ; 
but suffer not your passion of fear to rise too high on 
this. account, and make you flee into Egypt. For J 
am with you to save you—For you shall have my 
presence with you, to deliver and preserve you, so 
that Nebuchadnezzar shall have neither inclination 
nor power to do you any harm. J will show mercies 
unto you that he may have mercy, &e.—We are be- 
holden to God for all the compassion and kindness 
which we meet with from men ; though we may re- 
ceive good from their hands, it is God who inclines 
their hearts to do it. And cause you to return to your 
own land—The mercy which God here promises 

500 


$ Heb. so shall all the men be.-——* Chap. xxiv. 10; Verse 22, 
’ Chapter xliv. 14, 28,—t Chap. vii. 20. « Chap. xviii. 16 ; 
xxiv. 9; xxvi.6; xxix. 18;.22; xliv. 12; Zech. viii. 13. 


these men is, that the king of Babylon should give 
them liberty to go every one to his own inheritance; 
for at present they were banished by their own fears 
from their own houses and estates, though not. from 
their own country. 

Verses 13-18. But if ye say, We will not dwell in 
this land, neither obey—Hebrew, yow 1n35, so as 
not to obey. If they did not continue in their own 
land, they disobeyed the voice of the Lord. Saying, 
No; we-will go into the land of Egypt, where we 
shall see no war, &c.—Their great sin was unbelief: 


| they would not take the promise of God asa security. 


to them for a quiet and peaceable abode, and a sup- 
ply of all their wants, in J udea: but they resolved to 
go into Egypt, where ‘they expected to have a greater 
certainty of peace and plenty. Therefore the Lord 
declares by his prophet, that the evils which they 
feared in Canaan should overtake them with double 
violence in Egypt, namely, both the sword and fa- 
mine, by which they should die, and that they should 
be an execration and an astonishment, a curse and 
a reproach, (verse 18,) as God had threatened to 
make the inhabitants of Jerusalem, chap. xxiv. 9, and 
xxix. 18, where see the notes, And ye shall see this 
place no more—And in this, saith God, will I deal 
worse with you than with those who were carried 
captive to Babylon; many of them shall return, after 
the time fixed for the duration of their captivity is 
expired, but you shall return into this land no more. 
There was this aggravation in the sin of those Jews 
to whom God was now speaking by his prophet, that 
they had lately seen his words, by the same prophet, 
fully verified; yet would not take warning, but Tan 
into the same sin of unbelief. 
3 


Their disobedience 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


followed by destruction. 


A. M. 3416... 19 J The Lorp hath said concern- 
sais C. 588. 

ing you, O ye remnant of Judah ; 
*Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I 
have ¢admonished you this day. 

20 For® ye dissembled in your hearts, when 
ye sent me unto the Lorp your God, saying, 
¥ Pray for us unto the-Lorp our God; and ac- 
cording unto all that the Lorp our God shall 
say, so declare unto us, and we will do 2¢. 


x Deut. xvii, 16,——* Heb. testified against you.— Or, ye have 
used deceit against your souls. 


Verse 19. The Lord-hath said, Go ye not into 
Egypt—The good prophet, knowing how much it 
concerned this people to believe and obey the mes- 
sage God had sent to them by him, repeats again 
what he had urged before, assuring them it was by 
the command of the Lord that he said it. now 
certainly that I have admonished you this day— 
Hebrew, [33 Wyn, have testified to you, or, ad- 
monished you before witnesses. “God commanded 
the Jews, by Moses, not to have any commerce with 
Egypt, that they might not practise the idolatrous 
customs of that country, (Lev. xviii. 3,) with whose 
idolatries they had been defiled during their sojourn- 
ing there. Afterward he often reproved them by 
his prophets for making alliances with Egypt. And 
there were particular reasons, at this time, for so se- 
vere a prohibition, as the words here and in the con- 
text import, namely, because the Jews either learned 
several of their idolatrous practices from the Egyp- 
tians, or, at least were confirmed in those evil cus- 
toms by their example. Besides, it was the rival 
kingdom that contended for empire with the Baby- 
lonians ; and-so the Jews going into Egypt for pro- 
tection was, in effect, refusing to submit themselves 
to the king of Babylon, to whom God had decreed 
the government of Judea and all the neighbouring 
countries, chap. xxvii. 6.”—Lowth. 

Verses 20-22. For ye dissembled in your hearts— 
‘Hebrew, Domnynn, have used deceit. They acted 


21 And now I have this day de- A. M. 3416. 
clared it. to you; but ye have not fori 
obeyed the voice of the Lorp your God, nor 
any thing for’ the which he hath sent me 
unto you. 

22 Now therefore know certainly that * ye 
shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by 
the pestilence, in the place a ye desire 
Sto go and to sojourn. 


y Verse 2. 


z Verse 17; Ezekiel vi. 11——® Or, to go to 
sojourn. 


deceitfully, either toward God, calling him to bear 
witness to their sincerity in a matter in which they 
were not sincere; or toward the prophet, sending 
him.to inquire of God for them, and promising to act 
according as God should direct, when they never in- 
tended it; or, toward their own souls, as the margin 
reads it. Thus Blaney, Surely ye have practised 
deceit against your own souls, following the Maso- 
retic reading of the margin, confirmed by twenty- 
two MSS. and five editions. The LXX. read or 
erovnpevoaaite ev woyatc vuwov; for you have acted 
wickedly in your souls, and the Vulgate, because 
you have deceived your souls. Now Ihave this day 
declared-it to you—I went, according to-your desire, 
to inquire of God for you; he revealed his will to 
me respecting you, and now I have as faithfully tole 
you what itis. But ye have not obeyed, &c,—Or, 
will not obey. If it be asked how Jeremiah knew 
they would not obey God’s will in this instance, 
inasmuch as they had not yet declared their minds 
to him, it must be answered, God had made their in- 
tentions known to him. Now therefore know cer- 
tainly that ye shall die by the sword, &c.—You 
think to avoid death by going to Egypt to sojourn 
for a little time, but ‘you shall perish there, and that 
by those very deaths which, by going thither, you 
seek to avoid. Observe, reader, we must expect 
disappointment, misery, and ruin to follow actions 
done in disobedience to the revealed will of God 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


Here, (1,) Johanan and his companions, pretending that Jeremiah’s faithful admonitions were not of God, but from Baruch, 


disregard them, and go to Egypt, taking the prophet along with them, 1-7. 


(2,) God sends them another message, im- 


porting, that the Chaldeans should quickly pursue them into Egypt, and ravage that country, 8-13. 


Ast dbhb AND it came to pass, that when 
nabekiceiN Jeremiah had made an end of 
speaking unto all the people all the words of the 
Lorp their God, for which the Lorn their God 


had sent him to them, even all these A. M, 3416. 

B. C. 588. 
words, pal" gare 
2 *'Then spake Azariah the son of Hosha- 
iah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all 


a Chap. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLII. 


Verses 2,3. Then spake Azariah, the son of 
Hoshaiah—Called Jazaniah, chap. xlii. 1. We may |, 
3 ; 


xii. 1. 


observe many like instances in the books of Kings 

' and Chronicles, of the same persons being called by 

two differentnames. And all the proud men—They 
501 


Johanan and his companions 


JEREMIAH. ~ 


take Jeremiah into Egypt. 


A.M. 3416. the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, 
ee ‘Thou speakest falsely: the Lorn our 
God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into 
Egypt to sojourn there: 

3 But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee 
on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of 
the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, 
and carry us away captives into Babylon. 

4 So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the 
captains of the forces, and all the people, obey- 
ed not the voice of the Lorn, to dwell in the 
land of Judah, 

5 But. Johanan the son: of Kareah, and all 
the captains of the forces, took Pall the remnant 
of Judah, that were returned from all nations, 


whither they had been driven, to A Moa4I6. 
dwell in the land of Judah; bat a 

6 E'ven men, and women, ead children, “and 
the king’s daughters, ‘and every person that 
Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard had left 
with Gedaliah ‘the son of Ahikam the son 
of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and 
Baruch the son of Neriah. 

7 So they came into the land of Egypt: for 
they obeyed not the voice of the Lorp: thus 
came they even to * T'ahpanhes. 

8 {Then came the word of the Lorre unto 
Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying, 

9 Take great’stones in thy hand, and hide 
them in the clay in the brick-kiln, wish is at 
SSS 


> Chap. xl. 11, 12——¢ Chap. xli..10.—4 Ch, xxxix. 103 2 


— — 


e Chap. ii.16; xliv. 1; called Hanes, Isa. xxx. 4. 


= 


who refused to obey Almighty God when his com- 


mands-crossed their owninclinations. Saying unto 
Jeremiah, The Lord hath not spoken by thee—The 
constant method of hypocrites and infidels, who pre- 
tend they are not satisfied of the truth of divine re- 
velation, when the true cause of their unbelief is, 
that God’s commands contradict their own lusts and 
appetites. But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth 
thee on against us—They would not directly accuse 
Jeremiah of partiality toward, or confederacy with, 
the Chaldeans, as his enemies had done formerly, 
(chap. xxxvii. 13,) but they lay the blame upon Ba- 
ruch, whom they knew to be an intimate companion 
of Jeremiah’s, and fo have been kindly used by the 
Chaldeans upon Jeremiah’s account.—Lowth. 
Verses 4-7. So Johanan and all the captains, 
§c., obcyed not, &c.—That is, they resolved not to 
obey the message God had sent them by Jeremiah ; 
but took all the remnant of Judah that were return- 
ed, &c.—The resolution which they had formed they 
presently put in practice. Though Jeremiah and 
Baruch, and probably many of the people, were not 
willing to go along with them, yet these rebellious 
captains forced them to go; so that the prophet and 
his pious friends were now a kind of prisoners to 
their own countrymen. So they came into the land 
of Egypt—Their great inclination to go-into Egypt 
arose, as has been intimated, from a supposition that 
they should be safer there from the Babylonians, 
who, they thought, might injure them at any time 
while they stayed in Judea; but would not venture 
‘to attack Egypt, on aceount of its strongly fortified 
cities, which commanded the passes into the coun- 
try, and the various channels of the Nile, which 
were great obstructions to the march of an army. 
Thus they came even to Tahpanhes—One of the 
principal cities of Egypt, and a place of residence 
for their kings. ‘The word is contracted to Hanes, 
Isa, xxx. 4, and joined with Zoan, the chief city of 
the kingdom, Tahpanhes gave a name to a queen 
of Egypt, (1 Kings xi. 19,) and is supposed by many 
to be the same city which was afterward called 
dz 


. 


Daphne Pelusiace. In this behaviour of the Jews 
we have an instance of. great impiety joined to hy- 
pocrisy. They had promised with an oath to follow 
the advice of the prophet; but, because his counsel 
was not agreeable to their inclinations, they went’ 
down into Egypt, and even charged the prophet with 
speaking falsely in the name of the Lord. In these 
Jews we see a picture of those persons who, upon 
some ~occasions, express their zeal and good inten- 
tions, but reject the most wholesome counsels when 
those counsels thwart their passions, and are in op- 
position to what they have secretly purposed. With 
respect to Jeremiah, it)may be observed, God suffer- 
ed him to be carried to Egypt, that he might there 
denounce the ruin of the Egyptians as well as of the 
Jews, who had put their trust in them. Wherever 
the wicked are, the hand of God finds them out; and 
those who think, by disobeying him, to avoid the 
evils which they dread, and to that end make use of 
unlawful means, fall by those very means into the 
evils they expect to shun, and are confounded in 
their hope. 

Verses 8, 9. Then came the word of the Lord to 
Jeremiah in Tahpanhes—Jeremiah was now among 
idolatrous Egyptians and treacherous Israelites, yet 
here the word of the Lord came to him, and he pro- 
phesied. God can visit his people with his grace, 
and the revelations of his mind and will, wherever 
they are; and when his ministers are bound, his 
word is not bound. When Jeremiah went into the 
land of Egypt, not out of choice, but by constraint, 
God withdrew not his wonted fayour from him. 
And what he received of the Lord he delivered to 
the people. Wherever we are, we must endeavour 
to do good; for that is our business in this world. | 
Saying, Take great stones in thy hand—Such as 
are used as foundation-stones; and hide them in the 
clay in the brick-kiln—Or furnace. The Vulgate 
reads, in crypta, qua est sub muro lateritio, in the 
hollow place, or vaull, whichis under the brick wall ; 
and the LXX., ev npodupors, in the place before the 
gate which is at the entry of Pharaoh's’ aeeee— 

3 


The prophet predicts 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


the spoiling of Egypt. 


A. M. 3416. 
B. C, 588 
of J udah ; 
10 And ay unto them, Thus saith the Lorp 
_ of hosts; the God of Israel; Behold, I will send 
and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, | 
f my servant, and will set his throne upon these 
stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his 
royal pavilion over them. 
11 & And when he cometh, he shall smite the 
land of Egypt, and deliver » such as are for 
death to death; and such as are for captivity 


the entry of Pharaoh’s house in'|to captivity ; and such as are for the A.M. aal6. 
~ 'Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men || sword to the sword. Dake 


12 And I will kindle a fire in the houses of 
‘the gods of Egypt; and he shall’ burn them, 
and carry them away captives: and he shall 
array himself with the land of Egypt, as a 
shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall 
go forth from thence in peace. 

13 He shall break also the 1 images of 2 Beth- 
shemesh, that 7s in the land of Egypt; and 
the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall 
he burn with fire. 


Chap. xxv. 9; xxvii.6; Ezek. xxix. 18, 20.—s arn xliv. 
a:13% xlvi. 13.——" Chap. xv. 2; Zech. i. 


2 Or 


i Chap. xlvi. 25.——! Heb. statues, or standing images. 
the house of the sun. “ 


Which, however, might be a great way from the 
palace itself; the courts of great kings being almost 
equal to a city, for extent, in ancient times: particu: 
larly the palace of Babylon was four miles in com- 
pass, according to Diodorus Siculus: in the sight of 
the men, of Judah—Hebrew, D117" Dwss, liter- 
ally, of men Jews ; which signifies indefinitely some 
of that nation; not as in our present translation, 
which seems to imply, that the. presence of all the 
Jewish emigrants was required; for in that case the 
reading would at least have been, with the definite 
article prefixed, O™NTN wisn, the men the 
Jews . 
place these stones thus in the presence of the Egyp- 
tians, who weré unacquainted with his prophetic 
character, but in the sight ef the Jews to whom he 
was sent; at least some of them, who might attest 
what they had seen to others; in order that, since he 
could not prevent their going into Egypt, he might 
bring them to repent of their going. 

Verses 10,11. And say, Thus saith the Lord, I 
will send Nebuchadrezzar, &c.—God now com- 
mands his prophet to expound to the Jews the de- 
sign of the order given him in the preceding verse. 
The stones hid in the clay, at the entry of Phara- 
oh’s house, were intended to be a sign that the king 
of Babylon should make himself master of that 
royal city, and set his throne in that very place. This 
minute cir¢umstance is particularly foretold, that, 
when it, was accomplished, they might be put in 
mind of the prophecy, and confirmed in their belief 
of the extent and certainty. of the divine prescience ; 
to which the smallest and most contingent events are 
evident. God calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, 
because in this instance he should execute God’s 
will, accomplish his purposes, and be instrumental 
in carrying on his designs. And when he cometh, he 
shall smite the land of Egypt—Though Egypt has 
always been a warlike nation, it shall not be able to 
withstand the king of Babylon; but whom he will 
he shall slay, and in what way he pleases; and de- 

3 2 


see Blaney. , Jeremiah was not ordered to. 


liver such as are for death to death—See note on 
chap. xv. 2. ‘Death here: signifies the pestilence 
which the prophet foretels would overspread the 
country of Egypt by reason of the famine occasion- 
ed by sieges and other ravages of war. 

Verses 12, 13. And I will kindle a fire in. the 
houses of. the gods of Egypt—I will cause the tem- 
| ples of the gods of Egypt to be set on fire, and their 
|images to be. consumed, or carried away, as being 
neither able to save: their worshippers nor them- 
selves. God here speaks of himself as the prime 
mover, or principal agent in this business, no doubt 
with a design to inculeate this necessary and im- 
portant lesson, that in the punishing of idolatrous 
or ungodly nations both the plan is his, and the 
power of carrying it into execution, whatever in- 
struments he may choose to employ as the subor- 
dinate ministers of his providence. And he shall 
array himself with the land of Egypt—That is, he 
shall clothe, or enrich himself and his army with 
the spoils and plunder of the country: or he shall 
add Egypt to his dominions, and possess himself of 
the riches of it, with as much ease as ‘the shepherd 
puts on his garment. So calamities, when they sur- 
round men on every side, are compared to a gar-’ 
ment, Psa. cix. 19. .“ The expression shows,” says 
Rollin, “the prodigious ease with which all the 
power and riches of a kingdom are carried away, 
when God appoints the revolution.” And he shall 
go forth from thence in peace—None daring or at- 
tempting to resist him, or give hiny any molestation. 
He shall also break the images of Beth-shemesh 
—Or, the house of the sun, as the word signifies. 
The LXX. render the clause, ca: cvvtpuper cvdec HAi- 
exozewc, He shall breakin pieces the pillars of He- 
liopolis, that is, the city of the sun, where, as we 
learn from Herodotus, lib. ii. ¢. 59, the Egyptians 
celebrated a grand festival annually, in honour of 
the sun, that had a temple there. But wow m2, the 
house of the sun, seems rather to mean the temple 
itself, in which the images of their deity were erected. 

503 


a 


Judgments predicted 


JEREMIAH. 


because of idolatry. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


We have in this chapter, (1,) A most awakening. sermon delivered by Jeremiah to the Jews in Egypt, to reprove them for 
their obstinate continuance in idolatry, notwithstanding the warnings given them, both by the word and rod of God, and to 


threaten the judgments of God against them for it, 1-14. 


(2,) The impudent and impious contempt which the people put 


upon this admonition, and their declared resolution to persist in their idolatries, in despite both of God and his prophet, 


15-19. 


(3,) The sentence passed upon them for their obstinacy; that they should all be cut off, and perish in Egypt, 


except a very small number : as a token and earnest of which, the king of Egypt should shortly fall into the hands of the 
king of Babylon, and be unable any longer to protect them, 20-30. 


A. M, 3417. 


THE word that came to Jeremiah 
B. C..587. 


concerning all the Jews which 
dwell in the land of Egypt, which dwell at 
* Migdol, and at » Tahpanhes, and at ° Noph, 
and in the country of Pathros, saying, © 

2 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Ye have seen all the evil that I have 
brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities 
of Judah; and behold, this day they area 
desolation, ‘gad no-man dwelleth therein ; 

3 Because of their wickedness ryitch they 


have committed to provoke me to A. 16. 3al7. 
anger, in’ that they went ®to burn 

incense, and: to £ serve other gods, whom they 
knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers. © 


4 Howbeit, * I sent unto you all my servants 


the prophets, rising early and sending them, 
saying, O, do not this abominahie thing that 
T hate. 

5 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their 
ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no 
incense unto other gods. 


a Exod. xiv. 2; Chap. xlvi. 14——> Chap. xhii. 7. ¢ Isaiah 


xix. 13.—4 Chap. ix. 11; xxxiv. 22. 


© Chap. xix. 4——f Deut. xili. 6; xxxii. 7——42 Chronicles 
xxxvi. 15; Chap. vii. 0s xxv. 4; xxvi. 5; xxix. 19. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIV. © 

Verse 1. The word which came to Jeremiah— 
The patience and goodness of God to this remnant 
of his ancient people are very remarkable ; he leaves 
them not even in their rebellion, but commissions 
his prophet, whom he had before sent to forbid their 
going into this idolatrous country, to try if in Egypt 
they could be brought to repentance and reformation; 
concerning all the Jews which dwelt at Migdol, and 
at Tahpanhes, &c.—They were now. dispersed into 
divers parts of the country, and Jeremiah is sent with 
a message from God to them, which he delivered, 
either by going about from place to place to them; 
or when he had many-of them together in Pathros, 
as is mentioned verse 15.. We find a place. termed 
Migdol, mentioned Exod. xiv. 2,as situate near the 
Red sea. “ But I do not take this,” says Blaney, 
“to be here intended. Migdol properly signifies a 
tower, and may, in all probability, have been a name 
given to different cities in Egypt where there was a 
distinguished object of that kind. The city of Mag- 
dolus is mentioned by Herodotus, Hecateus, and 
others, and placed by Antoninus at the entrance of 
Egypt from Palestine, about twelve miles from Pe- 
lusium, This was too far distant from the Red .sea 
to be in the route of the Israelites; but its situation 
in the neighbourhood of Tahpanhes, or Daphne, 
and its distance from Judea, favour the supposition 
of its being the Migdol here spoken of. For then, 
as Bochart observes, we shall find the four places 
mentioned exactly in the order of their respective 
distances from that country ; Ist, Migdol, or Magdo- 
lus; 2d, Tahpanhes, or Daphne ; 3d, Noph, or Mem- 
phis ; and lastly, the district of Pathros, or Thebais.” 
Near Memphis stands one of the pyramids which 
are yet remaining. 

Verses 2-5. Ye have seen all the evil that I have 

504 


brought on Jracion eee refers to the late destruc- 
tion of it by the king of Babylon: this remnant of 
the people was a brand plucked out of the burning, 
and their eyes had been witnesses of the desolations 
which God had wrought. Because of their wick- 
edness, &c.—As they were eye-witnesses of the 
effect, so nothing but their unbelief made them 
strangers to the cause of the divine wrath manifest - 
ed against them; for God, by his prophets, had con- 
tinually assured them that the grand cause was their 
departure from him, the one living and true God, 
and forsaking his worship for that of idols. To 
serve other gods, whom they knew not—The sin of 
their various idolatries was aggravated by this, that 
they were as much strangers to the idols as to the 
people with whom they joined in the worship of 
them, neither they nor any of their fathers having 
had any proof that these idols had ever done, or 
were. able to do, any thing for their worshippers : 
compare Deut. xiii. 6, and xxxii. 17. These idols 
are opposed to the true God, called elsewhere the 
God of their fathers, who had made himself known 
to them by so many wonderful works and so many 
instances of his favour and benignity ; and had pro- 
mised to show the same favour to their posterity, if 
they continued steadfast in their obedience. J sent, 
§c., saying, O! do not this abominable thing 
that I hate—God had given them numberless admo- 
nitions and warnings by his prophets, that idolatry 
in all the species and instances of it was a.sin which 
he hated above all others, and would very dread- 
fully punish, yet they would not hear so as to yield 
obedience tohim; butstill persisted in the commission 
of this most abominable and absurd iniquity, The 
Hebrew, Wyn x3 5s, may be properly rendered, Do 
not, I pray you, this ‘ebominabte thing which I hate. 
Thus the Vulgate, Nolite, oro, facere verbum abo-= 
3 


God's judgments 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


against the Jews. 


eel 6 Wherefore "my fury and mine 
———— anger was poured. forth, and was 


kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets 
of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and deéso- 
late, as at this day. 

7 Therefore now thus saith the Lorp, the 
God of hosts, the God of Israel; Wherefore 
commit ye this great evil ‘against your souls, 


to cut off from you man and woman, child and } 


suckling, } out of Judah, to leave you none to 
remain ; : 
~ 8 In that. ye * provoke me unto wrath with 


the works of your hands, burning incense || 


unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whi- 
ther ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut 
yourselves off, and that ye might be 'a curse 
and a reproach among all the nations of the 
earth ? 

9 Have ye forgotten the *wickedness of 
your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings 
of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, 
and your own wickedness, and the wicked- 


ness of your wives, which they have # Me ey 
committed in the land of Judah, and ———— 
in the streets of Jerusalem ? 

10 They are not * humbled even unto this 
day, neither have they ™ feared, nor walked in 
my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before 
you and before your fathers. ig 

11 9 Therefore thus saith the Lorn of hosts, 

the God of Israel; Behold, "I will set my 
face against you for evil, and to cut off all 
Judah. 
' 12 And I will take the remnant of Judah, 
that have set their faces to go into the land 
of Egypt to sojourn there, and ° they shall all 
be consumed, and. fall in the land of Egypt ; 
they shall even be consumed by the sword and 
by the famine: they shall die, from the least 
even unto the greatest, by the sword and by the 
famine: and ? they shall be an execration, 
and an astonishment, and a curse, and a re- 
proach. 


13 4 For I will punish them that dwell in the 


bh Chap. xlii..18.— i Num, xvi. 38; Chap. vii. 19——* Heb. 
out of the midst of Judah. k Chap. xxv. 6, 7.——! Chap. xlii. 
18; Verse 12. 2 Heb. wickednesses, or, punishments, &c. 


3 Heb. contrite, Psa. li. 17.——™ Prov. xxviii. 14——1 Ley. 
xvii. 10; xx. 5, 63; Chap. xxi. 10; Amos ix. 4. © Chap. xiii. 
Liv 1722, » Chap. xlii. 18 +—9 Chap. xi. 11. 


minationis hujuscemodi. Be unwilling, I beseech 
you, to practise a thing so abominable. The lan- 
guage is as pathetic as it is emphatical. 

Verses 6,7. Wherefore my fury, §c., was pour- 
ed forth, &e.—As if he had said, For these very tea- 
sons, their idolatry and contempt of my word by 
my prophets, the very sins you are now committing, 
I gave Judah and Jerusalem into the hand of the 


king of Babylon, and they are, as you see this day, 


waste and desolate. Wherefore commit ye this 
great evil? &c.—What sort of prudence is it that 
influences you to do such actions as these, by which 
you cannot injure God, but yourselves only? ‘You 
are now but a few of many; what love can you have 
for your country while you take courses which will 
certainly tend to the utter extirpation of those few, 
so that thereshall be none.remaining of all the Jews? 
God designed that this remnant should have remain- 
ed in Judea, and kept possession of it, when the rest 
of their brethren were carried away captive, chap. 
xlii. 10. But by their going into Egypt and defiling 
themselves with the idolatries of that nation, they 
provoked God to make an utter destruction of them. 

Verses 8-10. Ye provoke me unto wrath with the 
works of your hands—By making. and setting up 
idols to worship. That yemight cut yourselves off, 
&c.—This is not to be so taken as if they did these 
things with a design to cut off themselves and their 
posterity: but only as signifying that their utter 
ruin would be the certain consequence of their con- 
tinuing’so to act. Have ye forgotten the wickedness 
of your fathers? &c—Have you forgotten what 

3 


(great wickedness’ your fathers committed, and what 
great punishments were in consequence thereof in- 
flicted upon them? We may be truly said to have 
forgotten that the ‘sight of which, or reflection there- 
on, makes no stich impression upon us as produces 
a suitable practice. Which they have committed in 
the land. of Judah, &c—To have practised ‘these 
things in any place would have been to contract 
great guilt; but to have done them in the land of 
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, in the valley 
of vision, and in the holy city, where there were 
such means of information and such helps to piety, 
was still more aggravated and inexcusable wicked- 
ness. They are not humbled even unto'this day— 
Neither they nor you are yet properly humbled, and 
prepared for receiving merey. Neither have they 
feared, nor walked in my law—Hence we learn, 
that reformation and obedience are the proper fruit 
of true contrition and humiliation; God does not 
account those to be humbled, but hardened, who are 
not reformed and made obedient, let their pretended 
contrition or humiliation be, in outward appearance, 
what it may. 

Verses 11-14. I will set my face against you 
for evil—See note on chap. xxi. 10.. And I will take: 
—Or, Iwill take away, namely, by destruction ; the 
remnant of Judah, &c.—The direful punishments 
denounced against those who went to Egypt were 
not denounced because it was a sin in itself for the 
Jews to leave their country, and seek a securer habit- 
ation in Egypt, but because, in so doing, they showed 
their distrust of God’s power or goodness, as if he 

505 


. 


T'heprophet’s admonitions 


— 


JEREMIAH. 


is disregarded by the Jews. 


SSS 


A.M. 3417. land of Egypt, as I have pwnished|| unto us in the name of the Lorp, a ali 


cos Saal Jerusalem, by the sword, by the fa- 


mine, and by the pestilence : 
14 So that none of the remnant of Judah, 


which are gone into the land of Egypt to rs 


journ there, shall escape or remain, that they 
should return into the land. of Judah, to the 
which they *have a desire to return to dwell 
there: for * none shall return but such as shall 
escape. 

15 § Then all the men which knew that 


their wives had burned incense unto other 


gods, and all the women that stood by, a_ great 
multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the 
land of Egypt; in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, 
saying, 

16 As for the word that thou hast spoken 


. 587. 
*we will not hearken unto thee. 


17 But we will certainly do * whatsoever thing 
goeth forth: out of our own mouth, to*burn in- 
cense unto the ® queen" of heaven, and to pour 
out drink-offerings unto her, as we have done, 
we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, 
in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Je- 
rusalem : “for chen had we plenty of ® victuals, — 
and were well, and saw no evil. 9 1 

18 But since we left off to burn incense to the 
queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offer- 
ings unto her, we have wanted all things, and 
have been consumed by the sword and by the 
famine. 

19 x And when we ‘burned incense to the 
queen of heaven, and poured out drink-offerings 


—— ef 


* Heb. lift up their soul— Verse 28.5 So Chapter vi. 16. 
t Num. xxx. 12; Deut. xxiii. 23; Judg. xi. 36; Verse 25. 


u Chapter vii. 18.——® Heb. bread. 


5 Or, frame of heaven. 
x Chap. vil. 18. 


were not able or willing to protect them in Judea, 
and also were guilty of disobeying his express com- 
mands, and disbelieving his faithful promises, where= 


by he had engaged to protect them. 'To which must | 


be further added, the great danger. and_ probability, 
not to say certainty, there was that they would fall 
into the idolatry of the Egyptians. Therefore God 
uttered grievous threatenings against their going 
thither, that they might be deterred. from it. 
will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, 
&c.—See notes on chap. xlii. 15-18. So that none 
of the remnant of Judah which are gone, &¢c.—Bla- 
ney translates this more agreeably to the Hebrew, 
thus: “ And the remnant of Judah, those who are 
eome into the land of Egypt, with a view to sojourn 
there, and to return into the land of Judah, &c., shall 


not have one escaper or surviver; whereas none 


shall return but escapers.” And he observes, “ It is 
evident, from verse 28, that some Jews. were to 
escape the general destruction in Egypt, and to re- 
turn into their own country, although but a few ; and 
the same thing is implied in the latter sentence of 
this verse. But the former part of this verse excludes 
out of the number of the escapers every individual 
of those that were called properly the remnant of 
Judah, those that had set their faces to enter Egypt 
to sojourn there, in opposition to the express com- 
mand of God, upon a presumption that they knew 
better than God how to consult their own restoration. 
The few then who were destined to escape, and to 
return back to the land of Judah, were to be such as 

id come into the land of Egypt in a less offensive 

anner, and happened to be there when the storm 
burst upon them.” 

Verse 15. Then all the men and all the women 
that dwelt in Pathros—Which was Upper Egypt; 
answered Jeremiah, &c.—From this it appears with 
how much reason it was that God ordered Jeremiah 


to endeavour to prevent their going into Egypt, since | 
506 


For I |, 


the. Israelitish women imitated the idolatry of the 


inhabitants of it, as soon as they came thither, and 


no people were immersed in a more absurd and 
shameful idolatry than the Egyptians. It is proba- 
ble that when. the Jewish women perceived the 
Egyptians to abound in riches and plenty, and to 
live in peace and security, they foolishly concluded 
that the gods which the Egyptians worshipped were 
more powerful, or more beneficent, than J ehovah, 
whom the Jews worshipped. , 

Verses 16-19. As for the word thou hast spoken 
unto us, we will not hearken unto thee—Johanan 
and the rest (chap. xliii. 5) only denied that God had 
said such things, and told Jeremiah he had spoken 
falsely : but now these people rise higher; they ac- 
knowledge Jeremiah had spoken to them in the name 
of the Lord, but, nevertheless, tell him in plain terms 
they would not obey his word, and indeed this is in 
the hearts of all sinners that are ruled by their lusts ; 
though they will sometimes pretend that what they 
hear is not the will of God, but spoken out of malice 
and prejudice; yet they are preresolved they will 
not comply with it, let their understandings be never 
so well informed. But will certainly do whatsoever 
thing goeth out of our own mowth—That is, that 
which we have solemnly vowed to perform. Here 
we have the root of all the disobedience of sinners, 
their resolutiom to please themselves, and do their 
own will, and not in any thing to deny themselves. 
To burn incense to the queen of heaven—To the 
moon and the rest of the host of heaven: see the 
note on chap. vii. 18; and xix. 13. As we have done, 


| we and our fathers, &e.—Their arguments for con- 


tinuing in this idolatry are, Ist;Custom and antiquity ; 

they and their fathers had practised it. 2d, The 

example of their kings and princes. 3d, 'The plenty 

and prosperity they had while they did so, as if their 

idols and not Jehovah had been the authors of it. 

They compared their former condition, before the 
3° 


The consequences 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


? 


of their idolatry. 
at 


ee 


4 Me 3417. unto her, did-we make her cakes to 

——— worship her, and pour out drink- 
offerings unto her, without our 7 men ? 

20 4 Then Jeremiah said unto all the peo- 
ple, to the men, and to the women, and to all 
the people which had ‘given him. that mati 
saying, 

21 The incense that ye burned in the cities 

of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye 
and your fathets, your kings and your princes, 
and the people of the land, did not the Lorp 
remember them, and came it no¢ into his mind ? 

22 So that the Lorn could ho longer bear, 

because of the evil of your doings, and because 


of the abominations which ye have 4M: 3417. 
committed ; therefore is your land Ya 
desolation, ‘pha an astonishment, and a curse, 
without an inhabitant, * as at this day. 

23 Because ye have bummed incense, and 
because ye have sinned against the Lorn, and 
have not obeyed the voice of the Lorn, nor 
walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor‘in his 
testimonies; *therefore this evil is happened 
unto you, as at this day. 

24 Moreover, Jeremiah said unto all the peo- 
ple, and to all the women, Hear the word 
of the Lorp, all Judah » that are in the land 
of Egypt: | 


2 Verse 6. 


7Or, hushands.— Chap. xxv. 11, 18, 38. 


—- 


a Dan. ix. 1, 12.——» Chap. xhii. 7; Verse 15. 


invasion of Judea and the siege of Jerusalem, with 
their present state, and- argued from their being in 
prosperity at that time, that they must needs have 
been then in the right; not considering that it was 
to be ascribed to the goodness and long-suffering of 
God waiting for their repentance, as being unwilling 
to destroy them, or even to bring any great calamity 
upon them. Besides, though on account of the 
measure of their iniquity being filled up, they now 
suffered more grievous calamities than they had ever 
done before, yet, if they were at all acquainted with 
the history of former times, they could not but know 
that idolatry had always brought calamities on their 


fathers, and that they never were so prosperous as 
when they worshipped -and served Jehovah only.’ 


But since we left off, §-c., we have wanted all things 
—This is their last argument in defence of their 
idolatry, an argument drawn from the evils that had 
befallen them since they had left, off to-worship the 
host of heaven; thus making their ceasing to 
commit the sin of idolatry the cause of their 
sufferings, whereas, in truth, the commission of that 
and their other sins had been the cause of all the 
calamities to which they had been exposed. And 
when we burned incense, §c., did we worship her 
without our men ?—Here the women speak, and al- 
lege that their husbands had joined with them in 
offering incense to the host of heaven, and that it was 
not done without their privity. “By the law of 
Moses the men had an independnet power of binding 
themselves by any religious vow or obligation ; but 
the vows of the women were not binding, without 
the knowledge and consent of their fathers and hus- 
bands; but if the father or husband knew of the vow, 
and did not signify his dissent at the time, his con- 
sent was presumed, and the vow stood ‘firm ‘and i irre- 
vocable, Num. xxx. 1-16. This appeal, therefore, to 
the concurrence of their men must be considered as 
coming from the female part of the assembly only, 
who thereby appear to declare that since they were 
thus authorized by those who alone had a legal right 
to control them, they should not submit to any other 
restraint upon their inclinations.”—Blaney. 

Verses 20-23. Then Jeremiah said, The incense 

3 


that ye burned, &c.—In these verses the prophet 
shows that they interpreted the dispensations of 
God’s providence toward them in a sense directly 


| contrary to their true intent and meaning. They 


concluded that their omission of late to burn incense 


to the queen of heaven was the cause of the calami- 
ties which had befallen them ; but the prophet shows 
them that the true cause was, not their leaving. off 
that practice, but their being formerly guilty of it. 
This their idolatry, with their other sins, did indeed 
go unpunished a great while: for God was long- 
suffering toward them, and during the time of his 
patience it was perhaps, as they said, well with them, 
and they saw no evil; but at length they beeame so 
provoking that, as the prophet tells them, verse. 22, 
the Lord could no longer bear, but began a eontro- 
versy with them. Upon this, it seems, some of them 
did in a degree reform their conduct: but their old 
guilt being uncancelled, and their corrupt inelina- 
tions being still the same, God remembered against 
them the idolatries of their fathers, their kings, and 
their princes, which they, instead of being ashamed 
of, gloried in: all these, he intimates, verse 21, came 
into his mind, with all the abominations which they 
had committed, verse 22, and all their disobedience 
to the voice of the Lord, verse 23: all was brought to 
account; and to punish them for these was their 
land made a desolation, an astonishment, and a curse, 
as they saw it to be. T'herefore—Not. for their 
late reformation, he assures them, but for their old 


| transgressions, had all that evil happened to them. 


Verses 24-28. Jeremiah said, Hear all Judah 


‘that are in the land of Egypt—That is, all you 


men and women that belong to Judah, and are now 
come to dwell in Egypt; ye and your wives have 


_spoken—The Hebrew word 739275, rendered have 


‘ 


spoken, is of the feminine gender, and implies thet 
| the women were first and principally concerne 


this idolatry, and that the men’s guilt lay chiefly in 
conniving at them, and suffering themselves to be 
seduced by them; saying, We will surely perform 
our vows, &e. —They insist on their unlawful vows 
as obligations i in conscience, which could not be dis- 
pensed with, just as Herod did on his unlawful oath, 


JEREMIAH. 


ie oP S ‘ af 


‘ cre , the king of Egypt. 


mW, 


A prophecy against 
A.M. 3417. 25 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
B.C. 587. 


the God of Israel, saying ; ° Ye and 
your wives have 
and fulfilled with your hand, saying, We will 
surely perform our yows that we have vowed, 
to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and 
to pour out drink-offerings unto her: ye will 
surely accomplish your vows, and surely per- 
form your vows. 

26 Therefore hear ye the word of the Lorp, 
all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt; 


- Behold, “I have sworn by my great name,| 


saith the Lorp, that * my name shall no more 
be named in the mouth of any man of Judah 
in all the land of ‘Egypt, saying, The Lord 
Gop liveth. 

27 ‘ Behold, I will watch over them for evil, 
and not for good: and all the men of Judah 
that are in the land of Egypt ® shall be con- 


h spoken with your mouths, | 


sumed by the sword and by the fa- A, M. 3417. 
mine, until there be an end of them. pon sa | 
28 Yet >a small number escape. the 
sword shall return out of th d of E 
into the land of Judah; and all the remna BE 
Judah, that are gone into. the land of Egypt to- ret 
sojourn there, shall know whose ‘ word: 
stand, ® mine, or theirs. . 
29 4 And this shall be a sign unto 3. ¢, soit 
you, saith the Lor», that I will punish 
you in this place, that ye may know ae 
words shall * surely stand against you for evil: 
30 Thus saith the Lorn; Behold, 11 will 
give Pharaoh-hophra king of Egypt into the 
hand of his enemies, and into the hand of 
them that seek his life; as I gave ™ Zedekiah 
king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchad- 
rezzar king of Babylon, his enejny, and that 
sought his life. 


© Verse 15.—4 Gen. xxii. 16—* Ezek. xx. 39.—f Chap. 
i. 10; xxxi. 28; Ezekiel vii. 6—s Verse 12. h Verse 14; 
Isa. xxvii. 13. 


— 


Matt. xiv. 9: as if, though to burn incense to the 
queen of heaven were a sin, yet their having vowed 
to do it were sufficient to justify them in the doing 
of it; whereas no man can, by his vow, make that 
lawful to himself, much Jess his duty, which God 
had before made sin. Ye will surely accomplish 
your vows, &c.—You are resolved upon it, and there 
is no moving you from your resolution. T'herefore 
hear ye the word of the Lord—-Hear what is God’s 
resolution. Behold, I have sworn by my great 
name, saith the Lord—I also have made a.solemn 
vow, in opposition to that wicked one of yours, and 
have confirmed it by an oath. J have sworn and 
will not repent: That my name shall no more be 
named by any man of Judah in the land of Egypt, 
&c.—“ These Jews seem to have joined the worship 
of the true-God with that of idols, as the Samaritans 
did before them, 2 Kings xvii. 33. ‘Thereupon God 
declares he will not receive any such polluted wor- 
ship at their hands, (compare Ezek. xx. 39,) nor 
suffer his name to be any longer profaned by such 
hypocrites, but will consume them by a sudden and 
general destruction »—Lowth. Behold, I will watch 
over them for evil—God here represents himself as 
one who would be solicitous and industrious to bring 
evil upon them, as men, who are so in any business, 
watch all opportunities for doing it: as if he had 
said, No opportunity shall be let slip to bring some 
dgment upon them, until there be an end of them, 
they be quite rooted out. Yet a small number 
that escape the sword shall return, &c.—A very 
few, next to none in comparison of the great num- 
ver that shall return out of the land of the Chal- 
deans: see note on verse 14. And all the remnant 
of Judah shall know whose words shall stand, mine 
or theirs—They said they should recover themselves 


i Verses 17, 25, 26.——® Heb. from me, or them. Psalm 
xexiiiclt—-! Chap. xlvi. 25, 26; Ezek. xxix. 3, &e. 7 vane. 
21, &e.——® Chap. xxxix. 5, 


when they returned to worship the queen of heaven. 
God says they shall hereby ruin themselves: and 
now the event will show who was in the right. The 
contest between God and sinners is, whose word 
shall stand, whose will shall be done, who shall 
prevail? Sinners say, We shall have peace, though 
we go on in sin: God says, Ye shall have no peace. 
And when God judges, he will overcome: his word 
shall stand, and not the sinner’s. : 
Verses 29, 30. And this shall be a sign unto you 
—Signs are usually antecedent to the thing signified, 
as Isa. xxxviii. 7; but here, as Exod. iii, 12, Isa. 
xxxvii. 30, and Luke, ji. 12, the word is taken, ina 
larger sense, for a circumstance that should attend 
the thing signified. It may be observed, however, 
that although the destruction of these Jews, and 
that of Pharaoh, were things immediately following 
each other, yet the latter was in order before the 
other. Iwill give Pharaoh-hophra into the hand 
of his eniemies— Pharaoh was a name common, in 
ancient times, to all the kings of Egypt; but several 
of them had some additional epithet to distinguish 
them from the rest. Thus the predecessor of this king 
was called Pharaoh-nechoh, 2 Kings xxiii. 29. This 
Pharaoh-hophra appears to have been the same 
that is ealled by profane authors Apres ; and his un- 
fortunate end, in exact conformity with this predic- 
tion, is particularly related by Herodotus, lib. ii. cap. 
169, and by Diodorus Siculus, lib. i. p. 43. “ His 
subjects rebelling, he sent Amasis, one of his gene- 
rals, to reduce them to their duty; but no sooner 
had Amasis begun to make his speech than they fix- 
ed a helmet on his head, and proclaimed him king. 
Amasis accepted the title, and confirmed the Egyp- 
tians in their rebellion ; and the greater part of the 
nation declaring for him, Apries was obliged to retire 


a 


igs, 
ce 


4 


The prophet 


. CHAPTER XLV. 


consoles Baruch. 


into Upper Egypt; and the country, being. thus 


%. 
>» 


oe 
Py , 
— CHAPTER XLV. 


weakened by intestine war, was attacked and easily 
overcome by uchadnezzar, who, on quitting it, 
left Amasis viceroy. After Nebuchadnezzar’s 


_. departure, Apries marched against Amasis, but, be- 


’ $ 


- ‘ 
‘This 


ing defeated at Memphis, was taken prisoner, carried 
to Sais, and strangled in his own palace; thus veri- 
fying this prophecy.” See Rollin’s Ancient Hist., 
vol, i., and Bishop Newton on the Prophecies, vol. 
i. p. 362. 


‘. 


chapter, though placed at a considerable distance from it, is evidently an appendage to chap. xxxvi. Baruch, as we there 


‘learn, had been employed by Jeremiah, as his amanuensis, to write a collection of all those dreadful threatenings which 
God had denounced by his mouth. This seems to have ‘affected his spirits, and to have alarmed his fears to. sucha degree, 
that God judged it proper to encourage and comfort him by letting him know that, although amidst the general calamities 
of his country he ought not to look for any great matters for himself, yet, in consideration of his services, his own life 
should be preserved to him by a special providence, in all places td which. it might be his lot to go, 1-5. 


A. M. 3397. FINHE: *-word that Jeremiah the pro- 
tal At phet spake unto Baruch the son 
of Neriah, when he had written these words in 
a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth 
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of 
Judah, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorn, the God’ of Israel, 
unto thee, O Baruch ; ‘ 

3 Thou didst say, Wo is me now! for the 
Lorp hath added grief tomy sorrow ; I fainted 


in my sighing, and I find no rest.- A. M. 3397. 
4 'Thus shalt thou say unto him, The en ey 
Lorp saith thus; Behold, ® hat which I have 
built will I break down, and that which I have 
planted I will pluck up, even this whole land. 
5 And seekest thou great things for thyself? 
seek them not: for behold, °I will bring evil 
upon all flesh, saith the Lorn: but thy life will 
I give unto thee ‘for a prey in all places whi- 
ther thou goest. 


a Chap. xxxyi. 1, 4, 32. Isa. v.'5.——¢ Chap. xxv. 26. 


4 Chap. xxi. 9; xxxvili. 2; xxxix. 18. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLV. 

Verse 1. The word that Jeremiah spake unto 
Baruch when he had written, &c.—“ This seems to 
indicate that the exact time of the uttering of this 
prophecy was between the writing and the publication 
of the roll. And, perhaps, if Baruch had not, re- 
ceived such special assurances of protection, he 
might not have had resolution enough to have fol- 
lowed the prophet’s further directions, and to have 
read first before all the people, and afterward before 
the princes, what he had written.”—Blaney. 

Verses 3-5. T'hou didst say, Wo is me now, &c. 
—“The sorrows which I felt for the threatenings 
denounced against my country and religion are in- 
creased by my own troubles, being sought after by 
the king’s command in order to be put to death :” 
see chap. xxxvi. 26. The Lord saith, That which 
I have built will I break down, &c.—The land and 


people which have so long flourished under the pe- 
culiar care of my providence I resolve now to give 
up to utter destruction: see chap. xxxi. 28. And 
seekest thou great things for thyself ?—Dost thou 
aspire to honour, dignity, and prosperity, or expect 
to be exempted from adversity and trouble in a time 
of great and common calamity? Seek them not— 
Never think of any thing of the kind; for, behold, 
I bring evil on all flesh—Upon the whole country 
where thou livest, and upon all orders and degrees 
of men therein. But thy life will I give unto thee 
for a prey—Thy life shall be preserved, but under 
such. circumstances that thou shalt have reason to 
look on thyself as peculiarly indebted to the divine 
providence for so singular and extraordinary a fa- 
vour. See note on chapter xxi. 9, where the same 
proverbial expression occurs, and is further ex- 
plained. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


4 


This chapter contains two prophecies against Egypt: the first fulfilled immediately after the publication ; the other about 
thirty-four years after. To be more particular: We have here, (1,) A prediction of the defeat of Pharaoh-necho's army, 
notwithstanding their pompous preparations and sanguine expectations, by the Chaldean forces at Carchemish on the 
Euphrates, 1-12. (2,) A prophecy of the invasion and conquest of Egypt, by the Chaldeons under Nebuchadnezzar, who 
should fill the country with terror and confusion, murder its inhabitants, and render it desolate for forty years, 13-26. 
(3,) A word of comfort is given to the Israel of God in the midst of these calamities, 27, 28. 


3 


509 


Jeremiah asa the defeat 


JEREMIAH. 


. aes 
of the Egyptian army. 


HE word ofthe Lorp which 
ciel tee came to Jeremiah the prophet 
against * the Gentiles ; 

2 Against Egypt, against the army of Pha- 
raoh-necho king of Egypt, which was by the 
river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebu- 
chadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the 
fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king 
of Judah. 


3 ° Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw 


near to battle. 

4 Harness the horses; and get. up, ye horse- 
men, and stand forth with your helmets; 
furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines. 


5 Wherefore have I'seen them dis- 4; M; ae 
mayed and turned away back ? and ——_— 
their mighty ones are ‘beaten down, and are 
2 fled apace, and look not back: for ¢ fear was 
round about, saith the Lorn. 

6 Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty 
man escape: they shall °*stumble,yand ‘fall 
toward the north by the river Euphrates. 

7’ Who is this that cometh up fas a flood, 
whose waters are moved as the rivers? » ¥ 

8 Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters 
are moved, like the rivers ; and he saith, I will 
go up, and will cover the earth ; I will destroy 
the city and the inhabitants thereof. 


2 Chapter xxv. 15.——> 2 Kings xxxiii. 29; 2 Ghistiges 
xxxv. 29; fulfilled presently. © So Chap. li. 11, 12; Nah. 
is yu 14: 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVI. ~ 

Verse 1. The word of the Lord which came to 
Jeremiah against the Gentiles—This is a general 
title to the collection of prophecies contained in this 
and the five following chapters, and refers to the 
denunciation of God’s judgments upon the countries 
round about Judea, namely, those of whom an enu- 
meration is made chap. xxv. 19-25. To some of 
these prophecies the date is annexed ; in others it is 
left uncertain. It is evident they were not all de- 
livered at the same time, and they seem to be here 
out of their proper place. In the Vatican and 
Alexandrian copies of the Septuagint, they follow 
immediately after chap. xxv. 13, where express men- 
tion is made of the book which Jeremiah had pro- 
phesied against all. the nations; which book is 
contained in this and the following chapters. It 
seems those who collected Jeremiah’s writings judg- 
ed proper, without confining themselves to the order 
of time, to join together all those prophecies which 
respected the Gentile nations, and were not imme- 
diately connected with the affairs of the Jews. 

Verse 2. Against Egypt, against the army of 
Pharaoh-necho—Pharaoh-necho was king of Egypt 
in Josiah’s time, and it was by his army that Josiah 
was killed at Megiddo, as is related 2 Kings xxiii. 
29, wheresee the note. That army was then march- 
ing under the conduct of Necho against the Medes 
and Babylonians, who, having by the capture of 

ineveh destroyed the Assyrian empire, had become 
formidable to the neighbouring states. Josiah op- 
posed it in its mar¢éh through the country, but was 
defeated, and received a wound in the battle which 

oved mortal. Necho continued his march after this 
ake defeated the Babylonians, took Carchemish, 
and securing it with a strong garrison, returned into 
his own country. Nabopolassar, the king of Baby- 


lon, observing that all Syria and Palestine had re- |’ 


voited on account of the reduction of Carchemish 

by the Egyptians, sent his son Nebuchadnezzar with 

an army to retake that city, and recover the revolted 

provinces. Necho marched with a powerful army 
510 


1 Heb, broken in pieces. 
vi. 25 ;.’xlix. 29. 
xlvii. 2; Dan. xi. 22. 


2 Heb. fled a flight—— Chapter 
® Dan. xi. 19. Tsai viii. 7; Chapter 


to oppose him; and it appears it was at the time 
when the Egyptian army lay along the banks of the 
Euphrates, waiting to oppose the entrance of Nebu- 
chadnezzar into Syria, that this prophecy was deli- 
vered, namely, as is here said, in the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim. ‘The two armies came to an engage 
ment near the city of Carchemish, and the event of 
the battle proved very disastrous to ‘the Egyptians, 


& 


who were routed with prodigious slaughter, as is. 


here foretold by the prophet in a very. animated 
style, and with great poetic energy and liveliness of 
colouring. 

Verses 3-6. Order ye the buckler, &e. —In these 
verses the mighty preparations of the Egyptians for 
war are described, which causes the prophet, who fore- 
sees the defeat, to express, as he does in the next two 
verses, “his astonishment at an event so contrary to 
what might have been expected; but he accounts 


for it by ascribing, it to the disposition of the Al- 


mighty, who had spread terror ll around, and had 
decreed that neither swiftness nor strength should 
avail the owners so as to save them from the impend- 
ing overthrow.”—Blaney. J have seen them dis- 
mayed and turned back—God had, in a vision, 
shown Jeremiah the army of the Egyptians diseom- 
fited’ and fleeing; and their mighty ones—Their 
most powerful warriors and valiant commanders; 
are beaten down, and are fled apace—Either fall in 
the battle, or flee away as fast as they can; for fear 
is round about—A panic fear hath seized the whole 
army. Let not the swift flee away—Let them not 
be able to escape from those that pursue them, but 
be either killed or taken. They shall stumb mile §c., 
toward the north by the river Euphrates—Which 
was northward from Egypt, and even from Judea: 
so Babylon is described as lying northward, being. 
situate upon that river. 

Verses 7-10. Who is this that cometh up as a 
flood—Here the king of Egypt is compared to a 
mighty river, the Nile, or the Euphrates, when it 
swells above its banks, ‘and th reatens to overwhelm. 
the country with ruin and desolation. And he saith, 

3 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


Pharaoh’s overthrow. 


> The prophet foretels 

agit’ 9 Come up, ye horses; and rage, 
ye chariots; and let the mighty: men 

come forth: ° the Ethiopians and ‘ the Libyans, 

that handle the shield; and the Lydians, ¢ that 

handle and bend the bow. 

10 For this is "the day of the Lord Gop of 
hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge 
him of his advetsaries: and ‘the sword shall 
devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk 
with their blood: for the Lord Gop of hosts 
* hath a sacrifice in the north country by the 
river Euphrates. 

11 'Go up, into Gilead; and take balm, ™O 


3 Heb. Cush, 4Heb, Put: g Isa. Ixvi. 19. 
6; Joel i. 15; ii. 1.——' Deut. xxxii. 42; Isa, xxxiv. Gea 
XXXiVs 65. Zeph, i. 7; Ezek. xxxix. 17. 


h Isa. xiii. 
K Isa, 


virgin, the daughter of Rgypt: in vain A. bed a 
shalt thou use many medicines ; Lk a ahi 
5 thou ® shalt not be cured. 

12 The nations have heard of thy shame, and 
thy cry hath filled the land: for the mighty 
man hath stumbled against the mighty, and 
they are fallen both togethier: 

13.4 The word that the Lorp spake to Jere- 
miah the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon should come and ° smite the land 
of Egypt. 

14 Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Mig- 
dol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: 


"1 Chap. viii. 22; li. 8——™ Isaiah xlvii. 1. 
shall be unto thee—— Ezek. xxx. 21. 


5 Heb. no cure 
© Tsa.-xix. 1; Chapter 


| xliii. 10, 11; Ezek. xxix. ; xxx. ; xxxii.; fulfilled about 571, 


—— 


I will go up, and will cover the earth—With my 
numerous armies; J will destroy the city—Carche- 
mish or Babylon; and the inhabitants thereof— 
Who shall not be able to withstand the powerful 


force I bring against them. Thus the prophet re- | 


presents him as beginning his march with all the 
ostentation and insolence of presumed success. 
Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots, &e.— 
Here he is exhibited calling aloud to the nations of 
which his army is composed, giving them the signal 
for action, and rousing them to deeds of desperate 
valour; but allin vain: for the time iscome for God 
to avenge himself of his ancient foes: they are doom- 
ed to slaughter, to fall a bloody sacrifice on the plains 
of the north. For, adds the prophet, verse 10, this 
is the day of the Lord God of hosts—That is, as it 
follows, the day of his vengeance. Hence, the day 
of the Lord is used in the New Testament to signify 
the day of judgment, of which all other days of 
vengeance are the earnests and forerunners. 'hat 
he may avenge himself of his adversaries—Of the 
idols of Egypt and’ their worshippers: the Egyp- 
tians were some of the first idolaters, and carried 
idolatry to its greatest height. And the sword shall 
devour, it shall be satiate, &c—These metapho- 
rieal expressions signify the very great slaughter 
which would be made at that time in the Egyptian 
army. For the Lord God hath a-sacrifice, &c.— 
The slaughter of men in battle, which is by way of 
punishment for their sins, is called a sacrifice to God, 
because it makes some kind of satisfaction and 
atonement to the divine justice. Sée the margin. 
Verses L1, 12. Go up into Gilead, and take bali 
—Gilead was famous for producing balm and such 
like healing gums: see note on chap. viii. 22. The 
prophet, alluding to the custom -of men’s going 
thither for relief in dangerous infirmities, ironically 
advises the Egyptians to try all the methods they 
ean think of to prevent that destruction that threat- 
_. ened them, but he signifies that all their endeavours 
~would be in vain. Compare chap. li.8. O virgin, 
the daughter of Egypt—Those cities or countries 
are called virgins which were never conquered. 
3 


Egypt was grown great by her conquests, particu- 
larly by the former battle at Carchemish, (see verse 
2,) and did not apprehend itself to be in any danger 
of being conquered. She nations have heard ‘of 
thy shame—Of thy armies being shamefully beaten 
and running away; for the mighty man hath stwm- 
bled against the mighty—When an army is once 
broken and disordered, multitudes are a hinderance 
one to another, and one part helps to destroy an- 
other. Thus the prophet concludes the first pro- 
phecy against Egypt, or, as he expresses it, the 
daughter of Egypt, by an apostrophe to her, ad- 
dressing’ her as a conquered nation, whose wound 
is pronounced incurable, ‘and disgrace universally 
known; forasmuch as the number of her warriors 
served only to augment the general disorder, and 
more effectually to destroy each other. 

Verse 13. The word that the Lord spake, &ce.— 
Here begins the second prophecy against Egypt, the 
exact time of the delivery of which we have no 
means of ascertaining; but the desolation foretold 
in it is undoubtedly the same with that predicted by 
Ezekiel, chaps. xxix., Xxx., xxxi., xxxii. And this 
came to pass in the twenty-seventh year of Jehoia- 
chin’s captivity, that is, the sixteenth year after the 
destruction of Jerusalem, as may be collected from 
Ezek. xxix. 17, where Nebuchadnezzar’s army is 
spoken of as having at that time suffered a great 
deal at the siege of Tyre; on which account the 
spoils of Egypt are promised them for their wages 
and indemnification: and the promise was acco 
ingly made good that same year. —Jos. Ant., lib. x. 
cap. 9. 

Wiries 14; 15. Publish in Migdol, and in Noph, 
and Tahpanhes—Concerning these three cities, see 
note on ch. xliy.1. The meaning is, publish this Py 
phecy over all the land of Egypt; or these thr 
places are named, because in them the Jews, who 
went into Egypt with Johanan, were chiefly settled. 
Say, Stand fast, and prepare thee—Prepare for 
war, and resolve to keep your ground, and not yield 
to the enemy: compare verses 2, 3. For the sword 
shall devour round about thee—The nations are de 

dll 


“ 
orl 


~~, +5 


Invasion and conquest of JEREMIAH. Egypt by the Chaldeans. 


A. M: 3397. say: .Ye, P Stand fast, and prepare 
B.C. 007 thee; for ¢the. sword shall. devour 
round about thee. 

15 Why are thy valiant men swept sing) 
they stood not, because the Lorn did drive 
them. 

16 He *made many to fall, yea, ‘one fell 
upon another: and they said, Arise, and 
let us go again to our own people, and to 
the land of our nativity, from the oppressing 
sword. 


———— 


P Verses 3, 4. ——1 Verse. 10.—* Hebrew, multiplied the faller. 


r Lev.. xxvi. 37. 


17 They did cry there, Pharaoh A.M. 3397. 
king of Egypt is but a noise; he hath ore | ve 
passed the time appointed. “ 

18 As I live, saith the King, * whose name is 
the Lorp of hosts, Surely as Tabor is among 
the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, °so 
shall he come. av A 

19 O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, 

7 furnish- thyself “to go into captivity:’ for 
Noph shall be waste and desolate saree an 
inhabitant. 


r¥ 


8 Isa. xlvii, 4; xlviii. 2; Chap. xlviii. 15.——t Chap. xlviii, 18. 
7 Heb. make thee instruments of captivity. "Isa. xx. 4, 


r 
stroyed around you, and you haye reason to expect 
that the sword will next reach you. Why are thy 
valiant men swept away y 2—* The Hebrew word 
vax, here rendered valiant, is sometimes spoken of 
God, as Gen, xlix. 24. Sometimes it is a title given 
to angels, as Psa. Ixxviii. 25; but the LXX. under- 
stand it hereof Apis, the idol of Egypt, which might 
properly be said to.be conquered when the nation, 
that had put themselves under his protection, was 
subdued.”—Lowth. And, instead of they stood not, 
because the Lord did drive them, as we translate the 
next clause, the LXX. add, o pooyor o exAeKtog o8 8K 
EMEWEV, OTL KUPLOG TapeAvoev avror, thy elect calf did 
not abide, because the Lord debilitated, literally, 
paralyzed, him. But it is not at all probable that 
this idol was here intended, but either of the mighty 
princes of Egypt; or, if the noun be singular, as 
Blaney understands it, reading, JY AN, thy mighty 
one, instead of, ran, thy mighty ones, then the 


king is probably meant. Neither the king himself, 


nor his valiant captains, could stand before Nebuchad- 
nezzar and the Chaldean army, because God dis- 
comfited them. It was.of God to destroy Egypt, 
and. when he works none can hinder him; when he 
strikes none can stand up against him, or stand be- 
fore him. 

Verses 16, 17. He made many to fall—Or, as the 
Vulgate renders Swid man, multiplicavite ruen- 
tes, he multiplied those falling, or more literally, 
the faller, as in the margin, the word being singular. 
Blaney connects this with the next clause, as the 
LXX. do, and reads the verse thus: “ He hath caused 
many to stumble, yea, to fall; they said therefore 
oie to another, Arise, and let us return to our peo- 
ple, and to our native country, because of the op- 
pressor’s sword.” These are either the words of the 
Egyptian allies, resolving to. return to their own 
countries, and not concern themselves any further 
with the affairs of Egypt; or else they are the words 
of the remains of the Egyptians, resolving to retire 
within their own borders, as thinking the Babylo- 
nians would not follow them thither. T'hey did ery, 
Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise—He is no 
more than an empty boaster: he has neglected the 
opportunities he ought to have laid hold on, and he 
is not prepared according to his appointment, 

512 


Verse 18. As I live saith the king, whose name is 
the Lord of hosts—He, before whom the mightiest 
kings on earth, though gods to us, are but-as grass- 
hoppers; he hath said and sworn what follows; 
Surely as Tabor, &c.—As surely as Taboris among 
the mountains and Carmel by the sea, so surely shall, 
the. conqueror of Egypt come. Or, though Egypt 
were as inaccessible as the top of Tabor, and begirt . 
with the sea like Carmel, yet the enemy should come 
upon -her, and make an entire conquest-of her. 
Houbigant paraphrases the clause thus, “As much as 
Tabor overtops all other mountains, so much shall 
the Chaldeans be superior to the Egyptians; and as 
the waves of the sea roar in vain at the foot of mount 
Carmel, so shall the Egyptians waves rage in vain.” 
Blaney understands the clause in nearly the same 
sense, observing, “’Tabor and Carmel were two of 
the most.considerable mountains in the land of 
Israel. Carmel formed the principal headland all ' 
along the sea-coast. Nebuchadnezzar is compared 
to these on account of his superiority over all 
others.” 

Verse 19. O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt— 
Blaney translates it, O inhabiting daughter of 
Egypt, observing, that an antithesis seems to be de- 
signed between nawr, inhabiting, and the act of mi- 
gration, which was to follow. Countries and cities 
are often represented under the emblem of women, 
especially in medals and pictures. Furnish thyself 
to. go into captivity—“ The expression is ironical, 
implying that, instead of the rich and goodly furni- 
ture wherein she did pride herself, she should be 
carried away captive, naked and bare, and wanting 
all manner of conveniences.” The Hebrew of this 
clause seems to be more literally translated in the 
margin than in the text; the word *4, there ren- 
dered instruments, meaning either the carri “s 
the trunks and boxes that were to hold the thi 
be removed. Blaney reads it, Get ready thy oe 
page Sor removing. For Noph shall be waste, &e. 
—Noph in particular. shall be wholly depopulated 
and Jaid waste. This place, called also Memphis, 
was accordingly laid waste some time after this, and 
remained some years in a state of desolation. ‘ It. 
was, indeed, afterward rebuilt, but never recovered 
its ancient splendour. : + 

3 


Destruction of Egypt 


_ A. M, 3397. 
B.C. 607. 


er 4 


~Yout of the north. 


her like § fatted bullocks; for they also are 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


by Nebuthadnezzar’s arm ye 


20 Egypt ts like a very fair * heifer, 
but destruction cometh; it cometh 


21 Also her hired men are in the: midst of: 


turned back, and are fled away together: they 
did not stand, because * the day of their cala- 
mity was come upon them, and: the time. of 
their visitation. 

22 * The voice thereof shall go like a serpent ; 
for they shall march with an army, and come 
against her with axes, as hewers of wood. 

23 They shall ” ot down her forest, saith the 


Lorp, though it cannot be searched ; A. M. 3397. 
because they are more than ° div i 
grasshoppers, and are innumerable. 

24 'The daughter of Egypt shall be confound- 
ed; she shall be delivered into the hand of ‘the 
people of the north. 

25 The Lorp of hosts, the God of, Israel, 
saith ; Behold, I will punish the ° multitude 
of ° No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, ‘ with their 
gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and all 
them that trust in him : 

26 & And I will deliver them into the hand of 
those that seek their lives, and into the hand of 


x So Hosea x. LL. y ¥ Chapter i. 14 ;: xlvil. 2; Verses 6, 10. 
® Heb. bullocks of the stall. z Psalm xxxvii. 13; Chap. 1. 27. 
a Isa, xxix. 4.——» Isa. x. 34. © Judg. vi. 5. 


| xxx. 14, 15,16; Nah. iii. 8, 


° Or, nourisher. 10 Heb, Amon.——* Ezek. 
‘ Chap. xlil. 12, 13; Ezek. xxx. 
13,——s Chap. ‘xliv, 30; Ezek. xxxii. 11. 


4 Chap. i. 15. 


Verses 20, 21. Baur is like a very fair heifer— 
“Tn the foregoing verse the prophet compared Egypt 
to a delicate young woman.._ Here he resembles her 
to a fat and well-favoured heifer. In which compari- 


son, as Grotius not improbably conjectures, there is | 


an allusion to-their god Api’, which was a bull, re- 
markable for his beauty and the fine spots or marks 
he had about him.”—Lowth. But destruction com- 
eth, &c.—The Hebrew is very emphatical, n)¥: yp 
w2 N23, destruction from the north, it cometh, ct 
cometh. Also her hired men—Her mercenary sol- 
diers ; are in the midst of her like fatted bullocks— 
Bullocks fatted up, and fit for the slaughter: or they 
are inactive, and as little courageous as. fatted bul- 
locks; foreign or hired troops never fighting with 
such spirit and resolution as those manifest who are 
defending their own country and property. They 
did not stand—Namely, in the fight; because the 
day of their calamity was come—Because the time 
when God resolved to punish them, and bring calam- 
ity upon them, was arrived, even the time of their 
visitation, as it is expressed chap. |. 27. 

Versés 22, 23. The voice thereof shall go like a 
serpent— That is, her (Egypt’s) voice shall be low 
and inarticulate through fear. This passage seems 
to be an imitation of Isa. xxix. 4, where we find the 
same threat denounced against Jerusalem, namely, 
T'hy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy 
voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit, out 
of the ground. ‘The cause which is assigned is the 
same in both places, the irresistible attack of power- 
ful enemies.”—Dr. Durell. See note on Isaiah xxix. 
4, For they shall march with an army—For the 
Chaldeans shall come with powerful forces; with 
axes, as hewers of wood—As if they came to fell 
timber ina wood. They shall cut down her forest 
—Here Egypt is compared to a forest, either for the 
multitude of cities and their stately buildings, or of 
people in that country; and its destruction is de- 
scribed by the metaphor of cutting down the trees 
of a forest. Though it cannot be searched, &ce.— 
Though the forest be very thick, and the trees 
thereof innumerable. Because they are more than | 

Vor. TT. ( 33 ) 


the PER pr ory wres the army of the Chal- 
deans shall be as numerous as the inhabitants of 
Egypt. In other words, though the cities and inha- 
bitants of Egypt be never so numerous and large; 
yet the Chaldean army shall plunder and destroy 
them, because their number is proportionable to such 
an enterprise. Armies are often compared to grass- 
hoppers and such like insects, both for their multi-- 
tudes, and because they make a general consumption, 
grasshoppers devouring all before them, wherever 


, they come: see Judg. vi. 5; vil. 12; Joel ii. 4, 5. 


Verses 25, 26. Behold, I will punish the multitude 
of No—Hebrew, 831}, Amon of No, which, says 
Blaney, “is the literal translation, and we need seek 
for no other.” Amon, or Ammon, as the word is 
generally written, was the name by which the Egyp- 
tians called Jupiter, who had a celebrated temple at 
Thebes, famous for its hundred gates in Homevr’s 
time, and supposed to be the same city with No here 
mentioned. Here Jupiter was worshipped in a dis- 
tinguished manner, on which account the place was 
called Diospolis, the city of Jupiter, which name 
the LXX. have put for No, Ezek. xxx. 14-16. If 
therefore No be Thebes, or Diospolis, as it seems 
evident it is, then Ammon of No signifies the deity 
of the place, the T'heban Jupiter, as Herodotus 
styles him, lib. ii. cap. 42. As, on the other hand, 
NNN NI, No-ammon, Nah. iii. 8, should be rendered, 
No of Ammon, which exactly corresponds with the 
Greek Avoorodic, or, city of Jupiter.. But very dif- 
ferent from these is the term, §3 })07 Nx, used Ezek. 
xxx. 15, which‘indeed signifies the multitude, or nu- 
merous inhabitants of No; although, from the simili- 
tude of the words }1Ds and }19n, Amon and Hamon, 
our translators, and others besides them, have con- 
founded them together. Some have supposed No to 
mean Alexandria, the great emporium of Egypt ; 
and the Chaldee and Vulgate have rendered it so. 
But Alexandria was not built till ages after the time 
when Jeremiah prophesied: and it does not appear 
that there had been before any city, at least any con- 
siderable one, standing upon the spot which the 
founder made the object of his choice. 

513 


* 


The prophet predicts 


by - aay? Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, 

- “and into the hand of, his servants: 
and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the 
days of old, saith the Lorn. 

27 4% ‘ But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, 
and be not dismayed, O Israel: for behold, I 
will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from 
the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall 


JEREMIAH. 


4 . 


return, and-be in rest and at ease, A- ma cf 
and none shall make him afraid. =— 

28 Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith 
the Lorp: for I am with thee; for I will make 
a full end of all the nations whither I have 
driven thee: but I will not make * a full end of 
thee, but correct thee in measure; yet willI 
1 not leave thee wholly unpunished. 


b Ezek. xxix. 11, 13, 14——i Isa. xli. 13, 14; xliil. 5; xliv. 2; 
Chap. xxx. 10, 11. 


k Chap. x. 24; xxx. 11——" Or, not utterly cut thee off. 


And Pharaoh and Egypt, with their gods and 
their kings—The same divine vengeance, which 
falls upon the idol Ammon and his worshippers, shall 
reach the rest of Egypt with their respective idols 
and governors. “When an idolatrous nation,” says 
Blaney, “is doomed to destruction, God is said to 
execute vengeance upon the idols of the country: 
see chap. xliii. 12, 13. Accordingly, here Ammon 
of No, the principal deity, and Pharaoh, the princi- 
pal man, among the Egyptians, are marked out in 
the first place as the primary objects of divine visita- 
tion; then follows, in the gross, Egypt with all her 
gods, and all her kings ; which latter term is ex- 
plained to include both Pharaoh himself, and those 
subordinate rulers who were dependant-upon him 


for the rank and authority they held. And after- 
ward it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old— 


At the end of forty years Egypt was to begin to re- 


cover itself, as Ezekiel foretels, chap. xxix. 13. 
Verses 27, 28. But fear not thou, O my servant 
Jacob; for I will make a full end of all the nations 
whither, &c.—See notes on chap. xxx. 10, 11, from 
whence these two verses are taken, containing a 
comfortable .promise to the Jews, that God will not 
make an utter destruction of them as he hath done 
of several other nations, against which the prophets 
have denounced his judgments ; but will still pre- 
servea remnant of them, to whom he will perform 
the promises made to their fathers: see. also note on 


| chap. xxx. 16, 17. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


This chapter contains the short but terrible doom of the Philistines, and of Tyre and Zidon. 
from the:north should invade and ravage their country in a most terrible manner, 1-5. 


It is foretold, (1,). That forces 
(2,) That the war should continue 


long, and be very ruinous, notwithstanding all endeavours to put an end to it, 6, 7. 


A. M. 3397. 


THE word of the Lorp that came 
B. C. 607. 


to Jeremiah the prophet *against 
the Philistines, > before that Pharaoh - smote 
1Gaza. 


2 Thus saith the Lorp; Behold, A. M. ae 
‘ . C. 60 

°waters rise up ‘out of the north, 

and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall 

overflow the land, and *all that is therem; the 


“Chep. xxv. 20; Ezek. xxv. 15,16; Zeph. ii. 4, 5——> Amos 
is 6, Te 8. 


1 Heb. Azzah. ¢ Isa, vill. 7; Chap 


. xlvi. 7, 8.4 Chap. i. 
14; xlvi. 20. 


2 Heb. the fulness thereof. \ 


NOTES ON CH APTER XLVII. 

Verse 1. The word of the Lord—against the Phi- 
listines—“ Among the other nations, who were 
doomed to suffer by the hostilities of N ebuchadnez- 
zar, the Philistines are enumerated, chap. xxv. 20; 
and the calamities foretold in this present chapter 
most probably befell them during the long siege of 
Tyre, when that prince ravaged their country, in 
order, as it is said, verse 4, to cut off from Tyre and 
Sidon all chance of assistance from that quarter. 
But as no history, sacred or profane, has mentioned 
the taking of Gaza by the king of Egypt, there is no 
means of ascertaining the precise date of the deli- 
very of this prophecy.” Before that Pharaoh 
smote Gaza—“Some have supposed the Pharaoh 
here spoken of to be Pharaoh-necho, and that he 


subdued Gaza after the battle of Megiddo, (2 Kings | 


514 


xxili. 29,) when the whole country round submitted 
to his victorious arms. Others have thought that it 
was Pharaoh-hophra, who, having marehed out of 
Egypt to the relief of Jerusalem, when besieged by 
the Chaldeans, in the ninth or tenth year-of Zede- 


kiah, thought proper to retire again on the approach - 
-of the enemy toward him, (chap. xxxvii. 5, 7,) but, 


on his return, fell upon Gaza, and pillaged i it. All 
this, however, is no better than mere conjecture.”— 
Blaney. 

Verses 2, 3. Behold, waters rise out of the north— 
Waters sometimes signify multitudes of people and 
nations, Rev. xvii. 15; sometimes great and threaten- 
ing calamities, Psa. Ixix, 1, these waters mean both. 
By the north, in this prophecy, the country of the 
Chaldeans is intended, from whence it is here fore- 


told an army should come and overflow the ansaise ; 


( 33* ) 


the doom of the Philistines. __ 


: 


Tyrus and Zidon 


—— 


A, M. 3397. city, and them that dwell therein: 

B. C. 607. ' 

—____ then the men shall cry, and all the 
inhabitants of the land shall howl. 

3 At the ° noise of the stamping of the hoofs 
of his strong horses, at the rushing of his cha- 
riots, awd at the rumbling of his wheels, the 
fathers shall not look back to ¢heir children for 


feebleness of hands ; 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


4 


threatened with destruction. 


4 Because of the day that cometh to ia au. 
spoil all the Philistines, and to cut off ———— 
from f Tyrus and Zidon every helper that re- 
maineth: for the Lorn will spoil the Philistines, 
® the remnant of ‘the country of * Caphtor. 

5 ' Baldness is come upon Gaza ; * Ashkelon 
is cut off with the remnant of their valley: 


how long wilt thou ' cut thyself? 


¢ Chap. viii. 16; Nah. iii. 2. € Chap. xxv. 22.—— Ezek. xxv. 
16; Amos i. 8; ix. 7.——* Heb. the isle. ——» Gen. x. 14, 


i Amos i. 7» Mic. i, 16; Zeph. ii. 4, 7;\Zech. ix. 5k Chap. 
xxv. 20. 1 Chap. xvi. 6; xli. 5; xlviii. 37. 


eas 


a deluge, spreading devastation and destruction 
everywhere. At the noise of the stamping, &c.— 
The word nuyw, here rendered stamping, occurs no- 
where else in the Hebrew Scriptures.. The LXX. 
render it, opuyc; impetus, force, rushing along: the 
Syriac and Chaldee, by words that respectively de- 
note a progressive motion. “But Grotius,” says 
Blaney, “seems to have expressed it most happily, 
who has rendered noyw ‘npn, a quadrupedante 
sono: having in view, no doubt, that line of Virgil, 
En. viii. 596. 


Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum. 


We may therefore render it, At the galloping sound, 
or, al the sound of the galloping,” of the hoofs of his 


strong horses—Hebrew, v'V1%, of his mighty ones ; | 


namely, horses.. At the rushing of his chariots, the 
rumbling of his wheels—Blaney unites these two 
particulars in one, and reads, “ At the rattling of the 
multitude of his wheels as he drove along.” ‘T'he 
Fathers shall not look back to their children—To 
provide for their safety, or so much as to see what 
becomes of them; for feebleness of hands—Their 
bodily vigour being dissolved, or relaxed, through 
the impression made by fear on their minds, which 
shall be such as to incapacitate them from exerting 
their strength to any eflicacious purpose. 

Verse 4. To cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every 
helper, &e.—The siege of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar 
Was an action famous in the histories of that age, the 
siege lasting thirteen years. Zidon was partaker of 
the same fate with Tyre, both in prosperity and ad- 
versity: see Isa. xxiii. 2,4. And her destruction is 
joined with that of Tyre by Ezek. chap. xxviii. The 
remnant of the country of Caphtor—Or, the isle of 
Caphtor ; called the remnant of the Philistines, 
Am. i. 8; and the remnant of the sea-coast, Ezek. 
xxv. 16. The expression denotes either a colony 
transplanted from Caphtor, or else that, small re- 
mainder of the Philistines, after they had been almost 
all destroyed in former times, according to the judg- 
ments denounced against them by Amos, chap. i. 8, 
and Isa. xiv. 19, &¢., Caphtor, or Caphtorim, were 
the ancient inhabitants of Palestine: see Deut. ii. 23. 
The Caphtorim and Casluhim were two neighbour- 
ing nations, and nearly related to each other, being 
both descended from Misraim the father of the 
Egyptians: see Gen. x. 13, 14; which may be the 
reason why Moses there derives the pedigree of the 
Philistines from the latter of these two. 

3 


The an- | 


cients generally suppose Caphtor to be the same 
with Cappadocia. These two nations might go out 
of Egypt, their native soil, and settle themselves in 
Cappadocia, where they passed. under the general 
appellation of Caphtorim, and afterward return back 
to their own native country, and settle in Palestine. 

Verse 5. Baldness is come upon Gaza; how long 
wilt thou cut thyself, &¢.—Under great calamities, 
and for the loss of any near kindred, it was usual for 
men to express their grief by shaving their heads, 
and cutting their flesh. Instead of Ashkelon is cut 
off, &c., Blaney reads, Ashkelon is put to silence, 
observing, that “silence likewise is expressive of 
great affliction. Thus Job’s friends are said to have 
sat with him ‘seven days and seven nights upon the 
ground without addressing a word to him, because 
they saw his grief was very great, Job ii. 13. And 
so the Hebrew word here used, 773, is to be under- 
stood, (Isa. xv. 1,) of Moab’s being made speechless 
with grief and astonishment the night that its cities 
were spoiled: see chap. xlviii. 2.” With the rem- 
nant of their valley—Instead of this interpretation, 
the LXX. read oc karatouror Evaxiu, the remnant of 
the Anakims. And this reading may be thought to 
derive some countenance from what is said Josh. xi. 
22. But we shall see reason to prefer the present 
reading of the text, if we consider the situation of 
Gaza and Ashkelon, about twelve miles distant from 
each other, near the sea, in a valley, of whose beauty 
and fertility an accurate traveller has given the fol- 
lowing description: “ We passed this day through the 
most pregnant and pleasant valley that ever eye be- 
held. On theright hand a ridge of high mountains; 
(whereon stands Hebron;) on the left hand the 
Mediterranean sea; bordered with continued hills, 
beset with variety of fruits. The champaign be- 
tween, about twenty miles over, full of flowery hills, 
ascending leisurely, and not much surmounting their 
ranker valleys; with groves of olives, and other 
fruits, dispersedly adorned.”—Sandys’s Travels, 
book iii. p. 150.. The author adds, that in his time, 
“this wealthy bottom (as are all. the rest) was, for 
the most part, uninhabited, but only for a few small 
and contemptible. villages”—a state of desolation, 
owing to the oppressions of a barbarous and ill- 
advised government. But we may easily conceive 
the populousness that must have prevailed there in 
its better days, especially if we consider the power 
which the Philistines once possessed, and the armies 
they brought into the field; although their country 

515 


T'he prophet predicts 


JEREMIAH. 


Moab’s destruction. 


I 
Le ——————————————————— ee 


a.M.3397. 6 O thou ™sword of the Lorn, 
BO. OF how, long will it be ere thou be 
quiet ? * put. up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, 
and be still. 


m Deut. xxxii. 41 ; Ezek. xxi. 3, 4, 5.——* Heb. gather thyself. 


was scarcely forty English miles in length, and 
much longer than it was broad.—Blaney. 

Verses 6,7. O thou sword of the Lord—By the 
sword of the Lord, war is here intended, with which, 
as a great instrument of calamity and destruction, 
God punishes the crimes of his enemies, and pleads 
the cause of his people. Some have understood the 
prophet as speaking in the words of the Philistines, 
complaining of the havoc which the sword made 
~ among them; but however weary they might be of 
the war, and desirous of its ceasing, it is not likely 
they should see the hand of God in it, or term it his 
sword. ‘The words are rather’to be considered as 
the lamentation of the prophet, (and it is a most pa- 


CHAPTER XLVIIL 


7 °How can it be quiet, seeing the A. M. 3397. 
B. C. 607. 
Lorp hath ™ given it a charge against 
Ashkelon, and against the sea-shore? there 
hath he ° appointed it. 


5 Heb. how canst thou ? n Ezek. xiv. 17.— Mic. vi. 9. 
£ a 


thetic and animated one,) over the miseries with 
which God, in his just displeasure, was punishing the 
nations for their sins. How can it be quiet, seeing 
the Lord hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, 

&c.—Here the prophet returns an answer to the 
foregoing inquiry, importing, that the havoc made 
by the sword was the effect of God’s irreversible 
purpose and decree. He gives the sword its com- 
mission, and it slays when and where he appoints, 
and continues to destroy a longer or shorter time, as 
he determines. When it is drawn, it will not "be 
sheathed till it has fulfilled its charge. As God’s 
word, so his rod and his sword shall accomplish that 
for which he sends them. s 


In this chapter, which concerns the Moabites, the prophet, (1,) Foretels, that a dreadful destruction should come upon them, 


and extend to all parts of their land, 1-6, 8, 21-25, 34: 


that the Chaldeans should shortly and unexpectedly invade their 


country, destroy them with great fury, force some to flee away, carry multitudes captive, with their idols, and lay the land 


desolate, 7-12, 14-16, 40-45, 
miseries, 17-19, 33-39. 


. That their joys should be turned into mourning, while their neighbours should bewail their 
(2,) He sets farth the causes of these calamities, namely, their pride, carnal security, and 


idolatry, 7, 11, 14, 29, 35; and their contempt of, and enmity.against God and his people ; 20, 27, 30, 42. (3,) Pro- 


mises their restoration after the Chaldean captivity, 47. 


be lino » AGAINST * Moab thus saith the | 
Lorp of hosts, the God of Israel; 
Wo unto Nebo! for it is spoiled; * Kir fash 
is confounded and taken: 1 Misgab is con- 
founded and na hel 


5. 


2° There shall be no more praise A, M. 3399. 
of Moab: in * Heshbon they have de- 0 Sopa 
vised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off 
from being a nation. Also thou shalt * be cut 
down, O Madmen; the sword shall 5 pursue thee. 


a mers xv. ; xvi.; Chapter xxv. 21; xxvii. 3; Ezekiel xxv. 
9; Amos ii. 1,2.——» Numbers xxxii. 38; xxxiii. 47; Isaiah 
xv, 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVIII. 

Verse 1. Against Moab—Hebrew, 3x10, To, or, 
concerning Moab, thus saith the Lord of hosts— 
This prophecy concerning the Moabites, as also the 
following which respect the Ammonites, Edomites, 
and other neighbouring nations, are supposed to 
have been fulfilled during the siege of Tyre by Ne- 
buchadnezzar : see note on chap. xlvii.1. Many ex- 
pressions and passages are found in this chapter 
which Jeremiah seems to have borrowed from a 
prophecy of Isaiah, chap. xv., and xvi. , concerning a 
like calamity which befell Moab, in all probability 
when Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, seized upon their 
cities and fortresses, and ravaged their country, on 
his march through it to invade the kingdom of Is- 
rael. By comparing the parallel places much light 
may be mutually thrown upon them. Kiriathaim, 

516 


¢ Numbers xxxii. 37." Or, the high place.——4 Isa. xvi. 14. 
© Isa. xv. 4——* Or, be brought to silence, Isa. xv. 1——* Heb. 
go after thee. 


one of the cities of Moab, here mentioned, was given 
by Moses to the Reubenites, as appears by Josh. xiii. 
10, but the Moabites afterward recovered the pos- 
session of it. Blaney thinks the word which our 
translators have rendered Misgab, as if it were the 
proper name of a city, is rather to be. considered as 
an appellative, especially as it has an article prefixed. 
He therefore renders it, the high fortress, observing 
that it may either mean 'Kiriathaim, before mention- 
ed, or any other high fortress of Moab. ' 
Verses 2-6. There shall be no more praise of 
Moab—The glory of Moab shall be contemned, as 
Isaiah speaks, chap.xvi. 14. Every thing for which 
it was famous shall be destroyed. Jn Heshbon they 
have devised evil against it—Heshbon was the capi- 
talcity of the Moabites: when the Chaldeans made 


| themselves masters of Heshbon, a place of greatim- 
3 


Invasion of Moab 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


by the Chaldeans, 


A.M, 3399. 3 ‘A voice of crying ‘shall be from 
B. C. 605. ; a 

——_— Horonaim, spoiling and great de- 
struction. 


4 Moab is destroyed ; 
caused a cry to be heard. 

5 § For in the going up of Luhith + continual 
weeping shall go up; for in the going down 
of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of 
destruction. 

6 "Flee, save your lives, and be like ‘the 
* heath in the wilderness. 

7 % For because thou hast trusted in thy 
works and in thy treasures, thou shalt also 
be taken: and * Chemosh shall go forth into 
captivity with his.’ priests and his princes 
together. 

8 And ™the spoiler shall come upon every 
city, and ho city shall escape: the valley also 


~her little ones have 


f Verse 5.—— Isaiah xv. 5. 4 Heb. weeping with weeping: 
h Sp li. 6 5 Or, a naked tree. i Ch. xvii. Num. 
xxi. 2b; Fads xi. 24; Isa. xlvi. 1,2; Chap. xliii. 12. 


portance, they consulted how to carry on their con- 
quests over the rest of the country. T'hou shalt be 
cut down, or, brought to silence, Isa. xv.1. O Mad- 
men—A city inMoab. Her-little ones.have caused a 
cry to be heard—Or, sent forth a cry. Both small 
and great were involved in this calamity, but the 
word Vy, signifies great as well as little: and the 
Chaldee paraphrast renders it here lords ; which 
seems to be the sense in which it is used. - For in 
the going up, &c.—The ascent of Luhith is in tears, 


and their. weeping is increased, because, in the de-| 


scent of Horonaim, the enemies have heard the cry 
of the sufferers: see Isa. xv. 5. Fleé, §c., and be 
like the heath—Resort to the most solitary places, 
and continue in obscurity where no coon can find 
you out. 

Verses 7-10. Chemosh shall go, &e. —Chemosh 
was the idol of the Moabites, Num. xxi. 29. Fhe 
valley also shall perish and the plain—Those who 
live in the country, with their flocks and pastures, 
shall be involved in the same calamity with the in- 
habitants of the cities. Give wings to Moab, &ce.— 
It is not a common speed that ean deliver him from 
that imminent danger which threatens him. Cursed 
be he, &c.—God executes his judgments upon sin- 
ners by the ministry of men, and those oftentimes as 
great sinners as they who suffer by them. He had 
declared by Jeremiah his purpose of making the 
Chaldeans his instruments in punishing the Jews and 
the neighbouring countries: see chap. xxv. 9. And 
it is here signified, that they would expose them- 
selves to the divine wrath and curse if they spared 
Moab, and did not execute judgment upon it effect- 
ually. 

Verses ll, 12. Moab hath been at ease—Or, hath 
been opulent, as the Chaldee renders }3xw, from his | 

3 ' 


shall perish, and the plain shall be A. fe ee 
destroyed, as the Lorp hath spoken. 

9 "Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee 
and get away: for the cities thereof shall be 
desolate, without any to dwell therein. 

10° Cursed be he that doeth the work of the 
Lorp ° deceitfully, and cursed be he that keep- 
eth back his sword from blood. 

11 “ Moab hath been at eas¢ from his youth, 
and he ” hath settled on his lees;and hath not 
been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither 
hath he gone into. captivity: therefore his 
taste 7remained in him, and his scent is not 
changed. 

12 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lorp, that I will send unto him wanderers that 


shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his 


vessels, and break their bottles. 


1 Chap. xlix. 3——™ Chap. vi. 26; Verse 18. 0 Psa. lv. 63 
Verse 28. © Judges v. 23; 1 Sam. xv, 3,9; 1 Kings xx. 42. 
6 Or, negligently.—pP Fae i, 12.——? Heb. ' stood. 


youth—Moab was an ancient kingdom, and had en- 
joyed great tranquillity, though a small country and 
surrounded with potent neighbours. It had now 
been in a state of peace and prosperity since the 
time of Shalmaneser, having experienced no particu- 
lar calamity since the judgment foretold by Isaiah, 
and inflicted by that prince; so that there were forty 
years between that affliction and this here spoken of. 
The comparison between the state of the Moabites 
and that of wine is elegant, and is kept up with great 
propriety. . All wines, it is said, ought to be kept for 
some time upon their lees, in order to preserve their 
strength and flavour; on which account the lees are 
expressed by a word that signifies the preservers. 
Wine is apt to be damaged by being drawn off too 
soon into other vessels. By this allegory, therefore, 
Moab is represented as having enjoyed singular ad- 
vantages from having constantly remained in his 
own country ever since he became a people. And 
the prophet’s words imply, that the Moabites had in- 
creased in pride and insolence in proportion to the 
duration of their national tranquillity and prosperity. 
Behold, saith the Lord, I will send unto him wan- 
derers—The Chaldean soldiers, that come out of a 
foreign country. These shall make a prey of him. 
and carry off as much of his wealth as they can, and 
spoil the rest. Blaney thinks the allegory begun in 
the preceding verse, is here continued and accord- 
ingly renders (yy), tilters, observing, that the 
Chaldeans, who are here designed, “should lower the 
vessels of Moab, namely, the cities, and empty them ; 
and also break to pieces their bottles or pitchers, 
that is, destroy the lesser towns and villages, de- 
pendant on the cities; to which the bottles, or pitch- 
ers, answer, being filled with the redundancy of the 
larger vessels,” 
517 


The joy of Moab 


JEREMIAH. 


turned into mourning. 


A. M. 3399. 13 And Moab shall be ashamed of: 
’ 4Chemosh, as the house of Israel 
‘was ashamed of *Beth-el their confidence. 

14 How say ye, ‘We are. mighty and 
strong men for the war ? 

15 * Moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her 
cities, and ®his chosen young men are * gone 
down to the slaughter, saith ¥ the King, whose 
name is the Lorn of hosts. 

16 The calamity of Moab ts near to come, 
and his affliction hasteth fast. 

17 All ye that are about him bemoan him; 
and all ye that know his name, say, % How is 
the strong staff broken, and the beautiful rod! 

18 * Thou daughter that dost inhabit,” Dibon, 
come down from ¢hy glory, and sit in thirst; 
for ° the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, 
and he shall destroy thy strong holds. 

19 O %inhabitant of 4 Aroer, *stand by the 
way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her 
that escapeth, and say, What is done ? 


down: ‘howl and cry; tell ye it in “a ase. 
s Arnon, that Moab is spoiled, a 

21 And judgment is come upon. * the plain 
country ; upon Holon, and upon eres a 
upon Mephaath, 

22 And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and 
upon Beth-diblathaim, 

23 And upon Kiriathaim, and upon, Beth- 
gamul, and upon Beth-meon, 

24 And upon ' Kerioth, and upon ‘Boz, 
and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far 
or neat. 

25 *'The horn of Moab is cut off, and his 
larm is broken, saith the Lorn. 

26 9 ™ Make ye him drunken ; for he mag- 
nified himself against the Licks : Moab also 
shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall 
in derision. 

27 For "was not Israel a derision unto 
thee? °was he found among thieves? for 
since thou spakest of him, thou ' skippedst for 


joy. 


20 Moab is PeINNRS for it is broken 
fn xi. 24; 1 Kings sxi. 7. + Hosea x. 6.——* 1 Kings 
xii, 29. t Isaiah xvi. 6," Verses 8; 9, 18. 8 Heb. the 
choice of ——* Chap. }. 27. ¥ Chap. xlvi. 18; li. 57. z Isa. 
ix. 4; xiv. 4,5. tJsaiah xli. 7; Chap. xlvi. 19.——> Num. 


Xx. 30; Isa, xv. 2. 


7 
¢ Verse 8.——® Heb. inhabitress. 
iv. 13, 16—— Isa, xvi. 7.——8 N 
i Verse 41; Amos li. 2. 
m Chap. xxv. 15, 27. 
movedst thyself. 


4 Deut ii. 36.——e 1 Sam. 
umbers xxi, 13.—} Verse 8. 
k Psa. lxxv. 10:——! Ezek. xxx. 23. 
» Zeph. ii. 8——» Chap. ii. 26.——*® Or, 


Verses 13-17. And Moab shall .be ashamed of 
Chemosh, &c.—They shall be disappointed in their 
expectations of succour from their tutelary idol, as 
the ten tribes have been in the trust they reposed in 
the calf they worshipped at Bethel. Moab is spoiled, 
and gone up out of her cities—The words out of 
are not in the Hebrew; therefore some render this 
clause, Moab is spoiled, and. the cities to which she 
ascended ; that is,those situated on high eminences. 
All ye that are about him bemoan him—His calami- 
ties are’ so great as must needs make all who see him, 
or have heard of his former fame and glory, bewail 
his misfortunes. How is the strong staff broken—A 
staff, or rod, is an emblem of authority, and thence 
comes to signify a kingdom, or government, espe- 
cially such a one as oppresses its subjects, or neigh- 
bours, Isa. ix. 4, and x. 5. 

Verses 18-25. T'houw daughter that dost inhabit 
Dibon—Thou that art éxalted in pride, and rendered 

_effeminate through luxury: Dibon being one of the 
chief cities of Moab ; come down from thy glory, and 
sit in thirst—Submit to a mean condition, wherein 
thou shalt feel the want of all the conveniences of 
life. The Hebrew language expresses a barren land, 
which yields no sustenance by a thirsty ground, 
Psa. Ixiii. 2; Isa. xxxv. 7; Ezek.xix. 13. O inhabit- 

ant of Aroer—A town in the borders of Moab; stand 

by the way and espy, &c.—The prophet describes 

the great concern and fear that were upon them, 

which made them hearken to every little report that 
518 


was stirring. Howl and cry—There will be just 
cause for a general lamentationy Judgmentis come 
upon the plain country, &c.—The inhabitants of the 
low grounds have suffered the punishment they de- 
served. . The horn of Moab is cut off—The author- 
ity and power of Moab are taken away. This isa 
metaphorical expression, taken from horned beasts, 
whose power to defend themselves, and injure other 
creatures, lies chiefly in their horns. And his arm 
is broken—His strength is exhausted, the arm of 
man being the instrument whereby he chiefly dis- 
covers his strength. 

Verses 26, 27. Make ye him drunken—God’s judg- 
ments are often represented under the metaphor of 
a cup of intoxicating liquors: see note on chap. 
xxv. 15. Moab also shall wallow in his vomit—The 
judgments. which God sends upon him shall expose 
him to the scorn of his enemies; just as a drunken 
man is the object of men’s laughter and derision. 
For was not Israel a derision unto thee ?—Didst not 
thou insult over the calamities of the Jews when 
they were carried away captive? Israel is here put 
for Judah. Was he found among thieves ?2—Though 
the sins Of Israel were greatin the sight of God, yet, 
as he had done no injury to the Moabites, there was 
no reason why they should use him with the same 
despite and contempt as if he had been a common 
thief and robber, whom all men think they have 
a right to abuse. For since thou spakest of him, 
thou skippedst for joy—This translation, Blaney ob 

3 


Priae and vdolatry 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


Moab’s destruction. 


Fae: 7 28 O ye that dwell in Moab, leave 

—-— the cities, and? dwell in the rock, and 
be like 4the dove that maketh her nest: in the 
sides of the hole’s mouth. 

29 We have heard the "pride of Moab, (he is ex- 
ceeding proud,) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, 
and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart. 

30 T know his wrath, saith the Lorp ; but it 
shall not be so; * his lies shall not so effect it. 

3Ll Therefore * will I howl for Moab, and I 
will cry out*for all Moab; my heart shall 
mourn for the men of Kir-heres. 

32°"O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee 
with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants are gone 


over the sea, they reach even to the A.M. ae 
sea of Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon 
thy summer-fruits and upon thy vintage. 

33 And *joy and gladness is taken from the 
plentiful field, and from the land of Moab; and 
I have caused wine to fail from the wine- 
presses : none shall tread with shouting ; ¢heir 
shouting shall be no shouting. 

34 ¥ From the cry of Heshbon even unto Ele- 
aleh, and even unto ‘Jahaz, have they uttered 
their voice, * from Zoar even unto Horonaim, 
as a heifer of three years old: for the ‘waters 
also of Nimrim shall be ™ desolate. 

35 Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, 


R Psalm lv.\6, 7; Verse 9.——4 Can: ii. 14, Isa. xvi. 6; 
STsa, xvi. 6; Chap. |. 36.——" Or, those on whom he 
sot (Heb. has bars) do i right. 


t Isa. xv., 53 xvi! V, LI. u Isa. xvi. 8. x Tsa. xvi. 10; 
Joel i. 22. y Isaiah xv. 4, 6. @Tsaiah xv. 5; Verse 5. 
12 Heb. desolations. | 


serves, seems quite foreign to the purpose, and does 
not accord with the literal meaning of the Hebrew, 
WINN 13,7737 142, which, he thinks, may be pro- 
perly rendered,» That thow shouldest insult him 
with all the power of thy words. 'The sense then of 
the sentence will be, “ Didst thou find Israel among 
thieves, coming to rob thee of thy property, that 
thou shouldest think thyself entitled to break out 
into all manner of revilings against him? Compare 
Ezek. xxv.8; Zeph.ii.8,10. Lowth suggests another 
interpretation, which the words will very well bear, 
and which agrees with the Chaldee paraphrase, 
namely, For the words thou hast spoken against 
him, thou shalt be carried captive. 'To this purpose 
also the Vulgar Latin, propter verba tua qué adver- 
sum illunr locutus es, captivus diceres. 

Verse 28. Ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities 
—The walls of which will not be sufficient to defend 
you from the sword of the enemy. And dwell in 
the rock—Hide yourselves in the rocks and caverns 
of your country. And be like the dove that maketh 
her nest in the sides of the hole’s mouth—That is, on 
the edge of the precipice, as Blaney interprets the ex- 
pression, or the brink of destruction. The Moabites 
are here, therefore, “ exhorted to retire for safety to 
those places where the apprehensions of danger 
would secure them from the enemy’s pursuit. That 
doves build in the clefts, or natural hollows of rocks, 
see Cant. ii, 14. Dr. Shaw, in his T'ravle, p. 162, 
fol., mentions a city on the African coast, called 
Haman-et, from the number of wild pigeons that are 
bred in the cliffs of the adjacent mountains.” 

Verses 29, 39. We have heard the pride of Moab 
—The several synonymous terms made use of in this 
verse are meant to express the great pride and inso 
Ience of Moab. Though some of these terms are 
not found in the parallel passage, (Isa, xvi. 6,) yet in 
the main they agree therewith; and “while they 
describe the overweening pride and haughtiness of 
Moab, and the intemperance of his rage, they inti- 
mate the small pretensions he had for such high as- 
suming, either in respect of the extent of his power, 


or his actual performances.” ' I know his wrath— 
Hebrew, 1N13), his fierce wrath, or rage ; butit shalt 
not be so—He shall not be able to execute it, or bring 
to pass what he thinks to do: his power shall not be 
equal to his malice. His lies shall not so effect it— - 
Or rather, have not so effected, the verb being in the 
past time. But this latter part of the sentence seems 
more properly rendered by Blaney, thus: “But he 
is not alike,” (that is, equal to his wrath and threats, ) 
“in the extent of his ability hei is not-alike in per 
forming.” 

Verses 31-33. Therefore will I howl for Moab— 
See note on Isa. xv.5. J will cry out for all Moab 
—The whole country of Moab: the phrase is the 
same. with whole Palestina, Isa. xiv. 31. For the 
men of Kir-heres—See note on Isa. xyi. 7, 11. Ovine 
of Sibmah—The expressions here denote the de- 
struction of the fruitful vineyards of Sibmah; the 
loss of which the neighbouring places of Jazer would 
have reason to lament. Thy plants are gone over 
the sea—The vineyards of Sibmah seem to have 
been of a vast extent, and to have been greatly cele- 
brated: see note on Isa. xvi. 8,9. And joy and glad- 
ness is taken from the plentiful field—The gathering 
in of the harvest and other fruits of the earth is usu- 
ally accompanied with great expressions of joy; but 
there would be no occasion for this in the land of 
Moab, as the enemy would spoil or carry away their 
crop and vintage. None shall tread with shouting 
—They shall not have a vintage left sufficient to ex- 
cite them to shouts of joy, or to induce them to 
exhort and encourage one another to labour ail 
gently. 

Verses 34-39. From the cry of Heshbon—When 
Heshbon was taken by the enemy, the ery of the 
inhabitants reached as far as Elealeh and Jahaz: the 
same was likewise heard from Zoar to Horonaim. 
As a heifer of three years old—The meaning un- 


doubtedly is, that the ery. of Moab, beginning at 


Heshbon, was continued on from city to city, till the 
whole country resounded as with the lowing of a 
cow that runs from place to place in search of her 


a 
“) he 


The great misery 


JEREMIAH. 


of the Moabites. 


A. M. 3399. saith the Lorn, *him that offereth in 
we the high places, and him that burneth 
incense to his gods. 

36 Therefore » my heart shall sound for Moab 
like pipes, and my heart shall sound like pipes 
for the men of Kir-heres: because ° the riches 
that he hath gotten are perished. a 

37 For “every head shall be bald, and every 
beard ™ clipped: upon all the hands shall be 
cuttings, and ° upon the loins sackcloth. 

38 There. shall be lamentation generally 
upon all the house-tops of Moab, and in the 
streets’ thereof: for I have broken Moab like 
fa vessel wherein is no pleasure, saith the 
Lorp. 

39 They shall howl, saying, How i is it broken 
own! how hath Moab turned the back with 
shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dis- 
maying to all them about him. 

40 For thus saith the Lorp; Behold, & he 


shall fly as an eagle, and shall * spread his} 


wings over Moab. 
Al ' Kerioth * is taken, and the strong holds 


> Isa. xv. 5; xvi. 11. ¢ Isa. xv. 7. 
13 Heb. diminished. © Gen. 


a[sa. xv. 2; xvi. 12. 
1 Tsa. xv. 2, 3 Chap. xlvii..5. 
Xxxvii. 34, ne Chapter xxii. 28. 
xxviii. 49; Chap. xlix. 22; Dan. vii. 4; Hos. viii. 1; Hab. i.8. 
h Isa, viii, Si Verse 24. 


w~PNum. xxiv. 17,——1 Heb. children of noise. 


are surprised, and * the mighty men’s A. M. 3399. 
hearts in Moab at. that day shall be sab 
as the heart of a woman in her pangs. 

42 And Moab shall be destroyed ! from being 
a people, because he hath magnified himself 
against the Lorp. 


43 ™ Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall 


be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith ihe 
Lorp. 
44 He that fleeth from the fear, shall fall into 


the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit, 


shall be taken in the snare: for "I will bring 
upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their 
visitation, saith the Lorp. 

45 They that fled stood under the shadow of 
Heshbon because of the force: but ° a fire shall 
come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame. 


fr 
the midst of Sihon, and ? shall devour ab: 


corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of 
the ’° tumultuous ones. 

46 1 Wo be unto thee, O Moab! the. people of 
Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken 
“captives, and thy daughters captives. 


15 Or, The cities. k Isa, xiii. 8; xxi. 3; Chap. xxx. 6; xlix. 
22, 24; 1.43; li. 30°; Mic. iv. 9 —— Psa. Ixxxiii. 4; Isa. vii. 8. 
m Isaiah xxiv. 17, 18. n Chap. xi. 23.——° Numbers xxi. 28. 


17 Heb. in captivity. 


calf that has been taken from her. Animage singu- 
larly expressive: see notes on isa. xv, 4-6. J will 
cause to cease in Moab him that offereth in the high 
places—For’an explanation of this and the next 
verse, see notes on Isa. xvi. 11,12. For every head 
shall be bald, &c.—This and all the other expres- 
sions of this verse signify the greatness of the afflic- 
tion, intimated by the manner of mourning, which is 
such as was used in the greatest calamities: com- 
pare Isa. xv. 3. J have broken Moab like a vessel 
wherein is no pleasure—As earthen vessels, if they 
are not fit for the use for which they were designed, 
are broken to pieces without any concern or regret, 
so as never to be repaired; thus have I broken Moab, 
saith the Lord, They shall howl, saying, How is it 
broken down !—Hebrew, nnn, broken to pieces, as 
the same word, is twice rendered chap. ].2.. The 
prophet persists in-his allusion to the breaking of an 
authen vessel, 

erses 40-44. Behold, he shall fly as an eagle— 
Conquerors are often compared to eagles and other 
birds-of prey ; and the encamping of their, armies is 
represented by the spreading of the wings of such 
fowls. The mighty men’s hearts. shall be as the 
heart of a woman in her pangs—They shall be dis- 
mayed at the apprehension of the evils that are 
eoming upon them, and shall lose their wonted 
courage and resolution. Moab shall be destroyed 
from being a people—From being a nation or go- 

520 


vernment, as it was before. _ Fear, and the pit, and 
the snare, &c.—These words, and those of the next 
verse, are taken from Isa. xxiv. 17, 18, where see the 
notes. 

Verses 45, 46. They that fled stood under the 
shadow of Heshbon, &c.—They that fled for fear 
of the enemies’ forces thought to find shelter and 
safety in Heshbon, a strong fenced city. Or, in- 
stead of, because of the force, the Hebrew nan, 
may be rendered for want of force, or strength, 
namely, force of their own to withstand the enemy. 
But a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a 
flame from the midst of Sihon—That is, of the city 
of Sihon, meaning still Heshbon. When the enemies 
have possessed themselves of Heshbon, -they will 
quickly spread like fire over the rest of the country. 
Thus the prophet fitly applies to the present case 
the words of an ancient poem made upon Sihon’s 
conquests over Moab, and recited by Moses, Num. 
xxi. 27, 28, where see the notes: And shall devour 
the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of 
the tumultuous ones—By the corner may be meant 
the borders, or extreme parts of the country. So 
the Hebrew word nso signifies, Num, xxxiv. 3; 
Neh. ix. 22.. The nobility, who are the stay and 
support of the government, are expressed by the 
crown of the head. By the tumultuous are meant 
those that are proud and haughty in their state and 
plenty, and insult over their inferiors. Wo be unto. 

3 


* 


4 Num, xxi.29 ¢ 


God’s judgments 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


against the Ammonites. 


Thus far ts the A. M. 3309. 
B. C. 605. 


saith the Lorp. 
judgment of Moab. 


A.M. 3309. 47 “| Yet will I bring again the 
B. C. 605. “Vi < 

captivity of Moab Tin the latter days, 

r Chapter 


xlix. 6, 39. 


thee, O Moab!—This verse is likewise taken out of 
Num. xxi. 19. The people of Chemosh perisheth— 
People are sometimes denominated from the God 
* they worship: so the Jews were called the people 
of the Lord, or Jehovah. 

Verse 47. Yet will I bring again the captivity 
of Moab—“ The Moabites were afterward restored 
to their country, as appears from Josephus, Antig. 


lib. xiii. c. 17. But these and similar promises of 
mercy after judgment are chiefly to be understood 
of the conversion of the Gentiles under the gospel, 
called the latter days in the prophets. Theconver- 
sion of idolaters is expressed by returning from 
their captivity, Ezek. xvi. 53.”—Lowth. - See also 
Calmet’s Dissertation upon the return of the Moab- 
ites, &ce. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


This chapter contains a collection of prophecies against several of those nations against which Jeremiah received a genera 


commission to declare God’s judgments, chap. xxv. 13. 
(3,). The Syrians, 23-27. 


(1,) Against. the Ammonites, 1-6. 
(4,), The Arabians of Kedar and Hazor, 28-33. 


(2,) The Edomites, 7-22. 
(5,) The Elamites, 34-39. Concerning 


the: tume of the fulfilment of these prophecies, see the note on chap. xlviii. 1. 


Sees (SON CERNING? *the Ammon- 
iste ites, thus saith the Lorn; Hath 
Israel no sons ? hath he no heir? why then | 
doth ? their king inherit > Gad, and his people 
dwell in his cities ? , ; 

2 Therefore behold, the. days come, saith the 
Lorp, that I ‘will cause an alarm of war to 


be heard in © Rabbah of the Ammon- + M, 2404 
ites; and it shall be a desolate heap, —— 


and her daughters shall be burned with fire: 


then shall Israel be heir unto them that were 
his heirs, saith the Lorn. 

3 Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye 
daughters of Rabbah, ¢ gird you with sackcloth ; 


ce 


2 Or, Against—— Ezek. xxi. 28; xxv.2; Amos i. 13; Zeph. 
\ ii. 8, 9——? Or, Melcom. 


— 


¢ Ezek. xxv. 5 ; Amos i, 14.——4 Isa. xxxii. 
11; Chap. iv. 8; vi. 26, 


> Amos i. 13. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIX. 

Verse 1. Hath Israel no-sons? Why then doth 
their king inherit Gad?—Is there no posterity of 
Israel, that the king of the Ammonites hath taken 
possession of Gad, asif he had a right to it, and his 
people dwell in the cities of it? Instead of their 
king here, Blaney reads Milcom, and Dr. Waterland 
and Houbigant Malkam, the idol of the Ammonites. 
“ God sorely afflicted those parts of the kingdom of 
Israel that lay eastward of Jordan, first by Hazael, 
2 Kings x. 33; afterward by Tiglath-pileser, chap. 
xv. 29; and then delivered up the whole kingdom 
to be carried captive by Shalmaneser, chap. xvii. 5) 
after which, it is probable, the Ammonites took oc-| 
casion to possess themselves of Gad, that lay near | 
their territories. But God’s dispossessing the Is- | 
raelites gave the Ammonites no right to invade their 
inheritance, (see Zeph. ii. 8,) especially as they had | 
been so tender of the Ammonites’ right as not to in-| 
vade their possessions in their march toward the' 
land of Canaan.” See Lowth, and Deut. iv. 19; 2 
Chron. xx. 10. It is probable, as the king of Am- 
moo had instigated Ishmael to kill Gedaliah, that 
the reason which induced Nebuchadnezzar to make 
war upon the Ammonites was torevenge that murder. 

Verse 2. Therefore I will cause the noise of warto 

) 


; 


4 


beheard in Rabbah, &c.—The principal city of that 
country. Her daughters shall-be burned with fire— 
That is; the lesser cities, which are reckoned so many 
daughters to the mother city. Then shall Israel be 
heir unto them that were his heirs—Hebrew, vw} 
rwy nx, Possidebit possessores suos, Vulgate, shall 
possess his possessors: or, as Blaney renders it, 
shall take to their possessions. who have taken to 
his. “This is understood,” says he, “to have been 
fulfilled when Judas Maccabeus defeated the Am- 
monites, and took their towns, 1 Mac. v. 6, &c. 
Zephaniah speaks in like manner, chap. ii. 9, The 
residue of my people shall spoil them, and therem- 
nant of my people shall possess them. But both 
prophets may, perhaps, refer to still future times, 
when Israel shall be finally restored to their own 
land, as is frequently foretold of them, and not only 
recover their own ancient possessions, but succeed, 
likewise, to the vacant possessions of their once 
hostile neighbours, long since extinet and irrecover- 
ably lost.” 

Verse 3. Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled— 
This “Ai must be a different city from that taken 
by Joshua, chap. viii., which lay on the west side of 
Jordan. Grotius mentions another city, called Gaia 


‘by Ptolemy ; which, being near Heshbon, the de- 


521 


God's judgments 


A. M. 3404. Jament, and run to and fro by the 

B. C. 600 ao 4 

hedges ; for *their king shall go into 
captivity, and his:* priests and his princes to- 
gether. 

4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, 4 thy 
flowing valley, O ‘backsliding daughter ? that 
trusted in her treasures, ® saying, Who shall 
come unto me ? 

5 Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith 
the Lord Gop of hosts, from all those that be 
about thee; and ye shall be driven out every 


JEREMIAH. 


against the Edomites. 


man right forth; and none shall ga- 4 4 hg 
ther up "him that wandereth. bat 

6 { And afterward I will bring again the 

captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the 
Lorp. . 

7 | ‘Concerning Edom, thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts: * Zs wisdom no more in Teman? lis 
counsel perished from the prudent? is their 
wisdom vanished’? 
‘8 ™Flee ye, *turn back, dwell déep, O inha- 
bitants of "Dedan; for I will bring the cala- 


3 Or, Melcom, 1 Kings xi. 5, 33. 
i. 15. 4 Or, thy valley floweth away. 
24.— Chap. xxi. 13. 


e Chapter xlviii. 7; Amos 
f Chapter ili. 14; vil. 


h So Verse 39; Chap. xlviii. 47,—i Ezek. xxv. ‘125 xxxv. 
2; Joel isi. 19; ‘Amos-i. 11. kK Obad. 8. 1 Isa, xix. 11. 
m Verse 30: “5 Or, they are turned back——® Chap. xxv. 23. 


struction of it was matter of concern. to the neigh- 
bouring city.” Lament, and run to and fro by the 
hedges—Try to hide yourselves in the thickets, and 
remove from ohe place to another, for fear of being 
discovered. But by n1173, here rendered hedges, 
Blaney thinks, are meant, “ those fences or enclo- 
sures round the lesser towns, which’ served to secure 
them against thieves and robbers, but were not dig- 
nified with the name of walls, capable of resisting 
the attack of aregular enemy.” 
supposes, distinguishes these from the fortifications 
of cities, Psalm Ixxxix. 40, terming the former N17), 
his fences, and the latter yan, his strong holds, 
or walled fortresses. According to this interpreta- 
tion, therefore, the prophet here foretels that “the 
inhabitants of the lesser towns should run to and fro, 
like persons distracted with fear, within their enclo- 
sures, not daring to step beyond them, lest they 
should fall in with the enemy, whose approach they 
dreaded.” For their king—Or, Milcom, their idol; 
shall go into captivity, and his priests and princes 
together—“ Here the same is said of Milcom,” says 
Blaney, “as was of Chemosh, chap. xlviii. 7, which 
shows that the word is properly used as thename of 
the Ammonitish idol.” 

Verses 4-6. Wherefore gloriest thou in the val- 
leys?—That is, in the riches of thy fat and plentiful 
valleys, which overflow with abundanee of all things: 
compare Isa. xxviii. 1,4. Though they be fruitful, 
yet glory not therein, for, notwithstanding their fer- 
tility, they shall be no security to thee against the 
terror which I shall bring upon thee. Behold, Twill 
bring fear upon thee—When God gives.up a people 
to destruction, he commonly takes ‘from thei their 
usual courage. But the word fear here may denote 
a hostile army, the cause of fear and terror. And 
ye shall be driven out every man right forth—That 
is, SO as not to dare to look back, or stop to consider 
which way to go, but flee for your lives that way 
which lies next. And none shall gather up him that 
wandereth—None shall bring him that flees from 
the enemy to his house, or afford him any shelter or 


accommodation. And afterward I will bring 
again the cagitony. of Ammon. See note on chap. 
xlvili. 47. 


522 


The psalmist, he | 


Verse 7. Concerning Edom—The destruction of 
Edom, or Idumea, is likewise foretold by Ezekiel, 
Joel, Amos, and Obadiah: see the margin. Js wis- 
dom no more in Teman—* The eastern part of the 
world (by which is chiefly meant Arabia and the 
adjacent countries) was famous for the study of 
wisdom, or philosophy, as it was called in later times: 
see I Kings i iv. 30. The Edomites put in their claim 
to this prerogative, as appears from what is said 
here, and in the parallel place of Obadiah, verse 8, as 
also ‘from the book of Job, where Eliphaz, one of 
the disputants, is called the Temanite, as being de- 
secended from Teman, Esau’s -grandson, who gave 
name to the city or country of Teman, elsewhere 
mentioned. Js counsel perished from the prudent 2 
—When God designs a people for destruction, he 
deprives them of that common prudence and fore- 
sight which are requisite for the due management of 
their affairs.”.—Lowth. Here Edom, which boasted 
itself, and whose fame was spread abroad for wis- 
dom and prudence, is described acting as if all its 
wisdom and prudence were gone. 

Verse 8. Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep-—® When 
the Arabs,” says Harmer, ‘ ‘have drawn upon them- 
selves such a general resentment of the more fixed 
inhabitants of those countries that they think them- 
selves unable to stand against them, they withdraw 
into the depths of the great wilderness, where none 
can follow them with hopes of success.” D’Arvieux 
tells us, “they will be quite ready to decamp upon 
less than two hours’ warning, and, retiring immedi- 
ately into the deserts, render it impossible for other 
nations, even the most powerful, to conquer them, 
they not daring to venture farinto the deserts, where 
the Arabs alone know how to steer their course, so 
as to hit upon places of water and forage. Is it not 
then most probable that the dwelling deep, which 
Jeremiah here recommends to the Arab tribes, means 
this plunging far into the deserts, rather than going 
into deep caves and dens, as Grotius and.other com- 
mentators suppose?” O inhabitants. of Dedan— 
The Dedanites were Arabians of the posterity of 
Dedan, a grandson of Abraham, Gen. xxv. 3. They 
seem by this place to have been, in latter times, sub- 
dued by the Idumeans, and incorporated a them. 


God's judgments 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


against the Edomites. 


A. M. 3404, 


em 04. ity of Esau. upon him, the time that 


I will visit him. 

9 If °grape-gatherers come to thee, would 
they not leave some gleaning-grapes ? if thieves 
by night, they will destroy till they have 
enough. 

10 ? But I have made Esau bare, I have. un- 
covered his. secret places, and he shall not be 
able to hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and 
his brethren, and his neighbours, and *he is 
not. 

11 Leave thy fatherless children, I will \pre- 
serve them alive; and let thy widows trust 
in. me. 

12 For thus saith the Lorp; Behold, * they 
whose judgment was not to drink of the cup, 


have assuredly drunken; and ar¢thou A. M. fe 
he that shall altogether go unpunish- ————_ 

ed? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou 
shalt surely drink of it. 

13 For *I have sworn by myself, saith the 
Lorp, that *t Bozrah shall become a desolation, 
a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the 
cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes. 

14 I have heard a“ rumour from the Lor», 
and an ambassador is sent unto the heathen, 
saying, Gather ye together, and come against 
her, and rise up to the battle. 

15 For lo, I will make thee small among the 
heathen, and despised among men. 
~16 Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, and 
the pride of thy heart, O thou that dwellest in 


5 Heb. their sufficiency. P Mal. i. 3.——7 Isaiah 
xvii. 14.—— Chap. xxv. 29; Obad. 16. 


°Obad. 5. 


8 Gen. xxii. 16; Isaiah xlv. 23; Amos vi. iva “ .xxxiv. 6; 
Ixiil. 1. « Obad. ae) 


Verses 9, 10. If g erape-gatherers come to thee, &e. 
—The vintage is not usually gathered: so clean but 
there will be a gleaning left, Isa. xvii. 6; and house- 
breakers, or thieves, commonly leave something be- 
hind. But I have made Esau bare—But ‘the de- 
struction coming upon thee will be so entire that 
scarcely a remnant shall be preserved. J have un- 
covered his secret places—I have taken from him 
every thing that might bea refuge or defence to him, 
and laid open all the recesses wherein he might con- 
ceal himself, or his riches. . His seed is spoiled, &c. 
—The calamity shall also extend to his family, and 
to all that he has any connection with. And he ts 
not—He is utterly ruined and undone. 

Verse 11. Leave thy fatherless children, I will 
preserve them, &c.—The Chaldee paraphrast under- 
stands this of the Jews, to whom the following words 
do certainly belong, as if it contained God’s promise 
to take care of their families, in that distressed and 
forlorn state to which the captivity had reduced 
them. Some, who apply it to the Edomites, under- 
stand it as spoken by way of irony, in which light 
they understand Isa. xvi. 4. “But there is nothing 
in the context,” says Houbigant, “ which can lead to 
this interpretation. I rather understand it as a pro- 
phecy; nor was it any thing wonderful that the con- 
querors should spare the little children and widows, 
from whom they had nothing to fear; nor that the 
Edomites should forsake both the one and the other, 

‘when compelled to a precipitate flight.” Or, it isa 
promise that God would not wholly destroy the race 
of Esau, but protect and preserve aremnant of them ; 
and that, at the time when he sent these his judg- 
ments on the proud and self-confident, and all their 
boasted strength was cast down, the weak and help- 
less should be remembered by him, the Father of 
mercies. 

Verses 12, 13. They whose judgment was ‘not to 
drink of the cup—Namely, of God’s wrath: see note 


raelifes, God’s peculiar people, who, in regard to the 
gracious promises which he had made to them and 


| to their fathers, the near relation in which they stood 


to him, and the many pious persons who, from age 
to age, were found among them, might, in all human 
appearance, have expected mercy at God’s hands; 
have, nevertheless, suffered dreadful judgments. 
And art thou he that shall altogether go unpunish- 
ed 2?—Is Edom the righteous nation, which, above all 
others, deserves to be exempted from punishment ? 
There is a peculiar emphasis, says Blaney, in the 
pronoun 81n, he, which denotes that Edom was he, 
the people, to which the punishment was peculiarly 
due: see note on chap. xxv. 29. J have sworn by 
myself—I have confirmed my threatening, as I have 
frequently confirmed my promises, by an oath; that 
Bozrahshall- become a desolation, &c.—Bozrah, one 
of the chief cities of Idumea, is here put for that 
country in general, it being usual with the prophets 
to describe the destruction of a whole nation by the 
ruin of some one or more of its principal cities: see 
verse 23; Amos i. 8, 12-14. 

Verses 14-16. Ihave heard a rumour—Hebrew, 
myinw, a report or message, from the Lord, and an 
ambassador is. sent wnto the heathen, Obadiah be- 
gins his prophecy against Edom in similar words. 
The prophets, it must be observed, “often represent 
God as summoning armies, and setting them in ar- 
ray of battle against those people whom he has de- 
creed to destroy. And his stirring up men’s spirits 
to invade such countries, is described here as if he 
had sent an ambassador to the Chaldeans and their 
confederates, to engage them in a war against the 
Idumeans ; according to the methods which earthly 
princes use to engage their allies.”.—Lowth. For 
lo, I will make thee small, &e.—I will bring thee 
low and make thee very contemptible, Thy terri- 
bleness hath deceived thee—“ ‘Thou hast been form- 
erly terrible to all about thee, and looked upon as 


on chap. xxv. 15; have assuredly drunken—The Is- || impregnable; and the confidence thou hast had in 


3 


523 


God's judgments 


JEREMIAH. 


against the Edomites. 


A ay mee the clefts of the rock, that holdest 
ers thie height of the bill: * though thou 
shouldest make thy ¥ nest as high as the eagle, 
7] will bring thee down from thence, saith the 
Lorp. 

17 Also Edom shall be a Aeocte fame @ every 
one that. goeth by it shall be astonished, and 
shall hiss at all the plagues thereof: 

18 ° As in the overthrow of Sodom and. Go- 
morrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith 
the Lorp, no man shall abide there, neither 
shall a son of man dwell in it. 

19 © Behold, he shall come up lke a lion 
from ‘the swelling of Jordan against the ha- 
bitation of the strong: but I will suddenly 
make him run away from her: and who ts a 
chosen man, that I may appoint over her ? for 
* who is like me? and who will 7 appoint me 


the time? and ‘ who is that shepherd 4, om B08. 
that will stand before me? —- 

20 & Therefore hear the counsel of the Lorn, 
that-he hath taken against Edom ; and his pur- 
poses, that he hath purposed against the inha- 
bitants of Teman : surely the least of the flock 
shall draw them out: surely he shall make 
their habitations desolate with them. ~ 

21 »'The earth is moved at the noise of their 
fall, at the cry the noise thereof was heard in 
the * Red sea. 

22 Behold, ‘ he shall come up and fly as the 
eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and 
at that day shall the heart of the mighty men 
of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her 
pangs. ‘ 

23. 9.* Concerning Damascus. Hamath is 
confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard 


x Obad. 4. ¥ Job xxxix. 27.——* Anos ix. 2. 2 Chap. 
xviii. 16; 1. 13. » Gen. xix. 25; Deut. xxix. 23; Chap. 1. 40; 
Amos iv. 11.—¢ Ch. l. 44,.—4 Ch. xii. 5. © Exod. xv. 11. 


this thy strength hath made thee careless and secure, 


and thereby given thy enemies an advantage against 


thee.” O thou that dwwellest in the clefts, &e.—St. 
Jerome, who lived in the neighbourhood, tells us, in 
his commentary upon Obadiah,“ that Idumea was 
arocky mountainous country, and that the inhabit- 
ants dwelt in caves dug out of the rocks and hills.” 
Though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the 
eagle—The greatest height or strength cannot place 
thee out of the reach of divine vengeance. The 
eagle is remarkable for its flying high, and making 
its nest in very high and inaccessible rocks: see note 
on Job xxxix. 27, 28. 

Verses 17-19. Edom shall be a desolation; every 
one shall hiss, &e.—See note on chap. xviii..16. As 
in the overthrow of Sodom, &c.—-A proverbial ex- 
pression, denoting an utter destruction. Behold, he 
shall come up like a lion, &c.—This is a description 
of Nebuchadnezzar’s marching with his army against 
Idumea, whom the prophet compares to a lion com- 
ing out of his den ‘near Jordan. When that river 
swells, in the time of harvest, the lions, that lie in the 
thickets on the river side, are raised out of their 
coverts, and infest the country: see note on chap. 
xii. 5, and Maundr ells Travels, pp. 81, 82. Against 
the habitation of the strong —Hebrew, TVS I Oe, 
the strong folds, or rough pastures. The LXX, 
read exc torov Avday, to the place Aitham, considering 
the word which we render strong as a proper name. 
But Iwill suddenly makehim run away from her— 
This clause should rather be rendered, J will rouse 
him up and make him run upon her, the preposition 
byn, here rendered from likewise signifying ,wpon; 
and being so rendered by our translators, 1 Kings 
ix. 5. To this purpose the Vulgate, quia ‘subito 
currere faciam eum ad illam, because I will cause 
him to run suddenly against her. And who is a 


7 Or, convent me in judgment. £ Job xli. 10.—+ Chap. l. 45. 
h Chap. 1. 46.——® Heb. Weedy sea. i Chap. iv. 13; aris. 40, 
41,—* Isa. xvii. 1; xxxvii.13; Amos i. 3; Zech. ix. 1, 2. 


chosen man that I may appoint over her?—Namely, 


to spoil and destroy her. What select man shall I 
employ for this purpose ? for it must be one who 
will do it effectually. Nebuchadnezzar, or his cap- 
tain-general Nebuzar-adan, seems to be here meant. 
For who is like me 2—Whao is able, like me, to pre- 
pare instruments to perform his work? And who 
will appoint me the time? and who is that shep- 
herd? &c.—Who will challenge me to meet him in 
the field, as if we were upon equal’ terms ? or what 
leader or general can enter the lists with me ? “The 
word shepherd often signifies a prince, or command- 
er. But here it is used in opposition to the lion 


| mentioned before ; as if he had said, A shepherd may 


as well encounter a lion as the best appointed war- 
rior contend with the Almighty, or those whom he 
makes the instruments of his vengeance.”—Lowth. 

Verses 20-22. Therefore hear the counsel of the 
Lord—Let them, the Edomites, hear and consider 
what God hath purposed against them. Swrely the 


| least of the flock shall draw them out—By the least 
of the flock, may be here understood the common 


soldiers in the Chaldean army, any ore of whom, 


he says, shall have courage and strength énough to 


conquer the Idumeans, and draw them to slaughter 
or captivity. The earth ig moved at-the noise o 
their fall—The neighbouring countries are astonish- 
ed at it. The prophet compares the destruction of 
Tdumea to the fall of a great building, which affrights 
those that are near it. The noise thereof was 
heard in the Red sea—The borders of Idumea 
reached to the Red sea. Behold he shall fly as the 
eagle—The suddenness and rapidity with which Ne- 
buchadnezzar, or his general, Nebuzar-adan, reg 
ed and fell upon Edom, are described in this 
see note on chap. xlviii. 40, 41. 

Verse 23. Concerning Damascus—“ Damascus 

3 


ae 


God’s judgments 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


against the Syrians. 


¢ 


A. M, 3404. 


wae evil tidings: they are ° faint-hearted ; 


"there is sorrow ' on the sea; it can- 
not be quiet. 

24 Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth 
herself to flee, and fear hath seized on her: 
™anguish and sorrow hath taken her, as a 
woman in travail. 

25 How is " the city of praise not left, the city 
of my joy! 

26 °' Therefore her young men shall fall in 
her streets, and all the men of war shall 


be, cut off in that day, saith the ei. 2008. 
Lorp of hosts. a 
27 And I will kindle a ? fire in the wall of 
Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of 
Ben-hadad. 

28 4 4 Concerning Kedar, and concerning the 
kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the 
Lorn; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil * the 
men of the-east. 


29 Their ‘tents 3 and their flocks shall they 


mJTsa, 
Verse 22. 


9 Heb. melted——(Isa. lvii. 20. 10 Or; as on-the sea. 
xiii. 8 ; Chap. iv. 31; vi. 24; xxx: 6; xlviii. 41; 


was the capital of the kingdom of Syria, and bad 
seemingly at this time swallowed up all the other petty 
sovereignties of that country. Isaiah had before ut- 
tered a prophecy concerning it, of a calamitous im- 
port, (chap. xvii.,) which had been fulfilled by Tig- 
lath-pileser’s taking it, and carrying the people cap- 
tive to Kir, 2 Kings xvi. 9. Amos also had foretold 
the same event, chap. i. 3-5. But it had recovered 
itself after the fall of the Assyrian empire, and is 
here doomed to suffer again the like calamities from 
the resentment of Nebuchadnezzar, probably about 
the same time with the other neighbouring nations: 
see note on chap. xlviii. 1. Hamath is confounded, 
and Arpad—Hamath and Arpad are elsewhere join- 
ed together: see 2 Kings xviii. 34; xix..13; Isa. x. 
9. Hamath was the capital of a part of Syria, bear- 
ing the same namé, and which formed once an inde- 
pendent kingdom. It was situate on, the northern 
frontier of the land of Israel, whence we find fre- 
quent mention of the entrance of Hamath, Num. 
xxxiv. 8, &c. The city of Hamath, Josephus tells 
us, was that which the Macedonians afterward 
called Epiphania: Ant., lib.i,cap.6. And Jerome, 
in his commentary on Isa, x. 9, says the same. He- 
math, quam Syri usque hodie Epiphanium vocant— 
Aphad, or Arvad, is with good reason held to be the 
island of Aradus, in the Mediterranean sea; as those 
who are called *119"n, Gen. x. 18, are by the LXX. 
rendered Apadcor, in the Vulgate, Aradti. — This 
island was not far from the shore, and nearly oppo- 
site to Hamath.”—Blaney. They heard evil tidings 
—Tidings of the approach of a hostile army; they 
are faint-hearted—Their courage fails them.» T’heir 
sorrow is on the sea—Or, as on the sea, namely, 
when a storm arises and the sea is tempestuous. 
Houbigant reads, They fluctuate as the sea; they 
cannot be at rest: compare Isa, lvii. 20, 21. But 
Blaney renders FANT CI 123, They are melted 
into a sea of solicitude: observing, “ This is a literal 
translation of the text; and appears to me prefer- 
able in sense to any of the interpretations I have 
hitherto met with.” 

Verses 24-27. Damascus is waxed feeble—That 
is, the inhabitants of Damascus. They have lost 
their ancient courage and valour; they were wont 
to be formidable to their enemies, but now they flee 
before them. J"ear, or rather, trembling, or, horror, 

3 


» Chap. xxxili. 9; li.41.——®° Chap. 1. 30; li. 4 ——p_Amos i. 4. 
4 Isa. xxi. 13. t Judg. vi. 3; Job i. 3.—# Psa. coxa 6: 


as 007, properly signifies, hath seized on her, dis- 
tress and pangs, Hebrew, Tam) my, have taken 
her, as a woman in tr avail—Great anguish and sor- 
row are ordinarily expressed by this similitude in the 
Scriptures. How is the city of praise—That is, a 
city of fame and renown; not left—Namely, not 


| spared, or left untouched by the enemy. This is 


thought to be spoken in the person of the king, or 
some other inhabitant of Damascus. Therefore her 


| young-men—Or, surely her tts men, as the parti- 


cle 129 is rendered chap. v. 2; shall fall in her 
streels—Or, broad places, as the Hebrew word sig- 
nifies. A fire shall consume the palaces of Benha- 
dad—The name of several kings of Syria. 

Verses 28, 29. Concerning Kedar and the kingdoms 
of Hazor—Kedar is well known to have-been one 
of the sons of Ishmael, Gen. xxv. 13, who settled in 
Arabia. But of Hazor we find no satisfactory ac- 
count given by commentators. There is, indeed, a 
city called Hazor, mentioned Josh. xi. 10, and in 


| other parts of Scripture: but this was in the land of 
| Canaan; whereas the kingdoms of Hazor, here men- 


tioned, were evidently in Arabia, in the neighbour- 
hood, at least, of Kedar. Among the sons of Joktan, 
however, who were prior to the Ishmaelites in Ara- 
bia, and whose descendants are therefore looked on 
as the only genuine Arabs, we find one whose name 


‘was Hazarmaveth, Gen. x. 26-30. And, as by Ke- 
| dar all the descendants of Ishmael are probably here 


designed, so all the other branches of the family of 
Joktan may, in like manner, be.included under the 
general name of Hazor. And perhaps the most pro- 
bable reason why the Arabians are called a mingled 
people is, that they were thus made up of the people 
of different descents; some of them being sprung 
from Joktan, others from Ishmael, to whom must be 
added the sons of Abraham by Keturah, who are also 
said to have been settled in Kedem, or the east 
country, Gen. xxv. 6, and perhaps other families be- 
sides. All these were divided into petty sovereign- 
ties under certain chiefs or princes, which explains 
what is to be understood by the kingdoms of Hazor : 

see Blaney. Arise ye, go up to Kedar, &c.—Here 
the prophet foretels that Nebuchadnezzar should 
conquer these kingdoms, and spoil the men of the 
East, as the-Arabians are called in the Scriptures. 
Their tents and their flock shall they—Namely, the 

525 


God's judgments ’ 


JEREMIAH. 


against Kedar, Hazor, §c. 


A. M. 3404. take away : they shall take to them- 
B. C. 600. : : 

selves their curtains, and all their ves- 
sels, and their camels; and they shall cry unto 
them, * Fear is on every side. 

30 YJ" Flee, ™ get you far. off, dwell deep, O 
ye ishabitlints of Hazor, saith the Lorn; for 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken 
counsel against you, and hath conceived a pur- 
pose against you. 

31 Arise, get you up unto *the ” wealthy 
nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the 
Lorp, which have neither gates nor bars, 
which ¥ dwell alone. 

32 And their camels shall be a booty, and the 
multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will 
scatter into all winds * them ¢ha¢ are }°in the 
utmost corners; and I will bring their calamity 
from all sides thereof, saith the Lorn. 

33 And Hazor * shall be a dwelling for dra- 
gons,-and a desolation for ever: ° there shall 


t Chap. vi. 25; xlvi. 5. 
x Exodus xxxvili. 11. 
xxili.9; Deut. xxxiii. 28; Mieah vii. 14. 
Verse 36. 


4 Verse 8. 1 Heb. flit greatly. 
12 Or, that is at ease. ¥ Numbers 
z Ezekiel v. 10; 


no man abide there, nor any son of A. M. 3404. 
B. C. 600. 
man dwell in it. oS ee 
34 % The word of the Lorn that gp G. 59s. 
came to Jeremiah the prophet against 
‘Elam in the beginning of the reign of ‘Zeile- 
kiah king of Judah, saying, 

35 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; Behold, I 
will break * the bow of a the chief of 
their might. 

36 And upon Elam will 1 bring the. four 
winds from the four quarters of heaven, and 
f will scatter them toward all those winds; and 


there shall be no nation whither the outéasts of 


Elam shall not come. 

37 For I will cause bore to ei diamayed 
before their enemies, and_ before them that 
seek their life: and I will ‘bring evil upon 
them, even my fierce anger, saith the Lorp ; 
sand I will send the sword after them, till I 
have consumed them : 


a Chap. ix. 263 xxv. 23.—1!* Heb. cut off into corners, or, that 
have the corners of their hair polled.——» Chap. ix. 11; x. 
Mal. i. 3. ¢ Verse 18.4 Chap, xxv.-25.——* Isa. xxii. 6 
f Verse 32. pie ix. 16; xlvili. 2. 


Chaldeans; take away—Their substance consisted in 
their cattle and their tents, from whence the country 
itself-is called the tents of Kedar, Psa. cxx.5: with 
these they removed from place to place for the con- 
venience of pasture. J'hey shall take. to themselves 
their curtains—Those elegant coverings of which 
their tents were made, and which were much supe- 
rior to those of any other people. And they shall 
cry unto then—Hebrew, sp), Let them call for, or 
command, that is, as Blaney renders it, Let them 
bring upon them terror from every side. 

Verses 39-33. Flee ye, get you far off—Hebrew, 
INn 13; Vulgate, Abite vehementer, Go away with 
eagerness, or, haste.- Dwell deep, or, “retire deep 
for to dwell:” see note on verse 8. Arise, get you 
up unto the wealthy nation—The prophet here gives 
the Chaldeans a commission from God to undertake 
this expedition, and seize. upon the wealth of the in- 
habitants of Hazor; which have neither gates nor 
bars—Who have never been attacked, and therefore 
live securely without walls or ramparts for their de- 
fence; which dwell alone—Solitarie habitant, dwell 
solitarily, as Buxtorf renders 133¥" 973. “Their 
habitations are isolated,” as some interpret it. “They 
do not live in cities, towns, or villages, where the 
houses are contiguous; but each family has its man- 
sion apart from the rest, with land about it sufficient 
for the subsistence of their cattle. In this dispersed 
state they were, of course, less provided with the 
means of defending themselves from the incursions 
ofthe enemy.” J will scatter into all winds—Into 
all the quarters of heaven; them that are in the ut- 
most corners—Or, those that inhabit the insulated 

526 


coast, namely, the eae of Arabia: see notes on 
chap. ix. 26, and xxv. 23. 

Verse 34. The word that came to Jeremiah 
against Elam—Elam we find to have been an inde- 
pendent, and even powerful kingdom, in the days 
of Abraham, Gen. xiv. 1. “ But I am not of opinion 
with those writers,” says Blaney, “who hold that by 
Elam, in Scripture, Persia is always meant. There 
isno.doubt but that when the monarchy of Persia 
was established under Cyrus, Elam was blended into 
and formed a part of it. But before that time Elam 
and Persia were two distinct kingdoms: of which 
this may be admitted for proof, that the kingdom of 
Persia, if Xenophon may be credited as an historian, 
was never subdued under the dominion of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, but preserved its liberty in alliance with the 
Medes. Elam, on the contrary, is not only here pro- 
phesied of, as destined to become a part of the Ba- 
bylonian conquests, but is actually spoken of, (Dan, 
viii. 2,) as a province of the Babylonish empire ; 
over which Daniel seems, to-have presided, having 
Shushan for the seat of his government. We may 
therefore conclude Elam to have been, as the name 
itself would lead us to suppose, the country called 
by heathen writers Elymais, which Pliny, in con- 
formity with Daniel, describes as separated from Su- 
siana, by the river Euleus, or Ulay; Nat. Hist., lib. 
vi. cap. 31.” 

Verses 35-38. Behold, I will break the bow of 
Elam—The Elamites were famous archers, as this 
expression intimates, as also Isaiah’s w were. chap. 
xxii.6; And Elam bare the quiver, Strabo also says, 
that the mountainous parts of Elymais bred ety 


- 


The prophet predicts 


CHAPTER L, " 


the ruin of Babylon. 


aea“a“awcwwoas=satOssOOOOooo EEE 


A. M. 3406. il] bh é 
B. C. 598 38 And I will set my throne in 


~ Elam, and will destroy from thence 
the king and the princes, saith the Lorp. 


h Chap. xliii. 10. 


\ 


—— 


.39 YJ But it shall come to pass ‘in SoM, 3400. 
the latter days, hat I will bring again °° 
the captivity of Elam, saith the Lorp. 


i Chap. xlviii. 47; Verse 6. 


archers; otpatiwra¢g tpedet tofotac Tee mhevorec, lib. 
Xvi, ; 744. Livy, and other heathen writers, also 
speak of the Elymean archers. Upon Elam will I 
bring the four winds, &e.—I will bring enemies 
upon Elam from every quarter; and scatter them to 
every quarter. Wars and commotions are meta- 
phorieally denoted by winds. And I will. send the 
sword after them—Even after they are driven out 
of their own country, my judgments shall pursue 
them. And Iwill set my throne in Elam—As Ne- 
buchadnezzar acted under the commission of God, 
and had authority from him to conquer this and the 
neighbouring mations, and is called God’s servant, 
the are of his power was in effect the setting 
up of the throne or dominion of Jehovah. -Some, 


howeyer, think this is spoken of the Persian mo- 
narchy, established there by Cyrus, who is expressly 
called, in Scripture, God’s anointed. one, whom he 
had particularly chosen. 

Verse 39. In the latter days, I will bring again — 
the captivity of Elam—This is supposed to relate — 
to the times of the Lagi and Selewcide, when the 
Elamites recovered their liberty. Or, if we con- 
sider what is said in the foregoing verse to relate to 
Nebuchadnezzar, this may be understood of Cyrus’s 
setting them free from the Babylonish yoke; for we 
find from Isa. xxii, 6, that the Elamites assisted Cy- 
rus in the conquest of Babylon; and Shushan, the 
chief city of Elam, was made the metropolis of the 
Persian empire. 


CHAPTER L. 


This, and the following chapter, contain a large description of the downfall of Babylon, and the empire of which that city 
was the seal; intermixed and contrasted with predictions concerning the redemption of Israel and Judah, who were not, 
like their oppressors, to be finally extirpated, but to survive them, and wpon their repentance and conversion to be pardoned 
and restored.» This prophecy follows the rest of those delivered by Jeremiah against the neighbouring countries, accord- 
ing to the method of God's judgments laid down before, chap xxv. 12, 13, where the prophet declares, that after Nebuchad- 
nezzar and his successors had fulfilled God’s purposes, in being executioners of his vengeance upon other countries, they 

themselves should drink of the-same cup. We have in this chapter, (1,) The-ruin of Babylon, 1-3; and again, 9-16 ; 
and again, 21-32; and again, 35-46. (2,) The redemption of God's people, 4-8; and again, 17-20; and again, 


33, 34. ’ 


THE word that the Lorp, spake 
“against Babylon and against 


A. M. 3409. 
B. C7595. 


the land of the Chaldeans * by Jeremiah the |} 


prophet. 

2 Declare ye among the nations, and publish, 
and * set up a standard; publish, and conceal 
not: say, Babylon is taken, » Bel is: confound- 
ed, Merodach is broken in pieces; ° her idols 


A. M. 3409. 


are confounded, her images are 
, 2 B. C. 595. 


broken in pieces. 
3 ‘For out of the north there cometh up °a 
nation against her, which shall make her land 
desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they 
shall remove, they shall depart, both man and 
beast. tart 
4 § In those days, and in- that time, saith 


a Isa. xiii. 1; xxi.1; xlvii. 1.——' Heb. by the hand of Jeremiah. 
? Heb. lift up. 


b Isa. xlvi. 1; Chap. li. 44. © Chap. xliii. 12, 13.——4 Chap. 
li. 48. e Isa, xiii. 17,18, 20; Verses 39, 40. 


~ NOTES ON ‘CHAPTER L. 

Verses 1-3. The word that the Lord spake against 
Babylon—This prophecy was delivered and sent to 
Babylon in the fourth year of Zedekiah’s reign, as 
appears from chap. li. 59. Declare ye among the 
nations—The downfall of Babylon was an event in 
which many nations were concerned,,that empire 
having been a common oppressor. Set up a stand- 
urd—To call people together, and impart unto 
them these good tidings. The destruction of Baby- 
lon was likewise a sort of signal to the Jews to as- 
semble together, in order to their return to their 

3 


own land, the’ time of their captivity being then to 
expire. Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken to 
pieces—When God punishes an idolatrous nation 
he is said to confound its idols, because they do not 
bring assistance to their worshippers, nor deliver 
them out of his hands. el is the same with Baal, 
a name common to the idols of the eastern coun- 
tries, and at first probably given to some of the hea- 
venly bodies? see note on Isa. xxxix. 1. For out 
of the north there cometh a nation against her— 
The Medes, who lay north of Babylon. : 
Verses 4,5. In those days—Wherein God shall 
527 


Way 


The prophet foretels 


JEREMIAH. 


Israel's dispersion. 


—* oc 
+ A ~ come, ‘ they and the children of Judah 
together, going and weeping: they shall go, 
: ee seek the Lorp their God. 

5 They shall ask the way to Zion ab their 
Pt thitherward, saying, Come and let. us 
join ourselves to the Lorp jin’ ia perpetual 
covenant that shall not-be forgotten. 


€ Hos. i. 11.——# Ezra iii. 12, 13; Psa. exxvi. 5,6; Chapter 
xxxi. 9; Zech. xii. 10.——} Hos. iii. 5. i Chap. xxxi. 31, &c. ; 
xxxii. 40.— Isa. liii. 6; Verse 17; 1 Pet. ii. 25. 


¥. the Lorp, the children of Israel shall || 6 My people hath been * lost sheep: A. M. 3409. 


their shepherds have caused them to ontea 


go astray, they have turned them away on 
1the mountains: they have gone figm moun- 
tain to hill, they have forgotten their ° mesting- 
place. 

7 All that found them have ™ devoured them : : 
and "their adversaries said, ° We offend not, 


1 Chapter ii. 20; iii. 6, 23-~—-* Heb. place to lie down in, 
m Psalm lxxix. 7.——? Chap. xl. 2,3; Zeéch, xi. 5——o Chap. 
ii.'3;, Dan. ix. 16. 


a 


begin to execute judgment on Babylon; the chil- 
dren of Israel shall come, &c.—This passage is 
primarily meant of the return of the Jews from 
their captivity, upon the destruction of the Babylo- 
nish monarchy. Many of the ten tribes, here term- 
ed the children of Israel, which had been carried 
captive into Assyria, hearing that their brethren of 
the two tribes were permitted and encouraged by 
Cyrus and his successors to return to their own land, 
undoubtedly associated themselves with them, and 
returned also from the several places where they 
had been settled: see Calmet’s Dissertation on the 
Return of the Ten Tribes. Going and weeping— 
Weeping, partly with sorrow for the sins which had 
brought the calamities of the captivity upon them, 
and partly for joy, that God should show them such 
mercy as to bring them again to their own country. 
They shall go and seek the Lord their God—They 
shall inquire after Jehovah, their own God, and seek 
his favour, protection, and aid, and shall now have 
no more to do with idols. 
that seek the Lord must seek him sorrowing ; and 
those that sorrow and are in trouble must seek him, 
and then their sorrow will soon be turned into joy, 
for he will be found of those that seek him. We 
learn from Ezra, chap. iii. 13, that the people both 
wept and rejoiced aloud at the laying of the founda- 
tion of the temple after their return from captivity, 
and that the noise of the weeping of some was equal 
to the shouts of joy raised by others. TZ'hey shall 
ask the way to Zion—The city of their ancient 
solemnities; with their faces thitherward—Deter- 
mined to returnyto it, now that the ruin of Babylon 
and the decree of Cyrus had opened the way for 
their release. The journey, indeed, is long and diffi- 
cult, and they know not the road, but they will make 
inquiry concerning it, and trust in God to enable 
them to surmount all the difficulties and dangers of 
the way. Reader, wouldst thou arrive at the hea- 
venly Canaan, and dost ask the way thither? Then 
see that thy face be thitherward, and not toward the 
world. Inthese words the prophet seems to allude 
to the Jews going in companies to Jerusalem at the 
solemn festivals. Saying, Let us join ourselves to 
the Lord in a perpetual covenant—They had bro- 
ken the covenant which their fathers had made with 
God, and which had been often solemnly renewed, 
especially a little time before the captivity, in the 
days of Josiah; but here they exhort one another 
to join themselyes to him again, by engaging afresh 
528 


Observe, reader, those | 


to be his, and that not for a time merely, but for 
ever; even ina perpetual, or everlasting covenant, 
as the Hebrew, CO y.n°73, signifies, and is trans- 
lated, chap. xxxii. 40; a covenant that must not be 
broken, and therefore must not be forgotten: for a 
due remembrance of it will be the means of a due 
observance of it. 

Verses 6,7. My people hath been lost oan 
men are compared to sheep that go astray, Isa. liii. 
6. Here this character is applied to the Jews, whom 
God calls his people, because of the ancient cove- 
nant made with their fathers. They are said to have 
been Jost, either on account of their captivity, being 
cast out of the land which God gave them, as sheep 
are lost out of their pasture, or in respeet of their 
idolatries and other sins. Their shepherds hare 
caused them to go astray—Their civil and ecclesi- 
astical governors have been the prinéipal causes of 
their sins and miseries: the former, by their wicked 
commands and example, the latter also by example 
as well as doctrine. T'hey have turned them away 
on the mountains—They have turned them aside 
from the right worship of God, performed at the 
temple, to sacrifice to idols upon the mountains and 
high places. He alludes to sheep straying hither 
and thither, through the windings and turnings of 
the mountains. “They have gone From mountain to 
hilli—F rom one species of idolatry to another. They 
have forgotten their resting place—Or, their fold, 
namely, they have forgotten me, in whose love and ser- 
vice, in whose favour, protection, and care they could 
only find rest, safety, and comfort. All that found 
them have devoured them—They have been a prey 
to their enemies on all sides. And their adversa- 
ries said, We offend not—“In making them cap- 
tives. Jeremiah introduces the Chaldeans speaking 
thus by the truest prosopopeia; for it could not be 
but the Chaldeans must have known those things 
which the prophets had foretold concerning the future 
captivity of the Jews; Nebuchadnezzar is a witness, 
who gave his captains orders to preserve Jeremiah :” 
see Houbigant. Because they have sinned against 
the Lord, the habitation of justice—A refuge and 
protection for those that are just and good, and con- 
sequently one that would not have cast off the Jews 
if they had not first forsaken him. This interpreta- 
tion supposes God to be here called, T'he habitation 
of justice, which he undoubtedly is, but whether the 
Chaldeans would term him so may be a question. 
Others, therefore, think the preposition in 4 ‘under 


Tne prophet describes 


CHAPTER L. 


Babylon overthrown. 


SSE =p ee eee fee eee 
CC 


A. M. 3409. because they have sinned against 
B.C. 595. dna ahh 
ie the Lor», ? the habitation of justice, 
even the Lorp, ‘the hope of their fathers. 

8 *Remoye out of the midst of Babylon, and 
go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and 
be as the he-goats before the flocks. 

9 -§] For lo, I will raise and cause to come 
up against Babylon an assembly of great na- 
tions from the north country: and they shall 
*set themselyes in array against her; from 
thence she shall be taken: their arrows shall be 
as of a mighty expert. man; "none shall re- 
turn in vain. 

10 And Chaldea shall be a spoil: * all that 
spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the Lorn. 

11 Y Because ye were glad, because ye re- 
joiced, O -ye destroyers of my heritage, be- 
cause ye are grown ° fat? as the heifer at grass, 
and ° bellow as bulls; 


P Psa. xc. 1; xci. 1—4 Psa. xxii. 4. — Isaiah xlviii..20 ; 
Chap. li. 6, 45; Zech. ii. 6, 7; Rev. xviii. 4. —8 Chap. xv. 14; 
li. 27; Verses 3, 41.—t Verses 14, 29.——* Or, destroyer. 
12 Sam. i. 22. x Rev. xvii. 16.——-Y Isa. xlvii. 6. © Heb, 
big, or, corpulent. z Hos, x. ll. 


stood, making this the aggravation of the Jews’ sins, 
that they were committed in a land which ought to 
have been a habitation of justice. Thus it is said, 
(Isa. xxvi. 10,) that the wicked man will deal wn- 
justly in a land of uprightness. 

Verse 8. Remove out of the midst of Babylon— 
An exhortation often used by the prophets on this 
subject: see the margin. Some learned men sup- 
pose that this exhortation relates to the siege of 
Babylon carried on by Darius Hystaspes in the fifth 
and sixth years of his reign. Before which time 
God had warned the Jews, by the Prophet Zecha- 
riah, (chap. ii. 6, 7,) to flee out of Babylon, and to 
deliver themselves from the miseries that should be- 
fall that city during the siege: see Dr. Prideaux. 
And be as the he-goats before the flocks—“ Let every 
one strive to lead the way to others, and give them 
an example of speedily obeying God’s call, without 
showing any fondness to the place, or the idolatries 
there practised.” 

Verses 9-11. For, lo, I will raise against Baby- 
lon, &c.—See verse 41, and chap. li. 27. From 
thence, or, as Twn, may be rendered, immediately, 
she shall be taken. Their arrows, &¢.—The Medes 
and Persians were famous for the use of the bow. 
And Chaldea shall be a spoil—To all her destroyers, 
who shall enrich themselves by plundering her. All 
that spoil her shall be satisfied—Namely, with spoil 
and plunder, for Chaldea, with Babylon its metropo- 
lis, was, at that time, the richest country in the world. 
Because ye were glad, &c.—They rejoiced at the 
ruin of the Jews, asin laid also to the charge of the 
Edomites, Obad. 12. Though the Chaldeans were 
the executioners of God’s judgments upon the Jews, 

Vou. OL. ( 34 ) 


12 Your mother shall be sore con- A. M. 3409. 
founded ; she that bare you shall be pce 
ashamed : behold, the hindermost ‘of the nations 
shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert. 

13 Because of the wrath of the Lorn it shall 
not be inhabited, *but it shall be wholly deso-' 
late: > every one that goeth by Babylon shall 
be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues. » 

14 ¢ Put yourselves in array against Baba 
lon round about: all ye “that bend the bow, 
shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sin- 
ned against the Lorn. 

15 Shout against her round about: she hath 
° given her hand: her foundations are fallen, 
fher walls are thrown down: for £ it is the 
vengeance of the Lorp: take vengeance upon 
her ; > as she hath done, do. unto her. 

16 Cut off-the sower from Babylon, and him 
that handleth the sickle in the time of har- 


6 Or, neigh as steeds. a Chapter xxv. 12. b Chap. xlix. 
17. ¢ Verse 9; Chap. li. 2. 4 Chap. xlix. 35; Verse 29. 
1 Chron. xxix. 24; 2 Chron. xxx. 8; Lam v.6; Ezek. xvii. 
18,—! Chap. li. 58. £ Chap. li. 6; 11.——» Psa. exxxvii. 8; 
Verse 29; Rev. xviii. 6. 7 Or, scythe. 


yet he punished them, because they were influenced 
in what they did purely by their own ambition and 
covetousness, and acted with inhumanity and-cruelty 
toward the conquered, though Providence directed 
their cruelties and oppressions, to the fulfiliing its 
own ends and purposes. In like manner, God 
threatens to punish the king of Assyria after he had 
been the executioner of his judgments upon Jerusa- 
lem. Becauseye are grown fat, &c.— The insolence 
and rudeness of oppressors are often compared to the 
wantonness of full-fed cattle. 

Verses 12-16. Your mother shall be sore con- 
founded—Namely, Babylon the metropolis, or mo- 
| ther-city of the empire. Or, your country shall be 
ashamed of you, her: children, who are not able to 
defend her. Behold, the hindermost of the nations, 
&c.—The translation of this clause in the Vulgate 
seems much preferable to ours, Ecce novissima erit 
in gentibus, et deserta, invia, et. arens, behold, she 
shall be the hindermost of the nations, a wilderness, 
desolate and dry. Because of the wrath of the 
Lord, it shall not be inhabited—See this illustrated 
in the notes on Isa. xiii. 19-22. Every one that goeth 
by Babylon shall be astonished—See note on chap. 
xviii. 16. For she hath sinned against the Lord— 
She hath been in a remarkable manner an enemy to 
God’s truth and people. This may be especially 
applied to mystical Babylon: see verses 29-381. 
Shout against her round about—As conquerors do 
when a city is taken. She hath given her hand— 
That is, she hath surrendered herself: she hath sub- 
mitted and promised obedience to the conqueror 
The phrase occurs in the same sense Lam. v. @ and 
‘also 1 Chron. xxix. 24,where see the margin. “hus, 

a 


. 


\ 


Israel’s restoration 


JEREMIAH. 


agamn declared. 


——— 

A.M, 3409. vest: for fear of the oppressing sword 
B. C. 595. 

‘they shall turn every one to his peo- 

ple, and they shall flee every one to his own land. 

17 4 Israel is * a scattered sheep; ‘the lions 


have eo him away: first ™the king of 


Assyria devoured him; and last this 
® Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon ie broken 
his bones. 
oe’ Therefore thus saith the a ws of hosts, 
he God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the 
king of Babylon and his land, as I have pun- 
ished the king of Assyria. 
19 ° And I will bring Israel again to his 


iTsaiah xiii, 14; Chap. li, 9—* Verse 6.——! Chap: ii. 15. 
m 2 Kings xvii. 6. ~ 9 Kings xxiv. 10, 14. 
Chap. xxxiii. 12; Ezek. xxxiv. 13, ry bard Chap. xxxi. 34. 


° Isa. Ixv. 10;., 


habitation, and he shall feed on Car- A, ae —y 
mel and Bashan, and his soul shall be 
satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead. | 

20 In those days, and in that tinae' the 
Lorp, ? the iniquity of Israel shal sought 
for, and there shall be none ; .and the sins of 
Judah, and they shall not be found: for L will’ 
pardon them 4 whom I reserve. 

21 J Go up against the land § of Merathaim, 
even against it, and against the inhabitants of 
"Pekod:® waste and utterly destroy after 
them, saith the Lorp, and do * according to all 
that I have commanded thee. 


QIsa. i, 9.-——® Or, of the rebels, r Ezek. xxiii. 23.——® Or, 
visitation. 2 Samuel xvi. 11 ; 2 Kings xviii. 35; 2 Chron 
xxxvi. 23; Isa. x. 6; xliv. 28; xlviii.14; Chap. xxxiv, 22. 


dare manus, to give the hands, in Latin, signifies to 
yield ; and most probably alludes to the act of the 
vanquished, who, throwing down. his arms, and 
stretching forth his defenceless hands, acknowledges 
himself to be in the victor’s power; her foundations 
are fallen—Namely, the foundations of her walls, 
laid in a marshy soil, and surrounded with a deep 
ditch. full of water, to the undermining power of 
which they were continually exposed: see Herodot. 
lib. i. cap. 178. Cut off the sower from Babylon— 
“Babylon resembled a country walled in rather than 
acity ; the walls, according to Herodotus, being sixty 
miles in compass. Within this large circuit a great 
deal of ground was cultivated with corn. So that 
enough grew within the walls to support the inhab- 
itants during a long siege.”--See Prideaux’s Connec- 
tions, page 187. Or, by Babylon here, may be un- 
derstood, not the city only, but the whole province. 
They shall turn every one to his people—This is 
spoken of the allies of the Babylonians. 

Verse 17. Israelis a scattered sheep—See note on 
verse 6. The lions have driven him away—Asa 


lion coming among a flock of sheep scatters them | 


one from another; so have these foreign invaders, 
enemies cruel as lions, served my people. First, 
the king of Assyria hath devoured him—Namely, 
Shalmanseer, who carried away the ten tribes into 
captivity, whence they never in general returned. 
And last this Nebuchadrezzar hath broken his bones 
—Hath entirely ruined Judah and Jerusalem, hath 
destroyed or carried captive the whole nation. 
Verse 18. Behold, I will punish the king of Ba- 
bylon, and his land—God may justly punish those 
who do the things that he hath commanded them to 
do, if they do them not in that manner in which he 
directs, or, if what they do be not done in obedience 
to his command,-but for the satisfaction of their own 
lusts: which was the case, as with the king of As- 
syria, Isa. x. 5-7, so also with the king of Babylon; 
as Ihave punished the king of Assyria—Some refer 
this to the punishment of the Assyrians, in the de- 
struction of Sennacherib and his army, in the time 
of Hezekiah; but the prophet seems rather to speak 
of a destruction of Assyria which followed the carry- 
530 


ing of the ten tribes into captivity, and therefore 
may most probably be understood of the destruction 
of Nineveh, the chief seat of the Assyrian empire, 
by Nebuchadnezzar, and Assuerus or Astyages,-as it 
is related in Tobit, chap. xiv. 15. At the taking of 
this great city, foretold by Jonah, Nahum, and Zeph- 
aniah, Chynadanus, the last king of the Assyrian 
race, was killed ;.and the seat and title of the empire 
removed to Babylon, which was no longer called 
the Assyrian, but the Babylonian monarchy. Bee 
Dr. Prideaux, pages 47, 48. 

Verses 19, 20. I will bring Israel again to his 
habitation—T will take care of Israel as a shepherd 
does of his flock, and bring them back to their an- 
cient habitations, and to their former peace and 
plenty. By Israel here is meant the two tribes of 
Judah and Benjamin, the Levites and some Israelites 
who joined with them, after the carrying away of 
the ten tribes. “As several parts of this prophecy,” 
says Lowth, “relate to that mystical Babylon whose 
destruction is foretold Rev. xviii., so these promises 
of grace and favour to the Jewish nation are chiefly 
to be understood of the general restoration of that 
people, which we may expect after the downfall of 
the anti-christian empire.” In those days the ini- 
quity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall 
be none—That is, I will be perfeetly reconciled to 
them, asif they had never offended. The Hebrew 
language often expresses the utter ceasing of any 
thing by seeking and not finding it. This promise 
seems principally to respect the times of the gospel, 
and the remnant of the Jews that shall be saved 
according to the election of grace: compare chap. 
xxxi. 34, and xxxiii. 8; Rom. xi. 5, 26, 27. 

Verse 21. Go up against the land of Merathaim, 
and against Pekod—Although these two words 
n>, Merathaim, and pa, Pekod, are considered 
by our translators as proper names; and the latter 
is so understood by the Chaldee paraphrast: yet all 
the other ancient versions agree in representing the 
former word as an appellative, and the latter as a 
verb, The former, which is the dual number of m0, 
marah, may signify either bitterness, or rebellion ; 
and Blaney thinks that “ Babylon is called the lan land 

( 34* ) 3 


Further description 


CHAPTER L. 


A. M. 3409, 
B. C. 595, 


22 * A sound of battle is in the land, 
and of great destruction. 
23 How is "the hammer of the whole earth 


cut as and broken! how is Babylon be- 
come a desolation among the nations ! 

24 I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art 
also taken, O Babylon, * and thou wast not 
aware: thou art found, and also caught, be- 
cause thou hast striven against the Lorn. 

25 The Lorn hath opened his armory, and 
hath brought forth ¥ the weapons of his indig- 
nation : for this is the work of the Lord Gop 
of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans. 

26 Come against her 1° from the utmost bor- 
der, open ‘her store-houses: ™ cast her up as 
heaps, and destroy her «utterly: let nothing of 
her be left. 

27 Slay all her ” bullocks ; let them go down 
to the slaughter: wo unto them! for their day 
Is come, the time of * their visitation. 

28 'The voice of them that flee and escape out 


| Zion the vengeance of the Lorp our . 


reall ye that bend the bow, cam 


of the land of Babylon, ” to declare i OP a 
God, the vengeance of his temple. 

29 Call together the archers against Babylon: 
ainst it 
round about ; let none thereof escape: 4 recom- 
pense her according to her work ; according to 
all that she hath done, do unto her: ¢ for she 
hath been proud against the Lorp, against the 
Holy One of Israel. 

30 f'Therefore shall her young men fall in 
the streets, and all her men of war shall be cut 
off in that day, saith the Lorp. 

dL Behold, I am against thee,-O thou 
most proud, saith the Lord Gop of hosts: 
for ®thy day is come, the time. that I will 
visit thee. 

32. And '*the most proud shall stumble and 
fall, and none shall raise him up: and *T will 
kindle a fire in his cities, and it-shall devour all 
round about him. 


t Chap. li. 54. —" Isa. xiv. 6; Chap. li. 20. x Chap. li. 
8,31, 39, 57; Dan. v. 30, 31. —v sa. xiii. 5." Heb. from 
the end,— 1 Or, tread her——t Psa. xxii. 12; Isa. xxxiv. 7; 
Chap. xlvi. 21. 


of bitterness, or of redoubled bitterness here, because 
it had proved such to the-Jewish nation, whose 
country had been ruined, and the people held in 
slavery there.” Accordingly he translates the verse 
as follows: “Against the land of bitterness go up; 
upon it, and upon its inhabitants visit, Osword, and 
utterly destroy their posterity, saith Jehovah, and 
perform according to all that I have charged thee.” 
The command seems to be directed to Cyrus and his 
confederates. t 

Verses 22-24. A sownd of battle is in the land— 
That is, in the land of Chaldea. How is the ham- 
mer of the whole earth broken!—That oppressive 
empire that smote the nations with a continual 
stroke, as is said Isa. xiv. 6, and brought them under 
subjection to it. J have laid a snare for thee ; and 
thou art also taken, O Babylon—Cyrus took the city 
by surprise and in an unexpected manner, entering 
it, by draining the river Euphrates, at a time when 
the walls were entire, the city full of provisions, and 
the people in high spirits, and in a state of the 
utmost security, dreading no such event. Accord- 
ing to Herodotus, part of the city was taken before 
those who dwelt in the midst of it knew any thing 
about it; so that with propriety they might be said 
to be caught as in a snare. Because thou hast 
striven against the Lord—The reason of this unex- 
pected ruin coming on this great people was their 
sinning against the Lord: see verse 14; here called 
a striving against him, as indeed all sin is. 

Verses 25-32. The Lord hath opened his armory, 
&e.—God hath raised up enemies to subdue the 

3 


© Verse 
© Isa. xlvii. 
12 Heb. pride-——s Verse 27. 


a Chap. xlviii.44; Verse 31.——? Chap. li. 10, 11. 
14. 4 Verse 15; Chap. cP 56; Rev. xviii. 6. 
10.——f Chap. xlix. 26; li. 4 
13 Heb. pride. © Chap. xxi. 14, 


Chaldeans, namely, Cyrus and his confederates, and 
hath furnished them with all the means necessary 
for such an undertaking. Come against her from 
the utmost border—From distant parts, namely, 
from the Caspian and Euxine seas. Cast her up as 
heaps—The marginal rendering seems preferable ; 
Tread her, trample over her, as heaps of ruins; or 
tread her as the corn is trodden down when it is 
thrashed. Slay her bullocks—That is, Her strong 
men, as the Vulgate and the Chaldee interpret the 
expression. Wo unto them, for their day is come 
—The time in which they are to be punished: The 
voice of them that escape, to declare in Zion, &e. 
—-This may either foretel that some of the Babylo- 
nians would flee as far as Judea for refuge, and there 
publish what had befallen Babylon, or, which seems 
more likely, that some of those Jews or proselytes 
to the Jewish religion in Chaldea, who were more 
than ordinarily zealous for the welfare of God’s 
church and people, would be ready, upon the first 
news of the taking of Babylon, to bring the glad 
tidings to Judea, that God had avenged his people, 
and executed his judgments on those who destroyed 
his temple, and profaned the holy vessels of it: see 
chap. li. 51; Dan. v. 1, 2,3, 5,30. Call together the 
archers—See verses 9, 14.. Recompense her accord- 
ing to her work—This is applied to mystical Baby- 
lon, Rev. xviii. 6, which, when fulfilled, will be a 
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, 
as St. Paul speaks, 2 Thess. i. 5, at which all good 
men ought to rejoice, and give glory to God when 
they see it effected. For she hath been proud 
531 


The great exter.t of 


JEREMIAH. 


Babylon’s desolation. 


A. M. 3409. 33 %[ Thus saith the Lorn of hosts ; 
B.0-5% Phe children of Israel and the chil- 
dren of Judah were oppressed together : and all 
that took them captives held them fast ; they 
refused to let them go. 

34 i} Their Redeemer is strong; * the Lorp 
of hosts is his name: he shall thoroughly 
_ plead their cause, that he may give rest to the 
- dana, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. 
35 9 A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith 
the Lorp, and upon the inhabitants of Baby- 
lon, and !upon her princes, and upon ™her 
wise men. 


36. A sword is ® upon the 1 liars ;1° Ais 3410- 
and they shall dote: a sword is ion ———— 
her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed. 

37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon 
their chariots, and upon all ° the mingled: peo- 
ple that are in the midst of her; and ” they 
shall become as women: a sword 7s upon her 
treasures ; and they shall be robbed. 

38 4A drought és upon her waters ; and she 
shall be dried up: for it is the land of ? graven 
images, and they are mad upon their idols. 

39.* Therefore the wild beasts of the desert 
with the wild beasts of the islands shall dwell 


i Rev. xviii. 8——* Isa. xlvii.4——! Dan. v. 30,——™ Isa. 
xlvii, 13, 2 Isa, xliv. 25; Chap. xlviii. 30.—* Or, chief 
stays. 15 Heb. bars——° Chap. xxv. 20, 24; Ezek. xxx. 5. 


P.Chap. li. 30; Nah. iii. 13——4 Isa. xliv. 27; Chap. li. 32, 
36 ; Rev. xvi. 12.— Verse 2 ; Chap. li. 44, 47, 52.— Isa. 
xiii. 21, 22 ; xxxiv, 14; Chap. it 37; Rev. xviii. & 


against the Lord—Hath exalted herself against God, 
saying, J am, and there is none besides me, Isa. 
xlvii. 7, 8, where see the notes. Therefore shall 
her young men fall in the streets—Xenophon re- 
lates, lib. vii, that when Gobryas and Gadates, two 
of Cyrus’s generals, with their soldiers, had got 
into the city, they marched directly toward the 
palace, killing all they met, and, having surprised 
the guards, cut them in pieces, and slain the king 
himself, they, without difficulty, made them- 
selves masters of the palace. J will kindle a fire 
in. his cities—This may be meant of the destruction 
made in the Babylonian territories, in the several 
expeditions Cyrus undertook against that monarchy 
before the taking of Babylon. 

Verses 33, 34. Israel and Judah were oppressed to- 
gether—Not together with respect to times, for there 
was a distance of one hundred and fifty years between 
the time of Israel’s and Judah’s being carried away 
captive; nor by the same enemy ; Israel being car- 
ried away by the Assyrians, Judah by the Chal- 
deans. Together here signifies no more than that 
they were both oppressed, or alike oppressed. And 
all that took them captives held them fast—Were 
determined not to release them. The prophet seems 
here to intimate, that as their enemies were not only 
very powerful, but fully resolved to detain them in 
captivity, his predictions of their deliverance might 
seem to some but vain words, never likely to be ful- 
filled. Hence he adds, in thenext verse, Their Re- 
deemer is strong—Or, their Avenger, as the word 
also signifies. He that has a right to them will claim 
his right, and make good his claim. He is stronger 


than their enemies who hold them fast, and can,, 


with infinite ease, overpower all their force, and 
baffle all their subtlety, and put strength into his 
own people, though they may be very weak. The 
Lord of hosts is his name—And he will answer his 
name, and make it appear that he is what his people 
call him, He shall thoroughly plead their cause— 
Hebrew, D2 NR 27139, pleading he will plead 
it, plead it with jealousy, and effectually plead it 
and carry it; that he may give rest to the land— 


To his people’s land, rest from al] their enemies 
round about; or, to the earth,as 18 more properly 
signifies, namely, rest from the oppressions of the 
Babylonish empire; and disquiet—Or, cause to 
tremble, as some render }'391, the inhabitants of 
Babylon—Because they have disquieted his people, 
and caused them to tremble, for whose honour and 
comfort he is jealous. 

Verses 35-37. A sword. is upon the Chaldeans— 
That is, there shall come a sword upon them. Up- 
on Babylon and her princes—Who were slain to- 
gether with their king, Belshazzar, at a feast, chap. 
li. 39; Dan. v. 2-30. And upon her wise men—The 
Chaldeans were famous for their skill in astrology, 
and other arts of divination; and yet the learned 
in those sciences were not able to foresee or pre- 
vent the dangers coming upon themselves in the 
common calamity. Aswordis upon the liars—Up- 
on the diviners, or the pretenders to the knowledge 
of future events; and they shall dote—They shall 
be proved to be foolish and ignorant, by things hap- 
pening directly contrary to what they had thought 
and said. Thus Isaiah, speaking of the same kind of 
men, says, He (namely, God) frustrateth the tokens 
of the liars, and maketh diviners mad. A sword is 
upon ali the mingled people—Upon her auxiliaries, 
made up of several nations: see Ezek. xxx. 5. And 
they shall become as women—Fearful, and having 
neither courage nor any thing else manly in them. 
A sword is upon her treasures, &¢c.—* Her trea- 
sures shall be a prey to such as come with sword in 
hand to rifle them: as Solon said to Creesus, who, by 
way of ostentation, showed him his treasures, “ Sir, 
if any one come that has better iron than you, he 
will be master of all your gold.”—Lowth. 

Verses 38-40. A drought is upon all her waters 
—Our translators, after the example of the Vulgate 
and others, have rendered 3°n, a drought, here, 
whereas they have translated it @ sword in the pre- 
ceding verses, as supposing, it seems, that a sword 
has nothing to do with waters. But they might 
very properly have rendered it @ sword here also: 
for this term is used metaphorically, to denote 

3 


- 


The prophet continues his 


CHAPTER LI. 


4 een 3409. ¢here, and the owls shall dwell there- 

—_— in: ‘and it shall be no more inha- 
bited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in 
from generation to generation. 

40 “As God overthrew Sodom and Gomor- 
rah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the 
Lorp; so shall no man abide there, neither 
shall any son of man dwell therein. 

41 *Behold, a people shall come from the 
north, and a great nation, and many kings 
shall be raised up from the coast of the earth. 

42 ¥ They shall hold the bow and the lance: 
they are cruel, and will not show mercy: 
*their voice shall roar like the sea, and they 
shall ride upon horses, every one put in array, 
like a man to the battle, against thee, O daugh- 
ter of Babylon. 

43 The king of Babylon hath heard the 
report of them, and his hands waxed feeble: 


Isa. xiii. 20 ; er xxv. 12. “ Gen. xix. 25; Isa. xili. 19; 
Chap. xlix.18; li. 26. x Verse 9; Chap. vi. 22; XXxv. 14; 
li. 27; Rev. xvii. 16—y¥ Chap. vi. 22. ? Tea. xiii. 18, 


either the instrument of divine vengeance generally, 
or the operations and effects of war in particular; in 
either of which senses it may be applied to waters 
as well as to treasures. And the allusion here is 
evidently to the stratagem of Cyrus, who drained 
off the waters of the Euphrates, which ran through 
the city of Babylon, by means of which his troops, by 
night, marched ‘along the bed of the river into the 
heart of the city, and surprised it. For it is the land 
of graven images, &c.—This vengeance comes 
upon them, because they have been the great encou- 
ragers and supporters of idolatry. It may be re- 
marked, that the executioners of the divine judg- 
ments were the Persians, who, in opposition to the 
Sabians, (whose notions the Chaldeans embraced, ) 
followed the ancient discipline of the magi, or wise 
men among them, and had neither altars nor images; 
as is attested by Strabo and Herodotus: see Pri- 
deaux’s Connections, p. 177, and Lowth. And 
they are mad upon their idols—See note on Isa. 
lvii. 5. They may well be termed mad who make 
a god of any creature, and especially those who wor- 
ship images which ‘their own hands have made. 
Therefore the wild beasts of the desert, &ec——Bla- 
ney renders this clause, T'ierefore shall wild cats, 
with jackals dwell, the daughters of the ostrich also 
shall dwell in her; and refers to Bochart in justi- 
fication of the propriety of his translation. Com- 


» anguish took hold of him, and pangs A. bees 3409. 


595. 
as of a woman in travail. 


44° Behold, he shall come up like a lion 
from the swelling of Jordan unto the habita- 
tion of the strong: but I will make them sud- 
denly run away from her: and who is a 
chosen man that I may appoint over her? for 
who is like me? and who will ‘appoint m 
the time ? and 4 who és that shepherd that w 


stand before me? 


45 Therefore hear ye °the counsel of the 
Lorp, that he hath taken against Babylon ; 
and his purposes, that he hath purposed against 
the land of the Chaldeans: surely the least of 
the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall 
make their habitation desolate with them. 

A6 ‘ At the noise of the taking of Babylon the 
earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the 
nations. 


aTsa. v. 30. » Chap. xlix. 24.——<¢ Chap. xlix. 19.——"¢ Or- 
convent me to plead. @ Job xli. 10; Chap. xlix. 19. © Isa, 


| xiv. 24; Chap. li. 11.—f Rev. xviii. 9. 


pare this passage with the parallel one, Isa, xiii. 19- 
22, where see the notes. 

Verses 41-46. Behold, a people shall come from the 
north—Namely, the Medes; and a great nation— 
That is, who are a great nation ; for this is no more 
than an explicative of the foregoing sentence. And 
many kings—Namely, the kings of the Persians, 
Armenians, Hyrcanians, Cadusians, and others who 
fought under Cyrus’s banner, as allies or friends to 
him. Their voice shall roar like the sea—The 
noise of an army is fitly compared to the roaring of 
the sea when it rages and is tempestuous. Every 
one put in array—In exact and firm order, as if the 
whole host.were but one man. The king of Baby- 
lon hath heard, &c.—Belshazzar was of himself a 
weak and dissolute prince, and was soon routed in 
the field ; and so dismayed that he shut himself up 
in Babylon. Beliold, he shall come up like a lion— 
See notes on chap. xlix. 19-21, where we have ap- 
plied unto Edom what is here spoken against Baby- 
lon. At the noise of the taking of Babylon the 
earth is moved, and the cry is heard, &c.—These 
words are intended to express the greatness of the 
destruction of Babylon, which should be such as 
should make all that part of the world to shake 
and tremble; and the nations, whether near or far 
remote, should be astonished at the downfall of so 
great a city and potent an empire. 


CHAPTER LL 


The prophet in this chapter proceeds with the prediction of the fall of Babylon: in the description of which he en- 
larges much for the encouragement of the pious captives, whose deliverance depended upon it, and was to be the 


3 


“ 


533 


Judgment of Babylon, 


JEREMIAH. 


and the reasons for it. 


result of it. 


Here is, (1,) The record of Babylon’s doom, with the particulars of it, intermixed with the grounds 


of God’s controversy with her, many aggravations of her fall, and great.encouragements given from thence to the 


Israel of God, that suffered such hard things by her, 1-58. 
Seraiah’s sinking a copy of these predictions i in the river Euphrates, near Babylon, 


Jewish captives there, 59-64. 


HUS saith the Lorn; Behold, I 
will raise up against Babtlos and 
against them that dwell in the 1 midst of them 
that rise up against me, * a destroying wind ; 

- 2 And will send unto Babylon ” fanners, that 
shall fan her, and shall empty her land: ° for in 
the day of trouble they shall be against her 
round about. 

3 Against Aim that bendeth “let the archer 
bend his bow, and against him that lifteth him- 
self up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her 
young men; ° destroy ye utterly all her host. 

4 'Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the 


A. M. 3409, 
B. 595. 


1 Heb. heart. a2 Kings xix. 7; eri 
¢ Wr 1, 14.——4 =. 


iv. 11.—> Chap. xv. 7. 
© Chap. I. 21. 


Chaldeans, ‘ and they that are thrust A. 


(2,) The representation and ratification of this by 
after he had red it to the 


M. 3409, 
through in her streets. — 

5 For Israel hath. not been forsaken, nor 
Judah of his. God, of the Lorn of hosts; 
though their land was filled with sin against the 
Holy One of Israel. 

6 &Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and 
deliver every man his soul: be not cut off 
in her iniquity; for »this is the time of the 
Lorn’s vengeance; ‘he will render unto her 
a recompense. 

7 * Babylon hath been a golden cup in the 
Lorop’s hand, that made all the earth a 


f Chapter xlix. 26; 1. 30, 37——s Chapter 1. 8; Rev. xviii. 4. 
h Chap. 1. 15, 28, Chap. xxv. 14. — Rev. xvii. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LI. 

Verses 1, 2. Behold, Iwill raise up against Baby- 
lon—Darius and Cyrus, who came against Babylon, 
came by a divine instinct. God excited their spirits 
to accomplish his purpose against that idolatrous 
city, and the oppressive government which had its 
seat there. Against them that dwell in the midst— 
Hebrew, in the heart; of them that rise up against 
me—That is, in the centre of the country of mine 
adversaries, which by a circumlocution means. the 
same. as Babylon itself. A destroying wind—See 
note on chap. iv. 11, where the prophet describes the 
Chaldean army coming up for the destruction of 
Judea under the same metaphor. The Chaldeans 
had been like a destroying, blasting wind to the 
Jews, and now the Medes and Persians are to be 
like one to them. And will send unto Babylon fan- 
ners—Enemies who shall drive them away as chaff 
is driven,away by the fan; or those who shall dis- 
perse her forces, and empty or spoil her land of all 
its riches, &e. This image is frequently made use 
of by the Hebrew prophets, to represent the ease 
with which the Almighty disperses and destroys his 
enemies: see notes on chap. xv. 7; Isa. xxi. 10; xli. 
16. For in the day of trouble they shall be against 
her, &c.—Or, as the words may be rendered, When 
they shall come round her on every side in the evil 
(or adverse) day. 

Verses 3-5. Against him that bendeth let the arch- 
er bend—See chap. 1.14; and against him that lift- 
eth up himself in his brigandine—Or, coat of mail: 
suffer not them who are skilful in using the bow, or 
armed in coats of mail, to avail themselves any thing 
of their skill or their armour, but oppose them with 
superior skill and force. Thus the slain shall fall 
in the land of the Chaldeans—There seems to be a 
transposition of words in this sentence, the sense 
certainly being, Thus the Chaldeans shall fall down 

534 


4 


slain to the earth. For Israel hath not been (or 
rather, shall not be) forsaken, nor Judah of his God 
—“ Though God was justly displeased with his peo- 
ple, yet he would not cast them off utterly, or de- 
prive them of his protection, though he would do. so 
to those that were the rod in his hand, to chastise 
and scourge his people.” 

Verses 6, 7. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, &e, 
—God’s people are here exhorted to flee out of 
Babylon with all haste, as Lot did out of Sodom, lest 
they should be consumed in the iniquity of. that 
place: see chap. 1.8. Babylon hath been a golden 
cup in the Lord’s hand—In what: sense Babylon is 
called a cwp may be seen by comparing chap. xxv. 
15. Her greatness and glory enticed and drew in 
many nations to be confederate with her, in hopes 
of enriching or aggrandizing themselves; but thereby 
they drew down destruction upon themselves. They 
thought to drink, or be in alliance with the Baby- 
lonians, was drinking out of a golden cup, but it 
proved to them adeadly draught. For she was a 
splendid instrument of vengeance, ordained by God 
against them; and as they all had suffered by her, 
so they are all here represented as glorying over 
her, and rejoicing when her turn of suffering came. 
By making all the earth drunken, is meant either- 
making all the neighbouring nations: act foolishly, 
and contrary to true wisdom and prudence, or the 
causing them, as it were, to stagger and fall through 
the terror and astonishment, the confusion and dis- 
may, which God’s judgments should produce among 
them: see note on chap. xxv. 15. We may observe 
further here, that this golden cup is said to be in the. 
Lord’s hand, to signify that these things had been 
brought about by the divine providence, and that 
God had used Babylon as an instrument to bring the 
nations to that cig #8 pniitenens which eed coal 


| deserved. e 


Desoldste state of Babylon 


CHAPTER LI. 


foretold by the prophet. 


A. whi ‘the nations have drunken of her 
wine; therefore the nations ™are 
mad. 
8 Babylon is suddenly * fallen and destroyed: 
° howl for her; ? take balm for her pain, if so 
be she may be healed. 


9 We would have healed Babylon, but she is’ 


not healed: forsake her, and ‘let us go every 
one into his own country: * for her judgment 
reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to 
the skies. 

10 The Lorp hath * brought forth our right- 
eousness : come, and let us ¢ sdéclate in Zion the 
work of the Lorn our God. 

11 "Make * bright the arrows; gather the 
shields: *the Lorp hath raised up the spirit 


1 Rev. xiv. 8——™ Ch. xxv. 16,——" Isa, xxi. 9; Rev, xiv. 8; 
xviii. 2. ° Chap. xlviii. 20; Rev. xviii. 9, 11, 19——» Chap. 
xlvi. LI. Isaiah xiii. 4; Chapter 1. 16. t Rey. xviii. 5. 
* Psa. xxxvii. 6——t Chap. 1. 28,——0 Chap. xlvi. 4. 


~ Verses & 8, 9. Babylon is sudden fallen—It was 
one of the aggravations of the punishment of Babylon, 
that her destruction came upon her suddenly and 
unexpectedly. Howl for her, &c.—So the kings, 
the merehants, and other factors, are described as 
lamenting the destruction of mystical Babylon, Rev. 
xviii. 9, 11, 17-19. Take balm for her pain—Use 
your utmost endeavours, and try every thing you 
ean to save her from destruction. This is spoken 
ironically, implying her ruin to be irrecoverable. We 
would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed— 
Some think “this is spoken in the name of God’s 
prophets, and the other witnesses of his truth, im- 
porting that they had sufficiently testified against her 
errors and idolatries, but that she was irreclaimable ; 
and therefore that it was time for all the lovers of 
truth to depart out of her, lest they should be in- 
volved in her punishments. »- But it is more pro- 
bable that the nations which had been subject to 
Babylon, and were her allies, are the speakers here, 
declaring that they had assisted her to the utmost of 
their power, and had endeavoured to support her 
sinking cause, but all in vain, nothing which they 
had dane or could do availing to save her from de- 
struction. And therefore, as her case was desperate, 
it was time for them to shift for themselves, and to 
leave Babylon to its fate, since it seemed to be the 
decree of Heaven that it should fall. Those who have 
written of the downfall of Babylon relate, that when 
its affairs seemed to grow desperate, it was deserted 
by most of its allies, few or none of them persevering 
to lend it any assistance. Her judgment reacheth 
unto heaven—That is, her sin, bringing down God’s 
judgments ; and is lifted wp even to the skies—It 
comes to the ears of even God himself, and engages 
him to take account of it and punish her. 

Verse 10. The Lord hath brought forth our 
righteousness—Hath made manifest the equity of 
our cause, revenged the wrongs we have suffered, 

3 


®., 


of the kings of the Medes: Y for his A; M. 3409. 
device is against Babylon, to destroy ———— 
it; because it ¢s * the vengeance of ‘the Lorp, 
the vengeance of his temple. 

12 *Set up the standard upon the walls of 
Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the 
watchmen, prepare the ?ambushes: for the 
Lorp hath both devised and done that which 
he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon. _ 

13 »O thou that dwellest upon many waters, - 
abundant in treasures, thine end is’ come, and 
the measure of thy covetousness. 

14 * The Lorn of hosts hath sworn 4 by him- 
self, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men, 
‘as with caterpillars; and they shall ° lift ° up 
a shout against thee. 


? Heb. pure.-——* Isaiah xiii. 17; Verse 28. y Chap. 1. 45. 
“Chapter 1. 28. 4 Nah. ii. 1; iil. 14. * Heb. liers in wait. 
» Rev. xvii. 1, 15. ¢ Chap. xlix. 13 5; Amos vi. 8. 4 Heb. by 
his soul. @ Nah. iii. 15. 5 Heb. utter. e Chap. I. 15. 


and shown ours to be the true religion, by bringing 
such remarkable judgments upon our enemies. 
Come, and let us declare in Zion, &e.—Therefore 
let us give glory to him in the assemblies of his 
church, and in the most public manner imaginable. 
This is spoken in the persons of the captive Jews. 

Verses 11,12. Make bright the arrows, gather 
the shields—Hebrew, conoun wh _ fill ihe quivers. 
Thus the LXX., acer Tac dap_etpac, With whom 
agree the Vulgate, Castalio, and others. The mean- 
ing is, Prepare all the instruments of war to defend 
yourselves, ye Babylonians, for you will have need 
ofthem all. The Lord hath raised up the spirit 
of the kings of the Medes—Neriglissar, king of 
Babylon, having formed an alliance against the 
Medes, Cambyses sent his son Cyrus with an army 
of thirty thousand Persians to join the Medes, com- 
manded by Cyaxares, king of Media, Cyrus’s uncle; 
called in Scripture, Darius the Mede. It was pro- 
perly his army that made the expedition against the 
Babylonians, Cyrus being employed as his general. 
Persia was then a small part of the empire of Media, 
and of little account till Cyrus advanced its reputa- 
tion; and even then it was called the kingdom of 
the Medes and Persians, the Medes haying still 
the preference: see Xenophon’s Cyroped., lib. i. and 
Lowth. Set up the standard upon, or rather, be- 
fore the walls. of Babylon; and proceed to take all 
the necessary steps to distress her, and make your- 
selves masters of her: for the Lord hath both de- 
vised, &c.—For God will both favour your under- 
taking, and will enable you to accomplish it. 

Verses 13-19. O thow that dwellest wpon many 
waters—The river Euphrates ran through the 
midst of Babylon, and there was a prodigious lake 
of water on one side of the city, besides other lesser 
waters near it, so that it was in a manner encom- 
passed with waters. Many waters do likewise sig- 
|nify mystically the many people over which this 
535 


The desolations coming 


JEREMIAH. 


upon the Babylonians, 


A. M. 3409. 


15 ‘ He hath made the earth by his 
B. C. 595. 


power, he hath established the world 
by his wisdom, and £ hath stretched out the 
heaven by his understanding. 

16 ® When he uttereth his voice, there is a 
* multitude of waters in the heavens; and ‘he 
causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends 
of the earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, 
and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures. 

17 * Every man ‘is brutish by his know- 
ledge; every founder is confounded by the 
graven image: ! for his molten image is false- 
hood, and there is no breath in them. 

18 ™They are vanity, the work of errors: 
in the time of their visitation they shall 
perish. 

19 ™ The portion of Jacob is not like them ; 
for he 7s the former-of all things: and Israel 
is the rod of his inheritance: the Lorn of hosts 
is his name. 

20 °'Thou art my battle-axe, and weapons 
of war: for with thee will I break in pieces 
the nations, and with thee will I destroy king- 
doms ; 


f Gen. i. 1, 6; Chapter x. 12. Psalm civ. 2; 
Isaiah xl. 22. h Chapter x. 13. al or noise. i Psalm 
exxxv., 7.— Chapter x. 14.——7 Or, is more brutish than to 
know.—+ Chap. 1. 2. 


21 And with thee will I break in ~ 4 
pieces the horse and his rider ; and a. 
with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and 
his rider ; 

22 With thee also will I break in pieces 
man and woman; and with thee will I break 
in pieces ? old and young ; and with thee will I 
break in pieces the young man and the maid ; 

23 I will also break in pieces with thee the 
shepherd and his flock ; and with thee will I 
break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke 
of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces 
captains and rulers. 

24 4And I will render unto Babylon and 
to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil 
that they have done in Zion in your sight, 
saith the Lorp. 

25 Behold, I am against thee, *O destroying 
mountain, saith the Lorp, which destroyest all 
the earth: and I will stretch out my hand upon 
thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, * and 
will make thee a burnt mountain. 

26 And they shall not take of thee a stone 
for a corner, nor a stone for foundations ; * but 


m Chap. x. 15. n Chap. x. 16.——° Isaiah ae 15; Chapter 
1, 23.—4 Or, in thee, or, by thee. P So 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17. 
4 Chapter 1. 15, 29. 'Isaiah’xiii. 2; Zech. iv. 7.—— Rev. 
viii. 8.——t Chap. 1. 40. 


was the siStptttng city : see Rey. xvii: 15. Abundant in 
treasures—Not only enriched by traffic, but by the 
conquest and spoil of many nations. Thine end is 
come, and the measure of thy covetousness—God 
has set bounds to thy covetousness, which it shall 
not pass over: thou shalt no more increase in 
wealth, but an end shall be put to all thy designs of 
this sort. The Lord of hosts hath sworn by him- 
self—The Lord, who is well able to make his words 
good, hath sworn by himself, for he could swear by 
no greater, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men 
as with caterpillars—Or, locusts, as, according to 
Bochart, the word pr properly signifies. Armies 
are often compared to caterpillars, locusts, and such 
like devouring insects. He hath made the earth by 
his power, &c.—It is he who, by his immense 
power, has made all these wonderful things which 
we see about us, and adorned and settled them by 
his wisdom, that has pronounced this concerning 
Babylon: and therefore you need not be doubtful 
respecting its accomplishment, since he who could 
create these mighty works, can certainly, whenever 
he pleases, effect what is infinitely more easy, the 
ruin of Babylon. But for an elucidation of this, 
and the four following verses, see notes on chap. x. 
12-16. 

Verses 20-24. Thow art my battle-axre, &c.— 
Cyrus, or rather the army of the Medes and Per- 
sians, seems to be intended here ; compare verses 11, 


12; as elsewhere the instrument. of God’s ven- 
geance is called a sword, a rod, a scourge. This 
army, with Cyrus, their general, God here says he 
will make use of for destroying the whole power of 
the Babylonish empire, and all orders and degrees 
of men in it, as he had formerly made that empire 
the executioner of his judgments upon other coun- 
tries, chap. 1. 23. “Or else,” says Lowth, “ the 
words may be understood of the church, and ‘imply, 
that God will destroy all those earthly powers and 
kingdoms which are adversaries to his truth and 
people, in order to establish and advance his church. 
This will be fulfilled at the fall of mystical Babylon, 
when God’s kingdom shall break in pieces all the 
kingdoms of the earth, in the destruction of that 
remnant of the fourth monarchy, according to 
Daniel’s prophecy, chap. ii. 44.” And I will render 
unto Babylon all. their evil (see verse 11, and 
chap. 1. 28) that they have done in Zion, in you 
sight—This may either refer to the evil done at 
Jerusalem and in Judea, by the Chaldeans, in the 
sight of God’s people, or to the open and public 
manner in which judgment would be executed on 
Babylon. 

Verses 25, 26. Behold, I am against thee, oO 
destroying mountain—Babylon was situate in a 
plain, but is called a mountain here, by reason of its 
superiority and eminence above all other places ;_ 
and perhaps also on account of its lofty walls, pa- 


The prophet continues his 


CHAPTER LI. 


predictions against Babylon. 


eS SE 


\ “ ate. thou shalt be °desolate for ever, saith 
—_—— the Lorp. . 

27 "Set ye up a standard in the land, blow 
the trumpet among the nations, * prepare the 
nations against her, call together against her 
¥ the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashche- 
naz; appoint a captain against her; cause the 
horses to come up as the rough caterpillars. 

28 Prepare against her the nations with 
* the kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, 
and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of 
his dominion. 

29 And the land shall tremble and sorrow ; 


for every purpose of the Lorp shall A.M. aie. 
be performed against Babylon, *to —— ~~ 
make the land of Babylon a desolation with- 
out an inhabitant. 

30 The mighty men of Babylon have for- 
borne to fight, they have remained in their 
holds: their might hath failed; » they became 
as women: they have burned their dwelling- 
places ; ° her bars are broken. 

31. 4 One post shall run to meet another, and 
one messenger to meet another, to show the 
king of Babylon that his city is taken at 
one end, 


° Heb. everlasting desolations. u Tsa. xiii. 2. x Chap. xxv. || Verse 43.» Isa. xix. 16; Chap. xlviii. 41; 1. 37. ¢ Lam. 
14.—y Chapter |. 41.—— Verse 11. 4 Chapter I, 13, 39, 40; || ii. 9; Amos i. 5; Nah. iii. 13.——4 Chap. 1. 24. 
laces, and other edifices ; and it has the epithet of || was accordingly appointed to this purpose. Cause 


destroying, on account of its being the cause of the 
destruction of many nations. Or, the words 17 
Mn2nN. may properly be rendered, mountain of 
corruption, a name given by way of reproach to the 
mount of Olives, after it was defiled by idolatry, 2 
Kings xxiii. 13, where see the note. The same ap- 
pellation is here given to Babylon, because it was 
the seat of idolatry; which was derived from 
thence into other countries under its government 
and jurisdiction. This is remarkably true of mys- 
tical Babylon. J will roll thee down from the rocks— 
That is, from thy strong holds. I will dismantle all 
thy walls and forts, and then set thee on fire, (see 
verses 58, 59,) so that thou shalt appear like a great 
mountain burning. “ Earthquakes were frequent in 
Palestine, and the sacred writers have embellished 
their writings with repeated allusions to this terrible 
phenomenon. The prophet here compares a power- 
ful nation, doomed to destruction, to a ruinous 
mountain, or rather a volcano, which would soon 
be consumed, and involve other mountains in its 
ruins.” And they shall not take of thee a stone— 
There shall not be left in thee a stone fit to be used 
in any principal part of a building, either for a foun- 
dation or for a corner-stone. This seems to be 
spoken figuratively, and to signify that they should 
no longer have kings and governors taken from 
among themselves, but should be under the domin- 
ion of foreigners. 

Verses 27-29. Set ye up a standard—blow the 
trumpet—These were common signals for assem- 
bling armies together. Call together the kingdoms 
of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz—These were 
countries under the dominion of the Medes. The 
two former: probably the greater and lesser Arme- 
nia, and the latter a part of Phrygia, near the Hel- 
sespont: so Bochart thinks. And that both Arme- 
nians and Phrygians composed part of the army 
which Cyrus led against Babylon, may be seen in 
Xenophon, Cyroped., lib. iii. and lib. vii. Appoint 
a@ captain against her—Appoint a proper person, 
who has skill, courage, and conduct, to command 
and direet all these nations. Such was Cyrus, who 

3 


her horses to come up as the rough caterpillars— 
Or, the rough locusts, as Bochart renders it, who 
observes, that there are some insects of that kind 
rough and hairy. Blaney reads, bristled locusts. 
Locusts represent horses, not only in their swift- 
ness, but likewise in the shape of their-heads, and 
Joel ii. 4, Rev. ix. 7, they are said to have the ap- 
pearance of horses and horsemen. Prepare against 
her the kings of the Medes—The several princes or 
viceroys of the provinces belonging to the Median 
empire, with their people. All princes and govern- 
ors are called kings in the Hebrew language. The 
land shall tremble and sorrow—An expression 
commonly used to express the confusion of the in- 
habitants under some great calamity. For every 
purpose of the Lord shall be performed, &e.—See 
notes on chap. 1. 16-40. 

Verses 80-82. The mighty men of Babylon have 
forborne to fight: they have remained, &c.—“ The 
year before the siege of Babylon, Cyrus overthrew 
Belshazzar in battle, whereupon his army retreated 
within the walls, where they were shut up by him 
and besieged. Afterward, when Cyrus entered the 
city, he ordered public proclamation to be made, 
that all persons should keep within their houses, 
and whoever was found abroad should be put to 
death; and threatened to set their houses on fire, if 
any offered to hurt the soldiers from the tops of their 
houses.” They became as women—Timorous, and 
without courage. They have burned their dwelling- 
places—The enemy have burned their houses. Her 
bars are broken—All her fortresses, and what she 
confided in as her chief defence against the enemy. 
One post shall run to meet another—Messengers 
shall'run from different parts, and so fall in with one 
another, all carrying the same intelligence to the 
same person, that the city was taken on the part 
every one came from. This is a very natural de- 
scription of what may be supposed to happen on a 
city being taken by surprise in the middle of the 
night; for, as fast as the alarm spread, people would 
be posting away with the news from all parts to the 
head-quarters. The — of the last clause, 

5s 


The prophet continues his 


JEREMIAH. 


a 
predictions against Babylon. 


A.M.3409. 32 And that *the passages are 
awe stopped, and the reeds they have 
burned with fire, and the men of war are 
affrighted. 

33 For thus saith the Lorn of hosts, the God 
of Israel; The daughter of Babylon is ‘like 
a thrashing-floor, *2¢.1° is time to thrash her: 
yet a little while, » and the time of her harvest 
shall come. ° 

34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath 
idevoured»me, he hath crushed me, he hath 
made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed 
me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly 
with my delicates, he hath cast me out. 


¢ Chapter 1. 38.— Isaiah xxi. 10; Mic. iv. 13; Amos i. 3. 
& Isa. xl. 15; Hab. iii. 12.——1° Or, in the time that he thrasheth 
her. h Isaiah xvii. 5; Hosea vi. 11; Joel iii. 13; Rev. xiv. 
15, 18. i Chap. 1. 7. 


35 ™ The violence done to me and A. M, 3409. 
to my ?” flesh be upon Babylon, shall — 
the “inhabitant of Zion say; and, My blood 
upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusa- 
lem say. 

36 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; Behold, 
kT will plead thy cause, and take vengeance 
for thee ; ! and I will dry up her sea, and make 
her springs dry. 

37 ™And Babylon shall become heaps, a 
dwelling-place for dragons, "an astonishment, 
and a hissing, without an inhabitant. 

38 They shall roar together like lions: they 
shall yell as lions’ whelps. 


1 Heb, My violence——™ Or, remainder, 13 Heb. inhabit- 
ress.—— Chapter 1. 34.——! Chapter 1. 38.—— Isa. xili. 22 ; 
Chapter 1. 39; Rev. xviii. 2. » Chapter xxy. 9, 18,.——14 Or, 
shake themselves. 


to show the king of Babylon that his city is taken 
at one end, is notaccurate: the word A¥pi does not 
mean ai one end, for one is not in the text, but at 
the extremity. It may not be improper to observe 
further here, that though it seems unusual to. say 
that one messenger runs to meet another, to acquaint 
any one with the same news, the usual expression in 
such a case being, that one messenger follows upon 
the heels of another; yet, in this matter, this unusual 
way of speaking was exactly descriptive of the fact ; 
for Babylon being taken by a party of soldiers en- 
tering by the charmel of the Euphrates at each ex- 
tremity of the city, the messengers who carried the 
news to the king at his palace would actually run 
toward and meet each other at or near the palace, 
as they came from opposite quarters, to acquaint 
him that his city was taken at the extremities; for 
we cannot but suppose that people would run from 
each end of the city to the palace as soon as Cy- 
rus’s men entered. The passage in the original 
has great beauty and sublimity, which, however, is 
almost lost in our translation. Houbigant seems to 
give it its due force, rendering the verbs in the pre- 
sent tense, and omitting the connecting particles, 
which greatly augments its energy, thus: “ Courier 
comes to meet courier—messenger meets messenger 
—to inform the king of Babylon that bis city is taken 
at the extremity, that the passages are stopped, [or 
surprised, see verse 41,] that fires are burning among 
the reeds, that the men of war are terrified.” The 
passages here mentioned “were most probably the 
entrances into the city from the river side, which 
were secured by gates that ought, as Herodotus ob- 
serves, to have been fast barred, which, if it had 
been done, would have effectually frustrated the 
attempt of the enemy; but being left open and un- 
guarded, on account of the public festivity, the 
assailants were in possession of those entrances, and 
in the heart of the city, before the besieged were 
aware of it.” ‘he word ("nJk, here rendered reeds, 
properly signifies marshes or lakes ; and the phrase 
538 


here seems to import, that the enemies had burned 
up all the outworks belonging to the marshy grounds 
about the river Euphrates.—Lowth. 

Verse 33. The daughter of Babylon is like a 
thrashing-floor—God’s people. have been sorely 
bruised and trodden under foot by the Babylonians, 
as corn in a thrashing-floor: see note on Isa. xxi. 10. 
It is time to thrash her—It is time for her to feel the 
miseries she has made others suffers The word 
thrash often signifies to subdue by force and power. 
Yet a little while and the time of her harvest shall 
come—There shall be a clear riddance made of her 
inhabitants and their treasures, as the harvest clears 
the fields, and leaves them empty and bare. By her 
harvest may be meant the slaughter and spoiling 
of her inhabitants; and by the ¢hrashing, or tread- 
ing, which follows the harvest, the destruction of 
the city itself. 

Verses 34, 35.° Nebuchadrezzar hath devoured 
me—Zion and Jerusalem, which are both expressed 
in the next verse, are the speakers here, and the 
words contain a pathetical description of the calami- 
ties brought upon the Jews by Nebuchadnezzar.and 
his forces, who, after they had devoured the wealth 
and laid waste the beauty of Judea, then turned the 
inhabitants out of it; and led them captives into 
a strange land. ZJ'he violence done to me and my 
flesh be upon Babylon—Let God return upon her 
the. violence she has done to me and to my children, 
Our nearest relations are called our flesh in Serip- 
ture. This imprecation is very similar to that in 
Psa. exxxvii. 8, where see the note. 

Verses 36-39. Thus saith the Lord, I will plead 
thy cause—This is, as it were, God’s ‘answer to the 
prayers and imprecations of the Jewish people, 
mentioned in the two foregoing verses. J will dry 
up her sea, and make her springs dry—This some 
think is spoken figuratively, meaning, I will exhaust 
her multitudes of people, and dry up all those so 
from whence she derived her immense wealth an 


power. But this was literally fulfilled in Cyrus’s 
3 


- 
God’s severe judgments 


CHAPTER LI. 


a 


denounced against Babylon. 


oe ig 39 In their heat I will make their 
———— feasts, and °I will make them drunk- 
en, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual 
sleep, and not wake, saith the Lorn. 

40 I will bring them down like lambs to the 
slaughter, like rams with he-goats. 

41 How is ?Sheshach taken! and how is 
‘the praise of the whole earth surprised! how 
‘s Babylon become an astonishment among the 
nations ! 

42 *The'sea is come up upon Babylon: she 
is covered with the multitude of the waves 
thereof. 


© Ver. 57.» Chap. xxv. 26.—4 Isa. xiii. 29 ; Chap. xlix. 25; 
Dan. iv. 30. * Isa. viii. 7, 8.——* Chap. 1. 39, 40; Ver. 29. 


draining the river, and thereby gaining an entrance 
into the city. All great waters are called seas in the 
Hebrew language. And Babylon shall become heaps 
—See note on chap. 1. 39,40. They shall roar to- 
gether like lions, &c.—This is either expressive of 
their grief and anguish of mind, or else the prophet 
describes the revels and riotous noise which they 
made upon the night of that public festival in which 
the city was taken: see below. Jn their heat I will 
make their feasts—Or, I will supply them with 
drink, as Blaney renders MANwn, observing, that 
all the ancient versions give the word that sense, 
and that it agrees with the use of it, Dan. i. 8, 10, 
16. And I will make them drunken—I will suffer 
them to give a loose to joy in their feasts, and to be 
intoxicated with wine: God is frequently said in 
Scripture to do those things which he permits to be 
done. Or the words may be taken figuratively, as 
signifying, While they are feasting I will prepare 
for them another cup to drink, namely, that of my 
fury and indignation. History informs us that Baby- 
lon was taken at a time when the Babylonians were 
so engaged in feasting and revelling, and so intoxi- 
cated with liquor, that the gates leading down to the 
river, which used to be shut every night, were left 
open, which gave a free passage to Cyrus and his 
army into the city. T'hat they may rejoice and 
sleep a perpetual sleep—That, in the midst of their 
jollity and security, they may sleep the sleep of 
death. 

Verses 41-43. How is Sheshach taken !—That 
Babylon is meant by Sheshach is certain; but why 
it is so called is yet matter of doubt: see note on 
chap. xxv. 26. Some indeed have supposed that it 
is called so from a goddess of that name, which the 
Babylonians worshipped, and which is supposed by 
Calmet to have been the same with the moon; but 
of these things there does not appear to be satisfac- 
tory proof. How is the praise of the whole earth 
surprised—Babylon was esteemed the wonder of 
the world, for the height, breadth, and compass of 
its walls, the palaces and hanging gardens belong- 
ing to it, for the temple of Belus, for the banks and 
facing of the river, and the artificial lakes and canals 

3 


43 * Her cities are a desolation, a dry % . Re. 
land, and a wilderness, a land where- ———— 
in no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of 
man. pass thereby. 

44 * And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I 
will bring forth out of his mouth that which he 
hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not 
flow together any more unto him: yea, “the 
wall of Babylon shall fall. 

45 * My people, go ye out of the midst of her, 
and deliver ye every man his soul from the 
fierce anger of the Lorp. 

46 And lest your heart faint, and ye fear 


tIsa. xlvi. 1; Chap. 1. 2-——" Verse 58. x Verse 6; Chap. 
1.8; Rev. xviii, 4——" Or, let not. 


made for the draining of it, and for its riches and 
greatness. The sea is come up upon Babylon, &e. 
—A numerous army, or a vast multitude of people, 
carrying all before them like an inundation. Her 
cities are a desolation—All the lesser cities, within 
the territories of Babylon, are become an uninhabit- 
ed, uncultivated desert: see note on Isa. xili. 20. 
Verse 44, And Iwill punish Belin Babylon—The 
heathen ascribed the honour of all their successes to 
their idols; and, upon any great victory, offered the 
best part of the spoils'to their gods, and deposited 
them in their temples, as a grateful acknowledgment 
that the success was owing to their assistance. So 
Nebuchadnezzar, upon every victory over the Jews, 
carried away part of the furniture of the sanctuary 
and put it in the temple of his idol: see 2 Chror, 
xxxvi. 7; Dan. i. 2.. The restoring of the holy ves- 
sels to their right owner, and to their former use, is 
what is here foretold by bringing forth out of his 
mouth that which he hath swallowed, which was 
done by Cyrus, upon his proclamation for rebuilding 
the temple, Ezra i.7. But the full accomplishment 
of this prediction Dr. Prideaux places in Xerxes’ de- 
molishing the temple of Belus, and plundering it of 
its vast wealth, which, from Diodorus Siculus’s ae- 
count of it, he computes to amount to twenty-one 
millions of our money: see his Connect., pp. 100, 101. 
And the nations shall not flow together any more 
unto him—There shall be no more costly presents 
brought by foreign nations unto the temple of Bel, 
as a compliment to that monarchy ; just as, under the 
Roman empire, people that were conquered by it, 
sent golden crowns to Jupiter Capitolinus: see 
Lowth. ' 
Verses 45, 46. My people, go ye out of the midst 
of her, &c.—See note on chap. 1. 8. And lest your 
heart faint, and ye fear for therumour, &c.—“ Lest 
the rumours of new forces, ready to join themselves 
to the Babylonians, dishearten you, and make you 
despair of seeing so great an empire subdued by any 
human power.” A rumour shall come one year, 
and after that in another year—This seems to be 


,an idiomatic phrase, denoting that terrifying ru- 


mours should continue year after year. And in 


589 


Threatenings against 


JEREMIAH. 


a 


A. M. 3409. Y for the rumour that shall be heard 
B.C: 99. in the land ; a rumour shall both come 
one year, and after that in another year shall 
come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler 
against ruler. 

47 Therefore behold, the days come, that 71 
will 1°do judgment upon the graven images 
of Babylon: and her whole land shall be con- 
founded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst 
of her. 

48 Then *the heaven and the earth, and all 
that is therein, shall sing for Babylon: ° for 
the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, 
saith the Lorn. 

49 As Babylon hath caused the slain of 
Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain 
of all *the sual 

50 ° Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, 


stand not still: remember the Lorp A. M, 3409. 
Bol. B96. 

afar off, and let Jerusalem come into 

your mind. . 

51 * We are confounded, because we have 
heard reproach: shame hath covered our hy 
for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of 
the Lorv’s house. 

52 Wherefore behold, the days come, saith 
the Lorn, ° that I will do judgment upon her 
graven images: and through all her land the 


| wounded shall groan. 


53 ‘Though Babylon should mount 4 to 
heaven, and though she should fortify. the 
height of her strength, yet from me shall spoil- 
ers come unto her, saith the Lorn. 

54 £ A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, 
and great destruction from thi, land of the 
Chaldeans : 


y 2 Kings xix. 7. z Chap. 1.2; Verse 52. 16 Heb. visit 
epon.—— Isa. xliv. 23 ; xlix. 13 ; Rev. xviii. 20. » Chap. 1. 
3, 41.——7 Or, Both Babylon i is to fall, O ye slain of Israel, and 


with Babylon, &c.——** Or, the country.—® Chapter xliv. 28. 
4 Psa. xliv. 15, 16 ; lxxix. 4.—e Verse 47,.— Chap. xlix. 16; 
Amos ix. 2; Obad. 4.—< Chap. 1. 22. 


these words the prophet, by God’s direction, gives 
signs or tokens to the captive Jews, whereby they 
might know the exact time when Babylon should be 
taken, and, consequently, when they should remove 
from the city into some other place, that they might 
not be terrified, and induced to quit the city before 
there was any occasion for their doing so; and he 
acquaints them that there should come a rumour 
one year, namely, of Cyrus’s preparations against 
the Babylonians; and that the next year there should 
be another rumour, namely, as we may suppose, of 
Cyrus’s march into Asia, and his victories there, and 
of his drawing nearer and nearer to Babylon every 
day. And violence in the land, ruler against ruler— 
“Tt is possible,” says Blaney, “that the contests 
between the adverse powers of Babylon and Media, 
during which the dominions of the former were sub- 
jected to the miseries of foreign invasion, may alone 
be here intended. But Berosus, the Chaldean histo- 
rian, as cited by Josephus, Contra Apion, lib. i, 
gives an account of civil violences and disorders that 
were committed in the land after the death of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, whose son, Evil-merodach, was, after a 
short reign, murdered, and his throne usurped by 
one of his subjects. 
ceeded him, was also murdered in his turn, and the 
kingdom restored to the lawful heir; and all this 
happened in the course of a few years previous to 
the foreign invasion. These therefore, I think,are 
more likely to be the violence in this passage al- 
Inded to, and introduced as the forerunners of still 
greater devastations. 

Verses 47-49. T'herefore behold, or rather, T'hen 
soon, the days come that I will do judgment upon 
the graven images, &c.—That is, cause the statues 
of the gods of Babylon to be broken to pieces, or 
carried away. Then the heaven and the earth, §c., 


The usurper’s son, who suc- | 


shall sing for Babylon—The angels in heaven, and 
many nations of the earth, shall rejoice and praise 
God for the just punishment brought upon Babylon. 
So at Babylon shall fall, or rather, Through Baby- 
lon have fallen, as 103) should be renderéd, the slain 
of all the earth—The reason is here assigned why 
the heavens and the earth, and all that are therein, 
should rejoice at the fall of Babylon, because not 
only the people of Israel, but of the whole earth, 
likewise had been greatly annoyed, oppressed, and 
diminished by the power of that ambitious nation. 
Verses 50, 51. Ye that have escaped the sword— 
Namely, the sword which wasted Babylon. Go 
away, stand not still—This is spoken to the Jews, 
who, attending to the advice given them, verse 45, 
withdrew from Babylon in time, and so escaped the 
sword by which they otherwise might have fallen. 
And here they are advised to flee still farther and 
farther off; but amidst all to remember their native 
country, and in particular Jerusalem, and the God 
they had worshipped there; and to pray for the 
restoration of the city and temple; and that he 
would avenge himself of the Babylonians for laying 
them in ruins. We are confounded, because we have 
heard reproach—The prophet here represents the 
words or thoughts of the pious exiles, when they 
heard the Babylonians speaking of Jehovah with con- 
tempt, and deriding them for worshipping him, who 
could not, they said, deliver his city and temple out 
of their hands, or preserve them from being destroy- 
ed. 
of the Lord’s house—The word sanctuaries, in the 
plural, is likewise used Psa. lxxiii. 17, though our 
English reads there, sanctuary. Probably the se- 
veral courts of the temple are meant by sanctuaries. 
Verse 58. Though Babylon should mount up to 
heaven—Though Babylon were built upon the most 
3 ‘ 


oe 


idols and ium. We 


For strangers are come into the sanctuaries 


“ 


* 
Threatenings against 


CHAPTER LL 


Babylon’s princes, ¢c. 


A, M. ps 55 Because the Lorp hath spoiled 


a Babylon, and destroyed out of her 
the great voice: when her waves do roar like 
great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered : 

56 Because the spoiler is come upon her, even 
upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, 
every one of their bows is broken: ? for the 
Lorp God of recompenses shall surely requite. 

57 ‘ And I will make drunk her princes, and 
her wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and 
her highty men: and they shall sleep a per- 
petual sleep, and not wake, saith ‘the King, 
whose name is the Lorp of hosts. 


58 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; A. M. 3409. 
© The | broad walls of Babyon shall first oe 
be utterly *° broken, and her high gates shall 
be burned with fire; and ™the people shall 
labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and 
they shall be weary. 

59 4] The word which Jeremiah the prophet 
commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son 
of Maaseiah, when he went * with Zedekiah 
the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth 
year of his reign. And this Seraiah was 
a *° quiet prince. 

60 So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil 


h Psa. xciv. 1; Chap. 
: _xlvi. 18; xiviii. 5. 


1,29; Ver. 24. iVer. 39. k Chap. 
9 Or, The walls of broad Babylon. 


1 Verse 4. 
the behalf of. 


20 Or, made naked. Hab. ii. 13.——*! Or, on 
22 Or, prince of Menucha, or, chief chamberlain. 


lofty and inaccessible mountain, and though it were 
made as strong as nature and art could make it, yet 
still I would cause it to be spoiled. 


Verses 55-57. Because the Lord hath spoiled | 


Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice— 
“When cities are populous, they are of course 
noisy: see Isa. xxil. 2. Silence is therefore a mark 
of depopulation ; and in this sense we are to under- 
stand God’s destroying, or taking away out of Baby- 
lon, the great noise, which, during the time of her 
prosperity, was constantly heard there, ‘the busy 
hum of men,’ as the poet very expressly calls it. In 
this manner the mystical Babylon is threatened, Rev. 
Xvili. 22, 23. Compare chap. vii. 34; xvi. 9; xxv. 
10."—Blaney. Every one of their bows is broken— 
Their strength is quite broken, and they cannot de- 
fend themselves, or hurt their enemies. - 


permit her princes, her commanders, and directors to 
be intoxicated, so that they shall neglect what should 
be done for their defence, and thereby be slain. 
Verse 58. The broad walls of Babylon shall be 
ulterly broken, &c.—That the wallsof Babylon were 
of a prodigious height and thickness, Herodotus 
tells, who says, they were 200 cubits high, and 50 
cubits in breadth, lib. i. cap. 178. “ We are aston- 
ished,” says Bishop Lowth, in his note on Isa. xiii. 
19, “at the accounts which ancient historians of the 
best credit give, of the immense extent, height, and 
thickness of the walls of Nineveh and Babylon ; nor 
are we less astonished, when we are assured by the 


concurrent testimony of modern travellers, that no re- | 


mains, not the least traces, of these prodigious works, 
are to be found. Our wonder will, I think, be mode- 
rated in both respects, if we consider the fabric of 
these celebrated walls, and the nature of the mate- 
rialsof which they consisted. Buildings in the Kast 
have always been, andare to this day, made of earth 
or clay mixed, or beat up with straw, to make the 
parts cohere, and dried only in the sun. This is 
their method of making bricks. The walls of the 
city were built of the earth, digged out of the spot, 
and dried upon the place; by which means both the 
ditch and the wall were at once formed ; the former 
furnishing materials for the latter. That the walls 
~ 3 


es 


Twill make | 
drunk her princes and her wise men, &e.—I will | 


of Babylon were of this kind is well known ; and Be- 
rosus expressly says, (apud Joseph. Antig, x. 11,) 
that Nebuchadnezzar added three new walls, both to 
the old and new city, partly of brick and bitumen, 
and partly of brick alone. A wallof this sort must 
have a great thickness in proportion to its height, 
otherwise, it cannot stand. The thickness of the 
walls of Babylon-is said to have been one-fourth of 
their height; which seems to have been no more 
than was absolutely necessary.” Her high gates 
shall be burned, and the people shall labour in vain, 
&c.—If the Chaldeans take never so much pains to 


|| quench. the fire, it shall be to no purpose; and all 


| their efforts to preserve their empire and city shall 
|be as insignificant as if men wrought in the fire, 
| which immediately destroys all the fruits of their 
labours. "The words may be better translated, “ And 
the people have laboured for a thing of naught, and 
the folks have wearied themselves for that which 
shall be fuel for the fire;” that is, the works which 
have been erected with such incredible labour and 
expense, shall be a prey to the flames. 

Verse 59. The word which Jeremiah commanded 
Seraiah, when he went with Zedekiah—The He- 
brew 17" prs x 1292, is rendered by the LXX., ore 
exopeveTo Tapa Ledeks, when he went from Zedekiah, 
on his behalf, or by virtue of his commission ; which 
seems to be the meaning of the clause; for we have 
no reason to suppose that Zedekiah went in person 
to Babylon at that time. Instead of, This Seraiah 
was a quiet prince, as our translators rendernnis Ww, 
the LXX. read, apywv dwpwr, a prince, or chief 
master of gifts, which Blaney interprets to mean, 
chief of the embassy, or who had the principal charge 
of the present sent from Zedekiah to the king of 
Babylon, judging, that in these words is specified the 
business on which Seraiah was sent. He was em- 
ployed to carry the present, or customary tribute, 
which Zedekiah was obliged to pay to the king of 
Babylon, in acknowledgment of his subjection and 
vassalage. 

Verses 60-62. So Jeremiah wrote in a book— 
Namely, in the two foregoing chapters; all the evil 
that should come upon Bab ylon—This was done 
| that it might be known even in Babylon itself that 
541 


The book of the prophecy 


A. M. 3409. that should come upon Babylon, even 

B. C. 595. , 

all these words that are written against 
Babylon. 

61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou 
comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read 
all these words ; 

62 Then shalt thou say, O Lorn, thou hast 
spoken against this place, to cut it off, that 
» none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, 


, > 


a " PM 
, 
JEREMIAH. ; sunk in the Euphrates, ~ 


but that it shall be 23 desolate for ever. ¥ M. 3409. 

63. And it shall be, when thou hast 2" — 
made an end of reading t k, ° that t 
shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into 
midst of Euphrates : 

64 And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon 
sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will 
bring upon her: Pand they. shall be weary. 
Thus far are the words of Jeremiah. 


1 Chap. 1. 3, 39; Verse 29. 23 Heb. desolations. 


a 
* 


© Rev. xviil. 21.—P Verse 58. 


Jeremiah had foretold the destruction of that city, 
six years before the Babylonians destroyed Jerusa- 
lem. And Jeremiah said, Whenthou shalt see and 
read all these words—This is probably to be under- 
stood, not of a mere private reading of them by him- 
self, but of his reading them to the Jews in Babylon, 
(namely, those that had been carried thither in Je- 
hoiakim’s captivity,) to comfort them under their 


exile, and, perhaps, in the hearing of some of the 


Babylonians themselves. T'hen shalt thou say— 


Looking up to God, and making a solemn protesta-. 


tion of the divine authority, and unquestionable cer- 
tainty, of that which thou hast read; O Lord, thou 
hast spoken against this place—And I believe what 
thou hast spoken. 'Thou hast passed sentence upon 
Babylon, and it shall be executed. This is like the 
angel’s protestation, Rev. xix. 9, concerning the de- 
struction of the New. Testament Babylon, These are 
the true sayings of God: and Rev. xxi. 6, These 
words are true and faithful. To cut it off, that 
none shall remain in it, &e.—Though Seraiah and 
the captive Jews see Babylon flourishing, yet, having 
read this prophecy, they must foresee Babylon fall- 
ing, and by virtue of this foresight, must learn neither 
to envy its pomp nor fear its power. Thus, reader, 
when we observe what this world is, how glittering 
are its shows, and how flattering its proposals, let us 
read in the book of the Lord, that its fashion passeth 
away, and that it shall shortly be cut off, and made 
desolate for ever, and we shall learn to look upon it 
with a holy contempt, and to die to all its false glo- 
ries and illusive joys. 


Verses 63, 64. And thou shalt bind a stone to it, ~ 
and cast it into the midst of Euphrates—The pro- 
pheéts, as we have seen, frequently gave sensible 
representations of the judgments they foretold: see™ 
chap. xix. 10. This now given was a significantem- ~— 
blem of Babylon’s sinking irrecoverably under the 
judgments here denounced against her: compare 
Rev. xviii. 21. This threatening was in a literal 


‘sense fulfilled by Cyrus’s breaking down the head or 


dam of the great lake, which was on the west side 
of the city, in order to turn the course of the river 
that way; for no care being afterward taken to re 
pair the breach, the whole country round it wad? 
overflowed. And the prophecy of Isaiah, chap. xiv. 
23, foretelling that the country of Babylon should 
become a possession for the bittern and pools of 
water, was literally fulfilled.—Prideaux and Lowth. 
And they shall be weary—This clause, expressed by 
one word in the Hebrew, namely, 15y"), is not to be 
met with in the translation of the LXX., “nor does 
it appear tome,” says Blaney, “to be authentic, not- 
withstanding the concurrence of the later versions 
and MSS. ‘The sense is entire and complete with- 
out it; and the addition serves only to cause per- 
plexity and confusion. The word seems to have 
been added by some transcriber, whose eye was 


caught by it at the close of the preceding paragraph, 


verse 58,” where the same word occurs. Thus far 
are the words of Jeremiah—Here the prophecies of 
Jeremiah end: the following chapter being added 
by some other hand, either in the lifetime of Jere- 
miah, and by his consent, or after his death. 


CHAPTER LII. 


This chapter contains a brief history of the captivity, nearly the same, word for word, as it is related in the second 
oook of Kings, chap. xxiv. 18-20, and chap. xxv., with some few additions. Some have supposed it placed here as 
a proper introduction to the book of Lamentations. But more probably the design was, by immediately subjoining 
this historical narrative of the desolations of the Jewish nation to the predictions of Jeremiah concerning them, 
to give a nearer view of the exact accomplishment of the divine word of prophecy. That this narrative could not 
be added by Jeremiah is manifest, not only by the last clause of the preceding chapter, but also by this considera- 
tion, that a great part of it is a repetition of what he himself had related in the xxxixth and xlth chapters of his 
prophecy. As therefore it must have been subjoined by some other person, it is most probable it was done by Ezra, 
who rs commonly supposed to have revised the sacred writings after the return of the Jews from Babylon, and to have 
collected them into one body. We have here, (1,) The reign of Zedekiah rendered unhappy by his sins and pu 
ments, 1-3. (2,) The besieging and taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, 4-7. (3,) The severe me a 

542 


7 
7 ae “me? 
"Jenga is besieged 


he 


~* jests 4 
how hin is release 
31-34. , 


a. 


‘ CHAPTER LIl. 


by the Chaldean army. 


; Eel te . 
Zedekiah anid his princes met with from Nebuchadnezzar, 8-11. (4,) The destruction of the temple and the city 


d seve 


A. M, als. 7 EDEKIAH was* one and twenty 
Yi ai years old when he began to reign, 
and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 
And his mother’s name was Hamutal the 
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 

2 And he did that which was evil in the eyes 
of the Lorn, according to all that Jehoiakim 
had done. ‘ 

3 For through the anger of the Lorn it came 
to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had 
cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah 
rebelled against the king of Babylon. 

B.¢.590, 4 % And it came to pass in the 
~— ninth year of his reign, in the tenth 
month, in the tenth day of the month, that 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and 
‘all his army against Jerusalem, and pitched 
against it, and built forts against it round 
about. 

5 So the city was besieged unto the eleventh 
year of King Zedekiah. 

B.c. 583, 6 And in the fourth month, in the 

ninth day of the month, the famine 
was sore in the city, so that there was no bread 
for the people of the land. 

7 Then the city was broken up, and all the 
men of war fled, and went forth out of the city 
by night by the way of the gate between the 
two walls, which was by the king’s garden ; 


12-14, ©.) The carrying away of the people into captivity, 15, 16, with an account of the numbers of those car- 


~ ried away, vec The taking away of the plunder of the temple, 17-23. 


other persons of rank in cold blood, by Nebuchadnezzar at Riblah, 24-27. 
and honoured after Nebuchadnezzar’s death, as an earnest of the deliverance of the Jews, 


(7,) The murder of the two chief 
(8,) King Je- 


(now the Chaldeans were by the city A. M. 3416, 
round about ;) and they went by the ———— 
way of the plain. 

8 4 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued 
after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the 
plains of Jericho; and all his army was scat- 
tered from him. 

9 ° Then they took the king, and carried him 
up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah, in the 
land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon 
him. 

10 ¢ And the king of Babylon slew the sons 
of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also all 
the princes of Judah, in Riblah. 

11 Then he ? put out the eyes of Zedekiah ; 
and the king of Babylon bound him in * chains, 
and carried him to Babylon, and put him in 
* prison till the day of his death. 

12 9% ° Now in the fifth month, in the tenth 
day of the month, f which was the nineteenth 
year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, 
£ came Nebuzar-adan, * captain ®of the guard, 
which 7 served the king of Babylon, into Jeru- 
salem. 

13 And burned the house of the Lorp, and 
the king’s house; and all the houses of Jeru- 
salem, and all the houses of the great men, 
burned he with fire: 

14 And all the army of the Chaldeans, that 


b2 Kings xxv. 1-27; 
© Ch. xxxii. 4. 4 Fozk. xii, 13. 
4 Heb. house of the wards. 


2 2 Kings xxiv. 18. ' Heb. reigned. 
Ch. xxxix.1; Zech. viii. 19. 
2 Heb. blinded.—— Or, fetters. 


e Zech. vii. 5; viii. 19.——f Verse 29. & Chapter xxxix. 9. 
5 Or, chief marshal. 6 Heb. chief of the executioners, or, slaugh- 
termen. And so verse 14, &c. 7 Heb. stood before. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER LII. 

Verses 1-11. Zedekiah was one and twenty years 
old—The first three verses of this chapter are word 
for word the same with 2 Kings xxiv. 18-20, where 
see the notes; and for the six following verses, see 
those on 2 Kings xxv. 1-6. Where he gave judgment 
upon him—Namely, for rebelling against him when 
he had taken an oath of allegiance to him. Of Ne- 
buchadnezzar’s slaying the sons of Zedekiah, putting 
out his eyes, binding him with chains, &c., see note 
on 2 Kings xxv. 7. 

Verses 12, 13. Now in the fifth month—This gave 
occasion to that solemn fast of the fifth month, ob- 
served in the times of the captivity: see Zech. vii. 
3-5; vu. 19. In the tenth day of the month—In the 
parallel place, 2 Kings xxv. 8, we read, on the seventh 

. This difference some attempt to reconcile, by 


te. 3 


supposing that the one place may speak of the day 
Nebuzar-adan set out from Riblah, and the other of 
the day that he arrived at Jerusalem ; or else, that he 
came on the seventh, but did not set fire to the build- 
ing till the tenth. “But it is more likely,” says Bla- 
ney, “to have arisen from some mistake of the tran- 
scriber, perhaps, in setting down then umbers at full 
length, which were expressed by numeral letters iu 
the old copies. And in this instance such a mistake 
might easily happen between the 7 and the °, of 
which the first stands for seven, the latter for ten.” 
And burned the house of the Lord—After it had 
stood, says Josephus, four hundred and seventy 
years ; but Archbishop Usher reckons it only four 
hundred and twenty-four years from the laying of 
the first foundation by Solomon: see note on 2 Kings 
XXxv. Y. 
543 


Destruction of Jerusalem, 


Ba8610.0npere with the captain of the guard, 
brake down all the walls of Jerusalem 
round about. 

15 * Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the 
guard carried away captive certain of the poor 
of the people, and the residue of the people 
that remained in the city, and those that fell 
away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the 
rest of the multitude. 

16 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard 
left certain of the poor of the land for vine- 
dressers and for husbandmen. 

17. 1 ‘ Also the * pillars of brass that were in 
the house of the Lorn, and the bases, and the 
brazen sea that was in the house of the Lorp, 
the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass 
of them to Babylon. 

18 ! The caldrons also, and the 8 shovels, and 
the snuffers, and the ° bowls, and the ‘spoons, 
and all the vessels of brass: wherewith they 
ministered, took they away. 

19 And the basins, and the !° fire-pans, and 
the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candle- 
sticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that 
which was of gold, in gold, and that which was 
of silver, in silver, took the captain of the guard 
away. 


A. 
B. 


JEREMIAH. . 


’ j 
and of i .. 


one sea, and A.M. sais. 
.C. 588. 


20 'The two pillars, 
twelve brazen bulls that were under 
the bases, which King Solomon had made in 
the house of the Lorp: ™the ™ brass all 
these vessels was without weight. 

21 And concerning the "pillars, the height 
of one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a ™ fil- 
let of twelve cubits did compass it; and the 
thickness thereof was four fingers: 7 was 
hollow. 

22 And a chapiter of brass was pron and 
the height of one chapiter was five cubits, with 
net-work and pomegranates upon the chapiters 
round about, all of brass. 'The second pillar 
also and the pomegranates were like unto. 
these. 

23 And there were ninety and six pomegra- 
nates on a side; and °all the pomegranates 
upon the net-work were a hundred round 
about. 

24 | And ?the captain of the guard. took 
Seraiah the chief priest, ‘and Zephaniah the 
second priest, and the three keepers of the 
13 door : 

25 He took also out of the city a eunuch, 
which had the charge of the men of war; and 
seven men of them that were near the king’s 


4 Chapter xxxix. 8, 9,——i i Chap. xxvii. 19. kK] Kings vii. 
Bs eds el Os 1 Exodus xxvil. 3; 2 Kings xxv. 14, 15, 16. 
8 Or, instruments to remove the ashes. ° Or, basins. 10 Or, 
censers. m ] Kings vii. 47, 11 Heb. their brass. 


n] Kings vii. 15; 2 Kings xxv. 17; 2 Chronicles iii. 15. 
12 Hebrew, thread. ©] Kings vil. 20. p 2 Kings xxv. 18. 
4 Chapter xxi. 1; xxix. 25. 18 Heb. threshold. 14 Heb. saw 
the face of the king. 


Verses 17-20. aes the 5. geile of h brass, ate, the 
Chaldeans brake—See note on 2 Kings xxy. 13. 
The temple was rifled of its riches and furniture at 
several times. The first was when Nebuchadnezzar 
came up against Jehoiakim, Dan. i. 2. The second 
time was at the captivity of Jechoniah, chap. xxvii. 
19; 2 Kings xxiv. 13; and now at the final destruc- 


tion of the city and temple they made a clear rid- | 


dance of all its ornaments. And twelve brazen bulls 
that were under the bases—Or rather, which were 
instead of bases, to support the brazen sea, (1 Kings 
vii. 25,) the Hebrew word nm, in other places, sig- 
nifying instead, or, in the place of another, So the 
LXX. understand it here. 

Ver. 21-23. The height of one pillar was eighteen 
cubits—The same account is given of the height of 
these pillars, 1 Kings vii. 15: but in 2 Chron iii. 15, 
it is said, that both the pillars made thirty-five cu- 
bits; which two texts may be easily reconciled by 
allowing one cubit for the basis. And a fillet of 
twelve cubils—So that the diameter was almost four 
cubits. The thickness whereof was four fingers— 
The pillar being hollow, the thickness of the work 
that encompassed the hollow space was four fingers 
over. There were ninety and sim pomegranates on 


a side—Or, toward every wind, as Blaney very 
properly renders mn). “In 1 Kings vii. 42, and 
2 Chron. iv. 13, it is said, there were four hundred 
pomegranates for each net-work or wreath. The 
mode of expression here is different, but amounts to 
exactly the same. For divide the two pillars into 
four quarters, according to the four winds; and let 
ninety-six pomegranates stand opposite to each of 
the four winds upon the two pillars ; the whole num- 
ber in front of the four winds, taken together, will be 
three hundred and eighty-four. But they were in 
four rows, two on each pillar, and in each row must 
have been four angular pomegranates, that could not 
be said to be opposite to any of the four winds, con- 
sequently, sixteen angular ones in the four rows; 
which sixteen being added to three hundred and 
eighty-four, make up the number of pomegranates in 
all four hundred; that is, a hundred in a row of 
wreathen work round about.” 

Verses 24, 25. And the captain of the guard took 
Seraiah the chief priest—1 Chron. vi. 14, he was 
the father of Ezra; Ezra vii. 1. 


2 Kings xxv. 18. And the three keepers of the door 


—These were not the ordina who were — 
ry porters, 3 = 


And Zephaniah — 
the second priest—See note on chap. xxix, 26; — 


ae 


a 


~ murdered, 


- - 2 
—* 


A. M. 3416. person, which were found in the city ; 
B.C. 588. say 

and the ' principal scribe of the host, 
who mustered the people of the land; and three- 
et he of the people of the land, that were 
found in the midst of the city. 


26 So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard | 


took them, and: brought them to the king of 
Babylon to Riblah. 

27 “| And the king of Babylon smote them, 
and put thein to death in Riblah in the land of 
Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away cap- 
tive out of his own land. . 

B.c.60. 29 WI * This is the people whom 
Nebuchadrezzar carried away cap- 
tive: in the ‘seventh year ‘three thousand 
Jews and three and twenty : 


CHAPTER LI. 


and many taken captive. 


29 “Inthe eighteenth year of Nebu- See? 
chadrezzar he carried away captive ———— 
from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two 
16 persons : 

30 In the three and twentieth year _ About 
of Nebuchadrezzar, Nebuzar-adan the —_— 
captain of the guard carried away captive of 
the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons : 
all the persons were four thousand and six 
hundred. 

31 4 * And it came to pass in the 
seven and thirtieth year of the capti- 
vity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the 


About 


twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day 


of the month, zhat Evil-merodach king of Baby- 
lon in the first year of his reign ¥ lifted up the 


” Or, scribe of the captain of the host. 


r2 Kings xxiv. 2. 
32 Kings xxiv. 12. 


€2 Kings xxiv. 74. 


“Verse 12; Chapter xxxix. 9—!§ Heb. souls. x 2 Kings 


gXV. 27, 28, 29, 30——y Gen. xl. 13, 20. 


taken from among the Levites, but were priests who 
stood at the door to receiye the offerings of the peo- 
ple, and thus were keepers of the sacred treasury, 
an office of high trust and consideration: see 2 Kings 
xii. 9, and xxiii. 4. He took also out of the city a 
eunwch—An officer: so it is in the. parallel place, 
2 Kings xxv. 19, where, instead of seven men, we 
read five. Josephus agrees with the reading here. 
And the principal scribe of the host—The muster- 
master-general, as we style him, or secretary of war. 
And. threescore men that were in the midst of the city 
—Of whom see note on 2 Kings xxv. 19. 

Verses 28-30, This is the people whom Nebuchad- 
nezzar carried away captive—“ These verses are 
not inserted in 2 Kings xxv. Nor are they to be 
found here, according to the Roman and Alexandrian 
editions of the LXX.; but in the Complutensian 
they are, and in two MSS. collated by Dr. Grabe; 
also in Theodotion’s version in the Hexapla. All 
the other ancient versions acknowledge them; and 
they are not omitted in any of the collated Hebrew 
MSS. ; so that there is no doubt of their being genu- 
ine. But are we to conclude from them, that the 
whole number of the Jews, whom Nebuchadnezzar, 
in all his expeditions, carried into captivity, was no 
more than four thousand six hundred? This cannot 
be true, for he carried away more than twice that 
number at one time ; whichis expressly said to have 
been in the eighth year of his reign, 2 Kings xxiv. 
12-16. Before that time he had carried off a num- 
ber of captives from Jerusalem in the first year of 
his reign, among whom were Daniel and his com- 
panions, Dan. i. 3-6. And of these Berosus, the 
Chaldean historian, speaks, as cited by Josephus, 
Ant,, lib.x. eap. 11. These are confessedly not taken 
notice of here. And as the taking and burning of 
Jerusalem are in this very chapter said to have been 
in the fourth and fifth months of the 19th year of 
Nebuehadnezzar, those who were carried into cap- 
tivity, at the date of those events, cannot possibly be 

Vou. Til. ( 35 ) 


the same with those that are said to be carried away 
either in the 18th or 23d year of that prince. Nor 
indeed is it credible, that the number carried away 
at the time the city was taken, and the whole coun- 
try reduced, could be so few as eight hundred and 
thirty-two. Here then we have three deportations, 
and those the most considerable ones, in the Ist, the 
8th, and 19th years of Nebuchadnezzar, sufficiently 
distinguished from those in his 7th, 18th, and 23d 
years. Sothat itseems most reasonable to conclude, 
with Archbishop Usher, that by the latter three the 
historian meant to point out deportations of a Jesser 
kind, not elsewhere noticed in direct terms in Serip- 
ture.”—Blaney. 

Verses 31, 32. In the seven and thirtieth year of 
the captivity of Jehoiachin, &c.—This note of time 
confirms the observation formerly made, namely, 
that the Scripture computation of the beginning of 
Nebuchadnezzar’s reign anticipates that of the Ba- 
bylonians by two years, which two years he reigned 
with his father: see note on chap. xxv. 1. Jn the 
five and twentieth day of the month, Evil-merodach 
lifted up the head of Jehoiachin—Released him out 
of prison, where he had Jain thirty-seven years, and 
advanced him. In the parallel place, 2 Kings xxv. 
27, where see the notes, we read, the seven and twen- 
tieth day of the month, which difference between 
the two passages, Lowth thinks may be reconciled, 
by supposing that his advancement was resolved 
upon the 25th day, but not brought to pass till the 

7th. In the first year of his reign—Hebrew, 1322 
wna, literally, in the year of his reign, or king- 
dom, that is, the year coincident with the beginning 
of it, from whence the date is taken. So that the 
word first is virtually implied in the phrase. Spake 
kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne 
of kings—See 2 Kings xxv. 28-30. This clause may 
perhaps be more properly rendered, Set his seat 
above the seat of the kings, which may easily be un- 
derstood to signify, that the king of Babylon prise 

545 


Jehoiachin is released 


JEREMIAH. 


and treated indly. 


A.M, 3442. head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, 
ee and brought him forth out of prison. 
32 And spake " kindly unto him, and set his 
throne above the throne of the kings that were 
with him in Babylon. ; 
33 And changed his prison garments: 7 and 


17 Heb. good things with him. 2 Sam. ix. 13. 


him more respect and honour than he did to any of | 


the other captive princes, by placing him nearest to 
himself: see Esth. iii, 1. “It is probable,’ says 
Blaney, “the phrase may have proceeded from the 
custom of placing cushions for persons of more than 
ordinary distinction in the place allotted them to sit 
in.’ See Harmer, chap. vi. observ. 26. 

Verses 33, 34. And changed his prison garments— 
This has been considered by some an act of gene- 
rosity in Evil-merodach, giving the captive king new 
garments, more suitable to his royal dignity than 
those he wore in prison. But Blaney thinks “ it was 
rather the act of Jehoiachin himself, whd; out of re- 
spect to the king of Babylon’s presence, and to mark 
his just sense of the favour shown him, no longer 
neglected his person and dress, as when a prisoner, 
and in affliction, but put on new apparel more adapt- 

546 


he did continually eat bread before A. M. 3442. 
him all the days of his life. hs ia wa 

34 And for his diet, there was a continual 
diet given-him of the king of Babylon, 8 every 
day a portion until the day of his death, all the 
days of his life. 


18 Heb. the matter of the day in his day. 


ed to the change in his circumstances. So Joseph, 
when he was sent for out of prison to appear before 
Pharaoh, first shaved himself, and changed his rai- 
ment, Gen. xli.14, David did the same after he had 
ceased mourning for his child, before he went into 
the house of God, 2 Sam. xii. 20. Mr. Harmer, 
(chap. vi. obs. 44, 45,) observes, both that to change 
the garments often is in the East a mark of respect in 
visiting ; and also that the putting on of new clothes 
is thought by those people to be very requisite, and 
indeed almost necessary, for the due solemnization 
of a time of rejoicing.” And there was a continual 
diet given him of the king—As it appears from the 
preceding verse that Jehoiachin himself sat at the 
king of Babylon’s own table, this seems to have 
been anallowance for the maintenance of his attend- 
ants and family. 

( 35* ) 3 


“we 


THE 


LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 


1. 


ARGUMENT. 


Tuis book has no title in the Hebrew, but, like the five books of Moses, takes its name from the first 
word of it, MIs, Echah, How. The Jewish commentators, however, entitle it, as the Greeks, 
Latins, our translators, and others do, Lamentations; an appellation expressive of the subject matter 
of it, the prophet lamenting in it, and that most pathetically, the destruction of Jerusalem and the 
temple, the desolation of Judea, and the captivity of God’s ancient people. Some indeed, and those 
men of eminence in literature, have supposed that the death of Josiah is the chief-subject of these 
mournful poems, and that these are the lamentations mentioned 2 Chron. xxxv. 25, as being com- 
posed ‘by Jeremiah on that occasion. But, as Blaney justly observes, ‘“ whatevet is become of 
those lamentations, these cannot possibly be the same; for their whole tenor, from beginning to 
end, plainly shows them not to have been composed till the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple, 
and the depopulation of the country by the transmigration of all its inhabitants; which events are 
not at all described in the style of prophetic prediction, but are alluded to and bewailed as what 
had been already fully accomplished. And that this was the most ancient opinion held concerning 
them, appears from the introductory title prefixed to the Greek version of the LXX., and from 
thence, probably, transmitted to the Latin Vulgate :” (see note on verse 1 :) but “ the internal evi- 
dence is sufficient to ascertain both the date and the occasion of these compositions ; nor can we 
admire too much the full and graceful flow of that pathetic eloquence, in which the author pours 
forth the effusions of a patriotic heart, and piously weeps over the ruins of his venerable country.” 
“ Never,” says an unquestionable judge of these matters, ‘was there a more rich and,elegant 
variety of beautiful images and adjuncts arranged together within so small a compass, nor more 
happily chosen and applied. What can be more elegant and poetical than the image of the city, 
which was formerly the pride of nations, sitting by herself, absorbed in grief, and a widow; de- 
serted by her friends, betrayed by her relations, stretching out her hands im vain, and finding no 
one to comfort her? What can be more elegant than the image of the ways of Zion, which are 
represented as grieving, and demanding the celebration of their solemn festivals? But if we should 
produce all the beautiful passages, we should be obliged to transcribe the whole poem.” See 
Bishop Lowth, de Sacra Poesi Hebreorum, Prelec. xxii, Indeed, as has been observed, the pro- 
phet’s peculiar talent lay in working up and expressing the passions of grief and pity; and, un- 
happily for him, as a man and a citizen, he met with a subject but too well calculated to give his 
genius its full display. 

These Lamentations of Jeremiah are very properly distributed into five chapters, each of them con- 
taining a distinct elegy, consisting of twenty-two periods, or stanzas, according to the number of 
letters in the Hebrew alphabet ; although it is in the first four chapters only that the several periods 
begin, acrostic-wise, with the different letters following each other in alphabetical order. By this 
contrivance the metre is more precisely marked and ascertained, particularly in the third chapter, 
where each period contains three verses, which have all the same initial letter. The first two 
chapters in like manner consist of triplets, excepting only the seventh period of the first, and the 
nineteenth of the second, which have each a supernumerary line. ‘The fourth chapter resembles 
the three former in metre, but the periods are only couplets. In the fifth chapter the periods are 
couplets, but of a considerably shorter measure. See Blaney. 


CHAPTER I. 


The prophet begins this his first elegy with mourning over the sad change of condition which his country had experienced ; at 
the same time sorrowfully confessing, that all her miscries were of her own procuring ; the result of national wickedness 
and rebellion against God, 1-11. In the midst of the discourse he, on a suda, ithdraws himself from view, and leaves 
Jerusalem to continue the complaint which she makes, (1,) .To friends, ting their compassionate consideration, 
2-17. (2,) To God, justifying his righteous procedure im thew affliction, but humbly soliciting, from his divine compas- 
sion, that comfort and redress which she found it in vain to look for from any other quarter, 18-22. 

3 547 


— 


“4 


The prophet’s lamentation 


LAMENTATIONS. 


4 
over Judah’s misery. 


A. M. 3416. 


nee How doth the city sit solitary, 


that was full of people! * how 
is she become as a widow ! she that was great 
among the nations, and .» princess among the 
provinces, how is she become tributary ! 

2 She ° weepeth sore in the ¢ night, and her 


aqsa. xlvii. 7, 8.——?® Ezra iv. 20. ¢ Jer, xiii. 17.——4 Job 
vii. 3; Psa. vi. 6. € Verse 19; Psa. exxxvil. 7; Jer. iv. 30; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. How doth the city sit solitary—The short 
history of the desolations of the Jewish nation, con- 
tained in the fifty-second chapter of Jeremiah, form- 
erly stood as a preface to the Lamentations; but, 
instead of it, the Greek and Latin copies havea short 
introduction, which may be thus translated: “And 
it came to pass after that Israel had been carried 
away captive, and Jerusalem was become desolate, 
that Jeremiah sat weeping, and lamented with this 
lamentation over Jerusalem, and said,” How, &c. 
The book being undoubtedly poetical, as a specimen 
of the kind of poetry which it contains, the reader 
is here presented with Blaney’s translation of the 
first stanza. 


‘Flow does she sit solitary, the-city that was full of people ! 
She is become as a widow, that was great among the nations ! 
She that was sovereign over provinces, Is become tributary!” 


Jerusalem is here represented as a weeping female, 
sitting solitary on the ground without any attendant 
or comforter, the multitude of her inhabitants being 
dispersed or destroyed. It is remarkable, that in 
times similar to tnis, that is, in the reign of the Em- 
peror Vespasian, a coin was struck, on which Judea 
is represented under the image of a woman sitting 
in tears beneath a palm-tree. How is she become as 
a widow! &c.—Cities are commonly described as 
the mothers of their inhabitants, and their kings and 
princes as their husbands: so, when they are 
bereaved of these, they are said to be widows and 
childless. ‘Thus Jerusalem, having lost her king and 
people, and being forsaken of her God, who was ina 
peculiar sense a husband to her, is here represented 
as sitting alone in that pensive melancholy condition. 
She that was great among the nations, &e.—The 
kings of Judah, in their flourishing state, extended 
their conquests over the Philistines, Edomites, and 
other neighbouring countries ; and by thus enlarging 
their dominions, greatly advanced the power of the 
metropolis of their kingdom. — But now, being under 
subjection to the king of Babylon, and forced to pay 
tribute to him, she was made nomore account of than 
any other city under the same yoke: see Calmet and 
Lowth. 

Verse 2. She weepeth sore in the night—In the 
Hebrew, according to the idiom of that language, it 
is, Weeping she weepeth, which our old English ver- 
sion renders She weepeth continually. The ex- 
pression, in ‘he night, is interpreted by some to 
signify her condition was so unhappy that, though 
oppressed with calamities, she did not dare to utter 
her complaints, unless secretly in the night, for fear 

548 


tears are on her cheeks: * among all A. M. 3416. 
her lovers ‘she hath none to comfort 2 © °° 
her: all her friends have dealt treacherously 
with her, they are become her enemies. 

3 & Judah is gone into captivity because of 
afiliction, and ‘because of great servitude : 


xxx. 14; Ezra xxv. 3-15; Obad. 10-14. f Verses 9, 16, 17, 
21.—— Jer. lii. 27.—— Heb. for the greatness of servitude. 


of irritating her enemies. Among all her lovers she 
hath none to comfort her—Those nations that court- 
ed her alliance in the time of her prosperity, or 
those allies, whose friendship she courted by sinful 
compliances, have forsaken her in her affliction, and 
joined with her enemies in insulting over her. 
“ Several of the neighbouring princes sent their am- 
bassadors to Zedekiah, Jer. xxvii. 3, &c., to engage 
him, as appears from the context, to join ‘them in a 
confederacy against the power of the king of Babylon. 
But they not only universally failed, and deserted 
Judah in the time of need, but most of them turned 
against her, and took a malignant pleasure in ag- 
gravating her misfortunes.” See Blaney and the 
margin. se 
Verse 3. Judah is gone into captivity because of 
affliction, &c.—Her miseries have received their 
finishing stroke in a total captivity among, and bond- 
age to, heathen and infidels, because of the oppres- 
sion exercised by her rulers and others, and the 
servitude to which they obliged their subjects and 
inferiors. This is the interpretation adopted by the 
Chaldee paraphrast, who represents the Jews as hav- 
ing been carried into captivity, in retaliation of their 
having oppressed the widows and the fatherless 
among them, and prolonged illegally the bondage of 
their brethren who had been sold for slaves. - But, as 
the word 743, here used, does not necessarily signify 
to go into caplivily, but often to remove, or go into 
exile, whether voluntarily or by compulsion; Blaney 
thinks that “a voluntary migration of the Jews is 
here intended, many of whom, previous to the cap- 
tivity, had left their country, and retired into Egypt 
and other parts, to avoid the oppressions and servi- 
tude that they had reason to apprehend from’ the 
Chaldeans, who had invaded, or were about to invade, 
their land. Either of these senses,” however, he 
observes, “is competent; and the interpretation 
according to them will be found to suit perfectly with 
the subsequent members of the period.” She find 
eth no rest—No satisfaction of mind, no settled place 
of abode, no remission of labour, terror, and suffer- 
ing; but, deprived of all peace and comfort, is con- 
tinually exposed to every insult and outrage, and to 
all manner of oppressions and vexations. All Rer 
persecutors—Or pursuers, rather; overtook her be- 
tween the straits—That. is, all her enemies have 
taken the opportunity of her being in a difficult and 
distressed condition, to oppress and injure her. The 
expression is metaphorical, taken from those who . 
hunt their prey, which they are wont to drive into 


cannot escape. 


some strait and difficwt passage, from te he 
~ ii 


bs 


: 
. 


. 


~ 


La 
. 


The miseries of Jerusalem 


CHAPTER I. 


the result of her wickedness 


M. 3416. »she dwelleth among the heathen, 

C. 588. 

she findeth no rest: all her perse- 
cutors overtook her between the straits. 

4 The ways of Zion do mourn, because none 
come to the solemn feasts: all her gates are 
desolate : her priests sigh, her virgins are afflict- 
ed, and she 7s in bitterness. 

5 Her adversaries ‘are the chief, her ene- 
mies prosper; for the Lorn hath afflicted her 
* for the multitude of her transgressions: her 
‘children are gone into captivity before the 
enemy. 

6 And from the daughter of Zion all her 
beauty is departed: her princes are become like 


A. 
B. 


harts that find no pasture, and they A.M. 3416. 
are gone without strength before the 
pursuer. 

7 Jerusalem remembered in the days of her 
affliction and of her miseries all her ? pleasant 
things that she had in the days of old, when 
her people fell into the hand of the enemy, 
and none did help her: the adversaries saw 
her, and did mock at her sabbaths. 

8 ™ Jerusalem hath grievously sinned ; there- 
fore she *is removed: all that honoured her 
despise her, because * they have seen her 
nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth back- 
ward. 


h Deut. xxviii. 64, 65; Chap. ii. 9 ——i Deut. xxviii. 43, 44. 
® Jer. xxx. 14,15; Daniel ix. 7, 16—! Jer. lii. 28,——?* Or, 
desirable, Verse 10. 


m] Kings viii, 46. 3 Hebrew, is become a removing, or, 
wandering. 4 Jeremiah xiii. 22, 26; Ezekiel xvi. 37; xxiii. 
29; Hosea ii. 10. 


Verses 4-6. The ways of Zion do mourn—The 
highways leading to Zion, which used to be thronged 
with people going to the solemn feasts before the 
Lord, now, as it were, mourned on account of nd 
persons travelling in them for that purpose. All her 
gates are desolate—The gates of Jerusalem, or of 
the temple: few or none passing through them, the 
city and country being depopulated; and there are 
no longer any courts of judicature, or assemblies of 
people, held in her gates. Her priests sigh—Because 
io victims, or other oblations, are offered, the temple 
and altar being destroyed. Her virgins are afflicted 
—Her calamities afflict the young as well as the old, 
and persons of all ages and ranks are in bitterness. 
Her adversaries are the chief—Her enemies have 
got the advantage over her, and she is become their 
vassal. This was a judgment that Moses threatened 
to them if they proved disobedient, Deut. xxviii. 43; 
namely, that their enemies should be the head, and 
they the tail. For the Lord hath afflicted her— 


‘Hath fulfilled his threatenings, denounced in case of 
disobedience. For the multitude of her transgres- 


sions—The procuring, provoking cause of all her 
calamities: for whoever may be made the instru- 


ments, God is the author of all these troubles: it is) 
the Lord that has afflicted her, and he has done it as} 


a righteous judge, because of her transgressions, 
which have been very many as well as very great. 
Hence her children, her inhabitants, are gone into 
captivity before the enemy—Are forced into slavery 
by the Chaldeans, as cattle are driven in herds by 
them that sellthem. And from the daughter of Zion 
all her beauty is departed—All the glory of God’s 
sanctuary, and the comely order of his worship, and 
all the beauty of holiness. Her princes are like 
haris, &e.——That upon the first alarm betake them- 
“selves to flight, and make no resistance : they are be- 
come dispirited, have lost their courage, given way 


' and fled before their enemies. 


"Verse 7. Jerusalem remembered in her affliction 
and misery. The word 711%, here rendered 
misery, frequently signifies banishment and captiv- 

ca 


cal 


ity. The LXX. render it azwouor, rejections, or ex- 
pulsions; all her pleasant things—All her former 
riches and glory, and the various benefits she enjoy- 
ed from God’s favour and protection, particularly the 
honour and happiness of having his peculiar pre- 
sence in the temple, and among his people, and the 
manifestation he gave of his will by the prophets. 
Nothing is more natural than for persons, who have 
fallen into adversity, to recollect the advantages 
they had formerly possessed, and to feel an aggrava- 
tion of their sufferings in proportion to the greatness 
of the contrast. The adversaries saw her, and did 
mock at her sabbaths-—Not considering the excellent 
uses those days were designed for; namely, to give 
men a proper degree of relaxation from labour; 
leisure to attend upon the service of God, and learn 
the duties of religion; and to celebrate the creation 
of the world, that wonderful effect of infinite wisdom, 
power, and goodness, which can never be sufficient- 
ly extolled. The heathen writers, it must be ob- 
served, commonly ridicule the Jews’ celebration of 
their sabbaths as a mark of their sloth and idleness, 

Verses 8, 9. Jerusalem hath grievously sinned— 
Hebrew, TNON NON, in sinning hath sinned, or hath 
sinned sin: that is, sinned wilfully and deliberately ; 
hath sinned that sin which of allothers is the abomi- 
nable thing which the Lord hates, the sin of idolatry. 
The sins of Jerusalem, which makes such a profes- 
sion of worshipping and serving the true God, and 
therefore of obeying his will, and enjoys such privi- 
leges, are of all others the most grievous sins. 7'here- 
fore she is removed—The greatest part of her inhabit- 
ants are eithercarried away captive to Babylon, or are 
fled for refuge and safety to some of the neighbour- 
ing nations. Blaney translates this clause, T'here- 


fore hath she been as one set apart for unclean, in- - 


stead of 77739, a word that occurs nowhere else, read- 
ing 775, after nineteen MSS., which signifies a wo- 
man inher state of separation. All that honoured her, 
despise her—She hath made herself vile, and there- 
fore is justly vilified. Because they have seen her 


nakedness—Have seen her deprived of all her ~ 


549 


B.C. 588. 
meen * Yi 


™. 


In the midst of her calamities, 


A. M. 3416. 


Ws 9 Her filthiness 7s in her skirts; she 
CFB 


° remembereth not her last end; there- 
fore she came down wonderfully : ? she had no 
comforter. O Lorn, behold my affliction : for the 
enemy hath magnified himself. 

10 The adversary hath spread out his hand 
upon tall her ‘pleasant things: for she hath 
seen that *the heathen entered into her sanc- 
tuary, whom thou didst command that * they 
should not enter into thy congregation. 


11 All her people sigh, tthey seek bread ; they 


© Deuteronomy xxxii. 29; [saiah xlvii. 7,——P Verses 2, 17, 
21. 4 Verse 7. 4 Or, desirable. r Jer. li. 51.—=s Deut. 
xxiii. 3; Neh. xiii. 1. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


Jerusalem makes her complaint. 


have given their pleasant things for 4. HHS. ’ 
meat ‘to relieve the soul: see, O Lorn, 
and consider; for I am become vile. ' 
12 7° Js it nothing to you, all ye that 7 pass 
by? behold, and see “if there be any sorrow 
like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, 
wherewith the Lorp hath afflicted me in the 
day of his fierce anger. 
13 From above hath he sent fire into my 
bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath 
* spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me 


t Jer. xxxviii.9; lii. 6; Chap. ii. 12; iv. 4——® Or, to make 
the soul to come again.—— Or, it is nothing ——" Heb. pass by 
the way. 4 Dan. ix. 12. x Ezek. xii. 13; xvii. 20. 


strength and glory. Asshe had defiled herself with 
idolatry, (called spiritual adultery in Scripture, ) so 
God has ordered her to be exposed to shame like a 
common harlot. Yea, she sigheth and turneth back- 
award—As ashamed to be seen in such a despicable 
condition, destitute of all those things which consti- 
tuted her former glory. Her filihiness is in her 
skirts—She carries the marks of her sins in the 
greatness of her punishments. She remembereth 
not her last end—Reflects not on what is still further 
coming upon her. “The plain meaning of this,” 
says Blaney, “taken out of metaphor, seems to be, 
that although evident marks of her pollution appear- 
ed about her, and the land was defiled by her sinful- 
ness, even to its utmost borders, she had no thought 
or consideration of what must be the consequence of 
all this at the last”? Therefore she came down 
wonder fully—She was brought low, and humbled in 
an extraordinary manner having sinned. grievously, 
verse 8, she was degraded and punished wonder- 
fully. Observe, reader, grievous sins bring wondrous 


ruin; there are some workers of iniquity for whom | 


is prepared a strange and uncommon punishment. 
Verse 10, 11. The adversary hath—Or rather, 


did, spread his hand upon all her pleasant things | 


—Hebrew, W19N9, her desirable things, namely, 
her riches, and what else she most desired to pre- 
serve. She hath seen the heathen entered into her 
sanctuary, &c.—She saw heathen nations, whom 
thou hadst forbidden even to be admitted into thy 
congregation, (as being uncireumcised,) enter into 
the sanctuary farther than ever her own people them- 
selves were permitted to go. The Chaldeans entered 
into the inmost part of the sanctuary, even into the 
holy of holies, into which none of the Jews, except 
the high-priest, were ever allowed to enter. All her 
people sigh, they seek bread—He probably refers to 
the time of the invasion of the country by the Chal- 
deans, and the siege of Jerusalem, when the whole 
body of the people were in a sad condition, and, in a 
land that ordinarily flowed with milk and honey, 
were at adoss for bread to eat. They have given 
their pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul— 
They have parted with their riches and all their de- 
sirable things to purchase bread to sustain their lives. 
See, O Lord, and consider—This is & prayer of Je- 
550 


rusalem to God for relief; for I am become vile— 
That is, miserable and contemptible. 

Verse 12. Is it nothing to you? &c.—The Vulgate 
reads this clause without an interrogation, thus: 
O vos omnes qui transitis per viam attendite, videte, 
&c. O all ye, who pass by the way, observe, see, 
&c. Lowth also and Blaney prefer reading it in a 
similax way ; the former thus: O all ye that pass 
by; or, O! I appeal to all you that pass by: and 
the latter, O that among you, all ye that pass by the 
way, ye would look and see, &c. Our translation, 
however, is more agreeable to the Hebrew, and cer- 
tainly more expressive and emphatical. The pro- 
phet speaks in the name of Jerusalem, or of the 
Jewish Church, still represented as a woman in 
misery, sitting by the way-side, and calling to travel- 
lers that passed by to have compassion on her, sug- 
gesting to them that hers was no ordinary affliction, 
nor the visitation of a common and ordinary provi- 
dence, but the effect of the Lord’s fierce anger, a most 
severe though just chastisement. The intention of 
the passage is to show that the calamities brought on 
the Jews, as the punishment of their idolatries and 
other crimes, ought to be observed and maturely 
considered by people of all nations, that from their 
miseries they might learn how dangerous it was to 
provoke the God of Israel by such practices; which 
he would not overlook in any people, not even in 
those that stood in the nearest relation to him, but 
would assuredly punish them: and to signify to the 
Babylonians themselves in what danger they stood 
by despising and setting at naught this only living 
and true God. But the prophet does not address 
them by name, nor speak more pointedly, lest he 
should irritate them still more against his already 
too miserable countrymen. “'These words are often 
quoted in speaking of our Lord’s sufferings, and they 
are capable of a striking accommodation thereto: 
but it should be recollected that this is only an ac- 
commodation, and not the real meaning of the sacred 
writer.”—Mr. Scott: who adds, “The address is so 
exquisitely pathetical, that no comment can pew 
do justice to it.” 

Verses 13-16. From above hath he sent fire into 
my bones—Calamities as consuming and as 
as fire in the bones. He hath spread ona 


Jerusalem complains of her grief, 


CHAPTER I. 


and acknowledges her sins. 


— 


A. M. 3416. back: 


he hath m P 
B. GC. 588 t ade me desolate 


and faint all the day. 

14 ¥ The yoke of my transgressions is bound 
by his hand: they are wreathed, and come up 
upon my neck: he hath made my strength to 
fall, the Lorp hath delivered’ me into their 
hands, from whom I am not able to rise up. 

15 The Lorn hath trodden under foot all my 
mighty men in the midst of me: he hath called 
an assembly against me to crush my young 
men: *the Lorp hath trodden § the virgin, the 
daughter of Judah, as in a wine-press 

16 For these things I weep ; * mine eye, mine 
eye runneth down with water, because >the 


comforter that should ° relieve my soul A. M. 3416 
is far from me: my children are deso- ae 
late, because the enemy prevailed. 

17 ° Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and 
4 there is none to comfort her: the Lorp hath 
commanded concerning Jacob, that his adver- 
saries should be round about him: Jerusalem 
is as a Menstruous woman among them. 

18 7 The Lorp is °righteous; for I have 
‘rebelled against his 1° commandment: hear, I 
pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: 
my virgins and my young men are gone into 
captivity.’ 

19 I called for my lovers, bué & they deceived 


y Deut. xxviii. 48. 
* Or, the wine-press of the virgin, &c, 
sista, ii, 18.—» Verses 2, 9. 


z Isa, Ixiii.3; Rev. xiv. 19, 20; xix. 15. 
aJer. xiii. 17; xiv. 17; 


® Heb. bring back. 
ix.'33:3Dan. ix. 7,14: 
g Verse 2; Jer. xxx, 14, 


¢ Jer. iv. 31—4 Ver. 2, 9. e Neh. 
f1 Sam. xii, 14, 15.——!° Heb. mouth. 


—Hath brought me into a most miserable condition, 
in which Iam so entangled that I cannot extricate 


myself nor escape from it. Thus the prophet teaches | 


Jerusalem to look beyond the Babylonians, and to 
see the sin-avenging hand of God in her sufferings. 
As if he had said, It is God himself that hath sent 
these evils upon me; he hath stirred up my ene- 
mies against me, and they are no more than the rod 
of his anger. 
bound by his hand, &c.—He has, as it were, gathered 
my iniquities and the iniquities of my people toge- 
ther, and made a yoke of them to put upon me, so 
that I am weighed down by them, and by the judg- 
ments inflicted on account of them. They are 
wreathed, and come up upon my neck—My punish- 
ments are twisted with my sins as cords to make 
them strong: I have a complication of judgments 
upon me, sword, famine, pestilence, captivity ; and 
they are not only prepared for my neck, but are 
already put uponit. He hath made my strength to 
fall, &e.—All my valiant men, the strength of my 
nation, is broken, and Lam so fallen that Iam not 
able to rise again. J'he Lord hath trodden under 
foot all my mighty men, &e.—The destruction which 
is made by war is frequently expressed by treading 
under foot: see note on Jer. 1.26. He hath called 
an assembly against me to crush, &c.—Instead of 
those solemn assemblies that were wont to be called 
together in the midst of me by the sound of trumpet, 
to celebrate my solemn feasts, God hath called an 
assembly of Chaldeans to lay me in ruins, and crush 
my people. Zhe Lord hath trodden the daughter 


of Judah as in a wine-press—That people, which |) 


was formerly chosen by Jehovah, and secured against 
all violent attempts by his immediate and almighty 
protection, he has now given up to the fury of their 
enemies, to afflict them with such severity that their 
blood has been shed in the streets of Jerusalem as 
wine from the wine-press. For these things I weep, 
&c.—For these sore afflictions, and for my sins which 
have caused them, and for these tokens of divine |, 
wrath which I see in them I weep so plentifully, 
3 


The yoke of my transgressions is || 


and am in such distress, that mine eye runneth down 
with water, because the comforter that should relieve 
my soul—Namely, God; ts far from me—Hath 
withdrawn himself, is departed from me in displea- 
sure, and beholds me afar off. My children are 
desolate—The other cities of Judah, under Jerusa- 
lem, the mother city, or my people, are wasted, de- 
stroyed, and made desolate, because the enemy hath 
prevailed—And effected his purpose. 

Verse 17. Zion spreadeth forth her hands—She 
extendeth her hands as a suppliant praying for re- 
lief and consolation. And there is none to comfort 
her—None who can, or are even inclined to do it. 
The Lord hath commanded, &c.—That is, it came 
to pass by God’s command, that the surrounding na- 
tions were the adversaries of Jacob. We meet with 
a similar form of expression Psa. Ixvili. 11, The 
Lord gave the word, great was the company of those 
that published it. Jerusalem is as a menstruous 
woman—She is become loathsome and filthy in the 
eyes of her former friends, like women separated 
from the congregation in the time of their legal un- 
cleanness. 

Verses 18,19. The Lord is righteous, for I have 
rebelled, &c.—He does me no wrong in dealing thus 
with me, nor can I charge him with any injustice. 
Observe, reader, whatever the troubles are which 
God is pleased to inflict upon us, we must own that 
in them he is righteous: we neither know him nor 
ourselves, if we do not acknowledge this. Jerusa- 
lem owns the equity of God’s actions by confessing 
the iniquity of herown. Hear, I pray you, all peo- 
ple—See note on verse 12. My virgins and my 
| young men are gone into captivity—Thus it is said, 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 17, that the Chaldeans had “no com- 
passion upon young men or maidens.” J called for 
my lovers, but they deceived me—They proved like 
the brooks in summer to the thirsty traveller, Job 
‘vi. 15. The Egyptians and her other allies are in- 
. tended, who made court to her in her prosperity, and 
| promised her assistance, but in the day of her ad- 
| versity and necessity were alienated from her, and 

551 


Jerusalem, in distress, 


LAMENTATIONS. 


seeks refuge in God. 


A. M, 3416. me: my priests and mine elders gave 
% oalii up the ghost in the city, * while they 
sought their meat to relieve their souls. 

20 Behold, O Lorn; for I am in distress: 
my ‘bowels are troubled; my heart is turned 
within me; for I have grievously rebelled: 

k abroad the sword bereaveth, at home ¢here is 
as death. 

21 They have heard that I sigh: !¢here is 


|none to comfort me: all mine ene- A. M. 2416 


: . C. 588, 
mies have heard of my trouble; they 2 


are glad that thou hast done it: thou wilt 
bring ™the day that thou hast ™ called, and 
they shall be like unto me. 

22 ™ Let all their wickedness come before thee 
and do unto them’ as thou hast done unto me 
for all my transgressions: for my sighs are 
many, and ° my heart is faint. 


! 


b Ver. 11.— i Job xxx. 27 ; 


Isa. xvi. 11; Jer. iv. 19; xlviii. 36; 
Chap. ii 11; 


Hos. xi. 8.——* Deut. xxxii. 25; Ezek. vii. 15, 


cast her off. Thus we are commonly déceived and 
disappointed in those creatures that we set our hearts 
upon, and put our trust in. Happy they that have 
made God their friend, and keep themselves in his 
love, for he will not deceive them! My priests and 
mine elders gave up the ghost in: the city—The 
famine hath consumed the most honourable as well 
as the meaner people. While they sought their meat 
lo relieve their souls—While they went about seek- 
ing for bread to keep them alive. The LXX. add, 
Kat #x evpor, and found none, With whom the Syriac 
agrees. But no such words appear in the Hebrew 


copies, although the thing is implied, for they would | 


not have died if they had found what they sought. 


Verse 20. Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress— | 


Take cognizance of my case, and use such means for 
my relief as thou pleasest. It is a matter of comfort 


to us, that the troubles which oppress our spirits are | but abandon me as in a desperate situation. 


perfectly known to God, and that his eye is continu- || 


ally upon them. Abroad the sword bereaveth, at 
home there is as death—Thus was Moses’s predic- 
tion, Deut. xxxii, 25, fulfilled, Zhe sword with- 


oul, and terror within, shall destroy both the young | 


man and the virgin, the suckling also, with the man 

of gray hairs. Virgil describes a similar. scene, 

when he says, 
“ 


Crudelis ubique 
Luctus, ubique pavor, et plurima mortis imago.” 
fEin, ii. 368. 
“ All parts resound with tumults, plaints, and fears ; 
And grisly death in sundry shapes appears.” 
“Drypden. 


By death, iS this clause, the pestilence is meant, as 
in Jer. xv. 2, where see the note: death acting, asit 
were, in propria persona, in its own proper person, 
and not by the instrumentality of another, as when 
a person is slain by the sword. So our great poet, 


in his description of a lazar-house, 
“ 


Despair 
*Tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch ; 


CHAPTER II. De A 


1 Verse 2. 


m leash 3 xiii, &c.; Jer. xlvi. &e.——" Or, pro 
elaimed.——n Psa. cix. 15——? Chap. v. 17. 


And over them triumphant death his dart 
Shook ———__—__—__.” 
Parapise Lost, book xi. 1. 489, &c. 


Instead of, Athome there is as death, Lowth pro- 
poses reading, there is certain death, observing, that 
the particle of similitude in the Scriptures sometimes 
implies a strong affirmation, as John i. 14, We be- 
held his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of 


| the Father, meaning such a glory as could belong to 
'none but the Son of God. 


Verses 21,22. They haveheard that Isigh—The 
nations contiguous to me, Egypt and others, that be- 
fore pretended to be my friends and allies, have been 
no strangers to my bitter afflictions, which have 
forced sighs from me; but there is none to comfort 
me—None of them can or will relieve my distress, 
They 
are glad that thou hast done it—They have even 
expressed gladness at the calamities that have be- 
fallen me; and they please themselves with the 
thought that thou our God, of whose favour and pro- 
tection we used to boast, shouldst forsake us, and 
give us up as a prey to our enemies. how ailt 
bring the day thal thou hast called, &e.—The day 
when thou wilt execute thy judgments upon the 
Babylonians, and our other enemies and false friends, 
will certainly come at the time thou hast determined 
for that purpose. “We have here again the like 
turn of phrase as in the first line of this period; for 
the meaning evidently is, that the enemies of Jeru- 
salem would in the end find little cause for their tri- 
umph, since thesame Almighty Being, whohad caus- 
ed her evil day to come, had declared that, after a while, 
they should also suffer the like fate. Thow that 
hast brought the day [of adversity upon me] hast 
pronounced, that they shall become even as I.”—- 
Blaney. Let all their wickedness come before thee— 
Let it appear that though thou hast chastened us for 
our sins, our enemies have still greater ones to an- 
swer and be punished for, 


ai 


In this chapter the prophet proceeds in giving a melancholy detail of the dire effects of the divine anger, in the subversion of 
both the civil and religious constitution of the Jews, and in that extreme wretchedness and distress, to which ti 
every denomination were thereby reduced, 1-9. He represents the elders, the virgins, and other inhabitants of . 


552 


Miserable condition of Jerusalem, 


ee — ~— 


CHAPTER IL. 


both civil and religious. 


as lamenting over the unparalleled miseries of their country, and charges her prophets with having betrayed her into ruin 
by their false and flattering suggestions, 10-14. He describes the astonishment of passengers on viewing the desolated 


condition of Jerusalem, 15-17. 


the compassion and consideration of God, 20-22. 


i Hew hath the Lorp covered the 
kA sete 2 daughter of Zion with a cloud in 
his anger, * and cast down from heaven unto 
the earth ” the beauty of Israel, and remembered 
not ° his footstool in the day of his anger ! 

2 The Lorn hath swallowed up all the habit- 
ations of Jacob, “and hath not pitied: he hath 
thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of 
the daughter of Judah ; he hath ! brought them 
down to the ground: *he hath polluted the 
kingdom and the princes thereof. 

3 He hath cut off in Ats fierce anger all the 
horn of Israel: fhe hath drawn back his right 
hand from before the enemy, % and he burned 
against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devour- 
eth round about. 


They call out to her to implore God's compassion for the removal of those heavy judg- 
ments, which, in the height of his displeasure, he had brought upon her, 18, 19. 


Her manifold miseries are referred to 


4 »He hath bent his bow like an A.M, 3416. 
enemy : he stood with his right hand pe vic: 
as an adversary, and slew *all' that were 
pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the 
daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury 
like fire. 

5 *'The Lorp was as an enemy: he hath 
swallowed up Israel, 'he hath swallowed up 
all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong 
holds, and hath increased in the daughter of 
Judah mourning and lamentation. 

6 And he hath violently ™taken away his 
‘tabernacle, "as if it were of a garden: he 
hath destroyed his places of the assembly: 
°the Lorn hath caused the solemn feasts and 
sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath de- 


a Matt. xi. 23.——» 2 Sam. i. 19——¢*1 Chronicles xxviii. 2; 
Psalm xcix. 5; exxxii. 7. 4 Verses. 17, 21; Chapter iii. 43. 
1 Heb. made to touch. © Psa. lxxxix. 39.—f Psa. lxxiv. 11. 
& Psa. Ixxxix. 46. 


h Isa. Ixiii. 10; Verse 5. 2 Heb. all the desirable of the eye. 
i Ezek. xxiv. 25. k Verse 4; Jeremiah xxx. 14. 12 Kings 
xxv. 9; Jer. lii. 13.— Psalm Ixxx. 12; lxxxix. 40; Isa.v. 5, 
> Or, hedge. n Isa, i. 8, ©Chap. i. 4; Zeph. iii. 18. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verse 1. How hath the Lord covered the daugh- 
ter of Zion with a cloud—Changed her condition 
for the worse, and turned the light of her prosperity 
into the darkness of adversity. And cast down, &c., 
the beauty of Israel—The temple and all its glory. 
And remembered not his footstool in the day of his 
anger—Hath not spared even the ark itself, the 
footstool of the shekinah, or divine glory, which was 
wont to appear, sitting, as it were, enthroned upon 
the mercy-seat, between the cherubim: see the 
margin. 

Verses 2-4. The Lord hath swallowed up the 
habitations, &c.— Without showing any pity or con- 
cern for them. He hath thrown down the strong 
holds, &c.—Hath suffered the enemies to batter 
down their fortifications to the ground. He hath 
polluted the kingdom, &c.—“ He hath shown no re- 
gard for the kingdom which himself had settled upon 
the family of David, but involved the royal family 
in one common destruction with the rest of the peo- 
ple. The expression is much the same with that of 
Psa. Ixxxix. 39, Thou hast profaned his crown by 
casting it lo the ground.”—Lowth. Hehath cut off, 
§c., all the horn of Israel—Namely, their strength 
and glory, and especially their kingly dignity. He 
hath drawn back his right hand, &c.—He hath 
withdrawn his wonted assistance, and given us up 
into the hands of our enemies. Or, as Blaney 
rather thinks, the right hand of Israel may be here 
intended, namely, his exertions of strength repre- 
sented as rendered ineffectual by God, or turned 
away from obstructing the progress of the enemy ; 
“just as God says, Jer. xxi. 4, that he would turn 

3 


aside the weapons of war that were in the hands of 
the Jews, so as to prevent their hindering the Chal- 
dean army from entering the city.” He burned 
against Jacob round about—God hath consumed 
them, not on this or that part merely, but every- 
where, as a fire which seizes a house, or a heap of 
combustible matter, on all sides at once. He hath 
bent his bow like an enemy, &c.—God, whom by 
their sins they had provoked, and made their enemy, 
behaved himself as such toward them, bending his 
bow, as it were, and stretching out his right hand to 
destroy them. And slew all that were pleasant to 
the eye-—The chief in worth and dignity ; those who 
were in the flower of their age, the joy and delight 
of their parents. He poured out his fury like fire— 
Which devours all before it, without any discrimi- 
nation. 

Verses 6, 7. He hath violently taken away his ta- 
bernacle as of a garden—The Vulgate reads, dissi- 
pavit, quasi hortum, tentorium swum ; he hath dis- 
solved, broke in pieces, scattered, or laid waste, his 
tent as a garden. Thus also Houbigant: that is, 
he hath destroyed the temple, the place of his resi- 
dence, and of our religious assemblies, as if it had 
been no better than a tent or cottage set up in a gar- 
den, or vineyard, just while the fruit was gathering, 
and then to be taken down again. ‘This interpreta- 
tion of the original text, which is, \3¥ 113 ODM, sup- 
poses 1Dv to be written for 130, words exactly alike 
in sound, though not always in sense, and frequent- 
ly put the one for the other. But, as the former, 
from yw, to hedge, originally signifies his hedge, 
many think the most proper rendering of the He- 
brew, and the true sense of the passage is, as in the 

553 


The inhabitants of Jerusalem 


LAMENTATIONS. 


lamenting over their miseries. 


A. M. 3416. spised in the indignation of his anger 
B. C. 588. A . 
the king and the priest. 
7 The Lorp hath cast off his altar, he, hath 
abhorred his sanctuary, he hath * given up into 
the hand of the enemy the walls of her pala- 


ces; ? they have made a noise in the house of. 


the Lorp, as in the day of a solemn feast. 

8 The Lorn hath purposed to destroy the wall 
of the daughter of Zion: *he hath stretched 
out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand 
from * destroying: therefore he made the ram- 
part and the wall to lament; they languished 
together. 

9 Her gates are sunk into the ground; he 
hath destroyed and "broken her bars: ‘her 
king and her princes are among the Gentiles : 
‘the law zs no more: her "prophets also find 
no vision from the Lorp. 


10 The elders of the daughter of A. M. 3416. 
Zion *sit upon the ground, and keep ——— 
silence; they have ¥ cast up dust upon their 
heads: they have * girded themselves with sack- 
cloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down 
their heads to the ground. 

11 * Mine eyes do fail with tears, » my bowels 
are troubled, ° my liver is poured upon the earth, 
for the destruction of the daughter of my peo- 
ple; because ‘the children and the sucklings 
6 swoon in the streets of the city. 

12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn 
and wine? when they swooned as the wounded 
in the streets of the city, when their soul was 
poured out into their mother’s bosom. 

13 What thing shall I. take to witness for 
thee? *what thing shall I liken to thee, O 
daughter of Jerusalem? What shall I equal to 


4Heb. shut up.—p Psa. lxxiv. 4. ——4 2 Kings xxi. 13; Isa. 
xxxiv. 11.——® Heb. swallowing up. * Jer. li. 30. s Deut. 
xxviii. 36; 2 Kings xxiv. 15; xxv. 7; Chapter i. 3; iv. 20. 
t2 Chron. xv. 3. u Psa, Ixxiv. 9; Ezek. vii. 26. 


x Job ii. 13; Isa. iii. 26; Ch. iii. 28,——¥ Job ii. 12.——? Isa. 
xv. 3; Ezek. vii. 18; xxvii. 31. a Psa. vi. 7; Chap. iii. 48. 
> Chap. i. 20. ¢ Job xvi. 13; Psalm xxii. 14——4 Verse 19; 
Chap. iv. 4.——§ Or, faint. e Chap. i. 12; Dan. ix. 12. 


margin, He hath taken away his hedge as of a gar- 
den ; that is, he hath withdrawn his protection, and 
left us exposed to the mercy of our enemies. He 
hath destroyed his places of the assembly—This 


translation, as also that of the Vulgate, understands | 


this asa repetition of the former clause ; but, as sixty 


MSS. and one edition, instead of 7p, read 11D at |) 


large, Blaney takes the congregation of Jehovah to 
be intended, rather than the place of their.assembly, 
and renders the words, He hath destroyed his con- 
gregation, namely, the people of Israel, the vineyard, 
which he had heretofore kept under his special pro- 
tection. The Lord hath caused the solemn feasts, 
§c., to be forgotten—Or rather, as MDwv is more pro- 
perly rendered, hath forgotten the solemn feasts, 
é&c., that is, “holds those services no longer in es- 
teem, but slights and disregards them:” compare 
Isa. i. 14,15. And hath despised the king and the 
priest—Hath shown no regard for either of those 
honourable offices, but hath suffered the kingdom to 
be destroyed, and the temple to be laid waste. He 
hath abhorred his sanctuary—It had been defiled 
with sin, that only thing which he hates, and for the 
sake of that he hath abhorred it, though hé had for- 
merly delighted in, and called it his rest for ever, 
Psa. cxxxiil. 14. 7T'hey have made a noise in the 
house of the Lord, &c.—“Instead of the joyful 
sound of praises and thanksgivings to God, such as 
used to be solemnly performed in the temple at the 
public festivals, there was nothing to be heard there 
but the noise of soldiers, and the rudeness of infidels, 
profaning that sacred place, and insulting the true 
God, who was worshipped there: compare Psalm 
Ixxiv. 4.”—Lowth. 

Verses 8,9. The Lord hath purposed to destroy 
the wallof Zion—The word wall is here to be taken 
in a metaphorical sense, for the strength and secu- 


rity of the city. He hath stretched out a line, &c. 
—Called emphatically, Isa. xxxiv. 11, WN 1p, the 
line of confusion or devastation, being designed to , 
mark out the extent of what was to be pulled down. 
For the instruments designed for building are in 
some places applied to destroying, beeause men 
sometimes mark out those buildings they intend to 
demolish. Thus, 2 Kings xxi. 18, God says, J will 
stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and 
the plummet of the house of Ahab: see likewise 
Amos vii. 7,8. T'herefore he made the rampart, 
§c., to lament—Made their walls and ramparts fee- 
ble, ready to shake like a man under some languish- 
ing distemper, who had no strength left. Her gates 
are sunk into the ground, &e.—The gates of Jeru- 
salem are destroyed and covered over with rubbish, 
and the bolts of the gates are broken. Her king and 
her princes are among the Gentiles—Zedekiah and 
the nobles of Judah, who were not slain, are in a 
state of miserable captivity. The law is no more 
—It is no longer read and expounded; the priests 
and the Levites, whose office it is to instruet the 
people, being dispersed among the heathen; and 
that part of the law which respects the publie wor- 
ship of God, being rendered impracticable by the 
temple’s being destroyed. Her prophets also find 
no vision from the Lord—The prophets are either 
dead, or in a state of captivity, and these latter are 
not favoured with divine revelations as they were 
wont to be, and so cannot resolve the doubts of those 
who come to them for advice, frm 
Verses 10-13. T'he elders, &c., sit upon the ground, 

and keep silence—These and the other expressions 
of this and the two following verses betoken the 
deepest mourning and sorrow. Mine eyes do failwith 


_tears—My sight is become dim with weeping. My 


i 


bowels are troubled—As they were when he foresaw 
3 


The Jews, in their calamity, 


CHAPTER Il. 


derided by their enemies. 


A. M. 3416. thee, that I may comfort thee, O vir- 

B.C. 588. |. ; 

——— gin daughter of Zion? for thy breach 
is great like the sea: who can heal thee? 

14 Thy ‘ prophets have seen vain and foolish 
things for thee: and they have not £ discovered 
thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but 
have seen for thee false burdens and causes of 
banishment. 

15 > All that pass 7by, ‘clap their hands at 
thee; they hiss ‘and wag their head at the 
daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Zs this the city 


{ Jer. ii. 8; v. 313. xiv. 14; xxiii. 16; xxvii. 14; xxix. 8,9; 
Ezek. xiii. 2—s Isa. lviii. 1 —— 1 Kings ix. 8; Jer. xviii. 
16; Nah. iii. 19. 7 Heb. by the way. i Ezek. xxv. 6. 


that men call 1'The Perfection of A. M. 3416. 
beauty, The Joy of the whole earth ? Eke ae 

16 ™All thine enemies have opened their 
mouth against thee: they hiss and gnash the 
teeth : they say, " We have swallowed her up: 
certainly this is the day that we looked for ; we 
have found, ° we have seen i¢. 

17 The Lorp hath done that which he had 
P devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he 
had commanded in the days of old: 4he hath 
thrown down, and hath not pitied : and he hath 


k 2 Kings xix. 21; Psalm xliv. 14. 1 Psalm xlviii. 2; 1. 2. 
m Job xvi. 9,10; Psa. xxii. 13; Chap. iii. 46, 0 Psa. lvi. 2. 
o Psa. xxxv. 21_——? Lev. xxvi. 16; Deut. xxviii. 15. 9 Ver. 2. 


these calamities coming, Jer. iv. 19, 20. My liver 
is poured upon the earth—My vitals seem to be dis- 
solved, and have lost all their strength. ‘That the 
mental passions,” says Blaney, “have a considerable 
influence upon the habit of the body in various in- 
stances, is a fact not to be questioned. And expe- 
rience daily shows, that a violent uneasiness of mind 
tends greatly to promote a redundance and over- 
flowing of vitiated bile. The liver is the proper 
seat of the bile, where its secretions are carried on. 
Hence the prophet’s meaning in this place seems to 
be, that he felt as if his whole liver was dissolved 
and carried off in bile, on account of the copious 
discharge brought on by continual vexation and fret- 
ting. Job expresses the same thing, chap. xvi. 13, 
where he says, He poureth out my gall upon the 
ground.” Because the children and sucklings 
swoon in the slreets—For want of sustenance. As 
the wounded—As those who are not presently 
despatched, but die-a lingering death. What thing 
shall I take to witness for thee?2—What instance 
ean I bring of any calamity like thine, that such an 
example may be some mitigation of thy compiaints. 
For thy breach is great, like the sea, &c.—The 
breach made in thee is like the breaking in of the 
sea that overflows a whole country, where no stop 
can be put to the inundation. 

Verse 14. T'hy prophets have seen vain and fool- 
ish things—The prophets, to whom thou didst choose 
to hearken, and whom thou didst believe, rather than 
those whom God sent to reveal his will, came and 
told thee idle tales, the fancies of their own minds, 
deluding thee with hopes of not being carried into 
captivity, or of a speedy return therefrom. J'hey 
have not discovered thine iniquity, &c.—They have 
not given thy people a just sense of their iniquities, 
in order that, by being humbled and brought to true 
repentance, they might avert God’s judgments, but 
they have rather flattered them in their sins, and 
thereby have hastened on their ruin: see the mar- 
gin. But have seen for thee false burdens—They 
have amused thee with false and fallacious prophe- 
cies, and that even after, as well as before, they were 
carried into captivity; (see Jer. xxix. 8, &e.;) and 
causes of banishment—Hebrew, -nit7, of casting 
out, of expulsion, as the word properly signifies: 

3 


that is, their pretended revelations, promising peace, 
and giving hopes of impunity to thy people continu- 
ing in sin, were so far from profiting thee, that they 
were in a great measure the causes of thy captivity. 
Why prophecies are termed nixwn, burdens, see 
notes on Isa. xiii. 1, and Jer. xxiii. 33. 

Verse 15. All that pass by clap their hands at 
thee; they hiss, &c—These were gestures of deri- 
sion, whereby the enemies of the Jews expressed a 
satisfaction in their calamities; saying, Is this the 
city that men call The Perfection of beauty—Or, 
perfect in beauty, as Blaney renders *3" n'43; The 
Joy of the whole earth—Such was the light in which 
the Jews had viewed Jerusalem, and such was the 
language in which they had been wont to speak of 
it. And it was at least a pardonable partiality in 
them, which led them to pass these encomiums upon 
it, and to suppose that all strangers would be equally 
delighted with its beauty as they themselves were. 
It was the metropolis of their nation, and the city 
their God had chosen to put his name there. There 
was his magnificent temple, and there the symbols 
of his divine presence, and the administration of the 
ordinances of his worship. hither the whole na- 
tion resorted, according to his appointment, to cele- 
brate their solemn feasts: and there those feasts were 
observed with all the magnificence of religious joy. 
It is no wonder, therefore, that they esteemed it the 
perfection of beauty, and a place in which the whoie 
earth ought to delight. 

Verses 16, 17. All thine enemies have opened their 
mouths against thee—As if they were ready to de- 
your thee: see the margin. Or they have opened 
them in scoffs, reproaches, and insults. T'hey hiss 
and gnash their teeth—In scorn and derision. They 
say, We have swallowed her up—Namely, Jerusa- 
lem. They triumph in their success against her, 
and in the rich prey they have got in making 
themselves masters of her. Certainly, this is the 
day we have looked for—Which we have expected 
and longed to see, Thus the enemies of the church 
are apt to take its disasters for its ruin, and to tri- 
umph in them accordingly ; but they will find them- 
selves deceived, for the gates of hell shall not 
prevailagainstit. The Lord hath done that which 
he had devise’—Our destroyers could have had no 

555 


Jeremiah calls on the Lord 


“ LAMENTATIONS. 


to help in time of trouble. 


A.M. 3416. caused thine enemy to ‘rejoice over 
rbiaad thee, he hath set up the horn of thine 
adversaries. 

18 Their heart cried unto the Lorn, O * wall 
of the daughter of Zion, “let tears run down 
like a river day and night: give thyself no rest ; 
let not the apple of thine eye cease. 

19 Arise, “cry out in the night: in the begin- 
ning of the watches * pour out thy heart like 
water before the face of the Lorn: lift up thy 
hands toward him for the life of thy young 
children, ¥ that faint for hunger 7in the top of 
every street. 

20 4 Behold, O Lor», and consider to whom 


thou hast done this. *Shall the A. M. 3416. 

women eat their fruit, and children 

Sof a span long? ’shall the priest and the pro- 

phet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lorn? 
21 *'The young and the old lie on the ground 

in the streets; my virgins and my young men 

are fallen by the sword ; thou hast slain them 


jin the day of thine anger; ‘thou hast killed, 


and not pitied. 

22 Thou hast called as in a solemn day *° my 
terrors round about, so that in the day of the 
Lorp’s anger none escaped or remained : 
‘those that I have swaddled and brought up, 
hath mine enemy consumed. 


rT Psalm xxxviil. 16; Ixxxix. 42.—— Verse 8, t Jeremiah 
xiv. 17; Chapter i. 16. "Psalm exix. 147. x Psalm Ixii. 
8.— Verse 11. z Isaiah li. 20; Chapter iv. 1; Nahum 
iii. 10. 


power against us, unless it had been given them from 
above: they were but the sword in God’s hand. 
And he hath not surprised us by these providences: 
he gave us notice before hand what he would do if 
we were disobedient, and he hath done no more 
than what he threatened long since. He hath ful- 
filled his word which he had commanded—Hath 
verified and made good his declarations uttered in 
days of old—Namely, by Moses, Lev. xxvi. 16-31; 
Deut. xxviil. 15-49. He hath set up the horn of 
thine adversaries—Hath advanced their power and 
glory. 

Verses 18, 19. Their heart cried unto the Lord— 
“The same,” says Blaney, “are the speakers here 
who are said to have made the foregoing remarks 
concerning the distressed condition of Jerusalem, 
namely, the passengers, (verse 15,) whose hearts, 
being deeply affected with what they saw, urged 
them to break forth into the following passionate 
exclamation, addressed to the daughter of Zion.” 
O wall of the daughter of Zion—The Vulgate reads 
the verse, Clamavit cor eorum ad Dominum, super 
muros filie Sion, Deduc quasi torrentem lacrymas 
per diem et noctem; non des requiem tibi, neque 
taceat pupilla occult tui: “Their heart hath cried 
unto the Lord concerning the walls of the daughter 
of Zion, Cause thy tears to descend, like a torrent, 
night and day; give thyself no rest, nor let the ap- 
ple of thine eye be silent.” As the wall and ram- 
part are said to lament, (verse 8,) because their ruins 
were objects of lamentation; so here the ruined 
wall, including the ruined city and its inhabitants, 
is called upon, by a beautiful prosopopeia, to mourn 
and weep over the desolations of that place which 
God had chosen for his peculiar residence, and to 
entreat him to take compassion on its miseries. The 
original expression, rendered the apple of thine eye, 
is literally the daughter of thine eye; by which 
Blaney thinks is meant, not the pupil, but the tear, 
which, he says, may, with great propriety and ele- 
gance, be termed the daughter of the eye from which 

556 


| 


a Leviticus xxvi. 29; Deuteron. xxviii. 53; Jeremiah xix. 93 
Chapter iv. 10; Ezek. v. 10. 8 Or, swaddled with their hands: 
> Chap. iv. 13, 16.——¢ 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17.——4 Chap. iii. 43- 
e Psa. xxxi. 13; Jer. vi. 25; xlvi. 5. f Hosea ix. 12, 13. 


itissues. Arise, cry out in the night—Do not cease 
thy prayers and supplications even in the night 
season. In the beginning of the watches—The 
Jews divided the night, first into three, and in after 
ages into four watches: see Judg. vii. 19; Matt. 
xiv. 25. Pour out thy heart like water before the 
Lord—Offer up thy earnest prayers with tears to 
the throne of grace; and send up thy very soul, and 
thy most devout affections along with them: see Psa, 
Ixii. 8; 1 Sam. vii.6. Lift up thy hands for the life 
of thy young children—That they at least may be 
spared ; (see verse 11;) that faint in the top of every 
street—See the margin. ‘The expression seems to 
mean the same as in every street. 

Verses 20-22. Behold, O Lord,to whom thou hast 
done this—To thy people, for whom thou hast for- 
merly expressed so much tenderness and affection. 
Jerusalem seems to be here introduced speaking. 
Shall the women eat their fruit—We find by com- 
paring this verse with chap. iv. 10, that God brought 
upon them that terrible judgment which he had de- 
nounced against them, if they continued to pro- 
voke him, namely, that they should eat the flesh of 
their own sons and daughters. See the margin. And 
children of a span long—Hebrew, nav, rendered 
in the margin, swaddled with their hands, and by 
the LXX., vyria Ynralovra paorec, infants sucking 
the breasts. Shall the priest and the prophet be 
slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?—Shall thy 
ministers be slain, and that in thy sanctuary? We 
learn from this, 1st, That the Chaldeans spared no 
character, no, not the most distinguished; even the 
priest and the prophet, who, of all men, one would 
think, might have expected protection from heaven, 
and veneration on earth, yet they were slain; not 
abroad in the field of battle, where they would 
have been out of their place, as Hophni and Phine- 
has were, but in the sanctuary of the Lord, the 
place of their business, and which they hoped 
would have been a refuge to them. 2d, They 
spared no age, no, not those who, by reason of their 

3 


The prophet bewails 


CHAPTER III. 


his severe afflictions. 


tender or decrepit age, were exempted from taking || As my people were wont to be called together from 


up the sword; for the young and the old lay on 
the ground slain in the streets. 3d, They spared 
no sex, the virgins and the young men fell by the 
sword. In the most barbarous military executions 
that we read of, the virgins were spared and made 
part of the spoil, but here they were put to the 
sword as well as the young men. We learn, 4th, 
That this was the Lord’s doing; he suffered the 
sword of the Chaldeans to devour thus without dis- 
tinction; he slew them in the day of his anger— 
Namely, his anger for their many and aggravated 
sins. J'how hast called, as in a solemn day—A 
day of awful retribution; my terrors round about— 


all parts on solemn days, when they were to meet 
at Jerusalem for thy service; so now, by thy provi- 
dence, my terrible enemies are by thee called to- 
gether to slay thy people in that holy city in which 
they were wont to worship thee. So that none es- 
caped nor remained—That is, few or none. T'hose 
that Ihave swaddled, and brought up, hath mine 
enemy consumed—As if they had been brought forth 
for the murderer, like lambs for the butcher, Hosea 
ix. 13. Zion, that was a mother to them all, la- 
ments to see those that were brought up in her 
courts, and under the tuition of her oracles, thus 
made a prey of and destroyed. 


CHAPTER. III. 


In this chapter the prophet seems to have had it in view to instruct his countrymen in the lesson of conducting themselves 
properly under adversity. To this end, (1,) He sets himself forth as an example of the most severe and trying afflic- 
tions, 1-20. (2,) He points out the inexhaustible mercies of God as the never-failing source of his consolation and 
hope, 21-24. (3,) He exhorts others to patience and quiet resignation under the like circumstances, showing that God is 
ever gracious to those that wait on him; that he is prone to pardon and pity, and takes no delight in afflicting mankind ; 
but turns away with disgust from all acts of oppression and malignant cruelty, 25-36. (4,) He asserts the divine 
supremacy in the dispensations of good and evil, and argues that no man has a right to complain when he is punished 
according to his deserts. He therefore recommends it to his fellow-sufferers, to examine themselves, and to turn to God 
with contrite hearts, sincerely deploring the sinfulness of their conduct, which had provoked the divine justice to treat them 
with such extraordinary severity, 37-47. (5,) He professes himself to be deeply affected with the calamities of his 
country, 48-54. But (6,) calling to. mind the desperate circumstances from which he had heretofore been rescued by the 
divine aid, he declareth his hope, that the same good Providence would frustrate the malice of his present enemies, and turn 
the scornful reproach they had cast upon him to their own confusion, 55-66. The construction of this chapter, as has 
been intimated in the general argument, differs from that of the two preceding. It consists indeed of twenty-two stanzas, 
according to the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet : but every stanza is divided into three parts, or verses, each of 


which begins with the same Hebrew letler ; the first three verses with Aleph, the next three with Beth, §e. 


And in one 


instance the order of the letters varies from that which is observed in the rest of the chapter. 


A. M. 3416. 
B. C. 588. 


I AM the man that hath seen af- 
fliction by the rod of his wrath. 
2 He hath led me, and brought me into dark- 
ness, but not inéo light. 
+ 3 Surely against me is he turned: he turneth 
his hand against me all the day. 


4 * My flesh and my skin hath he A. M. 3416. 
made old ; he hath » broken my bones. ———— 

5 He hath builded against me, and compassed 
me with gall and travail. 

6 © He hath set me in dark places, as they 


that be dead of old. 


a Job xvi. 8.—» Psa. li. 8; Isa. xxxviii. 13; Jer. 1. 17. 


¢ Psa. Ixxxviil. 5,6; exliii. 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IIL. 

Verses 1, 2. J am the man that hath seen afflic- 
tion—I myself have suffered affliction in this time 
of public calamity. He speaks, probably, with a 
particular regard to the ill treatment he had met 
with in the discharge of his prophetical office. 
Some indeed suppose that he speaks in this and the 
subsequent verses, to verse 21, in the character of 
the people, but so many passages manifestly refer to 
his own personal troubles, that such an interpreta- 
tion seems very improbable. He hath brought me 
into darkness, but not into light—Light is often 


meaning is, that God had been pleased to exercise 
him with calamity. Perhaps he refers especially to 
his being put into the dungeon and the stocks, and 
to the state of darkness and distress which his mind 
was in during these trials. 

Verses 3-7. Surely against me is he turned— 
The course of his providence toward me is quite al- 
tered. He was formerly kind and gracious, but 
now exercises an afflicting hand against me, and 
that not occasionally, or for a short time, but con- 
tinually, all theday. 'The phrase, He turneth his 
hand against me, is equivalent to that which oceurs 


used in Scripture for happiness or comfort, and “Isa. i. 25, I will turn thy hand upon thee, where see 
darkness for affliction and misery. The prophet’s || the note. My flesh, gc., hath he made old—He- 
557 


LAMENTATIONS. 


his severe afflictions. 


The prophet bewails 
A.M. 3416. 7 4 He hath hedged me about that 
B. C. 588. 


I cannot get out; he hath made my 
chain heavy. 

8 Also * when I cry and shout, he shutteth 
out my prayer. 

9 He hath enclosed my ways with hewn stone, 
he hath made my paths crooked. 

10 ‘He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, 
and asa lion in secret places. 

11 He hath turned aside my ways, and 
pulled me in pieces: he hath made me de- 
solate. 

12 He hath bent his bow, and "set me as a 
mark for the arrow. 


13 He hath caused ‘the ‘arrows of A. M. 3416. 
his quiver to enter into my reins. pds 

14 I was a ‘derision to all my people; and 
‘their song all the day. 

15 ™He hath filled me with *bitterness, he 
hath made me drunken with wormwood. 

16 He hath also broken my teeth ® with 
gravel-stones, he hath * covered me with ashes 

17 And thou hast removed my soul far off 


from peace: I forgat * prosperity. 


18 ° And I said, My strength and my hope is 
perished from the Lorp ; 

19 Remembering mine affliction and my 
misery, ? the wormwood and the gall. 


¥J0b'i iii, 23; xix. 8; Hosea ii. 6——® Job xxx. 20; Psalm 
xxn. 2: f Job x. 16; Isa. xxxvili. 13; Hos. v. 14; xiii. 7, 8. 
% Hos. vi. 1.— Job vii. 20; xvi. 12; Psa, xxxviii. 2, i Job 


vi. 4.——" Heb. sons. 


Jeremiah xx. 7.——! Job xxx. 9; Psa. lxix. 12; Verse 63. 
m Jer. ix. 15. 2 Heb, bitternesses. 0 Prov, xx. ita? Or, 
rolled me in the ashes——* Hebrew, good.——® Psalm xxxi. 22. 
5 Or, Remember. P Jer, ix. 15. 


prew, 7192, hath wasted, caused to decay. See notes 
on Job xvi.8; Psa. xxxi. 10, and xxxii. 3. He hath 
broken my bones—The anguish I feel in my mind 
is as painful to me as if all my bones were broken. 
He hath builded against me—He hath blocked me 
up in a strait place; he has so enclosed me with ca- 
lamities that there is no escaping them; and com- 
passed me with gall, &c.—Hath filled me with grief 
and anguish of mind, which is no less bitter than gall 
to the mouth. He hath set mein dark places, &e. 
—He hath confined me to a dungeon where no 
light enters; and I am secluded from human so- 
ciety, as if I were out of the world. He probably 
refers tothe pit of the prison into which he was cast 
by the command of Zedekiah. He hath hedged me 
about—See verse 5, and the margin. He hath made 
my chain heavy—He hath made my bondage, or my 
imprisonment, grievous. 

Verse 8. Also when I cry and shoult—When, un- 
der a conviction that, in my present distressed con- 
dition, I cannot deliver myself, and that no creature 
can deliver me, I make application to God in prayer 
for deliverance, and am serious, fervent, and impor- 
tunate in my addresses to him; he shutteth out my 
prayer—Refuses to hearken to it, or give me any 
ease or relief; Hebrew, Donw, the same as MND, 
he hath obstructed my prayer; “hath barred my 
prayer from approaching him.”—Blaney. Thus 
sometimes God seems to be angry even against the 
prayers of his people, Psa. Ixxx.5. And their case 
is deplorable indeed when they are 3 denied, not only 
the benefit of an answer, but the comfort of ac- 
ceptance. : 

Verses 9-13. Hehath enclosed my way with hewn 
stone—He hath not only hedged it up with thorns, 
Hos, ii. 6, but stopped it up with a stone wall which 
cannot be broken through; so that my paths are 
made crooked—That is, I traverse to and fro, to the 
right hand and to the left, to try to get forward, but 
Tam still turned back. Observe, reader, if we walk 
in the crooked ways of sin, crossing or swerving 

558 


| 


from God’s laws, it is just with God to make us 
walk in the crooked paths of affliction, crossing our 
designs and breaking our measures. He was unto 
me as a bear lying in wait—Surprising me with 
his judgments; and as a lion in secret places—So 
that which way soever I went, I was in continual 
fear of being attacked, and could never think myself 
safe. Hehath turned aside my ways—Hath blasted 
all my counsels and ruined my projects; (see above 
on verse 9;) and pulled me in pieces—Hath torn 
and gone away, Hos. v.14. He hath made me deso- 
late—Deprived me of all society, and of all comfort 
in my soul. He hath bent his bow—That bow, 
which was ordained against the church’s persecutors, 
is bent against her sons. He hath set me as a mark 
for his arrows—Which he aims at, and is sure to 
hit: so that the arrows of his quiver enter into my 
reins—And give me an inward and mortal wound. 
Verses 14-19. I was a derision to all my people 
—To all the wicked among them, who made them- 
selves merry with the prophet’s griefs and the public 
judgments ; and their song all the day—Hebrew, 
(n°), their instrument of music. The word, says 
Blaney, “is commonly rendered their song; but I 
rather think it means a subject upon which they 
played, as upon a musical instrument, for their di- 
version.” He hath filled me with bitlerness—A 
bitter sense of these calamities. God has access to 
the spirit, and can so imbitter it, as thereby to: imbit- 
ter all enjoyments; as when the stomach is foul, 
whatever is eaten becomes acid in it. He hath made 
me drunken with wormwood—That is, so intoxicated 
me with the sense of my afflictions, that I know not 
what to say or do. He hath broken my teeth with 
gravel-stones—Hath mingled gravel with my bread, 
so that my teeth are broken with it, and what I eat 
is neither pleasant nor nourishing. He hath covered 
me with ashes—As mourners were wont to be; or. 
as some render 198 *1w°99N, he hath laid me low, or 
made me wallow, in ashes, namely, because of 
sorrow and grief. These expressions implyine eer 


Exhortation to patience 


CHAPTER Ul. 


and hope in God’s mercy. 


A. M. 3416. 


20 My soul hath ¢hem still in re-| 
8. C. 588 


membrance, and is humbled in me. 

21 This 17 recall to my mind, therefore have 
T hope. 

22 4 % Jt is of the Lorp’s mercies that we 
are not consumed, because his compassions fail 
not. 

23 They are new * every morning : great is 
thy faithfulness. 

24 The Lorp is my * portion, saith my soul ; 
therefore will I hope in him. 


6 Heb. bowed. 7 Heb. make to return to my heart. 4 Mal. 
iii. 6 —— Isa. xxxiii. 2——* Psa. xvi. 5; Ixxiii. 26 ;. exix. 57; 
Jer. x. 16. 


25 The Lorp is good unto them » 4 oti 
that ‘wait for him, to the soul that 


seeketh him. 


26 It is good that a man should both hope and 
"quietly wait for the salvation of the Lorp. 

27 * It is good for a man that he bear the 
yoke in his youth. 

28 Y He sitteth alone, and keepeth HRs be- 
cause he hath borne i¢ upon him. 

29 *He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so 
be there may be hope. 


t Psa. exxx. 6; Isa. xxx. 18 ; Mic. vii, 7, ——" Psa. xxxvii. 7. 
x Psalm xc. 12; exix. 71. y Jeremiah xv. 17; Chap, ii. 10. 
z Job xiii. 6. 


of misery; that he received no comfort or refresh- 
ment from any thing. J said, My strength, my hope 
is gone—I even began to despair of God’s mercy; 
remembering my affliction-—Reflecting on all the 
miseries and hardships I had suffered. Without 
doubt it was his infirmity to think and speak thus, 
(Psa. Ixxvii. 10,) for with God there is everlasting 
strength, and he is his people’s never-failing hope, 
whatever they may suspect to the contrary. 

Verses 21-23. This I recall to my mind, &c.— 
Here the prophet begins to suggest motives of pa- 
tience and consolation: as if he had said, I call to 
mind the following considerations, and thereupon I 
conceive hope and comfort. And surely they are 
such as afford a sufficient ground for trusting in God 
under the severest trials. It is of the Lord’s mercies 
that we are not conswmed—It is not clear that this 
is the exact sense of the Hebrew, in which there is 
nothing for it is of. The LXX. translate the verse, 
Ta ehen Kupis, ott ex eerie we. The mercies of the 
Lord, because they have not left, or do not leave, 
me: that is, I rely on, and derive hope and consola- 
tion from, the mercies of the Lord, which still con- 
tinue to prevent and follow me. Because his 
compassions fail not--Ov ovytedecdycav, are not 
finished, exhausted, or brought to an end. They 
are new every morning: great, &c.—Thy mercies 
are renewed to us every day, one following another ; 
and thy faithfulness in performing them is as great 
as thy goodness in promising them. God’s mercy and 
truth, or fidelity, are usually joined together. Bla- 
ney connects these three verses thus: “'This I revolve 
in my heart, therefore will I have hope; the mer- 
cies of Jehovah, that they are not exhausted, that 
they fail not; new are his compassions every morn- 
ing; great is thy faithfulness.” According to our 
translation the prophet represents himself as calling 
to mind that, as a sinner, he deserved to be cut off, 
and delivered up to future punishment, and should 
certainly have been thus destroyed but for the mer- 
cies of God; while his people, for their sins, would 
have been so totally consumed that no remnant of 
them would have been left. “As, however, the Lord 
had mercifully spared him, and had not utterly de- 
stroyed them; as his compassions were plentcous 
and unfailing, and every morning renewed to him, 

3 


in the continuance of his life, and many unmerited 
benefits; and as God had given many precious pro- 
mises to Israel, and to every believer, and, in his 
great faithfulness, had always performed them to 
those who trusted in them; so he found there was 
yet encouragement to hope, and to exercise patience 
and repentance in expectation of returning comfort.” 
—Scott. 

Verses 24-26. The Lord is my portion, saith my 
soul—-An interest in the favour and love of God, and 
his presence with me, my heart tells me, is the best 
inheritance. And, possessing these, I have that which 
is sufficient to balance all my troubles, and make up 
all my Josses. For, while portions on earth are 
empty and perishing things, God is an all-sufficient 
and durable portion, a portion for ever. Therefore 
will I hope in him—I will stay myself upon him, and 
encourage inyself in him, when all other supports 
and encouragements fail me. Observe, reader, it is 
our duty and interest to make God the portion of 
our souls, and then to enjoy and take comfort in him 
as such, in the midst of afflictions and lamentations. 
The Lord is good unto them that wait for hin—To 
them that patiently wait his time; when he shall 
judge it a proper season to afford them comfort and 
deliverance; and who, in the mean while, apply 
themselves to him by prayer and humiliation. Jt is 
good—It is our duty, and will be our unspeakable 
comfort and satisfaction; that a man should hope 
and quietly wait, &c.—To hope that it will’ come, 
though the difficulties that lie in the way of it seem 
insuperable; to wait till it does come, though it be 
long delayed; and while we wait to be quiet and 
silent, not quarrelling with God, or making ourselves 
uneasy, but acquiescing in the divine disposal. 

Verses 27-30. Jt is good for a man that he bear 
the yoke in his youth—That he be inured betimes to 
bear those useful restraints which may give him a 
right sense of the duty which he owes to God, and 
the obedience he ought to pay to his laws. For the 
prophet’s expression is very applicable to the yoke 
of God’s commands; it is good for us to take that 
yoke upon us in our youth; we cannot begin too 
soon to be religious; it will make our duty the more 
acceptable to God, and easy to ourselves, if we engage 


in it when weare young. Here, however, the prophet 


Exhortation to patience 


30 *He giveth his cheek to him 
that smiteth him: he is filled full 
with reproach. 

31 °For the Lorp will not cast off for 
ever: 

32 But though he cause grief, yet will he 
have compassion according to the multitude 
of his mercies. 


A. M., 3416. 
B. C. 588, 


LAMENTATIONS. 


and hope in Gul’s mercy. 


33 For © he doth not afflict ® will- A. M. 3416. 
ingly, nor grieve the children of men. mae 

34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners 
of the earth, 

35 To turn aside the right of a man before 
the face of * the Most High, 

36 To subvert a man in his cause, * the Lorn 
10 approveth not. f 


aJsa. 1. 6; Matt. v. 39.——> Psa. xciv. 14. 
11; Heb. xii. 10. 


¢ Ezek. xxxiil. 


seems to speak chiefly of the yoke of affliction ; 
many have found it good to bear this yoke in their 
youth ; it has made those humble, and serious, and 
spiritually minded, who otherwise would have been 
proud, unruly, and as a bullock unaccustomed to 
the yoke. Ifit be asked, when we bear this yoke 
so that it is really good for us to bear it? we have 
the answer in the following verses: Ist, When we 
are sedate and quiet under our.afflictions ; when we 
sit alone and keep silence ; retire into privacy that 
we inay converse with God, and commune with our 
own hearts, silencing all discontented, distrustful 
thoughts, and laying our hand upon our mouth, as 
Aaron, who, under a severe trial, held his peace. 
When those that are afflicted in their youth accom- 
modate themselves to their afflictions, and study to 
answer God’s end in afflicting them, then they will 
find it good for them to bear it; for it yfelds the 
peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that are 
exercised thereby. 2d, When we are humble and 
patient under affliction; he gets good by the yoke, 
that not only lays his hand wpon his mouth in token 
of submission to the will of God in the affliction, but 
puts his mouth in the dust in token of sorrow, shame, 
and self-loathing at the remembrance of sin, and as 
one perfectly reduced and reclaimed, and brought, 
as it were, to lick the dust, Psa. lxxii. 9. And we 
must thus humble ourselves, if so be there may be 
hope. If there be any way to acquire and secure a 
good hope under our afflictions, as, blessed be God, 
there is, it is this way, and while we look for it we 
must own ourselves utterly unworthy of it. 3d, 
When we are meek and gentle toward those that are 
the instruments of our trouble, and manifest a for- 
giving spirit. He gets good by the yoke that gives 
his cheek to him that smiteth him, and rather turns 
the other cheek, than returns the second blow. He 
that can bear contempt and reproach, and not render 
railing for railing, and bitterness for bitterness ; 
that when he is filled with reproach, keeps it to him- 
self, and does not retort it upon them that filled him 
with it, but pours it out before the Lord, Psa. exxiii. 
4; he shall find it good to bear the yoke, and it shall 
turn to his spiritual advantage. The sum is, if tribu- 
lation work patience, that patience will work expe- 
rience, and that experience a hope that maketh not 
ashamed. 

Verses 31-33. T'he Lord will not cast off for ever 
—The truly penitent that put their trust in him, and 
sincerely desire and seek reconciliation with him: 

560 


® Hebrew, from his heart.——® Or, a superior.—4 Hab. i, 13. 
10 Or, seeth not. 


though he may for a time appear to estrange him- 
| self from them, yet he will certainly return to them. 
Though he cause grief—Though, as a prudent pa- 
rent, he may see reason to chastise his people by 
| affliction, yet as a kind and tender Father, who piti- 
eth his children in misery, according to the multi- 
tude, the unspeakable greatness and abundance of 
his mercies, he will have compassion upon them, 
For he doth not afflict willingly—Hebrew, 135%, 
from his heart, that is, of his own mere motion, 
_ without cause given him by the persons afflicted ; or 
freely and with pleasure; nor grieve the children of 
men—Much less his own children. Hence judg- 
|ment is called his strange work, and exercising 
mercy and loving-kindness his delight. 

Verses 34-36. To crush under his feet, &e.—In 
' these verses certain acts of tyranny, malice, and in- 
justice are specified, in the practice of which men 
are prone to indulge themselves one toward another, 
but which the divine goodness is far from counte- 
nancing or approving by any similar conduct. By 
‘the prisoners of the earth, or of the land, as the 
words may be properly rendered, Blaney thinks are 
meant the poor insolvent debtors, whom their eredit- 
ors among the Jews, as well as in other nations, 
were empowered to cast into prison, and to oblige to 
work out their debts; a power too often exerted 
| with great rigour and inhumanity: see Isa. lviii. 3 ; 
Matt. xviii. 30,34. To turn aside the right of a 
man—To prevent his obtaining, or to deprive him 
of, his just rights ; before the face of the Most High 
'—In the presence of the just and holy God, and 
under his all-seeing eye, who takes particular notice 
of all acts of injustice, and will severely punish them. 
|The word }y5y, here used, undoubtedly often means 
the most high God, and is so understood here, both 
by the LXX. and the Vulgate. Many commenta- 
tors, however, prefer the marginal reading, a swpe- 
rior, understanding thereby: a magistrate. And 
Blaney thinks it cannot here mean God, because, 
“though a person may be made to suffer greatly by 
having his judgment turned aside, that is, by being 
calumniated and misrepresented before an earthly 
superior, yet all such malicious attempts must fail 
and come to nothing where God is the judge, who 
cannot be deceived or imposed upon.” This is cer- 
tainly true: but it does not appear that the prophet 
_referred to this circumstance, but rather to the ef- 
frontery and daring wickedness of those who could 
be guilty of such injustice, when nea eer they 


ars, > ¢t. 


Ps... 


An acknowledgment 


CHAPTER III. 


of God’s goodness. 


--% _—_ 


A.M. 3416. 37 4 Who i is he * that saith, and it 
B.C. 588 

cometh to pass, when the Lorp com- 
mandeth i¢ not ? - 


38 Out of the mouth of the Most A. “ a 
High proceedeth not f evil and good ? aes 
39 & Wherefore doth a living man complain, 


e Psa. xxxiii. ee Job ii. 10; Isa. xlv. 7; Amos iii. 6. 


were before the omnipresent God, and that his eye 
was upon them, thus, as it were, bidding him defi- 
ance. Yo subvert aman in his cause—That is, to 
prevent his having justice done him, in a law-suit or 
controversy, by any undue interference ; as by bear- 
ing or suborning false witness, or exerting any kind 
of influence in opposition to truth and right: the 
Lord approveth not—Hebrew, 7x7 x9, seeth not: 
that is, hates sueh conduct, and turns away his face 
from it with abhorrence and disgust. Thus we read, 
Hab. i. 13, Thou art of purer eyes than to behold 
evil; and canst not look on iniquity. The general 
sense of the passage is, as God takes no pleasure in 
oppressing the poor and helpless, so neither will he 
suffer any men to escape unpunished that are guilty 
of such acts of injustice and cruelty, who never con- 
sider that all the wrongs they do are committed in 
the sight of the Supreme Judge of the world; and 
although for a time he thinks fit to prosper such op- 
pressors, yet, in due time, he will call them to a se- 
vere account for their wickedness. 
' Verses 37, 38. Who is he that saith—That com- 
mands an event to take place, or predicts that it shall 
take place, and it cometh to pass accordingly, when 
the Lord commandeth not?—Or who designs a 
thing, and brings his designs to effect, when the 
Lord is against him? ‘“ Haughty tyrants may boast 
of their power as if they were equal to Omnipotence 
itself; but still it is God’s prerogative to bring to 
pass whatever he pleases, without any let or impedi- 
ment, only by speaking, or declaring his purpose, 
that the thing should be done, as he did at the be- 
ginning of the creation: see Psa. xxxiii. 7. And as 
he makes men the. instruments of his vengeance 
when he sees fit, so he can restrain their cruelty 
whenever he pleases."—Lowth. Out of the mouth 
of the Most High proceedeth not evil and good ?—Do 
not calamities, as well as prosperous events, happen 
by God’s will and pleasure? The sum is: Nothing 
comes to pass in the world but by the disposal of the 
divine providence, which is directed by infinite wis- 
dom, justice, and goodness. The inspired writer seems 
to be arguing himself and the people of God into a 
quiet submission to the divine will in their afflictions, 
from the consideration of the hand of God in them. 
Verse 39. Wherefore, &c—The prophet here 
seems to check and blame himself for the complaints 
he had made in the former part of the chapter, 
wherein he appeared to reflect upon God as unkind 
and severe. And from the doctrine of God’s sove- 
reign and universal providence, which he had assert- 
ed in the last two verses, he draws this inference, 
Wherefore doth a living man complain? aman for 
_the punishment of his sins ?—No calamity or trouble 
befalls us, but what is the due reward of our sins; 
and is designed as a chastisement for them, in order 
io our purification and amendment, or for the trial 
Vor. I. ( 36 ) 


& Prov. xix. 3.——1! Or, murmur. 


of our grace, and in order to the exercise and increase 
ofit. If we view our afflictions in this light, it will 
prevent all murmuring and repining against the pro- 
vidence of God. We shall learn to be patient and 
resigned under his chastising hand, and even thank- 
ful that he condescends to correct and try us for our 
profit, and by preserving us alive in the body still 
gives us space for repentance. “There seems,” says 
Blaney, “to be a peculiar emphasis laid on the words 
‘n, [living,] and 733, [man,] in this passage. 2 is 
said to denote a@ man, because of his excellence and 
superiority over all other earthly beings. While a 
man therefore lives, and is possessed of those privi- 
leges of his nature, whatever he undergoes must be 
less than his sins have deserved, because death, which 
implies the loss of all those privileges, is the allotted 
wages of sin.” Mark well, reader, though we may 
pour out our complaints before God, we must never 
complain against or of God. How cogent are the 
reasons here suggested against such a conduct! We 
are men, Jet us herein show ourselves men. Shalla 
man complain? Shall a reasonable creature act 
contrary to all reason, and an immortal being forget 
or disregard his immortality? Shall he be so insen- 
sible of the value of the privileges of his nature, and 
of his obligations to God for them, as to abuse them 
to God’s dishonour, instead of using them to his glo- 
ry? Shall he take upon him to censure or call in 
question the dispensations of infinite wisdom, justice, 
and goodness toward him, and act as if he thought 
he knew better than his Maker what is good for him? 
Shall a living man complain—a man who has a 
thousand times forfeited his life, with all the bless- 
ings of it, but to whom it is still continued, and with 
it‘many of its comforts, and particularly the means 
of attaining life everlasting—a hope, or a founda- 
tion whereon to build a hope, of felicity and glory 
for ever? A man for the punishment of his sins ? 
A punishment infinitely less than his sins have de- 
served? and a punishment, or chastisement, rather, 
which the omniscient God knows to be absolutely 
necessary to bring him to repentance and reforma- 
tion, if he will by any means whatever be brought 
thereto? Surely, reader, if we be suffering for our 
sins, instead of spendi ir time in complaining and 
repining, we ought to MMiployed | in repenting and 
reforming, and, that we may have at least one evi- 
dence that God is reconciled to us, we should endea- 
vour to reconcile ourselves to his holy and gracious 
will. Or, to consider the matter in another point of 
view: Are we punished for our sins? It is then 
our wisdom to submit, and kiss the rod; for if we 
still walk contrary to God, he will punish us still 
seven times more, for when he judgeth he will over- 
come; but if we accommodate ourselves to him, 
though we be chastened of the Lord, we shall not be 
condemned with the world. 


561 3 


Exhortation to forsake sin, 


LAMENTATIONS. 


and to turn unto God. 


A.M. 3416. a man for the punishment of his 
20,58. 

So SDT 

40 Let us search and try our ways, and turn 
again to the Lorp. 

41 iLet us lift up our heart with owr hands 
unto God in the heavens. 

42 * We have transgressed and have rebelled : 
thou hast not pardoned. 

43 Thou hast covered with anger, and perse- 
cuted us: ! thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied. 

44 Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, 
™ that our prayer should not pass through. 


h Mic. vii. 9—— Psa. lxxxvi. 4. ——* Dan. ix. 5——1 Chap. ii. 
2, 17, 21——™ Verse 8.——® 1 Cor. iv. 13.——® Chap. ii. 16. 


45 Thou hast made us as the *off- A. M. 3416. 
scouring and refuse in the midst of 0 aka 
the people. 

46 ° All our enemies have opened their mouths 
against us. 

47 ? Fear and a snare is come upon us, ?de- 
solation and destruction. 

48 * Mine eye runneth down with rivers of 
water for the destruction of the daughter of 
my people. 

49 * Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, 
without any intermission, 


PIsa, xxiv. 17; Jer. xlviii. 43. 


4 Isa. li. 19.——t Jer. iv. 19 ; 
ix. 1; xiv.17; Chap. ii. 11, 


5 Psa. Ixxvii. 2; Chap. i. 16. 


Verses 40,41. Let us search and try our ways 
—This will be a more reasonable and profitable em- 
ployment than that of complaining and murmuring 


against the providence of God. Let us search what 
our ways have been, and try whether they have been 
right and good or not. Let us examine our tempers, 
words, and works, and consider what they have 
been, whether agreeable or contrary to the holy 
willof God. Let us try our ways, that by them we 
may try ourselves: for we are to judge of our state 


and character, not by our faint wishes, good inten- || 


tions, transient resolutions, or even warm affections, 
but by our steps; and not by one particular step, but 
by our ways, our whole conduct; the ends we aim 
at, the rules we goby, and the agreeableness or con- 
trariety of the temper of our minds, and the tenor 
of our lives to those ends and those rules. When we 
are in affliction it is peculiarly seasonable to consider 
our ways, (Hag. i.5,) that what is amiss may be re- 
pented of, and amended for the future, and so we 
may answer the intention of the affliction. We are 
apt, in times of public calamity, to reflect upon other 
people’s ways, and lay blame upon them, whereas 
our business is to search and try our own ways: we 
have work enough to do at home; we must each of 
us say, What have Idone? what have I contributed 
to the publie distress? That we may each of us 
mend one, then we shall all be mended. And let us 
turn again to the Lord—Namely, by a sincere con- 
version, even to him who is turned against us, and 
from whom we have turned; to him let us turn by 
repentance, reformation, and faith, as to our owner 
and ruler. This particu ust accompany the for- 
mer, and be the fruit of it; therefore we must search 
and try our ways, that we may turn from the evil of 
them to God; this was the method David took, who 
says, Psa. exix. 59, I thought on my ways, and turned 
my feet into thy testimonies. Let us lift up our 
heart, &c.—Let us apply ourselves unto God by 
prayer, without which we shall attempt in vain to 
take the preceding advice. Without supernatural 
light from him we shall search and try our ways to 
little purpose: we shall still remain unacquainted 
with ourselves, and shall pass a false judgment on 
our character and conduct; and without his renew- 
562 


ing grace we shall not be turned to him effectually. 
Now for these blessings we must make application 
to him in fervent prayer, lifting up our hearts with 
our hands, and pouring out our souls with our words, 


in confident expectation of receiving what we ask. 


Verses 42-47. We have transgressed, &c.—Here 
the prophet shows what will be the effect of a proper 
searching and trying of our ways; we shall be con- 
vinced of our sinfulness and guilt: and he here 
teaches us that confession of sin must accompany 
petition for the pardon of it. For he that would find 
mercy must confess as well as forsake his sins, Prov. 
xxviii. 13; 1 Johni.9. Thou hast not pardoned— 
That is, as the expression seems here to mean, thou 
hast not removed the judgments brought upon us for 
our sins. Thou continuest to punish us according to 
the just desert of our transgressions. Thou hast 
covered with anger—Kither, thou hast covered thy- 
self with anger, hast covered thy face, so as not to 
look upon us to move thy pity; or, which is more 
probably the sense, thou hast covered, that is, over- 
whelmed, us with thy wrath. Thou hast slain, thou 
hast not pitied—Thou hast pursued us to a fatal ruin, 
without showing us any pity. J'hou hast covered 
thyself, §c., that our prayer should not pass through 
—Whereas in our distress we had no other resource 
but to apply to thee for help, thou didst so hide thy 
face and withdraw thyself from us, that we could 
have no access to thee or intercourse with thee. The 
expression is metaphorical, and signifies no more 
than that God would not hear their prayers in their 
distress. J'how hast made us the offscouring, &c. 
—That is, thou hast made us extremely contempti- 
ble in the eyes of all nations, so that they value us 
no more than the sweepings of their houses, or the 
most vile refuse, or contemptible things imaginable. 
All our enemies have opened their mouths—That is, 
to mock, scoff, and reproach us. Fear and a snare 
is come upon us—That is, all manner of misery: see 
the margin. 

Verses 48-51. Mine eye runneth down with rivers 
of water—In this and the three following verses 
the prophet shows that the misfortunes of his coun- 
try constituted no small part of his personal afflic- 
tion. Mine eye affecteth my heart—Hebrew, ndny 

( 36" ) a 


: 


T he prophet seeks 


CHAPTER III. 


refuge in God. 


4, i. I5. 50 Till the Lorp ‘look down, and 


———— behold from heaven. 

51 Mine eye affecteth my heart ™ because 
of all the daughters of my city. 

52 Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, 
“ without cause. 

53 They have cut off my life * in the dungeon, 
and ¥ cast a stone upon me. 

54 * Waters flowed over my head; then *I 
said, I am cut off. 

55 % I called upon thy name, O Lorn, out 
of the low dungeon. 

56 *'Thou hast heard my voice: hide not 
thine ear at my breathing, at my cry. 

57 Thou “drewest near in the day that I 


called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear A. M. 3416. 
not. ind 

58 O Lorp, thou hast ° pleaded the causes, 
of my soul; ‘thou hast redeemed my life. 

59 O Lorp, thou hast seen my wrong: 
8 judge thou my cause. 

60 Thou hast seen all their vengeance and 
all their "imaginations against me. 

61 Thou hast heard their reproach, O Lorn, 
and all their imaginations against me ; 

62 The lips of those that rose up against me, 
and their device against me all the day. 

63 Behold their ‘ sitting down, and their rising 
up; *I am their music. 

64 | Render unto them a recompense, O Lorp, 


t Tsaiah Ixiii. 15.——"? Heb. my soul. 13 Or, more than all. 
« Psalm xxxv. 7, 19; lxix. 4; cix. 3; exix. 161. x Jeremiah 
xxxvil. 16; xxxviii. 6, 9, 10 ——¥ Dan. vi. 17. 2 Psalm Ixix. 
2; exxiv. 4, 5.—— Psalm xxxi. 22; Isaiah xxxviii. 10, 11; 
Verse 18. ; 


> Psa. exxx. 1; Jonah ii. 2. ¢ Psa, iii. 4; vi. 8; xviii. 6; 
Ixvi. 19; cxvi. 1——4 James iv. 8. e¢ Psa, xxxv. 1; Jer. li. 
36.— Psa. lxxi. 23——s Psa. ix. 4; xxxv. 23. bh Jer. xi. 
19.—— Psalm exxxix. 2.——* Verse 14.——! Psalm xxviii. 4 ; 
Jer. xi. 20; 2 Tim. iv. 14. 


“225, preys upon my soul, as the Vulgate renders 
the expressio it is, my grief wears out my health 
and strength; be Me of all the daughters of my 
city—GOn account of the sufferings of the inhabitants 
of my city. 

Verses 52-58. Mine enemies chased me sore— 
“The prophet in this, and the following verses, de- 
seribes his own sufferings, when his enemies seized 
him and put him into the dungeon, Jer. xxxvii. 16; 
xxxvili. 6. He compares them to a fowler in pur- 
suit of a bird; so, saith he, they sought all opportu- 
nities to take an advantage against me, and to de- 
prive me of my life and liberty: and this they did 
without any provocation given on my part. So 
the word T3n, without cause, signifies.’—Lowth. 
They have cut off my life—I was not only seques- 
tered from all human society, like a dead man, but 
in apparent danger of losing my life in the dungeon. 
And their laying a stone upon the entrance of that 
dark pit resembled the burying me alive. Waters 
flowed over my head; then I said, &c.—When I 
sunk down into the mire in this dungeon, I despair- 
ed of my life, just as if I had been sinking over head 
in ariver. J called upon thy name, O Lord—I had 
recourse to thee, O Jehovah, in my distress; owt of 
the low dungeon—As Jonah out of the whale’s belly. 
Observe, reader, though we be cast into ever so low 
a dungeon of calamity and trouble, we may from 
thence find a way of access to God in the highest 
heavens. Thus the psalmist, Out of the depths have 
T cried unto thee, Psa. exxx.1. Hide not thine ear 
at my breathing, at my cry—So he terms his prayer. 
It was his breathing toward God, and after God. 
Prayer is the breath of the new man, drawing in the 
air of grace in petitions, and returning it in praises; 
it is both the evidence and maintenance of the spirit- 
ual life. Some read it, at my gasping ; when I lay 
gasping for life, and ready to expire, and thought I 
was breathing my last, then thou tookest cognizance 

3 


of my distressed case. Thou drewest near in the 
day that I called upon thee—That is, thou didst gra- 
ciously assure me of thy presence with me, and 
didst give me to see thee nigh unto me, whereas I 
had thought thee to be at a distance from me. T'how 
satdst, ear not—This was the language, Ist, of 
God’s prophets, preaching to them not to fear, Isa. 
xli. 10, 13; 2d, of his providence, preventing those 
things which they were afraid of; and, 3d, of his 
grace, quieting their minds, and making thent easy, 
by the witness of his Spirit with their spirits, that 
they were his people still, though in distress, and 
therefore ought not to fear. Thou hast pleaded the 
causes of my soul—That is, as it follows, T'howhast 
redeemed my life, hast rescued it out of the hands 
of those that would have taken it away, hast saved it 
when it was ready to be swallowed up; thou hast 
given me my life for a prey. 

Verses 59-63. O Lord, thou hast seen my wrong 
—Here the prophet adverts to his present sufferings, 
and the ill usage he met with, concerning which he 
appeals to God; as if he had said, Thou hast seen 
that I have done no wrong at all, but that I suffer a 
greatdeal. He that knows all things knew, Ist, The 
malice they had against him ; thowhast seen, says he, 
all their vengeance—How they desire to do me a 
mischief, as if it were py way of reprisal for some 
great injury I had cont 2d, The designs and 
projects they had laid to do him a mischief. T'how 
hast seen, verse 60, and again, verse 61, Thou hast 
heard, all their imaginations against me, both their 
desires and their devices to ruin me; these, whether 
they show themselves in word or deed, are perfectly 
known to thee. 3d, The contempt and calumny 
wherewith they loaded him, all that they spoke 
slightly, and all that they spoke reproachfully of 
him. Thou hast heard their reproach, verse 61; 
all the ill characters they give me, laying to my 
charge things that I know not, all the methods that 

563 


The apostacy and punishment LAMENTATIONS. of the priests and people. 


aM, $216. according to the work of their hands. || 66 Persecute and destroy them in aoe ae 
ro: 5 Rea . C. 588. 

q 65 Give them * sorrow of heart, thy || anger ™ from under the ™ heavens of 

curse unto them. the Lorp. 


14 Or, obstinacy of heart. m Deut. xxv 19; Jer. x. 11. 


» Psalm viii. 3. 


they use to make me odious and contemptible, even || tense, and certainly should have heen so rendered, 
the lips of those that rose up against me, verse 62 ;|| as indeed they are by the LXX., Arodwoere avroie 
the contumelious language they use whenever they || evratodoua Kupte—Arrodwoere avrowp—xa, diag ue “oxOov. 
speak of me. Behold, their sitting down, &c,—That || 3v avreg xaradiwéee ev opyn, Kae eSararwoete avrec 
is, Behold at all times, whether they sit down or rise || vtoxarwbev re spave Kupie, - Thou wilt render unto 
up, 1 am made the subject of their merriment, and || them a recompense, O Lord—T hou, cvilt ae 


their laughing-stock. unto them the grief of my heart. Thor wilt per- 

Verses 64-66. Render to them a recompense, &c. || secute them in wrath, and destroy them from u 
—See note on Jer. xi. 20. The verbs in these verses || the heaven, O Lord. Thus also the Vulgate, Bla- 
are not in the imperative mood, but all in the future || ney, and many others. 


CHAPTER IV. 


In this chapter, (1,) The prophet contrasts, in various affecting instances, the wretched and deplorable circumstances of the 
Jewish nation, with the flourishing siate of their affairs in former times, 1-12. (2,) He ascribes the wnhappy change 


principally to the profligacy of their priests and prophets, which had drawn upon them the universal ence of God and 
man, 13-16. (3,) The people proceed with lamenting their hopeless condition, and, in a particular manner, the captivity 


of their soverergn, 17-20. (4,) The judgment of Edom is foretold, together with a final cessation of Zion’s calamities, 
21, 22. 


A. M. 3416. How is the gold become dim! how || ° like the ostriches in the wilderness. A. M. 3416. 
B. C. 588, A 1, B. C. 588. 

acid is the most fine gold changed! || 4 ¢ The tongue of the sucking child ———— 
the stones of the sanctuary are poured out *in|/cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst: 
the top of every street. *the young children ask bread, and no man 
2 The precious sons of Zion, comparable to || breaketh i¢ unto them. 

fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen || 5 They that did feed delicately are desolate in 

pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter! |/the streets: they that were brought up in scar- 
3 Even the ‘sea-monsters draw out the/|let ‘embrace dunghills. 

breast, they give suck to their young ones:|| 6 For the ? punishment of the iniquity of the 

the daughter of my people zs become cruel, || daughter of my people is greater than the pun- 


2 Chapter ii. 19,» Isaiah xxx. 14; Jer. xix. 11; 2 Cor. iv. 7. || ¢ Job xxxix. 14, 16.——4 Psalm xxii. 15—— Chapter ii. 11, 12. 
1 Or, sea calves. f Job xxiv. 8. 2 Or, iniquity. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. breast: so Blaney. Even these fierce and destruc- 
Verses 1, 2. How is the gold become dim—* How || tive animals are not so unnatural as to neglect the 
is the glory of the temple obscured! The sanctuary, || care of their young ones; whereas the women of 
which was overlaid with gold, (2 Chron. iii. 8,) now || Jerusalem have been reduced to that miserable ne- 
lies in ruins ; and the stones of it are not distinguish- || ce€sity as to disregard their children, as the ostrich 
ed from common rubbi tis probable that the | does her eggs. The tongue of the sucking child, 
prophet, in these wo alluded to the priests, | &e.—Such was the scarcity of food, that the women 
princes, and chief persons of the country, who,| had not nourishment sufficient to produce milk to 
though they might have been compared to the pil-|| enable them to give suck to their infants, and when 
lars, or corner-stones of that sacred building, yet|| the children begged for bread the parents had none 
were now involved in the same common destruction || to give them. hey that did feed delicately em- 
with the meanest of the people. The precious sons \, brace dunghills—Lie down on dunghills, and seek 
of Zion, comparable to fine gold—Those that in | about them in hopes to pick up something to eat. 
honour and worth exceeded others as much as fine | Verse 6. For the punishment, §c., is greater than 
gold doth other metals, are now disgraced and set at || the punishment of Sodom—The fate of Sodom was 
naught. less deplorable than that of Jerusalem ; for Sodom 
Verses 3-5. Even the sea-monsters draw out the|| was destroyed in aninstant; but Jerusalem end 
breast—The very sa have drawn out the || a long siege, and suffered all the miseries of famine, 


The apostacy and punishment 


CHAPTER IV. 


6. ishment of the sin of Sodom, that 
on was £ overthrown as in a moment, 
and no hanus stayed on her. 

7 Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they 
were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy 
in body than rubies, their polishing was of sap- 
phire : 

8 Their visage is * blacker ® than a coal ; ; they 
are not known in the streets: ‘their skin ent 

th to their bones; it is withered, it is become 

a stick. 

They that be slain with the sword are bet- 
ter than they that be slain with hunger: for 
these * pine away, stricken through for want 
of the fruits of the field. 


A. M. 3 
B. C. 5 


of the prophets and priests. 


10 * The hands of the ! pitiful wo- A. M. 3416. 
men have sodden their own children: © °** 
they were their ™ meat in, the destruction of the 
daughter of my people. 

11 The Lorp hath accomplished his fury ; 
"he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath 
kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the 
foundations thereof. 

12 The kings of the earth, and all the inha- 
bitants of the world, would not have believed 
that the adversary and the enemy should have 
entered into the gates of Jerusalem. 

13 For the sins of her prophets, and the ini- 
quities of her priests, * that have shed the blood 
of the just in the midst of her, 


3 Heb. darker than blackness. 


& Gen. xix, 25. h Chap. v. 


10; Joel ii. 6; Nah. ii. 10. 


a vi. 29. a-Jer. vii. 20. ° Deut. xxxii. 22; Jer. xxi, 


8 ] —i Psa. cii. 5-——* Heb. flow out. ||+14.——? Jer. v. 31; vi. 13; xiv. 14; xxiii, 11,21; Ezek. xxii. 
k Chapter ii. 20.—! Isaiah xlix. 15 -——™ Deuteron. xxviii. 57; || 26,28; Zeph. iii. 4——4 Matt. xxili. 31, 37. 
——_a,— — 
In Sodom all were de- || and eat their own children. Thus was the prophecy 


sickness, and hostile arms. 
stroyed together, and none left to mourn in bitter- 


ness of soul the sad loss of their dearest friends ; in | 


Jerusalem eerie! to mourn the deplorable 
fate of their frie oe country, and to suffer the 
ignominy and miseries of captivity. The original 


of the last clause, O17 72 15N.N9, is rendered by the | 


LXX., cat ove exovecav ev avtn yetpac, they did not 
cause "hands to labour, or be weary, in her : 
Blaney, nor were hands weakened in her. 

Verses 7-9. Her Nazarites were purer than snow 
—It seems the word, 7°73, ought not to be trans- 
lated here Nazarites, or those who were separated 
by a vow to God; but princes, or chief men: so 
Waterland understands the word, as also Blaney, 
who renders it, her nobles. We find the same term 
applied to Joseph, as one separated, or distinguish- 
ed in eminence and dignity above his brethren, 
Gen. xlix. 26. By being purer than snow, and 
whiter than milk, seems to be intended the whiteness 
of their skin, or the fairness of their complexion ; 
and by their being more ruddy in body than rubies, 
or brighter than pearls, as 13°35 1378, may be 
rendered, their high state of health may be meant. 
Their visage is blacker than a coal—The famine, 
and other hardships which they have endured, have 
‘altered their complexion, and made them look dry 
and withered. They that be slain with the sword 
are better, &e—That is, theircase is preferable to 
that of those slain with hunger ; for these pine away, 
&c.—That is, they waste away and perish by slow 
degrees, and, before they quite expire, suffer great 
misery. Stricken through for want of the fruits 
of the field—Pierced with far more exquisite pain 
through want of sustenance, than if they had been 
run through with the sword. 

Verses 10, 11. The hands of the pitiful women 
have sodden their own children—The affection of a 
mother toward her children is the strongest of all 
natural affections, and yet the famine hath forced 
that tender sex to divest themselves of it, and to boil 

3 


and by | 


of Moses, Deut. xxviii. 53, 57, most awfully fulfill- 
ed; where see the notes, and on chap. ii. 20. The 
Lord hath accomplished his fury, &c.—God’s anger 
hath effected an entire destruction, so as not to leave 
one stone upon another. 

Verse 12. The kings of the earth, §c., would ng 
have believed—“ 'The city was so well fortified, an 
had been so often miraculously preserved by God 
from the attempts of its enemies, that it seemed in- 
credible that it should at last fall into their hands.”— 
Lowth. 

Verse 13, For the sins of her prophets, &c.—That 
is, of the false prophets, to whom the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem chiefly hearkened ; and the iniquities of 
her priests—Who bore rule by their means, Jer. v. 
31; and instead of discountenancing and reproving 
sin in the people, as was their indispensable duty, 
were themselves guilty of many flagrant acts of in- 
justice, oppression, and violence; insomuch that, as 
is here attested, they even shed the blood of the just 
in the midst of Jerusalem, the holy city; that is, the 
blood of God’s prophets, and of those that adhered 
to them. The priests and false prophets were then 
the ringleaders in persecution, as in Christ’s time 
the chief priests and scribes were the men that in- 
censed the people against him, who otherwise would 
have persisted in their hosannas. This was the sin 
which the Lord would,not pardon, (2 Kings xxiv. 
4,) and which, wove ge brought utter de- 
struction upon that ei ot that the people were 
innocent; no, while the prophets prophesied falsely, 
and the priests abused the power which their own 
office and the doctrine of these prophets gave 
them, the people loved to have it so, and it was, 
partly at least, to please many of them that the pro- 
phets and priests acted as they did. But the blame 
is chiefly laid upon them who should have taught 
the people better, should have reproved and admo- 
nished them, and told them what would be the end 
of such conduct: of the hands, therefore, of those 

565 


The people lament 


A.M. 3416. 14 They have wandered as blind 

B. C. 588. , 

men in the streets, *they have pol- 
luted themselves with blood, *so *that men 
could not touch their garments. 

15 They cried unto them, Depart ye; ° i¢ is 
‘unclean; depart, depart, touch not: when 
they fled away and wandered, they said 
among the heathen, They shall no more 
sojourn there. 

16 The ‘anger of the Lorp hath divided 
them ; he will no more regard them: "they 
respected not the persons of the priests, they fa- 
voured not the elders. 

17 As for us, *our eyes as yet failed for our 


LAMENTATIONS. 


their hopeless condition. 


vain help: in our watching we have A. M. 6 
watched for a nation that could not ———— 
save Us. 

18 Y They hunt our steps, that we cannot go 
in our streets: our end is near, our days are 
fulfilled ; for ? our end is come. 

19 Our persecutors are *swifter than the 
eagles of the heaven: they pursued us upon 
the mountains, they Jaid wait for us in the 
wilderness. . 

20 'The ’ breath of our nostrils, the sin 
of the Lorn, ° was taken in their pits, of whot 
we said, Under his shadow we shall live among 
the heathen. 


r Jer, ii. 34. 5 Or, in that they could not but touch——* Num. 
xix. 16—®Or, ye polluted. t Levit. xiii. 45. 7Or, face. 
« Chap. v. 12. 


*2 Kings xxiv. 7; Isa. xx: 5; xxx. 6,7; Jer. 


| >Gen. ii. 7; Ch. ii. 9. 


xxxvil. 7; Ezek. xxix. 16.——yY 2 Kings xxy. 4, 5.——* Ezek. 
vii. 2, 3, 6; Amos viii. 2. a Deut. xxviii, 49; Jer. iv. 13. 
¢ Jer. lii.9; Ezek. xii. 13; xix. 4, 8. 


watchmen who did not give them warning was their 
blood required. Indeed, the ecclesiastical men were 
the chief cause of both the first and last destruction 
of Jerusalem. And so they are of the destruction 
of most other places that come to ruin through their 
neglect of their duty, or their encouraging others in 
their wicked courses; which shows us both how 
great a blessing to a people a godly, conscientious 
ministry is, and how great an evil a ministry is which 
is Otherwise. 

Verses 14-16. They have wandered as blind men 
in the streets—They strayed from the paths of right- 
eousness, and were blind to every thing that was 
good, but to do evil they were quick-sighted; they 
nave polluted themselves with blood—The blood of 
the saints and servants of the Lord; so that men 
could not touch their garments—But they would be 
legally polluted ; and there were so many of them, 
that a man could not walk in the streets but he must 
touch some of them. TJ'hey cried unto them, De- 
part ye: it is unclean—Or, ye polluted, depart, &c. 
“When they fled to save their lives, they could find 
no safe retreat, but every body shunned and avoided 
them as polluted; and used the same words to ex- 
press their abhorrence of this defilement of such 
persons, whose office it was to cleanse and purify 
others, as the lepers were by the law obliged to pro- 
nounce upon themselves, and ery, Unclean, unclean: 
see Lev. xiii, 45. The bloody garments of the priests 
called to remembrance nocent blood which 
had been shed by igi: (verse 13,) when 
people saw their sin th aliated upon them.”— 
Lowth. T'hey said among the heathen, They shall 
no more sojourn there—Even the heathen them- 
selves looked upon them as polluted persons, un- 
worthy of living in Judea, or attending on the 
worship of God in his temple. And they concluded 
that such impious wretches would never be restored 
to their native country, but would continue always 
vagabonds. TJ'he anger of the Lord hath divided 
them—* God, in his just displeasure, hath scattered 
and dispersed them into foreign countries, where no 


respect will be given to their characters.” This 
seems to be the language of their enemies, triumph- 
ing over them, as discerning that their God was 
provoked with them, and would have no more regard 
to them. And therefore these heen no more re- 
spected the persons of their priests or elders, but 
considered them as peculiarly guilty, and deserving 
of their abhorrence and execration. 

Verse 17. As for us, &c.—The prophet, after hav- 
ing digressed in the last five verses to make obser- 
vation on the wickedness of those who had been the 
principal cause of the national ruin, here returns 
again to the lamentable description of the particu- 
lars. Our eyes as yet failed for our vain help— 
The help of the Egyptians, which they had expected 
in vain. Jn our watching we have watched—We 
have long waited with eager desire and expectation ; 
for a nation that could not save us—For succours 
from a people who at last have wofully disappoint- 
ed us. : 

Verses 18-20. T'hey hunt our steps that we cannot 
go in our streets—The Chaldeans, employed in the 
siege, are so close upon us, that we cannot stir a foot, 
nor look out at our doors, nor walk safely in the 
streets. Our end is near—The end of our church 
and state; we are just at the brink of the ruin of 
both. Nay, our days are fulfilled, our end is come 
—We are utterly undone; a fatal, final period is put 
to all our comforts; the days of our prosperity are 
fulfilled, they are numbered and finished. Our per- 
secutors are swifter than the eagles—God has 
brought upon us that judgment which he threatened 
by Moses, of bringing a nation against us as swift 
as the eagle flieth, Deut. xxviii. 49. Such were the 
horsemen of the Chaldean army. We could no- 
where escape them, neither by fleeing to the moun- 
tains, nor by hiding ourselves in the valleys. The 
wilderness is in other places put for the lower, or 
pasture grounds. T'he breath of our nostrils, the 
anointed of the Lord, &c.—Our king, who was the 
very life of us; was taken in their pits—In those 
toils his enemies had laid for him. — 


The earnest prayer of 


CHAPTER V. 


the distressed Israelites. 


aang 21 %° Rejoice and be glad, O 
———— daughter of Edom, that dwellest in 
the land of Uz; ‘the cup also shall pass through 
unto thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt 


make thyself naked. 


22 °'The® punishment of thine ini- A.M. 3416. 
a, F . ©. 588. 
quity is accomplished, O daughter of —— 
Zion; he will no more carry thee away ‘into 
captivity : ‘ he will visit thine iniquity, O daugh- 
ter of Edom; he will ° discover thy sins. 


¢ Like Eccles. xi. 9.——4 Jeremiah xxv. 15, 16, 21; Obad. 10. 
e Isaiah xl. 2. 


posed that the prophet speaks this of Josiah, but it 
seems more probable that Zedekiah is meant, and 
ne being taken prisoner and led into captivity is 


re alluded to. Of whom we said, Under his 
shadow we shall live among the heathen—As long 
as he was safe, we had some hopes of being pro- 
tected, and of preserving some face of government, 
although we were carried away into a foreign coun- 
try. The protection a king affords his subjects is 
often, in Scripture, compared to the shelter of a 
great tree, which is a covert against storms and 
tempests: see Ezekiel xvii. 23, and xxxi. 6; Daniel 
iv. 12. 

Verses 21, 22. Rejoice and be glad, O daughter 
of dom—A sarcastical expression, as if the pro- 
phet had said, Rejoice while thou mayest, O Edom, 
over the calamities of the Jews; but thy joy shall 
not last long, for in a little time it shall come to thy 


f Psalm exxxvii. 7.——® Or, carry thee 
captive for thy sins. 


8 Or, Thine iniquity. 


turn to feel God’s afflicting hand; zhe cup of afflic- 
tion shall pass unto thee: see Jer. xlix.7, &c. The 
punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O 
daughter of Zion, &c.—It was usual for the pro- 
phets, when they denounced God’s judgments 
against any heathen nation, at the same time to give 
gracious promises to Israel; thereby importing that 
God would never cast off the Jewish people utterly, 
as he did other nations, but would in due time ex- 
tend his mercy toward them. He—Namely, God ; 
will no more carry thee away—Or, rather, suffer 
thee to be carried; into captivity— These and such 
like expressions, if they be understood in:a strict. 
literal sense, must relate to the final restoration of 
the Jews.”—Lowth. He will discover thy sins—He 
will manifest how great thine iniquities have been, 
by the remarkable judgments wherewith he will 
punish thee. 


CHAPTER V. 


In the Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic versions, this chapter is entitled, The prayer of Jeremiah. But no such litle appears n 
the Hebrew copies, or in the LXX. It is rather a memorial, representing, in the name of the whole body of Jewish exiles, 
the many and grievous hardships they groaned under, and humbly entreating God to commiserate their wretchedness, and 
to restore them once more to his favour, and to their ancient prosperity. More particularly, it contains, (1,) A remon- 


strance of the present calamitous state of God's people in their cuptivity, 1-16. 
God's sanctuary, as that which lay nearer their hearts than any secular interest of their own, 17, 18. 
plication to God, and expostulation with him, for the return of his mercy, 19-22. 


(2,) A protestation of their concern for 
(3,) An humble sup- 
The chapter may be considered as an’ 


. epilogue, or conclusion, well adapted to the contents of the preceding chapters. 


A. M. 3416. REMEMBER, *O Lorp, what is 
B.C. 588. : 
aed come upon us: consider, and be- 
hold ° our reproach. 

2 ° Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our 
houses to aliens. 

3 We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers 
are as widows. 


4 We have drunken our water for a pa6 
money; our wood ‘is sold unto us. § ———— 

5 “Our? necks are under persecution : we la- 
bour, and have no rest. 

6 ° We have given the hand ‘¢o the Egyp- 
tians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with 
bread. 


2 Psa. Ixxxix. 50, 51—— Chap. ii. 15; Psa. lxxix. 4.——¢ Psa. 
Ixxix. 1.——" Heb. cometh for price. 


4 Deut. xxviii. 48; Je 4,——* Heb. On our necks are 
we persecuted. © Ge 2; Jer: 1. 15. f Hos. xii. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 

Verses 1-6. Consider, and behold our reproach— 
Which we suffer from the heathen nations. Our 
inheritance is turned to strangers—Namely, to the 
Babylonians and others, to whom our lands are 
given. We are orphans and fatherless—All the 
chief men being carried away to Babylon, lest they 
should make any fresh attempts to shake off the Ba- 
bylonish yoke, all that were left in Judea were poor 

3 


people, destitute of almost every thing. We have 
drunk our water for money, &c.—When our coun- 
try was in our own possession, we had free use of 
water and wood, both which we are now forced to 
buy. Our necks are under persecution—We are 
become slaves to our enemies, who make us labour 
incessantly. We have given the hand to the Egyp- 
tians, &c.—We have been obliged to stretch out our 
hands to the Egyptians and Assyrians for bread to 
567 


The Israelites confess their 


A.M. 3416. 7 & Our fathers have sinned, and 
B. C. 583. : 
——""* hare not; aud we have borne their 
iniquities. 


8 ‘Servants have ruled over us: there is 
none that doth deliver ws out of their hand. 

9 We gat our bread with the peril of our lives 
because of the sword of the wilderness. 

10 Our skin was black like an oven because 
of the * terrible famine. 

11 !They ravished the women in Zion, and 
the maids in the cities of Judah. 

12 Princes are hanged up by their hand; 
™the faces of elders were not honoured. 

13 They took the young men “to grind, and 


the children fell under the wood. e 


LAMENTATIONS. 


sin, and pray for mercy. 


14 The elders have ceased from the A. M. 3416 
. ;. 8B, €..688 

gate, the young men from their music. 

15 The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance 
is turned into mourning. 

16 ° The* crown is fallen from our head: wo 
unto us, that we have sinned ! 

17 For this ” our heart is faint; 
things our eyes are dim. 

18 Because of the mountain of Zion, which 
is desolate, the foxes wallx upon it. 

19 Thou, O Lorp, ‘remainest for ever ; “thy 
throne from generation to generation. 

20 ‘Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, 
and forsake us so long time? 

21 "Turn thou us unto thee, O Lorp, and 


{for these 


& Jer. xxxi.29; Ezek. xviii. 2. h Gen. xlii. 13; Zech. i. 5. 
i Neh. v.15. k Job xxx. 30; Psalm exix. 83; Chapter iv. 8. 
3 Or, terrors, or, storms. lJsa. xili. 16; Zech. xiv. 2. mTsa. 
xvii. 6; Chap. lv. 16. 4 Judg. xvi. 21. © Job xix. 9; Psa. 
Ixxxix. 39, 


4Hebrew, The crown of our head is fallen— Chapter i. 22, 
9 Psa. vi. 7; Chapter ii. 11. * Psalm ix. 7; x. 16; xxix. 10; 
xe. 2; cii, 12, 26, 27; exlv. 13; Hab. i. 12._—* Psalm xlv. 6. 
5 Heb. for length of days ?—" Psa. Ixxx. < iA 


t Psa. xiii. 1. 
19; Jer. xxxi. 18. 


support us. Whether the expression here used im- 
plies their begging it of them, or buying it with 
money, is not quite plain. _ 

Verses 7-10. Our fathers have sinned, and are 
not—Death hath secured our fathers from these evils, 
though they had sinned; but the punishment they 
escaped, we suffer in the most grievous degree: see 
note on Jer. xxxi. 29. The expression, 7s not, or, 
are not, is often used of those who are departed out 
of this world, Gen. xlii. 138. Servants have ruled 
over us—Servants to the greatmen among. the Chal- 
deans, and other strangers, are become our masters, 
Neh. v.15. We gat our bread with the peril of our 
lives, &c.—It was at the hazard of our lives that we 
brought i in the grain out of the fields, on account of 
the robbers who infested the country. Blaney thinks 
*that the prophet refers here to the incursions of the 
Arabian free-booters, who, he supposes, might not 
be improperly styled, the sword of the wilderness, 
to whose depredations the people, on account of 
their weak and helpless state, were continually ex- 
posed, while they followed their necessary business. 
Our skin was black like an oven—Famine and other 
nardships changed the very colour of our counte- 
nances. 

Verses 12-16. Princes are hanged up by their 
hand—By the hand of their enemies. They took 
the young men to grind— ind at the mill was 
the common employment s, Exod. xi.5. The 
children fell under the hey made children 
turn the handle of the mill till they fell down through 
weariness: so some explain it with relation to the 
former part of the verse. But the expression may 
be understood of making them carry such heavy 
burdens of wood that they fainted under the load. 
The elders have ceased from the gate—The elders 
no more sit in the gates of the cities, to administer 
justice to every one, and keep things in order. The 
young men from their music—Those songs of mirth 
and joy which used to be heard in our nation are 

568 


heard no longer. The joy of our heart is ceased— 
Since the enemy came in upon us like a flood, we 
have been strangers to all comfort. Our dance is 
turned into mourning—Instead of leaping for joy, 
as formerly, we sink and lie down in sorrow. This 
may refer especially to the joy of their solemn feasts: 
this was now turned into mourning, which was dou- 
bled on their festival days, in remembrance of their 
former delights and comforts. The crown is fallen 
from our head—At their feasts, at their marriages, 
and other seasons of festivity, they used to crown 
themselves with flowers. The prophet most proba- 
bly alludes to this custom, as we may gather from 
the preceding verses. The general meaning is, “All 
our glory is at an end, together with the advantages 
of being thy people, and enjoying thy presence, by 
which we were distinguished from the rest of the 
world.”—Lowth. 

Verses 17, 18. For this our heart is bare 
sinks under ‘the load of its own heaviness. Our eyes 
are dim—See on chap. ii. 11. Our spirits fail us, 
and we are almost blind with weeping. Because of 
the mountain of Zion—The holy mountain, and the 
temple built upon it. Nothing lies with so heavy a 
load upon the spirits of good people, as that which 
threatens the ruin of religion, or weakens the interest 
thereof: and it is a mark of our possessing saving 
grace, if we can appeal to God-that we are more con- 
cerned for his cause than for any temporal interests 
of our own. The Jews had polluted the mountain 
of Zion with their sins, and therefore God justly 
made it desolate ; which he did to such a degree 
that the foxes walked upon it, as freely and com- 
monly as they did in the woods. It is lamentable 
indeed when the mountain of Zion is made a portion 
for foxes, Psa. Ixiii. 10. 

Verses 19-22. Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever 
—Though, for our sins, thou hast suffered these ca- 
lamities to befall us, and our throne, through thy 
righteous providence, is thrown down; a - ciad 


A prayer 


CHAPTER V. 


Sor restoration. 


A. M. 3416. we shall be turned; renew our days 
B. 0.588. | or old. 


6 Or, For wilt thow 


still the same God that thou ever wast: thy power is 
not diminished, nor thy goodness abated. Thou still 
governest the world, and orderest all the events of 
it, and shalt rule it, and superintend its affairs, for 
ever and ever. Thou art, therefore, always able to 
help us, and art thou not as willing as able? Is it 
possible thou shouldest be unmindful of the promises 
which thou hast made to thy people? Our hope, 
therefore, is still in thee, unto whom we look for 
mercy and deliverance. Wherefore dost thou forget 
us, &¢.—Wherefore dost thou act toward us, in the 
dispensations of thy providence, as if thou hadst for- 
gotten us, and forsaken us, and that for a long time? 
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord—Turn us unto thy- 
self from our sins and idols, by a sincere repentance 
and thorough conversion ; and we shall be turned— 
Effectually and lastingly turned to thee, so as to turn 
from thee nomore. Renew our days as of old— 
Restore us to that happiness and prosperity which 
we formerly enjoyed. But thow hast utterly rejected 
us—Hebrew, 13N0812 DN TON"D, which, it, seems, 
should rather be rendered, For surely thou hast 
cast us off, &c., the prophet, in this verse, assigning 
the reason of the preceding application. For God’s 
having rejected his people, and expressed great in- 
dignation against them, was the cause and ground 


+ 


22 ° But thou hast utterly rejected A. oper 
us; thou art very wroth against us. 


utterly reject us? 


of their pleading with him, and praying thus earnest- 
ly to be restored to his favour and the enjoyment of 
their ancient privileges. The Jewish rabbins, be- 
cause they would not have the book to conclude > 
with the melancholy words of this verse, repeat after 
them the prayer of the preceding verse, namely, 
Turn thou us unto thee, &c., a prayer which we 
cannot too frequently, or too fervently, address to 
God, for ourselves and others. And surely the fer- 
vent zeal with which the prophet beseeches the 
Lord to have compassion on his people, should ex- 
cite us, at all times, to pray earnestly to him, espe- 
cially for the protection, safety, and prosperity of 
his church, and the supply of all its wants, whether 
it be exposed to persecutions and sufferings on the 
one hand, or the assaults of infidelity, impiety, and 
vice on the other. We may learn also, from this 
humble and earnest prayer of the prophet for the 
restoration of the Jewish nation, that, when God cor- 
rects us, and afflicts us, even with the greatest se- 
verity, we must not despond or restrain prayer 
before him, but have recourse to him by true repent- 
ance and faith, and implore his pardoning merey 
and renewing grace, as the only way to obtain the 
light of his countenance, and a restoration to our 
fonfier state of peace, tranquillity, and comfort. 
569 


THE BOOK 


OF THE 


PROP He Be De A eel eae 


ARGUMENT. 


Ezextet, being the son of Buzi, of the house of Aaron, was consequently a priest, as well as a 
prophet. He was carried to Babylon, with many other Jews, in Jehoiachin’s captivity, and there- 
fore dates his prophecies by the years of that captivity. He began his prophetic office in the fifth 
year after it, and continued to prophesy about twenty years, namely, from the year of the.world 
3409 to 3430. His name, happily expressive of his character, signifies the power, strength, or 
courage of God. It appears he did not reside at or near Babylon, but by the river Chebar, many 
miles north of that city, great numbers of the captives being placed there. These, his fellow- 
exiles, as St. Jerome observes in his. preface to this book, being disposed to repine at their eon- 
dition, as more wretched, they supposed, than that of their brethren who had been suffered to 
remain in Judea; a principal part of the prophet’s design seems to have been to check these mur- 
murings, by removing the cause of them, and showing them how preferable their cireumstances 
were to those of their countrymen who had not yet been carried into captivity as they had been. 
For this purpose he sets before them that terrible scene of calamities ‘which God was about to 
bring upon Judea and Jerusalem, which should end in the utter destruction of the city and temple ; 
recounting and painting, in strong and lively colours, the heinous provocations of the Jews, which 
were bringing down these heavy judgments upon them. Jeremiah, it must be observed, was at the 
same time employed to the like purpose at J erusalem, in persuading the inhabitants left there, and 
in the other parts of Judea, not to think themselves more the favourites of God than their brethren 
who had been carried into captivity, for that more grievous calamities would soon befall them, while 
those who were at present captives should experience God’s peculiar favour and protection. But 
these prophets were ncither of them duly regarded by those to whom they addressed themselves ; 
for the Jews who remained in Judea gave no credit to Jeremiah’s predictions against them, but 
thought meanly of those who had been carried into captivity, and believed themselves to be the 
peculiar favourites of God, and that they only should possess the land of Canaan, while their cap- 
tive brethren should be for ever excluded from it. And the Prophet Ezekiel was lit re re- 
garded by those in captivity ; for, notwithstanding all his declarations, they murmured i God, 
and thought themselves more hardly dealt by than their brethren who remained in their own land. 

Although some frivolousapbjections, grounded on gross mistakes, have been started against the authen- 
ticity of this book, the prophecies contained in it, which have been very surprisingly fulfilled, and 
are fulfilling at this day, are a demonstration both of its truth, and that it was written by inspira- 
tion of God; especially the prophecies concerning Tyre and Egypt, chapters xxvi—xxxii. And as 
to the many predictions contained in it, which are not yet fulfilled, relating to the restoration of 
Israel, and the triumphs of the church over all her enemies, these, upon a careful investigation, 
will be found to coincide so entirely with many parts of Isaiah’s and Daniel’s prophecies, and those 
contained in the Revelation by St. John, that we can neither doubt their being given by divine in- 


spiration, nor that the e fulfilled at the proper season. 
It appears from many p: zekiel’s writings that, exclusive of his prophetic gift, he was a man 
of considerable lear d talents. “He had great erudition and genius,” says Grotius, in the 


* Introduction to his Commentary on this prophet, “so that, setting’aside his gift of prophecy, which 
is incomparable, he may deservedly be compared with Homer on account of his beautiful concep- 
tions, his illustrious comparisons, and his extensive knowledge of various matters, particularly of 
architecture.” Rapin, in his Treatise on Eloquence, calls his style roe TERRIBLE, as havin 
something in it which strikes the reader with a holy dread and astonishment, Bishop Lowth’s 
character of him is as follows: “ Ezekiel is inferior to Jeremiah in elegance, but is equal to Isaiah 
in sublimity, though in a different species of the sublime. He is bold, vehement, tragical, and 
deals very much in amplification. His sentiments are lofty, animated, poignant, and full of indig- 
nation. His images are fertile, magnificent, and sometimes rather bordering on indelicacy. His” 

570 3 


EZEKIEL. 


diction is sounding, grave, austere, rough, and sometimes uncultivated. He abounds in repetitions, 
not for the sake of beauty or grace, but from vehemence and indignation. Whatever his subject 
be, he keeps it always in his eye, without the least deviation, and is so much taken up with it that 
he has scarcely any regard to order or connection. In other things he may perhaps be exceeded 
by the other prophets ; but in that species for which he was particularly turned, that is, in force, 
impetuosity, weight, grandeur, no writer ever equalled him. His diction is clear enough; almost 
all his obscurity arises from his subjects. His visions are particularly obscure ; which, however, 
as in Hosea, Amos, and Zechariah, are delivered in a plain and historical narration. The greater 
part of this book, but especially the middle of it, is poetical: but some passages are so rough and 
unpolished, that we are frequently at a loss to what species of writing we ought to refer them.”— 
De Sacra Poest Hebreorum, Prelec. xxi. A learned German professor, Eichhorn, quoted by Bishop 
Newcome, having, in his Introduction to the Old Testament, spoken of Ezekiel as a writer “ dis- 
tinguished by much originality; adding dignity to his relations, by lively fictions of his inexhaust- 
ible imagination ;” and as “creating great artificial images, and by such means new worlds ;” and 
having represented the prophet’s first two visions as being “ accurately polished with much. art,” 
and therefore “could not possibly be an unpremeditated work ;” the bishop, with a reference to 
these sentiments, delivers his own judgment of Ezekiel as follows: “I do not consider him as the 
framer of those august and astonishing visions, and of those admirable poetical representations, 
which he committed to writing; but as an instrument in the hands of God, who vouchsafed to 
reveal himself through a long succession of ages, not only in divers parts, constituting a magnifi- 
cent and uniform whole, but also in divers manners, as by a voice, by dreams, by inspiration, and 
by plain or enigmatical vision. If he is circumstantial in describing the wonderful scenes which 
were presented to him in the visions of God, he should be regarded as a faithful representer of the 
divine revelations for the purpose of information and instruction ; and not as exhausting an exube- 
rant fancy, in minutely filling up an ideal picture. It is probable that Buzi, his father, had pre- 
served his own family from the taint of idolatry ; and had educated his son, for the priestly office, 
in all the learning of the Hebrews, and particularly in the study of their sacred books. Josephus 
says, that he was a youth at the time of his captivity; and his first revelation was made to him 
only five years after that period. ‘This is a season of life when a fervour of imagination ‘is natural 
in men of superior endowments. His genius led him to amplification; like that of Ovid, Lucan, 
and Juvenal, among the Roman poets ; though he occasionally shows himself capable of the austere 
and concise manner, of which the seventh chapter is a remarkable instance. But the Divine Spirit 
‘did not overrule the natural bent of his mind. Variety is thus produced in the sacred writings. 
Nahum sounds the trumpet of war, Hosea is sententious, Isaiah sublime, Jeremiah pathetic, Ezekiel 
copious. This diffuseness of manner in mild and affectionate exhortation, this vehement enlarging 
on the guilt and consequent sufferings of his countrymen, seems wisely adapted to their capacities 
and circumstances ; and must have had a forcible tendency to awaken them from their lethargy.” 
It has been observed, as an apology f roughness and incorrectness which appear in the style 
of this prophet, “that he lived in an age when the beauty, purity, and majesty of the Hebrew 
lan gig upon the decline, and that it would argue a great absurdity to expect the vigour of 
youth in the imbecilities of old age.’—See Michaelis’s Notes, p.110. St. Jerome hath more than 
one ved, that the beginning and latter part of this prophecy are more than ordinarily difficult 
and ure, and may justly be reckoned among the things in Scripture which are dvovoyra, hard to 
be understood. a 

In the first three chapters, Ezekiel describes a wonderful vision, whereby God confirmed and in- 
structed him in his prophetic office. In the followink chapters, to the twenty-fifth, he describes 
the horrible sins of the Jews, especially of those remaining in Jerusalem and Judea, and their ap- 
proaching punishments. From thence to the thirty-third chapter he foretels the ruin of many 
neighbouring nations who were enemies to the Jews, as the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Edom- 
ites, the Philistines, the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Egyptians. From thegthirty-third to the fortieth 
chapter, the murmurings and hypocrisies of the Jews, who were captives in Chaldea, are severely 
censured, with an exhortation to true repentance, and to a firm tation of an approaching 
salvation; in which not only the deliverance from the Babylonis ivity, but the far greater 
deliverance of all the world from the bondage of sin and 1GNoRANC us Christ, was signified 
In the last nine chapters is related a grand vision of the building of a temple. 

The liberty with which Ezekiel treated the idolatry of his countrymen is said to have so highly irri- 
tated the chief of them, as to have occasioned his being put to death: and in the time of Epipha- 
nius it was a current opinion that his remains were deposited in the same sepulchre with those of 
Shem and Arphaxad; that his tomb was then to be seen; and that the Jews kept a lamp burning 
in it; who likewise pretended that they had this prophecy written by the prophet’s own hand 
which they read every year on the day of expiation—Calmet’s Preface to this book. 

o71 


The time and place of 


EZEKIEL. 


Ezekiel’s prophesying. 


CHAPTER I. 


We have here, (1,) An account of Ezekiel, and of the date and place of his call to the prophetic office, 1-3. (2,) A vision 
granted him of a whirlwind, great cloud, fire, and four living creatures coming out of the midst of it, 4,5. (3,) A de- 


scription of them, and of their, motions, 6-14. 


15-25. 
A. M. 3409. N OW it came to pass in the thirtieth 
B. C. 595. é : 
SES year, in the fourth month, in the 


fifth day of the month, as I was among the 
1 captives *by the river of Chebar, that ° the 
heavens were opened, and I saw ° visions of 
God. 

2 In the fifth day of the month, which was 


(4,) Of wheels moved by them, and of the whole being directed by God, 
(5,) Of the glory of God, as in our nature, enthroned above them, 26-28. 


the fifth year of * King Jehoiachin’s hae 
captivity, ES 
‘3. The word of the Lorp came expressly unto 
* Fizekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land 
of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and 
* the hand of the Lorp was there upon him. 
4 § And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind 


a Verse 3; Chapter iii. 15, 23; x. 15, 20, 


1 Heb. captivity. 
tit Rev. 


22s txlii.S. 5 So Matt. iii. 16; Acts vii. 56; x. 11; 
xige ltt © Chap. viii. 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year 
—It is very uncertain from whence this computation 
of time commences. But the most probable opinion. 
seems to be that which the Chaldee paraphrast, 
Archbishop Usher, Dr. Prideaux, and other learned | 
men adopt: namely, that these thirty years are to 
be reckoned from the time when Josiah and all the 
people of Judah entered into that solemn covenant 
mentioned 2 Kings xxii. 3; and when the book of 
the law was found by Hilkiah the priest, which was 
in the eighteenth year of Josiah, from which date, it 
appears, to the fifth year of the captivity, were thirty 
years. This being an event which put the Jewish 
state upon a new.trial, was certainly sufficiently re- 
markable to render the time when it took place an 
era proper to be dated from. Accordingly, from the 
same period learned men compute the forty years of 
Judah’s transgression, mentioned chap.iv.6. Jn the 
fourth month—Thammuz, which nearly corresponds 
to our July; as I was among the captives—Carried 
away by Nebuchadnezzar, with King Jehoiachin, 2 
Kings xxiv. 14. Thus the godly are sometimes in- 
volved in the same outward calamities which befa 
the wicked. By the river Chebar—Which river 
Ammianus calls Aboras, and Ptolemy, Chabores. It | 
flows into the east side of the Euphrates at Circe- 
sium, or Carchemish, nearly two hundred miles 
northward of Babylon. On this river, at 'Tel-abib and | 
other places, Nebuchadnezzar planted his Jewish 
captives, probably to cultivate waste lands, or to 
carry on some manufacture for the benefit of their 
victors. This was the scen ekiel’s prophecies, 
which were continued thr course of twenty- 
two years. Here he was in body, though in 
visionary representation he was sometimes taken to 
Jerusalem: see Bishop Newcome. 

The heavens were opened—As a prelude to a 
heavenly vision. ‘The appearance of the heavens, as 
it were, opening, seems, in this and such like cases, 
to have been represented first to excite attention to 
the vision that was to follow: see Matt. iii. 16. And 
I saw visions of God—It is probable that the eap- ) 
tive Jews had been left some time without prophets 
or visions from God, which might supply the want H 


\ 


42 Kings xxiv. 12, 15. 2 Heb, Jehezkel.—* 1 Kings xviii, 
46; 2 Kings iii. 15; Chap. iii. 14, 22; viii. 1; xl. 1.— Isa, 
xxi. 1; Jer. xxiii. 19; xxv. 32. 


of the more ordinary means of instruction; at length, 
however, God raised them up a prophet in their cap- 
tivity, to whom he first revealed himself by an extra- 
ordinary vision, as he had done to Isaiah, chap. vi., 
to Jeremiah, chap. i., to Abraham, Acts vii. 2, and to 
many others of his servants} in order, as it were, to 
open and settle a correspondence, and a satisfactory 
way of intercourse, so that there needed not afterward 
a vision upon every fresh revelation made to them. 
Verses 2,3. In the fifth year of King Jehoiachin’s 
captivity—This was of course the fifth year of Zede- 
kiah, who succeeded Jehoiachin: And as the city 
and temple were destroyed in the eleventh year of 
Zedekiah, (2 Kings xxv. 2,) it follows that this vision 
appeared to Ezekiel six years before that event. The 
Hebrew writers, it must be observed, use several 
computations of the beginning of the Babylonish 
captivity: see the note on Jer. xxv. 11. That under 
Jehoiaehin, wherein Ezekiel was made a captive, is 
the computation he always follows in the sueceed- 
ing parts of his prophecy. The word ofthe Lord— 
This expression signifies any sort of reyelation, 
whether by a vision, such as is related i ollow- 
ing verses, or by a voice, as chap. ii. 3; came ea- 
pressly—Hebrew, 7° 17, being was, or, in coming 
came, that is, came assuredly; unto Ezekiel—lt 
came with such clearness and conviction that he 
could neither doubt of its divine authority, mistake 
its import, nor question his being appointed to the 
prophetical office; the priest—Being of the family 
of Aaron, he was a priest by birth, and was now 
made a prophet by an extraordinary call. Jn the 
land of the Chaldeans—In the worst places God 
can raise up instruments for the service of his church. 
And the hand of the Lord was there upon him—He 
felt sensible impressions of a divine power closing 
his senses to external objects, opening his eyes to 
see the visions, opening his ears to hear the voice, 
and his heart to receive both. When the hand of 
the Lord goes along with his word, then it becomes 
effectual. ; 
Verse 4. I looked—I very diligently surveyed the 
things which were represented to me in the vision, 
and behold a whirlwind—Denoting the ind 
tion and judgments of God; a quick, impetuous, and 
3 


The prophet’s vision 


CHAPTER I. 


of a whirlwind, Ge. 


3109. came £ out of the north, a great cloud, 

595. wager 

and a fire ‘infolding itself, and a 
brightness was about it, and out of the midst 
thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst 
of the fire. 

5 » Also out of the midst thereof came the 
likeness of four living creatures. And ‘ this 
was their appearance ; they had ¥the likeness 
of a man. 

6 And every one had four faces, and every 
one had four wings. 

7 And their feet were * straight feet; and the 
sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf’s 


A M. 
B. C. 


foot; and they sparkled 'like the A. M. 3409, 
colour of burnished brass. oe 

8 ™ And they had the hands of a man under 
their wings on their four sides; and they four 
had their faces and their wings. 

9 » Their wings were joined one to another ; 
°they turned not when they went ; they went 
every one straight forward. 

10 As for ? the likeness of their faces, they 
four 1 had the face of a man * and the face of a 
lion, on the right side: ‘and they four had the 
face of an ox on the left side; ‘they four also 
had the face of an eagle. 


§ Jer. i. 14; iv.6; vi. 1——*Heb. catching itself— Rev. 
iv. 6, &e. i Chap. x. 8, &c.—k Verse 10; Chap. x. 14, 21. 
* Heb. a straight foot. ' Dan. x. 6; Rev. i. 15. 7 


irresistible vengeance: see the margin. It is de- 
scribed hereas coming out of the north, because, as has 
been before observed, the Chaldean army, by which 
the judgment was to be executed, would, for con- 
venience of forage and water, march first northward, 
and then turn about toward Judea, so that they did, 
strictly speaking, come into it from the north. A 
great cloud—It is usual to express any great trouble 
by a great, dark cloud hanging over people’s heads. 
And here, in particular, it seems to signify the cala- 
mity coming on Judea by the Chaldean invasion. 
And a fire infolding itself—A fire appearing ime 
folds, like one wreath within another, This was in- 
dicative of God’s avenging justice, for God is de- 
scribed in Scripture as a consuming fire, when he || 
comes to execute his judgments upon sinners: see 
Deut. iv. 24. And a brightness was about it—Clear 
discoveries of God’s holiness and justice, which, it is 
thus signified, would be made manifest in what was 
about to be done. Out of the midst thereof as the 
colour ¢ ber—Rather, as the appearance of am- 
ber. “There was a bright pellucid appearance.”— 
Newcome. But Bochart shows that 7Aexzpov, the 
word used in the LXX., signifies not only amber and 
crystal, but a metal compounded of gold and silver, 
or of gold and brass ; and thinks that the last, called | 
xarxorbavov, Rev. i. 15, best suits this place. This 
seems to have been a symbolical representation of 
the Jewish people; for as this compound metal was 
not consumed in the fire, so the Jews were not to be 
wholly destroyed by the grievous calamities they 
were to be involved in, but to come out purer from the 
furnace of affliction, as gold and brass out of the fire. 

Verses 5,6. Out of the midst thereof came the 
likeness of four living creatures—Termed cherubim, 
chap. ix. 3, and x. throughout. These seem to have 
been a hieroglyphical representation of the holy an- 
gels, attendants on the king of glory, and the minis- 
ters of his providence, as well when he executes 
jedgments on sinners, as when he confers bene- 
fits on his people. They were four, probably 
to denote that they were employed in all the four 
quarters of the world, They had the likeness of a 

3 


1 Verse 11. © Verse 12; Chap. x. 11. 


m Chap. x. 18, 21, 
4 Num. ii. 10——" Num. ii. 3—* Num. ii. 18 


P Rev. iv. 7. 
t Num. ii. 25. 


man—“'They had the human stature.” So Houbi- 
gant. Or, as others interpret the phrase, “for the 
greatest part they appeared in the human shape.” 
This was to signify that they were intelligent and 
rational creatures, of which that form is to us the 
token. But each of them had four faces, which 
were probably emblems of their endowments and 
characters. “The face of a man implied that they 
possessed knowledge, foresight, prudence, compas- 
sion, and philanthropy ; that of a lion intimated their 
boldness and force in executing the will of God; 
that of an ov denoted strength, unwearied diligence, 
and perseverance; and that of an eagle, spiritual 
sagacity and heavenly affections, by which they 
soared aloft above all created objects, to the uncre- 
ated source of holiness and felicity.”—Scott. And 
every one had four wings—By which seems to be 
signified the activity and speed with which they exe- 
cuted God’s commands in all parts of the world. 
Verses 7-10. And their feet were straight feet— 
Emblematical probably of simplicity and upright- 
ness, or of the steadiness of their obedience. And 
the sole of their feet like the sole of a calf’s foot—To 
signify their firmness and constancy in performing 
the divine will. Or, as some think, the soles of their 
feet, being divided, like those of calves and other 
clean animals, might be emblematical of their per- 
fect purity and holiness. And they sparkled like 
the colour of burnished brass—To signify their zeal 
in God’s service, or that the glory of God should shine 
forth, or be made ifest in their aetions. And 
they had the han an—'To show their power 
and ability to per h speed what was enjoined 
them; or, that they did all things orderly, distinctly, 
and quickly; the hands of a man being most aptly 
made, of any thing we know, for performing any 
artificial operations. And by these hands being 
under their wings might be signified that their 
works were invisible and unknown to man, and done 
without any ostentation. They four had their faces 
and their wings—This is a repetition of what had 
been said before, in order that it might be more no- 
ticed. Their wings were joined one to another— 


EZEKIEL. 


the living creatures. 


‘Description of 
ee 34092. 11 Thus were their faces: and their 
, 595. 


wings were * stretched upward ; two 
wings of every one were joined one to another, 
and "two covered their bodies. 

12 And *they went every one straight for- 
ward; ¥ whither the spirit was to go, they went; 
and * they turned not when they went. 

13 As for the likeness of the living creatures, 
their appearance was like burning coals of fire, 
* gnd like the appearance of lamps: it went up 


and down among the living creatures; A. 2. ae. 
and the fire was bright, and out os 
the fire went forth lightning. 

14 And the living creatures » ran and return- 
ed ° as the appearance of a flash of lightning. 

15 Now as I beheld the living creatures, be- 
hold “one wheel upon the earth by the living 
creatures, with his four faces. 

16 ° The appearance of the wheels and their 
work was ‘ like unto'the colour of a beryl: and 


§ Or, divided above. 


uTsa. vi, 2. x Verse 9 ; Chapter x. 22, 
y Verse 20. 


z Verses 9, 17.—— Rev. iv. 5. 


¢ Matt. xxiv. 27——4 Chap. x. 9, ——e Chap. 
x. 9, 10——f Dan. x. 6. 


b Zech. iv. 10. 


To signify their perfect agreement ’in the speedy 
execution of God’s will ;/and that all the acts which 
God performs by the ministry of his angels are ad- 
mirably consistent, and agreeing with each other, 
and adapted to the purpose intended to be brought to 
pass. They turned not when they went—'They were 
immediately ready to do the work assigned them 
without any delay or hinderance, and they proceeded 
directly on in one and the same undeviating course ; 
Were constant and persevering in performing the 
divine will, without being turned aside therefrom by 
any obstacle whatever. They four had the face of 
aman, &¢.—See note on verse 6. 

Verses 11,12. Their wings were stretched up- 
avard--That is, two wings of each, namely, in a 
posture of flying, to show that they were always 


actively employed in executing God’s commands. | 


Some unite this clause with the preceding, and ren- 
der the whole, T'heir faces and their wings were 
stretched upward, namely, denoting a posture of at- 
tention, as if they were hearkening to the voice of 
God’s words, as angels are represented Psa. ciii. 20. 
Two wings of every one were joined one to another, 
&c.—Of the two living creatures in front, and of the 
two behind, the right wing of one reached to the left 
wing ofthe other, the extremities of the expanded inner 
wings forming an arch. In Isa. vi. 2, and Rey. iv. 6, 
each of the seraphim has six wings assigned him, 
whereas the living creatutes here have each but four; 


land receive new instructions. 


the reason of which is, that in:those places these ap- 
pearances are described a making use of two of their 
wings to cover their faces, out of reverence to the 
divine presence, before which they stand and wor- 
ship: whereas, here they are supposed to be actively 
employed as ministers of the Divine Providence, in 
executing. his counsels in all is of the world. And 
two covered their bodies— nify, perhaps, that 
we men are not able to un¢ d the nature of an- 
gels. Whither the spirit was to go, they went—— 
Without any dispute or delay: the Spirit of God di- 
rycted all their motions: and all their ministrations 
were as truly unconstrained and free, as they were 
subservient to God’s designs in his providential go- 
vernment of the church andthe world. They turned 
not when they went—They looked not back; they 
turned not out of the way; they ceased not till they 
had completed their course. 


Verses 13, 14. As for the likeness of the living || bute to the regular motion of it. 


574 


crealures—Their cclour, or aspect; their appear- 
ance was like burning coals—They were inflamed 
by the Spirit of God with aholy zeal for his glory, 
and with indignation against impenitent sinners. 
This might also be intended as a symbolical decla- 
ration, that after the long patience of God, all things 
now tended to vengeance, and the executing of 
his judgments upon the Jews; for executing which 
he would use these angels as ministers. And like 
the appearance of lamyps—This probably signified, 
that the uprightness of the divine justice should 
shine forth, or be made manifest in these judgments. 
It went up and down among the living creatures— 
That is, the fire moved itself up and down. Milton’s 
expression, (Paradise Lost, vi. 756,) is, “And 
careering fires between.” That is, fires which ran 
swiftly, and, as it were, tilted at each other: emblem- 
atical of the terrible effects of the ministry of these 
living creatures on the objects of divine vengeance. 
Out of the fire went forth lightning—Signifieative 
of the irresistible force of the divine judgments, and 
the terrible and sudden destruction to be produced 
by them. And the living creatures ran and returned 
as a flash of lightning—With inexpressible velocity: 
the swiftness of their motions every way resembled 
flashes of lightning. “They ran to do their work, 
and execute their orders,” says Henry, “and then 
returned to give an account of what they had done, 
They ran into the 
lower world, to do what was to be done there: and 
when they had done, returned as a flash of light- 
ning, to the upper world, to the vision of God. 
Thus we should be in the affairs of this world: 
though we run into them, we must not repose in 
them, but our souls must presently return like light- 
ning to God, their rest and centre.” 

Verses 15, 16. Now as I beheld, &c.—The prophet 
here proceeds to relate what he saw besides the liv- 
ing creatures, which he had described in the fore- 
going verses. Behold one wheel upon the earth be- 
side the living creatures—By each ‘of the living 
creatures stood one wheel, so that they were four 
in number, according to the number of the living 
creatures. While he was contemplating the glory . 
of the former vision, this other was presented to him: 
wherein the dispensations of providence are com- 
pared to the wheels of a machine, which all contri-_ 


Te 


‘ re 


Description of 


CHAPTER I. 


the four wheels 


SS TwTe=®o eee 


A. M. 3409. they four had one likeness: and their 

B. C. 595. : , 

appearance and their work was as it 
were a wheel in the middle of a wheel. 

17 When they went, they went upon their 
four sides: £ and they turned not when they 
went. 

18 As for their rings, they were so high that 


§ Verse 12.— Or, strakes. 


they were dreadful; and their ®rings A. M. 3409. 
were “full of eyes round about them Edita 
four. 

19 And ‘ when the living creatures went, the 
wheels went by them: and when the living 
creatures were lifted up from the earth, the 
wheels were lifted up. 


h Chap. x. 12; Zech. iv. 10.——i Chap. x. 16, 17. 


wheels, and their fitness for continual motion, aptly 
represent the constant revolution of human affairs 
under the conduct of providence, which orders, 
governs, and changes. Sometimes one spoke of the 
, Wheel is uppermost, sometimes another. “Those 
persons or communities which to-day are at the top 
of the wheel, may to-morrow be at the bottom, be- 
yond all human expectation or prevention; yet in 
the midst of apparent confusion, and while every 
thing seems hurried on by blind chance, or fatal ne- 
cessity, the most perfect regularity is observed, and 
the changes are directed by as fixed laws as those 
which regulate the motions of the wheels.”—Scott. 
The prophet’s seeing the wheels upon the earth was 
intended to denote, that the vision related to the 
affairs of this world; and the wheels being said to 
be beside the living creatures, which attended to di- 
rect their motions, manifests, that all inferior crea- 
tures are, and move, and act, as the Creator, by the 
ministration of angels, directs and influences them: 
visible effects are managed and governed by invisible 
causes. T'he appearance of the wheels—That is, 
their colour, for it is plain that is here intended ; and 
their work—Their workmanship, form, or figure, as 
the word nwyn is repeatedly used, 1 Kings vii. 17, 
&c., all that was wrought, whether engraved or 
otherwise, was of one colour; was like unto the 
colour of a beryl—A gem of a bluish green; and 
called in the text here T’arshish, probably from the 
place whence it came. The colour intended is 
azure, or that of the blue sky mixed with a bright 
green: see Dan. x. 6. Probably the wisdom, justice, 
and goodness of God’s providential government may 
be here signified by this beautiful colour of the 
wheels.. They four had one likeness—They were 
the same for dimensions, colour, frame, and motion, 
to indicate that there is a consistency and uniformity 
in all the dispensations of Divine Providence. TJ'heir 
appearance, §c., was as it were a wheel in the middle 
of a wheel—This may be explained two ways; either, 
Ist, That there were smaller wheels connected with, 
and put in motion by the larger, an emblematical re- 
presentation of the connection of causes and effects ; 
or, 2d, That they crossed one another in the middle, 
to signify the unsearchableness of the divine dispen- 
sations, and the intricacy of the affairs of this world, 
which seem to cross and thwart each other ; but yet 
all move under the superintendence of infinite wis- 
dom, justice, and goodness. 

Verses 17, 18. When they went—Namely, the 
wheels ; they went upon their four sides—The 
wheels being supposed spherical as a globe, by an 

3 


exact framing of two wheels one in the other, the 
four semicircles, which were in two whole wheels, 
may well be taken for these four sides on which 
these wheels moved, and such a wheel will readily 
be turned to all points of the compass. An expres- 
sive emblem this of that divine providence which 
extends alike easily to every part and thing; and, 
like a wheel or globe, has no beginning, ending, or 
separation, but is a cireumference including the whole 
of things, and equally acts more or less in every 
place and part. And they turned, or returned, not 
when they went—That is, they never returned, or 
went backward, till they came to the end of their 
course; but proceeded on in one straight course and 
unbent line of direction. So firm and sure are the 
methods, so unalterable and constant the purposes 
of God, and so invariable the obedience and observ- 
ance of holy angels. So subject to the will of God 
are all second causes, and so surely does the Divine 
Providence always accomplish its ends. Thus God 
speaks of his word and decree, Isa. lv. 11: It shall 
not return unto me void, but shall accomplish that 
which I please. ‘'To return by the way that he went, 
is a proverbial speech, signifying a man’s missing his 
aim, or not accomplishing his designs: see 1 Kings 
xiii. 9; 2 Kings xix. 33. As for thetr rings, or fel- 
loes—Namely, the circumference of the wheels; 
they were so high that they were dreadful—Their 
circuit was so vast as to impress a fear on the be- 
holder. This implied the vast compass of provi- 
dence, which, as we read, Wisd. viii. 1, reacheth 
from one end to another mightily, or, as St. Paul 
expresses it, the height and depth both of the wis- 
dom ‘and knowledge of God, how unsearchable his 
judgments are, and his ways past finding out, Rom. 
xi. 338. And their wings were full of eyes round 
about them four—That is, every one of the four 
wheels; and so were also the living creatures them- 
selves: see chap. x. 12, to signify the great wisdom 
and foresight which direct all the dispensations of 
Divine Providence ow fitly do the wheels, their 
motion, their hei ir eyes, and the form, ap- 
pearance, motion s, and eyes of the living 
creatures express the height and depth, the un- 
searchableness, wisdom, and vigilance of the Divine 
Providence ! 

Verses 19-21. When the living creatures went, 
the wheels went by them—The living creatures and 
the wheels moved in concert, to show with what 
readiness and alacrity all the instruments of provi- 
dence concur in carrying on its great designs and 
purposes; and that second causes here below act 

575 


Description of the firmament, 


M. 3 


yeaa. 20 *Whithersoever the spirit was to 


’ go, they went, thither was their spirit 
to go; and the wheels were lifted up over 
against them: } for the spirit 7of the living 
creature was in the wheels. 

21 ™When those went, these went; and 
when those stood, zhese stood: and when those 
were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were 
lifted up over against them: for the spirit ° of 
the living creature was in the wheels. 

22 "And the likeness of the firmament upon 
the heads of the living creature was as the 
colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth over 
their heads above. 

23 And under the 


A. 
B. 


or 


firmament were their 


EZEKIEL. 


and of the throne. 


wings straight, the one toward the A. M. 3409 

; AC, 895. 
other: every one had two, which ———— 
covered on this side, and every one had 
two, which covered on that side, their 
bodies. 

24 ° And when they went, I heard the noise 
of their wings, ” like the noise of great waters, 
as 4the voice of the Almighty, the voice of 
speech, as the noise of a host: when they 
stood, they let down their wings. 

25 And there was a voice from the firmament 
that was over their heads, when they stood, 
and had let down their wings. 

26 %*And above the firmament that was ~ 
over their heads was the likeness of a throne, 


k Verse 12.——! Chap. x. 17. 7 Or, of life. m Verses 19, 
20; Chap. x. 17.—— Or, of life ——-" Chap. x. 1. 


under the superintendence and conduct of God and 
his holy angels. When the living creatures were 
lifted up, $c., the wheels were lifted up—By the 
wheels being lifted up with the living creatures, may. 
be signified, that the dispensations of God on earth, 
where the wheels were first seen, are connected with 
the things of heaven, and are all appointed and di- 
rected with a reference to the concerns of God’s 
church, and of the spiritual and heavenly world. 
Whithersoever the Spirit was to go—Namely, the 
Spirit of God; they went—They punctually ob- 
served his conduct, and obeyed hisinfluence. Their 
wills were directed by his will. And the wheels were 
lifted wp over against them—Proportionably to the 
lifting up of the living creatures. The wheels, infe- 
rior agents, and second czases, act in unison with, 
and under the influence of, these angelic ministers 
of the divine will. For the spirit of the living 
creatures was in the wheels—Both the wheels and 
the living creatures were actuated by one and the 
same spirit. An undiscerned, yet divine, mighty, 
wise, and ever-living power and energy, influenced 
all, and governed all. When those went, these went 
—This is only a repetition of what is contained in 
the foregoing verse. 

Verses 22-25. And the likeness—The appearance 
or resemblance; of the firmament—The expanse, 
as the word signifies. Upon the heads of the living 
creatures—And, of course, of the wheels connected 
with them; was as the colour of the terrible crystal 
—For splendour, purity, an ity. All that was 
above these creatures and was beautiful, ma- 
jestic, and glorious, insomue t none could behold 
it without being dazzled and astonished at it: it 
could not but impress the mind of every beholder 
with veneration, solemnity, and awe, and therefore 
it is said to be terrible. And under the firmament 
—Below, at a great distance; were their wings 
straight—That is, the living creatures stood with 
their wings stretched out, ready for motion. T'he 
one toward the other—Prepared to concur in all their 


© Chapter x. 5.——p Chapter xliii.2; Daniel x. 6; Rey. i. 15. 
4 Job xxxvii. 4; Psa. xxix. 3,4; Ixviii. 33——" Chap. x. 1. 


covered on this side and on that side—On the right 
hand and on the left. The sense seems to be the 
same with that of verse 11, denoting that two of the 
wings of each living creature were stretched up- 
ward, to express their readiness to obey the divine 
commands; and with the other two they covered 
their bodies: see note on verse 11. And when they 
went—Were executing the commands of God; I 
heard the noise of their wings like the noise of great 
waters—Denoting “the terribleness of the judgments 
which they were to execute upon Jerusalem and the 
whole Jewish nation.” As the voice of the Almighty 
—It resembled great and dreadful thunder. T'he 
voice of speech like the noise of a host—Like the 


‘confused murmur of an army, intending the army 


} 


} 


} 


of the Babylonians. All these noises signified that 
the commands which God had given, or was now 
giving, to these ministering spirits, were of a dread- 
ful nature. When they stood—When they presented 


'themselves before God, having performed their 


office; they let down their wings—Put themselves 
in a posture of hearkening to God’s voice, and as it 
were quietly waited to receive his commands. And 


| there was a voice, §c., when they stood—The Vulgate 


seems to give the sense of this verse more exactly, 
thus: Cum fieret vox-super caput eorum, stabant et 
submittebant alas suas: when there was a@ voice 
over their heads they stood, &c., namely, in an atten- 
tive posture. 

Verses 26, 27. Above the firmament was the likeness 
of a throne—Namely, the throne of God. God 
having given his prophet emblems of his attendants 
and ministers, while he was coming forth in the 
chariot of his power and justice, to execute judg- 
ment, and of the mysterious dispensations of his 
providence toward his church and the world, he 
now proceeds to discover to him some glimpses of 
his divine glory. The prophet does not say that he 
saw a real thrpne, but only the likeness of a throne, 
emblematical, doubtless, of God’s sovereign power 
and dominion over all creatures, whether in heaven 


motions and actings. Every one had two, which || or on earth. Godis described in Seripture as dwell-— 


576 


. Description of Him 


CHAPTER I. 


that sat upon the throne 


A.M, 3409. Sas the appearance of a_sapphire- 

B.C. 595. ; 

—____—. stone: and upon the likeness of the 
throne was the likeness as the appearance of a 
man above upon it, ———— 

27 ‘And I saw as the colour of amber, 
as the appearance of fire round about within 
it, from the appearance of his loins even up- 
ward, and from the appearance of his loins 
even downward, I saw as it were the appear- 


ance of fire, and it had brightness A. M. 3409 

B, C. 595. 
round about. eae 
28 "As the appearance of the bow that is 
in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the 
appearance of the brightness round about. 
* This was the appearance of the likeness of 
the glory of the Lorp. And.when I saw i, 
YI fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of 
one that spake. 


8 Exodus xxiv. 10.—t Chapter viii. 2. 4 Revelation iv. 3; 


p ee if 


ing in light, and clothing himself with it. So the 
throne of God is here described as made up of light 
resembling the colours and brightness of a sapphire- 
stone. And upon the likeness of the throne, as the 
appearance of a man—“ When Moses and the el- 
ders saw the God of Israel, Exod. xxiv. 8, or the 
glory of God, as the Targum explains it, they saw 
no determinate figure, but an inconceivably resplen- 
dent brightness, that they might not think God could 
be represented by any image. But in this vision the 
form and shape of a man are directly represented to 
Ezekiel, as a prelude or figure of the incarnation,” 
This, indeed. was doubtless the ever-blessed and only- 
begotten Son of God, who was in due time to as- 
sume human nature, and in that nature to be the 
visible image and representative of his invisible Fa- 
ther, whom no man hath seen, or can see, 1 Tim. vi. 
16; Johni.18. He had appeared to Isaiah in glory, 
to constitute him a prophet, and he now appears to 
Ezekiel for the same purpose: see note on Isaiah 
vi. 1, and compare John xii. 37-41. He appears also 
as the Lawsgiver and King of Israel, to vindicate his 
own honour, punish his rebellious subjects, and give 
warning by his prophet, ere he executed his just but 
severe indignation. And I saw as the colour of am- 
ber—See note on verse 4. As the appearance of 
Jire—Said to be a fire infolding itself, verse 4. Round 
about within it—Namely, within the amber, to sig- 
nify that Christ’s executing of judgment outwardly 
proceeded from his zeal for the glory of God and 
his indignation against sin. From the appearance 
of his loins even wpward—Denoting, as some in- 
terpret it, his divine nature: and from the appear- 
ance of his loins even downward—Signifying his 
human nature. J saw, as it were, the appearance 
of fire—The general sense seems to be, that Christ, 
considered in his whole person, as God and man. is 
full of indignation against sin, and sinners continu- 
ing in sin, and is glorious in both his natures, and in 
all his proceedings: see 2 Thess. i.8. And it had 
brightness round about—Majesty, justice, and un- 
stained holiness shine round about him. In this 
colour does Christ appear to the Jews; he that would 
Vou, III. ( 37 ) 


* Chap. iii. 23; viii. 4 ——y Chap. iii. 23; Dan. viii. 17; Acts 
ix. 4; Rev. i.17. 


have visited them, clothed with the garments of sal- 
vation, now put on the garments of vengeance, ex- 
pressed by such metaphors. 

Verse 28. As the appearance of the bow that is in 
the cloud—The Hebrew future, 7°N°, is here fre- 
quentative, and should be rendered, /s wont to be 
in the cloud, in the day of rain, so was the appear- 
ance of the brightness—The meaning is, In the 
brightness, or light, that was about what I saw, was 
the appearance of the rainbow. The rainbow, as 
we learn from Gen. ix. 12, &c., was appointed as a 
sign or symbol of God’s covenant of mercy with 
men: therefore an appearance of a rainbow in this 
vision signified that amidst his severe judgments 
God would remember mercy, and not forget his 
covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; one part 
of which was, that their posterity should not become 
extinct, but should always remain; so that this ap- 
pearance gave an assurance that the Jewish nation 
should not be wholly destroyed, though it should 
suffer very grievous judgments. And inasmuch as 
this vision was an evident representation of the 
Worp that was to be made flesh, whose incarnation 
was to be the foundation of God’s covenant of 
mercy with mankind, a rainbow, the symbol and 
token of mercy, was a very fit attendant on such a 
glorious vision. J'his was the appearance of the 
likeness of the glory of the Lord—This is a descrip- 
tion of that glorious vision wherein Jehovah appeared 
to me, and whereby he made manifest his attributes 
and perfections. ‘The prophet terms it, not the ap- 
pearance of the glory, but of the likeness of the glory, 
&c., because the full discovery of the glory of God to 
any human creature is not consistent with the state 
of mortality, Exod. xxxiii. 20-23, but is reserved for 
the life to come, 1 Cor. xiii. 12; 1 John iii. 2. And 
when I saw it I fell my face—Through a re- 
verential sense of Go jesty, and his own frailty 
and meanness; or down with fear and 
astonishment before such glory. And I heard a 
voice of one that spake—They that are first humbled 
are most prepared to hear the voice of God, whether 
of instruction or consolation, Matt. v. 4, and x1. 28. 

577 3 


The commission 


EZEKIEL. 


of Ezekiel. « 


CHAPTER II. 


Ezekiel, being prepared by his wiston, is here, (1,) Ordained a prophet to deliver God’s messages to the Jewish captives in 


Chaldea, represented as very stubborn and rebellious, 1-5. 
chievous, 6. 
of mournful contents given. him to eat, 7-10. 


A. M. 3409. 
B. C. 595. 


AND he said unto me, Son of man, 
“stand upon thy feet, and I will 
speak unto thee. 

2 And "the spirit entered into me when he 
spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I 
heard him that spake unto me. 

3 And he said unto me, Son of man, I send 
thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious 
‘nation that hath rebelled against me: ° they 
and their fathers have transgressed against me, 
even unto this very day. 

4 4For they are *impudent children and 


stiff-hearted. Ido send thee unto them; and 
a Dan. x. 11——» Cy ap. iii. 24. 1 Heb, nations. © Jer. 
iii. 25; Chap. xx. 18, 21, 30.—4 Chap. iii. 7. 2 Heb. hard 


of face. 


© Chap. iil. 11, 26, 27 Chap. xxxiii. 33. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verses 1, 2. And he—Who sat upon the throne, 
the Son of God, whose messenger Ezekiel is here 
appointed to be to the Jewish captives now in Chal- 
dea; said unto me, Son of man—A title ninety-five 
times, at least, given to Ezekiel, in this prophecy, in 
order, as most commentators suppose, to put him 
in mind of his trailty and mortality, and to keep 
him humble, amidst so many divine visions and 
revelations vouchsafed him from God: see Psa. 
viii. 4. Stand upon thy feet—Arise, fear not, and 
put thyself into a posture of attending to what I 
shall say to thee. And with thiscommand God sent 
forth a power, enabling him to arise and stand. 
And the spirit entered into me—The same spirit 
which actuated the living creatures and the wheels; 
when he spake unto me—While he was speaking 
the words, or, as soon as they were spoken. 

Verses 3-5. I send thee to the children of Israel 
—God had for many ages been sending to them his 
servants the prophets, but to little purpose: they 
Were now sent into captivity for abusing God’s mes- 
sengers ; and yet even there God raises up and sends 
a prophet among them, to try if their ears were open 
to receive instruction, now they were holden in the 
cords of aflliction. 7 ellious nation—He- 
brew, (1), nations, ier: commission ex- 
tending to the disperse aelites, as well as the 
captive Jews, as also to the Jews still in Judea, to 
whom most of his predictions and reproofs re- 
lated, and whom his writings would reach, in the 
order of Divine Providence. T'hey and their fa- 
thers have transgressed against me—From age to 
age they had rebelled against him, and were now as 
much inclined todo so asever. They are impu- 
dent children, and stiff-hearted—The Hebrew, *wp 
34 ‘pim Cd, may be more significantly routing, | 

578 


(2,) He is cautioned not to be afraid of them, however mis- 


(3,) Instructed to declare to them precisely what God should mY him, which is represented by a roll full 


thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith A. M. 3409. 
the Lord Gop. = pe ray 

5 © And they, whether they will hear, or 
whether they will forbear, (for they are a 
rebellious house,) yet ‘shall know that there 
hath been a prophet among them. 

6 | And thou, son of man, £ Be not afraid of 
them, neither be afraid of their words, though 
8 briers * and thorns be with thee, and thou dost 
dwell among scorpions: ‘ be not afraid of their 
words, nor be dismayed at their looks, * though 
they be a rebellious house. 

7 And thou shalt speak my words unto 

e Jer. i. 8,17; Luke xii. 4, 3 Or, rebels: —— Isa. ix. 18; 


Jer. vi. 28; Micah vii. 4. —i Chapter iii. 9; 1 Peter iii. 14. 
& Chap. iii. 9, 26, 27——! Jer. i. 7, 17. 


They are children impudent in their countenance, 
and hardened in their hearts. “They are so far 
hardened in their wickedness as to have cast off all 
shame, and even the very outward show of mod- 
esty.” And whether they will hear, &e.—Whether 
they will regard what is said by thee or not, they 
shall know that there hath been a prophet, &¢.— 
They that obey shall know by the good I will do 
them; those that will not, by the evil which I will 
bring upon them. So that the event, answering to 
thy predictions, shall render thy authority unques- 
tionable, and them inexcusable for not hearkening 
to the warnings thou hast given them. 

Verses 6-8. And thou, be not afraid of them— 
“The prophets and messengers of God are often 
exhorted to take courage, and are promised a pro- 
portionable assistance in the discharge of their office, 
without fearing any man’s person, or standing in 
awe of any man’s greatness.”—Lowth. Neither be 
afraid of their words—Their accusations, threats, 
or whatever else a malicious heart can suggest to 
the tongue. Though briers and thorns be with 
thee—Though thou art among such as study to vex 
and torment thee. Briers, usually running up among 
thorns, are a very fit emblem of the frowardness and 
keenness of sinners against God and his prophets, 
and therefore wicked and persecuting men are often 
denoted by this expression in the prophetical wri- 
tings. And thou dost dwell among scorpions— 
Among men that are malicious and revengeful, and 
as dangerous and hurtful as the worst of serpents. 
Nor be dismayed at their looks—Wherewith they 
would brow-beat thee. They that would do any 
thing to purpose in the service of God, must not fear 
the faces of men. And thou shalt speak my words 
unto them—Do not forbear or desist from speaking 
to them what I have given thee in charge to speak, 

( 37* ) - 


Ezekiel receives the 


CHAPTER III. 


roll of prophecy. 


A. M. 3409. them, ™ whether they will hear, or 
——*™ whether they will forbear: for they 
are * most rebellious. 

8 But thou, son of man, hear what I say 
unto thee; Be not thou r ous like that 
rebellious house; open thy mouth, and eat 
that I give thee. ¥ 


m Verse 5.——* Heb, rebellion. 


0 Rey. x. 9. 


let them threaten and behave as they will, for thou 
shalt not receive any hurt from them, whether they 
pay regard to thee as a prophet or not. But thou, 
hear what I say unto thee—Obey when thou hearest. 
Those that would speak from God to their fellow- 
creatures, must be sure first to hear from God them- 
selves, and then must be obedient to his voice. Be 
not thou rebellious, &c.—That is, do not refuse to 
go on this errand, or to deliver the message where- 
with I send thee; do not fly off, as Jonah did, for 
fear of offending thy countrymen. If ministers, 
whose office it is to reprove sinners, connive at sin, 
and gratify sinners, either not showing them their 
wickedness, or not setting before them the fatal con- 


sequences of it, for fear of displeasing them, and. 


exposing themselves to their ill will, they hereby 
make themselves partakers of their guilt, and are 
rebellious like them. If people will- not do their 
duty in reforming, yet let ministers do theirs in re- 
proving, and this will yield them comfort on reflec- 
tion, whatever the success may be. Open thy mouth, 
and eat that I give thee—Receive into thy mind and 
heart, meditate upon, and digest the things which I 
reveal to thee. God’s words were to sink into him, 


9 4 And when I looked, behold, ° a A. M. 3409. 
hand was sent unto me; and lo, Pa onc tneed 
roll of a book was therein ; 

10 And he spread it before me; and it was 
written within and without: and there was 
written therein lamentations, and mourning, 
and wo. 


© Chap. viii. 3; Jer. i. 9——p Chap. iii. 1. 


that he might faithfully deliver them to others. 
The knowledge of divine truths is often expressed 
in Scripture by the metaphors of eating, digesting, 
and being nourished by bodily food: see Isa. lv. 1, 
2; John vi. 27. 

Verses 9,10. Behold a hand was sent unto me—I 
saw a hand stretched out toward me, as from that 
divine person who appeared to me in the shape of a 
man. And lo, aroll of a book was therein—W here- 
in were contained the contents of the following pro- 
phecy. And he spread it before me—That I might 
understand the contents of it. And it was written 
within and without—The ancient books were rolled 
on cylinders of wood or ivory, and usually the wri- 
ting was only on the inside; but this was written 
on both sides, both that which was innermost when 
it was rolled up, and on the outside also, which sig- 
nified that the prophecy contained a long series of 
events. And there was written therein lamenta- 
tions, and mourning, and wo—It contained predic- 
tions and revelations of impending calamities, and 
divers terrible judgments coming on the Jewish 
nation, and giving great cause for bitter sorrow and 
lamentation. 


CHAPTER IIL. 


In this chapter we have the further preparation of the prophet for the work to which God called him. 
roll.that was presented to him in the close of the foregoing chapter, 1-3. 
are given him, to the same purpose with those in the foregoing chapter, 4-11. 


(1,) His eating of the 
(2,) Further instructions and encouragements 
(3,) Amidst great rushing and noise, and 


mm much perplexity and anguish, he is carried by a mighty impulse of God's Spirit to those that were to be his hearers, 
12-15. (4,) A further explication of his office and business as a prophet is given him, under the similitude of a watch- 
man, 16-21. (5,) In a new vision, similar to the former, he is ordered to go and shut himself up in his house, and is 
struck dumb, and informed that God would restrain or restore his speech as he pleased, 22-27. 


a an, JY OREOVER he said unto me, 
—_——_——_— Son of man, eat that thou find- 


est ; * eat this roll, and go speak unto the house 
of Israel. 


a Chapter 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verses 1-3. Son of man, eat that which thou find- 
est—Chaldee, that which is given thee. Eat this 
roll—Receive into thy mind and heart, as certain 
and important truth, what is written therein: sce 
note 2 chap. ii. 8,9. So J opened my mouth, &¢.— 


2 So I opened my mouth, and he A. M. 3409. 
B. C. 595. 

caused me to eat that roll. 

3 And he said u e, Son of man, cause 

thy belly to eat, an thy bowels with this 


ii. 8, 9. 


In my vision I thought I readily complied with 

God’s command, and ate the roll which he ordered 

me to eat. This was a sort of symbolical introduc- 

tion of Ezekiel to the prophetic office, whereby he 

was fitted for, and enabled to discharge it. Thus 

Isaiah was in a vision fitted for it, by having his 
579 


The prophet receives 


EZEKIEL. 


Surther instructions. 


A. M. 3409. roll that Igive thee. Then did I ® eat 

B.C. 595. ‘ 

—_—__— it; and it was in my mouth °as 
honey for sweetness. 

4 4 And he said unto me, Son of man, go, 
get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak 
with my words unto them. 

5 For thou art not sent to’a people of a 
strange speech and of a hard language, but to 
the house of Israel ; 

6 Not to many people ?of a strange speech 
and of a hard language, whose words thou 
canst not understand. *Surely, “had I sent 
thee to them, they would have hearkened unto 
thee. 

7 Butthe house of Israel will not hearken unto 
thee; °for they will not hearken unto me: 
f for all the house of Israel are * impudent and 
hard-hearted. 

8 Behold, I have made thy face strong against 


b Revelation x.9; Jer. xv. 16. ¢ Psa, xix. 10; cxix. 103, 
1 Heb. deep of lip, and heavy of tongue, and so Verse 6. 2 Heb. 
deep of lip, and heavy of language. 3 Or, If I had sent thee, 
c., would they not have hearkened unto thee ?——4 Matt. xi. 21, 23. 
e John xv. 20, 


mouth touched with a live coal, taken from the altar 
by one of the seraphim; and Jeremiah, by having 
his mouth touched seemingly by the hand of God. 
And he said, Cause thy belly to eat—The mouth is 
the proper instrument for eating, but when food is 
digested, the belly is said to eat. As the belly often 
signifies in Scripture the mind, or secret thoughts, 
the expression here denotes the laying up this pro- 
phecy in his memory, and thoroughly considering 
and laying to heart its contents. And it was in my 
mouth as honey for sweetness—I took delight in 
having God’s secret counsels communicated to me, 
and in delivering his commands to my brethren ; 
and was pleased with the hopes of being an instru- 
ment of the conversion and amendment at least of 
some of them. But when he afterward understood 
of what heavy tidings he was to be the messenger, 
and what predictions and denunciations of divine 
judgments and wrath he was to deliver to the people, 
and that he would be hated and persecuted on this 
account, his mind was filled with grief and anguish. 
Thus when St. John took the little book out of the 
angel’s hand, and ate it .... x. 10,) though at 
first it was sweet as hon his mouth, as soon as 
he had eaten it his belly was bitter; on which Bishop 
Newton remarks, “The knowledge of future things 
at first was pleasant, but the sad contents of the little 
book afterward filled his soul with sorrow.” 

Verses 5-8. Thou art not sent to a people of a 
strange speech—It would be a great addition to the 
burden of thy office if thou wert sent, as Jonah was, 
as a prophet to a foreign nation, and to a people 
whose language thou couldest not understand, nor 
they thine. Not to many people of a strange speech, 

580 


their faces, and thy forehead strong 
against their foreheads. Po aaa 

9 & As an adamant, harder than flint have J 
made thy forehead: ® fear them not, neither be 
dismayed at Wace though they be a rebel- 
lious house. ° . 

10 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all 
my words that I shall speak unto thee receive 
in thy heart, and hear with thine ears. 

11 And go, get thee to them of the captivity, 
unto the children of thy people, and speak unto 
then, and tell them, ‘Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; whether they will hear, or whether they 
will forbear. 

12 Then * the spirit took me up, and I heard 
behind me a voice of a great rushing, saying, 
Blessed be the glory of the Lorn from his place. 

13 Iheard also the noise of the wings of the 
living creatures that * touched one another, and 


A. M. 3409. 
B. C. 595. 


f Chapter ii, 4. “Heb. stiff of forehead and hard of heart. 
gIsa,J.7; Jer. i. 18; xv. 20; Micah iii. 8.—— Jer. i. 8, 17; 
Chapter ii, 6.——' Chapter ii. 5,7; Verse 27,——* Verse 14; 
Chapter viii. 3; 1 Kings xviii. 12; 2 Kings ii. 16; Acts vili. 39. 
5 Heb, kissed. 


&c.—God seems, as it were, to hint here that the 
time would come when he should order his messen- 
gers to go to many people of a strange speech, and 
should find those who would obey him in this. The 
apostles, evangelists, and other first preachers of the 
gospel, were sent to such a people, or rather to all 
nations, however difficult and strange their language 
was. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would 
have hearkered, &c.—And yet, in all appearance, 
even a strange nation, who could not understand thy 
words plainly, or without the greatest difficulty, would 
have hearkened to thy preaching sooner than the 
house of Israel, so corrupt are they become. Be- 
hold, I have made thy face strong, &e.—Do but 
thou obey me in what I command thee, and I will 
give thee courage and firmness proportionable to 
the hardiness and insolence of those thou hast to 
deal with. 

Verses 11-13. Go to them of the captivity— 
Namely, those made captives with thyself in the 
reign of King Jehoiachin. Then the spirit took me 
up—Carried me from the place where I was before, 
when I saw the vision mentioned chap. i, 3, 4, to my 
countrymen and fellow-captives. And I heard be- 
hind me a voice of a great rushing—Emblematical, 
probably, of the great commotions and troubles he 
was to foretel, and which were to ensue. Or he 
meats a great sound, arising from many articulate 
voices joined together, and pronouncing the follow- 
ing words: Blessed be the glory of the Lord—Prais- 
ed be the gloriously holy and just God, or adored be 
the displays of his giory in all his dispensations. 
This sound seems to have been that of a chorus of 
angels, approving of and celebrating the judgments 

8 


Ezekiel is warned of the 


CHAPTER III. 


importance of faithfulness. 


A. M. mee the noise of the wheels over against 

~ them, and a noise of a great tushing: 

14 So! the spirit lifted me up, and took me 
away, and I went °in bitterness, in the 7 heat 
of my spirit; but ™the hand ofthe Lorp was 
strong upon me. 

15 4% Then I came to them of the captivity at 
Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and 
»I sat where they sat, and remained there 
astonished among them seven days. 

16 And it came to pass at the end of seven days, 
that the word of the Lorp came unto me, saying, 

17 °Son of man, I have made thee ? a watch- 


i Verse 12 ; Chapter viii. 3——® Heb. bitter——’ Heb. hot 
anger.——™ 2 Kings ili. 15; Chapter i. 3; viii. 1; xxxvii. 1. 
a Job ii. 13; Psa. exxxvii. 1; Jer. xxiii. 9; Hab. iii. 16. 


of God; from his place—“ Whatever place God 
honours with his especial presence is equivalent to 
his temple, and there the angels always attend upon 
his Divine Majesty to give him the honour due unto 
his name: see Gen. xxviii. 13-19. The words im- 
ply, that though God should forsake his temple, and 
destroy the place that was called by his name, yet 
his presence would make a temple of every place, 
and multitudes of the heavenly host would always 
be ready to do him service.” Also the noise of the 
wings of the living creatures, and of the wheels 
over against them—To signify that both angels and 
all inferior instruments were busy at work to exe- 
eute judgment according to their commission; and 
that the wheels of providence moved in concert 
with the wings of the living creatures, or the efforts 
of angels, to accomplish the divine purposes. 

Verse 14, So the spirit lifled me up and took me 
away—Caught me up into the air, and carried me, 
(as Philip was carried away from the eunuch,) and 
brought me to the place where I was to deliver my 
message, the place where the captive Jews were 
settled in great numbers: compare 1 Kings xviii. 
12; 2 Kings ii. 16; Acts viii. 39. J went in bittler- 
ness, &¢c.—I went in grief and anguish of mind, on 
account of the grievous things I was to declare to 
them, and the offence I foresaw I should give, and 
the opposition and ill treatment I should meet with. 
But the hand of the Lord was strong upon me— 
Urging and impelling, as well as empowering me to 
execute my commission. 

Verse 15. Then I came tothem of the captivity— 
To those of my countrymen who were captives, at 
Tel-abib, The prophet was before at some distance 
from this place, though on the same river, and these 
therefore must have been a distinct colony of cap- 
tives from those mentioned chap. i. 1, 3: see verse 
23 of this chapter. And I sat where they sat—This 
translation is according to the Vulgate, sedi, ubi 
alli sedebant. But Bishop Newcome renders the 
Hebrew, I dwelt where they dwelt ; that is, I took 
up my residence among them; and ‘remained there 

seven days—* Having my spirit wholly 


man unto the house of Israel: there- A. M. 3499. 
fore hear the word at my mouth, and siebas 
give them warning from me. 

18 When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt 
surely die; and thou givest him not warning, 
nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wick- 
ed way, to save his life; the same wicked man 
4 shall die in his iniquity ; but his blood will I 
require at thy hand. 

19 Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn 
not from his wickedness, nor from his. wicked 
way, he shall die in his iniquity; * but thou ° 
hast delivered thy soul. 


© Chapter xxxiii. 7, 8, 9——? Isaiah lii. 8; lvi. 10; Ixii. 6; 
Jer. vi. 17.——4 Chap. xxxili. 6; John viii. 21, 24.—F Isaiah 
xlix. 4,5; Acts xx. 26. F 


cast down and amazed, under the apprehension of 
these terrible judgments, which were to come upon 
my nation, and of which I was to be the messenger: 
see the margin. Seven days was the space of time 
appointed for mourning.”—Lowth. But the Vul- 
gate, instead of astonished, reads m@rens, mourn- 
ing ; and some render the clause, J remained there 
among them solitary seven days: supposing the 
meaning to be, that the prophet stayed that time 
among them, without saying any thing particular to 
them, or acquainting them that he was appointed to 
the prophetic office, in order that he might observe 
their actions and manner of life, and so might the 
better know how to address them in the discharge 
of his office, and what reproofs it would be most 
proper to give them. 

Verses 16-19. And at the end of seven days— 
During which time the prophet had sufficient oppor- 
tunity to observe their manners and prevailing vices ; 
the word of the Lord came to me—Informing me 
more particularly what my office was, and what the 
duty of that office. Son of man, Ihave made thee 
a watchman, &¢c.—Prophets have the title of watch- 
men given them; because, like watchmen placed on 
towers to discern and give notice of any dangers 
that may be approaching, they, by their prophetical 
spirit, were enabled to foresee the evils coming upon 
the ungodly, and were bound to give people timely 
notice, thatthey might avoid them by true repentance 
and reformation. When I say—By the threaten- 
ings of my word, or by my spirit exciting thee to 
give seasonable and ssary reproofs and warn- 
ings; unto the wicke y wicked person what- 
ever, poor or rich, mean or mighty. T'how shalt 
surely die—Both temporally and eternally, unless 
thy sincere repentance prevent this destruction ; 
and thou givest him not warning—As thy office in- 
dispensably requires thee to do; the same wicked 
man shall die in his iniquity—Shall depart this life 
in a state of sin and guilt, and be condemned to those 
punishments to which temporal death translates sin- 
ners; for his ignorance will not procure him impu- 
nity. But his blood will I require at thy hand— 

581 


Ezekiel receives directions 


EZEKIEL. 


Srom the Lord. 


A. M. 3409. 


20 Again, When a ‘righteous man 
B. C. 595. 


doth turn from his ®righteousness, and 
commit iniquity, and I lay a_stumbling-block 
before him, he shall die; because thou hast not 
given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and 
his righteousness which he hath done shall not 
be remembered ; but his blood will I require at 
thy hand. 

21 Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous 
man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth 
not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warn- 

“ed; also thou hast delivered thy soul. 

22 4 * And the hand of the Lorp was there 
upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth 
“into the plain, and I will there talk with 
thee. 

23 Then I arose, and went forth into the 
plain: and behold, * the glory of the Lorp 


stood there, as the glory which I 
¥saw by the river of Chebar: 7 and 
I fell on my face. 

24 ae spirit entered into me, and set 
me upon my feet, and spake with me, and said 
unto me, Go, shut thyself within thy house. 

25 But thou, O son of man, behold, ?they shall 
put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with 
them, and thou shalt not go out among them: 

26 And °I will make thy tongue cleave to 
the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be 
dumb, and shalt not be to them °a reprover : 
4 for they are a rebellious house. 

27 © But when I speak with thee, I will open 
thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, 
f Thus saith the Lord Gop; He that heareth, 
let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him 
forbear: & for they are a rebellious house. 


A. M. 3409, 
B.C. Y 


8 Chapter xviii. 24; xxxiii. 12, 14. 
t Verse 14; Chapter i. 3. 4 Chap. viii. 4. 
y eg iT. = Chap. i. 28. a Chap. ii. 2. 


8 Heb. righteousnesses. 
* Chap. i. 28. 
b Chap. iv. 8. 


© Chap. xxiv. 27; Luke i. 20, 22.—® Heb. a man reproving. 
4 Chap. ii. 5, 6, 7. ¢ Chap. xxiv. 27; xxxiii. 22. Verse 
11, Verses 9, 26; Chapter xii. 2, 3. : 


“Thou shalt be accountable for the loss of his soul, 
just as a man’s blood is laid to the charge of him who 
is any way accessory to his death.” Yet if thou 
warn the wicked, and he turn not—But still go onin 
his trespasses, unawakened and unreformed; he 
shall die, but thow hast delivered thy soul—Thou 
shalt be clear from the guilt of being accessory to his 
destruction. 

Verses 20, 21. Again, When a righteous man— 
One truly righteous, and devoted to the love and ser- 
vice of God in heart and life ; one whose person is 
justified, whose nature is renewed, and whose prac- 
tice is conformed to God’s holy will; doth turn from 
his righteousness and commit iniquity—Which the 
Scriptures show to be very possible, and experience 
and observation demonstrate to be a case not uncom- 
mon. And I lay a stumbling-block before him— 
Such a temptation to sin as he might have resisted, 
but to which, nevertheless, he yielded, and by w hich 
he was overcome. The word dwar, here rendered 
stumbling-block, sometimes signifies ruin, as chap. 
xviii. 30. Therefore some render this clause, And 
I cause iniquity to become his ruin; he shall die— 
Shall perish in his sin; and his righteousness shall 
not be remembered—Shall be of no advantage to 
him ; shall stand him in no*stead for the preventing 
of punishment. But his b will I require at thy 
hand—See on verse 18. Nevertheless if thou warn 
the righteous man—That he may not be drawn aside 
by bad examples, or any other temptation, to for- 
sake the ways of piety and virtue. And he doth not 
sin—But continues conscientiously to walk in God’s 
ordinances and commandments blameless. Heshall 
surely live—In the favour of God here, and in his 
kingdom hereafter. Also thou hast delivered thy 
soul—Both the warner and the warned escape de- 
struction. 

582 


Verses 22-27. And the hand of the Lord was there 
upon me--Namely, at Tel-abib. I felt a divine power 
acting upon me as before: see on chap. i. 3. And 
he said, Arise, go forth into the plain—Withdraw 
from the multitude, and retire to a place more pri- 
vate, and fit for contemplation, and the reception of 
divine communications. Then I arose—As I was 
commanded ; and the glory of the Lord stood there 

—The same glorious vision and representation of 
God’s majesty, which I had seen before, (chap. i. 28,) 
were manifested to me again. J"hen the spirit en- 
tered into me--The spirit, power, or influence of 
God came upon me in an extraordinary manner; 
and set me upon my feet--Raised me up after I had 
fallen on my face; and spake with me—This should 
be rendered, And he spake with me, for the verb 
717 is in the masculine gender. The spirit or 
power, which now entered into him, is distinguished 
from the divine glory, or Shechinah, which the pro- 
phet saw, as it is also very plainly chap. ii. 2.. And 
said, Go, shut thyself within thy house—From 
public view, and to receive further instructions. Or, 
as some think, symbolically to represent the siege 
of Jerusalem. Behold, they shall put bands wpon 
thee-—The LXX, read 1d dedovrae em oe Seopot, kat 
Snoovot oe ev avrotc, bands shall be put upon thee, and 
they shall bind thee with them. So also the Vulgate. 
Some think this was done by the captive Jews at 
Tel-abib, and that they bound him asa eriminal, and 
disturber of the peace, in order to the punishing of 
him. Others suppose his domestics bound him, as 
thinking him out of his right mind. But it is more 
probable, comparing this passage with chap. iv. 8 
that the meaning is, as Bishop Newcome observes, 
that his friends or servants bound him by his order ; 
namely, more fully to express the shutting up of the 
Jews in Jerusalem by the siege, a 


The siege of Jerusalem 


CHAPTER IV. 


portrayed on a tile, 


go out among them—-Thou shalt not go abroad 
among the people, but continue thus shut up. And 
thou shalt be dumb—-For some space of time I will 
withhold revelations from thee, and thou shalt say 
nothing to the people by way of admonition or re- 
proof. For they are arebellious house—They are 
an obstinate, refractory people, who will give no 
heed to thy words. But when I speak with thee—Or, 
when I have spoken to thee ; that is, revealed to thee 
the knowledge of what is to come, or have commu- 
nicated to thee what I intend to be declared to them; 


Iwill open thy mouth—Give thee the power of speak- 
ing such things to them as it is my pleasure should 
be set before them. He that heareth, let himhear— 
This is the last warning I shall give them, and they 
must take it as such, and either give heed to and 
obey what is said to them, and so avoid the im 
pending evil; or neglect it at their peril, and take 
the consequence which shall follow. ‘These words, 
itseems, were spoken to Ezekiel only, and are not 
any part of the message which he was to deliver to 
the people. 


CHAPTER IV. 


In this chapter, to try the faith of those Jewish captives who regarded Jerusalem with affection and a pious disposition, and 


to rebuke the presumption of those false prophets and their votaries, who expected a speedy return to it, 
(1,) He represents the close siege of it, and the fortifications that should be 


warns them of its approaching calamities. 


zekiel, by a figure, 


raised against it, by besieging a portraiture of it, lying three hundred and ninety days on his left, and forty on his right 
side, thus declaring of how long continuance those sins were, which God visited upon that people, 1-8. (2,) The famine 
which should rage in the city and among the captives is represented by-his eating coarse. bread, baked in a very mean and 
disagreeable manner, so long as this typical representation lasted, 9-17. 


4,0 3400. THOU also, son of man, take thee 
. C. 595. “ : 

a tile, and lay it before thee, and 
portray upon it the city, even Jerusalem. 

2 And lay siege against it, and build a fort 
against it, and cast a mount against it ; set the 
camp also against it, and set ! battering rams 
against it round about. 

3 Moreover take thou unto thee * an iron pan, 
and set it for a wall of iron between thee and 


1 Or, chief leaders, Chap. xxi. 22.——* Or, a flat plate, or. slice. 


the city: and set thy face against Sree 3 
it, and it shall. be besieged, and thou ————— 
shalt lay siege against it. *'This shall be a 
sign to the house of Israel. 

4 Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay 
the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: 
according to the number of the days that 
thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their 
iniquity. 


a Chap. xii. 6, 11; xxiv. 24, 27. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 


Verse 1. Take a tile, §c., and lay tt before thee— 
The prophets often foreshowed impending judg- 
ments by significant emblems, which usually strike 
more powerfully than words. So Jeremiah was 
commanded to go down to the potter’s house, and 
observe how frequently vessels were marred in his 
hands, (chap. xviii.,) and to take one of those earthen 
vessels and break it in the sight of the elders of the 
Jews, (chap. xix.,) that they might thereby be sensi- 
bly taught the greatness of God’s power, and their 
own frailty. So here God commands Ezekiel to 
take a tile, or such a slate as mathematical lines, or 
figures, are usvilly drawn upon, and there to make 
a portraiture of Jerusalem, thereby to represent it 
as under a siege. We may observe, that God often 
suited prophetical types and figures to the genius 
and education of the prophets themselves: so the 
figures which Amos makes use of are generally taken 
from such observations as are proper to the employ- 
ment of a shepherd, or a husbandman. Ezekiel had 
a peculiar talent for architecture, therefore several 
of his representations are suitable to that profession. 
And they that suppose the emblem here made use 

3 


of to be below the dignity of the prophetical office, 
may as well accuse Archimedes of folly for making 
lines in the dust: see Lowth. 

Verses 2, 3. And lay siege against it—Make a 
portraiture of a siege, and of such warlike instru- 
ments as are used in sieges, figuring every thing just 
as when an army lies before a place with an inten- 
tion of taking it. Moreover, take thow an tron pan 
—Or rather, an iron plate, probably such as cakes 
were baked on. “This,” says Bishop Newcome, 
“may denote the strong trenches of the besiegers, or 
their firmness and perseverance in the siege; or, ac- 
cording to others, that there was an iron wall be- 
tween the besieged and God, whom the prophet 
represented ;” namely, the sins of the people, which 
separated between them and God, and prevented 
him from showing them mercy. 

Verses 4-6, Lie thou also, &e,—“In his own house, 
chap. iii. 24. This was to be his posture, not with- 
out intermission, but in the exercise of his propheti- 
cal office, during that part of each day, when the 
people were likely to observe his conduct.”—Bishop 
Newcome. Upon thy left side—The left side, as 
being the least respectable, signified Israel, or the 

583 


Further delineation of the 


EZEKIEL. 


siege of Jerusalem. 


A. M. 3409. 


5 For I have laid upon thee the 
B.C. 595. 


years of their iniquity, according to 
‘he number of the days, * three hundred and 
ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity 
of the house of Israel. 

6 And when thou hast accomplished them, 
lie again on thy right side, aad thou shalt bear 
the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: 
I have appointed thee * each day for a year. 

7 Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward 


the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm A. M. 3409. 
shall be uncovered, and thou shalt Loe tte 
prophesy against it. 

8 ¢ And behold I will lay bands upon thee, 
and thou shalt not turn thee ® from one side to 
another, till thou hast ended the days of thy siege. 

9 4 Take thou also unto thee wheat, and 
barley, and beans, and-lentils, and millet, 
and ° fitches, and put them in one vessel, and 
make thee bread thereof, according to the 


3 About B.C. 975. Beginning from 1 Kings xii. 13; ending 
about B. C. 585. 


bNum. xiv. 34. 
¢ Chap. ili. 25. 


4 Hebrew, a day for a year, a day for a year. 
5 Heb. from thy side to thy side——® Or, spelt. 


ten tribes: the right side, as being most honoured, 
the tribes of Judah and Benjamin; or, as it is gene- 
rally expressed, the kingdom of Judah. Ezekiel’s 
lying on one side for a long time together, signified 
the great patience of God in bearing with the sins of 
Israel. And lay the iniquity of the house of Israel 
upon it: according to the number of the days, &c. 
—From the days that I shall order thee to lie upon 
thy left side thou shalt understand how many years 
I have borne with their iniquity, for each day was 
to signify a year: see verse 6. T'how shalt bear 
their iniquity—Thou shalt, in the way of a sign or 
symbol, suffer for their iniquity, namely, in lying so 
long upon one side. Or, thou shalt presignify the 
punishment which they shallbear. For Ihave laid 
upon thee the years of their iniquity—This verse 
explains the former: I have pointed out the number 
of years wherein apostate Israel sinned against me. 
According to the number of days, three hundred and 
ninety days—“ This number of years will take us 
back, with sufficient exactness, from the year in 
which Jerusalem was sacked by Nebuchadnezzar to 
the first year of Jeroboam’s reign, when national 
idolatry began in Israel.”—Bishop Newcome. Some, 
however, rather suppose that the years are meant 
which intervened between the falling of Solomon 
into idolatry, and the carrying away of the ten tribes 
by Shalmanezer, at which time they entirely ceased 
to be a nation or people of themselves, and were 
wholly dispersed and mixed with other nations. 
Thou shalt bear the iniquity of Judah forty days— 
So many years there were from the time when King 
Josiah entered into a solemn covenant to serve and 
worship God, (from whence their future idolatry re- 
ceived a great aggravation,) to the destruction of the 
city and temple. Ihave appointed thee each day 
for a year—Days frequently stand for years in the 
prophetical accounts of time. 

Verses 7,8. Thou shalt set thy face toward the 
siege of Jerusalem—Thou shalt look toward Jeru- 
salem, or toward the portraiture of it upon the tile, 
with a threatening countenance, as men do toward 
the city which they are besieging. And thine arm 
shall be uncovered—Or, stretched out, as the Vulgate 
reads it. Their habits were anciently so contrived, 
that their right arms were disengaged from their 
upper garments, that they might be the more ready 
for action. So ancient statues and coins represent 

584 


heroes with their right arms bare, and out of the 
sleeves of their garments. Thus God is said to make 
bare his arm, Isa. lii. 10, where he is represented as 
subduing his adversaries, and bringing salvation to 
his people. And thou shalt prophesy against it— 
Thou shalt signify by these signs what shall happen 
to it. And, behold, Iwill lay bands upon thee—See 
chap. ili. 25. God is said to do what was done in 
consequence of his command. And thou shalt not 
turn thee from one side to another—This may mean, 
that the Lord would powerfully enable, and even 
constrain him to lie quietly in the posture appointed 
him, till the days were accomplished, in the sense 
explained in note on verse 4, this being intended to 
signify that the Chaldeans should continue the 
siege, and should be, as it were, fixed and fastened 
there, as by bonds, till the city was taken. This evi- 
dently seems to have been a real transaction, and 
not a vision, otherwise it does not appear how it 
could have beena sign to the people; for how could 
any thing be a sign to them, of which they were not 
eye-witnesses? Till thou hast ended the days of 
thy siege—“'The three hundred and ninety days, 
mentioned verses 5 and 9, it seems, were designed, 
not only to signify the years of Israel’s sin, but the 
continuance of the siege of Jerusalem. That siege 


lasted, from the beginning to the end of it, seventeen ~ 


months, as appears from 2 Kings xxv. 1-4. But the 
king of Egypt, coming to relieve the city, was the 
occasion of raising the siege for some time, as ap- 
pears from Jer. xxxvii. 3. So that it may reasona- 
bly be gathered from the authority of the text, joined 
to the circumstances of the story, that the siege last- 
ed about thirteen months, or three hundred and 
ninety days.” 

Verse 9. Take thou also wheat and barley, &e.— 
In times of scarcity it is usual for people to mix a 
great deal of the coarse kinds of grain with a little 
of the better sort, to make their provisions last the 
longer. This Ezekiel was commanded to do, to sig- 
nify the scarcity, and the coarse fare, the inhabitants 
should have in the siege of the city. Three hun- 
dred and ninety days thou shalt eat thereof—During 
which time the siege lasted: see verse8, The forty 
days, mentioned verse 6, seem not to be brought into 
this account. These, denoting Judah’s sin of forty 
years’ continuance, being superadded to the t 


hundred and ninety days of the siege, may signify 
. 3 


-_ 


Great scarcity of 


CHAPTER IV. 


provisions foretold. 


Masa. number of the days that thou shalt 
——_——— lie upon thy side; three hundred and 
ninety days shalt thou eat thereof. 

10 And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall 
be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time 
to time shalt thou eat it. 

11 Thou shalt drink also water by measure, 
the sixth part of a hin: from time to time shalt 
thou drink. 

12 And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and 
thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out 
of man, in their sight. 

13 And the Lorp said, Even thus ‘shall 
the children of Israel eat their defiled bread 


4 Hos. ix. 3——* Acts x. 14.——f Exod. xxii. 31; Lev. xi. 40; 
xvii. 15.——s Deut. xiv. 3; Isa. Ixv. 4. 


the days spent in spoiling and desolating the city 
and temple, and carrying away the remnant of the 
people. Jerusalem was taken on the ninth day of 
the fourth month, Jer. lii.6; and on the tenth day 
of the fifth month the temple was burned, verse 12; 
and so we may reasonably conjecture by the eigh- 
teenth of that month, which was the fortieth from 
the taking of the place, the whole city was burned, 
and the few Jews who were left were carried into 
captivity: see Lowth. 

Verses 10-12. And thy meat shall be by weight 
twenty shekels, &c.—In sieges it is common to stint 
every one to a certain allowance, by which means 
they can guess how long their provisions will last: 
twenty shekels is but ten ounces; a short allowance 
for a day’s sustenance. From time to time shalt 
thou eatof it—This shall be thy daily allowance 
during the whole three hundred and ninety days. 
Thou shalt drink also water by measure—In sieges 
it is usual for the enemy to cut off the water from 
coming into the cities which they besiege, as much 
as they can, which produces a scarcity of it; the 
sixth part of a hin—Which is about a pint anda 
half of our measure. T'how shalt eat it as barley 
cakes—Such as people make in haste, when they 
have not time for preparing a set meal: see Exod. 
xii. 39. This represents the hurry and disorder 
which would be occasioned by the siege. And thou 
shalt bake it with dung—To signify the scarcity of 
all kinds of fuel. Sir J. Chardin, in his MS. quoted 
by Harmer, tells us, “the eastern people always 
used cow-dung for baking, boiling a pot, and dressing 
all kinds of victuals that are easily cooked; espe- 
cially in countries that had but little wood.” And 
D’Arvieux, “complaining that one sort of Arab bread 
smells of smoke, and tastes of the cow-dung used in 
baking it, informs us, that the peasants often make 
use of the same fuel, and that all who live in villages 
where there is not plenty of wood, are very careful 
to stock themselves with it; the children,” he says, 
“gather up the dung, and clap it against a wall to 
dry, from whence the quantity that is necessary for 


baking, or warming themselves, is taken from time 
3 


M. 3409. 


among the Gentiles, whither I will A. 
ROB. B. C. 595. 


drive them. Pav aha 

14 Then said I, * Ah Lord Gop! behold, 
my soul hath not been polluted: for from my 
youth up even till now have I not eaten of 
‘that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; 
neither came there abominable flesh into my 
mouth. 

15 Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given 
thee cow’s dung for man’s dung, and thou shalt 
prepare thy bread therewith. 

16 “{ Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, 
behold, I will break the "staff of bread in 
Jerusalem: and they shall ‘eat bread by weight, 


h Lev, xxvi. 26; Psa. cv. 16; Isa. iii, 1; Chap. v.16; xiv. 13. 
iVerse 10; Chap. xii. 19. 


to time.”—Harmer, chap. iv. observ. 20, vol. i. Ac- 
cording to Dathius, quoted by Bishop Newcome, the 
dung of camels, as well as that of cows or oxen, was 
also “often used by the easterns as fuel for preparing 
their food.” But the command here given to the 
prophet, to use human dung, expressed the greatest 
necessity, and was terribly significant of the extrem- 
ities which the inhabitants of Jerusalem should un- 
dergo during the siege, no nation making use of that 
offensive kind of fuel. 

Verse 13. Even thus shall the children of Israel 
eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles--The 
prophet, speaking above of eating and drinking by 
weight and measure, foretels the famine in Jerusa- 
lem; now in the bread baked with dung is also pre- 
signified the unclean bread which the children of 
Israel were to eat among the Gentiles. For their 
circumstances in their captivity would not permit 
them to observe the rules of their law relating to 
unclean meats; and they would be constrained to 
partake of meats, part of which had been offered to 
idols. Compare Hos. ix. 1-3; Dan.i.8. Bread is 
often used in the Hebrew for all sorts of food. 

Verses 14, 15. Then said I, Ah, Lord God, &e.— 
He deprecates this, and entreats it may not be en- 
joined him. Behold, my soul hath not been polluted 
—I have always carefully observed the distinction 
between meats clean and unclean: I beseech thee, 
command me not now to eat any thing so contrary to 
my former practice. Neither came their abomina- 
ble flesh into my mouth—The Hebrew word, yap, 
abominable, is used of such meats as were forbidden 
by the law, as the learned reader may see, Lev. vii. 
18, and xix. 7; Isa. lxv.4. Then he said, Lo, I have 
given thee cow’s dung, &c.—This indicated, that 
even the pious would suffer greatly during the siege 
of Jerusalem; and that all the circumstances of 
things would admit of, would be a very small dis- 
tinction between them and the wicked; for Ezekiel, 
God’s prophet, could only obtain the exchange of a 
somewhat -less offensive kind of fuel for one ex- 
tremely offensive. ‘ 

Verses 16,17. Behold, I will break the staff of 
585 


Further types of 


EZEKIEL. 


Jerusalem’s affliction, 


A. M. 3409. and with care; and they shall * drink 
B. C. 595. , 

water by measure, and with asto- 
nishment : 


k Verse 11, 


bread in Jerusalem—TI will cause a scarcity of bread 
in Jerusalem, 2 Kings xxv. 3; and deprive it of the 
chief support of man’s life. And they shall eat 
their bread by weight and with care—Here we have 
a declaration of the meaning of what the prophet 
was ordered to do, verses 10 and 11. It was intend- 
ed to signify, that during the siege, the people of 
Jerusalem should eat their food very sparingly, and 
with great anxiety, for fear they should not be able 


17 That they may want bread and et ee. 
water, and be astonished one with rs 
another, and ! consume away for their iniquity. 


1 Ley. xxvi. 39; Chap. xxiv. 23. 


to get a further supply, when what they had was 
consumed. That they may want bread and water 
—Or, so that they shall want bread and water: 
and be astonished one at another—Shall look upon 
one another astonished at each other’s ghastly, mea- 
ger countenances, or at the Peters their calam- 
ities; and consume away, &c.—And pine away with 
hunger and hardships, on account of, their wicked- 
ness. 


CHAPTER V. 


In this chapter, (1,) The destruction of the Jews, still remaining in Judea and Jerusalem, in various ways, is represented by 


the cutting, burning, and scattering of Ezekiel’s hair, 1-4. 


(2,) The Jews, particularly those of Jerusalem, are charged 


with wagrateful and wnparalleled contempt. of God's laws, profanation of God’s ordinances, and defilement of his temple 


with idols, 5-7, 11. 


(3,) On account hereof, and answerably to Ezekiel’s sign, great wrath is threatened, 8-10 ; and a 


variety of miseries issuing in their reproach and ruin, 12-17. 


A. M. 3410. 


AND thou, son of man, take thee a 
B. C. 594. 


sharp knife, take thee a barber’s 
razor, * and cause i¢ to pass upon thy head and 
upon thy beard: then take thee balances to 
weigh, and divide the hair. 

2 »'Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in 
the midst of ° the city, when ‘the days of the 


siege are e fulfilled : and thou shalt take a | third 
Pest itean xxi. ee. vi 20; Chap. Hiv: 20,—— Vee 12. 
hap. ive Ls 


part, and smite about it with a knife: A, M. 3410. 
and a third part thou shalt scatter ate 
in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after 
them. 

3 °Thou shalt also take thereof a few in 
number, and bind them in thy 1 skirts. 

4 Then take of them again, and cast them 
into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the 


4 Chap. iv.°8, 9——e Jeremiah xl. 6; lii. 16. —" Heb. wings. 


f Jer. xli. 1, 2; xliv. 14, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 

Verse 1. Take thee a sharp knife, take thee abar- 
ber’s razor—The latter, expression explains the for- 
mer; and cause it to pass upon thy head, &e.—Hair 
being then accounted an ornament, and baldness a 
token of sorrow, therefore shaving denoted calamity 
or desolation. “Among the Arabs,” says Harmer, 
chap. vi. observ. 23, “there cannot be a greater stamp 
of infamy than to cut off any one’s beard: and 
many among them would prefer death to this kind 
of punishment. And as they would think it a griev- 
ous calamity to lose it, so they carry things so far as 
to beg for the sake of it, ‘By your beard, by the life 
of your beard, do.’ In like manner some of the 
henedictions are, ‘God preserve your blessed beard, 
God pour his blessings on your beard.’ And when 
they would express their value for a thing, they say, 
‘It is worth more than his beard.’ I never had so 
clear an apprehension, I must confess, as after I had 
read these accounts, of the intended energy of that 
thought of Ezekiel, where the inhabitants are com- 
pared to the hair of the prophet’s head and beard. 
The passage seems to signify, that though the inha- 

586 


bitants of Jerusalem had been dear to God, as the 
hair of an eastern beard to its owner, yet that they 
should be taken away and consumed, one part by 
pestilence and famine, another part by the sword, 
and a third by the calamities of an exile.” See note 
on2 Sam. x.4. And then take the balances, &e.— 
A symbol of God’s justice, as the razor was of his 
wrath; to weigh and divide the haitr—What the 
prophet is here commanded to do was by way of 
another emblematical representation of what was to 
happen to the inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem. 
The hair signified the Jewish people; shaving the 
hair with a razor, the divine vengeance; the weigh- 
ing of the hair in the balances, the divine equity, 
which metes out to every one what is just and right; 
the dividing of the hair, the Pusan cmnee to 
different persons of them. zt 

Verses 2-4. T'hou shalt burn a thirdopats in the ' 
midst of the city—In the midst of that portraiture 
of the city, which the prophet was commanded to 
make, chap. iv. 1. This signified the destruction of 
the inhabitants within the city by ee 
lence; for both famine and pesti 


The Jews are charged with 


CHAPTER V. 


contempt of God's laws. 


A.M. 3110. fire: for there 
B. C. 594 Sf - 


> a fire come 
———— forth into all the louse of Israel. 

5 4 Thus saith the Lord Gop; This is 
Jerusalem; I have set it in the midst of the 
nations and countries that are round about her. 

6 And she hath changed my judgments into 
wickedness more than the nations, and my 
statutes more than the countries that are round 
about her: for they have refused my judgments 
and my statutes, they have not walked in them. 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause ye multiplied more than the nations that 


& Jer. ii. 10,11; Chap. xvi. 47. 


burn, as they make great havoc, and consume as fast 
as fire. T'how shalt take a third part, and smite 
about it with a knife—To show that a third part of 
the inhabitants should be slain with the sword; 


either in the sallies they made out of the city against | 


the enemy, or when the city was taken by assault. 
A third part thou shalt scatter in the wind—This 
signified that a part of them should be dispersed 
into various countries, as the chaff is dispersed by 
the wind; J will draw out a sword after them—My 
vengeance shall pursue them in their dispersions, 
and they shall be everywhere exposed to suffer vio- 
lence and injury. Also take a few and bind them 
in thy skirts—The Hebrew is, in thy wings. This 
signified that a small part of them should be pre- 
served in the land; and accordingly we find that 
Nebuzar-adan, captain-general of the king of Baby- 
lon, left a few of them in the land under Gedaliah, 
as we read Jer. xl. 5,6. Then take of them again, 
and cast them into the midst of the fire—This ex- 
pressed the calamity and destruction which should 
arise from this small remnant differing among them- 
selves: some espousing the part of Gedaliah, who 
had been set over them by the Babylonians, and was 
a good man; and others joining themselves to Ish- 
mael, one of the blood of David, but a wicked man; 
who formed a conspiracy against Gedaliah, and 
treacherously slew him, which was the occasion of 
the utter ruin of that poor remainder of the Jews, 
which were left in their native country. For there- 
upon some of them went down into Egypt, where 


they were all consumed according to Jeremiah’s pro- | 


phecy against them, chap. xliv. 11, &c., and the rest 
who remained in the land were entirely carried away 
captive by Nebuzar-adan, Jer. lii. 30. 

Verses 5,6. Thus saith the Lord, This is Jeru- 
salem—Here the explication of the foregoing type 
is given, namely, that the hair to be shaved off signi- 
fied Jerusalem, which was to be destroyed. J have 
set it in the midst of the nations—I set Jerusalem 
in the midst of the heathen nations, that it might be 
a pattern of religion and virtue to them: that the 
Egyptians, Syrians, Arabians, &c., might take exam- 
ple from her. Jerusalem was set in the midst of the 
nations to be as the heart in the human body, to in- 
vigorate the dead world with a divine life, as well as 

3 


! 


are round about you, and have not A. M. 3410. 

; ' B. C. 594. 
walked in my statutes, neither have ———— 
kept my judgments, * neither have done ac- 
cording to the judgments of the nations that 
are round about you ; 

8 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I, even I, am against thee, and will execute 
judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of 
the nations. 

9 "And I will do in thee that which I have 
not done, and whereunto I will not do any 
more the like, because of all thine abominations. 


h Lam. iv. 6; Dan. ix. 12; Amos iii. 2. 


to enlighten the dark world with a divine light. And 
she hath changed my judgments into wickedness— 
Instead of following my judgments, and the precepts 
I gave her for the conduct of life, she hath given 
herself up to wickedness. More than the nations—- 
She hath sinned against clearer light and stronger 
convictions of duty than the heathen nations, and 
therefore has contracted greater guilt, and deserved 
greater punishment than they. And my statutes 
more than the countries round about her—None 
of the countries round about had the statutes of 
Jehovah delivered to them, for he made known his 
statutes only to Israel: the meaning of this therefore 
must be, that the nations round about were more 
observant of the statutes and precepts delivered to 
them by men than the Israelites were of those deliver- 
ed to them by God. Thus we find from Jeremiah, 
that the Rechabites were much more observant of the 
precepts (though no easy ones) which their father or 
first founder enjoined them, than the Israelites were 
of the commandments given them by,God. 

Verses 7-9. Therefore, because ye multiplied 
more than the nations—Their multiplying, in the 
common sense of the word, was a blessing promised 
to them, and could not be alleged against them as a 
crime; therefore a word ought to be supplied here, 
as is done in many versions, namely, because ye 
multiplied your crimes, or wickedness, more than 
the nations, §c., neither have done according to the 
judgments [or manners] of the nations that are 
round about you—Namely, by persevering in the 
religion of your forefathers: you have not been so 
constant and zealous for the true religion as they 
have been fora false one. Or, as others interpret 
the clause, You have exceeded them in superstition 
and idolatry, and fallen short of them in moral du- 
ties. Therefore, behold, I, even I, am against thee 
—I will vindicate my laws from being contemned as 
they have been by you; for why should I suffer it 
to be said, See how they who profess to worship the 
true and only God, live immersed in wickedness, and 
without any virtue? And J will do in thee that 
which I have not done—As your sins have particu- 
lar aggravations above those of other nations, so 
your punishment shall be proportionably greater. 
I will not do any more the like—The punishments 

587 


EZEKIEL. 


against Jerusalem, 


Further judgments 
A.M.3410. 10 Therefore the fathers ‘shall eat 
B. C. 594. 


the sons in the midst of thee, and 
the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will 
execute judgments in thee, and the whole 
remnant of thee will I *scatter into all the 
winds. 

11 Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord Gop; 
Surely, because thou hast ! defiled my sanctu- 
ary with all thy ™detestable things, and with 
all thine abominations, therefore will I also 
diminish thee ; ™ neither shall mine eye spare, 
neither will I have any pity. 

12 9 °A third part of thee shall die with the 
pestilence, and with famine shall they be con- 
sumed in the midst of thee: and a third part 
shall fall by the sword round about thee; and 
PJ will scatter a third part into all the winds, 
and ¢1 will draw out a sword after them. 


13 Thus sO anger * be ac- A.M, 3410, 
: , B. C. 594. 
complished, andsI will * cause my fury ———— 


to rest upon them, tand I will be comforted : 
“and they shall know that I the Lorp have 
spoken i¢ in my zeal, when I have accom- 
plished my fury in them. 

14 Moreover, *I will make thee waste, and a 
reproach among the nations that are round 
about thee, in the sight of all that pass by. 

15 So it shall be a ¥ reproach and a taunt, an 
instruction and an astonishment unto the 
nations that are round about thee, when I 
shall execute judgments in thee in anger, and 
in fury, and in * furious rebukes. I the Lorp 
have spoken @z. 

16 When I shall * send upon them the evil 
arrows of famine, which shall be for their 
destruction, and which I will send to destroy 


iLev. xxvi. 29; Deut. xxviii. 53; 2 Kings vi.29; Jer. xix. 
9; Lam. ii. 20; iv. 10. k Verse 12; Lev. xxvi. 33; Deut, 
xxviii. 64; Chap. xii. 14; Zech. ii. 6. 12 Chron, xxxvi. 14; 
Chapter vii. 20; viii. 5, &c. ;/ xxiii. 38. m Chapter xi. 21. 
a Chapter vii. 4,9; viii. 185 ix. 10. © Verse 2; Jer. xv. 2; 
xxi. 9; Chap. vi. 12, 


you shall suffer shall be more remarkable for their 
greatness than those I shall at any time inflict upon 
other nations. 

Verses 10, 11. The fathers shall eat the sons, &c. 
—Fathers eating their children, and children their 
fathers, expresses the height of misery, and the most 
grievous famine. We have sufficient’ proof that 
such instances happened in the Jewish nation amidst 
their more than common calamities. Josephus re- 
lates some instances of parents eating their children 
during the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans; and 
we have further evidence of such horrid acts having 
been done by them in the extremity of famine, from 
the texts referred to in the margin. And the whole 
remnant of them will I scatter, &c.—This is another 
judgment threatened against. them by Moses, and 
remarkably fulfilled in this their last dispersion, in 
which they are to be found in every part of the 
known world,and yet live everywhere like strangers 
only upon sufferance: see note on Deut. xxviii.64. Be- 
cause thou hast defiled my sanctuary—Hast profaned 
my temple by placing idols in it, and worshipping 
them. With all thy detestable things, and all thine 
abominations—These are expressions of the same 
signification, denoting idols. Therefore will I also 
diminish thee—Will make thee of less account, and 
take from thee all honours as thou hast from me, 
as rnuch as lay in thy power: or, as some interpret 
the clause, J will cut off or destroy, by diminishing; 
(as the word ji is used Num. xxvii. 4,) with- 
out showing any pity or compassion. See the 
margin, 

Verses 12, 13. A third part of thee, &e.—In this 
verse is given an explication of what the burning 
of the hair, the smiting of it with a knife, &c., sig- 

588 


P Jer. ix. 16; Verses)2, 10; Chap. vi. 8m—4 Ley. xxvi. 33; 
Verse 2; Chap. xii. 14——" Lam. iv. 11; Chap. vi. 12; vii. 8. 
8 Chapter xxi. 17.—+ Deut. xxxii. 36; Isa. i. 24-———* Chapter 
Xxxvi. 6; xxxviii. 19. x Leviticus xxvi. 31, 32; Neh. ii. 17. 
y Deut. xxviii. 37; 1 Kings ix. 7; Psa. lxxix. 4; Jer. xxiv. $; 
Lam. ii. 15. % Chap. xxv. 17. a Deut. xxxii, 23, 24. 


nified* see on verse 2. And J will draw out a 
sword after them—My anger shall still pursue 
them, even into the countries whither they shall be 
banished and carried captives. As this was par- 
ticularly fulfilled in those that went into Egypt, (see 
on verse 4,) so it has been remarkably verified in 
the several persecutions and massacres they have 
undergone at different times in most of the coun- 
tries of Europe, in latter ages: see note on Deut. 
xxviii. 65.. Thus shall mine anger be accom- 
plished—My anger shall be appeased toward them, 
after I have executed due punishment upon them 
for their sins. And I will cause my fury—Or ra- 
ther, my wrath, or indignation, as, nn should be 
rendered, for to apply the word fury to God, is 
highly improper and indecent: to rest upon them— 
To be satisfied in punishing them. And J will be 
comforted—Here we have a strong instance of the 
metaphor called anthropopathia, by which the 
qualities of men are ascribed to God. As men 
sometimes find some sort of ease and rest in their 
minds upon venting their anger on just occasions, 
and bringing offenders to condign punishment; so 
God is here described as feeling ease and satisfac- 
tion in executing his justice on obstinate offenders: 
compare chap. xvi. 42, and xxi. 17; and see note on 
Isa. i.24. They shall know that I have spoken it 
in my zeal—Out of a just concern. for my own 
honour and authority, which they have slighted and 
despised. ; 

Verses 15-17. So it shall be an instruction to 
the nations—They shall learn from such an ex- 
ample of vengeance to fear me, and be afraid of 
my judgments. When I shall send upon them 


the evil arrows of famine—Hail, ae 


Po on ——P 


Destruction threatened upon 


CHAPTER VI. 


the Jews and their idols. 


2 Ero you: and I will inerease the famine 
- upon you, and will break your ” staff 

of bread: 
17 So will I send upon you famine and ° evil 


» Levit. xxvi. 26; Chapter iv. 16; xiv. 13——* Levit. xxvi. 22; 
Deut. xxxii. 24; Chap. xiv. 215 xxxiii. 27; xxxiv. 25. 


mildew, locusts, all which contribute to make a 
famine. So will I send upon you famine and evil 
beasts—Wild beasts multiply in a land when it be- 
comes uninhabited, Exod. xxiii. 29. This likewise 
is a punishment which, among others, was threat- 
ened against the Jews by Moses: see the margin, 


A. M. 3410 


beasts. and they shall bereave thee ; 
B. C. 594. 


and “ pestilence and blood shall pass 
through thee ; and I will bring the sword upon 
thee. I the Lorp have spoken it. 


4 Chapter xxxviii. 22. 


Pestilence and blood shall pass through thee— 
Blood signifies any unusual sort of death, and may 
denote here such a pestilence as would destroy mul- 
titudes; or that, in addition to destruction by pesti- 
lence, they should be slaughtered by their enemies 
throughout their land, 


CHAPTER VI. 


In this chapter, (1,) God threatens, by his prophet, to bring general destruction upon the Jews and their idols, 1-7. (2,) Pro- 
mises that a remnant of those in captivity should return to him by unfeigned repentance, and a thorough reformation, 8-10. 
(3,) Directs Ezekiel and his fellow-prophets to bewail, both the iniquities and the calamities of their nation, 11-14. 


earn ND the word of the Lorp came 
She ee unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, *set thy face toward the »moun- 
tains of Israel, and prophesy against them, 

3 And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the 
word of the Lord Gop: Thus saith the Lord 
Gop to the mountains, and to the hills, to the 
rivers, and to the valleys; behold, I, even I, 
will bring a sword upon you, and °I will de- 
stroy your high places. 

4 And your altars shall be desolate, and your 
‘images shall be broken: and ¢I will cast 
down your slain men before your idols. 

5 And I will * lay the dead carcasses of the 


® Chap. xx. 46 ; xxi. 2; xxv. 2.——» Chap. xxxvi. 1.——* Lev, xx. 
30.—" Or, sun-images, and so verse 6.—4 Lev: xxvi. 30, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verses 2-7. Set thy face toward the mountains 
of Israel—Turn thy face to that part where Judea 
is situated. Judea was a hilly country; therefore 
that whole land is expressed here and elsewhere by 
the mountains of Israei, Judah being called Israel, 
because the ten tribes, generally distinguished by 
that name, had been long since carried captive into 
Assyria, and Judah possessed a great part of their 
country. And prophesy against them—Direct thy 
discourse to them. The prophets sometimes di- 
rected their discourse to the inanimate parts of the 
creation, thereby to upbraid the stupidity of men. 
Thus saith the Lord to the mountains and to the 
hills—Every part of the country had been defiled 
with idolatry. The altars built for idol-worship 
were commonly placed upon mountains and hills; 
the shady valleys and river-sides were likewise made 
use of for the same purpose, particularly for the sa- 

3 


children of Israel beforé their idols ; A. M. 3410. 
and [ will scatter your bones round ee 
about your altars. 

6 In all your dwelling-places the cities shall 
be laid waste, and the high places shall be deso- 
late; that your altars may be laid waste and 
made desolate, and your idols may be broken 
and cease, and your images may be cut down, 
and your works may be abolished. 

7 And the slain shall fall in the midst of 
you, and *ye shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 

8 4 f Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may 
have some that shall escape the sword among 


2 Heb. give. ¢ Verse 13; Chap. vii. 4,9; xi. 10,12; xii. 15. 
f Jer. xliv. 28; Chap. v. 2, 12; xii. 10; xiv. 22. 


crificing of children to Moloch: see Isa. lvii.5; Jer. 
vii. 31. So by this the prophet denounces a general 
judgment upon the whole country. And your al- 
tars shall be desolate—See note on Lev. xxvi. 30, 
where Moses denounces against the Israelites the 
same judgments upon their provocations. J will 
cast down your slain men before your idols, &e.— 
So that their sin shall be read in the manner of their 
punishment; and while the idols are upbraided with 
their inability to help their worshippers, the idolaters 
are reproached with the folly of trusting in them. 
And ye shall know that I am the Lord— An epi- 
phonema, or conclusion of a severe denunciation 
often repeated by this prophet, importing that the 
judgments which God intended to bring on the 
Jews, would make the most hardened and stupid 
sinners sensible that this was God’s hand.”—Lowth. 

Verses 8-10. Yet will I leave a remnant—“ A 
gracious exception that often occurs in the prophets 


The desolations that shall 


A.M. 3410. the nations, when ye shall be scat- 
~ tered through the countries. 

9 And they that escape of you shall remem- 
ber me among the nations whither they shall 
be carried captives, because * I am broken with 
their whorish heart, which hath departed from 
me, and ® with their eyes which go a whoring 
after their idols: and ‘they shall loathe them- 
selves for the evils which they have committed 
in all their abominations. 

10 And they shall know that Iam the Lorn, 
and that I have not said in-vain that I would 
do this evil unto them. 

11 4 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Smite * with 
thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, 
Alas, for all the evil abominations of the house 
of Israel! ! for they shall fall by the sword, by 
the famine, and by the pestilence. 


& Psa. Ixxviii. 40; Isa, vi 13; xiii. 24; lxiii, 10.——» Num. 
xv. 39; Chap. xx: 7, 24. ev. xvi. 39; Job xlii. 6; Chap. 
XX. 43 ; Xxxvi. 31. oS Oba. xxi. 14, Chap. y. 12. 


EZEKIEL. 


take place in the land. 


12 He that is far off shall die of A. M. 3410. 
the pestilence; and he that is near a. 
shall fall by the sword; and he that re- 
maineth and is besieged shall die by the fa- 
mine: ™thus will I accomplish my fury upon 
them. 

13 Then "shall ye know that I am the Lorp, 
when their slain men shall be among their 
idols round about their altars, ° upon every 
high hill, ?in all the tops of the mountains, 
and under every green tree, and under every 
thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet 
savour to all their idols. 

14 Sowill I * stretch out my hand upon them, 
and make the land desolate, yea, * more deso- 
late than the wilderness toward * Diblath, in all 
their habitations: and they shall know that I 
am the Lorp. 


™ Chap. v. 13. n Verse 7. © Jer. ii. 20,—p Hos. iv. 13. 
4 Isa. lvil. 5. Isa. v, 25.——* Or, desolate from the wilderness, 
s Num. xxxiii. 46; Jer, xviii. 22. 


when they denounce general judgments against the 
Jews; implying that God will still preserve a rem- 
nant of that people; to whom he will fulfil the pro- 
mises made to their fathers.” And they that escape 
of you shall remember me, &c.—Your afflictions 
shall bring you to the knowledge of yourselves, and 
a sense of your duty tome. Because I am broken 
with their whorish hearts—I am much grieved, and 
my patience is tired out with this people’s idolatries, 
called in Scripture spiritual whoredom. God is here 
introduced as speaking after the manner of men, 
whose patience is tired out by the repeated provoca- 
tions of others, especially when they see no hopes 
of amendment. And with their eyes go a whoring 
after their idols—The eyes are the seat of lascivious 
inclinations: see 2 Pet. ii. 14. So, in pursuit of the 
same metaphor, the eyes are said to go a whoring 
after idols, the people being often tempted to idola- 
trous worship by the costliness of the images, and 
the fine show they made. And they shall loathe 
themselves, &c.—With a mixture of grief toward 
God, of indignation against themselves, and abhor- 
rence of the offence. And they shall know I have 
not said in vain, &¢.— Without cause, as the word 
t33n is more significantly translated chap. xiv. 22; 
the sufferers had given him just cause to pronounce 
that evil. Or, without effect: their sins were the cause, 
and their destruction is the effect of their sufferings. 

Verses 11-14. Smite with thy hand, and stamp 
with thy foot—Join to thy words the gestures which 
are proper to express grief and concern at the wick- 
edness of thy people, and for their calamities that 
will ensue. For they shall fall by the sword, &e.— 

590 


See note on chap. v. 12. He that is far off—And 
thinks himself out of danger, because he is out of 
the reach of the enemy ; shall die of the pestilence 
—The arrow that I will shoot at him. And he that 
is near—Who stays in his own country, or who is 
near a place of strength, which he hopes will be to 
him a place of safety, yet shall fall by the sword be- 
fore he can retreat to it. And he that remaineth— 
Who isso cautious as not to venture out, but remains 
in the city; shall die by the famine—The most 
miserable death of all: thus will I accomplish my 
fury—I will satisfy my just displeasure, and give 
them full measure of punishment: I will do all that 
against them which I had purposedtodo. Then shall 
ye know—See note on verse 10. When their slain 
men shall be among their idols—As was threatened 
before, verses 5-7. Upon every high hill, &e.— 
There, where they had prostrated themselves in 
honour of their idols, God will lay them dead to 
their own reproach, and the reproach of their idols: 
they lived among them, and shall die among them: 
they had offered sweet odours to their idols, but there 
shall their dead carcasses send forth an offensive 
smell, as it were, to atone for that misplaced incense. 
So will I stretch out my hand—Put forth my al- 
mighty power; and make the land desolate—nnw, 
a desolation, a Hebraism, for most desolate: that 
fruitful, pleasant, populous country, which has been 
as the garden of Eden, the glory of all lands; shail 
be more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath 
—Or Diblathaim, as it is called Num. xxxiii. 46; the 
desert in the borders of Moab, part of that great and 
terrible wilderness, described Deut. Cea 


Israel’s desolation 


CHAPTER VII. 


is at the aoor. 


= 


CHAPTER. VII. 


In this chapter, the approaching ruin of Judea is foretold very particularly, and in expressions most affecting and often 
repeated, that, if possible, the people might be awakened and brought to repentance, in order to the prevention of so great a 
calamity. The prophet is ordered to tell them, (1,) That it will be a final, complete, and miserable destruction, 1-6. 


(2,) That it was very near at hand, 7-10. 


(3,) That on account of their aggravated pride and violence it was wnavoid- 


able, 10-15. (4,) That neither their strength nor riches should in the least protect them from it, 16-19. (5,) That their 


glorious temple, in which they trusted, should be laid in ruins, 20-22. 


(6,) That their miseries and desolation, by the 


Chaldeans, should be as universal as their sins had been, 23-27. 


wa ir JY OREOVER the word of the 
= Ma Lorp came unto me, saying, 

2 Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord 
Gop unto the land of Israel; * An end, the 
end is come upon the four corners of the land. 

3 Now is the end come upon thee, and I will 
send mine anger upon thee, and ” will judge 
thee according to thy ways, and will ! recom- 
pense upon thee all thine abominations. 

4 And ° mine eye shall not spare thee, neither 
will I have pity: but I will recompense thy 
ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall 
be in the midst of thee: ¢and ye shall know 
that I am the Lorp. 

5 Thus saith the Lord Gon; An evil, an only 
evil, behold, is come. 

6 An end is come, the end is come: it 
? watches for thee ; behold, it is come. 

7 © The morning is come upon thee, O thou 
that dwellest in the land: ‘the time is come, 


aVerses 3,6; Amos viii.2; Matt. xxiv. 6,13, 14.—— Verses 


8, 9. 1 Heb. give. © Verse 9; Chap. v.11; viii. 18; ix. 10. 
4 Verse 27; Chapter vi. 7; xii. 20. 2 Heb. awaketh against 
thee. © Verse 10.—— Verse 12; Zeph. i. 14, 15. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. 

Verses 2-4. Thus saith the Lord unto the land of 
Israel—Unto the inhabitants of the land. Israel is 
often put for Judah, after the captivity of the ten 
tribes ; those that were left of these tribes joining 
themselves to the tribe of Judah. The whole coun- 
try of Judea is here comprehended. An end—-An 
end of God’s patience, of the peace and welfare of 
the people, and of the plenty, beauty, and desirable- 
ness of the land itself; 7s come—Or is near at hand ; 
even that dreadful end threatened by Moses and the 
prophets, as the certain punishment of idolatry and 
other violations of God’s law: wpon the four corners 
of the land—Upon all parts of it. Now is the end 
come upon thee—There shall be no more delays. 
I will judge thee according to thy ways—I will 
punish thee according to thy deserts. Thine abo- 
minations shall be in the midst of thee--The punish- 
ment of thy sins shall be upon thee everywhere 
throughout thy land. 

Verses 5-7. Thus saith the Lord, An evil, an 
only evil—A sore affliction, a singular and uncom- 
mon one. An end is come—A destruction, which 
shall be fatal to a great part of those that go into 

3 


the day of trouble is near, and not A. M. 3410, 
the sounding again of the moun- sche 
tains. 

8 Now will I shortly * pour out my fury upon 
thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee: 
* and I will judge thee according to thy ways, 
and will recompense thee for all thine abomi- 
nations. 

9 And ‘mine eye shall not spare, neither will 
I have pity : I will recompense ¢ thee according 
to thy ways, and thine abominations that are 
in the midst of thee ; *and ye shall know that 
I am the Lorp that smiteth. 

10 Behold the day, behold, it is come; ! the 
morning is gone forth ; the rod hath blossomed, 
pride hath budded. 

11 ™ Violence is risen up into a rod of wick- 
edness : none of them shall remain, nor of their 
Smultitude, nor of any of ®theirs: * neither 
shall there be wailing for them. 


3 Or, echo.— Chap. xx. 8, 21.—— Verse 3.—— Verse 4. 
* Heb. upon thee——* Verse 4.—! Verse 7.——™ Jer. vi. 7. 
5 Or, tumult. ® Or, their tumultuous persons. 0 Jer. xvi. 5, 
6; Chap. xxiv. 16, 22. 


captivity, as well as to those who are consumed in 
their own country. It is quite prepared to rush upon 
thee. Observe, reader, when the end is come upon 
the ungodly, then an only evil comeg,upon them. 
The sorest of temporal judgments have their allays; 
but the torments of the damned are an evil, an only 
evil. The morning is come upon thee—* God’s judg- 
ments shall overtake thee speedily and unexpected- 
ly.. The expression alludes to the time when ma- 
gistrates use to give sentence against offenders, which 
was in the morning.” TT'he time is come—The time 
of God’s vengeance, called elsewhere the day of the 
Lord. And not the sounding again of the moun- 
tains—The sound of war and slaughter, and not 
such a joyful sound as used to echo from the moun- 
tains, by which the treaders of grapes expressed 
their satisfaction at the time of the vintage: which 
the word 77, here used, properly signifies. Or, not 
a mere echo, not a fancy, but a real noise arising 
from the approach of the Chaldean army. 

Verses 10, 11. Behold the day—Which has lin- 
gered so long! it is come at last. The morning is 
gone forth—The day of destruction is already be- ~ 
gun. J'he rod hath blossomed—As the same word 

591 


The unavoidable 


EZEKIEL. 


desolation of Israel. 


A.M. 9410. 12 ° The time is come, the day 


“©: 5° draweth near: let. not the buyer re- 
n|/the multitude thereof. 


joice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath és 
all the multitude thereof. 


13 For the seller shall not return to that 


which is sold, 7although they were yet alive: 
for the vision ts touching the whole multitude 
thereof, which shall not return; neither shall 
any strengthen himself ®in ° the iniquity of his 
life. 

14 They have blown the trumpet, even to 


© Verse 7. 


7 Heb. though their life were yet among the living. 
® Or, whose life is in his iniquity. 


make all ready ; but none goeth to A. M, 3410. 
the battle: for my wrath is upon all : 


15 ? The sword és without, and the pestilence 
and the famine within: he that és in the field 
shall die with the sword; and he that zs in the 
city, famine and pestilence shall devour him. 

16 4 But ‘they that escape of them shall 
escape, and shall be on the mountains like 
doves of the valleys, all of them miqurning, 
every one for his iniquity. 


9 Heb. his iniquity—? Deut. pas 25; Lam. i. 20; Chapter 
v. 12,——4 Chap. vi. 8. 


which signifies a tribe, signifies also'a rod, the mean- 
ing of this sentence may be, the tribe of Judah hath 
flourished, or hath been prosperous. The conse- 
quence is mentioned in the following words: Pride 
hath budded—Her prosperity first filled her with 
pride, and that begat violence and all kinds of wick- 
edness. Or the sense may be, Nebuchadnezzar, the 
rod of God’s anger, the rod of correction ordained 
for Judah, is grown in power and pride, in violence 
and cruelty, and is thus prepared to punish the Jews, 
whose pride and luxury, injustice and idolatry, have 
exposed them to this instrument of the divine ven- 
geance. Violence is risen up into a rod of wicked- 
ness—Some render this, Violence is risen up against 
the rod of wickedness, and understand it of the vio- 
lent, impetuous Chaldean army rising up against the 
tribe of Judah, here called the rod of wickedness, 
to cut it down. 
Hebrew only expresses none of them, the words 
shall remain being supplied by our translators. 
Some versions read, None of them shall be free from 
evil. Neither shall there be wailing for them—The 
calamity shall be so general, families will be cut off 
so entirely, and they will be so stunned, as it were, 
with the greatness of their affliction, and so taken 
up in providjng for their own safety, that there will 
be no particular lamentation or wailing made for 
those who fall. 

Verses 12-15, Let not the buyer rejoice, &c.—The 
buyer will have no reason to rejoice, because he will 
not enjoy what he hath bought; nor the seller have 
cause to mourn for having been obliged to part with 
his possessions, of which the approaching desolation 
of the country and the captivity would otherwise 
have deprived him. For the seller shall not return 
to that which was sold, &e.—The year of jubilee 
shall be no advantage to the sellers; for though they 
should live till it come, yet they shall not enjoy the 
benefit of the law, (Lev. xxv. 13,) nor be restored 
again to their possessions, as the Chaldeans will have 
seized upon their Jands, who will pay no regard to 
the year of jubilee, with respect to restoring to every 
one his old inheritance. For the vision—Or the 
prophecy ; ; is touching the whole multitude—Is con- 
cerning the whole people; which shall not return— 


None of them shall remain—The | 


vision or prophecy, shall not return, namely, unful- 
filled; or, it shall not be void. Neither shall any 
strengthen himself in iniquity—Neither shall any 
one secure himself by acting wickedly. Or, “ And 
though they harden themselves in sin, and shut their 
eyes against the judgments which hang over their 
heads, these will at last unavoidably overtake them.” 
They have blown the trumpet—The house of Israel 
have summoned in all fit for arms: see Jer. vi. 1. 
But none goeth to the battle—There is not a man 
going to the war. For the people’s hearts fail them 
—Looking upon themselves as given up to destruc- 
tion. For my wrath is upon all the multitude 
thereof—That displeasure which takes away their 
courage. The sword is without—In the countries; 
and the pestilence and the famine within—The be- 
sieged city. He that isin the field—Whoever is in 
the field; shall die with the sword—Of the Chaldean 
soldiers. And he that is in the city—Whither he 
had fled for safety; famine and pestilence shall de- 
vour him—Shall eat him up. You, O Jews, shall 
be food for these insatiable destroyers. 

Verses 16-19. They that escape of them shall 
escape—This might be more intelligibly rendered, 
There are of them who shall escape; that is, 
“Some few shall have the favour of escaping the 
common calamity, called elsewhere the escaped, or 
the remnant, from whence is derived the phrase oz 
Lolouevor, in the New Testament, such as are, or 
should be, saved.” And shall be on the mountains 
like doves—Fearful and trembling, and bemoaning 
themselves on account of the calamities their sins 
have brought on them. All hands shall be feeble, 
&c.—Feebleness in the hands and knees is the con- 
sequence of the weakness and failing of the spirit. 
They shall also gird themselves with sackeloth—A 
general custom in the eastern countries in deep sor- 
rows and distresses. Horror shall cover them—Or, 
has overwhelmed them, as the same phrase is trans- 
lated Psa. lv..5. Shame shall be upon all Sfaces— 
The marks of confusion and misery shall be seen on 
all faces ; and baldness upon all their heads—Either 
by their pulling off their hair amidst their sorrows, 
or cutting it off in token of mourning: see note on 
Jer. xlviii. 37, They shall cast their silver in the 


Or, as Bishop Newtome reads it. Jt, that is, the || streets—Either that they may be ei” (a 
592 


Israel’s habitations shall 


CHAPTER VII. 


be given to the heathen. 


— 


A. M. 3410. 
B. C. 594. 


all knees shall }° be weak as water. 

18 They shall also * gird themselves with 
sackcloth, and ‘horror shall cover them; and 
shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness 
upon all their heads. 

19 They shall cast their silver in the streets, 
and their gold shall be removed: their * sil- 
ver and their gold shall not be able to deliver 
them in the day of the wrath of the Lorn: 
they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill 
their bowels: ™ because it is *the stumbling- 
block of their iniquity. 

20 “ As for the beauty of his ornament, he 
set it in majesty: but they made the images 
of their abominations and of their detestable 
things therein: therefore have I ' set it far 
from them. 


17 All * hands shall be feeble, and- 


21 And I will give it into the hands A. M. =i 

strangers for a prey, and to ———— 
e wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they 
all pollute it. 

22 My face will I turn also from them, and 
they shall pollute my secret place; for the 
‘tyobbers shall enter into it, and defile it. 

23 4 Make a chain: for * the land is full 
of bloody crimes, and the city is full of vio- 
lence. 

24 Wherefore I will bring the worst of the 
heathen, and they shall possess their houses: 
I will also make the pomp of the strong to 
cease, and their holy places shall be defiled. 

25 1 Destruction cometh; and they shall seek 
peace, and there shall be none. 

26 * Mischief shall come upon mischief, and 
rumour shall be upon rumour ; ” then shall they 


r Isaiah xiii. 7; Jer. vi. 24; Chap. xxi. 7. 
water. a ee. ti. 247s" xv. 2, 3: 
t Psalm lv. 5. 
& Prov. xi. 4; Zeph. i. 18. 
stumbling-block— Chap. xiv. 3, 4; xliv. 12. 


10 Heb, go into 
er. xlvili. 37; Amos viii. 10. 


to engage the enemy’s attention, and so to give them- 
selves time to escape out of the city. And their 
gold shall be removed—Carried away to Babylon. 


Their silver and their gold shall not deliver—Shall | 


not remove the distresses of the famine, or prevent 
their being carried into captivity. T'hey shall not 
satisfy their souls—Shiall not procure them food to 
satisfy their hunger, nor afford them any comfort. 
Because it is the stumbling-block of their iniquity— 
This silver and gold, which they valued too much, 
coveted immeasurably, abused to the purposes of 
pride, luxury, oppression, and idolatry; this that 
they stumbled at, and fell into sin, now they stumble 
at, and fall into the deepest misery. 

Verses 20-22. As for the beauty of his ornament 
—The temple and all that pertained to it, which was 
the beauty and glory of the Jewish nation, and ac- 


counted so by them; he set it in majesty—God | 


commanded that it should be a stately, beautiful, and 
magnificent structure; but they made the images of 


their abominations therein—Set up their idols in his | 
temple, and provoked him, their Maker and their) 


husband, with their-spiritual adulteries committed 
before his face; therefore have I set it far from 
them—I have parted between it and them, have re- 
moved them far from the temple: or, I have given 
it into the hands of the Gentiles to profane and pol- 
lute it: see the marginal reading, and verse 21. My 
face will I turn from them—Either from the Jews 
or from the Chaldeans, neither relieving the former 
nor restraining the latter. And they (the Chaldeans) 
shall pollute my secret place—My temple, and even 
the holy of holies. For the robbers shall enter into 
it—The Chaldean soldiers shall break open all doors, 
and rush forward, and enter there, where neither the 
Vou, If. ( 38 ) 


4 Hebrew, for a separation, or, uncleanness. | 
¥ P , OF, Uncted s. | 
12 Or, because their iniquity is their | 


y¥ Jer. vii. 30.—!8 Or, made it unto them an unclean thing. 
14Or, burglars. 72 Kings xxi. 16; Chapter ix. 9; xi. 6. 
15 Or, they shall inherit their holy places, 16 Heb. Cutting off. 
a Deut. xxxii. 23; Jer. iv. 20. Psalm Ixxiv.9; Lam. ii. 9; 
Chapter xx. ], 3. 


people, nor the Levites, nor the priests, except only 
the high-priest, were allowed to enter. 

Verses 23, 24. Make a chain—To foreshow the 
approaching captivity, when both king and people 
should be carried in chainsto Babylon. For the land 
is full of bloody crimes—The innocent blood that 
has been shed in it cries aloud for vengeance. See 
the margin. Wherefore Iwill bring the worst of 
the heathen—The most violent, proud, and bloody 
men, namely, the Chaldeans, who were at that time 
the great oppressors of the world, and a terror to all 
the countries round about them; and they shall 
possess their houses—Not only dwell in them, but by 
right of conquest account them their own, and as de- 
scending to their heirs after them. J will also make 
the pomp of the strong to cease—The excellence, 
magnificence, and glory of the mighty men shall be 
brought to nothing: Jerusalem itself, which they 
trust in, and think too well fortified by nature and 
art, and the divine presence, to be ever overthrown, 
shall be levelled with the ground. And their holy 
places—The temple and all its courts, shall be de- 
filed. God calls them their holy places, because, 
having been polluted by their idolatries, he no longer 
considered them as his. — 

Verses 25-27. Destruction cometh—Such as a 
provoked power makes when it cuts off all, root and 
branch. And they shall seek peace—By inquiring 
of the prophets; or rather, by suing to Nebuchad- 
nezzar, whom, after so many affronts, they will at- 
tempt to pacify. And there shall be none—No such 
thing can be obtained. Mischief shall come upon 
mischief—One calamity shall follow upon the neck 
of another. And rumour upon rumour—One piece 
of mournful intelligence after another, eye of 

593 


The glory of the Lord 


EZEKIEL. 


appears to the prophet. 


A. M. 341 


0. seek a vision of the prophet; but the 
B, C. 59 


* Jaw shall perish from the pri 
counsel from the ancients. 

27 The king shall mourn, and the 
shall be clothed with desolation, and the 


17 Hebrew, with their judgments. 


the enemies’ preparations, marches, successes, and 
cruelties, causing the hearts of the stoutest to sink 
within them. J'hen shall they seek a vision of the 
prophet—In this multiplied perplexity they will in- 
quire of the prophets, true or false, concerning the 
event of things; or will seek to them for some word 
of direction or comfort from God, as Zedekiah did, 
Jer. xxxiv. 18, &c. But the law shall perish from 
the priest, &c.—He shall have no words, either of 
advice or comfort, to speak to them. And counsel 
from the ancients—Nor shall their senators know 
what to advise. So great will be the confusion, 
trouble, and terror, that neither the pious nor the 
wise, whom they were wont to consult, and who 
used to give them counsel in all difficult cases, shall 
be able to advise any thing to the purpose in this great 


hands of the people of the land shall A. M. 3410. 
be troubled : I will do unto them after °° °°* 
their way, and according to their deserts will 
I judge them, ° and they shall know that I am 
the Lorn. 


© Verse 4, 


perplexity and distress. The king shall mourn— 
Zedekiah shall droop and despair. And the prince 
shall be clothed at h desolation—Every magistrate 
shall be seized with trouble and astonishment. And 
the hands of the “people shall be troubled—Hang 
down and melt away. There shall be a general 
consternation of all ranks and degrees of men. They 
that are in authority shall want presence of mind to 
give counsel and directions, and the inferiors shall 
have no heart to put any advice in execution. What 
can men contrive, or do for themselves, when God 
is departed from them? All must needs be in tears, 
all in trouble, when God comes to judge them ac- 
cording to their deserts, and so make them know, 


to their cost, that he is the Lord to whom vengeance 
belongeth. 


4 


CHAPTER VIIL 
God, having given Ezekiel a clear foresight of the miseries coming upon shea here gives hima clear insight tnto the 
2 ' 


people’s wickedness, by which he was provoked to bring those miseries upon t 
to show him the sins that were committed there, 1-4. There the prophet sees, (1,) 
(2,) The elders of Israel worshipping all manner of images 
(4,) The men worshipping the sun, 15, 16. 


of the altar, 5, 6. 
avomen weeping for Tammuz, 13, 14. 


m. takes him ina vision to Jerusalem, 


image of jealousy set at the gate 
cret chamber, 7-12. (3,) The 
d then appeals to the prophet, 


whether such a provoking people should have any pity shown them, and threatens nals to punish them, 17, 18. 


A. he 3411. 


ND it came to pass in the sixth 
ag pee Pe 


IES year, in the sixth month, in the 
fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house, 
and *the elders of Judah sat before me, 


that °the hand of the Lord Gop fell A, M. 3411. 
there upon me. * Kedlntad 

2 °'Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the 
appearance of fire: from the appearance of his 


a Chap. xiv.1; xx. 15; xxxill. 31. 


> Chap. i. 3; iii. 22——¢ Chap. i. 26, 27. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER. VII. 

Verse 1. And it came to pass in the sixth year— 
Namely, of Jehoiachin’s captivity. In the sixth 
month--The LXX. read, in the fifth month. As I 
sat in my house, and the elders of Judah—Men 
of note for their age or authority, or the chief of 
those who had been made captives with Jehoiachin, 
sat before me—Having come, probably,to inquire of 
the Lord concerning their present state of affairs, 
what the issue would be; or what would become of 
their brethren who remained in Judea and Jerusa- 
lem. It must be observed, “that in chap. iv. 4-6, the 
prophet is commanded to lie on his left side three 
hundred and ninety days, and on his right side forty 
days; to which must be added the seven days men- 
tioned chap. iii. 15. But the interval between this 
vision, and chap. i. 1, is only one year and two 
months, or four hundred and twenty days, reckon- 

594 , 


ing thirty days in a month. It would seem, there- 
fore, that this revelation was made to the prophet 
during his typical siege. ‘ But Vignoles, v. ii. 447, 
thinks, that the year was a lunar one, with an inter- 
calation of thirty days.—Secker. And, according to 
Michaelis, the Jews, and in general the people of 
Asia, were used to lunar years of three hundred and 
fifty-four days. Add to them two months, or fifty- 
nine days, and you have four hundred and thirteen 
days. A whole month was intercalated from time 
to time into the lunar year, tomake itagree with the 
harvest year. Add twenty-nine days, and you have 
four hundred and forty-two days.”—Newcome. — 
Verse 2. I beheld, and lo a likeness—Namely. 
of a man; the man whom he had seen upon the 
throne ; as the appearance of fire—This seems to 
have been the same appearance as ‘that | ationed 
before, chap. i. 27, signifying that God was about to 
( 38* ) —? 


rs a 


The prophet sees 


CHAPTER VIII. 


the image of jealuuay. 


4. M. 3411. loins even downward, fire ; and from 
Sees 

- ___— his loins even upward, as the a 
pearance of brightness, 4as the colour 
amber. 

3 And he °put forth the form of a hand, 
and took me by a lock of my head; and f the 
spirit lifted me up between the earth and the 
heaven, and * brought me in the visions of 
God to Jerusalem, to the door of the. inner 
gate that looketh toward rth ; > where 
was the seat of the image of jealousy, which 
' provoketh to Jealous 

4 And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel 
was there, according to the vision that I * saw 
in the plain. 


“| Then said ‘he unto me, Son of A. M. 3411. 
lift up thine eyes now the way es eee 
the north. So I lifted up mine eyes 
way toward the north, and behold north- 
ward at the gate of the altar this image of 
jealousy in the entry. 

6 He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, 
seest thou what they do? even the great 
abominations that the house of Israel commit- 
teth here, that I should go far off from my 
sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, and thou 
shalt see greater abominations. 

7 7 And he brought me to the door of the 
court; and when I looked, behold a hole in 
the wall. 


@ Chap. i. 4—* Daniel v. 5. —‘ Chap. iii. 14—— Chap. xi. 


Ae) ase 3 Pie 


b Jer. vii. 30; xxxii. 34; Chap. v. 11.—— Deut. xxxii. 16, 21. 
k Chap. i. 28; iii. 2, 23. 


inflict heavy judgments on the Jewish nation, butso 
as not entirely to destroy it. It is probable, while 
those who are here called the elders of Judah 
were sitting before the prophet with silence and at- 
tention, waiting for an answer to some inquiries they 
had made of him, as God’s prophet, concerning what 
was to be the future condition of the Jewish nation, 
that Ezekiel was on a sudden seized with an ecstasy, 
and had the things he gives an account of in the 
following verses presented before his eyes; or such 

a hon impression of them ma on his mind, 
that it seemed to him as if h@ actually saw them. 

* Verses 3-6. Andhe put b the form of a hand 
—He appeared so tosdo. , and all that follows, 
to the end of verse one in vision only, as 
appears from the expre ere used: and brought 
me in the visions of God, &c.—In a similar manner, 
it was represented to the Prophet Elisha’s mind, 
(2 Kings, v. 26,) what Gehazi was doing when he 
took the presents from Naaman, which the prophet 
there calls being present with Gehazi. To Jerusa- 
lem, to the door of the inner gate—To the entrance 
that goes into the inner court, called the court of the 
priests, where the altar of burnt-offerings stood ; 
where was the seat of the image of jealousy—“ An 
image set up within the precincts of the temple, to 
provoke God-to jealousy, by setting upa rival against 
him in the place dedicated to his own worship.” 
This was most probably an image of Baal, for that, 
we find, was the ido] they chiefly worshipped. As it 
was exceedingly provoking to God to set up another 
object of worship besides him; so it was still moreso 
to do this in the place which had been built for, and 
was dedicated to, his worship only. To speak inthe 
figurative sense in which God is spoken of, with re- 
gard to the Jewish nation, namely, as being a hus- 
band to it, it was just the same as if the adulterer 
were brought into the house of the husband whom 
he had injured, in his very sight; therefore it is 

very properly called here, the image of jealousy, or 

that exciteth jealousy. That I should go far off 
from my sanctuary—Which are provocations sufli- 
3 


cient to cause me to forsake my sanctuary, and de- 
liver it up to be profaned by the heathen, chap. vii. 
21, 22. This is significantly represented by the de- 
parting of the divine glory from the threshold of the 
temple, chap. x. 18. 

Verses 7-11. And he brought me to the door of the 
court—This, Dr. Lightfoot understands of the east 
gate of the inner court, called the gate of Nicanor, 
over which was the council chamber, where the san- 
hedrim used to meet, and in some of the rooms near 
it they secretly practised idolatry, as God discover- 
ed to the prophet, verse 11. Behold a hole in the 
wall—Through which I could look in, and see what 
abominations were committing there. T'hen he said, 
Dig now in the wall—This, and what follows, was 
done only by vision, during the prophet’s trance or 
ecstasy, while the elders sat before him. And when 
I had digged in the wall, behold a door—A private 
door, by which the elders entered into the cham- 
bers of their imagery, to perform idolatrous worship 
to the images. And he said unto me, Goin, &c.—To 
give me the fullest conviction, I not only looked 
through the hole, mentioned verse 7, but went into 
the very room where these idolatries were commit- 
ted. Behold the abominations that they do here-- 
Hebrew, are doing here: even under the approach 
of judgments, and under the walls of my temple. 
So I went in, and behold every form of creeping 
things—It is probable that they imitated the Egyp- 
tians in this kind of idolatry ; for the Egyptians used 
to worship several kinds of beasts and reptiles. Ac- 
cording to Diodorus Siculus, 1. i. p. 59, edit. Wess., 
(referred to by Secker,) “round the room in 
Thebes, where the body of King Osymanduas 
seemed to be buried, a multitude of chambers were 
built, which had elegant paintings of all the beasts 
sacred in Egypt.” It is not unlikely they imagined 
they evaded the law against setting up any image to 
worship, by having them only portrayed, or paint- 
ed, on the wall; or, at least, that it was not so great 
an offence; for the Jewish people in general seem 
to have had little regard to any thing but the strict 

595 


The various kinds of 


EZEKIEL. 


idolatry practised. 


A.M. 3411. 8 Then said he unto me, S 
pda man, dig now in the wall: and 
I had digged in the wall, behold a door. 

9 And he said unto me, Go in, and beh 
the wicked abominations that they do here. 

10 So I went in and saw; and behold every 
form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, 
and all the idols of the house of Israel, portray- 
ed upon the wall round about. 

11 And there stood before them seventy 
men of the ancients of the house of Israel, 
and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the 
son of Shaphan, with every man his censer 


1 Chap. 


in his hand; and a thick cloud of A. M.3411 

B.C. 593. 
cense went up. : = 
12 Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast 
hou seen what the ancients of the house of 
Israel do in the dark, every man in the cham- 
bers of his imagery ? for they say, |The Lorp 
seeth us not; the Lorp hath forsaken the 
earth. * 

13 4 He sai 
again, and th 
that they do. 

14 Then he brought me to the door of the 
gate of the Lorp’s house which was toward 


Iso unto me, Turn thee yet 
It see greater abominations 


ix, 9, 


letter of the law, not regarding the spirit of it. How- 
ever, as to objects for worship, pictures were prohi- 
bited, as well as carved images, as appears from 
Num. xxxiii. 52. And there stood before them seven- 
ty men of the ancients, &c.——-Heads of the tribes or 
families, or, at least, principal men, (according to the 
number of the sanhedrim,) who ought to have been 


examples of true religion, not ringleaders in idolatry. || 


By this the prophet was given to see, that it was not 
the vulgar, or the poor and ignorant only that were 
guilty of idolatry, but the leading men of the nation, 
and those of the greatest knowledge, power, and in- 
fluence, who were superior to, and had the direction 
of the common people ; so that it was properly a na- 
tional guilt, and, as such, loudiy called for national 
punishment. And in the midst of them stood Jaa- 
zaniah--Probably a prince of the people ; the sonof 
Shaphan—Mentioned 2 Kings xxii. 9. Shaphan 
was forward in reforming under Josiah, and his son 
is as forward in corrupting the worship of God. 
Verse 12. Hast thou seen what the ancients do in 


the dark—Do secretly ; every man in the chambers || 


of his imagery—Chambers so very private, that the 


prophet is described as obliged to dig a hole through || 


the wall before he could discover their idolatrous 
practices. For they say, The Lord seeth us not— 
They either deny the being and providence of God, 
(chap. ix. 9,) or they say in their hearts, God hath 
cast us off, and withdrawn his wonted protection 
from us. They seem to have been of the same mind 
with Ahaz, who resolved to worship the gods of the 
Syrians, his conquerors, 2 Chron. xxviii. 23. So 
these men worshipped the idols of their neighbours, 
whom they saw to be more prosperous than them- 
selves. Observe here, reader, a practical disbelief 
of God’s omniscience and superintending providence 
is one chief cause of men’s treacherous departures 
from him. The Lord hath forsaken the earth— 
Looks not after the affairs of it, and therefore we had 
as well worship any other god as him. Or, he hath 
forsaken our land, and left it to be a prey to its ene- 
mies, and therefore it is time for us to look out to 
some other god to whom to commit the protection 
ofit. This was a blasphemous reflection upon God, 
as if he had forsaken them first, otherwise they 
6 


would not have forsaken him. Those are indeed 
ripe for ruin who are arrived to such a pitch of im- 
pudence as to lay the blame of their sins on God 
himself. 

Verse 14. Then he brought me to the door which 
was toward the north—Dr. Lightfoot distinguishes 
| this door from that mentioned verse 5; this, he says, 
was the upper north gate, and that the lower; this 
| being just over against the temple itself; whereas 
that was opposite the altar. Behold, there sat wo- 
men weeping for Tammuz—“The prophet here 
_ refers toa Phoenician or Syrian superstition. Z'am- 
| muz was an idol.of Chaldee extraction, as is Plai 
from his name; whieh also is used forthe ten 
month, reckoning fr he autumnal equinox, thal, 
is, the month of Jun Tammuz, as the objen 
_of worship, expresses the s light in its perfec 
| tion, as in the summer . The Vulgate ren 
| ders Tammuz, by Adonis ; and that Adonis, accord- 
| ing to the physical theology of the heathen, was the 
| same as the sun, there is no question. Macrobius 

expressly affirms it, Saturnal., lib. i. eap. 21, and 

says, that the tradition of Adonis being killed by a 
boar, means the diminution of the sun’s light and 
heat by winter. This departure of Adonis, or the 
sun, was lamented in the most frantie ceremonies of 
grief by the Phenician and Assyrian women, who, 
on these occasions, used to prostitute themselves in 
honour of his vivifying power; and thus the Jewish 
women are described by our prophet, weeping for 
Tammuz, on the fifth day of the sixth month, that is, 
of August; at which time his death, by the winter 
boar, was drawing on apace. Tammuz was sup- 
posed to have been killed by a wild boar in mount 
Lebanon, whence flows the river Adonis, concern- 
ing which Lucian relates an opinion prevailing in 
these parts, that its stream, at certain seasons of the 
year, is of a bloody colour, which the heathen con- 
sidered as proceeding from a kind of sympathy in 
the river for his death: see Parkhurst and Uni. Hist., 
vol. i. p. 342, Milton has touched upon each of 
these particulars in the following elegant lines: — 

“ Tammuz came next behind, _ 
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured —— 
The Syrian damsels to lament hisfate, 

: 3 


a! 


The Jewish elders found 


CHAPTER VIII. 


3 


worshipping the rising sun, 


“A.M. 


3411. the north; and behold, there sat 
B, C. 593. 


women weeping for Tammuz. 
15 Then said he unto me, Hast thou see 


this, O son of man? turn thee yet again, and 


thou shalt see greater abominations than these. 
16 “4 And he brought me into the inner court 
of the Lorn’s house, and behold, at the door of 
the temple of the Lorn, "between the porch 
and the altar, "were about five and twenty 
men, ° with their backs tow e temple of 
the Lorn, and their faces toward the east; and 
they worshipped ? the sun toward the east. 


4] Then he said unto me, Hast A. M. 3411. 
een this, O son of man? 1JIs bet aks 
ight thing to the house of Judah that 
commit the abominations which they 
commit here? for they have ‘filled the land 
with violence, and have returned to provoke 
me to anger: and lo, they put the branch to 
their nose. 

18 * Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine 
‘eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: 
and though they ‘cry in mine ears with a loud 
voice, yet will I not hear them. 


m Joel ii. 17. 


2 Chap. xi. 1.——° Jeremiah ii. 27; xxxii. 33. 
P Deut. iv. 19; 2 Kings xxiii. 5, 11; Job xxxi. 26; Jer. xliv. 17. 
* Or, Ts there any thing lighter than to commit. 


4 Chap, ix. 9.—" Chap. v. 13; xvi. 42 ; xxiv. 13——s Chap. 
Vdigs Vite 4° 9's9ixh5, “10. t Prov. i. 28; Isa i. 153 Jer. xi. 
11; xiv, 12; Mic.iii.4; Zech. vii. 13. 


In am’rous ditties all a summer’s day, 
While smooth Adonis, from his native rock, 
Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood 
Of Tammuz, yearly wounded: the love-tale 
Infected Sion’s daughters with like heat, 
Whose wanton passions, in the sacred porch, 
Ezekiel saw, when by the vision led 

His eye survey’d the dark idolatries 

Of alienated Judah ————____.” 


ParapisE Lost, b. i. v. 446. 


Verses 15, 16. Turn thee yet again, and thou 
shalt see greater abominations—These latter wick- 
ednesses may be accounted greater,"because they 
were acted in a more sacred And he brought 
me into the inner court—T urt next the temple, 
namely, that of the priest d, behold, at the door 
of the temple—At thal ough which there was 
an entrance into the porelt of the temple, from the 
altar of burnt-sacrifices. Before, he saw the abomi- 
nations committed in the gates of the courts, now he 
is come to the very house itself. Were about Jive 
and twenty men with their backs toward the temple, 
&e.—In contempt of God and his worship they 
turned their backs toward his sanctuary, and their 
faces toward the sun; according to the custom of 
the Chaldeans, Persians, and other eastern nations 
who worshipped the sun. Lowth thinks Hezekiah 
might allude to some idolatrous practice of this kind, 
in that confession of his, recorded 2 Chron. xxix. 6, 
Our fathers have forsaken him, and turned away 
their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and 
turned their backs. They turned their back to God, 
and not the face, as Jeremiah expresses their con- 
tempt toward him, chap. ii. 27. To prevent even the 
appearance of this, the people were commanded to 
come into the courts of the temple at the north or 
southern gates when they came to worship, that 
they might not, at their return, turn their backs upon 
God: see chap. xlvi. 9. God ordered the holy of 
holies, in his temple, to be placed toward the west, 
in opposition to this species of heathen idolatry, 
which consisted in worshipping the rising sun. And 
the pious Jews always turned thei: faces toward the 
temple when they worshipped. . 

3 


e. 


; 


Verses 17, 18. Then he said—After the prophet 
had seen all, and had had time to consider all he 
saw, God appeals to him concerning the heinousness 
of their crimes. Js it a light thing to the house of 
Israel—Who know and profess better things, and 
are dignified with so many privileges above other 
nations? Is it excusable in them, who have God’s 
oracles and ordinances, that they commit the abomi- 
nations which they commit here?—Do they not de- 
serve to suffer who thus sin? Should~not such 
abominations as these make desolate? For they 
have filled the land with violence—All kinds of in- 
justice are here meant, toward all sorts of men, whom 
they first despised and then defrauded, oppressed, 
or destroyed. And it is not strange if they who 
wrong their Creator make no conscience of injuring 
their fellow-creatures, and with all that is sacred, 
trample also on all that is just. And this wickedness 
of their conduct toward each other would have made 
their worship an abomination, even if it had been 
paid to the true God: see Isa. i. 11, &e. And have 
returned to provoke me, &c.—After having filled the 
land with violence, they return to the temple to prac- 
tise their idolatries: from injustice against man they 
return to impiety against God, and thus, by fresh 
abominations, add new aggravations to their guilt. 
And lo, they put the branch to their nose—This ob- 
scure clause is supposed by several commentators to 
relate to some custom among the idolaters of dedi- 
cating a branch of laurel, or of some other tree, to 
the honour of the sun, and carrying it in their hands 
at the time of their worship. And Spencer, De leg. 
Heb., lib. iv. cap. 5, observes, “that the heathen, in 
the worship of their deities, held forth the branches 
of those trees which were dedicated to them:” a rite 
which was called among the Greeks, oayodopta, Ga2- 
Aodpra: that is, branch-bearing. And Lewis, in his 
Origines Hebrea, vol. iii. p. 4, observes, that the 
most reasonable exposition is, that the worshipper, 
with a wand in his hand, was wont to touch the idol, 
and then apply the stick to his nose and mouth, in 
token of worship and adoration. The Jewish rab- 
bins, however, reckon this among the texts which 
their wise men have corrected, and say the original 
reading was not ds, their nose, but ‘DN, my nose, 
’ 597 


The prophet is shown the 


EZEKIEL. 


destruction of Jerusalem, 


or face; according to which reading the sense wi 
be, They put a stick to my face, namely, to 
or exasperate me: or, taking 771 to mean he 
a branch, but, as Buxtorf renders it, odor malu 
tris, the words will mean, they put an offens 
smell to my nose, that is, they put an open affront 
upon me, namely, by turning their back to me in the 
place dedicated to my worship. And to this sense 
the LXX. interpret it, reading avtoe w¢ purypifovrec, 
they are as those that mock me, or publicly affront 
me. The Vulgate, however, reads the clause as we 


do. Dr. Lightfoot renders the place, They put the 
ranch to my wrath, or their wrath ; that is, “they 
dd more fuel to my wrath, which will burst out like 
a flame to consume them: just as if one should lay 
a heap of dry sticks upon a fire.” Therefore will I 
deal in fury, &c.—Hebrew, in anger, or wrath. 
Mine eye shall not spare—Their provocations are 
such, that my justice cannot be satisfied without 
bringing deserved punishment upon them; and 
though they cry, &c.—Their sins ery louder for ven 

geance than their prayers ery for mercy. 


CHAPTER IX. 


In a continuance of his vision, Ezekiel is here shown the destruction of Jerusalem for its wickedness. (1,) Instruments are 
prepared to destroy the city, 1,2. (2,) While the clowd of glory removes from off the ark in the holy of holies, to the 
threshold of the temple, those that mourned for the abominations committed in the city are ordered to be marked for preser- 
vation, 3,4. (3,) Orders are given for the execution of the rest, the slaughter of whom is immediately begun, 5-7. 
(4,) Ezekiel intercedes in vain for the mitigation of the sentence, 8-10. (5,) He who marked the mourners reports, that 


every thing was done according to order, 11. 


A. M. 3411. 


HE cried also in mine ears with a 
B. C. 593. 


loud voice, saying, Cause them 
that have charge over the city to draw near, 
even every man with his destroying weapon in 
his hand. 

2 And behold, six men came from the way 
of the higher gate, which lieth toward the 


north, and every man ?a slaughter- A. M. 3411. 
he B. C. 593. 
weapon in his hand; *and one man 
among them was clothed with linen, with a 
writer’s inkhorn *by his side: and they went 
in and stood beside the brazen altar. 
3 And °the glory of the God of Israel was 
gone up from the cherub whereupon he was, to 


1 Heb. which is turned. 2 Heb. a weapon of his breaking in 
pieces. a Lev. xvi. 4; Chap. x..2, 6,7; Rev, xv. 6. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 

Verses 1, 2. He cried also in mine ears—Namely, 
the man whom he had seen upon the throne; with 
a loud voice—This denoted the terribleness of the 
judgments which were going to be inflicted. Cause 
them that have charge, &c.—That is, says Lowth, 
“the angels who had the charge of executing God’s 
judgments upon the city.” Or it may be intended 
of the Chaldean army, or of its principal leaders, 
who had a charge or commission against Jerusalem, 
to avenge the divine justice of it, because of its hei- 
nous provocations. The passage is prophetical of 
the slaughter which should be made of its inha- 
bitants. And behold, &c.—No sooner was the com- 
mand given, than these ministers of God’s displea- 
sure appear ready to execute it. Sia men—In the 
vision they appeared as men, and the prophet terms 
them according to their appearance. From the way 
of the higher gate—See note on chap. viil. 14. 
Which lieth toward the north—The Babylonians 
made their inroads into Palestine, as has been more 
than once observed, from the north, and by this gate 
it seems, the Chaldeans first entered into the city. 
And every man a slaughter-weapon in his hand— 
Prepared for the work to which they were called. 
And one among them was clothed with linen—A gar- 
ment proper to the priesthood; and the habit in 

598 » 


3 Hebrew, upon his Vins oe, 23 iii. 23; viii. 45 x. 4, 18; 
23, 


which the angels often appeared, Dan. x. 5, and xii. 
6,7. This person, at least, seems to have been an 
angel, who had the charge given him of preserving 
those that were to be saved amidst the general de- 
struction; with a writer's inkhorn by his side—That 
he might set a mark on those who were to be pre- 
served amidst the general slaughter. Thus, Rev. vii. 
2, St. John in a vision saw an angel with the seal of 
the living God, and therewith the servants of God 
were sealed in their foreheads; “in allusion,” says 
Bishop Newton, “to the ancient custom of mark- 
ing servants in their foreheads, to distinguish what 
they were, and to whom they belonged.” The posi- 
tion of the inkhorn, by the side of this writer, may 
appear strange to a European reader, but according 
to Olearius, Dr. Shaw, and others, the custom of 
placing it by the side continues in the East to this 
day. And they went in and stood beside the brazen 
altar—To denote that the men ordained to destruc- 
tion were offered up as so many sacrifices to God’s 
justice. The destruction of the wicked is elsewhere 
expressed by the name of a sacrifice: see chap. 
xxxix. 17; Isa. xxix. 2,and xxxiv.6. ; 
Verses 3, 4. And the glory of God was gone to the 
threshold of the house—Namely, that glorious sym- 
bol of the divine presence which had been wont to 
appear between the cherubim upon a 
+ 


The penitent are marked, and 


—_—_— 


CHAPTER IX. 


the idolaters are slain. 


A.M. 3411. the threshold of the house. 


And he 
B.C. 593. 


called to the man clothed with linen, 
which had the writer’s inkhorn by his side ; 

4 And the Lorp said unto him, Go through 
the midst of the city, through the midst of 
Jerusalem, and ‘set °amark upon the fore- 
heads of the men ‘that sigh and that cry for 
all the abominations that be done in the midst 
thereof. 

5 % And to the others he said in ° my hear- 


4 Heb. mark a mark. 
xiii. 16,17; xx. 4. 
xii. 21; 2 Pet. ii. 8. 


© Exodus xii. 7; Rev. vii. 3; ix. 4; 
4 Psa. cxix. 53, 136; Jer. xiii. 17; 2 Cor. 
5 Heb. mine ears. 


Go ye after him through the Aspe opr 
nd smite: *let not your eye — ere 
either have ye pity: 
lay ° utterly old and young, both maids, 
and little children, and women: but £ come 
not near any man upon whom is the mark ; 
and "begin at my sanctuary. ‘Then they 
began at the ancient men which were before 
the house. 

7 And he said unto them, Defile the house, 


e Verse 10; Chap. v. 11——f 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17——® Heb. 
to destruction ——8 Rev. ix. 4.» Jer. xxv. 29; 1 Pet. iv. 17. 
i Chap. viii. 11, 12, 16, 


was departed out of that inner sanctuary to the 
threshold or door of the temple, to show that God 
would shortly forsake his house, and withdraw him- 
self from the Jews, because of their idolatries and 
other sins. The word cherub here stands for cheru- 
bim, as chap. x. 2. We must distinguish this appa- 
rition of the divine glory, which had its usual resi- 
dence in the temple, from that which was shown 
particularly to Ezekiel, chap. i, 26, and iii. 23. And 
he called to the man clothed with linen—He who sat 
on the throne, chap. i. 26, namely, the Son of God, 
gave his commands to the angel; and the Lord 
(Hebrew, Jehovah) said unto him, Go through the 
midst of the city—From the one end to the other, 
or rather through all parts of it; and set a mark, 
&ce.—To signify that distinction which God, by his 
providence, makes in times of common calamity be- 
tween some and others, Isa. xxvi. 20; Jer. xxxix. 16; 
Mal. iii. 18. For God in niMereatest wrath against 
his enemies has a reserve of mercies for his people. 
Upon the foreheads of the men that sigh—Namely, 
out of grief, or who mourn for the sins and miseries 
of others; andcry for all the abominations, &e.— 
Who dare openly bewail the abominations of this 
wicked city, and so bear their testimony against it. 
The Vulgate renders the clause, Et signa Thau 
super frontes virorum gementium, &c.; that is, 
“mark with the letter Thau the foreheads of the men 
who grieve, &c.” And it has been a long and pre- 
vailing opinion in the Christian Church, that the 
letter 7'hau was the mark here intended, namely, 
in the Samaritan character, supposed to have been 
used at that time by the Jews, and that the letter was 
written in the form of a cross, as St. Jerome attests 
in his commentary on the place. The prevalence 
of this opinion shows, at least, how early this use 
of the form of the cross prevailed in the Christian 
Church, which made way for the superstition and 
idolatry of the Papists in that particular. It is of 
more consequence to observe, that whatever this 
mark was, it was set upon the persons here described 
to signify that God owned them as his, and would 
spare and preserve them in the time of this general 
destruction. Observe, reader, a work of grace in 
the soul is to God a mark upon the forehead, which 
he will acknowledge as his mark, and by which he 
knows them that are his; and those who keep them- 
3 


selves pure in times of common iniquity, God will 
keep safe in times of common calamity. They that 
distinguish themselves shall be distinguished; they 
that ery for other men’s sins, shall not need to cry 
for their own afflictions; for they shall either be de- 
livered from them,or comforted under them. Observe 
again: God is more careful of his people than vin- 
dictive against his enemies ; for he orders the sealing 
of the mourners before the destruction of the rebels. 

Verses 5-7. T0 the others he said, Go ye after him 
and smite—That is, cut off and destroy all that are 
either guilty of, or accessory to the abominations of 
Jerusalem, and even all that do not sigh and cry for 


| them, or that are not affected with grief and sorrow 


on account of them. Let not your eyes spare—You 
must not save any whom God has doomed to destruc- 
tion. None needs to be more merciful than God is, 
and he had said, chap. viii. 18, My eye shall not 
spare, neither will I have pity. Take notice, reader, 
those that live in sin, and hate to be reformed, shall 
perish in sin, and deserve not to be pitied; for they 
might easily have prevented their ruin, but would 
not. Slay utterly old and young, &c.—Make no dis- 
tinction of age or sex. This was awfully fulfilled, 
partly by the sword of the Chaldeans, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 
17, and partly by famine and pestilence, each of 
which calamities swept away multitudes. And begin 
at my sanctuary—That sanctuary, the horrid profa- 
nation of which Ezekiel had seen, as is described in 
the former chapter ; they must begin there, because 
there the wickedness began which provoked God to 
send these judgments: the debaucheries of the 
priests were the poisoning of the springs from which 
all the corruption of the streams flowed. The wick- 
edness of the sanctuary was of all other the most 
offensive to God, and therefore there the slaughter 
must begin. #egin there to try if the people will 
take warning by the judgments of God upon their 
priests, and will repent and reform: begin there, that 
all the world may see and know that the Lord, whose 
name is Jehovah, is a jealous God, and hates sin 
most in those that are nearest to him, Indeed when 
judgments are abroad in the earth, they commonly 
begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. iv. 17, because such 
persons sin against greater light and clearer convic- 
tions, and abuse greater privileges than others. You 
only have I known, and therefore will I punish you, 
599 


Ezekiel intercedes in vain 


EZEKIEL. 


Sor the people of Israel. 


A.M. 3411. and fill the courts with the slain: 
cs eal go ye forth. And they went 

and slew in the city. E 

8 4 And it came to pass while they w 
slaying them, and I was left, that I * fell 
upon my face, and cried, and said, ' Ah Lord 
Gop! wilt thou destroy all the residue of 
Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon 
Jerusalem ? 

9 Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the 
house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, 


and ™ the land is 7 full of blood, and A. M. 3411. 
the city full of ® perverseness ; for they Som 
say, ®'The Lorn hath forsaken the earth, and 
° the Lorp seeth not. 

10 And as for me also, mine ? eye shall not 


spare, neither will 1 have pity, bu¢ 41 will re- 


compense their way upon their head. 

11 And behold, the man clothed with linen, 
which had the inkhorn by his side, ° reported 
the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast 
commanded me. 


' Chap. xi. 13, 
THeb, filled with. gia Or, 


k Num. xiv. 5; xvi. 4,22, 45; Josh. vii. 6. 
m2Kings xxi. 16; Chap. viii. i7. 
pai of judgment, 


» Chap. viii. 12.— Psa. x. 11; Isa, xxix. 15.—P Chapter 
v.11; vii. 45 viii. 18——a Chapter xi. 21.——® Heb. returned 
the word. 


Kars ili. 2, God’s temple is a sanctuary, a place 
of refuge and protection for penitent sinners, but not 
for any that go on still in their trespasses; neither 
the sacredness of the place, nor the eminence of any 
one’s office or station in it, will be their security. 
But come not near any man upon whom is the mark 
—Do not harm, nay, do not so much as threaten, or 
put in fear, any one of these. The sense is, I will so 
order it by my providence, that none whom I have 
designed for preservation. shall be destroyed, This 
prediction was remarkably fulfilled. Nebuchadnez- 
zar gave particular orders that Jeremiah should be 
protected, Baruch and Ebedmelech were secured, 
and it is likely others of Jeremiah’s friends for his 
sake; God had promised that it should go well with 
his remnant, and that they should be well treated, 
Jer. xv. 11; and we have reason to think that none 
of the mourning, praying remnant fell by the sword 
of the Chaldeans, but God found out some way or 
other to secure them all; as in the last destruction 
of Jerusalem by the Romans, the Christians were 
all secured in a city on the mountains, called Pella, 
and none of them perished with the unbelieving 
Jews. Then they began at the ancient men which 
were before the house—Namely, those who commit- 
ted idolatry in the several courts and apartments 
belonging to the temple; that is, they strictly observed 
the orders given them, and began at God’s sanctuary, 
as they were commanded, And he said, Defile the 
house, and fill the courts with slain—God, abhorring 
the temple, as having been polluted with idolatry, 
here not only declares that he will no longer own it 
for his place of residence, but delivers up both the 
inner and outward courts belonging to it to be pol- 
luted with blood and slaughter. Let us observe 
well, that if the servants of God’s house defile it 
with their sins, God will justly suffer its enemies to 
defile it with their acts of violence. If the ministers 
and members of God’s church pollute it with their 
errors and impieties, God will take away its wall of 
defence, and expose it to the ravages of persecutors. 
And they went forth and slew in the city—So it was 
represented to the prophet in his vision, which was 
still continued, as a prediction of what should shortly 
be done in reality. 

Verse 8, And while they were slaying, and I was 

600 


left—Having, as it is to be supposed, the mark of 
preservation set upon his forehead by the protecting 
angel. He seems to speak as if he thought he alone 
was preserved amidst the common destruction, al- 
though, certainly, all those who had a mark set upon 
them were preserved as well as he.’ J fell upon my 
face and cried, &c.—I appeared to myself in my 
vision to do so, namely, to fall down in a posture of 
supplication, to deprecate God’s anger, (see Num. 
xii. 5; and xvi. 4, 22, 45,) and to beseech him not to 
make an utter end of those small remains that were 
left of the Jewish nation, Jerusalem being almost 
the only place which was not in the enemy’s power. 

Verses 9,10. Then said he, The iniquity of the 
house of Israel, §c., is exceeding great—Here we 
have God’s denial of the prophet’s request for a miti- 
gation of the judgment, and the justification of him- 
self in that denial. Ist, Nothing could be said in 
extenuation of their guilt. God was as willing to 
show mercy as the prophet could desire, but here 
the case would not admit of it: it was such that 
mercy could not be granted without injuring justice ; 
and it was not fit that one attribute of God should be 
glorified at the expense of another. Their crimes 
were so flagrant, that to grant them a reprieve would 
be a connivance at their sins. The land is full of 
blood—Blood unjustly shed, which always cries for 
vengeance. And the city full of perverseness—All 
judgment was perverted; in judges, to injustice; in 
priests, to idolatry; in all, to skepticism, or atheism. 
For they say, The Lord hath forsaken the earth— 
And hath left us to do what we will in it, and what- 
ever wrong we do, he either knows it not, or will 
not take cognizance of it. Now how can those ex- 
pect benefit from the mercy of God who thus bid 
defiance to his justice? Therefore, 2d, Nothing can 
be done to mitigate the sentence. Mine eye shall 
not spare, &c.—I have borne with them as long as 
it was fit such impudent sinners should be borne 
with, and therefore J will now recompense their way 
on their head. 

Verse.1l. And the man clothed with linen reported 
the matter—Gave an account of what he had done 
in pursuance of his commission; he had found out 
all that mourned in secret for the sins of the land, 
and cried out against them by a public testimony, 


The glory of the Lord 


CHAPTER X. 


appears to the prophet. 


and he had marked them in order to their preserva- || had made, but he who was appointed to protect re- 


tion. Lord, I have done as thou hast commanded 
me—We do not find that those who were commis: 
sioned to destroy reported what destruction the 


rted his matter; for it would be more pleasing, 
to God and the prophet, to hear of those that 
re saved than of those that perished. : 


CHAPTER X. 


The prophet having informed us, chap. viii. 5, that when he was in vision at Jerusalem, he saw the same appearance of the 
glory of God there, which he had seen by the river Chebar, he now, in this chapter, gives us some account of the appear- 
ance there, as far as was needful for placing in a clear point of view two further indications of the approaching destrue- 
tion of Jerusalem, which God here gave him: namely, (1,) The scattering of coals of fire upon the city, taken from between 
the cherubim, 1-7. (2,) The removal of the glory of God from the temple, and its being upon the wing to be gone, 8-22. 


A. uM ail. THEN I looked, and behold, in the 

eee * firmament that was above the 
head of the cherubims there appeared over 
them as it were a sapphire-stone, as the appear- 
ance of the likeness of a throne. 

2 » And he spake unto the man clothed with 
linen, and said, Go in between the wheels, even 
under the cherub, and fill ‘thy hand with 
* coals of fire from between the cherubims, and 
4 scatter them over the city. And he went in 
in my sight. 

3 Now the cherubims stood on the right side 
of the house, when the man went in; and the 
cloud filled the inner court. 

4 °Then the glory of the Lorp * went up 
from the cherub, and stood over the threshold 


* Chap. i. 22, 26——» Chap. ix. 2, 3.——! Heb. the hollow of 
hy hand. Chapter i. 13.——4 Rev. viii. 5—® Verse 18; 
Chap. i. 28; ix. 3. 


of the house; and ‘the house was A. M. 3411. 
filled with the cloud, and the court isha 
was full of the brightness of the Lorn’s glory. 

5 And the * sound of the cherubims’ wings 
was heard even to the outer court, as "the 
voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh. 

6 And it came to pass, that when he had 
commanded the man clothed with linen, say- 
ing, Take fire from between the wheels, from 
between the cherubims; then he went in, and 
stood beside the wheels. ; 

7 And one cherub ‘stretched forth his hand 
from between the cherubims unto the fire that 
was between the cherubims, and took ¢hereof, 
and put if into the hands of him that was 
clothed with linen : who took 7¢, and went out. 


2 Hebrew, was lifted wp.—! | Kings viii. 10, 11; Chapter 
xliii. 5. & Chapter i. 24.—— Psalm xxix. 3, &e. ° Heb, 
sent forth. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X. 

Verses 1-3. Then I looked, &c.—Most of this 
chapter has been explained in the notes on chap. i. Jn 
the firmament, &c.—See chap.i.26. The repetition 
of the vision here signified that the heavy and terri- 
ble judgments of God were drawing nearer and 
nearer. /7Je—That sat on the throne; spake unto 
the man clothed in linen—To the angel, as before, 
chap. ix. 2; and said, Go in between the wheels, un- 
der the cherub—Or, between the cherubim, accord- 
ing to the explication given verse 7. And fill thy 
hand with coals of fire—Which sparkled and ran up 
and down between the living creatures: see chap. 


i. 13. This part of the vision signified that the city 
would shortly be consumed by fire. Coals of fire 
do elsewhere denote -the divine vengeance. Now| 
the cherubim—Which were part of the vision shown | 
to the prophet; stood on the right side of the house | 
—In the inner court, on the north side of the temple, | 
verse 18; namely, the court of the priests. And the 


cloud filled the court—A splendour, or brightness, 


the clouds, the storms of calamity which would fol- 
low it. : 
Verses 4-7. Then the glory of the Lord went up 
from the cherub—In token of bis departure from 
the temple. The words may be better rendered, 
For the glory of the Lord had gone up, &c. For the 
prophet repeats here what he had related before, 
chap. ix.3. And the house was filled with the cloud 
—The account here given must strike every reader 
as to its similarity with the description given of the 
Shechinah in the books of Mose’ and the first book 
of Kings. A bright cloud was the sign of God’s pre- 
sence, which first filled the tabernacle, Exod. xl. 35, 
(afterward the temple, 1 Kings viii. 10,) where it fixed 
itself upon the mercy-seat, Lev. xvi. 2. From 
whence God is said, so often in Scripture, to dwell 
between the cherubim. This glory now removed 
from the place where it used to appear in the inner 
sanctuary, and came down toward the porch of the 
temple, and stood, or fixed itself, partly in the tem- 
ple and partly in the inner court adjoining to it: see 


went before, and a cloud followed it. The splen- || note on chap. ix. 3. The glory stood, to show God’s 
dour signified the clearness of the judgment; and || unwillingness to leave his people, and give them 
601 


The removal of God’s glory 


EZEKIEL. 


from thie temple. 


A. M. 3411. 


8 And there appeared in the 
B. C. 593. 


cherubims the form of a man’s hand 
under their wings. 

9 *And when [I looked, behold the four wheels 
by the cherubims, one wheel by one cherub, 
and another wheel by another cherub: and the 
appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a 
' beryl-stone. 

10 And as for their appearances, they four 
had one likeness, as if a wheel liad been in the 
midst of a wheel. 

11 ™ When they went, they went upon their 
four sides; they turned not as they went, but 
to the place whither the head looked they fol- 
lowed it; they turned not as they went. 

12 And their whole * body, and their backs, 
and their hands, and their wings, and ™the 
wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the 
wheels that they four had. 

13 As for the wheels, ° it was cried unto them 
in my hearing, O wheel! 


14 ° And every one had four faces? A. Be hehe 
he first face was the face of a cherub, ae 
nd the second face was the face of a man, 
and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth 
the face of an eagle. 

15 And the cherubims were lifted up. This 
is ? the living creature that I saw by the river 
of Chebar. 

16 4 And when the cherubims went, the wheels 
went by them: and when the cherubims lifted 
up their wings to mount up from the earth, the 
same wheels also turned not from beside them. 

17 * When they stood, these stood ; and when 
they were lifted up, these lifted up themselves 
also; for the spirit ° of the living creature was 
in them. 

18 Then ‘the glory of the Lord * departed 
from off the threshold of the house, and stood 
over the cherubims. 

19 And "the cherubims lifted up their wings, 
and mounted up from the earth in my sight: 


iChapter i. 8; Verse 21. k Chap. i. 15.——! Chap. i. 16. 
m Chapter 1. 17,——* Heb. flesh. 4 Chap. i. 18. 5 Or, they 
were called in my hearing, wheel, or, galgal. 


time to return to him, and placed itself where it 
might be seen, both by priests and people, that both 
might be moved to repentance. And the sound of 
the cherubims’ wings, as the voice of the Almighty— 
As the sound of loud thunder. ‘The cherubim, in 
the prophet’s vision, seem to have moved to attend 
upon the Shechinah, which now had taken its station 
at the threshold of the ‘house. He went and stood 
beside, rather, belween, the wheels. 

Verses 8-13. There appeared in the cherubim the 
form of a man’s hand—See chap. i.8. The follow- 
ing verses to the 12th are the same, in substance, 
with chap. i. 16-18, where see the. notes. To the 
place where the head looked they followed, verse 11. 
Each wheel consisted of four semicircles in corre- 
spondence to the heads of each animal. [t was cried 
unto them, O wheel—Or, move round, as some ren- 
der the word. They were put in mind of continually 
attending upon their duty ; for the wheels and living 
creatures were animated with the same principle of 
understanding and motion. 

Verse 14. And every one had four ‘faces—See 
notes on chap. i. 6-10. The first had the face of 
a cherub—That is, of an ox, as appears by compar- 
ing this verse with chap. i. 10. The word cherub, 
indeed, originally signifies anox. The several faces 
are here represented in a different order from the 
description given of them chap. i. 10, of which dif- 
ference this reason may be assigned. In the first 
chapter the prophet saw this vision coming out of 
the north, and advancing southward, (verse 4,) 
where the face of a man, being placed on the south 
side, was first in view. The lion, being on the east 

602 


° Chap. i. 6, 10,——P Chap. i. 5——9 Chap. i. 19.——* Chap. 
i. 12, 20, 21. aA Or, of life——* Verse 4.——t Hosea ix. 12. 
4 Chap. xi. 22. . 


part, was toward his right hand; the ox, being placed 


toward the west, was on his left; and the eagle was 
toward the north. This interpretation is justified 
from the situation of the standards of the several 
tribes of Israel in the wilderness, (Num. ii. 2, 10, 18, 
25,) where Judah, whose standard was a lion, was 
placed on the east side; Reuben, whose standard 
was a man, was placed on the south; Ephraim, 
whose standard was an ox, was placed on the 
west; and Dan, whose standard was an eagle, was 
placed on the north side. Here the prophet is sup- 
posed to stand westward of the Shechinah, as that 
was moving eastward: so the ox was first in his 
view. 

Verses 15-17. And the cherubims were lifted up— 
To attend upon the divine glory wherever it went, 
and particularly at its removal from the temple. 
This is the living creature, &c.—Here it is spoken 
of as only one living creature, though before it is 
called the living creatures ; because it was, as it 
were, but one creature, of the likeness of four dif- 
ferent animals. 
was in them—There is a perfect harmony between 
second causes in their dependance on, and subjec- 
tion to, the one infinite, wise, good, holy, and just 
God. The Spirit of God directs all: the creatures, 
upper and lower, so that they all serve the divine 
purpose. Events are not determined by the wheel 
of fortune, which is blind, but by the wheels of pro- 
vidence, which are full of eyes. 

Verses 18, 19. Then the glory of the Lord de- 
parted from off the threshold, &c.—The cloud of 


glory, emblematical of the divine lees: aed 


ae. © 


For the spirit of the living creature - 


e 
Ezekiel prophesies against 


CHAPTER XI. 


the elders of Israel. 


! 


* M. 3411. when they went out, the wheels also 
, were beside them, and every one} 
stood at the door of the east gate of the Lorp’s 
house; and the glory of the God of Israel was 
over them above. 

20 * This is the living creature that I saw 
under the God of Israel ¥ by the river of Che- 
bar ; and I knew that they were the cherubims. 


x Chap. i. 22; Ver. 15.——Y Chap. i. 1——* Ch. i. 6; Ver. 14. 


21 * Every one had four faces apiece, Are ih 
and every one four wings; *and the ——__— 
ikeness of the hands of a man was under their 
wings. 

22 And the likeness of their faces was the 
same faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, 
their appearances and themselves: *they went 


every one straight forward. 


a Chap. i. 8; Verse 8.——» Chap. i. 10.——¢ Chap. 1. 12. 


makes a further remove from the temple: it now 
quite left the house itself, and settled upon the che- 
rubim, which stood in the court adjoining to it, ver. 3. 
And the cherubims lifted up their wings: the wheels 
also—See chap. i. 19, 26. And stood at the door of 
the east gate—This was a still further remove from 
the temple, (for the east gate was just at the entrance 
into the inner court before the temple,) to signify 
that the divine protection would entirely leave the 
house; and, God departing, the angels depart also, 


and withdraw that benefit and service which they 
gave before. Here, however, the glory of God, the 
cherubim, and the wheels, all stood, respiting execu- 
tion, and giving opportunity of preventing the ap- 
proaching misery. 

Verse 20. This is the living creature, &ce.—See 
chap. i. 22-26. And Iknew that they were the cheru- 
bims—KHither by special assurance as a prophet, or 
from reading and hearing about those that were re- 
presented in the holy of holies. 


CHAPTER XI. 


This chapter concludes the vision which Ezekiel saw at Jerusalem, and relates two messages which he received: (1,) A 


message of wrath against those who remained secure at Jerusalem, 1-13. 
(3,) The glory of God removes farther, 22, 23. 


tives at Babylon, 14-21. 
gives an account, 24, 25. 


M. 3411. Jf OREOVER, “the spirit lifted me 
aN up, and brought me unto ° the 
east gate of the Lorp’s house, which looketh 
eastward: and behold ° at the door of the gate 
five and twenty men; among whom I saw 
Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the 
son of Benaiah, princes of the people. 


A. 
B. 


& Chapter iii. 12, 14; viii. 3; Verse 24.——» Chapter x. 19. 
¢ Chapter viii. 16. 


(2,) A message of comfort to the dejected cap- 
(4,) The vision disappears, of which Ezekiel 


2 Then said he unto me, Son of A. M. 3411. 
man, these are the men that de- ———— ti 
vise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this 
city: 

3 Which say, } Zt is not ‘near; let us build 
houses: ° this city is the caldron, and we be 
the flesh. 


—! 


1 Or, It isnot for us to build houses near. 4 Chap. xii. 22, 27; 
2 Peter iii. 4. e Jer. i. 13; Chapter xxiv. 3, &e. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI. 

Verses 1-3. Moreover the spirit lifted me up—It 
seems it should rather have been rendered, And the 
spirit had lifted me up, for here he appears to go 
back to speak about those twenty-five men of whom 
he made mention chap. vii. 16, but had broken off 
from speaking of them to speak of things of greater 
importance; but he now returns to them again. 
And brought me unto the east gate—Caused me to 
see those parts in my vision just as if I had been 
there. And behold at the door five and twenty men 
—The same who are represented in chap. viii. 16, 
as worshipping the sun. They were princes of the | 
people—That is, most probably, members of the | 
great sanhedrim: compare Jer. xxvi. 10. Among) 
whom I saw Pelatiah, &c.—Named here for that 
dreadful, sudden death, whereby he became a warn- | 

3 


ing to others. T'hen said he unto me—Namely, 
the divine appearance which was before my eyes. 
These are the men that give wicked counsel—They 
probably advised and encouraged the people to use 
the Chaldean rites of worship, in order to please and 
gain the favour of that nation. Or, they persuaded 
the Jews that they had no reason to fear future 
trouble or mischief from the Chaldeans, and there- 
fore rendered them secure in their sins. Which say, 


It is not near—The threatened danger and ruin by 


the Chaldeans. These were such as put the evil 
day far from them, as is said Am. vi. 3, and so went 
on securely in building houses, and making such 
like improvements. "his city is the caldron, and 
we be the flesh—Jeremiah had foretold the destrue- 
tion of Jerusalem under the figure of a seething-pot, 
or caldron, Jer. i. 13. And Ezekiel himself uses 
603 


Proophecy against the 


EZEKIEL. 


Israelitish elders. 


A.M.3411. 4 Therefore prophesy against them, 
.B. C. 593. 
— prophesy, O son of man. 

5 And ‘the Spirit of the Lorn fell upon me, 
and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the 
Lorp; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel : 
for I know the things that come into your mind, 
every one of them. 

6 & Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, 
and ye have filled the streets thereof with the 
slain. 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop: Your 
slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they 
are the flesh, and this city is the caldron: + but 
I will pane you forth out of the midst of it. 


8 Ye have feared the sword; and se 
I will bring a sword upon you, ai = 
the Lord cgi: 

9 And I will bring you out of the midst 
thereof, and deliver you into the hands of 
strangers, and * will execute judgments among 
you. 

10 "Ye shall fall by the sword; I will j 
you in ™the border of Israel ; ay 
know that I am the Lorp. ; 

11 ° This city shall not be you 
neither shall ye be the flesh i 
thereof; but I will judge you bs 


Isr. ael: 4) 


f Chap. ii. 2 ; iii, 24,——# Chap. vil. 23 ; xxii. 3, 4} Chap, 
xxiv. 3, 6, 10, 11; Micah iii, 3—i Verse 9,— Chapter 
v8, 


the same metaphor, chap. xxiv. 3,4, &c. So these 
scoffers made use of the same expression on purpose 
to deride the menaces of the prophets;_as if they 
had said, If this city be a caldron, we are well con- 
tent to be the flesh that is boiled in it. “We will 
share all fates with her, we will either be preserved 
or perish with her.” So Michaelis, who thinks the 
words are a proverb. 

Verses 4, 5. Therefore prophesy against them— 
Declare to them how different things shall happen 
to them from what they expect. And the Spirit of 
the Lord fell upon me—See note on chap. iii. 24. 
And said unto me, Speak ; Thus have ye said—Ye 
have advanced the assertion, mentioned verse 3. 
“You have rightly said what you say: the city is 
the caldron, and we are the flesh, shall be fulfilled, 
but not as you understand it. Many of you will 
perish in the city. For those it will be the caldron, 
and they will be flesh boiled in it. But yourselves 
shall not be the flesh in the caldron: but you shall 
be taken out and elsewhere cut in pieces,’?—Mi- 
chaelis in Newcome. For J know the things that 
come into your mind—Here God declares that, how- 
ever much these men thought, and said in their 
hearts, The Lord seeth us not, yet still he not only 
saw them, but knew the things that came into their 
mind, every one of them, and took particular notice 
of that vain confidence with which they supported 
themselves, and endeavoured to put a good face upon 
a matter which they could n t know to be bad. 
Remember, reader, God p y knows not only 
the things that come out of our mouths, but the 
things that come into our minds; not only all we 
say, but all we think; even those thoughts which 
are most suddenly darted into our minds, and as 
suddenly slip out of them again, are perfectly known 
and narrowly observed by God: he knows us infi- 
nitely better than we know ourselves; he under- 
stands us afar off : the consideration whereof should 
oblige us to keep our hearts with all diligence, that 
no vain thoughts may come into them, or lodge 
~within them. 

604 


| flesh cut for the caldron. 
ly be called the caldron, into which the:> flesh has 


12 Kings xxv. 19, 20, 21 ; 
viii. 65; 2 Kings xiv. 25. 
14, 21, 23. © Verse 3. 


Jer. xxxix. 6 >: 


. 10.—™1 Kings 
» Psa. ix. 1657 


hap. vi. 7; xiii. 9, 


Verses 6, 7. Ye have multipli i 
city—Ye have, without law or j 


your slain in this 
ice, shed the blood 
of many in your streets. From this, and many 
other expressions in the Scripture, we may conclude 
that not only private murders were extremely fre- 
quent among them, but that they also frequently 
put to death, under colour of justice, those who were 
innocent of every crime deserving of death, but 
whom, for some wicked purposes, they wanted to be 
removed out of the way. And ye have filled the 
streets thereof with the slain—You have not only 
committed many murders yourselves, but you are 
accountable to God for all those whom the Chaldeans 
have slain, seeing you persuaded your people thus 
obstinately to stand out. Your slain, they are the 
fiesh, &c.—You yourselves, therefore, have made 
your city, as it were, a caldron, by the murdered 
bodies with which you have filled the streets of it; 
many of them cut in pieces, so that they seem like 
And this city may proper- 


been thrown. But I will bring you forth out of the 
midst of it—Not in mercy, but in wrath, by the 
conquering hand of the king of Babylon. You 


shall not die there, but I will reserve you for another 


punishment: see verses 9, 11. 
Verses 8-11. Ye have feared the sword—Of the 


Chaldeans; and have, to avoid it, courted them, and 


left my worship to follow their idolatrous rites: but 
this very sword will I bring upon you. And I will 
deliver you into the hands of strangers—Defeating 
all your projects for escape; and I will eaecute 
judgments among you—By the hands of the Chal- 
deans, whom I will make the instruments of my 
just vengeance. J will judge you in the border of 
Israel—Namely, in Riblah, just upon the borders of 
Judea. In this place the king of Babylon, who is 
here spoken of as God’s representative, sat in judg- 
ment on all the princes of Judah, and slew them: 
see the margin. T'his city shall not be your cal- 
dron—The place of your sufferings; greater are re- 
served for you elsewhere. me 


¥ 
a 


- 


“i 


A message of comfort 


CHAPTER XI. 


to the capuves at Babylon. 


A. M. 3411. 
B. 


12 And ? ye shall know that I am 
C. 593 


— the Lorn: ?for ye have not walked 
in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, 
but “have done after the manners of the hea- 
then that are round about you. 

13 “| And it came to pass, when I prophe- 
sied, that *Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. 
Then ‘fell I down upon my face, and cried 
with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord Gop! 
wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of 
Israel ? 

14 4 Again the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

15 Son of man, thy brethren, even thy bre- 
thren, the men of thy kindred, and all the 


P Verse 10. 2 Or, which have not walked. 9 Ley. xviii. 3, 
24, &c.; Deut. xii. 30,31; Chap. viii. 10, 14, 16. 


house of Israel wholly, are they unto A. M, 3411. 
whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem * % °%* 
have said, Get you far from the Lorp: unto 
us is this land given in possession. 

16 Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 
Although I have cast them far off among the 
heathen, and although I have scattered them 
among the countries, * yet will I be to them as 
a little sanctuary in the countries where they 
shall come. 

17 Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord Gop; 
“I will even gather you from the people, and 
assemble you out of the countries where ye 
have been scattered, and I will give you the 
land of Israel. 


rVer.1; Acts v. 5. 
vill. 14. 


S Ch. ix. 8. t Psa. xc. 1; xci. 9; Isa. 
4 Jer. xxiv.5; Ch. xxviii. 25; xxxiv. 13; xxxvi. 24. 


Verse 13. And when I prophesied, Pelatiah died 
—Mentioned verse 1, a principal man among the 
twenty-five princes, who made all the mischief in 
Jerusalem: see note on verse 2. It seems this was 
done only in vision now, (as the slaying of the an- 
cient men, chap. ix. 6,) but it was an assurance, that 
when this prophecy was published it would be done 
in fact. And the death of Pelatiah was a pledge of 
the complete accomplishment of the prophecy. 
Then fell I down upon my face, and cried—The 
prophet thought this an earnest of the common de- 
struction which was coming upon all the inhabitants 
of the city, and thereupon he earnestly deprecated 
so severe a judgment. See chap. ix. 8. 

Verses 14, 15. Again the word of the Lord came 
unto me——A seasonable word, to stop the mouths of 
the insulting Jerusalemites, and to encourage the 
captives at Babylon. Son of man, thy brethren—- 
The men of thy kindred, or, of thy redemption, as 
yn>xi may be rendered: that is, thy fellow-captives, 
as Bishop Newcome reads it; wnto whom the in- 
habitants of Jerusalem have said, Get ye far from 
the Lord, &c.--The Jews who were left in Judea 
thought themselves more the favourites of God than 
those who had been carried away captives, looking 
upon the latter as outcasts, and such as had no right, 
either to the privileges of Jews or to the land of Judea. 
The words, m7 52 1pN, rendered, Get you far 
from the Lord, may be translated, They have de- 
parted far from the Lord, that is, they have more 
grievously sinned and offended God than we. So 
thought and so said the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 
concerning those who had been carried into cap- 
tivity. Unto us is this land given in possession— 
This promised, holy land, where our fathers dwelt, 
is exclusively ours, and we shall never be put out 
of possession of it, but it shall always be our in- 
heritance. 

Verse 16. Therefore say—-In vindication of the 
captives; Although I have cast them far off—Not 
from myself, but from you and your polluted land, 

3 


and out of the way of the dreadful judgments which 
are approaching; among the heathen—The Chal- 
deans, or those among whom the Chaldeans have 
placed them; and have scattered them among the 
countries--Have separated them from each other, 
and dispersed them in many countries; yet will J 
be to them as a little sanctuary—A sanctuary, or a 
refuge and protection “for a short time,” (so Bishop 
Newcome,) that is, during the seventy years’ cap- 
tivity; ora little one in opposition to the great tem- 
ple at Jerusalem; which, when its inhabitants were 
in the greatest need, should afford them the least 
help. But I, says God, will really be to my cap- 
tives what the proud, self-deceiving Jews promise 
themselves from their temple, namely, their de- 
fence, support, and comfort. To me shall they flee, 
and in me shall they be safe, as he was that took 
hold on the horns of the altar. Or rather, they 
shall have such communion with me in the land of 
their captivity, as it was thought could be had no- 
where but in the temple. They shall have the 
tokens of my presence with them, and my grace in 
their hearts shall sanctify their prayers and praises, 
as truly as ever the altar at the temple sanctified the 
gift. Observe, reader, they that are deprived of 
the benefit of public ordinances, if it be not their 
own fault, may have the want of them abundantly 
supplied in the immediate communications of divine 
grace and comforts. 

Verses 17-20. I will even gather you from the 
people—This might be, in some degree, fulfilled in 
those that returned from captivity, but the perfect 
completion of this promise must be referred to the 
time of the expected general restoration of the Jew- 
ish nation. And they shall come thither—They who 
assemble upon Cyrus’s proclamation first, and they 
who afterward assemble upon Darius’s, shall over- 
come all difficulties, perform their journey, and come 
safely to theirown land. And they shall take away 
all the detestable things thereof—Shall abolish su- 
perstition and idolatry from the temple, the city, 

605 


Removal of 


EZEKIEL. 


the cherubim. 


A. M. 3411, 


18 And they shall come thither, and 
B. C. 593. 


*they shall take away all the detest- 
able things thereof, and all the Shona 
thereof from thence. 

19 And ¥I will give them one heart, and I 
will put 7a new spirit within you; and I will 
take *the stony heart out of their flesh, and will 
give them a heart of flesh : 

. 20 > That they may walk in my statutes, and 
keep mine ordinances, and do them: ° and 


they shall be my people, and I will 4. Spent se 
be their God. ——_—_. 
21 But as for them whose heart walketh 
after the heart of their detestable things and 
their abominations, 4J will recompense theix 
way upon their own heads, saith the Lord Gon. 
22 4 Then did the cherubims ° lift up their 
wings, and the wheels beside them; and the 
glory of the God of Israel was over them above. 
23 And ‘the glory of the Lorp went up 


* Chap. xxxvil. 23.——¥ Jer. xxxii. 39; Chap. xxxvi. 26, 27 ; 
Zeph. i. 9. z Psa. li. 10; Jer. xxxi. "33; xxxii. 39; Chap. 
xvill. 31. a Zech. vii. 12. 


> Psalm cv, 45. ¢ Jer. xxiv. 7; Chap. xiv. 11; ; XXXVi. 28; 
XXxvii, 27,_—4 ia # ix. 10; xxii. 31, © Chap. i. 19; x. 19. 
£ Chap. vill. 4; ix. 3; x. 4,18; xliii. 4. 


and the country, and shall live pure from all the 
pollutions with which the land had been formerly 
defiled. But this promise also ultimately respects 
the future conversion of the Jews,.as do those con- 
tained in the next two verses. And I will give 
them one heart—A heart entire for me, the living 
and true God, and not divided, as their hearts were 
formerly, among many gods; a heart firmly fixed 
and resolved for my worship and service, and not 
wavering; steady and uniform, and not inconstant, 
and inconsistent with itself. And hence they shall 
serve me with one consent, Zeph. iii.9. And I will 
put a new spirit within them—A disposition of mind 
agreeable to the new circumstances into which, in 
the course of my providence, I will bring them. 
Observe, reader, all that are regenerated have a new 
spirit: a spirit entirely changed from what it was 
before: they act from new principles, walk by new 
rules, and aim at new ends. A new name, a new 
profession, new opinions, or new modes of worship 
will not serve without anew spirit. If any man be 
in Christ he is a new creature: see the margin. 
And I will take away the stony heart out of their 
jiesh—Out of. their corrupt nature. Their hearts 
shall no longer be dead and dry, hard and unfeeling, 
but tender and apt to receive good impressions, and 
deeply sensible of, and affected with, things spiritual 
and divine. These are the same evangelical pro- 
mises as we read in the other prophets, particularly 
Jer. xxxii. 39. “ The insensibility of men, with 
regard to religious matters, is often ascribed to the 
hardness of their hearts. God promises here to give 
them teachable dispositions, and to take away the 
veil from their hearts, as St. Paul expresses it, 2 Cor. 
ili. 16; the same temper being indifferently expressed 
either by blindness or hardness of heart.’”—Lowth. 
That they may walk in my statutes—In their whole 
conversation; and keep my ordinances—In all acts 
of religious worship. These two particulars must 
go together, and not be separated; and those to 
whom God has given a new heart, and a new spirit, 
will make conscience of both, and then the following 
promise shall be fulfilled, Ther y shall be my people, 
and I willbe their God: the ancient covenant, which 
seemed to have been broken and forgotten, shall be 
renewed. By their idolatry and other sins, they 
appeared to have cast God off; and by their being 
606 


sent into captivity, and divers other punishments, 
God seemed to have cast them off; but when they. 
are curedof their idolatry and various vices, and de- 
livered from their captivity and other calamities, God 
and Israel own one another again: God, by his good 
work in them, makes them his people; and then, by 
the tokens of his good-will toward them, shows them 
that he is their God. 

Verse 21. But as for them—Whoever they be, 
and some there will be in the best times, who will 
refuse to own God for their God, and truly to love 
and obey him. Whose heart walketh after their 
detestable things--Whose judgment and choice, or 
whose will and affections, go after their idols and ini- 
quities, their lusts and vices. Iwill recompense their 
way upon their own heads—Their state shall differ 
as much as their practice does, from that of the peo- 
ple of God: I will treat them according to their ways. 

Verse 23, And the glory of the Lord went up from 
the midst of the city—The symbol of God’s pre- 
sence, which had before departed from the temple, 
(chap. x x. 18,) now quite left the city, to signify that 
he w ould acknowledge no longer his relation to 
either, but deliver them up to be profaned by the hea- 
then. It deserves to be observed here, that God did 
not quit the temple and city all at once, but by little 
and little. The cloud of his presence was first with- 
drawn from the mercey-seat in the holy of holies, 
the usual place of its residence, and removed to the 
threshold of the house, (chap. ix. 1,) where itremain- 
ed some time waiting for their repentance. Its 
second remove was from this threshold, leaving the 
house altogether, to settle upon the cherubim, which 
were hovering over the court, and upon the wing to 
depart, chap. x.18. It then, with these angelic minis. 
ters of the divine will, and the accompanying wheels 
of providence, withdrew to the east gate of the inner 
court, chap. x. 19. And now at last it quits Jerusa- 
lem altogether, and fixes itself upon the mountain on 
the east side of the city. By withdrawing himself 
from his people by slow degrees, God gave them 
time for consideration and repentance, to which 
each remove of the Shechinah wasa fresh and solemn 
call, and he thus also manifested with what reluc- 
tance he entirely abandoned the seed of Abraham 
his friend. And even his causing the symbol of his 
presence, before his final departure, to take its station 

3 


- 


The prophet is 


CHAPTER XII. 


brought to Chaldea. 


eM S411. from the midst of the city, and stood 
. Supon the mountain which is on 
the east side of the city. 
24 4 Afterward ‘the spirit took me up, and 
brought me in a vision by the Spirit, of God 


& Zech. xiv. 4.—— Chap. xliii. 2. - 


on the mount of Olives, where it was, as it were, 
within call, and ready to return, if now at length in 
this their day they would have understood the things 
that made for their peace, was'a further manifesta- 
tion of grace as well as of justice; for while the 
cloud of glory lingered there, it gave fresh encou- 
ragement to them to repent, and a final warning so 
to do, at the same time that it was emblematical of 
the judgment which, if their repentance did not pre- 
vent, should begin to be executed upon them from 
that mount, from whence the city would be annoyed 
by the darts of the Chaldeans. Nor was this only a 
figure of the calamities which were to be brought on 


the Jews by Nebuchadnezzar, but it was also an em- 
blem of the evils which were to befall them in conse- 
quence of their rejecting and crucifying their own 
Messiah, the Lord of glory. This Divine Saviour, 
after exhausting his pacience in instructing, correct- 


into Chaldea, to them of the cap- 4. oaners 
tivity. ‘So the vision that I had seen i 
went up from me. 

25 Then I spake unto them of the captivity 
all the things that the Lorp had showed me. 


i Chapter viii. 3. 


ing, and threatening Jerusalem, at length forsook it, 
and ascended to heaven from this same mount of 
Olives, in the presence of his apostles and disciples, 
that he might exercise his kingly office, and inflict a 
just and exemplary vengeance on this obstinately 
wicked and irreclaiméble | people. 

Verses 24,25. The spirit took me, and brought 
me in vision into Chaldea—That is, took away from 
before my eyes the image of Jerusalem and the tem- 
ple, &c., and presented nothing to my mind but what 
was the real matter of fact, namely, that I was a cap- 
tive with many others of my countrymen in the 
land of Chaldea. So the vision that I had seen went 
up from me—Was at an end. In other words, he 
recovered from his trance or ecstasy. Then I spake 
unto them of the captivity—He related unto them 
all that had passed in his vision, namely, all theta is 
contained in the last four chapters. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Though the vision of the divine glory was withdrawn from the prophet, yet God’s word continues to come to him, and 
is by him sent to the people: and to the same purpose with that which was shown in the vision, namely, to announce 
the terrible judgments that were coming upon Jerusalem, by which the city and temple should be entirely destroyed. 
In this chapter, (1,) The prophet, by removing his stuff and quitting his lodgings, is made a sign of Zedekial’s 
flight out of Jerusalem in the utmost confusion, when the Chaldeans took the city, 1-16. (2,) By eating his meat 
trembling, he prefigures the famine and consternation in the city during the siege, 17-20. (3,) A message is sent 
from God to the people, to assure them that all these predictions should be accomplished very shortly, and not be 
deferred, as they flattered themselves they would be, 21-28. 


A. ia 3411. 


(THE word of the Lorn also came 
B.C. 593. 


unto me, saying, 


a Chap. ii. 3, 6, 


2 Son of man, thou dwellest in the A. ie Ai. 
midst of *a rebellious house, which 


7, 8; iii. 26, 27. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. 

Verses 1,2. The word of the Lord also came, &c. 
—This is supposed to have happened in the sixth 
year of Zedekiah, and five years before the siege of 
Jerusalem; and the prophecies contained in the fol- 
lowing chapters, to the twentieth, are thought to be 
ofthe same year. Thou dwellest in the midst of a 
rebellious house—“ He was among them of the cap- 
tivity in Chaldea, as appears from verse 10, chap. xi. | 
24, xiv. 22, and xxiv. 2. And these seem to have 
disbelieved the prophecies that Jerusalem should be 
smitten and burned, and its inhabitants scattered 
abroad: see chap. iv. 2, and ix. 5, and x. 2, and xi. 9.” 
—Newcome. They saw Jerusalem still inhabited, 
and under the government of its own king. Andas 
they who were left in Judea thought themselves 

3 


much more highly in God’s favour than those who 
had been carried away captives, so those who had 
been made captives repined at their lot, and thought 
those who remained in their own country were in a 
much better condition than themselves; therefore 
the following symbolical representations were de- 
signed to show, that they who were left behind, to 
endure the miseries of a siege, and the insults of a 
conqueror, would be in a much worse condition than 
those who were already settled in a foreign land: 
see Lowth. Which have eyes to see, and see not, 
&c.—Who will not make use of that sense and 
derstanding which God has given them, nor lean 
from those examples and incidents which haye hap- 
pened, and by which God intended they should be 
instructed. ~ 
607 


The prophet points out 


A. M. 3411. » have eyes to see, and see not; they 
B.C. 993. have ears to hear, and hear not: ° for 
they are a rebellious house. " 

3 Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee 
1 stuff for removing, and remove by day in 
their sight: and thou shalt remove from thy 
place to another place in their sight; it may 
be they will consider, though they be a rebel- 
ious house. 

4 Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by 
day in their sight, as stuff for removing: and 
thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, ?as 
they that go forth into captivity. 

5 3 Dig thou through the wall in their sight, 
and carry out thereby. 

6 In their sight shalt thou bear i¢ upon thy 
shoulders, and carry i¢ forth in the twilight: 
thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the 
ground: ‘for I have set thee for a sign unto 
the house of Israel. 

7 And I did so as I was commanded: I 
brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for cap- 
tivity, and in the even I *digged through the 
wall with my hand; I brought ¢¢ forth in the 
twilight, and I bare it upon my shoulder in 
their sight. 


tIsa.vi.9; xlii.20; Jer. v.21; Matt. xiii. 13, 14. © Chap. 
ii. 5. 1 Or, instruments. 2 Heb, as the goings forth of cap- 
tivity. 3 Heb. Dig for thee. 4Jsa. viii. 18; Chapter iv. 3; 


xxiv. 24; Verse 11. * Heb, digged for me. 
f Chap. xvii. 12; xxiv. 19, 

Verses 3-6. Therefore, prepare thee stuff for re- 
moving—Hebrew, 111 *5D, vessels, or instruments 
of removing, namely, such as were suited for that 
purpose. Get all thy goods together, and pack them 
upas those do that remove from one place to another. 
Do this openly, and at noon-day, that the people, 
among whom thou dwellest, may all see and take 
notice of it. The prophets often prophesied in this 
way by signs, as being of greater force and efficacy 
than words. Thou shalt bring forth thy stuff by day 
in their sight—Before it is quite night, that they, 
who ought to learn by this sign, may see and con- 
sider it. T'how shalt go forth at even—To signify 
that Zedekiah and his retinue should escape out of 
the city by night, 2 Kings xxv.4. Dig through the 
wall in their sight—To show that the king would 
make his escape by the same means. Carry it forth 
in the twilight—What the prophet was here com- 
manded to carry out in the twilight, it seems, was 
something different from the goods he removed in 
the day-time; probably, necessary provision for his 
present subsistence may be intended. T'how shalt 
cover thy face that thou see not the ground—As Ze- 
dekialt shall do, that he may not be discovered. Or, 
as the prophet was now in Chaldea, this covering of 
his face, that he might not see the ground, might be 

608 


© Chapter ii. 5. 


EZEKIEL. 


the approaching captivity. 


8 And in the morning came the A. M. 3411. 
word of the Lorp unto me, saying, aaah 

9 Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, 
*the rebellious house, said unto thee, ‘ What 
doest thou ? 

10 Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 
This burden concerneth the prince in Jeru- 
salem, and all the house of Israel that are 
among them. 

11 Say, *I am your sign: like as I have 
done, so shall it be done unto them: *they ‘ shall 
remove and go into captivity. 

12 And * the prince that is among them shall 
bear upon fis shoulder in the twilight, and shall 
go forth: they shall dig through the wall to 
carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that 
he see not the ground with his eyes. 

13 My ‘net also will I spread upon him, and 
he shall be taken in my snare: and ™I will 
bring him to Babylon ¢o the land of the Chal- 


jdeans, yet shall he not see it, though he shall 


die there. 

14 And *[ will scatter toward every wind all 
that are about him to help him, and all his 
bands; and °I will draw out the sword after 
them. 


s Mal. i. 1— Verse 6. 5 Heb. by removing, go into cap- 
tivity. i2 Kings xxv. 4, 5,7. K Jer, xxxix. 4.1 Job xix. 
6; Lam. i. 13; Jer. lii. 9; Chap. xvii. 20.——m 2 Kings xxv. 7; 
Jer. lii.11 ; Chap. xvii. 16, 2 2 Kings xxy. 4, 5; Chap. v. 10. 
° Chap. v. 2, 12. 


intended to signify, that though Zedekiah should be 
brought into that country, yet he should never see 
it; as his eyes would be put out on the borders of 
Judea, as we read they were, Jer. lil. For Ihave 
set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel—I will 
show, by what thou dost, what shall happen to the 
Jewish nation, and particularly to their king. 
Verses 9-16. Hath not the house of Israel said— 
That is, I know they have said; as the words, “are 
they not written in the book of Chronicles, &ce.?” 
mean, they are written there. What doest thou, 
&c.—They have inguired by way of derision and 
contempt, what these signs mean. Say—-This bur- 
den concerneth the prince, &e.—Namely, King Ze- 
dekiah, chap. vii. 27. T'he prince that is among 
them shall bear upon his shoulder, &e—Their king 
shall even be forced himself to carry what he can 
out of the city, in the dusk of the evening. They 
shall dig through the wall, &c.—His retinue shall 
make a private way to get out of the city, that they 
may not be discovered: see Jer. xxxix. 4, and lii. 7. 
It is probable that the king and his companions fled 
through a breach made by themselves in the wall. 
Or the gate through which they fled might have 
been walled up during the siege. He shall cover his 
face, &c.—See note on verse 6, and on 2 Kings xxv. — 
3 


oe 


Only a few shall 


CHAPTER XII. 


be left in Judea. 


AM, 3411. 15 P And they shall know that I 

~ am the Lorp, when I shall scatter 
them among the nations, and disperse them in 
the countries. 

16 4 But I will leave °a few men of them 
from the sword, from the famine, and from the 
pestilence; that they may declare all their 
abominations among the heathen whither they 
come ; and they shall know that I am the Lorp. 

17 4% Moreover the word of the Lorp came 
unto me, saying, 

18 Son of man, * eat thy bread with quaking, 
and drink thy water with trembling and with 
carefulness ; 

19 And say unto the people of the land, Thus 
saith the Lord Gop of the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem, and of the land of Israel; they shall 
eat their bread with carefulness, and drink 
their water with astonishment, that her land 


may *be desolate from ‘all that is A. M. 3411. 
therein, * because of the violence of een 
all theny that dwell therein. 

20 And the cities that are inhabited shall be 
laid waste, and the land shall be desolate ; and 
ye shall know that I am the Lorp. 

21 4 And the word of’the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

22 Son of man, what is that proverb that ye 
have in the land of Israel, saying, *'The days 
are prolonged, and every vision faileth ? 

23 'Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; I will make this proverb to cease, and 
they shall no more use it asa proverb in Israel ; 
but say unto them, * The days are at hand, 
and the effect of every vision. 

24 For ¥ there shall be no more any 7 vain 
vision nor flattering divination within the house 
of Israel. 


P Psalm ix. 16; Chapter vi. 7,14; xi. 10; Verses 16, 20. 
4 Chap. vi. 8, 9, 10.——® Heb. men of number. * Chap. iv. 16. 
8 Zech. vii. 14. 


t Psalm civ, 37. u Verse 27; 


™ Heb. the fulness thereof. 
x Joeh ii. 1; Zeph. 


Chap. xi. 3; Amos vi. 3; 2 Pet. iii. 4, 
i. 14. ¥ Chap. xiii. 23. z Lam. ii. 14. 


7. My net also will I spread wpon him—Though 
he thinks to escape, yet I will bring his enemies upon 
him, who shall encompass him, and stop his flight, 
as when a wild beast is entangled in a net. J will 
bring him to Babylon, yet shall he not see it—Nei- 
ther the land nor the city; for his eyes will be put 
out at Riblah: see notes on 2 Kings xxv. 5-7. Iwill 
scalter toward every wind all that are about him— 
Hither the Egyptians, who came to assist him, or 
those that fled with him. And I will draw out the 
sword after them—I will cause them to be pursued 
by the sword and slain, whithersoever they go. But 
Twill leave a few men—Hebrew, 190° °w1s, men of 
number: that is, populus numerabilis utpote parvus, 
a people easily numbered, as being few: Hor., Ars 
Poet., 1.206. From thesword §c., that they may de- 


clare all their abominations—May confess that they || 


were justly punished for their idolatries and immo- 
ralities: or that they may declare the cause (name- 
ly, their heinous wickedness) why the city of Jeru- 
salem, and the temple dedicated to Jehovah there, 
were delivered up to destruction, and thereby may 
justify my proceedings. And they shall know that I 
am the Lord—Namely, the Chaldeans shall know it. 
See how God brings good out of evil! The disper- 
sion of sinners, who had done God much dishonour 
and disservice in their own country, proves the dis- 
persion of penitents, who shall do him much honour 
and service in other countries. 

Verses 17-19. Moreover, &c.—As he was a sign 
to them in digging through the wall and carrying 
out his stuff, so he must now be a sign to them in 
another way. Eat thy bread with quaking, &c.— 
Show all the signs of anxiety and consternation when 
thou takest thy common sustenance. This he was 


to do that he might express the calamitous condition || 


Vou. II. ( 39 


of those that should be in Jerusalem during the 
siege. And say unto the people—Thy fellow-cap- 
tives; Thus saith the Lord of the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem—-This was designed to inform the cap- 
tives that they were notin a worse condition than 
those that were left behind in Judea. They shall 
eat their bread with carefulness, &e.—See note on 
chap. iv. 16,17. That her land may be desolate—- 
Rather, because her land shail be desolate, namely, 
the land of Jerusalem, or the country, of which it 
was the head city, which was shortly to be laid 
waste, emptied of its inhabitants, wealth, and plenty. 
Because of the violence, &c.—The injustice, oppres- 
sion, and tyranny of the Jews toward one another. 
Verses 22-25. Son of man, what is that proverb? 
--The saying become proverbial. The days are 
prolonged, and every vision faileth—Words of the 
same import with those that occur verse 27, and 
chap. xi.3. Both of them the words of scoffers, who . 
turned the grace of God into wantonness, and took 
encouragement from his patience and long-suffering, 
to despise his threatenings, as if they would never be 
fulfilled. ‘ell them therefore—Who either use this 
proverb, or who stumble at my deferring to execute 
judgment ; J will make this proverb to cease--My 
patience shall soon be at its period, and will call on 
my justice to vindicate it, and then calamities felt 
will prove that there can be no more place for ang 
a proverb, the groundlessness of it being manifest 
all. Say unto them, The days are at hand—The 
time when God will show his wrath, and make his 
power.and justice known to the world by fulfilling 


| his threatenings and the predictions of his prophets. ~ 


For there shall be no more any vain vision—The 

false prophets, who foretold peace and safety, shali 

see their prophecies so confuted by the events, quite 
609 3 


False proph :ts 


EZEKIEL. 


compared to foxes. 


25 For I am the Lorn: I will speak, 

and * the word that I shall speak shall 
come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: 
for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say 
the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord 
Gop. 


A.M, 3411. 
B.C. 593 


26 “J Again the word of the Lorp came to 
me, saying, - 


aJsa. ly. 11; Verse 28; Dan. ix. 12; Luke xxi. 38. 


contrary to what they foretold, that they will never 
pretend any more to publish new prophecies. I am 
the Lord—I am able to discover the vanity and false- 
hood of the prophets that have flattered the people, 
and will do it by accomplishing what my true pro- 
phets have foretold. he word that I shall speak 
shall come to pass—-No length of time shall make 


27 »Son of man, behold, they of As 23, 
the house of Israel say, The vision ——— 
that he seeth is ° for many days to come, and 
he prophesieth of the times ¢hat are far off. 

28 4 Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop; There shall none of my words be 
prolonged any more, but the word which I have 
spoken shall be done, saith the Lord Gop. 


b Verse 22. 


© 2 Pet. iii. 4 ——4 Verses 23, 25. 


me forget it; no pretences of self-flattering prophets 
or people shall divert me from my purpose; no 
power can hinder, nor counsel defeat my design. J¢ 
shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, 
&c.—My threatenings shall be fulfilled in your own 
days, and you shall have ocular demonstration of 
their truth. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Nothing had a greater influence in hardening the Jews in their sins than the pretended predictions and flatteries of 


their false prophets. 
nounced against them, 1-16. 


Here, (1,) The sin of these prophets is set forth at large, and the judgments of God are de- 
(2,) The prophet shows also the sin and punishment of the false prophetesses, 17-23. 


Both agreed to sooth men up in their sins, and, under pretence of comforting God’s people, to flatter them with 
hopes that they should yet have peace; but Ezekiel here foretels that they should be proved liars, their prophecies 
mere fictions, and the expectations which the people built upon them nothing but illusions. 


A. M. 3411. 


AXP the word of the Lorp came] 
B. C. 593. 


unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, prophesy against the prophets 
of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto 
* them? that prophesy out of their own ° hearts, 
Hear ye the word of the Lorn ; 


2 Ver. 17.——! Heb. them that are prophets out of their own hearts. 
» Jer. xiv. 14; xxiii. 16, 26. 2 Heb. walk after. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIII. 

Verses 2-4. Son of man, prophesy against the 
prophets of Israel—So they called themselves, as if 
none but they had been worthy of the name of Is- 
rael’s prophets, who were indeed Israel’s deceivers. 
Say unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts 
—According to their own fancy, without having re- 
ceived any revelation from God. The true prophets 
often denounced God’s judgments against the false 
ones: laying to their charge many misdemeanours 
ingtheir private life and conversation, and upbraiding 
them for their unfaithfulness in the office they un- 
dertook of declaring God’s will to his people. Wo 
unto the foolish prophets—Ignorant and wicked, and 
who, while they wilfully deceived the people, un- 
thinkingly brought destruction upon themselves. 
. Observe, reader, foolish prophets are not of* God’s 
sending: those whom he sends, he either finds or 
makes fit for his work. Where he gives warrant, 


3 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Wo A. M. 3411. 
unto the foolish prophets, that ? follow ester 
their own spirit, 9 and have seen nothing! 

A O Israel, thy prophets are ° like the foxes in 
the deserts. 

5 Ye “have not gone up into the * gaps, 


a 


3 Or, and things which they have not seen.——* Cant. ii. 15. 
4 Psa. evi. 23, 30; Chap. xxii. 30,—* Or, breaches. 


he gives wisdom. That follow their own spirit, and 
have seen nothing—Who utter their own imagina- 
tions for true prophecies, and pretend to have visions 


| when they never had any. ~ O Israel, thy prophets, 


not mine, are like the foxes in the deserts—Hungry 
and ravening, crafty and guileful: “deceitful work- 
ers, (as the apostle styles such persons, 2 Cor. xi. 13,) 
who craftily insinuate false doctrines into weak and 
unstable minds, and greedily catch at any appear- 
ance of advantage to themselves.”—-Lowth. 

Verse 5. Ye have not gone up into the gaps—Or 
stood in the gap, or breach, as it is expressed chap. 
xxii. 30; Psa. evi. 23. Ye have not exercised your 
prophetical office, and framed your own conduct, 
so as to stop the wrath of Jehovah, by admonitions 
and exhortations to the people, and by personal 
piety and prayer to God. The place alludes to the - 
intercession which Moses made for the Israelites, 
whereby he withheld God’s hand, as it were, when 

( 39* ) eee 


The judgments of God 


CHAPTER XIII. 


against false prophets. 


A. M. 3411. neither made up the hedge for the 
* © house of Israel to stand in the battl 

ouse of Israel to stand in the battle 
in the day of the Lorn. 

6 ° They have seen vanity. and lying divina- 
tion, saying, The Lorn saith: and the Lorp 
hath not sent them: and they have made 
others to hope that they would confirm the 
word. 

7 Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have 
ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye 
say, The Lorp saith it, albeit I have not 
spoken ? 

8 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, 


5 Heb. hedged the hedge. 
® Or, secret, or, council. 


© Verse 23 ; Ch. xii. 24; xxii. 28. 
f Ezra ii. 59, 62; Neh. vii. 5; Psa. 


it was just stretched out to take vengeance upon the 
people for their heinous sin in making the golden 
ealf, Exod. xxxii. 10,11. The phrase is taken from 
those who put a stop to the enemy, when he is just 
entering in ata breach. In like manner it was the 
office and duty of those prophets, if they had truly 
been what they pretended to be, by their endeavours 
to reform the people, and their intercessions with 
God, to avert his displeasure, and prevent the ven- 
geance which was just ready to be poured out ona 
sinful people. Neither made up the hedge—The 
Vulgate renders it, neque opposuistis murum pro 
domo Israel, nor made up a wall for the house of 
Jsrael; another expression taken from people be- 
sieged in a city, who, if a breach be made in the 
wall, presently make it up, or build up a new one 
within it, to prevent the enemy from entering and 
becoming masters of the place. To stand in the 
battle in the day of the Lord—When God shall 
come, like a general at the head of his army, to exe- 
cute his judgment upon his enemies. 

Verses 6-9. They have seen vanity and lying di- 
vination—They have uttered false prophecies con- 
cerning peace and prosperity, pretending to have 
seea that which they did not see, and producing that 
as a divine truth which they knew to be a detestable 
_ lie. They have made others—Who were so simple 
as to believe them; to hope that they would confirm 
the word—Or rather, that the word would be con- 
Jjirmed. Their speaking with so much assurance 
made others*confidently expect that the event would 
answer their predictions, and that the judgments 
which the true prophets had threatened in the name 
of God would never come, whereby they hardened 
those in sin whom they ought to have endeavoured 
to bring to repentance. T'herefore, because ye have 
spoken vanity—Have uttered mere fictions and lies, 
with a view to your own advantage. Behold, I am 
against you, saith the Lord God—And who can be 
for you when I am against you? And my hand 
shall be upon the prophets—My power striking them 
so, that it shall be evident they fall under my dis- 
pleasure; as Pelatiah, chap. xi. 13, and Hananiah, 

3 


therefore, behold, I am against you, 
saith the Lord Gop. aoe ree 

9 And my hand shall be upon the prophets 
that see vanity, and that divine lies: they 
shall not be in the Sassembly of my people, 
‘neither shall they be written in the writing of 
the house of Israel, * neither shall they enter 
into the land of Israel; "and ye shall know 
that I am the Lord Gon. 

10 Because, even because they have seduced 
my people, saying, ' Peace; and there was no 
peace ; and one built up 7a wall, and lo, others 
*daubed it with untempered mortar : 

11 Say unto them which daub i with un- 


A.M, 3411: 
B. C. 593. 


lxix, 28.—# Chap. xx. 38.——h Chap. xi. 10, 12.—— Jer. vi 
14; vill, 11.—? Or, a slight wall. k Chap. xxii. 28. 


Jer. xxviii. 15. T'hey shall not be in the assembly 
of my people—Of those who shall hereafter worship 
me in Jerusalem; or, in the secret council of those 
who shall consult on public affairs. They shall not 
be members of my church here, nor partake of the 
communion of saints hereafter. The Hebrew word 
110, here rendered assembiy, properly signifies a 
secret assembly, or privy council; such as are ac- 
quainted with the secret intents and purposes of their 
prince. Hence it is applied to God’s chosen people, 
those that are acquainted with the whole counsel of 
God, and whom he instructs and directs by his Holy 
Spirit: see notes on Psa. xxv. 14; Jer. xxiii. 18. The 
prophet, therefore, here tells these men who pretend- 
ed to know so much of the secrets of the Almighty 
that they should never be of the number of those 
favourites of heaven to whom God would reveal 
himself and his counsels. Neither shall they be 
written, &c.—The sense of this clause is nearly the 
same With that of the preceding; the words contain- 
ing an allusion to the registers usually kept of the 
members of cities or corporations, to the privileges 
of which societies none are admitted but they whose 
names are entered into such registers. The false 
prophets, it seems, promised a speedy return to the 
exiles; God, therefore, tells them that they should 
never live to see it, nor should their names be entered 
into the register of those that should return home. 
Neither shall they enter into the land of Israel— 
They shall never see their own country again, nor 
shall they have a share in the blessings peculiar to 
true Israelites: see Lowth. 

Verses 10-15. T'hey have seduced my people, &c. 
—Have made my people to err, both with respect to 
the greatness of their own guilt, and my displeasure 
on account of it, as if both were less than they 
really are, and no great danger was to be appre- 
hended. They deceived them, by assuring them 
that none of those judgments should overtake them 
which Jeremiah and the other true prophets threat- 
ened them with, and they spoke peace to men’s con- 
sciences upon false grounds and principles. Thus 
they obstructed and drew them out of the way of 

611 


The judgments of God 


EZEKIEL. 


against false prophets. 


A.M. 3411. tempered mortar, that it shall fall: 
BC 1 there shall be an overflowing shower ; 
and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a 
stormy wind shall rend it. 

12 Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be 
said unto you, Where zs the daubing wherewith 
ye have daubed it ? 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; I will 
even rend i¢ with a stormy wind in my fury ; 
and there shall be an overflowing shower in 
mine anger, and great hailstones in my fury to 
consume if. 

14 So will I break down the wall that ye 
have daubed with untempered mortar, and 
bring it down to the ground, so that the founda- 
tion thereof shall be discovered, and it shall 
fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst 
thereof: ™and ye shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 

15 Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon 


1 Chapter xxxvili. 22. m Verses 9, 21, 23; Chapter xiv. 8. 
o Jer. vi. 14; xxviii. 9. © Chap. xx. 46; xxi. 2. : 


the wall, and upon them that have A. M. 3411. 
Woe B. C. 593. 
daubed it with untempered mortar, 
and will say unto you, The wall is no more, 
neither they that daubed it ; 
16 To wit, the prophets of Israel which pre- 
phesy concerning Jerusalem, and which ® see 


|| visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, 


saith the Lord Gop. 

17 9 Likewise, thou son of man, °set thy . 
face against the daughters of thy people, which 
prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy 
thou against them, 

18 And say, Thus saith the Lord Gop; Wo 
to the women that sew pillows to all § armholes, 
and make kerchiefs upon the head of every 
stature to hunt souls! Will ye 4 hunt the souls 
of my people, and will ye save the souls alive 
that come unto you ? , 

19 And will ye pollute me among my people 
* for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, 


p Verse 2.— Or, elbows. 92 Pet. ii. 14.——" Prov. xxviii. 
t 21; Mice. iii. 5. 


that repentance and reformation into which the other 
prophets were endeavouring to bring them. And, 
observe, reader, those are the most dangerous 
seducers who suggest to sinners that which tends to 
lessen their dvead of sin, or their fear of God. 
These are compared to men who build a slight tot- 
tering wall, which others daub with wuntempered 
mortar; sorry stuff which will not bind nor hold the 
bricks together; doctrines not grounded on, nor ac- 
cording with, the word of God. Say unto them 
that it shall fall—When they have the greatest 
need of defence, and when they least apprehend such 
anevent. T'here shall be an overflowing shower, 
&c.—Terrible judgments from God, often compared 
in Scripture to storms and tempests, the artillery of 
heaven, especially when he executes his judgments 
by a victorious army. Shall it not be said, Where 
is the daubing ? &c.—Then it will be asked, by way 
of taunt and reproach, where are the remedies you 
had provided, and in which you persuaded all to put 
confidence ? I will even rent it with a stormy wind 
in my fury—Rather, in my indignation. Under 
these metaphors is foretold the destruction of Jeru- 
salem, and the Jewish state by the Chaldean army. 
Thus the Chaldee paraphrase expounds it: “I will 
bring a mighty king with the force of a whirlwind, 
and a destroying people, as it were an overflowing 
storm, and powerful princes like great hailstones.” 
So will I break. down the wall, &e—Thus will I 
overthrow all your false confidences, and all the 
remedies which ye have provided against the ruin 
of the state ; and ye yourselves that were so confident 
of safety shall be consumed. The Chaldee para- 
phrase reads, J will destroy the city wherein ye have 


uttered these false prophecies, which exposition ac-, 


612 


cords with the next words, And ye shall be consumed 
inthe midst thereof; that is, shall be destroye2 ‘m 
the same common calamity. And ye shall know, 
&c.—Those that deceived others will in the end be 
found to have deceived themselves. And no doom 
will be more fearful than that of unfaithful ministers. 
Thus will I accomplish my wrath, &e.—Fulfil what 
my prophets foretold; and will say unto you—Will 
show by the awful event; Zhe wall is no more, 
neither they that daubed it—The city is no more, 
nor the false prophets. 

Verses 17-19. Likewise, set thy face against the 
daughters of thy people—Direct thy discourse against 
the female pretenders to prophecy. God sometimes 
bestowed the gift of prophecy upon women, Exod. 
xv. 20; Judg. iv. 4; 2 Kings xxii. 14. .This encou- 
raged others of that sex to pretend to the same gift: 
compare Rey. ii. 20. Wo to the women that sew 
pillows, &c.—As the prophet compares the deceitful 
practices of the false prophets to the daubing of a 
wall, so he represents the artifices of these female 
seducers by sewing pillows under the hearers’ arms, 
that they might rest securely in their evil ways. 
“The eastern mode of sitting,” says Harmer, chap. 
vi. obseiv. 35, “supported by pillows, explains this 
representation of Ezekiel. Dr, Russel has given ws 
aprint representing a fine eastern lady reposing her- 
self on one of these bolsters, or pillows, by leaning 
with one of her arms on one of them, while she is 
smoking.” In Barbary and the Levant they “al- . 
ways cover the floors of their houses with earpets; 
and along the sides of the wall, or floor, a range of 
narrow beds, or mattresses, is often pl ‘upon 
these carpets; and, for their further ease and con- 
venience, several velvet or damask bolsters are 


The judgments of God 


to slay the souls that should not die, | 
and save the souls alive that should 
not live, by your lying to my people that hear 
your lies? 

20 Wherefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I am against your pillows, wherewith ye 
there hunt the souls °to make ¢hem fly, and I 
will tear them from your arms, and will let the 


A. Mlb 
B. C. 593. 


° Or, into gardens. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


against false prophets. 


souls go, even the souls that ye hunt A. M. 3411. 
to make ¢hem fly. Bap. Ber 

21 Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver 
my people out of your hand, and they shall be 
no more in your hand to be hunted; ‘and ye 
shall know that I am the Lorp. 

22 Because with lies ye have made the heart 
of the righteous sad, whom I have not made 


8 Verse 9. 


placed upon these carpets or mattresses: indulg- 
ences that seem to be alluded to by the stretching 
of thentselves wpon couches, and by the sewing of 
pillows to arm-holes.”—Shaw’s T'ravels, p. 209, 
second edition. Sir John Chardin also mentions “a 
mattress, with large cushions, placed at the back and 
sides” of the person who uses it as a bed, Harm., 
vol. ii, chap. vi. observ. 46. See also, to the same 
purpose, Lady M. W. Montague’s description of a 
Turkish lady’s apartment, let. 32, vol. ii. p. 55. And 
make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature— 
Rather, Upon every head, wx> 53, of every stature, 
the false prophetess doing this without distinction 
of stature or age. “ This,” says Bishop Newcome, 
“may be a strong, eastern manner of expressing 
that these women hoodwinked their votaries, and 
kept them in spiritual darkness.” In the same light 
the passage is considered by Lowth and many others. 
“Or the covering of the head may have been of the 
orname>tal kind, to denote prosperity or victory, 
as pillows denoted tranquillity and plenty; and both 
may have been significantly applied to the heads and 
arms of those who consulted the prophetesses.” 
Thus we are told by Dr. Shaw, p. 221, and Lady M. 
W. Montague, vol. ii. p. 30, that the eastern women 
bind on their other ornaments for the head with a 
handkerchief, which the latter calls “a rich embroi- 
dered handkerchief.” These prophetesses, there- 
fore, Harmer thinks, “did the same thing by their 
flattering words, as would have been best expressed, 
if they had thought fit to signify the same thing by 
actions only, (as the prophets sometimes did,) by 
making bolsters for the arms, and presenting them 
to the Israelitish women, whom they wanted to as- 
sure of the continuance of their prosperity; and 
embroidering handkerchiefs, proper to bind over 
the ornaments of females in a state of honour, and 
afterward putting them on their heads. Whereas, 
the true prophets of God gave them to understand, 
in direet contradiction to all this, that if the Jews 
would not yield up themselves to the Chaldeans, 
great numbers of their men should perish, and their 
women should be brought down from those elevated 
places in which they sat supported by rich bolsters, 
and should be forced to sit on the ground; and, in- 
stead of a rich attire for their heads, should have 
their hair miserably dishevelled, strongly marking 
out grief in a despairing neglect of their persons. 
Such is the description Isaiah gives of the state 
of captives, (chap. xlvii. 1, 2,) which every one 
must see is just the reverse of what these prophet- 
3 


esses-are represented as doing: Come down and sit 
in the dust, &c.””—Harmer, chap. vi., observ. 35. 
To hunt souls—To allure, draw, or drive men 
into those nets and snares that they have laid for 
them, and thereby to make them their prey. Or to 
destroy men, to expose them to the divine vengeance, 
by lulling them into security, and enticing them to 
commit sin in following their directions. Will ye 
hunt the souls of my people?—Will ye make a prey 
of men’s souls by deluding them with fair promises 
and vain hopes? Will ye draw my people into de- 
struction, by promising them safety and happiness, 
while they continue in sin? “This verse,” says 
Secker, “should seem to mean, that these women 


‘made every body easy to their ruin, for their own 


profit.” Will ye pollute me among my people 2— 
Will ye profane my name, by making use of it to 
give credit to your own dreams and lies? Or, Will 
ye dishonour it by employing it to the vilest use, 
the encouraging of wickedness, and the discourag- 
ing of piety and virtue? For handfuls of barley, 
&c.—For the sake of gain to yourselves, even for 
the meanest presents? It is well known how cus- 
tomary gifts were, and still are, in the East. These 
false prophets and prophetesses being chiefly, if not 
solely, consulted by the corrupt and wicked part of 
the Jews, who made them presents for their an- 
swers; and those presents being generally the larger 
the more agreeabie the answers were, therefore these 
prophets and prophetesses always uttered what was 
pleasing, and gave encouragement to the wicked, 


|and what tended to disgrace and discourage the 


truly good. o slay the souls that should not die— 


| To denounce or prophesy death and destruction to 


those that shall be preserved. Thus they denounced 
death to those who yielded themselves to the Chal- 
deans in Jeconiah’s captivity, whom God had deter- 
mined to preserve alive, Jer. xxix. 5,6. And they 
encouraged those who remained at Jerusalem, with 
promises of peace and safety, who, God had fore- 
told, should perish: see chap. v.12. Or the words 
may be understood, in a more general sense, of dis- 
couraging the godly, and confirming the wicked in 
their evil ways: see verse 22; and Jer. xxiii. 14, 17. 
To slay, and make alive, signify here, to promise 
men life, or threaten them with death. So the pro- 
phet says he came to destroy the city, (chap. xliii. 
3,) when he came to pronounce the sentence of de- 
struction upon it—Lowth. 

Verses 20-23. Behold, Iam against your pillows, 
wherewith ye hunt the souls, &c.—To make them 

613 


Hypocrites threatened 


EZEKIEL. 


with punishment. 


3411. sad; and tstrengthened the hands 
oof the wicked, that he should not re- 
turn from his wicked way, '° by * promising 
him life ; 


A.M. 
B. C. 


t Jer, xxiii. 14.——"° Or, that I should save his life-——'! Heb. 
by quickening him. 


run into those snares and seductions that you have 
laid for them, verse 18. The metaphor is continued 
from the manner of hunting and pursuing living 
creatures, thereby to drive them into the toils pre- 
pared for them. Iwill tear them from your arms 
—J will make your cheats and impostures appear 
so evidently that nobody shall be in danger of being 
seduced by you any more:” see verse 23. Your 
kerchiefs also will I tear—I will lay quite open and 
render useless all your arts; they shall no longer 
serve your purpose. Because with lies you have 


CHAPTER XIV. 


23 Therefore " ye shall see no more A. M. 3411. 
: Seti 19 ees B.C. 593. 
vanity, nor divine divinations: for [ ~~~ 
will deliver my people out of your hand: * and 


ye shall know that I am the Lorp. 


«Verse 6, &c.; Chapter xii. 24; Micah iii. 6.——* Verse 9; 
Chap. xiv. 8; xv. 7. 


made the heart of the righteous sad—As you have 
deluded and comforted the wicked with vain hopes, 
so you have disheartened the righteous with ground- 
less fears, or made them sad with the lies and calum- 
nies you have invented against them. Therefore 
ye shall see no more vanity nor divine divina- 
tions, &c.—An entire end shall be put to all your 
false predictions and divinations; for ye shall all 
perish, namely, in the siege of Jerusalem, either by 
the famine, disease, or the weapons of the Chal- 
deans. 


o 


Here, (1,) The Jewish elders at Babylon, having come to inquire of the prophet, meet with a rebuke, instead of accept- 
ance, 1-5. (2,) They are called upon to repent of their sins and reform, otherwise it would be at their peril to 
inquire of God, 6-11. (3,) God assures his prophet, that when a land had exposed itself to his judgments by tres- 
passing grievously, no intercessions, not even those of Noah, Daniel, and Job, should prevail to save it from the 
destruction it had merited: much less should any intercessions be available to preserve Jerusalem from the judg- 


ments which its aggravated sins had deserved, and which God had determined to bring upon it, 12-21, 


(4,) It is promised that a remnant should escape, 22, 23. 


A. M. 3411. (THEN “came certain of the elders 
B. C, 593. 

ce Die of Israel unto me, and sat before 
me. 


2 And the word of the Lorp came unto me, 
saying, 


3 Son of man, these men have set up their 
idols in their heart, and put » the stumbling- 


And yei, 


block of their iniquity before their al. 
face: ° should I be inquired of at all —_——— 
by them? 

4 Therefore speak unto them, and say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord Gop; Every man 


of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols 


a Chap. viii. 1; xx. 1; xxxiii. 31. 


NOTES. ON CHAPTER XIV. 

Verse 1. Then came certain of the elders of 
Israel—Men of note, that were in office and power 
among the Jews. “The prophet neither tells us the 
name nor the intention of these elders of Israel, nor 
the time when they came to him. But the manner 
wherein God speaks, gives us to understand that 
they came only to tempt him, as the Pharisees came 
to Christ, and with no design to profit by what they 
heard, or to correct their faults:” see Calmet, And | 
sat before me—As was the usual posture of those 
that came to hear the instructions of any prophet or 
teacher: see chap. viii. 1. In after times the teach- 
ers sat in a chair or eminent seat, and the hearers 
on lower forms at the feet of their masters: see 
Luke x. 39; Acts xxii. 3. 

‘Verses 2, 3. And the word of the Lord came unto 
me—To acquaint me with the real character of these 
men, and what I should say tothem. T'hese men | 

614 


in his heart, and putteth the stumbling-block 


> Chap. vii. 19; Verse 4, 7.——° 2 Kings iii. 13. 


hove set up their idols in their hearts—They are not 
only inclined to idolatry in their hearts, but they 
have actually set up idols and worshipped them. It 
seems, however, that their idolatry consisted, not in 
entirely deserting, but in corrupting and poiluting 
the service of the true God, intermixing it with 
foreign worship and superstitions, learned from the 
heathen. And have set up the stumbling-block, &c. 
—Their idols, which were both the object of their 
sin, and the occasion of their ruin. Should J be in- 
quired of at all by them ?—Shall I give any counsel, 
or any answer concerning that of which they inquire 
of me, to such hypocrites as these ? 

Verses 4, 5. Say unto them—Declare my will 
clearly and faithfully; Every man of the house of 
Israel—Whoever he be, rich or poor, mighty or 
mean ; that selleth wp his idols in ‘his heart—That 
is attached in his heart to any species of idolatry; 


and cometh to the prophet—As if he were ene 


Israel is exhorted 


“ee og of his iniquity before his face, and 

—_—. cometh to the prophet; I the Lorn 
will answer him that cometh according to the 
multitude of his idols; 

5 That I may take the house of Israel in 
their own heart, because they are all estranged 
from me through their idols. 

6 47 Thereiors say unto the house of Israel, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Repent, and turn 
1 yourselves from your idols; and turn away 
your faces from all your abominations. 

7 For every one of the house of Israel, or of 
the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which 
separateth himself from me, and setteth up his 
idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling- 
block of his iniquity before his face, and cometh 


1 Or, others. 
Ch, xv. 7. 


4 Levit. xvii. 10; xx. 5, 6; Jer. is ah 
¢ Num. xxvi. 10; aac xxviii. 37; Ch. v. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


to repentance. 


to a prophet to inquire of him con- A. M, 3411. 
» C. 593. 

cerning me; I the Lorn will answer 

him by myself: 

8 And ‘I will set my face against that man, 
and will make him a ° sign and a proverb, and 
I will cut him off from the midst of my people ; 
fand ye shall know that I am the Lorp. 

9 And if the prophet be deceived when he 
hath spoken a thing, I the Lorp £ have de- 
ceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my 
hand upon him, and will destroy him from the 
midst of my people Israel. 

10 And they shall bear the punishment of 
their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet 
shall be even as the punishment of him that 
seeketh unto him ; 


f Chap. vi. 7——€ 1 Kings xxii. 23; Job xii. 16; Jer. iv. 10; 
2 Thess. ii. 11. 


to know what is best to be done, that he might do it; 
or what is the will of God, that he might comply 
with it: and what will be the issue of these times 
and affairs; J the Lord will answer him that cometh 
—And that in a way but little to his satisfaction ; 
according to the multitude of his idols—According 
to his real iniquity, not according to his pretended 
piety: I will declare the greatness of his sin by the 
greatness of his punishment; he has multiplied his 
idols, and I will multiply his sorrows. That Imay 
take the house of Israel in their own heart—That I 
may lay open what is in their hearts, and discover 
their hypocrisy and impiety; or, that I may reprove 
and convince them, from their own words and be- 
haviour, what a base part they act, and that their 
inward and secret wickedness is perfectly known to 
me. Because they are estranged from me through 
their idols—It is always through some idol or other 
that the hearts of men are estranged from God. 
Some ereature has gained that place in the heart 
which belongs to none but God. 

Verses 6-8. Therefore say, Repent—Be truly 
sorry for your past sins, and give proof of your sor- 
row by forsaking them, &c.; and turn from your 
idols—Separate yourselves from them, that they 
may not finally and eternally separate you from 
God. And turn away your faces—Your heart and | 
ways; from all your abominations—Not only from 
all your idolatries, but from all sinful practices. 
Turn your faces from them, abhor the very sight 
of them; not only forsake them, but do it with loath- 
ing and detestation. For every one of the house of 
Isr ael—Every Jew of the seed of Abraham, whom 
this warning first and principally concerns; or of 
the stranger that sojourneth, &c.—Every proselyte : 
or the expression may include the foreigners who 
lived in Judea, termed, in the fourth commandment, 
the stranger within their gates. For these, although 
they were neither circumcised nor subject to the 
ceremonial laws, yet were under ar obfigation to | 

3 : 


refrain from idolatry, or from worshipping any God 
but Jehovah. Which separateth himself from me 
— Who leaves me to worship idols. God considered 
them as separating themselves from him, not only if 
they wholly left off to worship him, but also if they 
worshipped as gods any other beings, real or ima- 
ginary, along with him. For he, being the only 
true God, could not, of course, admit of any other 
to be worshipped together with him, as no other 
being whatsoever had the least pretence to be wor- 
shipped as God. J the Lord will answer him by my- 
self—I who am Jehovah, the only Creator, Preserver, 
and Lord of all things, will answer him according 
to my own inherent power, not by words, but by 
executing my judgments upon him. And he shall 
find by the answer, that it was not the prophet, but 
God that answered, so dreadful, searching, and asto- 
nishing shall my answer be. And J will set my face 
against that man—I will make him a mark for my 
indignation ;-and will make him a sign and a pro- 
verb—A signal and remarkable instance of my ven- 
geance; and will cut him off, &c.—By sudden death, 
attended with extraordinary circumstances. 

Verses 9-12. And if the prophet be deceived— 
Or, seduced. This is to be understood of the false 
prophets, whose practices are reproved throughout 
the whole foregoing chapter. J the Lord have de- 
ceived that prophet—I Jehovah have suffered him to 
be deceived; I have given him up to strong delu- 
sions, as a just judgment upon him for going after 
idols, and setting up false pretences to inspiration, 2 
Thess. ii. 11, 12.. Or the words may signify, J wil 
disappoint the expectations of those prophets who 
seduce my people, by speaking peace to them. Fort 
will bring upon them those evils which they, with 
great assurance, have declared shall never come to 
pass. Thus Bishop Newcome, “When any false 
prophet is deceived, the probable event proving con- 


| trary to his prophecy, I Jehovah have so superin 


tended the course of things as to deceive that pro- 
615 


The intercession of Noah, Daniel, 


EZEKIEL. 


and Job, shall not save this people 


A.M.3411. 11 That the house of Israel may 
5 go no more astray from me, neither 
be polluted any more with all their transgres- 
sions; ‘but that they may be my people, and 
I may be their God, saith the Lord Gop. 

12 4 The word of the Lorp came again to 
me, saying, 

13 Son of man, when the land sinneth 
against me by trespassing grievously, then will 
I stretch out my hand upon it, and will breals 
the * staff of the bread thereof, and will send 
famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast 
from it : 

14 ! Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, 
and Job, were in it, they should deliver but 
their own souls ™by their righteousness, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

15 WIf I cause ™noisome beasts to pass 
through the land, and they ? spoil it, so that it 
be desolate, that no man may pass through 
because of the beasts: 


b 2 Peter ii. 15. Chapter xi. 20; xxxvii. 27—* Levit. 
xxvi. 26; Isaiah ili. 1; Chapter iv. 16; v. 16.-—-! Jer. xv. 1; 
Verses 16, 18, 20; Jer. vii. 16; xi. 14; xiv. 11. m Proverbs 
ri. 4. "Leviticus xxvi. 22; Chapter v. 17. 2 Or, bereave. 
© Verses 14, 18, 20. 


16 ° Though these'three men were A . 3411. 
3in it, as I live, saith the Lord Gon, eg 
they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters ; 
they only shall be delivered, but the land shall 

be desolate. 
17 | Or tf ?I bring a sword upon that land, 


and say, Sword, go through the land; so that 


I 4 cut off man and beast from it: 

18 * Though these three men were in it, as I 
live, saith the Lord Gop, they shall deliver 
neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall 
be delivered themselves. 

19 4 Or tf I send *a_ pestilence into that 
land, and * pour out my fury upon it in blood, 
to cut off from it man and beast : 

20 * Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in 
it, as I live, saith the Lord Gop, they shall de- 
liver neither son nor daughter; they shall bat 
deliver their own souls by their righteousness. 

21 “1 For thus saith the Lord Gop; * How 
much more when *I send my four sore judg- 


P Lev, xxvi. 25; Chapter v. 12; 
eph. i. 3. 


3 Heb. in the midst of it. 
xxi. 3, 43) xxix. 8; xxxvili. 21——4 Chap. xxv. 13; 


Verse 14.52 Sam. xxiv. 15; Chap. xxxviii. a Chap. 
vii. 8 Verse 14..—* Or, Also when——* Chapter v. 17; 
Xxxili. 27. 


phet.” And I will, &e.—Or, Yea, I will stretch out 
my hand upon him—Remarkably punish his false- 
hood, and in severity destroy him. And they—Both 
the deceiver and the deceived; shall bearthe punish- 
ment of their iniquity—There is so great a parity in 
the folly and impiety of both the seducing prophets 
and the seduced people, that it is hard to say, whose 
sin is greatest. The punishment of the prophet 
shall be, &c.—Their punishments shall be as similar 
as they made their sins: both shall be cut off and 
destroyed. T'hat the house of Israel may go no 
more astray from me—The judgments I will inflict 
upon the false prophets, and those that consult them, 
shall be an instruction to my people to continue 
steady to me and my worship, and not hanker after 
the idolatrous practices of the neighbouring nations. 

Verses 13, 14. When the land, or, when a land 
sinneth, &c. —The meaning of this and the follow- 
ing verses is, that when the inhabitants of a land have 
filled up the measure of their iniquities, and God 
ariseth to execute judgment upon them, the few 
righteous that are left among them shall not be able, 
by their prayers and intercessions, to deliver the na- 
tion from the judgments decreed against it. They 
shall but deliver their own souls ; as we see in the 
case of Sodom, where there were none righteous but 
Lot and his family : those just persons saved them- 
selves, but no intercession could avail to save the 
city. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and 
Job, were in it—All of them persons eminent for 
piety. Noah, as a reward of his piety, saved eight 

616 


persons out of the universal deluge, and obtained a 
promise from God that he would neyer destroy the 
world so again, Gen. viii. 21. Daniel interceded 
with God for the whole nation of the Jews, and ob- 
tained a promise of their restoration, and of the com- 
ing of the Messiah, Dan. ix. Job was appointed by 
God to make intercession for his three friends, and 
obtained pardon for them, Job xlii. 8. But when 
God’s irreversible decree is gone out against a na- 
tion which hath filled up the measure of its iniquity, 
even the prayers of such men will be ineffectual 
toward their deliverance. For it is only for those 
that are not arrived to that height of wickedness, 
that the prayers of the righteous avail: compare Jer. 
xv. 1. We may observe here how early the fame 
of Daniel’s piety was spread over Chaldea, who at 
this time was probably not above thirty years of age ; 
he having been carried to Babylon only fourteen 
years before, when he was very young. Forhe was 
taken captive in the third year of Jehoiakim, (Dan. 
i. 1,) who, after this, reigned eight years, 2 Kings 
xxiii. 36. And this prophecy, as appears from chap. 
viii. 1, was uttered in the sixth year of Jehoiachin’s 
captivity, who succeeded Jehoiakim, and only reign- 
ed three months. 

Verses 15-21. If I cause noisome beaste to pass 
through the land—We find it was one punishment 
of the inhabitants of Judea, to be infested by lions 
and other wild beasts. To this their neighbourhood 
to the deserts of Arabia exposed them; and God, at 


certain times, to punish them for thelr ins ether by 


A remnant 


CHAPTER XV. 


shall be delivered. 


eee eee 


A. M. 3411. ments 


upon Jerusalem, the sword 
B. C. 593 P eae bit 


—~ and the famine, and the noisome 
beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man 
and beast ? 

22 4 ¥ Yet, behold, therein shall be left a 
remnant that shall be brought forth, both sons 
and daughters: behold, they shall come forth 
unto you, and 7 ye shall see their way and 


their doings: and ye shall be com- A. M. 3411 
forted concerning the evil that I have ptvnal 
brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all 
that I have brought upon it. 

23 And they shall comfort you, when ye see 
their ways and their doings; and ye shall 
know that I have not done * without cause all 
that I have done in it, saith the Lord Gop. 


y Chap, vi. 8.——* Chap. xx. 43. 


causing a scarcity of food in the deserts, or by some 
other means, influenced these wild beasts to make 
incursions into Judea, in great numbers, which they 
otherwise were not wont to do. Or if I bring a 
sword upon that land, &e.—* If I deliver a land into 
the hand of acruel enemy. The conquerors’ sword 
is often called the sword of the Lord, in the pro- 
phets, because they are the executioners of God’s 
judgments.” So that I cut off man and beast from 
it—‘‘ Men are destroyed by the sword, and the cattle 
are driven away by the enemy; orelse consumed by 
pestilence, arising from the air’s being corrupted 
through the stench of dead bodies.” Or I send pes- 
tilence, and pour out my fury in blood—With great 
destruction of men’s lives, chap. xxxvili. 22; for 
every kind of sudden and immature death is called 
blood inthe Hebrew. How much more—Shall there 
be an utter destruction; when I send my four sore 
judgments upon Jerusalem—“ If it is just, with re- 
spect to other countries, that the good alone should 
escape punishment, how much more with respect to 
Jerusalem, after such repeated instructions and ad- 
monitions?? And if the intercessions of such holy 
men as those above mentioned could not prevent the 
execution of one of these four judgments upon those 
that had filled up the measure of their iniquities, 
how much less would they be able to keep off all 
the four, when I commission them all to come at 
once ? 

Verses 22, 23. Yet, behold, therein—In Jerusalem 
itself, though marked for utter ruin ; in Judea, though 
condemned to suffer unexampled desolations; shail 
be left a remnant—That shall not be cut off by any 
of those sore judgments before mentioned, but shall 
escape and be brought forth into Chaldea, to be your 
companions in captivity ; both sons and daughters— 
That shall be the seed of a new generation. And ye 


a Jer. xxii. 8, 9. 


shall see their ways and their doings—* Ye shall 
be made sensible of their guilt and reformation.” 
Their sufferings shall be made instrumental in bring- 
ing them to a due sense of the greatness and aggra- 
vations of their former iniquities, and you shall hear 
them make a free and ingenuous confession of them, 
and an humble profession of repentance for them, 
with promises of amendment, and you shall see in- 
stances of this amendment, and be witnesses of the 
good their affliction has done them, and how pru- 
dently and patiently they carry themselves under it. 
And ye shall be comforted—* By their confession of 
their idolatries, by a conviction of my justice, and by 
the spirit of allegiance to me, which they shall pro- 
pagate.’”—Bishop Newcome. Concerning the evil 
that I have brought upon Jerusalem—Ye shall the 
less grieve when you are made sensible they were 
not punished beyond what their sins deserved, and 
that their sufferings have had a salutary influence on 
their spirit and conduct. This consideration will 
compose your minds, and make you give glory to 
God, and acknowledge his judgments to be right- 
eous, though they touch you very nearly in the de- 
struction of your friends and country. And they 
shall comfort you when ye see their ways, &e.— 
When you see them repenting of their sins and re- 
forming their lives, humbling themselves before God, 
justifying his conduct toward them, and quietly ac- 
cepting the punishment of their iniquity. And ye 
shall know that I have not done without cause—Not 
without a just provocation, and yet not without a 
gracious design; all that Ihave donein it—In Jeru- 
salem and among its inhabitants. When afilictions 
have done their work, and have accomplished that 
for which they were sent, then will appear. the wis- 
dom and goodness of God in sending them, and God 
will not only bejustified, but glorified in them. 


CHAPTER XV. 


To reconcile Ezekiel himself, and his hearers, to the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, God here 
shows that it was as proper that they should be destroyed as that an unfruitful vine should be cut up and burned 
We have, (1,) The parable or similitude, showing that when the vine is barren it is unfit for any use, 1-5. (2,) The 


awful application of it to the Jews, 6-8 
3 


617 


The wicked compared 


A. M. 3411 
B. C. 593. 


ND the word of the Lorp came 
unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, What is the vine-tree more than 
any tree, or than a branch which is among 
the trees of the forest ? 

3 Shall wood be taken thereof to do any 
work? or will men take a pin of it to hang 
any vessel thereon ? 

A Behold, *it is cast into the fire for fuel; 
the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the 
midst of it is burned. 1Is it meet for any work ? 

5 Behold, when it was whole, it was ? meet 
for no work: how much less shall it be meet 


a John xv. 6.——! Heb. Will it 2 Heb. made fit. 


rosper ? 
> Lev. xvii. 10; 


Shap. xiv. 8. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XV. 

Verses 1-5. What is the vine more than any tree? 
—The house of Israel is often compared to a vine, 
which when fruitful is very profitable and valuable, 
but when barren is very worthless and contemptible. 
Of this the prophet reminds the Jews to humble 


them, and awaken them to asense of the importance | 


of bringing forth the fruits of righteousness. Or, 
than a branch whichis among the trees of the forest? 
—One single branch of a'tree in the forest is of more 
use and value than the whole vine-tree is, except for 
its fruit. Some, however, render this latter clause, 
If its branch is as the trees of the forest ; that is, if 
it brings forthno fruit. Shall wood betaken thereof 
to do any work?—There are some fruit-trees, the 
wood of which, if they do not bear fruit, is of much 
use, and may be made to turn-to a good account ; 
but the vine is not one of these; its wood is of no 
use in building, or in making any piece of furniture 
or domestic utensil; nor. indeed is it fit for any of 
the purposes for which the wood of other trees is 
used. It will not afford even a pin to drive into a 
wall or post, om which you: may safely hang any 
Weight: and, therefore, if the vine do not bring forth 
grapes it is good for nothing. Behold, it is cast into 
the fire for fuel—When, for its barrenness, it is cut 


down, it is only fit to be burned. The fire devoureth | 


both the ends of it, and the midst of it, &c.—* A 
very apt representation of- the state of Judea, when 
both its extremities were consumed by the ra- 
vages of the destroyer, and the middle of it, where 
the capital city stood, was threatened every moment 
with destruction from the enemy.” Js it meet for 
any work ?—Ks it worth any body’s while to save it 
from being burned for any use! Ifa piece of solid 
timber be kindled, somebody, perhaps, may snatch 


it out of the fire, and say it is a pity to burn it, for it | 


may be put to some better use; but if the branch of 
a vind be on fire, and, as usual, both the ends of it 
and the middle are kindled together, nobody goes 
about to save it: for when it was whats it was meet 
for no work, much less when the fire has almost de- 
voured it, Just so, the parable implies, it was of no 
use or consequence to save the Jewish nation from 
618 


EZEKIEL. 


to a fruitless vine. 


yet for any work, when the fire hath A. M. 3411. 
devoured it, and it is burned ? sows 

6 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Asthe 
vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I 
have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

7 And *T will set my face against them; 
* they shall go out from one fire, and another 
fire shall devour them ; ‘and ye shall know that 
I am the Lorn, when I set my face against them. 

8 And I will make the land desolate, because 
they have °committed a trespass, saith the Lord 
Gop. 


¢ Isa, xxiv. 18—4 Chap. vi. 7; vii. 4; xi. 10; xx. 38, 42, 44. 
3 Heb. trespassed a trespass. 


destruction, were it possible to do it, which had so 
little answered the design of God, in making them 
his people, and had been of so little use in promoting 
his glory among the surrounding nations. 

Verses 6-8. As the vine-tree among the trees of 
the forest, which Ihave given for fuel—That is, as 
the vine-tree, when barren and fruitless, like the wild 
trees of the forest, is given for fuel, being fit for no- 
thing else ; or as a vine, when barren and cut up, is 
thrown among other wood which is intended to be 
fuel for the fire; so will I give the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem—So will I destroy them by the Chal- 
deans, among other nations which are destroyed by 
them. For they are so degenerated, and grown so 
corrupt and wicked, that they are of no use any 
longer in the world; but are rather injurious to civil 
society, and therefore are only fit to be consumed. 
And I will set my face against them—To thwart all 
their counsels and confound their schemes, as they 
have set their faces against me to contradict my 
word and defeat my designs: or, I will look upon 
them with indignation. They shall go out from one 
Sire, and another fire shall devour them—The end 
of one judgment shall be the beginning of another ; 
and their escape from one only a reprieve till another 
come. They shall go from misery in their own 
country to misery in Babylon. They that kept 
themselves out of the way of the sword, perished by 
famine or pestilence: when one descent of the Chal- 


| dean forces upon them was over, and they thought, 


Surely the bitterness of death is past; yet soon after 
these enemies returned again with double violence 
till they had made a full end. And ye shall know 
that I am the Lord, when I have set my face against 
them—Y ou that are in Chaldea, when you shall hear 
what mischiefs, one after another, are heaped on 
Jerusalem, shall know that Iam Jehovah, a God of 
almighty power, that it is my wrath and vengeance 
that is poured upon them. Observe, reader, God 
shows himself to be the Lord by the destruction of 
his implacable enemies, as well as by the deliver- 
ance of his obedient people. And, observe also 
those against whom he sets his face, though they 
may come out of one trouble little hurt, ee 


: ae 


The spiritual origin 


CHAPTER XVI. 


of the apostate Israelites. 


another; though they come out of the pit, will be 
taken in the snare, Isaiah xxiv. 8; though they 
escape the sword of Hazael, will fall by that of 
Jehu, 1 Kings xix. 17: for evil pursues sinners. 
Nay, though they go out from the fire of tem- 


poral judgments, and seem to die in peace, yet 
there is an everlasting fire that will devour them ; 
for when God judgeth, first or last, he will over- 
come, and will be known by the judgments which he 
executeth. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


In the foregoing chapter Jerusalem was compared to an unfruitful vine, which was fit for nothing but the fire: un 
this chapter she is compared to an adulteress, that in justice deserved to be abandoned and exposed. The prophet 
therefore is commanded to show the people their abominations, that they might. see how little reason they had to 
complain of the judgments already come and coming upon them. Here, therefote, in a long discourse, are set forth, 
(1,) The despicable and deplorable beginnings of their church and nation, 3-5... (2,) The many honours and favours 
God had bestowed on them, 6-14. (3,) Their treacherous and ungrateful departures from him to the service and 
worship of idols, here represented by the most impudent whoredom, 15-34. (4,) A threatening of terrible destroying 
judgments, which God would bring’ upon them for this sin, 35-43, (5,) An aggravation both of their sin and of 


their punishment, by comparing them with the sin and punishment of Sodom and Samaria, 44-59. 


(6,) A promise 


of mercy in the close, which God would show to a penitent remnant, 60-63. 


eae GAIN the word of the Lorp came 
—_——— unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, * cause Jerusalem to know her 
abominations, 

3 And say, Thus saith the Lord Gop unto Je- 
rusalem ; Thy ‘birth ?and thy nativity zs of the 


land of Canaan; ° thy father was an A. M. 3411. 
Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite. usec 

4 And as for thy nativity, ‘in the day thou 
wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast 
thou washed in water *to supple thee; thou 
wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all. 


*®Chap. xx. 4; xxii.2; xxxiii. 7, 8, 9. 1 Heb. cutting out, or, 


habitation. 


b Chapter xxi. 30.—¢ Verse 45.4 Hos. ii. 3——* Or, when 
L looked upon thee. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVI. 
Verse 2. Cause Jerusalem to know her abomina- 
tions—Her foul sins and multiplied transgressions, 
especially her idolatries, or spiritual adulteries, and 
unexampled folly in her lewdness. “This might 
probably be done by way of letter, as Jeremiah sig- 
nified the will of God to the captives at Babylon. 
God here particularly upbraids Jerusalem for her 
iniquities, because it was the place he had chosen for 
his peculiar residence ; and yet the inhabitants had 
defiled that very place, nay, and the temple itself 
with idolatry ; the sin particularly denoted by the 
word abomination.” “ Nothing can give usa greater 
horror of the crimes of Jerusalem than the manner 
in which Ezekiel speaks here. This city must cer- 
tainly have carried her impiety to the greatest height, 
to merit reproaches'so lively and strong.” See Lowth 
and Calmet. : 
Verse 3. Thus saith the Lord God unto Jerusa- 


lem—Unto the whole race of the Jews, and espe-' 


eially to the natives and inhabitants of that proud 
city, who thought it a singular privilege to be born 


or to live there, counting it a more holy place than 


the rest of the land of Canaan. Thy birth and thy 
nativity—The LXX. render it, H pigfa ov ac n yeveorc, 
thy root and thy generation, and so also the Vulgate. 
The word rendered birth, or root, however, 772°, 
seems rather to mean, commerce, or dealings, ap- 
pearing to be derived from 30, to sell. Accordingly 
Buxtorf translates it commercia tua, thy dealings. 
3 


Houbigant, indeed, whom Bishop Newcome inclines 
to follow, prefers deriving the word from 173, to 
dig, referring to Isa. li. 1, and then the sense will 
be, thy origin, or thy rise, and thy nativity, is of the 
land of Canaan. If understood of the city of Jeru- 
salem, the assertion is strictly true. It was a Canaan- 
itish city, or strong hold, possessed and inhabited by 
the Jebusites, till David took it from them: see 
2Sam.v.6. The father, therefore, of this city, might 
be properly said to be an Amorite, and its mother a 
Hittite ; these names comprehending all the idola- 
trous nations of Canaan, of which the Jebusites were 
a branch. Or if the Jews or Israelites be intended, 
their progenitors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, so- 
journed in the land of Canaan long before the pos- 
session of it was given to their posterity ; and the 
two latter were natives of that country. But as those 
are said to be our parents, in Scripture language, 
whose manners we imitate, the Jews or Israelites, 
may be here represented as being of Canaanitish 
origin, because they followed the manners of the 
idolatrous inhabitants of that country, rather than 
those of the pious patriarchs: see verse 45; John 
viii. 44; Matt. iii.7. There is an expression of the 
same import in the history of Susannah, verse 56, 
that seems to be borrowed from this passage, O thou 
seed of Canaan, and not of Judah, beauty hath de- 
ceived thee, and lust hath perverted thy heart. 
Verse 4. As for thy nativity, &e.—* Jerusalem is 
here represented under the image of an exposed in- 
619 


The honours and favours 


EZEKIEL. 


bestowed on the Israelites. 


A.M. Saul. 5 None eye pitied thee, to do any 

_— —~ of these unto thee, to have compassion 
upon thee ; but thou wast cast out in the open 
field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day 
that thou wast born. 

6 4 And when I passed by thee, and saw 
thee * polluted in thine own blood, I said unto 
thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, 
I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, 
Live. 

7 °I have ‘caused thee to multiply as the 
bud of the field, and thou hast increased and 
waxen great, and thou art come to * excellent 
ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thy 
hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and 
bare. 

8 Now when I passed by thee, and looked 


3 Or, trodden under foot. e Exod. i. 7. 
million. 5 Heb. ornament of ornaments. 


4 Heb. made thee a 
f Ruth iii. 9. 


upon thee, behold, thy time was the A. M. 3411. 
time of love; ‘and I spread my skirt 2a 
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I 
sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant 
with thee, saith the Lord Gop, and £ thou 
becamest mine. , 

9 Then washed I thee with water; yea, I 
thoroughly washed away thy ® blood from thee, 
and I anointed thee with oil. : 

10 I clothed thee also with broidered work, 
and shod thee with badgers’ skin, and I girded 
thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee 
with silk. 

11 I decked thee also with ornaments, and I 
*put bracelets upon thy hands, ‘and a chain 
on thy neck. * 

12 And I put a jewel on thy 7 forehead, and 


¢ Exod. xix. 5; Jer. ii. 2.——® Heh. bloods —— Gen. xxiv. 22, 
47.— Prov. i. 9.——7 Heb. nose, Isa. iii. 21. 


fant, whom God preserved from destruction, brought 
up, espoused and exalted in sovereignty. But she 
proved faithless and abandoned; and therefore God 
threatens her with severe vengeance, but graciously 
promises that afterward he would fulfil his early 
covenant with her. The allegory is easily under- 
stood; and has much force, liveliness, and vehemence 
of eloquent amplification. The images are adapted 
to a people immersed in sensuality.”.—Bishop New- 
come. Thy navel was not cut—The navel-string, 
by which thou wast held to the body of thy mother, 
none took care to cut. By this and the other meta- 
phorical expressions in this and the next verse, the 
prophet hints how despised a people Israel was, and 
in what a forlorn condition when they went first into 
Egypt. Neither wast thou washed in water to sup- 
plethee—Hebrew, *ywob, ad aspectum meum, as 
Buxtorf renders it, that is, when I first beheld thee, 
or, wt jucunda aspectu esses, that thou mightest be 
pleasant to behold. Some render it, To make thee 
shine. The meaning is, to cleanse thee from the 
pollutions of thy birth. T"how wast not salted at all 
—It seems it was then customary to rub new-born 
infants over with salt; probably to dry up the hu- 
mours of their bodies. All the expressions here 
used allude to the custom observed by the eastern 
nations at the birth of their children; and “the de- 
sign of the prophet is to mark out that state of im- 
purity wherein the Hebrews were found in Egypt, 
plunged in idolatry and ignorance, and oppressed 
with cruel servitude.” 

Verse 5. None eye pitied thee, &e.—The cruelty 
of the Egyptians, who ought, in gratitude for the 
services they had received from Joseph, to have 
been as parents to the Israelites, seems to be here 
hinted at. J'how wast cast out in the open field— 
Thou wast exposed to perish. It was the custom to 
lay those children, whom their parents would not 
take the trouble of bringing up, in the open fields, 

620 


} 


and leave them there. To the loathing of thy per- 
son—Hebrew, ]w53 412, to the despising of thy 
soul, or life. The Vulgate reads, in abjectione ant- 
me tue in die qua nata es ; in the casting away of 
thy soul, or life, in the day in which thou wast born. 
The sense seems to be, In contempt of thee as un- 
lovely and worthless; and in abhorrence of thee as 
loathsome to the beholder. This seems to have 
reference to the exposing of the male children of 
the Israelites in Egypt. And it is an apt ilustration 
of the natural state of the children of men. Jn 
the day that we were born; we were shapen in ini- 
quity; our understandings darkened, our minds 
alienated from the life of God; and polluted with 
sin, which rendered us loathsome in the eyes of God. 

Verses 6, 7. And when I passed by thee—While 
as yet no body took so much care of thee as to wash 
thee from thy native filthiness, I took pity on thee; 
as a traveller that passes by and sees an infant lie 
exposed; and I provided all things necessary for 
thy support. God here speaks after the manner of 
men. J said wnto thee, Live—This is such a com- 
mand as sends forth a power to effect what is com- 
manded: he gave that life: he spake, and it was 
done. J caused thee to multiply, &¢.—The prophet 
in this verse describes the Israelites increasing in 
Egypt, under the metaphor of a female child grow- 
ing up to maturity: compare Exod. i.7. Thow art 
come to excellent ornaments—Hebrew, Dry 3, 
to ornaments of ornaments, that is, thou wast adorn- 
ed with the choicest blessings of Divine Providence. 
Or, as Dr. Waterland renders it, “ Thou didst arrive 
tothe perfection of beauty.” Thy breasts were 
fashioned, &c.—-Thou didst come to woman’s estate. 

Verses 8-12, Now when I passed by thee, &e.— 
This second passing by may be understood of God’s 
visiting them in Egypt, and calling them | Be- 
hold, thy time, &c.—The time of thy 
the time of my love toward thee. 


Their treacherous and ungrateful 


CHAPTER XVI. 


departure from God. 


A.M. 3411. ear-rings in thine ears, and a beauti- 

B. C. 593. 

———— ful crown upon thy head. 

13 Thus wast thou decked with gold and 
silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and 
silk, and broidered work ; * thou didst eat fine 
flour, and honey, and oil; and thou wast ex- 
ceeding | beautiful, and thou didst prosper into 


a kingdom. 


14 And ™thy renown went forth A. M. 3411 
among the heathen for thy beauty: eared 
for it was perfect through my comeliness, which 
I had put upon thee, saith the ‘Lord Gop. 

15 4 But thou didst trust in thine own beau- 
ty, °and playedst the harlot because of thy 
renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on 
every one that passed by; his it was. 


* & Deuteron. xxxii. 13, 14.——! Psa. xlviii. 2——™ Lam, ii. 15. 
» Deut. xxxii. 15; Jer. vii. 4; Mic. iii. 11. 


my skirt over thee—I espoused thee and took thee 
under my protection as a husband doth his wife, 
Ruth iii. 9. And covered thy nakedness—Enriched 
thee with the spoils and possessions of the Egyp- 
tians and Canaanites: see verses 10, 11. Yea, I en- 
tered into covenant with thee—This was done in 
mount Sinai, when the covenant between God and 
Israel was sealed and ratified. Those to whom God 
gives spiritual life, he takes into covenant with him- 
self. By this covenant they become his, his sub- 
jects and servants, which speaks their duty: and at 
the same time his portion and treasure, which 
speaks their privilege. TJ'hen I washed thee with 
water—It was a very ancient custom among the 
eastern people to purify virgins who were to be 
espoused. And I anointed thee with oi1—Thus also 
were women, On some occasions, prepared for their 
nuptials. The washings and purifications of the 
law are probably intended to be signified by these 
metaphorical expressions; and the priesthood by 
the anointing with oil here spoken of. J clothed 
thee also with broidered work—Or, with needle- 
work of divers colours. The expression may refer 
to the rich garments of the priests, and the cover- 
ing and hangings of the tabernacle; or it may de- 
note the gifts and graces bestowed upon them. And 
shod thee with badgers’ skins—Or, with sandals of 
a purple colour, as Bochart expounds the word wnn. 


The eastern people had an art of curiously dressing | 


and colouring the skins of badgers, of which they 
made their neatest shoes, for the richest and greatest 
personages. “This and the following verses allude 
to those parts of women’s attire which serve not 
only for use but for ornament also; and import that 
God did not only provide the Jews with necessaries, 
but likewise with superfluities.” J decked thee also 
with ornaments—This and the following expressions 
are descriptive of the great wealth and felicity of 
the Jewish people, particularly under David and 
Solomon. J put bracelets upon thy hands, &c.— 
Ornaments which none but persons of better quality 
used to wear, Gen. xxiv. 47; Prov.i.9. And I put 
a jewel on thy forehead—The same which is called 
a nose-jewel, Isa. iii. 21. And a beautiful crown 

thy head—* Crowns, or garlands, were used 
in times of public rejoicing; from whence is derived 
that expression of St. Paul, A crown of rejoicing, 
1 Thess. ii. 19: compare Isa. xxv. 10. Virgins were 
sometimes adorned with crowns; and they were 
commonly put upon the heads of persons newly 
married, Cant, iii. 11.’—Lowth. - 

3 


o sa. i. 21; lvii. 8; Jer. ij. 20; iii. 2, 6, 20; Chap. xxiii. 3, 8, 
Els 13} Fos. 212. 


Verses 13, 14. Thus wast thou decked with gold, 
&c,—With ornaments the most costly and splendid. 
And thy raiment was of fine linen, &c.—Which 
was of the manufacture of Egypt, and one of the 
principal ornaments of women, as well as of great 
men. TJ'hou didst eat fine flour, honey, and oil— 
Thy country afforded all manner of plenty and deli- 
cacies: see Deut. xxxii. 13, 14. T'how wast exceed- 
ing beautiful—This may refer to the beauty of the 
buildings of Jerusalem, and in particular of the 
temple. And thou didst prosper into a kingdom— 
Thou didst increase in majesty and dominion, and 
became superior to the nations around. Bishop 
Newcome renders this clause, T"how didst prosper 
into a queen, that is, didst become the reigning city, 
the mistress of many subject provinces. And thy 
renown went forth, §c., for thy beauty—Through 
thy power and riches thou wast able to procure 
every thing beautiful and desirable, so that thou 
didst soon become famous among the heathen na- 
tions around; or, perhaps, the words may refer to 
the excellent laws by which they were governed, 
and the various privileges of their church and state, 
which rendered their nation more perfect in beauty 
than any other in the world. Indeed, we can name 
nothing that would be to the honour of a people, 
but it was found in Israel in David and Solomon’s 
time, when that kingdom was in its zenith of pros- 
perity, power, and glory; piety, learning, wisdom, 
justice, victory, peace, wealth, were found there in 
perfection, and all sure to continue if they had kept 
close to God. Jt was perfect, saith God, through 
my comeliness, which I had put upon thee—That is, 
through the beauty of their holiness, as they were 
a people devoted to God. This was it that puta 
lustre upon all their other honours, and was indeed 
the perfection of their beauty. Observe, reader, 
sanctified souls are truly beautiful in God’s sight, 
and they themselves may take the comfort of it; 
but God must have all the glory, for whatever 
comeliness they have is that which God has put 
upon them. 

Verses 15-19. But thou didst trust in thine own 
beauty—Houbigant translates this, “But thou, trust- 
ing in thy beauty, didst play the harlot, degenerating 
from thy renown:” as if he had said, Thou didst 
abuse those honours, privileges, and advantages 
which I had bestowed upon thee, and didst make 
them an oceasion of pride, of self-confidence, and 
of forsaking me thy benefactor, and serving idols, 
It was chiefly by their frequent and scandalous idol- 

621 


The wmgratitude and 


EZEKIEL. 


wickedness of Israet. 


A. M. 3411. 


16 » And of thy garments thou didst 
B. C. 593. 


take, and deckedst thy high places 
with divers colours, and playedst the harlot 
thereupon: the like things shall not come, 
neither shall it be so. 

17 Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of 
iny gold and of my silver, which I had given 
thee, and madest to thyself images ‘of men, 
and didst commit whoredom with them. 

18 And tookest thy broidered garments, and 
coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil 
and mine incense before them. 

19 4 My meat also which I gave thee, fine 
flour, and oil, and honey, whérewith I fed thee, 
thou hast even set it before them for ?a sweet 
savour: and ¢hus it was, saith the Lord Gop. 

20 * Moreover, thou hast taken thy sons and 
thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, 
and these hast thou sacrificed unto them ° to 
be devoured. Js this of thy whoredoms a small 
matter, 


P 2 Kings xxiii.7; Chap. vii. 20; Hos. ii. 8. 1 Heb. of a 
male. 4 Hos. ii. 8? Heb. a savour of rest. * 2 Kings 
xvi.3; Psalm evi, 37,38; Isa. lvil. 5; Jer. vii. 31; xxxii. 35; 
Chap. xx. 26; xxiii. 37. 


21 That thou hast slain my child- A. M. 3411. 
ren, and delivered them to cause them pe So 
to pass through the fire for them? 

22 And in all thine abominations and thy 
whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days 
of thy ‘youth, ‘when thou wast naked and 
bare, and wast polluted in thy blood. " 

23 And it came to pass, after all thy wicked- 
ness, (wo, wo unto thee! saith the Lord Gop,) 

24 That “thou hast also built wnto thee an 
*eminent place, and * hast made thee a high 
place in every street. 

25 Thou hast built thy high place Yat every 
head of the way, and hast made thy beauty 
to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to 
every one that passed by, and multiplied thy 
whoredoms. 

26 Thou hast also committed fornication with 
“the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh ; 
and hast increased thy whoredoms, to provoke 
me to anger. 


* 


3 Heb. to devour—— Jer. ii. 2; Verses 43, 60; Hosea xi. 1. 
t Verses 4, 5, 6. «Verse 31. pace Or, brothel-house. ——* Isa. 
lvii. 5, 7; "Jer. ii. 20:5. iti, 2=—V. Prov. ix. 14, Chap. viii. 
10, 14; xx.7, 8; xxiii. 19, 20, 21. 


atries that the Jews and Israelites polluted their 
glory, and profaned the great name of Jehovah. 
And they presumed upon that very favour which 
God had showed to Jerusalem, in choosing it for the 
place of his*residence, as if that would secure them 
from his vengeance, let their idolatries and other 
wickedness be never so great. And playedst the 
harlot—Idolatry, as has been often observed, is ex- 
pressed by this metaphor. And of thy garments 
thou didst take, &c.—This was a great aggravation 
of their ingratitude, that they applied those very 
blessings which Jehovah, the true God, had given 
them, to the worship of idols, contrary to his ex- 
press command. 
Places of idolatrous worship, commonly built on 
eminences, with divers colours. Or, as the LXX. 
interpret it, Zhou madest idols, or images, of di- 
vers colours. Thou madest little shrines, chapels, 
or altars for idols, and deckedst them with hangings 
of divers colours, verse 18, 2 Kings xxiii. 7. The 
like things shall not come, &c.—I will utterly de- 
stroy those idolatries, and those that commit them. 
Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels, &c.—The 
wealth I had bestowed upon thee thou hast laid out 
in doing honour to idols; and particularly in setting 
up images to deified heroes, and didst pay them re- 
ligious worship, here signified by committing whore- 
dom with them. And coveredst them—Didst clothe 
with thy broidered garments the images thou hast 
made. And hast set mine oil, §c., before them— 
Thou offeredst these my creatures as meat-offerings, 
unto idols. The meat-offering is called an offering 
of a sweet savour, because of the frankincense which 
6 


And deckedst thy high places— | 


was put upon it, Lev. ii. 2. The oblation here men- 
tioned differs from those offered to God in one par- 
ticular, namely, that honey was mixed with it, which 
God had expressly forbidden to be used in his ser- 
vice, Lev. ii. 11. 

Verses 20-22. Thou hast taken thy sons, §c., 
whom thou hast borne unto me—Being married to 
me by a spiritual contract, verse 8. The children, 
with whom I blessed thee, were mine, being entered 
into covenant with me, as thou wast, Deut. xxix. 
11, 22. These thou hast sacrificed unto them to be 
devoured—These very children of mine hast thou 
destroyed by consuming them with fire. These in- 
human sacrifices were offered to the idol Moloch, in 
the valley of Hinnom. Is this of thy whoredoms 
a small matter—Were thy spiritual whoredoms, 
thy idolatries, a small matter, that thou hast pro- 
ceeded to this unnatural cruelty? Thow hast not 
remembered the days of thy youth--Thy infant state 
in Egypt; that miserable condition from which I 
rescued thee, when I first took notice of thee, and 
set thee apart for my own people. 

Verses 24-26. T'hou hast also built thee an emi- 
nent place in every street—Manasseh filled Jerusa- 
lem with idols, 2 Chron. xxxiii. 4, 5, 15; the altars 
of many of which were placed upon high or eminent 
places. At every head of the way—Not content 
with what was done in the streets of Jerusalem and 
other cities, thou hast erected thine altars in the 
country, wherever it was likely passengers would 
come. T'how hast also committed fornication with 
the Egyptians—While the Israelites sojourned in 


Egypt they learned to practise the er ell 


The ingratitude and 


CHAPTER XVI. 


wickedness of Israel. 


27 Behold, therefore I have stretch- 

~ ed out my hand over thee, and have 
diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered 
thee unto the will of them that hate thee, 
*the ‘daughters of the Philistines, which are 
ashamed of thy lewd way. 

28 »'Thou hast played the whore also with 
the Assyrians, because thou wast insatiable ; 
yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and 
yet couldest not be satisfied. 

29 'Thou hast, moreover, multiplied thy for- 
nication in the land of Canaan ° unto Chaldea; 
and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith. 

30 How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord 
Gop, seeing thou doest all these things, the 
work of an imperious, whorish woman ; 


A. M. 3411. 
C. 5 


a2 Chron. xxviii. 18,19; Verse 57. 5 Or, cities. b 2 Kings 
xvi. 7,10; 2 Chr. xxviii. 23; Jer. ii. 18,36; Ch. xxiii. 12, &c. 


31 °In that ¢thou buildest thine A, M. 3411. 
: : B. C. 593. 
eminent place in the head of every ——— 
way, and makest thy high place in every street ; 
and hast not been as a harlot, in that thou 
scornest hire ; 

32 But as a wife that committeth adultery, 
which taketh strangers instead of her husband ! 

33 They give gifts to all whores: but °* thou 
givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and “hirest 
them, that they may come unto thee on every 
side for thy whoredom. 

34 And the contrary is in thee from other 
women in thy whoredoms, whereas none fol- 
loweth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that 
thou givest a reward, and no reward is given 
unto thee; therefore thou art contrary. 


¢ Chapter xxiii. 14, &e,——® Or, in thy daughters is thine, &e. 
4 Ver. 24, 39. © Isa. xxx.3; Hos. viii. 9. 7 Heb. bribest. 


tries. From Josiah’s time the Jews were in strict 
confederacy with the Egyptians, and, to ingratiate 
themselves with them, practised their idolatries; 
and the worship of Tammuz, the idolatry they are 
upbraided with, chap. viii. 14, was derived from that 
country. Great of flesh—Who are naturally lusty 
and strong, and men of great stature. This expres- 
sion seems to signify that the Israelites were allured 
by the riches and grandeur of Egypt to imitate their 
idolatries. 

Verses 27-29. Behold, therefore—Open thine 
eyes, thou secure and foolish adulteress, see what 
has been done against thee, and consider it is for 
thy lewdness. J have stretched out my hand over 
thee—I have chastised and punished thee already in 
some measure. And have diminished thine ordi- 
nary food—Have taken away some of thy opu- 
lence, and abridged thee of many necessaries and 
conveniences. And delivered thee unto the will of 
them that hate thee—Have excited them to make 
war against thee, have given them victory over thee, 
and delivered thee into their power. The daugh- 
ters of the Philistines--This and what follows was 
effected in the reign of King Ahaz, 2 Chron. xxviii. 
16,18. The daughters of the Philistines are here 
put for the Philistines, as the daughters of Samaria, 
Sodom, and Syria stand for the people of those 
places, to carry on the allegory and comparison be- 
tween them and Jerusalem, being all of them de- 
scribed as so many lewd women, prostituting them- 
selves to idols, verse 41. By the same metaphor 
Samaria and Sodom are called sisters to Jerusalem, 
verse 46. Which are ashamed of thy lewd way— 
Who have not had the wickedness to imitate thy 
evil deeds; for they have not forsaken the religion 
of their country as you Jews have done, nor have 
been so fond of foreign idolatries. T'how hast 
played the whore also with the Assyrians—The 
Jews courted the alliance of their two potent neigh- 
bours, 4 Egyptians and Assyrians, as it served 


their present turn; and, to ingratiate themselves 
with them, served their idols, Jer. 11°18, 36. This 
is particularly recorded of Ahaz, 2 Chron. xxviii. 23. 
Thou hast multiplied thy fornication in Canaan 
unto Chaldea—The sense is, thou hast defiled thy- 
self with all the idolatries of the heathen, beginning 
with those that were practised by the former in-' 
habitants of Canaan, and, by degrees, learning new 
kinds of idolatry, derived from distant countries, 
such as Chaldea was reckoned. It is said unto 
Chaldea, to signify that they learned and practised 
the idolatries of Chaldea before they were carried 
captives thither. 

Verses 30-34. How weak is thy heart—Not only 
unstable as to good resolutions, but even restless 
and unsettled in evil practices, still hankering after 
some new kind of idolatry, and resolved to indulge 
a wandering appetite, verses 28, 29. J'he work of 
an imperious, whorish woman—A woman that ac= 
knowledges no superior, and will neither be guided 
nor governed. Jn that thow buildest thine eminent 
place—See verses 16, 22. And hast not been as a 
harlot, in that thou scornest hire—Thou art the 
more inexcusable in that thou hast practised these 
idolatries without being compelled to it by want and 
necessity, and thou also hast never gained by them. 
The metaphor of a lewd woman is still carried on; 
and as one whois lewd for the sake of a maintenance, 
is more excusable than those who are lewd to gratify 
their passions, so God here tells the Jewish people, 
by the prophet, that they had not even the plea, 
which common harlots had, of practising their sin 
out of necessity; for that they had never made 
any advantage of their idolatries, but were subservi- 
ent to those idolatrous nations, and lavished their 
riches on them, without reaping any benefit from 
them. They give gifts to all whores—That is, to 
the most of them: it is usual for loose men to do so. 
But thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers—By this 
is signified the large presents they frequently sent 

623 


The crime and punishment 


EZEKIEL. 


of the Jewish Church. 


35 § Wherefore, O harlot, hear, the 

_—_. word of the Lorn: 

36 Thus saith the Lord Gon; Because thy 
filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness 
discovered through thy whoredoms with thy 
lovers, and with all the idols of thy abomina- 
tions, and by ‘the blood of thy children, which 
thou didst give unto them ; 

37 Behold, therefore, ¢1 will gather all thy 
lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, 
and all them that thou hast loved, with all 
them that thou hast hated; I will even gather 
them round about against thee, and will dis- 
cover thy nakedness unto them, that they may 
see all thy nakedness. 

38 And I will judge thee, °as * women that 
break wedlock and ished blood are judged ; 
and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy. 

39 And I will also give thee into their hand, 
and they shall throw down thine eminent 
place, and shall break down thy high places: 


f Verse 20; Jer. ii. 34. § Jer. xiii. 22,26; Lament. i. 8; 
Chap. xxiii. 9, 10, 22, 29; Hosea ii. 10; viii. 10; Nah. ii. 5, 
® Heb. with judgments of. h Lev. xx. 10; Deuteron, xxii. 22 ; 
Chap. xxiii. 45. ‘Gen. ix. 6; Exod. xxi. fe Verses 20, 36. 
K Verses 24, 31.— ' Chap. xxiii. 26 ; Hos. ii. 3. 


‘they shall strip thee also of thy 
clothes, and shall take *thy fair 
jewels, and leave thee naked and bare. 

40 ™They shall also bring up a company 
against thee, ®and they shall stone thee with 
stones, and thrust thee through with their 
swords. 

41 And they shall °burn thy houses with 
fire, and ? execute judgments upon thee in the 
sight of many women: and I will cause thee to 
4cease from playing the harlot, ae thou alsa 
shalt give no hire any more. 

42 Sot will I make my fury fe thee to 
rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, 
and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. 

43 Because ‘thou hast not remembered the 
days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all 
these things ; behold, therefore, tI also will 
recompense thy way upon thy head, saith the 
Lord Gop: and thou shalt not commit this 
lewdness above all thine abominations. 


A. M. 3411 
B.C 


® Heb. Sulgwireds of thine ornament.——™ Chap. xxiii. 10, 47. 
2 John viii. ° Deuteron. xiii. 16; 2 Kings xxv. 9; ‘Jer. 
xxxix. 8; lii. 13 ——? Chap. v. 8: xxiii. io, 48.—4 Chey xxiii, 
27. Chap. Vl baer Ah 22; Psa, lxxviii. 42—t Char. 
ix, 1011, 2h. xxi Sl. 


to the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldeans, to pur- 
chase their friendship. The Jews are often up- 
braided for making leagues with idolaters, and court- 
ing their favours by presents, and by complying 
with their idolatries. And the contrary is in thee— 
The intelligent reader, says Bishop Warburton, per- 
ceives that the meaning of the metaphor is, “ You 
Jews are contrary to all other nations; you are 
fond of borrowing their rites; while none of them 
care to borrow yours, or to take any of them into 
their national worship.” See Div. Leg., vol. iii. 
Verses 37-39. Behold, Iwill gather all thy lovers 
—Those allies, whose friendship thou -hast courted, 
by complying with their idolatries; with all them 
that thou hast hated—As Edom, Moab, and Ammon: 
who were always of an envious and hostile disposi- 
tion toward the Jews, and insulted over their calami- 
ties. And I will discover thy nakedness to them— 
* They shall see thee carried away captive, stripped, 
and bare, without any covering to thy nakedness, ac- 
cording to the barbarous custom of conquerors in those 
times. The words allude to the punishment that 
used to be inflicted on common harlots and adulte- 
resses, Which was to strip them naked and expose 
them. And I will judge thee as women that break 
wedlock, and shed blood—\ will inflict upon thee 
the punishment of adultery and murder: that is, 
some of thy people shall be stoned, and some killed 
by the sword: for these were the punishments of 
adultery and murder. Jerusalem might be properly 
said to be stoned when the Chaldeans, from their 
slings and engines, ‘aia stones into the city ; 


for this was usual in the besieging of places in those 
days. And I will give thee blood in fury and in 
jealousy—I will punish thee with severity, as a 
jealous and provoked husband does a wife that has 
wronged him, Or, I will pour out the blood of thy 
slain like water: I will make an utter destruction of 
thine inhabitants. J'hey shall throw down thine 
eminent place—Probably the temple is here meant, 
called their eminent place, because they had filled it 
with idols; and shall break down thy high places— 
Dedicated to idolatrous worship. They shall strip 
thee also of thy clothes—They shall take away thy 
walls: or they shall plunder thee of every thing be- 
fore they carry thee away captive. And shall take 
thy fair jewels—Hebrew, NaN 4D, the vessels 
of thy ornament, or glory. The vessels of the tem- 
ple seem to be here intended. 

Verses 40-43. They shall bring a company 
against thee—A company shall come against thee, 
and beat down thy walls and houses, with stones 
slung out of battering-engines: see Jer. xxxiii. 4. 
The expression alludes, as in verse 38, to the punish- 
ment inflicted upon adulteresses, which was stoning. 
And they shall.burn thy houses, &c.—The punish- 
ment allotted to an idolatrous city, Deut. xiii. 16. 
The word may likewise allude to the punishment of 
burning, anciently inflicted upon Harlots: see Gen. 
Xxxviii. 24. And execute judgment upon thee in the 
sight of many women—Nations that shall triumph 
over thee; such as the Syrians, Philistines, &e.— 
The judgment which I shall execute upon thee shall 


be for an instruction to other nations, a 


Israel’s wickedness compared to 


CHAPTER XVI. 


that of Sodom and Samaria 


A. M. 3411. 
B. C. 593, 


44 J Behold, every one that useth 
proverbs shall use ¢his proverb against 
thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her 
daughter. 

45 Thou art thy mother’s daughter, that 
Joatheth her husband and her children; and 
thou art the sister of thy sisters, which loathed 
their husbands and their children: "your 
mother was a Hittite, and your father an 
Amorite. 

‘A6 And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and 
her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and 
«thy “ younger sister, that dwelleth at thy 
right hand, 7s Sodom and her daughters. 


47 Yet hast thou not walked after A, M. 3411. 
their ways, nor done after their abo- Noe 
minations: but 'as if that were a very little 
thing, ¥thou wast corrupted more than they, 
in all thy ways. 

A8 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, 7Sodom thy 
sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as 
thou hast done, thou and thy daughters. 

49 Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister 
Sodom, pride, * fulness of bread, and abundance 
of idleness was in her and in her daughters, 
neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor 
and needy. 

50 And they were haughty, and > committed 


u Verse 3. 
than thou, 


x Deut. xxxii. 32; Isaiah i. 10. 17 Heb. lesser 
48 Or, that was loathed as a small thing. 


y 2 Kings xxi. 9; Chap. v. 6,7; Ver. 48, 51—— Matt. x. 15; 
xi. 24. a Gen. xill. 10.——— Gen. xii, 13 3 xvii, 20s Rix1 ae 


them from following thine evil practices. It is said, 
in the sight of women, because Jerusalem is spoken 
of and represented as a woman. So will Imake my 
Sury, §c., to rest—I will fully satisfy my just anger, 
in inflicting these severe punishments upon thee. 
I also will recompense thy way upon thy head— 
Thou hast despised me, I also will despise thee ; 
thou hast forsaken me, I also will forsake thee. 
Thou shalt not commit this lewdness, &c.—Thou 
shalt not add these manifold and shameless practices 
of idolatry to all thy other wickedness. The clause 
however may be rendered, Neither hast thou laid to 
heart all these thine abominations. . 

Verses 44, 45. Every one that useth proverbs— 
They who love to apply proverbial sayings, shall 
apply that common saying to thee, As is the mother, 
so is her daughter—The inhabitants of Jerusalem 
are just such a people as the Amorites and Hittites 
were, whose land they inhabit. Thou art thy mo- 
ther’s daughter—The Canaanites and other nations, 
who dwelt in the land before the Israelites, are here 
called their mother; and in terming the Jews their 
mother’s daughter, the prophet signifies that they 
walked in the steps of the Canaanites, or imitated 
their manners. That loatheth her husband and her 
children—Both these qualities belong to harlots, and 
were verified in the Jews, who hated God, their hus- 
band, and offered their children to idols, having cast 
off all natural affection to them. And thow art the 
sister of thy sisters—Thou art in disposition like to 
those to whom thou art allied by blood. The sisters 
here spoken of are Sodom, the Ammonites, the 
Moabites, and Samaria, the principal city of the ten 
tribes. Moloch, who was worshipped in general by 
the ten tribes, and very often by those of Judah, was 
the ancient god of the Ammonites and Moabites: and 
the Samaritans also received among them the ancient 
gods of Chaldea. The inhabitants of Samaria were 
the kindred of the Jews by Jacob, and the Ammon- 
ites and Moabites were also related to them in the 
female line. 

Verses 46, 47. T'hine elder sister is Samaria, she 
and her daughters—That i is, her lesser towns. “Sa- 

Vou. UI. ( 40 5 


maria is called the elder, or greater sister, because it 
was a much larger city and kingdom, greater for 
power, riches, and numbers of people, and more 
nearly allied to Judah. And Sodom is called the 
younger sister, as being a smaller and less populous 
city, and further removed in blood from Jerusalem 
and its inhabitants, being only, as it were, a half sis- 
ter. That dwell at thy left hand—That is, toward 
the north, Samaria lying northward of Jerusalem, as 
Sodom lay southward of it. For these two quarters 
of the world are expressed by the right and left in 
the Hebrew language, being placed in such a posi- 
tion to those that set their faces eastward. The pro- 
phet here considers Samaria and Sodom as two cities 
still subsisting ; though Sodom had been long since 
destroyed, and Samaria had been overthrown one 
hundred and twenty-seven years before this prophe- 
cy of Ezekiel was delivered. Yet thou hast nog 
walked after their ways—Thou hast not been con. 
tent merely to be as bad as they, but hast carried thy, 
wickedness toa much greater height, and committed: 
many more crimes than they: see note on chap. v. 7. 
“The vices of Sodom and Samaria were not attend- 
ed with such aggravating circumstances as those of 
Jerusalem; for they had not been blessed with the 
same great privileges.” 

Verses 49, 50. Behold, this was the iniquity of 
Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, &c.—The inhabit~ 
ants of Sodom “ abused that plenty which God gave 
them to pride and idleness, which gave rise to those 
enormities that they afterward were guilty of. The 
Scripture takes notice of the fruitfulness of the soil 
where Sodom stood,” Gen. xiii. 10.—Lowth. Such 
is the depravity of human nature, that plenty, anda 
freedom from toil and danger, often prove people’s 
ruin; and therefore, if we were truly wise, we 
should be as much afraid of prosperity as we are of 
any of those supposed evils which are the frequent 
objects of our fears. Neither did she strengthen the 
hand of the poor and needy—Pride and luxury make 
men expensive in their way of living, and regardless 
of the wants and miseries of others. And they were 
haughty—-Hebrew, 12°72, they were os lofty, 

625 


1 Se 
> 


2 eo .4 


Tsrael’s wickedness compared to 


EZEKIEL. 


that of Sodom and Samaria. 


A. M. 3411. abomination before me: therefore °I 
BO 998. took them away as I saw good. 

51 Neither hath Samaria committed half of 
thy sins: but thou hast multiplied thine abomi- 
nations more than they, and ¢ hast justified thy 
sisters in all thine abominations which thou 
hast done. 

52 Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, 
bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou 
hast committed more abominable than they: 
they are more righteous than thou: yea, be 
thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in 
that thou hast justified thy sisters. 

53 ®When [shall bring again their captivity, 
‘the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, 


and the captivity of Samaria and her A, M, 2411. 
daughters, then will I bring again — : 
the captivity of thy captives in the midst of 
them : . 

54 That thou mayest bear thine own shame, 
and mayest be confounded in all that thou 
hast done, in that thou art §a comfort unto 
them. 

55 When thy sisters, Sodom and her daugh- 
ters, shall return to their former estate, and 
Samaria and her daughters shall return to their 
former estate, then thou and thy daughters 
shall return to your former estate. 

56 For thy sister Sodom was not } mentioned 
by thy mouth in the day of thy *° pride. 


¢ Gen. xix. 24.——4 Jer. iii. 11; Matt. xii. 41, 42. 
Verses 60, 61.—* Jer. xx. 16. 


e Isa. i. 95 


arrogant in their deportment toward good men, vex- 
ing Lot’s righteous soul, toward the angels, whom 
they assaulted in his house, and toward God himself, 
all whose laws they trampled under foot, Gen. xiii. 

28; and before whom they committed abominations 
of the most heinous and detestable kind; arriving 
by degrees to the height of impiety and wickedness, 
And, indeed, when pride has got the ascendency in 
aman he is in the high road to all abominations. 
And therefore I took them away as I saw good— 
Destroyed their cities, people, and country, by a 
most tremendous, unexpected, and unexampled judg- 
ment, 

Verses 51, 52. Neither hath Samaria—The king- 
dom of the ten tribes, founded in rebellion and idola- 
try ; committed half of thy sins—The sin of Jerusa- 
lem was greater than that of Samaria, because God 
had placed his name and the ordinances of his wor- 
ship there; and she had profaned his temple by 
placing idols in it, which was a degree of idolatry 
beyond any thing the ten tribes had been guilty of. 
And probably, with respect to other crimes, Jerusa- 
lem went beyond, or exceeded Samaria. But thou 
hast multiplied thine abominations more than they 
—Hast worshipped more idols, and slain more pro- 
phets; and hast justified thy sisters, &c.—Not made 
them righteous, but declared them less unrighteous 
than thou art; hast made them appear less guilty 
through the greatness of thy sins. ‘J'how also, who 
hastjudged thy sisters—Hast condemned their apos- 
tacy, and judged their punishment just; bear thy 
shame—For wherein thou hast judged them, or de- 
clared them to be deservedly punished, thou hast 
condemned thyself, having been guilty of the same 
sins, and those accompanied with greater aggrava- 
tions. The inhabitants of Judea allowed that the 
ten tribes were justly punished when they were car- 
ried into captivity, and yet fell into the same and 
greater crimes themselves. 

Verses 53-56. When I shall bring again the cap- 
tivity of Sodom and her daughters, &e.—“ Sodom 
and her daughters may mean cities placed in the dis-| 

626 


2 
4 


s Chapter xiv. 22, 23——1!° Hebrew, for a report, or, hearing. 
20 Heb. pride, or, excellences. 


trict where Sodom stood. Sodom was not where 
the lake is, Gen. xix. 24.”—Bishop Newcome. “The 
Moabites and Ammonites, descended from Sodom, 
are called by this name.”—Michaelis. “When the 
fulness of the Gentiles shall come into the church, 
some of whom may be compared with Sodom for 
wickedness, Isa. i. 9, then will I also remember you 
were my ancient people. St. Paul tells us the Jews 
will be provoked to emulation by the Gentiles com- 
ing into the church, and thereby be induced to ac- 
knowledge the truth, Rom. xi. 11-31. And the con- 
version of the Gentiles is expressed, Jer. xlviii. 47, 
and xlix. 6, 39, by returning the captivity of Moab, 
Ammon, and Elam ; and Isa. «viii. 7, and xix. 24, 25, 
and xxiii. 18, by the Egyptians, Syrians, Assyrians, 
and Ethiopians bringing presents to God, and ac- 
knowledging themselves his servants. And by the 
same analogy we may understand the bringing 
again the captivity of Sodom here, of the Gentiles 
coming into the church.”—Lowth. “The sense of 
this,” says Bishop Newcome, “is again expressed 
verse 55, and both verses are to be explained by 
verse 61. I refer the words rather to the future re- 
storation of the Jews than to their return from Baby- 
lon.” This prediction was partly fulfilled in the age 
of the apostles and first disciples of Christ; but the 
full accomplishment of it is undoubtedly yet future. 
That thou mayest bear thine own shame—That 
thou mayest be humbled and made ashamed, in hay- 
ing those put upon a level with thee whom thou 
hadst before so greatly contemned, and thought so 
much beneath thee. For thy sister-Sodom—Inclu- 
ding the cities in or near the place where she stood, 
and the Ammonites, Moabites, and other neighbour- 
ing nations, termed her daughters, verses 53, 55, and 
here put for the Gentiles in general; was not men- 
tioned in the day of thy pride—Was held in such 
contempt, that thou didst not think her worthy of 
being named by thee; before thy wickedness was 
discovered, verse 57—Before it was made apparent 
to the world by the judgments or punishments in- 
flicted on thee. Or, as Bishop Newcome and 

( 40* ) 3 


A promise of mercy 


CHAPTER XVI. 


to the penitent. 


A.M.3411. 57 Before thy wickedness was dis- 
B. C. 593. ‘ 
———— covered, as at the time of thy ™ re- 


proach of the daughters of 7! Syria, and all that 
are round about her, ‘ the daughters of the Phi- 
listines, which * despise thee round about. 

58 *'Thou hast **borne thy lewdness and 
thine abominations, saith the Lorp. 

59 For thus saith the Lord Gop; I will even 
deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast 
‘despised ™ the oath in breaking the covenant. 

60 4 Nevertheless, I will " remember my cove- 
nant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I 
will establish unto thee ° an everlasting covenant. 


61 Then ? thou shalt remember thy 5 ty Blea 
ways, and be ashamed, when thou ———— 
shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy 
younger: and I will give them unto thee for 
1 daughters, *but not by thy covenant. 

62 * And I will establish my covenant with 
thee; and thou shalt know that I am the 
Lorp: 

63 That thou mayest *remember, and be 
confounded, “and never open thy mouth any 
more because of thy shame, when I am _paci- 
fied toward thee for all that thou hast done, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


h2 Kings xvi. 5; 2Chron. xxviii. 18; Isaiah vii. 1; xiv. 28. 
*t Heb. Aram.—— Ver. 27. 42 Or, spoil—— Chap. xxiii. 49. 
*3 Heb. borne them.——! Ch. xvii. 13, 16.——™ Deut. xxix. 12, 14. 


2 Psalm evi. 45—— Jer. xxxii. 40; 1. 5» Chap. xx. 43 - 
xxxvi. 31.—4 Isa. liv. 1; lx. 4; Gal. iv. 26. * Jer, xxxi, 31. 
8 Hos. ii. 19, 20.—+ Verse 61. 4 Rom. i. 19. 


others interpret the words, “'The exemplary punish- 
ment of Sodom was not duly considered and spoken 
of by thee in the time of thy prosperity and self-con- 
fidence ; before thy humiliation showed thy wick- 
edness, and defeats and distresses were brought on 
thee by the Syrians and Philistines.” 

Verses 57-59. As at the time of thy reproach, &c. 


—These words appear to begin a new sentence; | 


which may be translated more intelligibly thus, by 
joining them to the following verse: “ But when it 
was the time of thy becoming the reproach of the 
daughters of Syria,” &c. The words, with regard 
to what goes before, import thus much: In thy 
prosperity thou didst despise those who were no 


worse than thyself; but thou hast since, in thy turn, | 


been insulted and invaded by thy neighbours, both 
Syrians and Philistines, whom God hath made use 
of as executioners of his judgments upon thee; thou 
hast been a remarkable instance of his vengeance, 
and God’s hand hath been heavy upon thee for all 
thine idolatries and abominations. 
to the frequent inroads which the Syrians and Philis- 
tines made into Judea, in the time of King Ahaz. 
Thou hast borne—Or, Thou shalt bear, thy lewd- 
ness, &c.—Thou shalt be punished according to thy 
wickedness. J will even deal with thee as thou hast 
done, which hast despised the oath, &c.—That so- 
Jemn oath and covenant you entered into with me, 
to be my people, and serve no other god besides, 
Deut. xxix. 12, 14. Hereupon God threatens her, 
that since she had broken her oath and promise, he 
should not think himself obliged to make good any 
of the promises of favour and protection which: he 
had made to her, but would give her up to ruin and 
éesolation. 

Verses 60-63. Nevertheless, I will remember my 
covenant with thee, in the days of thy youth—I will 
yet have some regard for you, because you were 


rormerly my people, by virtue of the covenant that 


I made with you at your coming out of Egypt. And 

I will establish with you an everlasting covenant— 

Such a one as shall never be abolished, namely, that 

of-the gospel: see note on Jer. xxxii.40. T'hen 
3 


The words relate | 


thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed— 
Thou shalt be affected with a deep sense of, and con- 
trition for, thy former provocations, as a necessary 
preparation for thy conversion. When thow shalt 
receive thy sisters—Converted with thee to Chris- 
tianity ; when the Gentiles, now strangers, but then 
sisters, shall be admitted with thee into the Christian 
Church. And I will give them unto thee for daugh- 
ters—As daughters hearken to, and obey their 
mothers, so shall the Gentiles, brought into the 
church of God, hearken to his word, which is there 
declared, and which first went forth from Jerusalem. 
“Even in the times of the apostles, there was a par- 
ticular deference paid to the church of Jerusalem, as 
the mother church of the Christian world: see Rom. 
xv. 26, 27, Accordingly, she is styled the mother 
of all churches, by the second general council in 
their synodical epistle: see Theod., Hist. Eccles., lib. 
v.c.9. A title which the Church of Rome now as- ° 
sumes, without any pretence from Scripture or anti- 
quity."—Lowth. Not by thy covenant—Not by that 
old covenant, which was violated ; not by external 
ceremonies, which were a great part of the first co-: 
venant; but by that covenant which writes the law 
in the believer’s heart, and puts the fear of God into 
his inward parts; the covenant which I will make 
with you, through the mediation of the Messiah ; a 
covenant founded in the divine love, cemented by 
the blood of Christ, and freed from the yoke of bond- 
age.. The first covenant was only for a time, but 
this shall be for ever. And thou shalt know that I 
am the Lord—Shalt know to thy comfort, that Tam 
Jehovah, the source of being and of blessedness, the 
God of almighty power, of infinite love, and of invi- 
olable faithfulness, merciful to thy unrighteousness, 
and remembering thy sins and iniquilies no more, 
Jer. xxxi. 34; as conspicuous in my mercies as I 
was before in my judgments. T'hat thou mayest 
remember and be confounded—That thou mayest 
acknowledge, and be deeply sensible, how many and 
) great thy transgressions have been, and how great 
) my mercy is in pardoning so many and such aggra- 
vated iniquities; and never open thy mouth any 
627 


The destruction of 


EZEKIEL. 


Judea foretold. 


more—Hither to justify thyself, or to condemn oth- 
ers, or to quarrel with thy God; because of thy 
shame—Because shame and sorrow, for thy past sins, 
will cover thee with confusion. When I am paci- 


{ 


| 


provocations. Observe, reader, the more sensible 
we are of God’s love to us, the more ashamed we 
are that ever we offended him; and the more our 
shame for sin is increased, the more will our com- 


fied toward thee for all that thou hast done—When || fort in God be increased also. 
I have pardoned all thy transgressions, and am re- || conciled to thee, notwithstanding thy innumerable 


CHAPTER XVII. 


In the preceding chapter God had set forth the wickedness of the Jewish nation, in their treacherously breaking thew 
covenant with him, and apostatizing from his worship to that of idols. Here, in a parable of two eagles and a vine, 
he represents the wickedness of Zedekiah, in courting the favour of the king of Egypt, after he had solemnly sworn 
allegiance to the king of Babylon, and had rendered himself and his kingdom tributary to him. (1,) We have the 


parable itself, 1-10. 


ing a 


(2,) The explication and application of it, 11-21. 
top branch on a high mountain, and causing it to flourish exceedingly, is promised the restoration of the 


(3,) In the close, by the emblem of plant- 


honour of David's family in Zerubbabel, but chiefly in the person and kingdom of Christ, 22-24. 


ALM. 3411. 


ANP the word of the Lorp came 
B. C. 593. 


unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a 
parable unto the house of Israel ; 

3 And say, Thus saith the Lord Gop; 7A 
great eagle, with great wings, long-winged, full 
of feathers, which had ‘divers colours, came 
unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch 
of the cedar. 

A He cropped off the top of his young twigs, 
and carried it into a land of traffic; he set it 
in a city of merchants. 


5 He took also of the seed of the A. M jets 
land, and * planted it in *a fruitful ———— 


field; he placed i¢ by great waters, and set it 


|4 as a willow-tree. 


6 And it grew, and became a spreading vine 
© of low stature, whose branches turned toward 
him, and the roots thereof were under him: so 
it became a vine, and brought forth branches, 
and shot forth sprigs. 

7 There was also another great eagle with 
great wings and many feathers: and behold, 


‘this vine did bend her roots toward him, and 
—— 


@ Verse 12. 1 Hebrew, embroidering. » 2 Kings xxiv. 12. 


? Heb. put it ina field of seed. 


¢ Deuteronomy viii. 7, 8, 9——4 Isaiah xliv. 4——® Verse 14. 
f Verse 15. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVII. 

Verse 2. Son of man, put forth a riddle—A con- 
tinued metaphor or figurative speech: an allegory. 
The prophets frequently delivered their instructions 
in this way, as being well calculated both to engage 
the attention of their hearers or readers, and to make 
a deep and lasting impression on their minds. It 
was a mode of teaching peculiarly adapted to the 
eastern people, and therefore often adopted by their 
instructers, whether inspired or uninspired. It is 
well known that our Lord frequently used it in 
preaching his gospel. 

Verses 3-6. A great eagle with great wings—The 
eagle is the king of birds, swift, strong, and rapacious. 
And this great eagle, according to all interpreters, 
represents Nebuchadnezzar. Its “ greatness, long 
wings, beautiful, abundant, and well-coloured plu- 
mage, denote the force and greatness of his empire, 
the rapidity of his conquests, and the number of his 
subjects. The Scripture has in other places de- 
scribed this prince under the figure.of an eagle. See 
Jer. xlviii. 40, 49; Dan. vii. 4. By his coming to 
Lebanon, and taking the highest branch of the ce- 
dar, is meant his invasion of Judea, his investing the 
city of Jerusalem, and taking King Jehoiachin and 
the princes captive."—Calmet. He cropped off the 
top of his young twigs—Both the king of Judah, 

628 


| 


now eighteen years old, and the nobles and chief of 
the land. And carried it into a land of traffic— 
“Babylon, and the country about it, being the seat 
of a universal monarchy, must needs have been a 
place of great trade. Strabo takes notice that the 
merchants who travelled by land to Babylon went 


| through the country of the Abrabians, called Sceni- 


t@, lib. xvi. p. 747; and vessels of great burden 
came up the river Euphrates to the walls of it from 
the Persian gulf.” See Pliny’s Nat. Hist., 1. vi. ¢. 26; 
and Lowth. He took also of the seed of the land— 
Of the king’s seed, as it is explained verse 13; that 
is, Zedekiah, whom the king of Babylon made king 
of Judah instead of Jehoiachin ; first exacting an 
oath of him, that he would be true to him, and pay 
him tribute. And he planted it in a fruitful field— 
Hebrew, yvi Nw, in a field of seed, that is, proper 
for seed: he placed it by great waters, and set it as 
a willow-tree—Judea was a fruitful country and 
well watered, (see Deut. viii. 7,) where Zedekiah 
flourished as a willow-tree, that thrives best in moist 
ground, Isa. xliv.4. And it became a spreading vine 
of low stature, &e.—Though Zedekiah flourished, 
yet he enjoyed but a tributary kingdom under the 
king of Babylon, and acknowledged him as his lord 
and sovereign: see verse 14. ’ 
Verses 7,8. There was also another great eagle—— 
3. 


T he destruction of 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Jerusalem foretold. 


A. M. 3411. 


athe |. shot forth her branches toward him, 


that he might water it by the furrows 
of her plantation. 

8 It was planted in a good *soil by great 
waters, that it might bring forth branches, and 
that it might bear fruit, that it might be a 
goodly vine. 

9 Say thou, Thus saith the Lord Gop; Shall 
it prosper? &shall he not pull up the roots 
thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it 
wither ? it shall wither in all the leaves of her 
spring, even without great power or many 
people to pluck it up by the roots thereof. 

10 Yea, behold, being planted, shall it pros- 
per? ® shall it not utterly wither, when the east 


wind toucheth it? it shall wither in A.M 3411. 
B. C. 593. 
the furrows where it grew. ae a 

11 “ Moreover the word of the Lorp came 
unto me, saying, 

12 Say now to ‘the rebellious house, Know 
ye not what these things mean? Tell them, 
Behold, * the king of Babylon is come to Jeru- 
salem, and hath taken the king thereof, and 
the princes thereof, and led them with him to 
Babylon ; 

13 ! And hath taken of the king’s seed, and 
made a covenant with him, ™ and hath ‘taken 
an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty 
of the land: 

14 That the kingdom might be * base, that 


* Heb. field ——8 2 Kings xxv. 7.— Chap. xix. 12 ; Hos. xiii. 
15.— Chap. ii. 5 ; xii. 9 ——* Verse 3; 2 Kings xxiv. 11-16, 


12 Kings xxiv. 17.——™ 2 Chron. xxxvi. 13.——* Heb. brought 
him to an oath. . Verse 6; Chap. xxix. 14. 


Namely, Pharaoh, king of Egypt, with whom Zede- 
kiah made an alliance ; whereupon that king sent an 
army to raise the siege of Jerusalem, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 
13; Jer. xxxvii.5,7. With great wings and many 
feathers—Having a great army and many people 
to support him. And this vine (namely, Zedekiah) 
did bend her roots toward him, &c—Zedekiah 
sought the assistance and protection of the king of 

Egypt. Dr. Waterland renders this clause, And 
shot forth her branches under him, from the furrows 
where she was planted, that he might water it: that 
is, give it assistance. The auxiliary forces which 
Zedekiah expected from Egypt are here intended. 
It was planted in a good soil, &ce.—The words are 
to the same purpose with verse 5, to show that Zede- 
kiah’s condition was so good under the king of Ba- 
bylon, that he needed not to have broken his oath out 
of a desire to better it, whereby he involved himself 
and his country in ruin: see notes on 2 Kings xxiv. 
20; and Jer. xvii. 25. 

Verses 9, 10. Say—Tell them what shall be the 
issue of all this, and tell it to them in my name. 
Shall it prosper?—Can it be that such breach of 
faith and such ingratitude should prosper? No, it 
cannot be: God will never suffer it. Zedekiah, be- 
sides the obligation of an oath, was bound to the king 
of Babylon by the ties of gratifude, as he owed all 
he possessed to him. Shall he not pull up the roots 
thereof ?—Shall not Nebuchadnezzar, in return for 

~ this perfidiousness, destroy him and his kingdom? 
see 2 Kings xxv. 7. And cut off the fruit thereof— 
Put his children and those of his nobles to the sword ? 
It shall wither in all the leaves of her spring—It 


shall wholly wither: not only the old branch shall | 


wither, but its young shoots also: and all the pro- 
mising hopes they had shall vanish: even without 
great power or many people—God shall be on the 
side of the Chaldeans, and he does not need great 
power or many people to effect his purpose. He 
can as easily overturn a sinful king and kingdom as 
a man can root up a tree that cumbers the ground. 


The king of Babylon, therefore, God being with him, 
shall easily subdue the land of Judah, and shall not 
need a large human force to assist him. Yea, shall 
it not utlerly wither when the east wind toucheth it? 
—Here the prophet compares the Chaldean army, 
which should come against Judea, to a parching 
wind that blasts the fruits of the earth, withers the 
leaves of the trees, and makes every thing look 
naked and bare. 

Verses 12-14. Say now to the rebellious house— 
To the house of Judah, which have been and still 
are rebellious against me, and are now entering into 
a rebellion against Nebuchadnezzar. This is God’s 
order to his prophet to explain the riddle. Anow 
ye not what these things mean2—Will you not ap- 
ply your minds to understand what God speaks to 
you? And that whether he directs his speech to 
you in plain words, or delivers his mind in riddles 
and parables? Behold, the king of Babylon is come— 
Or rather, did come, or came to Jerusalem—Namely, 
some time before the delivery of this prophecy: and 
hath taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof 
—Namely, Jeconiah and all his princes and officers: 
see 2 Kings xxiv. 12. And hath led them with him 
to Babylon—Judging them unfit to be trusted any 
more with any office or power in their own coun- 
try. And hath taken of the king’s seed—Hath taken 
from among the royal seed Mattaniah, Jehoiakim’s 
brother, and advanced him to the throne in Jerusa- 
lem, 2 Kings xxiv. 17; and made a covenant with 
him—A solemn agreement, on terms acceded to and 
approved by Mattaniah ; and hath taken an oath of 
him—An oath of fealty: when Nebuchadnezzar 
caused Mattaniah to enter into this covenant and 
oath, he changed His name to Zedeliah, which word 


| signifies, the justice of God, to express that God 


would avenge the crime of this restored captive, if 
he should break the covenant into which he had en- 
tered, and perjure himself: see note on 2 Kings 
xxiv. 17. He hath also taken the mighty of the land 
—Namely, as hostages for Zedckiah’s performance 


2 


Judgments against 


EZEKIEL. 


the king of Judah. 


A.M. 3411. it might not lift itself up, °bw¢ that 
B. C. 593 ‘ : Fae 
by keeping of his covenant it might 


stand. 

15 But °he rebelled against him in sending 
his ambassadors into Egypt, ? that they might 
give him horses and much people. 4 Shall he 
prosper ? shall he escape that doeth such things ? 
or, shall he break the covenant, and be de- 
livered ? 

16 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, surely * in 
the place where the king dwelleth that made 
him king, whose oath he despised, and whose 
covenant he brake, even with him in the midst 
of Babylon he shall die. 

17 * Neither shall Pharaoh, with Ais mighty 
army and great company, make for him in the 
war, * by casting up mounts, and building forts, 
to cut off many persons : 


18 Seeing he despised the oath by rienara 
breaking the covenant, when lo, he 
had "given his hand, and hath done all these 
things, he shall not escape. é 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; 
As I live, surely mine oath that he hath 
despised, and my covenant that he hath 
broken, even it will I recompense upon his 
own. head. 

20 And I will * spread my net upon him, and 
he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring 
him to Babylon, and ¥ will plead with him 
there for his trespass that he hath trespassed 
against me. 

21 And “all his fugitives with all his bands 
shall fall by the sword, and they that remain 
shall be scattered toward all winds: and ye 
shall know that I the Lorp have spoken 7¢. 


5 Heb. to keep his covenant, to stand to it. ©2 Kings xxiv. 20; 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 13. P Deuteron. xvii. 16; Isaiah xxxi. 1, 3; 
xxxvi. 6, 9-——4 Verse 9. Jer. xxxit. 53 Xi%xivs.0; Ml. Ts 


-of the covenant agreed on. That the kingdom 
might be base—Or rather, humble ; that it might be 
kept in subjection and obedience. Zedekiah being 
made only a tributary king, consequently was not in 
as honourable a condition as his predecessors had 
been in; but yet the keeping of his covenant was 
the only means, under present circumstances, to 
support himself and his government. 

Verse 15. But he rebelled in sending into Egypt, 
that they might give him horses—Egypt was a coun- 
try abounding in horses, of which there was great 
scarcity in Judea. This was not only a violation of 
his oath and covenant, but likewise a breach of that 
part of the Jewish law which forbade their king to 
fetch horses out of Egypt, or strengthen himself 
with the alliance of that nation. Shall he escape 
that doeth such things 2—Shall not the divine ven- 
geance overtake such ingratitude and perfidy ? Shall 
he break the covenant and be delivered 2—Can per- 
jury and covenant-breaking be the way to any man’s 
deliverance? Can such notorious sinning end in 
any thing but misery? From what is said on this 
occasion we learn, that an oath ought not to be 
violated though it was taken under unfavourable 
circumstances, and though the things to which a 
man bound himself by it were very disagreeable 
to him. 

Verses 16-21. As I live, saith the Lord, &c.—This 
intimates how highly God resented the crime, and 
how sure and severe the punishment of it would be. 
He swears in his wrath, as he did, Psa. xey.11. Ob- 
serve, reader, as God’s promises are confirmed with 
an oath, for comfort to the saints, so are his threat- 
enings, for terror to the wicked. Surely in the place 
where the king diwelleth—In Babylon, where Nebu- 
chadnezzar dwells, who made him king, when he 
might have as easily made him a prisoner. Whose 

630 


Chap. xii. 13. 8 Jer. xxxvii. 7. t Jer. lii. 4; Chap. iv. 2, 
uj Chron. xxix. 24; Lam. v. 6. x Chapter xii. 13; xxxii. 3. 
y Chap. xx. 36. z Chap. xii. 14. . 


oath he despised—Made light of, and perfidiously 
violated. Even with him he shall die—Shall be a 
prisoner in Babylon the rest of his days, and shall 
die there. Neither shall Pharaoh make for him— 
See Jer. xxxvii. 7. But the Hebrew, ins nwyr 
mondn3, may be properly rendered, as indeed it is by 
Bishop Newcome, Pharaoh shall not deal with him, 
namely, with Nebuchadnezzar, in war: or, shall not 
make war with him. Accordingly the Vulgate trans- 
lates the clause, “ Et non in exereitu grandi, neque 
in populo multo faciet contra eum Pharaoh pre- 
lium:” neither with a great army, nor with much 
people, shall Pharaoh fie cht a battle against him. 
By casting up, &c.—Or rather, When he hath cast 
up mounts, &c., that is, when Nebuchadnezzar has 
raised mounts and builded forts to annoy Jerusalem, 
and destroy its inhabitants, Pharaoh shall not bring 
any assistance to it. Seeing he despised, &c., when 
lo, he had given his hand—In token of entering into 
a mutual league and covenant: It was a ceremony 
used especially when an inferior made profession of 
his subjection to a superior. My covenant that he 
hath broken—God calls it his covenant, because it 
was entered into, or promised to be observed, by 
taking an oath in his name.. Even it will I recom- 
pense upon his own head—I will punish it-as it de- 
serves, and it shall appear by the punishment that 
my hand doth execute it. And I will spread my 
net, &c.—See on chap. xii. 18, where this clause oc- 
curs word for word. And will plead with him there 
—God is said to plead with men when he places 
their sins before their eyes, and convinces them of 
their disobedience by manifest tokens of his ven- 
geance. And all his fugitives—All the companions 
of his flight; with all his bands shall fall by the 
sword—Every thing here denounced by the prophet 
against Zedekiah exactly came to pags, as the reader 
; 3 


. their state was again restored. But if the words be 


The prosperous reign of 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


the Messiah foretold. 


A.M, 3411. 22 4 Thus saith the Lord Gop, I 
~ will also take of the highest * branch 
of the high cedar, and will set i¢; I will crop 
off from the top of his young twigs a tender 
one, and will ° plant 7¢ upon a high mountain 
and eminent: 
23 ‘In the mountain of the height of Israel 
will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, 
and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and 


° under it shall dwell all fowl of every 4. ye ei 
Wing; in the shadow of the branches ———— 
thereof shall they dwell. 

24 And all the trees of the field shall know 
that I the Lorp ‘have brought down the high 
tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up 
the green tree, and have made the dry tree to 
flourish : I the Lorp have spoken and have 
done i¢. 


aqsa. xi. 1; Jer. xxiii.5; Zech. iii. 8— Isa, liii. 2.——* Psa. 
ii. 6.——4 Isa. ii. 2, 3; Chap. xx. 40; Mic. iv. 1. 


e Chap. xxxi.6; Dan. iv. 12,——f Luke i. 52.——¢ Chap. xxii. 
14; xxiv. 14. 


may see by comparing these threatenings with the 
account given Jer. lii. 8-11; 2 Kings xxv. 5-7. 
Verses 22, 23. I will also take of the highest 
branch, &c.-—God, having spoken of Jerusalem, in 
the first part of this chapter, under the figure of a 
cedar, and the king of it as the highest branch of the 
cedar, here carries his view to farther scenes, and, 
after having acquainted his prophet with the fate of | 
Zedekiah, informs him, that as Nebuchadnezzar had | 
taken of the seed of the land, (or the king,) and | 
planted it, so he himself would take of the highest 
branch of the cedar and set it, &c. This appears 
plainly to be a prediction of the restoration of the | 
royal family of David; and it was in some degree 
fulfilled at the return from the captivity, when Ze- 
rubbabel, of the lineage of David, had a shadow of 
kingly authority among the Jews, and by his means 


properly examined, the expressions will be found to 
be such as, in their full sense, can only belong to 
Christ and his kingdom, which shall be extended 
over all the world. J will crop off from the young 
twigs a tender one—This may fitly be applied to our 
Saviour, in respect to the low estate to which the 
family of David was then reduced, and the meanness 
of Christ’s outward condition and appearance: see 
Isa. lili. 2. And will plant it upon a high mountain— 
Upon mount Zion, a type of the gospel church; and 
eminent—Not for outward splendour, but for spiritual 
advantages. In the mountain of the height of Israel 
—In Jerusalem, the capital city of my people, will I 
plant it—I will make him ruler of my church. He 
alludes to the temple placed on mount Moriah, a 
part of mount Zion, thence styled God’s holy moun-\ 
tain ; which expression is often used in the prophets 
to denote the Christian Church, which is described 
as a cily set on a hill, and conspicuous to al] the 
world. And it shall bring forth boughs—Have 
many members and subjects; and bear fruit—Do 
much good. The living members of the church are 


often compared to fruitful trees and flourishing 


branches. And be a goodly cedar—The most happy 
society in the world, Deut. xxxiii. 29; Psa. exliv. 15. 
And under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing— 
Persons of all nations shall become members of it. 
A powerful, especially if it be a mild government, is 
a shelter and security to all its subjects: compare 
chap. xxxi. 6; Dan.iv.12. Such shall the kingdom 
of Christ be to all that submit themselves to his laws. 

Verse 24. All the trees of the field—All the na- 
tions of the world; shall know that I the Lord have 
brought down the high tree—Have subdued and de- 
graded the enemies of my people; have exalted the 
low tree—Have’ advanced my church, and made it 
flourish; have dried up the green tree, &c—The 
same thing expressed in somewhat different words. 
Although these expressions may partly refer to the 
overthrow of the mighty Babylonian empire, and 
the restoration of the Jewish state by their return 
out of captivity, yet they are so magnificent, that 
they evidently intend much more than this. The 
Jewish kingdom did never, after the captivity, ar- 
rive at such a pitch of greatness as to give occasion 
to these magnificent expressions. Some more noble 
kingdom is undoubtedly here pointed at, namely, 
the kingdom of Christ, as has been observed above, 
which will at last be exalted above all the kingdoms 
of the world, and put an end to them all, while it 
will continue to all eternity: see Dan. iv. 35, 44, and 
vii. 27; Luke i.33; 1 Cor. xv. 24. It isunder Christ’s 
kingdom only that people of all nations, signified here 
by fowls of every kind, shall be gathered together. 
And the subjects of that kingdom only havt a cer- 
tain and eternal protection, and a supply of every 
thing necessary. There is therefore no doubt that 
this was spoken, in its full sense, of the eternal and 
all-powerful kingdom to be established in Christ, 
one of the royal seed of Judah according to the flesh. 
I the Lord have spoken it, and have done it—The 
prophets often speak of future events as if they were 
already accomplished, to assure us that they shall 
certainly come to pass. 


‘CHAPTER XVIIL. 


In order to refute a profane proverb of the wicked Jews, importing that God punished the innocent children instead of their 
wicked parents, God asserts in this chapter his sovereignty and justice: to manifest which, (1,) He declares that the 
wicked man shall die, or be punished, 4, 20: and that however good his father had been, 10-15: and however well he 


631 


T he children shall not bear 


EZEKIEL. 
*e 


the iniquity of their fathere. 


himself had lived for a time, 24, 26. 


~ 


(2,) He promises to reward the righteous man, 5-9: however wicked his parents 
had been, 14-18: and though himself had for a time been the same, 21-23. 


(3,) He declares that the end of such pro- 


vidential conduct was to vindicate his own equity, 19, 20, 25, 29: and to excite men sincerely to repent of sin and turn te 


him, 23, 30, 32. 
HE word of the Lorp came unto 


me again, saying, 

2 What mean ye, that ye use this proverb 
concerning the land of Israel, saying, The 
* fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the chil- 
dren’s teeth are set on edge ? 

3 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, ye shall not 


A. M. 3411. 
B. C. 593. 


a Jer. xxxi. 29; Lam. v. 7.——* Verse 20; | Rom. Vis; 23. 


have occasion any more to use this A. M. 3411. 
B. C. 593. 
proverb in Israel. ye ll 
4 Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of 
the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: 
>the soul that sinneth, it shall die. 
5 “I But if a man be just, and do ‘that which 
is lawful and right, 


1 Heb. judgment and justice. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XVIII. 

Verse 2. What mean ye, that ye use this proverb 
concerning the land of Israel—With. respect to the 
desolations made in it by the sword, famine, and pes- 
tilence. The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and 
the children’s teeth are set on edge—The present 
generation is punished for the offences committed 
by their forefathers, particularly for the sins com- 
mitted in the time of Manasseh, king of Judah: see 
2 Kings xwiii. 26; Jer. xv. 4. The Jewish people 
were very prone to plead their innocence, however 
great their crimes were. — - 

Verse 3. As J live, saith the Lord, ye shall not 
have occasion to use this proverb any tore in Israel 
—I will make such a visible discrimination between 
the righteous and the wicked, between those that 
tread in the steps of their forefathers and those who 
take warning by their examples, that you shall not 
have any further room to use this proverb among 
you. God threatens, it must be acknowledged, to 
visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, both in 
the Old Testament and the New: see Exod. xx. 5; 
Matt. xxiii. 35. But this is to be understood only, 
Ist, With respect to the temporal punishments of 
this world, not with respect to the eternal punish- 
ments of the next; and, 2d, When the children walk 
in the wicked steps of their parents, and so by de- 
grees fill up the measure of national iniquity: see 
notes on Jer. xv. 4, and xxxi. 29, where this matter 
is more fully explained. “The Scripture takes no- 
tice of-a certain measure of iniquity, which is filling 
up from one generation to another, till at last it 
makes a nation or family ripe for destruction. And 
although those persons on whom this vengeance 
falls suffer no more than their own personal sins 
deserved, yet, because the sins of former genera- 
tions, which they equal or outdo, make it time for 
God utterly to destroy them, the punishments due 
to the sins of many ages and generations are said to 
fall upon them.”—Dr. Sherlock. 

Verse 4. Behold, all souls are mine—As they are 
all equally my creatures, and in my power, so my 
dealings with them shall be without prejudice or 
partiality. The soul that sinneth, it shall die—The 
very same man that committeth sin shall be punish- 
ed for it. Some commentators explain this of the 
temporal death which was about to come on the 
wicked Jews by the sword, famine, and pestilence; 

632 


|and they would confine the whole chapter to these 


events. “But,” as Mr. Scott justly observes, “ it 
cannot be proved that every righteous man escaped 
those temporal judgments, or that all who survived 
them were righteous: without which this whole in- 
terpretation must fall for want of a foundation. 
Many, indeed, of the pious Jews had ‘their lives 
given them for a prey,’ but even what Jeremiah, 
Baruch, and others endured in the siege, and after 
the taking of Jerusalem, nearly equalled the exter- 
nal sufferings of many wicked men among them; 
and none of those who survived the siege escaped 
captivity or exile. So that facts, in this particular, 
did not so fully ascertain the equality of the divine 
conduct toward these distinct characters, as this 
hypothesis requires.” Temporal death, therefore, 
which, as the consequence of the first transgression, 
passes equally upon all men, cannot be only, or even 
chiefly, if it be at all, intended here. But, as life 
signifies in general all that happiness which attends 
God’s favour, so death denotes all those punishments 
which are the effects of the divine displeasure, (see 
2 Sam. xii. 13,) under which are comprehended the 
miseries of the next world. And these shall be 
allotted to men according to their deeds, (Rom. ii. 
6,) without any regard to the faults of their ances- 
tors, which shall not then be laid to their charge, or 
taken into account to aggravate their guilt. This 
the prophets well knew, and therefore; as they in- 
struct men in the practice of inward and evangelical 
righteousness, and in order to it speak slightingly of 
the mere external duties of religion, (see Isa. i. 11; 
Jer. vii. 22, 23,) so they raise men’s minds to look 
beyond the temporal promises and threatenings of 
the law, to the eternal rewards and punishments of 
another life, Isa. Ixvi. 24; Dan. xii. 2. In both 
which respects they prepared men’s minds for the 
reception of the gospel when it should be revealed. 
See Lowth. 

Verses 5-9. Ifa man be just—Or righteous, rather, 
as the word p-1¥ properly signifies; for it is not mere 
honesty, but true religion that is intended. And 
hath not eaten upon the mountains—Feasted on the 
sacrifices they offered to false gods. Idolatrous 
worship was commonly performed upon mountains 
or high places; and eating part of the sacrifice was 
properly maintaining communion with the ge to 
which it was offered. Neither hath lifted ‘mal 


The sinner shall perish ; 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


the righteous shall be safe. 


A. M. 3411. 


6 °And hath not eaten upon the 
B. C. 593. 


mountains, neither hath lifted up his 
eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither 
hath ¢ defiled his neighbour's wife, neither hath 
come near to °a menstruous woman, 

7 And hath not ‘ oppressed any, but hath re- 
stored to the debtor his & pledge, hath spoiled 
none by violence, hath » given his bread to the 
hungry, and hath covered the naked with a 
garment ; 

8 He ¢hat hath not given forth upon ‘ usury, 
neither hath taken any increase, that hath 
withdrawn his hand from iniquity, * hath ex- 
ecuted true judgment between man and man, 

9 Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept 
my judgments, to deal truly ; he zs just, he shall 
surely ' live, saith the Lord Gop. 

10 % If he beget a son that is a * robber, ™a 
shedder of blood, and *¢hat doeth the like to 
any one of these things, 

11 And that doeth not any of those duties, 


but even hath eaten upon the moun- ‘ x. “ 
tains, and defiled his neighbour’s wife, ———— 

12 Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath. 
spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, 
and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath 
2 committed abomination, 

13 Hath given forth upon usury, and hath 
taken increase; shall he then live? he shall 
not live: he hath done all these abominations ; 
he shall surely die; ° his ¢ blood shall be upon 
him. 

14 4 Now lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all 
his father’s sins which he hath done, and con- 
sidereth, and doeth not such like, 

15 > That hath not eaten upon the mountains, 
neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the 
house of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour’s 
wife, 

16 Neither hath oppressed any, *hath not 
withholden the pledge, neither hath spoiled 
by violence, but hath given his bread to the 


© Chap. xxii. 9——4 Ley. xviii. 20; xx. 10. ¢ Lev. xviii. 
19; xx. 18——f Exodus xxii. 21; Leviticus xix. 15; xxv. 14. 
& Exod. xxii. 26; Deut. xxiv. 12, 13.» Deut. xv. 7, 8; Isa. 
lviii. 7; Matt. xxv. 35, 36. i Wixod. xxii. 25; Lev. xxix. 36, 
37; Deut. xxiii. 19; Neh. v. 7; Psalm xv. 5.— Deut. i. 16; 
Zech. viii. 16. 


1 Chapter xx. 11; Amos v. 4. 2 Or, breaker up of a house. 
m Gen. 1x. 6; Exod. xxi. 12; Numbers xxxv. 31. Or, that 
doeth to his brother besides any of these. « Chapter viii. 6, 17. 


| o Lev. xx. 9, 11, 12, 13, 16,27; Chap. iii, 18; xxxili. 4; Acts 


5 Heb. hath not 


xviii. 6. 4 Hebrew, bloods. p Verse 6. 
pledged the pledge, or, taken to pledge. 


eyes to the idols—In prayer and adoration. And 
hath restored to the debtor his pledge—That is, what 
he could not be in want of without great inconve- 
nience ; such as clothes, bedding, and the like. God 
forbade the Jews to detain all night any pledge of 
this kind which they took from a poor man, (see the 
margin,) which was, in effect, to enjoin them to lend 
to the poor, without either pawn or usury. Hath 
given his bread to the hungry—After the offices of 
justice, come those of charity or beneficence: see 
margin. That hath not given forth wpon usury— 
Usury, when exacted of the poor, has been general- 
ly condemned as no better than oppression, and is 
particularly forbidden by the law: see the margin. 
It is probable this sort of usury is chiefly here meant, 
because it is joined with oppression, violence, and 
wait of charity. Every kind and degree of usury, 
however, was forbidden to the Israelites among one 
another, to promote a spirit of mutual kindness. 
But this law was peculiar to them: like their not 
reaping the corners of their fields, and their not 
gleaning their vines and olive-trees. Neither hath 
taken any increase—This seems to be meant of 
taking any advantage of the poor upon any occa- 
sion: see note on Ley. xxv. 36. Hath executed true 
judgment between mé@n and man—Whenever he 
has been appointed a judge or an arbiter of differ- 
ences between men; or, according as he has oppor- 
tunity of doing it. Hath walked in my statutes, 
and kept my judgments—My ordinances and com- 
nine attending diligently to the various in- 


stitutions of my worship, and living in continual 
obedience to my will as revealed in my word, and 
that from a principle of faith in, and love to me, 
Deut. vi.5; and xxx. 20; todeal truly—Uprightly 
and sincerely, according to the best of his know- 
ledge; he is just—Righteous in a gospel sense. 
Righteousness has been imputed to him, Gen. xv. 
6; Psa. xxxii. 1,2; and implanted in him, Deut. v. 
29, and xxx. 6; Psa. li. 10; otherwise it would not 
be thus practised by him. His person has been jus- 


tified, and his nature renewed, otherwise he would 


‘neither have inclination nor power to walk thus be- 


fore God in all well-pleasing. 


He shall surely live, 
saith the Lord God—Shall enjoy the comfort and 
reward of his obedience, and shall not need to fear 
any of those punishments that befall the wicked. 
He lives to God here, and shall live with him here- 
after: see notes on Psa. xv. 

Verses 10-13. Jf he—The righteous man before 
described, who transmits his human nature, but can- 


| not transmit his graces and virtues to his son; beget 


ason who is a robber, &e—Who is guilty of any 
of the evil practices above mentioned ; and that 
doeth not any of those duties—That lives in the 
neglect of the just and humane offices which have 
been mentioned, and which are commanded by the 
law; he hath committed abomination—This may 
chiefly refer to the last two clauses of verse 6. He 
shall not live—Namely, because of his father’s right- 
eousness. He shall not enjoy the divine favour and 
blessing here or hereafter: he shall not escape 
633 


The wicked, by repentance, 


A.M. 3411. hungry, and hath covered the naked 
B08. with a garment, 

17 That hath taken off his hand from the 
poor, ¢iat hath not received usury nor increase, 
hath executed my judgments, hath walked in 
my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity | 
of his father, he shall surely live. 

18 As for his father, because he cruelly op- 
pressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did 
that which is not good among his people, lo, 
even “he shall die in his iniquity. 

19 4 Yet say ye, Why? *doth not the son 
bear the iniquity of the father? When the son 
hath done that which is lawful and right, and 
hath kept all my statutes, and hath done*them, 
he shall surely live. 

20 * The soul that sinneth, it shall die. * The 


4 Chap. iii. 18——T Exod. xx. 5; Deut. v.9; 2 Kings xxiii. 
26 ; xxiv. 3, 4 Verse 4. * Deut. xxiv. 16; 2 Kings xiv. 
6; 2 Chron. xxv. 4; Jer. xxxi. 29, 30. 


EZEKIEL. 


shall find mercy. 


son shall not bear the iniquity of the A, M. 3411. 
father, neither shall the father bear Kid Aa 
the iniquity of the son: "the righteousness of 
the righteous shall be upon him, *and the 
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. 

21 7 But Yif the wicked will turn from all 
his sins that he hath committed, and keep all 
my statutes, and do that which is lawful and 
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. 

22 7 All his transgressions that he hath com- 
mitted, they shall not be mentioned unto him : 
in his righteousness that he hath done he shall 
deve, 1? 

23 *Have I any pleasure at all that the 
wicked should die? saith the Lord Gop: and 
not that he should return from his ways, and 
live ? 


u Isa. iii. 10, 11. x Rom. ii. 9——Y Verse 27; Chap. xxxiii. 
12, 19.——* Chap. xxxiii. 16——* Verse 32; Chap. xxxiii. 11; 
1 Tim. ii. 4; 2 Pet. iii. 9. 


punishment; namely, unless he turn to God in true 
repentance and reformation, verse 21. He hath 
done, or, because he hath done, all these abomina- 
tions—Which have rendered him an object of the 
divine wrath; his blood shall be upon him—He is 
the cause of his own destruction ; the whole blame 
of it must lie at his own door. 

Verses 19,20. Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son 
bear the iniquity of the father ?—God here puts into 
the prophet’s mouth what he knew the Jews would 
object (at least in their minds) to the foregoing de- 
clarations, namely, that they would deny what the 
prophet had said on this head, and would appeal to 
facts and experience that the son did bear the ini- 
quity of the father; so that the sense of the first 
clause of the verse is, Why do you affirm this? 
does not experience show that the son bears the 
iniquity of the father?~ Is it not plain and undeni- 
able, notwithstanding your fine discourse to the con- 
trary? To be sure, we feel the truth of it in our 
own cases. ‘To this cavil God makes answer in the | 
following words, affirming that this was no other- 
wise so than when the son followed the example of 
his father’s iniquity; for that, when the son did that 
which was lawful and right, and kept God’s statutes, 


or lived a life of true piety and virtue, he should} 


surely live, that is, should not be punished, or cut 
off, on account of the iniquity of his father. The 
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him— 
That is, the righteous shall receive the reward of his 
righteousness. And the wickedness of the wicked 
shall be upon hin—That is, the reward of his wick- 


edness. As certainly as it shall be well with the 
righteous, because he shall eat the fruit of his do- 
ings, so certainly shall woful punishment be exe- 
cuted upon the wicked who persist in their wicked- 
ness: see Isa. iii, 10, 11. 
Verses 21-23. But if the wicked will turn from 
634 


they repent of and forsake them. 


all his sins—That is, repent and bring forth fruit 
worthy of repentance. He shall surely live--He 
shall escape punishment: he shall be pardoned, and 
it shall be well with him in time and in eternity ; as 
if he had said, So far is God from punishing the 
sins of guilty parents on their innocent children, as 
is objected above, that it is certain he does not 
punish even the guilty for their own sins, when 
Our God, who 
mercifully pardons the penitent for their own sins, 
will not, cannot for a moment, be supposed to charge 
innocent children, or any others, with the sins that 
are not theirown. All his transgressions—That is, 
not one of all his transgressions ; shall be mention- 


| ed unto him—Or remembered against him ; that is, 


| if they were forgotten. 


imputed to or punished on him; they shall be as 
God is said in Scripture to 
remember men’s sins when he punishes them, and 
not to remember them when he pardons them: see 
Jer, xiv. 10, and xxxi. 34. Have I any pleasure, 
&§c., that the wicked should die2—“Is it any plea- 
sure to me that men should be wicked; or that 
those who are now wicked men, should die ever- 


‘lastingly? Is it not rather my desire that men 


should repent, and that the repentant should live? 
Is not this the very sum of my gospel, which I send 
into the world? Do I not call, and ery, and sue to 
men, that they would return from their sins, and be 
saved ?”—Bishop Hall. It is not in the nature of 
God, which is-infinitely holy and gracious, to have 
any pleasure in the unholiness and misery of any 
of his creatures. It does ‘a comport with the 
wisdom and rectitude of thé eternal lawgiver and 
sovereign ruler of the world, to take delight in see- 
ing his laws violated, the rights of his government 
infringed, and his subjects punished. And it can- 
not consist with the boundless love of the almighty , 
Father of the universe to take aie) od 


Of the righteous man that 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


Sails from his righteousness. 


A. M. 3411. 


b i 2 
ee atu 24 %J But » when the righteous turn 


eth away from his righteousness, and 
committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all 
the abominations that the wicked man doeth, 
shall he live? ©All his righteousness that he 
hath done shall not be mentioned : in his tres- 
pass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin 
that he hath sinned, in them shall he die. 

25 4% Yet ye say, ? The way of the Lorp is 
not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is 
not my way equal? are not your ways un- 
equal ? 

26 * When a righteous man turneth away 


from his righteousness, and commit- A. M. 3411. 
teth iniquity, and dieth in them; for tain 
his iniquity that he hath done, shall he die. 

27 Again, ‘when the wicked man turneth 
away from his wickedness that he hath com- 
mitted, and doeth that which is lawful and 
right, he shall save his soul alive. 

28 Because he & considereth and turneth away 
from all his transgressions that he hath commit- 
ted, he shall surely live, he shall not die. 

29 * Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of 
the Lorn is not equal. O house of Israel, are not 
my ways equal? are not your ways unequal ? 


* Chapter iii. 20; xxxiil. 12, 13, 18. ¢ 2 Pet. ii. 20; Matt, v. 
13; xii. 43; xxiv. 10, 45-51; Luke xxi. 34; John xv. 1-6. 
yes Be 


4 Verse 29; Chap. xxxiii. 17, 20.— Verse 24.—f Verse 21. 
& Verse 14.—— Verse 25. : 


ing the wretchedness of his offspring; or with the | 


infinite mercy of the Redeemer and Saviour of the 
fallen race of Adam, to delight in seeing those per- 
ish for whose salvation he gave his Son to die. On 
the contrary, he willeth all men to be saved, and, in 
order thereto, fo come to the knowledge of the truth, 
and is not willing that any should perish, 1 Tim. 


ii. 4; 2 Pet. iii. 9. Itis true that God has determined | 


to punish sinners continuing in sin; his justi¢e calls 
for it; and, pursuant to that, impenitent sinners will 
lie for ever under his wrath and curse. 


his antecedent will, the will of his delight and good 
pleasure. 


rather that they should turn from their ways and 
live ; and he is unspeakably better pleased when his 
mercy is glorified in their salvation than when his 
justice is glorified in their damnation. Hence that 


affectionate wish, Deut. v. 29, O that there were | 


such a heart in them, that they would fear me, &c., 
always, that it might be well with them, and with 
their children for ever! 

Verse 24. But when the righteous turneth away 
Srom his righteousness, &c.—“ The question here,” 
say some commentators, “is not whether truly 
righteous men ever do thus apostatize.” No? Surely 
it is the question, and the sole question: for if the 
truly righteous (of whom alone the prophet is 
speaking, and not of the hypocritically righteous, or 
mere professors of righteousness) do never aposta- 
tize, why does the prophet suppose that they do? 
Nay, why does he expressly affirm it, saying, When 
the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, 
and committeth iniquity? &c. Which is repeated 
verse 26, with the addition, And dieth in them; for 
the iniquity that he hath done shall he die. Surely 
these words are utteffy irreconcilable with the no- 
tion, that the truly righteous never fall away. They 
who maintain this position may, on similar grounds, 
maintain, and, to be consistent with themselves, ought 
to maintain, in contradiction to the 21st and 27th 
verses, that the truly wicked never turn frum their 


= 


For though the righteousness of his | 
government requires that sinners should die, yet | 
the goodness of his nature causes him to choose far | 


This is the | 
will of his decree, his consequent will, but it is not || 


be 


| 


'note on chap. iii. 20. 
| teaching this doctrine, or this the only passage of 


| gin, 


wickedness, never truly repent, and save their souls 
alive. For both events are equally supposed by 
the prophet frequently to take place, and it is affirm- 
ed in similar terms that both do take place. See 
Nor is this prophet singular in 


Scripture in which it is taught: it is abundantly and 
explicitly declared and attested in other parts of 


‘holy writ, and by other inspired writers, especially 
|| those of the New Testament, and even by Christ 


himself, as the reader may see, if he will take the 
trouble of consulting the passages quoted in the mar- 
All his righteousness that he hath done shall 
not be mentioned—For, better had it been for him not 
to have known the way of righteousness, than after 
he hath known it, to turn aside from the holy com- 
mandment, 2 Pet. ii. 21. Such a one sins against 
a clearer light, and greater convictions, and withal 


is guilty of the highest ingratitude in doing despite 


unto the Spirit of grace. 

Verses 25-29. Yet ye say, The way of the Lord 
is not equal, &c.—Yet ye allege that I do not act 
according to the strict rules of justice and equity: 
but ‘the declarations I have so often repeated con- 
cerning the eternal rewards and punishments allot- 
ted to the righteous and‘ the wicked, are sufficient to 
vindicate the puetlee of my proceedings against all 
your objections.” When a righteous man turneth 
away from his righteousness, &c.—* It is an opinion 
that prevails among the Jews, even till this day, that 
at the day of judgment a considerable number of 
good actions shall overbalance men’s evil ones. See 
chap. xxxiii. 13. So they thought it a hard case for 
a man who had been righteous the far greater part 
of his life, if he did at last commit iniquity, that his 
former righteousness should avail him nothing. In 
opposition to this doctrine, God here declares that a 
righteous man sinning and not repenting, should die 
in his sins; and that a wicked man, upon his repent- | 
ance, should save his soul alive."—Lowth. Again, 
when the wicked man, &c.—These verses are, as it 
were, a repetition of what had been said before; or 
rather, the conclusion of the matter, or the whole of 
the chapter summed up and brought to a point; 

635 


God has no pleasure in 


EZEKIEL. 


A. M. Bat. 


30 i Therefore I will judge you, O 
B.C, 593 


~ house of Israel, every one according 
to his ways, saith the Thon Gop. * Repent, 
and turn °yourselves from all your transgres- 
sions ; so iniquity shall not be your ruin. 

31 4 ‘Cast away from you all your transgres- 


the death of the wicked. 
sions, whereby ye have transgress A. M. 3411, 
4 oo Stem B. C. 593. 


and make you a ™new heart and a 
new spirit: for why will ye die,O house of Israel ? 

32 For "I have no pleasure in the death of 
him that dieth, saith the Lord Gop: wherefore 
turn 7 yourselves, and live ye. 


t Chap. vii. 3; xxxiii. 20.——* Matt. iii. 2; Rev. ii. 5——® Or, 
others.—! Ephes. iv. 22, 23. 


m Jer. xxxii. 39; Chapter xi. 19; xxxvi. 26.—® Lam. iii. 33; 
Verse 23 ; Chap. xxxili. 11 ; 2 Pet. iii, 9.—" Or, others. 


namely, that men suffer the divine punishments only 


on account of their sins; that they cannot enjoy the 
divine favour while they continue in sin; and that, 
in order to obtain it, it is indispensably necessary 


that they should turn from all their transgressions | 


and become new creatures, and that even former 


righteousness cannot obtain for them, or preserve) 
to them, the favour of God, while they relapse into) 


and continue in subsequent iniquity. In a word, 

that sin and wickedness are the sole objects of God’s 

aversion and indignation, and holiness and righteous- 
ness of his favour and approbation. 


Verses 30, 31. Therefore will I judge you, O house | 
of Israel, every one according to his ways, &e.—You | 
complain of the injustice of my ways or proceed- | 


ings; but if I judge you according to the desert of 


your ways, you will certainly be all found guilty: | 
and nothing but repentance, and areal turning to} 
God in heart and life, can avert that ruin to which) 


your sins have exposed you. Cast away from you 


all your transgressions—Here God, in a most tender | 


and pathetic manner, exhorts the Israelites, and in 
them all sinners, to comply with those terms on 
which alone he could or can take men into favour, 


and save them from destruction, namely, the casting | 
away or forsaking all their sins, whether of omission | 


or commission, all their sinful tempers, words, or 
works; and .giving up themselves sincerely and 
heartily to his love and service. And to show that 
a mere attendance on modes of worship, and an ex- 
ternal obedience to the precepts of God’s law, are 
not sufficient, nor can be accepted without internal 
purity and holiness, he adds, Make you a new heart 


and a new spirit—Which words imply, both that a 
new heart and a new spirit are absolutely necessary 
in order to salvation, and that means must be used 
by us in order to the attainment of these blessings. 
It must be well observed, that what is here com- 
manded as our duty, to show the necessity of our 
endeavours in the use of means, is elsewhere pro- 
mised as God’s gift, (see chap. xxxvi. 26, and xi. 19,) 
to show man’s inability to perform this duty, with- 
out the special grace of God, which, however, will 
not be denied to those who sincerely and earnestly 
seek it, in the way God has prescribed, namely, the 
way of prayer, watchfulness, self-denial, attention 
to and faith in the word and promise of God, assem- 
bling with his people, and carefully shunning the 
appearance of evil. For, as Lowth well observes, 
the difference of expression is thus to be reconciled, 
“that although God works in us to will and to do, 
and. is the first mover in our regeneration, yet we 
must work together with his grace, and not quench 
or resist its motions:” see notes on Jer. xxxi. 18, 
33, 34. To the same purpose are the words of 
Calmet here: “ Wecan do nothing weil of ourselves; 
we have of ourselves nothing but sin: all our power 
comes from God, and with the aid of his grace we 
can do all things. But if, on the one hand, we 
ought to humble ourselves on account of our impo- 
tence, on the other hand we ought to hope in him, 
who giveth to all liberally, and who willeth not our 
death, but our conversion. He informs us of our 
freedom of will, by enjoining us to make us a new 
heart: he would have us to do what we can, and to 
ask of him what we cannot.” 


CHAPTER XIX. 


The scope of this chapter, like that of the seventeenth, is to foretel and bewail the ruin of the house of David, in the calami- 
tous exit of Josiah’s sons, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Zedekiah, and his grandson Jehoiachin, in whom that illustrious line of 


kings was cut off, which the prophet is here ordered to lament, 1. 


This he doth by similitudes. (1,) The kingdom of 


Judah and house of David are here compared to a lioness, and these princes to young lions, fierce and ravenous, but hunted 


down and taken in nets by the Egyptians and Chaldeans, 2-9. 


(2,) That kingdom and faniily are compared to a vine, 


and these princes to branches which had been strong and flourishing, but either were, or soon would be, orolemat and 


burned, 10-14. 
636 


The parable of the 


CHAPTER XIX. 


lioness and her whelps. 


sen. JY OREOVER, * take thou up a 
Ae tlt ll lamentation for the princes of 
Israel, 

2 And say, What zs thy mother? A lioness: 
she lay down among lions, she nourished her 
whelps among young lions. . 

3 And she brought up one of her whelps: ? it 
became a young lion, and it learned to catch the 
prey ; it devoured men. 

4 The nations also heard of him; he was 
taken in their pit, and they brought him with 
chains unto the land of * Egypt. 

5 Now when she saw that she had waited, 
ana her hove was lost, then she took ¢ another 
of her whelps, and made him a young lion. 


6 *And he went up and down A.M. 3411, 
among the lions, f he became a young Bed rks) 
lion, and learned to catch the prey, and de- 
voured men. 

7 And he knew ' their desolate palaces, and 
he laid waste their cities: and the land was 
desolate, and the fulness thereof, by the noise 
of his roaring. 

8 & Then the nations set against him on 
every side from the provinces, and spread their 
net over him: » he was taken in their pit. 

9 4And they put him in ward ?in chains, 
and brought him to the king of Babylon: they 
brought him into holds, that his voice should no 
more be heard upon * the mountains of Israel. 


a Chap. xxvi. 17; xxvii. 2.——» Verse 6; 2 Kings xxiii. 31, 
32. © 2 Kings xxiii. 33; 2 Chronicles xxxvi.4; Jeremiah 
xxii. 11, 12.—4 2 Kings xxiii. 34. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIX. 

Verses 1,2. Take up a lamentation for the princes 
of Israel—The expression alludes to the mournful 
songs sung at funerals. Such a lamentation the pro- 
phet is directed to apply to the mournful condition 
of Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah. 
And say, What is thy mother ?—What resemblance 


shall I use to express the nature, deportment, and | 


state of the mother of these princes, namely, Judea, 
or the Jewish nation? ‘The prophet proposes a 
question that may be applied to each prince distinct- 
ly. A lioness—Here is an allusion, says Grotius, to 
Gen. xlix. 9, where Judah is represented under the 
emblem of a lion, and Judea was among the nations 
like a lioness among the beasts of the forest; she had 
strength and sovereignty. And the young lions 
which she produced are the princes, Josiah’s suc- 
cessors, whose life and disgraces the prophet here 
points out. She lay down among the lions—She 
remained in grandeur and security in the neighbour- 
hood of many powerful kings. She nourished her 
whelps among lions—She multiplied and increased 
in power, notwithstanding the envy of all the neigh- 
bouring nations. 

Verses 3, 4. And she brought up one of her whelps 
—This seems to be spoken of Jehoahaz, who, we are 
told, followed not the good example of his father Jo- 
siah, but the evil practices of the wicked kings his 
predecessors; and though we have no further ac- 
count of his acts, yet, from this, there is sufficient 
reason to suppose that he was rapacious and injuri- 
ous to his neighbours, and tyrannical and cruel; 
which possibly was the reason why Pharaoh-necho 
deposed him after he had reigned only three months, 
and placed his brother on the throne in his room. 
The nations also heand of him—The king of 
Egypt, hearing of his character, and probably some 
of his subjects having been used ill by him, deprived 
him of his kingly office, put him in bands, and car- 
ried him into Egypt, 2 Kings xxiii. 32,34. He was 
taken in their pit—This expression alludes to those 

3 


€, Jeremiah xxii. 13-17. f Verse 3. 1 Or, their widows. 
62 Kings xxiv. 2. bh Verse 4.——i 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6; Jer. 
xxli.. 18.——? Or, in hooks. k Ezek. vi. 2. 


pit-falls and snares which are made to take wild 
beasts; and as Jehoahaz is spoken of here as a 
young lion, the expression was quite applicable to 
signify his being taken prisoner. 

Verses 5-9. When she saw that she had waited 
—This seems to signify that the Jews waited some 
time before they thought of setting another king 
over them, hoping, probably, that the king of Egypt 
would restore unto them Jehoahaz, whom he had 
taken prisoner; but when they saw their hopes dis- 
appointed in this, and that there was no longer any 
room to expect it, then they, by the consent, and, 
probably, direction of the king of Egypt, elected Je- 
hoahaz’s brother, Eliakim, king in his stead, his 
name being changed to Jehoiakim. And he went up 
'and down among the lions—He imitated the kings 
his neighbours, and became rapacious and cruel like 
them. And learned to catch the prey, &c.—He 
learned and practised all the methods of tyranny and, 
oppression. Andhe knew their desolate palaces— 
Dr. Waterlandand Houbigant render it, He destroy- 
ed their palaces ; and Bishop Newcome, He brought 
evil upon their palaces. The meaning seems to be, 
that Jehoiakim made himself master of the riches 
and pleasant seats of the great men of the land. And 
the land was desolate, §c., by the noise of his roar- 
ing—His cruelty and oppression caused many of the 
inhabitants of Judea to remove out of it, and go and 
settle in other places, where they could live more 
secure. J'hen the nations set themselves against 
him, &c.—He was attacked by the Chaldeans, Syri- 
ans, Moabites, and Ammonites, and at last the king 
of Babylon took him prisoner, and carried him in 
fetters to Babylon: see 2 Chron. xxxvi.6. T'hat 


his voice should no more be heard, &c.—That he 
should be no more a terror to the land of Israel. For 
Jehoiakim being compared, in the foregoing verses, 
to a lion, whose voice, or roaring, strikes men with 
terror ; by saying that his voice should no more be 
heard, is signified that he should be no longer a terror 
| to any in the country. 

637 


The elders of Israel 


* EZEKIEL. 


consult the prophet. 


4. M. 341. 10 § Thy mother és ' like a vine 
By SR st thy blood, planted by the waters : 


she was ™ fruitful and full of branches by rea- 
son of many waters. 

11 And she had strong rods for the sceptres 
of them that bare rule, and her "stature was 
exalted among the thick branches, and she ap- 
peared in her height with the multitude of her 
branches. ; 

12 But she was plucked up in fury, she was 


cast down to the ground, and the A, M. 3411. 
°east wind dried up her fruit: her ———— ecco 
strong rods were broken and withered ; the fire 
consumed them. 

13 And now she is planted in the wilderness, 
in a dry and thirsty ground. 

14 And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, 
which hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath 
no strong rod ¢o be a sceptre to rule. 4 'This is 
a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. 


1 Chapter xvii. 6.——*% Or, in thy quietness, or, in thy likeness. 

m Deut. vili. 7, 8, 9. 2 So Chap. xxxi. 3; Dan. iv. 11. 
Verses 10-14. T'hy mother is like a vine—Here 
another similitude is made use of, and the Jewish na- 
tion is compared, as it frequently is in other places, 
to avine. Jn thy blood—So the Hebrew and Vul- 
gate; butthe LXX. read, we avfo¢ ev poa, as a flower 
on a pomegranate-tree ; and Bishop Newcome, who 
supposes the LXX. to have read 1975, and not 773, 
renders the clause, like a pomegranate, planted by 
the waters, &e.—“ The Jewish nation, whence the 
royal family had their original, was like a fruitful 
vine in a very flourishing condition.” And she had 
strong rods, &c.—F rom her sprung valiant princes, 
fit to sway the sceptre. A rod or sceptre isan em- 
blem of authority. Her stature was exalted among 
the thick branches—Among the neighbouring kings 
and princes: see 2 Chron. xxxii. 23. The increase 
of the nation’s power is expressed by this. But she 
was plucked up in fury—God, in his anger, removed 
her out of her own land. She was cast down to the | 
ground—She was reduced to a contemptible state. | 


° Chap. xvii. 10; Hos. xiii. 15.——? Judg. ix. 15; 2 Kings xxiv. 
20; Chap. xvii. 18——4 Lam, iv, 20. 


The east wind dried up her fruit—The Chaldean 
forces ravaged and depopulated the country; her 
strong rods were broken—Her kings and princes 
were subdued, and made captives. The fire con- 
sumed them—The divine anger brought them to de- 
struction, as fire consumes the branches of a tree 
when it is withered. And now she is planted in the 
wilderness—A great part of her people are carried 
captive, where their condition is as much different 
from what it was formerly, as the condition of a tree 
is when it isremoved out of a rich soil intoa dry and 
barren ground. The Jews suffered several captivi- 
ties before that final one which ended in the destrue- 
tion of their temple and government. And fire is 
gone out of a rod of her branches—This is spoken of 
Zedekiah’s breaking his oath of fidelity to the king of 
Babylon, which was the occasion of the destruction 
of the royal family, and the entire ruin of the govern- 
ment. Zhis is a lamentation, &c.-—This is matter 
of present lamentation, and shall be so to after ages. 


CHAPTER XX. 


The prophet, consulted by some of the elders of Israel, (1,) Signifies God’s displeasure against them, 1-3. (2,) Gives them 
a history of God’s dealings with their fathers, and of their treacherous dealings with God in Egypt, 4-9. In the wilder- 


ness, 10-26. In Canaan, 27-32. 


(3,) He denounces the judgments of God against them, 33-36. 


(4,) Promises mercy 


to a remnant in God’s bringing them to repentance, re-establishing them in their own land, and restoring his sanctuary 


among them, 37-44, 
tion of all ranks of people in the land, 45-49. 


A. M. 3412, 


ND it cz sj s 
mere AD it, came to pass in the seventh 


year, in the fifth month, the tenth 
day of the month, ¢hat * certain of the elders of 
Israel came to inquire of the Lorp, and sat 
before me. 


@ Chap. viii. 1; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XX. 

Verses 1-3. It came to pass in the seventh year, | 

&c.—Namely, of Jehoiakim’s captivity. All the pro-_ 

phecies recorded from the eighth chapter to this, | 

probably belong to the os year of that captivity. | 
6 


(5,) By a parable he predicts the burning of Jerusalem, and other cities of Judah, and the destruc- 


2 Then came the word of the Lorp Bie 
unto me, saying, penirecones 
3 Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, 
and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Gon ; 
Are ye come to inquire of me? As I live, saith 


Chap. xiv. 1. ' 
_————————— 
Certain of the elders came to inquire, &e—Came to 
me, as the prophet of God, to inquire what would be 
the event of their affairs; when they might expect 
deliverance from their calamities, and by what — 


means. J will not be inquired of by you—I will give 
5 3 u 


He shows the elders their 


CHAPTER XX. 


sin and ingratitude. 


A. M. 3412. the Lord Gop, I will not be in- 

B.C. 592. 

———— quired of by you. 

4 Wilt thou ? judge ° them, son of man? wilt 
thou judge them ? ‘cause them to know the 
abominations of their fathers : 

5 “| And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop ; In the day when °I chose Israel, and 
* lifted up my hand unto the seed of the house 
of Jacob, and made myself f known unto them 
in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up my hand 
unto them, saying, * lam the Lorn your God ; 


b Verse 31; Chap. xiv. 3——" Or, plead for them.——* Chap. 
xxii. 2; xxiii. 36.——4 Chap. xvi. 2. e Exodus vi. 7; Deut. 
Vii. 6. 2 Or, swear, and so verse 6; Exod. vi. 8.——f Exod, 
iii. 8; iv. 31; Deut. iv. 34——s Exod. xx. 2. 


6 In the day that I lifted up my AyMe 2419 
hand unto them, " to bring them forth ———~* 
of the land of Egypt into a land that I had 
espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, 
‘ which zs the glory of all.lands: 

7 Then said I unto them, * Cast ye away 
every man 'the abominations of his eyes, and 
defile not yourselves with ™ the idols of Egypt: 
I am the Lorp your God. 

8 But they rebelled against me, and would 
not hearken unto me; they did not every man 


h Exod. iii. 8,17; Deut. viii. 7, 8,9; Jer. xxxii. 22——i Psa. 
xlviii. 2; Verse 15; Daniel viii. 9; xi. 16,41; Zech. vii. 14. 
k Chap. xviii. 31.——1! 2 Chron. xv. 8.——™ Ley. xvii. 7; xviii. 


3; Deut. xxix. 16,17, 18; Josh. xxiv. 14. 


you no information concerning the things about 
which you come to inquire: or, you shall not receive 
such an answer as you expect, but such as your hy- 
pocrisy deserves. 

Verse 4. Wilt thou judge them—Or, rather, Wilt 
thou not judge them? Wilt thou not reprove, or 
condemn them? Wilt thou not denounce my judg- 
ments against them? Cause them to know the abomi- 
nations of their fathers—The abominable crimes of 
which their fathers have been guilty, and which they 
themselves, and the present generation of Jews, 
haye also committed with fresh aggravations: and 
hereby let them know what they have to expect. 
This whole chapter is a kind of decree, in which the 
prophet, after having set forth the crimes of the 
Jews, pronounces against them their reprobation, 
and foretels what blessings God would bestow on a 
faithful people who should serve him truly on his 
holy mountain. 

Verse 5. In the day when I chose Israel—When I 
entered into a solemn covenant. And lifted wp my 
hand, &c.—That is, sware unto them, this being a 
gesture used in swearing: see the margin, and notes 
on Gen. xiv. 22, and Psa. exliv.8. “Among the 
Jews the juror held up his right hand toward heaven ; 
which explains Psa. cxliv. 8, Whose mouth speak- 
eth vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of 
falsehood. The same form is retained in Scotland 
still”’—Paley’s Moral and Political Philosophy, 
p. 159. This manner of taking an oath is mentioned 
by Homer, Evyero yetpar avacyov, which shows it to 
have been of great antiquity, even among the hea- 
then. It was a solemn appeal to God, as the author 
of truth, and the defender thereof, and also the judge 
of the heart; implying a wish in the person swear- 
ing, that God would take vengeance if the truth was 
either violated or concealed. Some think, however, 
that lifting up the hand in this place means giving 
them help and deliverance: but the 15th and 23d 
verses evidently confirm the former explication. 
And made myself known unto them—By appearing 
unto Moses, and showing myself presentamong them, 
by the wonders I wrought for their deliverance. 
Saying, Iam the Lord your God—I am the God 
whom you ought to serve, and none else. 

3 


Verse 6. To bring them into a land that I had 
espied for them—Which I chose out of all others to 
bestow it upon them. So God is said to go before 
them, to search out a place to pitch their tents in, 
Deut. i. 33. The expressions import, that every step 
the people took, till their settlement in the land of 
Canaan, was under the immediate care and conduct 
of providence. Flowing with milk and honey— 
Judea is often called a land flowing with milk and 
honey, both on account of its own fruitfulness, and 
also from God’s peculiar blessing upon it: see Deut. 
xi. 12. The great number of inhabitants which it 
nourished is an evident proof of its fertility. Bochart 
observes, that this phrase occurs about twenty times 
in the Scriptures ; and that it is an image frequently 
used in the classics: as Peu de yadaxte medov, per 0 
ova, pét de pertcowy vextapt. The land flows with 
milk, flows with wine, flows with nectar of bees. 
Eurip. Bacch. 142. Which is the glory of all lands 
—The Hebrew, nvyonn 535 sn 12x, may either 
mean, that ¢his cireumstance of flowing with milk 
and honey is a glory to all lands, namely, in which 
it is found; or, that Judea was the glory of all lands, 
The Vulgate takes it in the latter sense, rendering the 
clause, Que est egregia inter omnes terras, which is 
excellent among all lands. Judea might justly be 
called the glory of all lands, because it was the place 
where the temple of the true God was fixed, Psa. 
xlviii. 2,3; Dan. xi. 16, 41, 45. 

Verses 7-9. Cast ye away every man the abomi- 
nations of his eyes—The idols to which your eyes 
are lifted up. One of the chief allurements to the 
worship of images is, that by way of indulgence to 
men’s imagination, they exhibit a visible object of 
adoration. This was what the Israelites were so 
fond of, when they said to Aaron, Make us gods to 
go before us, Exod. xxxii.1. And defile not your- 
selves with the idols of Egypt—It is generally sup- 
posed that the Israelites, while they dwelt in Egypt, 
learned the idolatry of that country: the fact indeed 
is not recorded in the books of Moses; but it may be 
collected from their proneness to that sin in the wil- 
derness. But they rebelled against me—The his- 
tory of the rebellions of the children of Israel begins 
as early as their beginning. So does the history of 

639 


God’s dealings with the 


EZEKIEL. 


Israelites in the wilderness 


A. M. 3412. cast away the abominations of their 
> sl eyes, neither did they forsake the idols 
of Egypt: then I said, I will "pour out my fury 
upon them, to accomplish my anger against 
them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 

9 ° But I wrought for my name’s sake, that 
it should not be polluted before the heathen, 
among whom they were, in whose sight I 
made myself known unto them, in bringing 
them forth out of the land of Egypt. 


10 Wherefore, I ? caused them to A. M. 3412. 
go forth out of the land of Egypt, and ba Naa 
brought them into the wilderness. 

11 ?And I gave them my statutes, and 

3 showed them my judgments, * which ¥ a mau 
do, he shall even live in them. 

12 Moreover, also I gave them my *sabbaths, 
to be a sign between me and them, that they 
might know that I am the Lorp that sanctify 
them. 


= Chap. vii. 8; Verses 13,21, ° Exodus xxxii. 12; Num. 
xiv. 13; Deut. ix. 28; Verses 14, 22; Chapter xxxvi. 21, 22. 
p Exod. xiii. 18——4 Deut. iv. 8; Nehemiah ix. 13, 14; Psalm 


exlvii. 19, 20.—* Heb. made them to know.—* Lev. xviii. 5; 
Verses 13, 21; Rom. x. 5; Gal. iii. 12——* Exod. xx. 8; xxxi. 
13; xxxv. 2; Deut. v. 12; Neh. ix. 14. 


man’s Sita from his Maker. No sooner have we 
read the story of his creation than we meet with 
that of his rebellion. So we see here it was with 
Israel; a people designed to represent the body of 
mankind, both in their dealings with God, and in 


God’s dealings with them. Then I said, I threat- || 


ened, I will pour out my fury upon them—Such 
a threatening as this is nowhere recorded in the 
Scriptures no more than that which follows verse 23 
of this chapter. Without question God might, have 
justly cut them off in Egypt for their idolatries and 
other sins which they had committed, and never 
exerted his power. for their deliverance. But I 
wrought for my name’s sake—For the glory of my 
mercy and faithfulness. 
luted before the heathen—Reproached and Dlas- 


That it should not be pol-. 


. phemed. This is elsewhere assigned as the reason | 
why God did not punish the Israelites according to | 


their deserts, namely, because it would have turned 
to God’s dishonour in the judgment of the heathen 


world, as if he had not been able to make good those | 


promises which he had given them. 
proper consideration to check the vain presumption 


This was a|| 
|i. 20; Heb. vi. 17, 18; viii. 10-12; xi. 13. 


of the Jews, who imagined that God’s gracious deal- | 


ings with them were owing to their own merits. 
Verses 10, 11. Wherefore Icaused them to go forth 


out of Egypt—Removed all obstacles, furnished |, 
them with all necessaries, went before them, and | 


showed them the way they should go, Exod. xiii. 17; 
and brought them into the wilderness—It was not 
Moses’s error, though Pharaoh thought so, Exod. 
xiv. 3, 4, but the peculiar conduct of God that 
»vrought them thither. And I gave them my statutes 
—A favour not afforded to other nations: see Deut. 
iv. 8; Psa. exlvii. 20. This was a treasure which 
David declared he prized above thousands of gold 
and silver, Psa. exix. 72. Which if a man do, he 
shall even live in them—That is, in keeping God’s 
commandments there is abundance of comfort, anda 
great reward. “By life is generally meant, in the 
Old Testament, all that happiness which is contained 
in the literal sense of the promises belonging to that 
covenant. Under these were mystically compre- 
hended the promises of a better life, wherein God 
will bestow upon his servants the peculiar marks of 
his favour, Psa. xvi. 11. These promises were made 
to the Jews upon condition of their punctual obedi- 
640 


ence to the whole law, Lev. xviii. 5, and xxvi. 3, 
&c.; Deut. xxvii. 26. And several persons under 
that dispensation are styled blameless, by reason of 
the sincerity of their obedience, though it was not 
perfect, or unsinning: see Luke i. 6; Phil. iii. 6. 
But if we understand the forementioned condition in 
its rigorous sense, as implying a perfectly exact and 
unsinning obedience; and as the word life contains 
the promise of eternal life under it; (a promise 
which the pious Jews expected, and hoped to ob- 
tain, Matt. xix. 16,17; Acts xxvi. 6,73) as it was 
impossible to be performed, so no person could lay 


| claim to eternal life by virtue of any promise therein 


contained; from whence St. Paul infers the neces- 
sity of seeking to Christ, and laying hold on the pro- 


| mises in the gospel, for the obtaining of justification 


and eternal life.’"—Lowth. It must always be re- 
membered, that the promises of spiritual blessings 
that we find in the Old Testament, such as pardon, 
acceptance with God, the Holy Spirit, sanctification, 
&c., belong to the gospel, or covenant of grace, as 
much as those in the New Testament: see 2 Cor, 


Verse 12. Moreover, I gave them my sabbaths— 


Including the weekly sabbaths, the sabbatical years, 
and all the solemn days of divine worship, in which 


no servile work was to be done: to be asign between 
me and them—A sign of their being peculiarly my 


| people, and to distinguish them from all other peo- 
_ ple, as the worshippers of me, Jehovah, who in six 
days made heaven and earth, and all things therein, 


and rested the seventh day; and also of my deliver- 
ing them out of their state of bondage in Egypt. 
That they might know that Iam the Lord that sanc- 
tifies them—That by their resting on those days 
from their usual employments, and their coming to- 


_ gether to wait upon me in the ordinances of my wor- 


ship, they might become more acquainted with me, 
and with my will concerning them, and might re- 
ceive a larger measure of my sanetifying grace. Ob- 
serve, reader, Ist, Sabbaths are privileges, and are to. 
be considered and improved as such. 2d, They are 
signs: it is a sign men have a sense of religion, and 
that there is some correspondence between them 
and God, while they make conscience of keeping 
holy the sabbath day. 3d, Sabbaths, if duly sancti- 
fied, are the means of our sanctification: if we do 


The rebellion and idolatry 


— 


CHAPTER XX. 


of the Israelites. 


13 WT But the house of Israel t re- 
belled against me in the wilderness: 
they walked not in my statutes, and they * de- 
spised my judgments, which if a man do, he 
shall even live in them: and my sabbaths they 
greatly * polluted: then I said, I would pour 
out my fury upon them in the Y wilderness, to 
consume them. 


A. M. 3412. 
B. C. 592. 


14 * But I wrought for my name’s sake, that | 


it should not be polluted before the heathen, in 
whose sight I brought them out. 

15 Yet also *1 lifted up my hand unto them 
in the wilderness, that I would not bring them 
into the land which I had given them, flowing 
with milk and honey, » which is the glory of 
all lands ; 

16 ° Because they despised my judgments, 
and walked not in my statutes, but polluted 
my sabbaths: for ‘their heart went after their 
idols. 


17 ° Nevertheless mine eye spared A. M. 3412. 
them from destroying them, neither es hao 
did I make an end of them in the wilderness. 

18 But I said unto their children in the wil- 
derness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your 
fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor 
defile yourselves with their idols : 

19 I am the Lorp your God; ‘walk in my 
statutes, and keep my judgments, and do 
them ; 

20 § And hallow my sabbaths; and they 
shall be a sign between me and you, that ye 
may know that I am the Lorn your God. 

21 Notwithstanding, »the children rebelled 
against me: they walked not in my statutes, 
neither kept my judgments to do them, ‘ which 
if aman do, he shall even live in them: they 
polluted my sabbaths: then I said, * I would 
pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my 
anger against them in the wilderness. 


*Num. xiv. 22; Psa. Ixxviii. 40; xev. 8, 9, 10. «Verses 
16, 24 ; Prov. i. 25. x Exod. xvi. 27. y Numbers xiv. 29; 
Xxvi. 63; Psa. evi. 23. z Verses 9, 22. a Numbers xiv. 28 ; 
Psa. xev. 11; evi. 26.—— Verse 6. ¢ Verses 13, 24. 


the duty of the day, we shall find to our comfort; it 
is the Lord that sanctifies us ; makes us holy, that 
is, truly happy, here; and prepares us to be happy, 
that is, perfectly holy, hereafter. 

Verses 13-17. But the house of Israel—Not a 
few, but the generality of the people; rebelled 
against me—Were undutiful, disobedient, contuma- 
cious, and even openly and repeatedly rebellious ; in 
the wilderness—Where they were receiving daily 
and great mercies from me; where they were on 
their way to Canaan, and were peculiarly dependant 
upon me for direction in the way, protection from 
their enemies, and the supply of all their wants; 
where they most needed my care and favour, and 
where the preserving their lives from being destroy- 
ed by noxious creatures and by famine, in that bar- 
ren, desolate, and howling desert, required and was 
a continued miracle. They walked not in my sta- 
tutes—Given them as the rule of their conduct 
toward me and one another. And they despised my 
judgments—Slighted them first as of little excel- 
lence, and then refused and cast them off. They 
who disobey God’s statutes despise them; they show 
by their disobedience that they have a mean opinion 
of them, and of him whose statutes they are. And 
my sabbaths they greatly polluted--That is, pro- 
faned, neglecting the duties enjoined to be done on 
those holy days, and employing them in worldly 
business, in pursuing sensual gratifications, or in 
practising secret idolatry and other wickedness. But 
I wrought, &c.—See on verse 9. Yet I lifted wp my 
hand, &c.—I solemnly swore (see verse 5) they 
should not enter into that rest I had designed for 
them. So all the murmuring, disobedient, unbeliev- 

Voi. TL 1 ) 


4Num. xv. 39; Psa. Ixxvili. 37; Amos v. 25,26; Acts vii. 42, 


43, © Psa. Ixxviii. 38.—f Deut. ¥e25 GB's). Vie) Vides ye ; 
Eire «bay abl & Verse 12; Jer. xvii. 22." Num. xxv. I, 
Deut..ix. 23, 24; xxxi. 27. ——i Ver. 11, 13.——* Verses 8, tae 


ing generation was excluded, and their children were 
brought in. Because they despised, &c.—See on 
verse 13. For their heart went after their idols— 
They were still inclined to the idolatries which they 
had learned in Egypt, to which they added new 
idols, which they had seen in the countries through 
which they travelled, namely, the idols of the Midi- 
anites, Amorites, &c.: see the margin. Neverthe- 
less, mine eye spared them——Though they did highly 
provoke me, and deserved to be all cut off, I had 
great patience with them, often reprieved them after 
sentence of condemnation was passed, and bore with 
their untoward manners, till a new and better dis- 
posed generation arose, to whom I could, consistently 
with my holiness, fulfil my promises made to their 
fathers. 

Verses 18-24. But I said unto their children in 
the wilderness—In the plains of Moab ; Walk ye not 
in the statutes of your fathers—Imitate not their 
superstitious usages, nor retain their foolish and 
wicked customs, but walk in the statutes of your 
God. ‘This refers to the many pathetical exhorta- 
tions contained in the book of Deuteronomy, par- 
ticularly those in chapters twenty-ninth to the thirty- 
second, which were uttered after that rebellious 
generation were all consumed, according as God had 
threatened them. Notwithstanding, the children 
rebelled against me—Even that generation which I 
afterward permitted to enter Canaan, and which I 
rendered victorious over all the inhabitants of that 
land, was guilty of many instances of disobedience 
and rebellion. The chief instance of that genera- 
tion’s contumacy and inclination to idolatry, was the 
iniquity of Peor, (Num. xxv. 3,) as that rg their 

641 


Israels rebellion in 


EZEKIEL. 


the land of Canaan. 


A. M. 3412, 


94 22 1 Nevertheless, I withdrew my 


hand, and ™ wrought for my name’s 
sake, that it should not be polluted in the sight 
of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them 
forth. 

23 I lifted up.my hand unto them also in 
the wilderness, that "I would scatter them 
among the heathen, and disperse them through 
the countries ; 

24 ° Because they had not executed my 
judgments, but had despised my statutes, and 
had polluted my sabbaths, and ? their eyes were 
after their fathers’ idols. 

25 Wherefore 41 gave them also statutes that 
were not good, and judgments whereby they 
should not live ; 

26 And I polluted them in their own gifts, in 


that they caused to pass * through ¢he eee aie. 
Jire all that openeth the womb, that 1 ——_— 
might make them desolate, to the end that they 
*might know that I am the Lorp. 

27 J Therefore, son of man, speak unto the 
house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lord Gop, Yet in this your fathers have 
t blasphemed me, in that they have * pemeoined 
a trespass against me. 

28 For when I had brought them into the 
land, for the which I lifted up my hand to give 
it to them, then “they saw every high hill, and 
all the thick trees, and they offered there their 
sacrifices, and there they presented the provoca- 
tion of their offering: there also they made their 
* sweet savour, and poured out there their drink- 
offerings. 


1 Psalm Ixxviii. 38; Verse 17.——™ Verses 9, 14. n Lev. 
xxvi. 33 ; Deut. xxviii. 64; Psa. evi. 27; Jer. xv. 4. © Verses 
13, 16. P Chap. vi. 9,——4 Psa, Ixxxi. 12; Verse 39; Rom. i. 
24; 2 Thess. ii. 11. 


fathers was the golden calf. Then the anger of the 
Lord was kindled against Israel: then there was 
a plague in the congregation of the Lord, which, if 
it had not been seasonably stayed by Phinehas’s zeal, 
had cut them all off; and yet they owned in Joshua’s 


time that they were not cleansed from that iniquity | 


unto that day, Josh. xxii. 17. Then it was that God 
said he would pour out his fury upon them, verse 
21; that he lifted up his hand, &c., in the wilder- 
ness—When they were a second time just ready to 


enter into Canaan; that he wouid scatter them among | 


the heathen—This very thing he said to them by 


Moses in his parting song, (Deut. xxxii. 20, 26, 27,) | 


which explains this passage. 
Verses 25, 26. Wherefore 
that were not good, &c.—This some understand of 
the ceremonial law, as if it were given purely to be 
a check and restraint to that perverse people, con- 
sisting of numerous rites and observances, many of 
which had no intrinsic good in them. “ But I con- 
ceive,” says Lowth, “the statutes here spoken of to 
be of a different nature from those mentioned verse 
11, because they have a quite contrary character 
given of them; and therefore I take the words to 
import, that God, in a just judgment for their diso- 
bedience to his own laws, gave them up to 4 repro- 
bate mind, and suffered them to walk after the idola- 
trous and impious customs of the heathen around 
them. And whereas, by obeying the laws and ordi- 
nances which he had given them, they might have 
lived happily, (verse 11,) they became slaves to the 
vile and cruel practices of the heathen idolatries, so 
as to offer up their very children in sacrifice to idols, 
to the utter destruction of themselves and their pos- 
terity, verse 26. This will appear to be the sense 
of the text, if we compare it with verse 39, and with 
Deut. iv. 28; xxviii. 36; Jer. xvi. 13; in which texts 
God threatens them, as a punishment for their neglect 
642 


I gave them statutes | 


2 Kings xvii. 17; xxi. 6; 2 Chron. xxviii. 3; xxxili. 6; Jer. 
xxxii. 35; Chap. xvi. 20, 21s Chap. vi. ii. 24, 
* Heb. trespassed a trespass——" Isa. lvii. 5, ‘kos ; Chap. vi. 13. 
x Chap. xvi. 


pees 


of his worship, to disperse them into the heathen 
countries, and thereby deprive them of an opportu- 
nity of serving him in public, and expose them to 
the peril of being seduced to idols. Just as David 
complains to Saul of the hardship of his exile, that 
it laid him open to the temptation of serving the 
heathen gods, 1 Sam. xxvi. 19.” In the same light 
Bishop Newcome views the passage, interpreting 
the sense to be, “I permitted them to observe sta- 
tutes, or idolatrous rites, of an evil and execrable 
nature.” And I polluted them in their own gifis— 
I suffered them to pollute themselves in offering 
abominable sacrifices. Jn that they caused to pass 
through the fire, &c.—In offering their firstborn sons 
in sacrifice to Moloch. That I might make them 
desolate—Which occasioned the destruction of great 
numbers of them, and made a desolation in the land. 
That they might know that Iam the Lord—This I 
permitted, that they might be made sensible that I 
am the living and true God, and a being infinitely 
more excellent than any or all of the idols, to the 
worship of which they had foolishly addicted them- 
selves: or, that they might be compelled to acknow- 
ledge, that I am a mighty king in punishing those 
that would not have me for a gracious king in go- 
verning them. 

Verses 27-29. Therefore, son of man, speak, &c. 
—Here the prophet proceeds with the story of their 
rebellions for their further humiliation, and shows 
that they persisted in them after they were settled 
in the land of Canaan. T'hus saith the Lord, Yet 
in this, &c.—Or, Moreover in this, your fathers have 
blasphemed me—Have dishonoured me in acting 
contrary to my commandments. For when I had 
brought them into the land, &e.—As soon as they 
were settled in the land promised to Abraham and 
his seed; then they saw every high hill, &e—When 
they saw the high hills and hel a 

( 41* ) my. 


Notwithstanding their sin, 


CHAPTER XX. 


mercy is promised them. 


—t 


A. M. 3412, 


RO te 29 Then *I said unto them, What 


. is the high place whereunto ye go? 
and the name thereof is called Bamah unto 
this day. . 

- 30 S| Wherefore, say unto the house of 

Israel, Thus saith the Lord Gop; Are ye 
polluted after the manner of your fathers? 
and commit ye whoredom after their abomi- 
nations ? ; 

31 For when ye offer ¥ your gifts, when ye 
make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pol- 
lute yourselves with all your idols, even unto 
this day: and *shall I be inquired of by you, 
O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord 
Gop, I will not be inquired of by you. 

32 And that * which cometh into your mind 
shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as 


® Or, I told them what the high place was, or, Bamah.—y Verse 
26.—— Verse 3. 


the heathen, as the families of the A. M. 3412. 
2 592. 
countries to serve wood and stone. 

33 9 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, surely 
with a mighty hand, and ” with a stretched-out 
arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over 
you: 

34 And JI will bring you out from the people, 
and will gather you out of the countries where- 
in ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and 
with a stretched-out arm, and with fury poured 
out. 

35 And I will bring you into the wilderness of 
the people, and there ° will I plead with you 
face to face. 

36 ¢ Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the 
wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead 
with you, saith the Lord Gop. 


a Chapter xi. 5 Jer. xxi. 5. ¢ Jer. ii. 9, 35; Chap. xvii. 
20.—4 Num. xiv. 21, 22, 23, 28, 29. 


choice of them as proper places whereon to erect 
altars for the worship of idols. The Jews were wont 
to offer sacrifices upon mountains or high places to 
the true God before the temple was built, 1 Kings 
iii. 2;5. And this custom was afterward permitted 
by godly kings, who were zealous in putting down 
all sorts of idolatry, 1 Kings xv. 14; and xxii. 43; 
2 Chron. xxxiii. 17. But by degrees those places 
became appropriated to idolatrous worship, and upon 
that score are severely condemned. There they 
presented the provocation of their offering—There 
they presented the offerings whereby they provoked 
me. This, being distinguished from their sacrifices 
already mentioned, is to be understood of their meat- 
offerings, of which see the note on Lev. ii. 1. These 
were especially styled offerings of a sweet savour. 
Then I said, What is the high place whereunto ye 
go?—What mean you that you go tothe high place ? 
What do you find so inviting there, that you will 
leave my altar, where I require your attendance, to 
frequent such places as I have forbidden you to wor- 


ship in, and which I will avenge? And the name! 


thereof is called Bamah—That is, the high place ; 
unto this day—‘ Notwithstanding my reproof, the 
name continues, and the practice, unto this day.” 
So Bishop Newcome, who adds, “It may be doubted 
whether the last six (Hebrew words) of this verse 
have not been taken into the text from the margin, 
where they anciently stood as a note.” “All the 
old versions have this verse, which yet seems out of 
its place here. If the verse should stand, it relates 
to something not to be explained now.”—Secker. 
Verses 30-32. Say unto the house of Israel— 
To the elders now sitting before thee, and through 
them to the rest of their brethren; Are ye polluted 
after the manner of your fathers—After all that God 
hath said to and against you by a succession of pro- 
phets, and done against you by a series of judgments, 
yet ” you take no warning? Will youstill be as 


wicked as your fathers were, and commit the same 
abominations that they committed? Some prefer 
rendering the words, Are ye not polluted, and do ye 
not commit whoredom, &c.? Do ye not walk in 
your fathers’ sins and idolatries, notwithstanding 
all the warnings I have given you, and the severe in- 


| stances of my displeasure against their practices, 


which ought to. have terrified you from following 
their bad exampie ? For when ye offer your gifts, 
§Fc., ye pollute yourselves—You render yourselves 
filthy and abominable in my sight. And shall I be 
inquired of by you—Are you fit to come and ask 
counsel of me, whom you have so shamefully and 
so obstinately forsaken and reproached? J will not 
be inquired of by you—I will answer you as little as 
you regard me. And that which cometh into your 
mind shall not be at all—Shall be quite frustrated. 
God, to convince them, here tells them what was in 
their thoughts, and what they had purposed. We 
find by the Scripture history, that the Jews had all 
along a fond desire of worshipping the gods of their 
neighbours, and could not bear that imputation of 
singularity, which their peculiar way of worship 
exposed them to. They thought also by this means 
to live more quietly among the heathen whither they 
were led captive. God tells them here that he 
would prevent this purpose of theirs from taking 
effect. And we find, from the very time of their 
return from the Babylonish captivity, they have been 
very cautious of committing idolatry, and scrupu- 
lous of making the least approaches to it.—Lowth. 
Verses 33-36, Surely with a mighty hand, &e.— 
I will no longer try to reclaim you by the gentle 
methods of patience and forbearance, but will govern 
you, as masters do bad servants, by stripes and cor- 
rections; and by this means cure you of your incli- 
nations to the heathen customs and idolatries.. And 
I will bring you out from the people—With whom 
you now live mixed, and whose manners and customs 


Mercy promised to 


EZEKIEL. 


the rebellious Israelites. 


37 And I will cause you to ° pass 
under the rod, and I will bring you 
into ® the bond of the covenant : 

38 And ‘I will purge out from among you the 
rebels, and them that transgress against me: I 
will bring them forth out of the country where 
they sojourn, and 8 they shall not enter into the 
land of Israel: ' and ye shall know that I am 
the Lorp. 

39 As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith 
the Lord Gop; 'Go ye, serve ye every one 
his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not 


A. M. 3412. 
B, C. 592. 


hearken unto me: *but pollute ye 4. A M9413. 
my holy name no more with your 
gifts, and with your idols. 

40 For 'in my holy mountain, in the mount- 
ain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord Gop, 
there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in 
the land, serve me: there ™ will I accept them, 
and there will I require your offerings, and the 
"first-fruits of your oblations, with all your holy 
things. 

Al I will accept you with your ® sweet ™ sa- 
vour, when I bring you out from the people, 


e Leviticus xxvii. 32; Jer. xxxiii. 13.——® Or, a delivering. 
f Chapter xxxiv. 17, 20; Matt. xxv, 32, 33,—8 Jer. xliv. 14. 
h Chap. vi. 7; xv. 73 xxiii. 49.——i Judges x. 14; Psalm Ixxxi. 
12; Amos iv. 4. 


* Isa. i. 13; Chap. xxiii, 38, 39 ——I Isa. ii. 2, 4; Chap. xvii. 
23; Micah iv. 1——® Isaiah ivi. Te ee Zech. viii. 20, &e. ; 
Mal. iii. 4; Rom. xii. 1. 7 Or, chief, ® Heb. savour of rest. 
2 Eph. v. 2; Phil. iv. 18. 


you follow. The Moabites, Ammonites, and other 
neighbouring nations, seem to be intended, into 
whose countries many of the Jews were carried 
captive, or went as voluntary exiles, before the gen- 
eral captivity by the Chaldeans. God here declares 
he will bring them thence, and carry them to Baby- 
lon. And I will bring you into the wilderness— 
Between Judea and Babylon, through which ye shall 
pass into captivity. Or, as some think, the barren 
lands in which the Babylonians planted these cap- 
tives are meant. “'The wilderness of the people,” 
says Michaelis, “is the desert in the neighbourhood 
of the Chaldeans, and of other nations. And there 
will I plead with you face to face—Convince you 
of your sins, execute judgments on you, and thereby 
most plainly manifest my justice to you. “I will 
punish you in the face of the world, and fill you with 
conviction. that my punishments are just.”—Bishop 
Newcome. Like as I pleaded with your fathers— 
Punished them for their sins; in dhe wilderness of 
the land of Egypt—That is, the wilderness. border- 
ing upon Egypt. As I there set the crimes of your 
fathers before their eyes, so that they were not able 
to deny their guilt, nor to say any thing against the 
justice of the punishment inflicted on them, so will 
I deal with you. 

Verses 37, 38. J will cause you to pass under the 
rod—Of punishment. I will bring you under the 
chastisement due to you for breaking my covenant. 
Or there may be an allusion to the custom of num- 
bering flocks and herds, by striking them with a rod: 
and so the sense will be, “I will take an exact ac- 
count of you, as a shepherd does of his flock, and 
will sever between the good and the bad, between 
the sheep and the goats.” And I will bring you 
into the bond of the covenant—By these methods I 
will reduce you to that obedience to which, by my 
covenant, you are obliged. And J will purge out 
from among you the rebels—I will separate the 
righteous from the wicked, in order to destroy the 
latter, as I did the rebellious Israelites in the wilder- 
ness. J will bring them forth out of the country, 
&ce.—I will bring them (namely, the rebels, or wick- 

644 


ed ones) forth out of the land of Judea, where they 
now sojourn, and where they boast that they shall 
always continue ; and they shall not enter into the 
land of Israel—They shall never return into it again. 
Bishop Newcome thinks “those are here referred to, 
who, after the murder of Gedaliah, went into Egypt, 
called here the land of their sojourning. Some of 
these were to be carried into Chaldea with the cap- 
tive Egyptians, Jer. xliii. 11, though the greater part 
were to be consumed, Jer. xliv. 12. Some of the 
obstinately rebellious Jews might also sojourn in 
other neighbouring countries subdued by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, as Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, &c., and 
might thence be taken into captivity. The sma!l 
number who returned from Egypt into Judea were 
righteous men, and not such as are here called rebels 
and transgressors.” 

Verse 39, As for you, O house of Israel, go ye, 
serve, &c.—Go at present, and serve your idols; 
persist in your idolatries, agreeably to the stubborn- 
ness of your hearts. An indignant concession 
And hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me 
—And continue to do so if you are resolved not to 
do according to my commandments, or to worship 
me as I have appointed. But pollute ye my holy 
name no more, &c.—While you are such idolaters, 
forbear to take my name into your lips. In other 
words, While you offer your gifts, and immolate 
your children to idols, do not call yourselves any 
longer my servants, nor pretend to pay your devo- 
tions in my temple, and thereby bring a reproach 
upon my name and worship. 

Verses 40-42. For in my holy mountain, &e.— 
The holy hill of Zion, holy through God’s appoint- 
ing it for the place of his temple. The mountain 
of the height of Israel—See chap. xvii. 28; Mic. 
iv. 1. Though mount Zion was not one of the 
highest mountains of Israel, yet God manifesting 
his presence there in his temple, it was more hon- 
oured than any of their other mountains. Lowth, 
and several other commentators, think the Christian 
Church is here meant, and termed God’s holy moun- 
tain in allusion to the temple at ae 


Mercy and restoration 


CHAPTER XX. 


promised to Israel. 


— IO aha 


A.M. 3412. and gather you out of the countries 

ty G. 592. 

wherein ye have been scattered ; and 
I will be sanctified in you before the histo? 

42 ° And ye shall know that I am the Lorn, 
P when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, 
into the country for the which I lifted up my 
hand to give it to your fathers. 

43 And ‘there shall ye remember your ways, 
and all your doings wherein ye have been de- 
filed; and tye shall loathe. yourselves in your 
own sight for all your evils that ye have com- 
mitted. 

44 * And ye shall know that I am the Lorp, 


° Verses 38, 44; Chapter xxxvi. 23 ; xxxviii. 23——? Chap. xi. 
17; xxxiv. 13; xxxvi. 24. RSE Chap. xvi. 61. 


mount Moriah, a part of mount Zion; (see notes on. 


chap. xvii. 23, and Isa. ii. 2;) and that the prophet 
here foretels the conversion of the Jews to Chris- 
tianity, and their union with the converted Gentiles 
in the church of God. At the same time, however, 
they suppose that, upon their conversion and return 
to their own country, certain privileges shall belong 
to the earthly Jerusalem, as the metropolis of that 
nation. There shall all the house of Israel, all of 
them, serve me—That is, all the house of Israel that 
are restored, shall serve me in Jerusalem. There 
shall be no more any such separation as when the 
ten tribes forsook the worship of God at Jerusalem. 
There will I accept them, and there will I require 
your offerings, &e.—Requiring signifies the same 
with accepling, by a metonymy of the cause for the 
effect; just as seeking is sometimes used for find- 
ing: see Isaiah lxv. 1. In the same sense, God is 
said not to require such instances of worship as he 
takes no delight in, Isa.i.11. Offerings signify in 
general every thing devoted to God’s service. 
Those who suppose that the prophet is here fore- 
telling the conversion of the Jews to Christianity, 


consider him as “expressing the Christian worship | 


by those religious oblations which were proper to 
his own time; as the other prophets frequently de- 
scribe the state of the Christian Church, by repre- 
sentations taken from the Jewish temple and ser- 
vice.”"—See Lowth. J will accept you with your 
sweet savour—This is mentioned in opposition to 
the sweet savour of their offerings to idols. The 
words may be rendered, J will be pleased with you, 
as with a sweel savour; or, as with the savour of an 
offering of atonement. When I bring you out— 
Or, as it may be better rendered, When I have 
brought you out from the people ; that is, either, 1st, 
When I have brought you back out of captivity to 
your own land; or, 2d, When I have converted you 
to Christ, and united you to the Christian Church. 
And I will be sanctified in you before the heathen— 
I shall procure honour to my name by the wonder- 
ful works, whether of justice or merey, which I will 
show toward you; and the nations shall consider 
me as a great and holy God, when they shall observe 
rt) 


when I have wrought with you ‘for A. M. 3412. 
my name’s sake, not according to your = 
wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt 
doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord 
Gop. 

45 “I Moreover the word of the Lorp came 
unto me, saying, 

46 "Son of man, set thy face toward the 
south, and drop thy word toward the south, 
and prophesy against the forest of the south 
field ; 

47 And say to the forest of the south, Hear the 
word of the Lorn; Thus saith the Lord Gon; 


* Lev. xxvi. 39; Chap. vi. 9; Hos. v. 15——* Verse 38; Chap. 
xxiv, 24——t Chap. xxxvii. 22. “Chap. vi. 2; xxi. 2. 


my deliverance of you, and your obedience to me. 
And ye shall know that Iam the Lord—Or, Jehovah; 
that is, He who causeth that To BE which he hath 
said SHALL BE, and who fulfilleth his promises. 
When I shall bring you into the country, &c.—Into 
the land which I sware to give to your fathers and 
their posterity: see verse 5. 

Verses 43, 44. And there shall ye remember your 
ways—There, in my holy mountain, in Zion, when 
you are restored to your own land; and more espe- 
cially in the Christian Church, when, in conse- 
quence of your conversion, you enter into it, and 
enjoy the privileges of it, ye shall remember and be 
humbled on account of your doings, whereby you 
have been defiled. ‘When you find how gracious I 
am to you, notwithstanding your long-continued diso- 
bedience and repeated rebellions, you will be over- 
come with my kindness, and blush to think of your 
refractory conduct toward so good a God. And ye 
shall loathe yourselves in your own sight—See notes 
on chap. vi. 9, and xvi. 63. Thus the prophet fore- 
tels that the restoration of the Jews to their own 
land would be accompanied with a general repent- 
ance, and a deep remorse for their former misdoings. 
And we find, from the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, 
that this was in fact the case with multitudes of 
them: they fasted and made public confessions of 
their sins upon their returning to Judea, and entered 
into ageneral and solemn engagement to be obedient 
to God, and observe his laws for the future. And, 
undoubtedly, this humiliation, godly sorrow, and true 
repentance, will more especially take place, and be 
more abundantly manifested in and among that peo- 
ple, when they shall be converted to Christianity in 
the latter days. 

Verses 45-49. Moreover, the word of the Lord, 
&c.—Here we have a new prophecy, with which 
Houbigant, following many learned commentators, 
begins the xxist chapter, and that very properly ; for 
what is contained in that chapter is only an expla- 
nation of what is contained in the remainder of this. 
Son of man, set thy face toward the south—The 
prophets were generally commanded to turn them- 
selves toward the places concerning which they were 

645 


Threatenings 


EZEKIEL. 


against Israel. 


A. M. 3412. Behold, * I will kindle a fire in thee, 
B. C. 592. 

__—_—. and it shall devour ¥ every green tree 
in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame 
shall not be quenched, and all faces 7 from the 
south to the north shall be burned therein. 


* x Jer. xxi. 14.——y Luke xxiii. 31. 


going to prophesy ; and Ezekiel being now in Chal- 
dea, near the river of Chebar, Judea lay to the south 
ef him. And drop thy word, &c.—That is, prophesy. 
The gift of prophecy seems to be here compared to 
rain, or dew, distilling from heaven upon the earth, 
and refreshing and rendering it fruitful: see Deut. 
xxxii. 2. Such is the benefit of sound doctrine 
wherever it is received. And prophesy against the 
Sorest of the south field—By this is meant Jerusa- 
lem, the word forest being taken metaphorically for 
acity; either because its stately buildings resembled 
tall cedars standing in their several ranks, or, as 
Archbishop Secker supposes, from the number of 
its inhabitants. And say, Behold, I will kindle a 
fire in thee—By fire here is meant, not only the 
burning of literal fire, but every thing which destroys 
or consumes, as in chap. xix. 12. Indeed, fire is 
often taken, in a general sense, for God’s severe judg- 


48 And all flesh shall see that I the A. M. 3412. 
Lor have kindled it: it shall not be °° 
quenched. 

49 Then said I, Ah, Lord Gop! they say of 
me, Doth he not speak parables ? 


z Chap. xxi. 4, : ( 


ments, which, it is here said, shall devour both the 
green tree and the dry, that is, the righteous as well 
as the wicked; the righteous being here, as else~ 
where, compared to green and flourishing trees, and 
the wicked to dry and withered ones, such as are 
only fit for the fire. The flaming flame shall not 
be quenched—The evils I will send upon them shall 
not cease, till what I will has been accomplished. 
And all faces from the south to the north shall be 
burned—The destruction shall reach from one end 
of the land to the other: see chap. xxi. 44. Ah, 
Lord God! they say of me, Doth he not speak para- 
bles2—They make this an argument for disregard- 
ing what I say, that I use so many similitudes and 
metaphorical expressions, that they cannot under- 
stand my meaning. To take away all ground for 
this objection, God commands him, in the next chap- 
ter, to speak the same thing in plain words, 


CHAPTER XXI. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) An explication of the prophecy in the close of the last chapter, with directions to the 
prophet upon it, 1-7. (2,) A prediction of the sword that was coming on the land, 8-17. A prospect given of the 
king of Babylon's coming to Jerusalem, to which he was determined by divination, 18-24, (3,) Sentence passed on 


Zedekiah, 25-27. 


A. M. 3412, 


B. C. 592. ANP the word of the Lorp came 


unto me, saying, 

2 *Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusa- 
lem, and drop ¢hy word toward the holy 
places, and prophesy against the land of Israel, 
3 And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith 
he Lorp; Behold, I am against thee, and 


a Chap. xx, 46.—> Deut. xxxii. 2; Amos vii. 16; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXI. 

Verses 1-5. Son of man, set thy face toward Je- 
rusalem—Here God directs the prophet to declare 
in plain language, what he had ordered him to speak 
allegorically, from the 46th to the 48th verses of the 
foregoing chapter. And say to the land of Israel— 
The prophet’s face being turned toward Judea and 
Jerusalem, he addresses them as if they were pre- 
sent before him. Behold, Iam against thee—I am 
become thine enemy because of thy sins; I hate thy 
practices, and will punish thee for them. And will 


draw forth my sword out of his sheath—By the | 
646 


(4,) The destruction of the Ammonites, 28-32. 


will draw forth my sword out of his A. M. 3412. 
sheath, and will cut off from thee * the sie al 
righteous and the wicked. __ 

4 Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the 
righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my 
sword go forth out of his sheath against all flesh 
‘ from the south to the north : 


Mic. ii. 6, 11.——¢ Job ix. 22.——4 Chap. xx. 47. 


sword here is meant the same as by the fire in the 
foregoing chapter, namely, every thing which de- 
stroys. It may, however, be taken in a rather more 
literal sense than the fire is there to be understood, 
as the calamities of Judea were chiefly to arise from 
the sword of the king of Babylon, who was God’s 
instrument to execute his purpose on Judea. And 
will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked 
—I will take away from thee the righteous by send- 
ing them into captivity; and the wicked by destroy- 
ing them, either by the sword, or famine, or pesti- 
lence. My sword shall go forth against all flesh— 
3B 


Threatenings of God 


M. 3412. 


et 5 That all flesh may know that I 


the Lorp have drawn forth my 
sword out of his sheath: it *shall not return 
any more. 

6 ‘Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the 
breaking of thy loins, and with bitterness sigh 
before their eyes. 

7 And it shall be, when they say unto thee, 
Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt an- 
swer, For the tidings, because it cometh : and 
every heart shall melt, and £ all hands shall be 
feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all 
knees 'shall be weak as water: behold, it 
cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

8 4 Again the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

9 Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith 


CHAPTER XXI. 


against Israel. 


the Lorn; Say, * A sword, a sword A. M. 3412. 
is sharpened, and also furbished : wee 

10 It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, 
it is furbished that it may glitter; should we 
then make mirth? ?it contemneth the rod of 
my son, as every tree. 

11 And he hath given it to be furbished, that 
it may be handled: this sword is sharpened, 
and it is furbished, to give it into the hand of 
i the slayer. 

12 Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be 
upon my people, it shal] be upon all the princes 
of Israel: * terrors by reason of the sword shall 
be upon my people: * smite therefore upon thy 
thigh. 

13 * Because it is !a trial, and what if the 
sword contemn even the rod? ™it shall be no 
more, saith the Lord Gop. 


€ So Isaiah xlv. 23; lv. 11— Isaiah xxii. 4; Jer. xxiii. 9; 

Dan. vii. 28; Hab. iii. 16.——s Chapter vii. 17.—— Heb. shall 

0 into water Deuteron. xxxil. 41; Verses 15, 28. 2 Or, 
it is the rod of my son, it despiseth every tree. i Verse 19. 


3 Or, they are thrust down to the sword with my people.—— Jer. 
xxxi. 19, 4Or, When the trial hath been, what then? shall 
they not also belong to the despising rod ?——1 Job ix. 23 ; 2 Cor. 
vill. 2; Heb. xi. 36. m Verse 27. 


Against all the Jews that dwell in the land. J¢ shall 
not return any more--That is, into its sheath, till it 
hath executed all my purposes. 

Verses 6,7. Sigh, therefore, with the breaking of 
thy loins, &c.—-Show all the tokens of grief and con- 
cern; sigh and groan deeply ; let the sense of these 
impending judgments so greatly affect thee, as to 
make thee stoop like one quite borne down under the 
weight of them. God’s judgments, as they were 
represented to the minds of the prophets, very often 
affected them with dreadful apprehensions, especially 
when they concerned their own people: see the 
margin. With bitterness sigh before their eyes—- 
Before the eyes of the elders of Israel, mentioned 
chap. xx. 1, or of the Jewish captives, who could 
not but be touched with a tender sense of the cala- 
mities ready to befall their brethren in Judea. Every 
heart shall melt, &c.—Men’s hearts and strength 
shall fail them for fear. 

Verses 9, 10. Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened— 
The sword was unsheathed in the foregoing verses ; 
here it is fitted to do execution, which the prophet 
is commanded to lament. 1. Itis sharpened, that it 
may cut, and wound; and make sore slaughter. The 
wrath of God will put an edge upon it; and what- 
ever instruments he shall be pleased to use in execu- 
ting his judgments, he will fill them with strength, 
courage, and fury, according to the service they are 
employed in. 2. It is furbished, that it may glitter, 
to the terror of those against whom it is drawn. It 
shall be a kind of flaming sword. Though the glory 
of God’s justice may seem to have been eclipsed for 
a while, (like a sword rusting in the scabbard,) du- 
ring the day of his patience, and the delay of his 
judgments; yet it will shine out again, and be made 
-o glitter. 3. It isa victorious sword, nothing shall 


stand before it. It contemneth the rod of my son, as 
every tree—It makes no distinction between the 
sceptre and common wood; between the branches 
of the royal family, descended from David and Solo- 
mon, (who were honoured with the title of God’s 
sons,) and the meanest of the people. This seems 
to be the meaning of the clause, provided our trans- 
lation be just; but it is rendered very differently in 
some otherversions. The Vulgate reads, Qui moves 
sceptrum filii mei, succidisti omne lignum, Thou 
who removest the sceptre of my son, hast cut down 
every tree; which Capellus understands of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, who took away the sceptre, and over- 
turned the kingdom. The marginal reading, Jt is 
the rod of my son, it despiseth every tree, may be 
understood in twosenses. It may either mean, Jt is 
the rod whereby I chastise my son, namely, my peo- 
ple Israel. These, collectively considered, are term- 
ed God’s son, Exod. iv. 22,23; Hos. xi.1; as being 
selected and chosen from all others, to stand to him 
in the relation of sons and daughters. Or, it may 
signify, It is the rod of my son, the Messiah, ap- 
pointed by me to be the judge of the world, and in- 
vested with authority to execute judgment. This rod 
despiseth every tree; for it isthe rod of tron, where- 
by the Son of God breaks the power of his enemies, 
Psa. ii. 9, and dashes them in pieces like a potter’s 
vessel, without respect of persons. 

Verses 12, 13. Cry and howl, son of man—As a 
mark of the vehemence of thy grief. For it shall 
be upon my people—Namely, the devouring sword ; 
upon all the princes of Israel—Both princes and 
people shall be involved in one common destruction, 
Smite therefore upon thy thigh—Use all the outward 
expressions of grief and mourning. Because it is a 
trial—As all great calamities are often styled: see 

647 


EZEKIEL. 


against Israel. 


Threatenings of God 
A. oS ag 14 Thou, therefore, son of man, 
B. 


’ prophesy, and "smite thy * hands 
together, and let the sword be doubled the third 
time, the sword of the slain: it és the sword of 
the great men that are slain, which entereth 
into their ° privy chambers. 

15 I have set the ® point of the sword against 
all their gates, that their heart may faint, and 
their ruins be multiplied: ah! Pat 7s made 
bright, i¢ is 7 wrapped up for the slaughter. 

16 4Go thee one way or other, either on the 
right hand, ®or on the left, whithersoever thy 
face is set. 


n Num. xxiv. 10; Verse 17; Chap. vi. 11. 5 Heb. hand to 
hand. ©] Kings xx. 30; xxi. 25. ® Or, glittering, or, fear. 
P Verses 10, 28.——? Or, sharpened. 


17 I will also * smite my hands to- A. M. 3412 
B. C. 592. 
gether, and ‘I will cause my fury to 
rest: I the Lorn have said it. 

18 “| The word of the Lorp came unto me 
again, saying, 

19 Also, thou son of man, appeii thee two 
ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon 
may come: both twain shall come forth out of 
one land: and choose thou a place, choose i¢ at 
the head of the way to the city. 

20 Appoint a way, that the sword may come 
to *Rabbath of the Ammonites, and to Judah 
in Jerusalem the defenced. 


4 Chapter xiv. 17——8 Hebrew, set thyself, take the left hand. 
* Verse 14; Chap. xxii. 13.——* Chap. v. 13.—t Jer. xlix. 2; 
Chap. xxv. 5; Amos i, 14. 


the margin. And what if the sword contemn even 
the rod?—Namely, the sceptre and royal family. 
The Hebrew, T) ON 179) NOND VAL, it seems, should 
rather be rendered, And what if even the rod, or 
sceplre, contemn?—That is, if the king and kingdom 
of Judah despise this trial. J¢shall beno more, saith 
the Lord—Both shall be destroyed, and be no more. 
The word rendered rod here, is continually put in 
Scripture for governor, or government ; a rod, staff, 
or sceptre, being the usual signs of government. 
God, therefore, here foretels, that if the sceptre of 
Judah should despise, or not profit by, the correction 
or punishment brought upon it by the instrumental- 
ity of Nebuchadnezzar, it should be entirely broken, 
and be no more; which came to pass accordingly. 
The royal family was not amended by this severe 
judgment, and therefore was laid aside. “The scep- 
tre here only means the kingly power in the house 
of David, and not that supreme authority which Ja- 
cob foretold should not forsake Judah till the com- 
ing of the Messiah.” 

Verses 14,17. Prophesy, and smite thy hands to- 
gether—In token of amazement and sorrow. And 
let the sword be doubled the third time—Bishop 
Newcome reads, Bring the sword twice ; yea, bring 
it thrice ; namely, that God’s judgments might be 
fully executed, and his justice satisfied. It isproba- 
ble that the three great slaughters which should be 
made of the inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem are 
here intended, namely, 1st, During the siege, in 
which, undoubtedly, great numbers fell who were 
without the walls of the city, and many within: 2dly, 
When the city was taken by assault, which certain- 
ly was no’ without great slaughter: and 3dly, The 
massacre of Gedaliah, and those that sided with him. 
The sword of the slain—Wherewith many shall be 
slain. Jt is the sword of the great men, &e.—Ap- 
pointed for the slaughter of the great men, namely, 
the princes, rulers, and captains ; which entereth 
into their privy chambers—Where they were hidden 
in hopes of escaping. J have set the point of the 
sword against all their gates—I have gathered to- 
gether the Chaldeans round about Jerusalem, with | 

648 


their swords sharpened and drawn at every gate, to 
meet and slay all that shall attempt to come out, or 
to slay all they find on entering the city. Ah! itis 
made bright—Hebrew, p12 mwy, It is made like 
lightning. 'The same metaphor which occurs in 
Virgil: 

‘* Vaginaque eripit, ensem fulmineum.”—AEn. iv. 1. 579, 

‘He drew his sword, which did like lightning blaze.” 

It is wrapped—Or rather, It is sharpened for the 
slaughter. So Kimchius and some others translate 
nuyn, deriving the word from by, a style, or tron 
pen: see Buxtorf. Go thee one way or other—God 
is here represented as speaking, by way of apostro- 
phe, to the sword, and giving it an unlimited com- 
mission to destroy wherever it should be drawn. I 
will also smite my hands together--In token of my 
approbation. I will animate and encourage the slay- 
ers togoon. And I will cause my fury to rest—I 
will satisfy my anger by a full execution of my 
judgments. 

Verses 19, 20. Appoint thee two ways—So as to 
represent them to the eyes of thy countrymen: see 
chap. iv. 1; “Designa in tabella, lapide, aut terra,” 
Mark on a map, a stone, or on the earth.—Vatablus. 
That the sword of the king of Babylon may come 
—Dr. Waterland translates this, “ Appoint thee two 
roads for the king of Babylon’s sword to come by 5 
let both go forth out of one land; and choose thou a 
way-mark ; choose it at the head of the road toward 
the city: verse 20, Point out a road for the sword to 
go to Rabbath, and to Judah in Jerusalem the de- 
fenced.” Instead of the defenced, Houbigant reads, 
that he may besiege it. God here foreshows his pro- 
phet, that when the king of Babylon should come 
with his army into Syria, and find the Ammonites 
had entered into a confederacy with Egypt as well 
as Zedekiah, he would be in doubt against which of 
the two people he should first make war, and would 
commit the decision of the matter to his arts of di- 
vination, described verse 21; and that God should 
direct the divination to be for taking the road that 
leads to Jerusalem. The words, Let both go forth 


out of one land, seem to mean, that the _" 


The divination of the 


CHAPTER XXI. 


Chaldeans by arrows, §c. 


A. M.3412. 21 For the king of Babylon stood 

~ at the *parting of the way, at the 
head of the two ways, to use divination; he 
made his * arrows bright, he consulted with 
Uimages, he looked in the liver. 

22 At his right hand was the divination for 
Jerusalem, to appoint captains, }* to open the 
mouth in the slaughter, to “lift up the voice 
with shouting, *to appoint battering-rams 


9 Heb. mother of the way. 10 Or, knives. 11 Heb. teraphim. 
12 Or, battering-rams, Chap. iv. 2——1* Heb. rams. 


should divide itself into two, leading to different 
places. This, as appears from what follows, was 
the road coming out of Arabia, which afterward 
parted into two, one leading to Rabbath, and the other 
to Jerusalem. 

Verses 21, 22. For the king of Babylon stood at the 
parting of the way—The prophet here expresses 
what was future as if it were past, according to the 
usual style of the prophets, when speaking of things | 
soon to come to pass. And he explains the symbolli- | 
eal action spoken of in the two foregoing verses ; he 
shows that it was designed to represent what the 
king of Babylon would do when he was on his 
march, and came to the place where the road wasdi- 
vided; that he would wse divination to determine 
which of the roads he should take. He made his | 
arrows bright—The Vulgate reads, Commiscens 
sacittas, Mingling his arrows ; which sense of the | 
verb PP, agrees better with the accounts given us 
by ancient writers of this kind of divination, and 
therefore is preferred by Dr. Pocock, who confirms 
itby the Arabic use of the word. It is also adopted by 
Bishop Newcome. The way of divining by arrows 
is thus described by St. Jerome in his commentary 
on this place: “ They wrote on several arrows the 
names of the cities they intended to assault; and 
then, putting them all together promiscuously in a 
quiver, they drew them out thence as lots are drawn ; 
and that city whose name was written on the arrow 
first drawn was the city they first made war upon.” 
A method of divining by arrows is still in use, it ap- 
pears, among theidolatrous Arabs. Of this we read 
the following description, in Sale’s Preliminary Dis- 
course to the Koran, p. 126: “Seven divining arrows 
were kept atthe temple of Mecca; but generally, in 
divination, the idolatrous Arabs made use of three 
only, on one of which was written, My Lord hath 
commanded me ; on another, My Lord hath forbid- 
den me; and the third was blank. If the first was 
drawn, they looked on it as an approbation of the en- 
terprise in question ; if the second, they made a con- 
trary conclusion; but if the third happened to be 
drawn, they mixed them, and drew over again, 
till a decisive answer was given by one of the 
others.” He consulted with images—The Hebrew 


word here is teraphim, the name given to the 

images, or gods, which Rachel stole from Laban, 

Gen. xxxi. 19. In what way these were consulted | 
3 


a 


against the gates, to cast a mount, a i 
and to build a fort. —— 

23 And it shall be unto them as a false divi- 
nation in their sight, “to them that ¥ have 
sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance 
the iniquity, that they may be taken. 

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause ye have made your iniquity to be remem- 
bered, in that your transgressions are discover- 


u Jer. li, 14. 


* Chap. iv. 2.——14 Or, for the oaths made unto 
them. y Chap. xvii. 13, 15, 16, 18. 


—" 


cannot now be said, and all conjectures about it are 
vain. He looked in the liver—This was another 
way of divination used among these heathen ; they 
determined for or against certain things, according 
to the state of the liver of sacrificed animals, whether 
mutilated or complete, sound or unsound, or from its 
colour, or some marks appearing in particular places 
of it, and this by rules laid down among them. Af 
his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem— 
When the king of Babylon stood at the head of the 
two ways, to consult which of the two he should 
take, the tokens that were shown him, God so order- 
ing it, induced him to march with his army to the 
right, that is, toward Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar 
must be considered as coming from Dan, and march- 
ing along the river Jordan. Rabbath was therefore 
situated to the left hand, and Jerusalem to theright: 
see Michaelis. From this, and many other instances 
in the Scriptures, we may conclude, that things ap- 
parently the most fortuitous, such as the coming up 
of lots, and the like, are subject to the direction of 
Divine Providence, and, when occasion requires it, 
are ordered to answer its purposes; to open the 
mouth in the slaughter—Or, to the slaughter ; that 
is, to animate the soldiers to slay. To lift wp the 
voice with shouting—To make the military ery, in 
order to strike the inhabitants with terror. We find 
it was usual, in almost all armies, to begin the attack 
of their enemies with aloud ery, which served to 
animate their own men, and to intimidate the ene- 
my. Zo cast a mount—See note on Jer. xxii. 24. 
Verses 23, 24. And it shall be as a false divina- 
tion to them that have sworn oaths—That is, the 
Jews, when they shall hear of it, shall deride and 
despise it as a vain, lying divination, and so shall 
consider themselves as being unconcerned in it; 
and that though they have sworn homage to the 
king of Babylon, and afterward perfidiously broken 
their covenant with him. But he will call to re- 
membrance the iniquity, that they may be taken— 
Nebuchadnezzar will remember Zedekiah’s breach 
of his oath, and all his and his people’s treacheries, 
and will avenge himself by taking the city, and ma- 
king him and his subjects prisoners of war. The 
form of expression seems to imply that the king of 
Babylon had had it chiefly in his mind to go against 
Rabbath; but the divinations all signifying that he 
should go against Jerusalem, caused him to reflect 
649 


Sentence passed 


EZEKIEL. 


on Zedekiah, 


A. M. 3412. ed, so that in all your doings your 
Bc. 92, 

__——— sins do appear ; because, I say, that 
ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken 
with the hand. 

25 4 And thou, * profane wicked prince of 
Israel, * whose day is come, when iniquity shall 
have an end. 

26 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Remove the 
diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not 


2 2 Chron. xxxvi. 13; Jer. lii. 2; Chap. xvii. 19:—— Verse 
29; Chap. xxxv. 5. + Chap. xvii. 24; Luke i. 52. 15 Heb, 
Perverted, perverted, perverted, will I make it. 


on the perfidious behaviour of the Jewish nation 
toward him, and so determined him to take the way 
to Jerusalem, in order severely to punish the inha- 
bitants of it. Because ye have made your iniquity 
to be remembered—Not by yourselves, that it might 
be repented of, but by me, that it might be punished: 
because by your open and manifest continuance in 
your former sinful courses against me, and rebellions 
against the king of Babylon, you cause both me and 
him to call your iniquitous conduct to mind, and 
punish you for it: ye shall be taken by the hand— 
As birds or beasts, entangled in the net, are easily 
taken with the hand, so shall you be taken in the 
easiest manner, and fall into the hands of the king 
of Babylon, whose anger you have justly provoked. 

Verses 25, 26. And thou, profane wicked prince 
of Israel—The words are directed to Zedekiah, 
whom the prophet calls profane and wicked, chiefly 
with respect to his breaking that solemn oath, ut- 
tered in the name of God, whereby he had engaged 
himself to be tributary to the king of Babylon. By 
this action he and his courtiers did great dishonour 


to the true God. The king of Babylon, it appears, || 


kept the oath which he sware to them by. his false 
gods, while they broke the oath which they sware 
to him by Jehovah! Thus disgracing the true God 
before the Babylonians and other heathen, who 
must needs entertain a contemptible opinion of that 
being, whose worshippers durst break the oath 
which they had sworn by him. Therefore with 
respect to this, as well as his unalterable regard to 
truth and the due observance of oaths, God could 
not but look with indignation upon the breach of 
their oath, and inflict punishment upon them for it. 
See note on chap. xvii. 15. Whose day is come— 
The day of whose calamity is near at hand, when 
he shall receive the due punishment of his iniquity. 
Remove the diadem—The original word is often 
used for the priestly mitre, but here it means some 
kingly ornament, probably the royal tire of the 
head. Take off the crown—Depose him from his 
kingly dignity. T'his shall not be the same—The 
kingdom shall never be what it has been. Evwalt 
him that is low—This seems to be spoken of Jehoia- 
chin, who was many years kept in prison at Baby- 
lon; but at length, as we read 2 Kings xxv. 27, was 
taken out of prison, kindly treated, and advanced to 


M. 3412. 


be the same: exalt ‘him that is low, A. 
B. C. 592. 


and abase him that is high. fr = il 
27 J will overturn, overturn, overturn it: 
° and it shall be no more, until he come whose 
right it is; and I will give it him. 

28 And thou son of man, prophesy and 
say, Thus saith the Lord Gop ‘concerning 
the Ammonites, and concerning their re- 
proach; even say thou, ®'The sword, the 


¢ Genesis xlix. 10; Verse 13; Luke i. 32, 33; ‘John i. 49. 
4 Jeremiah xlix. 1 ; Chapter xxv. 2, 3,6; Zephaniah ii. 8, 9, 10. 
€ Verses 9, 10. : 


And abase him that is high—Namely, Zedekiah ; 
who was to be pulled down from his throne, have 
his eyes put out, and be kept in prison the remainder 
of his days. 

Verse 27. Iwill overturn, overturn, overturn it— 
By several degrees I will utterly overthrow the 
kingdom of Judah; and it shall be no more—It 
shall never recover its former lustre and dignity; 
until he come, &c.—Till the Messiah come to take 
his kingdom. To the same purpose is Lowth’s 
paraphrase on the verse: “After that Zedekiah is 
deprived of his regal authority, there shall be no 
more kings of that family till Christ come, the King 
so often foretold and promiged, who in due time 
shall reign upon the throne of his father David, 


| and of whose kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 
| 1.32,33. After the captivity, some of the priests of 


the Asmonean race assumed the style and title of 
kings; but not being of the tribe of Judah, they 
could have no just right to that honour. The ex- 
pression, Whose right it is, seems to be peculiarly 
characteristic of the Messiah, who is always spoken 
of by the prophets as the true and right heir to the 
throne of David, and as one who was in an eminent 
manner to inherit the kingdom. His indeed the 
right was; for him was reserved the kingly do- 
minion, not only over Judea, but the whole earth. 
The repetition of the word overturn, in the begin- 
ning of this verse, or, as the Hebrew expression 
my may be more literally rendered, an overturning, 


/may probably be intended to predict the repeated 


| subyersions which the Jewish state was to undergo 


in future times, by the Chaldeans, Macedonians, Ro- 
mans, and many others, and the multiplied destruc- 
tions of their nation, by which they would be 
punished for their sins; which subversions and de- 
structions will not come te-any happy termination, 
till they submit to the easy yoke-of their long-re- 
jected Messiah, and in humility, faith, and gratitude, 
accept the salvation which he waits to confer upon 
them. Nay, and the expression might be intended 
“to predict all the convulsions in states and king- 
doms, which shall make way for the establishment 
of his kingdom throughout the earth.”--Seott. 
Verses 28, 29. T'hus saith the Lord concerning 
the Ammonites--Because the Ammonites were re- 
prieved by Nebuchadnezzar’s decision to besiege 


great honour by Evil-merodach, king of Babylon. | Jerusalem, they were ready to promise themselves 


The destruction of 


CHAPTER XXII. 


the Ammonites foretold. 


ae esis. sword is drawn: for the slaughter i¢|| thou wast created, *in the land of A 
-_—— is furbished, to consume because of || thy nativity. 


the glittering: 

29 While they ‘see vanity unto thee, while 
they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon 
the necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, 
® whose day is come, when their iniquity shall 
have an end. 

30 Shall® I cause i¢ to return into his 
sheath ? ‘I will judge thee in the place where 


.M. 3412. 
B. C. 592. 

31 And I will 'pour out mine indignation 
upon thee, I will ™ blow against thee in the fire 
of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of 
brutish men, and skilful to destroy. 

32 Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy 
blood shall be in the midst of the land; * thou 
shalt be no more remembered : for I the Lorp 
have spoken i¢. ’ 


f Chapter xii. 24; xxii. 28. & Verse 25; Job xviii. 20; 
Psalm xxxvii. 13———* Or, cause it to return — Jeremiah 
xlvii. 6, 7. 


iGen. xv. 14; Chap. xvi. 38.—— Chap. xvi. 3.——! Chap. 
vii. 8; xiv. 19; xxii. 22.——™ Chapter xxii. 20, 21——17 Or, 
burning. n Chap. xxv. 10. 


security, and to insult over the calamities brought 
on the Jews; a practice for which they are often 
reproved very severely by the prophets, and threat- 
ened with the like judgments. And concerning 
their reproach--Wherewith they reproached Israel 
in the day of Israel’s afflictions; say thou, T'he 
sword is drawn, is drawn—Warlike preparations 
are made against you, the war is declared, and your 
enemy hath drawn the sword. For the slaughter it 
is furbished—It is prepared to make dreadful de- 
struction, to lay waste your country, and consume 
its inhabitants. - While they see vanity unto thee— 
While the soothsayers and pretenders to divination 
foretel nothing but happy events to thee,O Ammon! 
the sword is preparing to destroy thee. 7 bring 
thee upon the necks of them that are slain—To add 
thy people to the number of those who are slain in 
Judea, (verses 14, 15,) and to make thy condition like 
theirs; whose day is come—See verse 25. When 
their iniquity shall have an end—-When their de- 
served punishment, coming upon them, shall put a 
stop to their wickedness. This prophecy concern- 
ing the Ammonites was fulfilled by the Babyloni- 
ans, about five years after the destruction of Jeru- 
salem, because the Ammonites assisted Ishmael to 
wrest the government of Judea out of the hands of 


Gedaliah, whom the king of Babylon had fixed there 
as his deputy. 

Verses 30-32. Shall I cause it to return into his 
sheath 2—Shall the sword that is drawn to execute 
the judgments of God upon Ammon be put up in 
its sheath before it has done its work? Surely not. 
I will judge thee in the place where thou wast 
created—That is, where thy nation first received its 
existence: thou shalt not be carried captive, but 
shalt be destroyed in thy own land. J will pour 
out mine indignation upon thee—Which shall over- 
whelm thee as with a flood, and sweep thy nation into 
ruin. J will blow against thee, &c.—To melt thee 
as it were in a furnace. See chap. xxii. 20, 21. 
And deliver thee into the hand of brutish men— 
The LXX. read, avdpwr BapBapwv rextatvovtar diag- 
Oopac, of barbarous men, artificers of destruction ; 
or, as we render it, skilful to destroy. Thou shalt 
be for fuel to the fire—Thy country and cities shall 
be destroyed by fire. Thy blood shall be in the 
midst of the land—A slaughter shall be made of 
thee in every part of thy country, and thy blood 
shall appear everywhere. T'hou shalt be no more 
remembered—The Jewish people still subsist, but 
the Ammonites are lost in the mass of mankind, and 
have been long forgotten. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A catalogue of the sins of Jerusalem, 1-12. (2,) The punishment of those sins threatened, 


13-16. (3,) They are condemned as dross to the fire, 17-22. 


(4,) A prediction, that as all orders of men had con- 


tributed to the national guilt, all should share in the punishment of it, 23-31, 


A.M. 3412, JVLOREOVER the word of the 

B. C. 592. 5 
Lorp came unto me, saying, 

2 Now, thou son of man, *wilt thou ‘judge, 


«Chap. xx. 4; xxiii. 36-———' Or, plead for—— Chapter xxiv. 
6,9; Nah. iii. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXII. 
Verses 2-5. Wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the 
oloody city?—Wilt thou plead for it? Or rather, 


* bloody city? A. M. 3412. 


. 7 b h 
wilt thou judge ° the B. C. 592. 


yea, thou shalt *show her all her 
abominations. 


2 Hebrew, city of bloods. ——* Hebrew, make her know, Chapter 
xvi, .2. 


expression is doubled to awaken the prophet more 
fully, and to quicken him to his work. Jerusalem 
is termed the bloody city, Hebrew, DDN VY, the 


Wilt thou not judge? see note on chap. xx. 4. The || city of bloods, because of the blood of innocent per- 
3 


651 


A catalogue of the 


A. M. 3412. 


3 Then say thou, Thus saith the 
B. C. 592. 


Lord Gop, The city sheddeth blood 
in the midst of it, that her time may come, and 
maketh idols against herself to defile herself. 

4 Thou art become guilty in thy blood that 
thou hast *shed; and hast defied thyself in 
thine idols which thou hast made; and thou 
hast caused thy days to draw near, and art 
come ever unto thy years: “therefore have I 
made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a 
mocking to all countries. 

5 Those that be near, and those that be far 
from thee, shall mock thee, which art * infa- 
mous and much vexed. 

6 Behold, * the princes of Israel, every one 
were in thee to their ° power to shed blood. 

7 In thee have they set ‘light by father and 
mother: in the midst of thee have they & dealt 
by ° oppression with the stranger : in thee have 
they vexed the fatherless and the widow. 


EZEKIEL. 


sins of Jerusalem. 


8 Thou hast "despised my holy a Ss. 
things, and hast ‘profaned my sab- 
baths. 

9 In thee are 7 men * that carry tales to shed 
blood: ‘and in thee they eat upon the moun- 
tains: in the midst of thee they commit mee 
ness. 

10 In thee have they ™ discovered their fa- 
thers’ nakedness: in thee have they humbled 
her that was "set apart for pollution. 

11 And Sone hath committed abomination 
°with his neighbours wife; and * another 
Phath lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law ; 
and another in thee hath humbled his ‘sister, 
his father’s daughter. 

12 In thee * have they taken gifts to shed 
blood; *thou hast taken usury and increase, 
and thou hast greedily gained of thy neigh- 
bours by extortion, and ‘hast forgotten me, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


¢ 2 Kings xxi. 16: — —! Deut. xxviii. i: 373 1 Kings ix. 7; Chap. 


14s Dan. ix. 16.—* Heb. polluted of name, much in vecation, 
ees th i. 23; Micah iii. 1, 2,3; Zeph. ii. 3. 5 Heb. arm. 
f Deuteron. xxvii. 16,——S Exodus xxii. 21, 22. 6 Or, deceit. | 
h Verse 26. iLev. xix. 30; Chap. xxiii. 38. Heb. men 
of slanders. k Exod. xxiii. 1; Lev. xix. 16.——! Chap. xviii. 
6, 11. m Lev xviii. 7,8; xx.11; 1 Cor. v. 1. 


" Lev. xviii. 19 ; xx.18; Chap. xviii. 6.——® Or, every one 


© Lev. xviii. 20; xx. 10; Deut. xxii. 22; Jer. v. 85 Chap. xviii. 
Ly 9 Or, every one. p Lev. xviii. is; <n 12. ——!° Or, by 
lewdness. 4 Lev. xviii. 9; xx. 17. r Exod. xxiii. 8; Deut. 


xvi. 19; xxvii. 25. » Exodus xxil. 25; Lev. xxv. 36; Deut. 
xxiii. 19; Chapter xviii..13—t Deut. “xxxii, 18; Jer. ‘iii, 21: 
Chap. xxiii. 35. 


sons, of children sacrificed to Moloch, and of prophets 
and righteous men shed in her, and that by courts 
of justice under colour of law. Yea, thow shalt show 
her-—Make her know; all her abominations—-That | 
I may be justified in all the desolations which I have 
brought, and shall still more fully bring upon her. | 


The city sheddeth blood in the midst of it--Openly || 


and impudently; ‘hat her time may come--The time 
of her destruction, as the consequence of her having 
filled up the measure of her iniquities; and maketh | 
idols against herself—To herown ruin. Thow hast | 
caused thy days to draw near—The days of thy 
sorrows and sufferings; and art come even to thy | 
years—-To the end of thy years of trial, so that thou 
shalt be borne with no longer. Therefore have I | 
made thee a reproach unto the heathen—Have ex- | 
posed thee to their contempt and scorn; and a) 
mocking to all cowntries--A proverb, and a by-word, | 
and cause of astonishment to all people, according 
to the prediction of Moses, (Deut. xxviii. 37,) and 
the solemn warning given by the Lord to Solomon, 
when he appeared to him after the dedication of the | 
temple, 1 Kings ix. 7. Those that are near--And 
are eye-witnesses of thy apostacy and degeneracy, | 
as the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, and Phi- 
listines; and those that be far from thee—The 
Medes, Persians, Hyrcanians, &e., to whom thou 
shalt be carried captive ; shall ‘mock thee, which art | 
infumous—Of a most infamous name; and much 
veved—aAfllicted, empoverished, and ruined: or ra- | 
ther, who art full of tumult and trouble, as 139) 
mM more properly signifies: that is, in which | 
652 


|| I ordered. 


there are continually confusion and disorder, by the 
commission of acts of violence. 

Verses 6-12. Behold, the princes of Israel, &e.— 
Probably the members of the great sanhedrim, or 
the king’s counsellors and chief officers, are here in- 
tended ; every one in thee—Not one to be found of 
amore merciful temper; to their power—Accord- 
ing to their ability ; to shed blood—Every one of 
the princes committed acts of violence, and shed 
blood, as far as he had it in his power to do it. In 
thee have they set light by father and mother—Diso- 
bedience to, or slighting of parents, is unnatural and 
brutish in itself, and had, in particular, a curse de- 
nounced against it by God’s law, Deut. xxvii. 16; so 
that it is here placed next to murder in the catalogue 
of their sins. Thou hast despised my holy things, 
&¢e.—Thou hast paid no proper regard to my holy 
temple, mine altars, sacrifices, feasts, and other things 
consecrated to my service, nor to the pure worship I 
appointed ; but hast defiled and profaned them all 
by worshipping of idols together with me, and min- 
gling heathen rites with the forms of worship which 
The sabbaths, which I appointed to be 
set apart for my honour, thou hast, in great mea- 
sure, employed in the worship and to the honour of 
false gods. Jn thee are men that carry tales to shed 
blood—Who raise calumnies and depose falsehoods 
even so far as to take away the lives of innocent 
persons. In thee they eat upon the mountains—Thy 
inhabitants sacrifice, and feast upon the in 
the mountains, in honour of idols or false gods, In 
the midst of thee they commit | 


The punishment of 


those sins threatened. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


ey. 3412. 13 Behold, therefore I have “smitten 

_—" my hand at thy dishonest gain which 
thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath 
been in the midst of thee. 

14 *Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands 
be strong, in the days that I shall deal. with 
thee? ¥I the Lorp have spoken it, and will 
do it. 

15 And 71 will scatter thee among the hea- 
then, and disperse thee in the countries, and 
* will consume thy filthiness out of thee. 

16 And thou ™ shalt take thine inheritance in 
thyself in the sight of the heathen, and ° thou 
shalt know that I am the Lorp. 

17 4 And the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

18 Son of man, ° the house of Israel is to me 
become dross: all they are brass, and tin, and 
iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace ; they 
are even the 1 dross of silver. 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop, Be- 


cause ye are all become dross, behold, A. M. 3412. 
therefore I will gather you into the Ba sea 
midst of Jerusalem. 

20 3 As they gather silver, and brass, and 
iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the 
furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it ; 
so will I gather you in mine anger and in 
my fury, and I will leave you there, and melt 
you. 

21 Yea, I will gather you, and ¢blow upon 
you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be 
melted in the midst thereof. 

22 As silver is melted in the midst of the fur- 
nace, so shall ye be melted in the midst there- 
of; and ye shall know that I the Lorp have 
° poured out my fury upon you. 

23 “| And the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

24 Son of man, say unto her, Thou art the 
land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in 
the day of indignation. 


« Chapter xxi. 17. x Chapter xxi. 7. ¥ Chapter xvii. 24. 
2 Deut. iv. 27; xxviii. 25, 64; Chap. xii. 14, 15.——@ Chapter 
xxiii..27, 48. 11 Or, shall be profaned.cm— Psalm ix. 16; 


CTsa. i, 22; Jer. vi. 28, &c.; Psalm exix. 119. 
13 Heb. according to the gathering. ——4 Chap. 
¢ Chap. xx. 8, 33; Verse 31. 


Chap. vi. 7. 
12 Heb. drosses. 
xxii. 20, 21, 22. 


in the most scandalous instances. Jn thee have they 
discovered their fathers’? nakedness—Have defiled 
their fathers’ beds, or taken their mothers-in-law for 
wives, called by St. Paul, such fornication as is not 
named among the Gentiles. In thee have they taken 
gifts to shed blood—Thy judges have taken bribes, 
not only to pervert justice, but even to take away 
the lives of the innocent. 

Verses 13-16. Therefore I have smitten my hand 
at thy dishonest gain, &c.—Therefore I have ex- 
pressed my indignation against thy avarice and un- 
just practices: I have called for punishment to come 
upon thee, and have animated and encouraged thy 
enemies to destroy thee. Can thy heart endure?— 
Will not thy heart fail thee when thou shalt fall into 
those calamities which I will certainly bring upon 
thee? And will consume thy filthiness out of thee 
—Will purge thee in the furnace of afflictions, and 
take that method to consume thy dross, and put an 
end to thy idolatrous practices. And thou shalt take 
thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of the hea- 
then—* Instead of being mine inheritance, and under 
my peculiar care and protection, thou shalt be cast 
out among the heathen, and there eat the fruit of 
thine own ways, and receive the just reward of thy 
wickedness.” The translation of this clause in the 
margin seems preferable: Thou shalt be profaned, 
that is, thou shalt no longer enjoy the privileges of 
a city called by my name, and set apart for my wor- 
ship, but shalt be laid open as common ground to be 
profaned by infidels: compare Isa. xlvii. 6. 

Verses 18-22. The house of Israel is to me become 
ces Their filthiness may be fitly compared to 


‘ie 


the mixture of dross and baser metals with the pure 
silver: and as that is purified by being melted in a 
furnace or crucible, so Jerusalem, when it is set on 
fire, shall be the furnace into which I will cast them 
and their wickedness to be consumed: compare Jer. 
vi. 28-30. God’s severe judgments are expressed 
by the furnace of affliction, (Isa. xlviii. 10,) and 
compared to a refiners fire, (Mal. iii. 2; Isa. i, 25,) 
because they are designed to purge men from that 
dross and corruption which are too often the effect of 
ease and prosperity.”—-Lowth. As they gather sil- 
ver, so will I gather you—From all parts. I will, by 
a secret, overruling providence, bring you into Je- 
rusalem, as into a furnace where you may be con- 
sumed, And Iwill blow wpon you in the fire of my 
wrath—I will stir or blow up the fire of my wrath 
against you. God’s vengeance is often compared to 
fire, but here it was so ina literal sense, when both 
city and temple were consumed by fire, 2 Kings 
xxv. 9. 

Verses 24, 25. Thou art the land that is not 
cleansed nor rained upon, &e.—Though God’s judg- 
ments have been as violent floods, and as hottest 
fires, thou hast not been cleansed from thy wicked- 
ness by the punishments I have sent upon thee, nor 
purified by the instructions and admonitions which I 
have given thee by my prophets; which, if they had 
been duly received, would have been instrumental in 
cleansing thee from all thy filthiness, as the heavy 
rains wash away the filth that lies upon the earth: 
see Isa. iv. 4; John xv. 3; Eph. v. 26; 1 Pet. i. 22, 
Or this latter clause, nor rained upon, may be taken 
literally, and signify that God had withheld rain from 

* 653 


The corrupt state of the people, 


EZEKIEL. 


and their consequent punishment. 


A. M. 3412. 25 ' There is a conspiracy of her 
+ aie prophets in the midst thereof, like a 


roaring lion ravening the prey; they £ have 
devoured souls; » they have taken the treasure 
and precious things; they have made her many 
widows in the midst thereof. 

26 ‘Her priests have “violated my law, and 
have *profaned my holy things: they have 
put no ' difference between the holy and pro- 
fane, neither have they showed difference be- 
tween the unclean and the ciean, and have hid 
their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am pro- 
faned among them. 

27 Her ™ princes in the midst thereof are like 
wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and 
to destroy souls, to get dishonest gains. 

28 And "her prophets have daubed them 

f Hos. vi. 9——S Matt. xxiii. 14. h Mic. iii. 11; Zeph. iii. 
3,4.—— Mal. 17. 8. 14 Heb. offered violence to. K Ley. xxii. 
2; 1Sam. ii. 29.——! Lev. x. 10; Jer. xv. 19 ;, Chap. xliv. 23, 


m[sa. i. 23; Chap. xxii. 6; Mic. ili. 2, 3, 9, 10,11; Zeph. iii. 3. 
n Chap. xiii. 10. 


them, which was one of the judgments wherewith 
God punished them in the day of his wrath, Jer. 
xiv. 4. There is a conspiracy of her prophets— 
That is, of the false prophets: acontrivance to speak 
all alike, smooth words, and to utter promises of 
peace and safety: they are all agreed together to 
deceive the people, and to plot the ruin of the true 
prophets, and those that favour them. T'hey have 
devoured souls—They have brought men to ruin and 
destruction, by deceiving them with their false pre- 
dictions; and taken away their lives, by false accu- 
sations and evil practices. They have taken the 
treasure and precious things—As a reward of their 
lies. By their cunning arts they have obtained 
riches, power, and honours, and have drained the 
people of their substance; they have made her— 
Namely, the land; many widows—By persuading 
Zedekiah to persist in the war, which filled Jerusa- 
lem with dead husbands and forlorn widows. 

Verse 26. Her priests have violated my law— 
Which they ought to have observed, and to have 
taught the people to observe; and have profaned 
my holy things—The gifts and sacrifices offered in 
my service; either by offering them in an undue 
manner, as the sons of Eli did, 1 Sam. ii, 15, or with- 
out due purification of themselves; or else eating 
them as common meats, without regard to the rules 
prescribed inthe law. They have put no difference 
between the holy and profane—They have not shown 
any regard to the rules of my law, concerning what 
is holy and unholy, clean and unclean, and that both 
with respect to persons and things. And they are 
guilty of this neglect in contradiction to an express 
charge given them respecting this matter, Lev. x. 10. 
By the holy is here meant that which was peculiarly 
dedicated to God; by the profane, things in com- 
mon use; by the unclean, those meats which were 


with untempered mortar, ° seeing pens 
vanity, and divining lies unto them, ———— 
saying, Thus saith the Lord Gop, when the 
Lorp hath not spoken. 

29 » The people of the land have used ¥ op- 
pression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed 
the poor and needy : yea, they have * oppressed 
the stranger 1° wrongfully. 

30 * And I sought for a man among them, 
that should * make up the hedge, and ‘stand 
in the gap before me for the land, that I should 
not destroy it: but I found none. — 

31 Therefore have I * poured out mine in- 
dignation upon them ; I have consumed them 
with the fire of my wrath: * their own way 
have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the 
Lord Gop. 


© Chapter xxiii. 6,7; xi. 29.——? Jer. v. 26, 27, 28; Chapter 
xviii. 12. 18 Or, deceit.——4 Exodus xxii. 21; xxiii. 9; Lev. 
xix. 33; Chap. xxii. 7——1® Heb. without right——* Jer. v. 1. 
8 Chap. xiii. 5. t Psa. cvi. 23. 4“ Verse 22,_—* Chap. ix. 
10; xi. 21; xvi. 43. 


forbidden to be eaten; by the clean, what it was law- 
ful to eat. And have hid their eyes from my sab- 
baths—They have taken no care that my sabbaths 
should be kept, and have not attended themselves 
upon my public worship on the sabbath days, 2 
Chron. xxix. ’7; and thereby have encouraged my 
people in the neglect and profanation of it. And I 
am profaned among them—I am dishonoured by 
them, and they use my name to false and wicked 
purposes, 

Verses 27, 28. Her princes are like wolves—The 
chief officers of state stick at no method of injustice 
and oppression whereby they may increase their 
substance, though it be by taking away the lives 
and estates of the innocent: see the margin. And her 
prophets have daubed them, &c.—Have daubed over 
the evil practices of the great men, by palliating de- 
vices: or, have flattered them in their ways of sin 
and violence, and encouraged them to proceed 
therein with promises, which, like ill-tempered mor- 
tar, will deceive them, though all seems at present 
smooth and safe. 

Verses 29-31. T'he people of the land—The com- 
mon people; have used oppression—Have wronged 
each other by acts of fraud and violence, and have 
greatly and cruelly oppressed each other. Andhave 
vexed the poor and needy—By these frauds and op- 
pressions, instead of relieving them, which they 
ought to have done. Yea, they have oppressed the 
strangers wrong fully—W ithout any colour of justice 
or reason. This was contrary to an express prohi- 
bition of God’s law, frequently repeated and enforced 
upon them, from the consideration, that they them- 
selves were strangers in Egypt. And I sought— 
God speaks after the manner of men; for a man 
among them—Any one among the pri prophets, 
priests, or people; that should make up the ee 


a 


The apostacy of Israel and 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


Samaria from God. 


That should repair the breach, and prevent further 
mischief; and stand in the gap before me—That 
might interpose between a sinful people and their 
offended God; deprecate God’s wrath, and entreat 
for mercy, that the land might not be destroyed; but 
I found none—All were corrupted, and went on in 
sin without repentance. This general complaint 
must be understood with some restriction, such as is 
commonly understood in unlimited expressions. 
For we read, chap. ix. 4, that there were some that 


sighed and cried to God (by way of deprecating his 
wrath) for the abominations done in Jerusalem ; 
and they undoubtedly exhorted the people to repent- 
ance and reformation. Therefore have I poured out 
mine indignation upon them—Have given it full 
scope, that it might come upon them ina full stream; 
yet, whatever calamity God brings upon a sinful 
people, it is their own way that is therein recom- 
pensed upon their heads, and God punishes them 
not more, but much less, than their iniquity deserves. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


In this long chapter, as in chap. xvi. and xx., we have a history of the apostacies of God’s professing people from him, 
and the aggravations of those apostacies, under the similitude of whoredom and adultery : the kingdoms of Israel 
and Judah, of the ten tribes, and the two, with their capital cities, Samaria and Jerusalem, are considered dis. 


tinctly. 


We have, (1,) The apostacy of Israel and Samaria from God, 1-8: and their ruin for it, 9,10. (2,) The 


apostacy of Judah and Jerusalem from God, 11-21: and sentence passed upon them, that they shall in like manner 
be destroyed for it, 22-35. (3,) The joint wickedness of them both together, 36-44. and the joint ruin of them 


both, 45-49. 


(THE word of the Lorp came again 
unto me, saying, 
2 Son of man, there were *two women, the 
daughters of one mother : 
3 And they committed whoredoms in Egypt; 
they committed whoredoms in ° their youth: 
there were their breasts pressed, and there they 


A. M. 3412. 
B. C. 592. 


a Jer. iii. 7, 8, 10; Chap. xvi. 46——® Lev. xvii. 7; Josh. xxiv. 
14; Chap. xx. 8.—* Chap. xvi. 22.——4 Chap. xvi. 8, 20. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIII. 

Verses 2,3. There were two women, daughters of 
one mother—Judah and Israel, two kingdoms. 
“Countries are commonly represented as mothers 
of their people, and the inhabitants as their children: 
so the daughters of Syria signify the inhabitants of 
that country, chap. xvi. 57. Thus Samaria and Je- 
rusalem are described in this chapter as sisters, the 
offspring of the same land, or country.” And they 
committed whoredoms in Egypt—The Israelites first 
learned idolatry in Egypt, for Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob were wholly free from it. They committed 
whoredoms in their youth—The time when the Is- 
raelites were in Egypt, or were lately departed out 
of it, is called their youth in the prophets, because 
that was the time when God first owned them for 
his people. There were their breasts pressed— 
“There they served idols, and there they corrupted 
their ways,” as the Chaldee paraphrase expresses the 
sense. The reader must observe, “'The style of this 
chapter, like that of chap. xvi., is adapted to persons 
among whom, at that time, no refinement subsisted. 
Large allowance must be made for language address- 
ed to an ancient eastern people, in the worst period 
of their history ; all whose ideas were sensual; and 


bruised the teats of their virginity. gt wee 
4 And the names of them were ———~ 
Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister ; and 
‘they were mine, and they bare sons and daugh- 
ters. Thus were their names; Samaria is 
1 Aholah, and Jerusalem ? Aholibah. 

5 And Aholalt played the harlot when she 


1 That is, His tent, or, tabernacle. 2 That is, My tabernacle in 
her, 1 Kings viii. 29. 


Bishop Newcome. The Scripture commonly calls 
idolatrous churches and nations by the name of har- 
lots: and in like manner honours those, who pre- 
serve their allegiance to God pure and undefiled, 
with the title of chaste wives, or virgins. 

Verse 4. The names of them were Aholah and 
Aholibah—“ The word Aholah signifies, Her tent, or 
tabernacle: Aholibah denotes, My tent, or taberna- 
cle, is in her. These two different appellations im- 
ply that Samaria had indeed a tabernacle, or place 
for public worship, but of her own devising ; namely, 
the cities of Dan and Bethel, where the golden calves 
were set up; whereas God’s tabernacle first, and af- 
terward his temple, was placed in Jerusalem. He 
placed his name there, or chose it for the place of 
his peculiar residence,” 1 Kings viii. 29. Aholah, or 
Samaria, is here called the elder sister, as having 
the greatest dominion, power, wealth, and number 
of people belonging to her, ten tribes out of twelve 
being under her jurisdiction. And they were mine— 
By a solemn marriage covenant. And they bare 
sons and daughters—Were fruitful, and brought 
forth children to me: they increased in numberof 
people, and among these there were some that were 
my spiritual children by adoption and grace, by 


whose grand inducement to idolatry seems to have | faith, love, and obedience. 


been the brutal impurities which it encouraged.”— 
3 


Verses 5, 6. And Aholah played the harlot when 
655 


7s apostacy of Judah and 


EZEKIEL. 


Jerusalem from God. 


A.M. 3412. was mine; and she doted on her 
baad lovers, on * the Assyrians her neigh- 
bours, 

6 Which were clothed with blue, captains 
and rulers, all of them desirable young men, 
horsemen riding upon horses. 

7 Thus she * committed her whoredoms with 
them, with all them that were ‘the chosen 
men of Assyria, and with all on whom she 
doted ; with all their idols she defiled herself. 

8 Neither left she her whoredoms brought 
f from Egypt: for in her youth they lay with 
her, and they bruised the breasts of her virgi- 
nity, and poured their whoredom upon her. 

9 Wherefore, I have delivered her into the 
hand of her lovers, into the hand of the § Assy- 
rians, ost whom she doted. 


10 These * discovered her naked- A. M. 3412 
C. 592. 
ness: they took her sons and her 
daughters, and slew her with the sword: and 
she became ° famous among women; for they 
had executed judgment upon her. 
11 And ‘ when her,sister Aholibah saw this, 
k she ® was more corrupt in her inordinate love 


than she, and in her whoredoms 7more than 


her sister in her whoredoms. 

12 She doted upon the ! Assyrians her’ neigh- 
bours, ™ captains and rulers clothed most gor- 
geously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of 
them desirable young men. 

13 Then I saw that she was defiled, that 
they took both one way ; 

14 And that she increased her whoredoms 
for when she saw men portrayed upon the 


e2 mie xv. 19: xvi. 7; xvii. 3; Hosea viii. 9.——* Heb. 
bestowed her whoredoms upon them. 4 Heb. the choice of the 
children of Ashur. f Verse 3, & 2 Kings xvii. 3, 4, 5, 6, 23; 
xviii. 9, 10, 11. h Chap. xvi. 37, 41. 5 Heb. a name. 


she was mine—When she was under my govern- 
ment and protection. ‘“ After she had lived in cove- 
nant with me, and attended upon my service and 
worship all the time of the judges, and of David and 
Solomon, she fell off from my service, and was the 
first that established idolatry by a law, and consent- 
ed to Jeroboam’s wicked device “of setting up the 
golden calves.” Inthe Scripture language, the Jew- 
ish people are said to play the harlot with those 
whose religious ceremonies they imitated. And she 
doted on her lovers—That is, her foreign allies, 
whose idolatries she was fond of, and hoped by that 
means to procure their friendship and assistance: see 
note on chap. xvi. 33,37. On the Assyrians her 
neighbours—The king of Assyria was a very potent 
prince, and thereupon his alliance was courted both 
by the kings of Israel and Judah: see the margin. 
Which were clothed with blue, captains and rulers 
—“As women are apt to fall in love with comely 
young men, well mounted and richly clothed; so 
the Israelites were enamoured with the state and 
bravery of the Assyrians, and thought themselves 
secure if they could but procure their alliance and 
friendship, and in order to it embraced their idola- 
tries. Horsemen riding upon horses—Horses were 
scarce in Judea, which made the Jews apply them- 
selves to the neighbouring countries for troops of 
horse, in the time of any hostile invasion.”—Lowth. 

Verses 7-10. Thus she committed whoredoms with 
them—She defiled herself with idols, as the sense is 
more plainly expressed at the end of the verse. 
Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt 
—She added new idolatries to those she had former- 
ly committed: see verse 3. Wherefore I delivered 
her into the hand of her lovers—God made these 
very Assyrians the executioners of his judgments 
upon the ten tribes, many of them being carried 
away captive by Pul, king of Assyria, afterward by 

656 


i Jer, iii. 8 ——* Jer. iii. 11; Chap. xvi. 47, 51——*® Heb. she 
corrupted her inordinate love more than, &ce.——" Heb. more than 
the whoredoms of her sister. 12 Kings xvi. 7, 10; 2 Chronicles 
xxviii. 16-23 ; Chap. xvi. 28.——™ Verses 6, 23, 


Tiglath-pileser, and at length the whole country was 
subdued and depopulated by Shalmaneser: see the 
margin. The kings of Babylon were likewise styled 
kings of Assyria, 2 Kings xxiii. 29; 2 Chron. xxxiii. 
11. Lovers mean the same with allies; those whose 
friendship and assistance the Jews courted, by com- 
plying with them in their idolatries, chap. xvi. 37. 
These discovered her nakedness: they took her sons 
and her daughters—These stripped her of every 
thing, and carried her and her children away cap- 
tive: see the margin, and verse 29. And slew her 
with the sword—Those that were not led captive 
were slain in the field of battle, or in the siege of 
Samaria, 2 Kings xvii. 5. And she became famous 
among women—The Hebrew reads, She became a 
nation among women: as she had been formerly re- 
nowned among the heathen for her beauty, (chap. 
xvi. 14,) so now she was everywhere talked of as a 
remarkable instance of God’s vengeance, and set 
forth for an example to other cities and nations, to 
deter them from the like abominations. 

Verses 11, 12. When her sister Aholibah saw 
this, she was more corrupt—Jerusalem was so far 
from taking warning by the judgments inflicted on 
Samaria, that she advanced to greater degrées of 
idolatry. She doted wpon the Assyrians her neigh- 
bours—Ahaz, king of Judah, entered into a confede- 
racy with the king of Assyria, hoping for relief from 
his power and the bravery of his army, and wor- 
shipped the idols which the Assyrians worshipped, 
in order to ingratiate himself with them,. See the 
margin. 

Verses 13-16. T'hen—When she neither took 
warning nor feared; I saw that she was defiled— 
That her heart was already set on her idols; that 
they both—Samaria and Jerusalem ; took one way— 


That Judah fell into the same idl ractices 
as Israel. And that she increased her w, 


The apostacy of Judah and 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


Jerusalem from God. 


+% M. Rig wall, the images of the Chaldeans 
= portrayed aii: vermilion, 

15 Girded with girdles upon their loins, ex- 
ceeding in died attire upon their heads, all of 
them princes to look to, after the manner of 
the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their 
nativity : 

16 ® And ®as soon as she saw them with her 
eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messen- 
gers unto them into Chaldea. 

17 And the *Babylonians came to her into 
the bed of love, and they defiled her with their 
whoredom, and she was polluted with them, 
and ° her mind was ' alienated from them. 

18 So she discovered her whoredoms, and 
discovered her nakedness : then ? my mind was 


alienated from her, like as my mind * M. 3412. 

B. C. 592. 

was alienated from her sister. ———. 

19 Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in 

calling to remembrance the days of her youth, 

4 wherein she had played the harlot in the land 
of Egypt. 

20 For she doted upon their paramours, 
"whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose 
issue is like the issue of horses. 

21 Thus thou calledst to remembrance the 
lewdness of thy youth, in bruising thy teats by 
the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth. 

22 4 Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the 
Lord Gon; * Behold, I will raise up thy lovers 
against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, 
and I will bring them against thee on every side; 


; Chapter xvi. 29.—® Heb. at the sight of her 


2 2 Kings xxiv. 
# © Verses 22, 28, 


eyes.——* Heb, children of Babel. 


P Jeremiah vi. 8.—4 Verse 3. 


10 Heb, loosed, or, disjointed. 
s Chap. xvi. 37; Verse 28. 


r Chap. xvi. 26, 


—Added to the number of her idolatries; for when 
she saw men portrayed, &c.—These were probably 
the pictures of those deified heroes, whom the Chal- 
deans worshipped as gods; such were Bel, Nebo, 
and Merodach, mentioned Isa. xlvi. 1; Jer. 1. 2. 
Calmet, however, understands the words in a differ- 
ent sense, paraphrasing them thus: “ Before she had 
seen the Assyrians, upon the bare relation concern- 
ing them, or upon the painting only which was made 
of them, her passion was inflamed toward them.” 
Girded with girdles upon their loins—A girdle was 
a mark of dignity, and worn as such by princes and 
men in authority. In died attire upon their heads 
—Houbigant reads, Having their heads bound with 
a died tiara, or turban. 'The Chaldeans, and after- 
ward the Persians, wore a sort of turban upon their 
heads, died of different colours, and with different 
degrees of ornaments, according to their different 
qualities. As soon as she saw them, she doted upon 
them—These images pleased her so much, that she 
sent to Babylon to learn the manner how their idols 
were to be worshipped: see verses 40, 41; chap. 
xvi. 17. This, Lowth thinks, relates to those times 
when a correspondence was maintained between the 
cities of Babylon and Jerusalem, after that Nebu- 
chadnezzar had conquered Judea, and made it a 
tributary kingdom, in the beginning of the fourth 
year of Jehoiakim. 

Verses 17-20. And the Babylonians came to her, 
&c.—The metaphor of representing idolatry by the 
inordinate lust of adultery is still carried on. And 
her mind was alienated from them--She quickly 
grew weary of these also, as lewd women are of 
their former gallants, and look out for new ones. 
She broke her league and covenant with them, as 
St. Jerome very well expresses the sense; meaning 
that covenant which Jehoiakim made with Nebu- 
chadnezzar to be his tributary, and which was after- 
ward renewed by Zedekiah. So she discovered, or, 
after she discovered, her whoredoms—The sense 

Vou. IH. ( 42°) 


ei 


being still continued with the foregoing verse. The 
meaning is, She was open and notorious in her lewd 
practices, and in the highest degree shameless. 
Then my mind was alienated from her—As she, 
by her idolatries, had broken all the bonds of duty 
and allegiance whereby she was engaged to me, a 
sin often compared to a wife’s disloyalty toward her 
husband, so I withdrew my love and affection from 
her, and resolved to give her a bill of divorce, as the 
Prophet Jeremiah expresses it, and not own her any 
more as mine, as I had cast off her sister Samaria. 
Yet she multiplied, &c.—Though she was fond of 
new idolatries, she did not forget her old ones, even 
those which she had learned in Egypt. For she 
doted upon their paramours—Upon the idols of 
Egypt, and the impure rites which accompanied 
their idolatrous worship. ‘This may relate to the 
time when Zedekiah entered into a new confederacy 
with Egypt, which made the people fond of admit- 
ting the Egyptian idolatries. Whose flesh, &e.— 
These expressions seem to be made use of, to signify 
the excess of the Egyptian idolatry. They may 
likewise metaphorically express the great power 
and riches of the Egyptians, which made the Jewish. 
people fond of courting their friendship and alliance. 
Verses 22-24. Iwill raise up thy lovers against 
thee, &c.—I will execute my judgments upon 
thee, by those very Babylonians whose alliance and 
idolatries thou hast been so fond of, but since hast 
broken the league thou madest with them, contract- 
ing a new one with Egypt, and thereby hast pro- 
voked them to revenge thy perfidiousness. Pekod, 
and Koa, and Shoa, and all the Assyrians with 
them—The inhabitants of the several provinces of 
the Babylonish monarchy; for most of the ancients 
understand these words as names of places. Pekod 
is mentioned as a province of Babylon, Jer. 1. 21, 
St. Jerome, however, upon the place, understands 
these three words, Pekod, Shoa, and Koa, in an ap- 
pellative sense, to “denote so many titles, or degrees 
657 3 


Judgments aenounced 


EZEKIEL. 


against Judah and Jerusalem. 


A. M. 3412, 
B.C. 592. 


23 The Babylonians, and all the 
Chaldeans, t Pekod, and Shoa, and 
Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: "all of 
them desirable young men, captains and rulers, 
great lords and renowned, all of them riding 
upon. horses. 

24 And they shall come against thee with 
chariots, wagons, and wheels, and with an as- 
sembly of people, which shall set against thee 
a buckler and shield and helmet round about : 
and I will set. judgment before them, and they 
shall judge thee according to their judgments. 

25 And I will set my jealousy against thee, 
and they shall deal furiously with thee: they 
shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and 
thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall 
take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy 
residue shall be devoured by the fire. 

26 *They shall also strip thee out of thy 
clothes, and take away thy 1 fair jewels. 


27 Thus Y will I make thy lewdness A. M. 3419. 
to cease from thee, and ” thy whore- 
dom brought from the land of Egypt: so that 
thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor 
remember Egypt any more. 

28 For thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I 
will deliver thee into the hand of them * whom 
thou hatest, in the hand of them »from whom 
thy mind is alienated : 

29 And they shall deal with thee hatefully, 
and shall take away all thy labour, and ° shall 
leave thee naked and bare: and the naked- 
ness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both 
thy lewdness and thy whoredoms. 

30 I will do these things unto thee, because 
thou hast * gone a whoring after the heathen, 
and because thou art polluted with their idols. 

31 Thou hast walked in the way of thy sis- 
ter; therefore will I give her *cup into thy 
band. 


t Jer. 1, 21.—— Verse 12. 
ments of thy decking. 


x Chap. xvi. 39.——1! Heb. instru- 
y Chap. xvi. 41; xxii. 15. 


of honour; as much as to say, governors, princes, 
and great men. In which sense the two former 
words, Pekod (or Pakud) and Shoa, are confess- 
edly taken in Scripture. All of them desirable 
young men, &c.—As their riches and bravery made 
them appear amiable in your eyes when you first 
courted their alliance, so they shall appear in the 
same splendid equipage when they come to invade 
your country and to besiege your city; but then 
their gallant appearance shall strike a terror and a 
consternation into you. And they shall come against 
thee with chariots, &c.—Chariots are mentioned, 
both by sacred and profane writers, as of principal 
use in the ancient way of fighting. And I will set 
judgment before them, &c.—I will deliver thee into 
their power, as the ministers of my justice, who 
shall make thy punishments bear a correspondence 
with thy guilt. 

Verses 25-27, I will set my jealousy against thee, 
&c.—I will be against thee, as a jealous man is 
against his wife; and they shall deal furiously— 
And they, as the executioners of my wrath, shall 
act toward thee as persons provoked to great fury. 
And they shall take away thy nose, &c.—A punish- 
ment of adultery which rage sometimes dictated. 
As husbands in that case render those women de- 
formed whose beauty hath been too pleasing to 
Strangers, so shall the Chaldeans deface all the 
glories and ornaments of Jerusalem, and after they 
have slain and carried captive its inhabitants, shall 
set the city on fire, and reduce it to a heap of ashes. 
The mutilations mentioned in this verse were com- 
mon among the Chaldeans, St*Jerome assures us, 
that they frequently cut off the nose and the ears 
of adulterers. And this was practised toward adul- 

658 


z Verses 3, 19.——* Chap. xvi. 37.» Verse 17.——* Chapter 
xvi. 39 ; Verse 26,——1* Chap. vi. 9——® Jer. xxv. 15. 


teresses in Egypt. They shall also strip thee, &c. 
—As lewd, disgraced harlots and captives were used 
chap. xvi. 39. And take away thy fair jewels—All 
thy rich; beautiful ornaments, which shall be a prey 
tothe enemy. Thus will I make thy lewdness to 
cease—“These severe judgments shall effectually 
deter thee from idolatry, and make thee abhor the 
least approaches toward it. Accordingly we find 
that after the captivity the Jews never returned to 
their former idolatrous practices..—Lowth. And 
thy whoredom brought from the land of Egypt— 
Thy idolatries which thou broughtest with thee from 
Egypt, where thou didst first learn idolatry, and ever 
hast had an inclination to it. 

Verses 28-30. Behold, I will deliver thee, &e— 
I will give thee up into the power of the Chaldeans, 
whom thou wast formerly fond of, verse 22; but 
since thou hast broken thy league and friendship 
with them, thy love is turned into hatred: see verse 
17. They shall deal with thee hatefully, &c.— 
As thou hast changed*thy friendship for them into 
enmity, so shall they deal with thee; their hatred 
against thee shall be greater than their former love 
toward thee. This shall prompt them to take a 
full revenge upon thy perfidiousness, to consume all 
the fruits of thy labours, and to take away all the 
wealth thou hast gathered by thine industry. Thy 
whoredoms shall be discovered—All thy foul and 
shameful deeds shall be brought to light. J will do 
these things, because thou hast gone a whoring, &c. 
—I will cause all these things to be done unto thee 
by the Babylonians, who are the executioners of my 
anger. 

_ Verses 31-35. Therefore will I give her cup, &e. 
_] will make thee drink the same bitter or 


( 42" ) ard 


The joint wickedness of CHAPTER XXIII. Samaria and Jerusalem. 
A.M. 3412. 32 Thussaith the Lord Gop; Thou|| 37 That they have committed adul- A. M. 3412. 


Bi, 8 shalt drink of thy sister’s cup deep 


and large ; ‘thou shalt be laughed to scorn and 
had in derision ; it containeth much. 

33 Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness 
and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and 
desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria. 

34 Thou shalt ¢ even drink it and suck 7¢ out, 
and thou shalt break the sherds thereof, and 
pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken 
it, saith the Lord Gop. 

35 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause thou hast " forgotten me, and ‘cast me 
behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy 
lewdness and thy whoredoms. 

36 “% The Lorp said moreover unto me; Son 
of man, wiltthou «judge Aholah and Aholibah? 
yea, ' declare unto them their abominations ; 


€ Chap. xxii. 4, 5. ——S Psalm lxxyv. 8; Isaiah li. 17.——» Jer. 
li, 32; iii. 21; xiii. 25; Chapter xxii. 12.——i1 Kings xiv. 9; 
Nehemiah ix. 26.——* Chap. xx. 4; xxii. 2——'* Or, plead for. 
Isa, lviii. 1. 


experience the same calamity that has fallen upon 
her. God’s judgments are often compared to a cup 
of intoxicating liquors, because they astonish men, 
and bereave them of common judgment and discre- 
tion, and likewise expose them to the scorn and con- 
tempt of their enemies. J'how shalt even drink it 
and suck it out—There shall be no punishment 
which thou shalt not partake of. Thou shalt drink 
of the cup of calamity even to the dregs; that which 
is the very worst and most bitter: see notes on Psa. 
xxv. 8, and Isa.li.17. Thou shalt break the sherds 
thereof—People who are quite intoxicated, often in 
their drunken madness break the cups out of which 
they had drunk; therefore by this expression here 
is meant, that the Jewish people should be, as it 
were, driven to madness by the grievous judgments 
that should fall upon them. And pluck off thine 
own breasts—“Thou shalt tear away thy breasts 
with the sharp pieces of the broken cup, through 
grief and madness.”--Bishop Newcome. Or, Thou 
shalt be in a fury with thyself for having by thine 
own sins brought such grievous calamities upon 
thyself. Her breasts are mentioned as the parts 
which had a principal share in her guilt, according 
to the allegorical description here given of her idol- 
atries. Because thou hast forgotten me—Because 
thou hast not only forsaken my worship, but hast 
showed the utmost contempt of and aversion from 
me. Therefore bear thou also thy lewdness— 
Therefore thou shalt suffer the punishment of thy 
wickedness and idolatry. 

Verses 36-39. Wilt thou judge Aholah and Aho- 
libah—That is, Samaria and Jerusalem? The 
meaning is, Wilt thou not judge, or, Wilt thou not 
condemn them? That they have committed adul- 


tery, and ™ blood és in their hands, B. C. 592. 


and with their idols have they committed adul- 
tery, and have also caused their sons, ® whom 
they bare unto me, to pass for them through 
the fire, to devour them. 

38 Moreover, this they have done unto me: 
they have defiled my sanctuary in the same 
day, and ° have profaned my sabbaths. 

39 For when they had slain their children to 
their idols, then they came the same day into 
my sanctuary to profane it; and lo, ? thus have 
they done in the midst of my house. 

‘40 And furthermore, that ye have sent for 
men ? to come from far, 4 unto whom a messen- 
ger was sent; and lo, they came: for whom 
thou didst * wash thyself, * paintedst thine eyes, 
and deckedst thyself with ornaments, 


m Chapter xvi. 38; Verse 45. n Chap. xvi. 20, 21, 36, 45; 
xx. 26, 31. © Chap. xxii. 8——P 2 Kings xxi. 4——"® Heb, 
coming.——1 Isa. lvii. 9.——? Ruth iii. 3——* 2 Kings ix. 30; 
Jer, iv. 30. 


of the heinous sins of murder and adultery; and 
have also caused their sons, &c.—Have caused their 
children, who of right belonged to me, and who 
ought to have been bred up to be my worshippers, 
to be burned in the fire, by way of sacrifice in honour 
to false gods. They have defiled my sanctuary in 
the same day—They have also come directly from 
these idolatrous and abominable rites and sacrifices 
into my temple, as though they could worship me 
acceptably when they were thus horribly polluted. 
And have profaned my sabbaths—Have spent the 
sabbaths, which I appointed to be observed to my 
honour alone, in the service and to the honour of 
idols. Or, they profaned them by coming into 
God’s courts to observe them, immediately after 
they had deflled themselves by their idolatrous and 
horrid ceremonies. For when they had slain their 
children to their idols—To my great dishonour, and. 
the reproach of the human nature; then they came 
into my sanctuary—With their hands imbrued, and 
their clothes stained with their children’s blood, to 
present themselves before me; expecting accept- 
ance with me notwithstanding their villanies, as if I 
either did not know their wickedness, or did not hate 
it. And lo, thus have they done in the midst of 
my house—In the inward part of my temple. Some 
expound the words, of their setting up idols in the 
very temple, and worshipping them there. 

Verses 40-42. And furthermore, ye have sent for 
men to come from far, &c.—Here the same thing 
which was spoken of in the former part of the 
chapter, is mentioned again in other words, namely, 
their courting the alliances of foreign nations, by 
complying with their idolatries: and this is set forth 
under the representation of the several arts which 


tery, and blood is, &c.—That they have been guilty || harlots used to recommend theimselves to new lovers: 
3 . 


659 


The joint ruin of 


EZEKIEL. 


Samaria and Jerusalem. 


ee 


A. M. 3412. 


4 Al And sattest upon a “stately tbed, 
, 592. 


and a table prepared before it, " where- 
upon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil. 

42 And a voice of a multitude being at ease 
was with her: and with the men © of the com- 
mon sort were brought 1° Sabeans from the 
wilderness, which put bracelets upon their 
hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads. 

43 Then said I unto her that was old in 
adulteries, Will they now commit  ' whore- 
doms with her, and she with them ? 

44 Yet they went in unto her, as they go in 
unto a woman that playeth the harlot : so went 
they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the 
lewd women. 

45 % And the righteous men, they shall 
x judge them after the manner of adulteresses, 


14 Heb. honourable. t Esth. i. 6; Isa. lvii. 7; Amos ii. 8; 
vi, 4. “Proverbs vii. 17; Chapter xvi. 18,19; Hosea ii. 8. 
+> Heb, of the multitude of men. 16 Or, drunkards. 17 Féb, 
her whoredoms.—* Chap. xvi. 38. y Verse 37. 


and after the manner of women that A, M. 3412 
shed blood: because they are adal- ro anal 
teresses, and ¥ blood és in their hands. 

46 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 71 will 
bring up a company upon them, and will give 
them 1% to be removed and spoiled. 

47 * And the company shall stone them wan 
stones, and 19 despatch them with their swords ; 
> they shall slay their sons and their daughters, 
and burn up their houses with fire. 

AS Thus ° will I cause lewdness to cease out 
of the land, ‘that all women may be taught 
not to do after your lewdness. 

49 And they shall recompense your lewdness 
upon you, and ye shall °* bear the sins of your 
idols: f and ye shall know that I am the Lord 
Gop. 


z Chap. xvi. 40. 18 Heb, for a removing and spoil—— Chap. 


xvi. 41. 19 Or, ay le them out. b 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17, 19; 
Chap. xxiv. 21. hap. xxii. 15; Verse 27——4 Deut. xiii. 
11; 2 Pet. ii. 6. e Verse 35.—! Chap. xx. 38, 42, 44; xxv. 5. 


compare Isa. lvii.'7, 9. Jor whom thou didst wash 
thyself—A custom generally practised by women in 
those countries, before they entertained their lovers. 
Paintedst thy eyes—It seems to have been their 
fashion in those days to draw strokes about their 
eyes, or to colour their eye-brows with black lead. 
And sattest wpon a stately bed—Here the custom 
of sitting or lying upon beds, at the feasts made in 
honour of idols, or faise gods, seems to be particu- 
larly spoken of, as may be inferred from the fol- 
lowing words: whereupon thou hast set mine in- 
cense and mine oil—-That is, whereupon thou hast 
offered up to idols that incense and oil which ought 
to have been offered up to me. It was usual, after a 
sacrifice to idols, for a table well spread to be placed 
before a couch, and a feast to be partaken of. The 
lectisternia of the Romans were borrowed from 
this eastern idolatrous rite, Livy, v. kiii. Houbi- 
gant thinks, that by the table here spoken of is meant 
the altar which Ahaz erected, after the similitude of 
that which he had seen at Damascus. And a voice 
of a multitude, &c.--The noise of festivity, and of 
people assembled together in jollity, was heard all 
around. It seems their loose mirth, at their meet- 
ings in honour of some of their idols, is here par- 
ticularly meant. And with the men of the common 
sort were brought Sabeans, &e.—The prophet pro- 
ceeds in comparing the idolatries of the Jews to the 
practices of lewd women, who prostitute themselves 
to all comers, even those of the meanest condition. 
Such were the Sabeans that came from the wilder- 
ness, that is, from Arabia, called the desert, where 
dwelt the posterity of Seba, mentioned Gen. x. 
Which put bracelets upon davis hands, &e—That 
is, upon the hands and heads of these two lewd 
women, Aholah and Aholibah. Bracelets and 
crowns were ornaments proper for brides, and were 
likewise presented by lovers to their mistresses: and 
660 


therefore this may signify the compliance of the 
Jewish people with the grossest idolatries. Or the 
meaning may be, that Aholah and Aholibah, the in- 
habitants of Samaria and Jerusalem, put bracelets 
upon the hands, and beautiful crowns upon the 
heads, of such worthless idolaters as the Sabeans 
of the wilderness were; that is, courted their friend- 
ship and alliance with gifts. 

Verses 43, 44. Then I said unto her that was 
grown old in adulteries—Aholibah, who had been 
long idolatrous. The words import that experience 
might, before this time, have sufficiently convinced 
her of the folly of her ways. Will they now commit 
whoredoms with her ?—-God is here represented as 
waiting to see whether that mutability, which is 
natural to the human race, would not occasion a dif- 
ference between the Jewish people and their idola- 
trous allies, and make them grow weary of one 
another. Yet they went in unto her, &¢e.—Both 
Samaria and Jerusalem continued to defile them- 
selves with the idolatries of all the heathen round 
about them: compare verses 7, 17. 

Verses 45-49. And the righteous men, they shall 
judge them—All just judges, yea, all men that have 
any sense of common honesty, will condemn their 
conduct, and pronounce them deserving of the pun- 
ishment of adulteresses and murderers. Or, as others 
interpret the words, “ As upright magistrates used to 
condemn and execute judgment upon adulterers and 
murderers, so did the prophets, in the name of God, 
denounce sentence against Jerusalem and Samaria; 


and even the heathen princes, who executed the’ 


sentence, were more righteous than the apostate 
sufferers."—Scott. J will bring a y upon 
them, &c.—This is spoken of the Babylonians, who 
were to plunder and carry away a great part of the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. And the re a 
stone them with stones, and despatch them 


Jerusalem compared 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


to a boiling pot. 


swords—Stoning was the punishment of adulterers, 
and putting to death with the sword that of murder- 
ers. The Babylonian army might be properly said 
to be the executioners of both these punishments 
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, as, without doubt, 
they killed many of them during the siege by the 
stones they cast from their engines, and slew many 
by the sword when they took the city by assault. 
Thus will I cause lewdness to cease, &e.—Thus will 
I put an end to idolatry in the Jewish nation. That 


all women may be taught not to do after your lewd 
_ness—That is, that all nations may dread defiling 
themselves with the guilt of your idolatries. For as 
. the kingdoms of Israel and Judah are here described 
as two women, therefore, by all women here must 
be meant all nations. And ye shall bear the sins of 
your idols—Ye shall bear the punishment due to 
your sins of idolatry. To bear sin, or iniquity, is 
an expression often used in the Scriptures to signifv 
| undergoing the punishment due to it. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


Tnthis chapter, (1,) By the sign of flesh boiling in a pot are shown the miseries that Jerusalem should suffer during the siege, 
1-14. (2,) By the sign of Ezckiel’s being forbidden to mourn for the sudden death of his wife is shown, that the calami- 
ties coming on the Jews should be so astonishing as to exceed all expressions of sorrow, 15-27. 


oy AGAIN; in the ninth year, in the 
faa tenth month, in the tenth day of 
the month, the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

2 Son of man, write thee the name of the 
day, even of this same day: the king of Baby- 
lon set himself against Jerusalem *this same 
day. 

3 >And utter a parable unto the rebellious 


——_€— 


a2 Kings xxv.1; Jer, xxxix. 1; lii. 4. 


house, and say unto them, Thus saith A. uM: 3414, 
the Lord Gop; ° Set on a pot, set i¢ 
on, and also pour water into it : 

4 Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every 
good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder ; fill ié 
with the choice bones. 

5 Take the choice of the flock, and 1 burn 
also the bones under it, and make it boil well, 
and let them seeth the bones of it therein. 


© Jer. i.13; Chap. xi. 3. 


b Chap. xvii. 12. 1 Or, heap. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIV. 

Verses 1,2, Again, in the ninth year—Namely, of 
Jehoiachin’s captivity, and of Zedekiah’s reign; the 
word of the Lord came unto me—-Namely, in Chal- 
dea, where the prophet now was, and where, as the 
words here evidently imply, God gave him notice, 
though many hundreds of miles distant from Jerusa- 
lem, of Nebuchadnezzar’s beginning to lay siege to 
that city, just at the time when he began to do it. 
Saying, The king of Babylon set himself against 
Jerusalem—Hebrew, o°-9211 5x 70, hath set him- 
self, or, as Buxtorf renders it, accedit, vel appropin- 
quat, comes, or approaches, to Jerusalem, Dx¥Y3 
mn orn, this self-same day—Namely, this day that 
I now speak to thee. Write thee the name of the 
day, &c.—Make a memorial of the day, and of my 
having this day informed thee of this great event; 
and signify it to the people, that when they shall re- 
ceive intelligence from Judea of the siege having 
been begun this day, according to thy information, 
it may be a confirmation of the truth of thy mission, 
and of the certainty of the fulfilment of all thy pre- 
dictions. This was about two years before the taking 
of Jerusalem: see 2 Kings xxv. 1; Jer. xxxix. 1; 
and lii, 4. 

Verses 3-5. Utter a parable unto the rebellious 
house—Though the house of Judah has as yet paid 
no due regard to what thou and the rest of the pro- 

3 


phets have uttered or done; nevertheless, still further 
represent to them the destruction coming upon them 
by a symbolical action. Set on a pot, &c.—By the 
pot was signified Jerusalem, (under which figure it 
is represented, both by this prophet, chap. xi. 3, and 
by Jeremiah, chap. i. 13.) and by the pieces gathered 
into it, the different ranks of men gathered into that 
city, by taking refuge within its walls, when the 
Chaldean army approached to besiege it. By the 
water and fire were signified the calamities which 
they were to suffer. By every good piece, the thigh 
and the shoulder, the wealthiest and chief of the in- 
habitants of the land seem to be meant, who would 
flee from their country houses to live in safety in 
Jerusalem ; and by the choice bones, the bravest and 
strongest among the common people, or the most 
warlike, who would betake themselves to the city for 
its defence. Burn also the bones under it—Not the 
bones of the pieces to be boiled, but of the many in- 
nocent persons to be murdered in Jerusalem, whose 
blood cried for vengeance, and their bones, scattered 
on the face of the earth, will both make and main- 
tain this fire. Bishop Newcome renders the clause, 
Pile also (in the margin we read heap) the bones 
under it: namely, as he explains it, “the useless 
bones (verse 10) which the coals (verse 11) would 
consume, to show what a general destruction of the 
meaner sort would be caused by the Chaldeans.” 
661 


Lhe miseries of Jerusalem 


EZEKIEL. 


during the siege. 


6 Wherefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Wo to “the bloody city, to the 
pot vehiaiae seaitn is therein, and whose scum is 
not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece ; 
let no ® lot fall upon it. 

7 For her blood is in the midstof her ; she set it 
upon the top of a rock ; ‘she poured it not upon 
the ground, to cover it with dust ; 

8 That it might cause fury to come up to take 
vengeance ; ® I have set her blood upon the top 
of a rock, that it should not be covered. 

9 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop ; " Wo 


% M. 3414. 
. C. 590. 


4 Chapter xxii. 3; xxiii. 37; Verse 9. € 2 Sam. viii. 2; Joel 
ili. 3; Obad. 11; Nah. iii. 10, 


to the bloody city! I will even make A. M. 3414. 
the pile for fire great. joeniabe 

10 Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume 
the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be 
burned. 

11 Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, 
that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, 
and that ‘ the filthiness of it may be molten in 
it, that the scum of it may be consumed. 

12 She hath wearied herself with lies, and 
her great scum went not forth out of her: her 
scum shall be in the fire. 


f Lev. xvii. 13; Deut. xii. 16, 24.——s Matt. vii. 2——) Verse 
6; Nah. iii. 1 ; Hab. ii. 12——i Chap. xxii. 15. 


And make it boil well—To denote the heat or vio- 
lence of the calamity, and perhaps also that the city 
would be set on fire and consumed. 

Verses 6-8. Wherefore thus saith the Lord—Here 
begins an explication of the preceding symbolical 
representation ; Wo to the bloody city—Jerusalem, 
which is this pot; whose scum is therein—W hose filth- 
iness, or wickedness, is not purged out of it. Bring 
it out piece by piece—One piece after another till all 
be taken. Let nothing be left in it; let it be emptied 
of every thing. This signified the entire ruin and 
spoil of the city and the inhabitants of it, all without 
distinction being either killed or carried into cap- 
tivity. Let no lot fall upon it—There shall be no 
lot cast to determine who shall be spared and who 
consumed, or who shall be left and who carried into 
captivity; for they shall be all either destroyed or 
carried away. For her blood is in the midst of her 
—The innocent blood which she hath shed. She set 
it upon the top of a rock—Openly and publicly, with- 
out fear, or shame, or reluctance ; she set it where it 
might be seen by all, and seen long; she shed blood 
in a presumptuous manner, and with a high hand ; 
she was impudent and barefaced in her cruelties ; 
she did not seek to cover or excuse them,’ She 
poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust 
—As being ashamed of shedding it. “These words 
allude to the command of the law, Lev. xvii. 13, that 
they should cover the blood of any beast, or other 
living creature which was slain, with dust; which 
precept was not only intended to prevent their eating 
of blood, but also to give mena sort of horror or 
aversion to bloodshed.”—Lowth. That it might 
cause fury to come up to take vengeance—For such 
impudent murders as these, which even dared the 
divine indignation. Ihave set her blood upon the 
top of a rock-—Her punishment shall be as notorious 
in the sight of the world as her sin was. I will 
punish it so openly, and in such a manner, as shall 
not be soon forgotten. 

Verses 9-11. Thus saith the Lord, &c.—In this 
and the two following verses is still more fully ex- 
plained the meaning of the symbol of the boiling pot, 
and what the fire is that made it boil. By making 
the pile for the fire great, is signified the destruction 

662 


being very great and general. And spice it well— 
Or, season it well, so as to make it desirable. The 
expression imports, that the Babylonians should be 
as much set on destroying the city and inhabitants, 
as hungry people are greedy of devouring meat well 
spiced and dressed. This was a very proper ex- 
pression, considering that Jerusalem, in the foregoing 
part of this chapter, is represented as a boiling pot, 
and the inhabitants of it as pieces of flesh boiled in 
it. All the other expressions of this verse signify 
an entire destruction. T'hen set it empty wpon the 
coals thereof, &c.—This expresses, that after a rid 
dance was made of the inhabitants, either by slaugh- 
tering them with the sword, or carrying them away 
into captivity, the city itself, represented by the pot, 
should be burned with fire, that its impurity might 
be consumed, or purged away by the flames; that is 
to say, that their wickedness might be taken away 
with their persons and city ; or that the remains of 
the inhabitants, who were made captives, should be 
reformed by this terrible destruction of Jerusalem. 
If we understand it as spoken of the place of the 
city, the expression may allude to what was com- 
manded in the ceremonial law, namely, that metal 
vessels, which water could not cleanse, should be 
purified by fire. Thus nothing short of burning Je 
rusalem down to the ground could purge it from its 
abominations: afterward it should be rebuilt, and be- 
come a holy city, free from the idolatries which had 
formerly defiled it. 

Verses 12-14. She hath wearied herself with lies 
—Hebrew, ZINN, with vanities, or troubles ; mul- 
tiplying her idolatries, and seeking help sometimes 
from one idol and sometimes from another, but all in 
vain. The expression may also include the alliances 
the Jewish people entered into, and the various arts 
of policy they employed to avert their ruin, none of 
which were of any service to them: as if he had 
said, She has taken a great deal of pains, but to no 
purpose: her allies, their promises, their forces, their 
gods, all prove a lie to the house of Judah. Her 
great scum went not out of her, &c.—All the admo- 
nitions I gave her by my prophets, and my sundry 
chastisements and punishments of her sin, availed 
nothing to the purifying her from her idolatries and 


The prophet forbidden 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


to mourn for his wife. 


M. 3414. 
C. 


no 13 In thy filthiness is lewdness: 


because I have purged thee, and thou 
wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from 
thy filthiness any more * till 1 have caused my 
fury to rest upon thee. 

14 'I the Lorp have spoken i¢: it shall 
come to pass, and I will do i; I will not go 
back, ™ neither will I spare, neither will I re- 
pent; according to thy ways, and according to 
thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

15 % Also the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

16 Son of man, behold, I take away from 
thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet 
neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall 
thy tears ? run down. 

17 *Forbear to cry, "make no mourning for 
the dead, ° bind the tire of thy head upon thee, 
and P put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and 


A. 
B. 


k Chapter v. 13; Siti. 18; xvi. 42.——! 1 Samuel xv. 29. 
m Chapter v. 11.——* Heb. go. 3 Heb. Be silent, o Jere- 
miah xvi. 5, 6, 7. © Leviticus x. 6; xxi. 10. P 2 Samuel 
xv. 30.——4 Micah iii. 7. 


1 cover not ¢hy ‘lips, and eat not the A. M. 3414. 
bread of men. id 

18 So I spake unto the people in the morning : 
and at even my wife died; and I did in the 
morning as I was commanded. 

19 4 And the people said unto me, * Wilt 
thou not tell us what these things are to us, 
that thou doest so ? 

20 Then I answered them, The word of the 
Lorp came unto me, saying, 

21 Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus 
saith the Lord Gop; Behold, ‘I will profane 
my sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, 
‘ the desire of your eyes, and *that which your 
soul pitieth ; "and your sons and your daugh- 
ters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword. 

22 And ye shall doas I have done: * ye 
shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of 
men. 

23 And your tires shall be upon your heads, 


“Heb. upper lip, and so Verse 22; Lev. xiii. 45. * Chap. 
xii. 9; xxxvii. 18. 5 Jeremiah vii. 14; Chap. vii. 20, 21, 22. 
t Psa. xxvii. 4. « Chap. Xxili. 
47. 


5 Heb. the pity of your. soul. 
* Jer. xvi. 6, 7; Verse 17. 


other wickedness ; her scum shall be in the fire— 
The fire must consume her and her wickedness. In 
thy filthiness is lewdness—Thou hast shown thyself 
shameless and incorrigible in thine idolatries. Be- 
cause I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged 
—I did what was requisite on my part to thy amend- 
ment, but thou refusedst to comply with those fre- 
quent calls and exhortations which I gave thee; and 
therefore my Spirit shall not strive with’ thee any 
longer with gentle methods, but I will proceed to 
execute my severest judgments upon thee, namely, 
by sending thee into captivity, and letting thee suffer 
all the calamities of it for along season. According 
to thy doings shall they judge thee—According to 
thy deserts shall the Chaldeans, who are the minis- 
ters of my justice, punish thee. 

Verses 16-18. Behold, I take away from thee the 
desire of thine eyes with a stroke—Behold, I take 
away from thee thy wife, the object of thy love and 
thy affection, by a sudden stroke from my own im- 
mediate hand, that is, by a sudden death. . Observe, 
reader, we know not how soon the desire of our eyes 
may be removed from us. Death is a stroke from 
which the most pious, the most useful, the most 
amiable, are not exempted. Yet neither shalt thou 
mourn nor weep—Thou shalt not show any signs of 
grief. This command was given to the prophet, to 
signify that the public calamity should be so great, 
that private ones would not appear worthy of notice, 
nor would they be at leisure to lament them, so much 
would those of a public nature distract and oppress 
them. Bind the tire of thy head upon thee—Use 
thy ordinary dress upon thy head; for in the time 
of ePENS it was customary sometimes to shave 


the head, sometimes to cast dust upon it. Put on 
thy shoes upon thy feet—Going barefoot was usual 
in great sorrow and affliction; and therefore the pro- 
phet, who was to show no sign of sorrow, was com- 
manded to put on his shoes. Cover not thy lips— 
Covering the lips, or face, was another token of 
mourning. And eat not the bread of men—Partake 
not of the mourning-feast, that relations used to pre- 
pare for the funerals of their friends: see note on 
Jer. xvi. 7. So I spake to the people, §c., and at 
even my wife died—My wife accordingly died very 
suddenly in the evening of a day, on the morning of 
which I had been speaking to the people, concern 
ing the intimations I had of her death; and the next 
morning I declared what commands God had laid 
upon me, not to make any outward show, or sign of 
mourning upon that oceasion. 

Verses 19-24. Wilt thow not tell us what these 
things are—That is, what is the meaning of thy un- 
usual actions. They seem to make this inquiry by 
way of derision and contempt. Speak unto the 
house of Israel—Now he is commissioned to declare 
the meaning of what he did. Thus saith the Lord, 
Behold, I will profane my sanctuary—I will deliver 
my temple into the hands of the heathen, and they 
shall profane and destroy it: even that temple 
wherein you placed your glory, and thought your 
greatest protection. ‘he desire of your eyes, and 
that which your soul pitieth—As much your desire, 
as my wife was mine; most dear to you, the destruc- 
tion of which will affect you with a most poignant 
grief. Your sons and your daughters whom ye have 
left shall fall by the sword—Whom you left behind 
you when you were made captives; for this was ad- 

663 


Judgments threatened 


EZEKIEL. 


against the Ammonites. 


A.M. 3414. and your shoes upon your feet: ¥ ye 
Be 6." shall not mourn nor weep; but ” ye 
shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn 
one toward another. 

24 Thus * Ezekiel is unto you a sign: ac- 
cording to all that he hath done shall ye do: 
band when this cometh, ° ye shall know that 
I am the Lord Gop. 

25 J Also, thou son of man, shall it not be 
in the day when I take from them ‘their 
matty the joy of their glory, the desire of 


M. 3414. 


their eyes, and ® that whereupon they sce 


set their minds, their sons and their 
daughters, 

26 That °he that escapeth in that day shall 
come unto thee, to cause thee to hear 7¢ with 
thine ears ? 

27 ‘In that day shall thy mouth be opened 
to him which is escaped, and thou shalt speak, 
and be no more dumb: and £thou shalt be a 
sign unto them; and they shall know that I 
am the Lorp. 


¥ Job xxvii. 15; Psa. Ixxvill. 64. z Lev. xxvi. 39; Chap. 
XXxilL. 10.— Isaiah xx. 3; Chap. iv.33. xii. 6, 11. —— Jer. 
xvii. 15; Jobn xiil. 19; xiv. ’29. 


¢ Chap. vi. 7; xxv. 5.——4 Verse 21.——® Heb. the lifting up 
of their soul. ¢ Chapter xxxiii. 21, 22.——f Chap. ili. 26, 27; 
xxix. 215 xxxili. 22.—s Verse 24. 


dressed to those who were at this time captives in 
Babylonia, having been carried thither with Jehoia- 
chin. Or the meaning may be, Your sons, §-c., who 
are left to you, from the famine and the pestilence. 
Ye shall not mourn nor weep—These terrible judg- 
ments shall strike you with astonishment, and pro- 
duce in you such distress as is too great. to be ex- 
pressed by words oractions ; but ye shall pine away 
for your iniquities, &e—You shall be absorbed in 
silent sorrow, and shall waste away by lingering 
grief, and secret lamentation over each other’s ca- 
lamities, as the punishment of your iniquities, which 
have made your land, city, temple, and families deso- 
late, and yourselves miserable. Thus Ezeriel is a 
sign unto you—His actions foreshow you what your 
conditions shall be. The sacred writers, in several 
places, speak of themselves in the third person. And 
when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the Lord 
—Comparing the prediction with the event will con- 
vince the most obstinate that the immediate hand 
of God is in the judgments which are come upon 
you. 

Verses 25-27. Also thou son of man, shall it not be, 
&c.—This question is to be resolved affirmatively ; 
it shall be: in the day when I take from them their 
strength—Their walls, fortifications, and defences, 


with all that is dear and valuable to them; the joy of 
their glory, the desire of their eyes—Their kingdom, 
city, and temple, the emblem of my special presence 
among them, and protection over them, whose beau- 
ty and magnificence were their peculiar glory, and 
the most grateful object of their sight ; together with 
their sons and daughters, whereon they placed their 
affections ; he that escapeth in that day—Namely, 
when the city shall be taken, and both it and the 
temple burned; shall come unto thee, to cause thee 
to hear it, &e.—To acquaint thee, that what thou 
didst prophesy iscome to pass. See the fulfilling of 
this recorded chap. xxxiii. 21, 22. In that day 
shall thy mouth be opened to him that is escaped— 
This implied, that the prophet was to prophesy no 
more about the affairs of Jerusalem and Judah till 
after the destruction of the city and temple; when 
the fulfilling of this part of his predictions, so con- 
trary to the expectations of those who despised his 
prophecies, would give him more credit with them, 
and make them pay a higher regard to what other 
things he should prophesy of. According to this we 
find, that the spirit of prophecy, in regard to the af- 
fairs of Judea, did not come on him again till the 
news of the taking of Jerusalem was brought to him, 
See chap. xxxiii. 21-23. 


CHAPTER XXYV. 


Having finished his denunciations of wrath against the wicked Jews, Ezekiel threatens their heathen enemies with desolating 


judgments. We have here, (1,) A prophecy against the Ammonites, 1-7, 
12-14. (4,) The Philistines, 15-17. 
A. M. 3414. HE word of the Lorp came 


B. C. 590. ‘ : 
—_——___— again unto me, saying, 


2 Son of man, *set thy face > against the Am- 
monites, and prophesy against them ; 


a Chapter vi. 2; xxxv. 2.—— Jer. xlix. 1; Chap. xxi. 28; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXYV. 


Verses 1,2. T'he word of the Lord came again 
unto me—Though Ezekiel had finished his testimo- 
664 


(2,) The Moabites, 8-11. (3,) The Edomites, 


3 And say unto the Ammonites, i 3414. 
Hear the word of the Lord Gop; se 09 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; ° Because thou 
saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it 
—————————— See 
Amos i, 13; Zeph. ii. 9——¢* Prov. xvii. 5; Chap. xxvi. 2. 


ny with respect to the destruction of Jerusalem, he 
must not be silent; there were divers nations Sa 


|| ing upon the land of Israel which he must p 


4 


Judgments threatened 


CHAPTER XXV. 


against the Ammonites. 


A. M. 3414. was profaned; and against the land 

B. C. 590. : 

———— of Israel, when it was desolate ; and 
against the house of Judah, when they went 
into captivity ; 

4 Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the 
*men of the east for a possession, and they 
shall set their palaces in thee, and make their 
dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and 
they shall drink thy milk. 

5 And I will make ‘Rabbah °a stable for 


‘Heb. children.——4 Chap. xxi, 20.—* Isa, xvii. 25 xxxii. 
14, 15.— Chap. xxiv. 5 xxvi. 6; xxxv. 9.—£ Job xxvii. 
23; Lam. ii. 15; Zeph. ii. 


against, as Isaiah and Jeremiah had done before 
him; and must proclaim God’s controversy with 
them, chiefly because of the injuries and. indignities 
which they had done to the people of God in the 
day of their calamity. God’s resenting thus the in- 
jurious conduct of these nations toward his Israel, 
was an encouragement to Israel to believe, that 
though he had dealt thus severely with them, yet he 
had not cast them finally off, but would hereafter 
own them and plead their cause. The chronologi- 
cal order of these prophecies is after chap. xxxiii. 21, 
&c., at a time when, not only the taking of Jerusalem 
was known, but also the conduct which the surround- 
ing nations pursued, in consequence of that event. 
Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites— 
“Look thou toward the coast of the Ammonites, 


and in this posture prophesy against them.”—Bishop | 
Ezekiel was now a captive in Chaldea, and | 
had been so many years, and knew little, except by | 


Hail. 


supernatural revelation, even of the state of hisown 
nation, and much less of the nations around it; but 
God tells him both what they were doing, and what 
he was about to do with them. And thus, by the 
spirit of prophecy, he is enabled to speak as perti- 
nently to their case as if he had been among them. 


Verse 3. Say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word | 


of the Lord God—Not the word of your god Che- 
mosh, for, indeed, he is dumb, and utters no word; 
but the word of Jehovah, the God of Israel, who is 
also the God of the whole earth; because thou 
saidst, Aha, against my sancluary—Because, when 
thou shouldst have pitied, thou didst proudly insult 
over my people, and show thyself glad at the calami- 
ties that had befallen them; rejoicing that the tem- 
ple was profaned and burned by the victorious Chal- 
deans, the cities destroyed, the country wasted and 
depopulated, and the nation ruined. “The Ammon- 
ites, Moabites, and Edomites, though related in 
blood to the Jews, yet bore a constant hatred toward 
them, which they took all opportunities of showing, 
when the Jews were under any distress, and particu- 
larly at the time of their general captivity, and the 
destruction of their city and temple. For this they 
are often reproved by the prophets, and threatened 
with the like or severer judgments, and particularly 
the Ammonites.” See Lowth, and note on chap. 
xxi. 28. This hostile spirit and conduct of these 
3 


camels, and the Ammonites a couch- % M. 3414, 
ing-place for flocks: fand ye shall 2: 9: 5° 
know that I am the Lorp. 

6 For thus saith the Lord Gop; Because 
thou Shast clapped ¢hy ? hands, and stamped 
with the ° feet, and rejoiced in * heart with all 
thy despite against the land of Israel ; 

7 Behold, therefore I will ‘stretch out my 
hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for 6a 
spoil to the heathen; and.I will cut thee off 


2 Hebrew, hand.——* Hebrew, foot, 
Zeph. ii. 8, 10. 4 Hebrew, soul. 
meat. 


h Chapter xxxvi. 53 
i Chap. xxxv. 3.—* Or, 


neighbouring nations toward God’s ancient people, 
seem to have arisen partly from their envy at the 
wealth, and the good land which they enjoyed; 
partly from their fear of the growing power of the 
Jews, and partly from their hatred to the religion 


}and the divine oracles with which they were fa- 


voured. , 

Verses 4-7. Behold, I will deliver thee to themen 
of the east—That is, to the Chaldeans, whose coun- 
try lay east of the Ammonites. This people was ac- 
cordingly conquered and subdued by the Chaldeans, 
about five years after the destruction of Jerusalem. 
And they shall drink thy milk—Milk was the prin- 
cipal sustenance of those people, whose riches con- 
sisted chiefly in their stocks of cattle. The Hebrew 
word 25n, however, here rendered milk, signifies 
also the fattest or choicest parts of any flesh or fruits. 
So it is used Gen. xlv. 18, Ye shall eat the fat of 
the land ; and Psa. Ixxxi. 16, where our translation 
reads, The finest of the wheat, in the Hebrew it is, 
The fat of the wheat. And this clause is rendered 
by the LXX., Kaz avrot miovtac tov miotyta cov, And 
they shall drink, or swallow down, thy fatness. 
And I willmake Rabbah a stable for camels—Rab- 
bah was the chief city of the Ammonites. What is 
said of it here, that it should be made a stable for 
camels, implies, that instead of being a city inhabit- 
ed by men, it should be a place for cattle, and parti- 
cularly for camels, to feed and lie down in, of which 
that and the neighbouring countries had great store. 
It is a proverbial expression for utter destruction, to 
say that grass grows where a town stood. Because 
thou hast clapped thy hands, &e.—Showed expres- 
sions of joy and satisfaction in the most insolent man- 
ner, with all thy despite against the land of Israel 
—With the utmost hatred and contempt of my peo- 
ple; Iwill stretch outmy hand upon thee—Namely, 
my hand of wrath. And will deliver thee for a spoit 
to the heathen—Or, for meat, as the word in the He- 
brew text, 124, properly cy pe though the marginal 
reading of the Masorites is, 135, for a@ prey. The 
greedy, covetous soldiers shall make thy wealth 
their prey; the hungry enemies shall eat thee up. 
And I will cut thee off from the people—Thou shalt 
no more be reckoned among the nations, but shalt 
cease from being a people. And thou shalt know 
that I am the Lord—In these words the threaten- 

665 


Prophecies against the 


EZEKIEL. 


Moabites, Edomites, §c. 


A. M. 3414. from the people, and I will cause thee 
age perish out of the countries: I will 
destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am 
the Lorp. 

8 § Thus saith the Lord Gop; Because that 
k Moab and ! Seir do say, Behold, the house of 
Judah is like unto all the heathen ; 

9 Therefore, behold, I will open the ® side of 
Moab from the cities, from his cities which are 
on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Beth- 
jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim, 

10 ™ Unto the men of the east 7 with the Am- 
monites, and will give them in possession, that 
the Ammonites "may not be remembered 
among the nations. 

11 And I will execute judgments upon Moab ; 
and they shall know that I am the Lorp. 

12 % Thus saith the Lord Gop; ° Because 


that Edom hath dealt against the house of 


Judah ® by taking vengeance, and hath greatly 
offended, and revenged himself upon them ; 
13 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; I 


will also stretch out my hand upon 4. 4 yg 
Edom, and will cut off man and ei 
beast from it; and I will make it desolate from 
Teman; and ° they of Dedan shall fall by the 
sword. 

14 And ?I will lay my vengeance upon 
Edom by the hand of my people Israel: and 
they shall do in Edom according to mine 
anger and according to my fury; and they 
shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord Gop. 

15 { Thus saith the Lord Gop; 4 Because 
‘the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and 
have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, 
to destroy i¢ '° for the old hatred ; 

16 Therefore thus saith the ton Gop; Be- 
hold, *I will stretch out my hand agin, the © 
Philistines, and I will cut off the *Cherethims, 
"and destroy the remnant of the 1 sea-coasts. 

17 And I will *execute great 1 vengeance 
upon them with furious rebukes; ¥ and they 
shall know that I am the Lorp, white I shall 
lay my vengeance upon them. 


k Isa. xv.; xvi; Jer. xlviii. 1; Amos ii. 1— Ch. xxxv. 2,5, 


12. § Heb. shoulder of Moab. m Verse 4. 7 Or, against 
the children of Ammon. « Chap. xxi. 32. 92 rs XXViil. 


17; Psalm exxxvil. 7; Jer. xlix. 7,8: Chap. xxxv. 2; Amos i. 


11; Obad. 10. 8 Heb, by revenging revengement. 


ings, both in verse 5 and in this verse, conclude. 
For thus, 1st, God would maintain his own honour, 
and make it appear that he was ihe God of Israel, 
though he suffered them for a time to be captives in 
Babylon. And, 2d, He would bring those that were 
strangers to him into an acquaintance with him, and 
it would be a blessed effect of their calamities. How 
much better is it to be poor and know God, than to 
be rich and ignorant of him ! 

Verses 8-10. Because that Moab and Seir, &e.— 
By Seir the Idumeans are intended. The prophet 
joins them togetheras guilty of the same crime, and 
then denounces particular judgments against each of 
them. Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all 
the heathen—Hebrew pian 429, like all the na- 
tions ; subdued by Nebuchadnezzar indiscriminate- | 
ly with them; they are not distinguished from their 
neighbours by the protection of the God whom they 
worship, and they find no advantage in worshipping 
of him, over those who worship other gods. It ap- 
pears from hence, that the Jews had boasted, and the 
Gentiles till then acknowledged, that the Jews were 
under an extraordinary providence. The LXX. 
here read, the house of Israel and Judah. There- 
Sore will I open the side of Moab from the cities—I 
will expose Moab to be invaded, and open a passage 
for his enemies to enter his frontier cities, and from 
thence to possess themselves of the best part of his 
country. Unto the men of the east—See verse 4. 


°Or, they shall fall by the sword unto Dedan.— Isa. xi. 14; 
Jer. xlix. 2. 4 Jer, xxv. 20; xlvii. 1; Joel iii. 4; Amos i. 6. 
2 Chron. xxviii. 18° Or, with perpetual hatred. Zeph. 
ii. 4, t1 Sam. xxx. 14—* Jer. xlvii. 4 Or, haven of 
the sea. x Ch. v. 15.——!* Heb. vengeances. ¥ Psa. ix. 16, 


May make no figure among their neighbours, their 


| strength being entirely broken. 


Verses 12-14. Because that Edom, &e.—* The 


| Idumeans, being the posterity of Esau, bore an ancient 


grudge against the Jews, upon the account of their 
ancestor’s losing his right of primogeniture, and the 
subduing of Edom by David afterward, 2 Sam. viii. 
14. Upon both of these accounts they took hold of 


| all opportunities of venting their spite against the 


Jewish nation: see particularly 2 Chron. xxviii. 17. 
For this their behaviour they were in former times 
reproved by Amos, chap. i. 11, and afterward by 
Obadiah, verse 10, and by Ezekiel, here and chap. 
xxxv. 5. The ill will that they showed toward them 
at the time of their captivity was very remarkable, 
as appears by those pathetical words of Psa. exxxvii. 
7, Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the 
day of Jerusalem, when they said, Down with it, 
down with it, even to the ground.” I will lay my 
vengeance upon Edom, by Israel—My people Israel 
themselves, whom the Edomites have so often in- 
sulted, shall be the instruments of my vengeance 
upon Edom, and shall requite the wrongsthey have 
received by subduing Idumea; this they did under 
the conduct of Judas Maccabeus. And afterward 
the high-priest Hyrcanus made an entire i com 
of this country : see Prideaux, part ii. p. 307. 

Verses 15-17. Because the Philistines have-dealt 
by revenge—The Philistines being bord 


That the Ammonites may not be remembered, &c.— || the Jews, were their ancient enemies, from the very 
666 3. 


The prophecy, 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


against Tyre. 


time of the judges downward, more particularly in 
the time of Ahaz: see 2 Chron. xxviii. 18. There- 
Sore I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines 
—I will bring calamities upon them, and enemies 
who shall subdue them. They were accordingly 
subdued by Nebuchadnezzar: see Jer. xxv. 20, and | 
xlvii. 1. The Cherethims, or Cherethites, are the 
same with the Philistines, or a tribe of that. people: 
see the margin. And destroy the remnant of the 


| 


sea-coast—The same who are called the remnant 
of the Philistines, Amos. i. 8; the remnant of Ash- 
dod, Jer. xxv. 20; and the remnant of the country 
of Caphthor, chap. xlvii. 4: on which two places see 
the notes. It is called the remnant, or remains, 
because the sea-coast of the Philistines, namely, 
about Ashdod, had been before much wasted and 
spoiled by the invasion of Psammetichus, king of 
Egypt. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


The comparatively despicable nations of the Ammonites and Moabites on the south-east, Edomites on the south, and Philistines 
on the south-west, of Judea, recewwed a short doom. Now Tyre, at that time the most famous city for trade in the world, 


receives a large one in this and the two subsequent chapters. 


the Tyrians’ ruin; namely, their rejoicing in Jerusalem's fall, in hopes of increasing their trade by it, 2, 3. 


Here, after the date of the prediction, is, (1,) One cause of 
(2,) Their 


destruction, how terrible and complete ! 4—6, 12-14; and to be effected by a prodigious and furious army of Chaldeans, 


3, 7-11. 


A. M. 3416. 


ANP it came to pass in the eleventh 
B. C. 588. 


year, in the first day of the 
month, that the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

2 Son of man, *because that Tyrus hath 
said against Jerusalem, » Aha, she is broken 
that was the gates of the people: she is turned 
unto me: I shall be replenished, now she is 
laid waste : 

3 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will 


—_ 


(3,) What surprise and alarm their desolations should give to the nations around, 15-21. 


cause many nations to come up A. M. 3416. 

: 5K . B.C. 588, 
against thee, as the sea causeth his ———— 
waves to come up. 

4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, 
and break down her towers: I will also scrape 
her dust from her, and ° make her like the top 
of a rock. 

5 If shall be @ place for the spreading of 
nets 7 in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken 
it, saith the Lord Gop: and it shall become a 
spoil to the nations. 


alsa. xxiii.; Jer. xxv. 22; xlvii.4; Amos i.9; Zech. ix. 2. 


© Verse 14.——4 Chap. xxvii. 32. 


> Chap. xxv. 3; xxxvi. 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVI. 

Verse 1. In the eleventh year, in the first day of 
the month—By the eleventh year seems to be in-| 
tended the eleventh of Jehoiachin’s captivity; for | 
Ezekiel seems to reckon this time chiefly from that | 
period. What month it was is not mentioned: some 
think the first month of the year is meant; others | 
the first month after the taking of Jerusalem. 

Verses 2, 3. Because that Tyrus hath said, Aha, 
she is broken, &e.—The meaning seems to be, the 
city is broken, at whose gates the people entered in; 
that is, the place is demolished where there used to | 
be a confluence of people from all parts, especially | 
at the solemn festivals. She is turned unto me, I 
shall be replenished—Tyre rejoiced at the fall of 
Jerusalem, because she expected her trade would be 
increased by it in becoming the mart for the commo- | 
dities which, while Jerusalem stood, were bought 
and sold there. To which may be added, that when 
Jerusalem was taken, the spoil of the city was car- 
ried thither for sale, and several of the inhabitants 
who were made captives, were there sold as slaves. | 
Therefore, behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus— | 
The providence of God had greatly favoured Tyre: 
t was a pleasant and wealthy city, and might have | 

3 


continued so if its inhabitants had sympathized with 
Jerusalem in her calamities; but when, instead of 
that, they took pleasure in those calamities, and 
rejoiced at the fall of that neighbouring city, because 
of the gain which they thought would thereby accrue 


'|to them, they provoked the wrath of God against 


themselves, for he cannot but abhor the conduct of 
all such as take pleasure in the calamities of others. 
T will cause many nations to come up against thee, 
&c.—The Chaldeans with their confederates might 
be very properly called many nations, as, without 
doubt, the army of Nebuchadnezzar, whose domi- 
nions were very extensive, was made up of the peo- 
ple of various nations. As the sea causeth his waves 
to come up—*'They shall be as loud, as numerous, 
as irresistible, as the waves of the sea. This is one 
of the beautiful and expressive images which occur 
in the magnificent prophecy here recorded.”—Bishop 
Neweome. Great and victorious armies are de- 
scribed in other places of Scripture under the figure 
of an inundation carrying all before it. 

Verses 4-6. They shall destroy the wails of 
Tyrus, &c.—The expressions of these verses sig- 
nify that Tyre should be entirely demolished, and 
that the place where the city stood should be made 

667 


The destruction of 


EZEKIEL 


Tyre foretold. 


A. M. 3416. 
B. ©. &8 the field shall be slain by the sword ; 
* and they shall know that I am the Lorp. 

7 4 For thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I 
will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon, fa king of kings, from the north, 
with horses, and with chariots, and with horse- 
men, and companies, and much people. 

8 He shall slay with the sword thy daughters 

in the field: and he shall & make a fort against 
thee, and ! cast a mount against thee, and lift up 
the buckler against thee. 

9 And he shall set engines of war against thy 
walls, and with his axes he shall break down 
thy towers. 

10 By reason of the abundance of his horses, 


ee sas 


6 And her daughters which are in|| their dust shall cover thee: thy walls A. Me 3416. 


shall shake at the noise of the horse- sas 


men, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, 
when he shall enter into thy gates, as men 
enter into a city wherein is made a breach. 

11 With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread 
down all thy streets: he shall slay thy Pte 
by the sword, and thy strong garrisons shal 
down to the ground. — 

12 And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, 
and make a prey of thy merchandise: and 
they shall break down thy walls, and destroy 
8thy pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy 
stones, and thy timber, and thy dust, in the 
midst of the water. 

13 " And I will cause the noise of ‘ thy songs 


e Chap. xxv. 5. € Ezra vii. 12; Dan. ii. 37.——s Chap. xxi. 
22. 1 Or, pour out the engine of shot. 4 Heb. according to 
the enterings of a city broken up. 


|. Rev. xviii. 22. 


3 Heb. houses of thy desire. 
vii. 345 xvi. 9; xxv. 10. 


b Isaiah xiv. 14; xxiv. 8; Jer. 
i fsa. xxiii. 16; Chap. xxviii. 13; 


as bare as the top of a rock, and that it should be 


employed to no other use but that of a desolate shore, | 


the drying of the fishermen’s_nets. Nebuchadnez- 
zar quite demolished old Tyre, and the stones and 
rubbish of it were afterward made use of by Alex- 


the island where new Tyre stood, by which means 
he took that. This latter city is since so decayed, 
that there are no remains of it left but a few huts 
belonging to fishermen, who are in the habit of hang- 
ing out their nets to dry upon the rocks, as is re- 
lated by travellers that have been upon the place. 
“The present inhabitants of Tyre,” says Maundrell, 
page 49, “are only a few poor wretches, harbouring 
themselves in the vaults, and subsisting chiefly upon 
fishing.” The Jesuit Hadrianus Parvillerius resided 
ten years in Syria; and the famous Huetius heard 
him say, that when he approached the ruins of Tyre, 
and beheld the rocks stretched forth to the sea, and 
the great stones scattered up and down on the shore, 
made clean and smooth by the sun, waves, and 
winds, and useful only for the drying of fishermen’s 
nets, many of which happened at the time to be 
spread on them, it brought to his memory this pro- 
phecy: see Newton on the prophecies, Diss. xi.; and 
note on Isaiah xxiii. 1, &c. And her daughters 
shall be slain with the sword—By the daughters of 
Tyre here are meant the lesser towns, which were 
under her jurisdiction as the mother city, or metro- 


polis of the kingdom: the inhabitants of these would 
be slain with the sword. 


Verses 7-11. Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus 
Nebuchadrezzar—J osephus asserts, upon the autho- 
rity of the Phenician Annals, translated by Menan- 
der, the Ephesian, into Greek, “that Nebuchadnezzar 
besieged Tyre thirteen years, when Ithobal was king 
there, and began the siege in the seventh year of 
Ithobal’s reign, and that he subdued Syria and all 


| 


| ters of a great city. 
| gates, as men enter, &c.—Shalmaneser, king of 


Annals, quoted by the same historian, that the Ty- 
rians received their kings afterward from Babylon. 


_These Annals too, as Dr. Prideaux hath clearly 
| shown, agree exactly with Ezekiel’s account of the 
‘time and year wherein the city was taken.” —Bishop 
ander, to carry on a causeway from the continent to || 


Newton. Nebuchadnezzar is here called king of 


| kings, because he had several other kings under him 


as his vassals and tributaries. With horses and with 
chariots, &c.—With a vast army, but all land forces; 


| for we do not find that he had any naval force, or 
/any means of attacking the place by sea, which 


made his undertaking the more difficult. He shall 
make a fort against thee, &c.—The various opera- 
tions and actions of a siege are here set forth, all 
which it is said Nebuchadnezzar should employ 


against Tyre. And in asiege of so long continuance 


as thirteen years, undoubtedly every method and art 
of annoying and injuring the city was made use of. 
By reason of the abundance of horses, &c.—This is 


|| a lively description of the tumult and desolation that 


attend a conquering army making themselves mas- 
When he shall enter into thy 


Assyria, had besieged Tyre, but without success: the 
Tyrians with a few ships had beaten his large fleet ; 
(Josephus’s Antig.;) but yet, it is here foretold, 
Nebuchadnezzar should prevail. Thy strong gar- 
risons—Or, thy strong fortresses, or, the fortresses 
of thy strength, as }iy M\2¥7 rather signifies; shall 
go down to the ground—Shall be entirely demolished. 
The LXX., however, render the clause, Tyv vrocacw 
TG loxvoc sy emt TY ynv karaget, He shall bring 
down the station of thy strength, or, thy strong 
(that is, military) station to the ground. The Vul- 
gate understands the expression of their images, 
tutelary gods, rendering the words, Et statue nobi- 
les in terram corruent, Thy famous statues shall 
fall to the ground. 


Phenicia. . It further = from the Phenician|| Verses 12-14, And they shall make mms aie 


Alarm of the nations at 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


the destruction of Tyre. 


ae x 3416, to cease ; and the sound 

: shall be no more heard. 

14 And ¥I will make thee like the top of a 
rock: thou shalt be @ place to spread nets upon ; 
thou shalt be built no more: for I the Lorp 
have spoken ?¢, saith the Lord Gop. 

15 41 Thus saith the Lord Gop to Tyrus; 
Shall not the isles 'shake at the sound of thy 
fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaugh- 
ter is made in the midst of thee ? 

16 Then all the ™princes of the sea shall 
»come down from their thrones, and lay away 
their robes, and put off their broidered gar- 


of thy harps 


ments: they shall clothe themselves A. M. ue 
with ‘trembling; ° they shall sit upon : 
the ground, and ? shall tremble at every mo- 
ment, and ¢ be astonished at thee. 

17 And they shall take up a "lamentation 
for thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroy- 
ed, that wast inhabited * of seafaring men, the 
renowned city, which wast * strong in the sea, 
she and her inhabitants, which cause their terror 
to be on all that haunt it! 

18 Now, shall the isles tremble in the day of 
thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall 
be troubled at thy departure. 


& Verses 4, 5.——! Jer. xlix. 21; 


Verse 18; Chapter xxvii. 
28; xxxi. 16——® Isaiah xxiii. 8. » Jonah iii. 6——* Heb. 
tremblings. 


° Job ii. 13.—P Chapter xxxii. 10.—9 Chapter xxvii. 35. 
t Chap. xxvii. 32; Rev. xviii. 9. 5 Heb, of the seas. 5 Isa. 
xxlil. 4, Verse 15. 


riches—The Chaldean army shall hinder thy trade 
during the war, and plunder thee in the end of it. 
And make a prey of thy merchandise—Of the fruit, 
or gains, of thy merchandise. And destroy thy 
pleasant houses— The houses of thy desire, as the 
margin reads it, or, Thy desirable houses. And 
shall lay thy stones, §c., in the midst of the water 
—Shall cast thy ruins into the midst of the sea. 
And Iwill cause the noise of thy songs to cease— 
All signs or indications of mirth shall cease from 
the midst of thee. Great cities are full of all kinds 
of gayety and luxury: this had been the case with 
Tyre, but it is here foretold that all this should be 
turned {nto a melancholy silence. J will make thee 
like the top of a rock—See note on verse 4. Thou 
shalt be built no more—This was fulfilled; for 
though the inhabitants built a new city, and called 
it New Tyre, yet it was situated in a quite different 
place, namely, on an island, at some distance from 
the continent on which the former city stood: see 
note on Isa. xxiii. 1. It was also fulfilled with re- 
spect to the new city, which “received a great blow 
from Alexander, not only by his taking and burning 
it, but much more by his building of Alexandria in 
Egypt, which in time deprived it of much of its 
trade, and thereby contributed more effectually to 
its ruin. It had the misfortune afterward of chang- 
ing its masters often, being sometimes in the hands 
of the Ptolemies, kings of Egypt, and sometimes of 
the Seleucide, kings of Syria, till at length it fell 
under the dominion of the Romans. It was taken 
by the Saracens about the year of Christ 639, in the 
reign of Omar, their third emperor. It was retaken 
by the Christians, during the time of the holy war, 
in the year 1124: Baldwin, the second of that name, 
being then king of Jerusalem, and assisted by a fleet 
of the Venetians. From the Christians it was taken 
again, in the year 1289, by the Mamelukes of Egypt, 
under their sultan, Alphix, who sacked and razed 
this, and Zidon, and other strong towns, that they 
might not ever again afford any harbour or shelter 
to the Christians. From the Mamelukes it was again 
taken, in the year 1516, by Selim, the ninth emperor 
3 


of the Turks, and under their dominion it continues 
at present. But, alas! how fallen! how changed 
from what it was formerly! for, from being the 
centre of trade, frequented by all the merchant ships 
of the east and west, it is now become a heap of 
ruins, visited only by the boats of a few poor fisher- 
men: see note on verse 4. So that as to this New 
Tyre, or this part of Tyre, the prophecy hath like- 
wise been literally fulfilled: J will make thee like 
the top of a rock; thou shalt be a place to spread 
nets upon.’—Bishop Newton. 

Verses 15-18. Shall not the isles shake at the 
sound of thy fall?—All those that dwell upon the 
sea-coast near thee shall be thrown into a consterna- 
tion at the news of thy being taken and destroyed. 
All the princes of the sea shall come down from 
their thrones—All the princes and rich merchants 
(or the merchants who are as princes, as Isaiah 
speaks) of Zidon, Carthage, and other maritime 
cities that maintained a trade with Tyre, and got 
great wealth by that means, shall express a deep 
grief and concern for the fall of it. They shall 
clothe themselves with trembling—With fear pro- 
ductive of trembling; or, they shall be afraid on 
every side, and full of fear and trembling. And 
they shall take up a lamentation for thee—Shall 
bitterly bewail thy fall. Compare Rey. xviii. 9. 


| And say, How art thou destroyed—How totally and 


irrecoverably, thou who wast such a great, rich, 
splendid, and well-fortified city! T'he renowned 
city, which was strong in the sea—Tyre is called 


| the strength of the sea, (Isa. xxiii. 4,) being strong 


| 


at sea, both by its situation and its great naval forces, 
upon which account it was formidable to all that had 
trading upon the sea. Now shall the isles tremble 
—The Vulgate reads, Nunc stupebunt naves, Now 
shall the ships tremble, &c., that is, all seafaring 
men. Yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be 
troubled, &c.—The description given here, and in 
the foregoing verses, of the lamentation of the 
neighbouring places, and of the merchants and sea- 
faring people, at the fall of Tyre, is extremely 
pathetical. By thy departure here, the Chaldee 
669 


A lamentation over 


pantiovichadtne 


the ruin of Tyre 


19 For thus saith the Lord Gon; 
’ When I shall make thee a desolate 
city, like the cities that are not inhabited ; when 
I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great 
waters shall cover thee; 

20 When I shall bring thee down * with 
them that descend into the pit, with the people 
of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts 


u ane xxxii. 18, 24.——* Chap. xxxii. 33, 26, 27, 32.——¥ Chap. 


of the earth, in places desolate of old, cages 
with them that go down to the pit, oi 
that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set 
glory *in the land of the liste 


21 YI will make thee %a terror, and thou. 


shalt be no more: 7 though thou be sought for, 
yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the 
Lord Gop. 


xxvil. 36 ; xxviii. 19.——® Heb. terrors—— Psalm xxxvii. 36. 


thderstands the removal of the inhabitants of Tyre 
into captivity. But Houbigant and others explain 
it of their forsaking the city, and fleeing away in 
ships to Carthage, and other distant places. 

Verses 19-21. Thus saith the Lord, When I shall 
make thee a desolate city—When I shall fulfil these 
predictions, and make thee what I now threaten to 
make thee; like the cities that are not inhabited— 
Whose walls are broken down, and whose streets 
are all solitary. When I shall bring up the deep 


upon thee—This may be understood either figura-. 


tively of Nebuchadnezzar’s army, or literally of the 
sea overflowing and covering a great part of the an- 
cient seat of the city, in consequence of the walls 
and outworks thereof being demolished. And great 
waters shall cover thee—Kither, literally, the wa- 
ters of the sea, or, metaphorically, great afflictions. 
When I shall bring thee down with them that de- 
scend into the pit—When thou shalt be brought to 
utter desolation, like the cities which have been long 
‘buried in ruin and oblivion. The phrase of going 
down into the pit, (by which term is often signified 
the grave,) is frequently made. use of in Scripture, 
to express the destruction of a-person or place. 
Thus our Saviour says of Capernaum, (Luke x. 15,) 
Thou shalt be thrust down to hell, or, rather, as it 


ought to be translated, into the state of the dead; 
that is, thou shalt become desolate, or be no longer 
acity.. With the people of old time—With those 
who are now in entire oblivion, as those who lived 
in the first ages of the world now are. And shall 
set thee in the low parts of the earth—Another de- 
scription of the grave, from the situation and soli- 
tude of it; in places desolate of old—Desolate from 


the beginning. And J shall set glory in the land . 


of the living—That is, when I shall reinstate Judea 
in glory again. Judea is called the land of the liv- 
ing, (which signifies, according to the genius of the 
Hebrew language, ‘the land of happy men,) because 
that the inhabitants were assured of all blessings so 
long as they served God faithfully. The prophet 
here foretels that the city of Jerusalem, at whose 
destruction the inhabitants of Tyre had so greatly 
exulted, should be again rebuilt in the same place, 
and even attain to a height of reputation-and glory, 
while the city of Tyre should remain a desolation. 
I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more 
—Thou shalt be left in the ruins of desolation, a 
terrible example of my vengeance. Though thow 
be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again— 
A mode of expression this, which denotes an entire 
destruction: see notes on verses 4, 5, 14. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


This chapter contains a prophetic lamentation over the ruin of Tyre; in which we have, (1,) A large account of the dignity, 
wealth, splendour, and power of that city, while in its glory, the vast trade which it carried on with the nations around, in 
the west of Asia, north of Africa, south of Europe, and the isles of the Mediterranean sea, 1-25: which is designed to 
make its overthrow appear the more dreadful. (2,) A prediction of its fall and ruin, to the terror, and-avonder of all around, 


26-36. 


A.M. 94 7 

Brees. . THE word of the Lorn came again 
i ee unto me, saying, 

2 Now, thou son of man, * aks up a lamenta- 
tion for 'Tyrus ; 


3. 


a Chap. xix. 1; XXxvi. ade xxvili. 12; xxxii. 2; 


3 And say unto rick >O thou A. M. 3416 
that art situate at the entry of the 
sea, which art °a merchant of the people for 
many isles, Thus saith the Lord Gop; O 


> Chap. xxviii. 2—— Isa. xxiii, 3, oa 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVIL._ 
Verses 2-4. Take up a lamentation for Tyrus— 
This alludes to the mournful lamentations used at 
fnerals, wherein the mourning women recounted 


every thing that was valuable or praiseworthy be- | Isaiah xxiii. 1. 


670 


longing to the deceased, and then lamented the loss 
of him; and say, O thou that art situate at the entry 
of the sea—That art a sea-port, fitted by situation 
for carrying on trade with many countries: see 


Thou hast said, I ie sa 


The riches, glory, and 


CHAPTER XXVIi. 


commerce of Tyre. 


A.M. 3416. Tyrus, thou hast said, ¢ I az of per- 
———— fect beauty. 

4 Thy borders are in the ? midst of the seas, 
thy builders have perfected thy beauty. 

5 They have made all thy ship-boards of fir- 
trees of ° Senir: they have taken cedars from 
Lebanon to make masts for thee. 

6 Of the oaks of Bashan have they made 
thine oars; *the company of the Ashurites 
have made thy benches of ivory, brought out 
of ‘the isles of Chittim. , 

7 Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt 
was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy 
sail; * blue and purple from the isles of Elishah 
was that which covered thee. 


4 Chapter xxviii. 12.—+* Heb. perfect of beauty. 2 Heb. 
heart——° Deut. iii. 9——* Or, they have made thy hatches of 
* ivory well trodden——* Heb. the daughter——t Jer. ii. 10. 


8 The inhabitants of Zidon and A. M. 3416. 
. B.C. 588 

Aryad were thy mariners: thy wise 

men, O 'l'yrus, that were in thee, were thy 

pilots. 

9 The ancients of * Gebol and the wise men 

thereof were in thee thy ‘calkers:7 all the 
ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee 
to occupy thy merchandise. 
-10 They of Persia, and of Lud, and of > Phut, 
were in thine army, thy men of war: they 
hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set 
forth thy comeliness. 

11 The men of Arvad with thine army were 
upon thy walls round about, and the Gamma- 
dims were in thy towers: they hanged their 


£1 Kings v.18; Psa. lxxxiii. 7. 
7 Heb. strengtheners—— Jer. xlvi 


5 Or, purple and scarlet. 
6 Or, stoppers of chinks. 
9; Chap. xxx. 5; xxxviii. 5. 


beauty—Thou hast boasted that thou hast every 
thing to render thee complete, and that there is no- 
thing wanting to thee. Thy borders are in the 
midst of the seas—Thy dominions are not confined 


to the land, but extend far into the sea; where thou | 


* commandest without control, and sailest from place 
to place without interruption, to bring home thy 
riches. T'hy builders have perfected thy beauty— 
Undoubtedly such a city as Tyre, which had store 
of riches, was built with great magnificence and 
beauty; but the following verses seem to show, that 

‘these words are chiefly to be understood of the 
builders of their ships, wherein the chief strength 
and glory of the Tyrians were placed. 

Verses 5-7. T'hey have made thy ship-boards— 
The decks of thy ships; of fir-trees of Senir—By 
these are meant, the fir-trees which grew upon 
mount Hermon, which was anciently called Shenir, 
or Senir. They have taken cedars to make masts 
for thee—Though cedars have a thick; and not a 

- lofty trunk, masts consisting of diffe parts may 
be made of different cedars duly sized, or properly 
shaped if of too large a size. Of the oaks of Bashan 
have they made thine oars—That they might be 
strong. The company of the Ashurites—That is, 
the Assyrians; have made thy benches of ivory— 
“Perhaps the seats in the cabins of the royal gal- 
leys.” Instead of the company of the Ashurites, &c., 
Bishop Newcome (with R. Salomo, Bochart, Hou- 
bigant, and some others, using a different pointing of 
the Hebrew word so rendered) reads the latter part 
of the verse thus: J'hy benches have they made of 
ivory, inlaid in boa from the isles of Chittim—That 
is, the islands and coasts of the Mediterranean. In 
this sense the Chaldee understands the clause. Cor- 
sica, with which no doubt the Tyrians traded, was 
famous for the box-tree; and we may easily allow 
that the benches of some of the Tyrian ships were 


i 


So Virgil would have thought, who uses such an 
emblem to set forth the beauty of young Ascanius: 


“¢_______Quale per artem 
Inclusum buxo, aut Oricia terebintho 
Lucet ebur.” fin. x. 135. 


“Distinguish’d from the crowd he shines a gem 
Enchased in gold, or polish’d ivory set 
Amidst the meaner foil of sable jet."—Drypen.’ 


Fine linen with broidered work, &c., from Egypt— 
“Fine linen was one of the principal commodities 
of Egypt, and was a habit used for persons of the 
best quality; which shows to what an excess of 
vanity the Tyrians were come, to use such costly 
manufactures for sails to their ships. Suetonius, in 
his Life of Caligula, cap. 37, reckons this among 
several instances of that emperor’s extravagance, 
that he furnished his pleasure-boats with costly sails, 
and other expensive ornaments.” Blue and purple 
from the isles of Elishah was that which covered 
thee—“‘ Blue and purple are elsewhere reckoned 
among those colours which set off the richest attire. 
The common clothing of the Tyrians was of these 
kinds, which were brought from the islands of the 
/Bgean sea, particularly Coos, famed for purple 
among heathen authors. Elishah denotes the coun- 


| tries upon the coast of Greece: apart of Pelopon- 


nesus retains the name of Elis among the Greek 
writers.”—Lowth. 

Verses 8-11. The inhabitants of Zidon and Ar- 
vad were thy mariners—So great was the opulence 
and pride of the Tyrians, that they hired foreigners 
to do the more laborious and menial employments, 
and would do nothing else themselves than steer the 
vessels, priding themselves on being the most able 
pilots. Of Zidon, see note on Isaiah xxiii. 4, and 
of Arvad, on Jer. xlix. 23. The ancienis of Gebal, 
&c., were thy calkers—Thou employedst-the inhabit- 


adorned with streaks of ivory inlaid in that kind of || ants of Gebal for calking thy ships, as being remark- 
wood, which certainly would appear very beautiful. || ably skilful in that trade. Concerning Gebal, which 
3 


671 : 


A summary of the 


EZEKIEL. 


trade of Tyre. 


A. M. 3416. shields upon thy walls round about ; 
n= oP yet they have made ‘thy beauty perfect. 

12 *Tarshish was thy merchant by reason 
of the multitude of all /ind of riches; with 
silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy 
fairs. 

13 'Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were 
thy merchants: they traded ™ the persons of 
men and vessels of brass in thy ® market. : 

14 They of the house of ® Togarmah traded 
in thy fairs with horses, and horsemen, and 
mules. 

15 The men of ° Dedan were thy merchants ; 


M. 3416. 


many isles were the merchandise of + co 


thy hand: they brought thee for a 
present, horns of ivory and ebony. 

16 Syria was thy merchant by reason of the 
multitude of *the wares of thy making: they 
occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, 
and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, 
and }° agate. 

17 Judah, and the land of Israel, they were 
thy merchants: they traded in thy market 
P wheat of 4 Minneth and Pannag, and honey, 
and oil, and * balm." 

_18 Damascus was thy merchant in the mul- 


1 Verse 3.——* Gen. x. 4; 2 Chron. xx. 36.—!Gen. x. 2. 
m Rey. xviii. 13. 8 Or, merchandise. "Gen, x. 3; Chap. 
XXXViil. 6——®° Gen. x. 7. 


=e 

* Heb. thy works. 10 Hel. chrysoprase—? 1 Kings vy. 9, 
11; Ezra ili. 7; Acts xii. 20. 4 Judg, xi, 33.——" Jer. viii. 
22.——!! Or, rosin. 


Was a province of Phenicia, see note on Psa. 1xxxili. 
7. Allthe ships of the sea were in thee—Ships from 
all parts came to trade with thee. T'hey of Persia, 
§c., were in thine army—Thy citizens -being all 
given to trading, thou madest use of foreign soldiers 
for thine army, when thy city was besieged. Bo- 
chart thinks that Lad denotes African Ethiopia; but 
Michaelis places this people westward in Africa. 
Both think Lud an Egyptian colony. The former, 
by Phut, understands the African Nomades: see 
Nah. iii.9. They hanged the shield and helmet in 
thee—In thy garrisons, which were kept in time of 
peace. J’he menof Arvad, &c., were upon thy walls 
—They defended thy walls, when they were assault- 
ed by the king of Babylon’s army. And the Gam- 
madims were in thy towers—It is very uncertain 
what people are here meant by this name. Mr. Ful- 
ler and Bishop Newcome think it probable they were 
a people of Phenicia. The Hebrew word is derived 
from one which signifies to be contracted, narrowed, 
&c., and Parkhurst is of opinion that these people 
were the inhabitants of the country about Tripoli in 
Syria, formerly called the Ayxcov, or Elbow, of Phe- 
nicia, from its being narrowed, and projecting into 
the sea in that form. Ludolphus conjectures they 
were Africans; the Chaldee paraphrase takes them 
to be Cappadocians. Dr. Spencer denominates them, 
“Parvula simulacra, plerumque cubitalia, in domi- 
nus aut turribus ethnicorum in earum tutelam, aut 
presidium, collocata,”’ Little images, generally a 
cubit inlength, placed upon the houses, or towers of 
the heathen, for their protection, or defence. 

Verses 12-15. Tarshish was thy merchant—Traf- 
ficked with thee. Of Tarshish, see note on Isaiah 
ii, 16, and xxiii. 1. Javan, Tubal, and Meshech—By 
Javan is to be understood Greece, in which sense 
Alexander is styled king of Javan, or Greece, Dan. 
viii. 21. So the LXX. translate it here, and in that 


them to be the people afterward called Tibareni and 
Moschi, who are generally mentioned together, and 
were situated near the Euxine sea. They traded the 
persons of men—In buying and selling slaves in the 
markets. Bochart observes, that Pontus, to which 
the Tibareni extended themselves, was remarkable 
for slaves, and that the Grecian slaves were the most 


| valuable of any. And vessels of brass in thy mar- 


ket—The Hebrew word nwni here, generally trans- 
lated brass, likewise signifies steel, and is so rendered 
by our interpreters, Psa. xviii. 34. And we may 
very well understand it so here; for the Chalybes, a 
people so called from their steel manufactures, lived 
in the neighbourhood of the Tibareni and Moschi, 


for which reason steel is called the northern iron, 


Jer. xv. 12. By Togarmah, Bochart supposes Cap- 
padocia is meant. Michaelis, however, prefers Arme- 
nia, which abounded in horses, and among the inha- 
bitants of which a tradition prevailed, that they were 
descended from Thorgom. By Dedan, the above- 
mentioned critics, with Bishop Newcome, understand 
acity in the Persian gulf, now called Daden. To 
this place MB chcieoos of the eastern isles, or sea- 
coasts, br t their wares. Many isles were, or 
rather, had, the merchandise of thy hand—That is, 
many isles took thy manufactures, or bought commo- 
dities of thee; and, by way of return for them, 
brought thee in ivory, and other rarities from India, 
whither they traded. T'hey brought these by way 
of present, says our translation; but it was rather 
by way of price, or return, for the commodities 
exported, and so it is rendered in some versions. 
Verses 16-20. Syria was thy merchant, &e.— 
From what is said here, we may conclude that the 
inhabitants of Tyre were exceedingly industrious, 
skilful in arts, and politic; for here almost all nations 
are described as bringing their respective commodi- 
ties to Tyre, to give in exchange for the wares or 


place of Daniel. And all Greece, except Pelopon- 
nesus, was anciently called Tonia. Tubal and Me- 
shech are names usually joined together in Scripture. 
Two of Japhet’s sons are so called, Gen. x.2. Bo- 
chart and Bishop way with others, suppose 


manufactures. of that place} which: shows to what. 
a vast height they® cafriéd: their niafvfactiresS and?” | 
what immensé profits they must have gained, : | 
it seems,théy were able to purchase all kinds 
cious ‘stones, and the richest commodities — 


ae 


A summary of the 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


trade of Tyre. 


A.M.3416. titude of the wares of thy making, 
— for the multitude of all riches; in the 
wine of Helbon, and white wool. 

19 Dan also and Javan, ” going to and fro, 
occupied in thy fairs: bright iron, cassia, and 
calamus, were in thy market. 

20 * Dedan was thy merchant in ® precious 
clothes for chariots. 

21 Arabia, and all the princes of ‘ Kedar, 
4 they occupied with thee in lambs, and rams, 
and goats: in these were they thy merchants. 

22 The merchants of * Sheba and Raamah, 
they were thy merchants: they occupied in thy 
fairs with chief of all spices, and with all pre- 
cious stones, and gold. 


23 * Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, - 5 sain 
the merchants of ¥ Sheba, Asshur, ————. 
and Chilmad, were thy merchants. 

24 These were thy merchants in all sorts 
of things, in blue ‘clothes, and _broidered 
work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound 
with cords, and made of cedar, among thy 
merchandise. 

25 *'The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee 
in thy market; and thou wast replenished, 
and made very glorious *in the midst of the 
seas. 

26 4 Thy rowers have brought thee into 
great waters: » the east wind hath broken thee 
in the " midst of the seas. 


12 Or, Meuzal. * Gen. xxv. 319 Heb. clothes of freedom. 
t Gen. xxv. 13; Isaiah ia. 14 Heb. they were the merchants 
of thy hand." Gen. x. 7; 1 Kings x. 1, 2; Psa. Ixxii. 10, 15; 


world, with their own manufactures. Judah and 
Israel were thy merchants—Both the kingdom of 
the two tribes, and that of the ten. T'hey traded in 
thy market wheat of Minnith—Minnith was a place 
belonging to the Ammonites, Judg. xi. 338, and was 
noted for excellent wheat, great quantities of which 
the Jews brought to Tyre, the Tyrians having none 
of their own growth, but being supplied therewith 
by the Jews and Israelites/from the growth of their 
own or the neighbouring countries: see 1 Kings v. 
9-11; Ezra iii. 7; Acts xii.20. And Pannag—This 
is a word not elsewhere to be found, supposed by 
some to be the name of a place; by others, more 
probably, taken for some rich ointment, or gum. 
The Vulgate translates it balsam. In the wine of 
Helbon—Helbon is supposed to be that part of Syria 
which is called Chalybonitis by Ptolemy ; and white 
wool—Bochart understands this to be wool of a bright 
purple colour. The LXX. and Chaldee render it, 
wool from Miletus, a place famous for that commo- 
dity. Dan also, &e.—Grotius thinks that Dan in 
the kingdom of Israel can scarcely be meant here; 
and finds that a city called Dana is placed by Ptole- 
my in the islandof Ceylon. Dedan, §c.,in precious 
clothes for chariots—Kither these were rich cover- 
ings which were flung over the horses when har- 
nessed to chariots, or else coverings for the seats of 
the chariots. 

Verses 21-24. Arabia, §c., occupied with thee-- 
Hebrew, 9nd}, were the merchants of thy hand ; 
that is, they took off thy manufactures (see verse 
15) in exchange for cattle, in which their substance 
chiefly consisted. Of Kedar and its flocks, see 
notes on Isa. xxi. 16, 17, and Ix. 7. The merchants 
of Sheba and Raamah—These were people of Ara- 
bia Felix, dwelling near the Persian gulf. They 
traded in the rich products of their own country, 
namely, spices, precious stones, and gold, in which 
it abounded: see note on 1 Kings x. 1, 10. Haran, 
and Canneh, and Eden—By Haran here, it seems, 
the place is meant where Abraham dwelt when he 

Vou. IL ( 43 ) 


Isa. lx. 6. * Gen. xi. 31; 2Kings xix. 12. y Gen. xxv. 3. 
18 Or, ewcellent things. 16 Heb. foldings. z Psa. xlviii. 7; Isa. 
ii. 165 xxiii. 14. a Ver. 4, —> Psa. xlviii. 7.——"7 Heb. hearé. 


came out of Ur of the Chaldees, (see Gen. xi. 31,) 
called Charre by the Romans, and noted for the 
defeat of Crassus. Canneh some suppose to be 
the same place that is called Calneh, Amos Vi. 2, 
or Calno, Isa. x. 9, a city near the Euphrates. 
Others take it for Ctesiphon, a noted city situate 
upon the river Tigris. Eden is joined with Haran, 
2 Kings xix. 12, as it is here. The merchants of 
Sheba—There were two Shebas, as there were two 
Dedans; one descended from Raamah, (Gen. x. 7,) 
the other from Jokshan, Abraham’s son, Gen. 
xxv. 3. As the 22d verse is explained of the former, 
so the latter may be understood here: they were 
bothin Arabia. And Chilmad—Both the Chaldee and 
LXX. explain this by Carmania. Inchests of rich ap- 
parel, &c.—The rich apparel here spoken of was care- 
fully packed up in chests of cedar, to give these clothes 
a fine scent, and preserve them from putrefaction. 

Verse 25. The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee, 
&c.—Ships of Tarshish signify sometimes in Scrip- 
ture any trading or merchant ships; and in this ge- 
neral sense the expression seems to be used here: 
the prophet, having already reckoned up the princi- 
pal countries which traded with Tyre, now adds, in 
comprehensive terms, that all merchants, or traders, 
sung or spake great things of her riches: see note 
on Isa. ii. 16. Jn the midst of the seas—Through 
all the islands of the sea, the sea-coasts, and from 
one part to another. 

Verse 26. Thy rowers have brought thee into 
great waters—The prophet here begins to change 
the subject, and now, in metaphorical Janguage, 


|speaks of the danger into which the rulers and 
| statesmen of Tyre had brought her by their pride 


and ill-concerted measures. He compares her to a 
ship, impelled by its own rowers into a very tem- 
pestuous sea, by which is meant their war with the 
Chaldeans. See a similar comparison Isa. xxxiii. 23. 
Great troubles are frequently signified by great wa- 
ters. The east wind hath broken thee—By this is 


signified the Chaldean army coming from the east: La 


673 3 


The trade and 


EZEKIEL. 


riches of Tyre. 


A. M. 3416. 


ew tas 27 Thy ‘riches, and thy fairs, thy 


merchandise, thy mariners, and thy 
pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy 
merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are 
in thee, and in all thy company which is in 
the midst of thee, shall fall into the 19 midst of 
the seas, in the day of thy ruin. 

28 The suburbs ¢ shall shake at the sound 
of the cry of thy pilots. 

29 And ° all that handle the oar, the mariners, 
and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down 
from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; 

30 And shall cause their voice to be heard 
against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall 
“cast up dust upon their heads, they # shall 
wallow themselves in the ashes: — 

31 And they shall "make themselves utterly 
bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, 
and they shall weep for thee with bitterness 
of heart and bitter wailing. 


32 And in their wailing they shall i oe 
‘take up a lamentation for thee, and ————_ 
lament over thee, saying, * What city is like 
Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the 
sea ? 

33 | When thy wares went forth out of the 


||seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst 


enrich the kings of the earth with the multi- 
tude of thy riches and of thy merchandise. 

34 In the time when ™ thou shalt be broken 
by the seas in the depths of the waters, » thy 
merchandise and all thy company in the midst 
of thee shall fall. 

35 ° All the inhabitants of the isles shall be 
astonished: at thee, and their kings shall be 
sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their 
countenance. ae i 

36 The merchants among the pec 
hiss at thee; ¢thou shalt be 71a ‘terror, a 
never shalt be any more. oy 


¢ Prov. xi. 4; Verse 34; Rey. xviii. 9.——18 Or, even with all. 
19 Heb. heart. 20 Or, waves. 4 Chap. xxvi. 15, 18. e Rev. 
xviii. 17, f Job ii. 12; Rev. xviii. 19.——% Esther iv. 1, 3; 
Jer. vi. 26.—+ Jer. xvi. 6; xlvil. 5; Mic. i. 16. 


i Chapter xxvi. 17;, Verse 2.——* Rey. xviii. 18, 


-1 Rev. 
xviii. 19.——™ Chap. xxvi. 19—— Verse 27.—°® Chi i. 
15, 16. P Jer. xviii. 16.——4 Chap. xxvi. 21——*? - 
rors. 22 Heb. shall not be for ever. a 


as if he had said, As the violence of the east wind 
occasions many shipwrecks in the sea, so the army 
of thy enemies, coming upon thee, shall ruin thy 
strength and glory, and leave thee like a wreck cast 
upon the shore. “ Thisis a proper allegory,” says 
Bishop Warburton, “ with only one real sense; and 
it is managed by the prophet with that brevity and 
expedition which a proper allegory demands, when 
used in the place of a metaphor.” Grotius refers 
to Horace, lib. i. ode 14, as an allegory very simi- 
lar to this of the prophet. 

Verses 27-32. Thy riches, §c., and all thy com- 
pany, shall fall into the midst of the seas—Shall 
be as utterly ruined and destroyed as if they were 
sunk in the sea by ashipwreck. Or, this may sig- 

_hify their falling in a sea-fight. The suburbs shall 
shake, &c.—The cry of thy wounded seamen’shall 
make the inhabitants of the suburbs shake for fear: 
See chap. xxvi. 15. The mariners, §c., shall come 
down from their ships—Seafaring men, finding no 
encouragement to follow their employment, now 
thy traffic is destroyed, shall lay aside their trade, 
and mourn over thee. They shall stand upon the 
land—Bishop Newcome reads, upon the shore, 
understanding it of “the shore of the adjoining 
island, from which they viewed the conflagration 
of their city.” St. Jerome tells us, from the ancient 
histories of the Assyrians, that when the safety of 
the city was despaired of, great numbers of Tyrians 
secured themselves and their riches in their ships. 
See notes on Isa. xxiii. 1, 12. And shall cause their 
voice to he heard against thee—Or rather, over thee, 
as the LXX. and Vulgate translate it. And shall 


© cry bitterly--For the common ruin, and their own || of the isles shall be astonished—Wondering 


674 


share in it. And shall cast wp dust upon their heads 

—-Shal] use expressio f the deepest mourning 
and lamentation. They shall wallow themselves in 

ashes--As having bid a final farewell to all ease an? 

comfort. They shall make themselves utterly bald 

for thee--Another expression of public sorrow. 

And—They, who used to wear fine linen; shall gira 

them with sackcloth—According to the custom of 

great mourners. And shall weep for bitterness of 

heart——Instead of singing, as formerly, their merry - 
songs. And in their wailing they shall take up a 

lamentation for thee--The words allude to the 

public lamentations made at funerals. See note on 

Jer. ix. 17,18. Saying, What city is like Tyrus-- 

Did ever any city come down from sueh ajheight 

of prosperity to such depth of adversity? Like 

the destroyed in the midst of the sea——Alas! what 

was once her safeguard, and the source of her 

wealth, is now her grave. 

Verses 33-36. When thy wares, &c.--When thy 
wares or manufactures were transported through 
the seas to every part, thou filledst many people— 
Didst supply the wants, or minister to the luxuries 
and pleasures, of many nations. Time was when 
thy wares, those of thy own making, and those 
that passed through thy hands, were exported 
to all parts of the world; then thou filledst many 
people, and didst enrich the kings of the earth and 
their kingdoms. But in the time when thou shalt 
be broken—As a ship that is wrecked at sea; thy 
merchandise and all thy company shall fall—They 
that used to be enriched by thee, shall be ruined 
with thee, as is usual in trade. All the inhabitants 


( 43* ) 


The prophet predicts the 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


ruin of the king of Tyre. 


that ever such a change should be effected, that 
Tyre should fall. And their kings shall be sore 
afraid—Sensible how much less able they are to 
resist the conqueror and defend themselves than 
thou wast, and not knowing whom he will next 
attack. They shall be troubled in their counte- 
nance—They shall not be able to conceal the dis- 
composure of their minds, but will show it evident- 
ly in their countenances. The merchants among 
the people shall hiss at thee—By way of insult and 
derision ; as men are apt to despise those in adversity, 
whom they courted and respected in prosperity. 
The Chaldee Paraphrase renders it, They shall be 
astonished ; and this sense agrees better with the 
lamentations of the seafaring men, mentioned in 
the foregoing verses. 

The following reflections by Bishop Newton, on 
the fall of Tyre, are peculiarly worthy of the read- 
er’s attention: “Such hath been the fate of this city, 
. once the most famous in the world for trade and 
ecommerce. But trade isa fluctuating thing: it pass- 


cae x: 


ed from Tyre to Alexandria, from Alexandria to 
Venice, from Venice to Antwerp, from Antwerp to 
Amsterdam and London, the English rivalling the 
Dutch, as the French are now rivalling both. It be- 
hooves those who are in possession of it, to take the 
greatest care that they do not lose it. Liberty is a 
friend to that, as that is a friend to liberty, But the 
greatest enemy to both is licentiousness, which tram- 
ples upon all law and lawful authority, encourages 
riots and tumults, promotes drunkenness and de- 
bauchery, sticks at nothing to supply its extrava- 
gance, practises every art of illicit gain, ruins credit, 
ruins trade, and will in the end ruin liberty itself. 
Neither kingdoms nor commonwealths, neither pub- 
lic companies nor private persons, can long carry 
on a beneficial, flourishing trade without virtue, and 
what virtue teacheth, sobriety, industry, frugality, 
modesty, honesty, punctuality, humanity, charity, 
the love of our country, and the fear of God. The 
prophets will inform us how the Tyrians lost it; and 
the like causes will always produce the like effects.” 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 
In thas chapter we have, (1,) A prediction of singular disgrace and ruin to the king of Tyrus, by the Chaldeans, to punish 


has singular pride and high concert of his own wisdom, dignity, and wealth, 1-10. 


astonishingly fallen from his grandeur, 11-19. 
from which she had originated, 20-23. 


(2,) A lamentation over him, thus 


(3,) A prediction of ruin to Zidon, a neighbouring city of Tyrus, and 
(4,) A promise of the restoration and safety of Israel, after the captivity in 


Babylon and present dispersion, notwithstanding the insults and abuse which they had suffered from their neighbours % 


the day of their distress, 24-26. 


A. M. 3416. "THE word of the Lorp came again 

B. C, 588. . 

—— unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Because thy heart 
is lifted up, and *thou hast said, I am a God, 
I sit iz the seat of God, in the ! midst of the 
seas; ° yet thou arf a man, and not God, 
though thou set thy heart as the heart of 
God : 


3 Behold, ‘thou art wiser than A. M. 2416 
Daniel ; there is no secret that they brits saa 
can. hide from thee: 

4 With thy wisdom and with thine under- 
standing thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast 
gotten gold and silver into thy treasures : 

5 * By ° thy great wisdom and by thy traffic 
hast thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is 
lifted up because of thy riches : 


2 Verse 9.—» Chap. xxvii. 3, 4——* Heb. heart. 
xxxi. 3.——4 Zech. ix. 2. 


¢ Isaiah 


2 Hebrew, by the greatness of thy wisdom. 


¢ Psalm Ixii. 10; 
ech. ix. 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXVIII... 

Verse 2. Say to the prince of Tyrus—The name 
of this prince was Ithobalus, according to the Phe- 
nician annals. Because thy heart is lifted up—In 
pride and self-conceit; and thow hast said—Namely, 
in thy heart; Jama god—I am likeagod. J sitin 
the seat of God—Inaccessible by mortals. Jn the 
midst of the seas—As God is safe from all injury in 
his throne in heaven, so am I as safe; for the sea 
secures me. These words express an insolent boast 
of self-sufficiency, as if he had said, I fear no man, 
nor stand in need of any: I am seated in a place of 
impregnable strength: the sea defends me, so that 
no enemy can assault me. And they represent the 


who trusted in his own strength, and forgot his de- 
pendance upon God. The same crime was in like 
manner punished in the king of Egypt, chap. xxix. 3, 
and afterward in Nebuchadnezzar himself, Dan. iv. 
30,31. Yet thou art man, and not God—Subject to 
all the infirmities, casualties, sorrows, and distresses 
that attend human nature, and to all the changes 
of human affairs, and hast not any of that innate, 
invincible power, and of that immutability of con- 
dition, which is in God. Though thou hast set thy 
heart as the heart of God—Hast entertained thoughts 
which become nope but God. 

Verses 3-8. Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel 
—In thy own conceit. The fame of Daniel’s wis- 


excessive pride and carnal security of this prince, |, dom was quickly spread over Chaldea, upon his © 
3 675 


A lamentation for 


EZEKIEL. 


the king of Tyre. 


6 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gon; Because thou hast set thy heart 
as the heart of God ; 

7 Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon 
thee, ‘ the terrible of the nations: and they shall 
draw their swords against the beauty of thy 
wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness. 

8 They shall bring thee down to the pit, and 
thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain 
in the midst of the seas. 

9 Wilt thou yet * say before him that slayeth 
thee, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, 


A. M. 3416. 
B. C. 588. 


and no God, in the- hand of him A. M. 3416. 
that *slayeth thee. bes ri 

10 'Thou shalt die the deaths of "the uncir- 
cumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have 
spoken i¢, saith the Lord Gop. 

11 “ Moreover the word of the LorpD came 
unto me, saying, 

12 Son of man, ‘take up a lamentation 
upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, 
Thus saith the Lord Gon; *Thou sealest 
up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in 
beauty. 


f Chapter xxx. 11; xxxi.12; xxxti. 12.——# Verse 2. 
woundeth. 


OF 


being advanced to several posts of honour and dig- 
nity by Nebuchadnezzar. See Dan. ii.8. So here 
the prophet in an ironical manner upbraids the vain 
boasts which the prince of Tyre made of his wis- 
dom, and the policy of those about him, as if it ex- 
ceeded the endowments of Daniel. ‘The Pheni- 
cians, of whom the Tyrians were a colony, (see note 
on Isa. xxiii. 12,) valued themselves for their wis- 
dom and ingenuity, as being inventors of naviga- 
tion, letters, and sciences. Compare Zech. ix. 2. 
With thy wisdom, ¢c., thou hast gotten thee riches 
—Thy skill in navigation and trade has increased 
thy wealth. Behold, I will bring upon thee the ter- 
rible of the nations—The Babylonians, who by their 
conquests have made themselves terrible to all the 
nations round about them. They shall draw their 
swords against the beauty of thy wisdom—They 
shall deface and destroy all the beautiful edifices 
which thou hast erected with admirable art, and 
every thing which thou valuest as ornamental or 
useful, beauteous or magnificent, even all the glory 
of thy kingdom. They shall defile thy brightness 
—They shall render thy kingdom, which is now 
flourishing and glorious, weak and contemptible. 
Thou shalt die the deaths, &c.—Thou shalt die the 
death of those who perished in the flood. The ex- 
pression deaths, in the plural, intimates a still fur- 
ther punishment, even after the death of the body; 
such as that impious race experienced, and such as 
this haughty prince had well deserved by his mad 
pride and blasphemous impiety. And therefore 
with the same emphasis the prophet tells us, verse 
10, Thou shalt die the deaths, the double death, of 
the uncircumcised ; that is, of unbelievers and ene- 
miestoGod. For circumcision being the rite which 
distinguished God’s chosen people from the heathen, 
uncircumcised is equivalent in sense to wicked or 
profane. So the Chaldee Paraphrase renders it 
here. “This is not the only place in this prophecy 
where the destruction by the deluge is alluded to: 
for this, and the fall of angels, being two of the 
greatest events that ever happened and the most re- 
markable of God’s judgments, it was very natural for 
the prophets to recur to them, when they would 
» ‘aise their style in the deseription of the fall of 


h Chapter xxxi. 18; xxxii. 19, 21, 25, 27.1 Chapter XXvii. 2. 
& Chap. xxvii. 3 ; Verse3. + 


empires and tyrants. See chap, xxvi. 19, 20, and 
xxvii. 26, 32,34. As the style of this prophet is 
wonderfully adapted to the subject whereof he 
treats, so he compares the destruction of this famous 
maritime city to a vessel shipwrecked in the sea, 
and so sends its inhabitants to the people of old 
times, as he calls them, who were swallowed up in 
the universal deluge. Their prince he compares to 
the prince of the rebel angels, whose pride had 
given him such a dreadful fall.” See Peters on 
Job, p. 373, and notes on verse 14, 

Verse 9. Wilt thou yet say—Or, Wilt thou then 
say, before him that slayeth thee, I am God—No- 
thing can be more finely expressed than this: the 
| prince of Tyrus thought himself, as a god, as invin- 
cible, as secure from all harm; God therefore, by his 
prophet, asks hint here if he would have these proud 
thoughts, if he would think of himself as a god, 
when he found himself in his enemy’s power, just 
going to be slain. ‘The question is most sharp and 
cutting: it sets the folly of his insolent pride in the 
strongest light; for surely he could not boast of 
being a god, when he was to fall by the sword of a 
man; and whatever proud thoughts he now enter- 
tained of himself, they certainly would be changed 
when he saw the sword of his enemy lifted up to 
slay him. So Plutarch tells us of Alexander, that 
“he vainly affected to be thought Jupiter’s son, and 
next in honour to Bacchus and Hercules: yet when 
he saw the blood run out of a wound he had re- 
céived, which at the same time gave him much 
pain, he confessed that was not such blood as Homer 
said issued from the immortal gods.”—Lib. 2, De 
Alexandri fortuna. This whole chapter, as well as 
the foregoing one, is exceedingly fine, both as to the 
style and composition. 

Verses 12, 13. T'ake up a lamentation upon the 
king of Tyrus—See chap. xxvii. 32. Zhou sealest 
up the sum, full of wisdom, &c.—In thine own 
opinion thou art the perfect pattern of wisdom and 
all other excellences; thou possessest them in full 
measure, they are thine by an unalienable tenure, 
sealed up safely among thy treasures. The LXX. 
render this, Sv aroc¢payropua opoiwoewe, Kat cepavoc kaA- 


| Aove, Thou art the seal of likeness, mage 


A lamentation for 


aig, 13 Thou hast been in ! Eden the 


garden of God: every precious stone 
was thy covering, the *sardius, topaz, and the 
diamond, the ®* beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, 
the sapphire, the °emerald, and the carbuncle, 
and gold: the workmanship of ™ thy tabrets 
and of thy pipes, was prepared in thee in the 
day that thou wast created. 


A. M.3 
B.C. 5 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


the king of T'yre. 


14 Thou aré¢ the anointed * cherub 
that covereth ; and I have set thee 
so: thou wake upon ° the holy mountain of 
God; thou hast walked up and down in the 
midst of the stones of fire. 

15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the 
day that thou wast created, till iniquity was 
found in thee. 


1 Chapter xxxi. 8, 9.——* Or, ruby. 
chrysoprase. 


5 Or, chrysolite. 6 Or; 


m Chap. xxvi. 13. 


5 Exod. xxv. 20; Verse 16. 
xx. 40. 


© Chapter 


beauty. 'To the same purpose the Vulgate, 7'u sig- 
naculum similitudinis, plenus sapientia, perfectus 
decore: that is, says Lowth, “Thou art the image 
of God, an exact impression taken from that great 
copy. For the following verse shows that the ex- 
pression alludes to Adam, when he was first created, 
and came pure out of the hands of his Maker; full 
of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.” Thou hast 
been in Eden—“ As thy situation was pleasant, so 
wast thou plentifully supplied with every thing 
which could contribute to make thy life pleasant 
and happy. The state of paradise, in common 
speech, denotes a condition every way complete and 
happy. See Isa. li.3. The expression, as well as 
the whole context, alludes to the complete happi- 
ness which Adam enjoyed in paradise, before his 
apostacy and fall.” Every precious stone was thy 
covering—Not only was thy crown adorned with 
the choicest jewels, but thou wast arrayed with royal 
robes, enriched with gold and precious stones of all 
sorts. There is probably an allusion here to the 
precious stones which were placed in the high- 
priest’s breast-plate, as the next verse alludes to the 
echerubim over the mercy-seat. Accordingly the 
LXX. enlarge the number of the stones here men- 
tioned from nine to twelve, and place them in the 
same order in which they are ranked Exod. xxviii. 
17, &c. The workmanship of thy tabrets, §c., was 
prepared in thee—Or, for thee, in the day thou wast 
created—The highest expressions of joy, such as 
are the sounding of all sorts of musical instruments, 
ushered thee into the world, according to the usual 
practice at the birth of great princes; and ever since 
thou hast been brought up in the choicest delicacies 
which a royal palace or a luxurious city could 
furnish. 

Verses 14,15. Thou art the anointed cherub that 
covereth—The prophet here alludes to the cherubim 
in the temple of Solomon, which were a part of the 
ark, being made of beaten gold, and therefore were 
with it anointed, and were very large, and covered 
the mercy-seat with their wings. The prince of 
Tyrus is here compared to one of these, on account 
of the high power which he bore among men, and 
his covering or protecting his people by that power. 
St. Jerome translates the expression, The extended 
cherub that covereth: that is, whose wings are 
stretched out to cover, &c., reading wD, exrtended, 
instead of nw, anointed. And I have set thee so 
—It was I a St determined that thou shouldest 

3 ; 


be so great a king, and have a vast power to defend 
and protect thy people. But this prince, like too 
many of mankind, was insensible of the hand which 
raised him, and did not consider to whom he owed 
his power and glory. T'how wast upon the holy 
mountain of God—The image of the cherub is pur- 
sued. “Such was thy eminent distinction, that thou 
wast, as it were, placed in the temple of God on his 
holy mountain.” Or, thou wast placed in as secure 
a situation as if thou hadst been fixed on the holy 
mountain where the temple of God stands. Thou 
hast walked, &c., in the midst of the stones of fire— 
Thou hast, as it were, been placed among the twelve 
precious stones on the breast-plate of the high-priest. 
Or this obscure sentence may signify that this 
prince’s palace and his attendants were very richly 
adorned with precious stones, which shone with a 
burning brightness, like fire. Lowth thinks “ the 
words allude to the high advancement of Satan in 
heaven before his fall, where he was placed in one 
of the highest orders of angels, such as were nearest 
in attending upon the Divine Majesty.” Thou wast 
perfect in thy ways, till iniquity was found in thee 
—‘ An exact description of the evangelical purity in 
which the devil was created, and in which he con- 
tinued till, being lifted up with pride, he fell from 
his first estate.” ‘ Whoever compares this place in 
Ezekiel with the parallel place in Isa, xiv, 12, &e., 
where the downfall of the king of Babylon is fore- 
told in the same prophetic language, will soon per- 
ceive that they throw a reciprocal light upon each 
other, and that the fall of angels is alluded to in both. 
The beauty and propriety of these allusions of the 
prophets will appear with greater lustre when it is 
considered that the host of heaven were the objects 
of the heathen idolatry ; both the visible and invisi- 
ble host, as well the angels as the lights of heaven ; 
for the superstition seems to have been originally 
the same, as the worship of the heavenly bodies ter- 
minated in the worship of those angels, or intelli- 
gences, who were believed to animate and conduct 
them: and hence we see a reason why the angels 
were Called stars, and morning-stars, in Scripture: 
as in Job xxxviii.7, and so here, the covering cherub 
is the same with Lucifer, the son of the morning, 
in Isaiah. Thus, while the prophets describe the 
overthrow of an idolatrous prince or state by a 
fallen angel, or a falling star, they only make their 
gods to tumble with them: see Dissertation on 
Job, p. 374, 
677 


EZEKIEL. 


against Zidon. 


The prophecy 
A.M.346. 16 By the multitude of thy mer- 


B. © 5° chandise they have filled the midst 


of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: 
therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the 
mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, ?O 
covering cherub, from the midst of the stones 
of fire. 

17 2 Thy heart was lifted up because of thy 
beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by 
reason of thy brightness: -I will cast thee to the 
ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they 
may behold thee. 

18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the 
multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of 
thy traffic; therefore will I bring forth a fire 
from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, 
and I will bring thee to ashes upon the 
earth in the sight of all them that behold 
thee. 


19 All they that know thee among 4 a ag 
the people shall be astonished at thee: —-s—— 
‘thou shalt be 7a terror, and never shalé thou 
be any more. 

20 4] Again the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

21 Son of man, ‘set thy face * against Zidon, 
and prophesy against it. 

22 And say, Thus saith the Lord Gop; * Be- 


'|hold, I am against thee, O Zidon; and Iwill 


be glorified in the midst of thee: and * they 
shall know that I am the Lorn, when i shall 
have executed judgments in her, and shall be 
Y sanctified in her. 

23 * For I will send into her pestilence, and 
blood into her streets; and the wounded shall 
be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon 
her on every side; and they,shall know that I 
am the Lorp. 


P Verse 14, 4 Verses 2, 5. * Chap. xxvi. 215 xxvii. 36. 
7 Heb. terrors. s Chapter vi. 2; xxv. 2; xxix, 2. ' Isaiah 
xxiii. 4, 12; Jer. xxv. 22; xxvii. 3; Chap. xxxii. 30, 


x Psalm ix. ; 


«Exodus xiv. 4, 17; Chapter xxxix. 13. 
xxxvi. 23; Verse 25,—# Chapter 


16, y Chapter xx. 41; 
XXXVIll. 22, 


dise, &¢c.—The riches which thy great trade has 
produced have but increased thy love of gain more 
and more, and induced thee to commit acts of vio- 
lence, fraud, and extortion, to make further additions 
to thy power and riches; therefore I will cast thee 
out of the mountain of God—I will cast thee down 
to contempt from that supereminent degree of power 
and glory to which I had raised thee, and from the 
exalted station of governing others, and being able to 
afford them protection, and from all thy great pomp 
and magnificence. Thy heart was lifted up be- 
cause of thy beauty—Thou becamest vain and inso- 
lent on account of thy power, riches, and magnifi- 
cence. Here the root of this prince’s ruin is pointed 
out tous. His power and riches produced pride and 
insolence in him, and those every evil way. His 
grandeur blinded him, so that he did not see his true 
happiness, nor the right way of pursuing it, but wan- 
dered in ways which led to ruin. J will lay thee 
before kings, that they may behold thee—I will make 
thee a spectacle to other princes, expose thee as a 
miserable object before their eyes, that thou mayest 
be an example to them to deter them from the like 
pride and practices. 
Verses 18, 19. Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries 
an throne, palace, judgment-seats. The word 
ID, generally rendered sanctuary, sometimes sig- 
es a palace, in which sense it probably ought to 
16 taken Amos vii. 13, where our translation ren- 
ders it the king’s chapel. Thus Bishop Patrick un- 
derstands it, Exod, xxv. 8, where our version reads, 
Let them hale mea Diaticder4 3; God commanding 
that he should be served and attended upon in the 
tabernacle, as a king in his court or palace. The 
cherubim were his throne, the ark his footstool, the 
678 


Verses 16,17. By the multitude of thy merchan- : 


altar his table, (and therefore called by that name, 
chap. xli. 22; Mal. i. '7,) the priests his attendants, 
and the show-bread and sacrifices his provisions. The 
king of Tyre had filled his palace and courts of ju- 
dicature, and the Tyrians their stately buildings, with 
iniquity and injustice, and therefore God was deter- 
mined utterly to destroy them by the Chaldeans. 
I will bring fire from the midst of thee—Punish- 
ment shall follow thy crimes, and thy own ways shall 
bring it upon thee: thy destruction shall proceed 
from thyself. J will bring thee to ashes wpon the 
earth—I will bring thee todust. 'Thou shalt be made 
no more account of than ashes spread on the ground. 
All that know thee shall be astonished—So low a fall 
from such a height of glory will astonish all who ever 
saw thy former magnificence. 

Verses 21-23. Set thy face against Zidon—Di- 
rect thy face and thy speech toward Zidon, and fore- 
tel its destruction by the king of Babylon. Tyre and 
Zidon were neighbouring cities, and generally par- 
takers of the same prosperity or adversity. We have, 
indeed, no history that informs us of the particulars 
of what befell Zidon; but it is likely that it sent help 
to the Tyrians, and so (Nebuchadnezzar proving vic- 
torious) suffered with them, and was reduced first 
under the power of the Chaldeans, and afterward of 
the Persians. Say, Behold, I am against thee, O 
Zidon—Provoked by thy sins, I am an adversary to 
thee, and am determined to punish thee. J awill be 
glorified in the midst of thee—I will make my 
power and justice known by the judgments I will 
execute upon thee. In the same sense God saith, 
Exod. xiv. 17, I will get me honour upon Pharaoh. 
And will be sanctified i in her—And will get myself 


reverence, fear, and praise, by the pun t I will 
bring upon her. God is said to be sanctified in these 


Deliverance from 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


captivity promised. 


= 


24 4 And there shall be no more 
— *a pricking brier unto the house of 
Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are 
round about them that despised them ; and they 
shall know that I am the Lord Gop. 

25 Thus saith the Lord Gop; When I shall 
have » gathered the house of Israel from the 
people among whom they are scattered, and 
shall be ° sanctified in them in the sight of the 


A. M. 3416. 
B. C 


heathen, then shall they dwell in A.M, 3416 
their land that I have given to my pale. 
servant Jacob. 

26 And they shall 4 dwell ®safe therein, and 
shall ® build houses, and ‘ plant vineyartis; yea, 
they shall dwell with confidence, when I have 
executed judgments upon all those that °de- 
spise them round about them; and they shall 
know that I am the Lorp their God. 


a@Num. xxxiii. 55; Josh. xxiii. 13.—— Isaiah xi. 12; waa 
xi. 173 x, 41; xxxiv. 13; xxxvii. 21——* Verse 


© Isa. 
° Or, spoil. 


j4 Jer. xxiii. 6; Ch. xxxvi. 28.——® Or, with confidence. 
ixv. 21; Amos ix. 14——f Jer. xxxi. 5. 


for whose preservation or destruction he exerts his 
power in a remarkable manner, so as to get glory to 
himself. For I will send her pestilence and blood 
—The pestilence, which often accompanies long 
sieges, shall destroy her inhabitants. And the 
wounded shall be judged, §c., by the sword—That is, 
the wounded shall fall in the midst of her by the 
sword, and meet with their deserved punishment 
from it. 

Verses 24-26. There shall be no more a pricking 
brier—There shall no more be any nation that shall 
injure, and be a vexation to the house of Israel; for 
all their troublesome neighbours, who had been as 
so many thorns in their sides, shall be destroyed or 
repressed, and in consequence thereof they shall 
dwell quietly and securely in their own land. This 
promise was in part fulfilled after their return from 
their captivity in Babylon; but the following verse 
shows that it chiefly relates to the general restoration 
of the Jews, when all the enemies of God’s church and 
truth shall be vanquished and subdued, often denoted 
in the prophetical writings by the name of Edom, 
Moab, and other neighbouring nations, who, upon 


| all occasions, were wont to show their spite and ill- 
| will against God’s ancient people. When J shall 
have gathered the house of Israel, &e.—This seems 
to be a plain prophecy of the restoration of the Jews 
to their own land, as will appear to any one who will 
compare the words with the parallel texts referred to 
inthe margin; and the rules laid down concerning 
the division of the land among the twelve tribes 
(chap. xlvii., xlviii.) do very much favour this inter- 
/pretation: see note on Isa. xi. 12. And shall be 
sanctified in them—See on verse 22. And they shall 
dwell safely therein—In comparison of what they 
/have done formerly: they shall have peace, and 
freedom from the annoyance of enemies. And shall 
\build houses, and plant vineyards—Building and 
planting are commonly joined together. When f 
shall have executed judgments—The prophets com- 
‘monly conclude their threatenings against infidels 
/with gracious promises to God’s people, implying 
‘that he will not make an utter destruction of 
them, as of other people, but preserve a remnant, 
to whom he may fulfil his promises made to their 


| fathers. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


In this and the three following chapters is foretold the conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar. 
the same judgment upon Egypt which was foretold by Jeremiah, chap. xlvi. 13, &c. 
diction of the destruction of Pharaoh, for his treacherous dealing with Israel, 1-7. 

(3,) A promise of the restoration thereof in part, 13-16. 


Egypt, 8-12. 


ing it, 17-20. (5,) A promise of mercy to Israel, 21. 


et M. — an thetenth year, in the tenth month, 
in the twelfth day of the month, 


This was a denunciation of 

In this chapter we have, (1,) A pre- 
(2,) A prediction of the desolation of 
(4,) A prediction of Nebuchadnezzar’s possess- 


the word of the Lorp came unto me, A 74 sAl6. 
saying, 


eo NOTES ON CHAPTER XXIX. 

Verse 1. In the tenth year, &c.—The prophecies 
of Ezekiel, in regard to foreign nations, are not 
placed according to the order of time in which they 
were delivered, but according to the respective dis- 
tances of the nations from Judea, beginning with 
those which lay nearest to it. And with respect to 
the prophecies against Egypt, it is justly remarked 

3 


by Dathius, that this and the three following chapters 
are joined together, because they treat of the same sub- 
ject, though they consist of prophecies uttered at very 
different periods of time. The period assigned in the 
present text, in this verse, for the prophecy first re- 
corded here, is during the siege of Jerusalem; and, 
agreeably to verses 6, 7, might be immediately after 
Pharaoh’sretreat, foretold by Jeremiah,chap. xxxvii.7. 
679 


The prophecy 


EZEKIEL. 


against Pharaoh. 


A.M. 3416. 2 Son of man, “set thy face against 
B. C. 588. 5) : 
_—*. Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and prophesy 
against him, and ” against all Egypt: 

3 Speak and say, Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 
° Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, the great ‘dragon that lieth in the 
midst of his rivers, ° which hath said, My river 
is mine own, and I have made i¢ for myself. 

4 But fI will put hooks in thy jaws, and I 
will cause the fish of thy rivers to. stick unto 
thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the 
midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers 
shall stick unto thy scales. 


5 And J will leave thee thrown into A. M. 3416. 
the wilderness, thee and all the fish wba 
of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the + open 
fields; ¢thou shalt not be brought together, 
nor gathered: "I have given thee for meat to 
the beasts of the field, and to the fowls of the 
heaven. 

6 And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know 
that I am the Lorn, because they have been a 
‘ staff of reed to the house of Israel. 

7 ‘When they took hold of thee by thy 
hand, thou didst break, and rend all their 
shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, 


a Chapter xxviii. 21. >’ Tsaiah xix.1; Jeremiah xxv. 19; 
elvis %, 20h ¢ Jeremiah xliv. 30; Chapter xxviii. 22; Verse 
10. 4 Psa, lxxiv. 13, 14; Isa. xxvii. 1; li. 9; Chap. xxxii. 2. 
© Chap. xxviii. 2. 


Verses 2,3. Set thy face against Pharaoh—Pha- 
raoh being a common name to all the kings of Egypt, 
this prince was called Pharaoh-hophra, by way of 
distinction, by Jeremiah, chap. xlvi. 30, and Apries 
by Herodotus. The word (:3n, fannim, signifies 
any great fish, but seems to be here used to signify 
the crocodile, a fish in a manner peculiar to the river 
Nile, to which the king of Egypt is compared, on ac- 
count of his dominions lying upon that river, which 
he boasted himself of, on account of the prodigious 
fertility which the overflowing of the Nile caused. 
It is spoken of here as rivers, on account of its many 
mouths, or channels. The word Pharaoh signifies 
a crocodile in the Arabic tongue. Among the an- 
cients, Michaelis tells us, the crocodile was a symbol 
of Egypt, and appears so on the Roman coins. Mil- 
ton seems to have had this sublime passage in view, 
when he said, Par. Lost, xii. 190— 


—— Thus with ten wounds 
The river-dragon, tamed, at length submits. 


My river is my own—That is, the kingdom of Egypt, 
watered by the Nile, is mine. Ihave made it for 
myself—It is my own indefeisible right and proper- 
ty, which I cannot be dispossessed of. This king 
was, indeed, exceeding prosperous, and reigned un- 
interrupted for twenty-five years; by which he was 
so elated, as we learn from Herodotus, that he was 
wont to boast, that not even any god could dispossess 
him of his kingdom. 

Verses 4,5. But Iwill put hooks in thy jaws— 
The king of Egypt being spoken of as a great fish, 
or a crocodile, God here, in pursuance of the same 
metaphor, tells him that he will put hooks in his 
jaws, or stop his vain-glorious designs and boastings, 
by raising up enemies that should gain the mastery 
over him, as the fisherman has the fish in his power, 
when he has struck the hook into its jaws. This 
hook to the king of Egypt was Amasis, one of his 
officers, who set up himself as king, by the favour of 
the people, and dethroned his master. J will cause 
the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales—I will 
cause even thy own people to press thee hard, and 

680 


f Isaiah xxxvii. 29; Chapter xxxviii. 4——* Heb. face of the 
field. — 6 Jer. viii. 2; xvi. 4; xxv. 33} Jer. vil. 33; xxxiv. 
20.— i 2Kings xvili. 21; Isa. xxxvi. 6——* Jer. xxxvii. 5, 7, 
11; Chap. xvn. 17. 


to be a torment to thee. And Iwill bring thee up 
out of thy rivers—By this is metaphorically express- 
ed his being induced to undertake a foreign expedi- 
tion. The expression alludes to the nature of a croco- 
dile, which is not confined to the water, but uses to 
come upon the land, where he is frequently taken. 
And I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, 
and all the fish of thy rivers—Thy army shall be 
discomfited, and fall in the deserts of Lybia and Cy- 
rene; for there seems to be here an allusion to the 
heavy loss which Apries and the Egyptian army 
sustained in his expedition against the Cyreni- 
ans, toward whom they must have marched over 
the desert. Herod. ii. § 161. Apries himself did not 
fall in battle, but was taken prisoner by Amasis, and 
strangled by the Egyptians. Herod. ii. § 169. See 
note on Jer. xliv. 30. Thou shalt fall upon the open 
fields—A king is said to be defeated, or victorious, 
when his armies are so. "how shalt not be brought 
together, nor gathered—The bones, or carcasses, of 
thy army shall not be collected in order to their bu- 
rial, nor gathered to the dead in the sepulchres allot- 
ted for them. J have given thee for meat to the 
beasts of the field, &e.—See Rev. xix. 17, 18. Some 
think the expression here is metaphorical, and signi- 
fies that the power of depriving him of his kingdom, 
power, liberty, riches, and at last life itself, should be 
given to cruel and rapacious men. 

Verses 6,7. Because they have been a staff of 
reed to the house of Israel—This expression, a staff 
of reed, is very emphatical, to signify a confidence 
which has failed those that depended upon it, or has 
done them more hurt than good; for if a reed is 
leaned upon as a staff, it most certainly bends under 
the weight and breaks, and the splinters sometimes 
run into the hand of him who leaned upon it. 
Though the Jews were greatly blamed by God for 
entering into alliance with the Egyptians, yet we find 
God here declaring that he would punish the Egyp- 
tians for not having performed their engagements to 
the Israelites; for though God forbade the Israelites 
to seek the alliance of the Egyptians, this n 
less did not excuse the Egyptians in their : ch 


The prophecy 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


agatnst Egypt. 


A. M. 3416. thou brakest, and madest all their 
_______. loins to be at a stand. 

8 “| Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I will bring !'a sword upon thee, and cut 
off man and beast out of thee. 

9 And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and 
waste; and they shall know that I am the 
Lorp: because he hath said, The river zs mine, 
and I have made it. 

10 Behold, therefore, I am against thee, and 
against thy rivers, ™and I will make the land 
of Egypt *utterly waste and desolate, ° from 
"the tower of *Syene even unto the border of 
Ethiopia. 

11 ° No foot of man shall pass through it, 


nor foot of beast shall pass through A. M. 3416. 


oe. : : : B. C. 588, 
it, neither shall it be inhabited forty ——* 


years. 

12 P And I will make the land of Egypt 
desolate in the midst of the countries that are 
desolate, and her cities among the cities that 
are laid waste shall be desolate forty years: 
and I will scatter the Egyptians among the 
nations, and will disperse them through the 
countries. 

13 Yet thus saith the Lord Gop; At the 
‘end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians 
from the people whither they were scattered : 

14 And I will bring again the captivity of 
Egypt, and will cause them to return inéo the 


1 Chap. xiv. 17; xxxii. 11, 12, 13. m Ch. xxx, 12,—?* Heb. 
wastes of waste. *Or, from Migdol to Syene, Exodus xiv. 2; 


Jer. xliv. 1. n Chap. xxx. 6.——* Heb. Seveneh. © Chap. 
xxxii, 13.—P Chap. xxx. 7, 26.——1 Isa. xix. 23; Jer. xlvi. 26. 


faith. When they took hold of thee by thy hand— 
—When they relied on thee for help; thow didst 
break—Or, thou wast crushed, as Newcome renders 
it; and rend all their shoulder—Or, their arm. 'The 
sense is, that the Egyptians proved a destruction to 
the Jewish people, who expected to be helped by 
them: see Jer. xxxvii. 5,7; 2 Kings xxiv.7. This 
king of Egypt came with a great army to raise the 
siege of Jerusalem, but would not venture a battle 
with the Chaldeans, and marched back again, leav- 
ing Jerusalem to be taken by them. 

Verses 8,9. Behold, I will bring a sword upon 
thee—This was fulfilled, first by the civil wars which 
broke out in Egypt, and next by the invasion of it by 
Nebuchadnezzar, who carried his victorious arms 
through the whole country, destroying wherever he 
came; and will cut off man and beast—That is, de- 
stroy a vast number both of men and beasts. And 
the land of Egypt shall be desolate-—A great part of 
Egypt was, without doubt, laid waste and made deso- 
late by the ravages of war. Because he hath said, 
The river is mine—Arrogance and self-confidence 
are always spoken of in Scripture as highly displeas- 
ing to God. Whenever any one thinks, speaks, or 
acts as if he were self-dependant, and had safety, 
prosperity, and happiness in his own power, then do 
the Scriptures represent God as giving up such a 
one to calamity, to convince him how little reason he 
had to think highly of, or to trust in himself. 

Verses 10-12. Behold, I am against thee and thy 
rivers—Since thou hast opposed me, I will set my- 
self against thee, and bring down the strength and 
glory of thy kingdom, wherein thou magnifiest thy- 
selfso much. From the tower of Syene, even unto 
the border of Ethiopia—If we follow this transla- 
tion, we must understand the word Cush, rendered 
here Ethiopia, of Arabia, as it is often taken: see 
note on Jer. xiii. 23. For Syene was to the south of 
Egypt, under the tropic of Cancer, and bordering on 
African Ethiopia: see Pliny’s Nat. Hist., 1. v. c. 9. 
But the words may be properly translated thus: 
From ee to Syene, even to the borders of Ethio- 


| of a part of it, and not the whole. 


pia: compare chap. xxx. 5,9. Migdol was atown near 
the Red sea, mentioned Exod. xiv. 2; Jer. xliv. 1; xlvi. 
14, (where see the notes,) at the entrance of Egypt 
from Palestine ; whereas Syene was at the other 
end of the country. What is said here of the devast- 
ation of Egypt, appears from this to be spoken only 
No foot of man 
shall pass through it, &e.—The intestine wars of the 
Egyptians, and the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar, 
made some provinces of Egypt, which were most 
the scenes of action, quite desolate; out of which 
state they did not wholly recover for the space of 
forty years. And her cities shall be desolate forty 


| years—“ We cannot prove, indeed, from heathen au- 


thors, that this desolation of the country continued 
exactly forty years, though it is likely enough that 
this, as well as the other conquered countries, did 
not shake off the Babylonish yoke till the time of 
Cyrus, which was about forty years after the con- 
quest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar: but we are as- 
sured by Berosus, that Nebuchadnezzar took several 
captives in Egypt, and carried them to Babylon; 
and from Megasthenes we learn, that he transplant- 
ed and settled others in Pontus. So true it is that 
they were scattered among the nations, and dis- 
persed through the countries, and might, upon the 
dissolution of the Babylonian empire, return to their 
native country.”—-Bishop Newton. 

Verses 14, 15. And I will bring again the captivity 
of Egypt—This captivity of the Egyptians, though 
not taken notice of by Herodotus, is mentioned by 
Berosus, in one of the fragments of his history, 
quoted by Josephus, Antiq., 1. x. chap. 11, and pub- 
lished with notes by Scaliger, at the end of his books, 
De Emendatione Temporwm, whose remark upon 
the place is very observable, namely, “'The calami- 
ties that befell the Egyptians are passed over by He- 
rodotus, because the Egyptian priests would not in- 
form him of any thing that tended to the disgrace of 
their nation.” And I will cause them to return into 
the land of Pathros—That part of Egypt which is 
called T'hebais, as Bochart proves by several argu 

681 


Egypt is promised 


EZEKIEL. 


to Nebuchadrezzar. 


A. M. 3416. land of Pathros, into the land of their 
~lbtte’ 5habitation ; and they shall be there 
a ®base™ kingdom. 

15 It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; 
neither shall it exalt itself any more above the 
nations: for I will diminish them, that they 
shall no more rule over the nations. 

16 And it shall be no more ‘the confidence 
of the house of Israel, which bringeth their 
iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look 
after them: but they shall know that I am the 
Lord Gop. 


5 Or, birth Heb, low. 


* Chap. xvii. 6, 14, 


A. M. 3432 


17 {| And it came*to pass in the 
B. C. 572, 


seven and twentieth year, in the first 
month, in the first day of the month, the word 
of the Lorp came unto me, saying, _ 

18 Son of man, ‘ Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon caused his army to serve a great 
service against T'yrus: every head was made 
bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had 
he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus, for the 
service that he had served against it: 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebu- 


8 Isa, xxx. 2,3; xxxvi. 4,6.—— Jer. xxvii.6; Chap. xxvi. 7, 8. 


ments. And they shall be there a base kingdom, 
the basest of kingdoms—“By base kingdom is 
meant, that it should be tributary and subject to 
strangers, for the much greatest part of the time. 
This is the purport and meaning of the prophecy; 
and the truth will appear by a short deduction of the 
history of Egypt from that time to this. . It was first 
of all tributary to the Babylonians under Amasis; 
upon the ruin of the Babylonish empire, it was sub- 
ject to the Persians; upon the failure of the Persian 
empire, it came into the hands of the Macedonians ; 
after the Macedonians, it fell under the dominion of 
the Romans; after the division of the Roman em- 
pire, it was subdued by the Saracens, in the reign of 
Omar, their third emperor ; about the year of Christ 
1250, it was in the possession of the Mamelukes, a 
word which signifies a slave bought with money, but 
is appropriated to those Turkish or Circassian slaves, 
whom the sultans of Egypt-bought young, and 
taught military exercises. 
royal authority, and by that means Egypt became 
their prey. But, A.D. 1517, Selim, the ninth em- 
peror of the Turks, conquered the Mamelukes, and 
annexed Egypt to the Ottoman empire, of which it 
continues to be a province to this day. By this deduc- 
tion it appears, that the truth of Ezekiel’s prediction 
is fully attested by the whole series of the history 
of Egypt, from that time to the present. And who 
could pretend to say, upon human conjecture, that so 
greata kingdom, so rich and fertile a country, should 
ever afterward become tributary and subject tostran- 
gers? Itis now a great deal above two thousand 
years since this prophecy was first delivered; and 
what likelihood or appearance was there, that the 
Egyptians should, for so many ages, bow under a 
foreign yoke, and never, in all that time, be able to 
recover their liberties, and have a prince of their own 
to re-gn over them? But as is the prophecy, so is 
the ovent.”—Bishop Newton. ‘ 
Verse 16. It shall be no more the confidence of the 
house of Israel—At the same time that the Jews 
put confidence in Egypt they distrusted the promises 
and assistance of God, and forsook him to comply 
with the idolatries of their allies. Which bring eth— 
Or, as Newcome translates it, Calling their ini- 
quity to remembrance—That is, as he interprets it, 


Theseslaves usurped the’ 


causing God to remember and punish the iniquity 
of his people. Orthe sense of the verse may be, that 
the Israelites should no more look to Egypt for help ; 
but, by the deplorable state it should be reduced to, 
be put in mind of the judgments which wickedness 
brings down from God; and of their own folly and 
iniquity in distrusting his assistance, and seeking to 
Egypt for help, contrary to his commands, and even 


‘complying with the Egyptian idolatries, in order to 


engage them in their favour. 

Verses 17,18. And it cameto pass, &c.—The new 
prophecy, which begins here, is connected with the 
foregoing, on account of its relating to the same sub- 
ject, and not on account of its being the next revela- 
tion in time which Ezekiel had; for there is nearly 
seventeen years distance between the date of the 
foregoing prophecy and this; during which Egypt 
was torn to pieces by sedition and civil wars, which 
seems to be signified by the foregoing prophecy ; 
and, the time then approaching that Nebuchadnezzar 
was. to invade and conquer Egypt, God thought 
proper to declare it to the prophet more openly and 
expressly than he had done before. Nebuchadnez- 
zar caused his army to serve a great service against 
Tyrus—The siege lasted thirteen years, till the 
heads of the soldiers became bald with continual 
wearing their helmets, and the skin was worn off 
their shoulders with carrying earth to raise mounts 
and fortifications against it: see note on chap. xxvi. 
8. Yethad he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus— 
Before the town came to be closely besieged, the 
inhabitants had removed their effects into an island, 
about half a mile distant from the shore, to which 
they afterward removed themselves, and where they 
built a new city; so that there was no inhabitant nor 
booty left there when Nebuchadnezzar’s army took 
the city. Thus St. Jerome, “ When the Tyrians saw 
that the works for carrying on the siege were per- 
fected, and the foundations of the walls were shaken, 
by the battering of the rams, whatsoever precious 
things in gold, silver, clothes, and various kinds of 
furniture, the nobility had, they put them on board 
their ships, and carried them to the islands; so that, 
the city being taken, Nebuchadnezzar found nothing 
worthy of his labour.” ‘ ic; 

Verses 19, 20. He shall take her m _and 


Continuation of the 


CHAPTER XXX. 


prophecy against Egypt. 


4M, 2432. chadrezzar king of Babylon; and he 

’ shall take her multitude, and 7 take 

her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be 
the wages for his army. 

20 Ihave given him the bind of Egypt ° for 

his labour wherewith he “served against it, 


7 Heb. spoil her spoil, and prey her prey. ——* Or, for his hire. 


take her spoil—Nebuchadnezzar and his army shall 
have the captives and spoil of Egypt, which they 
shall utterly pillage and lay waste. Because they 
wrought for me, saith the Lord—The destruction 
of cities and countries isa work of God’s providence, 
for the effecting of which he makes use of kings 
and princes as his instruments. Upon this account 
he calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, Jer. xxv. 9, 
because he wrought for him, as it is here expressed, 
that is, executed his judgments upon Tyre, and the 
other cities and countries which God had delivered 
into his hands. Though Nebuchadnezzar was actu- 
ated by his own ambition to make the conquest of 
Tyre, yet, because in doing it he had executed God’s 
purposes, and that which was pleasing to him, in 
humbling the Tyrians, therefore God here declares 
that he should not go without a reward; for that he 
would give him the spoilof Egypt, which nation was 
ripe for punishment. If God is so gracious as to re- 
ward those who do but execute his designs acci- 
dentally, not intentionally, how much reason have 


because they wrought for me, saith + ee psa. 
the Lord Gop. wt haerelitareees 

21 4 In that day * will I cause the horn of the 
house of Israel to bud forth, and I will give thee 
Ythe opening of the mouth in the midst of them; 
and they shall know that I am the Lorp. 


—— 


u Jer. xxv. 9. 


* Psa. exxxii. 17.——y Chap. xxiv. 27. 


we to expect that he will most amply reward those 
who intentionally obey his will! 

Verse 21. In that day—The phrase frequently 
denotes, in the prophets, not the same time which 
was last mentioned, but an extraordinary season, re- 
markable for some signal events of providence: in: 
this sense it is to be understood here. . I will cause 
the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth—The 
horns being the token of strength in beasts, and that 
in which their power chiefly consists; therefore the 
word is put to signify strength, or dominion, or a 
flourishing condition ; and therefore to say, that the 
horn of Israel should bud forth, was as much as to 
say, that the Jewish nation should grow prosperous, 
and come to a flourishing condition again. This 
seems to be spoken of the return of the Jews from 
their captivity, and settling again in Judea. I will 
give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of 
them—When thy prophecies are made good by the 
event, this shall add a new authority to what thou 
speakest: see’ chap. xxiv. 27. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A continuation of the prophecy against Egypt, in which is foretold the destruction of all her 
allies and confederates, all her interests and concerns, and the several steps which the king of Babylon should take in 


effecting that destruction, 1-19. 


(2,) A repetition of a former prophecy against Egypt, delivered while the Egyptians, 


who had come to assist Zedekiah, were returning home, not having accomplished their purpose, 20-26. 


A. M. 3432, "THE word of the Lorp came again 
taeda’ unto me, saying, 
2 Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith 
the Lord Gop; * Howl yé, Wo worth the day! 
3 For the day is near, even the day of the 
Lorp is near, a cloudy day; it shall be the 
time of the heathen. — 


4 And the sword shall come upon es, e- 
Egypt, and great } pain shall be in ———— 
Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, 
and they ° shall take away her multitude, and 


4 her foundation shall be broken down. 


' 5 Ethiopia, and ? Libya, and Lydia, and ° all 


the mingled people, and Chub, and the *men 


alsaiah xiii. 6.— Chapter vii. 7,12; Joel ii. 1; Zeph. i. 7. 
10r, fear. © Chap. xxix. 19. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXX. 

Verses 2-4. Thus saith the Lord, Howl ye, &ce.— 
The prophet addresses the inhabitants of Egypt. 
Wo worth the day—Ah! the day: alas! what sad 
times are approaching. Even the day of the Lord 
—The time of God’s vengeance, wherein he will 
manifest his sore displeasure against Egypt and its 
allies; @ cloudy day—A day that shall be dismal 
with calamities. Times of trouble have often this 
appellation. Jt shall be the time of the heathen— 

3 


4 Jer. 115, ce A Chap. xxvii. 10. © Jer. xxv. 20, 


——* Heb. children. 


Wherein they shall be punished. Great pain shall 
be upon Ethiopia—Great trouble and distress ; when 
the slain shall fallin Egypt—By the sword of the 
Chaldeans; and they shall take away her multitude 
—Shall carry multitudes of them captive to Baby- 
lon; and her foundations shall be broken down— 
Her strong forts and citadels; or her government, 
laws, and all the supports and defences of her com- 
monwealth. 

Verse 5. Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia—The 

683 


Destruction of Egypt by 


A. M. 3422. of the land that is in league, shall fall 
0:97 with them by the sword. 

6 Thus saith the Lorp; They also that up- 
hold Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her 
power shall come down: ‘from the tower of 
Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

7 ® And they shall be desolate in the midst 
of the countries that are desolate, and her 
cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are 
wasted. 

8 And they shall know that I am the Lorp, 
when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all 
her helpers shall be ° destroyed. 

9 In that day "shall messengers go forth 
from me in ships to make the careless Ethio- 
pians afraid, and great pain shall come upon 


EZEKIEL. 


- 


the Chaldeans foretold, 


them, as in the day of Egypt: for, A. M. 3432. 
lo, it fener bs bem 
10 Thus saith the Lord Gop; ‘I will also 
make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the 
hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon. 

‘11 He and his people with him, * the terrible 
of the nations, shall be brought to destroy the 
land: and theyshall draw their swords against 
Egypt, and fill the land with the slain. 

12 And 'I will make the rivers ®dry, and 
™ sell the land into the hand of the wicked : and 
I will make the land waste, and ‘all that is 
therein, by the hand of strangers: I the Lorp 
have wusken it. 

13 Thus saith the Lord Gop; I will also ® de- 
stroy the idols, and I will cause their images 
to cease out of Noph; °and there shall be no 


*Or, from Migdol to Syene. f Chap. xxix. 10.—% Chap. 
xxix. 12. 5 Heb. broken.——+ Isaiah xviii. 1, 2.—— Chap. 
xxix. 19 ——* Chap. xxviii. 7. 


names in Hebrew are Cush, Phut, and Lud, which 
are mentioned together asthe Egyptian allies, Jer. 
xlvi.9. Cush probably signifies Ethiopia here, be- 
ing joined with Phut and Lud, which were nations 
of Africa. And all the iningled people—All their 
mercenary soldiers, consisting of various nations. 
If we distinguish these from the men of the land, 
mentioned afterward, they may mean that mixture 
of Carians, Ionians, and other nations lying upon 
the Mediterranean sea, which Apries got together to 
encounter Amasis, who, together with him, were 
destroyed. And Chub—The Cubii are mentioned 
by Ptolemy as a people of Mareotis, a province of 
Egypt. There is no mention of this people any- 
where else in the Scriptures. According to Mi- 
chaelis, the ancient geographers have a mercantile 


town, Kubee, on the Indian sea, under the eighth de- | 


gree of north latitude. 

Verses 6-9. T'hey also that uphold Egypt shall 
fall—By this seems to be meant the governors of 
the several provinces, those who are called the stay 
of the tribes thereof, Isa. xix. 13; that is, of the 
several Nomi, or districts of Egypt. From the 
tower of Syene shall they fall—This should rather 
be rendered, from Migdol to Syene. See note on 
chap. xxix. 10. W *hen I have set a fire in Egypt— 
When I shall have kindled up the flame of war in 
Egypt. God’s judgments are often compared to 
fire: see the margin. And when all her helpers 
shall be destroyed—All her allies and auxiliaries. 
In that day shall messengers, &c.—Houbigant trans- 
lates this verse, Fn that day shall swift messengers 
go forth from me, who shall terrify the secure Ethio- 
pian; and he shall have great fears concerning the 
day of Egypl, because it shall be nigh. He ob- 
serves, that as the messengers are said to be “sent 
to Cush, or Ethiopia, if the ‘Arabians be meant, they 
were not to be gone by ships: if the Ethiopians, 


1 Isa. xix. 5, 6.- 5 Heb. drought———® Isa. xix. eee 
the fulness thereof——* Isaiah xix. 1; Jer. xliii. 12; xlyi. 25 ; 
Zech. xiii. 2. © Zech, x..11. 


properly so called, to the south of Egypt, it was not 
proper for messengers to be sent to them in ships, 
because the navigation was against the stream, and 
could not be so quick as it ought upon an approach- 
ing calamity.” Bishop Newcome, however, adopts 
our translation of the first clause, observing, that to 
send messengers up the Nile in ships was, if not so 
swift, yet a more secure way of communicating in- 
telligence in atime of general commotion, than to 
send them by land. The Egyptians and Ethiopians 
being confederates, the ill news of the conquest ot 
Egypt could not but greatly affect the Ethiopians. 

Verses 10-12. I will make the multitude of Egypt 
to cease—I will diminish the number of its inhabit- 
ants. J will make the rivers dry—The fertility of 
Egypt depending on the rise and overflowing of the 
Nile, the meaning of the metaphor is, I will destroy 
the plenty, prosperity, and strength of Egypt. And 
sell the land into the hand of the wicked—Namely, 
the haughty and cruel Babylonians. ‘To sell, signi- 
fies here to deliver up, as men do goods which they 
sell. Compare Deut. xxxii. 30; Judg. ii. 14; and 
iv. 9. 

Verse 13. I will also destroy the idols—Idolatry 
being one of the principal things for which God 
visits the infidel nations, he would take particular 
vengeance upon the idols, thereby showing how 
much he is superior to them in power. Cambysis, 
the successor of Cyrus, destroyed the idols of Egypt. 
I will cause their images to cease out of Noph— 
Noph, or Memphis, was one of the principal cities 
of Egypt, a seat of their kings, where their sepul- 
chres stood, one of which is still remaining. It is 
often mentioned in Scripture. In Hosea it is called 
Moph, and by many at this day Menoph. — ‘This place 
was famous for the worship of Apis and 
whereupon the prophet, in a particular mar 
nounces destruction to the idolatry of 


Lgypt shall be conquered, 


CHAPTER XXX. 


pillaged, and scattered. 


M32. “thore ‘8 prince of the land of Egypt: 
———— Pand I will put a fear in the land of 
Bgypt. 

14 And I will make %Pathros desolate, and 
will set fire in *Zoan,® ‘and will execute 
judgments in No. 

15 And I will pour my fury upon ° Sin, the 
strength of Egypt; and ‘I will cut off the mul- 
titude of No. 

16 And I will "set fire in Egypt: Sin shall 
have great pain, and No shall be rent asunder, 
and Noph shall have distresses daily. 

17 The young men of !° Aven and of ! Pibe- 
seth shall fall by the sword: and these cities 
shall go into captivity. 

18 * At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be 
2 darkened, when I shall break there the yokes 
of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall 
cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, 
and her daughters shall go into captivity. 

19 Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: 
and they shall know that I am the Lorp. 
B.C.5s3, 20 % And it came to pass in the ele- 

venth year, in the first month, in the 
seventh day of the month, that the word of 
the Lorp came unto me, saying, < 

21 Son of man, I have ¥ broken the arm of 


Pharaoh king of Egypt; and lo, 7 it A.M. 3416. 
shall not be bound up to be healed, emi 
to put a roller to bind it, to make it strong to 
hold the sword. 

22 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gon; Be- 
hold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and 
will * break his arms, the strong, and that which 
was broken ; and I will cause the sword to fall 
out of his hand. 

23 And I will scatter the Egyptians among 
the nations, and will disperse them through the 
countries. 

24 AndI will strengthen the arms of the king 
of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but 
I will break Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall 
groan before him with the groanings of a deadly-_ 
wounded man. 

25 But I will strengthen the arms of the king 
of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall 
down; and ¢they shall know that I am the 
Lorp, when I shall put my sword into the hand 
of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it 
out upon the land of Egypt. 

26 * And I will scatter the Egyptians among 
the nations, and disperse them among the 
countries; and they shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 


p Isaiah xix. 16.—4 Chap. xxix. 14. © Psa. Ixxviii. 12, 43, 
8 Or, Tanis. S Neh. iii. 8, 9, 10.—®* Or, Pelusiam. Jer. 
xlvi. 25. “Verse 8. 10 Or, Heliopolis. 11 Or, Pubastum. 


x Jer, ii. 16. 12 Or, restrained. y Jer. xlviii. 25.—— Jer. 
xlvi. 11. a Psalm xxxvii. 17. b Verse 26; Chap. xxix. 12, 
¢ Psalm ix. 16.—4 Verse 23; Chap. xxix. 12, 


And there shall be no more a prince of the land 
of Egypt—This undoubtedly refers to the future 
government of Egypt by foreigners, or to the gene- 
ral destruction of the Egyptian princes by Nebu- 
chadnezzar and Amasis. All men know, says Jose- 
phus against Appion, 1. ii. sec. 11, Ore Iepowy kar per’ 
exervec, nyemevov tno Aotag Maxedovwv, Acyurtioe pev 
edeAevov, avdparodur edev dtageporrec, “ That the Egyp- 
tians were subject to the Persians, differing nothing 
from slaves, and after them to the Macedonians, who 
ruled over Asia.” See the note on chap. xxix. 15. 
And Iwill put a fear in Egypt—I will make the 
Egyptians faint-hearted, and not able to defend 
themselves. 

Verses 14, 15. I will make Pathros desolate— 
That is, Thebais; and will set fire in Zoan—Or, 
Tanis, one of the ancient cities in Egypt, and the 
metropolis of the kingdom in Moses’s time: see Psa. 
Ixxviii. 12,43. J will execute judgments in No— 
Called the multitude of No, or Hamon-no, in the 
next verse, and probably the same with the city 
Thebes, famous for its hundred gates: see the note 
on Jer. xlvi. 25. I will pour my fury upon Sin, the 
strength of Egypt—It is generally agreed that Sin 
is the same with Pelusium, one of the seven mouths 


of Egypt, as Suidas observes, and therefore was 
strongly fortified, that no enemy might gain admit- 
tance. 

Verses 17, 18. The young men of Aven, &ce.— 
Aven is the same with On, mentioned Gen. xli. 45, 
in aftertimes called Heliopolis, as the margin here 
explains it, because of a temple or image there dedi- 
cated to the sun: see notes on Isa. xix. 18; Jer. 
xliii. 13. The word is so translated both here and 
Gen. xli. 45, by the LXX., who were very well ac- 
quainted with Egypt and all the principal places of 
it. And they translate Phibeseth, Bubastum. At 
Techaphnehes—Elsewhere written T'’ahpanhes, sup- 
posed to be the same place which was afterward 
called Daphne Pelusiace ; the day shall be darken- 
ed--By this expression is signified its being involved 
in great calamity; for the day, or light, in the Scrip- 
ture language, is put for prosperity: therefore the 
day being darkened signifies a state of adversity. 

Verses 20-26. It came to pass in the eleventh 
year, &c.—It seems this prophecy was delivered 
soon after the Egyptian army had marched out of 
Egypt to relieve Jerusalem when besieged by Nebu- 
chadnezzar, but had returned without effecting any 
thing, (see notes on Jer. xxxvii. 5, 7,) and some 


of the Nile, which was commonly called the key ||months before that city was taken, that is, more 
3 685 


A prophecy sent to Pharaoh 


EZEKIEL. 


and his multitude, 


than sixteen years before the preceding prophecies. 
Thave broken the arm of Pharaoh—I have begun 
to break, or will break, Pharaoh’s strength, so that 
he shall not be able to recover his former power. 
Calmet’s interpretation is, “I will break Pharaoh by 
the revolt of his subjects, by the war which Amasis 
shall bring upon him, and afterward by that of Ne- 
buchadnezzar; and this in the space of fourteen or 
fifteen years.” It is usual for the prophets to speak 
of a thing future as if it was already accomplished. 
It shall not be bound up to be healed—His calamity 
shall be so far from being lessened, that it shall in- 
crease more and more every day. And will break 
his arms, the strong, and that which was broken— 
Or, rather, the firm one, as well as the broken, or in- | 


firm one. The king of, Babylon had before dispos- 
sessed the king of Egypt of all his new conquests, 
from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates, 2 
Kings xxiv. 7. So that this part of his strength was 
already taken away, and never to be recovered ; and 
now God threatens to destroy the remainder of his 
power, namely, the kingdom of Egypt itself. And 
I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand—He 
shall have no more strength to defend himself than 
a man hath to use his sword when his arm is broken. 
And he shall groan with the groanings of a deadly- 
wounded man—His strength and power shall fail, 
and he shall groan with anguish as a man who is 
dying of his wounds. J will scatter the Egyptians 
among the nations—Scee note on chap, xxix. 12, 18. 


“ CHAPTER p.e. as 
In this chapter the prophet is directed to put Pharaoh in mind of the dreadful fall of the king of Assyria, whose brite city 


was Nineveh, and who was much superior to him in power and greatness. 


The prosperity and grandeur of the Assyrian 


monarch, his vast empire and mighty sway, are set forth.under the metaphor of a lofty, spreading cedar, fair and flourish- 


ing, and overtopping all the trees of the field,, 1-9. 


He shows Pharaoh how much he resembled him in pride, carnal con- 


fidence, and security, and then reminds him how the mighty tree of that monarchy was cut down and destroyed, what a 
noise tt made among the nations by its fall, and what a warning it gave to all potent princes, to beware of pride and con- 
fidence in themselves and their own power, 10-17. He leaves it to the king of Egypt to apply all this to hamself, and in 
the destruction of the Assyrian empire to foresee the ruin of his own kingdom, 18. 


Pte . AND it came to pass in the ele- 
B. 

—— venth year, in the third month, 
in the first day of the month, that the word of 
the Lorp came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, and to his multitude; * Whom art thou 
like in thy greatness ? 

3 » Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Leba- 
non } with fair branches, and with a shadowing 
shroud, and of a high stattire ; and his top was 
among the thick houghs. 


2 Verse 18. -——? wie iv. 10.——! Hebrew, fair of branches. 
nt Jers ii. a6. 3 Or, nourished. 3 Or, brought him up. 


“NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXI. 

Verses 1, 2. In the eleventh year, in the third 
month, &c.—This was another revelation upon the 
subject of the destruction of Egypt, imparted two 
months after that which is mentioned in the conclu- 
sion of the foregoing chapter. Whom art thou like 
in thy greatness ?—Thou pridest thyself, as if there 
never was any prince or king that could compare 
with thee. The prophet here asks a question, not 
to rweive an answer from Pharaoh, but to answer it 


himself, as he does in the next and following verses, 
wherein he acquaints the king of Egypt that the 
king of Assyria was equally as powerful as he, and 
yet came to a miserable end; from whence he might 
learn, that he had no security for the continuance 
of his grandeur, but might be soon cast down as the 
king of Assyria had been. 
686 


4 ©The waters ? made him great, aM. ae 
the deep *set him up on high with 
her rivers running round about his plants, and 
sent out her ‘little rivers unto all the trees of 
the field. 

5 Therefore, “his height was exalted above 
all the trees of the field, and his boughs were 
multiplied, and his branches became long be- 
cause of the multitude of waters, ® when he abot 
forth. 

6 All the * fowls of heaven made their nests 


4 Or, conduits. 


4 Dan, iv, 11— Or, when it sent thant forth. 
e Chap. xvii 23 5 Dan. iv. 12, 


Verses 3-9. Behold the Assyrian—This, says 
Archbishop Secker, seems an admonitory compari- 
son of Pharaoh to the late Assyrian monarch, ap- 
plied to Pharaoh, verse 18. By the Assyrian, com- 
pared here to a tall and fair cedar, such as grew in 
mount Lebanon, Archbishop -Usher and Dr. Pri- 
deaux understand that king of Assyria whom some 
call Chyniladanus, others Saracus, of whom it seems 
the words of the Prophet Nahum (chap. iii. 18) are 
to be understood, In like manner Zephaniah joins 
the’ destruction of Assyria and the desolation of 
Nineveh together, chap. ii. 18. Nabopolassar, the 
king of Babylon, and Cyaxares, the king of Media, 
called by the names of Nebuchadonosor and Assue- 
rus in Tobit, (chap. xiv. 15,) joining their forces 
together against him, besieged Nineveh, took it, and, 


jlafter having slain the king, utterly bie Ms that 


aie alii ia = 


The prophecy 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


sent to Pharaoh. 


Ap My 2418. in his boughs, and under his branches 
———— did all the beasts of the field bring 
forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt 
all great nations. 

7 Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the 
length of his branches: for his root was by 
great waters. 

8 The cedars in the f garden of God could not 
hide him: the fir-trees were not like his boughs, 
and the chestnut-trees were not like his branches; 
nor any tree in the garden of God was like 
unto him in his beauty. 

9 [have made him fair by the multitude of 
his branches: so that all the trees of Eden, 
that were in the garden of God, envied him. 

10 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause thou hast lifted up thyself in height, and 
he hath shot up his top among the thick 
boughs, and £his heart is lifted up in his 
height ; 

11 I have therefore delivered him into the 

£ Genesis ii. 8; xiii. 10; Chapter xxviii. 13——s Daniel v. 


20.—* Hebrew, in doing he shall do unto him—— Chapter 
Xxviil. 7. 


hand of the mighty one of the hea- A. M. 3416 
then ; ° he shall surely deal with him: bn Saal 
I have driven him out for his wickedness. 

12 And strangers, * the terrible of the nations, 
have cut him off, and have left him: ‘ upon 
the mountains and in all the valleys his 
branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken 
by all the rivers of the land ; and all tke people 
of the earth are gone down from his shadow, 
and have left him. 

13 * Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the 
heaven remain, and all the beasts of the field 
shall be upon his branches : 

14 To the end that none of all the trees by 
the waters exalt themselves for their height, 
neither shoot up their top among the thick 
boughs, neither their trees 7stand up in their 
height, all that drink water: for ! they are all 
delivered unto death, ™to the nether parts of 
the earth, in the midst of the children of men, 
with them that go down to the pit. 


i Chap. xxxii. 5; xxxv. 8. k Isa, xviii. 6; Chap. xxxii. 4. 
7Or, stand upon themselves for their height} Psa. Ixxxii. 7. 
m Chap, xxxii. 18, 


great and famous city, and put an end to that part 
of the Assyrian empire, Nabopolassar having. be- 
fore possessed himself of the other part, which was 
properly called the Babylonian empire. See Dr. 
Prideaux, p. 45. In this remarkable catastrophe the 
prophecies of Jonah, Nahum, and Zephaniah, fore- 
telling the destruction of Nineveh, were fulfilled. 
His top was among the thick boughs—He overtop- 
ped all the other flourishing trees. T'he waters 
made him great— As trees flourish by a river side, 
so the traffic of the several branches of the river 
Tigris, upon which Nineveh was situate, made that 
city and kingdom rich and populous, and she im- 
parted her wealth and stores among the neighbour- 
Ing provinces.”—Lowth. T'herefore his height was 
evalled, &c.—He became greater than all the kings 


about him. The greatness of Nebuchadnezzat’s | 


power and kingdom is set forth under the same em- 
blem, Dan. iv. 10, &e. All the fowls made their 
nests in his boughs—Several nations applied to him 
for protection, and thought themselves.and all their 
concerns safe under his government. Under his 
branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth, 
&c,—Under the protection of his extensive empire 
did the people increase, and the countries become 
more populous. The cedars in the garden of God 
could not hide him, &c.—He overtopped the goodly 
cedars, called in the Hebrew the cedars of God, 
Psa. Ixxx. 9; such fair ones as might,be supposed to 
have grown in paradise. The expressions are all 
allegorical, signifying the supereminent greatness of 
the king of Assyria, and how much more powerful 


All the trees of Eden, &c.—All the kings of the 
Fast envied him, and his greatness. So the Chaldee 
paraphrast. 

Verses 10-14. Because thou hast lifted up thy- 
self—Because thy pride hath still increased with thy 
prosperity. J have delivered him into the hand of 
the mighty one of the heathen—Or, the mighty one 
of the nations, as the word >”) is rendered in the 
next verse. The word x, eel, here rendered mighty 
one, though generally spoken of God, yet is some- 
times applied to heroes, (see chap. xxxii. 21,) some- 
times to angels, as excelling in strength, as Psalm 
Ixxxix. 6. So God here says, he delivered the As- 
syrian into the hand of Nabopolassar, king of Baby- 
lon, who, joining his forces with tlrose of the king of 
Media, made himself master of Nineveh, and of the 
king of Assyria, whose seat itwas. And the terrible 
of the nations have cut him off—The armies of the 
kings of Babylon and Media shall utterly destroy 
him and his empire, and leave him without life er - 
power. Upon the mountains, &c., his branches are 
fallen—As the limbs of a tree are broken by the 
fall, and those that rested under its shadow are 
frighted away and forsake the place, so the As- 
syrian’s power was overthrown in all the places of 
his dominion. Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of . 
the heaven remain, &c.—As the birds sit upon the 
boughs of a tree cut down, and the beasts browse 
upon its branches, so his dominions shall be a prey 
to the conquerors: or, his armies that are slain shall 
become meat to the birds and beasts. 7'o the end 
that none of all the trees exalt themselves—That his ~ 


he was than any other of the kings of that time. || destruction may be a warning to other kings and 
3 687 


The dreadful destruction 


EZEKIEL. 


of the king of Egypt 


A. M. 3416. 


- 15 Thus saith the Lord Gop; In} 
se the day when he went down to the 


grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep 


for him, and I restrained the floods thereof, and 
and I caused, 


the great waters were stayed : 
Lebanon *to mourn for him, and all the trees 
of the field fuinted for him. 

16 I made the nations to ® shake at the sound 
of his fall, when I ° cast him down to hell with 
them that descend into the pit: and Pall the 
trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, 
all that drink water, 4shall be comforted in the 
nether parts of the earth. 


17 They also went» down into hell A.M, 3416 

: 4 588. 
with him, unto them that be slain 
with the sword; and they that were his arm, 
that * dwelt. under his shadow in the midst of 
the heathen. ; 

18 %*'T'o whom art thou thus like in glory 
and in greatness among the trees of Eden? 
yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees 
of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth: 
‘thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircum- 
cised with them that be slain by the sword. 
This 7s Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the 
Lord Gop. 


8 Heb. to be black. n Chapter xxvi. 15. 
P Isa, xiv. 8.—4 Chap, xxxii. 31. 


© Isaiah xiv. 15. 
r Lam. iv. 20. 


s Verse 2; Chapter xxxii. 19——t Chapter xxviii. 10; xxxii. 
19, 21, 24, &c. 


potentates, to deter them from priding themselves in 
the time of their prosperity. J or.they are all de- 
livered unto death—The mighty men of the As- 
syrians were delivered to death as well as those of 
the meaner sort. The fall of the Assyrian was thus 
largely spoken of to convince the king of Egypt, if 
he would be instructed, that no human power, how- 
ever great, was able to secure its possessor from the 
wrath of God and his judgments, or to maintain 
itself against his attacks. 

Verse. 15. In the day when he went down to the 
grave—This, and the following verses, are an elegant 
description of that consternation that seized the 
king of Assyria’s allies, at the suddenness of his 
downfall; the same metaphor being still pursued. 
I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him 
—The deep, that is said to have raised up this fair 
tree, verse 4, is now described as mourning at his 
downfall. JI restrained the floods, and the great 
waters were stayed—As if the streams had stopped 
their usual course on purpose to lament his fate. 
The meaning seems to be, that the great nations and 
numerous people under his dominions, or his con- 
federates and allies, were all struck with astonish- 
ment at his fall. J caused Lebanon to mourn for 
him—By Lebanon is probably signified Syria, which 
was in alliance with the king of Assyria. All the 
trees of the field fainted for him—All the neigh- 
bouring princes lamented his ruin, and were dis- 
heartened at having lost their protector. 

Verses 16,17. I made the nations to shake at the 
sound of his fall—Through fear and terror. When 
I cast him down to hell—Rather, to the grave; with 
them that descend into the pit—That die and are 
buried, All the trees of Eden, &e.—The greatest 
kings on earth. All that drink water—That partake 


of wealth and other worldly enjoyments; shall be 
comforted in the nether parts of the earth—The 
deceased princes, confederates to the Assyrians, de- 
scribed here as so many stately trees and cedars, 
shall feel some mitigation of their calamities, when 
they see thee brought down as low as themselves: 
compare chap. xxxii. 31, and see notes on Isaiah 
xiv. 8-16, a passage exactly parallel to this. They 
also went down into hell—Or, the grave; with him 
—His allies underwent the same fate with himself, 
and were cut off in the common destruction. And 
they that were his arm—His auxiliaries; that dwelt 
under his shadow—Who lived under his protection; 
in the midst of the heathen—Or, the nations: see 
on verse 11% namely, in several countries and pro- 
vinces: see Lam. iv. 20. When the Assyrian power 
was overthrown, it was easy for the Chaldeans to 
subdue all its allies. 

Verse 18. Jo whom art thou thus like in glory? 
&c.—To whom, among the great princes of the 
world, canst thou, O king of Egypt, be so fitly com- 
pared, with all thy glory and greatness, as to this 
king of Assyria, since, like him, thou shalt be thrown 
down from all thy pomp and grandeur to the lowest 
state of humiliation and ruin. T'how shalt lie in the 
midst of the uncircumcised—Thou shalt be put 
among those of whom God makes no account. “Na- 
tions that admitted circumcision, held the uncireum- 
cised in the utmost contempt. The Egyptians, at 
least the priests and the learned among them, were 
circumcised; but now they shall lie among the un- 
circumcised.”—Michaelis. T'his is Pharaoh and 
all his multitude, saith the Lord God—In this verse 
the latter part of verse 2 is resumed, and the alle- 
gory, under which the Assyrian is represented, is 
applied to Pharaoh. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


We have in this chapter a further description of the lamentable destruction of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, which is set forth 
under two similitudes. (1,) The killing of a mischievous lion, and a whale, crocodile, or some such devouring creature, 1-16. 


(2,) The funeral of a great commander, 
cised, 17-32. 
688 


or captain-general, brought down to the grave with the nations of the uncircum- 


The dreadful fall 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


of the king of Egypt. 


A. M. 3417. 


alg ANP it came to pass in the twelfth 


~ -canlinahab year, in the twelfth month, in the 
first day of the month, that the word of the 
Lorp came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, *take up a lamentation for 
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, 
»'Thou art like a young lion of the nations, 


Sand thou arf asa! whale in the seas: and 


thou camest forth with thy rivers, and: trou- 
bledst the waters with thy feet, and “fouledst 
their rivers. 

38 Thus saith the Lord Gon; I will therefore 
*spread out my net over thee with a company 
of many people; and they shall bring thee up 
in my net. 

4 Then ‘will I leave thee upon the land, I 
will cast thee forth upon the open field, and 
£ will cause all the fowls of the heaven to re- 


4. Chapter xxvii. 2; Verse 16. > Chap. xix. 3, 6; xxxviii. 
; © Chap. xxix. 3. ‘Or, dragon. 4 Chap. xxxiv. 18. 
© Chapter xii. 13; xvii. 20; Hosea vii. 12——f Chapter xxix. 5. 
s Chap. xxxi. 13. h Chap. xxxi. 12. 


main upon thee, and [I will fill the A. M. 3417. 

beasts of the whole earth with thee. ss 
5 And I will lay thy flesh " upon the moun- 

tains, and fill the valleys with thy height. 

6 I will also water with thy blood ?the land 
wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains ; 
and the rivers shall be full of thee. 

7 And when [ shall *put thee out, ‘I will 
cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof 
dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and 
the moon shall not give her light. 

8 All the ‘ bright lights of heaven will I make 
‘dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy 
land, saith the Lord Gop. EM 

9 Iwill also ° vex the hearts of many people, 
when I shall bring thy destruction among the 
nations, into the countries which thou hast not 
known. 


2 Or, the land of thy swimming.—— Or, extinguish. i Isa, 
xiil. 10; Joel ii. 31; iii. 15; Amos viii. 9; Rev. vi. 12,13; 
Matt. xxiv. 29.——* Heb. light of the light in heaven. 5 Heb. 
them dark. 5 Heb. provoke to anger, or, grief. 


NOTES ON PSALM XXXII. 

Verses 1, 2. In the twelfth year—Namely, of Je- 
hoiachin’s captivity, about which time Amasis began 
to set up himself against the king of Egypt, con- 
cerning whom this prophecy is. Sonof man, take 
up a lamentation for Pharaoh— To the preceding 
funeral panegyrie over Assyria, the fate of which 
was past, Ezekiel prophetically subjoins a similar 
panegyric over Egypt, though its fate was still future; 
making plainly here a happy variation in the orator- 
ical figure, by which past events are brought down 
and represented as now present before our eyes; 
whereas, on the contrary, by this prophetic figure 
future events are anticipated, and represented as al- 
ready past.”— Obs. on Books, ii. 188. Thou art like 
@ young lion of the nations—Thou art like a beast 
of prey, devouring far and near. Thou art asa 
whale in the seas—By the word tannim we may 
fitly understand a crocodile, as has been observed 
upon chap, xxix. 3, and the description that follows 
agrees very well to a crocodile, but cannot be applied 
toa whale. And thou camest forth with thy rivers, 
&c.—Or rather, Thou rushedst forth through thy 
streams, and didst trouble the waters, &c.; that is, 
thou wentest beyond the bounds of thine own king- 
dom, and didst trouble and tread down, or subdue, 
the neighbouring cities and nations. 

Verses 3-6. I will spread out my net over thee, 
&c.—I will bring thine enemies upon thee, who 
shall encompass thee on every side, and master thee 
as a wild beast or monstrous fish is taken in a net. 
Then will I leave thee upon the land—That is, leave 
thee to certain destruction, or take away from thee 
all means of recovery. For Pharaoh being here 
spoken of as a water animal, leaving him upon the 
land, signified leaving him to certain death, without 
the means of escaping it; for a fish left upon the 

Vou. IIL. ( 44 ) 


land must needs die, let it struggle as it will, water 
being absolutely necessary to its life. This was lit- 
erally fulfilled when, making war upon the Cyre- 
nians, he was vanquished, and his army cut in pieces, 
and left a prey to the fowls and beasts in the deserts 
of Libya and Cyrene: see note on chap. xxix. 4, 5. 
And I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with 
thee—With the flesh of thy vastarmies. Or rather, 
understanding the words figuratively, I will enrich 
al] nations with thy spoils. And I willlay thy flesh 
upon the mountains, &c.—Thy people shall be slain, 
both upon the mountains and in the valleys, and 
their carcasses lie unburied there. J will also water 
with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest— 
The land of Egypt, wherein thou bearest rule; even 
to the mountains—The mountains shall be wet with 
it, as well as the lower grounds: compare Isaiah 
xxxiv.3. And the rivers shall be full of thee—All 
places, beth high and low, both land and water. AI 
the expressions in these verses are hyperbolical, sig- 
nifying the vast slaughter that should be made of the 
Egyptians, and the immense booty that should be 
obtained by their enemies. 

Verses 7-10. And when I shall put thee out— 
When I shall cast thee down from thy power, and 
extinguish all thy glory. J will cover the heaven, 
and make the stars thereof dark—It is well known 
that the downfall of states and kingdoms, kings and 
princes, is often expressed in the Scriptures by 
these or such like metaphors: see notes on Isaiah 
xiii. 10; xxiv. 23; xxx. 26. But here the expressions 
may mean, I will make every thing look sad and 
dismal, or will cause a universal sorrow ; for to men 
amidst great calamities and afflictions every thing 
appears dark and gloomy, and even the light itself 
seems little different from darkness; and therefore 
it is usual to express a state of great pas’ by the 

689 


The dreadful fall 


EZEKIEL. 


of the king of Egypt. 


A. M. 3417. 


oo a 10 Yea, I will make many people 


Kamazed at thee, and their kings 
shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall 
brandish my sword before them; and ' they 
shall tremble at every moment, every man for 
his own life, in the day of thy fall. « 

11 %™For thus saith the Lord Gop; The 
sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon 
thee. 

12 By the swords of the mighty will I cause 
thy multitude to fall, *the terrible of the na- 
tions, all of them: and ° they shall spoil the 
pomp of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof 
shall be destroyed. 

13 I will destroy also all the beasts thereof 
from beside the great waters; ? neither shall 
the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the 
hoofs of beasts trouble them. 

14 Then will I make their waters deep, and 


k Chap. xxvii. 35. 
Chapter xxx. 4. 
p Chap. xxix. 11, 


1 Chapter xxvi. 16. m Jer. xlvi. 26; 
n Chapter xxviii. 7. © Chapter xxix. 19. 
7 Heb. desolate from the fulness thereof. 


cause their rivers to run like oil , saith A, Mf 97 
the Lord Gop. oe 

15 When I shall make the land of Egypt 
desolate, and the country shall be 7 destitute of 
that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all 
them that dwell therein, 4 then shall they know ‘ 
that I am the Lorp. 


' 16 This zs the * lamentation wherewith they 


shall lament her: the daughters of the nations 
shall lament her: they shall lament for her, 
even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith 
the Lord Gop. ~ 

17 4 It came to pass also in the twelfth year, 
in the fifteenth day of the month, the 
word of the Lorp came unto me, saym 

18 Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, 
and ‘cast them down, even her, and the daugh- 
ters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts 
of the earth, with them that go down into the pit 


4 Exodus vii. 5; xiv, 4,18; Psalm ix. 16; Chapter vi. 7. 
‘Verse 2; 2 Samuel i. 17; 2 Chron. xxxv. 25; Ohare xxvi. 17, 
8 Chap. xxvi. 20; xxxi. 14, 


heavens being covered, and the stars darkened. All 
the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over 
thee—I will imvolve thy whole land in trouble and 
distress, making every thing in it look dismal. I 
will vex the hearts, §c., when I shall bring thy de- 
struction among the nations—When thy exiles shall 
be dispersed into foreign countries, (see chap. xxix. 
12,) and relate the miserable circumstances of thy 


destruction, it shall oe grief and consternation in | 


all that hear it. Yea, I will make many people 
amazed at thee, and their kings, &c.—The kings 
and princes of Africa, who lay near to Egypt, seem 
here to be spoken of; for the destruction of Egypt 
could not but fill them with fear for themselves, lest 
the victor should make them suffer the same fate. 
Verses 13, 14. I will also destroy the beasts 
thereof—Their horses, in which they trusted so 
much, Isa. xxxi. 3, and other cattle, feeding in their 
rich pastures by the river sides. Netther shall the 
foot of man, nor the hoofs of beasts, &c.—The 
country shall be so deserted that the waters of the 
river shall not be fouled by man or beast. But we 
may understand the prophet here as speaking meta- 
phorically, and by the beasts of Egypt, intending 
its armies, which had frequently troubled the neigh- 
bouring nations, but which, it is here said, should 
trouble them no more; for when Egypt should be 
made desolate, and the number both of men and beasts 
should be diminished by their wars and confusions, 
then they should neither have the will nor the power 
to give their neighbours any further molestation; 
but the nations around them should enjoy quietness, 
like that of a river which smoothly glides along, and 
never has its streams fouled or disturbed: see verse 2. 
Thenwill I make their waters deep, &e.—The na- 
tions which used to be harassed and troubled by 
; 690 


the Egyptians, shall then enjoy great peace and 
quietness. 

Verse 15. When I shall make the land of Egypt 
desolate, &ce.—When I shall bring the fore-mentioned 
dreadful calamities upon it. ZJ'hen shall they know 
that I am the Lord—The awful and destructive 
visitation shall be sanctified to those that survive: it 
shall yjeld them important instruction, and they 
shall give glory to my power and justice, while a 
sensible conviction of the vanity of the world, and ~ 
of the fading and perishing nature of all things in 
it, shall draw their affections from it, and from all 
that it contains, and induce them to seek an acquaint- 
ance with me as their portion and happiness. ~ 

Verse 16. T'his is the lamentation wherewith they 
shall lament her—This isthe substance of the lament- 
ation, which may be properly uséd to bewail the 
calamities which Egypt shall suffer: see note on 
verse 2, T'he daughters of the nations shall lament 
her—That is, the people of the neighbouring coun- 
tries shall use such like words as these when they 
hear of Egypt’s calamities: thus the daughter of 
Zion and of Babylon signifies the inhabitants of 
those cities. This verse alludes to the mourning 
women, whose office it was to lament at funerals. 

Verses 17, 18. It came to pass, in the fifteenth day 
of the month—Namely, of the month before men- 
tioned, which was a few days after the time of the 
preceding revelation. T'he word of the Lord came 
unto me—Giving me further directions how to im- 
prove the fall of Egypt. Son of man, wail for the 
multitude of Egypt—Prepare the funeral ceremonies 

at the burial of Egypt, and compose an elegy suit- 

able to the sad occasion. Bishop observes, 

that “this prophetic ode is a master-piece in that 

species of writing which is appropriated to the ex- 
( 44* ) + 


The dreadful fall 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


of the king of Egypt. 


~ 
A. M. 3417. 19 * Whom dost thou pass in beau- 
B. C. 587 


——— ty? "go down, and be thou laid with 
the uncircumcised. : 
20 They shall fall in the midst of them that 
are slain by the sword: * she is delivered to the 
_ sword: draw her and all her multitudes. 
21 *'The strong among the mighty shall 


speak to him out of the midst of hell with them || 


that help bim: they are Y gone down, they lie 
uncircumcised, slain by the sword: 


22 * Asshur is there and all her A. M. 3417. 
company: his graves are about him: = 
all of them slain, fallen by the sword : 

23 * Whose graves are set in the sides of the 
pit, and her company is round about her grave: 
all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which 
> caused ° terror in the land of the living. 

24 There is ° Elam and all her multitude 
round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen 
by the sword, which are 4 gone down uncircum- 


ae xxxi. 2, 18.——" Verses 21, 24 ; Chapter xxviii. 10, 
* Or, the sword is laid——* Isaiah i. 31; xiv. 9, 10; Verse 27. 
‘Verses 19, 25. 


z Verses 24, 26, 29, 30.—Isa. xiv. 15> Chap. xxvi. 17, 
20; Verses 24, 25, 26, 27, 32.——? Or, dismaying. ¢ Jer. xlix. 
34, &c.—4 Verse 2]. 


citin r.? And cast them down, even her, &c. 
—H ant renders this clause, And thrust them 


down with the daughters of the nations; thrust 
them down to the lower parts of the earth, to those 
who are gone down to the lake. And he observes, 
“hat “the prophet is commanded to thrust the Egyp- 
ians down to the shades below; that is, to exhibit, 
by an hypotyposis, familiar with the prophets, the 
ruin of the Egyptians, similar to the ruin of the peo- 
ple who have been destroyed and gone down to the 
regions of the dead.” The reader will observe that 
this figure of speech is a representation of things 
painted in such strong and bright colours as may 
eause the imagination of the hearers to conceive of 
them rather as present to their view than described 
in words. Such is the representation which the 
prophet here gives of the calamities of the Egyptians. 
The expressions, Unto the nether parts of the earth, 
with them that go down into the pit, denote utter 
destruction, and are parallel to those elsewhere used, 
of being brought down to heil, to the grave, or into 
silence. The Egyptians affected to be buried in 
their pyramids, and their kings, princes, and nobles 
would be laid by themselves, but Ezekiel provides 
them their graves among common people, to lie just 
where they fell. 

Verses 19, 20. Whom dost thou pass in beauty ? 
—What reason hast thou to prefer thyself before 
others? Art thou better than they, that thou 
shouldest not die and be laid in the dust as well as 
they? Go down—Namely, to the regions of the 
dead ; and be laid with the uncircumcised—Among 
profane and loathed carcasses, such as the bodies of 
the uncircumcised were in the opinion of the cir- 
eumeised: see notes on chap. xxviii. 8-10, and xxxi. 
18. The cirewmcised, in Scripture, being put for 
those for whom God had a peculiar regard, and this 
being one of the distinguishing characteristics of his 
peculiar people, therefore the term uncircwmcised 
seems to be used for those whom God had rejected, 
that is, for the wicked and profane. T'hey shall 
fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword 
—Thy people shall not die the common death of all 
men, but shall be cut off by an extraordinary judg- 
ment from the hand of God himself: they shall be 
slain by the sword. Draw her and all her multi- 
iude—Carry her and her people away to the grave, 

3 


like so many carcasses, which are buried without any 
solemnity. The words seem to be spoken to the 
Babylonians, the executioners of God’s judgments 
upon Egypt. : 

Verse 21. T'he strong among the mighty shall 
speak to him—Namely, to the king of Egypt; out of 
the midst of hell—Or, the pit, as Bishop Newcome 
renders the word: see verse 23. The passage is “a 
poetical description of the regions of the dead; 
where the ghosts of deceased tyrants, with their 
subjects, are represented as coming to meet the king 
of Egypt and his auxiliaries, upon their arrival at 
the same place. Hell signifies here the state of the 
dead.”—Lowth. See note on Isa. xiv. 9. They 
are gone down—The warriors, famous in their time 
for their exploits, have undergone the same fate with 
other men of blood, and are gone down to the grave 
by violent deaths. 

Verses 22, 23. Asshur is there and all her company 
—The Assyrians, both king and people, whose de- 
struction is represented in the foregoing chapter: 
though famous, warlike, and victorious, that mighty 
monareh fell. His graves are about him—The 
graves of his soldiers slain in the war. This expres- 
sion, and that in the next verse, her company is 
round about her grave, seem to signify no more 
than a universal destruction of high and low, and 
that death had made them all equal. The masculine 
and feminine genders are promiscuously used in the 
following verses. The masculine referring to the 
prince, whose subjects the deceased were; the fem- 
inine to the nation or country to which they belonged. 
Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit—Here 
is supposed a spacious vault, in the midst whereof 
the king of Asshur lies, and round the vault, in recep- 
tacles hewn about its sides, his famous captains and 
commanders. And her company is round about her 
grave—Like lesser graves placed round the monu- 
ment of some person of great quality. All of them 
slain, which caused terror, &c.—Who were a terror 
while they were alive to their neighbours. 

Verses 24, 25. There is Elam and all her multi- 
tude—Which was conquered by Nebuchadnezzar: 
see note on Jer. xlix. 36. The nations mentioned in 
this and the following verse were probably confed- 
erates with the Assyrians, and fell when they did. 
Which caused terror—yet have they borne their 

691 


Th desolation of 


EZEKIEL. 


different states. 


A. M. 3417. cised into the nether parts of the 
ee earth, ®° which caused their terror in 
the land of the living ; yet have they borne their 
shame with them that go down to the pit. 

25 They have set her a bed in the midst of 
the slain with all her multitude: her graves 
are round about him: all of them uncircum- 


cised, slain by the sword: though their terror | 


was caused in the land of: the living, yet have 
they borne their shame with them that go down 
to the pit: heis put in the midst of them that 
be slain. ; 

26 There is  Meshech, Tubal, and all her 
multitude: her graves are round about him: 
all of them & uncircumcised, slain by the sword, 
though they caused their terror in the land of 
the living. 

27 "And they shall not lie with the mighty 
that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which are 
gone down to hell ?° with their weapons of war : 
and they have laid their swords under their 
heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their 
bones, though they were the terror of the 
mighty in the land of the living. 


— 

28 Yea, thou shalt be broken in the A, M. 3417. 
midst of the uncircumcised, and shalt 
lie with them that are slain with the sword. 

29 There isiEdom, her kings, and all her 
princes, which with their might are “ laid by 
them that were slain by the sword: they shall 
lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that 
go down to the pit. : * 

30 *'There be the princes of the north, all of 
them, and all the ' Zidonians, which are gone 
down with the slain; with their terror they are 
ashamed of their might; and they lie uncir- 
cumcised with ¢hem that be slain by the sword, 
and bear their shame with them tha own 
to the pit. 

31 Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be 
™ comforted over all’ his multitude, even Pha- 
raoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

32 For I have caused my terror in the land of 
the living: and he shall be laid in the midst of 
the uncircumcised with them that “are slain 
with the sword, even Pharaoh ang all his mul- 
titude, saith the Lord Gop. ° 


e Verse 23,——f Genesis x. 2: Chapter xxvii. 13; xxxviii. 2. 
& Verses 19, 20.— Verse 21 ; Isa. xiv. 18, 19. 10 Web. with 
weapons of their war. 


shame—They have been shamefully subdued, and 
have lost their lives and glory together, as Asshur did 
before them. They have set her a bed in the midst 
of the slain, &c.—Elam and her people have gone 
down to the state of the dead, among those who 
have fallen by the sword. The word bed is used 
for the grave, Isa. lvii. 2, and may, in both places, 
allude to the costly monuments, or sepulchres, 
which used to be erected for persons of great quali- 
ty. Her graves are round about him--The king 
and people are involved in the same common de- 
struction. 

Verses 26-28. There is Meshech, Tubal, &¢.— 
These are some other of the Assyrian allies ; some 
think the Cappadocians, and other nations neigh- 
bouring to them, are here meant. The Scythians 
also, who anciently governed Asia, may be compre- 
hended, and their expulsion from Media by Cyaxares 
may here be referred to: see Obs. on a i. 192. 
And they shall not lie with the mighty, &e.—They 
shall not lie among those heathen heroes, men of 
courage and fortitude, who were laid in distinct 
graves, with pomp and magnificence, but shall all be 
tumbled together into one common pit, as their ac- 
tions have not made them worthy of any distinction. 
Which are gone down to hell—Or, the state of the 
dead, as the word which we translate hell ought often 
toberendered. With their weapons of war—Brave 
men, who had gained signal victories, used, by way 

692 


i Chapter xxv. 12.——1 Hebrew, given, ‘or, put.——* Chap. 
xxxvili. 6, 15; xxxix. 2——! Chapter xxviil. 21——™ Chap. 
xxxi. 16. 


of honour, to have their arms buried with them, or 
hung upon their sepulchres. » Thus was the grave 
of Misenus honoured by Aineas. 


e — Ingenti mole sepulchrum 
Imponit, suaque arma viro.” ZEN. Vi. 232. 


“Tt was usual,” says Kirchman, De F'uner. Roman., 
1. iii. c. 18, “in former times, in some places, to put 
swords, shields, and other armour in the graves of 
military men, as they did in the grave of Theseus, 
and-on the bier of Alexander the Great.” But the 
meaning of the prophet here is, that those, of whom 
he speaks, should be without these usual martial so- 
lemnities, with which people formerly oftemhonoured 
their dead. Instead of which he says their iniqui- 
ties shall be wpon their bones—Their death shall 
carry in it plain tokens of their sins, and of God’s 
vengeance pursuing them.on account of them. Yea, 
thou shalt be broken in the midst-of the uncircum- 
cised—Thou, O king of Egypt, shalt have no ho- 
norary distinctions paid thee at thy death, or be laid 
in a magnificent tomb, as those great conquerors 
have been, but shalt lie ina common pit, or grave, 
promiscuously with those who are overcome and 
slain in battle. 

Verses 29-32. There is Edom, her kings, &¢— 
Of whose destruction Ezekiel prophesied, ehap. xxv. 
12; laid by them that were slain by the sword—Laid 
among the conquered. With them that go down to 

ie 


The duty of a 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


spiritual watchman. 


the pit—Among those of no renown, who are thrown | 
into one common grave without any honour or dis- | 


tinction paid tothem. T'here be the princes of the 


north—By these, it seems, are meant the Tyrians, 


who lay north of Judea, and were overcome in many 
battles by the Chaldeans. Pharaoh shall see them, 


and shall be comforted, &c.—Here, by a poetical | 


figure, sense is given to Pharaoh among the dead, 
and he feels a consolation in that state to see so many 
other kings and nations brought into the same con- 
dition as himself and his people were in. Even 
Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword—He- 
rodotus affirms, that Apries, or Pharaoh-hophra, was 
strangled: o de puv avervitay, |. ii. p. 154. But the 
enemies of Apries may have used the sword against 
him before he expired. For Ihave caused my ter- 
ror in nd of the living—In the Hebrew text it 
is, is terror, that is, Ihave permitted the king 
of Egypt to be a vexation and terror to many while 


he was alive in the world. And he shall be laid in 
the midst of the uncircumcised—That is, with the 
basest sort, or those of no distinction. Or, if we read 
with the Masorites, whom our translators follow, my 
terror, the meaning of the verse may be, As these 
kings and nations have been a terror to the world 
while they were in it, verse 24, &c., so will I be now 
a terror to them, and especially to Pharaoh and his 
people, in making them a remarkable example of 
my vengeance. Observe, reader, the calamitous state 
of human life! See what a dying world this is! The 
strong die, the mighty die; Asshur, Elam, Meshech, 
Tubal, Edom, the princes of the north, the Zido- 
nians, Pharaoh, and all his multitude! But here 
is likewise an allusion to the final and everlasting 
ea: of impenitent sinners. Those that are wncir- 
cimcised in heart are slain by the sword of divine 
justice. Their iniquity is upon them, and they bear 
their shame for ever! 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 
In this chapter we have, (1,) TheWutty of a spiritual watchman, 1-9. (2,) A declaration of the safety of penitents, and the 


destruction of apostates, 10-20. 
pented not, 21-29. 


A.M. M. sau. GAIN the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, speak to *thechildren of thy 
people, and say unto them, » When 'I bring the 
sword upon a land, if the people of the land 
take a man of their coasts, and set him for their 
© watchman : 

3 If when he seeth the sword come upon 
the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the 
people ; 

4 Then, * whosoever heareth the sound of the | 
trumpet, and taketh not warning ; if the sword | 


“(3,) A message to those who flattered themselves with hopes of safety, though they re- 
(4,) A reproof of those who approved the word of God, but did not prectiee it, 30-33, 


come and take him away, “his blood A. M. 3417, 
B. C. 587. 
shall be upon his own head. Fiabe apts 
5 He heard the sound of the trumpet, and 
took not warning ; his blood shall be upon him. 
But he that taketh warning shall deliver his 
soul, 
6 But if the watchman see the sword come, 


and blow not the trumpet, and the people be 


not warned ; if the sword come, and take any 


‘person from among them, °he is taken away 


in his iniquity; but his blood will I require a+ 
ithe watchman’s hand. 


a Chap. iii. 11——»® Chap. xiv. 17. 1 Heb. a land when I 


“V7: ai bo Ay = “Verse 7; Hos. ix. 8. 
heareth.—é Chap. xviii. 13. © Verse 8. 


2 Heb. he that hearing 


bring a sword upon her——* 2 Samuel xviii. 24, 25; 2 Kings ix. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Verses 1-6. Again the word of the Lord came unto 
me—“ Tt is plain that Ezekiel uttered what is contained 
in this chapter to verse 20, before Jerusalem was 
taken by the Babylonians ; but how long before is 
uncertain.”—Bishop Newcome. Son of man, speak 
to the children of thy people—To the Jews, to whom 
he had not spoken since he declared what is con- 
tained in chap. xxiv. The reader will find in chap. 
iii., from verses 17 to 22, the substance of what is 
repeated in the first ten verses of this chapter. The 
instruction is the same in both passages; but the 
subject is here more fully and explicitly illustrated. 
“When the prophet had confirmed his predictions 
of evil, both to the Jews and heathen, by exemplifi- 
eations of the like predictions already fulfilled among 

3 


the latter, he proceeds to apply home the conclusion 
arising hence by an expostulation and pathetic ad- 
dress to the hearts and consciences of the Jews. But 
to what Jews is this addressed? To the Jews who 
were already in captivity. In order, then, that this 
address might make the stronger impression on them, 
and produce its wished-for effect, he immediately 


| subjoins an information, which he here presents, as 


having been just then received, of the actual capture 
and destruction of the city of Jerusalem, agreeably 
to his foregoing prophecies against it: the accom- 
plishment of which prediction against the Jews 
themselves, joined to his historic narrations before, 
of the accomplishment of many others against the 
heathen, both completes his arguments in favour of 
the credit and veracity of his predictions against 
693 


EZEKIEL. 


spiritual watchman. 


The duty of a 
A.M. 3417. 7 So thou, O son of man, I have 


.C. 587. 
Bye, on set thee a watchman unto the house 


of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at 
my mouth, and warn them from me. 

8 When I say unto the wicked, O wicked 
man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not 
speak to warn the wicked from his way, that 
wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his 
blood will I require at thy hand. 

9 Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his 
way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his 
way, he shall die in his iniquity ; but thou hast 
delivered thy soul. 


10 $f Therefore, O thou son of man, 4 M. eo 
speak unto the house of Israel ; Thus 
ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our 
sins be upon us, and we £ pine away in them, 
» how should we then live ? 

11 Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord 
Gop, iI have no pleasure in the death of the 
wicked ; but that the wicked turn from his way 
and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways ; 
for * why will ye die, O house of Israel ? 

12 Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the 
children of thy people, The righteousness of 
the righteous shall not deliver him impthe day 


f Chapter iii. 17——* Chapter xxiv. 23.—— So Isa. xlix. 14; 
hap. xxxvil. 11. 


Egypt, or other nations, and also proves, by a con- 
spicuous example, the truth of that maxim with 
which he had concluded his late address to the cap- 
tive Jews, That God will judge every one after his 
ways, both Jews and heathen.”— Obs. on Books, ii. 
196. 

When I bring the sword upon a land—When an 
enemy approaches to any land, which never happens 
without my appointment or permission ; of the people 
of the land take a man of their coast—Or, from among 
them, to which sense the word 7x)", here used, is 
translated, Gen, xlvii.2; and set him for their watch- 
man—Such watchmen were placed upon the turrets 
of their city-walls, or upon high mountains near, to 
give notice of the enemy’s approach: see the margin. 
If when he seeth the sword come upon the land—If, 
when he spies the enemy marching against it, he blow 
the trumpet, sound the alarm ; and warn the people— 
The sound of the trumpet is a warning, yet it is 
sometimes necessary to add a warning by word of 
mouth, and tell the people brought together by 
the trumpet what he sees. Whosoever heareth, &c., 
and taketh not warning—Considers not, minds not 
what he hears, nor will be made sensible of the dan- 
ger, so as to provide for resisting or fleeing from the 
sword ; ifthe sword come and take him away—De- 
stroy him; his blood shall be upon his own head— 
His destruction is owing to himself. He heard the 
sound of the trumpet—He heard as well as others 
who escaped, and he might have delivered himself 
as they did who took warning. His blood shall be 
upon him—The guilt and blame of his death cannot 
be charged on any but himself. But he that taketh 
warning shall save his soul—Shall save his life from 
the danger that threatens it. In like manner, he that 
takes warning by the prophet’s admonition shall pre- 
serve himself: from the judgments threatened against 
sinners. But ifthe watchman see the sword come, 
and blow not the trumpet—If he neglect his charge, 

which is to give the alarm; and the people be not 

warned—But are surprised by the enemy; if the 

sword take any person from among them—Cut any 

one off unexpectedly ; ;heis taken away inhis iniquity 

~-Punished and cut off by the Lord for his sins for- 
694 


i2 Sam, xiv. 14; Chap. xvili. 23, 32; 2 Peter iii. 9. 


Chap. 
xviii. 31.1 Chap. ili. 20; xviii. as; 26, 27. 


merly committed, and in consequence of the present 
fault of not watching, a great fault in every one that 
is guilty of it in time of war. But his blood will I 
require at the watchman’s hands—The guilt of that 
blood will I charge upon the watehman, and punish 
him for it, for he soe in not giving the necessary 
warning. 

Verses 7-9. So thou, O son of man—The Lord 
here applies the preceding account of the watch- 
man’s Office to the prophet, and shows that his duty 
is illustrated thereby. As if he had said, If a watch- 
man, appointed by his fellow-citizens, is so highly 
guilty, if he do not give warning to the city, and 
shall receive such punishment from my hands; what 
must not thou expect, who art appointed by me to 
give warning to thy countrymen of the terrible evils 
which their sins will bring upon them, if thou ne- 
glect to do it? God has never left his people with- 
out sufficient means of instruction, but has vouch- 
safed it to them more or less in every age, from the 
beginning of the world to this day. He has, from 
time to time, and at all times, set watchmen over 
them, raised up good and holy men to instruct, ad- 
monish, warn, and reprove. “TI have even sent unto 
you all my servants the prophets daily, rising up 
early and sending them, but you have not hearkened 
unto me, nor inclined your ear,” Jer. vii. 25. When 
Tsay unto the wicked, &c. —See notes on chap. iii. 
18, 19. 

Verses 10, 11. Jf our transgressions be upon us, 
&c.—If the unpardoned guilt of our sins lie upon us, 
and we be punished for them in the wasting of our 
country, the burning of our city, the abolishing:the 
public worship of God, &¢.; and we pine away in 
them—Experience their bitter consequences in fa- 
mine and disease, and in a variety of other calami- 
ties; how shall we live?—How then ean the pro- 
mises of life belong to us? How can such assurances 
be true as were given us chap. xviii. 17-322 What 
ground can we have to hope fora of our 
former condition? Or, how canst thou promise the 
continuance or restoration of any mercy to 7? How 
can it be better with us than itis? If ten- 
ings be true, it will be worse with us, not better 

3 


God’s dealings with 


aM. aly of his transgression: as for the wick- 

—___ edness of the wicked, ™he shall not 
fall thereby in the day that he turneth from 
his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be 
able to live for his righteousness in the day 
that he sinneth. 

13 When I shall say to the righteous, that 
he shall surely live; "if he trust to his own 
righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his 
righteousnesses shall not be remembered ; but. 
for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall 
die for it. . 


14 in, °when I say unto the wicked, 
Fis alt surely die ; if he turn from his sin, 
and do * that which is lawful and right ; 


15 Jf the wicked ” restore the pledge, ¢ give 
again that he had robbed, walk in ‘the statutes 
of life, without committing iniquity; he shall 
surely live, he shall not die. 

16 * None of his sins that he hath committed 


m 2 Chron. vii. 14.——" Chap. iii. 20; xviii. 24.—° Chap. 
iii. 18, 19 ; xviii. 27.——* Heb. judgment and justice. P Chap. 
xviii. 7.——4 Exod. xxii. 1, 4; Lev. vi. 2, 4,5; Num. v. 6,7; 
Luke xix. 8. 


and if they be not true, how can we trust thy pro- 
mises of recovery? These are supposed to be the 
words of impious persons, who, pretending to de- 
spair of God’s mercies, take encouragement from 
thence to continue in their sins. Say, As I live, I 
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked—For an 
elucidation of this and the following verses to the 
20th, compare chap. xviii.; and see the notes there. 

Verse 13. When I shall say to the righteous, that 
he shall surely live—When I make him a promise 
of life, peace, and every blessing which he stands in 
need of; if he trust to his own righteousness—F or- 
merly performed, but now abandoned; or, if he rely 
upon the good works he hath done, and think the 
worth of them will overbalance the guilt of his evil 
deeds; which seems to have been the opinion of the 
later Jews, who lay it down for a rule in their Mishna, 
That all Israel shall have a share in the world to 
come. Allhis righteousness shall not be remember- 
ed, &c.—He shall come again under the guilt of all 
his past sins, and shall be exposed to condemnation 
and wrath: see notes on chap. xviii. 24-29. It is 
evidently signified here, that to trust in our own 
righteousness, whether internal or external, whether 
graces or virtues, past or present, or to entertain 
high thoughts of our own attainments in religion, 
and to put confidence therein, is one step toward a 
fall, and generally issues in apostacy. 

Verse 15. If the wicked restore the pledge, give 
azain that he had robbed—It is a necessary condi- 
tion of obtaining pardon, that men make restitution 
of what they have unjustly gotten from others. The 
law is express to this purpose, Lev. vi. 5, where the 
offender is required to add a fifth part to the princi- 

3 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


the righteous and wicked. 


shall be mentioned unto him: he hath A. M. 3417. 


.done that which is lawful and right ; 


he shall surely live. 

17 4‘ Yet the children of thy people say, 
The way of the Lorn is not equal: but as for 
them, their way is not equal. 

18 "When the righteous turneth from his 
righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall 
even die thereby. 

19 But if the wicked turn from his wicked- 
ness, and do that which is lawful and right, he 
shall live thereby. 

20 Yet ye say, * The way of the Lorn is not 
equal. O ye house of Israel, I will judge you 
every one after his ways. 

21 “ And it came to pass in the twelfth year 
Yof our captivity, in the tenth month, in the 
fifth day of the month, 7 ¢hat one that had 
escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, say- 
ing, * The city is smitten. 


t Leviticus xviii. 5; Chapter xx. 11, 13, 21.—#5 Chap. xviii. 
22. Verse 20; Chap. xviii. 25, 29. « Chap. xviii. 26, 27. 
* Verse 17; Chap. xviii. 25, 29,——y Chap. i. 2.——* Chapter 
xxiv. 26. a2 Kings xxv. 4. 


pal, and give it to him to whom it appertaineth ; see 
the note there. To the same purpose is that received 
rule among the Christian casuists, taken from St. 
Augustin, Epistle liv., Non dimittlilur peccatum, nist 
restituatur ablatum. The sin is not forgiven, un- 
less what is taken away be restored. Lord Claren- 
don’s observations on this subject are peculiarly ex- 
cellent: “Robbery and violence would be too gainful 
a trade, if a man might quit all scores by repentance, 
and detain all he hath gotten; or if the father’s re- 
pentance might serve the turn, and the benefit of the 
transgression be transmitted as an inheritance to the 
son. If the pledge remained it must be restored; 
the retaining it is committing a new iniquity, and 
forfeits any benefit of the promise. If he hath it not, 
nor is able to procure it, his hearty repentance is 
enough without reparation: but to enjoy the spoil, 
and yet to profess repentance, is an affront to God 
Almighty, and a greater sin than the first act of vio- 
lence, when he did not pretend to think of God, and 
so did not think of displeasing him. Whereas now 
he pretends to reconcile himself to God, and mocks 
him with repentance, while he retains the fruit of 
his wickedness. He who is truly penitent restores 
what he hath left to the person who was deprived of 
it, and pays the rest in devout sorrow for his tres- 
ass.” 

Verse 21. In the twelfth year of our captivity, 
&e.—According to this reading, the news of the 
taking and burning of Jerusalem was brought to that 
part of the Babylonish dominions where the Jewish 
captives were placed in a year, five months, and 
twenty-six days after the calamity happened: see 
Jer. lii, 12. But eight MSS. having *nwy instead of 

695 


The desolation of 


EZEKIEL. 


Judea foretold. 


22 Now "the hand of the Lorp 
was upon me in the evening, afore 
he that was escaped came; and. had opened 
my mouth, until he came to me in the morn- 
ing; °and my mouth was opened, and I was 
no more dumb. 

23 Then the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 

24 Son of man, ‘they that inhabit those 
® wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, 


A. M. 3417. 
B. C. 587. 


f Abraham was one, and he inherited A. M. 3417. 
the land: ®but we are many; the — 
land is given us for inheritance. 

25 Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop; " Ye eat with the blood, and ‘lift 
up your eyes toward your idols, and * shed 
blood : and shall ye possess the land? 

26 Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomi- 
nation, and ye™ defile every one his neighbour's 
wife: and shall ye possess the land? 


b Chapter i. 3. © Chapter xxiv. 27. 4 Chapter xxxiv. 2. 
e Verse 27; Chapter xxxvi. 4. f Isaiah li, 2; Acts vil. 5. 
& Mic. iii. 11; Matt. iii. 9; John viii. 39. 


h Genesis ix. 4; Lev. 1.17; vii. 26; xvii. 10; xix. 26; Deut. 
xii. 16. i Chap: xviii. 6——* Chapter Xxil. 6, 9. Chap. 
xvill. 6; xxii. 11. 


‘nw, Bishop Newcome, and some others, think the 
preferable reading is, the eleventh year. If this be 
adopted, only about six months passed between the 
taking of Jerusalem and the communication of that 
event to Ezekiel. One that had escaped out of Je- 
rusalem came unto me—According to what God had 
foretold to him should be the case, as is mentioned 
chap. xxiv. 26, and which was to be as.a new com- 
Mission unto. him to speak unto the people; from 
doing whigh, by the command of God, he had 
ceased for near three years before; the prophetic 
influence, or impulse, not coming upon him during 
that time. 

Verse 22. Now the hand of the Lord was upon me 
in the evening-—I felt a sensible impulse of the pro- 
phetice spirit: see chap.i.3. And had opened my 
mouth, until he came to me in the morning—Had so 
influenced my mind, that I found myself disposed 
and prepared to speak freely and with authority. 
Not that he had been utterly dumb before: for he 
had probably “been able to converse with the Jews 
concerning the predictions formerly delivered to 
them, and perhaps spake, or delivered in writing to 
them, the prophecies which he uttered concerning 
other nations; but he had received no further reve- 
aes from God respecting their affairs: in thissense 

had been dumb.”—Scott. But now the Spirit 
pe him to speak, and continued so to do till the 
messenger came, whose information concerning the 
taking and burning of Jerusalem, which had been 
repeatedly and clearly foretold ‘by the prophet, 
would give an indisputable authority and credit to all 
his predictions, and prepare the people’s minds to 
receive, with faith and a due regard, every future 
message which he was commissioned to deliver to 
them. 

Verse 24. T'hey that inhabit those wastes of the 
land of Israel—They that are left behind in the 


land, that is now wasted with fire and sword: see 


the margin, Speak, saying, Abraham was one, 
and inherited the land—Had the privilege of dwell- 
ing and feeding his flocks in it; as if he had said, 
“If Abraham, being only a single person, had the 
whole country of Judea given him, there is much 
greater reason to conclude, that God will preserve 
the possession of it to us, who are a numerous part 
of Abraham’s posterity. These men speak after the 
: 96 


vain manner of the Jews, who fondly — at 


they have a right to all the promises made to Abra- 
ham, without considering the vast difference between 
them and Abraham, both in faithand practice. The 
appellation of one is given to Abraham in other parts 
of Scripture, because he was singled out from the rest 
of his family, to be the original, or head, of the Jew- 
ish nation.’—Lowth. 

Verses 25, 26..Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
—Remove from them this destructive carnal confi- 
dence, and show them what they do, and how far 
they are from being Abraham’s genuine seed. Ye 
eat with the blood—Which was expressly forbidden 
in the Jewish law, as appears from Lev. vii. 26, as 
well as that more ancient law ordained to all man- 
kind, Gen. ix. 4; and lift up your eyes toward 
your idols—Offer up your prayers unto your ficti- 
tious gods; and shed blood—That is, commit mur- 
ders; and shall ye possess the land?—When you 
do not perform the conditions on which the land 
was given, namely, that of being a holy people, can 
you think that you shall continue to enjoy it? Ye 
stand upon your Sword—You make your strength 
the law of justice, and, confiding in that, you do 
whatsoever your inclinations lead you to, whether 
right or wrong; according to the character given of 
ungodly men, Wisd. ii. 11, who say, “Let our 
strength be the law of justice, for that which is fee- 
ble is found to be nothing worth,” &c. Houbigant 
translates the clause, You stand in your high way, 
or the corners of your streets, and commit your 
abominations, considering the words as referring to 
their public and open profession of idolatry. Dr. 
Spencer (De Legib. Hebrew, lip. ii. cap. 11) thinks 
that the expression alludes to a custom of the hea- 
then, “who put the blood of their sacrifices into a 
vessel, or pit, in order to call up and consult evil 
spirits, and then stood with their swords drawn, to 
keep the demons off from doing them any harm.’ 
Ye defile every one his neighbour's wife—Ye uni- 
versally commit adultery ; and shall ye possess the 
land?—The question implies a peremptory denial. 
Thus the prophet shows how vain-and ill-grounded 
their expectations were of being continued in the 
possession of Judea, since they did those things 
which were contrary to the divine law, and which con- 
sequently excluded them from any right to the land, 

3 


. 


T he desolation of 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


Judea foretatd. 


A. M. 3417. 


27 h h S 
lalate 7 Say thou thus unto them, Thus 


saith the Lord Gop; As I live, surely 
"they that are in the wastes, shall fall by the 
sword, and him that is in the open field, ° will I 
give to the beasts * to be devoured, and they that 
be in the forts and in the caves, shall die of 
the pestilence. 

28 1 For I will lay the land * most desolate, 
and the * pomp of her strength shall cease; and 
Sthe mountains of Israel shall be desolate, that 
none shall pass through. 

29 Then shall they know that I am the Lorn, 
when I have laid the land most desolate, be- 
ca f all their abominations which they have 
committed. 


30 % Also, thou son of man, the A. =. ails 
children of thy people still are talking ———— 
Sagainst thee by the walls and in the doors of 
the houses, and ‘speak one to another, every 
one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, 
and hear what is the word that cometh forth 
from the Lorp. 

31 And "they come unto thee 7as the people 
cometh, and *they *sit before thee as my peo- 
ple, and they hear thy words, but they will not 
do them: » for with their mouth ° they show 
much love, bu¢é *their heart goeth after their 
covetousness. 

32 And lo, thou art unto them as a very 
lovely song of one that hath a pleasant Voice, 


a Verse 24. 
P Judges vi. 2; 1 Sam: xiii. 6. 
xxxvi. 34, 35. ® Heb. desolation and desolation. 
vii. 24; xxiv. 21; xxx. 6, 7.——* Chapter vi. 2, 3, 6. 


of thee. 


° Chapter xxxix, 4. “Heb. to devour him. 
4 Jer. xliv. 2, 6, 22; Chapter 
’r Chapter 
6 Or, 


Verse 27. Surely they that are in the wastes— 
They who continue to dwell among the desolations 
of Jerusalem and Judea; shall fall by the sword— 
This they accordingly did, both through the civil 
dissensions among them, in the conspiracy formed 
against Gedaliah, and likewise by the Chaldeans re- 
venging hisdeath. And him that is in the open field 
will I give to the beasts—He shall bea prey to lions 
and other ravenous beasts, that will multiply in the 
ruined country. And they that bein the forts and 
eaves—Out of the reach of men and beasts; shall 
die of the pestilence—My hand shall reach them, 
and send among them those destructive disorders 
which shall sweep them away. ‘These three judg- 
ments here mentioned, the sword, destructive beasts, 
and the pestilence, together with famine, are often 
threatened as the last and finishing strokes of divine 
vengeance upon the Jewish nation: see chap. v. 12, 
17, and vi. 12, and xiv. 21; Jer. xv. 3. By the forts 
and caves here spoken of, are meant the strong holds 
formed by nature in the rocks, or cut out in the 
sides of the mountains. Many of them were so large 
that men might secure themselves, their families, 
and their goods in them. So David is said, 1 Sam. 
xxiii. 14, to abide in strong holds, and remain in a 
mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. Such was the 
eave of Adullam, where David had his residence for 
some time, and was there resorted to by hisrelations, 
(1 Sam. xxii. 1 ,) and at another time by his principal 
officers, 2 Sam. xxiii. 15. 

Verses 28, 29. For I will lay the land most deso- 
late—I will make the land destitute of inhabitants, 
by the destruction which shall be made of them by 
the sword, by wild beasts, and the pestilence, and by 
their being carried into captivity. And the pomp of 
her strength shall cease—All that wealth and mag- 
nificence wherein they pleased themselves, as that 
which gave them i strength and reputation in the eyes 
of the world, are taken away: see chap. vii. 24. Or 

3 


| try, and sweep away its inhabitants. 
they know that Iam the Lord—That I am their 
| Lord, their righteous governor, 


t Isa, xxix, 13. « Chap. xiv. 1; xx. 1. 7 Heb. according 
to the coming of the people——® Or, my people sit before thee. 
x Chapter vili. 1——y Psalm Ixxviii. 26, 37; Isaiah xxix. 13. 
° Heb. they make loves, or, jests. 2 Matt. xiii. 22. 10 Heb. 
a song of loves. 


—t— 


the phrase may denote the beauty and glory of the 
temple, which they looked upon as their chief 


| strength and protection ; none shall pass through— 
None shall choose even so much as to pass through 


the country, on account of its being infested with 
wild beasts through its desolateness, and because the 
air of it shall be rendered unwholesome, by means 


| of the effluvia arising from dead and dying bodies, 


and the pestilential diseases which rage in the coun- 
Then shail 


and just judge. 
When TI have laid the land most desolate, &e.— 


_WhenI have brought these destructive calamities 


upon it, because of the sins and abominations of 
its inhabitants. Observe, reader, those are untract- 
able and unteachable indeed, that are not made 
to know their dependance upon God when all their 
creature comforts fail them, and they are made 
desolate. 

Verses 30-32. T'he children of thy people—Those 
of the captivity; still are talking against thee—Or 
rather, of thee, as the LXX. rightly render it; for 


with their mouths they showed much love, as it fol- 


lows in the next verse. By the walls and in the 
doors of their houses—Both in their public places of 
concourse, and in their private meetings. And speak 
one to another, saying, Come, &e.—These were such 
as drew nigh to God with their mouths, but their 
hearts were far from him, as Isaiah describes their 
hypocrisy, chap. xxix. 13; and they come unto thee 
as the people cometh—Or, as disciples flock to their 
teachers: so the Chaldee paraphrase explains it. 
They make a profession of great regard to piety and 
virtue, and express a great esteem for thee, but at 
the same time they indulge themselves in sin and 
wickedness. And lo! thou art unto themas a very 
lovely song, &e.—They come to hear thee for their 
entertainment, not for their edification, in the spirit 


Judgments against the 


EZEKIEL. 


shepherds of Israel. 


ie and can play well on an instrument : 
’ for they hear thy words, but they do 
them not. 


a] Sam. iii. 20. 


33 * And when this cometh to pass, A. M, 947 
(lo, it will come,) then shall they mae 


know that a prophet hath been among them. 


b Chap. ii. 5. 


in which many go to hear noted and eloquent preach- 
ers. St. Austin tells us, that he himself was such an 
auditor of St. Ambrose before he was converted, 
Confess., 1. v. c. 12; “I heard him diligently when 
he discoursed in the congregation, but not with that” 
application of mind which I ought to have done; 
but I came rather out of curiosity, to know whether | 
his eloquence was answerable to the opinion which 
the world had of him. I was very attentive to his 
style, and charmed with the sweetness of his de- 
livery, but had little value or concern for the subjects 


he treated of.” 


Verse 33. And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it 
will come)—Or, rather, lo, it is come; for so the 
same phrase is translated chap. vi. 2, 6, 10, the verb 
being in the present tense ; when they shall see thy 
prophecies concerning the destruction of Jerusalem 
actually fulfilled, and all the events predicted by thee 
exactly brought to pass; then shall they know that 
a prophet hath been among them—Then shall they 
be convinced of the truth of thy mission, and of their 
own inexcusable crime in despising thy prophecies. 
The words of this verse are evidently spoken by the 
Lord to his prophet. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


In this chapter the shepherds of Israel, that is, their rulers, both in church and state, are called to an account, as having been 


very much accessory to the sin and ruin of Israel, by their neglect of the duties of thevr station. 


We have here, (1,) A 


high charge exhibited against them for their negligence, their unskilfulness, and unfaithfulness:in the management of 


public affairs, 1-6, 8. 


(2,) Their discharge from their trust, for their insufficiency and treachery, 7-10. (3,) A gracious 


promise that God would take care of his flock, though they did not, and that it should not always suffer as it had done, by 


their maladministrations, 11-16. 


(4,) Another charge is exhibited against those of the flock that were fat and strong, for 
the injuries they did to those who were weak and feeble, 17- 


22. (5,) Another promise that God would, in the fulness of 


time, send the Messiah to be the great and good Shepherd of the sheep, who should redress all grievances, and set every 


thing to rights with the flock, 23-31. 


A. M. 3417. 


ND the word of the Lorp came 
B. C. 587. 


unto me, saying, 
2 Son of man, prophesy against the *shep- 
herds of Israel;~prophesy, and say unto them, 


Thus saith the Lord Gop unto the i ee 
shepherds; Wo be to the shepherds —_—___ 
of Israel that do feed themselves! should not 


the shepherds feéd the flocks ? 


a Chap. xxxiii. 24. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Verse 1. The word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying—It is probable that this prophecy immedi- 
ately followed the preceding; and that at, or imme- 
diately after, the arrival of the news that Jerusalem 
was conquered, the prophet was commissioned to 
speak of the tyranny and carelessness of the govern- 
ors and teachers, and to point out their negligence 
as a principal cause of the incredulity and wicked- 
ness of the people. Thus the transition appears to 
be natural, and the connection close, between this 
prophecy and the foregoing one, as also between the 
beginning of this prophecy and its conclusion. For 
considering that, in parts at least, the people suffered 
for the faults of the shepherds, mercy now urged 
the prophet to declare, from God, that he would 
judge between them, save the flock, and set wp one 
shepherd over them, ‘who should feed them, even his 
servant David. 

Verse 2. Prophesy against the shepherds of Is- 
rael—The word shepherd, in the prophetical wri- 


b Jer. xxiii. 4; Zech. xi. 17. 


tings, comprehends both civil and ecclesiastical 
governors. See notes on Isa. lvi. 11; Jer.ii. 8. Other 
writers also use the same expression; princes being 
called shepherds of their people, as well as those 
who have the immediate care of their souls: see 
Psa. lxxviii, 71,72. Thus Homer calls Agamemnon, 
Tloievarawv, the shepherd of the people. And as the 
threatenings here denounced extend to all sorts of 
governors, so the several sins of the princes, priests, 
and prophets are reproved, chap. xxii. 25, &e. Wo 
to the shepherds of Israel that feed themselves— 
That regard their own profit and advantage, not the 
good of the people committed to their charge. The 
beauty of the original, OMS OYIVT IoRX 4, may 
be expressed in Latin or Greek, though not in Eng- 
lish:—pastoribus gui pascunt semet ipsos: toe ou 
Keow ot Toimatvovotv cavrovg. Plato, in the first book of 
his Commonwealth, describing the office of a cg 
‘trate, saith, “He, should look upon himself 
taining the office of a shepherd, that 

chief business to take care of his flock; n 


this 


The unfaithfulness of 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


the shepherds of Israel. 


A. M. 3417. 


3 °Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe 
B. C. 587. 


you with the wool, ¢ ye kill them that 
are fed: but ye feed not the flock. 

4 °'The diseased have ye not strengthened, 
neither have ye healed that which was sick, 
neither have ye bound up ¢hat which was 
broken, neither have ye brought again that 
which was driven away, neither have ye sought 
that which was lost ; but with ¢ force and with 
cruelty have ye ruled them. 

5 » And they were ‘scattered, + because there 
is no shepherd: *and they became meat to 
all the beasts of the field, when they were 
scattered. 

6 My sheep wandered through all the moun- 


tains, and upon every high hill: yea, 4. M. 3417. 
. CO. 587. 

my flock was scattered upon all the 

face of the earth, and none did search or seek 

after them. 

7 “| Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word 
of the Lorn; 

8 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, surely be- 
cause my flock became a prey, and my flock 
‘became meat to every beast of the field, be- 
cause there was no shepherd, neither did my 
shepherds search for my flock, ™but the shep- 
herds fed themselves, and fed not my flock ; 

9 Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word 
of the Lorp ; 

10 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I am 


eJsa. lvi. 11; Zech. xi. 16——4 Chap. xxxiii. 25, 26; Micah 
iii. 1, 2,3; Zechariah xi. 5.——e Verse 16; Zechariah xi. 16. 
f Luke xv. 4+ 1 Pet. v. 3. 


h Chap. xxxiii. 21, 28. —i1 Kings xxii. 17; Matthew ix. 36. 
1 Or, without a shepherd ; and so Verse 8.— Isa. lvi. 9; Jer. 
xil. 9; Verse 8. 1 Verses 5, 6.——™ Verses 2, 10, 


were going to a feast to fill himself and satiaté his 
appetite, or to a market to make what gain he can 
to himself” Eusebius, in his twelfth book De Pré- 
paratione Evangelica, chap. xliv., hath transcribed 
the whole passage, as an exact parallel to this place 
of Ezekiel. See Lowth. 

Verses 3, 4. Ye eat the fat—Or, the milk, as the 
LXX. render it. The Hebrew words chalab, milk, 
and cheleb, fat, differ only in their points, so that the 
ancient versions take them promiscuously one for 
the other. These shepherds of the Lord’s flock, 
these civil and ecclesiastical rulers of the people, 
used their power over them, and exercised their 
offices, merely for their temporal advantage and 
emolument. “They exacted their tribute and taxes, 
their tithes and perquisites, with great earnestness; 
and they oppressed, and even destroyed the people, 
to enrich themselves: but they bestowed no pains to 
provide for the welfare of the state, or of the souls 
of those intrusted to them.”—Scott. Ye kill them 
that are fed—Ye take away the lives of the wealthy 
and substantial by unjust means, in order to enrich 
yourselves with their estates. But ye feed not the 
flock—Ye take no care for their benefit, temporal or 
spiritual. Ye are so ignorant that ye know not how 
to feed them, and ye are so indolent that ye will not 


take any pains to do it, and ye are so treacherous | 


and unfaithful that ye never desired or designed it. 
The diseased—The weak and languishing; have ye 
nol strengthened—W ith your help, counsel, or coun- 
tenance. Ye have not applied proper remedies to 
the wants and necessities of those committed to your 
charge. ‘The magistrates have not taken care to re- 
lieve the needy and defend the oppressed. The 
priests and the prophets have not been diligent in 
giving the people proper instructions, in rectifying 
the mistakes of those that were in error, in warning 
the unruly, or comforting the disconsolate. Neither 
have ye bound up that which was broken—Ye have 
not given relief to the afflicted and miserable: a 
metaphor taken from surgeens binding up wounds 
3 


in order to cure them. Neither have ye brought 
again that which was driven away, &c.—Or, which 
was gone astray, as the word N71) is translated, 
Deut. xxii. 1. Ye have not, by your instructions 
and exhortations, endeavoured to reduce those who 
had wandered from the way of truth, or to reclaim 
those who were ready to perish in their sins; bat 
with force and cruelty have ye ruled them—Have 
endeavoured to reduce and govern them by the 
rough methods of compulsion and cruelty, and not 
by the gentle way of reason and argument, long- 
suffering, meckness, and love; and your government 
over them has been exercised by tyranny and op- 
pression, instead of justice, kindness, and benefi- 
cence. 

Verses 5, 6. And they were scattered, &c.—Driven 
into other parts of the land, or into other coun- 
tries, by the severity, exactions, and oppressions of 
their rulers. Because there is no shepherd—No one 
worthy of the name of a shepherd; none that cared 
for or properly watched over and fed the flock. 
And they became meat to all the beasts of the field 
—They were made a prey to, and were spoiled by, 
their enemies, temporal and spiritual. My sheep 
wandered through all the mountains—As silly sheep, 
when there is no one to look after them, wander 
from one mountain and hill to another; so my 
thoughtless and infatuated people, disregarded and 
neglected, or treated with cruelty by those that 
should have protected and guided them, have mani- 
fested their ignorance and folly in following various 
species of idolatry, and in forming to themselves 
religions after their own imaginations, full of super- 
stition and impiety. And none did search or seek 
after then—Their priests and princes were so far 
from calling them back from these wanderings, that 
they were the first to follow them; nay, and even to 
go before, and set them the example. 

Verse 10. Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I am 
against the shepherds—They have made me their 
enemy by their negligence and abuse of their pow. 


The gracious promise 


EZEKIEL. 


of God to his flock. 


— 


A. M.3417. against the shepherds ; 
B. C, 587. 


and ® I will 
". require my flock at their hand, and 
cause them to cease from feeding the flock; 
neither shall the shepherds ° feed themselves 
any more; for I will deliver my flock from their 
mouth, that they may not be meat for them. 

11 Y For thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, 
I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek 
them out. 

12 * As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in 
the day that he is among his sheep that are 
scattered ; so will I seek out my sheep, and 
will deliver them out of all places where they 
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark 
day. 

13 And °I will bring them out from the 
people, and gather them from the countries, 
and will bring them to their own land, and 
feed them upon the mountains of Israel by 


the rivers, and in all the inhabited A. M. 3417. 
places of the country. tei esa 

14 *I will feed them in a good pasture, and 
upon the high mountains of Israel shall their 
fold be: ‘there shall they lie in a good fold, 
and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the 
mountains of Israel. 

15 I will feed my flock, and I will cause them 
to lie down, saith the Lord Gop. 

16 tT will seek that which was lost, and 
bring again that which was driven away, and 
will bind up that which was broken, and will 
strengthen that which was sick: but I will de- 
stroy " the fat and the strong ; I will feed them 
* with judgment. 

17 And as for you, O my flock, thus saith 
the Lord Gon; ¥ Behold, I judge between * cat- 
tle and cattle, between the rams and the * he- 
goats. 


2 Chapter 11. 18; Heb. xiii. 17. © Verses 2, 8. 2 Heb. 
According to the seeking. ——? Chap. xxx. 3; Joel 11. 4 Isa, 
Ixv. 9,10; Jer. xxiii. 3; Chap. xxviii. 25 ; XXXVi. 24; "73 il. 21, 
22. t Psa, xxiii, 2.——* Jer. xxxiii. 12. t Verse 4; Isaiah 


‘xl. 11; Micah iv. 6; Matt. xviii. 11; Mark ii. 17; like VY. 3% 


uJsaiah x. 16; Amos iv. 1. x Jer. x. 24——¥ hap. xx. 37, 
38; Verses 20, 22; Zech. x. 3; Matt. xxv. 32, 33.——* Heb. 
small cattle of lambs and kids. 4 Heb. great he-goats. 


er, and I will appear and act as such. They have 
been enemies to my sheep, though pretending to be 
their shepherds; I will be an open enemy to them; 
and will require my flock at their hands—I will re- 
quire @ severe account from their kings and princes, 
their priests and prophets, of the damage my people 
have sustained through their ill management; and 
Iwill deprive them of the Lonour, pre-eminence, 
and advantage of which they have made such an 
ill use. 

Verses 11-16. Behold, I, even I, will search my 
sheep—-I myself will recall them from their wander- 
ings into the right way; and will seek them out— 
Hebrew, on1p2, I will seek them early, or, seek 
them in the morning. As a shepherd seeketh out 
his flock—With the greatest care and diligence; as 
he gathers them together, counts them, brings them 
to the fold, observes what they have suffered, and, 
if lame or torn, binds up and heals them, and pro- 
vides pasture for them; so will I.seek out my sheep, 
&c.—Though magistrates and ministers fail in doing 
their part for the good of the church, yet God will 
not fail in doing his; he will take his flock into his 
own hands, rather than it should be deprived of any 
kindness he had designed for it. The under shep- 
herds may prove careless, but the chief Shepherd 
neither slumbers nor sleeps. They may be false, 
but he abides faithful. And deliver them out of all 
places where they have been scattered—Will bring 
them home from their several dispersions, whither 
they have been driven; in the cloudy and dark day 
—Hebrew, 99791 }37 013, in the day of clouds and 
dar ineaes. in the pee and dismal time of the de- 
struction of their country. And will bring them out 

700 


from the people—This prophecy primarily respect- 
ed their restoration from captivity in Babylon, and 
was in part at least fulfilled when so many thousands 
of them returned to their own land under the con- 
duct of Zerubbabel, Ezra, and others. It seems, 
however, to look still further, even to the general 
restoration of the whole Jewish nation from their 
present wide dispersion over the whole world, which 
restoration most of the prophets foretel shall be 
effected in the latter days. But there is no need to 
confine this promise wholly to the Jews; when 
those, in any age or nation, that have gone astray 
from God into the paths of sin are brought back by 
repentance ; when those that erred come to the ae- 
knowledgment of the truth; when God’s outcasts 
are gathered and restored, and religious assemblies 
that were dispersed are again collected and united 
upon the ceasing of persecution; and when the 
churches have rest and liberty, then this prediction 
has a true accomplishment. J will feed them in a 
good pasture—I will supply all their wants, and 
make ample provision for the support both of their 
natural and spiritual life. Upon the high mountains 
of Israel shail their fold be—There shall they have 
fixed habitations upon their return, and there shall 
they rest in safety. There shall they lie in a good 
fold, &c.—These expressions denote. both plenty 
and security. But I will destroy the fat and the 
strong—Those who oppress and tyrannise over the 
weak. J will feed them with judgment—1 will 
judge, chastise, and punish them. 

Ver. 17, 19. As for you, O my flock—The p ophet, 
having finished what he had to say to the st s, 
now delivers God’s message to the flock. 


The spiritual David, 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


the true Shepherd. 


£3 ly 18 Seemeth it a small thing unto 
——— you to have eaten up the good pas- 
ture, but ye must tread down with your feet 
the residue of your pastures? and to have 
drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul 
the residue with your feet? 

19 And as for my flock, they eat that which 
ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink 
that which ye have fouled with your feet. 

20 % Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop 
unto them; * Behold, I, even I, will judge 
between the fat cattle and between the lean 
cattle. 

21 Because ye have thrust with side and 
with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased 


z Verse 17.——4 Verse 17.——» Isa. xl. 11; Jer. xxiii. 4,5; 
John x. 11; Heb. xiii. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 25; v. 4——¢ Jer. xxx. 9; 
Chap. xxxvii. 24, 25 ; Hos. iii. 5. 


before ordered him to speak tenderly to them, and to 
assure them of the mercy which he had in store for 
them. But now he is ordered to make a difference 
between some and others of them, to separate be- 
tween the precious and the vile, and then to give them 
a promise of the Messiah, by whom this distinction 
_ would be effectually made ; partly at his first coming, 
when for judgment he should come into this world, 
John ix. 39; but completely at his second coming, 
when he shall, as it is here said, jadge between cattle 
as a shepherd divides between the sheep and the 
goats, and shall set the sheep on his right hand and 
the goats on his left, Matt. xxv. 32, 33. Between 
the rams and the he-goats—The Hebrew, it seems, 
may be better rendered, Between the small cattle, 
and the cattle of rams and of he-goats, between 
the weak and the strong cattle ; that is, between the 
rich and the poor, as the Chaldee Paraphrase explains 
the sense upon verse 20. Seemeth it a small thing 
unto you to have eaten up the good pasture? &c.— 
This reproof may be fitly applied to those of the 
rich and great, who take no care that the poor may 
enjoy the benefit of their superfluities, but will rather 
let them be thrown away and lost, than they will 
take the trouble of seeing them disposed of for the 
relief of those that stand in need. As for my flock, 
they eat that which ye have trodden, &c.—They are 
compelled to live upon the relics of what you have 
spoiled and destroyed. 

Verses 21, 22. Because ye have thrust with side 
and shoulder, &c.—Have molested and vexed the 
poor and weak by your unjust and violent dealings ; 
therefore will I save my flock—I will interpose, and 
rescue the poor of my people from violence and 
oppression. The reader will easily observe that the 
metaphors used in these verses are taken from two 
sorts of cattle, the one of the larger and stronger 
kind, the other of the smaller and weaker sort, which 
the larger ones are wont to thrust aside and push at 
with their horns, 

3 


A. M. 3417. 


with your horns, till ye have scat- 
B. C. 587. 


tered them abroad ; a as 

22 Therefore will I save my flock, and they 
shall no more be a prey; and *I will judge 
between cattle and cattle. 

23 And I will set up one »Shepherd over 
them, and he shall feed them, ° even my ser- 
vant David; he shall feed them, and he shall 
be their shepherd. 

24 And “I the Lorn will be their God, and 
my servant David *a prince among them; I 
the Lorp have spoken i¢. 

25 And ‘I will make with them a covenant 
of peace, and £ will cause the evil beasts to 
cease out of the land: and they * shall dwell 


4 Verse 30; Exodus xxix. 45; Chap. xxxvii. 27,——®* Chap. 
xxxvil. 22; Luke i, 32, 33.—f Ch. xxxvii. 26.——8 Lev. xxvi. 
6; Isa. xi. 6-9; xxxv. 9; Hos. ii. 18. h Ver. 28; Jer. xxiil. 6. 


Verses 23-25. And Iwill set up one Shepherd— 
That is, the Messiah, “the true Shepherd, who hath 
given himself this name both in the prophets and in 
the gospel, and who hath perfectly fulfilled all the 
duties, the characters whereof have been before de- 
scribed. He is called David, because he sprung 
from David according to the flesh ; because he pos- 
sessed eminently and really all those qualities which 
the Scriptures give to David as the type of the Mes- 
siah ; and because he was the person in whom all 
the promises made to David were fulfilled. Though 
this prophecy was in a great measure completed 
when Christ, by the preaching of the gospel, gather- 
ed into one the children of God, among whom were 
many of the lost sheep of Israel, yet it will receive 
a further completion at the general conversion of 
the Jews.”—Calmet. J the Lord will be their God 
—I will renew my covenant with them, and receive 
them again into my protection. Twill be a God all- 
sufficient for them, and they shall not, as formerly, 
have recourse to any other. And my servant David 
a prince among them—To reduce them to their alle- 
giance, to receive their homage, and to reign over 
them, in them, and for them. Observe, reader, 
those, and those only, that have the Lord Jesus for 
their Prince, have the Lord Jehovah for their God. 
And Iwill make with them a covenant of peace— 
The covenant of grace is this covenant of peace; in 
it God is at peace with penitent and obedient be- 
lievers, speaks peace to them, and assures them of 
peace with him, and of all good, even all the good 
they néed to make them happy. ‘This peace is 
through Jesus Christ, who hath procured it for us 
by his merits, and imparts it to us by his Spirit. He 
is the peace predicted by Micah, chap. v. 5. Peace 
to men was announced at his birth; his gospel is the 
gospel of peace, and he himself is the God and King 
of peace: in short, he it is who pacifieth all things 
and reconciles and unites in one Jews and Gentiles, 
God and man, heaven and earth. And I will cause 

701 


The spiritual Shepherd 


A. M. 3417. safely in the wilderness, and sleep in 
B.C. 587. 
2. the ‘woods, 

26 And I will make them and the places 
round about ‘my hill *a blessing; and I will 
1cause the shower to come down in his season ; 
there shall be ™ showers of blessing. 

27 And "the tree of the field shall yield her 
fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase, and 
they shall be safe in their land, and shall know 
that I am the Lorp, when I have ° broken 
the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out 
_of the hand of those that ? served themselves 
of them. 

28 And they shall no more ‘be a prey to the 


iTsaiah lvi. 7; Chap. xx. 40.— Gen. xii..2; Isa. xix. 24; 
Zech. viii. 13 ——! Lev. xxvi. 4. m Psa. Ixvili. 9; Mal. iii. 
10. " Lev. xxvi. 4; Psalm Ixxxy. 12; Isa. iv. 2. © Lev. 
xxvi. 13; Jer. ii. 20. ——p Jer. xxv. 14, 


the evil beasts to cease out of the land—Persecutors 
shall no more distress my church, nor infidels seduce 
them. They shall dwell safely in the wilderness, 
and sleep in the woods—They shall be perfectly safe, 
by night as well as by day, under my protection. 
He alludes to the circumstance of the eastern shep- 
herds frequently lying abroad in the fields with 


their flocks during the night, without a tent to shel-. 


ter them. 

Verses 26-28. Iwill make them and the places 
round about my hill a blessing—I will there give 
remarkable instances of my favour, and of the hap- 
piness which flows from it. God’s hill is the same 
with his holy mountain, mentioned chap. xx. 40, 
where see the note. TJ'here shall be showers of 
blessings—Blessings in great abundance, and of all 
sorts, temporal and spiritual, earthly and heavenly. 
The tree of the field shall yield her fruit—There 
shall be great fertility and plenty in every part of 
the land. The spiritual blessings of the gospel are 
often described under the emblems of fruitfulness 
and abundance. And they shall. be safe in their 
land—In no danger of being invaded and enslaved, 
though their great plenty might be supposed to be a 
temptation to their neighbours to desire their land. 
And they shall know that I am the Lord—They 
shall indeed know that I, and I only, am the living 
and true God, and their God and Saviour; when J 
have broken the bands of their yoke—Those bands 
by which they had been brought down, and long 
held under oppression; had been made slaves, and 
used as such. The same expression is used of the 
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, (Lev. xxvi. 13; 
Jer, ii. 20,) their final restoration being represented 
as the greater deliverance of the two. And none 
shall make them afraid—The experience of my 
particular care over them, shall inspire them with 
that confidence in me which shall preserve them 
from all disquieting fears and anxieties. 

Verses 29, 30. And I will raise up for them a 
vlant of r enown—The — the branch from the 


“ p » 
= "ss - | hd _ 


ee 


EZEKIEL. 


and his spiritual flock. 


heathen, neither shall the beasts of the A. As Say: 
land devour them; but they shall : 
dwell safely, and ribuie shall make them afraid. 

29 And I will raise up for them a * plant ° of 
renown, and they shall be no more ® consumed 
with hunger in the land, ‘neither bear the 
shame of the heathen any more. 

30 Thus shall they know that "I the Lorp 
their God am with them, and that they, even 
the house of Israel, are my people, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

31 And ye my * flock, the flock of my pasture, 


are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord 
Gop. 


4 Verse 8; Chae xxxvi. 4," Verse 25; Jer. xxx. 10; xlvi, 
27,—» Isa, Ri. Jer. xxiii. 5. 5 Or, ‘for renown.——*® Heb. 
taken away. Chap. xxxvi. 3, 6, 15.——" Verse 24; Chapter 
Xxxvii. 27.——* Psa. ¢. 3; John x. 11. 4 


root of David, so frequently foretold by the prophet. 
And they shall be no more consumed with hunger 
—But shall be blessed with plenty of all things. 
Spiritual blessings, the blessings peculiar to the Mes- 
siah’s kingdom, are chiefly intended. These his 
subjects shall possess in abundance, and shall be 
satisfied therewith, whatever their lot may be as to 
the things of this life. Neither shall they bear the 
shame of the heathen any more—By whom they 
were formerly reproached, as if their God had east 
them off. Then shall they know—The very hea- 
then shall be convinced by these many and great 
blessings bestowed upon my people; that I the Lord 
—I, Jehovah, who can perform what I promise; am 
with them—Am reconciled to them, and do bless 
and save them ; and that they—Whom these heathen 
despised and injured, and formerly made slaves ; 
even the house of Israel, are my people—My pecu- 
liar people, above all people in the world, and as 
such shall be taken care of by me. 

Verse 31. And ye my flock, &c., are men—These 
words at the conclusion of the chapter, explain the 
metaphor which runs through the whole of it; name- 
ly, that what was said of a flock and its shepherds, 
is to be understood of men and their governors, and 
especially of God’s people, whom their civil and ec- 
clesiastical governors neglected, or misled and op- 
pressed, but whom God regards, watches over, pre- 
vides for, and takes care of, as a shepherd does his 
flock. It is justly observed here by Mr. Ostervald, 
that “this is a chapter which both magistrates and 
rulers of the church ought to meditate upon very se- 
riously. The complaints that God here makes of 
false shepherds, and the curses he denounces against 
them, show that it is the duty of pastors, with their 
utmost diligence, to watch over the sheep with which 
they are intrusted, and to provide with care and 
readiness for all their wants; and that if they fail 
herein, they must give a severe account to God for 
it. This too lays an obligation upon princes and 
magistrates, to govern faithfully and justly a aa 


ve 


The final overthrow of CHAPTER XXXV. the persecuting Edomites, 


committed to their trust. What befell the Jews, who, || and that all who are concerned for the glory of God, 
for the unfaithfulness of their prophets and magis- || and the happiness and edification of the church, have 
trates, were utterly destroyed, shows that it is the || great reason to pray to God, that he would always 
greatest misfortune to a nation to have wicked rulers; || raise up to his people faithful and good pastors.” 


CHAPTER XXXYV. 


in this chapter the prophet renews his former denunciations of judgments wpon the Edomites, (see chap. xxv. 12,) as a just 
punishment for their insulting over the calamities of the Jews. We have, (1,) A charge drawn up against them for their 
spite and malice, 5,6, 10-13, 15. (2,) A denunciation of rwin on account thereof: that God will be their enemy, 3: and 


their country shall be laid waste, and made most desolate, 4, 


6-9: and shall be left so when other countries that had been 


wasted should recover themselves, and be restored to their former prosperity, 14, 15. 


A. M, 3417. JOREOVER the word of the 

B. C. 587. 7 , : 

ORD came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, *set thy face against » mount 
Seir, and ° prophesy against it. 

3 And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 
Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, and 
1] will stretch out my hand against thee, and I 
will make thee ! most desolate. 

4 *I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt 
be desolate, and thou shalt know that I am the 
Lorp. 

5 ‘Because thou hast had a ? perpetual 
hatred, and hast *shed the blood of the chil- 
dren of Israel by the * force of the sword in the 


time of their calamity, #in the time mathe | 
that their iniquity had an end: tei 

6 Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord Gon, I 
will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall 
pursue thee: » since thou hast not hated blood, 
even blood shall pursue thee. 

7 Thus will I make mount Seir * most deso- . 
late, and cut off from it ‘him that passeth out 
and him that returneth. 

8 * And I will fill his mountains with his 
slain men: in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and 
in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are slain 
with the sword. 

9 'T will make thee perpetual desolations, 


a Chapter vi. 2.» Deut. ii. 5. ¢ Jer. xlix. 7,8; Chapter 
xxv. 12; Amos i. 11; Obadiah 10, &c——4 Chapter vi. 14. 
! Hebrew, desolation and desolation, So verse 7. e Verse 9. 
f Chap. xxv. 12; Obadiah 10. 2 Or, hatred of old, Chap. xxv. 
15.—* Heb. poured out the children. 


4 Heb. hands. & Psa. exxxvii. 7; Chap. xxi. 25, 29; Dan. 
ix. 24; Obad. 11.—— Psalm cix. 17.——® Heb. desolation and 


desolation, verse 3.—i Judg. v. 6; Chap. xxix. 11. k Chap. 
xxxi. 12; xxxii. 5.——! Jer. xlix. 17, 18; Verse 4; Chap. xxv. 


13; Mal.i. 3, 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXV. 

Verses 1-6. Moreover, the word of the Lord, &c. 
—*The prophet goes on to show, that the same rea- 
son which would operate in favour of the Jews, 
would not operate in favour of the heathen; espe- 
cially not in favour of the Jews’ relations, the Edom- 
ites: for they showed no mercy, and therefore de- 
served to receive none ; and, because they had per- 
petual hatred, they were to be made a perpetual 
desolation.” — Obs. on Books. Set thy face against 
mount Setr—Mount Seir is the same with Idumea: 
see Deut. ii. 5. Iwill lay thy cities waste, &e.—To 
the same effect Jeremiah prophesied against them, 
chap. xlix. 7, &c., where see the notes. Because 
thou hast had a perpetual hatred, &e.—See note on 
chap. xxv. 12. In the time that their iniquity had 
an end—That is, either at the time when God exer- 
cised against them the last chastisement of their ini- 
quity; or at the time of their extreme affliction, 
when the anger of God was most inflamed against 
them. It is the greatest of all cruelties to insult the 
afflicted, and to add new sorrows to the unhappy: 
see Caimet. Therefore I will prepare thee unto 
blood—I will expose thee to great slaughter. Since | 
thou hast not hated blood, &¢c.—Since thou hast loved 

3 


a 


cruelty, and taken delight in shedding blood, ven- 
geance and slaughter shall pursue thee, and thou 
shalt fall into the hands of those that will be as eager 
to shed thine. 

Verses 7-12. Thus will I make mount Seir most 
desolate—Hebrew, 7'9Dv) T9204, a desolation and 
a desolation, or, a desolation and an astonishment, 
as Bishop Newton renders it, following the reading 
of several MSS. And.cut off from it him that pass- 
eth out, &c.—No travellers shall go forward or back- 
ward in it with safety: see the margin. And thy 
cities shall not return—Thy cities shall not be re- 
stored to thee again. This was exactly fulfilled; for 
the Nabatheans having driven the Edomites out of 
their ancient habitations, in the time of the Babylon- 
ish captivity, they settled themselves in the south- 
ern part of Judea, where they were afterward con- 
quered by Hyrcanus, and obliged to embrace the 
Jewish religion, and so became at length incorpo- 
rated with that nation—Dr. Prideaux. Because 
thou hast said, These two nations, §c., shall be mine 
—The two nations and countries here spoken of 
mean the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The 
Edomites had settled themselves in part of Judea, 
and hoped to have got possession both of the land of 

703 


Final overthrow 


EZEKIEL. 


r ; of the Edomites. 


A. M. 3417. and thy cities shall not return: ™ and 
ain ye shall know that I am the Lorp. 

10 Because thou hast said, These two nations 
and these two countries shall be mine, and 
we will ® possess it; © whereas °the Lorp was 
there : 

11 Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
I will even do ? according to thine anger, and 
according to thine envy which thou hast used 
out of thy hatred against them; and I will 
make myself known among them, when I 
have judged thee. 

12 1 And thou shalt know that I am the 
Lorn, and that I have heard all thy blas- 
phemies which thou hast spoken against the 


m Chap. vi. 7; vil. 4, 9; xxxvi. 11. Psalm lIxxxiii. 4, 12; 
Chap. xxxvi.5; Obad. 13. 6 Or, though the LORD was there. 
o Psa. xlvi. 1, ’3; exxxii. 13, 14; Chap. xlviii. 35. 


mountains of Israel,. saying, They i. 
are laid desolate, they are given us ———— 


7to consume. 

13 Thus * with your mouth ye have ® boasted 
against me, and have multiplied your words 
against me: I have heard them. 

14 Thus saith the Lord Gop; * When the 
whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee deso- 
late. 

15 t As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance 
of the house of Israel, because it was deso- 
late, so will I do unto thee; "thou shalt be 
desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even 
all of it: and they shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 


Pp Matt. vii. 2; James ii. 13——4Chap. vi. 7; Psalm ix. 16. 
7 Heb. to devour. rT] Sam. ii.3; Rev. xiii. 6. ® Heb. mag- 
nified. § Isa. Ixv. 13, 14.——t Obad. 12, 15.——" Verses 3, 4. 


Judah and the land of Israel in time. The Ammon- 
ites had the same design, asappears from Jer. xlix. 1. 
Whereas, or although, the Lord was there-—Was 
still with his ancient people, and had not yet entirely 
abandoned them, or withdrawn his protection from 
their country, and given it up to be laid waste. These 
Edomites, it seems, did not believe that God had 
placed his name in Judea, had chosen it for the place 
of his peculiar residence, and would never quite re- 
linquish his property init. Therefore I will even 
do according to thine anger—As thou out of anger 
and envy didst hurt them, so will I hurt thee. J will 
make myself known among them—I will, make my 
people see that I have not quite cast them off, by the 
punishments I will bring upon thee on account of 
the evil thou hast done to them. And thou shalt 
know that I am the Lord—Thou shalt then be 
convinced that I am the sovereign Lord of all 
things. 


| 
| 


Verses 13-15. With your mouth ye have boasted 
against me—As if I were nét able to make good my 
promises toward my people, or to assert my right in 
Judea. When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make 
thee desolate—When I shall restore other countries, 
conquered by the king of Babylon, to their former 
prosperity, thou shalt still lie waste and desolate. 
The Edomites never recovered their country after 
the Nabatheans had expelled them out of it. T how 
shalt be desolate, all Idumea—The expression is like 
that of Isaiah, whole Palestina, Isa. xiv. 295 that is, 
all the several tribes and divisions of it. We learn 
from Psa. exxxvii. '7, that the Edomites exulted 
greatly at the fall of Jerusalem, and gave all the en- 
couragement they could to its destroyers. The 
punishments inflicted on them may teach us that 
God is displeased with and punishes those who have 
no pity on the miserable, and who take pleasure in 
doing evil to others. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


This and the following chapter contain a prediction of the general restoration both of Israel and Judah, a subject 
often spoken of by this prophet, of which the return of the two tribes from Babylon may be considered as an earnest. 
In this chapter we have two distinet prophecies, (1,) One that seems chiefly to relate to the temporal state of the 
Jews, wherein their present deplorable condition, and the triumphs of their enemies therein are described : but it is 
promised that their grievances should all be redressed, and that in due time they should be settled again in 


their own land, in the midst of peace and plenty, 1-15. 


(2,) Here is another promise that seems chiefly to concern 


their spiritual estate, wherein they are put in remembrance of their former sins, and God’s judgments upon them 
to humble them, 16-20 ; but it is promised that God would glorify himself in showing mercy to them, 21-24. That 
he would sanctify them by giving them his grace, and fitting them for his service, and this for his own name’s sake, 


and in answer to their prayers, 25-38, 


704 


Restoration of the 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


mountains of Israel. 


aa Lac AlS9°: thou son of man, prophesy 
atl unto the * mountains of Israel, 
and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word 
of the Lorn: 

2 ‘Thus saith the Lord Gon; Because ° the 
enemy hath said against you, Aha, ° even the 
ancient high places “ are ours in possession : 

3 Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the 
Lord Gon; ! Because they have made you 
desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, 
that ye might be a possession unto the residue 
of the heathen, ° and * ye are taken up in the 
lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the 
people : 

4 Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear 
the word of the Lord Gop; Thus saith the 
Lord Gop to the mountains, and to the hills, 
to the * rivers, and to the valleys, to the deso- 
late wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken, 
which fbecame a pigy and £ derision to the 
residue of the heathen that are round about; 


5 Therefore thus saith the Lord A. M. 3417. 
Gop; "Surely in the fire of my jea- Boxee 
lousy have I spoken against the residue of the 
heathen, and against all Idumea, ‘ which have 
appointed my land into their possession with 
the joy of all ¢heir heart, with despiteful minds, 
to cast it out for a prey. 

6 Prophesy therefore concerning the land of 
Israel, and say unto the mountains, and to the 
hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus saith 
the Lord Gop ; Behold, I have spoken in my 
jealousy and in my fury, because ye have 
X borne the shame of the heathen. 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; I 
have ! lifted up my hand: Surely the heathen 
that are about you, they shall bear their 
shame. 

8 But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall 
shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit 
to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to 
come. 


2 Chap. vi. 2, 3——» Chap. xxv. 3; xxvi. 2. © Deuteron. 
xxxii. 13. 4 Chap. xxxv. 10.—!Heb. Because for because. 
e Deut. xxviii. 37; 1 Kings ix. 7; Lam. ii. 15; Daniel ix. 16. 
2 Or, ye are made to come upon the lip of the tongue. 


3 Or, bottoms, or, dales. £ Chapter xxxiv. 28.—s Psalm 
Ixxix. 4. h Deut. iv. 24; Chap. xxxviii. 19.——i Chap. xxxv. 
10, 12.——* Psalm exxiii. 3,4; Chapter xxxiv. 29; Verse 15. 
' Chapter xx. 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Verse 1. Son of man, prophesy unto the mount-' 


ains of Israel—The prophet had been ordered, 
chap. vi. 2, to set his face toward the mountains of 
Israel, and to prophesy against them. Then God 
was coming forth to contend with his people; but 

“now he is returning in mercy to them, and his pro- 
phet must speak good and comfortable words to these 
mountains; and what he saith to them, he saith to 
the hills, to the valleys, to the desolate wastes in the 
country, and to the cities that were forsaken, verse 
4, and again, verse 6. The people were gone, some 
one way and some another; nothing remained there 
to be spoken to but the places, the mountains and 
valleys: these the Chaldeans could not carry away 
with them. Now to show the mercy God had in re- 
serve for the people, the prophet is to speak of him 
as having a regard for the country, which if the Lord 
had been pleased for ever to abandon, he would not 
have called upon it to hear his word, nor would he 
have showed it such things as these. 

Verses 2-7. Because the enemy hath said, &c.— 
This prophecy appears to be a continuation of the 
preceding. “The Idumeans have- made their 
boasts (see verse 5, and chap. xxxv. 10) that they 
should become masters of the mountainous parts of 


Judea, where the ancient fortresses were placed | 


which commanded all the rest of the country.”— 

Lowth. And ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, 

&c.—Your calamities have made you become a 

proverb, a by-word, and a reproach among the hea- 

then round about you, according to the threatenings 

of the prophets denounced against you: see the mar- 
Vou. TIL. ( 45 ) 


| 


| 


gin. Thus saith the Lord to the mountains, §c., 
which became a prey to the residue of the heathen— 
To those heathen that were left after the general 
desolations threatened to the neighbouring countries, 
Moab, Edom, Ammon, &c.. Surely in the fire of 
my jealousy—In that fervent zeal and concern that I 
have for my own honour, which is blasphemed among 
the heathen; have I spoken against the residue of 
the heathen—Against all the nations that are and 
have been enemies to Israel; against all Idumea, 
which have appointed my land into their possession 
—Who have fully expected to get the dominion of 
my land; and be the sole possessors of it. Because 
ye have borne the shame of the heathen—Because 
the heathen nations have made a scoff of you; there- 
fore I have lifted up my hand—I have sworn, or 
absolutely determined: see Gen. xiv. 22. Surely 
the heathen that are about you shall bear their shame 
—The heathen nations around, that have made a 
mock of you, shall be mocked themselves, and be as 
much held in contempt as they have held you. 
Verses 8-12. But ye, O mountains of Israel, shall 
yield your fruit, &c.—Here the land of Judea is or- 
dered to provide for the sustenance of the people of 
Israel, who were about to return out of captivity to 
dwell there again; for, says the prophet, they are at 
hand to come—That is, the deliverance of my peo- 
ple shall be effected in a short time. This prophecy 
seems to have an immediate reference to the return 
of the Jews from Babylon; but there can be no 
doubt, as Calmet justly observes, that it has also a 
further reference, even to the general return of the 
Israelites, and to the kingdom of the Moora ; the 
705 


T he sins of the people 


EZEKIEL. 


have caused their dispersion. 


 A.M.3417, 9 For behold, I am for you, and I 
BCS) vill turn unto you, and ye shall be 


tilled and sown: 

10 And { will multiply men upon you, all the 
house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities 
shall be inhabited, and ™the wastes shall be 
builded : 

11 And "I will multiply upon you man and 
beast ; and they shall increase and bring fruit : 
and I will settle you after your old estates, and 
will do better wnto you than at your begin- 
nings: °and ye shall know that I am the 
Lon. 


12 Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, 


even my people Israel ; ? and they shall possess 
thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and 
thou shalt no more henceforth % bereave them 
of men. 

13 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Because they 
say unto you, * Thou land devourest up men, 
and hast bereaved thy nations; 


14 Therefore, thou shalt devourmen A. M. = 
no more, neither + bereave thy nations an 
any more, saith the Lord Gop. 

15 * Ne:ther will I cause men to hear in thee 
the shame of the heathen any more, neither 
shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any 
more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to 
fall any more, saith the Lord Gop. 

16 J Moreover the word of the Lorp came 
unto me, saying, 

17 Son of man, when the house of Israel 
dwelt in their own land, ' they defiled it by 
their own way and by their doings: their way 
was before me as ° the uncleanness of a re- 
moved woman. 

18 Wherefore I poured my fury upon them 
«for the blood that they had shed upon the 
land, and for their idols wherewith ey had 
polluted it: 

19 And I ¥ scattered them among the heathen, 
and they were dispersed through the countries: 


m Verse 33; Isaiah lviii. 12; Ixi. 4; Amos ix. 14, n Jere- 
miah xxxi. 27; xxxili. 12. > Chapter xxxv. 9; xxxvil. 6, 13. 
P Obadiah 17, &c.——4 Jeremiah xv. 7. 


longest distance of time that the things of this world 
can extend to being but a moment in respect of eter- 
nity. For Iam for you, and will return unto you, 
&c.—I will send down again my blessing upon you, 
and favourable seasons; and cause you to be inha- 
bited, so that you shall again be cultivated and fruit- 
ful. This is also addressed, as it were, to the land 
of Judea. And the cities shall be inhabited—The 
cities and towns that lie in ruins shall be built again. 
And I will multiply upon you man and beast—As 
God, in his judgments, threatened to cut off man and 
beast from the land, (chap. xiv. 17,) so here he pro- 
mises to replenish it with both. And will do better 
unto you than at your beginning—In bestowing upon 
you the blessings of the gospel, the promises of 
which were first made to the Jews and to their chil- 
dren, Acts ii. 39. The words may likewise imply, 
that God would give them a more lasting and secure 
possession of their land than ever they had before: 
see the following verses. Yea, I will cause men to 
walk wpon you—O mountains, or land of Israel, verse 
8. And thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them 
of men—That is, thou shalt no more be remarkable 
for thy inhabitants dying in uncommon numbers, 
by pestilence, the sword, and famine. 

Verses 13-15. Because they say, Thou land de- 
vourest men—Or, thy people. The country of Judea 
(as appears from what is here said) was spoken of 
by the neighbouring nations with disgrace, as a 
country-particularly fatal to its inhabitants, where 
more died by famine, pestilence, and the sword, than 
in any other place: and therefore God here says, 
that there should be no more any occasion to give 

7" 


‘ages, consumed thy people. 


t Num. xiii. 32.——* Or, cause to fall——* Chap. xxxiv. 29, 
t Lev. xvili. 25, 27, 28; Jer. ii. 7. u Lev. xv. 19. x Chap. 
xvi. 36, 38; xxiii. aes | Chap. xxii. 15. 


this character of Judea, for that these judgments and 
frequent calamities should cease init. Therefore 


| thou shalt devour men no more—Thou shalt be free 


from such destructive judgments as haye, in past 
Neither will I cause 
men to hear in thee the shame of the heathen—Nei- 
ther shall thy inhabitants hear any more the scoffs 
of the heathen nations round, reproaching them on 


| account of their grievous calamities, as if they were 


an accursed people, forsaken by their God, and 
abandoned to destruction. Neither shalt thou cause 
thy nations to fall, &c.—Or, as the Chaldee and 
some other ancient versions translate the words, 
Neither shalt thou bereave thy people any more, an 
interpretation adopted by Bishop Newcome. The 
Vulgate renders the clause, Et gentem tuam non 
amittes amplius—And thou shalt not lose thy na- 
tion (or people) any more, that is, by these remark- 
able calamities. Those who think these promises 
were fulfilled in the restoration of the Jews from the 
captivity of Babylon, and their re-establishment in 
their own land, take the expressions no more, and 
not any more, in a limited sense, amd understand 
thereby only a long period of time: but it seems 
more reasonable to suppose that these and such like 
prophecies, of which there are many in the Scrip- 
tures, remain yet to be accomplished, and that they 
respect the future restoration of the Jews to their 
own land, after their conversion to Christianity. 

Verses 17-19. When the house of Israel dwelt in 
their own land—In fulness of bread, ease, and se- 
curity, as they did in days past; they defiled it 
Rendered it abominable before God, and 

( 45* ) a 


A promise of 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


deliverance. 


A. M. 3417. “according to their way and accord-| 


B.C. 587. . . é ; 
ing to their doings I judged them. 


20 And when they entered unto the heathen, 
whither they went, they *profaned my holy 


name, when they said to them, These are the} 


people of the Lorn, and are gone forth out of 
his land. 
21 But I had pity » for my holy name, which 


the house of Israel had profaned among the | 


heathen, whither they went. 

22 Therefore say unto the house of Israel, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 1 do not this for 
your sakes, O house of Israel, ° but for my holy 


name’s sake, which ye have profaned A. M. nt 
7. 


| among the heathen, whither ye went. 


23 And I will sanctify my great name, which 
was profaned among the heathen, which ye 
have profaned in the midst of them; and the 
heathen shall know that I am the Lorn, saith 
the Lord Gon, when I shall be ¢ Sanctified in 
you before * their eyes, to M4 

24 For *T will take you from among the hea- 
then, and gather you out of all countries, and 
will bring you into your own land. 


you, and ye shall be clean: * from all _your 


2 Chap. vii. 3; xviii.30; xxxix. 24—— Isa. lii.5; Rom. ii. 24. 
> Chap. xx. 9, 14..—< Psa. evi. 8. 


4 Chap. xx. 41; xxviii. 22, 5 Or, you > Chap. xxxiy. 13; 
XXXvii. 21, enet Isa. lii. 15; Heb. x. 22 Jen xxxili. 8. 


able to themselves ; by their own way and by their 
doings—By the way of their own choice, their 
wicked way, forsaking my law, despising my coun- 
sel, deserting my worship and temple ; and by their 


unholy conversation and unrighteous practices. | 
Their way was before me as the uncleanness of a | 


removed woman—As a woman under a legal pollu- 
tion was forbidden to come within the courts of the 
temple, or to attend upon God’s worship there; so 
the defilements which the Jews had contracted by 
their idolatries, adulteries, murders, and other hei- 
nous sins, rendered them unfit to be acknowledged 
as God’s people, or to offer up any religious service 
tohim. Wherefore I poured my fury upon them 
—These and their other sins were the true causes of 
the desolation of their country; and of all the mise- 
ries which they underwent, and not any thing in the 
land itself, as the heathen said, verse 18. According 
to their doings I judged them*-God frequently re- 
peats that his judgments upon the Jews were no 
more than what their own ways or doings obliged 
him to inflict. There was in his dealings with them 
no arbitrary exercise of sovereignty, but they were 
dealt with according to their own conduct. And 
thus God deals with mankind in general: his actions, 
in regard to them, are not founded in an arbitrary 
exercise of his absolute sovereignty over them, but 
in impartial justice, wisdom, and goodness, and he 
judges them according to their own ways, and not 
according to the dictates of an arbitrary will. 

Verse 20. When they entered unto the heathen, 
they profaned my holy name—lst, By their evil 
practices they brought a scandal on God’s name, and 
gave occasion to the heathen to say, See what pro- 
fligate wretchegithese are, who call themselves Jeho- 
vah’s peculiar people ; judge what sort of a God he 
is who has such worshippers. The Jews were no 
eredit to their profession wherever they went; but, 
on the contrary, a reproach to it, and the name of 
God and his holy religion was blasphemed through 
them, Rom. ii. 24, Observe, reader, when those that 
pretend to stand related to God, as his servants and 
children, and to bein covenant and communion with 
him, are nevertheless found corrupt in their morals, 
slaves to their appetites and passions, dishonest in 

3 


their dealings, and false to their words, and the trusts 
reposed in them, the enemies of the Lord have there- 
by great cause given them to blaspheme both him 
and his religion. 2d, God’s name was profaned by 
the sufferings of Israel; for from them the enemies 
of God took oceasion to reproach God, as unable to 
protect his own worshippers, and to make good his 
own grants. They said in scorn, These are the 
people of the Lord; these wicked people! you see 
he could not keep them in their obedience to his 
precepts; these miserable people! he could not keep 
them in the enjoyment of his favours. These are 
the people that came out of Jehovah’s land; they are 
the very scum of the nations! 

Verses 21-23. But Ihad pity for my holy name— 
That is, as it is expressed chap. xx. 9, J wrought for 
my names sake, that it should not be polluted, or 
brought into disgrace, among the heathen: I pre- 
served, reformed, brought back my people from cap- 
tivity, and re-established them in their own land, for 
the honour of my mercy, truth, and power. Say, I 
do not do this for your sakes, &c—The promises I 
make in your favour are not owing to any desert of 
yours, but purely to vindicate my own honour. And 
I will sanctify my great name, &c.—I will give il- 
lustrious proofs of my power and goodness, and vin- 
dicate my honour from the reproaches with which it 
hath been blasphemed among the heathen, upon the 
occasion of your evil doings and your sufferings, 
And the heathen shall know that I am the Lord— 
The return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivi- 
ty was taken notice of by the heathen as a signal 
instance of God’s providence toward them, as ap- 
pears from Psa. exxvi. 2. And their general con- 
version, and future restoration to their own land, will 
bea much more remarkable proof of God’s fulfilling 
the promises made to their fathers; so that the hea- 
then themselves will be compelled to observe and 
acknowledge it: see chap. xxxvii. 28. When J 
shall be sanctified in you before your eyes—When, 
by means of the wonderful power and goodness 
which I shall manifest in your restoration, they shall 
be convinced that I am indeed the living and true 
God. 

Verse 25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you=- 

707 


: 


BT Then. will I sprinkle clean "Wale up 


The great promise of a 


EZEKIEL. 


new heart and a new spirit. 


RE I ES 


A. M. m7 1. filthiness, and from all your idols, will 
ta + Icleanse you. 
“26 A} new heart also will I give you, and a 


“new spirit will I put within you: and I will 


take away the stony heart out of your flesh, 
and I will give you a heart of flesh. 

27 And I will put my ‘Spirit within you, 
and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye 
shall keep my judgments, and do them. 

28 * And. ye shall dwell in the land that I 


“* 
gave to your fathers ;*!and ye shall 4 eel 


be my people, and I will be your 
God. 

29 I will also ™save you from all your un- 
cleanness: and "I will call for the corn, and 
will increase it, and ° lay no famine upon you. 

30 And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, 
and the increase of the field, that ye shall re- 
ceive no more reproach of famine among the 
heathen. ° 


h Jer, xxxii. 39; Chap. xi. 19——i Chap. xi. 19; xxxvii. 14. 
k Chapter xxviii. 25 ; xxxvii. 25, Jer. xxx. 22; Chap. xi. 20; 


The expression here alludes to those Ideal purifica- 
tions which were made by sprinkling water upon 
the unclean persons: see Num. viil.7, and xix. 13. 
But the cleansing intended is plainly that of the soul, 
by the blood of Christ sprinkled upon men’s con- 
sciences to take away their guilt, (see Heb. ix. 14, 
and xii. 24,) and by the grace of the Holy Spirit 
sprinkled on the whole soul, to purify it from all 


corrupt inclinations and dispositions; ~ both which | 


blessings are received by faith in Christ, and in the 
promises of God made through him: see Gal. ii. 16, 
and iii. 14; Acts xv.9. From all your filthiness— 
Filthiness, as the apostle expresses it, of flesh and 
spirit ; from all unhallowed appetites, passions, and 
dispositions; from all impurity of heart and life; 


from every thing contrary to the mind of Christ, the | 


image of God, or the divine nature; and from all 
your idols will I cleanse you—From all internal as 
well as external idolatry; from putting that trust in 
the work of your own hands, or in any creature, 
which you ought to put only in your Creator; or 
from setting your affections on any person or thing 
in preference to him, who is your Redeemer and 
Saviour, your Friend and Father, your portion and 
treasure, your God, and your all. Observe, reader, 
sin is of a defiling nature; idolatry particularly is so; 
it renders sinners odious to God, and unhappy in 
themselves; but when our guilt is pardoned, and our 
corrupt nature sanctified, then we are cleansed from 
this filthiness; and there is no other way of being 
sayed from it. This God promises to his people 
here, in order to his being sanctified in them, verse 
23. We cannot sanctify God’s name, unless he 
sanctify our hearts, nor live to his glory, but by his 
grace. 

Verses 26, 27. A new heart also will I give you— 


A new disposition of mind, excellent in itself, and 


vastly differént from what it was before; a frame of 
soul changed from sinful to holy, from carnal to 
spiritual ; a heart in which the law of God is writ- 
ten, Jer. xxxi. 33; a sanctified spirit, in which the 
almighty grace of Goa is victorious, and turns it from 
the world to God, and from all sin ‘to all holiness; a 
state of mind which i is the supernatural gift of God, 
and not wrought in any man by his own power. 
And I will take away the stony heart—The hard, 
senseless, unfeeling, inflexible heart; the heart un- 
apt and averse to. receive any divine impressions, 


a. 


Xxxvii. ‘27.——™ Matt. i. 21; Rom. xi. 26——"I ev. 16. 
© Chap. xxxiv. 29.—? Chap. xxxiv. 27. 
and to return any devout affections. Out of your 


flesh—That is, out of you. And TI will give you a 
heart of flesh—A soft and tender heart, that has 
spiritual senses exercised, and is conscious to itself 
of spiritual pains and pleasures; a heart of quite 
another temper, hearkening to God’s law, trembling 
at his threats, moulded into a compliance with his 
whole will; disposed to do, to be, or to suffer what 
God wills; receiving the divine impress as soft wax 
receives the impress of the seal. I willput my Spirit 
within you—My enlightening, regenerating, and 
sanctifying Spirit; that Holy Spirit which is given 
to and dwells in all true believers; and cause you— 
Sweetly and powerfully, yet without compulsion ; 
to walk in my statutes—In all my ordinances and 
commandments, and that from judgment, choice, and 
affection. For our spirits, when renewed by God’s 
Spirit to a disposition conformed to his holiness, 
readily comply with his will in all things, concur 
with his designs, and become workers together with 
him. And ye shall keep my judgments, and do 
them—Ye shall be willing and able to perform all 
acceptable obedience, and to live a life of universal 
holiness and righteousness. 

Verses 28-30. And ye shall dwell in the land— 
Spiritual blessings, promised in the last three verses, 
are now followed with temporal blessings. ‘Thus 
does earth often follow heaven, and godliness hath 
the promise of the life that now is, as well as of 
that which is to come. When the Israelites are thus 
prepared for mercy, then shall they return to their 
possessions, and be settled again in them. And 
there God will acknowledge them for his people, 
and will protect and bless them as such, bestowing 
liberally upon them all good things. J will also 
save you—Will continue to save you; from all your 
uncleannesses—I will take away the guilt of them, 
deliver you from the. power and pollution of them, 
and preserve you from the punishments due to them. 
Salvation from all uncleanness includes justification, 
entire sanctification, and meetness for glory. And I 
will call »for the eorn, &e.—All necessaries are here 
comprised in one. And lay no famine upon you— 
This was one of the judgments which they had Ja- 
boured under; and it had been as muchas any other 
a reproach to them, that they should be starved in a 
land so famed for fruitfulness. But it is here pro- 
mised, that now this calamity should = 


ee 


Gracious promises to 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


the house of Israel. 


FF 


A. M. 3417. 


31 Then ‘shall ye remember your 
B. C. 587 


own evil ways, and your doings that 
were not good, and ‘shall loathe yourselves in 
your own sight for your iniquities, and for your 
- abominations. 

32 *Not for your sakes doI ¢his, saith the 
Lord Gop, be it known unto you; be ashamed 
and confounded for your own ways, O house 
of Israel. ns 

33 Thus saith the Lord Gop; In the day 
that I shall have cleansed you from all your 
iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the 
cities, ‘and the wastes shall be builded. 

34 And the desolate land shall be tilled, 
‘whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that 


‘ passed by. 
35 And they shall say, This land that was 


desolate is become like the garden & ut = 
of "Eden; and the waste, and deso- ———_— 
late, and ruined cities are become fenced, and 
are inhabited. f 

36 Then the heathen that are left round 
about you shall know that I the Lorp build 
the ruined places, and plant that that was 
desolate: *I the Lorp have spoken i¢, and I 
will do it. 

37 Thus saith the Lord Gon; YI will yet 
for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, 
to do z¢ for them; I will increase them with 
men like a flock. 

38 As the ®holy flock, as the flock of Jerusa- 
lem in her solemn feasts, so shall the waste 
cities be filled with flocks of men; and they 
shall know that I am the Lorp. 


4 Chap. xvi. 61, 63. 


* Lev. xxvi. 39; Chap. vi. 9; xx. 43. 
SDeut. ix. 5; Verse 22. 


' Verse 10, “Isa. li. 3; Chap. 


xxviii. 13; Joel ii. 3. x Chap. xvii. 24; xxii. 14; xxxvii. 14. 
y Ch. xiv. 3; xx. 3,31—— Ver. 10.——® Heb. flock of holy things. 


more, nor should they any more bear the reproach 
of it, but should have the credit of possessing abun- 
dance ; the fruit of the tree, and the increase of 
the field, being multiplied to them. 

Verses 31, 32. T'hen shall ye remember your own 
evil ways—Reflect seriously upon your former sins. 
And shall loathe yourselves in your own sight— 
With holy shame and confusion of face, seeing how 
loathsome you have made yourselves in the sight of 
God; for your iniquities and for your abomina- 
tions—Being convinced that they were without all 
excuse. Here wesee what is the most powerful in- 
ducement to an evangelical repentance, namely, a 
just sense of the mercy and grace of God toward 
us. The more we.see of his readiness to receive us 
mto favour upon our repentance, the more reason 
we shall see we have to be ashamed of ourselves that 
we should ever sin against so much love. That 
heart is hard indeed that will not be thus melted: 
see notes on chap. vi. 9, and xvi. 61. Not for your 
sakes do I this, be it known to you—Here is repeated 
what is said verse 22, on purpose to check all vain 
presumption in the Jews, and confidence of their 
own merit; a fault they have been wery prone to in 
every age. 

- Verses 37, 38. I will yet be inquired of by. the 
house of Israel--The house of Israel must, Ist, Pray 
for these blessings; for by prayer God is sought 
unto and inquiged after. What isthe matter of God’s 
promises, must be the matter of our prayers. By 
asking for the mercy promised, we give giory to the 
donor, express our value of the gift, our own de- 


pendance upon God, and put honour upon prayer, 
upon which he has put honour. Christ himself 
must ask, and then God will give him the heathen 
Sor his inheritance ; must pray the Father, and then 
he will send the Comforter ; much more must we 
ask that we may receive. 2d, They must consult 
the oracles of God, for thus also God is sought unto~ 
and inquired after: the mercy must not be an act of 
providence only, but a child of promise; and there- 
fore the promise must be looked at, and prayer made 
for it, with an eye of faith fixed upon it, which must 
be both the guide and the ground of our expectations. 
In both these ways we find Daniel inquiring of God, 
in the name of the house of Israel: then when God 


was about to do these great things for them, he con- 


sulted the oracles of God, for he understood by books 
namely, the book of the Prophet Jeremiah, both 
what was to be expected, and when; and then he set 
his face to seek God by prayer, Dan. ix. 2,3. As 
the holy flock, &c.—F locks designed for holy uses, as 
sacrifices, and therefore further described by the 
place where they were presented, namely, Jerusa- 
lem; in her solemn feasts—The three great annual 
feasts. These flocks were for quality the best of 
all, and for numbers very great on these solemn oc- 
casions: see 2 Chron. xxxv. 7; and 1 Kings viii. 63. 
Thus shall men multiply, and fill the cities of re- 
planted Judah. And the increase of the numbers of 
a people is then honourable, when they are all dedi- 
cated to God as a holy flock, to be presented to him 
as living sacrifices. Crowds are a lovely sight in 
God’s temple. 


: ) CHAPTER XXXVIL 


fn this chapter, (1,) By the vision of dry bones, quickened by prophecy, is represented that, however dispersed among 
enemies, destitute of human help, and dispirited in their own minds, the Jews were in their captivity, God would, by 


709 


The vision of 


EZEKIEL. 


Fs 


the dry bones. 


Cyrus’s proclamation, and his own influences, animate, help, and gather them to their own land, 1-14. 


(2,) By the 


uniting of two sticks in Ezekiel’s hand is represented, that notwithstanding the old enmity between them, the Jews 
and ten tribes would, after the captivity, and especially after the dispersion, happily unite, and renounce their 
idolatries, and under the Messiah enjoy the most comfortable relation to God, abundant peace and prosperity, and 
holy fellowship with him, 15-28. But this shall have its more excellent fulfilment in the quickening influences of 
the Holy Spirit, in the erection of the gospel church, and entrance into the millennial blessedness; in the making 
of Jews and Gentiles one mystical body of Christ, and in the glorious resurrection and heavenly blessedness. 


A. M. 3417: 


HE * hand of the Lorp was upon 
B. C. 587. 


ae me, and carried me out °in the 
Spirit of the Lorn, and set me down in the 
midst of the valley which was full of bones, 

2 And caused me to pass by them round 
about: and behold, there were very many in 
the open ‘valley; and lo, they were very dry. 


3 And he said unto me, Son of man, A. me . 
can these bones live? and I answer- - I: 
ed, O Lord Gon, °* thou knowest. 

4 Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon 
these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, 
hear the word of the Lorp. 

5 Thus saith the Lord Gop unto these bones ; 


a Chapter i. 3.—— Chapter iii. 14; vill. 3; xi. 24; Luke iv. 1. 
1 Or, champaign. 


¢ Deut. xxxii. 39; 1 Samuel ii. 6; John v. 21; Romans i iv. by 
2 Cor. i. 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER. XXXVII. 

Verse 1. The hand of the Lord was upon me—I 
was actuated by a divine power; and carried me 
out in the Spirit of the Lord—Or, by the Spirit of 
the Lord. It is highly probable that all this passed 
in vision. And set me down in the midst of the val- 
ley full of bones—The first and great object of this 
prophecy seems evidently to be the restoration of 
the Jews from the Babylonish captivity. A nation 
carried into captivity ceases to be a nation, and there- 


fore may be fitly compared to bones, or dead bodies; | 


so that by the valley of bones was first signified, the 
Babylonish dominions filled with captive Jews. 
Bishop Warburton observes, “that the messengers 
of God, prophesying for the people’s consolation in 
disastrous times, frequently promise a restoration 
to the-former days of felicity ; and, to obviate all dis- 
trust from unpromising appearances, they put the 
case even at the worst, and assure the people, in 
metaphorical expressions, that though the commu- 
nity were as entirely dissolved as a dead body re- 
duced to dust, yet God would raise that community 
again to life.’ But besides the deliverance of the 
Jews from Babylon, this vision is a lively representa- 
tion of a three-fold resurrection: 1st, Of the resur- 
rection of souls, from the death of sin to the life of 
righteousness, to a holy, heavenly, spiritual, and di- 
vine life, by the power of divine grace accompanying 
the word of Christ, John v. 24, 25. 2d, The resur- 
rection of the gospel church, or of any part of it, 
from an afilicted state to liberty and peace. 34, 
The resurrection of the body at the great day, espe- 
cially the bodies of believers, to life eternal. This 
last seems to be one thing particularly designed. 
“Though the generality of commentators,” says 
Mr. Peters, “ regard this vision and prophecy as no 
other than a figurative representation and prediction 
of a return of ‘the Jews from the captivity of Baby- 
lon, or some other of their captivities and dispersions, 
yet, perhaps, we shall find, upon a more attentive 
consideration, that whatever hopes it might give 
them of a temporal and national deliverance or 
prosperity, yet there was evidently something fur- 
ther designed; and that to comfort them in their 
distressed situation, with the prospect of a future re- 
710 


surrection in a proper sense, was as much intended 
by the Spirit of God, or rather more so, than the 
other. 

Verses 2, 3. He caused me to pass by them round 
about—To take an exact view of them ; and behold, 
there were very many in the open valley—As if it 
had been a place where a great battle had been fought, 
and a vast multitude slain, who had been left unbu- 
ried till the flesh was all "consumed, and the bones 
were divided and scattered about, And lo, they were 
very dry—Having been long exposed to the sun and 
wind in the open valley, and the marrow, within, as 
well as the flesh without, being utterly wasted. This 
circumstance was intended to show how unlikely it 
was, humanly speaking, that the Jews should ever 
be delivered from their dispersions and restored ; 
should ever be brought together again, and formed 
into a body politic, or even into the skeleton of one. 
Still more unlikely it is that the dead in sin should 
be quickened, and raised up into living Christians; 
and most unlikely of all, that the dead bodies of men, 
after they have been turned into dust, and scattered 
to the four winds of heaven, should live again, and 
become bodies of light and glory. And he said, Son 
of man, can these bones live?—Namely, immedi- 
ately, and in your sight? Or, as Houbigant renders 
it, Shall these bones live? The question, as he justly 
observes, is not concerning the possibility of the fact, 
for the prophet well knew that God could do all 
things. but the Lord, introductory to what follows, 
asks him whether these bones should now revive or 
not. And though this be the right interpretation of 
the place, yet a resurrection from the dead is very 
justly collected from it: for ‘a simile of the resur- 
rection,” says St. Jerome, “ would n@Wer have been 
used to signify the restoration of the people of Israel, 
unless such a future resurrection had been believed 
and known; because nobody ever confirms uncertain 
things by things which have no existence.” And J 
answered, O Lord, thou knowest—Raising the dead 
can only be an act of thy power and good pleasure. 
The prophet replies ina doubting manner, sgn 
he knew not the scope of the vision. _ 

Verses 4-6. Again he said, Prophesy upon thes: 
bones—Here sense and understanding re 


ae 


The vision of the 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


dry bones revived. 


A. a ay Behold, I will ¢ cause breath to enter 

_______ into you, and ye shall live: 

6 And I will lay sinews upon you, and will 
bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with 
skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live ; 
® and ye shall know that I am the Lorp. 

7 So I prophesied as I was commanded: and 
as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a 
shaking, and the bones came together, bone to 
his bone. 

8 And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the 
flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered 
them above: but there was no breath in 
them. 

9 Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the 
2 wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the 
wind, Thus saith the Lord Gop; ‘ Come from 
the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon 
these slain, that they may live. 


10 So I prophesied as he command- A. M. 3417 
ed me, £and the breath came into fe a 
them, and they lived, and stood up upon their 
feet, an exceeding great army. 

11 Then he said unto me, Son of man, these 
bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, 
they say, " Our bones are dried, and our hope is 
lost: we are cut off for our parts. 

12 Therefore prophesy and say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, ‘O my. 
people, I will open your graves, and cause you 
to come up out of your graves, and * bring you 
into the land of Israel. 

13 And ye shall know that I am the Lorp, 
when I have opened your graves, O my people, 
and brought you up out of your graves, 

14 And-'shall put my Spirit in you, and ye 
shall live, and I shall place you in your own 
land: then shall ye know that I the Lorp 


d Psa. civ. 30; Verse 9. © Chap. vi. 7; xxxv. 12; Joel ii. 27; 
iii. 17.——? Or, breath. f Psa. civ. 30; Verse 5. 


s Rev. xi. 11.—» Psa. exli. 7; Isa. xlix. 14. —i Isa. xxvi.19; 
Hos. xiii. 14.——* Ch. xxxvi. 24; Ver. 25,——! Chap. xxxvi. 27. 


to the dry bones; and as these bones signified the 
captive Jews, they are with strict propriety called 
upon to hear the word of the Lord. But this is also 
to be considered, as has been intimated on verse 1, a 
prophetical representation of that voice of the Son 
of God which quickens and raises to spiritual life 
such as are dead in sin; and which all that are in 
their graves shall hear at the last day, and shall 
come forth out of them. Thus saith the Lord, I will 
cause breath to enter into you, &c.—The breath of 
life, as it is expressed Gen. ii. 7 And I will lay 
sinews wpon you, &c.—All the expressions made use 
of here are such as describe the resurrection of a 
dead body. 

Verses 7-10. So I prophesied as I was commanded 
—i declared these promises or gracious purposes of 
God concerning these bones. And as I prophesied 
there was a noise, &e.—Such a noise as we may 
suppose would arise from the motion of the bones. 
And behold a shaking—A trembling, or commotion 
among the bones, enough to manifest a divine pre- 
sence working among them. And the bones came 
together, &c.—Glided nearer and nearer, till each 
bone met the bone to which it was to be joined. Of 
ali the bones of those numerous slain not one was 
wanting, not,one missed its way, not one missed its 
place, but ea@f knew and found its fellow. - Thus, in 
the resurrection of the dead, the scattered atoms shall 
be ranged in their proper place and order, and every 
bone come to ils bone—By the same wisdom and 
power by which they were first formed in the womb 
of her that was with child. And lo, the sinews and 
the flesh came up upon them—Gradually spreading 
themselves. And the skin covered them above—En- 
veloped the bones, sinews, and flesh of each body; 
but there was no breath in them—Or spirit, rather ; 
no svuls animated the bodies. T'hen said he, Pro- 

3 


phesy unto the wind--Or rather, unto the spirit, 
namely, the quickening spirit of God, or principle of 
life, issuing from him, and imparting life to every 
creature that possessesit. Come from the four winds, 
O breath, O spirit—This signified the gathering of 
the Jewish people from the different quarters of the 
world where they were scattered; and breathe on 
the slain—Animate these dead bodies; that they 
may live—May awake into living men. So J pro- 
plesied, and the breath—The spirit; came into 
them—<A soul animated each body ; and they lived, 
§c., an exceeding great army—Not only living men, 
but effective men, fit for service in war, and formi- 
dable to all that should give them any opposition. 
Applied to the Jews, released and returning from 
captivity, the words signify that they should amount 
to a great multitude, when they should be gathered 
from their several dispersions, and should be united 
in one body. Observe, reader, with God nothing is 
impossible: he can, out of stones, raise up children 
to Abraham, and out of dead and dry bones an ex- 
ceeding great army, to fight his battles and plead his 
cause. j 

Verses 11,12. These bones are the whole house 
of Israel—These bones represent the forlorn and 
desperate condition to which the whole nation of 
Israel is reduced; they say, Our bones are dried, 
&c.—Our affairs are in the most desperate condition ; 
there is not so much as any hope left of their being 
retrieved. We arecut off for our parts—We are sepa- 
rated and cut off from one another, like a limb that is 
cut off fromthe body. Therefore prophesy,&e.—In- 
form these poor, dejected, desponding Israclites of 
their mistake, and revive their hope by anew promise 
and declaration of my purposes of mercy toward 
them. O my people, I will open your graves— 
Though your captivity be as death; your prisons and 

711 


The vision of the 


EZEKIEL. 


two sticks united. 


eee 


ooh She have spoken it, and performed %t, 
B.C. 7 saith the Lorp. 

15 % The word of the Lorp came again unto 
me, saying, 

16 Moreover, thou son of man, ™ take thee 
one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and 
for ™the children of Israel his companions : 
then take another stick, and write upon it, For 
Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the 
house of Israel his companions: 

‘7 And °join them one to another into one 
stick ; and they shall become one in thy hand. 

18 And when the children of thy people shall 
speak unto thee, saying, ? Wilt thou not show 
us what thou meanest by these? 

19 4Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, I will take * the stick of Joseph, 
which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the 
tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them 
with him, even with the stick of Judah, and 


make them one stick, and they shall x M. 3417, 

. ©. 587. 

be one in my hand. en never gad 

20 And the sticks whereon thou writest shall 
be in thy hand * before their eyes. 

21 4 And say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop; Behold, tI will take the children 
of Israel from among the heathen, whither they 
be gone, and will gather them on every side, 
and bring them into their own land: — 

22 And “I will make them one nation in the 
land upon the mountains of Israel; and * one 
king shall be king to them all: and they 
shall be no more two nations, neither shall 
they be divided into two kingdoms any: more 
at all: 

23 ¥ Neither shall they defile themselves any — 
more with their idols, nor with their detestable 
things, nor with any of their transgressions : 
but 7 I will save them out of all their dwelling- 
places, wherein they have sinned, and will 


m Num. xvii. 2. 
18. 
x6, 


n 2 Chron, xi. 12, 13, 16; xv. 9; xxx. 11, 
© Verses 22, 24.——? Chap. xii. 9; xxiv. 19.——4 Zech, 
r Verses 16, 17.——* Chap. xii. 3. 


t Chap. xxxvi. 24.— Isa. xi. 13; Jer. iii. 18; 1. 4; Hos. i. 
11.—* Chap. xxxiv. 23, 24; John x. 16.—— Chap. xxxvi. 26, 
z Chap. xxxvi. 28, 29. 


places of confinement close as graves, yet will I 
open those graves. And cause you to come up out 
of your graves—I will bring you out of your state 
of captivity, in which you are little better than 
dead persons, having no power or privileges of your 
own, nor enjoying any thing which can properly be 
called life. The Jewish nation, in their state of dis- 
persion and captivity, are called the dead Israelites, 
by Baruch, chap. iii. 4: and their restoration is de- 
scribed as a resurrection by Isaiah, chap. xxvi. 19. 
In like manner St. Paul expresses their conversion, 
and the general restoration which shall accompany 
it, by life from the dead, Rom. xi. 15. And the 
foregoing similitude showed, in a strong and beauti- 
ful manner, that God, who could even raise the 
dead, had power to convert and restore them 
Verses 16,17. Take thee one stick—That is, one 
rod. The expression seems to allude to Num. xvii. 
2; where Moses was commanded to take twelve 
rods, one for each tribe, and to write the name of the 
tribe upon the rod; for Judah, and. the children of 
Israel his companions—That is, the tribe of Benja- 
min, and a part of that of Levi, who adhered to the 
tribe of Judah. Then take another stick—A second, 
such as the first was; and write wpon it, For Joseph, 
the stick of Ephraim—Upon Reuben’s for feiting his 
birthright, that privilege was conferred upon the 
sons of Joseph, of whom Ephraim had the prece- 
dence: see 1 Chron. v. 1; Gen. xlviii. 20; which 
made him to be reckoned the head of the ten tribes; 
Samaria, the seat of that kingdom, being likewise 
situate in the tribe of Ephraim. Upon these accounts 
the name of Ephraim, in the prophets, often signi- 
fies the whole kingdom of Israel, as distinct from 
that of Judah. All the rest of the tribes were the 
712 


companions of Ephraim, as the tribes of Benjamin . 
and Levi were the companions of Judah. And join” 
them into one stick—A rod was an emblem 0 
power, (see Psa. cx. 2,) so joining these two rods, 
or sticks, together, denoted uniting the two king- 
doms under one prince, or governor. 

Verses 18-20. Wilt thou not show us what thou 
meanest—Ezekiel foretold many things by signs; 
and the Jews were very inquisitive into the meaning 
of them: but sometimes their curiosity proceeded 
rather from a secret contempt of the prophet and 
his predictions, than a real desire of information. 
Say, I will take the stick of Joseph—On which 
Joseph’s name was written, and which represents 
Joseph, that is, the kingdom of the ten tribes; which 
is in the hand of Ephraim—Of which Ephraim is 
the head. They shall be one in my hand—I wilt 
make them one nation, and appoint one king to rule 
over them, namely, Christ the Messiah. And the 
sticks, §c., shall be before their eyes—Thou shalt 
place the sticks, or rods, thus joined together, before 
their eyes, as a visible token or pledge of the truth 
of what I enjoin thee to speak.to them in the follow- 
ing words. : 

Verses 21-25. Behold, I will take iM children of 
Israel from among the heathen—See the margin. I 
will make them one nation——They shall not be di- 
vided any more into separate kingdoms; the conse- 
quence of which was, their setting up separate ways 
of worship, and espousing separate interests: com- 
pare Isa. xi. 13. This promise was in a great degree 
fulfilled in the restoration of the Jews to their 
land from their captivity in Babylon ; for 
of the house of Israel returned with the 
Judah, and were united in one body with 


Blessedness of the people 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


under the gospel dispensation. 


Nleoeqlyeywqwq>*e—«$<=~=OS (0s aw>so<«_>@>a>a=_u0§010(0(d(dl(=<=5=6<==x. OO 


el cleanse them: so shall they be my 
———— people, and I will be their God. 

24 And *David my servant shall be king 
over them; and * they all shall have one shep- 
herd: © they shall also walk in my judgments, 
and observe my statutes, and do them. 

25 4 And they shall dwell in the land that I 
have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein 
your fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell 
therein, even they, and their children, and their 
children’s children ° for ever: and f my servant 
David shall be their prince for ever. 


26 Moreover I will make a ® cove- A. M. 3417. 
nant of peace with them; it shall be — se hia 
an everlasting covenant with them: and I will 
place them, and "multiply them, and will set 
my ‘sanctuary in the midst of them for ever- 
more. 

27 * My tabernacle also shall be with them: 
yea, I will be ! their God, and they shall be my 
people. 

28 ™ And the heathen shall know that I the 
Lorp do " sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary 
shall be in the midst of them for evermore. 


atsa. xl.11; Jer. xxiii. 5; xxx. 9; Chap. xxxiv. 23, 24; Hos. 
ut. 5; Luke i. 32.— Verse 22; John x 16. © Chapter 
xxxvi, 27.——4 Chap. xxxvi. 28. € Isa. Ix. 21; Joel iii. 20; 
Amos ix. 15.—S Verse 24; John xii. 34. 


& Psa. Ixxxiy. 3; Isa. lv. 3: Jer. xxxii. 40; Chap. xxxiv, 25. 
» Chap. xxxvi. 10,37. 12 Cor. vi. 16.——* Ley. xxvi. 11,12; 
Chap. xliii.7; John i. 14.——! Chap. xi. 20; xiv.11; xxxvi. 28. 
m Chap. xxxvi. 23.— Chap. xx. 12. 


were under one and the same governor, Zerubbabel; 
who, though he did not (lest it should give umbrage 
to the Persian kings) assume the title of king, yet 
executed the authority, and was looked upon as a 
king by the Jewish people: but the expressions here 
made use of seem to imply something further, and to 
refer, in their full sense, to the final restoration of 
the Jews, after their conversion to Christianity, when 
Christ, in a peculiar sense, shall be their king. The 
Messiah is described as King of the Jews in most of 
the prophecies in the Old Testament, beginning 
with that of Gen. xlix. 10, concerning Shiloh. From 
David’s time he is commonly spoken of as the per- 
son in whom the promises relating to the perpetuity 
of Dayid’s kingdom were to be accomplished. This 
was a truth unanimously owned by the Jews: see 
John i. 49, to which our Saviour bore testimony be- 
fore Pontius Pilate, when the question being put to 
him, Art thow a king? he made answer, T'hou say- 
est [the truth] for Tam a king: thus these words 
should be translated, for St. Paul, alluding to them, 
calls them a good confession, 1 Tim. vi. 13. The 
same truth Pontius Pilate himself asserted, in that 
inscription which he providentially ordered to be 
written upon the cross; (see John xix. 19-22 ;) so that 
the chief priests impiously renounced their own 
avowed principles, when they told Pilate that they 
had no king but Cesar, verse 15. Neither shall 
they defile themselves any more with their idols— 
Or, abominations, as the word (x \pw is elsewhere 
translated, and generally signifies idols: see the mar- 
gin. But I will save them out of all their dwelling- 
places—I will bring them safe out of them; and will 
cleanse them®Both justify and sanctify them. And 
David my servant—That is, the son of David, who 
was also David’s Lord; shall be king over them— 
Shall reign over their hearts and lives; and they 
shall all have one shepherd—This king shall be their 
one chief shepherd; others that shall feed and rule 
the flock shall be shepherds by commission from 
him. And they shall dwell in the land that I have 
given unto Jacob—A promise often repeated in this 
prophecy: see verses 12, 21, and the note on chap. 
xxviii. ” Eiven they and -their children for ever 


—The Jews, converted to Christ, shall inherit Ca- 
naan till Christ come to judgment at the end of the 
world. 

Verses 26-28. I will make a covenant of peace 
with them—I will grant them the blessing of peace 
and prosperity. Or rather, the words are to be un- 
derstood in a spiritual sense, that God will be recon- 


| ciled to them through Christ, and admit them into 


that covenant of peace of which Christ is the Media- 
tor, and therefore is called owr peace, Eph. ii. 14; 
and then the following words, It shall be an ever- 
lasting covenant with them, may fitly be ¢xplaized 
of the gospel, being such a covenant as shall never 
be abolished, or give way to any new dispensation. 
It is certain that the expression, a covenant of peace, 
could not at all agree with the ancient covenant, for 
when was there an age, half an age, twenty years 
peace in Israel? The whole history of the Jewish 
nation is nothing more than a recital of wars and 
continual divisions. And if we understand it or 
peace between God and his people, where shall we 
find this people faithfully attached to the Lord during, 
one century only? We have only to open the books. 
of the prophets, and the other sacred records, to re- 
mark their infidelities and perpetual rebellions 


/against God. This expression, therefore, can only 


respect the new covenant, whereof Jesus Christ, the 
Prince of peace, is the mediator, and who gives us 
that true peace which surpasses all conceptions: see 
Calmet. And I will set my sanctuary in the midst 
of them—I will set up a spiritual, glorious temple 
and worship among them; for evermore—Never to 
be altered or abolished on earth, but to be consum- 
mated in heaven. My tabernacle also shall be with 
them—The tabernacle wherein I will show my pre- 


| sence among them, and my protection over them. 


God’s placing first his tabernacle, and then his tem- 
ple among the Jews, was a pledge and token both 
of his presence and protection. And we may under- 
stand him as promising here new and more valuable 
tokens of his presence among them, by the graces of 
his Holy Spirit, and the efficacy of his word and or- 
dinances, if not also some extraordinary appearances 
of the divine majesty. J will be their God. and they 
713 


Attempt of Gog and Magog 


LZEKIEL. 


on the land of Israet. 


shall be my people—By my grace I will make them 
holy, as the people of a holy God; and I will make 
them happy, as the people of the ever-blessed God. 
And the heathen shall know that I do sanctify Israel 
—The conversion of the Jewish nation, and their 


Sl ———— 
being restored to a state of favour and acceptance 
with God, will be a work of providence, taken notice 
of by the heathen themselves, who shall join them- 
selves to the Jews, as the church of God and tem- 
ple of truth: see note on chap, xxxvi. 23. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


The prophecy contained in this and the following chapter 


, concerning Israel’s victory over Gog and Magog, without 


question, relates to the latter ages of the world, when the whole house of Israel shall return into their own land, 


chap. xxxix. 25-29. And the expressions we meet with 


in this chapter, verses 8 and 16, that this should come to pass 


in the latter days, and after many days, are a proof that the event was to happen a great while after the several pre- 


dictions of the prophets concerning it. 


So that this must be looked upon as one of those obscure prophecies of Scrip. 


ture, the fulfilling whereof will best explain the meaning. ‘In this chapter we have, (1,) The attempt of Gog and 
Magog on the land of Israel, 1-13. (2,) The terror occasioned thereby, 14-20. (3,) Their defeat by the immediate 


hand of God, 21-23. : 


A. M, 3417. ANP the word of the Lorp came 
B. C. 587. Pea 
“(SS eae unto me, saying, 

2 *Son of man, ? set thy face against ° Gog, 
the land of Magog, ' the chief prince of ¢ Me- 
shech and Tubal, and prophesy against him, 


3 And say, Thus saith the Lord AM. salt. 
Gop; Behold, I am against thee, O 3 
Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and 'Tubal : 

4 And ° I will turn thee back, and put hooks 
into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and 


® Chap. xxxix. 1—» Chap. xxxv. 2, 3. © Revelation xx. 8. 


1 Or, prince of the chief. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Verses 2, 3. Set thy face against Gog, the land 
of Magog—We find, Gen. x. 2, that the second son 
of Japhet was called Magog, but. Ezekiel uses the 
word here as the name of the country of which Gog 
was prince: and Michaelis thinks that it denotes 
those vast regions to the north of India and China, 
which the Greeks called Scythia, and which we term 
Tartary. Woubigant also thinks that the prophet 
here means the Scythians, who are the descendants 
of Magog, the son of Japhet, and whose neighbours 

_Were the people of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal; that 
_is, the Russians, Muscovites, and Tibareni, or Caup- 
padocians ; and thus Theodoret and Josephus un- 
derstand it. The Turks are generally allowed to be 
of Scythian origin. Secythopolis. and Hierapolis, 
which cities the Scythians took when they overcame 
Syria, were ever after by the Syrians called Magog: 
see Plin.,1. v.c. 23. The Arabs call the Chinese wall 
Sud Yagog et Magog, that is, the mud wall, or rampart 
of Gog and Magog. Gog and Magog are mentioned in 
Rey. xx.8; and these, says Bishop Newton, “seem to 
have been formerly the general name of the northern 
nations of Europe and Asia, as the Seythians have 
been since, and the Tartars are at present. The pro- 
phecy in the Revelation alludes to this of Ezekiel ir 
many particulars ; both the one and the other remain 
yet to be fulfilled, and therefore we cannot be abso- 
lutely certain that they may not both relate to the 
same event. But it seems more probable that they 
relate to different events: the one is expecied to take 
effect before, but the other will not take effect til] 
after the Millennium. Gog and Magog in Ezekiel 
are said expressly, verses 6, 15, and chap. xxxix. 2, 
714 


4 Chapter xxxii. 26. © 2 Kings xix. 28; Chapter xxix. 4; 


Xxx1x,. 2, 


to come from the north quarters, and the horth 
parts; but in St. John they come from the four 
quarters, or corners of the earth. Gog and Magog 
in Ezekiel bend their forces against the Jews re- 
settled in their ownland ; but in St. John they march 
up against the saints and church of God in general. 
Gog and Magog in Ezekiel are, with very good rea- 
son, supposed to be the Turks, but the Turks are the 
authors of the second wo; and the second wo, Rev. 
xi. 14, is past before the third wo; and the third 
wo long precedes the time here treated of. It may 
therefore be concluded that Gog and Magog, as Well 
as Sodom, and Egypt, and Babylon, are mystic names 
in the book of Revelation; and the last enemies of 
the Christian Church are so denominated, because 
Gog and Magog appear to be the last enemies of the 
Jewish nation. Who they shall be, we cannot pre- 
tend to say with the least degree of certainty.” The 
chief prince of Meshech and Tubal—The king or 
head of all those northern nations which lie upon 
the Euxine sea: see note on chap. xxvii. 138. The 
LXX. take the word Rosh, here translated chief, for 
a proper name, and render the clause, The prince 
of Rosh, Meshech, &c. So. takew it} may signify 
those inhabitants of Scythia from whom the Rus- 
\| sians derive their name and original. ’ 

| Verses 4-6. I will turn thee back, and put hooks 
into thy jaws—I will disappoint all thy designs, and 
turn thee about as easily as a fisherman masters a 
great fish, when he hath once fastened the hook into 
its jaws: see chap. xxix. 4. And J will bring thee 
forth—Or, after Ihave brought thee forth; that is, 
after I have so disposed matters that thou hast been - 
induced to come forth out of thine own try, to 


t 


- oo 


» 


. 


Attempt of Gog and Magog 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


on the land of Israel. 


cet all thine army, horses and horsemen, 
———— fall of them clothed with all sorts of 
armour, even a great company with bucklers 
and shields, all of them handling swords: 

5 Persia, Ethiopia, and ? Libya with them ; 
all of them with shields and helmet: 

6 ® Gomer, and all his bands; the house of 
» Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his 
bands: and many people with thee. 

7 ' Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, 
thou, and all thy company that are assembled 
unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them. 

8 4 * After many days, ! thou shalt be visited : 


in the latter years thou shalt come A, M. 3417. 
into the land that is brought back ie Mic 
from the sword, ™ and is gathered out of many 
people, against "the mountains of Israel, which 
have been always waste: but it is brought forth 
out of the nations, and they shall ° dwell safely 
all of them. 

9 Thou shalt ascend and come ? like a storm, 
thou shalt be ‘like a cloud to cover the land, 
thou and all thy bands, and many people with 
thee. 

10 Thus saith the Lord Gop; It shall also 
come to pass, that at the same time shall things 


£ Chapter xxiii. 12——? Or, Phut, Chapter xxvii. 10; xxx. 5. 
© Gen. x. 2.—— Chap. xxvii. 14. —— Isa. viii. 9, 10; Jer. xlvi. 
3, 4, 14; li. 12.——* Gen. xlix. 1; Deut. iv. 30; Verse 16. 


1 Jsaiah xxix. 6. 
xxxvi. 1, 4, 8. 
28; Verse 1l. 


m Verse 12; Chap. xxxiv. 13. 1 Chap. 
° Jer. xxiii. 6; Chap. xxvili. 26; xxxiv. 25, 
P Isa, xxvili. 2.——4 Jer. iv. 13 ; Verse 16. 


invade, spoil, and destroy other countries. Persia, 
Ethiopia, and Libya with them—As their allies. 
Ethiopia and Libya are called Cush and Phut in 
the Hebrew, and are joined together as allies, chap. 
xxx. 5, where see the note. The Persians are in 
like manner joined with Africans, chap. xxvii. 10. 
All of them with shield and helmet—So the Libyans, 
or people of Phut, are described, Jer. xlvi. 9, as 


handling the shield, that is, being remarkable for | 


their great and large shields, as Xenophon relates of 
them, Cyroped., lib. vi. Gomer and all his bands— 
Gomer is joined with Magog, Gen. x. 2, and proba- 
bly here signifies Galatia, Phrygia, and Bithynia, 
which, with Cappadocia, denoted by Togarmah, 
comprehend all the northern parts of Asia Minor, 
which border upon the Euxine sea. Concerning 
Togarmah, see note on chap. xxvii. 14. And-many 
people with thee—Those of Cilicia, Pamphylia, and 
Other nations inhabiting Asia Minor. 

Verse 7. Be thou prepared—The prophet, speak- 
ing ironically, encourages Gog and his allies to make 
all warlike preparations, and muster all their forces 
together, that God might gain the greater honour by 
their signal defeat: see verse 16. And be thou a 
guard unto them—Let them rely upon thy prowess 
and conduct as their leader. 

Verses 8,9. After many days thou shalt be visited 
—In the latter days of the Messiah’s kingdom among 
men, or after a succession of many generations, shall 
the judgment here mentioned be inflicted by God 
upon thee. Jn the latter years—Or days, as in the 
former clause, and verse 16; that is, toward the end 
of the worldg compare Dan. viii. 26. Thow—Gog, 
with all thy numbers; shalt come into the land that 
is brought back from the sword—The land of the 
Jews, a people recovered from the countries into 
which they had been dispersed by the sword of their 
enemies. The land, it must be observed, is here put 
for the people of the land, who are said to be brought 
back from the sword, in the same sense in which 
they are elsewhere styled a remnant ; those being 
intended that should remain after the various judg- 
ments that had fallen upon the nation, and the hard- 

3 


ships they had suffered in their several dispersions. 
And is gathered out of many people—Among whom 
they had been scattered: see note on chap. xxxiv. 13. 
Against the mountains of Israel, which have been 
always waste—It is already two thousand five hun- 
dred years since the ten tribes were carried away 
out of their own land by Shalmaneser. Certainly 
the expression, always, or perpetually waste, de- 
notes a much longer desolation of the country than 
that which it suffered during the Babylonish captivity. 
It seems, all the various desolations of Judea are 
here included, namely, those by the Assyrians, Ba- 
bylonians, Antiochus Epiphanes, the Romans, and 
lastly, as at this time, by the Turks. But iti—The 
land of Canaan, that is, the people of it, is brought 
forth out of the nations—This is a repetition of what 
was said just before, namely, that Israel had been 
wonderfully preserved, and restored to their own 
land, through the particular providence of God; to 
which is added, And they shall dwell safely all of 
them—That is, the same divine power that has de- 
livered and restored them will still continue to pro- 
tect them. how shalt ascend and come like a 
storm—Thou shalt come suddenly, and witha mighty 
and destructive force. Thou shalt be like a cloud 
to cover the land—Thy forces shall be so very nu- 
merous as to overspread the land like a dark cloud, 
which makes every thing look melancholy and dis- 
mal: see chap. xxx. 3. The sense of the passage is, 
that after the return of the Jews and Israelites into 
their own country, and their having lived there for 
some time in peace and safety, this enemy will think 
to take advantage of their security, and fall upon 
them unexpectedly. “It seems to me,” says Bishop 
Newcome, “that the prophecy remains to be fulfilled 
after the future re-establishment of the converted 
Jews in their own land, when the Mahommedans and 
pagans will invade them. On this supposition, the 
subject matter of this and the following chapter is 
well connected with the promises of distant blessings 
made toward. the close of chap. xxxvii.” 
Verses,10-13. Jt shall come to pass at the same 
time—The time when my people are gathered to- 
715 


The terror occasioned 


EZEKIEL. 


by Gog and Magog. 


A. M.3417. come into thy mind, and thou shalt 
BO 8? s think an evil thoughts 

11 And thou shalt say, I will go up to the 
land of unwalled villages; I will * go to them 
that are at rest, * that dwell safely, all of them 
dwelling without walls, and having neither 
bars nor gates, 

12 © To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to 
turn thy hand upon ‘ the desolate places that 
are now inhabited, "and upon the people ¢Kat 
are gathered out of the nations, which have 
gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the ° midst 
of the land. 

13 * Sheba, and ¥ Dedan, and the merchants 
“ of Tarshish, with all * the young lions thereof, 
shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a 
spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take 
a prey? to carry away silver and gold, to 


take away cattle and berm: to take A. ell 
a great spoil ? rk 

14 YJ Therefore, son of man, prophesy and 
say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord Gon; » In 
that day when my people of Israel * dwelleth 
safely, shalt thou not know it 2 

15 * And thou shalt come from thy place out of 
the north parts, thou, *and many people with 
thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great 
company, and a mighty army: 

16 f And thou shalt come up against my peo-— 
ple of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; ®it 
shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee 
against my land, " that the heathen may know 
me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, 
before their eyes. 

17 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Art thou he 
of whom I have spoken in oli time 7by my 


3 Or, conceive a mischievous purpose.—— Jeremiah xlix. 31. 
8 Verse 8.—+ Or, confidently. 5 Heb. to spoil the spoil, and 
to prey the prey, a xxix. 19. \ Chapter xxxvi. 34, 35. 
uVer. 8. shap. xxvii. 22, 23. 


¥ Chapter xxvii. 15, 20.——* Chapter xxvii. 12——* Chapter 
xix. 3, 5. —-» Isaiah iv. 1——* Verse 8.—4 Chap. xxxix. 2. 
e Verse 6.—! Verse 9.—=8 Verse 8.—h Exod. xiv.4; Chap. 
xXxxvi. 23; xxxix. 21——7 Heb, by the hands, 


gether, settled in peace in their own land, and think 
themselves secure ; shall things come into thy mind 
—Mischievous things; and thou shalt think an evil 
thought—Shalt entertain a malicious design for the 
destruction of my. people. And thou shalt say— 


Wilt resolve in thyself; Z will go up—I will invade | 


with all my forces; the land of unwalled villages— 
A people weak, and destitute of any considerable 
defences. 
willingly be quiet, and suspect as little evil from 
others as they intend against others, and who trust 


in the protection of their God, who hath promised | 
they shall dwell safely. Dwelling without walls, | 


&c.—That is, having no sufficient fortifications to de- 
fend them against the force of anenemy. T° take 
a spoil, &ec.— With the thoughts of taking a large 
spoil without any difficulty. 7'o turn thy hand upon 
the desolate places—To go against, or fall upon, a 
country which had Jain a long time desolate, but 


which has been peopled again, and come into a) 
Judea is very plainly marked | 


flourishing condition. 
out by this land, which Gog is here represented as de- 
signing to attack, because it lay open to be invaded. 
That dwell in the midst of the land—Hebrew, in 
the navel of the land, that is, in Jerusalem, which 
stood nearly in the middle of Judea, and was situate 
upon a rising ground, which the Hebrew metaphor- 
ically expresses by the navel. Sheba and Dedan, 
and the merchants of Tarshish—These were people 
that traded much, the two former dwelling in the 
east, and the merchants of Tarshish often sailing 
from the Spanish coasts into the eastern parts, as 
having commerce with Tyre, which bordered upon 
Judea. “These merchants, as soon as they heard 
of this intended invasion, came into Gog’s camp as 
to a market, to buy both persons and goods which 
~ should come into the conqueror’s power.” With all 
716 


the young lions thereof—Their kings and princes, 
as the Targum understands it; or their chief mer- 
chants, who are described as so many princes, (Isa. 
xxiii. 8,) and are called lions because of the injus- 
tice and oppression they too commonly practised in 
their commerce. 

Verses 14-16. In that day, &e.—At that remark- 


| able time, when I shall gather my people from their 
To them that are at rest—Who would || 


dispersions and bring them again to their own Jand, 
and they shall be established therein and dwell safe- 
ly, without apprehension of danger from any enemy, 
and without any defence to prevent their being at- 
tacked; shalt thou not know it?—Will they not be 
pointed out to thee as a people thou mayest easily 
conquer, and with whose spoils thou mayest without 
difficulty enrich thyself? And thow shalt come from 
thy place out of the north paris—See on verse 6; 
thou and many people with thee, all of them riding 
upon horses, &c.—The character here given of this 
people may properly be applied to the Turks or 
Tartars, the strength of whose armies consists prin- 
cipally in their cavalry. As a cloud to cover the land 
—Seeon verse9. It shallbe inthe latler days—This 
is repeated to prevent the application of the pro- 
phecy to any event that should take place before 
the days of the Messiah: see on verse 8. And I 
will bring thee against my land—I wilt permit thee 
to come; that the heathen may know me, when I 
shall be sanctified in thee—Shall be confessed to be 
a great God over all, a gracious and faithful God to 
my people, and a dreadful enemy and avenger 
against the wicked. Before their eyes—tIn the sight 
of all the heathen that are with Gog, and much more 
in the sight of God’s own people. This signal vic-| 
tory over Gog and his associates shall be a means 
of bringing infidels to give glory to God. 
Verse 17. Art thou he?—This would a 


- 


The defeat of 


prophets of Israel, which 
~ prophesied in those days many years, 
that I would bring thee against them? 

18 And it shall come to pass at the same 
time when Gog shall come against the land of 
Israel, saith the Lord Gop, that my fury shall 
come up in my face. 

19 For ‘in my jealousy ‘and in the fire of 
my wrath have I spoken, } Surely in that da 
there shall be a great shaking in the land of 
Israel ; 

20 So that ™the fishes of the sea, and the 
fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, 
and all creeping things that creep upon the 
earth, and all the men that are upon the face 
of the earth, shall shake at my presence, " and 


A. M. 3417. servants the 
B. C. 587 


i Chap. xxxvi. 5, 6 ; xxxix. 25.——* Psa. Ixxxix. 46.——! Hag. 
ii. 6,7; Rev. xvi. 18. m Hos. iv. 3. n Jer. iv. 24; Nah. 
i. 5, 6. ——* Or, towers, or, stairs. © Psa. ev. 16. p Chapter 


xiv. 17.—4 Judg. vii. 22; 1 Sam. xiv. 20; 2 Chron. xx. 23. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


Gog and Magog. 


the mountains shall be thrown down, A. M. 3417. 
and the ® steep places shall fall, and eee 
every wall shall fall to the ground. 

21 And I will ° call for ? a sword against him 
throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord 
Gop: * every man’s sword shall be against his 
brother. 

22 And I will * plead against him with § pes- 
tilence and with blood; and ‘I will rain upon 
him, and upon his bands, and upon the many 
people that are with him, an overflowing rain, 
and “ great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. 

23 'Thus will I magnify myself, and * sanc- 
tify myself; ¥ and I will be known in the eyes 
of many nations, and they shall know that I 
am the Lorp. 


r Tsaiah lxvi. 16; Jer. xxv. 31.—=s Chap. v. 17.—* Psalm 
xi. 6; Isa. xxix. 6; xxx. 30. “Chap. xiii. 11; Rey. xvi. 21. 
x Chap. xxxvi, 23,——yY Psa. ix. 16; Chap. xxxvii. 28; xxxix. 
7; Verse 16. 


translated, Art thow not he? a sense which the He- 
brew particle of interrogation often imports; of 
whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the 
prophets—“It, is doubtful by what prophets God 
foretold the irruption of Gog; but though nothing 
of this kind be found in the prophets that remain, it 
is enough that Ezekiel did not first foretel these 
things. Many of the sacred pages are lost, which 
might probably be extant when Ezekiel delivered 
this prophecy.”—Houbigant. The expressions here 
used, of old time, and which prophesied in those 
days, many years, plainly imply that there was to 
be asuccession of many ages between the publishing 
of these prophecies, and this event foretold by them. 

Verses 18-20. My fury shall come up in my face 
—An expression taken from human passions, which 
cause the blood to fly up into the face. So Isaiah 
describes Almighty God as burning with anger, his 
lips being full of indignation, and his tongue as a 
consuming fire, chap. xxx. 27, where see the note. 
For in my jealousy—My zeal for the salvation and 
happiness of my people, and for my own glory; 
have I spoken—Against my enemy Gog, and his 
herd. Surely in that day there shall be a great 
shaking—A great commotion, as Dr. Waterland 
renders the expression; or a great disturbance, tu- 
mult, and confusion. Great changes and alterations 
in kingdoms and governments are often expressed 
in Scripture by shaking of heaven and earth, the 
sea and dry land: see the margin. So that the 


_ fishes of the sea, §c., shall shake at my presence— 


Every part of the creation shall bear its share of 

this calamity, as if there were a convulsion of the 

whole frame of nature. The prophets often de- 

scribe God’s judgments upon particular countries or 

persons, as if a dissolution of the whole world took 
3 


\ 


| Gomorrah by fire and brimstone from heaven. 
_is plain that the extraordinary circumstances men- 


place, because his particular judgments are an 
earnest of the general judgment: see note on Isa. 
xiii. 10. And the mountains shall be thrown down 
—The strong holds situate on the mountains, and 
the walls, towers, and other fortifications, shall be 
beat down and demolished. 

Verses 21, 22. And I will call—Rather, But I wiil 
call, for a sword against him—That is, when he has 
carried all before him for some time, I will at length 
raise up those who shall withstand him. God’s do- 
ing a thing is often expressed in Scripture by his 
speaking the word, and giving out his command. 
Thus he is said Psa. (cv. 16) to call for a dearth 
upon the land of Canaan. Throughout ali my 
mountains—Throughout all the land of Judea; for, 
as has been observed before, Judea being very moun- 
tainous, it is often in Scripture denominated the 
mountains of Israel, or, the mountains of the Lord. 


| Every man’s sword shall be against his brother— 


God often destroys his enemies by intestine quarrels 
among themselves, and making them executioners 
of his judgments upon each other: see the margin. 
And I will plead against him with pestilence and 
with blood—Or, I will plead with him. God pleads 


/ with men by his judgments, which are a manifest 


token of the vengeance due to their sins. And I 
will rain upon him, §c., an overflowing rain, &c. 
—lI will as plainly show myself in the destruction 
of these my enemies, as when I discomfited the ar- 
mies of the Canaanites and Philistines by tempests 
of thunder and hail, or when I consumed Sodom and 
“ It 


tioned in these verses remain to be accomplished on 


| the future enemies of the Jews, when God’s people 
| are reinstated in his favour.”—Bishop Newcomnie. 


717 


Prophecy against 


EZEKIEL, 


Gog and Magog. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. , : 


In this chapter we have a continuation of the prophecy against Gog and Magog. This contains, (1,) An express and 
more large prediction of the utter destruction of Gog and Magog, 1-7. (2,) An illustration of the vastness of that 
destruction in three consequences of it: the burning of their weapons, 8-10; the burying of their slain, 11-16; and 
the feasting of the fowls and wild beasts on the carcasses unburied, 17-23. (3,) A declaration of God’s gracious 
purposes concerning Israel, in this and his other providences respecting them, and a promise of the further mercy 


he had in store for them, 23-29, 


A. M. 3417. TTHEREFORE, * thou son of man, 
B. C. 587. J 

aco elated prophesy against Gog, and say, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I am 
against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Me- 
shech and 'Tubal : 

2 And I will turn thee back, and ‘leave but 
the sixth part of thee, »and will cause thee to 
come up from ? the north parts, and will bring 
thee upon the mountains of Israel: 

3 And I will smite thy bow out of thy left 
hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of 
thy right hand. 

4 °'Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of 
Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people 
that is with thee: ‘I will give thee unto the 
ravenous birds of every ° sort, and ¢o the beasts 
of the field, + to be devoured. 


2 Chapter xxxviii. 2, 3. 1 Or, strike thee with six plagues, 
or, draw thee back with a hook of six teeth, .as.chapter xxxviii. 4. 
> Chap. xxxviii. 15. 2 Heb. the sides of the north. © Chap. 
xxxvili. 21; Verse 17. 4 Chap. xxxiii. 27. * Heb. wing. 


5 Thou shalt fall upon * the open A. M. 3417. 
field: for I have spoken i¢, saith the oe 
Lord Gop. 

6 © And I will send a fire on Magog, and 
among them that dwell ®carelessly in ‘ the 
isles: and. they shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 

7 So will I make my holy name known in 
the midst of my people Israel; and I will not 
let them pollute my holy name any more: 
‘and the heathen shall know that I am the 
Lorp, the Holy One in Israel. 

8 4 * Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith 
the Lord Gop; this is the day ! whereof I have 
spoken. . 

9 And they that dwell in the cities of Israel 
shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the 


* * Heb. to devour. 5 Heb, the face of the field-——e Chapter 
XXXxvili. 22; Amos i. 4. § Or, confidently. £ Psa. xxii. 10. 
& Ver. 22.—— Lev. xviii. 21; Chap. xx. 39.——i Chap. xxxviii. 
16, 23.—— Rev. xvi. 17; xxi. 6.——! Chap. xxxviii. 17. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XXXIX. 

Verses 1, 2. Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy 
—Continue to prophesy; against Gog—That all 
these things concerning him may be remembered. 
The chief prince of Meshech, &c.—See note on 
chap. xxxviii, 2. And I will turn thee back—See 
ibid. verse 4. I will lead thee and turn thee where- 
soever I please: thou shalt not proceed any further 
than I shall permit thee, but shalt be driven back. 
And leave but a sixth part of thee—Or, as others 
render it, J will strike thee with six plagues, those 
mentioned chap. xxxvili. 22. And I will cause thee 
to come up, &¢.—The words may be better rendered, 
After I have caused thee to come up from the north 
parts, and have brought thee upon the mountains of 
Israel—See a like construction chap. xxxviii. 4. 

Verses 3-7. I will smite thy bow out of thy left 
hand—There shall be no might in thy hand, as Mo- 
ses threatens the Israelites, Deut. xxviii. 32; thou 
shalt not be able to use thy weapons to any purpose. 
Iwill give thee unto the ravenous birds, &¢.—See 
verse 17, and chap. xxxiii. 27. And I will send a 
fire on Magog—That is, into the country of Gog. 
This fire seems to signify that the land, after the 
army of Gog had left it, should be laid waste by the 
neighbouring people. Fire frequently signifies God’s 
fierce judgments. And among them that dwell care- 


harm can come upon them. All countrieslying upon 
the sea-coast are called islands in the Hebew lan- 
guage. So will Imake my holy name known in the 
midst of my people—I will give evident displays of 
my power and goodness among them; and J will 
not let them pollute, &c.—In the Hebrew it is, I will 
not pollute my holy name any more; that is, I will 
not suffer it to be polluted: verbs active often signi 
fying only permission. The sense is, I will not sut- 
fer my name to be dishonoured any more, nor let it 
be said among the heathen that I was not able to 
rescue my people out of the hand of their enemies. 

Verses 8-10. Behold, it is come, it is done, saith 
the Lord—-The time appointed for this great destruc- 
tion is come, and it is the last and finishing stroke 
of God’s justice upon the enemies of his church and 
truth. The prophet here speaks in the rapture of 
prophecy of this event, determined and fixed in the 
counsels of God, as already completed: see the 
margin. They that dwell in the city shall set on 
fire and burn the weapons—In token of an entire 
conquest, and that such a lasting peace should ensue 
that there should be no more need of warlike pre- 
parations. Weapons here include all the instru- 
ments of war, engines, carriages, wagons, &c. 
Bishop Lowth observes, on Isa. ix. 4, that some hea- 
then nations burned heaps of arms to the 


lessly in the isles—That is, among the inhabifants || god of victory, and that among the Romans tliis act 


of the sea-coast, who dwell securely, and think no || was an emblem of peace. 


718 


Among God’s : ana 


. , 2 


The total defeat of 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


Gog and his army. 


4. M- 3417. weapons, both the shields and the 

: bucklers, the bows and the arrows, 
and the * hand-staves, and the spears, and they 
shall ® burn them with fire seven years: 

10 So that they shall take no wood out of the 
field, neither cut down any out of the forests ; 
for they shall burn the weapons with fire: ™ and 
they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob 
those that robbed them, saith the Lord Gop. 

11 % And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves 
in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the 
east of the sea: and it shall stop the ° noses of 
the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog 
and all his multitude: and they shall call i 
The valley of }° Hamon-gog. 

12 And seven months shall the house of Israel 


be burying of them, * that they may cleanse the 
land. 


7 Or, javelins. 5 Or, make a fire of them. m Jsaiah xiv. 2; 
Rev. xiii. 10.——® Or, mouths. That is, The multitude of 
Gog.—— Deut. xxi. 23; Verses 14, 16. © Chap. xxviii. 22. 


13 Yea, all the people of the land a. ™. "ae 
shall bury them: and it shall be to 
them a renown the day that °I shall be glori- 
fied, saith the Lord Gon. 

14 And they shall sever out 7! men of con- 
tinual employment, passing through the land 
to bury with the passengers those that remain 
upon the face of the earth, ?to cleanse it: 
after the end of seven months shall they 
search. 

15 And the passengers that pass through the 
land, when any seeth a man’s bone, then shall 
he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have 
buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog. 

16 And also the name of the city shall be 
13Hamonah. ‘Thus shall they 4 cleanse the 
land. 

17 % And, thou son of man, thus saith the 
Lord Gop; *Speak ‘unto. every feathered 


11 Heb. men of continuance. P Verse 12. 12 Heb. build. 
13-That is, The multitude. 4 Verse 12.— Rev. xix. 17. 
14 Heb. to the fowl of every wing. 


might show their trust in him as their defender. 
And they shall burn them with fire seven years—— 
The victory shall be so great, that, during this period 
of time, they shall suffice for fires on the moun- 
tains and in the open fields, where the slain shall 
fall, and whither the inhabitants of the adjoining 
cities shall occasionally go forth. Or by seven years 
Wwe may understand a long time, a certain number 
being put for an uncertain one. And the meaning 
may be, There shall be in the country so great a 
quantity of military weapons, that they shall serve 
the people a long time for fuel. We should remem- 
ber that they do not make very large fires in those 
hot countries. Mariana, in his Spanish History, b 
ii. c. 24, relates, that after the victory which the 
Spaniards gained over the Saracens in 1212, they 
found so many spears and other warlike weapons of 
wood, as served them four years for fuel: see Cal- 
met. Zhey shall spoil those that spoiled them-— 
See the margin. 

Ver. 11-16. I will give unto Gog a place there of 
graves—Houbigant translates this passage, An illus- 
trious place for sepulture, the valley of passengers 
opposite to the sea; through which the travellers 
shall pass, stopping their noses—According to the 
Chaldee, the scene here spoken of was the lake of 
Gennesareth. In the Hebrew language, all lakes 
are called by the name of seas. The same is called 
the eastern sea, (chap. xlvii. 18,) to distinguish it 
from the Mediterranean, called the great sea west- 
ward, Josh. xxiii. 4. The valley near this sea is 
called the valley of the passengers, because it was the 
great road by which the merchants and traders from 
Syria, and other eastern countries, went into Egypt: 
see Gen. xxxvii. 17,25. And seven months shall 
the rat of Israel be burying of them—-For a long 


time after the battle, the inhabitants shall be em. 
ployed in burying the bones of the slain, that the 
land might not be polluted by them. Yea, ail the 
people of the land shall bury them—See the note 
on the following verse. And it shall be to them a 
renown, &c.--Or, The day that I shall be glorified 
shall be to them a day of renown, or a remarkable . 
day of joy and gladness, And they shall sever out 
men, &¢—To cleanse the land thoroughly men 
shall be set apart, and be constantly employed in 
picking up the bones of the slain that are scattered 
about, and burying them with the dead bodies of 
travellers who had happened to die on the roads ; 
and they shall continue to do this, and be in daily 
search after the bones, for the space of seven months. 
The length of time assigned to this employment 
denotes the vast number of the slain, and the great 
care taken to cleanse the land from pollution. And 
when any seeth a man’s bone, then shall he set up 
a sign—A stone, or some other mark, that men 
may avoid passing over the bones, and that the per- 
sons appointed to bury them may take them from 
thence, and carry them to the proper burying-place. 
Also the name of the city shall be called Hamonah 
—Some render this verse, Also the name of the city, 
assigned to them who shall cleanse the land, shall 
be called Hamonah, that is, a multitude. 'The 
meaning seems to be, that the city where these ap- 
pointed buriers should reside during the time they 
were employed in this office, and near which they 
should bury the dead, should afterward, in memory 
thereof, be called Hamonah ; which, signifying a 
multitude, thereby denoted ‘the greatness of the 
victory. 

Verses 17-22, Thou son of man, speak unto 
every feathered fowl, &c.—It was the custom 0° 

719 


Gracious promises of 


EZEKIEL. 


restoration to the Jews. 


A.M. 3417. fowl, and to every beast of the field, 
B. © 587s Assemble yourselves, and come; 
gather yourselves on every side to my * sacri- 
fice that I do sacrifice for you, evém a great 
sacrifice ‘upon the mountains of Israel, that 
ye may eat flesh, and drink blood. 

18 " Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and 
drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of 
rams, of lambs, and of 1 goats, of bullocks, all 
of them * fatlings of Bashan. 

19 And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and 
drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice 
which I have sacrificed for you. 

20 ¥ Thus ye shall be filled at my table with 
horses and chariots, 7 with mighty men, and 
with all men of war, saith the Lord Gon. 

21 4 *And I will set my glory among the 
heathen, and all the heathen shall see my 
judgment that I have executed, and » my hand 
that I have laid upon them. 


s Isaiah xviii. 6; xxxiv.6; Jer. xii.9; Zeph. i. 7. POP, 
slaughter. t Ver. 4. a Rey. xix. 18. 16 Heb, great goats, 
x Deut. xxxil. 14; Psalm xxii. 12. y Psalm Ixxvi. 6; Chap. 
XXxVvili, 4. 2 Rev. xix. 18.——* Chap. xxxviii. 16, 23. 


22 °So the house of Israel shall A.M. 3417 
know that I am the Lorp their God si 
from that day and forward. 

23 an heathen shall know that the 
house of Israel went into captivity for their 
iniquity : because they trespassed against me, 
therefore * hid I my face from them, and ‘ gave 
them into the hand of their enemies: so fell 
they all by the sword. 

24 & According to their uncleanness nied ac- 
cording to their transgressions have I done unto 
them, and hid my face from them. — 

25 “ Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; 
Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, 
and have mercy upon the ‘whole house of 
Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name ; 

26 * After that they have borne their shame, 
and all their trespasses whereby they have 
trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely 
in their land, and none made them afraid. 


b Exod vii. 4. ¢ Verses 7, 28.——4 Chapter xxxvi. 18, 19, 
20, 23. € Deut. xxxi. 17; Isaiah lix. 2.— Levit. xxvi. 25. 
¢ Ch. xxxvi. 19.—— Jer, xxx. 3, 18; Ch. xxxiv. 135 xxxvi. 21. 
i Chap. xx. 40; Hos. i, 11.——* Dan. ix. 16——1 Lev. xxvi. 5, 6. 


persons that offered sacrifice, to invite their friends to 
the feast that was made of the remainder: see Gen. 
xxxiv. 54; 1 Sam. ix. 13. So here the prophet, by 
God’s command, invites the beasts and fowls to par- 
. take of the sacrifice of his enemies slain. The 
slaughter of God’s enemies is called a sacrifice, be- 
cause it is offered up as an atonement to the divine 
justice: see the margin. A great sacrifice upon the 
mountains of Israel—Where this great army was 
to bedestroyed. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, 
and drink the blood of the princes—Rather, of the 
chief ones, of the earth, of rams, &c—By the 
names of these several animals, all wont to be used 
in sacrifices, are here signified men of all orders and 
ranks, as princes, generals, captains, and common 
soldiers. All of them fatlings of Bashan—All of 
them in the prime of life and strength, like young 
fatted beasts. And drink blood till ye be drunken— 
Or, be satiated. Ye shall be filled at my table—At 
the table which is, as it were, spread by me. The 
allegory is continued. “ The table of God is the 
field covered with dead bodies, the place of the 
slaughter of Magog. It is impossible to conceive 
how unbelievers ‘could quote this verse to prove that 
the Jews of old times ate the flesh of horses, and 
even of men. Voltaire, though cautioned that not 
the Jews, nor men, but wild beasts and birds, were 
invited to this feast of slaughter, that is, to the con- 
sumption of the slain, yet insisted to the last on his 
strange accusation, »__Michaelis. And all the hea- 
then shall see my judgments—Shall see the punish- 
ments which I have executed on those who despise 
my name. So the house of Israel shall know that 
I am the Lord their God—Both by my acts of 
720 


mercy, in bringing them out of their captivity, and 
gathering them from their dispersions, and by my 
judgments executed upon their enemies. 

Verse 23. And the heathen shall know, &¢e.—The 
heathen nations shall be made sensible that my peo- 
ple were not carried away by their enemies because 
I wanted power to save them, but as a just punish- 
ment of their sins. Because they trespassed against 
me—Commnitted sin with a high hand. Therefore 
hid Imy face from them—Withdrew my favour and 
protection; and gave them into the hand of their 
enemies-—-Who could not have hurt them if they had 
not first forsaken me their God, and exposed them- 
selves to my displeasure. So fell they all by the 
sword—My defence being withdrawn, they fell 
under the sword of the enemy. 

Verses 25, 26. Therefore now will I bring again 
the captivity of Jacobh—See note on chap. xxxiv. 13, 
and xxxvi. 24, And have mercy upon the whole house ; 
of Israel—On the ten tribes with the two. This 
bringing back the captive Jews and Israelites, and 
gathering them from their dispersions, will be an act 
of mere mercy. By sin, indeed, they deserved to 
be made captives ; but no righteousness of theirs did 
or could deserve deliverance from captivity. It was 
not extremity of justice that so punished them, 
but it will be the riches of mercy that thus pardons 
and redeems them. After they have borne their 
shame—The shame and reproach due to their sins ; 
and all their trespasses—That is, the punishment 
of those trespasses, committed when they dwell safe- 
ly in their land, and none made them afraid— 
When they were in a state of peace, prosperity, 
and safety, which should have Se nc 


3 


Gracious promises of 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


restoration to the Jews. 


A.M, 3417. 27 ™ When I have brought them 

- again from the people, and gathered 

them out of their enemies’ lands, and ® am sanc- 
tified in them in the sight of many nations ; 

28 ° Then shall they know that I am the Lorp 

their God, ‘7 which caused them to be led into 


captivity among the heathen: but I 4. M. yc 
have gathered them unto their own : 
land, and have left none of them any more there. 
29 » Neither will I hide my face any more 
from them: for I have 4 poured out my Spirit 
upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord Gon. 


™ Chapter xxviii. 25, 26.——® Chap. xxxvi. ~ 245; xxxviii. 16. 
° Chap. xxxiv. 30; Verse 2' 


17 Heb. by my causing of them, &c.——? Isa. liv. 8 ——4 Joel ii. 
28; Zech. xii. 10; Acts ii. 17. 


and obedience; but even then they sinned, as if 
dangers and calamities would never overtake them. 
Strange ingratitude! to cast off the fear of God, and 
all regard to his law, when he had set them free 
from the fear of all enemies. 

Ver. 27, 28. When Ihave brought them again from 
the people—According to my promises ; and gather- 
ed them out of their enemies’ lands—Wherever 
they were scattered ; and am sancttfied in them— 
By their patiently accepting punishment, repenting 
of sin, loathing their former ways, and themselves 
on account of them, acknowledging me to be holy, 
just, and good, and dedicating themselves unre- 
servedly to my service ; when I am thus sanctified 
among them, and in the sight of the nations who 
shall see that the furnace has purified them; then 
shall they know—On the fullest experience and clear- 
est evidence; that J am the Lord their God—And 
that I have never ceased to exercise a paternal care 
over them; and in all my chastisements of them, as 
well as my benefits conferred on them, have had 
their good in view: see notes on verse 22, and chap. 
xxxiv. 30. Observe, reader, by the variety of events 
through which God brings us in the course of his 
providence, if we look up to him in them all, we 
shal] become better acquainted, both with his divine 


perfections, and his various designs in all his dispen- 
sations toward us. 

Verse 29. Neither will I hide my face any more 
from them—I will never again withdraw my favour 
or protection from them, or turn from them in dis- 
pleasure. For I have poured out—In abundant 
mercy ; my Spirit upon the house of Israel—Which, 
as a Spirit of truth, shall enlighten their minds, and 
make them wise unto salvation; as aSpirit of grace, 
shall regenerate and create them anew; as a Spirit 
of power, shall strengthen them for every duty, and 
enable them to withstand and conquer every tempta- 
tion; as a Spirit of holiness, shall cleanse them from 
sin, sanctify their souls, and stamp them with mine 
image ; and, as a Spirit of adoption and consolation, 
shall inspire them with confidence and hope, and 
render every branch of obedience, and every exer- 
cise of piety and virtue, sweet and delightful to 
them. It appears by this promise, that there will be 
a new and plentiful effusion of God’s Spirit on the 
Jews and Israelites in the latter days, in order to 
their conversion, their establishment in grace, and 
their restoration to their own land: see Isa. lix. 20, . 
21, a passage applied by St. Paul to this very pur- 
pose, Rom. xi. 26,27. Compare likewise Zech. xii. 
10, and chap. xi. 19, and xxxvi. 27, of this prophecy. 


PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTERS XL.-XLVIIL. 


We are now entering upon a portion of the Holy Scriptures which is justly looked upon to be one of the 
most difficult in all the book of God. The Jews will not allow any to read it till they are thirty years of 
age, and they tell those who do read it, that though they cannot understand every thing in it, yet when 
Elias comes he will explain it. Many commentators, both ancient and modern, have acknowledged 
themselves to be at a loss how to interpret it. But because it is hard to be understood, we must not 
therefore throw it aside as useless, but must humbly search into its meaning, and adyance as far as we 
can in the knowledge thereof; and when we despair of finding satisfaction in every difficulty we meet 
with, we must bless God that our salvation does not depend upon it, but that things necessary are suffi- 
ciently plain; and we must wait till God shall reveal even this unto us. These chapters are the more to 
be regarded because the two last chapters of the Revelation seem to have a plain allusion to them, as 
Rey. xx. has to the foregoing prophecy of Gog and Magog. 
The contents of this prophecy are as follows: In this and the two following chapters we have the vision 
of a glorious temple. In chap. xliii. God is represented as taking possession of it. In chap. xliv. orders 
are given concerning the priests that are to minister in this temple. Chap. xlv. directs concerning the 
division of the land, what portion should be allotted for the sanctuary, what for the city, and what for 
the prince, both with respect to his government of the people, and his worship of God. Chap. xlvi, 
contains further instructions for him and the people. And after the vision of the holy waters, we have 
the borders of the holy land, the portions assigned to the tribes, and the dimensions and gates of the 
holy city, in chap. xlvii. xlviii. 
Some suppose that the following description of the temple was intended to show how gloriots Solomon’s | 
temple had been, during the flourishing state of the Jewish Church, in order that the capitves might see 
Vou. III, ( 46 ) 721 3 


The vision of the EZEKIEL, temple and city. 


what they had lost by sin, and might be the more humbled. Others consider it as intended for a model 
according to which the new colonists were to erect a temple on their return to their own land; observing, 
at the same time, the customs and usages which Ezekiel here orders, and dividing the country as he 
directs. Perhaps the general scope of the vision might be two-fold: Ist,’To assure the captives that they 
should not only return to their own land and be settled there, which had been often promised in the 
foregoing chapters, but that they should have, and therefore ought to be encouraged to build another 
temple which God would own, and where he would meet and bless them: that the ordinances of their 
worship should be revived, and the sacred priesthood should there attend ; and, though they should not 
have a king to live in such splendour as formerly, yet they should have a prince, or ruler, (who is often 
spoken of in this vision,) that should countenance the worship of God among them, and should himself 
be an example of a diligent attendance upon it: and that prince, priests, and people should have a very 
comfortable settlement in theirown land. 2d, To direct.them to look further than all this, and to expect 
the coming of the Messiah, who had before been prophesied of, under the name David, (the man that 
projected the building of the first temple,) and who should set up a spiritual temple, even the gospel 
church, the glory of which should far exceed that of Solomon’s temple, and which should continue to 
the end of time. And the gospel temple, erected by Christ and his apostles, was so closely connected 
with the second material temple, and was erected so carefully just at the time when that temple fell into 
decay, being designed to receive its glories when it resigned them, that it was proper enough they 
should both be referred to in one and the same vision; which vision, under the type and figure of a 
temple and altar, priest and sacrifices, foreshowed the spiritual worship that should be performed in 
gospel times, as being more agreeable to the nature both of God and man, and that worship perfected 
at last in the kingdom of glory, in which, doubtless, these visions will have their full accomplishment 5 ; 
if not, as some think, in a glorious and happy state “of the gospel church, to take place on earth in the 
latter days. 

The grand outlines of the description here given, as Mr. Scott observes, might be taken from Solomon’s 
temple, with the additions made to its courts and out-buildings in after ages; and Zerubbabel, Joshua, 
and the other Jews, who returned from Babylon, might have respect to it in rebuilding the temple after 
the captivity ; but “there are several circumstances which evidently show that something vastly supe- 
rior to either the first or second temple was intended ; and that the external description must be consi- 
dered as a figure and emblem of spiritual blessings. 'This will appear, in many particulars, as we pro- 
ceed; but-especially the dimensions of the temple, city,and land; and the division of the land to the 
prince, priests, and tribes ; and the river of water springing from the threshold of the temple, enlarging 
till it reached the Dead sea, and sweetening its waters; with the trees growing on the banks of the river, 
bearing fruit every month, cannot be literally interpreted, or made to accord with any thing which has 
yet taken place.” 

A late writer gives the following character of this part of Ezekiel’s prophecy: “ From the fortieth chapter 
a new elevated scene commences, Before, there was nothing but oracles full of misfortunes, of punish- 
ments, of death and ruin;. visions concerning the destruction of the government, and concerning the 
flight and state of the last king; and pictures of the universal corruption, idolatry, and superstition of 
Israel. From the fortieth chapter a new temple rises before the eyes of the holy seer, he walks round 
about it in Palestine, he measures the city and country for their new inhabitants, he orders sacrifices, 
feasts, and customs. In short, a Magna Charta is planned for priests, kings, and people, in future ages 
and latter times. Lastly, from hence prosaic expression predominates: at least, the prophet elevates 
himself by poetical colouring much more rarely than before.” 


CHAPTER XL. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A general account of this vision of the temple and city, 1-4. (2,) A particular account 
of the east gate, north gate, and south gate, 5-31. (3,) Of the inner court, 32-38. (4,) Of the tables, 39-43. 
(5,) Of the lodgings for the singers and priests, 44-47. (6,) Of the porch of the house, 48, 49. 

A, M3430. IN the five and twentieth year of our ||in the self-same day >the hand of A. M. a 

asad captivity, in the beginning of the||the Lorp was upon me, and brought 

year, in the tenth day of the month, in the || me thither. Py © 

fourteenth year after that * the city wassmitten,!! 2 ° In the visions of God brought he me into 


Chap. xxxiii. 21—» Chap. i. 3. | © Chap. viii. 3, é Pace, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XL. . 

Verses 1, 2. In the five and twentieth year of our 

captivity—Of the captivity of those that were car- 
722 


ried away with Jehoiachin, eleven years before Je- 

rusalem was taken. In the beginning of the year— 

In the month Nisan ; in the pat day of th 
( 46* 


ats . 


The description of 


CHAPTER XL. 


the new tempte. 


A.M. 3430. the land of Israel, ¢and set me upon 
B, C. 574. : . ; 

a very high mountain, } by which was 
as the frame of a city on the south. 

3 And he brought me thither, and behold, 
there was a man, whose appearance was ° like 
the appearance of brass, ‘ with a line of flax in 
his hand, #and a measuring-reed; and he 
stood in the gate. 

4 And the man said unto me, "Son of man, 
behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine 
ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall 
show thee; for to the intent that I might show 
them unto thee art thou brought hither: 
‘declare all that thou seest to the house of 
Israel. 


5 And behold *a wall on the out- A.M. 3430 
side of the house round about, and evn aN 
in the man’s hand a measuring-reed of six 
cubits long, by the cubit and a hand-breadth: 
so he measured the breadth of the building, 
one reed: and the height, one reed. 

6 “4 Then came he unto the gate ? which 
looketh toward the east, and went up the stairs 
thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate, 
which was one reed broad; and the other 
threshold of the gate, which was one reed 
broad. 

7 And every little chamber was one reed long, 
and one reed broad; and. between the little 
chambers were five cubits: and the threshold 


@ Rey. xxi. 10.—+ Or, upon which Chap. i. 7; Dan. x. 6. 
£ Chap. xlv. 1; xlvii. 3—s Rev. xi.1; xxi. 15. 


h Chapter xliv. 5.—i Chapter xliii. 10——* Chapter xlii. 20. 
2 Heb. whose face was the way toward the east. 


—The day that the paschal lamb was to be taken up 
in order to the feast on the fourteenth day; in the 
fourteenth year after that the city was smitten— 
Zedekiah’s reign commenced from Jehoiachin’s cap- 
tivity, in the eleventh year of whose reign the city 
was destroyed, Jer. lii. 5,6.’ So the fourteenth year 
after its destruction must be coincident with the 
twenty-fifth of Jehoiachin’s captivity. In the self- 
same day the hand of the Lord was upon me, &c. 
—I was actuated by a divine power, which brought 
me, in vision, from the land of my captivity to the 
place where Jerusalem had stood. In the visions of 
God brought he me—This plainly declares that the 
prophet was not transported to the land of Israel in 
body, but only that it appeared to him, in his vision, 
as if he were transported thither, and things were 
represented to his mind just the same as if he had 
been actually there. And set me upon a very high 
mountain—This expression is thought to point out 
mount Moriah, on which the temple was built. Or, 
if that mountain could not properly be so character- 
ized, the prophet’s station may be considered as 
merely represented in vision, without a correspond- 
ing real one. Michaelis thinks nothing more is sig- 
nified by it “than that Jerusalem, and the true 
worship of God, should be very much exalted, and 
made known to all the world.” Or is it not rather 
so denominated, as representing the seat of the 
Christian Church, foretold by the prophets to be 
established on the top of the mountains, Isa. ii. 1; 
Mie. iv. 1: compare Rev. xxi. 10. By which was 
the frame of a city—The portrait of a city. By 
this was signified the temple, on the south of the 
mountain where the prophet was set, which, with 
all its courts, buildings, and walls encompassing the 
courts, and the whole area, or holy mountain, resem- 
bled a city for largeness. 

Verses 3-5. Behold, there was a man—The same 
no doubt that appeared to the prophet, chap. i. 20, 
(where see the note,) whose name is the Branch, 
and who builds the temple of the Lord, Zech. vi. 12, 
13; whose appearance was like the appearance of 

3 


brass—Bright and sparkling, Rev. i. 15. With a 
line of flaw in his hand—The use of the line was 
to measure the land of Israel, and of the reed to 
take the dimensions of the buildings in and about 
the temple; as also to set out several portions of 
land belonging to the sanctuary and city, to the 
prince and people: see the margin. And he stood 
in the gate—Probably the north gate, being the first 
entrance the prophet may be supposed to have ar- 
rived at, as he came from Chaldea, which lay north- 
ward of Judea. Son of man, behold, §&c., and hear 
—Take notice of what thou seest, so that thou may- 
est afterward tell it to thy people. And, behold, a 
wall on the outside—A wall went round the whole 
compass, or square, of the holy mountain, whereon 
the temple was situate, to separate the holy ground 
from that which was. common: see chap. xlii. 20. 
And in the man’s hand a measuring-reed of six 
cubits long, &c.—Here is explained what sort of a 
cubit is meant in the following delineation of the 
temple, namely, one that consisted of six hand- 
breadths, or one hand-breadth over the cubit used in 
Chaldea, where he now lived. This is the measure 
of a Scripture cubit, generally agreed to be equiva- 
lent to eighteen inches, or a foot anda half of our 
measure. See Bishop Cumberland, Of Scripture 
Weights and Measures, p. 36, &c. According to 
Michaelis, the Hebrew measures are, 1. The finger’s- 
breadth: 2. Four fingers, or a hand-breadth: 3. 
‘The ell; the smaljer of five hand-breadths, the 
larger of six: 4. The rod, of six ells. He also al- 
lows the rabbinical account, that a finger is equal to 
the length of six barley grains. So he measured 
the breadth of the building—That is, of the outwaré 
wall, which was three yards high, and three yards 
broad. This wall surrounded a part which corres: 
ponded to the court of the Gentiles, and served as a 
security against the precipices of the mount on 
which the temple stood. 

Verses 6-8. Then came he unto the gate, &c.— 
After having passed the court of the Gentiles, he 
came to the eastern gate, or the court of Israel. For 

723 


The description of 


EZEKIEL. 


the new temple. 


A. M. 3430. of the gate by the porch of the gate 

B.O. 5# vithin was one reed. 

8 He measured also the porch of the gate 
within, one reed. 

9 Then measured he the porch of the gate, 
eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits ; 
and the porch of the gate was inward. 

10 And the little chambers of the gate eastward 
were three on this side, and three on that side ; 
they three were of one measure: and the posts 
had one measure on this side and on that side. 

11 And he measured the breadth of the entry 
of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the 
gate, thirteen cubits. 

12 The *space also before the little cham- 
bers was one cubit on this side, and the space 
was one cubit on that side: and the little 


chambers were six cubits on this side, A. M. 3430. 
and six cubits on that side. 7 fe A Atal 

13 He measured then the gate from the roof 
of one little chamber to the roof of another; the 
breadth was five and twenty cubits, door against 
door. 

14 He made also posts of threescore cubits, 
even unto the post of the court round about the 
gate. 

15 And from the face of the gate of the en- 
trance unto the face of the porch of the inner 
gate were fifty cubits. ; 

16 And there were } narrow * windows to the 
little chambers, and to their posts within the 
gate round about, and likewise to the ®arches : 
and windows were round about ® inward: and 
upon each post were palm-trees 


3 Heb. limit, or, bound! 1 Kings vi. 4—* Heb. closed: 


the temple being placed toward the west part of the 
holy mountain, as the holy of holies was at the west 
end of the temple, this was the first gate that led to it, 
and it opened into the court of the people: see verse 
19. It is called the king’s gate, (1 Chron. ix. 18,) as 
being built by King Solomon. And went up the stairs 
thereof, &e.—He went up the stairs that he might 
more easily measure the upper lintel, as well as the 
lower threshold. ‘The word 4), translated threshold, 
signifies the lintel, or upper part of the door-case, as 
well as the threshold properly so called, or the lower 
part of it. Some understand the word here of the 
two side-posts, in which sense it is used Amos ix. 1. 
And every little chamber, &c.—Along the wall of 
the porch were chambers, three on each side,verse 10; 
these the angel measured, and they were of equal 
dimensions, each one reed square, with a passage of 
five cubits breadth between them. And the threshold 
of the gate, §c., was one reed—The inward threshold 
at the further end of the porch, looking into the first 
court, was.of the same size with the outward one, 
verse 6. He measured also—Or, he even measured ; 
the porch of the gate within—The words seem to 
be a repetition of what was said in the latter part of 
verse 7. 

Verses 9-12. Then measured he the porch of the 
gate, eight cubits, &e.—This was a portico beyond 
the little chambers which looked into the first court. 
It was eight cubits wide, and the two side-posts were 
two cubits thick, which made up the ten cubits men- 
tioned verse 11. And the little chambers of the gate 
eastward were three, &c.—Or the little chambers of 
the eastern gate, which he has hitherto been de- 
scribing, and the form of which is here repeated. 
These rooms were for the use of the porters that took 
care of the several gates that led to the temple. And 
the posts had one measure—The side-posts, or fronts 
of the doors, belonging to each row of chambers, 
were of the same size. And the length of the gate 


thirteen cubits—By the length of the gate, Villal-|| side-post, or front. 
724 


© Or, within. 


5Or, galleries, or, porches. 


pandus understands the height, which he supposes 
to have been two reeds, or twelve cubits and 
a half. The space also before the little cham- 
bers was one cubit, &c—There was a border, or 
a rail, which enclosed a cubit’s space before each 
chamber. 

Verses 13, 14. He measured then the gate from 
the roof of one little chamber, &c.—Measuring the 
arch of the gate from north to south, it was in breadth 
twenty-five cubits, which is thus computed: the 
breadth of the gate ten cubits, the breadth of both 
the side walls thirteen cubits, and two cubits for the 
space or border on each side of the chambers, verse 
12. Door against door—The door on each cham- 
ber exactly answered the door on the opposite side. 
He made also posts, &c.—He described, or made a 
delineation of the height of the columns or pillars 
which were to support the rooms or stories over the 
arch of the gate; and these were in height sixty 
cubits. Even unto the posts of the court round 
about the gate—It is supposed there is’ an ellipsis in 
these words, which may be thus supplied: And there 
was one measure to the pillars of the court, and of 
the gate round about; which makes the sense run 
plain and easy. y 

Verses 15, 16. And from the face of the gate, &c. 
—The whole length of the porch, from the outward 
front unto the inner side, which looked into the first 
court, was fifty cubits. There were narrow win- 
dows to the little chambers, &c.—Every one of these 
little chambers (verse 7) had a narrow window to it, 
toward the inside of the gate where the passage was; 
and so there was over the side-posts or fronts placed 
at the entrance of every chamber; and likewise to 
the arches—The word translated arches signifies 
also a porch, or entrance; and the word being so 
taken, the sense is, that there was a window over 
every door. And upon each post were palm-trees— 
A palm-tree was carved upon the chapiter of each 


+ a”* 


The description of 


CHAPTER XL. 


the new temple. 


A. M. 3430. 
B.C 


paseo 17 Then brought he me into ™ the 


outward court, and lo, there were 
“chambers, and a pavement made for the 
court round about: °thirty chambers were 
upon the pavement. 

18 And the pavement by the side of the gates 
over against the length of the gates was the 
lower pavement. 

19 Then he measured the breadth from the 
forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of 
the inner court 7 without, a hundred cubits east- 
ward and northward. 

20 9 And the gate of the outward court § that 
looked toward the north, he measured the 
length thereof, and the breadth thereof. 

21 And the little chambers thereof were three 
on this side and three on that side; and the 
posts thereof and the ° arches thereof were after 
the measure of the first gate: the length thereof 
was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty 
cubits. 

22 And their windows, and their arches, and 
their palm-trees, were after the measure of the 


m Rey. xi. 2——" 1 Kings vi. 5. 


© Chap. xlv. 5. 


7Or, from 


gate that looketh toward the east: A. M. 3430 
.C. 574. 
and they went up unto it by seven 

steps; and the arches thereof were before them. 

23 And the gate of the inner court was over 
against the gate toward the north, and toward 
the east: and he measured from gate to gate a 
hundred cubits. 

24 “| After that he brought me toward the 
south, and behold a gate toward the south: 
and he measured the posts thereof and the 
arches thereof according to these measures. 

25 And there were windows in it and in the 
arches thereof round about, like those windows: 
the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth 
five and twenty cubits. 

26 And there were seven steps to go up to it, 
and the arches thereof were before thea: and 
it had palm-trees, one on this side, and another 
on that side, upon the posts thereof. 

27 “| And there was a gate in the inner court 
toward the south: and he measured from 
gate to gate toward the south a hundred 
cubits. 


without. 


8 Heb. whose face was.—? Or, galleries, or, porches. 


Verse 17. Then brought he me into the outward 
court—There were two courts belonging to Solo- 
mon’s temple; the outward for the people, the in- 
ward for the priests. It is probable that Solomon 
built only the inner court: see 1 Kings vi. 36, com- 


pared with chap. viii. 64: and that the outer court | 


was built after his time, whereupon it is called the 
new court, (2 Chron, xx. 5,) after which time there 
is particular mention of the two courts of the house 
of the Lord, 2 Kings xxi.5. <A third court, called 
the court of the Gentiles, was afterward added by 
Herod, when he rebuilt the temple. And lo, there 
were chambers—These. chambers were over the 
cloister, and supported by it: see verse 14, and chap. 
xiii. 8. They might be for the use of the priests, 
and likewise store-houses for tithes and offerings: 
see 1 Chron. xxviii. 12. And a pavement made for the 
court round about—A beautiful floor made with 
checker-work. The whole floor of this court was 
thus paved. Thirty chambers were upon the pave- 
ment—That is, fifteen on the south side of the gate, 
and fifteen on the north side, built over the pave- 
ment, 

Verse 19. Then he measured the breadth, §c., 
a@ hundred cubits eastward and northward—He 
measured the whole space of ground between the 
west front of the lower gate, (namely, the gate at the 
east end of the outer court,) and the east front of 
the upper gate, which led into the inner court, and 
found it a hundred cubits; the same was the space 
between the south front and the north front: so the 
court " exactly square. The expression is ellipti- 


cal; as if he had said, There were a hundred cubits 
from west to east, and from north to south. It must 
be observed, the gate at the east end of the outer 
court is called the lower gate, for the same reason as 
the pavement is called the lower pavement, verse 18 ; 
because there was still an ascent, as a person went 
from one court to the other, 

Verse 23. The gate of the inner court was over 
against the gate toward the north, &c.—The words 
may be translated more intelligibly thus: And the 
gate of the inner court was proportionable, or an- 
swerable, to the gate that was toward the north and 
toward the east. The expression is elliptical, like 
that of verse 19, and the full import of it is, that the 
north gate of the inner court did exactly answer this 
north gate of the outer court, described verses 20, 
22. And in like manner the east gate of the inner 
court answered the east gate of the outward court. 

Verses 24-26. After that he brought metothe south, 
&c.—The prophet having shown, by way of paren- 
thesis, in the 23d verse, the exact correspondence 
between the gates of both courts, proceeds in these 
three verses to describe the south gate of the outer 
court, by the same dimensions he had before given 
of the east and north gate. 

Verses 27-31. And there was a gate in the inner 
court toward the south—The south gate in the inner 
court was exactly parallel to the south gate in the 
outer court: see verse 23. And he brought me to 
the inner court by the south gate—Those who main- 
tain that the outer eourt enclosed the inner on the 
east, north, and scvth sides, explain these words in 


The description of 


"A. M. 3430. 


28 And he brought me to the inner 
B. C. 874. 


court by the south gate: and he 
measured the south gate according to these 
measures ; 

29 And the little chambers thereof, and the 
posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according 
to these measures: and there were windows 
in it and in the arches thereof round about: i¢ 
was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits 
broad. 

30 And the arches round about were ? five 
and twenty cubits long, and five cubits ?° broad. 

31 And the arches thereof were toward the 
outer court; and palm-trees were upon the 
posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight 
stepse 

32 J And he brought me into the inner court 
toward the east: and he measured the gate ac- 
cording to these measures. 

33 And the little chambers thereof, and the 
posts thereof, and the arches thereof, were ac- 
cording to these measures: and there were 
windows therein and in the arches thereof 
round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five 
and twenty cubits broad. 

34 And the arches thereof were toward the 
outward court; and palm-trees were upon the 
posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and 
the going up to it had eight steps. 


EZEKIEL. 


the new tempte. 


| And he brought me to the A. M. acd 
‘ie gate, and measured it roves” sda al 
ing to these measures ; 

36 The little chambers thereof, the posts 
thereof, and the arches thereof, and the win- 
dows to it round about: the length was fifty 
cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 

37 And the ‘posts thereof were toward the 
outer court; and palm-trees were upon the 
posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and 
the going up to it had eight steps. 

38 And the chambers, and the entries thereof 
were by the posts of the gates, bigness they 
washed the burnt-offering. 

39 4 And in the porch of the cate were two 
tables on this side, and two tables on that side, 
to slay thereon the burnt-offering, and 4 the sin- 
offering, and * the trespass-offering. 

40 And at the side without, as one goeth 
up to the entry of the north gate, were two 
tables ; and on the other side, which was at the 
porch of the gate, were two tables. 

41 Four tables were on this side, and four 
tables on that side, by the side of the gate ; 
eight. tables, whereupon they slew their sacri- 
Sices. 

42 And the four tables were of hewn stone 
for the burnt-offering, of a cubit and a half long, 
and a_cubit and a half broad, and one cubit 


P Verse 21 3 xxv.3 xxxili.; xxxvi.——!? Heb. breadth.——4 Lev. 


iv. 2, 3. * Leviticus v. 6; vi. 6; vii. 1. Or, at the ak 


this sense, that the prophet was conducted from the 
south gate of the outer court, verse 24, to the south 
gate of the inner court, which was over against it, 
and so into the inner court itself. And he measured 
the south gate, &c—After he had measured the 
inner court, he took the dimensions of the south 
gate itself, and the chambers thereto belonging, and 
found them of the same dimensions with the former. 
The arches five and twenty cubits long, &¢e.— 
Length is here taken for height, as before, verse 11. 
The words express the dimensions of those arches 
which were between the several little chambers, be- 
tween each of which there was a space of five cubits, 
verse 7. The arches were toward the outer court— 
Or, were like [those of | the outer court. 

Verse 38. And the chambers were by the gates 
where they washed the burnt-offerings—The cham- 
bers, mentioned verse 36, were near the entrance of 
the north gate; where they washed the legs and 
entrails of the burnt-offerings; and marble tables 
were placed there for that purpose. According to 
this exposition, the word gates in the plural stands 
for gate in the singular. But Dr. Lightfoot says, 
they washed the sacrifices on the south | side, as well 
as on the north side of the court of the priests, when 

726 


the sacrifices were more numerous than the north 
side could well contain: he therefore understands 
the word. gates as comprehending here both the 
north and south gate, and confirms this interpreta- 
tion from the placing of the lavers which were de- 
signed for that use, and were set five on the right 
side of the house, and five on the left, 1 Kings 
vii. 39. 

Verses 39, 40. In the porch of the gate were two 
tables, &c.—Those expositors who, by the word 
gates, in verse 38, understand both the north and 
south gates, render the sense of these two verses 
perspicuously thus: Jn the porch of one gate 
(namely, that on the south) were two tables on this 
side, and two tables on that side, &e. And at the 
outer side of the step of the entry of the north gate 
were two tables ; which interpretation agrees very 
well with what follows, verse 41, Four tables were 
on this side, and four on that side. But they that 
understand these verses to be only a description of 
the north gate (on which side of the altar the sacri- 
fices were commonly killed) suppose that two tables 
were on each side, as a person came into the porch 
of the gate, and two on each side of the inner part 
of the gate that looked toward the altar, § ——- 

3 


a? 


The description of 


CHAPTER XLI. 


the new temple. 


A. M, 3430. high: whereupon also they laid the 
___- instruments wherewith they slew the 
burnt-offering and the sacrifice. 

43 And within were ” hooks, a hand broad, 
fastehed round about: and upon the tables was 
the flesh of the offering. 

44 * And without the inner gate were the 
chambers of *the singers in the inner court, 
which was at the side of the north gate; and 
their prospect was toward the south: one at the 
side of the east gate having the prospect to- 
ward the north. 

45 And he said unto me, This chamber, 
whose prospect is toward the south, zs for the 
priests, the keepers of the “charge of the 
house. 

46 And the chamber whose prospect 7s toward 

_the north, is for the priests, “the keepers of the 


12 Or, end irons, or, the two hearth-stones- 8 1] Chron. vi. 31. 
t Ley. viii. 35; Num. iii. 27, 28, 32,38; xviii. 5; 1 Chron. vi. 
49; ix. 23; 2Chron. xiii. 11; Psa. exxxiv. 1. 


Verse 43. Within were hooks, a hand broad, fas- 
tened round about—Within the gate, or entrance, on 
the north side of the inner court, were iron hooks, 
for the hanging up the beasts that were to be sacri- 
ficed, in order to the flaying off their skins. And 
upon the tables was the flesh, &c.—Or, they laid 
the flesh of the offering ; upon the marble tables the 
priests laid the flesh of the slain beasts, which they 
cut in pieces, and fitted for the altar: see Lev. i. 6. 

Verses 44-47. And without the inner gate, &e.— 
Houbigant, following the LXX., translates this verse 
thus: And he brought me to the inner gate, where 
there were two chambers in the inner court; one at 
the northern side of the gate which looked to the 
south; the other at the southern side of the gate 
which looked to the north. And he said, This cham- 
ber, whose prospect is toward the south, is for the 
priests—The word chamber may stand for chambers 
in the plural, (as side-chamber doth, chap. xli. 5-9,) 
and signify a row of buildings on the north side of 
the inner court, distinct from the chambers of the 
singers, verse 44, and designed for the use of the 
priests, who were in constant attendance, according 
to their courses, upon the service of the temple: see 
the margin. T'he keepers of the charge of the 
house—They took care of the holy vessels, and kept 
constant watch and ward about the temple. The 
word priesis may include Levites underit, as Levites 


cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; 


charge of the altar: these are the A. M. 3430. 
sons of * Zadok among the sons of mee 
Levi, which come near to the Lorn to minister 
unto him. 

47 So he measured the court, a hundred 
cubits long, and a hundred cubits broad, four- 


square ; and the altar that was before the house. 


48 S| And he brought me to the porch of the 


iT 


house, and measured each post of the porch, ihe” 


five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that _ 
side: and the brencith of the gate was three 
cubits on this sidé, and three cubits on that 
side. 

49 »The length of the porch was twenty 
and he 
brought me by the steps whereby they went 
up to it: and there were 7 pillars by the posts, 
one on this side, and another on that side. 

13 Or, ward, or, ordinance ; and so verse 46. 


5; Chap. xliv. 15. 
16. Y 1 Kings vi. 3. 


« Num. xviii 
*] Kings ii. 35 ; Chap. xlili. 19; xliv. 15, 
z | Kings vii. 21. 


elsewhere comprehends priests. And the chamber 
whose prospect is toward the north, &c.—Another 
row of chambers on the south side of the inner 
court, is for the descendants of Aaron, whose office 
it is to attend upon the service of the altar, and keep 
the fire burning thereon perpetually. These are the 
sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi—The family 
of Zadok is only taken notice of in this vision; it 
may be for this reason, because they kept close to 


the worship of God, when the priests of Ithamar’s _ 


line forsook it, and fell into idolatry. The altar 
that was before the house—Or rather, The altar 
was before the house; that is, stood in the inner 
court, just before the porch that opened into the 
temple. The altar was not now measured, the mea- 
sure of it being described afterward. 

Verses 48, 49. And measured each post of the 
porch—By the posts are meant the side-posts, or 
columns, on each side of the door of entrance: see 
verse 9; these were measured to be five cubits thick, 
both on the north and south sides. And the breadth 
of the gate was three cubits on this side, &e.—“ Two 
doors, of three cubits wide, opening each way, 
formed the entrance; these, with five on each side, 
called the posts of the porch, amount to sixteen 
cubits; and the other four may be supposed to have 
been the distance from these posts to the outside of 
the walls of the temple.”—Scott. 


CHAPTER XLI. 
In this chapter we have, (1,) The dimensions of the temple itself, 1-13. (2,) An account of another building, 14, 15, 


(3,) The manner of the buildiug of the house, 16, 17. 


(4,) The ornaments of the house, 18-20. 


(5,) The altar of 


incense and the table, 21, 22. (6,) The doors between the temple and the oracle, 23-26. 


727 


%, 


$ 
wo 


The description of 


EZEKIEL, 


the new temple. 


A. M. 3430. 
B. C. 574. 


APTERWARD he brought me to 
tlie temple, and measured the 

posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six 

cubits broad on the other side, which was the 

breadth of the tabernacle. 

2 And the breadth of the door was ten 


‘/ cubits; and the sides of the door were five 


cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the 


/ 8 hep other side: and he measured the length thereof, 


forty cubits: and the breadth twenty cubits. 
3 Then went he inward, and measured the 


| * posts of the door, two cubits; and the door, 
~ lA six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven 


cubits. 

4 So *he measured the length thereof, 
twenty cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, 
before the temple: and he said unto me, 'This 
as the most holy place. 


5 After, he measured the wall of the A. M. 3430. 
house, six cubits; and the breadth of 2 ©: 5" 
every side-chamber, four cubits, round about the 
house on every side. : 

6 > And the side-chambers were three, ? one 
over another, and * thirty in order; and they 
entered into the wall which was of the house 
for the side-chambers round about, that they 
might ¢ have hold, but they had not hold in the 
wall of the house. 

7 And > there ° was an enlarging, and a wind- 
ing about still upward to the side-chambers : 
for the winding about of the house went still 
upward round about the house ; therefore the 
breadth of the house was still wpward, and so 
increased from the lowest chamber to the high- 
est by the midst. 

8 I saw also the height of the house round 


a1 Kings vi. 20; 2 Chron. iii. 8 1 Kings 


1 Or, entrance. 
2 Heb. side-chamber over side-chamber, 


vi. 5, 6. 


3 Or, three and thirty times, or, foot. 4 Heb. be holden,——* Heb. 
it was made broader, and went round. ©] Kings vi. 8. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLI. 

’ Verses 1, 2. Afterward he brought me to the tem- 
ple—“ After having described the courts and the 
porch, the prophet enters into the temple, properly 
so called, whereof he gives the dimensions and de- 
scription.” And he measured the posts—By the 
posts are meant the door-cases on each side of the 
entrance, 
and south sides; which was the breadth of the taber- 
nacle—These walls, in their thickness, took up as 
much space as the whole breadth of Moses’s taber- 
nacle, as appears from Exod. xxvi. 16, 22, 23; where 
the west side of the tabernacle consists of eight 
boards, each a cubit and a half broad. The breadth 
of the door was ten cubits, &e.—The entrance itself 
being ten cubits broad, and the wall on each side five 
cubits, makes the breadth of the house to be just 
twenty cubits, as it is expressed in the latter part of 
the verse, which was the same in Solomon’s temple, 
1 Kings vi. 2. And thelength forty cubits—Namely, 
the length of the first sanctuary, or holy place, as 
distinct from the holy of holies, which was twenty 
cubits in length, verse 4, and made the whole struc- 
ture sixty cubits long; wherein it agreed with Solo- 
mon’s temple. 

Verses 3, 4. Then went he inward—From the 
outward sanctuary he went forward toward the holy 
of holies, and measured the thickness of the parti- 
tion wall to be two cubits, the entrance itself six 
cubits, and breadth of the wall, on each side of the 
door, seven cubits: see chap. xl. 48; where the 
breadth of the gate is taken in the same sense. The 
breadth of the wall, thus computed, making up four- 
teen cubits, and being added to the breadth of the 
entrance itself, makes up twenty cubits; the breadth 
of the inner sanctuary, as it is set down in the next 
verse. So he measured the length thereof—Of 
the holy of holies twenty cubits, and the breadth 

728 


These were six cubits thick on the north | 


twenty cubits—It was an exact cube, of the same 
dimensions in length, breadth, and height: see 
1 Kings vi. 20; ‘before the temple—Or rather, as the 
words should be rendered, according to the temple ; 
that is, the breadth of it. j 

Verses 5, 6. He measured the wall of the house 
six cubits—Three yards thick was this wall, from 
the ground to the first story of the side-chambers. 
And the breadth of every side-chamber four cubits 
—Of the lowest floor; for there were three stories 
of these, and they differed in their breadth, as the 
wall of the temple, on which they rested, abated of 
its thickness ; for the middle chambers were broader 
than the lowest by a cubit, and the highest as much 
broader than the middle. The side-chambers were 
three, one over another—They were three stories 
high; and thirty in order—As in Solomon’s temple, 
according to Josephus’s description, Anfiq., lib. viii. 
cap. 38, sec. 2, where it appears, that round Solomon’s 
temple were chambers three stories high, each story 
consisting of thirty chambers. It is supposed that 
twelve were placed to the north, twelve to the south, 
and six to the east. And they entered into the wall 
--At five cubits height from the ground, the wall 
which supported these outward chambers, abated of 
its thickness one cubit, in consequence of which 
there was a rest, or a ledge, of one cubit’s breadth, 
on which the ends of each story were fastened: see 
1 Kings vi. 10. But they had not hold in the wail 
of the house—They were not fastened into the main 
wallof the house, but rested on the outside of the 
wall where it became-more narrow. 

Verses 7, 8. And there was an enlarging—Name- 
ly, of the side-chambers; so much of breadth added 
to the chambers as was taken from the thickness of 
the wall: see the preceding note; and a winding 
about still upward—W inding stairs, which enlarged 
as the rooms did, went up between a cham- 

¢ 


» 


The description of CHAPTER XLI. the new temple. 
+ cr about: the foundations of the side-||ing was five cubits thick round about, A. Je. Se 
o74, 


~ chambers were “a full reed of six 
great cubits. 

-9 The thickness of the wall, which was for 
the side-chamber without, was five cubits: and 
that which was left was the place of the side- 
chambers that were within. 

10 And between the chambers was the wide- 
ness of twenty cubits round about the house on 
every side. 

11 And the doors of the side-chambers were 
toward the place that was left, one door toward 
the north, and another door toward the south: 
and the breadth of the place that was left was 
five cubits round about. 

12 Now the building that was before the 
separate place at the end toward the west was 
seventy cubits broad ; and the wall of the build- 


and the length thereof ninety cubits. 

13 So he measured the house, a hundred 
cubits long; and the separate place, and the 
building, with the walls thereof, a hundred 
cubits long ; 

14 Also the breadth of the face of the house, 
and of the separate place toward the east, a 
hundred cubits. 

15 And he measured the length of the build- 
ing over against the separate place which was 
behind it, and the ° galleries thereof on the one 
side and on the other side, a hundred cubits, 
with the inner temple, and the porches of the 
court 5 

16 The door-posts, and *the narrow win- 
dows, and the galleries round about on their 
three stories, over against the door, 7 ceiled 


4 Chap. xl. 5—— Or, several walks, or, walks with pillars. 


bers from the bottom to the top; and there were two 
doors at the top of each pair of stairs, one door 
opening into one chamber, and the other into the 
opposite one. For the winding about, &c.—The 
stairs, as they rose in height, enlarged themselves 
too; round about the house—On all sides of the 
house, where these chambers were. T'herefore the 
breadth was still upward—It became broader by 
one cubit in every upper chamber. J saw also the 
height of the house—Of the chambers which rose to 
three stories high. TJ'he foundations, §c., were a 


full reed of six great cubits—-The lowest chamber | 


had properly a foundation laid on the earth, but the 
floor of the middle and the highest story must be 
accounted here a foundation; so from the ground to 
the ceiling of the first room were six great cubits; 
from the first to the second, six great cubits; and 
from the third floor to the roof of the chamber, a 
like number ; to which if we add one cubit for the 
thickness of each of the three floors, you have 
twenty-one cubits, or ten yards and a half for height. 

Verses 9-11. T’he thickness of the wall, &c.— 
This is supposed to be meant of an outward wall 
enclosing the side-chambers. And that which was 
left—Or, the space which was left, as Bishop New- 
come translates it, judging it to be intended of a 
space allowed for a walk, or gallery of communica- 
tion, before the chambers, which space was five 
cubits broad, verse 11. And between the chambers 
was the wideness of twenty cubits—A word being 


here used for chambers different from that which | 


oceurs before, it is supposed that another row of | 
buildings, parallel with the side-chambers, but at 


twenty yards’ distance from them, is intended, and 


that there was a passage of twenty cubits between same dimensions. 
The description, however, is very | side-chambers, described verses 6, 7. 


these buildings. 
obseure, and the interpretations of commentators, 


| 


e Chap. xl. 16 ;. Verse 26.——’ Heb. ceiling of wood. 


bers were toward the place that was left—Or, toward 
the void space. The doors of the lower rooms 
opened into this void space before the chambers, 

Verses 12-14. Now the building, &c—-This seems 
to be another building not before mentioned, but now 
measured by itself. So he measured the house—The 
whole temple, oracle, sanctuary, and porch, with the 
walls, which were in length a hundred cubits from 
east to west, which may be thus computed: 


Cubits, 
The thickness of the wall of the east porch 5 
The passage through the porch . 11 
The wall between the porch and the temple 6 
The outward sanctuary ; 40 
The partition wall . i ‘ : 2 
The holy of holies. : Z “ 20 
The thickness of the west wall . 4 6 
The side-chambers at the west: end 5 
The outer wall of those chambers . : 5 


Also the breadth of the face of the house--The 
front of the temple eastward was a hundred cubits. 

Verses 15-17. And he measured the length, &e. 
—Noldius translates this sentence more clearly thus: 
And he measured the length of the building which 
was before the separate place, [and] that which was 
behind it, or opposite to it; by which he understands 
the north and south porch, the east and west sides 
having been measured before, verses 12,14. And 
the galleries thereof on one side, FC. a hundr ed cu- 
bits, with [or and] theinner temple, and the porches 
thereof—As the temple, and the area wherein it 
stood, made a square of a hundred cubits; so the 
courts and buildings thereto belonging were of the 
By the galleries are meant the 
Within the 
inner temple-—Called the inner house, verse 17, 


- of course, different. Z'he doors of the side-cham-_| chap. xlii. 15, to distinguish it from the courts and 
3 729 


The description of 


EZEKIEL. 


the new temple. 


A. M. 3130. with wood round about, and from 
a tld ground up to the windows, and 
the windows were covered ; 

17 To that above the door, even unto the 
inner house, and without, and by all the wall 
round about within and without by ° measure. 

18 And it was made ‘ with cherubims and 
palm-trees, so that a palm-tree was between a 
cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had 
two faces ; 

19 *So that the face of aman was toward 
the palm-tree on the one side, and the face of 
a young lion toward the palm-tree on the other 
side : i¢ was made through all the house round 
about. 

20 From the ground unto above the door were 


8 Or, and the ground unto the windows.——® Hebrew, measures. 
£] Kings vi. 29.——S Chap. i. 10.——"° Heb. post. 


buildings which were about it. The door-posts and 
the narrow windows, &c.—He measured also the 
thickness of the walls on each side of the porch, and 
the thickness of the door-cases at the entrance into 
the temple; as also the narrow windows belonging 
to the three stories of chambers, which were placed 
on the outside of the temple. From the ground up 
to the windows—-He measured from the ground up 
to the windows which were placed above the side- 
chambers. And the windows were covered—With 
lattices or curtains, or both. J'o that above the door 
—-It seems this verse is connected with the preced- 
ing, and signifies that the windows were made in 


| 
exact proportion, both over the porch, and through |) 


every part of the temple and the buildings adjoining 
to it. 

Verses 18-20. And it was made with cherubims 
and with palm-trees—On the inside of the house the 
walls were adorned with carved work of cherubim 
and palm-trees, as Solomon’s temple was, 1 Kings 
vi. 29. The cherubs and palm-trees were placed 
alternately; and according to the different ways of 
counting them, you might reckon a palm-tree placed 
between two cherubs, or a cherubim placed between 
two palm-trees. So the face of a man was toward 
a palm-tree, &e.—The cherubim had four faces, or 
appearances, but only two of these appeared plainly 
in this carved work; the two other faces, namely, 
that of an ox and an eagle, being supposed to be hid 
in the plain or surface of the wall. From the ground 
unto above the door—Uyp to the windows, as it is ex- 
pressed verse 16, or up to the ceiling, as the LXX. 
explain it. 

Verses 21, 22. The posts of the temple were 
squared, &¢c.—The lintels, or door-posts, both of the 
temple and inner sanctuary, were not arched, but 
square, with a flat beam, or upper lintel, laid upon 
the top of the side-posts: compare the margin of 
1 Kings vi. 33. The altar of wood was three cubits | 


high, and the length thereof two cubits--The LXX. || both of the outward and inward 


730 


- 


cherubims and palm-trees made, and A. M. 3430. 
on the wall of the temple. ty eden 

21 The ‘posts of the temple were squared, 
and the face of the sanctuary ; the appearance 
of the one as the appearance of the other. 

22 > The altar of wood was three cubits high, 
and the length thereof two cubits; and the 
corners thereof, and the length thereof, and 
the walls thereof, were of wood: and he said 
unto me, This és ‘ the table that is * before the 
Lorp. 

23 1 And the temple and the eines had 
two doors. 

24 And the doors had two leaves apiece, two 
turning leaves; two leaves for the one door, 
and two leaves for the other door. 


hb Exod. xxx. eas Oy aie xliv. 16; Mal. i. 7, 12—— Exod, 
—!1 Kings yi. 31-35. 


add, by way of explication, xa: ro evpo¢g rnxwv dvo, and 
the breadth thereof twocubits ; that it might be four- 
square, as Moses’s altar of incense was, Exod. xxx. 2, 
The altar here described is a cubit higher, and double 
the breadth to that of Moses, which is supposed to 
be agreeable to the dimensions of the altar made by 
Solomon, who did not exactly observe the propor- 
tions prescribed to Moses, in making the cherubim 
and the other furniture of the temple; God having 
given a new model to David of all the parts and or- 
naments of the temple, 1 Chron. xxviii. 12, 19. This 
‘altar was made of wood, but overlaid with gold, 
Exod. xxx. 3, and therefore is called the golden 
altar. And the corners thereof, §c., were of wood— 
| The corners are the same with the horns, mentioned 
Exod. xxx. 2;being made out of the four posts which 
_ supported each corner of the altar. The surface, or 
top of it, is called the length, and the sides the walls. 
This is the table that is before the Lord—The 
words altar and dable are used promiscuously ; and 
this table, or altar, is said to be before the Lord, as 
being in the place of his peculiar presence: compare 
Exod. xxx. 8. In the same sense the burnt-offering 
_is said to be made at the door of the tabernacle of the 
\congregation before the Lord, that is, in the place 
dedicated to his worship, Exod. xxix. 42; and the 
lamp is said to burn before the Lord, chap. xxvii. 21, 
though the candlestick stood in the outward sanc- 
tuary. 
Verses 23-25. And the temple and the sanctuary 
had two doors—Each of them had a double, or fold- 
ing-door. And the doors had two leaves aptece— 
The two doors being exceedingly large, that of the 
outward sanctuary ten cubits broad, and that of the 
inner six, (see verses 2, 3,) and of a height propor- 
tionable; each of them had two leaves, that they 
/ might be more easily opened, and each Tea haa: a 
| wicket in it. And there were made on the 
cherubims and palm-trees—Namely, on the 


‘The description of 


CHAPTER XLII. 


the new tempie. 


A. M. 3430. 25 And there were made on them, || 26 And there were ™ narrow win- A. M. 3430. 


on the doors of the temple, cherubims 
and palm-trees, like as were made upon the 
walls; and there were thick planks upon the 
face of the porch without. 


m Chap. xl. 16; 


there were thick planks upon the face of the porch 
without—There was a wainscot work of boards fas- 
‘ened to the end of the great beams, which came out 


; .C. 574. 
dows and palm-trees on the one side ———— 


and on the other side, on the sides of the porch, 
and wpon the side-chambers of the house, and 
thick planks. 


Verse 16. 


beyond the wall of the porch. These were laid so 
as to make a frieze-work over the entrance of the 
eastern porch. 


CHAPTER XLIL 


This chapter contains, (1,) A description of the chambers all around the inside of the wall of the courts, 1-12, 
(2,) The uses of them, 13,14. (3,) A survey of the whole ground on which the temple and its courts were built, 


15-20. 

A. M. 3430. TPHEN he brought me forth into 
B. C. 574. 

pecans the outer court, the way toward 
the north: and he brought me into * the cham- 
ber that was over against the separate place, 
and which zzas over before the building toward 
the north. 

2 Before the length of a hundred cubits was 
the north door, and the breadth was fifty 
cubits. . 

3 Over against the twenty cubits which were 
for the inner court, and over against the pave- 
ment which was for the outer court, was ° gal- 
lery against gallery in three stories. 

4 And before the chambers was a walk of ten 


cubits breadth inward, a way of one M. save 
cubit; and their doors toward the north, ——""~ 

5 Now the upper chambers were shorter: 
for the galleries }were higher than these, 
2than the lower, and than the middlemost of 
the building. 

6 For they were in three stories, but had not 
pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore the 
building was straitened more than the lowest 
and the middlemost from the ground. 

7 And the wall that was without over against 
the chambers, toward the outer court on the 
forepart of the chambers, the length thereof 


was fifty cubits. 
\ 


a Chap. xli, 12, 15.——» Chap. xli. 16——" Or, did eat of these. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLII. 

Verses 1-4. Then he brought me forth into the 
outer court— Outer with respect to the temple itself, 
or the outer part of the court, which court was that 
of the priests, as appears from what follows. Jnto 
the chamber that was over against the separate 
place—Chamber is put for chambers. Before the 
length, §c., was the north door—This north door 
faced one of the cloisters, the length of which was a 
hundred cubits, and its breadth fifty, which was the 
proportion of all the cloisters. Over against the 
twenty cubits which were for [or, which belonged to] 
the inner court, and over against the pavement 
which was for [or, belonged to] the outer court— 
One side of these buildings looked upon the void 
space about the temple, which contained twenty cu- 
bits, mentioned chap. xli. 10; and the other side was 
toward the pavement belonging to the outer court, 
described chap. xl. 17. And before the chamber was 
a maa ‘ten cubits—According to our reading of 


2 Or, and the building consisted of the lower and the middlemost. 


this verse, there seem to have been two rows of 
these chambers, and a walk between them of ten cu- 
bits’ breadth, with an entrance into it from the cham- 
bers of the breadth of one cubit. But the LXX., 
Syriac, Houbigant, and Bishop Newcome, after @ 
walk of ten cubits breadth, add, and of a hundred 
cubits long. 

Verses 5-7. Now the upper chambers were shorter, 
&c.--The two upper stories had balconies standing 
out of them, the breadth of which was taken out of 
the rooms themselves, and made them so much the 
narrower, because the weight of the balconies was 
not supported by pillars, as the rooms over the clois- 
ters were, but only by the wall. T'he wall that was 
without, §c., was fifty cubits—The wall that enclosed 
these buildings was commensurate with the breadth 
of one of the cloisters of the outer court, which were 
fifty cubits broad. These three verses are allowed 
by the Jewish Rabbis Solomon and Kimchi to be 
very difficult to be understood. 

; 731 


The description of 


EZEKIEL. 


the new temple. 


A. M. 3430. 


8 For the length of the chambers 
B. C. 574. 


that were in the outer court was fifty 
cubits; and lo, before the temple were a hun- 
dred cubits. 

9 And °from under these chambers was * the 
entry on the east side, 5as one goeth into them 
from the outer court. 

10 The chambers were in the thickness of 
the wall of the court toward the east, over 
against the separate place, and over against the 
building. 

11 And ° the way before them was like the 
appearance of the chambers which were to- 
ward the north, as long as they, and as broad 
as they: and all their goings out were both 
according to their fashions, and according to 
their doors, 

12 And according to the doors of the cham- 
bers that were toward the south was a door in 
the head of the way, even the way directly be- 


fore the wall toward the east, as one entereth 


into them. 


3 Or, from the place. 4 Or, he that brought me. 5 Or, as he 
came. © Verse 4.4 Lev. vi. 16, 26; xxiv. 9. 


13 4 Then said he*unto me, The A. M, 3430. 
north chambers and the south cham- as 
bers which are before the separate place, they 
be holy chambers, where the priests that ap- 
proach unto the Lorn ‘ shall eat the most holy 
things: there shall they lay the most holy 
things, and °* the meat-offering, and the sin- 
offering, and the trespass-offering ; for the place 
is holy. 

14 ‘When the priests enter theréin, then 
shall they not go out of the holy place into the 
outer court, but there they shall lay their gar- 
ments wherein they minister; for they are 
holy ; and shall put on other garments, and shall 
approach to those things which are forthe people. 

15 9 Now when he had made an end of mea- 
suring the inner house, he brought me forth to- 
ward the ‘gate whose prospect is. toward the 
east, and measured it round about. 

16 He measured the east ° side with the mea- 
suring reed, five hundred reeds, with the mea- 
suring reed round about. 


e Lev. ii. 3,10; vi: 14, 17,25, 29; vii.1; x. 13,14; Num, xviii, 
9, 10.—+* Chap. xliv. 19,—-* Heb. wind. _ 


Verses 8-12. For the length of the chambers, &c. 
—The chambers that were built over the cloisters 
were in length fifty cubits. And lo, before the tem- 
ple were a hundred cubits—In passing from the 
north to the south side of the temple, verses 11, 12, 
over the space of ground that frented the east: side 
of it, the prophet was shown that it measured a 
hundred cubits, chap. xli. 14. And from under these 
chambers was the entry, &e.—The entry into these 
south chambers was by a pair of stairs at the east 
corner of the outer court: see chap. xlvi. 19. The 
chambers were in the thickness—Or rather, in the 
breadth of the wall—That is, of the ground which 
that wall enclosed. Over against, or before, the se- 
parate place, and before the building—These ex- 
pressions denote that these south chambers had the 
same situation with respect to the temple, as the 
north chambers had, spoken of verse 1. And the 
way before them, &c.—Such a way led to these 
chambers, as did to the chambers on the north side. 
As long as they, and as broad as they—The propor- 
tions of both were the same; and the windows, 
doors, and passages belonging to these, were exactly 
uniform with those on the north side. The sense of 
the twelfth verse would be plainer, if the words were 
thus translated, And such were the doors of the 
chambers toward the south ; namely, as those to- 
ward the north. Z'here was @ door in the head of 
the way, &c.—Namely, like that described verse 9. 
Verses 13,14, T'he north chambers, and the south 
chambers—Namely, those described in the forego- 
ing part of the chapter; they be holy chambers, 


732 


The show-bread, the remainder of the meat-offering, 
sin-offering, and trespass-offering, are expressly call- 
ed the most holy things, Lev. vi. 14, 17, and xxiv. 9; 
and are distinguished from the holy things, such as 
the peace-offerings, first-fruits, and tithes, Lev, xxi. 
22. These were to be eaten within the precincts of 
the temple, by the direction of the Levitical law. 
There shall they lay the most holy things—These 
rooms were likewise set apart for laying up the re- 
mainder of the sacrifices, till they were eaten by the 
priests and their families, Ley. x. 13, and xxii. 13. 
When the priests enter therein—Within the inner 
court; then shall they not go out of the holy place, 
&c., but there they shall lay their garments, &c.— 
They shall not go into the court of the people, in 
their priestly vestments, but shall lay them up in 
some of these chambers. The priestly garments 
were only to be used in the time of their ministra- 
tion, as appears from Exod. xxviii, 48. And shall 
put on other garments, and shall approach, &e.— 
The words should rather be translated, and shall 
come into the court belonging to the people; the’ 
outer court, mentioned at the beginning of the verse. 

Verses 15, 16. When he had made an end of 
measuring the inner house—The inner house de- 
notes the temple, distinguished from the courts 
about it; he measured the east side, &e.—This and 
the following verses contain the measures of the holy 
mountain, or area, upon which the temple stood, and 
which is described to be an exact square, consisting 
of five hundred reeds.in measure on each side of it, 


that is, of very near an English mile. The 
where the priests shall eat the most holy things— | area, therefore, was near four miles in 


=. “ z 


The glory of the Lord 


CHAPTER XLII. 


returns to the temple. 


17 He measured the north side, five 
hundred reeds, with the measuring- 
reed round about. 

18 He measured the south side, five hundred 
reeds, with the measuring-reed. 

19 He turned about to the west side, and 


A. M.-3430. 
C. 574. 


& Chap. xl. 5. 


circuit as large as one-half of the whole city of Jeru- 
salem, in its most flourishing condition, and certainly 
far greater than that occupied either by Solomon’s 
temple, with all its out-buildings and courts, or by 
the temple built after the return of the Jews from 
Babylon; and indeed greater than the mountain of 
the temple was capable of containing, according to 
the description given of it by all the Jewish writers. 
This proves, as Mr. Scott justly observes, that the 
vision cannot be explained of any temple that has 
hitherto been built, or indeed of any literal temple, 
but must be understood figuratively and mystically. 
Bishop Newcome indeed, following Capellus, says, 
“Read here, and verses 17-19, nN, cubits, for D°3p, 
reeds, with the LXX., verses 17, 20.” But the former 
word, signifying cubits, does not once occur in the 
Hebrew text, whereas the word rendered reeds is 
repeated four times. And as to the LXX., it is evi- 
dent they “had Solomon’s temple in view, and 
changed reeds for cubits, in order to adjust the di- 
mensions of this temple to those of Solomon’s; and 
that late writers have proposed the alteration in the 
text for the same reason. But if men allow them- 
selves to substitute one word for another in the sa- 
cred text, because the alterations would render that 
consistent with their systems which otherwise 
would be incompatible with them, there is no know- 


oehbie five hundred reeds, with hd ad 
|the measuring-reed. ——— 
20 He measured it by the four sides: € it ha 
a wall round about, "five hundred reeds long, 
and five hundred broad, to make a separation 


between the sanctuary and the profane place. 


h Chap. xlv. 2. 


ing to what lengths they may proceed. Surely it is 
better to acknowledge our ignorance on such abstruse 
subjects than to support a favourite scheme of inter- 
pretation, by giving countenance to so dangerous a 
measure.” We have said above, that the area here 
described is an exact square; and it is to be ob- 
served, that the heavenly Jerusalem, represented to 
St. John, Rev. xxi. 16, is likewise described as four- 
square, that figure being an emblem of solidity. And 
Ezekiel’s vision, as well as St. John’s, is designed, in 
its mystical sense, to represent the regularity and 
strength of Christ’s church and kingdom. 

Verse 20. It had a wall round about—To defend 
it from being invaded or profaned. Such a square 
wall as is here described, seems only capable of a 
mystical sense and interpretation. T'o make a sepa- 
ration between the sanctuary and the profane place 
—Between that compass of ground which was in- 
cluded in the precincts of the temple, and was con- 
sidered as consecrated to the Lord, and where it was 
not permitted either the heathen, strangers, or im- 
pure persons, to present themselves ; and that place, 
here termed profane, which all the world might en- 
ter indiscriminately, men, women, pure, impure, 
Gentiles, and others. Welearn from Josephus, that 
such a place of separation existed at the temple in 
his time: see Antigq., lib. xv. c. 14, and Calmet 


CHAPTER XLII. 


In this chapter and the next the temple-service is described, but under the type of the Old Testament service. 
(1,) God takes possession of the temple in a cloud of glory, 1-6. 


Flere, 
(2,) He promises that his presence shall continue 


in it, provided the people return to and continue in his worship, according to the instituted and holy ordinances of 
it, and keep themselves from idolatry, 7-12. (3,) The altar of burnt-offerings is described, 13-17 ; with directions 


for the consecration of it, 18-27. 


A, Me £430. AFTERWARD he brought me to 
pr ree rene the gate, even the gate *that 
looketh toward the east : 


«Chap. x. 19; xliv. 1; xlvi. 1——» Chap. xi. 23. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIII. 

Verses 1, 2. Then he brought me to the gate— 
The eastern gate of the court of the priests, which 
was just before the temple. And behold, the glory 
of the God of Israel—The word behold is an ex- 
pression of joy and admiration; as if the prophet 
had said, Behold, a wonderful and joyful sight! 
The glory of that God who calls himself the God 

3 


2 »And behold, the glory of the one 
God of Israel came from the way alte 
of the east: and °¢ his voice was like a noise 


© Chap. i. 24; Rev. i.15; xiv. 2; xix. 1, 6. 


of Israel, which had departed from this place and 
people, and had absented itself from them for so 
long a time, is now returning to them, and fixing its 
residence among them. When the glory of the Lord 
forsook the temple, it is represented as departing 
from the eastern gate of it; afterward, as quite for- 
saking the city, and removing to a mountain on the 
east side of it; and now that glory is described as 
733 


The glory of the Lord 


EZEKIEL. 


returns to the temple. 


M. 3430. of many waters: ‘and the earth 
ea sh Pah 
shined with his glory. 

3 And it was ° according to the appearance 
of the vision which I saw, even according to 
the vision that I saw 1 when I came ‘to destroy 
the city: and the visions were like the visions 
that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell 
upon my face. . 

4 ™ And the glory of the Lorp came into the 
house by the way of the gate whose prospect 
is toward the east. 

5 ‘So the Spirit took me up, and brought me 
into the inner court ; and behold, * the glory of 
the Lorp filled the house. 


A: 
B. 


dCh, x. 4; Isa. vi. 3; Rev. xviii, 1. e Ch. i. 4, 28; viii. 4. 
1 Or, when I came to prophesy that the city should be destroyed, 
Chap. ix. 1, 5. £ So Jeremiah i. 10.——% Chap. i. 3; iii. 23. 
h Chap. x. 19; xliv. 2.——i Ch. iii, 12,14; viii. 3. kK] Kings 
viii, 10, 11; Chap. xliv. 4.——! Chap. xl. 3.——™ Psa. xcix. 1. 


returning by the same way it departed: see chap.x. 
18, and xi. 23.. This was intended to signify that 
God would again accept of this place for a temple to 
be built on it, and dedicated to his worship, and 
would accept of the servicethat should be paid him 
there, and afford the place his peculiar protection. 
And his voice was like a noise of many waters— 
Great and terrible: compare chap. i. 24; Rev. i. 15. 
Hither to signify the dreadfulness. of God’s judg- 
ments, or the efficacy of his commands, who calls 
things into existence by the power of his word. 
And the earth shined with his glory—The rays of 
his glory, like the sunbeams, ‘enlightened the earth : 
see the margin. This glory of the Lord seems to 
have been intended as an emblem of the light of the 
gospel, which is the glory of Christ, and which 
spread from the eastern part of the world into the 
western; and which has been, and still is, powerful 
and mighty in operation, in saving mankind, and en- 
lightening the earth with abundance of knowledge, 
holiness, and comfort. 

Verses 3-5. And it—This glory of the God of Is- 
rael ; was according to the vision, &c., when I came to 
destroy the city—That is, to prophesy that the city 
would be destroyed. The prophets are often said to 
do those things which they foretel shall be done. And 
I fell upon my face—In humble and reverent adora- 
tion of the divine majesty, of overwhelmed, as it 
were, and not able to bear the lustre of such glory. 
But the Spirit took him up, when the glory of the 
Lord was come into the house, that he might see how 
the house was filled with it. He had formerly seen, 
to his great grief, how the glory of the Lord, in this 
same appearance, departed from the temple, because 
it was profaned ; and now he sees, to his great satis- 
faction, how it returns to it. As we do not find that 
ever the Shechinah did in such a manner take posses- 
sion of the second temple, it seems evident that this 
was to have its accomplishment in that glory of the 
divine grace which shines so bright in the gospel 
church, and fills it, 


734 


6 And I heard him speaking unto A. M. 3430. 
me out of the house; and ! the man aha 
stood by me. 

7 4 And he said unto me, Son of man, ™ the 
place of my throne, and * the place of the soles 
of my feet, ° where I will dwell in the midst of 
the children of Israel for ever, and my holy 
name, shall the house of Israel ? no more defile, 
neither they, nor their kings, by their whore- 
dom, nor by ‘the carcasses of their kings in 
their high places. 

8 ‘In their setting of their threshold by my 
thresholds, and their posts by my posts, ? and 
the wall between me and them, they have even 


n] Chron. xxviii. 2; Psa. xcix. 5.——9 Exod. xxix. 45; Psa. 
Ixviii. 16; exxxii. 14; Joel ili..17; John i, 14; 2 Cor. vi. 16. 
P Chap. xxxix. 7.——4 Ley. xxvi. 30; Jer. xvi. 18,—* 2 Kings 
xvi, 14; xxi. 4, 5,7; Chap. viii. 3; xxiii.39; xliv, 7.——?* Or, 
for there was but a wall between me and them. 


Verse 6. I heard him speaking unto me, &e.—The 
prophet now receives instructions more immediately 
from the glory of the Lord, as Moses did when God 
had taken possession of the tabernacle, Lev. i. 1. 
When God’s glory shines in the church, we must 
from thence expect to receive divine oracles. And 
the man stood by me—We could not bear to hear the 
voice of God, any more than to see the face of God, 
if Jesus Christ did not stand by us as a Mediator. 
Or, if this was a created angel, it is observable, that 
when God. began to speak to the prophet, he stood 
by, and gave way, having no more tosay. Nay, he 
stood by the prophet as a learner with him; for to 
the principalities and powers, to the angels them- 
selves, who desire to look into these things, is made 
known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, 
Eph. iii. 10. ee 

Verses 7-9. And he said unto me, Son of man, &e, 
—God here, in retaking possession of his house, in 
effect renews his covenant with his people Israel; 
and Ezekiel negotiates the matter, as Moses formerly 
did. This would be of great use to the captives at 
their return, both for direction and for encourage- 
ment; but it more especially concerns those that are 
blessed with the privileges of the gospel temple, and 
shows that they hold their blessings under the con- 
dition of their obedience. T'he place of my throne 
—The sense would be plainer if the beginning of the 
verse were rendered, 7'his is the place of my throne, 
&c.—The cherubim are deseribed as God’s throne, 
and he is said to dwell, or sit, between the cherubim, 
and the ark was as his footstool. Observe, reader, 
his temple, the church, is the place where the throne 
of his grace is erected; and in the dispensations of 
grace he has a throne, and manifests himself as a 
king, to whom we must be subject. Where I will 
dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever 
—He alludes to the promise formerly made with re- 
lation to the tabernacle and temple, (see Psa. Lxviii. 16, 
and exxxii, 14, ) which promise is to be understood, 
like all God’s other promises made of o 


Solemn exhortation 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


to the people, 


A. M. 3430. defiled my holy name by their abo- 
24... ; 

minations that they have commit- 
ted: wherefore I have consumed them in mine 
anger. 

9 Now, let them put away their whoredom, 
and ‘the carcasses of their kings, far from me, 
t and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever. 

10 4 Thou son of man, * show the house to 
the house of*Israel, that they may be ashamed 
of their iniquities: and let them measure the 
3 pattern. 

11 And if they be ashamed of all that they 


8 Verse 7.—t Verse 7. «Chap xl. 4. 


ditional, (see verse 9,) and intended to be eminently 
fulfilled in and by Christ, in whom all the promises 
of the Old Testament are to have their final accom- 
plishment. Zechariah prophesied, chap. vi. 13, that 
the Messiah should build the temple of the Lord, and 
bear the glory; that is, as such prophecies are ex- 
plained in the New Testament, he shall build the 
Christian Church, and in him shall all the fulness of 
the Godhead dwell bodily and really, not in types 
and figures. To the same sense we may explain the 
prophecy of Haggai, chap. ii.7, The glory of the 
latter house shall be greater than that of the former ; 
for no visible glory appeared in the second temple, 
till the Lord whom they expected came to his tein- 
ple, Mal. iii. 1; that is till the Messiah, who was the 
brightness of his Father’s glory, appeared there, and 
made it an illustrious figure of that true temple, or 
church of believers, where he would continue his 
presence for ever; see 2 Cor. vi. 16. And my holy 
name shall Israel no more defile by their whoredom 
—By idolatry, often described in Scripture under the 
metaphor of fornication. The captivity had that 
good effect upon the Jews, that they scarce ever after 
relapsed intoidolatry. And the entire destruction of 
idolatry is often mentioned as a blessing reserved for 
the latter days, when the Jews shall be converted, and 
the fulness ofthe Gentiles come into the church. Nor 
by the carcasses of their kings in their high places— 
Idols are called carcasses, because they are without 
life and motion, and likewise upon the account of 
their being hateful and loathsome in the sight of 
God: see the margin. Theyare called carcasses of 
kings because they were set up, and the worship of 
them encouraged, by the idolatrous kings of Judah, 
who erected high places for that purpose near Jeru- 
salem, in the very view of the temple, 2 Kings 
xxiii. 13. By this means the temple itself was pro- 
faned by those that came directly from the worship 
of idols to attend upon God’s service in the temple. 
Nay, they even advanced to.such high degrees of 
idolatry, as to set up their threshold by God's 
threshold, that is, to erect the altars and images of 
their idols in the temple itself, and the courts before 
it. And the wall—For there was but awall between 
me and them: see the margin. 

Hate 10. Show the house to the house of Israel, 


have done, show them the form of the A. Mi ah 
house, and the fashion thereof, and —— 
the goings out thereof, and the comings in 
thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the 
ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, 
and all the laws thereof: and write ¢¢ in their 
sight, that they may keep the whole form there- 
of, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them. 

12 This zs the law of the house ; Upon * the 
top of the mountain the whole limit thereof 
round about shall be most holy. Behold, this 
is the law of the house. 


Set 
$Or, sum, or, number.——* Chap. xl. 2. 


that they may. be ashamed, &c.—The prophet is 
here directed to show the measure and pattern of the 
house to. the Jews, with a view to render them 
ashamed of their idolatries and other iniquities, 
which had provoked God to deprive them of the 
honour and happiness of his residence among them, 
and the benefit of his ordinances. It seems also, 
that this same draught ahd description of the house 
and its courts, &c., was to be laid before them, as a 
model for them to imitate, as far as they should be 
able, when they should return to their own country, 
and rebuild their temple. See Preliminary Obser- 
vations to chap. xl~xlviii. But, as has been more 
than once intimated, “the words may have a further 
view, and the model of God’s temple here set forth 
might be intended as a pattern of heavenly things, 
as Moses’s was, Exod. xxv. 40, and a type of that 
pure church, built upon the foundation of the apos- 
tles and prophets, which we may hope God will in 
due time everywhere restore. And, in the mean 
season, it is the duty of all Christians, according to 
their ability, to inform themselves and others what 
is the pattern, form, and fashion of this true church 
of God, in order to reform all those deviations which 
have been made from it. Let them measure the 
pattern—In order to build their new temple by it, 
when they shall return from captivity, as far as their 
abilities will reach. For the same purpose the pro- 
phet is commanded in the following verse to write 
it in their sight. 

Verse 12. This is the law of the house—This is 
the first comprehensive rule; or, this is the genera. 
law respecting this temple, and all that belongs to it. 
Whereas formerly only the chancel, or sanctuary, 
was most holy, now the whole mount of the house, 
the whole limit thereof round about, including all the 
courts and all the chambers, shall be so. This sig- 
nified that, in gospel times, Ist, The church should 
have the privilege of the holy of holies, namely, 
that of a near access to God. All believers have 
now, under the gospel, liberty to enter into the holi- 
est, Heb. x. 19, with this advantage, that whereas the 
Jewish high-priests entered by the virtue of the 
blood of bulls and goats; we enter by the virtue of 
the blood of Jesus, and at all times, and wherever we 
are, we haye through him access to the Father. 2d, 

739 


How the temple was 


EZEKIEL. 


to be hallowed. 


oa eee 


13 § And these are the measures 
of the altar after the cubits: ’ The 
cubit zs a cubit and a hand-breadth ; even the 
4bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a 
cubit, and the border thereof by the ° edge 
thereof round about shall be a span: and this 
shall be the higher place of the altar. 

14 And from the bottom wpon the ground 
even to the lower settle shall be two cubits, and 
the breadth one cubit ; and from the lesser settle 
even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and 
the breadth one cubit. 

15 So *the altar shall be four cubits; 
from 
horns. 

16 And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, 
twelve broad, square in the four squares thereof. 

17 And the settle shall be fourteen cubits 
long and fourteen broad in the four squares 
thereof; and the border about it shall be half a 
cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit 
about; and “his stairs shall look toward the 
east. 


A. M. 3430. 
C. 574. 


and 
7the altar and upward shall be four 


y Chap. xl. 5; xli. 8. 4 Hebrew, bosom. 
6 Heb. Harel, that is, the mountain of God, 
is, the lion of God, Isa. xxix. 1. 


5 Hebrew, lip. 
7 Heb. Ariel, that 


That the whole church should be under an indis- 
pensable obligation to press toward the perfection of 
holiness, as he who hath called us is holy. All must 
now be most holy. Holiness becomes God’s house 
for ever, and in gospel times more than ever. Be- 
hold, this is the law of the house! Let none expect 
the protection and blessings of it that will not sub- 
mit to this law. 

Verses 13-17. These are the measures of the 
altar—-The Jews, after their return out of captivity, 
had an altarlong before they hada temple, Ezra iii. 
3; but the altar here spoken of is an altar in the 
temple, the mystical temple emblematical of the 
gospel church; and this altar is mystical too, for 
Christ is our altar. Z'he bottom shall be a cubit, 
&c.—-To render the dimensions here specified of the 
altar more intelligible to an English reader, it may 
be best to observe, that it was about six yards square 
at the top, and seven at the bottom. It was four 
yards and a half high; it had a lower bench, or 
shelf, here called a settle, a yard from the ground, 
on which some of the priests stood to minister, and 
another, two yards above that, on which others of 
them stood; and those were each of them half a 
yard broad, and had ledges on either side, that they 
might stand firm upon ‘them. The sacrifices were 
killed at the table spoken of chap. xl. 39; what was 
to be burned on the altar was given up to those on 
the lower bench, and handed by them to those on 
the higher, and they laid it on the altar. Thus in the 
service of God we must be assistant to one another. 

736 


18 4 And he said unto me, Son of A. M. 3430 
man, thus saith the Lord Gop ; These x Hie 
are the ordinances of the altar in the day when 
they shall make it, to offer burnt-offerings there- 
on, and to * sprinkle blood thereon. 

19 And thou shalt give to >the priests the 
Levites that be of the seed of Zadok, which 
approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith 
the Lord Gop, °a young bullock for a sin- 
offering. 

20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, 
and put 7¢ on the four horns of it, and on the 
four corners of the settle, and upon the border 
round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and 
purge it. i 

21 Thou shalt take the bullock also of the 
sin-offering, and he “shall burn it in the ap- 
pointed place of the house, * without the sanc- 
tuary. 

22 And on the second day thou shalt offer a 
kid of the goats without blemish for a sin- 
offering ; and they shall cleanse the altar, as 
they did cleanse i¢ with the bullock. 


2 Exod. xx. 26.—=® Lev. i. 5 > Chap. xliv. 15.——* Exod. 
xxix. 10,12; Lev. viii, 14,15; Chap. xlv. 18, 19——4 Exod.. 
xxix. 14.——° Heb, xiii. 11. 


Verses 18-27. T'hese are the ordinances of the 
altar—Here we have directions concerning the dedi- 
cation of the altar at first. Seven days were to be 
spent in the dedication of it, and every day sacri- 
fices were to be offered upon it, particularly a goat 
for a sin-offering, (verse 25,) besides a young bul- 
lock for a sin-offering on the first day, verse 19; 
which teaches us, in all our religious services, to 
have an eye to Christ, the great sin-offering. Nei- 
ther our persons nor our performances can be ac- 
ceptable to God, unless sin be taken away ; and that 
cannot be taken away but by the blood of Christ, 
which both sanctifies the altar (for Christ entered by 
his own blood) and the gift upon the altar. There 
was also a bullock and a ram to be offered for a 
burnt-offering, (verse 24,) which was intended pure- 
ly for the glory of God, to teach us to have an eye 
to that in all our services. This dedication of the 
altar is called the cleansing and purging of it, verses 
20, 26. Christ, our altar, though he had no pollu- 
tion to be cleansed from, yet sanctified himself, John 
xvii, 19. And when we consecrate the altars of our 
hearts to God, to have holy love always burning upon 
them, we must see that they be purified and cleansed. 
from ‘the love of the world and the lust of the flesh. 

It is observable, that there are several differences 


between the rites of dedication here, and those which _ 


were appointed Exod. xxix., to intimate that the 
ceremonial institutions were mu table things, and the 
changes made in them were earnests of their termi 

nation in Christ. Only here, a — 


The east gate of the temple 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


appropriated to the prince. 


AM; 3430. 23 When thou hast made an end 
_——__— _ of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a 
young bullock without blemish, and a ram out 
of the flock without blemish. 

24 And thou shalt offer them before the Lorn, 
fand the priest shall cast salt upon them, and 
they shall offer them up for a burnt-offering 
unto the Lorp. 

25 £ Seven days shalt thou prepare every day 
a goat for a sin-offering: they shall also pre- 


f Lev. ii. 13——s Exod. xxix. 35, 36; Lev. viii. 33. 8 Heb. 


fill their hands, Exod. xxix. 24. 


ral law that all the sacrifices must be seasoned with 
salt, (Lev. ii. 14,) particular orders are given (verse 
24) that the priests shall cast salt upon the sacrifices. 
Grace is the salt with which all our religious per- 
formances must be seasoned, Col. iv. 6. An ever- 
lasting covenant is called a covenant of salt, because 
it is incorruptible. The glory reserved for us is in- 
corruptible and undefiled; and the grace wrought 
in us, influencing the hidden man of the heart, is in 
that which is not corruptible, and therefore, in the 
sight of God, of great price. We may observe fur- 
ther here, that constant use was to be made of the 


pare a young bullock, and a ram out ya, 
of the flock, without blemish. waeuecachaciaass 

26 Seven days shall they purge the altar 
and purifyit; and they shall * consecrate 
themselves. 

27 » And when these days are expired, it shall 
be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, 
the priests shall make your burnt-offerings upon 
the altar, and your ® peace-offerings: and I will 
‘accept you, saith the Lord Gop. 


h Ley. ix. 1. 


® Or, thank-offerings. i Job xlii. 8; Chap. xx. 
40, 41; Rom. xii. 1; 1 Pet. ii. 5. 


altar when dedicated; the priests being directed to 
make their burnt-offerings and peace-offerings upon 
it, (verse 27,) for therefore it was sanctified, that it 
might sanctify the gift that was offered upon it. And 
for their encouragement in this whole service, God 
promises, on condition of their observing these di- 
rections, that he would graciously accept them: for 
those that give themselves to God shall be accepted 
of him, their persons first, and then their perform- 
ances, through the Mediator; and if our persons be 
accepted, and our services be pleasing to him, it is 
enough, we need no more. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
In this chapter we have, (1,) The appropriating of the east gate of the temple to the prince, 1-3. (2,) A reproof to 


Israel for their former profanations of the sanctuary, and a caution, 4-9. 


(3,) The degrading of one part of the 


Levites, and establishing of the family of Zadok in the priesthood, 10-16. (4,) Divers laws and ordinances con- 


cerning the priests, 17-31. 


A. M. 3430. "THEN he brought me back the way 
B. ©, 574. 
of the gate of the outward sanc- 
tuary *which looketh toward the east; and it 
was shut. 
2 Then said the Lorp unto me; This gate 
shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no 


@ Chap. xliii. 1——» Chap. xliii. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLIV. 

Verses 1, 2. Then he brought me back, &c.— 
From the altar to the gate belonging to the court of 
the priests, and leading to the outward court of the 
temple. All the courts were reckoned holy ground, 
and called sometimes by the name of the temple. 
And it was shut—After that the glory of the Lord 
had entered that way. TJ'hen saith the Lord, This 
gate shall be shwt—Shall be generally kept shut; xo 
man shall enter in by it—None of the common peo- 
ple: see chap. xlvi. 1. Because the Lord hath 
entered in by it—Namely, that glory which was the 
visible sign of God’s presence. This order was 
given, both to perpetuate the remembrance of 
the solemn entrance of the glory of the Lord 

Vou. III. 47 


man shall enter in by it; » because A. M. 3430. 
the Lorn the God of Israel hath en- 9°" 
tered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. 

3 Jt is for the prince; the prince, he shall 
sit in it to °eat bread before the Lorn; 
‘he shall enter by the way of the porch of 


¢ Gen. xxxi. 54; xliii, 31; 1 Cor. x. 18——4 Chap. xlvi. 2, 8. 


into the house, and also to possess the minds of the 
people with a deep reverence for the Divine Majes- 
ty, and with very awful thoughts of his transcendent 
glory; which was also designed in God’s charge to 
Moses at the bush, Put off thy shoe from off thy 
foot. 

Verse 3. It is for the prince—The words, It is, 
are not in the Hebrew, which is only, For the prince ; 
and therefore the meaning seems to be, that this gate 
should, in general, be shut for, or to the prince, as 
well as to private persons; even he should not have 
the liberty of entering in at it, except at certain sea- 
sons. Dr. Waterland translates the clause thus: As 
to the prince, since he is prince, he shall sit, &c, 


' The kings of Judah had a distinguished place in the 
3 


737 


Israel is reproved for 


EZEKIEL. 


ne 


profaning the sanctuary. 


A. M.3130. that gate, and shall go out by the 
rhe way of the same. 

4 4 Then brought he me the way of the 
north gate before the house: and I looked, and 
® behold, the glory of the Lorn filled the house 
of the Lorn: fandI fell upon my face. 

5 And the Lorp said unto me, § Son of man, 
‘mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and 
hear with thine ears all that Isay unto thee 
concerning all the ordinances of the house of 
the Lorp, and all the laws thereof; and mark 
well the entering in of the house, with every 
going forth of the sanctuary. 

6 And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even 
to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 
O ye house of Israel, ‘let it suffice you of all 
your abominations ; 

7 *In that ye have brought into my sanc- 
tuary *strangers,! ™uncircumcised in heart, 
and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanc- 
tuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye 


offer "my bread, °the fat and the A. M. 3430. 
C. 574. 

blood, and they have broken my 

covenant because of all your abominations. 

8 And ye have not ?kept the charge of my 
holy things: but ye have set keepers of my 
3charge in my sanctuary for yourselves. 

9 4 Thus saith the Lord Gop; *No stran- 
ger, uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircum- 
cised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, 
of any stranger that is among the children of 
Israel. 

10 * And the Levites that are gone away far 
from me, when Israel went astray, which went 
astray away from me after their idols; they 
shall even bear their iniquity. 

11 Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctu- 
ary, *having charge at the gates of the house, 
and ministering to the house: * they shall slay 
the burnt-offering and the sacrifice for the 
people, and “they shall stand before them to 


minister unto them. 


© Chapter iii. 23; xliii. 5 Clap. i. 28. s Chap. xl. 4. 
1 Heb. set thy heart. bh Chap. ii. 5——i Chap. xlv. 9; 1 Pet. 
iv. 3. k Chapter xliii. 8; Verse 9; Acts xxi. 28. 2 Heb, 
children of a stranger. 1 Levit. xxii. 25. m Levit. xxvi. 41; 
Deut. x. 16; Acts vii. 51. 


| xxix. 34. 


o Lev. iii. 16; xvii. 11.—? Lev: 
xxii. 2——% Or, ward, or, ordinance; and so verses 14, 16; 
Chap. xl. 45. 4 Verse 7. r2 Kings xxiii. 8; 2 Chronicles 
xxix. 4, 5; Chap. xlviii. 11. 8] Chron. xxvi. 1.——t 2 Chron. 
u Num. xvi. 9. 


n Lev. xxi. 6, 8, 17, 21. 


temple; a kind of tribunal placed opposite the east- 
erm gate: see chap. xlvi. 12; 2 Chron. vi. 12, 13. 
By the prince here is probably meant the chief 
governor of the Jews after the captivity, such as 
were Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, for Sheshbazzar, or 
Zerubbabel, is called the prince of Judah, Ezra i. 8. 
The prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the 
Lord—To eat part of the peace-offerings which were 
provided at his charge: see chap. xlvi. 2. Bread 
stands for all sorts of entertainments, and particu- 
larly for a religious feast made of the remainder of 
a sacrifice: see the margin. 

Verses 4-8. T'hen he brought me by the way of 
the north gate of the house—The east gate being 
shut. And, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the 
house of the Lord—As appeared by the light which 
shone through the windows, for there was no door 
into the sanctuary on that side. And the Lord said, 
Son of man, mark well, &¢.—See notes on chap. 
xl. 4; and xliii. 2. Mark well the entering, §C., 
with every going forth of the sanctuary—The word 
laws is to be understood in this last sentence, the 
sense being, that the prophet should admonish the 
people of the lars relating to the admitting certain 
persons into the temple, or the courts of it, and to 
suffer none that were unqualified to attend upon 
God’s service there. This appears to be the sense 
from the following verses. And thou shalt say, Let 
it suffice you of all your abominations—Let the 
time past be sufficient for you to have provoked me 
with your abominations. Jn that ye have brought 
into my sanctuary strangers, &c.—In that ye have 

738 


set up idols within the precincts of my temple, and 
have appointed idolatrous priests to officiate there. 
When ye offer my bread, the fat, and the blood— 
At the very time when ye were offering my sacri- 
fices upon the altar. Or the words may imply, that 
they suffered heathen to offer at God’s altar, express- 
ly contrary to the law, Ley. xxii. 27. By bread 
may be understood the meat-offerings made of flour, 
which accompanied the other sacrifices, although 
every thing offered upon the altar is properly called 
the bread of God. The fat and blood of every 
sacrifice were peculiarly appropriated to God. And 
they have broken my covenant—Idolatry was a direct 
breach of that covenant into which God had entered 
with the Jews: upon which account it is so often 
represented under the metaphor of adultery. And 
ye have not kept the charge of my holy things— 
You have not observed the laws I gave you for 
taking care of the things relating to my house and 
worship, but have appointed such persons to officiate 
there as best suited with your own inclinations. 
Verses 9-14. No stranger shall enter into my 
sanctuary—To offer any sacrifice or oblation there, 
(see verse 7,) nor be suffered to go beyond the pre- 
cincts appointed for proselytes. The Levites that 
are gone far from me, &c.—Many of the Levites 
departed from God’s service, and fell into idolatry ; 
first in the general apostacy of the ten tribes, and 
afterward under Ahaz, and other wicked kings of 
Judah: see 2 Kings xxiii.9. These, God here says, 
should bear the punishment due to their iniquity, 


,and be degraded from attending upon the higher 
( 47* ) ra 


ed 


Laws and ordinances 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


concerning the priests. 


A. M. 3430. 


fe 12 Because they ministered unto 


~ them before their idols, and * caused ¢ 

the house of Israel to fall into iniquity ; there- 
fore have I * lifted up my hand against them, 
saith the Lord Gop, and they shall bear their 
iniquity. 

13 * And they shall not come near unto me, 
to do the office of a priest unto me, nor to 
come near to any of my holy things, in the 
‘most holy place: but they shall * bear their 
shame, and their abominations which they have 
committed. 

14 But I will make them "keepers of the 
charge of the house, for all the service thereof, 
and for all that shall be done therein. 

15 % ° But the priests the Levites, ‘the sons 
of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctu- 
ary °when the children of Israel went astray 
from me, they shall come near to me to minister 
unto me, and they ‘shall stand before me to 
offer unto me § the fat and the blood, saith the 
Lord Gop: 


16 They shall enter into my sanc- A. M. 3430, 
tuary, and they shall come near to inc 
"my table, to minister unto me, and they shall 
keep my charge. 

17 4% And it shall come to pass, that when 
they enter in at the gates of the inner court, 
‘they shall be clothed with linen garments; 
and no wool shall come upon them, while they 
minister in the gates of the inner court, and 
within. 

18 * They shall have linen bonnets upon 
their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon 
their loins; they shall not gird themselves 
5 with ° any thing that causeth sweat. 

19 And when they go forth into the outer 
court, even into the outer court to the people, 
‘they shall put off their garments wherein they 
ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, 
and they shall put on other garments; and 
they shall ™ not sanctify the people with their 
garments. 

20 ® Neither shall they shave their heads, nor 


x Isa. ix. 16; Mal. ii. 8. 
of iniquity unto, &c.; Chapter xiv. 3, 4. 
22 Kings xxiii. 9; Numbers xviii. 3. 
xxxvi. 7—— Num. xviii. 4; 1 Chron. xxiii. 28, 32. 
xl. 46; xliii. 19.——* 1 Sam. ii. 35. © Verse 10. 


“ Heb. were for a stumbling-block 
y Psalm evi. 26. 
a Chapter xxxii. 30; 
© Chap. 


£ Deut. x. 8.—s Verse 7.——h Chapter xli, 22.——i Exodus 
Xxvili. 39, 40, 43; xxxix. 27, 28. Exodus xxviii. 40, 42; 
xxxix. 28.—5 Or, in sweating places. ® Heb. in, or, with sweat, 
1 Chap. xiii. 14. ™ Chap. xlvi. 20; Exod. xxix. 37; xxx. 29; 
Lev. vi. 27; Matt. xxiii. 17, 19. n Lev. xxi. 5. 


offices belonging to the priesthood, and thrust down 
to lower services: see verse 13. Many of the priests 
and Levites, who had been employed in the service 
of the first temple, lived to see the second, as ap- 
pears from Ezra iii. 12. But the descendants of 
former idolatrous priests and Levites may be here 
meant; or, the ordinances here prescribed were in- 
tended to be standing rules, which were to be always 
observed whenever such a ease as that here specified 
should happen. Yet they shall be ministers, §c., 
having charge at the gates—Performing the office 
of porters, or other inferior offices belonging to the 
Levites. They shall slay the burnt-offering, &c. 
—Shall kill and flay the beasts appointed for the 
sacrifices. And they shall stand before them, &e.— 
They shall be servants to the people, in performing 
the most servile offices belonging to the temple. 
Because they ministered unto them before their 
idols, &c.—They led the people into idolatry, by 
giving themabad example. T'herefore have J lift- 
ed up my hand against them—I have solemnly 
sworn that I will- punish them for this their sin. 
They shall not come near me, &c.—They shall not 
offer any sacrifice at my altar, or come into the tem- 
ple to perform any part of the priestly office there. 
So Josiah discharged the priests that had been guilty 
of idolatry from attending upon the service of the 
altar, 2 Kings xxiii. 9. 

Verses 15, 16. T'he priests the Levites—The Le- 
-vites who are priests; the sons of Zadok—Who 
continued faithful; they shall stand before me to 

3 


offer the fat, &e.—They shall serve at the altar of 
burnt-offering, and offer sacrifices thereon. They 
shall enter into my sanctuary—lInto the holy place ; 
to minister unto me—To burn incense there upon 
the golden altar, to sprinkle the blood of the victims 
before the veil, to trim the lamps, and to change the 
loaves on the sacred table every sabbath. They 
shall keep my charge—-They shall have this ho- 
nour in reward. of their fidelity. Observe, reader, 
God will put marks of honour upon those who 
are faithful to him in trying times, and will employ 
those in his service who have kept elose to it when 
others drew back. 

Verses 17-20. When they shall enter in at the 
gates of the inner court——The court just before the 
temple, where the altar of the burnt-offering stood ; 
they shall be clothed with linen garments—The 
ephod, breeches, mitre, and girdle, (the habit of the 
ordinary priests,) were all of fine linen, contrived 
for glory and beauty, (Exod. xxviii. 40,) fine linen 
being the habit of persons of the greatest quality ; 
while they minister in the gates of the inner court 
—That is, in the court of the priests; and within— 
In the sanctuary itself. T'hey shall not gird them- 
selves with any thing that causeth sweat—Not with 
a woollen girdle, which may make them sweat du- 
ring their laborious service about the altar, and make 
their garments smell offensively. When they go 
forth into the outer court, they shall put off their 
garments—See note on chap. xlii. 14. They shall 
not sanctify the people with their garments—Ac- 


' 


Laws and ordinances 


EZEKIEL. 


concerning the priests. 


erg suffer their locks to grow long; they 
BS 37" shall only poll their heads. 

21 ° Neither shall any priest drink wine, when 
they enter into the inner court. 

22 Neither shall they take for their -wives 
a P widow, nor her that is 7put away: but 
they shall take maidens of the seed of the 
house of Israel, or a widow *that had a priest 
before. 

23 And ‘they shall teach my people the dif- 
ference between the holy and profane, and 
cause them to discern between the unclean and 
the clean. 

24 And ‘in controversy they shall stand in 
judgment; and they shall judge it according 


to my judgments: and they shall A. M. 3430. 
keep my laws and my statutes in sa 
all mine assemblies; ‘and they shall hallow 
my sabbaths. 

25 And they shall come at no tdead person to 
defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, 
or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for 
sister that hath had no husband, they may 
defile themselves. 

26 And “after he is cleansed, they shall 
reckon unto him seven days. 

27 And in the day that he goeth into the 
sanctuary, * unto the inner court, to minister in 
the sanctuary, ¥ he shall offer his sin-offering, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


P Leviticus xxi. 7, 13, 14——’ Hebrew, 
4 Leviticus x. 10, 11; 


° Leviticus x. 9, 
thrust forth——* Heb. from a priest. 
Chap. xxii. 26; Mal. ii. 7. 


r Deut. xvii. 8; 2 Chronicles xix. 8, 10.—=+ Chap. xxii. 26. 
t Levit. xxi. 1. « Numbers vi. 10; xix. 11. x Verse 17. 
y Levit. iv. 3. 


cording to the law, common things, touching holy 
things, became consecrated, and no more fit for 
common use. Neither shall they shave their heads 
—This prescription is implied in the words of the 
law, Lev. xxi. 5; especially according to the trans- 
lation of the LXX., who render the sentence, Z'how 
shalt not shave thyself with baldness [to make thy- 
self bald] wpon the head for thedead. 'They indeed 
understand it as an expression of mourning for the 
dead, which agrees with the sense of the parallel 
texts, Lev. xix. 27, 28; Deut. xiv. 1. But the words 
in the original contain a general prohibition, and 
consequently include other seasons, as well as times 
of mourning. St. Jerome upon this place supposes, 
with great probability, that the Jewish priests were 
forbidden to shave their heads, that they might dis- 
tinguish themselves from the heathen priests, par- 
ticularly the Egyptian priests of Isis and Serapis, 
who had their heads shaved and uncovered. Learn- 
ed men have observed, that many other Jewish laws 
were made in opposition to the rites observed in the 
heathen worship. Nor suffer their locks to grow 
long—Letting their hair grow long and neglected 
Was a sign of mourning, as well as shaving it close 
to the head, and therefore was forbidden to be are 
tised by the priests of God. 

Verses 21-23. Neither shall any priest drink 
wine when they enter into the inner court—That is, 
during the time of their ministration: see the note 
on Ley. x. 9, 10, from whence this law is taken, and 
where the reason of itis given. Neither shall they 
take for their wives a widow—This law we find Ley. 
xxi. 13,14; but it there concerns only the high-priest, 
here it is applied to all the priests in general. And 
they shall teach my people the difference between the 
holy and profane, &c.— Between good and evil, be- 
tween what is lawful and what is unlawful; ‘that 
they may neither scruple what is lawful, nor wexibaks 
upon what is unlawful; that they may not pollute 
what is holy, nor pollute themselves with what is 
profane. Ministers should take pains to cause peo- 

740 


ple to discern between the clean and the unclean, 
that they may not confound the distinctions between 
right and wrong, nor mistake concerning them, so 
as to put darkness for light, or light for darkness ; 
but may have a well-informed judgment, especially 
in all matters of duty. 

Verse 24. And in controversy they shall stand in 
judgment—The priests were to determine all con- 
troversies relating to the law, as well the judicial as 
the ceremonial part of it, which were brought before 
them, Deut. xvii. 8,9; and the people were to seek 
the law at their mouths, (Mal. ii. 7,) that is, to in- 
quire of them what was the purport and meaning of 
it, and to abide by their determination. And they 
shall judge according to my judgments—Which I 
have declared, and not according to their own fan- 
cies, inclinations, or secular interests. ‘Thus minis- 
ters must decide controversies among the people of 
God according to his word; and must take care that 
they give no countenance to any false or perfidious, 
fraudulent or dishonest practices, but must set their 
faces against them. And they shall keep my laws 
and my statutes in all mine assemblies, &e.—As 
well upon the solemn festivals, and the assemblies 
proper to them, as at other times, and on ordinary 
occasions. And they shall hallow my sabbaths— 
Whereas the priests before the captivity profaned 
them : see chap. xxii. 26. 

Verses 25, 26. They shall come at no dead person 
to defile themselves—Whosoever touched a dead 
body became legally unclean, (Num. xix. 11,) and 
thereby was disqualified for attending upon God’s 
worship in the temple, Lev. xxii. 3. Upon which 
account the priests were forbidden to contract such 
defilement, unless for their nearest relations, which 
prohibition is here renewed: see the margin. After 
he is cleansed they shall reckon unto him seven days 
—His uncleanness continued seven days, according 
to the forecited Jaw, Num. xix. 11; and the priests 
were to reckon to him seven days more, before he 
could be admitted into the sanctuary. 


a 


CHAPTER XLV. 


The division of 


the holy land. 


-_— ae 28 And it shall be unto them for 
———_... an inheritance; I * am their inherit- 
ance: and ye shall give them no possession in 
Israel: I am their possession. 

29 *'They shall eat the meat-offering, and 
the sin-offering, and the trespass-offering ; and 
> every ° dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs. 

30 And the ” first * of all the first-fruits of all 


things, and .every oblation of all, of A.M. 3430. 
F B. C. 574. 
every sort of your oblations, shall be ———— 
the priest’s: “ ye shall also give unto the priest 
the first of your dough, °* that he may cause the 
blessing to rest in thy house. 
31 The priest shall not eat of any thing that 
is ‘ dead of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or 
beast. 


z Num. xviii. 20; Deut. x. 9; xviii. 1,2; Josh. xiii. 14, 33. 
aLev. vi. 18, 29; vii. 6 ——> Lev. xxvii. 21, 28, compared with 
Num. xviii. 14.——* Or, devoted. 


20 Or, chief. © Wxod. xiii. 2; xxii. 29, 30; xxiii. 19; Num. 
ii. 13; xviil. 12, 13.——4 Num. xv. 20; Neh. x. 37. © Prov. 
ui. 9, 10; Mal. iii. 10.——f Exod. xxii. 31; Lev. xxii. 8. 


Verses 28-30. Jt shall be unto them for an inherit- 
ance, &e.—Their ministry in my sanctuary, and the 
perquisites thereto belonging, shall be to them instead 
of lands and inheritances, of which they shall not 
have any share, as the other tribes have, (see the 
margin,) excepting the portion allotted to them in 
the beginning of the following chapter. They shall 
éat the meat-offering, &c.—They shall have their 
share of them, after the part dedicated to God has 
been consumed upon the altar. And every dedicated 
thing shall be theirs—Whatsoever men dedicate to 
God, the use of it shall accrue to the priests ; if it be 
a living creature, it shall be killed, and the priests 
shall have the benefit of it ; if a piece of land, it shall 
belong to the priests: see the margin. And the first 
of all the first-fruits, &e.—The word (133, trans- 
lated jirst-frutts, signifies the first ripe, or best of the 
fruits, while they were growing in the field: see the 
margin. The latter word, 70170, rendered oblation, 
denotes an offering out of the product of the ground 
after it was made fit for use ; as out of the corn, after 


it was threshed and laid in heaps in the floor or 
granary; and so of oil and wine, after they were 
pressed and fitted to be used. Ye shall also give 
unto the priests the first of your dough—The first 
dough that you bake of the new corn every year, in 
the same proportion as in other first-fruits. That he 
may cause a blessing to rest on thy house—That the 
priest, whose office it is to bless the people in God’s 
name, may pray for and bless thee and thy family. 
Observe, reader, it is all in all to the comfort of any 
house to have the blessing of God upon it, and that 
blessing to rest init; to dwell where we dwell, and 
to extend to those that shall come after us. And the 
way to have the blessing of God upon our estates is, 
to honour God with them, and to give him and his 
ministers, him and his poor, their share out of them. 
God blesses, he surely blesses, the habitation of those 
who are thus just, or righteous, Prov. iii. 33; and 
ministers, by instructing and praying for the fami- 
lies that are kind to them, should do their part to- 


ward causing God’s blessing to rest there. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


This chapter contains, (1,) The division of the holy land, 1-8. 
(3,) The oblations to be offered, and the prince’s part therein, 13-17. Particularly in the 


and to the people, 9-12. 


(2,) The ordinances that were given both to the prince 


beginning of the year, 18-20. And in the passover and feast of tabernacles, 21-25. 


A. M, 3430. OREOVER, ' when ye shall * di- 
set M vide by lot the land for inherit- 
ance, ye shall ® offer an oblation unto the Lorp, 
*a holy portion of the land: the length shall be 


the length of five and twenty thou- Aa Me Sa 
sand reeds, and the breadth shall be Sh 
ten thousand. ‘This shall be holy in all the 


borders thereof round about. 


1 Heb. when ye cause the land to fall——+* Chap. xlvii. 22. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLV. 

Verse 1. When ye shall divide by lot the land for 
inheritance—The land was first divided by lot under 
Joshua, a particular share of which was to be God’s 
portion, as an acknowledgment of his sovereign do- 
minion: see Lev. xxv. 23. It is therefore here called 
mI, an oblation. The word properly signifies 
the offering made to God out of the first-fruits and 
other increase of the ground, (see chap. xliv. 30; 
Num. xviii. 24,) because this was a sort of first-fruits 

3 


2 Heb. holiness. 


b Chap. xlviii. 8. 


of the land or soil itself, chap. xlviii. 14. Thelength 
shall be five and twenty thousand reeds, and the 
breadth ten thousand—The Hebrew does not ex- 
press either reeds or cubits: our translation supplies 
the word reeds, but Houbigant, Waterland, New- 
come, and many other interpreters, read cubits, 
which sense they think is plainly determined by 
verse 3, where it is said, Of this measure (namely, 
the cubit measure mentioned in the preceding clause, 
verse 2) shalt thou measure the length of five and 
741 


The division of 


EZEKIEL. 


the holy land. 


A. M. 3430. 
B. C, 574. 


2 Of this there shall be for the 
sanctuary ° five hundred in length, 
with five hundred in breadth, square round 
about; and fifty cubits round about for the 
3 suburbs thereof. 

3 And of this measure shalt thou measure the 
length of five and twenty thousand, and the 
breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be the 
sanctuary and the most holy place. 

4 * The holy portion of this land shall be for 
the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which 
shall come near to minister unto the Lorn : and 
it shall be a place for their houses, and a holy 
place for the sanctuary. 

5 f And the five and twenty thousand of 


- 


length, and the ten thousand of Ceo 
breadth, shall also the Levites, the ———— 
ministers of the house, have for themselves, 
for a possession for ® twenty chambers. 

6 4» And ye shall appoint the possession of 
the city five thousand broad, and five and 
twenty thousand long, over against the oblation 
of the holy portion: it shall be for the whole 
house of Israel. 

7-9 And a portion shall be for the prince on 
the one side and on the other side of the obla- 
tion of the holy portion, and of the possession of 
the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, 
and before the possession of the city, from the 
west side westward, and from the east side east- 


© Chapter xlii, 20——* Or, void places. 4 Chapter xlviii. 10. 


e Verse 1; Chap. xlviii. 10. 


twenty thousand, &c. According to this measure, 
the portion here set apart will be almost.seven miles 
square ; whereas if we measure by reeds it will arise 
to six times as much, and can only be understood 
in a mystical sense. Mr. Scott, however, with some 
others, is of opinion, “that our translators did right 
in adding the word reeds to the numbers mentioned 
in this admeasurement; referring to the reed that 
was in the hand of Ezekiel’s divine conductor, be- 
cause the length and breadth of the sanctuary are 
stated the same as before: (see chap, xlii. 16-19 :) 
so that,” they think, “unless the text be there totally 
changed, without any authority, this passage as 
well as that must be understood of reeds.” They 
acknowledge, indeed, “that the land of Canaan could 
by no means admit of so large a proportion being 
allotted to the sanctuary, with the priests and Le- 
vites,” &c.; but they think “this was intended to 
intimate the immensely large extent of the Christian 
Church above that of Israel; especially in those 
glorious times, which are doubtless emblematically 
predicted.” 

Verses 2-5. Of this there shall be for the sanctu- 
ary five hundred in length, &c.—If we understand 
these dimensions of cubits, it exactly agrees with 
the opinion of the Jews, that the temple stood in an 
area of five hundred cubits square. And fifty cubits 
Sor the suburbs—This likewise bears a suitable pro- 
portion to the contents of a square of five hundred 
cubits. And in it shall be the sanctuary and the 
most holy place—Both the outward sanctuary and 
the inward oracle, or holy of holies, together with 
the courts adjoining, shall be placed in the centre or 
middle of it: see chap. xlviii. 10. And it shall be a 
place for their hauses—The priests were divided into 
twenty-four courses, (1 Chron. xxiv.,) who performed 
the publie worship by turns: so the houses were 
for them to live in who were not in their course of 
waiting. And the five and twenty thousand of length, 
&e—The French translation renders the sense 
plainer, thus: There shall be other five and twenty 

742 


f Chapter xlviii. 13.——s Chapter xl. 17.—— Chap. xlviii. 15. 
{ Chap. xlviil. 21, 


thousand, &c.: see chap. xlviii. 13. This appears to 
be the true sense of the place, because otherwise 
there will be wanting ten thousand in breadth to 
make an exact square of twenty-five thousand: see 
the following verse. The Levites, being very nu- 
merous, (they were reckoned at thirty-eight thousand 
in David’s time, 1 Chron. xxiii. 3,) had as large a 
piece of ground allotted to them as belonged to the 
temple and the whole priestly order. For twenty 
chambers—Most commentators understand this of . 
several rows of chambers, or ranges of building. 
The LXX. read, rodevc rov xaroxewy, cities to inhabit: 
such cities as were allotted to them by Moses, Num. 
XXXv. 2, 

Verse 6. And ye shall appoint the possession of 
the city, five thousand broad, §c., over against (or 
by the side of, see chap. xlviii. 14) the oblation of 
the holy portion—This must run parallel in length 
with the holy portion, though but half its breadth, 
by which means these three portions made an exact 
square. It shall be for the whole house of Israel— 
The capital city, to which all the tribes shall resort 


upon the solemn festivals, and shall have twelve 
gates, according to the number of the tribes of Israel, 
chap. xlviii. 31. This portion appointed for the city, 
considered separate from the other portions, was a 
rectangle, containing an area of about seventeen 
miles in circuit; which, according to Josephus, was 
more than four times the cireuit of Jerusalem: see 
Bell. Jud., v. iv. 3, where that city is stated to be 
thirty-three stadia in circumference. 

Verses 7, 8. And a portion shall be for the prince 
on the one side, &c.—One-half of the prince’s por- 
tion was to lie on the west side of the three portions 
laid out for the priests and sanctuary, the Levites 
and city; and the other half to be on the east side 
of it, and to run parallel to them in breadth from 
north to south. And the length shall be over against 
one of the portions—Or, as the words may be more 
intelligibly rendered, And the length shall be answer- 
able to every one of these portions, both on the vest 

2 


Laws given 


CHAPTER XLV. 


to the prince. 


A. M, 3430. ward: and the length shall be over 

B. C. 574. 

against one of the portions, from the 
west border unto the east border. 

8 In the land shall be his possession in 
Israel : and * my princes shall no more oppress 
my people ; and ¢he rest of the land shall they 
give to the house of Israel according to their 
tribes. 

9 § Thus saith the Lord Gop; | Let it. suf- 
fice you, O princes of Israel: ™ remove vio- 
lence and spoil, and execute judgment and 
justice, take away your ‘exactions from my 
people, saith the Lord Gop, 

10 Ye shall have just "balances, and a just 
ephah, and a just bath. 

11 The ephah and the bath shall be of one 
measure, that the bath may contain the tenth 
part of a homer, and the ephah the tenth part 
of a homer: the measure thereof shall be after 
the homer. ; 

12 And the °shekel shall be twenty gerahs: 
twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen 
shekels, shall be a maneh. 


13 'This is the oblation that ye shall A. M. 3430. 
offer ; the sixth part of an ephah of a Baty ns 
homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part 
of an ephah of a homer of barley ; 

14 Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath 
of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath 
out of the cor, which is a homer of ten baths: 
for ten baths are a homer : 

15 And one * lamb out of the flock, out of two 
hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel, for a 
eee ate and for a burnt-offering, and for 

6 peace-offerings, to make reconciliation for 
them, saith the Lord Gop. 

16 All the people of the land ‘shall give this 
oblation *for the prince in Israel. 

17 And it shall be the prince’s part to give 
burnt-offerings, and meat-offerings, and drink- 
offerings, in the feasts, and in the new-moons, 
and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the 
house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin-offer- 
ing, and the meat-offering, and the burnt-offer- 
ing, and the ® peace-offerings, to make recon- 
ciliation for the house of Israel. 


k Chapter she 18; Jer. xxii. 17; Chap. xix. 6, 1: XZ. 213 
xxii. 27. hap. xliv. 6.— Jer. xxii. 3——* Heb. ewpul. 
sions. ——" Levit. xix. 35; Prov. xi. 1. 


© Exod. xxx. 13; Lev. xxvii. 25; Num. iii. 47. 5 Or, kid. 
6 Or, thank- -offerings. P Levit. i. 4.-—" Hebrew, shall be for. 
s Or, with Or, thank-offerings. 


border and on the east ; that is, it shall run parallel 
with them, both on the east and west side. In the 
land shall be his possession in Israel—Or, this shall 
be his possession of land in Israel. And my princes 
shall no more oppress my people—As they formerly 
did: for which they are severely reproved: see the 
margin. 

Verses 9-12. Let it suffice, O ye princes of Israel 
—This is a reproof of the oppressions of the former 
kings and their chief officers. The title of princes 
of Israel is to be understood of such princes as the 
Jews afterward had of the Asmonean race; for 
there were no more princes to reign of the tribe of 
Judah till Christ came. Ye shall have just balances 
—Ye shall take care that there be no deceit in pri- 
vate trade: ye shall provide just measures, both for 
buying and selling, both dry things and liquid: for 
the ephah was the measure of dry things, as the 
bath was of liquid. The homer was about ten 
bushels, which amounts to about eighty gallons in 
liquid things. And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs. 
—This is made the standard of the shekel, Exod. xxx. 
13, which confutes the common opinion, that the 
weights of the sanctuary were double to those of 
common use. The shekel is usually valued at 2s. 6d. 
of our money; but some suppose it to be in value 

2s. 4\d. of our money, and a little over. T'wenty 

sbekels, five and twenty, fifteen shall be your maneh 

—Maneh is the same with the Greek pva, and the 

Latin mina, being both derived from it. A maneh, 

or mina, consists of sixty shekels, that is, thirty 
3 


ounces of silver; which, reckoning every shekel at 
2s. 6d. value, amounts to 7/7. 10s. The dividing the 
maneh into twenty, twenty-five, and fifteen shekels, 
supposes there were coins of these several values, 
whieh, taken all together, were to be of the same 
weight with the mina. 

Verses 13-16. This is the oblation, &c.—The 
Hebrew word here translated oblation, distinguished 
from the first-fruits, (see note on verse 1,) signifies 
the portion belonging to the Levites out of the fruits 
of the earth, when they were gathered in: see chap. 
xliv. 30. For which reason St. Jerome, upon the 
place, supposes the following words to express the 
proportion the. people ought to pay the Levites out 
of the increase of their ground; which by their 
rabbins was determined to amount to at least a six- 
tieth part: after which separation a tenth part was 
to be paid out of the remainder. The portions allot- 
ted to the priests and Levites were not intended only 
for their own maintenance; but likewise to make a 
constant provision for those sacrifices, both ordinary 
and extraordinary, which were appointed by the 
law: see Mal. iii. 10. And one lamb out of the flock, 
out of two hundred—This offering is enjoined, be- 
sides the setting apart the firstborn for the use of 
the priests and Levites, for making provision for the 
daily burnt-offering, Num. xxviii. 3, and for burnt- 
offerings and peace-offerings, or sacrifices of thanks- 
giving, that were to be made upon proper occasions. 
Out of the fat pastures of Israel—This implies that 
these lambs were to be the best and fattest of their 

743 


Ordinances for 


EZEKIEL. 


the priests. 


A. M. 3430. 18 Thus saith the Lord Gop; In|; 22 And upon that day shall the A, M. 3430. 


B.C, 574. ° 
aS °" the first month, in the first day of 


the month, thou shalt take a young bullock 
without blemish, and ‘ cleanse the sanctuary : 

19 * And the priest shall take of the blood of 
the sin-offering, and put 7¢ upon the posts of the 
house, and upon the four corners of the settle 
of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of 
the inner court. 

20 And so thou shalt do the seventh day of 
the month § for every one that erreth, and for 
him that is simple: so shall-ye reconcile the 
house. 

21 *In the first sonth, in the fourteenth day 
of the month, ye shall have the passover, a 
feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be 
eaten. 


4 Leviticus xvi. 16. * Chap. xliii. 20. Leviticus iv. 27. 
t Exod. xii. 18; Lev. xxiii. 5,6; Num. ix. 2,35; xxviii. 16,17; 
Deut. xvi. 1. d 


kind, as all other tithes and things dedicated to God 
were to be. Yo make reconciliation for them— 
This effect is ascribed to burnt-offerings, as well as to 
those which were properly sacrificed for sin. All 
the people, &c., shall give this oblation for the prince 
—Or, with the prince ; that is, the people shall join 
with the prince in making these oblations; whereas 
those that follow in the next verse are to be at the 
sole charge of the prince. 

Verses 18-20. In the first month, §c., thou shalt 
take a young bullock—These words are directed to 
the prince, whois commanded, on the first day of 
the new year, (which, according to the ecclesiastical 
computation, began with the month Nisan, and an- 
swers to our 10th of March: see Exod. xii. 2,) to 
provide a bullock for a burnt-offering to cleanse the 
temple from any defilement it might have contracted, 
by the people’s offering their sacrifices, or coming 
into any of the courts belonging to it, while they 
were under any legal pollution. And the priest shall 
take of the blood, &c.—The office of the priest is 
here distinguished from that of the prince: the 
prince was to provide the sacrifices, and the priest 
to offer them. So shalt thou do the seventh day for 


: ‘ B, C. 574. 
ptince prepare for himself and for ———— 


all the people of the land “a bullock for a 
sin-offering. 

23 And *seven days of the feast he shall 
prepare a burnt-oflering to the Lorp, seven 
bullocks and seven lambs without blemish daily 
the seven days; Yand a kid of the goats daily 
for a sin-offering. 

24 * And he shall prepare a meat-offering of 
an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah fora 
ram, and a hin of oil for an ephah. - 

25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day 
of the month, shall he do the like in the * feast 
of the seven days, according to the sin-offering, 
according to the burnt-offering, and according 
to the meat-offering, and according to the oil. 


u Lev. iv. 14.—* Lev. xxiii. 8. —-y Num. xxviii. 15, 22, 30; 
xxix. 5, 11, 16, 19. z Chapter xlvi. 5, 7.——®@ Ley. xxiii. 33 ; 
Num. xxix. 12; Deut. xvi. 13. 


every one that erreth—For all the errors of all the 
house of Israel through ignorance, There were 
particular sacrifices appointed for sins of ignorance, 
whether of private persons or of the whole congre- 
gation, Lev.iv.13. So shall ye reconcile the house— 
Cleanse it from any pollution it may have contracted 
through the ignorance of any of the common people. 

Verse 25. In the seventh month—According to 
their ecclesiastical account, which is Tisri, and an- 
swers to part of our August and September. Jn the 
fifteenth day, §c., shall he do the like—Namely, the 
prince. On that day the feast of tabernacles began, 
and continued seven days. Here we see the defi- 
ciency of the legal sacrifices for sin; they were 
often repeated, not only every year, but every feast, 
and every day of the feast, because they could not 
make the comers thereunto perfect. Hence we may 
also learn the necessity of frequently repeating the 
same religious exercises. Indeed, the sacrifice of 
atonement was offered once for all; but the sacrifice 
of acknowledgment, that of a broken heart, that of 
a thankful heart, must be offered every day. And 
these spiritual sacrifices are always acceptable to 
God through Christ Jesus. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
In this chapter we have, (1,) Further rules for the worship of the priests and people, 1-15. (2,) A rule for the 


prince’s disposal of his inheritance, 16-18. 
ings, 19-24, 
744 


(3,) A description of the places for the boiling and baking the offer- 


2 


——. 


Ordinances for the prince 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


and for the people. 


ee. THUS saith the Lord Gop; The 
nex oath gate of the inner court that look- 
eth toward the east shall be shut the six work- 
ing days ; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, 
and in the day of the new-moon it shall be 
opened. 

2 * And the prince shall enter by the way of 
the porch of that gate without, and shall stand 
by the post of the gate, and the priests shall 
prepare his burnt-offering and his peace-offer- 
ings, and he shall worship at the threshold of 
the gate: then he shall go forth; but the gate 
shall not be shut until the evening. 

3 Likewise the people of the land shall wor- 
ship at the door of this gate before the Lorn in 
the sabbaths and in the new-moons. 

4 And the burnt-offering that *the prince 
shall offer unto the Lorp in the sabbath day 
shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram 
without blemish. 

5 © And the meat-offering shall be an ephah 
for a ram, and the meat-oflering for the lambs 
1 as he shall be able to give, and a hin of oil to 
an ephah. 

6 And in the day of the new-moon it shall 
be a young bullock without blemish, and six 


lambs, and a ram: they shall be A. M. 3430. 
; ; B, C. 574. 
without blemish. ani sear sae 

7 And he shall prepare a meat-offering, an 
ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, 
and for the lambs according as his hand shall 
attain unto, and a hin of oil to an ephah. 

8 ¢ And when the prince shall enter, he shall 
go in by the way ofthe porch of that gate, and 
he shall go forth by the way thereof. 

9 4 But when the people of the land ° shall 
come before the Lorp in the solemn feasts, he 
that entereth in by the way of the north gate to 
worship shall go out by the way of the south 
gate; and he that entereth by the way of the 
south gate shall go forth by the way of the 
north gate: he shall not return by the way of 
the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth 
over against it. 

10 And the prince in the midst of them, when 
they go in, shall go in ; and when they go forth, 
shall go forth. 

11 And in the feasts and in the solemnities 
fthe meat-offering shall be an ephah to a 
bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the 
lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to 
an ephah. 


2 Chap. xliv. 3; Verse 8 Chap. xlv, 17. 


© Chap. xlv. 
29; Verses 7, 11. 


1 Heb. the gift of his hand, Deuteronomy xvi. 17.——4 Verse 2, 
e Exod. xxiii. 14-17; Deut. xvi. 16.——f Verse 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVI. 

Verses 2,3. The prince shall enter by the way 
of the porch of that gate without—The prince shall 
go through the outer gate of that court, and so pass 
tothe inner gate, where he may see the whole ser- 
vice performed at the altar. And shall stand by the 
post of the gate—That is, by the entrance of the 
gate, where there was a seat prepared for him: see 
note on chap. xliv. 2. And the priests shall prepare 
his burnt-offering—Or, offer his burnt-offering, as 
the original word often signifies. And he shall wor- 
ship at the threshold of the gate--By bowing his 
head, bowing down his face to the ground, or falling 
down upon the ground, as the posture of divine 
worship is elsewhere described. But the gate shall 
not be shut until the evening—Because the people 
were to pay their solemn worship in the same place, 
as is prescribed in-the following verse. Likewise 
thz people shall worship at the door of this gate— 
Here the inner porch of the east gate is assigned for 
their station, who came to present themselves before 
the Lord upon the solemn festivals, and they were 
to come no further into the inner court. 

Verses 4, 5. The burnt-offering that the prince 
shall offer, &e.—It was the prince’s part to provide 
sacrifices for the sabbaths and other festivals: see 
chap. xly. 17. But this was a new ordinance; and 
the number of the beasts that were to be offered, 

3 


and the proportions of the meat and drink-offerings, 
are different here from those prescribed in the law, 
as will appear by comparing the fourth, sixth, 
seventh, and fourteenth verses of this chapter, with 
Num. xxviii. 9-12, 15. And the meat-offering for 
the lambs as he shall be able to give—The Hebrew 
is, According to the gift of his hand ; that is, as much 
as he shall think sufficient. 

Verses 8-10. He shall go in by the porch of that 
gate—To go in at the eastern gate was the privilege 
of the prince and the priests only; the people were 
to enter in by the north or south gates, as is men- 
tioned in the following verse. He that entereth in 
by the way of the north gate, shall go out by the 
way of the south, &c.—These words imply the rea- 
son why the people were not to come in at the east 
gate, because, there being no passage or thoroughfare 
out of the temple westward, if they had entered in 
at the east gate, they must have returned back the 
same way they came in, which would have occa- 
sioned avast throng and hinderance, considering: the 
multitude that came to the temple. And perhaps 
this order was also designed to take away any 
superstitious distinction between the several gates 
of the temple, by commanding that every one should 
go out the opposite way to that by which he came 
in, whether it were toward the north or south. And 
the prince in the midst of them—The prince shall 

745 


Ordinances for the prince 


EZEKIEL. 


and for the people. 


pare a voluntary burnt-offering or 
peace-offerings voluntarily unto the Lorn, £ one 
shall then open him the gate that looketh to- 
ward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt- 
offering and his peace-offerings, as he did on 
the sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and 
after his going forth one shall shut the gate. 

13 »Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt-offer- 
ing unto the Lorp of a lamb ? of the first year 
without blemish: thou shalt prepare it *every 
morning. 

14 And thou shalt prepare a meat-offering for 
it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, 
and the third part of a hin of oil, to temper with 
the fine flour ; a meat-offering continually by a 
perpetual ordinance unto the Lorn. 

15 Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the 
meat-offering, and the oil, every morning for 
a continual burnt-offering. + 

16 4 Thus saith the me dGon; If the menue 
give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance 


h'Bxod, xxix. 38; Num. xxviii. 3. 
* Heb. morning by morning. 


& Chap. xliv. 3; Verse 2. 
* Heb. a son of his year. 


12 Now, when the prince shall pre-|| thereof shall be his sons’ ; it shall be Ay “A a0. 


their possession by inheritance. —— 

17 But if he give a gift of his inheritance to 
one of his servants, then it shall be his to ‘ the 
year of liberty; after it shall return to the prince : 
but his inheritance shall be his sons’ for them. 

18 Moreover, * the prince shall not take of the 
people’s inheritance by oppression, to thrust 
them out of their possession ; bu¢ he shall give 
his sons’ inheritance out of his own possession : 
that my people be not scattered enemy man from — 
his possession. 

19 @ After, he brought me Rios the entry, 
which was at the side of the gate, into the holy 
chambers of the priests, which looked toward the 
north: and behold, there was a place on the 
two sides westward. 

20 'Then said he unto me, This is the place 
where the priests shall ! boil the trespass-offering 
and the sin-offering, where they shall ™ bake the 
meat-offering ; that they bear them not out into 
the outer court, "to sanctify the people. 


12 Chron, xxxy. 13. 


i Leviticus xxv. 10.— Chap. xly. 8. 
1 Chap. ale 19; 


m Ley. ii. 4, 5, 7. 


pay the same attendance upon God’s worship with the 
people, since all men are equal in the sight of God. 

Verses 12-14. Now when the prince shall prepare 
avoluntary offering—The foregoing verses gave di- 
rections about the sacrifices the prince was enjoined 
to offer upon solemn days; this gives directions con- 
cerning his free-will, or voluntary offerings, concern- 
ing which see Lev. xxii. 18, 21. Upon these occa- 
sions the eastern gate was to be opened for the 
prince; but then, as soon as the service was over, 
and he was gone out, the gate was to be shut, because 
that gate was not to stand open, but only on the 
sabbath and festival days. Thou shalt daily pre- 
pare—The LXX. read, He shall prepare, or make, 
a burnt-offering, &c., as also all the ancient versions, 
except the Chaldee. He shall prepare it every 
morning—The daily evening sacrifice is generally 
supposed to be here implied, according to the pre- 
scription of the law, Num. xxviii. 3. The sivth 
part of an ephah, &c.—In Numbers xxviii. 5, the 
proportion required is the tenth part of an ephah, 
and the fourth partof ahinof oil. By a perpetual 
ordinance unto the Lord—The law of the passover 
is called a perpetual ordinance, Exod. xii. 17; and 
likewise the ordinances about the first- -fruits, Ley. 
xxiii. 14. The Hebrew word, yy, is used in each 
of these places; but it does not always denote per- 
petuily ina strict sense, but only a long period, or 
succession of time. 

Verses 16-18. If the prince give a gift, &e.—By 
these verses we learn, that even gifts, or legacies of 
lands, could only be granted till the year of jubilee, 


except to a person’s own heirs; for at that period all |} those that touched them: see note on 


746 


such gifts or grants devolved again to the original 
possessors, or their heirs.  J¢ shall be his to the year 
of liberty—That is, of jubilee, called the year of 
liberty, because it freed men’s persons from the ser- 
vice of their masters, and their estates from any 
engagements by which the right of them was trans- 
ferred from their proper owners. After it shall 


return to the prince—Or to his heirs, if he be dead. 


But his inheritance shall be his sons’ for them—Or, 
his inheritance shall belong to his sons; it shall be 
theirs so as not to be alienated. TJ'he prince shall 
not take of the pcople’s inheritance—As Ahab did, 
1 Kings xxi. 16. That my people be not scattered 
—Lest, being turned out of their own, they be foreed 
to wander up and down the country for a livelihood. 

Verses 19, 20. He brought me through the entry 
—A private passage, chap. xlii. 9, which led to the 
priests’ chambers, which were on the north side of 


the inner court, and are described chap. xl. 44, 46. 


There was a place on the tivo sides westward—Or, 
on their sides westward ; that is, there was an en- 
closure on the west side of these chambers. This 
is the place where the priest shall boil the trespass- 
offering—The flesh of the sacrifices, which were to 
be eaten, was to be boiled, except the flesh of the 
passover. Where they shail bake the meat-offering 
—<According to the directions given Ley. ii. 4-7. 
T hat they bear them not into the outer court, to sanc- 
tify the people—The flesh of those sacrifices, and 
the remainder of the meat-offering, were accounted 
most holy; and consequently, according to the law, 
were supposed to convey some kind of bi eg to 


” 


The vision of 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


the holy waters. 


A. M. 3430. 
B. C. 574 


21 Then he brought me forth into 
the outer court, and caused me to pass 
by the four corners of the court; and behold, * in 
every corner of the court there was a court. 

22 In the four corners of the court there 
were courts joined of forty cubits long and 
thirty broad: these four ® corners were of one 
Measure. 


* Heb. a court ina corner of a court, and a court in a corner of a court. 

Verses 21-24. Behold, in every corner of the 
court there was a court—At every corner, where 
the side walls metin right angles, there was another 
little court. J'here were courts joined of forty 
cubits long, &c.—These little courts were in the 
shape of an oblong square, joined with inner walls 
to the outside walls of the greater court. The mar- 
ginal reading, made with chimneys, gives a sense 
which very well agrees with the uses for which the 
courts were designed. here was a row of build- 


| 23 And there was a row of build- * M. 2430. 


C. 574. 


ings round about in them, round 
about them four, and i¢ was made with boil- 
ing-places under the rows round about. 

24 Then said he unto me, These are the 
places of them that boil, where the ministers 
of the house shall °boil the sacrifice of the 
people. 


Oo 


6 Heb. cornered. Verse 20. 


5 Or, made with chimneys. 


ings round about in them—Namely, on the inside of 
these courts. Then said he, These are the places, 
&c.—As there was a place in the inner court for 
boiling the trespass and sin-offering, verses 19, 20; 
so these boiling-places might be appointed for boiling 
the peace-offerings, which were esteemed inferior 
in holiness to those above mentioned, and therefore, 
perhaps, were dressed by the Levites, or inferior 
ministers; whereas the former were boiled by the 


priests in the court properly belonging to them. 


~ 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


Tn this chapter we have, (1,) The vision of the holy waters, their rise, extent, depth, and healing virtue; the plenty 


of fish in them, and an account of trees growing on the banks of them, 1-12. 


(2,) An appoiniment of the borders« 


of the land of Canaan, which was to be divided by lot to the tribes of Israel, and the strangers that sojourned 


among them, 13-23. 


. AFTERWARD he brought me 
oe EAP SPN again unto the door of the house ; 
and behold, * waters issued out from under the 
threshold of the house eastward: for the fore- 
front of the house stood toward the east, and 


A. ca rg 
B.C 


the waters came down from under 
from the right side of the house, at 
the south side of the altar. 

2 Then brought he me out of the way of the 
gate northward, and led me about the way 


A. 
B. 


a Joel iii. 18; Zech. xiii. 1; 


xiv. 8; Revelation xxii. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVII. 

Verse 1. He brought me again to the door of the 
house—The door of the temple, described chap. 
xli.2. And behold, waters issued from under the 
threshold eastward—Ezekiel had repeatedly walked 
round the house, and had surveyed the doors of it, 


but had not discovered this stream of water spring- | 
Thus God | 


ing from under its threshold till now. 


makes known his mind and will to his people, not | 


all at once, but by degrees. Dr. Lightfoot tells us, 
that there was a large quantity of water conveyed 
in pipes under ground from the fountain of Etam, 


for the uses of the temple; and some commentators | 


seem disposed to interpret this part of Ezekiel’s 

vision, of that water. Others think he only alludes 
to it, or draws his similitude from it, but is to be mys- | 
tically understood. Whether he allude to any such | 
conduit, or stream of water, or not, that the waters 
here spoken of are to be understood mystically, will 


| 


stated concerning their direction and course, their 
continual increase, and salubrious effects; cireum- 
stances all utterly inapplicable to the water said to be 
brought in pipes for the uses of the temple. TJ'he 
fore-front of the house stood toward the east, and 
the waters came down from under the right side of 
the house, and proceeded eastward—They did not 
therefore come to the temple, as if intended for the 
purposes of washing the sacrifices,carrying offthe filth, 
and keeping every partclean and wholesome; but they 
issued from it, and proceeded to refresh and fertilize 
other places. The prophecy of Zechariah, chap. 
xiv. 8, that living waters should go forth from Jeru- 
salem, half of them toward the former sea, and 
half toward the hinder sea; and St. John’s vision 


| (Rev. xxii. 1)of a pure river of water of life, pro- 


ceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb, 
elucidate this part of Ezekiel’s viston, and direct us 
in the application of it. Itis undoubtedly to be un- 


hardly be doubted by any that consider what is | derstood of the gospel of Christ, which went forth 
3 747 


The vision of 


EZEKIEL. the holy waters. 


A. M. 3430. without unto the outer gate by the 
= way that looketh eastward; and be- 
hold, there ran out waters on the right side. 

3 And when *the man that had the line in 
his hand went forth eastward, he measured a 
thousand cubits, and he brought me through 
the waters; the 1 waters were to the ankles. 

4 Again he measured a thousand, and brought 
me through the waters; the waters were to 
the knees. Again he measured a thousand, 


> Chap. xl. 3.——" Heb. waters of the ankles, 


from Jerusalem, and spread itself into the countries 
around; and of the gifts and graces of the Holy 
Ghost which accompanied it, and by virtue of which 
it diffused its influence far and wide, and produced 
the most blessed effects. Thus Isaiah foretold that 


out of Zion should go forth the law, and the word |) 


of the Lord from Jerusulem, chap. ii. 3. At Jeru- 
salem it was that the Spirit was poured out upon the 
apostles, enduing them with the gift of tongues, that 
they might carry these waters to all nations; and 
in the temple first they stood and preached the 
words of this life. But this temple of Ezekiel was 
not so much designed to be an emblem of the mate- 
rial temple, built after the return of the Jews from 
Babylon, or of the Jewish Church, which had its 
principal seat there, as of the Christian Church, the 
temple built on the foundation of the apostles and 
prophets, of which Jesus Christ is at once the 
foundation and chief corner-stone; nay, and also 
its threshold and door of entrance: and from him 
springs the well, and from him proceed the rivers of 
living water, which refresh and comfort the souls 
of true believers, and render them fruitful to the 
praise and glory of God: see John iv. 10, 14, and 
vii. 38, 39. Through these waters, the places, which 
had before been a mere wilderness, are made like 
Eden ; and what had been a dry and barren desert, 
becomes like the garden of the Lord ; joy and glad- 
ness are found therein, thanksgiving and the voice 
of melody, Isa. li. 3, and xxx. 25, where see the 
notes. 

Verse 3. And when the man that had the line— 
The angel, described with a line in his hand, chap. 
xl. 3; went forth eastward—Went on directly from 
the east gate; he measured—By the line in his hand; 
@ thousand cubits—Almost the third part of an 
English mile; and he brought me through the waters 
—To try the depth of them. And the waters were 
to the ankles—“ The gradual rise of the waters de- 
notes the large effusion of the Spirit, (which was 
very remarkable at the first publication of the gos- 
pel,) and its wonderful increase from small begin- 
nings; as well as most probably some future and 
large effusion thereof to be poured out upon the 
Jews and Gentiles, in order to their conversion. 
And the latter part of the representation, as Mr. 
Scott observes, may relate to the times when the 
gospel shall fill the earth, and produce most exten- | 

748 


| was cast ; 


|and brought me through ; 
were to the loins. os 

5 Afterward he measured a thousand; and 
it was a river that I could not pass over: for 
the waters were risen, ® waters to swim in, a 
river that could not be passed over. 

6 9 And he said unto me, Son of man, hast 
thou seen this? Then he brought me, and 
caused me to return to the brink of the river. 

7 Now, when I had returned, behold, at the 


the waters A. M. 3430. 
B. C. 574. 


2 Heb. waters of swimming. 


sive and important good effects on the state of man- 
kind in every nation. Thus the river here signifies 
the same as the stone, (Dan. ii. 34, 45,) cut owt with- 
out hands, becoming a great mountain, and filling 
the whole earth; and the same as the little leaven 
(which is Christ’s illustration of the subject) leaven- 
ing the whole three measures of meal into which it 
or as the grain of mustard-seed becoming 
a large plant, like a tree, in which the fowls of the 
air might make their nests. The emblem may also 
be applied to illustrate the growth of grace, know- 
ledge, and holiness, in true Christians, who, instead 
of resting in past attainments, forgetting those 
things which are behind, reach forth unto those 
which are before, and press toward the mark for 
the prize of their high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus. Of such the religion may be fitly compared 
to the morning light, which shines more and more 
unto the perfect day. 

Verses 6,7. And he said, Son of man, hast thou 
seen this 2—Hast thou considered, or taken notice of, 
this vision now showed unto thee? ‘To see, often 
signifies to take notice of what we see: on the con- 
trary, they are said to have eyes and see not, who do 
not observe what is placed before their eyes. This 
is an intimation to us, that it is our indispensable 
duty to consider well what is signified by these wa-_ 
ters, and by their increase and effects: namely, to 
mark well the progress of the gospel in the world, 
and the process of the work of grace in the heart; to 
follow and carefully observe these waters, as Ezekiel — 
here did; to attend to the motions and drawings of 
the blessed Spirit, and walk after them under a di- 
vine conduct. It is good to be often searching into 
the things of God, and trying to discover the depth 
of them; not only to Jook on the surface of the wa- 
ters, but to go as far as we can toward the bottom 
of them; to be often digging, often diving into the 
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, as those who 
covet to be intimately acquainted with them. If we 
carefully consider the things of God, we shall find 
some of them very plain, and easy to be understood, 
like the waters that came only up to the ankles; oth- 
ers more difficult, and which require a deeper search, 
as the waters which rose io the knees, or the loins; 
and some quite beyond our reach, which we can 
neither fathom nor penetrate into, but, despairing to 


find their bottom, or measure their depth - 


a +, 


The vision of 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


the holy waters, 
7 


A. M. 3430. 3 bank 


of the river were very man 
B. C. 574 ¥. y 


~ °trees on the one side and on the 
other. 

8 Then said he unto me, These waters issue 
out toward the east country, and go down into 
the ‘desert, and go into the sea: which being 
brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be 
healed. | 

9 And it shall come to pass, that every thing 
that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the 


2 Heb. age Verse 12; Rev. xxii. 2.——* Or, plain, Deut. 
iii. 17; iv.49; Josh. iii. 16. . 


content, with St. Paul, to sit down on the brink, and 
adore it, crying out with him, O the depth of the 
riches, both of the wisdom and. knowledge of God! 
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways 
past finding out! Rom. xi. 33. 

Then he caused me to return by the brink of the 
river—He made me go along by the riverside. Be- 
hold, on the bank of the river were very many trees 
—The words allude to the trees planted in paradise, 
and designed for man’s food in the state of inno- 
cence ; and especially to the tree of life which grew 
there. The reader will observe, that many of the 
ideas in this chapter are taken from the terrestrial 
paradise; see verse 12, and compare Rev. xxii. 1, 2, 
where the same ideas are carried to the celestial 
paradise by St. John. 

Verses 8,9. Then said he, These waters issue to- 
ward the east country—These waters are described 
as taking their course along the plain, or champaign 
country, (for that is the sense of the word here ren- 
dered desert,) toward the lake where Sodom former- 
ly stood, called the Dead sea, and by Moses, the Salt 
sea: see Deut. iii.17. Which being brought forth 
into the sea, the waters shall be healed—These liv- 
ing and salubrious streams, by mixing with the salt 
and brackish waters of the sea, shall render them 
wholesome and fit for use; finely representing the 
tendency of the gospel, and, the healing virtue of 
divine grace, in curing the corruptions of human 
nature, and vices of mankind. And every thing that 
liveth, §c., whithersoever the river shall come, shall 
live—“ Even in the Asphaltite lake, or Dead sea, 
which is so unfavourable to animal life. Josephus 
represents this lake as salt, and incapable of feeding 
fishes. ‘Tacitus says, that it does not suffer fishes or 
water-fowl to live in it; yet Maundrell observed two 
or three shells of fishes on the shore. Bishop Po- 
cocke found its water very salt; and on tasting it, 
his mouth was constringed, as if it had been a strong 
alum water. The bishop observes, ‘It has been 
said by all authors, and is the common opinion, that 
there is no fish in this lake: the fresh water fish of 
the river Jordan probably would not live in it. After 
I left the Holy Land, it was positively affirmed to 
me, that a monk had seen fish caught in this water; 
and possibly there may be fish peculiar to this lake, 
for which this water may not be too salt: but this is 
a fact that deserves to be inquired into. 

3 


and A. M. 3430. 


rivers shall come, shall live: 
C. 574. 


there shall be a very great multitude 
of fish, because these waters shall come thither : 
for they shall be healed: and every pm sey 
live whither the river cometh. 

10 And it shall come to pass, tha¢ the fishers 
shall stand upon it from En-gedi even unto En- 
eglaim ; they shall be a place to spread forth 
nets ; their fish shall be according to their kinds, 
as the fish ¢ of the great sea, exceeding many. 


4 Numbers xxxiv. 6; Joshua xxiii. 4; 
Chap. xlviii. 28. 


5 Hebrew, two rivers. 


about this lake has always been thought to be very 
bad.’ ‘The Dead sea,’ says Michaelis, ‘is more 
brackish than any known sea or salt-well in the 
world. It contains as much salt as water can dis- 
solve, namely, the fourth part of the weight of the 
water: and this is the reason why neither men nor 
animals sink in the Dead sea. If you throw fishes 
into heavy water, they cannot swim, but fall imme- 
diately on their sides.”’”—Newcome. The reader 
who wishes to have further information on this sub- 
ject, may find it in Dr. Pococke and Dr. Shaw’s 
Travels, or the Encycl. Britan. on the word As- 
phaltites. Every thing shall live whither the river 
cometh—This signifies the wonderful and blessed 
efficacy of the gospel, when accompanied by the in- 
fluence of the Holy Spirit, and received in faith and 
love: it communicates spiritual life to such as were 
before dead in trespasses and sins: it creates them 
anew in Christ Jesus unto all holy tempers, words, 
and works, such as God hath ordained that men 
should walk in them. 

Verse 10. Fishers shall stand upon it from En- 
gedi unto En-eglaim--En-gedi was in the wilderness 
of Judah, Josh. xv. 61, 62. De L’Isle places it toward 
the south-west point of the Dead sea; and En- 
eglaim is placed by the same writer at the north of 
the Dead sea, where Jordan runs into it. It is men- 
tioned, Isa. xv. 8, as a place on the borders of Moab, 
which country lay on the east side of the Dead sea. 
Bishop Newcome, following the punctuation adopt- 
ed by the Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic, reads, From 
En-gedi even to En-eglaim there shall be a spread- 
ing forth of nets ; by which is signified, that fishers 
should be employed along the whole coast of it, de- 
noting the multitude of gospel preachers, all over the 
world, labouring to gain sinners to Christ. Their 
fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of 
the great sea—That is, the Mediterranean; exceed- 
ing many—Great multitudes of sinners, of all de- 
scriptions, in a thousand diversified forms of guilt 
and wretchedness, shall be brought to God by the 
word of these preachers, these fishers of men. So 
that this isa further amplification of what is said in 
verse 8, that the waters should be healed, and strong- 
ly illustrates the salutary effect of the gospel, and 
the multitude of converts that should be made in the 
Gentile countries, even in the most idolatrous, igno- 


The air || rant, and wicked. 


749 


The vision of ° 
fA 


EZEKIEL. 


the holy waters. 


A. M. 3430, 


11 But the miry places thereof and 
B. C. 574, 


the marshes thereof °shall not be 
healed ; they shall be given to salt. 

12 And ° by the river upon the bank thereof, 
on this side and on that side, 7shall grow all 
trees for meat, ‘whose leaf shall not fade, 


neither shall the fruit thereof be con- A, M. 3430. 

: : .. B.C. 574. 
sumed ; it shall bring forth * new fruit 
according to his months, because their waters 
they issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit 
thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof 
° for § medicine. 


¢ Verse 7.—’ Heb. 


6 Or, and that which shall not be healed. 
J shall come up. 


Verse 11. But the miry places thereof, and the 
marshes thereof, shall not be healed—* There shall 
still remain some marshes, creeks, or swamps, into 
which these healing waters shall not find an en- 
trance; and these must be left incurably steril and 
worthless.”—Scott. This represents the case of 
those countries or individuals, who either utterly re- 
ject the gospel, or, though they profess to receive it, 
do not obey and walk according to it, but hold the 
truth in unrighteousness. They shall be given to 
salt—The gospel is the only healing medicine for 
_ the disorders of our fallen nature, and they who will 
not receive it in the love of it, remain incurable, and 
are abandoned to final ruin. The Hebrew language 
often expresses irremediable barrenness and unpro- 
fitableness by being given wp to salt, sallness being 
equivalent to barrenness in that language. When 
Abimelech destroyed Sichem, he sowed the ground 
whereon it stood with salt, to denote that it should 
never be cultivated or inhabited again, Judg. ix. 45. 

Verse 12, And by the river, upon the bank thereof, 
shall grow all trees for meat—See the note on 
verse 7. By these trees may be understood, “the 
plenteous provisions of the gospel, the precious pro- 
mises of the sacred word, and the privileges of be- 
lievers, as communicated to their souls by the quick- 
ening Spirit. These abound on each side of the river, 
wherever the gospel is successfully preached; they 
afford nourishment and delight to the souls of men; 
' they never fade or wither; they are various, accord- 
ing to the variety of circumstances and occasions in 
the experience of Christians; (as if a tree should 
yield a succession of different kinds of fruit, through 
the months of the year;) and even the leaves serve 
as medicines to their souls. The warnings and re- 
proofs of the word, and the salutary corrections of 
their Father’s rod, though generally less valued, and 


always less pleasant, than divine consolations, yet 
tend to cure their maladies, and restore them to ho- 
liness and happiness.”—Scott. 

Most expositors, however, consider these trees as 
emblematical of true, spiritual Christians, termed by 
Isaiah, trees of righteousness, the planting of the 
Lord, chap. 1xi. 3, set by the rivers of water, the 
waters of the sanctuary, Psa. i. 3, grafted into Christ, 
the tree of life, and, by virtue of their union with 
him, made trees of life too, rooted in him, Col. ii. 7. 
There isa great variety of these trees, through the 
diversity of gifts with which they are endued by 
that one Spirit which works all in all., They grow 
on the bank of the river, for they keep close to holy 
ordinances, and through them derive sap and virtue 
from Christ. They are fruit-trees, designed, as the| 

750 


f Job viii. 16; Psa. i.3; Jer. xvii. 8.——® Or, principal—® Or, 
for bruises and sores.——S Rev. xxii. 2. 4 


fig-tree and the olive, to honour with their fruits both 
God and man, Judg. ix. 9. The fruit thereof shall 
be for meat, for the lips of the righteous feed-many, 
and the fruits of their righteousness are many ways 
beneficial. The very leaves of these trees are for 
medicine, or, as the margin has it, for bruises and 
sores. True Christians, with their good discourses, 
the leaves of the trees of righteousness, as well as 
with their beneficent actions, which are their fruits, 
do good to those about them: they strengthen the 
weak, and bind up the broken-hearted. Their cheer- 
fulness does good like a medicine, not only to them- 
selves, but to others also, And their leaf shall not 
fade—They shall be enabled, by the grace of God, 
to persevere in their piety and usefulness, having not 
only life in their root, but sap in all their branches. 
Therefore their profession shall not wither, nor their 
discourse lose its healing, strengthening virtue. 
Neither shall their fruit be consumed--Thatis, they 
shall not cease to bear fruit, retaining still the princi- 
ples of their fruitfulness; but shall bring it forth even 
in old age. Or, the reward of their fruitfulness shall 
abide for ever; they shaJl produce fruit that shall 
abound to their account at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ, fruit to life eternal. They shall bring forth 
new fruit according to their months—Some in one 
month and others in another; or, each one of them 
shall bring forth fruit monthly; which signifies a 


| constant disposition, desire, resolution, and endea- 


vour to bear fruit, and that they shall never be weary 
of well-doing. And the reason of this extraordinary 
fruitfulness is, because their waters issue out of the 
sanctuary—It isnot to be aseribed to their own wis- 
dom, power, or goodness, or to any thing in them- 
selves, but to the continual supplies of divine grace, 
with which they are watered every moment, Isa 
xxvii. 3. For, whoever may be the instrument of” ‘ 
planting them, it is divine grace which gives the in- 
crease. 
The reader will observe, that this part of Ezekiel’s 
vision is evidently referred to and almost copied by 
St. John, Rev. xxii. 2, who applies it to the salvation 
of Christ, begun on earth, and perfected in heaven. 
This whole passage, from verse 1-12 inclusive, as 
Bishop Newcome observes, “is one of the most 
striking allegories in the Hebrew Scriptures,” and 
must so necessarily have a mystical and spiritual 
meaning, that from thence we are compelled to con- 
clude that all the other parts of the vision, from the 
beginning of the xlth to the end of the xlviiith chap- 
ter, must have such a meaning also; and that what- 
ever allusion the prophet’s description of the tem- 
ple, its courts, &c., and the division nic a i 


The dimensions and 


tars vg 13 4 Thus saith the Lord Gop: 
———— This shail be the border, whereby ye 
shall inherit the land according to the twelve 
tribes of Israel: > Joseph shall have two por- 
tions. 

14 And ye shall inherit it, one as well as 
another : concerning the which I }° lifted! up 
my hand to give it unto your fathers: and this 
land shall * fall unto you for inheritance. 

15 And this shall be the border of the land 
toward the north side, from the great sea, the 
way of Hethlen, as men go to ™ Zedad ; 

16 "Hamath, ° Berothah, Sibraim, which 7s 
between the border of Damascus and the bor- 
der of Hamath ; ™ Hazar-hatticon, which zs by 
the coast of Hauran. 


CHAPTER XLVII. : 
é 


limits of the land. 


17 And the border froin the sea shall A. M. 3430. 
be ? Hazar-enan, the border of Da- siti di 
mascus, and the north northward, and the bor- 
der of Hamath. And ¢his is the north side. 

18 And the east side ye shall measure 
” from Hauran, and from Damascus, and from 
Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, 
from the border unto the east sea. And ¢his is 
the east side. 

19 And the south side southward, from T'a- 
mar, even to 4 the waters of } strife in Kadesh, | 
the ‘river to the great sea. And this is the 
south side % southward. 

20 'The west side also shall be the great sea 
from the border, till a man come over against 
Hamath. 'This zs the west side. 


h Gen. xlviii. 5; 1 Chron. v. 1; Chap. xlviii. 4, 5.——1° Or, 
swore. iGen.xii.7; xiii. 15; xv. 7; xvii. 8; xxvi.33; xxviii. 
13; Ch. xx. 5, 6, 28, 42——* Chap. xlviii. 29. 1 Chap, xlvili. 
1.— Num. xxxiv. 8. o Num. xxxiv. 8. ©2 Sam. viii. 8. 


prince, priests, and tribes, might have to Solomon’s 
temple, or to that built after the return of the Jews 
from Babylon, and the former divisions of the coun- 
try ; yet that the vision was principally intended of 
the spiritual temple of the Christian Church, and of 
its great extent, prosperity, and glory in the latter 
days, when the fulness of the Gentiles shall come 
in, and all Israel shall be saved. 

Verse 13. This shall be the border, &c.—The 
borders described in the following part of this chap- 
ter shall be the limits or boundaries of your coun- 
try; whereby ye shall inherit the land according to 
the twelve tribes of Israel—By the several captivi- 
ties both of Israel and Judah, the several limits or 
borders, belonging to the inheritance of each tribe, 
were obliterated and forgotten; whereupon a new 
boundary and division are here made of the holy 
Jand. “The allotment of the land,” says Grotius, 


“made here, and in the next chapter, would have | 


taken place, had the ten tribes in general, as well as 


Judah and Benjamin, turned themselves to the wor- | 


ship of the true God: for if so, they, as weli as Ju- 
dah and Benjamin, would have obtained a restora- 
tion. But only some part of them returned with 
Judah and Benjamin, with whom they settled in 
common in the land of Judea.” This may, perhaps, 
be the literal sense of the following part of the pro- 
phecy ; but, without question, a mystical sense is im- 
plied under this literal description, as well as in all the 
preceding parts of the vision. Joseph shall have 
two portions—Upon Reuben’s forfeiting his birth- 
right, the double portion, belonging to the firstborn, 
accrued to Joseph and his two sons, Manasseh and 
Ephraim, according to Jacob’s own appointment. 
Verse 14. And ye shall inherit it, one as well as 
another—Namely, the ten tribes which are scattered 
abroad as well as Judah and Benjamin. These two 
tribes, together with some of the families of the tribe 


N Or, the middle village-——? Num. xxxiv. 9; Chap. xviii. 1. 
12 Heb. from between. 4 Num, xx. 13; Deut. xxxii. 51; Psa, 
Ixxxi. 7; Chapter xlviii. 28. ——13 Or, Meribah. 14 Or, vailey. 
15 Or, toward T'eman. 


turned from the Babylonish captivity; by which it 
appears, that this prophecy has not yet been fulfill- 
ed, but relates to the general restoration of the Jews 
and Israelites, an event often foretold in the prophe- 
cies of the Old Testament. And this land shall fall 


unto you for inkeritance—Here is an allusion to the, 


manner of their first acquiring the possession of the 
land, which was by lot, by which means all contro- 
versies were prevented, the lot referring all things to 
the divine designation and appointment. 

Verses 15-17. This shall be the border toward 
the north—The northern border of the land was to 
begin from the west point, on which side lay the 
Mediterranean sea, and to go on northward toward 
Hethlon, a place between Tyre aad Damascus, and 


so forward to Zedad, mentioned Num, xxxiv. 8, | 


Hamath, and other places here mentioned in these 
verses. 

Verse 18. And the east side ye shall measure 
from Hauran—The city Aurana, and the district 
Auranitis, the north-east limit of the Holy Land. 
Damascus lay more northerly than Hauran, but the 
country called Auranitis might reach near it. Gilead 
is well known to have been a long tract of land, 
which was extended to the country of Sihon king of 
the Amorites. From the land of Israel by Jordan— 
From the northern limits of the land of Israel near 
Cesarea Philippi, or Dan, where the river Jordan 
takes its rise. Unto the east sea—That is, the Dead 
sea, or the lake of Sodom: see verse 8. 

Verse 19. And the south side southward—The 
southern frontier shall be from En-gedi, called Ha- 
zazon-tamar, 2 Chron. xx. 2, to the waters of Me- 
ribah, or strife, in Kadesh, in the south limit of Ju- 
dah, and from thence to the river of Egypt, namely, 
Besor, which runs into the sea not far from Gaza. 

Verse 20. T'he west side shall be the great sea 
from the border—That is, from the southern border, 


of Levi, made up the principal part of those who re-|| mentioned in the foregoing verse. J'ili @ man come 
3 


751 


‘ 


The portionsof . EZEKIEL. the different tribes. 


s 


A. M.3430. 21 So shall ye divide this land|]|they shall be unto you as born in the A. M, 3430 
B.C. 574. : B. C. 574. 
unto you according to the tribes of || country among the children of Israel ; 

Israel. they shall have inheritance with you among 

22 4 And it shall come to pass, that ye shall||the tribes of Israel. 
divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you,|| 23 And it shall come to pass, that in what 
‘and to the strangers that sojourn among you/|| tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give 
which shall beget children among you: *and|| him his inheritance, saith the Lord Gop. 


r Eph. iii. 6; Rev. vii. 9, 10. 8 Rom. x. 12; Gal. iii. 28; Col. iii. 11. 


over against Hamath—Or rather, till aman come to || mystically denotes the incorporating the Gentiles 
Hamath, the northern point toward the west frontier. || into the same church with the Jews, making them 

Verse 22. Ye shall divide it by lot for an inherit-|| fellow-heirs, and of the same body with them by 
ance unto you—See the note on verse 14. And to|| the gospel, Eph. iii. 6. They shall have inheritance 
the strangers that sojourn among you—Foreigners | with you among the tribes, &c.—In whatsoever 
never before had the privilege of purchasing or pos- || tribe they sojourn, as it is expressed in the next 
sessing any inheritance among the Jews; so this|| verse. 


_CHAPTER XLYVIIL 


In this chapter we have the division of the country, the boundaries of which were described in the preceding chapter. 
Here is, (1,) The portion of seven tribes, 1-7. (2,) The allotment of land for the sanctuary, priests, and Levites, 
8-14. (3,) For the city and prince, 15-22. (4,) For the other five tribes, 23-29. (5,) A plan of the city, tis gates 
and new name, 30-35. 


Rath 2850. OW these are the names of the |/east side unto the west side, a por- Ath, 0. 
———— tribes: * From the north end to || tion for Manasseh. Sil. 
the coast of the way of Hethlon,as one goeth to || 5 And by the border of Manasseh, from the 
Hamath, Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus ||east side unto the west side, a portion for 
northward, to the coast of Hamath ; (for these are || Ephraim. 
his sides east and west ;)1a portion for Dan.|| 6 And by the border of Ephraim, from the 
2 And by the border of Dan, from the east side || east side even unto the west side, a portion for 
unto the west side, a portion for Asher. Reuben. 
3 And by the border of Asher, from the east side || 7 And by the border of Reuben, from the 
even unto the west side, a portion for Naphtali. |/east side unto the west side, a portion for 
4 And by the border of Naphtali, from the || Judah. 


a Chap. xlvii. 15. 1 Heb. one portion. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XLVIIL south, being divided into twelve equal parts, (see 

Verses 1,2. These are the names of the tribes: || chap. xlvii. 14,) besides the allotment for the holy 
from the north end, &c.—As the description of the || portion and for the prince, and the city and temple 
boundaries of the land began on the north, so the || being placed where they formerly stood. Hence it 
portion of that tribe to which the most northern lot beaks necessary that there should be seven shares on 
fell is first named, which is Dan. For these are his || the north side of that allotment, and but five on the 
sides east and west—These are the boundaries be-|| south side ; Jerusalem not standing in the middle of 
longing to that tribe, from the east point, near mount || the Holy Land, but more toward the south, as will 
Libanus and Gilead, to the west point, bounded by || appear to any one that consults an accurate map of 
the Mediterranean sea. And by the border of Dan|| Judea. Many learned men are of opinion, that this 
a portion for Asher—All along from the south side || particular description of the several portions allot- 
of Dan, measuring from east to west, shall the share || ted to the tribes, relates to the settlement of the 
of Asher be. Jews in their own country, after their conversion to 
Verse 7. And by the border of Reuben, &c., a|| Christianity. Certainty several passages in the pro- 
portion for Judah—From the 1st verse to the 7th, | phets bear this aspect: see particularly chap. xxxvi. 
the situation of seven of the twelve tribes is de-|, and xxxvii. of this prophecy. “But without laying 
scribed, which were placed on the north side of the || too great a stress upon this opinion, we may reason- 
holy portion, the “ of Judea, from north to., ably suppose that some mystical sense — 

52 , 


A ail 


Allotment of land for 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


the priests and Levites. 


A. M. 3430. 


8 § And by the border of Judah, 
B. O. 574. 


from the east side unto the west side, 
shall be >the offering which ye shall offer of 
five and twenty thousand reeds in breadth, and 
in length as one of the other parts, from the 
east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary 
shall be in the midst of it. 

9 The oblation that ye-shall offer unto the 
Lorp shall be of five and twenty thousand in 
length, and of ten thousand in breadth. 

10 And for them, even for the priests, shall 
be this holy oblation; toward the north five 
and twenty thousand in length, and toward 
the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward 
the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward 
the south five and twenty thousand in length ; 
and the sanctuary of the Lorp shall be in the 
midst thereof. 


11 ° It? shall be for the priests that A, M. 3430. 
are sanotified of the sons of Zadok; oa i 
which have kept my *charge, which went not 
astray when the children of Israel went astray, 
das the Levites went astray. 

12 And this oblation of the land that,is offer- 
ed shall be unto them a thing most holy by the 
border of the Levites. 

13 And over against the border of the priests, 
the Levites shall have five and twenty thou- 
sand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: 
all the length shall be five and twenty thou- 
sand, and the breadth ten thousand. 

14 ¢ And they shall not sell of it, neither ex- 
change, nor alienate the first-fruits of the land: 
for it is holy unto the Lorp. 

15 9% * And the five thousand that are left in 
the breadth over against the five and twenty 


» Chapter xly. 1-6.——¢ Chap. xliv. 15.——? Or, The sanctified 
portion shall be for the priests. 


3 Or, ward, or, ordinance-——4 Chap. xliv. 10. © Exod. xxii. 
29; Lev. xxvii. 10, 28, 33——f Chap. xxxv. 6. 


under this description. By the twelve tribes the 
pure Christian Church is sometimes signified in the 
New Testament: see Luke xxii. 3; Rev. vii. 4, in 
which latter book twelve is a hieroglyphical num- 
ber, denoting the true church, built upon the doc- 
trine of the twelve apostles: see Rev. xii. 1, and 
xxi. 14. By the same analogy, the number of a 
hundred and forty and four thousand, (Rev. vii. 4, 
and xiv. 1,) signifies the church of true Christians, 
who continue, steadfast in the apostolical doctrine, 
twelve being the square root out of which that num- 
ber arises; so this division of the land among the 
twelve tribes may imply, that all true Christians 
shall be equally sharers in the privileges of the 
gospel.” 

Verse 8. By the border of Judah, §c., shall be the 
offering, &c.—Next to the border of Judah, which 
runs in length from east to west, shall be the offer- 
ing ye shall set apart for the service of God, chap. 
xlv. 1. The word reeds, it must be observed, is not 
in the original text, either here or in that place, and, 
as we have there noticed, many learned men think 
it more probable, that the measure of cubits is in- 
tended in both passages: see the note there. Andin 
the length as in one of the other parts—Given to 
the adjoining tribes. From the east side unto the 
west side—Which was likewise twenty-five thou- 
sand reeds, or cubits, according to the dimensions 
of the holy portion, set down chap. xlv. 1-6, for the 
oblation was to be four-square, consisting of twenty- 
five thousand, multiplied by twenty-five thousand. 

Verses 9, 10. The oblation ye shall offer unto the 
Lord—For his sanctuary and priests: see chap. xlv. 
1: shall be five and twenty thousand in length—See 
note on chap. xlv. 3,4. Toward the north five and 
twenty thousand in length—The dimensions from 
east to west are called by the name of breadth here, 
but of length, verse 8, and so they truly are, as may 

Vou. UL ( 48 ) 


appear from the description given of the whole in 
the notes on the xlvth chapter. But Houbigant reads 
this verse more intelligibly, as follows: “ Toward the 
north the length shall be twenty-five thousand cu- 
bits ; likewise toward the south the length shall be 
twenty-five thousand cubits; and the breadth toward 
the east shall be ten thousand cubits; and toward 
the west ten thousand cubits,” &c. 

Verses 11, 12. It shall be for the priests. of the 
sons of Zadok—See note on chap. xliv. 10, 15. 
Which went not astray as the Levites—Or, as the 
other Levites went astray. “The word Levites is 
here used in its greatest latitude, and comprehends 
the priests, as well as those who were properly called 
Levites. Many of these had defiled themselves with 
idolatry, for which crime they were to be degraded 
from the honours due to those priests who had con- 
tinued faithful in their office.”"—Lowth. This ob- 
lation shall be unto them a thing most holy—As all 
things dedicated to God were. By the border of 
the Levites—It shall lie next to the portion of the 
Levites which lay southward between the priests? 
and the city’s portion. 

Verses 13, 14. Over against the border of the 
priests—It might be better translated, just by, or be- 
side the border of the priests. ‘The words import, 
that the border of the Levites should run parallel to 
that of the priests. And in the same sense the words 
should be translated in the 15th, 18th, and 21st 
verses of this chapter. And they shall not sell it, 
neither exchange—Or, transfer, &c. As it was 
God’s portion, they were not to sell, or part with it, 
upon any pretence of advantage, or of greater con- 
venience. This portion of land is called the first- 
fruits, as it is styled an oblation, verses 8, 12, to de- 
note that the whole land was God’s property. 

Verses 15-17. And the five thousand that are left 
in the breadth over against [or beside, see verse 13] 

753 3 


& 


Allotment of land for 


EZEKIEL. 


the city and prince. 


A. M. 3430. thousand, shall be £a profane place 
B. 0: 57+ for the city, for dwelling, *and for 
suburbs; and the city shall be in the midst 


thereof. 


16 And these shall be the measures thereof; 


the north side four thousand and five hundred, 
and the south side four thousand and five hun- 
dred, and on the east side four thousand and 
five hundred, and the west side four thousand 
and five hundred. 

17 And the suburbs of the city shall be toward 
the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the 
south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east 
two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two 
hundred and fifty. 

18 And the residue in length over against 
the oblation of the holy portion .shall be ten 
thousand eastward, and ten thousand west- 
ward: and it shall be over against the obla- 
tion of the holy portion; and the increase 
thereof shall be for food unto them that serve 
the city. 

& Chap. xii. 20.—+ Chap. xlv. 6. 


ine five and twenty thousand—This five thousand, 
added to the twenty-five thousand in length, and two 
ten thousands in breadth, mentioned verse 10, makes 
up a square of twenty-five thousand every way: see 
verse 20. Shall be a profane place for the city, &c. 
—It is called a profane place comparatively, because 
it was not so holy as the temple and the sanctuary. 
And the city shall be in the midst thereof—A square 
piece of ground, of four thousand five hundred cu- 
bits on every side, shall be taken out of the middle 
of the twenty-five thousand cubits in length, for the 
area of the city. The north side four thousand 
Jive hundred, &c.—It shall be an equilateral square, 
every side being exactly of the same measure, con- 
sisting in all of eighteen thousand measures, as is 
expressed verse 35. According to Josephus, Bell. 
Jud., v. 43, Jerusalem was thirty-three stadia in cir- 
cuit, which the square here described does not great- 
ly exceed. And the suburbs shall be toward the 
north two hundred and fifty—The city and suburbs 
together making assquare of five thousand. 

Verses 18-20. And the residue in length over 
against [or beside] the oblation of the holy portion 
shall be ten thousand eastward and ten thousand 
westward—These two dimensions, of ten thousand 
in length both eastward and westward, remain on 
each side of the area, which is five thousand cubits 
square, and set apart for the site of the city. It shall 
be over against [or beside] the oblation of the holy 
portion—It shall join to the Levites’ portion, both on 
the east and west side ; and it shall lie parallel with 
the two portions belonging to the priests and Le- 
vites. And the increase thereof shall be for food 
unto them that serve the city—Perform burdensome 
754 


19 » And they noe serve the city A. ae 9420. 
shall serve it out of all the tribes 
of Israel. 

20 All the oblations shall be five and twenty 
thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye 
shall offer the holy oblation four-square, with 
the possession of the city. 

21 4 ‘And the residue shail be for the prince, * 
on the one side and on the other of the holy 
oblation, and of the possession of the city, over 
against the five and twenty thousand of the 
oblation toward the east border, and westward 
over against the five and twenty thousand to- 
ward the west border, over against the portions 
for the prince : and it shall be the holy oblation ; 
* and the sanctuary of the house shail be in the 
midst thereof. 

22 Moreover, from the possession of the Le- 
vites, and from the possession of the city, being 
in the midst of that which is the prince’s, be- 
tween the border of Judah and the border of 
Benjamin shall be for the prince. 


i Chap. xlv. 7.——* Verses 8, 10. 


offices of public utility, whether of a higher or lower 
kind. ‘They that serve the city shall serve it out of 
all the tribes—This service being a burden, it was 
fit that all the tribes should bear their part in it. AlZ 
the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand, &¢.— 
That is, twenty-five thousand in length, multiplied 
by twenty-five thousand in breadth. Ye shall offer 
the oblation four-square—So the heavenly Jerusalem 
is described, Rev. xxi. 16, as lying four-square, a 
square figure being the emblem of perpetuity, 
strength, and solidity. With the possession of the 
city—Or the land assigned for the site of the city; 
which wasa square of five thousand cubits, and being 
added to the portion of the priests and Levites, made 
their twice ten thousand to be twenty-five a 
in breadth. 

Verse 21. The visit shall be for the porn on 
the one side and on the other, &c.—The prince’s part 
shall be extended, both on the east and west side of 
the several allotments belonging to the priests, the 
Levites, and the city. Over against the five and 
twenty ‘thousand, &ce.—The particle 35 5s, trans- 
lated over against, is rendered before, in the parallel 
text, chap. xlv. 7, "and thus interpreted makes the 
sense clearer, the words then importing, that the 
prince’s portion was to run along eastward and west- 
ward, like a frontierbefore the holy portions; and to 
extend eastward to Jordan, or the Dead sea, and 
westward to the great sea, retaining its breadth of 
twenty-five thousand cubits from north to south. 

Verse 22. Moreover from, or rather, be the 
possession of the Levites, and beyond the possession 
of the city—That is, the possessions belonging to 
the priests and eae the city, a 

( 


Conclusion of the 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


description of the temple. 


A. M. 3430. 23 9] As for the rest of the tribes, 
— ~*~. from the east side unto the west side, 
Benjamin shall have a * portion. 

24.And by the border of Benjamin, from the 
east side unto the west side, Simeon shall have 
a portion. 

25 And by the border of Simeon, from the 
east side unto the west side, Issachar a portion. 

26 And by the border of Issachar, from the 
east side unto the west side, Zebulun a por- 
tion. 

27 And by the border of Zebulun, from the 
east side unto the west side, Gad a portion. 

28 And by the border of Gad, at the south 
side southward, the border shall be even from 
Tamar wnto 'the waters of °strife i Kadesh, 
and to the river toward the great sea. 

29 ™ This is the land which ye shall divide 
by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, 
and these are their portions, saith the Lord 
Gop. 


30 “ And these are the goings out he her 
of the city on the north side, four ———— 
thousand: and five hundred measures. 

31 » And the gates of the city shall be after 
the names of the tribes of Israel: three gates 
northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of 
Judah, one gate of Levi. 

32 And at the east side four thousand and 
five hundred: and three gates; and one gate 
of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of 
Dan. 

33 And at the south side four thousand and 
five hundred measures: and three gates; one 
gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate 
of Zebulun. 

34 At the west side four thousand and five 
hundred, with their three gates; one gate of 
Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali. 

35 It was round about eighteen thousand 
measures: °and the name of the city from 
that day shall be, ® The ? Lorn is there. 


“ Hebrew, one portion—! Chapter xlvii. 19.——® Hebrew, 
Meriba-kadesh——™ Chapter xlvii. 14, 21, 22.— Revelation 
xxi. 12. 


© Jeremiah xxxiii. 16—® Heb. Jehovah-shemmah, Exodus 
xvii. 15; Judges vi. 24——? Jer. iii. 17; Joel iii. 21; Zech. 
ii. 10;-Rev. xxi. 3; xxii. 3. 


bounded on the easf and west side with the prince’s 
portion; so those were to lie in the middle, and this 
beyond them. Between the border of Judah and 
the border of Benjamin shall be for the prince— 
The border of Judah was to extend from east to west, 
next to the holy portion, on the north side, (see 
verses 1-8,) and the border of Benjamin from east 
to west, next the allotment set apart for the city, on 
the south side: see verses 23-28. The several por- 
tions allotted for the priests, the Levites, and the 
city, were to extend only to the length of twenty- 
five thousand cubits from east to west; so that 
wherever ground ran in a parallel line eastward and 
westward beyond that boundary, even to the land’s 
end, was to belong to the prince. And, supposing 
the whole country to be sixty miles in breadth, and 
the holy portion about seven miles square, there will 
remain above twenty-six miles, both on the east and 
west side, for the prince’s share. 

Verses 23-28. As for the rest of the tribes, &e.— 
The portion assigned for Judah being situate next to 
the holy portion on the north, side, that assigned 
to Benjamin lay next to the ground allotted to the 
city on the south side. All these allotments ran 
from east to west in length, and from north to south 
in breadth. In the 24th and the next three verses, 
the four remaining tribes have their allotments as- 
signed them, lying on the south side of the holy 
portion. 

Verse 31. And the gates of the city shall be after 
the names of the tribes of Isracl—It had twelve 
gates in all, three on each side, which was very pro- 
per, since it lay four-square ; and these twelve gates 

3 


were inscribed to the twelve tribes. Because the 
city was to be served out of all the tribes of Israel, 
verse 19, it was fit that each tribe should have its 
gate; and Levi being here taken in to keep to the 
number twelve, Ephraim and Manasseh are made one 
in Joseph. Conformable to this, in St. John’s vision, 
Rey. xxi. 12, 13, the New Jerusalem (for so the holy 
city is called there, though not here) has twelve 


‘gates, three on a side, and on them are written the 


names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel. 
Observe, reader, into the church of Christ, whether 
militant or triumphant, there is a free access by faith 
for all that come, of every tribe, from every quarter. 
Christ has opened the kingdom of heaven for all be- 
lievers. Whoever will may come, and take of the 
water of life, and of the tree of life, freely. 

Verse 35. The name of the city from that day 
shall be, The Lord is there—It is very frequently 
said in Scripture, that a person or thing should be 
called by a certain name, when it was to be invested 
with qualities which might entitle it to that denomi- 
nation. Thus Isaiah, foretelling the coming of the 
Messiah, says, His name shall be called Wonder ful, 
Counsellor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting 
Father, The Prince of Peace, because he was to 
possess the qualities which should serve as a founda- 
tion for all those titles. In like manner, 2 Sam. xii. 
25, it is said, that Solomon should be called Jedi- 
diah, or, the Beloved of the Lord; and, Isa. i. 26, 
and lxii. 4, 12, that Jerusalem should be called T'he 
City of Righteousness, The Faithful City, Heph- 
zibah, or the Lord’s Delight, Sought Out, A City ' 
not forsaken. Not that it was to quit its ancient 

755 


Conclusion of the » 


EZEKIEL. 


book of Ezekiel. 


name, and assume all these ; but it was tobe crown- 
ed with the favours of heav:cn in such a manner as 
to draw upon itself all these honourable titles. Here 
the prophetic declaration, that the name of the city 
should be Tur Lorp is THERE, might be intended to 
signify, lst, That the captives, after their return, 
should have manifest tokens of God’s presence with 
them, and of his residence among them, both in his 
ordinances and in his providences; so that they 
should have no occasion to ask, as their fathers did, 
Is the Lord among us or not? for they should see 
and acknowledge that he was among them of a truth. 
And then, though their troubles should be many and 
threatening, they would be like the bush which 
burned, but was not consumed, because the Lord 
was there. More especially it was meant to signify, 
2d, That the gospel church should have the presence 
of God in it; though not in the Shechinah, or cloud 
of glory, as of old, yet in a token noless sure, name- 
ly, that of the Holy Spirit in his gifts and graces. 
Where the gospel is faithfully preached, gospel or- 
dinances duly administered, and God worshipped in 
the name of Jesus Christ only, it may be truly said, 
The Lord is there ; for, faithful is he that hath 
promised, and will fulfil his word, Lo, J am with 
you always, even unto the end of the world. The 
756 


Lord is in his church, to rule and govern it, to pro- 
tect and defend it, and graciously to own, accept, 
and bless his sincere worshippers, and to show him- 
self nigh unto them in all that they call upon him 
for. This should engage us to keep close to the 
communion of saints, and not to forsake the as- 
sembling of ourselves together; for where two or 
three are met in the name of Jesus, he is there. 
Nay, the Lord is present with and in every true and 
genuine Christian: God dwells in him, and he in 
God. It may be truly said of every. one who has a 
living principle of grace in his soul, The Lord is 
there. And, as thisis the chief privilege, glory, and 
happiness of the church militant, that the Lord is 
present with and in her; so, 3d, It is the principal 
blessing of the church triumphant. That the pure 
in heart shall there see God; shall see his face, and 
his name shall be on their foreheads ; that God him- 
self, who sits on the throne, shall be with them, and 
dwell among them, (Rev. vii. 2, 25, and xxi. 3,) is 
the crowning blessing of the heavenly city, and the 
consummation of the felicity of all its inhabitants. 
For in his presence is fulness of joy, and athis right 
hand are pleasures for evermore. Let us therefore 
give all diligence to secure to ourselves a place in 
that city, that we may be for ever with the Lord. 
3 


THE BOOK 


OF THE 


eee OP HET) DAP NCE. 


ARGUMENT. 


Dantet, the author of this book, was of the tribe of Judah, and probably of royal descent. Josephus 
says he was of the family of Zedekiah, who was the last king of Judah, before the destruction of 
the city and temple of Jerusalem. He was carried away captive to Babylon when he was very 
young, probably not more than eighteen years of age, namely, in the fourth year of the reign of 
Jehoiakim king of Judah, in the year of the world 3398, before Christ 606. Being possessed of 
extraordinary endowments, both of body and mind, he was soon noticed and much renowned in 
Babylon; and on account of his extraordinary wisdom and virtue, and that supernatural illumination 
God vouchsafed him, which was manifested in his interpreting of dreams, and predicting future 
events, he was advanced to great authority under Nebuchadnezzar, which he appears to have pos- 
sessed during all the subsequent period of the Chaldean monarchy. He also held an exalted station, 
and filled offices of great trust and power, under Darius the Mede, and Cyrus the Persian. His 
great wisdom and extraordinary piety are celebrated by his fellow-captive Ezekiel, with whom he 
was cotemporary. For that prophet, when upbraiding the king of Tyre with his self-conceit and 
pride, asks, Art thou wiser than Daniel? And he mentions Daniel with Noah and Job, as persons 
who had greater power with God in prayer than any others of the human race: see Ezekiel 
xxviii. 3, and xiv. 14. Daniel, though probably younger than Ezekiel, yet appears to have begun 
to prophesy before him. «It is likely he first resided in the court at Babylon, and afterward in 
those of Media and Persia. 

Some of the later Jews have shown an inclination to exclude Daniel from the number of the prophets ; 
and their rabbis have accordingly placed his book among the Hagiographa, or holy writings, and not 
among the books of the ; rophets. But their dislike to him has evidently proceeded only from hence, 
that his predictions are so clear and so express, respecting the time of the Messiah’s appearance, 
the character he should bear, the offices he should sustain, and the violent death he should suffer ; 
and afford such evidence of the truth of Christianity, that they had no other way to avoid conviction 
than to deny the divine authority of the book from whence that evidence is drawn. But herein 
they contradict the sense of the more ancient Jews, and: particularly of Josephus, who calls him 
one of the greatest of the prophets, and says that “he not only foretold future things, which was 
common to him with other prophets, but also fixed a time for their coming to pass.”—Antig., lib. x. 
eap.12. Our Saviour’s authority is decisive in this matter, expressly calling Daniel a prophet, 
Matt. xxiv. 15; in doing which he likewise declared the sense of the Jews of that time; for, as he 
spoke the words in the hearing of the Jewish doctors, they certainly would have objected to Dan- 
iel’s authority, if they had not believed and allowed his divine inspiration. Andif we consider the 
important subject of some of his prophecies, especially those respecting the Messiah, and the large 
extent of others of them, predicting the four great monarchies that should arise in succession, and 
even giving a prophetical history of the church and of the world to nearly the end of time, he may 

justly be reckoned among the greatest of prophets. As Daniel and St. John had both of them the 

ar and happiness of being persons greatly beloved of God, (compare Dan. x. 11 with John xiii. 
23,) so the latter, in his Revelation, doth little more (as Mr. Mede has observed) than distinctly 
unfold those events which the former foretels in general terms. 

This book is written partly in the Hebrew, and partly in Chaldee ; for which singular circumstance 
we may fairly account, without any imputation on the credit of the book, or the judgment of: the 
author. He had been early taught the language of the Chaldeans, and from his long residence in 
the country, may be presumed to have been well acquainted with it. And many of the Jews also, 
during the time of the captivity, doubtless attained a considerable knowledge of that language ; and 
especially those Jews would make it their business to learn it who did not incline to return with 


3 ; 757 


DANIEL. 


their brethren into Judea, but remained in Babylon. And his prophecies were undoubtedly design- 
ed for the benefit of all these Jews, and also of the Chaldeans themselves, whose annals might 
receive confirmation from his work, and be alleged as vouchers of its authenticity. “ Now what 
could be more natural,” says Mr. Wintle, “than that an author, thus circumstanced, should contrive 
his work in amanner” which he judged would be “ the most extensively useful ; and with this view 
should compose a part of it in the language of the country wherein he dwelt, and the other part in 
the original language of the church of God ?” 2 

We learn from St. Jerome, that the famous Porphyry, who flourished in the latter end of the third 
century after Christ, and wrote fifteen books against the Christian religion, endeavoured in one of 
them to depreciate the prophecies of Daniel, affirming that the book in which they are contained 
was not composed by Daniel, whose name it bears, but by somebody who lived in Judea about the 
time of Antiochus Epiphanes ; because all the prophecies which respected events to that time con- 
tained true history, but all beyond that were manifestly false. This work of Porphyry is wholly 
lost, excepting a few fragments and quotations that are preserved in St. Jerome and others of the 
fathers. But it was completely refuted by Eusebius, Appolinarius, and Methodius, in the answers 
they gave to it. And, as St. Jerome rightly observes, such a method of opposing the prophecies is 
the strongest testimony of their truth. For it shows they were fulfilled with such exactness, that 
to infidels the prophet seemed not to have foretold things future, but to have related things past. 
That Daniel’s prophecies were not written after the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, appears clearly 
from hence, that they were translated into Greek a hundred years before his times; and that the 
translation was in the hands of the Egyptians, who were neither friendly to the Jews nor their 
religion. Nay, the prophecies of Daniel, foretelling the great successes of Alexander, chap viii. 5, 
and xi. 3, were shown to Alexander himself by the Jews, who thereupon obtained several privileges 
from him, as Josephus informs us, -Anfig., lib. ii. cap. 8. ‘Indeed it may be proved, it hath been 
proved, to a demonstration,” says Bishop Newton, ‘‘as much as any thing of this nature can be 
proved to a demonstration, by all the characters and testimonies, both internal and external, that 
the prophecies of Daniel were written at the time that the Scripture says they were written.” 
Add to this, that this book of Daniel was one of the Jewish canon, and continually read in their 
synagogues; and indeed if it had not been in their canon, and received by them as one of their 
sacred books, it is impossible Josephus could have made so solemn an appeal to its authenticity as 
he has done. They who wish for further proof of the genuineness and divine inspiration of Daniel’s 
prophecies, may receive full satisfaction in Bishop Chandler’s Vindication of his Defence of Chris-~ 
tianity, in which he has very largely and learnedly confuted every objection to them, and established 
upon the firmest foundation their truth and divine authority. 

The book of Daniel, says Mr. Locke, is divided into ‘two parts; the former, containing the first six 
chapters, is historical, the latter is prophetical. His style, unlike that of the sueceeding prophets, 
is plain and narrative ; on which account, says Bishop Lowth, he is not to be numbered among 
the poetical writers of Scripture. Among the old prophets he is most distinct in order of time, and 
easiest to be understood; and therefore in those things which relate to the last times, he is a key 
to the rest. All his prophecies refer to each other, as if they were several parts or members of 
the same body. The first is the easiest to be understood; and every successive prophecy adds 
something new to that which precedes. He writes in Hebrew, where what he delivers is a bare 
narrative ; but he relates in Chaldee the conversations which he had in this language with the wise 
men andthe kings; and in the same‘language he reports Nebuchadnezzar’s edict, published by 
him after Daniel had interpreted his dream concerning the great golden image. This shows the 
ibe accuracy of our prophet, who relates the very words of those persons whom he introduces as 
speaking. 

It is believed that Daniel died in Chaldea, and that he did not take the advantage of the permission 
granted by Cyrus to the Jews, of returning to their country: the great employments which he had 
possessed in the Persian empire probably detained him there. St. Epiphanius says he died at 
Babylon, and herein he is followed by the generality of historians. See Calmet’s Preface, Bishop 
Chandler’s Vindication, and Bishop Lowth’s twentieth Prelection. ‘ 


CHAPTER I. 


In this chapter we learn, (1,) That Daniel, and some other descendants of David, were carried captive to Babylon in the 
third year of Jehoiakim ; and that he and some other young men were chosen by Nebuchadnezzar’s orders to be educated 
in the learning of the Chaldeans, and that victuals were appointed them from Nebuchadnezzar’s table, 1-7. (2,) That 
Daniel and his three companions, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, piously refused the royal dainties, and determined 
to live on pulse and water, which the steward, to whose care they were committed, allowed them to do, 8-16. (3,) The 
wonderful improvement which they made above all their fellows in knowledge and wisdom, 17-21. : “ae aa 

758 a 


Nebuchadnezzar’s 
A. M, 3398. TN the third year of the reign of 
oth tea I Jehoiakim king of Judah * came 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusa- 
lem, and besieged it. 

2 And the Lorp gave Jehoiakim king of 
Judah into his hand, with ” part of the vessels 
of the house of God: which he carried ° into 
the land of Shinar to the house of his god ; 
“and he brought the vessels into the treasure- 
house of his god. 

3 “| And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the 


a2 Kings xxiv. 1; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6—— 2 Kings xxiv. 13; Jer. 
xxvii. 19, 20.—* Gen. x. 10; xi. 2; Isa. xi. 11; Zech. v. 11. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verses 1, 2. In the third year of the reign of Je- 
hoiakim came Nebuchadnezzar, &c.—See notes on 
2 Kings xxiv. 1-4. And the Lord gave Jehoiakiin 
into his hand—He took Jehoiakim prisoner, and put 
him in chains, with a design to carry him to Baby- 
lon ; but he having humbled himself, and submitted 
to become tributary, he was restored to his kingdom. 
“ At this time,” says Lowth, “ Jehoiakim having be- 
come tributary to the king of Babylon, consequently 
the seventy years of the Jewish captivity and vassal- 
age to Babylon began.” With part of the vessels of 
the house of God—Some of the vessels were still left, 
which Nebuchadnezzar seized when he carried Je- 
coniah captive: see the margin; which he carried 
into the land of Shinar—That is, he carried the ves- 
sels, and not, as some would understand it, the cap- 
tives also; for Jehoiakim only:is mentioned, who 
died, as we have seen, in the land of Judah. Shinar 
was the original name of the country about Babylon, 
(Gen. xi. 2,) and it was still sometimes called by this 
name by some of the prophets: see the margin. And 
he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his 
god—Of his idol Bel, (see note on Jer. 1. 2,) from 
whence they were taken by Cyrus, and delivered to 
Zerubbabel, Ezra i. 7,8. To this agrees the testi- 
mony of Berosus, who tells us that Nebuchadnezzar 
adorned the temple of Bel with the spoils of war 
which he had taken in that expedition: see Joseph. 
Antiq., lib. x. cap. 11. 

Verses 3, 4. And the king spake unto Ashpenaz, 
master of the ewnuchs—One of the chief officers of 
his palace; the officers that attended about the per- 
sons of the eastern kings being commonly eunuchs, 
(a custom still practised in the Ottoman court,) such 
being employed as guardians over the women which 
the kings kept for their pleasure. That he should 
bring certain of the children of Israel, and, or rather, 
even, of the king’s seed—The conjunction copu- 
lative being often used by way of explication. And 
thus Isaiah’s prophecy was punctually fulfilled, chap. 
xxxix. 7. Children in whom was no blemish—He 
was directed to make choice of suchas were comely, 
and had no defect or deformity of body, to which 
the Hebrew word town, here used, is chiefly ap- 
plied, answerable to the Greek wouec. But by the 

3 


CHAPTER I. 


conquest of Judea. 


master of his eunuchs, that he should A. M. 3398 
bring ‘certain of the children of Israel, —_—_— 
and of the king’s seed, and of the princes ; 

4 Children °in whom was no blemish, but 
well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and 
cunning in knowledge, and understanding 
science, and such as had ability in them to 
stand in the king’s palace, and f whom they 
might teach the learning and the tongue of the 
Chaldeans. 

5 And the king appointed them a daily pro- 


42 Chron. xxxvi. 7—— Foretold 2 Kings xx. 17, 18; Isaiah 
XXXVI. 7. € Lev. xxiv. 19, 20,— Acts vii. 22. 


subsequent characters in the verse, it should seem 
that the young men were to be as complete in every 
respect as was possible, perfect in their mental as well 
as corporal powers. The greatest care seems to have 
been required as to the accomplishments of their 
minds, and on this account three several expressions 
are made use of, the particular force of each of 
which it may not be easy to ascertain. “Perhaps,” 
says Mr. Wintle, “the first relates to the best and 
most excellent natural abilities; the second, to the 
acquisition of the greatest improvements from culti- 
vation; and the third, to the communication of their 
perceptions in the happiest manner to others.” He 
translates the clause as follows: Ready of under- 
standing in all wisdom, and of skill in science, and 
expertin prudence, Or, more generally, the expres- 
sions may only signify that they were to be such as 
had been instructed, and had made proficiency, in 
every thing that was taught in the land of Judea. 
And such as had ability in them to stand in the 
king’s palace—Not only being of a strong constitu- 
tion to endure the fatigue of long waitings, in or 
near the royal presence, during which they were not 
permitted to sit down; “but qualified for every bu- 
siness in which they might be employed, and to do 
credit to the situation in which they were to stand.” 
And whom they might teach the learning and tongue 
of the Chaldeans—As Moses was learned in all the 
wisdom of the Egyptians, so we are not to wonder 
that Daniel was taught the learning of the Chaldeans; 
and that he so far excelled in it, as to be placed at 
the head of the magi: see chap. iv. 9. It must be 
observed that the word ot", rendered children in 
the beginning of this verse, does not signify persons 
in a state of childhood, but refers to those of more 
advanced years. The expression is applied to Reho- 
boam’s counsellors, 1 Kings xii. 8, who cannot be 
thought to have been mere children. Nor can we 
suppose Daniel and his companions to have been 
less than eighteen or twenty years of age at this 
time, as may be concluded from Daniel’s being put 
into considerable posts in the government soon 
after. 

Verse 5. T'he king appointed them a daily pro- 
vision of the king’s meat—Such as he had at his own 
table; wherein his humanity and bounty appeared 

759 


Pd 


History of Daniel and 


DANIEL. 


his three countrymen. 


A. M. 3398. vision of the king’s meat, and of * the 
- BG; 00" wine which he drank: so nourishing 
them three years, that at the end thereof they 
might & stand before the king. 

6 Now, among these were of the children 
of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and 
Azariah : 

7 »Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs 
gave names: ‘for he gave unto Daniel the 
name of Belteshazzar ; and to Hananiah, of 
Shadrach ; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and 
to Azariah, of Abed-nego. 


yi. the wine of his drink.—8 Ver. 19; Gen. xli. 46; 1 Kings 
—h Gen. xli. 45 ; 2 Kings xxiv. 17. att Chap. iv. 8; v. 12. 


8 4 But Daniel purposed in his heart A. M. 3398. 
that he would not defile himself * with os 
the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the 
wine which he drank: therefore, he requested 
of the prince of the eunuchs thins he might not 
defile himself. 

9 Now ! God had brought Daniel into favour 
and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs. 

10 And the prince of the eunuchs said unto 
Daniel, I fear my lord the king; who hath ap- 
pointed your meat and your drink: for why 
should he see your faces * worse liking than 


k Deut. xxxii. 38; Ezek. iv. 13; Hos. ix.3; Acts xv. 20,——! Gen. 
xxxix. 21; Psa. evi, 46; Prov. xvi. 7——* Heb. sadder. 


toward them the more conspicuous, they being cap- 
tives. So nourishing them, &c.—The Vulgate ren- 
ders it, Ut enutriti, fc. ; that, being nourished three 
years, they might afterward stand in the presence 
of the king. It seems from what is here said, that 
the Chaldeans entertained a notion that a diet of the 
best sort contributed both to the beauty of the body 
and the improvement of the mind.” 

Verses 6, '7. Among these were Daniel, Hananiah, 


&c.—All their names had some affinity with the | 


name of Jehovah, the God whom they worshipped. 
Daniel signifies, God is my judge, or the judgment || e 
of God; Hananiah, God has been gracious to me, 
or, one favoured of Jehovah ; Mishael, the powerful 
one of God; Azariah, the help of Jehovah, or, Jeho- 
vah is my succour. In like manner, the prince of 
the ewnuchs, in changing their names, as a mark of 
dominion and authority over them, gave them such 
as had an affinity with the names of the gods of the 
Chaldees; Belteshazzar, the name given to Daniel, 


being derived from Bel, or Baal, the chief idol of | 


Babylon, and signifying the treasurer of Baal, or, 
the depositary of the secrets, or treasure, of Baal. 
Shadrach, according to some, means the inspiration 
of the sun; being derived from shada, to pour out, 


and rach, a king, a name given to the sun by the | 


Babylonians. Meshach, derived from a Babylonian 
deity called Shach, or from a goddess called She- 
shach, is thought to signify, He who belongs to Shach, 
or Sheshach. Abed-nego imports the servant of the 
shining light, or, as Calmet thinks, of the sun, or the 
morning star, unless the word should be written 
Abed-nebo, referring to the idol so called, which gave 
name to several distinguished personages among the 
Babylonians: see Isa. xlvi.2. It is certain from He- 
rodotus, lib, i., that the Chaldeans worshipped Jupi- 
ter Belus, Venus, and other idols, or the same under 
other names; and from these it is probable that the 
names were given, according to Chaldee usage, to 
. these young men. 

Verse 8. But Daniel purposed that he would not 
defile himself—The defilement here alluded to might 


arise either from the food being such as was prohi- | 


bited in the law of Moses, or élee what was offered 
to the idols of the Chaldees, or entreated to be blessed 
760 


in their names: see 1 Cor. viii. 10, 20. With the 


| portion of the king’s meat—It was the custom of 


most nations, before their meals, to make an oblation 
of some part of what they ate and drank to their gods, 
as a thankful acknowledgment that every thing which 
they enjoyed was their gift; so that every entertain- 
ment had something in it of the nature of a sacrifice. 
This practice, generally prevailing, might make 
Daniel and his friends look upon the provisions 
coming from the king’s table as no better than meats 
offered to idols; and therefore to be accounted un- 

clean, or polluted : see the margin. Nor with the 


|| wine ‘which he drank—Though wine was not prohi- 


bited in the Levitical law, yet Daniel might wish to 
abstain from it, chiefly from motives of temperance ; 
or because it came from an entertainment wherein a 
libation was made of it to idols, he might think him- 
self obliged to abstain from motives of conscience : 
see Wintle and Lowth. 

Verse 9. Now God had brought Daniel into fa- 
vour and tender love, &c.—Hebrew, (9M, com- 
passionate regard, or, bowels of compassion, which 
is also the sense of the same word, chap. ii. 18. Itis 
a very strong expression, and denotes a kind of pa- 
rental compassion, like that of St. Paul in his epistle 
to Philemon, verse 12, Receive him that is mine own 
bowels. We see a like instance of God’s care over 
Joseph, (Gen. xxxix. 21,) when he was a poor cap- 
tive, a prisoner, and destitute of all friends to support 
or comfort him: see Psa. evi. 46, where, as here, the 
favour of men toward God’s people is attributed to 
his overruling and gracious providence over them. 
And, considering what important consequences fre- 
quently follow upon it, we may, with great reason, 
acknowledge the hand of God in it, whenever it 
takes place. 

Verse 10. The prince of the eunuchs said, I fear 
my lord the king—He objects that he should incur 
the king’s displeasure, and bring his life into danger, 
if he complied with Daniel’s request; the king 
having appointed what sort of meat and drink Daniel 
and his young friends should use, and having given 
no one authority to change it for any other, especial- © 
ly for a kind less calculated to preserve their health, 
and increase the strength and vigour of a 


History,of Daniel and 


CHAPTER I. 


his three countrymen. 


A.M, 3398. the children which are of your ‘sort ? 
~ then shall ye make me endanger my 
head to the king. 

11 Then said Daniel to * Melzar, whom the 
prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, 
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 

12 Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten 
days; and let them give us ° pulse ’ to eat, and 
water to drink. 

13 Then let our countenances be looked 
upon before thee, and the countenance of the 
children that eat of the portion of the king’s 
meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy ser- 
vants, 

14 So he consented to them in this matter, 
and proved them ten days. 


*Or, term, or, continuance. 
7 Heb. that we may eat, &c. 


5 Or, the steward. 6 Heb. of pulse. 
™ ] Kings iii. 12; James i. 5, 17. 


15 And at the end of ten days their A. as 08. 
countenances appeared fairer and : 
fatter in flesh than all the children which did 
eat the portion of the king’s meat. 

16 Thus Melzar took away the portion of 
their meat, and the wine that they should 
drink ; and gave them pulse. 

17 4 As for these four children, ™God gave 
them " knowledge and skill in all learning and 
wisdom : and ® Daniel had ° understanding in 
all visions and dreams. 

18 Now at the end of the days that the 
king had said he should bring them in, then 
the prince of the eunuchs brought them in be- 
fore Nebuchadnezzar. 

19 And the king communed with them: and 


2 Acts vil. 22. ——® Or, he made Daniel understand. ° Num. 


xii. 6; 2Chron. xxvi. 5; Chap. v. 11, 12,14; x. 1. 


tions, ,and beauty of their: appearance. For why should 
he see your faces worse liking—Hebrew, sy, 
cxv@pera, as the LXX. render it, more sad and de- 
jected, or meager and lean; than the children which 
are of your sort—Or, which are of your age, as the 
Hebrew word 43 signifies i in the Arabic, and as the 
LXX. understand it. Probably, however, the word 
may inelude the condition also, 


Verses 11, 12. Then said Daniel, Prove thy ser- | 


vants, I beseech thee—To satisfy him that there 
would be no danger of any ill consequence, Daniel 
desires the matter might be put to a trial for ten 
days ; and let them give us pulse to eat—The word 
Dyin, here used, seems to signify fruits or vegeta- 


bles ; or rather, according to the Greek interpreter, | 


seeds in general, At the 16th verse the word is 


Diy, seeds, and some MSS. read it so in this verse. | 


The sense is doubtless the same in both places, and 
perhaps may be well enough expressed by that kind 
of nourishing seed called pulse. The LXX. render 
it, azo rwv orepuatov, of seeds. “Pliny, in his Na- 
tural History, p. 380, mentions a kind of pulse, that 
is said to affect the temper of those that feed upon 
it, and to produce equanimity and gentleness. 
rious sorts of grain were dried and prepared for food 
by the people of the East, as wheat, barley, rice, and 
pulse. Of some of these was the parched corn, 
mentioned in Scripture, and the chief food of the 


labourers and poorer sort of people; and perhaps | 
something of this kind of preparation might have | 


been the choice of Daniel.”—Wintle. 
Verse 15. At the end of ten days their countenances 
appeared fairer, &c.—The poor pulse, seeds, and 


roots, nourished and strengthened Daniel and his | 


companions more than the rich food which the 
others ate from the king’s table nourished them. 
Although this might, in part, be the natural effect of 


their temperance, yet it must chiefly be ascribed to | 


the special blessing of God, which will make a little | 
go a great way, and a dinner of herbs more nutritive | 
and strengthening than a stalled ox. 

3 


Verse 17. As for these four children—The Hebrew 
is literally, As to these children, or young men, each 
of them four: to them God gave knowledge and skill 
in all learning and wisdom— That is, in all sorts of 
learning and knowledge. They became particularly 
skilful in those parts of the Chaldean learning which 
were really useful, and which might recommend 
them to the favour of the kings both of Babylon and 
Persia, and qualify them for places of trust under 
them; as Moses’s education in the Egyptian learn- 
ing fitted him to be aruler of God’s people. And 
Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams 
—Daniel excelled the others in the gift of prophecy, 
and in his extraordinary skill in interpreting all sorts 
of visions and dreams, namely, such as were sent of 
God, and foreshowed future events, under the cover 
of certain images and representations, which required 
an interpretation in order to the understanding of 
their true signification. But we must not suppose 
that Daniel attained this skill by any study or rules of 
art. It was God’s supernatural gift unto him, as was 


| the same kind of knowledge which Joseph possessed 
/and manifested when he interpreted the dreams of 
Va- tI 


Pharaoh, and those of the chief butler and baker. 
Verses 18-20. Now at the end of the days that 
the king had said he should bring them in—At the 
end of three years, see verse 5, the prince of the 
eunuchs brought them in—According to the king’s 
command. And the king communed with them—To 
try their proficiency. This shows the king’s ability 
and judgment, without which he could not have dis- 
cerned their fitness for his service, and their excel- 
lence above others. He examined all candidates 
that applied, and preferred those that outstripped the 
rest. T'herefore stood they before the king—They 
were in continual attendance in the king’s court. 


|The same expression is used of Elijah and Jeremiah, 


as God’s servants and messengers, 1 Kings xvii. 1; 
Jer. xv. 19. And the Levites are said to stand be- 
fore the congregation to minister to them, Num. 


|xvi. 9. And in all matters of wisdom and under- 


761 


Mistory of Daniel and 


DANIEL. 


his three countrymen. 


A.M. 3398. among them all was found none like 
Be. . Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Aza- 
riah: therefore ? stood they before the king. 

20 4 And in all matters of * wisdom and un- 
derstanding, that the king inquired of them, 


p Gen, xli.46; Verse 5.——1] Kings x. 1, 
understanding. 


* Heb, wisdom of 


standing—In a general knowledge of things; that 
the king inquired of them—This is a further con- 
firmation of the king’s noble endowments, and of his 
great care to choose only proper persons to be in 
offices of trust, namely, persons well qualified to 
serve him in the great affairs of the kingdom. He 
found them ten times better, &c.—Hebrew, wy 
mvs, ten hands above, all the magicians. and as- 
trologers that were in his realm—The words may 
be understood of those that employed themselves in 
the lawful search of natural causes and effects, and 
of the regular motions of the heavenly bodies. For, 
inasmuch as Daniel made intercession to the captain 
of the guard, that the wise men of Babylon might not 
be slain, chap. ii. 24, we cannot suppose that all of 
them were such as studied unlawful arts and sciences, 
especially as he himself was afterward made master, 
or head, over them. These names are evidently to 
be taken in a good sense, as the magi, Matt. ii. 1; 
and the astrologers were then nearly, if not alto- 
gether, the same as astronomers with us. In short, 
the words seem to comprehend: those persons in 
general, that were distinguished in the several kinds 
of learning cultivated among the Chaldees. It can- 
not, therefore, be collected from these words, that 
Daniel applied himself to the study of what are 
called magic arts, but to the sciences of the Chal- 


he found them ten*times better than A. “shee 
all the magicians and astrologers that 
were in all his realm. 

21 * And Daniel continued even unto the first 
year of King Cyrus. 


Chap. vi. 28; x. 1. He lived to see that glorious time 6 of the 
return of his people from the Babylonian captivity, though he 
did not die then, So till is used Psa. ex. A; exii. 8. 


dees ; in the same manner as Moses had, long before, 
applied himself to the study of the wisdom of Egypt. 
And in giving Nebuchadnezzar proof that Daniel ex- 
celled all the wise, men in his realm in these branches 
of knowledge and wisdom, God poured contempt on 
the pride of the Chaldeans, and put honour on the 
low estate of his people. 

Verse 21. And Daniel continuwed—Hebrew, 1), 
he was, namely, in the court of Babylon, known, 
employed, and held in reputation, under Nebuchad- 
nezzar and his successors; even unto the first year 
of Cyrus—Till the monarchy passed from the Chal- 
deans to the Persians in the person of Cyrus, under 
whom also he maintained his authority. For the 
expression, wnto, or till, the first year, is not intend- 
ed to signify that he lived no longer; for it appears, 
from chap. x. 1, that he lived at least till the third 
year of that monarch, in which year he had visions 
and revelations. He lived to see the promises of 
Isaiah and Jeremiah fulfilled, with respect to the de- 
liverance of the Jews from their state of captivity in 
Babylon, which began to be accomplished in the 
first year of Cyrus, Ezrai.1, and for the accomplish- 
ment of which we find Daniel very solicitous, chap. 
ix. 1,2. This being so remarkable a year, the text 
takes notice that Daniel lived to that time, but does 
not say how much longer he lived. 


CHAPTER II. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The perplexity of Nebuchadnezzar through a dream, which he had forgotten, 1. (2,) His applica- 
tion to the wise men of Babylon to tell him the dream and the interpretation thereof, and their inability to do it, 2-11. 


(3,) Orders given.to destroy them all, as impostors, and Daniel with his fellows among the rest, 12, 18. 


(4,) By promis- 


ing to declare the dream and its interpretation, Daniel prevents the execution of these orders, at least in part; and by 
joint prayer with his three companions, he obtains from God the discovery of the dream and its interpretation, 14-19. 


(5,) The thanksgiving he offered to God for this great favour, 20-23. 
he made to him, both of the dream and of the interpretation of it, 25-45. 


(6,) His admission to the king, and the discovery 
(7,) The great honour which Nebuchadnezzar 


conferred on Daniel, in recompense for his service, and the preferment of his companions with him, 46-49. 


A. M. 3401. 


B. G. 603. AND in the second year of the 


reign of Nebuchadnezzar, Ne- 


2 Gen. xli. 8; 


buchadnezzar dreamed dreams, A. A.M 3401. 
“wherewith his spirit was troubled, Lease 


Chapter iv. 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verse 1. In the second year of the reign of Nebu- 
chadnezzar—That is, according to the Babylonian 
account, or the fourth according to the Jewish; that 
is, in the second year of his reigning alone, or the 
fourth from his first reigning jointly with his father. 

762 


Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams—Having sub-. 
dued all his enemies, and firmly established his 
throne, it is probable he was thinking upon his bed 
(see verse 29) what should come to pass 

what should be the future success of his family and 


kingdom, and whether any, or whatyieapiies end 


. (lee 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream 


CHAPTER II. 


of the metallic image. 


d Phis sleep brake from him. 
2 °'Then the king commanded to 
call the magicians, and the astrologers, and the 
sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to show the 
king his dreams. So they came and stood 
before the king. 

3 And the king said unto them, I have 
dreamed a dream, and my spirit was troubled 
to know the dream... 

4 Then spake the Chaldeans to the king 


A. M. 3401. an 
B. C. 603. 


in Syriac, 4O king, live for ever: tell A.M. 3401, 
thy servants the dream, and we will 
show the interpretation. 

5 The king answered and said to the Chal- 
deans, The thing is gone from me: if ye will 
not make known unto me the dream, with the 
interpretation thereof, ye shall be °cut! in 
pieces, and your houses shall be made a dung- 
hill. 

6 f But if ye show the dream, and the inter- 


> Esther vi, 1; Chap. vi. 18.—<« Gen. xli. 8; Exodus vii. 11 ; 
Ch ws v. eer Rings 31; Chap. iii.9; ¥. 10; vi. 6, 21. 


¢1 Sam. xv. 33 ; Ezra vi.11; 2 Kings x. 27; Chap. iii.29; Luke 
xil. 46; Heb. xi. 27." Chald. made pieces ——f Ch ap. ¥. 16. 


kingdoms might arise after his own: and as our 
waking thoughts usually give some tincture to our 
dreams, he dreamed of something to the same pur- 
pose, which astonished him, but which he could not 
rightly understand. The dream affected him strongly 


at the time; but awaking in confusion, he had but an | 
imperfect remembrance of it; he could not recollect | 


the particulars. It is said he dreamed dreams, be- 


cause though it was but one continued dream, it con- | 


tained divers scenes of affairs, being a description of 


the succession of the four monarchies ‘which were | 


to continue, under different forms, unto the end of 
the world. Wherewith his spirit was troubled— 
The Hebrew expression, 1n10.Coysnn), denotes that 
his spirit was violently agitated, or in such conster- 
nation as to affect his body, and disturb his rest. And 
his sleep brake from him—Or, went from him, as a 
like phrase is rendered chap. vi. 18. 

Verse 2. Then the king commanded to call the 
magicians and the astrologers—Concerning the 
meaning of these two words, see note on chap. i. 20. 
Daniel and his companions were not called among 
them; perhaps because the Chaldeans despised them 
as youths and strangers, and would not have them 
thought equal in knowledge to themselves. And the 
sorcerers—This word is always taken in an ill sense 
by the sacred writers, signifying a sort of necro- 
mancers, that through diabolical arts pretended to an 
acquaintance with departed spirits; from 4w3, presti- 
giis uli, to wse deceitful tricks, or enchantments. 
They were, perhaps, not very unlike the sortilegi, 
or fortune-tellers of the ancient Romans; and exer- 
cised themselves in various sorts of juggling tricks, 
or enchantments, which were supposed to be per- 
formed by the assistance of demons: see note on 
Isa. xxix. 4, And the Chaldeans—The Chaldeans 
were so much addicted to the study of the motions 
of the heavenly bodies, and to make prognostications 
from thence, that the word Chaldean is used, both in 
Greek and Latin writers, for an astrologer. Diodo- 
rus, lib. ii., speaking of the Chaldeans, says, They 
employ their whole time in philosophy and divina- 
tion, and are trained up to them from their child- 
hood: and Strabo, lib. xvi., makes a distinction, and 
observes, that the word is sometimes applied to the 
nation, sometimes to the sect. Curtius, lib. v. cap. 1, 
deseribes them thus: “Chaldzi siderum motus et 
statas temporum vices ostendere soliti:” “The Chal- 
. 3 - x - 


deans are accustomed to show the motions of the 
stars, and the appointed changes of times:” and 
Cicero, De Divin., p. 4, “Chaldei—diuturna obser- 
vatione sidertim scientiam putantur effecisse, ut pre- 
dici posset quid cuique eventurum et quo quisque 
fato natus esset:” “’The Chaldeans, by the long ob- 
servation of the stars, are thought to have formed a 
science, whereby may be foretold what is about to 
happen to every one, and to what fate every one is 
born.” These passages may serve to show the 
opinion that was commonly entertained of these 
Chaldeans; and therefore we shall be less surprised 
to find, at verse 4, this name, according to the gene- 
ral sense of it, used for the magicians of every sort. 
To show the king his dreams—Dreams were often 
considered by the heathen as giving particular inti- 
mations of the will of Heaven;-and hence the ex- 
pression of Homer, in his first Iliad, Kat yap 7’ ovap ex 
Atog eatt, For dreams descend from Jove. And in 
the beginning of his second Iliad, he has, by a bold 
and beautiful prosopopeia, conveyed the will of Ju- 
piter to Agamemnon in a dream, investing Ovecpog 
(a dream) with all the qualities of a divine messen- 
ger. Diog. Laert. makes mention of a dream of So- 
crates, whereby he foretold his death within three 
days; and most of the schools among pagan philoso- 
phers gave credit to dreams, and considered them as 
revealing the will of the gods: see Wintle. 

Verse 4. Then spake the Chaldeans to the king ix 
Syriac—The ancient Chaldee and the Syrian lan- 
guage were the same: see Gen. xxxi. 47; 2 Kings 
xviii. 26; Ezraiv.’7. This language is found in its 
greatest purity in the books of Daniel and Ezra. The 
following part of the chapter, from this verse, is 
written in Chaldee, and so on to the end of the seventh 
chapter: the reason of which seems to be, that what 
is said from hence to the end of that chapter, relates 
chiefly to the Chaldeans, or the inhabitants of Baby- 
lonia; whereas what follows, from the beginning of 


the eighth chapter, refers mostly to the Jewish peo- 
ple, and therefore is written in Hebrew. 

Verses 5,6. The king said, The thing is gone 
from me—That i is, he could not recollect the sub- 
stance, much less all the particulars of it; some traces 
of it, however, must have remained in his mind, by 
which he thought the whole might be brought back 


to his remembrance, if his wise men could give him 
any clew to his dream, or hit, any way, upon the sub- 
763 


| 


“ 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream 


DANIEL. 


of the metallic image. 


A, M. 3101. pretation thereof, ye shall receive of 
epee He gifts and ?rewards and great 
honour: therefore, show me the dream and 
the interpretation thereof. 

7 They answered again and said, Let the 
king tell his servants the dream, and we will 
show the interpretation of it. 

8 The king answered and said, I know of 
certainty that ye would ° gain the time, because 
ye see the thing is gone from me. 

9 But if ye will not make known unto me 
the dream, 8 there is but one decree for you: 


2 Or, fee, Chap. v. 17; Verse 48. 


ject of it. This, without doubt, was the state of his 
mind ; for unless some traces of his dream, however 
imperfect, had remained in it, his wise men would 
have endeavoured to impose upon him, and have 
told him any dream they could devise. Jf ye will 
not make known the dream, ye shall be cut in pieces 
—Literally, be made into pieces. So Syriac; that is, 
utterly destroyed, as the LXX. and the Vulgate ren- 
der it. A kind of punishment, of which other places 
in Scripture make mention: see the margin. And 
your houses shall be made a-dunghill—That is, 
shall be entirely pulled down, and never rebuilt. 
The ground of this threatening of the king is, that 
the eastern nations esteemed it a very grievous pu- 
nishment inflicted upon any one to efface his memo- 
ry, which in a great measure would be done by 
pulling down his house, and preventing its being 
ever rebuilt. The LXX. read, o: ovkoe vyuwv dvapra- 
yncovrat, your houses shail be plundered, and the 
Vulgate, your houses shall be confiscated, or taken 
for the king’s use. This proud king seemed deter- 
mined to exercise the bitterest acts of cruelty against 
his magicians, and to bjot out the very traces of their 
memory, if they did not gratify his unreasonable but 
anxious Wishes. . We meet with a like denunciation 
from this haughty monarch, chap. iii. 9. But if ye 
show the dream, §c., ye shall receive gifis—As I 
have threatened you with death, and the destruction 
of all you have, if you do not perform what I re- 
quire: so I promise you honour and great rewards 
if you do perform it. 

Verses 7, 8. They answered, Let the king tell his 
servants the dream—But this the king could not do; 
and yet, unless he could do it, they could not pro- 
ceed one step toward the gratifying of his desires. 
The king said, I know of a certainty that ye would 
gain time—“You only want to protract the time, 
either that the dream may return, or that my uneasi- 
ness may be dissipated, and that, occupied in other 
affairs, [ may think no more of the dream. But I 
will have from you immediately a positive answer, 
and a precise explication.” However tyrannical 
this may appear in the king, his reasoning must be 
allowed to be very just and right: for if the astrolo- 
gers could obtain from their gods the knowledge of 
future events by the explication of a dream, certainly 


for ye have prepared lying and cor- A. M. 3401. 
rupt words to speak before me, till a 
the time be changed: therefore tell me the 
dream, and I shall know that ye can show me 
the interpretation thereof. . 

10 % The Chaldeans answered before the 
king, and said, There is not a man upon the 
earth that can show the King’s matter: there- 
fore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that ask- 
ed such things at any magician, or astrologer, 
or Chaldean. 

11 And i¢ is a rare thing that the king re- 


3 Chald. buy, Eph. v. 16—— Esth. iv. 11. | 


the same gods could have made known to them what 
the dream was. The original expression means, to 
buy, or redeem, time, and may be properly applied 
to men’s using their utmost endeavours to free them- 
selves out of some imminent danger, or difficulty, 
gaining time being of considerable advantage to that 
purpose. 

Verse 9. If ye will not make known the dream, 
§c., there is but one decree for you—No alteration 
will be made as to my declaration; and you have 
nothing to expect but the execution of the sentence 
which I have passed upon you. For ye have pre- 
pared lying and corrupt words—The king’s mean- 
ing seems to be, that he found by their behaviour, 
they were ready, in case he told his dream, to invent 
and give some kind of plausible interpretation of it; 
or such a one as might, in some way or other, be 
applicable to whatever events should follow it: in 
short, that he found their pretended knowledge to be 
all imposture, since, if they were able to foretel 
things not yet come to pass, they might certainly tell 
things already past, and so inform him what was the 
subject of his dream. Till the time be changed— 
Till there be such an alteration of things, that neither 
my dream, nor your interpretation, may be thought 
of any more. Or, as some think, thismay be spoken 
of the wise men framing excuses, in order to delay 
their punishment, in hopes there might be some 
change in things, or in the king’s mind, whereby 
they might escape it. From what he says, however, 
in the conclusion of the verse, it seems to be rather 
an insinuation, that they intended to forge or invent 
an interpretation of his dream, not being able to 
show the true interpretation of it. 

Verses 10,11. The Chaldeans answered, There 
is not aman uponthe earth that can show the king’s 
matter—Here the wise men are driven to acknow- 
ledge their inability, and their excuse is, that they 
could indeed tell what dreams signified, if the dreams 
were told them; but as to telling what a person had 
dreamed, it was above the power of any art or know- 
ledge but that of the gods, who knew all things. But 
this reasoning was weak, and showed the king’s ac- 
cusation to be just, namely, that they had prepared 
lying and corrupt words to speak e him; or, 
that their business and skill were only to-invent or 

“3 


Daniel offers to interpret 


CHAPTER II. 


a 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream 


A. M, 3401. 
B.C. 903 can show it before the king, * except 
the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh. 

12 For this cause the king was angry and 
very furious, and commanded to destroy all the 
wise men of Babylon. 

13 And the decree went forth that the wise 
men should be slain; and they sought Daniel 
and his fellows to be slain. 

14 {7 Then Daniel * answered with counsel 
and wisdom to Arioch the ‘captain ® of the 
king’s guard, which was gone forth to slay the 
wise men of Babylon : 


. v. 11.—+* Chald. returned. 5 Or, chief 
. chief of the executioners, or, slaughtermen, 


bh Verse 28; Cha; 
marshal—_——® Chald. 


quireth, and.there is none other that||" 15 He answered and said to Arioch A. M. 3401. 


e 2 é B. C. 603. 
the king’s captain, Why és the decree Sees 


so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made 
the thing known to Daniel. 

16 Then Daniel went in, and desired of the 
king that he would give him time, and that he 
would show the king the interpretation. 

17 Then Daniel went to his house and made 
the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and 
Azariah, his companions : 

18 ' That they would desire mercies 7 of the 
God of heaven concerning this secret; *that 
Daniel and his fellows should not perish with 


Gen. xxxvii. 36. 
God. 


1 Matt. xviii. 12. ™Chaldee, from before 
® Or, that they should not destroy Daniel, &c. 


affix such interpretations of dreams as they thought 
suitable, without having any real knowledge at all 
of future things. 

Verses 12, 13. For this cause the king was angry 
and very furious, &e.—The king, in his rage and 
fury, probably did not think of sending for Daniel, 
which made Daniel try to get admission to the king, 
verse 14, to prevent his own destruction, as well as 
that of the other wise men. And they sought Daniel 
and his fellows to be slain—Though, as it appears, 
they had not been summoned with the wise men of 
Chaldea. This was extremely unjust to Daniel and 
his companions; for it is highly probable they would 
have received no share of the gifts, and rewards, and 
great honour, which the other wise men would have 
received could they have told the king’s dream, there- 
fore they ought not to have been involved in their 
punishment. But those concerned in the execution 
of the decree, being armed with power, did not at- 
tend to the voice of justice: absolute power, indeed, 
too seldom does, 

Verse 14. Then Daniel answered with counsel 
and wisdom—This seems to be better rendered in 
the Vulgate, namely, Tunc Daniel requisivit de lege 
atque sententia ab Arioch—T'hen Daniel inquired 
of Arioch concerning the law and decree, namely, 
which the king had made for destroying the wise 
men; that is, he inquired the reason of the decree 
and judgment issued against them; for as he had not 
been called in unto the king with the other wise men, 
he probably was ignorant of all that had passed with 
regard to the king’s dream. The word oyu, here 
rendered wisdom, usually signifies an edict, or public 
decree, set forth by authority. Captain of the 
king’s guard—* Literally, chief of the king’s execu- 
tioners. Greek, apyayeipo, the chief butcher [or 
chief cook.] The term s*n3v 35, may probably 
mean, the leader of the guard appointed for capital 
punishments. Nor does this office seem to have 
been at all infamous; for Arioch had free access to 
the king, as we find, verse 25: see also 1 Sami. xv. 
33. And perhaps his office might be to execute any 
of the king’s commands on his subjects, whether 
they related to honour or dishonour, to life or to 

3 


death. The same title is given to Nebuzar-adan, 
2 Kings xxv. 8; and from the character of the com- 
mander, it seems to mean a person of the first author- 
ity over the soldiery. Mr. Bruce (Trav., p. 455) 
speaks of an officer, called the executioner of the 
camp, whose business it was to attend at capital pun- 
ishments; and this belonged only to a detachment 
of the royal Abyssinian army.”—Wintie. 

Verses 15,16. Why is the decree so hasty from the 
king ?—So precipitate, or, as Wintle renders it, so 
urgent, to slay the innocent, who were never called, 
and knew nothing of the matter? The word naynny, 
here used, signifies both hasty and pressing. So the 
Syriac. The LXX. render it,-7 avaidyc, shameful ; 
the Vulgate translates the verse thus: He (namely, 
Daniel) asked him who had received authority from 
the king, for what reason so cruel a sentence had 
gone forth from the presence of the king? Then 
Arioch made the thing known to Daniel—Acquaint- 


‘ed him with the whole affair, of which, it is evident, 


he knew nothing before. Then Daniel went in— 
Or, went up, as Sy properly signifies; that is, either 
to the palace or throne of the king; and desired of 
the king that he would give him time, &e—The 
king’s anger was now abated ; and withal the provi- 
dence of God was visible, in inclining the king’s 
heart to allow Daniel that favour which he had be- 
fore denied to the magicians; and that he would 
show the king the interpretation—Daniel promised 
this, in confidence that God, to whom he intended to 
make application by prayer, would discover to him 
both the dream and its interpretation. Doubtless 
God inspired him with a persuasion to this purpose. 
Verses 17, 18. Then Daniel went to his house— 
Which, it seems, was near the palace, that he might 
there bé@tlone with his God; for from him alone, 
who is the Father of lights, he expected this import- 
ant discovery. Nor did he only pray for it himself, 
but engaged his companions also to unite their sup- 
plications to his. That they would desire mercies— 
Chaldee, xy Ponn, et misericordiam petendam 
esse, that mercy must be asked, of the God of hea- 
ven—In applying to God for any blessing, all our de- 
pendance must be on his mercy and compassion 
765 


* 


Daniel offers to interpret 


DANIEL. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. 


+ 


4 geod . the rest of the wise men of Babylon, 

19 Then was the secret revealed 
unto Daniel *in a night vision. ‘Then Daniel 
blessed the God of heaven. 

20 Daniel answered and said, ! Blessed be the 
name of God for ever and ever: ™for wisdom 
and might are his : 

21 And he changeth *the times and the 
seasons; ° he removeth kings, and setteth up 
kings; ? he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and 
knowledge to them that know understanding: 

22 1 He revealeth the deep and secret things: 
*he knoweth what is in the darkness, and * the 
light dwelleth with him. * 

23 I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God 
of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and 


might, and hast made known unto 4. ee 
me now what we * desired of thee: 

for thou hast mow made known unto us the 
king’s matter. =” 

24 | Therefore, Daniel went in unto Arioch, 
whom the king had ordained to destroy the 
wise men of Babylon: he went and said 
thus unto him; Destroy not the wise men 
of Babylon: bring me in before the king, 
and I will show unto the king the inter- 
pretation. 

25 Then Arioch brought in Daniel before 
the king in haste, and said thus unto him, °T 
have found a man of the * captives of Judah, 
that will make known unto the king the inter- 
pretation. 


k Num. xii. 6; Job xxxiii. 15, 16—! Psa. exiii.2; exv. 18. 
m Jer. xxxii. 19.——» Esth. i. 13; 1 Chron. xxix. 30; Chap. vii. 
2D eA, © Job xii. 18; Ps- ‘xxv. 6,7; Jeremiah xxvii, re 
Chap. iv. 17. p James i. 5, 


4 Job xii. 22; Psa. xxv. 14; Verses 28, 29.——* Psa. cxxxix. 
T1;/12's Hebrews iv. 13 Chapter v. 11,14; James i. 17. 
t Verse 18. ®Chald. That I have found.—— Chald. children 
of the captivity of Judah, 


for we can expect nothing by way of recompense 
for our merits. Concerning this secret-—Namely, 
that it might be discovered unto them. Observe, 
reader, whatever is the matter of our care, or occa- 
sions us trouble or fear. we must spread before God 
in prayer; for God gives us leave to be humbly free 
with him, and in prayer to enter into the detail of 
our wants and burdens. The danger here equally 
tlireatened Daniel and his friends, and therefore it 
was fit they should all join in prayer for the averting 
of it. And here we see the power and efficacy of 
united addresses to Heaven, and the important bene- 
fits which the fervent prayers of a few holy men may 
sometimes bring down upon a multitude. Daniel’s 
prudence, and his piety, with that of his friends, 
were the means of saving the lives of all the wise 
men of Babylon! 

Verses 19-23. Then was the secret revealed—It 
is generally thought that this secret was revealed to 
Daniel only, and that in sleep, by a dream, or, as it is 
here termed, a night vision. T'hen Daniel blessed 
the God of heaven—He does not stay till he had 
told what had been revealed to him to the king, and 
seen whether he would own it to be his dream or 
not; but, being confident it was so, and that he had 
gained his point, he immediately turns his prayers 
into praises. As he had prayed in full assurance 
that God would do for him what he asked, so he 
gives thanks in full assurance that he had done it, 
- and in both he has an eye to God as the God of 
heaven. Daniel answered and said—“ lithe latter 
part of this-and the next three verses, Daniel cele- 
brates the praises of the Almighty in a simple, but 
truly sublime and animated strain of warm and un- 
affected piety, makes especial mention of his wisdom 
and power, and illustrates the display of those attri- 
butes in several instances, apposite to the subject and 
oceasion.”—Wintle. For wisdom and might are 
his—His wisdom appears in ordering the great 

766 


affairs of the world, and his might, or power, in 
bringing them to pass. To the same purpose Jere- 
miah styles him, great in counsel, and mighty in 
work, chap. xxxii. 19. And he changeth the times, 
&e. ~The great changes of the world. are brought to 
pass by removing kings and translating their do- 
minions to others; by raising some empires, and 
pulling down others. Of this, Nebuchadnezzar’s 
dream, which was then revealed to Daniel, contains 
several signal instances, as it comprehends the suc- 
cession of the four great monarchies of the world. 
He knoweth what is in the darkness, &¢e.—The most 
secret things are manifest to him; he discerns them 
while they yet lie hid in their causes, and discovers 
and brings them to light atthe proper time, I praise 
thee, §c., who hast given, or, because thou hast given, 
me wisdom and might—Namely, the means and 
power of saving myself and others from the greatest 
danger. 

Verses 24, 25. Therefore Daniel went in unto 
Arioch—Daniel , having been thus divinely instructed, 
was desirous to save the lives of the wise men of 
Babylon, who were unjustly condemned, as well as 
his own; and, being now prepared, he goes imme- 
diately to Arioch, and bespeaks the reversing of the 
sentence against them. Though there might be 
some among them, perhaps, who deserved to die, as 
magicians, by the law of God; yet that which they 
here stood condemned for was not a erime worthy 
of death or of bonds: and others of them probably 
employed themselves in laudable studies, and 
searches after useful knowledge. Zhen Arioch 
brought in Daniel before the king in haste—Or, 
very speedily, as the Syriac reads it; and said, I 
have found a man that will make Ienown unto the 
king the interpretation—Jerome remarks here the 
manner of courtiers, Qui cum bona ‘nunciant, § sua 
videri volunt, who, when they rel: ae 
are willing to "have them thought their to 


CHAPTER II. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. 


Daniel interprets 
A. M. 3401. 26 The king answered and said to 
B. C. 603. 


Daniel, whose name was Belteshaz- 
zar, Art thou able to make known unto me 
the dream which I have seen, and the inter- 
pretation thereof? 

27 Daniel answered in the presence of the 
king, and said, The secret which the king 
hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astro- 
logers, the magicians, the soothsayers, show 
unto the king ; 

28 "But there is a God in heaven that re- 
vealeth secrets, and maketh known to the 


King Nebuchadnezzar * what shall A. M. 3401. 
be in the latter days. Thy. dream, -_s 
and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are 
these ; 

29 As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came 
into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come 
to pass hereafter: Yand he that revealeth se- 
crets maketh known to thee what shall come 
to pass. 

30 ” But as for me, this secret is not revealed 
to me for any wisdom that I have more than 
any living, but for their sakes that shall 


"Gen. xl. 8; xli. 16; Verses 18, 47; Amos iv. 13. 
hath 


11 Chald. 
hk made known. —* Gen. xlix. 1.1 Chald. came up. 


y Ver. 21, 28. “Gen. xli. 16; Acts iii, 12. 13 Oy, but for 
the intent that the inteFpretation may be made known to the king. 


have merit ascribed to themselves. But Daniel was 
Yar from assuming any merit to himself, and therefore 
ascribes entirely to God the ability which he had to 
make known to the king the dream and the inter- 
pretation of it. 

Verses 26-29. The king said to Daniel, Rhone 
name was Belteshazzar—See note on chap. wis 
Art thou able to make known to me the dream? &e. 
—The king seems to have questioned whether he 
could make his promise good. The less likely, how- 
ever, it appeared to the king that Daniel should do 
this, the more God was glorified in enabling him to 
do it. Daniel answered, Cannot the wise men, &c. 
—Daniel’s words, as here translated, bear the inter- 
rogative form; but notin the original. They seem 


- to be more accurately translated by the LXX., To 


~ 


“wusnpLov o BaclAevg ETEpwTa oVK EoTL DOSwY——avayyelAa: 


to Baoret, The mystery concerning which the king 
inquires, it does not belong to the wise men, §c., to 
declare to the king. Or, as the Vulgate has it, “the 
wise men cannot declare.” But there is a God in 
heaven that revealeth secrets—Daniel assumes no- 
thing to himself, but gives the glory to God alone, 
whose knowledge, as he tells the king, infinitely 
exceeds that of all the wise men of Chaldea, and of 
the gods, or demons, which they consulted, or wor- 
shipped. And atthe same time he also, with great 
generosity, pleads the cause of the wise men, who 
could not tell the dream; alleging in their excuse, 
that such knowledge was not attainable by any mere 
human ability; and that he should have been as 
much at a loss as they, had not God been pleased to 
reveal it unto him: see verse 30. The modesty and 
humility of Daniel, in this whole address to the 
king, are highly deserving of our notice and imitation. 

soothsayers, here mentioned, were not noticed 
among the several sorts of pretenders to wisdom, 
named in verse 2. The word so rendered, derived 
from 113, to cut, is thought by some to signify either 
the aruspices, who examined the liver and entrails 
of beasts by eutting them open; or those diviners 
who, by the disposition and combination of numbers, 


~ made amulets, or charms, by which they pretended 
_ to foretel future events. Rabbi Jacchiades favours 


the re opinion, supposing that the aruspices were 


scarcely known in the East. And maketh known 
what shall be in the latter days—Or, what shall 
come to pass hereafter, as it is expressed verses 29, 
45. Oking, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon 
thy bed—Daniel, by way of introduction to his tell- 
ing the king what had been the subject of his dream, 
informs him of what he meditated, or thought, be- 
fore he fell asleep, namely, that he revolved in his 
mind what should be the future condition of the vast 
empire which he had erected by his various con- 
quests. This surely must have excited in Nebu- 
chadnezzar a great admiration of the God whom 
Daniel worshipped. 

Verse 30. This secret is not revealed to me for 
any wisdom that I have more than any living— 
Namely, to merit such a discovery, or qualify me for 
receiving it. No praise is due to me on this occa- 
sion. Observe, reader, it well becomes those whom 
God has highly favoured and honoured, to be hum- 
ble and low in their own eyes; and to lay aside all 
opinion of their own wisdom and worthiness, that 
God alone may have all the praise of what they are, 
and have, and do. But for their sakes that shall 
make known the interpretation to the king—For the 
sake of Daniel’s brethren and companions in tribu- 
lation, who had by their prayers helped him to 
obtain this discovery, and so might be said to make 
known the interpretation; that their lives might be 
spared, that they might come into favour and be 
preferred, and that all the people of the Jews might 
fare the better in their captivity for their sakes. 
This is the sense of the words, according to the 
common translation; but the marginal reading is 
thought by many to be more agreeable to the con- 
text, which if we follow, the meaning of the clause 
is, “Not for any wisdom of mine, but that the king 
may know the interpretation,” &¢c. “The impious 
king,” says Jerome, “had a prophetic dream, that, 
the saint interpreting it, God might be glorified, and 
the captives, and those who served God in captivity, 
might receive great consolation. We read the same © 
thing of Pharaoh; not that Pharaoh and Nebuchad- 
nezzar deserved to see such things, but that Joseph 
and Daniel, interpreting them, might be preferred to 
all others.” And, as Jerome observes afterward, 

67 


Daniel interprets 


A. M. 3401. make known the interpretation to the 
aadegtiicss king, *and that thou mightest know 
the thoughts of thy heart. 

31 4 Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a 
great image. This great image, whose bright- 
ness was excellent, stood before thee ; and the 
form thereof was terrible. 

32 » This image’s head was of fine gold, his 
breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his 
thighs of brass, 

33 His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and 
part of clay. 


DANIEL. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. 


34 Thou sawest till that a stone A. M. 3401. 
was cut out ?* without ° hands, which ———— 
smote the image upon his feet that were of 
iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. 

35 Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the 
silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, 
and became ‘like the chaff of the summer 
thrashing-floors ; and the wind carried them 
away, that *no place was found for them: 
and the stone that smote the image ‘be- 
came a great mountain, £ and filled the whole 
earth. 


a Verse 47. 14 Chaldee, wast seeing. b Verse 38, &c. 
15 Or, sides.——!® Or, which was not ia hands, as Verse 45. 
¢ Chap. viii. 25; Zech. iv. 6; 2Cor. v. 1; Heb. ix. 24. 


a Psa. i. 4; Hos. xiii. 3. 


e Psa. xxxvii. 10, 36.—* Isaiah 
ii. 2, 3.——¢ Psalm Ixxx. 9. ; ' 


“That Nebuchadnezzar might admire the grace of 
divine inspiration, he (Daniel) not only told him the 
dream which he was favoured with, but even the 
secret thoughts of his heart previous to the dream,” 

Verse 31. Thou, O king, sawest, and behold, a 
great image—“It appears, from ancient coins and 
medals, that cities and people were often represented 
by figures of men and women. A great, terrible 
human figure was therefore a proper emblem of 
human power and dominion; and the yarious metals 
of which it was composed not unfitly typified the 
various kingdoms which should arise. It consisted 
of four different metals, gold, and silver, and brass, 
and iron, mixed with clay; and these four metals, 
according to Daniel’s own interpretation, mean so 
many kingdoms; and the order of’ their succession 
is clearly denoted by the order of the parts; the 
head and higher parts signify the earlier times, and 
the lower parts the latter times. Hesiod, who lived 
two hundred years before Daniel, spoke of the four 
ages of the world under the symbols of these metals; 
so that this image was formed according to the com- 
monly received notion, and the commonly received 
notion was not first propagated from hence.”—Bishop 
Newton. J'his image, whose brightness was excel- 
lent, stood before thee—This image, says Grotius, 
appeared with a glorious lustre in the imagination 
of Nebuchadnezzar, whose mind was wholly taken 
up with admiration of worldly pomp and splendour ; 
but the same monarchies were represented to Daniel 
under the shape of fierce and wild beasts, chap. vii., 
as being the great supporters of idolatry and tyranny 
in the world. And the form thereof was terrible— 
The success which accompanied their arms made 
them feared and dreaded by all the world. 

Verses 32,33, This image’s head was of fine gold— 
The Babylonian monarchy had arrived to the height 
of glory under Nebuchadnezzar, (see verses 37, 38,) 
who likewise improved and adorned the city of Ba- 
bylon to such a degree as to make it one of the won- 
ders of the world; so that this empire might justly 
be compared to a head of gold. His breast and his 
arms of silver—The second monarchy, of Medes 
and Persians, would be inferior to the first: see note 
on verse 39, His belly and his thighs of brass, his 

768 


legs of iron—These emblems denoted the strength 
of the third and fourth monarchies, and the irresisti- 
ble force with which they should subdue their ad- 
versaries. Jron and brass are the emblems of 
strength in the prophetical writings; and they were 
in other respects emblematical of these empires, as 
we shall see by and by. His feet part of iron and 
part of clay—By this was signified the Roman em- 
pire in its declining state, as will be shown presently. 

Verses 34, 35. Thou sawest till a stone was cut 
out without hands, which smote the image, &c.—Here 
the whole image is represented as destroyed by a 
great stone falling upon its feet and breaking them 
to pieces, whereby the whole image was oversetand 
broken. In like manner the kingdom of Christ, a 
kingdom of God’s owh erecting, was to break to 
pieces and destroy the fourth and last empire, in 
which the remainder of the others was comprehend- 
ed, and at length to put an end to all earthly rule, 
authority, and power, 1 Cor. xv. 24. The Jews, as 
well as Christians, agree that by the stone here is 
meant the Messiah, or his kingdom, and indeed it is 
a very apt description of it; for without any visible 
means, or adequate assistance of human power, it 
arose, prevailed mightily, and increased to a high 
degree of strength and greatness, and will still in- 
crease, until it become superior to, and swallow up, 
all the kingdoms of the earth. T'hen was the iron, 
the brass, &c., broken to pieces, and became like the 
chaff, &c.—There was no sign or remainder left of 
their former greatness. The same expression is used 
by Isaiah, chap. xli. 15, where see the note. The ex- 
pressions in both places allude to the thrashing-floors 
in the eastern countries, which were usually placed 
on the tops of hills. And the stone that smote the 
image became a great mountain, &¢e.—This denotes 
the advancement and increase of Christ’s kingdom, 
that it should from small beginnings proceed to fill 
the whole earth; as if a stone by degrees should 
grow to a mountain. Thus Christ is described as 
going. forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. vi. 2. 
Christ, the foundation of the church, is often de- 
scribed as a stone: see Isa. xxviii. 16; Zech. iii. 9; 
and the church in its flourishing state is represented 
| as a mountain, Isa. ii. 2; Ezek. xx. 40; Rev. xxi.10 

=) 


Daniel interprets 


CHAPTER II. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. 


A. M. 3401. 


36 This is the dream; and we will 
B. C. 603. 


tell the interpretation thereof before 
the king. 

37 » Thou, O king, art a king of kings: ‘ for 
the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, 
power, and strength, and glory. 

38 * And wheresoever the children of men 


dwell, the beasts of the field and the A. M. 3401. 
fowls of the heaven hath he given fae 
into thy hand, and hath made thee ruler over 
them all. !'Thou art this head of gold. 

39 And after thee shall arise ™another kingdom 
” inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of 
brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth. 


h Ezra vii. 12; Isaiah xlvii. 5; Jer. xxvii. 6,7; Ezek. xxvi. 7; 
Hosea viii. 10. 


i Ezra i. 2.——* Chap. iv. 21, 22; Jer. xxvii. 6——1 Verse 32. 
m Chap. v. 28, 31. 1 Verse 32. 


Verses 36-38. T'his is the dream, and we will 
tell the interpretation—Here again Daniel shows his 
modesty, allowing his friends a share in the honour 
of interpreting the dream, because the interpreta- 
tion was obtained by their joint prayers to God. 
Thou, O king, art a king of kings—So Nebuchad- 
nezzar is styled Ezek. xxvi.'7, because he had divers 
kings for his vassals and tributaries. And Daniel 
here addresses him as if he were a very powerful 
king, and his empire very large and extensive. For 
the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, &c. 
—The monarch might perhaps think, like some of 
his predecessors, that his conquests were owing to 
his fortitude and prudence: see Isa. x. 13, But the 
prophet assures him, that his success mustbe prima- 
rily imputed to the God of heaven. Though most 
of the ancient eastern histories are lost, yet some 
fragments remain which speak of this mighty con- 
queror, and his extended empire. Berosus informs 
us, that he held in subjection Egypt, Syria, Phe- 
nicia, Arabia, and surpassed all the Chaldeans and 
Babylonians who reigned before him. Josephus, 
Philostratus, Megasthenes, and Strabo, assert, that 
he surpassed even Hercules, proceeded as far as 
Hercules’ pillars, subdued Spain, and led his army 
into Thrace and Pontus. But his empire was of no 
long duration, for it ended in his grandson Belshaz- 
zar, not seventy years after the delivery of this pro- 
phecy, nor above twenty-three years after the death 
of Nebuchadnezzar; which may be the reason why 
Daniel speaks of him as the only king, the rest being 
to be considered as nothing ; nor do we read of any 
thing good or great performed by them.—Bishop 
Newton: see notes on Jer. xxv. 9, 11, 15-26, and 
xxvii. 6-8. And wheresoever the children of men 
dwell, hath he made thee ruler over them all—The 
great monarchies assumed to themselves the title of 
being lords of the world; see chap. vi. 25, and viii. 5; 
so the word o:«euevn, the world, commonly signifies 


the Roman empire, inthe New Testament. Thou art 
this head of gold—Thou and thy family and thy re-| 


presentatives. The Babylonian therefore was the first 
of these kingdoms, and it was fitly represented by 
the head of fine gold, on account of its great riches, 
and the splendour and glory of its capital city, Ba- 
bylon, which for the same reason was called the 
golden city, Isa. xiv. 4, a golden cup, Ser. li.'7, and 
the lady of kingdoms, Isa. xvii. 5,7, where see the 
notes. The Assyrian is usually said to be the first 
of the four great empires, and the name may be al- 
lowed to pass, if it be not taken too strictly: for the 
Assyrian empire, properly so called, was dissolved 
Vou. Til ( 49 


before this time, and the Babylonian was erected in 
its stead; but the Babylonians are sometimes called 
Assyrians in the best classic authors, as well as in 
the Holy Scriptures.—Bishop Newton. 

Verse 39. After thee shall arise another kingdom 
inferior to thee— It is very well known, that the 
kingdom which arose after the Babylonian was the 
Medo-Persian. The two hands and the shoulders 
signify that the empire of the Babylonians should 
be destroyed by two kings. The two kings were 
the kings of the Medes and Persians, whose pow- 
ers were united under Cyrus, who was con of one 
of the kings, and son-in-law of the other, and who 
besieged and took Babylon, put an end to that empire, 
and erected on its ruin the Medo-Persian, or the Per- 
sian, as it is more usually called, the Persians hay- 
ing soon gained ascendency over the Medes. The 
empire is said to be inferior, as being less than 
the former, according to the, Vulgate translation, be- 
cause neither Cyrus, nor any of his successors, ever 
carried their arms into Africa or Spain, so far as 
Nebuchadnezzar is reported to have done; or rather, 
as being worse, according to Castalio ; for indeed it 
may be truly asserted, that the kingsof Persia were 
the worst race of men that ever governed an empire. 
This empire, from its first establishment by Cyrus to 
the death of Darius Codomanus, lasted not much 
above two hundred years.”—Bishop Newton. 

And another third kingdom of brass, which shall 
bear rule over all the earth— The prophet,” says 
Jackson, in his Chron., vol. i. p. 393, “having just 
mentioned this second kingdom, with great delicacy 
hastens to the third, because he would not tell the 
king that the second kingdom was to destroy his.” 
It is universally known that Alexander the Great 
subdued the Medes and Persians, and subverted their 
empire. This prince is said, by the author of the 


|| first book of Maccabees, “ to be the first that reigned 


over Greece, after having smitten Darius the king 
of the Persians and Medes; to have made many 
wars, won many strong holds, and slain the kings 
of the earth; also to have gone through to the ends 
of the earth, and taken the spoils of many nations.” 
It is reported of this mighty conqueror, that “he 
built more than seventy cities, twelve of which, or, 
as Curtius intimates, eighteen, he named Alexan- 
dria; that his soldiers, though unarmed, were never 
afraid, while he was with them, of any armed forces. 
He engaged no enemy which he did not conquer, 
besieged no city which he did not take, and made 
attempts on no nation which he did not entirely sub- 
due.” But all would not satisfy the vast cravings 
769 


Damel interprets 


DANIEL. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. 


A.M. 3401. 40 And ? the fourth kingdom shall 
_—— be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron 
breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: 
and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it 
break in pieces, and bruise. 

41 And whereas thou sawest ‘the feet and 
toes, part of potters’ clay, and part of iron, the 
kingdom shall be divided ; but there shall be in 


P Chap. vii. 7, 234 Verse 33. 


of his ambition, so that the Roman satirist with great 
justice observed of him, 


“Unus Pelleo juveni non sufficit orbis; 
AMstuat infelix augusto limite mundi.”—Juv. Sat. x. 


One world does not satisfy the Macedonian youth: 
he chafes unhappy, cooped in the narrow compass 
of the globe: see Wintle. The kingdom, therefore, 
which succeeded to the Persian was the Macedo- 
nian, or Grecian; and this kingdom was fitly repre- 
sented by brass, for the Greeks were famous for 
their brazen armour, their usual epithet being, XaAKo- 
xiravec Ayator, The brazen-coated Greeks. 'This 
third kingdom is said to bear rule over all the earth, 
by a figure usual in almost all authors. Alexander 
himself commanded that he should be called, T'he 
king of all the world ; not that he really conquered 
the whole world, but that he had considerable do- 
minions in Europe, Asia, and Africa, that is, in all'the 
three parts of the world then known. Diodorus Si- 
culus, and other writers, give an account of ambassa- 
dors coming from almost all the world, to congratu- 
late him upon his success, or to submit to his empire: 
and then especially, as Arrian remarks, did Alexan- 
der appear to himself, and to those about him, to be 
master both of all the earth and all the sea. But 
this third kingdom must be considered as compre- 
hending not only Alexander, but likewise the Mace- 
donian princes who succeeded him. This will ap- 
pear the more probable, because the former king- 
doms comprehended all the succeeding princes of 
the same house and nation, even till the ruin of their 
empire, and its translation to the different prince and 
nation which succeeded to the sovereign power and 
dominion: see Bishop Newton, and Dr. Chandler’s 
Vindication of Daniel. 

Verses 40-43. The fourth kingdom shail be strong 
as iron, &c.—This description agrees well with the 
Roman empire, and the event answered the predic- 
tion; for the Roman was vastly more strong and ex- 
tensive than any of the preceding three. As iron 
breaketh and bruiseth all other metals, so this brake 
and subdued all the formerkingdoms. The metal is 
here different, and consequently likewise the nation 
must be different from the preceding. For the four 
metals must signify four different nations; and as 
the gold signified the Babylonians, the silver the Per- 
sians, and the brass the Macedonians, so the iron 
must necessarily denote some other nation: and it 
may safely be said, that there is not, and has not 
been, a nation upon earth, to which this description 

770 


it of the strength of the iron, foras- A, M. 3401 
much as thou sawest the iron mixed 2° 
with miry clay. 

42 And as the toes of the feet were part of 
iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be 
partly strong, and partly ’ broken. 

43 And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with 
miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with 


17 Or, brittle. 


is applicable, but the Romans. The Romans suc- 
ceeded to the Macedonians, and therefore, in course, 
were next to be mentioned. And as the two arms 
of silver denoted the two kings of the Medes and 
Persians, so the two legs of iron seem equally to 
have signified the two Roman consuls. The iron 
was mized with clay; and the Romans were defiled 
with a mixture of barbarous nations. The Roman 
empire was at length divided into ten lesser king- 
doms, answering to the ten toes of the image. These 
kingdoms retained much of the old Roman strength; 
so that the kingdom was partly strong and parily 
broken—It subdued Syria, and made the kingdom 
of the Seleucide a Roman province, in the year 
sixty-five before Christ; it subdued Egypt, and made 
the kingdom of the Lagide a Roman province, in 
the year thirty before Christ; and, in the fourth 
century after Christ, it began to be torn in pieces by 
the incursions of the barbarous nations. Mr. Mede, 
who was as able and consummate a judge as any in 
these matters, observes, “' That the Roman empire 
was the fourth kingdom of Daniel, was believed by 
the church of Israel, both before and in our Saviour’s 
time; received by the disciples of the apostles, and 
the whole Christian Church, for the first three hun- 
dred years, without any known contradiction. And, 
I confess, having so good a ground in Seripture, it i 
with me tantwm non articulus fidei, little less than 
an article of faith:” see his Works, book iv. ep. 6, 
p- 735, and Bishop Newton. 

Daniel seems to divide this kingdom into three 
periods. The first is its strongest and flourishing 
state, which seems to be denoted by the zron legs: 
the second is the same kingdom, weakened by civil 
wars and the divided state of the empire, denoted by 
the feet, which were part of potter's clay, and part 
of iron; for which reason the prophet tells us the 
kingdom shall be divided, though there shall be in it 
something of the strength of tron, because the iron 
was mixed with the clay: the third is the same em- 
pire in a yet further state of declension, during which 
one part of it was to be absolutely destroyed, denoted 
by the ¢oes, the extremity of the image, and of con- 
sequence the last period of this fourth empire. As 
the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of 
clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong and 
partly broken—That is, one part of this divided 
empire shall remain, and the other part be entirely 
destroyed. And as the last period of this kingdom 
is denoted by the toes, this evidently intimates that 
the remaining part, which was not n, should he 

( 49* ) "3 


Daniel interprets 


CHAPTER II. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. 


ge he the seed of men: but they shall not 

_—___" cleave * one to another, even as iron 
is not mixed with clay. 

44 And in’! the days of these kings * shall 
the God of heaven set up a kingdom, * which 
shall never be destroyed: and the ?° kingdom 
shall not be left to other people, ‘bud it shall 


break in pieces and consume all A.M. 3401. 
these kingdoms, and it shall stand Ss 
for ever. 

45 *Forasmuch as thou sawest that the 
stone was cut out of the mountain * without 
hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, 


the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; 


18 Chald. this with this. 19 Chald. their days Verse 
28. S Chapter iv. 3, 34; vi. 26; vii. 14,27; Micah iv. 7; 
Luke i. 32, 33. 


20 Chald. kingdom thereof.—— Psa. ii. 9; Isa. 1x. 12; 1 Cor. 
xv. 24, " Verse 35; Isa. xxviii. 16,.——*! Or, which was not 
in hand. 


divided into ten distinct kingdoms or governments. 
And whereas thow sawest iron mixed with clay, 
they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men, 
&c.—The conjunction of the Romans with the con- 
quered nations, and afterward with the Goths, Van- 
dals, and other barbarians, who subverted the em- 
pire, seems to be here intended: in consequence of 
which these ten kingdoms became a medley of peo- 
ple, of different nations, laws, and customs. But they 
shall not cleave one to another—Although the kings 
of the several nations shall try to strengthen them- 
selves by marriage alliances, yet reasons of state, the 
desire of empire, and the different interests which 
they pursue, will prove stronger than ties of blood, 
and often engage them in contentions and wars with 
each other, and thereby weaken the common strength. 
As Tacitus observes, “Dominandi cupido cunctis 
affectibus flagrantior erit:’ The lust of ruling will 
be more powerful than all the affections. “It is 
especially observable,” says Wintle, “ that in the de- 
clining state of the Roman empire, intermarriages 
with the barbarians were frequent and distinguished, 
as may be learned from the histories of the times ; 
but yet the cement would not hold so as to form any 
great kingdom, or even to prevent the impending 
fate of the empire.” But some explain the verse of 
the commotions and clashings that took place be- 
tween the secular and ecclesiastical powers, after 
the kingdom was divided into ten parts, answerable 
to the ten toes of the image. 

Verses 44, 45. And in the days of these kings— 
That is, kingdoms, or during the succession of these 
four monarchies; and it must be during the time of 
the last of them, because they are reckoned fowr in 
succession, and consecuently this must be the fifth 
kingdom. (Shall the God of heaven set wp a king- 
dom—This can only be understood with propriety, 
as the ancients understood it, of the kingdom of 
Christ. Accordingly, his kingdom was set up du- 
ring the days of the last of these kingdoms, that is, 
the Roman. The stone was totally a different thing 
from theimage; and the kingdom of Christ is totally 
different from the kingdoms of this world. The sfone 
was cut out of the mountain without hands, as our 
heavenly body is said (2 Cor. v. 1) to be a building 
of God, a house not made with hands, that is, spirit- 
ual, asthe phrase is used in other places. This the 
fathers generally apply to Christ himself, who was 
miraculously born of a virgin, without the concur- 
rence of man: but it should be rather understood of 
the kingdom of Christ, which was formed out of the 

3 


Roman empire, not by number of hands, or strength 
of armies, but without human means, and the virtue 
of second causes. This kingdom was set up by the 
God of heaven, and from hence the phrase of the 
kingdom of heaven came to signify the kingdom of 
the Messiah ; and so it was used and understood by 
the Jews, and so it is applied by our Saviour in the 
New Testament. Other kingdoms were raised by 
human ambition and worldly power; but this was 
the work not of man, but of God: this was truly, as 
it is called, the kingdom of heaven, and (John xviii. 
36) a kingdom not of this world ; its laws, its pow- 
ers were all divine. This kingdom was never to be 
destroyed, as the Babylonian, the Persian, and the 
Macedonian empires have been, and in a great mea- 
sure also the Roman. This kingdom was not to be 
left to any other people ; it was to be erected by God 
in a peculiar manner, to extend itself over all the 
nations, and still to consist of the same people, with- 
out any alteration or change of their name. What 
this people were to be, and by what name to be 
called, the prophet expressly declares chap. vii. 17, 
18; they were to be the saints of the Most High. 
Of such was this kingdom to consist, and never to 
depart from them ; a character which expressly de- 
termines the nature of the kingdom, and by whom 
it was to be erected and governed. This kingdom 
was to break in pieces and consume all kingdoms— 
To spread and enlarge itself, so that it should com- 
prehend within itself all the former kingdoms. This 
kingdom was to fill the whole earth, to become uni- 
versal, and to stand for ever. As the fourth king- 
dom, or the Roman empire, was represented in dif- 
ferent states, first strong and flourishing, with legs 
of iron, and then weakened and divided, with feet 
and toes part of iron and part of clay; so this fifth 
kingdom, or the kingdom of Christ, is described 
likewise in two states, which Mr. Mede rightly dis- 
tinguishes by the names of regnum lapidis, the 
kingdom of the stone, and regnum montis, the king- 
dom of the mountain. The first commenced when 
the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, 
while the statue continued on its feet, and the 
Roman empire was in its full strength, with legs of 
tron: the second, when the stone began to increase 
into a mountain, and to fill the earth, the Roman 
empire being in its last and weakest state. The 
image is still standing upon its feet and toes of iron 
and clay; and the kingdom of Christ is yet a stone 
of stumbling and a rock of offence. But the stone 
will one day smite the image upon the feet and toes, 
771 


Daniel and his companions 


DANIEL. 


are promoted to great honour. 


A. M. 3401. the great God hath made known to 

~ the king what shall come to pass 
22 hereafter: and the dream ¢s certain, and the 
interpretation thereof sure. 

46 4 * Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell 
upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and 
commanded that they should offer an oblation 
Y and sweet odours unto him. 

47 The king answered unto Daniel, and said, 
Of a truth it és, that your God is a God 
of gods, and a Lord of kings, * and a revealer 


of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal A. M. 3401. 

: B. C. 603. 
this secret. rE ee 

48 'Then the king made Daniel a great man, 
“and gave him many great gifts, and made 
him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, 
and ’ chief of the governors over all the wise 
men of Babylon. 

49 Then Daniel requested of the king, ° and 
he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
over the affairs of the province of Babylon: 
but Daniel ¢ sat in the gate of the king. 


22 Chaldee, after this. x Acts x. 25; xiv. 13; xxviii. 6. 
y Ezra vi. 10. z Verse 28, 


and destroy it utterly, and will itself become a great 


mountain, and fill the whole earth: or, in other | 


words, The kingdoms of this world will become the 
kingdoms of our Lord and of his: Christ, and he 
shall reign for ever and ever. We have, therefore, 
seen the kingdom of the stone ; but we have not yet 
seen the kingdom of the mountain. Some parts of 
this prophecy still remain to be fulfilled ; but the ex- 
act completion of the other parts will not suffer us 
to doubt of the accomplishment of the rest also in 
due season: see Bishop Newton. 

Verse 46. J'hen the king Nebuchadnezzar fell 
upon his face and worshipped Daniel—He was so 
astonished at hearing his whole dream declared and 
interpreted by Daniel with such exactness, and at 
finding such wonderful events foretold by it, that he 
was ready to think him more than man, (just as the 
Lyeaonians ‘and barbarians thought of St. Paul, Acts 


xiv. 13, &c., and xxviii. 6,) and therefore prostrated | 


himself before him, intending, as it should seem, to 
pay him some kind of adoration. It must be ob- 
served, however, that “doing reverence by prostra- 
tion was not only an act of worship paid to God, but 
often given to kings and great men, in the times of 
the Old Testament: see 2 Sam. ix. 6, and xiv. 33. 
It was likewise an expression of reverence paid to 
prophets on account of the sanctity of their office, 
and not refused by them, 1 Kings xviii. 7. Of this 
kind, probably, was the worship paid by the leper to 
Christ, (Matt. viii. 2,) whom he took for a prophet. 
But when other circumstances were added to it, 
which made it look like divine worship, then it was 
refused to be accepted, as in the case of Peter, (Acts 
x. 25,) and of the angel, Rev. xix. 10. The adoration 
here described seems to have been of this latter kind, 
being joined with offering incense, an act of worship 
peculiar to God alone: see Ezra vi. 10, For this 
reason it is highly probable that Daniel refused the 
honours offered to him, and put the king in mind 
that he should give God the glory; as we find he 
does in the following verse.”—Lowth. 

Verses 47,48. Of a truth it is, that your God is a 
God of gods—Such a God as there is no other; 
above all gods in dignity, over all gods in dominion. 
And a Lord of kings—From whoin they derive 
their power, and to whom they are accountable: 

772 


a Verse 6.——> Chap. iv. 9 ; v. 11.——* Chap. iii. 12——¢ Esth. 
ii. 19, 21; iii. 2. 


the supreme Governor of the world, and Ruler of all 
the kings and kingdoms in it. And a revealer of 
secrets—One who sees and can bring to light what 
is most secret; seeing thow couldest reveal this secret 
—Couldest discover a matter, which it would have 
been impossible for thee to discover, if God had not 
revealed it to thee. TJ'hen the king made Daniel a 
great man—Or magnified him, as the original ex- 
pression means. God made Daniel a great man in- 
deed, when he took him into such intimate communion 
with himself, a much greater man than Nebuchad- 
nezzar could make him; but because God had ho- 
noured him, therefore the king honoured him too. 
And gave him many great gifts—Which Daniel had 
no reason to refuse, since they put him into the 
greater capacity of doing good to his brethren in cap- 
tivity. These gifts were no more than grateful re- 
turns from the king for the good services Daniel had 
done him, and were not desired or aimed at by Dan- 
iel, as the rewards of divination were by Balaam. 
And made him ruler over the whole province of 
Babylon—Which, no doubt, had a mighty influence 
upon the other provinces; and chief of the govern- 
ors over all the wise men—Constituted him the 
chief ruler and inspector of them who were students 
and professors of learning and wisdom. We are not 
to suppose that this holy prophet, in the exercise of 
the office now assigned him, would give any coun- 
tenance or encouragement to any who practised 
unlawful arts and divinations: rather he would do 
all in his power to abolish all such practices, and 
would instruct those of whom he had the oversight 
in the knowledge of the one living and true God, 
and in that wisdom which has him for its author and 
its end, " 

Verse 49. T'hen Daniel requested of the king, 
and he set Shadrach, &c.—He used his interest for 
his friends, as became a good man, and procured 
places in the government for them, that they might 
be assisting to him in his office, and sharers in his 
honour, by whose intercessions, united with his own, 
so important a secret had been revealed to him: 
such a grateful sense had he even of that service! 
This preferring of them would not only be a great 
help to Daniel in his place and business, but would 
| afford them many and great opportunities as 


Nebuchadnezzar sets 


CHAPTER III. 


up a golden image. 


useful to their brethren in captivity. But Daniel 
satin the gate of the king—Was a constant attend- 
ant at the king’s court: and as the expression may 


probably signify, was a kind of chief justice, hearing 
and determining such causes as were brought before 
him, and administering justice to the people. 


CHAPTER III. 


In this chapter we have an account of the extraordinary trial, wonderful deliverance, and further advancement of Daniel’s 


three friends. 


(4,) They are cast into a fiery furnace, 19-23. 
of his error, 24-27. 


4M. 3 NEBUCHADNEZZAR the king 

ramen made an image of gold, whose 
height was threescore cubits, and the breadth 
thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of 
Dura, in the province of Babylon. 

2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to 
gather together the princes, the governors, and 
the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the 
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of 
the provinces, to come to the dedication of the 
image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set 


up. 


1Chald. with might. 


2 Chald. they command. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verse 1. Nebuchadnezzar made an image of gold 
—How soon this image was erected, after the dream 
in his second ,year, is uncertain. The Greek and | 
Arabic interpreters suppose it to have been in the 
eighteenth year of his reign, and Dr. Prideaux agrees 
with them. But whether it was then, or, as some 
think, later, the design of it probably was, to frus- 
trate the exposition, and defeat the end of the dream: 
on which account, perhaps, the image was made 
wholly of gold, and not of different metals, to make | 
an ostentatious display of the abundance of his | 
wealth, and to obviate the jealousies of his people, 
excited by his favours to Daniel and his friends. | 
Some or all of these motives might influence this | 
haughty and inconstant monarch to desert the true | 
God, whom he had so lately acknowledged, and to | 
yield again to the force of those inveterate habits, | 
from which he had been so miraculously recovered: | 
see Wintle. The height thereof was threescore 
cubits—The proportion of the height of this image | 
seems very unequal to the breadth, unless the pedes- | 
tal, on which it was placed, be included therein. | 
Houbigant, and some others, on account of this dis- | 
parity, think it was rather acolumn or pyramid than 
an image of the human form: but Diodorus, lib. ii. | 
§ 9, giving an account of the plunder Xerxes had 
taken out of the temple of Belus, mentions an image 
of massy gold that was forty feet lugh, which Pri- 
deaux conjectures to have been this statue made by 


(1,) Nebuchadnezzar erects a golden image, and requires all his subjects to worship it, 1-7. 
informed that the Jewish princes refuse to worship it, 8-12. 


ia htelai The statue of Jupiter also, made 


(2,) He is 
(3,) They resolutely persist in their refusal, 13-18, 


(5,) They are miraculously preserved unhurt, and the king is convinced 
(6,) He gives glory to God, and shows favour to his servants, 28-30. 


3 Then the princes, the governors, i i Beh 
and captains, the judges, the trea- ———— 
surers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the 
rulers of the provinces, were gathered together 
unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchad- 
nezzar the king had set up; and they stood 
before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had 
set up. 

4 Then a herald cried ‘aloud, To you 7 it 
is commanded, *O people, nations, and lan- 
guages, 

5 That at what time ye hear the sound of the 


a Chap. iv. 1; vi. 25, 


by Lysippus, at Tarentum, is said to have been forty 
cubits high. It is probable that the plain of Dura, 
here mentioned, was some extensive plain near Ba- 
bylon, and that the image set up in it was erected in 
honour of Bel, the chief idol of the Babylonians. 

Verses 2,3. Then Nebuchadnezzar sent to gather 
together the princes, &c.—It would be very difficult, 
and perhaps impossible, at this distance of time, to 
ascertain the proper titles and offices of the several 
characters that are here mentioned, and certainly 
would answer no valuable end to any reader. It 
may be sufficient to observe, that it is probable only 
those were summoned to attend on this occasion 
who held places under the government. Thousands 
of others, no doubt, would be present, and, when 
present, were required to comply with the king’s 
injunction respecting worshipping the image, though 
they had not been summoned. And they came and 
stood before the image—They made their personal 
appearance, and showed themselves ready to per- 
form the worship required of them. 

Verses 4-6. Then a herald cried aloud—Made 
proclamation in the languages of the several nations 
assembled; J'o you it is commanded, O people, na- 
tions, and languages—Whatever parts of the em- 
pire you come from, and whatever language you 
speak. This form of speech was doubtless design- 
ed to set forth the largeness and extent of the Baby- 
lonish empire. That at what time ye hear the 
sound of the cornet, &c.—That 1s, of wind and 
stringed instruments of various sorts. It is justly 

773 


Daniel and his companions 


DANIEL. 


are accused before the king. 


A. M. 3424. cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, 
ea swine 3dulcimer,* and all kinds of music, ye 
fall down and worship the golden image that 
Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up. 

6 And whoso falleth not down and worship- 
peth shall the same hour "be cast into the 
midst of a burning fiery furnace. 

7 Therefore, at that time, when all the people 
heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sack- 
but, psaltery, and all kinds of music, all the 
people, the nations, and the languages, fell down 
and worshipped the golden image that Nebu- 
chadnezzar the king had set up. 

8 J Wherefore at that time certain Chalde- 
ans © came near, and accused the Jews. 


3 Or, singing ——* Chald. symphony. b Jer, xxix. 22; Rev. 
xiii. 15.—* Chap. vi. 12.’ 


observed by Mr. Scott here, that “the several words 
by which the several kinds of musical instruments 
are enumerated in this chapter, do not seem to ad- 
mit of any satisfactory explanation :” certainly, 
“without distinctly referring to ancient usages,” and 
going to a great length of explication, “they cannot 
be made intelligible, except to those few who are 
fully acquainted with those usages, and perhaps 
scarcely even to them:” and if the reader could attain 
correct ideas of the forms and powers of them all, 
he would from this derive but little edification. 
Ye fall down and worship the golden image—Let 
all take notice, 1st, That the king strictly charges 
and commands all manner of persons, whatever 
other gods they worship at other times, now to wor- 
ship this. 2d, That all do this just at the same time, 
in token of their communion with each other at this 
service. And whosoever falleth not down and wor- 
shippeth—St. Jerome observes, that falling down is 
applied, in Scripture, rather to idols than the true 
God; (see Matt. iv.9;) shall the same hour, &e.— 
This is the first place in the Old Testament where 
we meet with the division of time into howrs. The 
Greeks ascribe the invention of them to Anaximan- 
der, who, perhaps, received it from the Chaldees. 
The mode of punishment here mentioned was com- 
mon among this people: compare Jer. xxix. 22. 
It has been said, that Abraham was’ exposed to this 
punishment before his departure from Chaldea: see 
Gen. xi. 31; and Calmet. Similar methods has 
mystical Babylon followed, to compel those she de- 
nominates heretics to embrace her creed, and join 
in her anti-christian worship. 

Verse 7. All the people, &c., fell down and wor- 
shipped—And what wonder, considering that all the 
charms of music were made use of to allure them 
to a compliance on the one hand, and the terrors of 
the fiery furnace to frighten them into it on the 
other? Thus beset with the double temptation of 
allurement and terror, they all yielded to the will 
of the idolatrous king. Observe, reader, there is 

774 


9 They spake and said to the Sot 
hing Nebuchadnezzar, ‘O king, live es 
for ever. 

10 Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that 
every man that shall hear the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dul- 
cimer, and all kinds of music, shall fall down 
and worship the golden image : 

11 And whoso falleth not down and worship- 
peth, that he should be cast into the midst of 
a burning fiery furnace. 

12 © There are certain Jews whom thou hast 
set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these 
men, O king, *have not regarded thee: they 


4 Chap. ii. 4; v.10; vi. 6, 21. © Chap. ii. 49.——® Chaldee. 
have set no regard upon thee. 


nothing so unreasonable, or sinful, which the care- 
less world will not be drawn to by pleasure, or dri- 
ven to by pain, and fear of torture and death. By 
such methods as these, false worship has been set 
up and maintained in different ages. 

Verses 8-12. At that time certain Chaldeans 
came near, and accused the Jews—It is not impre- 


| bable that these Chaldeans were such as envied 


these friends of Daniel their preferments, having per- 
haps themselves expected the places to which they 
had been advanced. They spake and said, O king, 
live for ever—They approached the king with a 
great show of loyalty, and concern for his life, 
honour, and interest. Thou, O king, hast made a 
decree, &e.—They put him in mind of the law he 
had lately made, that all manner of persons, without 
exception, should fall down and worship his golden 
image: they put him in mind also of the penalty 
which was to be inflicted upon recusants. There 
are certain Jews, &c.—It is likely that Nebuchad- 
nezzar had no particular design to insnare Shadrach 
and his companions in making this law; for then he 
would himself have had his eye upon them, and 
would not have needed this information; but their 
enemies, who sought an occasion against them, laid 
hold on this, and were forward to accuse them. To 
aggravate the matter, and incense the king more 
against them, they, 1st, Put him in mind of the dig- 
nity to which the criminals had been preferred ; 
that though they were Jews, foreigners, captives, 
and men of a despised nation and religion, yet the 
king had set them over the affairs of the province 
of Babylon—It was, therefore, they suggested, very 
ungrateful, and an insufferable piece of insolence in 
them, to disobey the king’s command, who had 
shared so much of the king’s favour. And, besides, 
the high station they were in would give their refu- 
sal the greater influence, and render it of the worse 
consequence. 2d, They suggest, that it was done 
maliciously, contumaciously, and in contempt of 
him and his authority. These men, haa have 


The three Hebrews cited before 


CHAPTER IIT. 


the king for disobedience. 


A. M. 3424. serve not thy gods, nor worship the 

B. C. 580. ; ; 

————. golden image which thou hast set up. 

13 4 Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and 
fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, 
and Abed-nego. Then they brought these 
men before the king. 

14 Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto 
them, Js it * true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, do not ye serve my gods, nor wor- 
ship the golden image which I have set up ? 

15 Now if ye be ready that at what time 
ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, 


§ Or, of purpose, as Exod. xxi, 13——f As Ex, xxxii. 32 ; Luke 


not regarded thee, they serve not thy gods, &¢.— 
Thus princes, who are wont to be incensed enough 
against innocent people, seldom want those about 
them who do all they can to excite them to greater 
wrath. If it be asked here, Where was Daniel on 
this occasion? It may be answered, He was proba- 
bly absent, either because the king’s business called 
him elsewhere, or because he had leave of absence 
from the king; unless we suppose that he stood so 
high in the king’s favour that none durst complain 
of him for his non-compliance. But why did not 
his companions keep out of the way? Surely, be- 
cause they would obey the king’s orders as far as 
they could conscientiously, and wished to be present 
to beara public testimony against this gross idola- 
try. God also, no doubt, inclined them to attend, 
that they might glorify him by a noble confession, 
made in face of the most extreme danger ; and that 
he might honour and reward them, by a most ex- 
traordinary and wonderful deliverance, 

Verse 13. T'hen Nebuchadnezzar in his rage, 
&c.—How little was it to the honour of this mighty 
prince that he had rule over so many nations, when, 
at the same time, he had no rule over his own spirit! 
How unfit was he to rule reasonable men, who would 
not himself be ruled by reason! Surely it did not 
need to surprise him to hear that these three men 
did not now serve his gods, for he knew very well 
they never had done it, and that their religion, to 
which they had always adhered, forbade them to do 
if. Norhad he any reason to think they acted thus 
in contempt of his authority, since they had in all 
instances showed themselves respectful and dutiful 
to him as their prince. 

Verses 14, 15. Nebuchadnezzar said, Is it true, 
O Shadrach? &c.—Or, of purpose, as the margin 
reads it, and as the word is used, Exod. xxi. 13. Is 
it designedly and deliberately done, or was it only 
through inadvertency, that you have not served my 
gods? What! you thatI have nourished and brought 
up; that have been educated and maintained at my 
charge; that I have been so kind to, and done so 
* much for; you that have been in such reputation for 
wisdom, and therefore should better have known 
your duty to your prince; what! do not you serve 
my gods, nor worship the golden image which Ihave 

3 


sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and A. M. 3424. 
all kinds of music, ye fall down and 2&5 
worship the image which I have made; ‘ well: 
but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same 
hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace ; 
¢ and who zs that God that shall deliver you out 
of my hands? 

16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, an- 
swered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnez- 
zar, " we are not careful to answer thee in this 
matter. 


17 If it be so, our God whom we serve is 


xili. 9.——S Exod. v.2; 2 Kings xviii. 35.—— Matt. x. 19. 


set up? Observe, reader, the faithfulness of God’s 
servants to him has often been the wonder of their 
enemies and persecutors, who think it strange that 
they run not with them to the same excess of riot. 
Now if ye be ready, &c.—He is willing to admit 
them to a new trial; if they did purpose before not 
to worship his gods, yet it may be, upon second 
thoughts, they will change their minds; it is there- 
fore repeated to them upon what terms they now 
stand: Ist, The king is willing that the music should 
play again, for their sakes only, to soften them into 
a compliance; and if they will not, like the deaf ad- 
der, stop their ears, but will hearken to the voice of 
the charmers, and. will worship the golden image, 
well and good, their former omission shall be par- 
doned. But, 2d, The king is resolved, if they persist 
in their refusal, that they shall immediately be cast 
into the fiery furnace, and shall not have so muchas 
an hour’s reprieve. Thus does the matter lie ina 
little compass; Twrn or burn, is the king’s language. 
And because he knew they buoyed themselves up in 
their refusal with a confidence in their God, he inso- 
lently sets him at defiance, saying, And who is that 
God that shall deliver you out of my hands? Let 
him deliver youif he can. Now he forgot what he 
himself once owned, that their God was a God of 
gods, and a Lord of kings, chap. ii. 47. Proud men 
are still ready to say, as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, 
that I should obey his voice? 

Verse 16. Shadrach, Meshach, &c., said, We are 
not careful to answer thee, &c.—In,so plain a case 
there is no room for deliberation: we have an an- 
swer ready at hand, that we ought to obey God 
rather than man. Admirable example this of a true 
faith in God, and ready obedience to his will! How 
worthy of our imitation! It is such an instance of 
fortitude and magnanimity as is scarce to be paral- 
leled. ‘They did not break out into any intemperate 
heat, or passion, against those that worshipped the 
golden image, did not insult or affront them, nor did 
they rashly thrust themselves upon the trial, or go 
out of the way to court martyrdom ; but when they 
were duly called to the fiery trial, they quitted them- 
selves with a conduct and courage that became suf- 
ferers for so good a cause. 

Verses 17, 18. If it be so—If we are brought into 

ve) 


The three Hebrews cast into 


DANIEL. 


the burning fiery furnace, 


og able to deliver us from the burning 
wae ~ fiery furnace, and he will deliver ws 
out of thy hand, O king. 

18 But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, 
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship 
the golden image which thou hast set up. 

19 4 Then was Nebuchadnezzar 7 full of 
fury, and the form of his visage was changed 
against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: 
therefore he spake, and commanded that they 
should heat the furnace one seven times more 
than it was wont to be heated. 


7 Chald. Frise 


* Or, mantles, 


8 Chald. mighty of strength. 


iis s strait: if we must be thrown into the fiery fur- 
nace unless we serve thine image; owr God whom 
we serve ts able to deliver us, &c.—As we are firm- 
ly persuaded of the power of our God to deliver us, 
so we trust in his merey and goodness, that he will 
deliver us out of this imminent danger. This they 
spake out of a well-grounded hope, not from a cer- 
tain foresight of being delivered; for such an as- 
surance would have detracted much from the worth 
of their courage and constancy, in despising the dan- 
ger which threatened them. And it appears, from 
what follows, that they were firmly fixed in their 
resolution, not to dishonour the true God by wor- 
shipping this image, or any of the gods of Babylon, 
although they should perish in the flames, for so 
they declare in the following words. But if nol, &c., 
we will not serve thy gods—It was, therefore, all one 
to them which way God would honour himself; they 
were resolved to suffer rather than sin, and leave 
their cause to God. Indeed, if God be for us, we 
need not fear what man can do unto us. Let him do 
his worst: God will deliver us either from death, or 
in death. 

Verses 19-21. T'hen was Nebuchadnezzar full 
of fury—Nebuchadnezzar had himself known and 
ewned so much of the true God, that one would have 
thought, though his pride and vanity had induced 
him to make this golden image, and set it up to be 
worshipped, yet that what these young men now 
said (whom he had formerly found to be wiser than 
all his wise men) would have revived his convic- 
tions, and at least have engaged him to forbear pro- 
ceeding to extremities against them ; but it proved 
quite otherwise. Ist, Instead of being convinced by 
what they said, he was exasperated, and made more 
outrageous. 2d, Instead of mitigating their punish- 
ment, in consideration of their quality and the 
honourable offices they were in, he ordered it to be 
heightened, commanding the heat of the furnace to 
be increased seven-fold; which, though it would not 
make their death more grievous, but rather despatch 
them the sooner, yet was designed to signify, that 
the king looked upon their crime as seven times 
more heinous than the crimes of others, and so made 
their death more ignominious. But God brought 
glory to himself ovt of this fuolish instance of the 

776 


20 And he commanded the ® most A. M. 3424, 
mighty men that were in his army Se mand 
to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace. 

21 Then these men were bound in their 
® coats, their hosen, and their 1° hats, and their 
other garments, and were cast into the midst 
of the burning fiery furnace. 

22 Therefore because the king’s 1 command- 
ment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding 
hot, the }* flame of the fire slew those men that 
took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. 


11 Chald. word. Or, spark. 


10 Or, turbans. 


tyrant’s rage; for though it would not have made 
their death the more grievous, yet it made their deli- 
verance much the more illustrious. 3d, He ordered 
them to be bound in their clothes, which was done 
accordingly. ‘They were bound, that they might 
not struggle, or make any resistance ; were boundin 
their clothes for haste, or that they might be con- 
sumed the more slowly and gradually: but God’s 
providence ordered it for the increase of the miracle, 
in that their clothes were not so much as singed. 
What a terrible death was this, to be cast bound into 
the midst of a burning fiery furnace! It makes one’s 
flesh tremble to think of it, and horror to take hold 
of one. It is amazing that the tyrant was so hard- 
hearted as to inflict such a punishment, and the con- 
fessors possessed of such fortitude as to submit to it, 
rather than sin against God. But what is this to the 
second death? to the furnace into which the tares 
shall be cast in bundles? to that lake which burns 
eternally with fire and brimstone? Let Nebuchad- 
nezzar heat his furnace as hot as he can, a few mi- 
nutes will finish the torment of those who are cast 
into it; but hell-fire tortures, and doth not kill; the 
pain of damned sinners is more exquisite, and the 
smoke of their torments ascends for ever and ever, 
and they have no rest, no intermission, no cessation 
of their pains, who have worshipped the beast and 
his image, Rev. xiv. 10, 11; whereas their pain - 
would be soon over that were ‘cast into this furnace, 
for not worshipping this Babylonian beast and his 
image. 

Verses 22, 23. Because the king’s commandment 
was urgent—That they should despatch them quick- 
ly, and be sure to do it effectually; and they there- 
fore resolved to go to the very mouth of the furnace, 
that they might throw them into the midst of it ; and 
were hasty and precipitate in executing their orders, 
and did not take proper care for themselves against 
the violence of the heat. "he flame of the fire slew 
those men that took.up Shadrach, &c.—The apocry- 
phal additions to the book of Daniel say, that the 
flame ascended forty-nine cubits above the mouth of 
the furnace. Probably God ordered it so, that the 
wind blew the flame directly upon them. Thus did 
God immediately plead the cause of his injured ser- 
vants, and take vengeance for them on ss cos 


They are miraculously 


CHAPTER III. 


preserved unhurt. 


A. M. tote 


23 And these three men, Shadrach, 
B. C. 580. 


~ Meshach, and Abed-nego, fell down 
bound into the midst of the burning fiery 
furnace. 

24 4 Then ee cies the king was 
astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, 
and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast 


three men bound into the midst of A. M. 3424. 
the fire? They answered and said da 
unto the king, True, O king. 

25 He answered and said, Lo, I see four men 
loose, * walking in the midst of the fire, and 
“4 they have no hurt: and the form of the fourth 
is like ! the Son of God. 


18 Or, governors.—— Isa. xliii. 2.——** Chald. there is no hurt 


in them. 1 Job i. 6; xxxvili. 7; Psa. xxxiv. 7; Verse 28. 


tors, whom he punished not only in the very act of 
their sin, but by theirsin. But these men were only 
the instruments of this cruelty: he that commanded 
them todo thishad the greater sin; yet they suffered 
justly for executing an unjust decree: a decree 
which, it is very likely, they executed with pleasure. 
As to Nebuchadnezzar himself, he was referred fora 
future reckoning. There is a day coming when 
proud tyrants will be punished, not only for the cru- 
elties they have been guilty of, but for employing 
those about them in their cruelties, and so exposing 
them to the judgments of God. It is probable, the 
noise occasioned by what befell these men drew Ne- 
buchadnezzar to the place where the furnace was, 
where he beheld what is related in the following 
verses. These three men fell down bound, &c.— 
All this is expressed with emphasis, to make the 
power of God more glorious in their preservation; 
for that flame which slew the executioners, might 
much more easily have killed them, even before they 
fell down. 

Verses 24, 25. Then Nebuchadnezzar was as- 
tonied, and rose up in haste—Some have thought 
there is something wanting between this and the 
preceding verse, expressive of the reason of Nebu- 
chadnezzar’s astonishment. Hence Houbigant inserts 
two verses, which are found in the Vulgate to this 
purpose: “But an angel of the Lord descended to 
Azariah and his companions into the furnace, and 
drove the flame of the fire from the furnace. And 
they walked in the midst of the flame, praising and 
blessing the Lord.” The LXX. and Arabic read 
the beginning of this verse thus: T'hen Nebuchad- 
nezzar heard them singing praise, and was aston- 
ished, &c. But it is probable that either the slaying 
of the men who executed his sentence was that 
which astonished Nebuchadnezzar, or rather, his 
unexpectedly seeing at a distance the young men 
walking at liberty, and apparently in comfort, in the 
fiery furnace. He said, Lo, I see four men loose, 
walking in the midst of the fire—\st, They were 
loose from their bonds: the fire, which. did not so 
much as singe their cluthes, burned the cords with 
which they were tied. 2d, They had no hurt, felt no 
pain or uneasiness in the least; the flame did not 
scorch them, the smoke did not stifle them: they 


were alive, and as well as ever in the midst of the) 


flames. See how the God of nature can, when he 
pleases, control the powers of nature, to make them 
serve his purposes! Now was fulfilled in the letter 
that gracious promise, Isa. xliii. 2, When thou walkest 
aia the fire thou shalt not be burned, neither 


shall the flame kindle upon thee. By faith they 
quenched the violence of fire. 3d, They walked in 
the midst of the fire: the furnace was large, so that 
they had room to walk; they were unhurt, so that 
they were able to walk; their minds were easy, so 
that they were disposed to walk as in a paradise, or 
garden of pleasure. Can a man walk wpon hot 
coals, and his feet not be burnt? Prov. vi. 28. Yes; 
they did it with as much pleasure as the king of 
Tyrus walked up and down in the midst of his pre- 


_cious stones, which sparkled as fire, Ezek. xxviii. 14, 


4th, There was a fourth seen with them in the fire, 
whose form, says Nebuchadnezzar, is like the Son 
of God—Or rather, like a son of God, or, of the 
gods; in agreement with the Hebrew, LXX., and 
Syriac; that is, “Like a divine and glorious person, 
sent from the powers above to. rescue and deliver 
these men.” For as Nebuchadnezzar was an idolater, 
it is searce to be conceived that he should know any 
thing concerning the Son of God, the Messiah, and 
much less of his form and likeness; whereas all the 
heathen hada notion, which runs through their theo- 
logy, of the sons of the deities, as powerful beings, 
sent often to the aid and protection of mankind. 
But though we can scarce suppose Nebuchadnezzar 
to have called or known this person to have been the 
Son of God, the promised Redeemer; yet it is ex- 
tremely probable, (and so the best Jewish as well as 
Christian commentators have understood it,) that he 
was indeed the Son of God, who often appeared in- 
our nature, in a human form, before he assumed that 
nature for our salvation; the great angel, or messen- 
ger of the covenant, who under that character fre- 
quently revealed himself to the patriarchs of old; 
and accordingly, in a subsequent verse, he is called 
the angel of God, the messenger sent to deliver 
these servants of the Lord; the same who was 
afterward sent to Daniel, to preserve him from the 
rage of the lions. Moreover, we may observe, that 
as angels are often called sons of God, and as most 
nations had high ideas of their power, perhaps Ne- 
buchadnezzar might only mean an angel, a celestial 
delegate; and this seems the more probable from 
his own words, verse 28, Blessed be God, who hath 
sent his angel, and delivered his servants, &e.— 
That angel, or son of God, whom I saw in the fur- 
nace, &c.: see Christian Mag., vol. ii. page 613. 
Observe, reader, those that suffer for Christ, have 
his gracious presence with them in their sufferings, 
even in the fiery furnace, even in the valley of the 
shadow of death, and therefore even there they neea 
fear no evil. Hereby Christ showed that what is 
Ti7 


A decree is made in 


DANIEL. 


Savour of the three Hebrews. 


A.M. 3424. 26 Then Nebuchadnezzar came 

B. ©. "near to the mouth of the burning 
fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of the 
most high God, come forth, and come hither. 
Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
came forth of the midst of the fire. 

27 And the princes, governors, and captains, 
and the king’s counsellors, being gathered to- 
gether, saw these men, ™upon whose bodies 
the fire had power, nor was a hair of their 


18 Chald. door——™ Heb. xi. 34. « Psalm xxxiv. 7,8; Jer. 
xvii. 7; Chap. vi. 22, 23. 


head singed, neither were their coats A. td 
changed, nor the smell of fire had ———— 
passed on them. 

28 Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, 
Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, who hath sent his angel, and de- 
livered his servants that "trusted in him, and 
have changed the king’s word, and yielded 
their bodies, that they might not serve nor wor- 
ship any god, except their own God. 

29 ° Therefore, °I make a decree, That 


© Chap. vi. 26.——1® Chald. a decree is made by me. 


done against his people, he takes as done against 
himself: whoever throw them into the furnace, do 
in effect throw him in; J am Jesus, whom thou per- 
secutest, Acts ix. 5. . 


Verses 26, 27. Then Nebuchadnezzar came near | 


to the mouth of the furnace—As near as he durst 
come; and spake—With a milder tone than before, 
God having abated the fire of his fury; and said, 
Ye servants of the most high God, &c.—The miracle 
calls to his mind the confession which he had for- 
merly made of the true God, chap. ii. 47. And he 


can now at once both acknowledge him to be most | 


high above all gods, and the three worthies, who had 
been condemned to the flames, to be his faithful ser- 
vants. Observe, reader, sooner or later God will 
convince the proudest of men, that he is the most 
high God, and above them, and too hard for them, 


even in those things wherein they deal proudly and | 


presumptuously, Exod. xviii. 11. He will likewise 
let them know who are his servants, and that he 
owns them, and will stand by them. Nebuchad- 
nezzar now embraces those whom he had abandoned 
to destruction, and is ready to show them every pos- 
sible kindness, perceiving them to be the favourites 
of Heaven. How the fourth, whose form was like 
the Son of God, withdrew, and whether he vanished 
away or visibly ascended, we are not told; but of the 
other three we are informed, that they came forth 
out of the midst of the fire—As Abraham their father 
out of Ur, that is, the fire, of the Chaldees, into 
which, says the tradition of the Jews, he was cast 
for refusing to worship idols, and out of which he 
was delivered, as those his three descendants were. 
When they had their discharge, they did not tempt 
God by staying any longer, but came forth as brands 
out of the burning. And the princes, governors, &c., 
being gathered together, saw those men—All the 
great men came together to view them, and were 
amazed to find that they had not received the least 
damage by the fire; that it had no power over their 
bodies, &c.—Several expressions are here used, 
which rise in fine order one above another, and the 
climax is beautiful. The fire not only had no pre- 
vailing power over their bodies, but neither was a hair 
of their head burned, nor their flowing robes singed, 
nor even the smell of fire had passed on them. 
778 


Verse 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and 
said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, &e.—So 
Darius offers up his acknowledgments to the God 
of Daniel, chap. vi. 26, looking upon him as superior 
to other gods, but not as the only true God. Who 
hath sent his angel—Thus Daniel ascribes his de- 
liverance from the lions to an angel, chap. vi. 22; 
and delivered his servants that trusted in him—That 
confided in his power, love, and faithfulness, that he 
would stand by and support them in their time of 
trial, and either bring them out of the fiery furnace 
back to their place on earth, or lead them through it 
forward to their place in heaven; and in this cenfi- 
dence became fearless of the king’s wrath, and regard- 
less of theirownlives. And have changed the king’s 
word—Have rendered his command of none effect, 
God having himself suspended the execution of it; 
and yielded their bodies—To expected torture and 
death; that they might not serve, &c.—That is, rather 
than they would consent to serve any god, except their 
own God—Or, any false god: all gods, but Jehovah, 
being false pretenders to divinity. By this miracle 
Nebuchadnezzar was plainly given to understand, 
that all the great suecess which he had had, and 
should yet have against the Jews, and in which he 
gloried, as if he had therein overpowered their God, 
was purely owing to their sin; that if the body of 
that nation had faithfully adhered to their own God, 
and the worship of him only, as these three men 
did, they would all have been delivered out of his 
hands, as these three men were. And this was a 
necessary instruction for him at this time. 

Verse 29. Therefore, I make a decree, &c.—He 
issues a royal edict, strictly forbidding any to speak 
evil of the God of Israel. We have reason to think 
that both the sins and the troubles of Israel had 


| given great, though no just occasion to the Chaldeans 


to blaspheme the God of Israel, and it is likely Ne- 
buchadnezzar himself had encouraged them to do 
it; but now, though he is no true convert, nor is 
influenced to worship him, yet he resolves never to 
speak evil of him again, nor to suffer others to do so. 
If any should presume to do it, he decrees that they 
should be counted the worst of malefactors, and 
should be dealt with accordingly. The miracle now 
wrought by the power of this God, in — 


The king relates his 


CHAPTER IV. 


remarkable dream. 


ar 324. every people, nation, and language, 
————. which speak “any thing amiss 
against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, shall be ?cut'® in pieces, and 


their houses shall be made a dunghill: 4 be- 


cause there is no other god that can A. M, 3424. 
‘ : B. C. 580. 
deliver after this sort. peng seend 
30 | Then the king ™ promoted Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the province of 
Babylon. 


17 Chald. error.—p Chap. ii. 5.——1® Chald. made pieces. 


4 Chap. vi. 27.——!* Chald. made to prosper. 


worshippers, and that publicly, in the sight of the 
thousands of Babylon; was a sufficient justification 
of this edict. And it would contribute much to the 
ease of the Jews in their captivity, to be, by this 
law, screened from the fiery darts of reproach and 
blasphemy, with which, otherwise, they would have 
been continually annoyed. Observe, reader, it is a 
great mercy to the church, and a good point gained, 
when its enemies, though they have not their hearts 
turned, yet have their mouths stopped, and their 
tongues tied. If a heathen prince laid such a re- 
straint upon the proud lips of blasphemers, how 
much more should Christian princes do it. Nay, in 
this thing, one would suppose that men should be a 


law to themselves; and that those who have so little 


love to God that they care not to speak well of him, 
yet should never find in their hearts, for we are sure 
they can never find cause, to speak any thing amiss 
of him. 

Verse 30. Then the king promoted Shadrach, 
&c.—He not only reversed the attainder of these 
three men, but restored them to their places in the 
government, nay, and preferred them to greater and 
more advantageous trusts than they had held before; 
or, as the margin reads it, He made them to prosper. 
The LXX., add at the end of the verse, And he ad- 
vanced them to be governors over all the Jews who 
were in his kingdom. 'Their promotion, which was 
much to their own honour, would be still more to the 
comfort of their brethren in captivity in those parts. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Damel, having finished the history respecting his three friends being cast into the fiery furnace, for refusing to worship Nebu- 
 chadnezzar’s golden image, here adds another history relating to that king, which he gives in the very words of the public 
_ edict which had been made on the occasion, that every one might be convinced of the truth of the story, having the testi- 
mony of a public edict for it. In this edict, after solemnly acknowledging the power and dominion of God, 1-8, Nebu- 
chadnezzar relates at large a dream which he had had, which none of his magicians could interpret, but for the interpreta- 
tion of which he had applied to Daniel, 4-18. Daniel interprets it, as foretelling Nebuchadnezzar’s fall, unless he should 
prevent it by his speedy repentance and reformation, 19-27. The accomplishment of it, when he was in the height of his 
pride, in his being suddenly deprived of his senses for seven years, and then recovering his reason and government, 28--34, 


36. His solemn acknowledgment of God’s absolute supremacy and almighty power, 34, 35, 37. 


Sip Rens JN EBUCHADNEZZAR the king, | 
Sateen “unto all people, nations, and 
languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace 
be multiplied unto you. 

2 *I thought it good to show the signs and 
wonders ® that the high God hath wrought to- 
ward me. 


3 °How great are his signs! and A. M. 3434. 
na ; pee Se 
how mighty are his wonders! his ———— 
kingdom is ‘an everlasting kingdom, and his 
dominion zs from generation to generation. 
4 4 I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in my 
house, and flourishing in my palace : 
5 Isaw a dream which made me afraid, ° and 


* Chapter iii. 4; vi. 25! Chaldee, It was seemly 


before me. 
> Chap. iii. 26. | 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verses 1-3. Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all 
people, &c.—He addresses the proclamation, not | 
only to his own subjects, but to all to whom the 
writing should come. Peace be multiplied wnto 
you—May all things prosperous happen unto you. 
The Chaldee is, Your peace be multiplied: a usual 
form of addressing the subjects of this vast empire. 
I thought it good to show the signs, &c., that the 
high God hath wrought toward me—Namely, by 
ones to him future things of so extraordinary 


¢ Chap. vi. 27.——4 Verse 34; Chap. ii. 44; vi. 26. 
ii. 28, 29. 


¢ Chap. 


a kind, as could not naturally have been supposed to 
happen; and in bringing to pass some of them upon 
himself in a most wonderful manner. How great 
are his signs, &c.—“ The king’s repeated experience 
had extorted from him the sublime confession con- 
tained in this verse; the latter part of which is a 
fine display of the infinite power and dominion of 
the true God.”—Wintle. 

Verses 4, 5. I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest, &t.— 
Nebuchadnezzar, “for the extent of his dominion, 
and the great revenues it supplied ; for his unrivalled 

779 


The king relates his 


DANIEL. 


remarkable dream. 


A.M, 3434. the thoughts upon my be! and the 

B. ©. 510. visions of my head ‘troubled me. 

6 Therefore made I a decree to bring in all 
the wise men of Babylon before me, that they 
might make known unto me the interpretation 
of the dream. 

7 &Then came in the magicians, the astrolo- 
gers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and 
I told the dream before them; but they did 
not make known unto me the interpretation 
thereof. 

8 ¥ But at the last Daniel came in before me, 
» whose name was Belteshazzar, according to 
the name of my god, ‘and in whom is the 
spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told 
the dream, saying, 


£ Chap. ii. 1—s Chap. ii. 2. Chap. i. 7.—/ Isa. Ixiii, 
11; Verse 18; Chap. ii. 11; v. 11, 14.——* Chap. ii. 48; v.11. 


9 O Belteshazzar, * master of the A.M. 3434. 
magicians, because I know that the salad 
spirit of the holy gods ¢s in thee, and no secret 
troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream 
that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof. 

10 Thus were the visions of my head in my 
bed; I saw, and behold !a tree in the midst 
of the earth, and the height thereof was great. 

11 The tree grew, and was strong, and the 
height thereof reached unto heaven, and the 
sight thereof to the end of all the’earth: 

12 The leaves thereof were fair, and the 
fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all: 
™the beasts of the field had shadow under it, 
and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs 
thereof, and all flesh was fed of it. 


2 Chald. I was seeing.——! Ezck. xxxi. 3; Verse 20 
Zech. xi. 2; Psa. xxxvii. 35.——™ Ezek. xvii. 23; 


alga, ¥55945 
Lam. iv. 20. 


success in war; for the magnificence and splendour | 
of his court; and for his stupendous works and im- | 


provements at Babylon, was the greatest monarch, | 
not only of his own times, but incomparably the. 
greatest the world had ever seen. _ At a time when || 
he was at rest in his house, and flourishing in his 
palace ;” having lately subjected to his empire Syria, 
Phenicia, Judea, Egypt, and Arabia, and returned to | 
Babylon inflated with his success and victories, and | 
being in the meridian of his glory, and thinking of | 
nothing but enjoying in peace the fruit of his con- 1 
quests, he was unexpectedly alarmed, and thrown | 
into trouble and distress, by~a prophetic dream | 
which he here records. Thus God’s particular | 
judgments often resemble the general one in their | 
coming suddenly and unexpectedly, when men in- 
dulge themselves in carnal security. 

Verses 6,7. Therefore made I a decree to bring 
in the wise men—As he did before, on a like occa- | 
sion ; but they did not make known unto me the in- || 
terpretation—Though they, had promised with great | 
confidence, when consulted before, respecting his 
former dream, that if it were told them they would, 
without fail, interpret it. But the key of this dream 
was in asacred prophecy, with which they were not 
acquainted, namely, Ezek. xxxi. 3, &c., where the 
Assyrian monarch is compared, as Nebuchadnezzar |, 
is here, to a tree cut down for his pride. Had they 
read and considered that divine record, they might 
perhaps have discovered the mystery of this dream. 
But Providence ordered it so, that they should be 
first puzzled with it, that Daniel’s interpreting of it 
afterward might redound to the glory of Daniel’s 
God. 

Verses 8, 9. But at the last Daniel came in be- 
fore me—Whether sent for by the king, or brought || 
by another, appears not, but he was last, that it might || 
appear that he only, or rather, his God, who revealed 


| lightening the prophet. 


them to him, had the true understanding of these 
secrets: for if he had come first, or before the rest 
780 


had tried all their skill in vain, they would have been 
ready to affirm they understood the interpretation 
of the dream as well as he, and so God would not 
have had the glory of it; but now it was evident that 
the interpretation was from the Spirit of God en- 
In whom is the spirit of the 
holy gods—Who is enlightened by the gods, or 
heavenly powers, with a supernatural degree of - 
knowledge, such as none of the wise men of Babylon 
can attain to. The original words, however, may 
be rendered, the holy God, as they are in the Greek 
and Arabic: and it is probable that this king had 
now the one true God in his mind. O Belteshazzar, 
master—Or, chief, of the magicians, as Wintle 
translates the words. That he was superior to, or 
placed as a governor over, all the magieians, or wise 
men, see on chap. i. 20, and ii. 48. Because I know 
that the spirit of the holy gods—Or rather, of the 
holy God, is in thee, and that no secret troubleth 
thee—Or, is difficult to thee. The LXX. read, e« 
advvaret oe, is not impossible to thee. ‘Thou art not at 
a loss to find out any secret thing whatsoever. Tell 
me the visions of my dream, and the interpretation 


_ thereof—Nebuchadnezzar tells the dream himself in 


the following words; so that the meaning of this 
sentence must be, Tell me the interpretation of the 
dream. The LXX. translate it thus: Hear the vision 


of my dream, which Isaw, and tell me the interpret- — 


ation thereof. 
Verses 10-16. I saw, &¢.—The substance of what 


the king relates is, that he saw in a dream “a tree, 


strong and flourishing ; [in the midst of the earth, or 
of his empire ;] its summit pierced the clouds, and 
its branches overshadowed the whole extent of his 
vast dominions: it was laden with fruit, and luxuriant 


in its foliage: the cattle reposed in its shade, and the 
fowls of the air lodged in its branches, and multi- 


tudes partook of its delicious fruit. But the king 


| saw a celestial being, a watcher, and a holy one, 


come down from heaven; and heard ea 


The king relates 


CHAPTER IV. 


his remarkable dream. 


A. M. 3434. 
B. C. 570. 


13 I saw in the visions of my head 
upon my bed, and behold, "a watcher 
and °a holy one came down from heaven ; 

14 He cried *aloud, and said thus, ? Hew 
down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake 
off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: 4 let the 


2 Psalm ciii. 20; Verses 17, 23. © Deut. xxxiii. 2; Chapter 
vill. 13; Zech. ‘xiv. 5; Jude 14. 


with a loud voice, that the tree should be hewn 
down, its branches lopped off, and its fruit scattered, 
and nothing left of it but the stump of its roots in 
the earth, which was to be secured, however, with a 
band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the 
Jield. Words of menace follow, which are applica- 
ble only to a man, and plainly show, that the whole 
vision was typical of some dreadful calamity, to fall 
for a time, but for a time only, on some one of the 
sons of men.”—Bishop Horsley. The whole of this 
allegorical dream is explained in the subsequent part 
of the chapter; and therefore it will only be neces- 
sary to notice here two or three of the singular ex- 
pressions and,particulars found in it. 

lst, By the terms watcher and holy one, or, as the 
expression is, verse 17, watchers and holy ones, has 


generally been understood some principal angel, or | 


angels, the angelical orders being described as always 
attending upon God’s throne to receive and execute 
his commands: see Psa. ciii. 20; Matt. xviii. 10; and 
notes on Ezek. i. 11, 24. For which reason they 
are called the eyes of the Lord, Zech. iv. 10. But 
Bishop Horsley, in his sermon on the 17th verse, 
strongly combats, and seems to have fully confuted 
this opinion. His train of reasoning is too long to 
be inserted here, and indeed it is not necessary to in- 
sert it, the following short extract being quite suffi- 
cient to clear up the point. “Those who understand 
the titles of watchers and holy ones of angelic beings, 
agree, that they must be principal angels—angels of 
the highest orders; which, if they are angels at all, 
must certainly be supposed: for it is to be observed, 
that it is not the mere execution of the judgment 
upon Nebuchadnezzar, but the decree itself, which 
is ascribed to them. ‘The whole matter originated 
in their decree; and at their command the decree 
was executed. Zhe holy ones are not said to hew 
down the tree, but to give command for the hewing 
ofitdown. Of how high order, indeed, must these 
watchers and holy ones have been, on whose decrees 
the judgments of God himself are founded, and by 
whom the warrant for the execution is finally issued? 
It is surprising, that such men as Calvin among the 
Protestants of the continent—such as Wells and the 
elder Lowth in our own church—and such as Calmet 
in the Church of Rome, should not have their eyes 
open to the error, and impiety indeed, of such an 
exposition as this which makes them angels, espe- 
cially when the learned Grotius, in the extraordinary 
manner in which he recommends it, had set forth its 
merits, as it should seem, in a true light, when he 
says, that it represents God as acting like a great 
monarch ‘upon a decree of his senate:’ and when 
3 


beasts get away from under it, and sm -~ 
the fowls from his branches. onedeacntial 

15 Nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots 
in the earth, even with a band of iron and 
brass, in the tender grass of the field; and 
let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and le¢ 


3 Chaldee, with might——P Matthew iii. 10.——4 Ezekiel 


Sark 22, 


another of the most learned of its advocates ima- 
gines something might pass in the celestial senate, 
bearing some analogy to the forms of legislation 
used in the assemblies of the people at Rome, in the 
times of the republic. It might have been expected 
that the exposition would have needed no other con- 
futation, in the judgment of men of piety and sober 
minds, than this fair statement of its principles by 
its ablest advocates. 

“The plain truth is, that these appellations, 
Watchers and Holy Ones, denote the persons in the 
Godhead ; the first describing them by the vigilance 
of their universal providence, the second by the 
transcendent sanctity of their nature. The word 
rendered Holy Ones is so applied in other texts of 
Scripture, which make the sense of the other word, 
coupled with it here, indisputable. In perfect con- 
sistency with this exposition, and with no other, we 
find, in the 24th verse, that this decree of the Watch- 
ers and the Holy Ones is the decree of the Most 
High God; and in verse 13, God, who in regard to 


| the plurality of the persons, is afterward described 


by these two plural nouns, Watchers and Holy Ones, 
is, in regard to the unity of the essence, described by 
the same nouns in the singular number, Watcher 
and Holy One. And this is a fuller confirmation of 
the truth of this exposition: for God is the only 
being to whom the same name in the singular and 
in the plural may be indiscriminately applied: and 
this change from the one number to another, with- 
out any thing in the principles of the language to 
account for it, is frequent in speaking of God in the 
Hebrew tongue, but unexampled in the case of any 
other being. The assertion, therefore, is, that God 
had decreed to execute a signal judgment upon Ne- 
buchadnezzar for his pride and impiety, in order to 
prove, by the example of that mighty monarch, that 


‘the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and 


giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over 
it the basest of men.’ To make the declaration the 
more solemn and striking, the terms in which it is 
conceived distinctly express that consent and con- 
currence of all the persons in the Trinity, in the de- 
sign and execution of this judgment, which must be 
understood indeed in every act of the Godhead.” 
2d, The command given by these watchers and 
holy ones may be considered as addressed to any 
of those creatures, animate or inanimate, that are to 
fulfil the Creator’s will; or the expression may be 
understood as being merely a prediction that the 
tree should be cut down, and its leaves shaken off, 
&c.: and the hewing down of the tree signified only 
the removal of it for a time, not its entire destruc- 
781 


Daniel interprets 


DANIEL. 


the king’s dream. 


. 


A. M. 3434. his portion be with the beasts in the 
B. C. 570. 
grass of the earth. 

16 Let his heart be changed from man’s, and 
let a beast’s heart be given unto him; and let 
seven * times pass over him. 

17 This matter és by the decree of the watch- 
ers, and the demand by the word of the holy 
ones: to the intent * that the living may know 
tthat the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of 
men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and 
setteth up over it the basest of men. 

18 This dream I King Nebuchadnezzar have 
seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the 


interpretation thereof, * forasmuch as A. M, 3434. 

: : B. C. 570. 
all the wise men of my kingdom are ———— 
not able to make known unto me the inter- 
pretation: but thou art able: * for the spirit of 
the holy gods ¢s in thee. 

19 4 Then Daniel, ¥ whose name was Bel- 
teshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his 
thoughts troubled him. 'The king spake, and 
said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the in- 
terpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar 
answered, and said, My lord, the dream be to 
them that hate thee, and the interpretation 
thereof to thine enemies. 


® Chap. xi. 13; xii. 7.#——=* Psa. ix. 16——* Chap. ii. 21; v. 21; 
Verses 25, 32. 


tion, because while the root remained in the ground 
new shoots might break forth, and so the tree grow 
up again. When it is added, let the beasts get away 
from under it, the meaning evidently is, let not his 
subjects rely upon him for protection, for he shall 
not be in a condition to afford them any, or to be the 
author of any good to them. Nevertheless (it is 
further commanded) leave the stump of his roots in 
the earth—By which is signified, that Nebuchadnez- 
zar’s kingdom should be preserved to him, and that 
no one should seize upon it during his exile, or afflic- 
tion. The words, with a band of iron and brass, 
were meant to give still further assurance that his 
kingdom should remain unshaken and sure to him, 
like things held firm and immoveable by iron or 
brass. The next expression, in the tender grass of 
the field, either alludes to the circumstance of the 
stump of a tree lying buried and neglected in the 
field, till it is overgrown with grass and herbs, and 
so is not noticed; or it is a transition from the sign 
to the thing signified, from the tree to Nebuchadnez- 
zar, represented by it, the tree with its stump being 
lost sight of, and a person coming in its stead, to 
whom only what follows is applicable. Let his 
heart be changed from man’s—* It is hard to say 
what the real nature of this transformation was. The 
Syriac seems to incline to a change of the mind, and 
probably it means no more than that his heart, or 
the nature of his constitution, was made savage and 
brutish, either by a real madness, or by such a slo- 
venly neglect of himself, or deprivation of the proper 
use of his speech and limbs, as might reduce him to 
a state like the beasts. There is a kind of madness 
called lycanthropy, wherein men have the fury of 
wolves.”—Wintle. See Univ. Hist., p. 964. Scali- 
ger thinks this madness of Nebuchadnezzar is ob- 
seurely hinted at in a document of Abydenus, pro- 
duced by Eusebius; wherein, having represented 
the king, from the Chaldean writers, to have fallen 
into an ecstasy, and to have foretold the destruction 
of that empire by the Medes and Persians, the author 
adds, that immediately after uttering this prophecy 
he disappeared ; which Scaliger expounds of the 
king’s being driven from his kingly state, and the 
782 


«Gen, xli. 8, 15; Chapter v. 8, 15. x Verse 8,—-Y Verse 8. 
z 2 Sam. xviii. 32; Jer. xxix. 7. 


society of men: see Scaliger’s notes upon the An- 
cient Fragments in the appendix to his work de 
Emendatione Temporum. See also Houbigant and 
Calmet on the metamorphosis of Nebuchadnezzar. 
And let seven times pass over him—tLiterally, Till 
seven times be changed upon him, that is, seven 
years, for so the expression evidently signifies in 
several parts of this book, as we shall see hereafter. 

Verses 17,18. This matter is by the decree of the 
watchers, §c., to the intent that the living may know. 
&c.—The intent of the matter was to give mankind 
a proof, in the fall and restoration of this mighty 
monarch, that the fortunes of kings and empires are 
in the hand of God; that his providence perpetually 
interposes in the affairs of men, and that he distri- 
butes crowns and sceptres according to his will, but 
always for the good of the faithful primarily, and 
ultimately of his whole creation. And setteth over 
it the basest of men—If this be applied to Nebuchad- 
nezzar, it must be understood, either with respect to 
his present condition, whose pride and cruelty ren- 
dered him as despicable in the sight of God as his 
high estate made him appear honourable in the eyes 
of men; and, therefore, was justly doomed to so 
low a degree of abasement: or else it may be inter- 
preted of his wonderful restoration and advancement 
after he had been degraded from his dignity. 

Verse 19. T'hen Daniel was astonied for one 
hour—“ Stood in silent astonishment for nearly an 
hour,” both at the surprising circumstances of the 
judgment denounced against the king, and likewise 
out of a tender regard and respect for his person, 
who had bestowed so many favours upon him. The 
Vulgate renders it, cepit intra seipswm tacitus cogi- 
tare, he began to consider in silence within himself, 
or silently reflected on the particulars of the dream 
just related. But the LXX. read azyveon, obstupe- 
factus fuit, he was amazed, or confounded. The 
king said, Let not the dream trouble thee—W hatso- 
ever it be that thou understandest from the dream, 
tell it freely without fear. Daniel answered, The 
dream be to them that hate thee—May the ill it por- 
tends happen to thy enemies. The words are spoken 


by the figure called euphemismus, according to 
3 


Daniel interprets 


CHAPTER IV. 


the king’s dream, 


A. M. S434. 20 * The tree that thou sawest, 
——— which grew, and was strong, whose 


height reached unto the heaven, and the sight 
thereof to all the earth ; . 

21 Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit 
thereof much, and in it was meat for all; under 
which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon 
whose branches the fowls of the heaven had 
their habitation : 

22 »It is thou, O king, that art grown and 
become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and 
reacheth unto heaven, ° and thy dominion to 
the end of the earth. 

23 4 And whereas the king saw a watcher and 
a holy one coming down from heaven, and say- 
ing, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet 
leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, 
even with a band of iron and brass, in the 
tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with 


the dew of heaven, ° and le¢ his por- + au ane 
tion be with the beasts of the field, till ——""~ 
seven times pass over him ; 

24 This is the interpretation, O king, and 
this zs the decree of the Most High, which is 
come upon my lord the king: 

25 That they shall ‘drive thee from men, 
and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the 
field, and they shall make thee to eat grass 
as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of 
heaven, and seven times shall] pass over thee, "till 
thou know that the Most High ruleth in the king- 
dom of men, and ' giveth it to whomsoever hewill. 

26 And whereas they commanded to leave 
the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall 
be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have 
known that the * heavens do rule. 

27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be ac- 
ceptable unto thee, and ! break off thy sins by 


a Verses 10, 11, 12. b Chapter ii. 38. « Jer, xxvii. 6, 7, 8. 
4 Verse 13. © Chap. v. 21.—— Verse 32 ; Chap. v. 21, &c. 


& Psalm cvi. 20. Verses 17, 32; Psa. Ixxxiii. 18.——i Jer. 
xxvii. 5.—— Matt. xxi. 25; Luke xv. 18, 21.——! 1 Pet. iv. 8. 


which any displeasing or ungrateful thing is signi- 
fied by a more soft and agreeable mode of expres- 
sion: see a like instance, 1 Sam. xxv. 22. “Such 
rhetorical embellishments are pointed at no individu- 
als, have nothing in them of malice or ill-will, and 
may be presumed to be free from any imputation of 
a want of charity.”"—Wintle. Daniel thus expresses 
his dutiful concern for the safety of the king’s per- 
son and government. For though Nebuchadnezzar 
Was an idolater, a persecutor, and oppressor of the 
people of God, yet he was Daniel’s prince, and there- 
fore, though he foresees, and is now going to foretel, 
ill concerning him, he dares not wish ill to him. 
Thus Jeremiah had before exhorted the Jewish cap- 
tives at Babylon to wish and pray for the prosperity 
of the government under which they lived. 

Verses 20-22. The tree that thou sawest is thou, 
Oking, that art grown and become strong—Princes 


and great men are frequently represented in Scrip- |, 


ture by fair and flourishing trees. So the king of 
Assyria is described, Ezekiel xxxi. 3-8: compare 
Isa. x. 34; Zech. xi. 2. Thy greatness is grown 
and reacheth unto heaven—As near as human great- 
ness can do. He shows the king his present pros- 
perous state in the glass of his own dream: see verse 
11. And thy dominion to the end of the earth—To 
the Caspian sea, to the Euxine sea, and to the At- 
lantic ocean.—Grotius. See note on chap. ii. 38. 
Verses 24-26. This is the interpretation, O king, 
&c.— We may observe that Daniel informs the king 
with the greatest tenderness, and most respectful 
terms, of the sad reverse of condition that was to 
happen tohim. They shall drive thee from men— 
In the Chaldee and Hebrew the plural active, they 
shall do, signifies no more than, thus it shall be, be 
the cause what it may. ‘The meaning seems to be, 
that Nebuchadnezzar should be punished with in- 
3 


1 


sanity, which should so deprave his imagination, 
while he yet retained his memory, and, perhaps, his 
reason in some intervals, as that he should fancy 
himself to be a beast, and should live as such, till his 
heart, that is, his apprehension, appetite, or likings, 
should be changed from those of a man to those of 
abeast. Jo eat grass as oxen signifies to live upon 
the herbs of the field; for the original word signifies 
any kind of field-herb as well as grass. TJll thow 
know that the most high God ruleth, &e.—It ap- 
pears from what is here said, that this judgment was 
inflicted on Nebuchadnezzar on account of his pride 
or haughtiness, and his making no acknowledgment 
of a Divine Providence ordering and governing the 
affairs of the world; but attributing the acquisition 
of all his great power and vast dominion to his own 
prudence and valour, instead of acknowledging it as 
the gift of the most high God. And whereas they 
commanded to leave the stump, §c., thy kingdom 
shall be sure unto thee—There shall be no other 
king chosen during thy affliction, but thoushalt again 
receive thy kingly power, and reign as before. Af- 
ter that thow shalt have known that the heavens do 
rule—The heavens are here put for the God of the 
heavens. 

Verse 27. Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be 
acceptable unto thee—These words Daniel adds out 
of love to the king, if perhaps his complying with 
the advice given might turn away this dreadful 
stroke from him, or at least might give the king 
some hopes of a mitigation of the calamity. And 
break off thy sins by righteousness—Cease to do 
evil, and learn to do well. Change thy principles 
and practices; do justly and love mercy; and in- 
stead of oppressing the poor, have compassion upon 
them, and be kind and bountiful to them. Give this 
evidence of thy true repentance and reformation, 

783 “ 


Nebuchadnezzar 


DANIEL. 


becomes insane. 


A. M. 3434. righteousness, and thine iniquities by 
pale showing mercy to the poor; ™if it 
may be ‘a ™ lengthening of thy tranquillity. 

28 ¥ All this came upon the king Nebuchad- 
nezzar. 

29 Atthe end of twelve months he walked ° in 
the palace of the kingdom of Babylon. 

30 The king °spake, and said, Is not this 
great Babylon, that Ihave built for the house 
of the kingdom by the might of my power, and 
for the honour of my majesty ? 

31 » While the word was in the king’s mouth, 
there fell 4 a voice from heaven, saying, O King 
Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The 
kingdom is departed from thee : 

32 And ' they shall drive thee from men, and 
thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the 


field: they shall make thee to eat A, M. 3434 

‘ . C. 570. 
grass as oxen, and seven times shall ——_— 
pass over thee, until thou know that the Most 
High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth 
it to whomsoever he will. 

33 The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon 
Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from 
men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body 
was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs 
were grown like eagles’ feathers, and his nails 
like birds’ claws. 

34 And ‘at the end of the days 1 p o 587. 
Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes 
unto heaven, and mine understanding returned 
unto me, and I blessed the Most High, and I 
praised and honoured him * that liveth for ever, 
whose dominion is “an everlasting dominion, 


m Psalm xli. 1, &c.——*Or, a healing of thine error. 
0} Kings xxi. 29.——® Or, upon. 
20.—+P Chap. v.5; Luke xii. 20. 


© Prov. xvi. 18; Chap. v. | 


4 Verse 24. Verse 25,’ Verse 26.—! Chap. xii. 75 
Rev. iv. 10. u Psa, x. 16; Chap. ii. 44; vii. 14; Mice. iv. 7; 
Luke i. 33. 


Though the word p19, here used, properly signifies 
to break off, as it is here translated, yet many of 
the versions render it, to redeem, and read the 
clause, Redeem thy sins by righteousness, that is, as 
they explain it, by almsgiving ; and thus the pas- 
sage is alleged as favouring the doctrine of expiatory 
merit, and purchase of absolutions and pardons: but, 
it must be observed, sins are not said to be redeemed 
in Scripture, but persons; and the plain sense of the 
words is as it is given in our translation. Jf it may 
be a lengthening of thy tranquillity —Daniel was not 
certain of pardon for him, nor did he altogether de- 
spair of it. With what wisdom and tenderness does 
he speak, and yet with what plainness! 

Verses 28-33. All this came upon the king Ne- 
buchadnezzar—With what admirable propriety is 
the person changed here! the six following verses 
being delivered in the third person. But in the 34th, 
Nebuchadnezzar, having recovered his reason, speaks 
in the first person again. At the end of twelve 
months—God deferred the execution of his threats 
against this impious prince for a whole year, giving 
him that time wherein to repent and return to him; 
but seeing that he persevered in his crimes, the mea- 
sure of his iniquities being full, he put his menaces 
in execution.—Calmet. “ Strange as it may seem,” 
says Bishop Horsley, “notwithstanding Daniel’s 
weight and credit with the king,—notwithstanding 
the consternation of mind into which the dream had 
thrown him, the warning had no permanent effect. 
He was not cured of his overweening pride and 
vanity till he was overtaken by the threatened judg- 
ment. Al the endof twelve months, he was walking 
in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon—Probably 
on the flat roof of the building, or perhaps on one of 
the highest terraces of the hanging gardens, where 
the whole city would be in prospect before him; 
and he said, in the exultation of his heart, Is not this 

o 784 


| 


i 


great Babylon, which I have built for the seat of 
empire, by the might of my power, and for the 
honour of my majesty ?2—The words had scarcely 
passed his lips, when the might of his power and the 
honour of his majesty departed from him. The 
same voice, which in the dream had predicted the 
judgment, now denounced the impending execution; 
and the voice had no sooner ceased to speak than 
it was done.” 

Of the extent, glory, and splendour of Babylon, 
see note on Isa. xiii. 19, Although Babylon was 
one of the oldest cities in the world, being built by 
Nimrod a little after the erection of the famous tower 
of Babel, and considerably augmented by Semira- 
mis, yet Nebuchadnezzar had very much improved 
it, and made it one of the wonders of the world, on 
account of the largeness and height of the walls 
which he built round it, the temple of Belus, his own 
palace, and the famous hanging gardens belonging 
to it, all of which were the works of this king. Bo- 
chart thinks that Babylon was as much indebted to 
Nebuchadnezzar as Rome was to Augustus Cesar, 
who used to boast, that he received the city of brick, 
and left it of marble. But Herodotus says, it was 
built gradually by several other Assyrian kings; and 
he relates, that the wealth of the Babylonian state 
was so great, that it was equal to one-third part of all 
Asia; and that, besides the tribute, if the other sup- 
plies for the great king were divided into twelve 
parts, according to the twelve months of the year, 
Babylon would supply four, and all Asia the other 
eight. 2 

Verses 34, 35. Al the end of the days, I Nebuchad- 
nezzar lifted wp mine eyes, &e.—The first indica- 
tion of his recovery is noted by a reverse of the 
cause of his fall. At the expiration of the term, or 
at the end of seven years, he lifted up his eyes unto 
heaven, and his understanding returned ; that-is, he 

“; s 


‘ 


The profane feast 


CHAPTER V. 


of Belshazzar. 


as, A. and his kingdom is from generation 
to generation : 

35 And *all the inhabitants of the earth are 
reputed as nothing: and ¥he doeth according 
to his will in the army of heaven, and among 
the inhabitants of the earth: and ? none can 
stay his hand, or say unto him, * What doest 
thou ? 

36 At the same time my reason returned unto 
me: and for the glory of my kingdom, mine 


xTsa. xl. 15, 17.——¥ Psa. exv. 3; exxxv. 6. 2 Job xxxiv. 29, 
a Job ix. 12; Isa. xlv.9; Rom. ix. 20.—» Verse 26. 


honour and brightness returned unto A. M. 3434. 
me; and my counsellors and my lords ———— 
sought unto me; and I was established in my 
kingdom, and excellent majesty was ° added 
unto me. 

37 NowI Nebuchadnezzar praise, and extol, 
and honour the King of heaven, ‘all whose 
works are truth, and his ways judgment: 
* and those that walk in pride he is able to 
abase. 


¢ Job xlii. 12; Prov. xxii. 4; Matt, vi. 33.——4 Psa. xxxiii. 4; 
Rev. xv. 3; xvi. 7. ® Exod, xviii. 11; Chap. v. 20. 


recovered the use of his reason, and became sensible 
of his dependance upon God; he acknowledged 
against whom he had transgressed by his pride; he 
humbled himself before him; acknowledged the 
greatness of his power, and the justice of his wrath; 
applied to him in prayer, and obtained merey. And 
I blessed the Most High, &c.—I rendered praise to 


that supreme, infinite, and eternal God, the Maker | 


of heaven and earth, and the upholder, preserver, 
and sovereign Lord of the universe, on whom all 
creatures are dependant, and to whom all intelligent 
creatures are accountable for their conduct; the 
highest angels not being above his command, nor 
the meanest of the children of men beneath his cog- 
nizance. And all the inhabitants of the world are 
reputed as nothing—The greatest monarchs, as well 
as persons of an inferior rank, are as nothing in his 
sight; and he disposes all things in heaven and earth 
by an irresistible power and authority. Observe, 
reader, a due consideration of God’s infinite great- 
ness makes the creature appear as nothing; crea- 
tures are nothing to help, nothing to hurt, nothing 
in duration, nothing solid and substantial, nothing 
without dependance upon, and influence and sup- 
port from God. God is I AM, and there is none 
else ; verily, every man in his best estate is alto- 
gether vanity, Psa. xxxix. 5; yea, less than vanity, 
and nothing, Psa. |xii. 9; Isa. xl. 17. And he doth ac- 
cording to his will—Being the Lord of hosts, and 
the only absolute and universal monarch of the 


world; none can stay his hand, or say unto him, 
What doest thou ?—He is irresistible and uncon- 
trollable. 

Ver. 36, 37. And for the glory—Or rather, And the 
glory of my kingdom, and mine honour and bright- 
ness—Or countenance, (as the word ‘y'1, here used, 
is translated, chap. v. 6, and vii. 28,) returned to me 
—TI recovered my former looks, was possessed of the 
same outward glory and majesty, and was honoured 
with the same attendance and retinue, as I was be- 
fore. Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise, and extol, 
and honour, &e.—The number and variety of the 
words here used are meant to express the vehe- 
mence of the king’s zeal and affectionate devotion. 
All whose works are truth, and his ways judgment— 
Who governs the world with equity and justice. 
And those who walk in pride he is able to abase— 
Of which Nebuchadnezzar himself was a remarkable 
instance. This doxology seems evidently to have 
proceeded from his heart; and it is very probable, 
from the confession that he makes, and the glory 
and praise which he gives to God, that his conver- 
sion was real, and that he was a true proselyte to 
the Jewish religion. This great king, it appears, 
lived only one year after his recovery; and it may 
be hoped that, during that term, he continued in the 
faith and worship of the true God. His death hap- 
pened in the thirty-seventh year of Jehoiachin’s 
captivity, after he had reigned sole monarch forty- 
three years. ; 


CHAPTER V. 


In this chapter we have an account, (1,) Of Belshazzar’s profane feast, and of his polluting the sacred vessels taken from 


the temple of God, 1-4. (2,) Of the handwriting on the wall, denowncing his consequent punishment, 5-9. 
(4,) The accomplishment of it in the death of the king, and the trans - 


terpretation of that handwriting by Daniel, 10-29. 
Serring of the kingdom to another people, 30, 31. 


ee BELSHAZZAR the king * made 
—— a great feast to a thousand of 


a Esther i. 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 
Verse 1. Belshazzar—The son of Evil-merodach, 
and grandson of Nebuchadnezzar; made a great 
Vou. IIL, 1a) 


(3,) The in: 


his lords, and drank wine before the A. M, 3466. 
B. C. 538, 
thousand. 


— 


feast to a thousand of his lords—To the pr‘ucipal 

officers and great men of his court, and was himself 

present at it. This feast was made at a time of pub 
785 e 3 


The divine message 


DANIEL. 


to Belshazzar. 


A. M. 3466. 2 Belshazzar, while he tasted the 
oh aeaias wine, commanded to bring the golden 
and silver vessels » which his 1 father Nebuchad- 
nezzar had *teken out of the temple which 
was in Jerusalen; that the king, and_ his 
princes, his wives, and his concubines, might 
drink therein. 

3 Then they brought the golden vessels that 
were taken out of the temple of the house of 
God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, 
and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, 
drank in them. | 

4 'They drank wine, ° and praised the gods of 
gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and 
of stone. 

5 % In the same hour came forth fingers of 


b Chapter i. 2; Jeremiah lii. 19. Or, grand-father, as 
Jeremiah xxvii. 7; 2 Sam. ix.7; 2Chronicles xv. 16; Verses 
11, 13.——* Chald. brought forth. © Rev. ix. 20.—4 Chap. 
iv. 31.——* Chald. brightnesses, Verse 9. 


lic rejoicing, being an annual festival, when the 
whole night was spent in revelling; of which sea- 
son Cyrus took the advantage to make himself mas- 
ter of the city, as Herodotus and Xenophon relate, 
and as was foretold by Jeremiah, chap. 1. 24, and li. 
39, 57, where see the notes. 

Verses 2-4. Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine 
—When he grew warm with wine, Houb. Com- 
manded to bring the golden and silver vessels, &c. 
Triumphing thereby over God and his people. 
They drank wine—Made themselves merry with 
wine. And praised the gods of gold, &c.—Praised, 
as gods, senseless images of gold, silver, brass, iron, 
&c.; thus insulting the great God of heaven and 
earth, as if these images were more powerful than 
he, and had enabled them to prevail against him and 
his people. This their conduct was the more sin- 
ful, because Nebuchadnezzar had, not long before, 
prohibited, by a solemn decree, that any one should 
speak lightly of the God of the Jews. The Alex- 
andrine and Coptic versions, after mentioning their 
praising their false gods, add, “But the everlasting 
God they praised not.” Such a wanton and sacri- 
legious insult deserved and called for exemplary 
punishment. 

Verses 5, 6. In the same hour—At the very time; 
came forth fingers of a man’s hand—The like- 
ness of a man’s hand; and wrote over against the 
candlestick—The angel Gabriel, say the rabbins, 
directing this hand, and writing by it. Belshazzar 
seems to have filled up the measure of his iniquity, 
by this act of gross impiety and dishonour done to 
the true God. And the king saw—It seems, first 
saw ; the part of the hand that wrote—It is probable 
this candlestick was a hanging sconce, near the 
king, and that the light it cast made him see the 
hand while it was writing, as well as the writing 
which remained on the wall. His seeing the hand, 
but not the en whose hand it was, made the 


|| with the highest honours of the court; 


a man’s hand, and wrote over against A.M. 3466. 
the candlestick upon the plaster of — 
the wall of the king’s palace: and the king 
saw the part of the hand that wrote. 

6 Thenthe king’s *countenance * was changed, 
and his thoughts troubled him, so that the 
5joints ° of his loins were loosed, and his * knees 
smote one against another. 

7 £The king cried 7 aloud to bring in £ the 
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. 
And the king spake and said to the wise men 
of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, 
and show me the interpretation thereof, shall 
be clothed with ® scarlet, and have a chain of 
gold about his neck, * and shall be the third 
ruler in the kingdom. 


4Chald. changed it. 5 Or, girdles, Isaiah v, 27.——® Chald. 
bindings, or, knots. € Nahum ii. 10.—f Chapter ii. 2; iv. 
6. 7Chald. with might——+ Isaiah xlvii. 18——® Or, purple. 
h Chap. vi. 2. 


thing more frightful. Then the king’s countenance 
was changed, &c.—His face became pale with ter- 
ror: for although he could not read the writing, and 
therefore did not know what was its purport, yet a 
sense of guilt made him forebode that the words had 
some dreadful meaning ; and his thoughts troubled 
him—His remorse of conscience respecting the past, 
and his fearful apprehensions with regard to the fu- 
ture; so that the joints of his loins were loosed— 
He discovered the disorder of his mind by the trem- 
bling which seized his whole body. And his knees 
smote one against another—So soon ean the terrors 
of God shake the loftiest cedars, and terrify the ty- 
rants of the earth! Thus can the Lord spoil the mad 
mirth of drunken atheists ina moment! “The ex- 
pressions in this verse, in a collected view, contain 
such a description of terror as is rarely to be met 
with ; the dead change of the countenance, the per- 
turbation of the thoughts, the joints of the loins be- 
coming relaxed, and the knees smiting against each 
other, are very strong indications of horror. Ho- 
race has, ‘ Et corde et genibus tremit; and Virgil, 
‘Tarda trementi genua labant;? but these are far in- 
ferior to the picturesque description of Daniel.”— 
Wintle. 

Verse 7. The king cried aloud—Manifesting at 
once great fear and great impatience; to bring in 
the astrologers, &¢.—In this he imitated Nebuchad- 
nezzar his grandfather; it seems indeed to have been 
the general practice of these heathen kings, in all 
unexpected emergencies, to apply to these their wise 
men for help. But the ill success of Nebuchadnez- 
zar, in such applications, might have taught Belshaz- 
zar a better lesson. The king said, Whosoever 
shall read this writing, &e.—To engage these wise 
men to exert the utmost of their skill in this matter, 
he promises that whosoever would give him a satis- 
factory account of this writing should be dignified 
and be the 


* 
4 


( 50* ) 


‘ 


- Daniel is sent for to interpret 


CHAPTER V. 


the handwriting on the wall, 


eee ot08. 8 Then came in all the king’s wise 
——__— men: ‘but they could not read the 
writing, nor make known to the king the inter- 
pretation thereof. 

9 Then was King Belshazzar greatly * troubled, 
and his ° countenance was changed in him, and 
his lords were astonished.’ 

10 % Now the queen, by reason of the words 
of the king and his lords, came into the ban- 
quet-house: and the queen spake and said, 
'O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts 
trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be 
changed : 

11 ™There is a man in thy kingdom, in 


iChapter ii. 27; iv. 7——* Chap. ii. 1.——® Chald. bright- 
nesses, Verse 6.—! Chapter ii. 4; 1ii, 9——™ Chapter ii. 48 ; 
iv, 8, 9, 18.——"° Or, grandfather, Verse 2. 


third ruler in the kingdom—* Grotius considers 
the king as the first, the king’s son as the second, 
and the interpreter of the vision to be the third. Or 
it may mean, that there should be a triumvirate ap- 
pointed to govern the kingdom, as was the case in 
the beginning of the reign of Darius, and the inter- 
preter should be one of these. Mr. Bruce (vol. iv. p. 
32) speaks of a person who was suddenly advanced 
to a command, the third in the kingdom of Abyssi- 
nia for rank, power, and riches; and that, at his pub- 
lic investiture, he had a circle of gold put upon his 
head, was clothed with a white and blue mantle, and 
made the king’s lieutenant-general in the provinces 
allotted to him.”—Wintle. 

Verses 8, 9. Then camein all the king’s wise men 
—Ambitious of the honour, and desirous to gratify 
the king. But they could not read the writing— 
Because, says Houbigant, it was written in the an- 
« eat Samaritan characters, which were very unlike 
the Uhaldean letters. Or perhaps only the initial 
letters, M. T. P. were written. But God, for his own 
glory, reserved the honour of reading and interpret- 
ing it for his servant Daniel. Mr. Wintle renders 
the clause, “ They were unable to read the writing, 
so as to make known the interpretation to the king.” 
Then was King Belshazzar greatly troubled—His 
consternation and distress*were renewed and in- 
creased, his last hope having failed him; and his 
lords were astonished—His associates in sin shared 
in the consternation; and notwithstanding their 
number, mirth, and wine, were dismayed and terri- 
fied exceedingly. 

Verses 10-12. Now the queen, &c.—The king’s 
wives and concubines sat with him at the feast, verse 
2; therefore the person here called the queen, and 
said to come into the banqueting-house on this so- 
lemn occasion, must have been the queen-mother, 
the widow of Evil-merodach, named Nitocris, a lady, 
according to Herodotus, eminent for her wisdom, 

' and who had the chief direction of public affairs. 
: The a said, Let not thy thoughts trouble thee— 


whom is the spirit of the holy gods ; As. S666 
and in the days of thy *° father light ———— 
and understanding and wisdom, like the wis- 
dom of the gods, was found in him; whom the ~ 
king Nebuchadnezzar thy ™ father, the king, 
I say, thy father, made "master of the magi- 
cians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers : 

12 ° Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and 
knowledge, and understanding, }* interpreting 
of dreams, and showing of hard sentences, and 
13 dissolving of 1* doubts, were found in the 
same Daniel, > whom the king named Belte- 
shazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will 
show the interpretation. 


1 Or, grandfather, Verse 2. n Chapter iv. 9. © Chapter 
vi. 3.——"* Or, of an interpreter, &c.—— Or, of a dissolver. 
14 Chald. knots ——? Chap. i. 7. 


Be not so distressed, nor yield to terror and despond- 
ency. There is a man in thy kingdom—Some 
persons are apt to wonder that Daniel was unknown 
to Belshazzar, which others have accounted for from 
the abandoned and indolent character of this prince; 
but there is a further reason, which Mr. Harmer, vol. 
i.p. 166, has hinted, from Sir John Chardin, namely, 
that he had been mazouled, as they express it in the 
East, that is, displaced at the death of a prior king ; 
since, in the East, when the king dies, the physi- 
cians and astrologers are removed: the former for 
not having driven away death, and the latter for not 
having predicted it. It is probable, however, that 
Daniel was not totally unknown to the king; but 
being perhaps in no esteem, or not employed in any 
considerable department of the state, in the early 
part of his reign, he was not readily recollected. In 
whom was the spirit of the holy gods—See note on 
chap. iv. 8. And in the days of thy father—That is, 
of thy grandfather, Nebuchadnezzar, light and un- 
derstanding, &c.—That is, an enlightened under- 
derstanding, or supernatural illumination, as the 
next words show. Such an insight he had into 
things secret, and such a foresight of things to 
come, that it was evident he was divinely inspired, 
and possessed of extraordinary wisdom, given him 
from above. Forasmuch as an excellent spirit and 
knowledge, §c., were found in the same Daniel— 
His excellent disposition, his humble, holy, heavenly 
spirit, was both a great ornament to his wisdom, and 
fitted him for the reception and increase of that ex- 
traordinary gift of God. Now let Daniel be called, 
and he will show the interpretation—She speaks 
with confidence; for, being aged, and Nebuchadnez- 
zar having been dead not above twenty-four years, 
she no doubt well remembered the extraordinary 
events which had occurred in the latter part of his 
life, and the supernatural inspiration, and extraordi- 
nary wisdom, which Daniel had manifested on these 
occasions. And she speaks as if she knew where to 
find Daniel, though Belshazzar probably did not. 
787 


Daniel interprets the 


DANIEL 


handwriting on the wall. 


A. M. 3466. 13 Then was Daniel brought in 
BC. 58 before the king. And the king spake 
and said unto Daniel, Ar¢ thou that Danie 
‘ which art of t.te children of the captivity of 
Judah, whom the king my * father brought out 
of Jewry ? 

14 I have even heard of thee, that 4 the spirit 
of the gods is in thee, and that light and under- 
standing and excellent wisdom is found in 
thee. 

15 And now * the wise men, the astrologers, 
have been brought in before me, that they should 
read this writing, and make known unto me the 
interpretation thereof: but they could not show 
the interpretation of the thing : 


4 Verses 11, 12.——- Verses 7, 8. 
16 Chald. interpret. 


18 Or, grandfather. 


Verses 13-17. T'hen was Daniel brought in before 
the king—Daniel was now near ninety years of age; 
so that his years and honours, and fermer prefer- 
ments, might have entitled him to a free admission 
into the king’s presence ; yet he was willing to be 
introduced, as a stranger, by the king’s servants. 
The king said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel— 
This question of the king shows, that if he was at all 


acquainted with Daniel, it was very imperfectly ; | 


and that in however high esteem that extraordinary 
man had been held in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, 
and whatever offices of trust and honour he had 
then filled, he was now sunk into neglect, Belshazzar 
being a weak and vicious prince, according to the 
character historians give of him, and one who inte- 
rested himself very little in public affairs, leaving the 
care of them to his mother, and himself minding 
nothing but his pleasures. Now if thou canst read 
the writing, &c., thou shalt be clothed with scarlet— 
He promises him the same rewards if he could read 
and interpret the writing as he had promised his wise 
men on condition of their doing it. T'hen Daniel 
answered, Let thy gifts be to thyself—As Daniel 
was now in years, and Belshazzar young, he there- 
fore seems to take a greater liberty, and to deal more 
plainly with him, than he had done upon the like 
occasions with Nebuchadnezzar. He addresses him 
asa very aged and eminent person would address 
one much younger than himself. When he was 
consulted by Nebuchadnezzar, and was allowed the 
liberty of conversing with him and giving him coun- 
sel, he foresaw that ‘the Chaldean monarchy would 
continue for some time, and that his being preferred 
would give him an opportunity of being useful to his 
brethren; but he now knew that that empire was 
about to terminate, and Belshazzar’s reign and life to 
come toa period. Nebuchadnezzar, though an idol- 
ater and a tyrant, yet had great abilities , attended to 
the affairs of his kingdom, and was, in many re- 
spects, very eminent as a monarch; but Belshazzar 
was every way base, odious, add contemptible. 


16 And I have heard of thee, that A, M. 3466. 
thou canst **make interpretations, and am 
dissolve doubts: ‘now if thou canst read the 
writing, and make known to me the interpreta- 
tion thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, 
and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and 
shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom. 

17 % Then Daniel answered and said before 
the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give 
thy ‘7 rewards to another; yet I will read the 
writing unto the king, and make 4 
him the interpretation. 

18 O thou king, tthe most high God gave 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and 
majesty, and glory, and honour : 


8 Verse 7.—17 Or, fee, as Chap, ii. 6——t Chap. ii. 37, 33; 
iv. 17, 22, 25. 


of heaven in the most daring manner, by profaning 
the sacred vessels in his revels, and extolling his 
own idols. Daniel therefore knew that his doom was 
irreversible, and immediately to be put in execution ; 
and he did not speak to him as a subject to his prince, 
but as the delegate of heaven he denounced sentence 
against him as a condemned criminal.”—Scott. 
Some commentators have been puzzled to account 
for Daniel’s rejecting the king’s presents here, and 
afterward accepting them, as is mentioned verse 29; 
but his intention in what he now says is only modest- 
ly to decline the honours, and to intimate that they 
could have no influence on his mind, which yet, at 
the king’s command, afterward he could not but ac- 
cept. In other words, he means to say, that he was 
ready to do whatever the king enjoined, without any 
respect to a recompense: see Calmet. Yet will I 
read the writing unto the king—Daniel seems to 
have made this declaration in consequence of a per- 
suasion wherewith he was inspired of God, before 
he even cast his eye upon the writing. 

Verses 18, 19. O thou king—Before Daniel reads 
the writing, he judges it proper to remind the king 
of God’s dealings with Nebuchadnezzar, his progeni- 
tor, and of those remarkable instances of divine pro- 
vidence, both in mercy and in judgment, which were 
intended to be an instructive lesson, as to all princes 
that should hear of them, so especially to all the de- 
scendants of that great monarch. Healso, with great 
fidelity and seriousness, sets Belshazzar’s profane 
conduct before him, that he might be humbled and 
brought to repentance. TJ'he most high God gave 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, &c.—His 
great power, and vast extent of empire, were the 
gifts of God to him, and were not acquired by his 
own policy or bravery, or those of his generals and 
armies. Grotius explains the different terms of this 
verse thus: A kingdom, that is, a widely-extended 
empire; majesty, or magnificence among his sub- 
jects; glory from his victories; and honour from the 
enlargement of the city, the building of its walls, 


“ Above all, he had that night beeninsulting the God || temple, and palace. And for the —a 
id 


788 


; 


The intcrpretation 


CHAPTER V. 


of the handwriting. 


19 And for the majesty that he gave 
————-~ him, “all people, nations, and lan- 
guages, trembled and feared before him: whom 
he would he slew; and whom he would he kept 
alive; and whom he would he set up; and 
whom he would he put down. 

20 *But when his heart was lifted up, and 
his mind hardened ?* in pride, he was 1 deposed 
from his kingly throne, and they took. his 
glory from him: 

21 And he was ‘driven from the sons of 
men; and *his heart was made like the 
beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild 
asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and 
his body was wet with the dew of heaven; 
7 till he knew that the most high God ruled 
in the kingdom of men, and ¢hat he appointeth 
over it whomsoever he will. 

22 And thou his son, O Belshazzar, * hast 
not humbled thy heart, though thou knewest 
all this ; 


A. M. 3466. 
538 


« Jeremiah xxvii. 7; Chapter iii. 4. 
18 Or, to deal proudiy, Exodus xviii. 11. 
come down.—yY Chap. iv. 32. 
2 Chap. iv. 17, 25. 


* Chapter iv. 30, 37. 
19 Chaldee, made to 
29 Or, he made his heart equal. 


gave him—For the vast power, riches, and victorious 
hand which he gave him; all people, nations, &c., 
trembled and feared before him, &c.—We have here 
a strong picture of the absolute and independent 
power of these princes ; they regarded their subjects 
only as slaves. Xerxes, having assembled the great 
men of hiskingdom, when he had determined to un- 
dertake the war against Greece, said to them, “I have 
assembled you that I might not seem to act solely by 
my own counsel; but remember that I expect obe- 
dience, not advice from you.”—Calmet. 


Verses 20-23. But when his heart was lifted up— || 


The expressions here have a peculiar force, in mark- 
ing the haughty insolence of King Nebuchadnezzar. 
His authority, as mentioned in the last verse, had 
been raised to the highest pitch ; and on that account 
we find here that his mind was elated, and his spirit 
grown obdurate in pride and arrogance; instead of 
his ascribing all his honours and advantages to the 
real giver of them, the true God, whom he had been 
brought to acknowledge, and to the neglect of whom, 
and of improving by his grandfather’s sufferings, the 
prophet justly and judiciously attributes Belshaz- 
zar’s fate. Thou his son, §c., hast not humbled thy 
heart—Thovu hast not been made sensible of thy own 
utter weakness, and thy absolute dependance on Je- 
hovah, the true God, who thus abased thy father in 
the midst of his power and pride. But hast lifted 
up thyself against the Lord of heaven—As if thou 
hadst been equal, or even superior to himin wisdom 
and power. He instances in four particulars: Ist, 
They have brought the vessels of his house before 
3 « 


23 But hast lifted up thyself against A, M. 3466. 
the Lord of heaven; and they have Ses 3 
brought the vessels of his house before thee, 
and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy 
concubines, have drunk wine in them; and 
thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, 
of brass, iron, wood, and stone, ° which see not, 
nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose 
hand thy breath is, ‘and whose are all thy 
ways, hast thou not glorified. 

24 Then was the part of the hand sent from 
him ; and this writing was written. 

25 “] And this is the writing that was written, 
MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN. 

26 This zs the interpretation of the thing: 
MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, 
and finished it. 

27 TEKEL; ° Thou art weighed in the 
balances, and art found wanting. 

28 PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and 
given to the ‘ Medes and & Persians. 


a2Chron. xxxiii. 23; xxxvi. 12. b Verses 3, 4.——° Psa. 
exv. 5, 6.—4 Jeremiah x. 23. © Job xxxi. 6; Psalm Ixii. 9; 
Jer. vi. 30.—— Foretold, Isaiah xxi. 2; Verse 31; Chap. ix. 1. 
§ Chap. vi. 28. 


thee—To profane them in your idolatrous feasts : 2d, 
Thou hast praised the gods of silver and gold, §c., 
which see not, &c. 3d, Thou hast not glorified the 
true God, in whose hands thy breath is, and all thy 
ways: yea, 4th, Thou hast highly dishonoured, af- 
fronted, and reproached him. 

Verses 24-28. Then was partof the hand sent from 


| him—The LXX. read, Aca rov70 ex xpoowrov avtov arec- 


TaAn aoTpayahoc xElLpoc, kal THY ypagny TavTHY eveTage, “On 
this account hath the joint, or part of a hand, been sent 


from his presence, and hath formed this writing.” 


The reading in the Vulgate is to the same purpose. 
Houbigant translates the verse, “Therefore is the 
hand sent from him, the fingers whereof have form- 
ed this writing.” And this is the writing, Mrenr, &c. 
—In the Arabic the three words are considered as 
participles, Mensuratum,Appensum, Divisum, “Mea- 
sured, Weighed, Divided.” The words are fully 
explained by Daniel in the following verses. Mrnn; 
God hath numbered thy kingdom, &e.—God hath 
numbered the days of thy reign, and put an end to it. 
The word Mens is doubled in the foregoing verse, to 
show that the thing was certain, and established by 
God, as Joseph tells Pharaoh in a like ease, Gen. xli. 
32. TrexeL; Thou art weighedin the balances, &ce. 
—The reason that an end is put to thy reign so soon 
is, that thou art found light in the scales of divine 
equity. Wicked men are often compared to silver 
adulterated, and alloyed with baser metals, which 
makes it too light when weighed in the balances: 
such was Belshazzar when weighed in the scales of 
divine justice. The same comparison is used by 
789 


The fuifilment DANIEL. of the prediction. 
A.M. 3466. 29 Then commanded Belshazzar, || 30 ‘In that night was Belshazzar a es 


3B. ©: 88" ond they clothed Daniel with scarlet, 


and put a chain of gold about his neck, and 
made a proclamation concerning him, "that he 
should be the third ruler in the kingdom. 


h Verse 7.—— Jer. li, 31, 39, 57.—— Chap. ix. 1. 


Homer, when Hector’s fatal day approaches, Jlad, 
xxii., and by Virgil, at the death of Turnus, Zn. xii. 
And so Milton, in the war of the angels, 

“ 


Long time in even scale “ 
The battle hung.” Par. Lost, b. vi. 1. 245. 


Prres; Thy kingdom is divided—Or broken from 
thee. The word Prrss signifies broken ; and it also 
signifies the nation of the Persians, for they were 
called Paros, by the Chaldeans: so that this word 
not only signified that the Babylonish kingdom 
should be broken, but also by whom it should be 
broken. Upwarstn, the other word in the writing, 
is a participle of the same verb from whence Peres 
is derived, and literally signifies, And they divide it. 
Concerning Belshazzar’s destruction, see notes on 
Isa. xiv. 

Verse 29. Then commanded Belshazzar, and the 
clothed Daniel—The king was so struck with his 
superior wisdom, and conceived himself so bound 
by the promise he had made before his nobles, that 
he ordered the prophet to be rewarded immediately 
with the honours he had promised him, which he 
was forced to accept, and which probably prepared 
him for a more easy reception by the succeeding 
monarch, “Nor let it be matter of wonder that 
Daniel is said to be clothed as it were immediately, 
for these habits were always at hand for the eastern 
monarchs to reward their friends or favourites with; 
and Mr. Harmer tells us, from Sir John Chardin, 
that the kings of Persia have great wardrobes, where 
there are always many hundreds of habits ready, 
designed for presents, and sorted.— Obs., vol. ii. p, 87. 
It seems likewise that, on some occasions, the great 
men of the East were accustomed to carry with 
them, on their journeys, a variety of habits and vest- 
ments, in order to distribute them as presents to 
those whom they wished to honour and reward. 
And this will account for the changes of garments, 
which Naaman the Syrian had with him, when he 
returned from the Prophet Elisha, some of which 
were given to his perfidious servant, 2 Kings v.”—- 
Wintle. 

Verses 30, 31. In that night was Belshazzar the 
king of the Chaldeans slain—He and all his nobles 


were slain together, in the midst of their feasting 


the king of the Chaldeans slain. aie —— 

31 * And Darius the Median took the king- 
dom, * being *? about threescore and two years 
old. 


21 Chald. he as the son of. 


22 Or, now. 


and revelling, as Herodotus, lib. i., and Xenophon, 
inform us. The latter relates the story thus, Cyro- 
ped., lib. vii—‘‘ That two-_deserters, Gadatas and 
Gobryas, having assisted some of the Persian army 
to kill the guards, and seize upon the palace, they 
entered into the room where the king was, whom 
they found standing up in a posture of defence; but 
they soon despatched him, and those that were with 
him.” It seems not improbable, likewise, that they 
burned the houses of the city, or at least the ad- 
vanced buildings, in their progress, and forced the 
citizens to quit them in the greatest consternation ; 
for they came upon them with such surprise, that, 
according to Herodotus, “they had passed through 
the gates, which were left open in this riotous night, 
and had taken the extreme parts of the city, before 
those who inhabited the middle parts knew of the 
capture,” lib. i. p.' 77. Thus the prophecy of Jere- 
miah was accomplished, that Babylon should be 
taken at the time of a public feast, while her princes 
and great men, §c., should be drunken, and should 
sleep a perpetual sleep, and not awake: see notes 
on Jer. li. 32, 39, 57. Respecting the method prae- 
tised by Cyrus to surprise the city, by draining that 
part of the Euphrates which ran through it, together 
with many other curious particulars relating to 
Babylon, see notes on Isa. xiii. And Darius the 
Median took the kingdom—This Darius is said to be 
one of the seed of the Medes, chap. ix. 1, and is sup- 
posed, by the most judicious chronologers, to be the 
same with Cyaxares, the sonof Astyages; him Cyrus 
made king of the Chaldeans, as being his uncle by 
the mother’s side, and his partner in carrying on the 
war against the Babylonians; and left him the palace 
of the king of Babylon, to live there whenever he 
pleased, as Xenophon relates, Cyroped., lib. viii. As 
Darius succeeded to the empire through Cyrus’s 
permission, or appointment, and was dependant upon 
him for it, Ptolemy’s canon supposes Cyrus to be 
the immediate successor of Nabonnedus, or Bel- 
shazzar, and allots nine years to his reign; whereas 
Xenophon reckons two of these years to Darius, 
and seven to Cyrus, The Chaldee phrase, rendered 
here took, the kingdom, is translated, possessed the 
kingdom, chap. vii. 18, and means the same with suc- 
ceeding in the kingdom.—Lowth. 


CHAPTER VI. 


This chapter contains the history, (1,) Of Daniel's preferment under Darius, 1-3. (2,) Of the envy which it exerted w t- 
principal officers of the state 4,5. (3,) Of their conspiracy against him on that account, and the decree they obte ne< 
from the king against prayer, 6-9. (4,) Daniel's continuance and constancy in prayer, notwithstanding that decres,10 


790 


Damiel is invested 


CHAPTER VI. 


with great power. 


SS ——————eeeeeeeoo=eeeeeeeeeee ee elT=zlzq&=q@=]ee_ se 


(5,) He is informed against and cast into the den of lions, 11-17. 


(6,) His miraculous preservation in the lions’ den, and 


deliverance out of it, 18-23. (7,) The punishment is retorted upon his accusers, who are torn to pieces, 24. (8,) The 
king is brought to the acknowledgment and praise of the true God, and publishes a decree in honour of him, 25-27. 


(9,) Daniel's subsequent prosperity, 28. 


A. M. 3466. 


pyle 
B. C. 538. [t pleased Darius to set * over the 


kingdom a hundred and twenty 
princes, which should be over the whole 
kingdom ; 

2 And over these three presidents; of whom 
Daniel was first: that the princes might give 
accounts unto them, and the king should have 
no damage. 

3 Then this Daniel was preferred above the 
presidents and princes, > because an excellent 
spirit was in him; and the king thought to set 
him over the whole realm. 


a Bsth. i. l.—— Chap. v. 12, ——¢ Eccles. iv. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verse 1. It pleased Darius—That this Darius 
was the Cyaxares of Xenophon, as has been ob- 
served in note on chap. v. 31, St. Jerome not only 
asserts, but proves by the testimony of Josephus, 
Trogus Pompeius, and other historians; so that it 
appears to have been the generally received opinion 
in his time, as it probably was also in the time of 
Josephus, which was not more than five or six hun- 
dred years afterCyrus. He was the sonof Astyages, 
or Ahasuerus, or Assuerus, as he is called Dan. ix. 
1, and Tobit xiv. 15; namely, that king of Media 
who concurred with the Assyrian monarch in the 
desiruction of Nineveh. Jo set over the kingdom 
a hundred and twenty princes—According to the 
number of the provinces, which were subject to the 
Medo-Persian empire. These were afterward en- 
larged to a hundred and twenty-seven, by the vic- 
tories of Cambyses and Darius Hystaspis: see Est. 
i. 1. Darius acts here as the absolute master of the 
Babylonish state. He distributes the employments; 
he divides the kingdom, and orders that an account 
of the whole should be rendered to three principal 
officers, to whom he gives the superintendence over 
the rest. Several writers have thought, that after 
Darius had conquered Babylon, he returned to Media, 
and took Daniel with him, and that it was there that 
the establishments here spoken of were made. But 
if this was not done at Babylon, it is much more 
likely to have been done at Shushan than in Media: 
see chap. viii. 2. See Lowth and Calmet. 

Verses 2, 3. And over these three presidents ; of 
whom Daniel was first—He had been appointed 
one of the principal officers of state by Belshaz- 
zar, chap. v. 29. The office to which he was now 
advanced seems to have been of the same sort with 
that conferred on Joseph by Pharaoh, Gen. xli. 41. 
Grotius thinks these eparchs were like the prefecti 
pretorio in the latter part of the Roman empire. 
That the princes night give accounts unto them— 
Might lay before them the state of the public accounts. 

3 


4 % °Then the presidents and A. M. 3467. 
princes sought to find occasion against at 
Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they 
could find none occasion nor fault ; forasmuch 
as he was faithful, neither was there any error 
or fault found in him. 

5 'Then said these men, We shall not find any 
occasion against this Daniel, except we find it 
against him concerning the law of his God. 

6 Then these presidents and princes  assem- 
bled together to the king, and said thus unto 
him, ¢ King Darius, live for ever. 


1 Or, came tumultuously.—4 Neh, ii. 3; Verse 21; Chap. ii. 4. 


They doubtless also received appeals from the princes, 
or complaints against them, in case of maleadminis- 
tration. And the king should have no damage—That 
he might not sustain any loss in his revenue, and 
that the power he delegated to the princes might 
not be abused to the oppression of the subjects; for 
by that a king, whether he thinks so or not, receives 
real damage; both as it alienates the affections of his 
people from him, and provokes the displeasure of 
God against him. Daniel was preferred, because 
an excellent spirit was in him—Besides that spirit 
of uncommon wisdom and sagacity which was in 
Daniel, he had great experience in public affairs, it 
being now sixty-five years since he was first ad- 
vanced by Nebuchadnezzar, chap. ii. 48. It is no 
wonder, therefore, that Darius should have thoughts 
of putting the chief management of the whole empire 
into his hands. 

Verses 4-6. Then the presidents and princes 
sought to find occasion against Daniel—We may 
judge, from what is here said, how blameless Daniel 
was in his conduct, and of how great advantage it is 
to act with virtue and integrity. All the spite and 
malice of his enemies could not so much as find out 
a pretence for accusing him, because he conducted 
himself in all affairs with uprightness, and established 
his credit by his virtuous behaviour. Then said 
these men, We shall not find, &c.—'They coneluded, 
at length, that they should not find any occasion 
against him, except concerning the law of his God 
—By this it appears that Daniel kept up the profes- 
sion of his religion, and held it fast in that idolatrous 
country, without wavering or shrinking; and yet 
that was no bar to his preferment. There was no 
law requiring him to be of the king’s religion, or in- 
capacitating him to bear office in the state unless he 
were. It was all one to the king what God he 
prayed to, so long as he did the business of the state 
faithfully and well. In this matter, therefore, his 
enemies hoped to insnare him. It is observable, 
that when they found no occasion against him con- 

791 


Fike ibasaba officers obtain 


DANIEL. 


a decree against’ Daniel. 


A. M. 3467. 
B. C. 537. 


7 All the presidents of the kingdom, 
the governors, and the princes, the 
counsellors, and the captains, have consulted 
together to establish a royal statute, and to make 
a firm ? decree, that whosoever shall ask a 
petition of any god or man for thirty days, save 
of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den 
of lions. 

8 Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign 
the writing, that it be not changed, according 


2 Or, interdict. e Esther i. 11; viii. 8; Verses 12, 15. 


3 Chald. passeth not. 


to the *law of the Medes and Per- A. M. 3467. 
sians, Which ° altereth not. na creel 

9 Wherefore King Darius signed the writing 
and the decree. 

10 4 Now when Daniel knew that the 
writing was signed, he went into his house; 
and his windows being open in his chamber 
f toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees 
®three times a day, and prayed, and gave 
thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. 


f 1] Kings viii. 44, 48; Psa. v. 7; Jonah ii, 4—— Psa. lv. 17; 
"Acts ii. 1,:2, 15; iii, b.; eM 


cerning the kingdom, they had somuchsense of justice 
left, that they did not suborn witnesses against him to 
accuse him of crimes he was innocent of, and to swear 
treason against him; wherein they shame many that 
were called Jews, and many now called Christians. 
Verses 7-9. All the presidents, §c., have consulted 
to make a firm decree—As Daniel’s adver saries could 
have no advantage against him by any law now in 
being, they therefore ‘contrive a new law, by which 
they hope to insnare him, and in such a matter as 
they knew they would be sure of doing it. They 
pretended that this law, which they wished to have 
enacted, was the result of mature deliberation; that 
all the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, 
princes, &c., had consulted together about it, and 
that they not only agreed to it, but advised it, for 
divers good causes and considerations; nay, they 
intimate to the king that it was carried nemine con- 
tradicente. All the presidents, say they, are of this 
mind, and yet we are sure that Daniel, the chief of 
the three presidents, did not agree to it; and we 
have reason to think that many more excepted 
against it, as absurd and unreasonable, Observe, 
reader, it is no new thing for that to be represented, 
and with great assurance too, as the sense of the 
nation, which is far from being so; and that which 
few approve of, is sometimes confidently said to be || 
that which all agree to! These designing men, under 
colour of doing honour to the king, but really intend- 
ing the ruin of his favourite, urge him to make one 
of the most absurd decrees that can well be imagined ; 
a decree which would not only suspend by law all | 
the exercise of every kind of religion through that 
vast empire, for the space of a month, (except any 
chose to worship the king, who thus inconsiderately, 
or impiously, suffered himself to be regarded as the 
only deity of his subjects,) but would prohibit under 
pain of death, to be inflicted in the most barbarous 
manner, any request being made from one man to 
another: “nay, the edict was so framed, that a child 
might have been condemned for asking bread of his 
father, or a starving beggar for craving relief.”— 
Seott. And now, O king, say they, establish the de- 
cree, §c., according to the law of the Medes and 
Persians—There was a law ijn_this monarchy, that 
no ordinance or edict, made with the necessary for- 
malities, and with the consent of the king’s counsel- 
lors, could be revoked: the king himself had no 
792 


power in this case. Diodorus Siculus tells us, lib. 
iv., that Darius, the last king of Persia, would have 
pardoned Charidemus after he was condemned to 
death, but could not reverse the law that had passed 
against him. We may observe the difference of 
style between this text and that of Est. i.19. Here 
the words are, the law of the Medes and Persians, 
out of regard to the king, who was a Mede; there it 


_is styled, the law of the Persians and Medes, the 


king being a Persian at that time: see Calmet and 
Lowth. Chardin says, that in Persia, when the king 
has condemned a person, it is no longer lawful to 
mention his name, or to intercede in his favour. 
Though the king were drunk, or beside himself, yet 
the decree must be executed; otherwise he would 
contradict himself, and the law admits of no contra- 
diction. Wherefore King Darius signed the writing 
—It is not much to be wondered at that Darius, who 
seems to have been a weak man, should sign the de- 
cree, as it appeared to be proposed in order todo him 


the highest honour, and to set him, as it were, upon 


an equality with the gods. 

Verse 10. Now when Daniel knew that the writing 
was signed, he went into his house, &c.—He did not 
retire to the country, or abscond for some time, 
though he knew that the law was levelled against 
him; but because he knew it was so, therefore he 
stood his ground, knowing that he had now a fair 
opportunity of honouring God before men, and 
showing that he preferred his favour, and his own 
duty to him, before life itself. And his windows 
being open in his chamber—The LXX. read, ev row 
vmepwore avtov, in his upper rooms. It seems to have 
been a custom among the devout Jews to set apart 
some upper room, or rooms, in their houses, for their 
oratories, as places the farthest from any noise or 
disturbance. So we read, Tobit iii. 17, that Sarah 
came down from her upper chamber: and, the apos- 
tles assembled in an upper room, Acts i. 13. Toward 
Jerusalem—According to the ancient eustom of the 
Jews; for those who were in the. country, or in 
foreign lands, turned themselves toward Jerusalem ; 
and those who were in Jerusalem turned themselves 
toward the temple to pray, conformably to Solomon’s 
consecration-prayer, 1 Kings viii.48,49. He prayed, 
it seems, with his windows quite open to view, the 
shutters being removed, since he chose to make his tes- 


timony to the exclusive worship of God, eis. 


The king endeavours 


CHAPTER VI. 


to deliver Daniel. 


A. M. 3467. 11 Then these men assembled, and 
———— found Daniel praying and making 
supplication before his God. 

12 » Then they came near, and spake before 
the king concerning the king’s decree; Hast 
thou not signed a decree, that every man that 
shall ask a petition of any god or man within 
thirty days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast 
into the den of lions? The king answered 
and said, The thing zs true, ‘ according to the 


» Chap. iii. 8——# Verse 8. 


« Chap. i. 6; v. 13. 


others, as public as might be, that he might show he 
was neither ashamed of worshipping Jehovah, the God 
of his fathers, nor afraid of any thing he might suffer 
on that account; and he had them open toward Jeru- 
salem, to signify his affection for the holy city, 
though now in ruins, and the remembrance he had 
of its concerns daily in his prayers, He kneeled 
upon his knees—The most proper posture in prayer, 
most expressive of humility before God, of reverence 
for him, and submission to him; three times a day 
—Morning, noon, and evening, the hours of prayer 
observed by devout men of former times, Psa. lv. 17; 
which religious custom was continued by the apos- 
tles, with whom the third, the sixth, and the ninth 
hours were times of prayer; and prayed, and gave 
thanks before his God—He joined prayer and thanks- 
giving together in all his devotions, in which he is 
an example for our imitation. Thanksgiving ought 
to make a part of every one of our prayers; for 
when we pray to God for the mercies we want, we 
ought to praise him for those we have received. 
« Observe, reader, though Daniel was a great man, he 
did not think it below him to be thrice a day upon 
his knees before his Maker; though he was an old 
man, and it had been his practice from his youth up, 
he was not weary of this kind of well-doing; and 
though he was a man of business, of great and im- 
portant business, and that for the service of the 
public, he did not think this would excuse him from 
the daily exercises of prayer and praise. How 
inexcusable then are they who have but little to do 
in the world, and yet will not do thus much for God 
and their souls! As he did aforetime—He did not 
abate his prayers because of the king’s command, 
and through fear of death by the lions; nor did he 
break the law purposely: for he did no more than 
he had been wont to do aforetime, he only persevered 
in his former long-continued course. ‘ 

Verses 11, 12. T'hen these men assembled and 
found Daniel praying—Their design being laid, 
they watched narrowly, and found, as they expected, 
Daniel upon his knees, making supplication, not to 
Darius, but to Jehovah, in flat opposition to the law 
signed by the king, and not to be violated without 
suffering its penalty. T'hen they came near, and 
spake before the king—Having now got what they 
wanted, an unanswerable plea against Daniel, they 
came with open mouth, and urged that the king’s 
law was broken, a law which he had solemnly signed 


law of the Medes and Persians, which A. M. 3467. 
altereth not. pet ad 

13 Then answered they and said before the 
king, That Daniel, * which 7s of the children 
of the captivity of Judah, ! regardeth not thee, 
O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, 
but maketh his petition three times a day. 

14 Then the king, when he heard these 
words, ™ was sore displeased with himself, and 
set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and 


1 Chap. iii. 12. m So Mark vi. 26, 


and ratified, and so rendered unalterable; pleading 
that the king’s authority, and the honour of the 
nation, lay at stake. The king answered, The 
thing is true, &e.—He owned such a law had been 
made, and signed by him, and that therefore it must 
be put in force. 

Verse 13. Then answered they, That Daniel— 
Thus they expressed themselves by way of con- 
tempt; which is of the children of the captivity of 
Judah—This was added to aggravate his fault; that 
one who was a foreigner, and brought thither a cap- 
tive, should offer a public affront to the laws of the 
king, whose favour and protection he enjoyed. One 
cannot easily find a more striking instance than this 
relation affords of the power of inveterate malice 
and bitter envy. He regardeth not thee, O king, 
say they, nor the decree that thou hast signed—Thus 
it often happens, that what is done faithfully, and 
out of conscience toward God, is misrepresented as 
done obstinately, and in contempt of the civil powers. 
In other words, the best saints are frequently re- 
proached as the worst men. Daniel regarded God, 
and therefore prayed, and doubtless prayed for the 
king and government; and yet this is construed as 
not regarding the king. And the excellent spirit 
with which Daniel was endued, and that established 
reputation which he had gained, could not protect 
him from these poisonous darts. They do not say, 
He makes his petition to his God, lest Darius should 
interpret that to his praise, but only, He makes his 
petition; which was the thing forbidden by the law. 

Verses 14, 15. F'hen the king, when he heard these 
things, was sore displeased with himself—Having 
too late discovered that the princes, in procuring him 
to sign this decree, had no other end or aim, but to 
take advantage of it to the prejudice of Daniel. The 
word wx2, here rendered displeased, which in He- 
brew signifies to be rotten, is used in Chaldee for 
such great distress as preys upon the mind, and occa- 
sions rottenness in the bones. 'The meaning is, that 
the king was very much troubled, and exceedingly 
vexed with himself. And set his heart on Daniel to 
deliver him—The LXX. render it, «ae mepe tov Aavina 
nywvicato To eerecfar avtov, a very strong expres- 
sion, implying that his anxiety to save him was so 
great as to throw him into an agony. And he 
laboured till the going down of the sun—Endea- 
youring to find out some exception for him from the 
law, and being in a great strait through the necessity 

793 


Daniel is cast into 


DANIEL. 


the den of lions.» 


A. M. 3467. he laboured till the going down of the 
BO 3 oun to deliver him. 

15 Thenthese men assembled unto the king, 
and said unto the king, Know, O king, that 
athe law of the Medes and Persians is, That 
no decree nor statute which the king establisheth 
may be changed. 

16 Then the king commanded, and they 
brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of 
lions. Now the king spake and said unto 
Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continu- 
ally, he will deliver thee. 

17 ° And a stone was brought, and laid upon 


the mouth of the den; ? and the king A. M, 3467. 
Cay : . ©. 537. 
sealed it with his own signet, and ——— 
with the signet of his lords; that the purpose 
might not be changed concerning Daniel. 

18 § Then the king went to his palace, and 
passed the night fasting : neither were *instru- 
ments of music brought before him: ¢and his 
sleep went from him. , 

19 Then the king arose very early in the 
morning, and went in haste unto the den of 
lions. 

20 And when he came to the den, he cried 
with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the 


0 Verse 8. 


© Lam, iii. 53. 


he was under to have the law executed, and the 
regard he had for Daniel. TZ'hen these men assem- 
bled unto the king—Theses were bold men, and 
resolved to pursue their point and have their will, 
rather than the king should have his, in this case. 
The king wished to retrieve an evil act, and to re- 
tract, or at least to mitigate, a rigid and rash decree, 
which was acting an honourable and princely part; 
but they insist that the law must have its course, and 
its sentence be fully executed on him, who, they 
urged, had violated it, because it was a fundamental 
maxim in the constitution of the government of the 
Medes and Persians, that no decree or statute which 
the king established should be changed. 

Verse 16. Then the king commanded, and they 
brought Daniel, &c.—The king at last, though with 
great reluctance, and against his conscience, yields 
to the violence of Daniel’s enemies, and signs the 
warrant for his execution: and that venerable, grave 
man, who carried such a mixture of majesty and 
sweetness in his countenance, who had so often 
shown himself great upon the bench, and at the 
council-board, but was greater upon his knees; that 
had power with God and man, and had prevailed, is, 
purely for worshipping his God, brought, as if he 
had been one of the vilest malefactors, and thrown 
into the den of lions to be devoured by them. Thus 
the best man in the kingdom is made a sacrifice to 
the vilest! Who can think of it without the utmost 
compassion for the sufferer, and the utmost indigna- 
tion against the malicious persecutors? Now the 
king spake unto Daniel—Partly, perhaps, to en- 
courage him, but chiefly, it seems, to excuse himself 
for giving his consent to so palpable an act of injus- 
tice and. cruelty, which he ought to have resisted, 
whatever had been the consequence; Thy God, 
whom thou servest continually—Here the king bears 
testimony to Daniel’s integrity and fidelity to his 
God, notwithstanding that it had influenced him to 
disobey the new law; he will deliver thee—So the 
Chaldee, the Greek, and Vulgate; but the Syriac and 
Arabic render the words optatively, May he deliver 
thee, which seems best, as it is not likely the king, 
after consenting to so wicked an act, should be in- 
spired with a persuasion from God (and he could 

794 


P So Matt. xxvii. 66.——4 Or, table-——4 Chap. ii. 1. 


have it no other way) of Daniel’s deliverance. He 
might, indeed, have heard of the miraculous pre- 
servation of Daniel’s three friends in the fiery fur- 
nace, by the power of their God, in the days of Ne- 
buchadnezzar; but he could have no assurance that; 
a similar miracle would now be wrought by the same 
God. All, therefore, that his words were intended 
to express, seems to be only a wishful hope, but no 
certain persuasion. 

Verse 17. Anda stone was brought, and laid upon 
the mouth of the den—Because, perhaps, it was seen 
that the lions did not seize on him immediately ; and 
therefore, that they might have full opportunity to 
satisfy their rage and hunger, Daniel’s enemies were 
determined he should be confined all night among 
them. And the king sealed it with his own signet, 
and with the signet of his lords—That neither the 
one nor the other of the parties might separately do 
any thing for or against Daniel. We may observe 
here, with Mr. Wintle, that the design of the king 
and of the nobles was probably different; the latter 
feared the king, lest he should release Daniel; the 
former was apprehensive that some other injury 
might be done to him, beyond the power of the wild 
beasts. Hence the Vulgate renders the conclusion 
of the verse, Ne quid fieret contra Danielem, That 
nothing might be done against Daniel; indicating 
the king’s desire, that the lions’ den might be closed 
with a sealed stone, lest the lords should put Daniel 
to death when they found him not slain by the lions. 


| Theking’s sealing the stone, “must naturally remind 


us of the like circumstances which happened at the 
interment of our Saviour, of whom Daniel, in this 
case at least, has by many been considered as a 
type:” see Matt. xxvii. 60, 66. ; 

Verses 18-20. Then the king went to his palace 
—Vexed at himself for what he had done, and eall- 
ing himself unwise and unjust for not adhering to 
the laws of God and nature, notwithstanding the law 
of the Medes and Persians; and passed the night 
Jfasting—His heart was so full of grief and fear, that 
he could eat no supper, nor take any kind of refresh- 
ment. Neither were instruments of music brought 
before hin—In which, amidst his present distress 
and trouble, he could take no pleasure, — doubt 


Daniel is miraculously 


CHAPTER VI. 


delivered from the den of lions. 


A.M. 3467. king spake and said to Daniel, O);was found in me; and also before A. M, 3467. 


B. C. 537. : ze : 
———— Daniel, servant of the living God, * is 


thy God, whom thou servest continually, able 
to deliver thee from the lions ? 
_ 21 Then said Daniel unto the king, * O king, 
live for ever. 

22 * My God hath sent his angel, and hath 
"shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not 
hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency 


r Chap. iii, 15.——*® Chap. ii. 4——t.Chap. iii. 28. 


B. C. 537. 
thee, O king, have I done no hurt. =———_~ 


23 Then was the king exceeding glad for 
him, and commanded that they should take 
Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was 
taken up out of the den, and no manner of 
hurt was found upon him, * because he be- 
lieved in his God. 

24 YJ And the king commanded, ¥ and they 


u Heb. xi. 33.-——* Heb. xi. 33.——Y Deut. xix. 19. 


Daniel spent a far more pleasant night among the 
lions, while employed in fervent prayer, and ad- 
miring, grateful praise, than either his malicious per- 
secutors, or the king himself,” whose solicitude about 
Daniel made him very unhappy, and effectually pre- 
vented him from closing his eyes in sleep. The 
king arose very early in the morning—Full of 
anxiety about Daniel; and went in haste unto the 
lions’ den—Concerned to know whether the faint 
hope he entertained of his preservation had been 
realized. And when he came to the den—The LXX. 
render it, ev tw eyytfew avtov tw Aakka, in his ap- 
proaching the den, or, when he came near to the 
den, as Wintle renders it; he cried with a lamenta- 
ble, or doleful, voice unto Daniel—Longing to know 
whether he was yet alive, and yet trembling to ask 
the question, lest he should be answered by the roar- 
ing of the lions after more prey; O Daniel, servant 
of the living God—Here Darius makes an acknow- 
ledgment, that the God whom Daniel served was the 
true and living God, not an imaginary and fictitious 
deity. Nebuchadnezzar made the same confession 
more than once; but neither of these kings had cou- 
rage to renounce the worship of the false and ficti- 
tious deities of their country. Js thy God, whom 
thou servest continually, able to deliver thee, &c.— 
That is, has he been able to deliver thee, or has he 
thought fit in this case to exert his power? What 
he doubted of, we are sure of, that the servants of the 


living God have a master who is well able to deliver | 


and protect them; and who will assuredly do both 
the one and the other, as far as he sees will be for 
their good and for his glory. 

Verses 21-23. Then said Daniel—Daniel knew 
the king’s voice, though it was now a doleful voice, 
and spake to him with all the deference and respect 
that was due to him. O king, live for ever—He 
does not reproach him for his unkindness to him, and 
his easiness in yielding to the malice of his persecu- 
tors; but, to show that he has heartily forgiven him, 
he meets him with his good wishes. Observe, reader, 
We must not upbraid those with the unkindnesses 
they have done us, who, we know, did them with 
reluctance, for they are very ready to upbraid them- 
selves with them. My God hath sent his angel— 
The same bright and glorious being that was seen 
with Shadrach and his companions in the fiery fur- 
nace, (see note on chap. iii. 25,) had visited Daniel ; 
and, it is likely, in a visible appearance, had enlight- 
ened ey dark den, kept Daniel company all night, 


and had shut the lions’ mouths that they had not in 
the least hurt him. This heavenly being made even 
the lions’ den Daniel’s strong hold, his palace, his 
paradise; he never had a better night in hislife. See 
the power of God over the fiercest creatures, and 
confide in his power to restrain the roaring lion, 
that goes about continually seeking to devour, from 
hurting those that are his! See the care God takes 
of his faithful worshippers, especially when he calls 
them out to suffer for him. If he keep their souls 
from sin, comfort their souls with his peace, and re- 
ceive their souls to himself, he doth, in effect, stop 
the lions’ mouths that they cannot hurt them. For- 
asmuch as before him innocency was found in me— 
Daniel, in what he had done, had not offended either 
against God or the king. Before him, to whom he 
had prayed, he had been continually upright and 
conscientious in the discharge of his duty, endea- 
vouring to walk unblameably before him. And also 
before thee, O king, have I done no hurt—He was 
represented to the king as disaffected to him and his 
government, because he had not obeyed the new 
law; but he could appeal to the Searcher of hearts, 
that he had not disobeyed it out of contumacy or 
stubbornness, but purely to preserve a good con- 
science, which is the only true principle of loyalty 
and obedience: see Rom. xiii. 5. On this subject, as 
far as we find, Daniel had said nothing before in his 
own vindication, but had left it to God to clear up 
his integrity as the light, and God had now done it 
effectually, by working a miracle for his preserva- 
tion. Then was the king exceeding glad—To find 
him alive and well; and commanded that they should 
take Daniel up out of the den—As Jeremiah was 
taken out of the dungeon: for as the decree had now 
been complied with, and its penalty suffered, even 
Daniel’s persecutors could not but own that the law 
was satisfied, though they were not; or, if it were 
altered, it was by a power superior to that of the 
Medes and Persians. And no manner of hurt was 
found upon him—He was nowhere crushed, or torn, 
or scared, or hurt in any way whatever; because he 
believed in his God—In God’s power, and love, and 
faithfulness ; because he confided in him for protection, 
while he lived in obedience to his commandments. 

Verse 24. And the king commanded, and they 
brought those men, &e.—Darius, being animated by 
this miracle wrought for Daniel, now begins to take 
courage and act like himself: those that would not 
suffer him to show mercy to Daniel, now God has 
795 


Darius makes a decree 


DANIEL. 


in favour of the true God. 


A. M. 3467. brought those men which had ac- 
B.C. 887 cused Daniel, and they cast them into 
the den of lions, them, ” their children, and their 
wives ; and the lions had the mastery of them, 
and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they 
came at the bottom of the den. 

25 4% *Then King Darius wrote unto all 
people, nations, and languages, that dwell in 
all the earth ; Peace be multiplied unto you. 

26 >I makea decree, That in every dominion 
of my kingdom men.° tremble and fear before 


the God of Daniel: ¢ for he is the A.M. 3467 
living God, and steadfast for ever, and ical 
his kingdom ¢hat which shall not be *destroy- 
ed, and his dominion shall be even unto the 
end. 

27 He delivereth and rescueth, and he work- 
eth signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, 
who hath delivered Daniel from the ® power 
of the lions. 

28 So this Daniel prospered in the reign of 
Darius, £ and in the reign of ® Cyrus the Persian. 


2 Bsth. ix. 10; Deut. xxiv. 16; 2 Kings xiv. 6——+# hap. iv. 1. 
> Chap. iii. 29. © Psa. xcix. 1. 4 Chap. iv. 34. 


done it for him, shall be made to feel his resentments, 
and he will do justice for God, who hath showed 
mercy for him. Daniel’s accusers, now his inno- 
cence is cleared, and Heaven itself is become his 
compurgator, have the same punishment inflicted on 
them which they designed against him, according to 
the law of retaliation made against false accusers, 
Deut. xix. 11,19. Such they were now reckoned, 
Daniel being proved innocent; for though the fact 
of his praying was true, yet it was not a fault. They 
were cast into the den of lions, which perhaps was a 
punishment newly invented by themselves; it was, 
however, that which they maliciously designed for 
Daniel. And now Solomon’s observation was veri- 
fied, The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and 
the wicked cometh in his stead. Them, their chil- 
dren, and their wives—According to the cruel laws 


and customs which prevailed in’ those countries, of | 


involving whole families in the punishment due to 
particular persons; in opposition to which that equi- 
table law was ordained by Moses, that the fathers 
should not be put to death for their children, nor the 
children for the fathers, Deut. xxiv. 16. And the 
lions had the mastery of them—This verified and 
magnified the miracle of their sparing Daniel; for 
hereby it appeared, that it was not because they 
were not fierce, or had not appetite, but because they 
Were not permitted to touch him. The Lord is 
known by those judgments which he executeth. 
Verses 25-27. Then King Darius wrote to all 
people—He wrote to all the several nations in his 
extensive empire. Darius here studies to make some 


amends for the dishonour he had done both to God | 


and Daniel, by now doing honour to both. J make 
a decree, that men tremble and fear before the God 
of Daniel—This decree goes further than Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s upon the like occasion, for that only re- 
strained people from speaking amiss of this God; 
but this requires them to fear before him, to main- 
tain and express awful and reverent thoughts of him. 
And well might this decree be prefaced, as it is, with 
Peace be multiplied unto you ; for the only founda- 
tion of true peace and happiness is laid in the fear of 
God. But though this decree goes far, it does not 
go far enough: had he done right, and acted accord- 
ing to his present convictions, he would have com- 
796 


© Chap. ii. 44; iv. 3,34; vii. 14,27; Luke i. 33——f Chapter 
iv. 3.—* Heb. hand.—— Chap. i. 21,—» Ezra i. 1, 2. 


manded all men, not only to tremble and fear before 
this God, but to trust in, love, and obey him, to for- 
sake the service of their idols, and to call upon and 
worship him only, as Daniel did. But idolatry had 
been so long and so deeply rooted, that it was not 
to be extirpated by the edicts of princes, nor by any 
power less than that which accompanied the glorious 
gospel of Christ. For he is the living God, &c.— 
Darius here mentions the considerations which 
moved him to make this decree; and, in doing this, 
he presents us with a very just and sublime charac- 
ter of the true God,—a character suited to his na- 
ture, and probably such as the king had learned of 
Daniel. Some think he was a convert to the true 
religion; if so, this, together with the favours shown 
to the prophet, may in some measure account for 
the notice taken of his reign, Certainly the reasons 
on which he here grounds his decree, were sufficien 
to have justified one for the total suppression of ide. 
latry. He delivereth and rescueth, &e.—He has an 
ability sufficient to support his authority and domi- 
nion, delivering his faithful servants from trouble, 
and rescuing them out of the hands of their enemies. 
He worketh signs and wonders, quite above the 
power of nature to effect, both in heaven and earth— 
By which it appears that he is sovereign Lord of 
both: who hath delivered Daniel from the lions— 
This miracle, and that of delivering Shadrach ard 
his companions, were wrought in the eye of the 
world; were seen, published, and attested, by two of 
the greatest monarchs that ever existed: and were 
illustrious confirmations of the first principles of re- 
ligion, abstracted from the narrow scheme of Juda- 
ism, effectual confutations of all the errors of hea- 
thenism, and very proper -preparations for pure 
catholic Christianity. 

Verse 28. So this Daniel prospered—Observe, 
reader, how God brought good to him out of evil! 
The bold stroke which his enemies made at his life 
became the occasion of taking them off, and their 
children also, who otherwise would have stood in 
the way of his preferment, and have been, upon all 
occasions, vexatious to him; and now he prospered 
more than ever, was more in the favour of his prince, 
and in reputation with the people, which gave him 


a great opportunity of doing good to lie ge 


Daniel’s vision of the 


CHAPTER VIL. 


four great beasts. 


CHAPTER VII. d 


The historical part of the book of Daniel was finished with the last chapter; the remaining part of it acquaints us with the 
visions which at different times were communicated to the prophet himself. The interval of time, from the first to the last 
of these visions, is about one or two and twenty years ; that is, from the first year of Belshazzar, mentioned at the begin- 


ning of this chapter, to the third year of Cyrus, at the beginning of chap. x. 


The first vision, or dream, is contained in 


this chapter, and is the only one that is written in the Chaldee language ; and perhaps the similarity of it to the dream of 
Nebuchadnezzar, which the prophet had related and expounded in chap. ii., might have been one reason why this same 
language was here adopted, and the benefit designed by it for the impious king, in whose reign it was delivered, another. 
What was there prefigured by a large statue, composed of various metals, is here pointed at by’ a very different sort of 


emblems, each suited to the disposition or character of the persons to whom the communications were made. 
contains, (1,) Daniel's vision of the four ravenous beasts successively rising out of a tempestuous sea, 1-8. 


of God's throne or government and judgment, 9-14. 
stood by, 18-28. 


A. M. 3449. 


aA N the first year of Belshazzar king 


of Babylon, * Daniel ! had a dream 
and visions of his head upon his bed: then 
he wrote the dream, and told the sum of the 
? matters. 

2 Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision 
by night, and behold, the four winds of the 
heaven strove upon the great sea. 


The chapter 
(2,) His vision 


(3,) The interpretation of these visions given by an angel that 


3 And four great beasts °came up A. M. 3449. 
B. C. 555. 
from the sea, diverse one from another. 

4 The first was “likea lion, and had eagles’ 
wings; I beheld till the wings thereof were 
plucked, ?and it was lifted up from the earth, 
and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a 
man’s heart was given to it. 

5 * And behold another beast, a second, like 


2Num. xii. 6; Amos iii. 7—! Chald. saw. 
2 Or, words. © Rev. xiii. 1. 


> Chap. ii, 28. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. 

Verse 1. In the first year of Belshazzar, &c.— 
The prophet, having related some remarkable pas- 
sages concerning himself and his brethren in capti- 
vity, and having given proof of his supernatural illu- 
mination in interpreting other men’s dreams, pro- 
ceeds to give an account of his own visions; and 


thereupon goes back to the first year of Belshazzar’s | 


reign, which was seventeen years before the history 
contained in the last chapter. 


nezzar’s dream, chap. ii., with some enlargements 
and additions, and different images. 
Verses 2, 3. Behold, the four winds strove wpon 


the great sea—This denotes those commotions in| 
the world, and that troublesome state of affairs, out | 
of which empires and kingdoms commonly take | 


their rise. And four great beasts came up from the 
sea—Signifying the four great monarchies, or king- 
doms, that should successively arise in the world, 
and have their origin from wars and commotions, 
which generally end in setting up the conqueror to be 
a great monarch over those whom he hath subdued: 
compare Rev. xiii. 1. The reason why these mo- 
narchies, which were represented to Nebuchadnez- 
zar in the form of a great image, formed of gold 
and silver, brass and iron, are here exhibited by 
fierce and savage beasts, has been observed in the 
note on chap. ii. 31. 
Verse 4. The Jirst was like a lion--The Chaldean 
or Babylonian empire, compared to the head of gold, 
the chief of metals, in the image represented to Ne- 
buchadnezzar in his dream, chap. ii. 32, 37, 38, is 
here represented as a lion, the king of beasts. In- 
stead of alion, the Vulgate, Greek, and Arabic read, 
a lioness, signifying, says Jerome, the cruelty of that 
3 


| 


4 Deut. xxviii. 49 ; 2 Sam. i. 23; Jer. iv. 7,13; xlviii. 40; Ezek. 
xvii. 3; Hab. i. 8—® Or, wherewith. € Chap. ii. 39. 


empire, lionesses, according to naturalists, being 
fiercer than lions. It is represented as having eagles? 
wings, to denote the extent and rapidity of its con- 
quests, that empire being advanced to its height ~ 
within a few years, by the conduct and arms of one 
single person, namely, Nebuchadnezzar. J beheld till 


the wings thereof were plucked——Or, torn out, as 


wn) may be rendered: that is, it was checked in 


its progress by frequent defeats, and rendered un- 


This vision concerns |, 
the same events with a referred to in Nebuchad- || 


able to make further conquests. Its wings were be- 
ginning to be plucked at the time of the delivery of 
this prophecy; for at this time the Medes and Per- 
sians were encroaching upon it. Belshazzar, the 
king now reigning, was the last of his race; and in 
the seventeenth year of his reign Babylon was 
taken, and the kingdom transferred to the Medes 
and Persians. And it was lifted up from the earth— 
Removed from its foundation, and lost its stability: 
or, as some render the clause, the wings thereof 
were plucked, wherewith it had been lifted up from 
the earth, that is, had been enabled to fly swiftly, in 
extending its conquests ; and made stand upon the 
feet as aman, and a man’s heart was given to it— 
When it was thus curtailed and humbled, it became 
more peaceable and humane, agreeably to the idea 
of the psalmist, Psa. ix. 20, Put them in fear, O Lord, 
that the nations may know themselves to be but men. 
The minds of the people were humbled by their 
misfortunes, and by the calamities coming more and 
more upon the empire; and they who vaunted as if 
they had been gods, now felt themselves to be but 
men. 

Verse 5. And behold another beast like a bear— 
This is the kingdom of the Medes and Persians, who, 
for their cruelty and greediness after blood, are com- 
pared to a bear, which is a most voracious and cruel 

797 


Daniel's vision of the 


DANIEL. 


four great beasts. 


A. M. 3449. to a bear, and, ‘it raised up itself on 
one side, and i¢ had three ribs in the 
mouth of it between the teeth of it: and they 
said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh. 

6 After this I beheld, and lo, another, like a 
leopard, which had upon the back of it four 
wings of a fowl; the beast had also ‘ four heads ; 
and dominion was given to it. 


4 Or, it raised up one dominion.‘ Chap. viii. 8, 22. 


animal. Bochart recounts several particulars wherein 
the Persians resembled bears; but the chief likeness 
consisted in what has been just mentioned, and this 
likeness was principally intended by the prophet, as 
may be inferred from the words of the text, Arise, 
devour much flesh. A bear, saith Aristotle, is an 
all-devouring animal; and so the Medo-Persians 
were great robbers and spoilers, according to Jere- 
miah, chap. li. 48, 56: see Bishop Newton and the 
note on Isaiah xiii. 18. And it raised up itself on 
one side—Some think the allusion is to the eastern 
quarter of the world, from whence the Persians 
came; others, to the elevation of the Persians above 
' the Medes and Babylonians, which three powers are 
conceived to be meant by the three ribs in the mouth 
of the bear: but Sir Isaac Newton and Bishop 
Chandler, with great propriety, explain them as sig- 
nifying the kingdoms of Babylon, Lydia, and Egypt, 
which were conquered by it, but were not properly 
parts and members of its body. They might be 
called ribs, as the conquest of them much strength- 
ened the Persian empire; and they might be said to 
be between the teeth of the bear, as they were much 
grinded and oppressed by the Persians. 

Verse 6: After this I beheld, and lo, another like 
a leopard— This third kingdom is that of the Mace- 
donians, or Grecians, who, under the command of 
Alexander the Great, overcame the Persians, and 
reigned next after them: and it is fitly compared to 
a leopard upon several accounts. The leopard is 
remarkable for swiftness, and Alexander and the 
Macedonians were amazingly swift and rapid in their 
conquests. The leopard is a spotted animal, and so 
Was a proper emblem, according to Bochart, of the 
different manners of the nations which Alexander 
commanded; or, according to Grotius, of the various 
manners of Alexander himself, who was sometimes 
merciful, and sometimes cruel; sometimes temperate, 
and sometimes drunken; sometimes abstemious, and 
sometimes incontinent. The leopard, as Bochart 
observes, is of small stature, but of great courage, 
so as not to be afraid to engage with the lion and 
the larger beasts; and so Alexander, a little king, in 
comparison, of small stature too, and with a small 
army, dared to attack the king of kings, that is, 
Darius, whose kingdom was extended from the 
Aigean sea to the Indies. Which had upon the back 
of it four wings of a fowl—The Babylonian empire 
was represented with ¢wo wings, but this is described 
with four. For, as Jerome says, nothing was swifter 
than the victories of Alexander, who ran through all 

798 


7 After this I saw in the night opal 
visions, and behold £a fourth beast, ———— 
dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly ; 
and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and 
brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with 
the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the 
beasts that were before it; *and it had ten 
horns. 


g Chap. ii. 40; Verses 19, 23.——h Chap. ii. 41; Rev. xiii. 1. 


the countries from Ilyricum and the Adriatic sea to 
the Indian ocean and the river Ganges, not so much 
fighting as conquering ; and in siz years (he should 
have said in twelve) subjugated part of Europe and 
all Asia to himself. T'he beast had also four heads 
—To denote the four kingdoms into which this 
same third kingdom should be divided, as it was 
after the death of Alexander, among his four cap- 
tains; Cassander reigning over Macedon and Greece, 
Lysimachus over Thrace and Bithynia, Ptolemy over 
Egypt, and Seleucus over Syria. And dominion 
was given to it—Which shows, as Jerome observes, 
that it was not owing to the fortitude of Alexander, 
but proceeded from the will of the Lord. And, in- 
deed, unless he had been directed, preserved, and 
assisted by the mighty power of God, how could 
Alexander, with thirty thousand men, have over- 
come Darius with six hundred thousand, and in so 
short a time have brought all the countries, from 
Greece as far as to India, into subjection.”—Bishop 
Newton. 

Verse 7. Behold a fourth beast—This fourth king- 
dom can be no other than the Roman empire, which 
answers this emphatical description better than any 
of the former kingdoms. Dreadful, and terrible, 
and strong exceedingly—And therefore compared to 
iron, chap. ii. 40. Jt devoured and brake in pieces 
—It spread its arms and its terrors to a much greater 
extent than any of the preceding powers, and en- 
tirely subdued all the remains of the former king- 
doms, and all the nations that had been subject to 
them. It reduced Macedon into a Roman province 
about one hundred and sixty-eight years, the king 
dom of Pergamus about one hundred and thirty- 
three years, Syria about sixty-five years, and Egypt 
about thirty years, before Christ. And besides the 
remains of the Macedonian empire, it subdued many 
other provinces and kingdoms; so that it might, by 
a very usual figure, be said to devour the whole earth, 
to tread it down and break itin pieces ; and become 
in a manner, what the Roman writers delighted to 
call it, “The empire of the whole world.” The 
words of Dionysius Halicarnassus are very apposite 
to this subject. “The city of Rome,” says he, 
“ruleth over all the earth as far as it is inhabited, 
and commands all the sea, not only that within the 
Pillars of Hercules, but also the ocean, as far as it is 
navigable; having first and alone, of all the cele- 
brated kingdoms, made the east and west the bounds 
of its empire, and its dominion hath continued longer 
than that of any other city or kingdom.” And it 


a 


Daniel’s vision 


CHAPTER VII. 


of God’s throne. 


A. M. 3449. 


8 I considered the horns, and _ be- 
B. C. 555. 


hold, ‘there came up among them 
another little horn, before whom there were 
three of the first horns plucked up by the roots : 
and behold, in this horn were eyes like the 
eyes *of man, !and a mouth speaking great 
things. 

9 “| ™I beheld till the thrones were cast down, 
and “the Ancient of days did sit, ° whose gar- 


i Verses 20, 21,24; Chap. viii. 9——* Rev. ix. 7.——! Psa. 
xii. 3; Verse 25; Rev. xiii. 5.——™ Rev. xx. 4. — Psa. xe. 2; 
Verses 13, 22.—— Psa. civ. 2; Rev. i. 14. 


acas diverse from all the beasts that were before it 
—This is intimated by its having no name, being 
more cruel and horrid than any sort of beast what- 
ever; and the Roman power was so multiform, that 
it could not be pointed out by any one species of re- 
semblance. And it was different from all kingdoms 
in its republican form of government, its greatness, 
length of duration, and extent of dominion. But its 
chief distinction consisted in its having ten horns, 
which we find at verse 24 are ten kings or kingdoms: 
see also Rev. xvii. 12. And these answer to the ten 
toes of the image, chap. ii. 42. The empire con- 
tinued in its greatness till the reign of Theodosius 
the Great, and soon afterward the partition hap- 
pened, and the broken form remained, for the ten 
kingdoms were to be no more united, till the Ancient 
of days should come. 

Verse 8. I considered the horns—Viewed and 
observed them exactly, otherwise he could not have 
observed the little horn, whose rise was scarce dis- 
cernible at first; and behold there came up among 
them—Much about the same time, Rev. xvii. 12; 
another little horn—Distinct from the ten horns, and 
of a different constitution. Some have understood 
by this the Turkish empire, and consider Egypt, 
Asia, and Greece as being the three horns torn up 
or reduced thereby ; butthe more generally received 
and probable opinion refers it to antichrist, or the 
Papal hierarchy, which rose to the height here de- 
scribed from very small beginnings: see on verse 
24. The eyes, like human eyes, indicate the per- 
spicacity, foresight, and cunning of this power; and 
the mouth speaking great, or presumptuous things, 
is not unlike the man of sin, described by St. Paul, 
“whose coming should be after the working of Satan 
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness,” 2 Thess. 
ii. 9, 10: see also Rev. xiii. 5, 6. 

Ver. 9, 10. I beheld till the thrones were cast down 
—Till all these earthly kingdoms were brought to an 
end, and all enemies and opposite powers were de- 
stroyed. But the word 15, here used, may be ren- 
dered, were pitched, or placed, namely, for the re- 
ception of God, and his assessors in judgment, the 
saints and angels. Thus the LXX., ewe ors 01 Spovor 

erednoay, till the thrones were placed, or set, or 

fixed ; and so the Vulgate. And the verb in the 

text is used in the same sense in the Chaldee para- 

phzase on Jeremiah i. 15; where our translation 
3 


ment was white as snow, and the A. M. 3449. 
hair of his head like the pure wool: =e 
his throne was like the fiery flame, ? and his 
wheels as burning fire. 

10 2A fiery stream issued and came forth 
from before him: ‘thousand thousands minis- 
tered unto him, and ten thousand times ten 
thousand stood before him: * the judgment was 
set, and the books were opened. 


P Ezek. i. 15, 16.——4 Psa. 1. 3; xcvii. 3; Isa. xxx. 33; Ixvi. 
15. v1] Kings xxii. 19; Psa, lxviii. 17; Heb. xii. 22; Rev. v. 
inl S Rev. xx. 4, 12. 


reads, They shall set every one his throne, &c. The 
following words justify this translation: And the 
Ancient of days did sit—That is, the eternal Judge 
of the world, who has been from everlasting, who is 
at present, and who shall always be: and whom the 
prophet thus describes, to adapt himself to human 
apprehensions, and to make the following part of his 
description more intelligible; but no similitude is 
pointed out, nor ought we from hence to attempt to 
represent the invisible God by any figure. The 
metaphors here used, says Bishop Newton, “are 
borrowed from the solemnities of earthly judica- 
tories, and particularly of the great sanhedrim of 
the Jews, where the father of the consistory sat, 
with his assessors seated on each side of him, in the 
form of a semicircle, with the people standing before 
him: and from this description again was borrowed 
the description of the day of judgment in the New 
Testament.” Whose garment was white as snow— 
Signifying the unspotted righteousness of his pro- 
ceedings. He is elsewhere described as covering 
himself with light as with a garment, Psa. civ. 2: 
see also 1 Johni.5. Kings and princes used an- 
ciently to wear white garments, as an emblem of 
perfect justice. And the hair of his head like the 
pure wool—To denote the eternity and maturity of 
his counsels, and that his decisions are all perfectly 
right and true, without the least mixture of any par- 
tial affections. His throne was like the fiery flame— 
Denoting his awful majesty, and the severity of his 
judgments on the ungodly; and his wheels of burning 
jfire—Emblematical of the revolutions and dispen- 
sations of his providence, Ezek. i. 15, being dread- 
fully severe and destructive to the wicked. The 
reader will observe, God’s throne is here described . 
in the nature of a triumphal chariot, supported by 
angels as so many fiery wheels. Grotius remarks, 
that the ancient thrones and selle curules had 
wheels. A fiery stream issued and came forth from 
before him—Signifying his justice and wrath in giv- 
ing forth and executing sentence against the ungodly. 
Thousand thousands ministered unto him—His 
retinue was an innumerable company of angels; and 
ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him— 
To receive their sentence from hislips. The judg- 
ment was set—That is, the, court, namely, God the 
supreme judge, and the saints as his assessors, made 
| their public appearance. And the books were opened 
799 


i 


| 


Daniel's vision 


DANIEL. 


of God’s throne. 


A.M. 3449. 11 I beheld then because of the voice 
Ba ptthie great words which the horn 
spake: tI beheld even till the beast was slain, 
and his body destroyed, and given to the burn- 
ing flame. 

12 As concerning the rest of the beasts, they 
had their dominion taken away: yet ° their 
lives were prolonged for a season and time. 

13 I saw in the night visions, and behold, 
* one like the Son of man came with the clouds 


t Rey. xix. 20.—* Chald. a prolonging in life was given them. 
u Ezek, i. 26; Matt. xxiv. 30; xxvi. 64; Rev. i. 7,13; xiv. 14. 
x Verse 9.—-y Psa. il. 6, 7,.8';* viil.-65,.¢ex- 1,23 "Matt. xi, 275 


of heaven, and came to * the Ancient A. M, 3449 
. C. 555. 

of days, and they brought him near 

before him. 

14 Y And there was given him dominion, and 
glory, and a kingdom, that all * people, nations, 
and languages, should serve him: his dominion 
is *an everlasting dominion, which shall not 
pass away, and his kingdom, ¢hat which shall 
not be destroyed. 

15 % 1 Daniel >was grieved in my spirit in 
xxviii. 18; John iii. 35; 1 Cor. xv. 27; Eph. i, 22——* Chap. 


iii, 4 Psa. exlv. 13; Chap. ii. 44; Verse 27; Mice. iv. P; 
Luke i. 33; John xii. 34; Heb. xii. 28. pee Verse 28. 


That is, “those evidences which contained the laws 
and will of God, whether natural or revealed ; those 
in which the actions of men, with all their cireum- 
stances of aggravation or extenuation were recorded ; 
those from which the clearest and. completest con- 
viction might be adduced, in order to render the 
judgment such as that all should be obliged to ac- 
knowledge it to be the result of the most perfect 
truth and consummate justice: see Rev. xx. 12.”— 
Wintle. 

Verses 11, 12. I beheld then—Chaldee, nn TiN, 
Iwas attentive, spectabam attentus, I beheld atten- 
tively, as Grotius renders it ; because of the voice of 
the great words which the horn spake—See on verse 
25. I was desirous of knowing, and looked care- 
fully to see what would be the end of this matter, 
more particularly on account of the arrogant and 
boasting words which the horn spake. Jbeheld even 
till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed— 
This signified, that no other earthly kingdom should 
succeed to this, but that when an entire end should be 
put to it, and the ten kingdoms included in it, then 
the kingdom of Christ should succeed, as is more 
fully set forth toward the end of this chapter. We 
may observe, that it is not only said of this fourth 
beast, that he was slain, but that his body was de- 
stroyed and given to the burning flame ; that is, 
made entirely extinct, as every thing is that is burned 
in the fire; whereas it is said, concerning the rest of 
the beasts, that though they had their dominion 
taken away, their lives were prolonged for a season 
and time. ‘Their bodies were not destroyed, as that 
of the fourth beast, but they were suffered to con- 
tinue still in being; that is, other kingdoms of the 
same nature, though different in some particulars, 
succeeded to them, The destruction of the beast, it 
must be observed, will be the destruction of the horn 
also, and consequently the horn is a part of the 
fourth beast, or of the Roman empire. 

Verse 18. I saw in the night visions, &c—Here 
is described by what means these changes were to 
be brought about; behold, one like the Son of man 
came with the clouds of heaven—One in the shape 
and likeness of a man, but clothed with such ensigns 
of majesty and honour, (signified here by the clouds 
of heaven,) as showed him to be an extraordinary 
person, (compare Rey, i. 13, and xiv. 14,) indeed no 

800 


less than the Messiah, as the following description 
of him declares. As the two foregoing verses declare 
why the fourth beast was destroyed, this part of the 
vision shows by whom it was done; setting Christ 
forth in his judicial capacity, and’ describing him by 
that title, which, in allusion to this place, he often 
gave himself, namely, the Son of man. He particu- 
larly alludes to this text, Matt. xxvi. 64, where he 
speaks of his coming in the clouds of heaven; by 
which expression he acknowledged himself to be 
the true Messiah here described, and gave a direct 
answer to the question there proposed to him, Art 
thou the Christ, the Son of the blessed? Compare 
Mark xiv. 61, 62; Rev. i.7. Whereupon they con- 
demned him as guilty of blasphemy. <A learned pre- 
late, in his Defence of Christianity from the ancient 
Prophecies, p. 131, observes, that *33), anani, the 
clouds, was a known name of the Messiah among the 
Jewish writers, which shows that they understood 
this text as spoken of him. 

Verse 14. There was given him dominion, &e.— 
“ All these kingdoms shall in their turns be destroy- 
ed, but the kingdom of the Messiah shall stand for 
ever. It was in allusion to this prophecy that the 
angel said of Jesus, before he was conceived in the 
womb, Luke i. 33, He shall reign over the house of 
Jacoh for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no 
end. After what manner these great changes will 
be effected, we cannot pretend to say, as God hath 
not been pleased to reveal it. We see the remains 
of the ten horns which arose out of the Roman em- 
pire. We see the little horn still subsisting, though 
not in full strength and vigour, but as we hope upon 
the decline, and tending toward a dissolution. And 
having seen so many of these particulars aecomplish- 
ed, we can have no reason to-doubt that the rest also 
will be fulfilled in due season; though we cannot 
frame any conception how Christ will be manifested 
in glory ; how the little horn, with the body of the 
fourth beast, will be given to the burning flame ; or 
how the saints will take the kingdom, and possess it 
for ever and ever. It is the nature of such prophe- 
cies, not to be perfectly understood till they are ful- 
filled. The best comment upon them will be their 
completion.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verses 15-18. I Daniel was grieved in my spirit 
—Upon account of the extraordinary er 


An angel interprets 


CHAPTER VII. 


the vision of Dantvel. 


A. M. 3449. the midst of my ° body, and the vi- 

B.C. 555. 

———— sions of my head troubled me. 

16 I came near unto one of them that. stood 
by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he 
.told me, and made me know the interpretation 
of the things. 

17 ° These great beasts, which are four, are 
four kings, which shall arise out of the earth. 

18 But ‘the saints of the 7 Most High shall 
take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom 
for ever, even for ever and ever. 

19 Then I would know the truth of ° the 
fourth beast, which was diverse *from all the 
others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of 
iron, and his nails of brass; which devoured, 
brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with 
his feet. ; 

20 And of the ten horns that were in his head, 
and of the other which came up, and before 


whom three fell; even of that horn A. M. 3449. 
B. C. 555 

that had eyes, and a mouth that 

spake very great things, whose look was more 

stout than his fellows. 

21 I beheld, and the same horn made war 
with the saints, and prevailed against them ; 

22 £ Until the Ancient of days came, "and 
judgment was given to the saints of the Most 
High; and the time came that the saints pos- 
sessed the kingdom. 

23 Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be 
‘the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall 
be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour 
the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and 
break it in pieces. 

24 * And the ten horns out of this kingdom 
are ten kings that shall arise: and another 
shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse 
from the first, and he shall subdue three kings. 


6 Chald. sheath. © Verse 3.——4 Isa. lx. 12, 13,14; Verses 
22, 27; 2 Tim. ii. 11, 12; Revelation ii. 26, 27; iii. 21; xx. 4. 
7Chaldee, high ones, that is, things, or, places. © Verse 7. 
SChald. from all those. 


f Chapter viii. 12, 24; xi. 31.; Revelation xi. 7; xiii. 7; 
xvii, 14; xix. 19 s Verse 9.——5 Verse 18; 1 Corinthians 
vi. 2; Rev. i. 6; v.10; xx. 4.——1 Chapter ii. 40,—* Verses 
7, 8,20; Rev. xvii. 12. 


seemed to be signified by the vision, the particulars 
of which troubled me, though I had not a perfect 
apprehension of their meaning. Jcame near unto 
one of them that stood by—Namely, to one of the 
angels who were attending as ministering spirits. 
And asked him the truth, &c.—Desired him to give 
me a clear understanding of all this. So he told me, 
&c.—Explained to me the true and plain meaning 
of these things. Z'hese great beasts are four kings 
—Four kingdoms, or monarchies. So the word king 
is used Isa, xxiii. 15. Which shall arise out of the 
earth—Which shall raise themselves merely upon 
éarnal, worldly grounds and considerations, and that 
by wars and troubles, and which shall think of and 
concern themselves with only earthly things; 
whereas the kingdom of Christ is described, in the 
next verse, as a heavenly, spiritual kingdom, fitting 
men for heaven. But the saints of the Most High 
shall take the kingdom—When the earthly kingdom 
shall be destroyed, the heavenly, or spiritual king- 
dom of the saints shall commence ; they shall enter 
upon it on earth, but shall retain it in heaven for 
ever. The Chaldee word ;315y, rendered Most 
High, is literally high ones, as it is translated in the 
margin: and these saints are indeed high ones, being 
children and heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ. 


Sometimes, however, the one true God is spoken of | 


in the plural number by way of eminence, as ‘Josh. 
xxiv. 19, where it is in the Hebrew, He is the holy 
Gods. The expression may therefore mean as we 
have it rendered. 

Verses 19-22. Then I would’know the truth of the 
fourth beast—Namely, what was intended to be sig- 
nified by it. And of the ten horns that were in his 


other which came up, &e.—See verse 8; whose look 
was more stout than his fellows—Or more great and 
magnificent; or, who was more arrogant, and claim- 
ed a superiority over the rest: for though this horn, 
or power, was small at first, it at length exceeded all 
other powers in pomp and pre-eminence, exalting 
itself not only above all temporal authorities, but 
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, 
2 Thess. ii.4. beheld—Chaldee, Iwas seeing, or con- 
sidering attentively ; and the same horn made war 
with the saints—By the saints here is to be under- 
stood the servants of Christ. So antichrist is describ- 
ed as making war with the saints, and overcoming 
them for a time: see the margin. Until the Ancient 
of days came—To vindicate their cause, to crush 
the idolaters, and to extirpate the dominion of anti- 
christ: or until the final judgment, when the saints 
shall sit as assessors with Christ, shall be seated on 
thrones, and reign as kings and priests with God 
and Christ, and possess the kingdom for ever. And 
judgment was given to the saints, &e.—Power to 
judge and rule over their enemies. And the time 
came that the saints possessed the kingdom—See on 
verse 14. 

Verses 23, 24. The fourth beast shall be diverse 
from all kingdoms—As being managed under dif- 
ferent forms of government; having a form of com- 
monwealth at the beginning of its greatness, and 
afterward governed by kings and emperors; and in 
process of time being divided into ten kingdoms, or 
principalities ; and all of them under the direction ~ 
of one spiritual head. And the ten horns are ten 
kings—Or, kingdoms. A horn is an emblem of 
strength, so it comes to signify power and authority ; 


head—Of what they were emblems; and of the||and from thence it is applied to denote sovereignty, 
801 3 


Vou IIL. (51 ) 


An angel interprets 


DANIEL. 


the vision of Danres, 


A.M. 3449. 25 ! And he shall speak great words 
ina against the Most High, and shall 
™ wear out the saints of the Most High, and 


think to change times and laws: and A. ra pie. 
°they shall be given into his hand ———— 


P until a time and times and the dividing of time. 


! Isaiah xxxvii. 23; Chap. viii. 24, 25; xi. 28, 30, 31,36; Rev. 
; xiii. 5, 6. ——™ Rev. xvii. 6; xvill. 24. 


or dominion. The ten horns, or kingdoms, were to 
arise out of the dissolution of the Roman empire, 
which came to pass accordingly. ‘There are various 
enumerations of these ten kingdoms in the division 
of the Roman empire, none of which are reckoned 
to commence earlier than the latter end of the fourth, 
or the beginning of the fifth century. Bishop New- 
ton, in his fourteenth Dissertation, has given several 
lists, by Machiavel, by Mr. Mede, by Bishop Lloyd, 
and by Sir Isaac Newton; and at last has added one 
which he has selected from the others, and which 
he has placed in the eighth century. His words are, 
“The principal states and governments then were, 
1. The senate of Rome, who revolted from the 
Greek emperors, and claimed and exerted the privi- 
lege of choosing a new western emperor; 2. The 
Greeks in Ravenna; 3. The Lombards in Lombar- 
dy; 4. The Huns in Hungary; 5. The Alemannes 
in Germany; 6. The Franks in France; 7. The 
Burgundians in Burgundy ; 8. The Goths in Spain ; 
9. The Britons; 10. The Saxons in Britain. Not that 
there were constantly ten kingdoms, they were 
sometimes more and sometimes fewer; but, as Sir 
Isaac Newton says, ‘whatever was their number 
afterward, they are still called the ten kingdoms, 
from their first number.’ ” 

And another shall arise after them—Greek, ori 
wtov, behind them, as the words may be rendered ; 
that is, either unperceived by them, or whose 
height, or dominion, should not acquire its summit 
till long after their establishment. This is generally 
agreed, by all Protestant interpreters, to be the 
kingdom of the pope, which was certainly of a very 
different nature from any of the former, being first 


ecclesiastical, or spiritual, and afterward claiminga | 
The LXX. add, that | 


temporal or civil jurisdiction. 
it should be distinguished from the former, xaxoec, in 
evils, or malignancies. And the kings, or kingdoms, 
which it should pluck up by the roots, or humble, as 
rarewooet, the word used by the LXX., signifies, 
(which is also the reading of the Vulgate,) are point- 
ed out by the same prelate to be the exarchate of 
Ravenna, the kingdom of the Lombards, and the 
state of Rome. These states were reduced in the 
eighth century; and the epistles and bulls issued by 
the pope are, after that time, dated from the years 
of the commencement of the pope’s temporal juris- 
diction, or advancement to the papal chair; and the 
pope, by wearing his triple crown, hath in a man- 
ner pointed himself out for the person here intend- 
ed: see Bishop Newton and Mr. Wintle. 

And what still more fully characterizes this power, 
and proyesit to be intended of the Papacy, is, that it is 
said, in verse 8, in this horn were eyes like the eyes 


of aman; which denotes cunning and foresight, | 


exercised in looking out and watching all opportu- 
nities of promoting one’s interest. “And the policy 
802 


° Revelation xiii. 7.——p Chapter xil. 7; 
Revelation xii. 14. 


» Chapter ii. 21. 


of the Roman hierarchy hath almost passed into a 
proverb. The pope is properly called an overlooker, 
or overseer; an ettcxoroc, or bishop, in the literal 
sense of the word. In verses 8, 20, it is said, He 
had a mouth speaking great things: and who hath 
been more noisy and blustering than the pope, es- 
pecially in former ages; boasting of his supremacy, 
thundering out his bulls and anathemas, excom- 
municating princes, and absolving subjects from 
their allegiance? His look was more stout than his 
fellows, verse 20, And the pope assumes a superi- 
ority, not only over his fellow-bishops, but even over 
crowned heads: and requires his foot to be kissed, 
and greater honours to be paid to him than to kings 
and emperors themselves.” 

Verse 25. He shall speak great words against 
the Most High—Symmachus reads, He shall speak 
great words, as the Most High ; “setting himself 
above all laws, divine and human: arrogating to 
himself godlike attributes, and titles of holiness and 
infallibility ; exacting obedience to his ordinances 
and decrees, in preference to, and in open violation 
of, reason and Scripture; insulting men and blas- 
pheming God. In Gratian’s Decretals, the pope has 
the title of God given to him. And shall wear out 
the saints—By wars, and massacres, and inquisitions, 
persecuting and destroying the faithful servants of 
Jesus, and the true worshippers of God; who pro- 
test against his innovations, and refuse to comply 
with the idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, 
He shall think to change times and laws—Appoint- 
ing fasts and feasts, canonizing saints, granting par- 
dons and indulgences for sins, instituting new modes 
of worship, imposing new articles of faith, enjoining 
new rules of practice, and reversing at pleasure the 
laws of God and man.”—Bishop Newton. 

And they shall be given, &c.—“A time, all agree, 
signifies a year ; and a time, and times, and the di- 
viding of time, or half a time, are three years and 


}ahalf; and the ancient Jewish year, consisting of 


twelve months, and each month of thirty days, a 
time, and limes, and half a time, or three years and 
a half, are reckoned in the Revelation, chap. xi. 2, 3, 
and xii. 6, 14, as equivalent to forty-two months, or 
twelve hundred and sixty days; and a day, in the 
style of the prophets, is a-year; (see Ezek. iv. 4;) 
and it is confessed that the seventy weeks, in Dan. 
ix. are weeks of years, and consequently twelve 


hundred and sixty days are twelve hundred and 


sixty years. So long antichrist, or the little horn, 
will continue: but from what point of time the com- 
mencement of these twelve hundred and sixty years 
is to be dated, is not easy to determine. It should 
seem that they are to be computed from the full es- 
tablishment of the power of the pope, and no less is 
implied in the expression, given into his hand. Now 


the power of the pope, as a horn, or tempora! 
( 517 ic ca ; 


— wan 


End of the vision, according 


CHAPTER VIII. 


to the expounding angéi. 


A. M. 3449. 
B. C. 555. 


26 1 But the judgment shall sit, 
and they shall take away his do- 
minion to consume and to destroy i¢ unto 
the end. 

27 And the * kingdom and dominion, and the 
greatness of the kingdom under the whole 
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints 


% Verses 10, 22. * Verses 14, 18, 22.——s Chap. ii. 44; Luke 
i. 33; John xii. 34; Rev. xi. 15. 


of the Most High, * whose kingdom A. M. 3449. 
; ‘ B. C. 555. 
is an everlasting kingdom, tand all ———— 
® dominions shall serve and obey him. 

28 Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for 
me Daniel, “my cogitations much troubled me, 
and my countenance changed in me: but T 


xkept the matter in my heart. 


t Isaiah lx. 12,——® Or, rulers. " Verse 15; Chap. viii. 27; 
x. 8, 16. x Luke ii. 19, 51. 


prince, it hath been shown, was established in the 
eighth century; and twelve hundred and sixty 
years from that time, will lead us down to about the 
year of Christ 2000, or the year of the world 6000: 
and there is an old tradition, both among Jews and 
Christians, that at the end of 6000 years the Mes- 
siah shall come, and the world shall be renewed; 
the reign of the wicked one shall cease, and the reign 
of the saints upon earth shall begin. But, as Irene- 
us says in a like ease, itis surer and safer to wait 
for the completion of the prophecy than to conjec- 
ture and divine about it. When the end shall come, 
then we shall know better whence to date the be- 
ginning.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verses 26, 27. But the judgment shall sit, &ce.— 
God, in the course of his providence, will sit (speak- 
ing after the manner of men) in judgment on this 
usurping, tyrannical, and persecuting power, which 
shall be judged, condemned, degraded, consumed, 
and destroyed, and his authority never more revived, 
to the end of the world: see note on verses 10, 11. 


And the kingdom and dominion, §c., shall be given || 


to the saints of the Most High—True religion shall 
universally prevail under the countenance and pro- 
tection of Christian princes; and the kingdom of 
Christ shall be erected in power and glory in all 
parts of the earth. In other words, The stone cut 
out of the mountain without hands shall become 
itself a mountain, and fill the whole earth: see| 


note on chap. ii. 44, 45, and on verse 14 of this 
chapter. If the reader will be at the pains to com- 
pare this vision of Daniel, concerning the four great 
wild beasts, and the exposition of it by the angel, 
with Nebuchadnezzar’s dream of the great image, as 
explained by Daniel, he will be struck with their per- 
fect agreement with each other, and find the one 
illustrative of the other. 

Verse 28. Hitherto is the end of the matter—Here 
the angel that spoke to me concerning these matters 
finished his discourse. As for me, my cogitations 
much troubled me—The extraordinary circumstances 
of the vision made a great impression upon my 
mind; and it was matter of great trouble to me, to 
foresee the profanation of God’s laws and worship, 
and the persecutions and calamities which should 
come upon his church and people. And my coun- 
tenance changed in me—The impression which this 
vision made upon me, weakened my spirits, and 
altered my complexion, as if I had had a fit of sick- 
ness. But Lkept the matter in my heart—I laid 
the matter up in my memory and heart, and meditated 
frequently upon it, and by that means was enabled 
to give an exact account of the vision, and its inter- 
pretation, in writing, for the use and benefit of others 
as well as myself; and that after ages might have 
this great proof of the Almighty’s governing all the 
affairs of the world, and of his foreknowledge of 
future events, 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Hitherto the prophecies of Daniel, that is, from verse 4 of the second chapter to the 8th, are written in Chaldee. As they 
greatly concerned the Chaldeans, so they were published in that language. But the remaining prophecies arc written in 
Hebrew, because they treat altogether of affairs subsequent to the times of the Chaldeans, and no ways relate to them, but 


principally to the church and people of God. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) Daniel’s vision of the ram and he-goat, and of 


the little horn of the latter, which should become very mischievous to the people of God for a time, 1-14. (2,) The inter- 


pretation of this vision by an angel, showing that the ram 


signified the Medo-Persian empire; the he-goat, the Grecian 


monarchy ; and the little horn, a king of that monarchy, who should terribly persecute the Jews and their religion, profane 
the temple, and take away the daily sacrifice there offered, 15-25: which events he attests as certain, and charges Danicl, 


who was much affected thereby, to conceal them, 26, 27. 


haa TN the third year of the reign of King 
_—____ ~~ Belshazzar a vision appeared unto 


me, even unto me Daniel, after that A. “ at. 
which appeared unto me * at the first. ———— 


a Chap. 
NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. 
Verse 1. Inthe third year of King Belshazzar— 


Daniel’s former vision of the four great beasts, repre-| 
3 


ti. be 


senting the four great empires of the world, took 

place in the first year of Belshazzar; now, in the 

third year of that king’s reign, he had another vision, 
803 


Daniel's vision of the 


DANIEL. 


ram and he-goat. 


A. M. 3451. 


2 And J saw in a vision; and it 
B. C. 553. 


came to pass, when I saw, that I 
was at »Shushan iz the palace, which is in 
the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, 
and I was by the river of Ulai. 

3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and 


behold, there stood before the river a A. M. 3451. 
ram which had éwo horns: and the 2° >* 
two horns were high; but one was higher than 
the other, and the higher came up last. 

4 I saw the ram pushing westward, and north- 


ward, and southward; so that no beasts might 


b Esther i. 2. 


1 Heb. the second. 


which chiefly respected two of those empires. Thus 
God showed the same things to Daniel at different 
times, and under different symbols; doubtless in 
order that they might be more deeply impressed on 
his mind, and that he might more distinctly under- 
stand them in all their circumstances. We find 
God acting in the same manner with some of the 
other prophets, particularly Ezekiel, to whom he 
showed the destruction of Jerusalem by a great many 
different types, or symbols. This vision was com- 
municated to Daniel about the year before Christ 
5538, according to Usher, Prideaux, and other chro- 
nologers. 

Verse 2. Isaw in a vision—When I was awake, 
and had my bodily senses: see verse 3, and compare 
chap. x.4,5. This was accounted a more perfect 
degree of revelation than the having a representa- 
tion of things imprinted on the imagination during 
sleep. When I saw, I was at Shushan in the palace 
—This circumstance shows that Daniel continued in 
some post of honour, at least during the former part 
of the reign of Belshazzar. Which is in the pro- 
vince of Elam—The province of Elam, or Persia, 
properly so called, was taken from Astyages, king 
of Media, by Nebuchadnezzar, according to the pro- 
phecy of Jeremiah against Elam, chap. xlix. 34. 
And it was subject to the king of Babylon when 
Daniel saw this vision; though afterward the viceroy 
of that country revolted to Cyrus, and joined with 
him in taking Babylon. And J was by the river 
Ulai—Or, Elueus, as it was called by the Greeks 
and Romans. This river divided Susiana from the 
province of Elam, properly so called: see Plin., lib. 
vi. cap. 27. Elam, however, is often taken in a 
larger sense, so as to comprehend Susiana under it. 
It was usual for the prophets to see visions by river 
sides, of which Daniel gives us another instance, 
chap. x. 4; and Ezekiel likewise saw visions by the 
river Chebar, Ezek. i. 3; as if the Holy Spirit de- 
lighted to manifest himself in such retired scenes. 
And the gifts and graces of the Spirit are often, in 
Scripture language, described by the metaphors of 
springs and streams of water, than which nothing is 
more agreeable and refreshing in hot and dry coun- 
tries. 

Verse 3. I saw, and behold, aram with two horns 
—In the former vision there appeared four beasts, 
because there four empires were represented; but 
in this two only, because here we have a representa- 
tion of what was transacted chiefly within two em- 
pires. The first of the four empires, that is, the 
Babylonian, is wholly omitted here; for its fate was 
sufficiently known, and it was now drawing very 
near to a conclusion. The second empire in the 

804 


former vision is the first in this; and what is there 
compared to a bear, is here prefigured by a ram. 
This ram had two horns ; and, according to the ex- 
plication of the angel Gabriel, verse 20, it was the 
empire of the Medes and Persians. The source of 
this figure of horns for kingdoms, must be derived 
from the hieroglyphics of Egypt, from which most 
of the metaphors and figures in the oriental lan- 
guages were originally derived; and in these lan- 
guages the same word signifies a horn, a crown, 
power, and splendour, whencea horn was an ensign 
of royalty among the Phenicians; and the Hebrew 
word {7p, keren, signifying a horn, is several times 
by the Chaldeans rendered xni39n, malchutha, or a 
kingdom; and horns are frequently used for kings 
and kingdoms in the Old Testament. This empire, 
therefore, which was formed by the conjunction of 
the Medes and Persians, was not unfitly represented 
by a ram with two horns. Cyrus, the founder of 
this empire, was the son of Cambyses, king of Per- 
sia, and, by his mother Mandane, was grandson of 
Astyages, king of Media; and afterward marrying 
the daughter and only child of his uncle Cyaxares, 
king of Media, he succeeded to both crowns, and 
united the kingdoms of Media and Persia, It wasa 
coalition of two very formidable powers, and there- 
fore it is said that the two horns were high; but one, 
it is added, was higher than the other, and the higher 
came up last. The kingdom of Media was the more 
ancient of the two, and more famous in history. 
Persia was of little note or account till the time of 
Cyrus; but under him the Persians gained and main- 
tained the ascendant. But a question remains, why 
that empire, which was before likened to a bear for 
its cruelty, should now be represented by a ram? 
Now the Hebrew word for a ram, which is 1x, ail, 
and my, eelam, which is the Hebrew word for 
Persia, both sprang from the same root; and both 
implying something of strength, the one is not im- 
properly made the type of the other. The propriety 
of it appears further from hence, that it was usual 
for the king of Persia to wear a ram’s head made 
of gold, and set with precious stones, instead of a 
diadem. We may add, that a ram’s head with 
horns, one higher and the other lower, was the royal 
ensign of the Persians, and is still to be seen on the 
pillars of Persepolis: see Bishop Newton. 

Verse 4, Isaw the ram pushing westward, &e.— 
Under Cyrus himself the Persians pushed their con- 
quests westward, as far as the Augean sea, subduing 
Babylonia, Syria, and Asia Minor; and extended 
them to part of Greece under his successors, Darius 
the son of Hystaspes, and Xerxes: northward they 
subdued the Lydians, Iberians, Albanians, Armenians 

3 


Vision of the ram 


CHAPTER VIII. 


and he-goat. 


A. M. 3451. stand before him, neither was there 

B. C. 553. , ; 

any that could deliver out of his 
hand; °but he did according to his will, and 
became great. 

5 And as I was considering, behold, a he- 
goat came from the west on the face of the 
whole earth, and * touched not the ground: and 
the goat had °a ¢ notable horn between his eyes. 


6 And he came to the ram that had A. M. 3451. 
two horns, which I had seen standing Bead Bie 
before the river, and ran unto him in the fury 
of his power. 

7 And I saw him come close unto the ram, 
and he was moved with choler against him, 
and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: 
and there was no power in the ram to stand 


€ Chap. v. 19; xi. 3, 16. 2 Or, none touched him in the earth. 


3 Heb. a horn of sight.——4 Verse 21. 


Cappadocians, and the adjacent countries: southward 
they conquered Arabia, Egypt, and Ethiopia, if not 
under Cyrus, as Xenophon affirms, yet most certainly 
under Cambyses, the son and successor of Cyrus, 
Under Darius they subdued India; but in the pro- 
phecy no mention is made of their conquests in the 
East, because those countries lay very remote from 
the Jews, and were of little concern or consequence 
to them. 

Verse 5. As I was considering, behold, a he-goat, 
&c.—This is interpreted, verse 21, to be the king, or 
kingdom, of Grecia. “A goat is very properly 
made the type of the Grecian or Macedonian em- 
pire; because the Macedonians at first, about two 
hundred years before Daniel, were denominated 
Egeade, or the goats’ people; and upon this occa- 
sion, as heathen authors report: Caranus, their first 
king, going with a great multitude of Greeks to seek 
new habitations in Macedonia, was commanded by 
the oracle to take the goats for his guides to empire: 
and afterward, seeing a herd of goats flying from a 
violent storm, he followed them to Edessa, and there 
fixed the seat of his empire, made the goats his 
ensigus, or standards, and called the city gee, or, 
The Goats’ Town, and the people 4geada, or, 
The goats’ people. And to this may be added, that 
the city Age, or Age, was the usual burying-place 
of the Macedonian kings. It is also very remarkable, 
that Alexander’s son, by Roxana, was named Alez- 
ander AZgus, or the son of the goat; and some of 
Alexander’s successors are represented on their coins 
with goats’ horns. This he-goat came from the 
west ; and who is ignorant that Europe lies westward 
of Asia? He came on the face of the whole earth, 
carrying every thing before him in all the three parts 
of the world then known; and he touched not the 
ground—His marches were so swift, and his con- 
quests so rapid, that he might be said, in a manner, 
to fly over the ground without touching it. For the 
same reason, the same empire, in the former vision, 
was likened to a leopard, which is a swift, nimble 
animal; and, to denote the greater quickness and 
impetuosity, to a leopard with four wings.” “He 
flew,” says Dean Prideaux, “with victory, swifter 
than others can travel; often with his horse pursuing 
his enemies upon the spur whole days and nights; 
and sometimes making long marches for several 
days one after the other, as once he did in pursuit of 
Darius, of near forty miles a day, for eleven days 
together. So that, by the speed of his marches, he 
eame upon his enemies before they were aware of 

3 


him, and conquered them before they could be in a 
posture to resist him.” The goat had a notable 
horn between his eyes—“This horn, says the angel, 
is the first king, or kingdom, of the Greeks in Asia, 
which was erected by Alexander the Great, and 
continued for some years in his brother, Philip Ari- 
deus, and his two young sons, Alexander Agus and 
Hercules.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verses 6,7. And he came to the ram that had two 
horns, &c.—“ The ram had before pushed westward, 
and the Persians, in the reign of Darius Hystaspes 
and Xerxes, had poured down with great armies 
into Greece; but now the Grecians, in return, car- 
ried their arms into Asia, and the he-goat invaded the 
ram that had invaded him. And he came to the 
ram &c., which I had seen standing before the river, 
and ran unto him in the fury of his power. One 
can hardly read these words without having some 
image of Darius’s army standing and guarding the 
river Granicus, and of Alexander on the other side, 
with his forces plunging in, swimming across the 
stream, and rushing on the enemy with all the fire 
and fury that can be imagined. And I saw him: 
come close unto the ram—He had several close en- 
gagements, or set battles, with the king of Persia, 
and particularly at Granicus in Phrygia, at the straits 
of Issus in Cilicia, and in the plains of Arbela, in 
Assyria. And he was moved with choler against 
him—For the cruelties which the Persians had ex- 
ercised toward the Grecians; and for Darius’s at- 
tempting to corrupt sometimes his soldiers to betray 
him, and sometimes his friends to destroy him: so 
that he would not listen to the most advantageous 
offers of peace, but determined to pursue the Persian 
king, not as a generous and noble enemy, but as a 
poisoner and a murderer, to the death which he de- 
served. And smote the ram, and brake his two 
horns—He subdued Persia and Media, with other 
provinces and kingdoms of the Persian empire; and 
it is remarkable, that in Persia he barbarously sacked 
and burned the royal city of Persepolis, the capital 
of the empire; and in Media Darius was seized and 
made prisoner by some of his own treacherous sub- 
jects, who not long afterward basely murdered him. 
And there was no power in the ram to stand before 
him, &c.—He conquered wherever he came; routed 
all the forces, took all the cities and castles, and en- 
tirely subverted and ruined the Persian empire. 
And there was none that could deliver the ram out 
of his hand—Not even his numerous armies could 
defend the king of Persia, though his forces in the 

805 


Vision of the ram 


DANIEL. 


and he-goat. 


4. M. 3451. before him, but he cast him down to 
B50. the ground, and stamped upon him: 
and there was none that could deliver the ram 
out of his hand. 

8 Therefore, the he-goat waxed very great: 
and when he was strong, the great horn was 
broken ; and for it came up ° four notable ones 
toward the four winds of heaven. 

9 f And out of one of them came forth a little 
horn which waxed exceeding. great, ® toward 


the south, and toward the east, and A.M, 3451. 
toward the » pleasant land. hod: Kua 

10 ‘And it waxed great, even * to * the host 
of heaven ; and! it cast down some of the host 
and of the stars to the ground, and stamped 
upon them. 

11 Yea, ™he magnified himself even *to 
"the prince of the host, °and *by him ? the 
daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place 
of his sanctuary was cast down. 


e Chapter vii. 6 ; xi. 4; Verse 22. Chap. vil. 8; xi. 21. 
£ Chap. xi. 25,——4 Psa. xlviii. 2; Ezek. xx. 6,15; Chap. xi. 
16, 41, 45.—— Chap. xi. 28. “Or, against the host.— So 
Isaiah xiv. 13. 


m Jer, xlviii. 26,42; Chapter xi. 36; Verse 
Paik 5 Or, against. 2 Josh. v. 14.——° Chapter xi. 31; xii. 
ll. ® Or, from him. P Exodus xxix. 38; Nard XXVili. 3; 
Ezek. xlvi. 13. 


1 Rev. xii. 4. 


battle of Issus amounted to 600,000 men, and in that 
of Arbela, to 10 or 1100,000, whereas the whole 
number of Alexander’s was not more than 47,000 in 
either engagement.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verse 8. Therefore the he-goat waxed very great 
—See note on chap. ii. 39. The empire of the goat 
was in its full strength when Alexander died. He 
was succeeded by his natural brother Philip Arideus, 
and by his own two sons before mentioned; but in 
the space of about fifteen years they were all mur- 
dered, and the firstborn, or kingdom, was entirely 
broken. 

And for it came up four notable ones—The royal 
family being thus extinct, the governorsof provinces, 
who had usurped the power, assumed the title of 
kings, and by the defeat and death of Antigonus in 
the battle of Ipsus they were reduced to four, Cas- 
sander, Lysimachus, Ptolemy, and Seleucus; who 


parted Alexander’s dominions between them, and | 


divided and settled them into fowr kingdoms, which 
are the fowr notable horns that came up in the room 
of the first great horn, and are the same as the four 
heads of the leopard, chap. vii. Toward the four 
winds of heaven—In the partition of the empire 
Cassander held Macedonia and Greece, and the 
western parts; Lysimachus had Thrace, Bithynia, 
and the northern regions; Ptolemy possessed Egypt 
and the sowthern countries; and Seleucus obtained 
Syria and the eastern provinces. Thus were they 
divided toward the four winds of heaven, 

_ Verse 9. And out of one of them—Namely, out of 
one of the four notable horns, mentioned in the pre- 
ceding verse, came forth a little horn—The reader 
will be pleased particularly to observe this, as being 
a key to the right interpretation of the subsequent 
prophecy. The little horn proceeded from one of 
the four kingdoms just mentioned, into which Alex- 
ander’s empire was divided after his death : therefore 
to look for it elsewhere, or to interpret it of any 
power, king, or kingdom, which had not its origin in 
one of them, must be a misinterpretation of the pro- 
phecy. From one of the four successors of Alex- 
ander, namely, from Antiochus the Great, came forth 
Antiochus, afterward called Epiphanes, or Iilus- 
irious, by his flatterers; but by Polybius termed 
more properly Epimanes, or the madman. 

806 


He was || 


indeed a vile person, as the angel characterizes him, 
chap. xi. 21, to whom the honour of the kingdom did 
not belong, Demetrius, his eldest brother’s son, being 
the rightful heir. He is here called a little horn, as 
he was originally of no great fortune or dignity, a 
younger brother, a contemptible person, and a sort 
of captive at Rome. Some have objected, that the 
word horn, in these visions, never signifies a single 
king, but always a kingdom or empire; but this is 
evidently a mistake, as the notable horn, mentioned 
verse 5, which the goat had between his eyes, mani- 
festly means Alexander the Great. This /iitle horn 
belonging to the third, or Macedonian monarchy, 
must not be confounded with the little horn belong - 


| ing to the fourth, mentioned chap. vil. 8-20, although 


this here spoken of may be allowed to be a type or 
figure of the latter. Whieh waxed exceeding great 
toward the south—He extended his dominion toward 


the south, when, taking advantage of the youth of 
| Ptolemy Philometer, (see 1 Mace. i. 16-19,) he made 


himself master of Egypt, called the sowlh, in several 
places of chap. xi. of this prophecy. And toward 
the east—Where he conquered Armenia, and pene- 
trated into Persia. And toward the pleasant land— 
Or, the land of Judea, called the pleasant land, by 
the holy writers, as being chosen by God for the 
place of his people’s habitation, and of his house or 


/temple; where also the Messiah was to appear, 
| called elsewhere the glory of all lands, Ezek. xx. 6, 


15. The cruelties which Antiochus Epiphanes ex- 
ercised in Judea seem to be the primary subject o* 
the following verses. In which, however, he may 
be considered as a type of antichrist, exercising still 
greater cruelties on the Christian Church, 

Verses 10, 11. And it waxed great, even to the 
host of heaven-—By the host of heaven, seems to be 
here meant the Jewish priesthood, so called from 
their continual attendance on God’s service in the 
temple, as the angels do in heaven. : The word N33, 
here rendered host, is applied to the attendants in 
the sanctuary, Exod. xxxviii. 8; Num, iv. 23. And 
it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the 
ground—Persons of principal dignity and high of- 
fices are often called stars in the Scriptures, In Isa. 
xxiv. 21, The host of the high ones that are on high, 
is explained by Vitringa of the Jewishrulersand pee- 


Vision of the ram 


CHAPTER VIII. 


and he-goat. 


A.M. 3451. 


12 And a7 host was given him 
B. C. 553. 


against the daily sacrifice by reason 
of transgression, and it cast down ‘the truth to 
the ground ; and it * practised, and prospered. 
13 4 Then I heard "one saint speaking, and 
another saint said unto ®that® certain saint 
which spake, How long shall be the vision 


concerning the daily sacr ‘nets and A. by Mers 
the transgression of 1° desolation, to : 
give both the sanctuary and the host to be 
trodden under foot ? 

14 And he said unto me, Unto two thousand 
and three hundred ™ days; then shall the 
sanctuary be }* cleansed. 


4 Ch. xi. 31.——? Or, the host was given over for the transgression 
against the daily sacrifice —— Psa. cxix. 43, 142; Isa. lviii. 14. 
t Verse 4; Chap, xi. 28, 36. 4 Ch. iv. 13; xii. 6; 1 Pet. i. 12. 


ple: see chap. xii. 3, and Rev. i. 20, where the an- 
gels, or governors of the church, are called stars. 
The words here seem to import, either that Antio- 
chus should put an end to the services of the temple, 
by taking away the daily sacrifice, verse 12; or else 
that he should seduce some of the priests and rulers, 
by threats and flatteries, to turn apostates. And 
stamped upon them— Utterly subdued and destroyed 
them: see chap. vii.7. Yea, he magnified himself 
even to [or against] the prince of the host—This 
may be understood of the high-priest Onias, (com- 
pare chap. xi. 22,) whom Antiochus deprived of his | 
office, putting Jason in his place, an ungodly wretch, 
who set up heathen rites in God’s temple, 2 Mac. iv. | 
13-17. But Jerome and Theodoret understand it of | 
God himself, as do many others; or of Christ, the 
High-Priest over the house of God, whose sanctua- 
ry the temple is called in the following words. An- 
tiochus erected in the temple a statue to Jupiter. 
Olympus, deservedly esteemed the abomination of | 
desolation, and thus magnified himself against God, 
to whom the sanctuary and its services were appro- 
priated. And by him the daily sacrifice was taken | 
away—The sacrifice which was offered, in the name | 
of the whole nation, every morning and evening: | 
see Num. xxviii. 3. This was taken away by'An- | 
tiochus, together with the whole customary worship, | 
and both altar and temple profaned: see 1 Mac. i. 
44-64. And the place of his sanctuary was cast | 
down—Or cast out, or rendered profane: comp. Rev. | 
xi. 2. It was deprived of the honour and privileges. 
that belonged to a holy place, as if the enclosures 
had been thrown down which separated it from 
common ground. It may include also the profana- | 
tion of the high-priesthood, which Antiochus set up | 
to sale, and let men of the most profligate lives have | 
it; so that both the sanctuary itself, and the priest- 
hood, might truly be said to be rendered profane. 
Verse 12. And a host was given him against the | 
daily sacrifice by reason of transgression—Antio- 
chus prospered so far in his attempts against the | 
Jews and their religion, that he built a citadel in the: 
city of David, and placed a garrison of soldiers 
there, to disturb those that should come to worship | 
God at the temple: sce 1 Mac. i. 33-36, This God | 
permitted, as a just punishment for the sins of the 
people, and particularly of those who professed a 
willingness to forsake the worship of God, and to. 
join with the heathen in their idolatry, 1 Mac. i. 11; 
2 Mac. iv. 13-17. Some translate the words, And a_ 
set lime was appointed against the daily sacrifice ; | 
3 


8 Or, the numberer of secrets, or, the wonderful numberer. 
* Heb. Palmoni. 10 Or, making desolate, Chap. xi. 31; xii. 11. 
1 Heb. evening morning. 12 Heb. justified. 


for the word N33, rendered host, signifies likewise @ 
set time: see chap.x. 1. And it cast down the truth 
to the ground, and prospered—The book of the law, 
or the divine ordinances delivered to the Jews by 
Moses, is here called the truth. He prospered so 
far in ‘his attempts against the true religion, as to 
suppress it for a time, and hinder the open profession 
of it: see verse 24, and chap. xi. 28-382. We read, 
1 Mac. i. 56, that Antiochus ordered the copies of the 
law to be cut in pieces and burned. 

Verses 13, 14. Then I heard one saint speaking— 
The word saint here is equivalent to angel: see ch. 
iv. 13. What this saint or angel said, is not express- 
ed; no more than the words spoken by that iJlustri- 
ous person who appeared to Daniel, chap. x x. 5, are 
recorded. And another saint said to that cer ‘tein. 
saint which spake—Several angels are introduced in 
Daniel’s visions, and so in Zechariah’s. This ap- 
pears to be spoken of one of a higher rank, as being 
able to unfold those secrets which were hid from 


|| the other angels; and is therefore justly supposed to 


mean the Son of God, called the Wonderful Coun- 
sellor, Isa. ix. 6, as being acquainted with all God’s 
purposes and designs. flow long shall be the vision 
concerning the daily sacrifice? &e.—The words, 
says Lowth, may be translated more agreeably to the 
Hebrew thus: For how long a time shall the vision 
last, the daily sacrifice be taken away, and the 
transgression of desolation continue ? Since, how- 
ever, there are no words in the Hebrew for taker 
away and continue, Mr. Winte rather thinks the in 
guiry respects only the duration of the vision, and 
that the other words are by way of explaining what 
the vision is, namely, “of the daily sacrifice, and of 
the transgression of desolation, and of the sanctuary 
and host,” or its attendant ministers, “being sup- 
pressed and trampled on.” He therefore translates 


| the clause thus: How long will be the term of the 


vision of the daily sacrifice, and the transgression. 
that maketh desolate, exposing both the sanctuary 
and the host to be trainpled on? 'The plain mean- 
ing of the verse is, that one of the angels asked the 
superior personage, distinguished here by the title of 
that certain saint, How long the evils signified in 
this vision, and particularly the taking away, or in- 
terruption, of the daily sacrifice, &c., should last. 
By the transgression of desolation seems to be 
meant the harassing and ravaging of the city by the 
| garrison of Antiochus, setting up an idol to be wor- 
shipped in God’s temple, and, by that and other hea- 
thenish superstitions, profaning it, and also the host, 
807 


Daniel's vision. 


* Gabrier interprets DANIEL. 
SSS 
A.M. 3451. 15 J And it came to pass, when I, 


even I Daniel, had seen the vision, 
and Ysought for the meaning, then behold, 
there stood before me 7 as the appearance of a 
man. 

16 And I heard a man’s voice * between the 
banks of Ulai, which called, and said, ’ Gabriel, 


y Ch. xii. 8; 1 Pet. i. 10, 11.——* Ezek. i. 26. a Ch. xii. 6,7. 


make this man to understand the A. M. 3451 

Ly : B. C. 553. 
vision. + Ha laa 

17 So he came near where I stood: and 
when he came, I was afraid, and ° fell upon 
my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O 
son of man: for at the time of the end shall be 
the vision. 


> Chap. ix. 21; Luke i, 19, 26——* Ezek. i. 28; Rev. i. 17. 


or the Levites; persuading them, either by threats 
or enticements, to quit the worship of Jehovah, the 
true God, or to mix it with the worship of idols, con- 
trary to the divine law. And he said, Unto two 
thousand and. three hundred days—Hebrew, Until 
the evening [and] morning two thousand and three 
hundred. This signifies a space of about six years, 
and is to be taken from the first invasion of Judea 
by Antiochus, when he profaned the priesthood, and 
includes his second coming into that country, when 
he forbade the worship of God in the temple, and set 
up an idol there. After this time of two thousand 
three hundred days, or about six years from the first 
coming of Antiochus, it is here declared that the 
temple should be purged, or cleansed from the pol- 
luted or unclean things which Antiochus had brought 
into it, or from those things in it which he had de- 
filed, by using them for idolatrous rites: see 1 Mac. 
iv. It must, however, be remembered, that many 
interpreters understand these days inthe same sense 
in which days are generally understood by this pro- 
phet, namely, for years ; and thus refer the prophe- 
cy to antichrist, of whom, Antiochus was a type. 
This will carry us on to a still distant time in the 
church of God, to the completion of that opposition 
to the church of Christ which has been wished for 
long since, when the sanctuary will be perfectly 
cleansed, and to which the twelve hundred ninety 
and thirteen hundred thirty-five years of chap. xii. 
must have a reference. Sir Isaac Newton, Obs., 
chap. ix., not only reckons the days to be years, but 
will have the horn to be Rome, and does not refer it 
at all to Antiochus; and in this he is followed, in a 
great measure, by Bishop Newton, who makes the 
years commence from the time of Alexander’s in- 
vading Asia, three hundred thirty-four years before 
Christ, and thus to end with near the sixth millennium 
of the world. With this interpretation of Bishop 
Newton, Mr, Faber (a late writer) finds great fault, 
and endeavours to prove that the Mohammedan 
delusion, and not that of the Papacy, is intended here 
by the little horn. His reasonings, calculations, and 
quotations on this subject, cannot possibly be insert- 
ed here, nor even an abstract of them. ‘The reader 
that wishes to be acquainted with his scheme, must 
necessarily be referred to the book itself. There 
seems, however, to be one insuperable objection, 
both to Bishop Newton’s and this interpretation, and 
that is, that they are utterly irreconcileable with 
verse 9, where it is expressly said, that this little 
horn came forth from one of the four notable horns, 
or kingdoms, into which Alexander’s empire was 
808 


divided. Now it cannot be said that either the Pa- 
pacy, which arose in the west of Europe, or Moham- 
medanism, which had its rise and first prevailed in 
Arabia, sprang from any of the four branches of the 
Macedonian empire. 

Verses 15, 16. When I had seen the vision, and 
sought for the meaning—Here we are informed of 
Daniel’s earnest desire to have the vision explained 
to him, For those that rightly know the things of 
God, cannot but desire to be led still further into the 
mystery of them. And those who desire to know 
the meaning of what they have seen or heard from 
God, must seek it, and that diligently, namely, by 
earnest prayer and close meditation, T'hen there 
stood before me as the appearance of a man—The 
Scriptures frequently represent the angels as appear- 
ing in human forms, which it is likely they do, be- 
cause, perhaps, there is nothing visible to us that so 
much resembles what they really are, as the human 
form does. And I heard a man’s voice between the 
banks of Ulai—That is, between me and the river 
Ulai. Which said, Gabriel, make this man under- 
stand the vision—Explain it more clearly to him, if 
there be any thing in it which he does not perfectly 
understand. He who spake this seems to be the 
same angel who is spoken of verse 13, and called 


| there that certain saint, by way of distinction; for 
/he here speaks as one that had authority over the 


angel Gabriel. 

Verse 17. So he came near where I stood—That 
he might speak more familiarly with him. And 
when he came, I was afraid—This fear was proba- 
bly occasioned by the effulgent brightness of the hea- 
venly messenger, which quite amazed Daniel upon 
his drawing near to him. And J fell upon my face— 
Not to worship the angel, but because he could not 
bear the lustre of his glory. But he said unto me, 
Understand, O son of man—We find this is a title 
given to none of the prophets but Ezekiel and Da- 
niel, who had more frequent converse with angels 
than any of the rest: and it is given to the prophet 
here, either to put him in mind that he was but flesh 
and blood, that he might not be exalted for having 
these heavenly visions imparted to him; or else it 
was used as a mark of honour, implying that he was 
something more than an ordinary man, even one 
highly favoured and beloved of God. For at the 


|| time, or, to the time, of the end shall be the vision— 


That is, there is a precise time determined for the 

accomplishment of the vision, when it shall certainly 

be fulfilled. Or the meaning may be, that the fulfill- 

ing of the vision should not come to ae 
2 


Gabriel interprets 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Daniel's vision. 


A. M. 3451. 


18 * Now as he was speaking wit 
B. C. 553. P e with 


me, I was in a deep sleep on my face 
toward the ground: ® but he touched me, and 
3 set me upright. 

19 And he said, Behold, I will make thee 
know what shall be in the last end of the in- 
dignation: ‘ for at the time appointed the end 
shall be. 

20 © 'The ram which thou sawest having two 
horns are the kings of Media and Persia. 


21 » And the rough goat is the king A. M. 3451. 

; B. C. 553. 
of Grecia: and the great horn that 
is between his eyes ‘is the first king. 

22 * Now that being broken, whereas four 
stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up 
out of the nation, but not in his power. 

23 And in the latter time of their kingdom, 
when the transgressors 1 are come to the full, a 
king ™of fierce countenance, and understand- 
ing dark sentences, ® shall stand up. 


4Chap. x. 9,10; Luke ix. 32. e Ezekiel ii. 2. 13 Heb. 
made me stand upon my standing ——f Chap. ix. 27; xi. 27, 35, 
36; xii. 7; Hab. ii. 3. 


& Verse 3.——» Verse 5. 
Chapter xi. 4. 
xxvii. 50. 


i Chapter xi. 3.—— Verse 8; 
14 Hebrew, are accomplished. ™ Deuteron. 
n Verse 6. 


— 


siderable space of time; that it was concerning mat- 
ters at a distance, namely, at the distance of almost 
four hundred years. 

Verses 18, 19. Now as he was speaking, I was in 
a deep sleep—I was as one that faints away, and falls 
into a swoon through fear and astonishment. But 
he touched me, and set me upright—By only a touch 
of him my strength revived, and I came to myself. 
And he said, Behold, I will make thee know—I will 
inform thee, and give thee to understand, what shall 
be in the last end, or, to the last end, of the indigna- 
tion—I will acquaint thee with the whole series of 
God’s judgments upon his people, to the end and 
conclusion of them. 
regard to the captivity in the first place ; and there- 
fore, beginning from this, the angel hints at a sort of 
epitome of the evils which would fall upon the pos- 
terity of God’s chosen people, till their iniquity was 
taken away, and their sin purged, when the indigna- 
tion would be overpast, Isa. xxvi. 20.”—Wintle. 

Verses 20-22. The ram, &c., having two horns, 
are the kings, or kingdoms rather, of Media and 
Persia. And the rough goat is the king, or king- 
dom, of Grecia. And the great horn, §c., is the first 
king—Namely, Alexander the Great, the first Gre- 
cian king that reigned over Asia. Now that being 
broken—That is, this first king being deceased ; four 
kingdoms shall stand wp, &c.—Shall arise from it, 
under the rule of the same nation that the first king 
was of, namely, the Grecian. But not in his power 
—They were to be kingdoms of Greeks, not of Al- 
exander’s own family, but only of his nation; neither 
were they to be equal tohim in power and dominion, 
as an empire united is certainly more powerful than 
the same empire divided, and the whole is greater 
than any of its parts. 

Verse 23. And in the latter end of their kingdom 
—When their power was diminishing, and the Ro- 
man empire beginning to be established in Greece, 
from whence the Grecian kingdoms in Asia had their 
origin: for the bringing of Greece into subjection to 
the Roman power was a manifest indication of the 
declension of the Macedonian, or third monarchy, 
with its four heads, and the advancement of the fourth 
monarchy. Now this was remarkably brought to 
pass when ASmilius, the Roman consul, vanquished 
Toe king of Macedonia, and thereby brought all 


“The prophet had doubtless a 


Greece under the power of the Romans, which hap- 


| pened one hundred and sixty-six years before Christ, 


and about the time when Antiochus profaned the 
temple, and set up therein the abomination of deso- 
lation. It must be observed likewise, that, before that 
time, the four horns, or kingdoms, had been reduced 
to two principal ones, Syria and Egypt. Antiochus 
had attempted to gain the latter, and had marched 
toward Alexandria to besiege that city, the conquest 
of which would have made him absolute master of 
the whole kingdom; but in order to prevent his suc- 
cess, Ptolemy Euergetesand his sister Cleopatra had 


| sent ambassadors to the Romans, to beg their relief; 
/and when Popilius was deputed by the senate to go 


into Egypt, he proposed terms to Antiochus which 
he was obliged to accept, and obey the commands 
of the senate. Thus both Syria and Egypt became, 
in some sort, vassals to Rome. When the trans- 
gressors are come to the full—Here the reason is 
assigned why God permitted these calamities to fall 
on his people, namely, their wickedness had risen to 
a very great height: of which Bishop Newton gives 
the following account. ‘The high-priesthood was 
exposed to sale. Good Onias was ejected for a sum 
of money, to make room for wicked Jason; and Ja- 
son again was supplanted for a greater sum of mo- 
ney, by a worse man, if possible, than himself, his 


'|brother Menelaus; and the golden vessels of the 


temple were sold, to pay for the sacrilegious pur- 
chase. At the same time, the customs of the hea- 
then nations were introduced among the Jews; the 
youth were trained up and exercised after the man- 
ner of the Greeks; the people, apostatized from the 
true religion, and even the priests, (2 Mac. iv. 14,) 
despising the temple, and neglecting the sacrifices, 
hastened to be partakers of unlawful diversions. 
Nay, the temple was profaned under the conduct of 
the high-priest Menelaus, was defiled with swine’s 
blood, and plundered of every thing valuable; and 
in the same year that Paulus Aumilius vanguished 
Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, and thereby 
put an end to that kingdom, the Jewish religion was 
put down, and the heathen worship was set up in 
the cities of Judea, and in Jerusalem; and the tem- 
ple itself was consecrated to Jupiter Olympus, and 
his image was erected upon the very altar.” So evi- 
dent it is that the transgressors were come to the 
809 


Gabriel interprets 


DANIEL. 


Daniel's vision. 


A.M. 3451. 24 And his power shall be mighty, 
B.C. 5°36 but not by his own power: and 
he shall destroy wonderfully, ? and shall pros- 
per, and practise, ‘and shall destroy the mighty 
and the } holy people. 

25 And ‘through his policy also he shall 


cause craft to eae in his hand; ‘and he 


shall magnify himéelf i in his heart, ieee 
and by peace shall destroy many: 

“he shall also stand up against the Prince 
of princes; but he shall be * broken without 
hand. 

26 ¥ And the vision of the evening and the 
morning which was told is true: * wherefore 


o Rev. xvii. 13, 17. p Verse 12 F Oaagee xi. 36. ——1 Verse 
10; Chap. vii. 25. 18 Heb. people of the holy ones, * Chap. 
xi. 21, 23, 24. 8 Verse 11; Chapter xi,'36. 


full, and that it was in the latter time of the Mace- 
donian empire, when what follows took place. A 
king of fierce countenance shall stand up—This isa 
very just character of Antiochus, according to Dio- 
dorus, Polybius, and all the historians. And such a 
character may be presumed to belong to antichrist, 
who would be acquainted with all the depths of Sa- 
tan, Rev. ii.24. “I must confess,” says Mr. Wintle, 
“that this part of the interpretation appears to me to 
agree better with Antiochus than with the Romans: 
when interpreted of the latter, it is understood to 
mean a warlike and politic state.” Understanding 
dark sentences—One practised in craft and policy, 
particularly in the arts of seducing men from their 
religion. In this Antiochus was too successful with 
the Jews. Michaelis renders the clause, rex omnis 
doli peritus, a king skilled in every kind of deceit. 
Mr. Wintle reads, penetrating in mysterious craft. 
Verse 24. And his power shall be mighty—His 
power shall increase more and more, namely, in 
Judea; but not by his own power—This shall not be 
owing so much to himself, as to the wickedness and 
factions among the Jews. “Antiochus,” says Mr. 
Wintle, “was certainly much favoured in his designs 
by a factions party of the Jews themselves, by the 
treachery of the Jewish people, according to Jo- 
sephus, and, according to Appion, the perfidy of 
others. Eumenes, king of Pergamus, and his 
brother Attalus, being jealous of the Romans, de- 
sired to make the king of Syria their friend, and 
supported Antiochus in his kingdom. The divine 
displeasure also against the Jews operated to the 
furtherance of his designs, who was herein an agent 
of the vindictive justice of God.” And he shall 
destroy wonderfully—He shall cause a very great 
and scarcely credible desolation in Judea. Wintle 
renders it, He shall make astonishing havoc, and 
shall be successful: which prediction was accom- 
plished when Jerusalem was taken by Antiochus, 
40,000 Jews were slain, and as many were sold into 
slavery. And shall destroy the mighty and the holy 
people—Or, the people of the holy God,as Twp ay 
may be rendered, the noun plural being sometimes 
applied to the Deity. Or the expressions may 
mean, that he should destroy many of the principal 
and chief men, and many of the'common sort, 
termed the holy people, as being good men, and sin- 
cere worshippers of God. With regard to the 
former, Grotius observes, from Josephus, that men 
of the greatest reputation, and of the most generous 
spirit, among the Jews, paid no regard to Antiochus, 
810 


16 Or, prosperity.—* Verse 11 ; Chap. xi. 36.—* Job xxxiv. 
20; Lam. iv. 6; Chap. ii. ee 45.—¥ Chap. x. 1.——* Ezek. 
xii. 27; Chap. x. 14; xii. 4,9; Rev. xxii. 10. 


and therefore were harassed daily, and died under 
the most bitter torments. Antiochus, in his first 
invasion of Judea, slew and led captive 80,000 Jews ; 
and two years afterward sent Apollonius, with an 
army of 22,000 men, to destroy those that assembled 
in their synagogues on the sabbath, 2 Mae. y. 14, 24; 
and 1 Mae. i. 29. 

Verse 25. Through his policy also he shall cause 
craft to prosper—His craft and cunning shall suc- 
ceed. And he shall magnify himself in his heart— 
Elated by his successes, he will always be aiming at 
more and more, and making further attempts; and 
by peace shall destroy y many—Without making 
war, and without being a declared enemy, or re- 
ceiving injuries from them, he shall destroy many. 
Under pretence of peace and friendship, he invaded 
and spoiled both Egypt and Judea. The character 
which Grotius gives of Antiochus may serve to 
throw light on these clauses of the verse. “He had 
no regard to piety or integrity, to any true or false 
God, but measured all things by the rule of his own 
convenience. He certainly deceived many nations, 
and by_his flatteries and frauds obtained, as well as 


|enlarged his dominion; and under the colour of 
|| peace, or pretended tranquillity, he oppressed the 


unwary, and destroyed multitudes:” see 1 Mac. i. 
30. He shall also stand up against the Prince of 
princes—He shall exalt himself against the true 
God, the Lord of heaven and earth, abolishing his 
worship, and setting up idolatry in its stead. But 
he shall be broken without hand—By an immediate 
judgment of God. God struck him with a noisome 
disease, attended with horrible torments both of body 
and mind: see 1 Mace. vi. 8-13; 2 Mac. ix. 5-29. It 
is observable, that Polybius and Josephus both con- 
firm the account which the authors of the books of 
Maccabees give of his death, in a state of madness, 
from the apparitions and reproaches of spectres and 
evil spirits. 

Verse 26. And the vision of the evening and the 
morning, &c., is true—The vision of the 2300 even- 
ings and mornings, mentioned verse 13, is certain. 
The angel here tells him, that these calamities would 
certainly last during the time expressed by that 
number of days, and then would have an end. 
Wherefore shut thou up the vision, for it shall be for 
many days—Some consider these words as e 


SS- 
ing the same thing that is meant by shuttin: ‘up the 
words, and sealing the book, chap. xii. 4, e sense 


in both places, they think, is, that ue full meaning 
of the prophecy should be concealed from ian 


‘ rs rere | 


Daniel vs greatly 


CHAPTER IX. 


affected by the vision. 


A. M. 3451. shut thou up the vision ; for it shall|| tain days; afterward I rose up, 


BE 3. be for many days. 


27 * And I Daniel fainted, and was sick cer- 


band A. M. 3451. 
: FAL page B.C. 553. 
did the king’s business; and I was as- —_—~~—~ 
tonished at the vision, ° but none understood Z¢. 


‘  aChap. vii. 28; x. 8, 16. 


general, till the accomplishment of the events fore- 
told. Thus we find that shutting and opening, seal- 
ing and unfolding, are opposed in the prophetical 
language, and import the same as concealing and re- 
vealing. Thus taken the words imply, that pro- 
phecies are never fully understood till they are ac- 
complished: and the nearer the time approaches of 
their accomplishment, the more light shall diligent 
inguirers have for the explaining them. But the 
words may also imply a command to Daniel to com- 
mit this vision to writing, and then to take such care 
of the copy as would ensure its preservation, even 
till the things spoken of in it should be fulfilled; 
that so the prophecies might be compared with the 
events accomplishing them, and it might be seen 
how exactly they had been foretold. And in order 
that Daniel might take proper measures for pre- 
serving the account of these visions, and that pos- 
terity might take the same care, the angel concludes 
with observing, that the vision should be for many 
days ; that is, that the accomplishment of it would not 
take place till after a long space of time; it being a 
term of near four hundred years from the first inti- 


mation of the vision, in the third of Belshazzar, to | 


the cleansing of the sanctuary by Judas, in the time 
of Antiochus. It is of importance to observe here, 
that in remembrance of this great mercy which 
God had showed to his people, in delivering them 
from the tyranny and idolatry of Antiochus, a solemn 
feast was instituted, called Ey«aza, or the feast of 
dedication, which was annually observed, in conse- 
quence of cleansing the sanctuary, and the conse- 
eration of the altar, by Judas Maccabeus, for the 
space of eight days, from the 25th day of the month 
Casleu, 1 Mae. iv. 59. And to this St. John alludes, 
chap. x. 22, where he speaks of the feast of dedica- 
tion. 


b Chap. vi. 2, 3. © Verse 16, 


Verse 27. And I Daniel fainted—Rather, lan- 
guished, or pined, being overwhelmed with grief at 
the calamities which I learned by the vision were to 
come upon my countrymen, and also for the profa- 
nation of the temple in those days, And J was as- 
tonished at the vision, but none understood it—The 
meaning of this clause seems to be, that though 
Daniel was greatly troubled at this vision, even after 
he rose and went about the king’s business, yet he 
took care to conceal it, so that none might take no- 
tice of it. 

In the explication of this vision, the usurpations 
of Antiochus have been referred to, for the primary 
sense of the ravages committed by the little horn; 
yet, at the same time, it hag been hinted, that there 
are some strong features in the vision, which favour 
the opinion of those who refer it to later times, par- 
ticularly to the rule and dominion of antichrist. “I 
am of opinion,” says Mr. Wintle, “that, in the spirit 
of prophecy, both applications were meant to be 
comprehended; and I see no reason for not extend- 
ing the prophetic visions, or revelations, to events, 
to which, by the rules of fair and just interpretation, 
they shall be found applicable. The only sure way 
of knowing the meaning of a prophecy is, by com- 
paring it with the accomplishment; and if successions 
of events shall, in more than one instance, be found 
to agree, and square exactly with a single series of 
predicted circumstances, I should be inclined to 
/make the improvement as extensive as may be, con- 
sistently with truth and justice; and to acknowledge 
the wisdom and prescience of the Divine Contriver, 
who is acquainted with all his works from the foun- 
dation of the world, and who could adapt human 
language, in one form, to such an admirable variety 
of purposes, thus making his own strength perfect 
in weakness.” 


CHAPTER IX. 


This chapter contains, (1,) A most affecting and ardent prayer of Daniel for the restoration of Israel, on a near view of the 


expiration of the seventy years allotted for Judah’s captivity, 1-19. 


2,) The answer sent him by an angel, implying the 


restoration of the Jews to their own land, and containing one of the clearest prophecies of the Messiah to be found in all 
the Old Testament ; of the time and design of his appearing, and of the dreadful and lasting ruin, dispersion, and mise- 
ries of the Jewish nation, for their obstinate rejection of him, 20-27. 


ae Pa the first year * of Darius the son 
——— _~ of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the 


® Chap. i.21; v.31; vi. 28. 


| NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 

Verses 1, 2. In the first year of Darius—That is, 

imniediately after the overthrow of the kingdom of 
3 


| 
| 
dl 

4 


| Medes, which was made king over < t -_ 
the realm of the Chaldeans ; —— ee 


1 Or, in which he, &c. 


Babylon, which was the year of the Jews’ deliver- 

ance from eaptivity. This Darius was not Darius 

the Persian, under whom the temple was built, as 
811 


Daniel's prayer to Ged 


DANIEL. 


Sor his people. 


A. M. 3466. 


2 In the first year of his reign I 
B. C. 538. 


Daniel understood by books the nuim- 
ber of the years, whereof the word of the Lorp 
came to ” Jeremiah the prophet, that he would 
accomplish seventy years in the desolations of 
Jerusalem. 

3 4° And I set my face unto the Lord Gon, 
to seek by prayer and supplications, with fast- 
ing, and sackcloth, and ashes: 

4 And I prayed unto the Lorp my God, and 
made my confession, and said, O ¢ Lord, the 


great and dreadful God, keeping the oe on 
covenant and mercy to them that love ——— 
him, and to them that keep his commandments ; 

5 © We have sinned, and have committed 
iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have 
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts 
and from thy judgments: 

6 ‘Neither have we hearkened unto thy ser- 
vants the prophets, which spake in thy name 
to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to 
all the people of the land. . 


b2 Chron. xxxvi. 21; Jer. xxv. 11, 12; xx. 10.—=* Neh. 
i.4; Chap. vi. 10; Jeremiah xxix. 12, 13; James iv. 8, 9, 10. 
d@ Exod. xx. 6; Deut. vii. 9; Neh. i. 5; ix. 32. 


e] Kings viii. 47, 48; Nehemiah i. 6, 7; ix. 33,34; Psalm 
evi. 6; Isaiah lxiv. 5, 6,7; Jer. xiv. 7; Verse 15.2 Chron. 
xxxvi. 15, 16 ; Verse 10. 


some have asserted, to invalidate the credibility of 
this book; but Darius the Mede, who lived in the 
time of Daniel, and is called Cyaxares, the son of 
Astyages, by the heathen historians: see note on 
chap. vi. 1. Jn the first year of his reign, I Daniel 
understood by books, &c.—Namely, by the several 
prophecies of Jeremiah, chap. xxv. 11, 12, and xxix. 
10, which are called so many books: sce Jer. xxv. 
13, and xxx. 2. We may learn from hence, that the 
later prophets studied the writings of those prophets 
who were before them, especially for the more per- 
fect understanding of the times when their pro- 
phecies were to be fulfilled. The same they did 
by several of their own prophecies. That he would 
accomplish seventy years, &c.—Concerning the time 
from whence these seventy years are to be dated, 


see note on Jer. xxv. 11,12. Daniel saw a part of | 


Jeremiah’s prediction fulfilled, by the vengeance 
which the Lord had taken upon the house of Nebu- 
chadnezzar; but he saw no appearance of that de- 
- liverance ‘of the Jews which the prophet foretold. 
This was the cause of his uneasiness, and the motive 
of his prayers. 

Verse 3. J set my face unto the Lord God—This 
expression does not merely mean, that he directed 
his face to the place where the temple had stood: it 
signifies also his resolution to apply to God with the 


utmost seriousness, fervency, importunity, and per-| 


severance, for the accomplishment of his promises 
respecting the restoration of his people. It denotes, 
says Henry, “the intenseness of his mind in this pray- 
er, the fixedness of his thoughts, the firmness of his 
faith, and the fervour of his devout affections in the 
duty.” To seek by prayer and supplication, &e.— 
God’s promises, in general, are conditional, and in- 
tended, not to supersede, but to excite and encourage 
our prayers: this was especially the case with re- 
gard to God’s promise of restoring the Jews from 
captivity after seventy years, and this condition was 
particularly expressed when the promise was made 
by Jeremiah, chap. xxix. 10-14, where God says, 
Ye shall call upon me, and I will hearken unto you, 
§c., and will turn away your captivity, &e. Here 
we see Daniel complied with the condition; he 


sought unto the Lord with all his heart, (and = eral, and rising to rebellion and apostacy. 


812 


doubtedly excited others to do the same,) and the 
Lord was found of him. With fasting, and sack- 
cloth, and ashes—In token of humiliation, sorrow 
for their sins, and grief for the duration of their cap- 
tivity. 

Vers 4. I prayed unto the Lord my God—Daniel 
could approach God with confidence, knowing him 
to be his God in covenant, his reconciled God and 
Father. Observe, reader, we must know God to be 
our God, if we would pray in faith, and with suc- 
cess, when we apply to him for any blessing. And 
made my confession—Both acknowledging his jus- 
tice and holiness, and my own and my people’s ini- 
quity. ‘The more pious men are, and the better they 
are acquainted with themselves and God, the greater 
is the sense they have of their past guilt and present 
unworthiness, and the deeper is their humiliation: 
see Job xlii.6; and 1 Tim.i. 15. Observe, reader, in 
every prayer we must make confession, not only of 
the sins we have committed, (which is what we com- 
monly call confession,) but of our faith in God, and 
dependance upon him; our sorrow for sin, and our 
resolutions against it. It must be our confession, 
the language of our own convictions, and what we 
ourselves do heartily subseribe to. And said, O 
Lord, the great and dreadful God—A God of whom 
it is our duty always to stand in awe, and who art 
well able to deal with the greatest and most terrible 
of thy church’s enemies; keeping covenant and 
mercy to them that love him—Fulfilling his promises 
to his people, and showing them merey and loving- 
kindness, even beyond what he hath promised. 

Verse 5. We have sinned, and have committed 
iniquity—Daniel uses the same confession here that 
is prescribed, in Solomon’s consecration prayer, to 
be used by the Jews in the land of their captivity ; 
with a promise subjoined, of a favourable answer 
that God would make to their supplications present- 
ed to him on such an occasion: see the margin. And 
being one of the Jewish nation, he speaks of their 
sins as his own; and, though certainly a most holy 
man, puts himself among the greatest sinners. 
There seems to be a kind of gradation in the pro- 
phet’s confessions here, beginning with sins in gen- 


= 


‘; 2 oe 


Daniel’s prayer to God 


CHAPTER IX. 


Sor his people. 


ee hike 70) Bord. © richtequsriess ? 
B.C. 533 ; ghteousness ? belong 


______— eth unto thee, but unto us confusion 
of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, 
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto 
all Israel, that are near, and that are far off, 
through all the countries whither thou hast 
driven them, because of their trespass that they 
have trespassed against thee. 

8 O Lord, to us belongeth * confusion of face, 
to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, 
because we have sinned against thee. 

9 * 'To the Lord our God belong mercies and 
forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against 
him ; 

10 * Neither have we obeyed the voice of the 
Lorp our God, to walk in his laws, which 
he set before us by his servants the prophets. 


11 Yea, 'all Israel have transgressed A. M. 3466. 
thy law, even by departing, that they si abate 
might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse 
is poured upon us, and the oath that is written 
in the ™law of Moses the servant of God, be- 
cause we have sinned against him. 

12 And he hath * confirmed his words, which 
he spake against us, and against our judges 
that judged us, by bringing upon us a great 
evil: ° for under the whole heaven hath not 
been done as hath been done upon Jerusalem. 

13 ? As it is written in the law of Moses, all 
this evil is come upon us: ‘yet >made we not 
our prayer before the Lorn our God, that we 
might turn from our iniquities, and understand 
thy truth. 

14 Therefore hath the Lorp * watched upon 


& Neh. ix. 33. 2 Or, thou hast, &c.—— Verse 7.—— Neh. 
ix. 17; Psalm exxx. 4, 7.——* Verse 6.——! Isaiah i. 4, 5, 6; 
Jeremiah viii. 5, 10.——™ Lev. xxvi. 14; Deut. xxvii. 15, &c. ; 
xxviii. 15, &c.; xxix. 20, &c.; xxx. 17,18; xxxi. 17, &c:; 
xxxii. 19, &c.; Lam. ii.17. : 


» Zechariah i. 6. © Lamentations i. 12; ii, 13; Ezekiel 
v. 9; Amos iii. 2.——p? Leviticus xxvi. 14; Deut. xxviii. 15; 
Lam. ii. 17. 4 Isaiah ix. 13; Jeremiah il. 30; v.3; Hosea 
vii. 7, 10. 3 Hebrew, entreated we not the face of the, &c. 
t Jeremiah xxxi, 28; xliv. 27. 


Verses 7-10. O Lord, righteousness belongeth 
unto thee—Thou hast done us no wrong in any of 
the calamities which thou hast brought upon us; but 
hast shown thyself to be just and holy, nay, merciful 
and gracious, punishing us far less than our iniquities 
deserved. But unto us confusion of faces—But 
ignominy and shame belong to us; and the contempt 
and ill treatment we have met with has been no 
more than we justly deserved. Tothe men of Judah, 
and unto all Israel that are near, &c.—To the two 
tribes of Judah and Benjamin, that are near, by the 
rivers of Babylon; and to the ten tribes, that are 
afar off, in the land of Assyria. Confusion belongs 
not only to the common people of our land, but to our 
kings, our princes, and to our fathers, who ought to 
have seta better example, and to have used their 
authority and influence for the checking of the 
threatening torrent of vice and profaneness. Neither 
have we obeyed the voice of the Lord—Though we 
were under infinite obligations to obey him: /o walk 
in his laws—Which were all holy, just, and good ; 
which he set before us by his servants the prophets— 
By Moses, and the succession of prophets that fol- 
lowed him; who re-enforced the law of Moses, and 
gave the people new instructions from God upon 
emergent occasions. 

Verses 11-14, Yea, all Israel have transgressed 
thy law—Not here and there one, but the generality 
of them; the body of the people have transgressed, 
by departing, and taking themselves out of the way, 
that they might not hear, and so might not obey thy 
voice: therefore the curse is poured upon us, and 
the oath, &c.—That is, the curse that was ratified 
by an oath in the Jaw of Moses. This further justi- 
fied (sod in their troubles, that he only inflicted the 
penalty of the law, of which he had given them fair 
notice. It was necessary for preserving the honour 

2 


of God’s veracity, and saving his government from 
contempt, that the threatenings of his word should 
be executed; otherwise they would have looked but 
as bugbears, nay, they would have had no terror in 
them. And hehath confirmed his words against us— 
Because we broke his laws, And against our judges 
that judged us—Because they did not, according to 
the duty of their places, punish the breach of God’s 
laws. He informed them frequently, that if they 
did not execute justice, as terrors to evil-doers, he 
must and would take the work into his own hands; 
and now, says Daniel, he has confirmed what he 
said, by bringing upon us a great evil—In which 
the princes and judges themselves have deeply 
shared. Jor under the whole heaven hath not been ~ 
done, &c.—See note on Lam. i. 12, and ii. 18; Ezek. 
v.9. As itis written, &c., all this is come upon us 
—This is a devout acknowledgment, that, from the 
very beginning of their state, they had been fore- 
warned that such evils as they now suffered would 
come upon them, when they forsook the Lord their 
God, and turned aside from the observation of his 
law. And itis an humble confession of God’s justice 
and providence, in making his judgments exactly 
fulfil the threatenings denounced many ages before 
by Moses. Yet we made not our prayer before the 
Lord our God—Not in a right manner, as we should 
have made it, with a lowly, penitent, and obedient 
heart; we haya been smitten, but have not returned 
to him that smote us; literally, we have not en- 
treated the face, or, as Wintle translates it, have not 
deprecated the wrath, of the Lord our God. We 
have taken no care to make our peace with God, and 
reconcile ourselves to him. Daniel set his brethren 
a good example of praying continually, but he was 
sorry to see how few there were that followed his 
example; in their affliction it was expected they 
813 


DANIEL. 


Sor his people. 


Daniel's prayer to God 


A. M. 3466. the evil, and brought it upon us: for 
BC. 88 sthe Lory our God és righteous in 
all his works which he doth: * for we obeyed 
not his’ voice. 

15 And now, O Lord our God, " that hast 
brought thy people forth out of the land of 
Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast * gotten 
thee * renown, as at this day; ¥ we have sin- 
ned, we have done wickedly. 

16 4 O Lord, # according to all thy righteous- 
ness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy 
fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, 
@ thy holy mountain: because for our sins, » and 
for the iniquities of our fathers, * Jerusalem and 


thy people ‘are become a reproach oe oe 
to all that are about us. Piha 

17 Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer 
of thy servant, and his supplications, °* and 
cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary 
f that is desolate, § for the Lord’s sake. 

18 *O my God, incline thine ear, and hear ; 
open thine eyes, ‘and behold our desolations, 
and the city * which® is called by thy name: 
for we do not ® present our supplications before 
thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great 
mercies. 

19 O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, 
hearken and do; defer not, ‘for thine own 


8 Neh. ix. 33; Ver. 7. tVer, 10. 4 Exod. vi. 1,6; xxxii. 
11; 1 Kings viii. 51; Neh. i.10; Jer. xxxii. 21. 4 Heb. made 
thee a name. x Hxodus xiv. 18; Neh. ix. 10; Jer. xxxii. 20. 
y Verse 5. z1 Sam. xii. 7; Psalm xxxi. 1; Ixxi. 2; Micah 
vi. 4, 5. 4 Verse 20; Zechariah viii. 3,x——» Exodus xx. 5. 
¢ Lam. 1. 15, 16. 


would seek God early, but they sought him not, so 
as to turn from their iniquities and understand his 
truth. Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the 
evil—Hebrew, watched over the evil; namely, hath 
taken care that his threatenings should be fulfilled, 
as a just judge takes care that execution be done, ac- 
cording to the sentence pronounced; because we 
have not been melted, he hath kept us still in the 
furnace, and watched over it to make the heat yet 
more intense; for when God judges he will over- 
come, and will be justified in all his proceedings. 
Verse 15. And now, O Lord, who hast brought thy 
people forth, &c.—A form of supplication used in 


several places of Scripture, whereby devout persons | 


entreat God to continue his favours, by recounting 
his former mercies toward them. And hast gotten 
theerenown, or, made thee a name, as at this day— 
That is, even to this day, namely, by bringing Israel 
out of Egypt; and wilt thou lose the credit of that, 
by letting them perish in Babylon? Didst thou get 
renown by that deliverance which we have'so often 
commemorated, and wilt thou not now also get thee 
renown by this which we have so often prayed for, 
and so long waited for? We have sinned, we have 
done wickedly—Here Daniel confesses again God’s 
being just and good in all his ways; and that it was 
owing to themselves only that all. these evils were 
come upon them. 

Verses 16, 17. According to all thy righteousness 
let thine anger be turned away—The word right- 
eousness here, as in many other places of Scripture, 
is equivalent to mercy ; (see the margin;) from thy 
holy mountain—The place whereon thy temple 
stood. Jerusalem and thy people are become a re- 
proach—Our conquerors and others, who know 
into what a miserable condition we are brought, 
mock at us, and say, See to what a state the people 
are reduced, who boasted themselves to be the 
chosen people of the Lord of heaven and earth! 


Now, therefore, cause thy face to shine upon thy || passion. 


814 


4 Psalm xliv. 13, 14; Ixxix. 4. © Numbers vi. 25; Psalm 
Ixvii. 1; lxxx. 3, 7, 19. f Lam. v. 18.—8 Verse 19; John 
xvi, 24.— Isaiah xxxvii. 17.——i Exodus iii. 7; Psalm ]xxx. 
14, &c.——* Jeremiah xxv. 29. 5 Heb. whereupon thy name 
is called, 6 Heb. cause to fall, Jeremiah xxxvi. 7.——! Psalm 
xxix. 9, 10; cil. 15, 16. 


sanctuary—Returm in mercy to us, and show that 
thou art reconciled to us, by repairing the desola- 
tions of thy sanctuary. For the Lord’s sake—That 
is, aS some interpret the expression, for thine own 
sake; that is, do this that thou mayest do honour 
to thyself. Or rather, as most Christian interpreters 
understand the words, for the Lord Christ's sake ; 
for the sake of the Messiah promised, who is Lord. 
The Hebrew word, here rendered Lord, is >37%, 
Adonai, the word used for the Messiah Psa. ex. 1, 
where David calls him his Lord. It is for Christ’s 
sake, and because of the atonement he has made for 
sin, that God causes his face to shine upon sinners, 
when they repent and turn to him. In all our 
prayers, therefore, that must be our plea; we must 
make mention of his righteousness, even his only. 
He himself has directed us to pray in his name. 
Verses 18, 19. O my God, incline thine ear and 
hear—The prophet’s importunity, in these verses, is 
very remarkable and affecting, and shows how ex- 
ceedingly he had it at heart to have his request grant- 
ed. Open thine eyes, and behold our desolations— 
Especially the desolations of thy city and temple: or, 
look with pity upon a most distressing and piteous 
case. For we do not present our supplications be- 
fore thee for our righteousness—That is, our right- 
eous acts. We do not hope to have suecess for the 
sake of any thing we have done, do, or ever can do 
as if we were worthy to receive thy favour, as if we 
could merit it by any good in us, or could demand 
any thing as a debt; but for thy great mercies—The 
only sources of all our blessings. Grant what we 
ask, to make it appear thou art a merciful God. 
Observe, reader, the good things we request of 
God we call mercies, because we expect them purely 
from God’s merey. And because misery is the pro- 
per object of mercy, therefore the prophet here 
spreads the deplorable condition of God’s church 
and people before him, as it were, to move his com- 


O Lord, hear; O Lord, Sorgive; defer 


id 
J 


Gabriel is sent 


CHAPTER IX. 


to comfort him. 


High 46. sake, O my God: for thy city and 
———— thy people are called by thy name. 

20 “| ™ And while I was speaking, and pray- 
ing, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my 
people Israel, and presenting my supplication 
before the Lorp my God for the holy moun- 
tain of my God ; 

21 Yea, while I was speaking in prayer, even 
the man "Gabriel, whom I had seen in the 
vision at the beginning, being caused to fly 


"swiftly, ° touched me Pabout the A. M. 3466. 
; J t B. C. 538, 
time of the evening oblation. BS 

22 And he informed me, and talked with me, 
and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth § to 
give thee skill and understanding. 

23 At the beginning of thy supplications the 
°commandment came forth, and 4I am come 
to show thee ; * for thou art ° greatly beloved: 
therefore * understand the matter, and consider 
the vision. 


m Psa. xxxii. 5; Isa. Ixv. 24. . Chap. viii. 16.——7 Heb. 
with weariness, or, flight——° Chapter viii. 18; x. 10, 16. 
P 1 Kings xviii. 36. 


8 Heb. to make thee skilful of understunding.——® Heb, word- 
4 Chap. x. 12. t Chap. x. 11, 19. 10 Heb, a man of desires. 
5 Matt. xxiv. 15. 


not—Forgive our sins, and then hasten our deliver- 
ance. That the mercy which we ask may be grant- 
ed, let the sin, that stands in the way of our receiv- 
ing it, be removed; O Lord, hearken and do—Not 
hearken and speak only, but hearken and do: do 
that for us which none else can do, and that speedily. 
As he now sees the appointed day approaching, he 
could pray in faith that God would make haste to 
them, and not defer the expected blessing. 

Verses 20, 21. And while I was speaking and 
praying, &c.—We have here the answer that was 
immediately sent to Daniel’s prayer, and it is a very 
remarkable one; as it contains the most illustrious 
prediction of Christ, and gospel grace, that is extant 
in any part of the Old Testament. Daniel here ob- 
serves, and lays a great emphasis on, the time when 
this answer was given; While Iwas speaking, says 
he, verse 20, yea, while I was speaking in prayer, 
verse 21. Before he rose from his knees, and while 
there was yet more which he intended to say if the 
answer was not given. He mentions the two heads 
which he chiefly insisted on in prayer, and which, 
perhaps, he designed yet further to enlarge upon. 
Ist, He was confessing sin, his own sin, and the sin 
of his people Israel. 2d, He was making supplica- 
tion before the Lord his God, and presenting peti- 
tions to him as an intercessor for Israel. Now while 
Daniel was thus employed, he had both a grant made 
him of the mercy he prayed for, and had a discovery 
communicated of a far greater and more glorious 
redemption, which God could work out for his 
church in the latter days. He further observes, 
that as this answer was given him at the very mo- 
ment when he was requesting it, and before he had 
concluded his petitions, so it was about the time of 
the evening oblation—The altar was in ruins, and 
there was no oblation offered upon it; but, it seems, 
the pious Jews, in their captivity, daily thought of 
the times when it should have been offered, and at | 
those hours endeavoured to set forth before God | 
their prayers as incense, and the lifting up of their | 
hands as a morning or evening sacrifice, Psa. cxli. 2. | 
The evening oblation was a type of the great sacri- 
fice which Christ was to offer in the evening of the | 
world; and it was in virtue of that sacrifice that | 
Daniel’s prayer was accepted, and this glorious dis- 
covery of redeeming love was made to him: the 


Lamb opened the seals of prophecy in the virtue of 
his own blood, Rey. v. 5. - 

Daniel informs us here also by whom this an- 
swer was sent. It was not communicated to him in 
a dream, or by a voice from heaven; but, for the 
greater certainty and solemnity of it, an angel was 
sent from heaven to bring it to him. The man 
Gabriel—That is, the angel Gabriel, appearing in a 
human shape, whom I had seen in the beginning— 
Or, before, see chap. viii. 16; being caused to fly 
swiftly—An expression used to signify the haste he 
made to bring Daniel an answer to his prayer. An- 
gels are winged messengers, quick in their motions, 
and delay not a moment to execute the orders they 
receive. But, it would seem; that at some times 
they are directed to use more expedition, and make 
a quicker despatch than at others, as, it appears, was 
the case with Gabriel now; touched me—Probably 
to infuse additional strength and courage into him, 
that he might be perfectly recollected, have the pro- 
per use and exercise of all his faculties at this im- 
portant season, and might at once understand and 
retain a perfect remembrance of the whole message 
which the angel was commissioned to bring him 
from God. 

Verses 22, 23. And he informed me—Namely, on 
what errand he came; and talked with me—That is, 
familiarly, as one friend talks with another. And 
said, O Daniel, I am come to give thee skill and 
understanding—To reveal to thee things of infinite 
importance, and to make thee understand them. Mr, 
Wintle reads this verse in connection with the pre- 
ceding, as follows: “Even as I was yet speaking 
—the man Gabriel—reached me, about the time of 
the evening oblation; when he brought information, 
and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now 
come forth to improve thee in understanding.” Az 
the beginning of thy supplication the commandment 
came forth—God’s command to me, to instruct thee 
further in what should hereafter befall the city and 
temple of Jerusalem, in the behalf of which thou 
didst pour forth thy supplications. Here was a re- 
markable completion of that promise, Isa. Ixy. 24, 
While they are yet speaking I will hear. For thou 
art greatly beloved—Learned men have observed a 
near affinity between the prophecy of Daniel and 
the Revelation of St. John; and we may take notice 

815 


The seventy weeks 


DANIEL. 


of years interpreted. 


A.M. 3466. 24 1! Seventy weeks are determined 
B. C. 538 


———— upon thy people and upon thy holy 


city, to finish the transgression, and A. M. 3466. 
: - : B. C. 538. 
13t0 make an end of sins, ‘and to ————— 


1! They begin from the seventh of Artaxerxes ; Num. xiv. 34; 
Ezekiel iv. 6. 


13 Or, to seal up, Lamentations iy. 22. 
tTsaiah liil. 10, 


12.QOr, to restrain. 


that much the same title is given to both. Daniel is 
styled here, and chap. x. 11, 19, a man greatly be- 
loved; and the character given to St. John is, that 
of the disciple whom Jesus loved, John xxi. 20, 24. 
Therefore, understand the matter, and consider 
the vision—Apply thy mind carefully to what is 
said, for this prophecy contains in it truths of the 
greatest importance. Our Saviour plainly refers to 
these words, which are repeated verse 25, when, ex- 
plaining the latter part of this prophecy of the final 
destruction of Jerusalem, he adds, Let him that 
readeth understand, Matt. xxiv. 

Verse 24. Seventy weeks, &c.—Weeks not of days, 
but of years, or, seventy times seven years, that is, 
four hundred and ninety years, each day being ac- 
counted a year according to the prophetic way of 
reckoning, (see note on chap. vii. 25,) a way often 
used in Scripture, especially in reckoning the years 
of jubilee, which correspond with these numbers in 
Daniel: see Lev. xxv. 8.. See also Gen. xxix. 27, 
where, to fulfil her week, is explained by perform- 
ing another seven years’ service for Rachel; and 
Num. xiv. 34, where we read, that according to the 
number of the days which the spies employed in 
searching out the land of Canaan, even forty days, 


the Israelites were condemned to bear their iniqui- | 


ties, even forty years. Thus God says likewise to 
Ezekiel, cotemporary with Daniel, I have laid upon 
thee the years of their iniquity, according to the 
number of the days three hundred and ninety days. 
Ihave appointed thee pacu pay ror A year. Nor 
was this mode of expression in use only among the 
Jews; for Varro, speaking of himself, says, he 
was entered into the twelfth week of his age, at the 
close of which he would have been eighty-four 
years old. In these instances, the days evidently 
denote solar years, which were in use throughout 
the Jewish history; so that there is no probability 
that the angel should here intend any such singu- 
larity, as counting by lunar years. Are determined 
upon, or concerning, thy people—Hebrew 4nNn3, are 
decided. The great event specified was not to be 
protracted beyond this period, fixed and determined 
in the counsels of God. 

To finish the transgression—The reader will ob- 
serve, the expression is not, to finish transgressions, 
but pwan, the transgression; a word which is de- 
rived from a theme which signifies, “to revolt, to 
rebel, to be contumacious, to refuse subjection to 
rightful authority, or obedience to a law which we 

‘ ought to observe.” To finish such transgression, is 
éxpressed by a word (8934) which denotes univer- 
sality, to cartcel, or annihilate. Dr. Apthorp, in his 
Discourses on Prophecy, vol. i. p. 262, justly ob- 
serves, that the diversity of expression respecting 
the several benefits here promised to the world by 
the Messiah, may be well supposed to intend so 
many distinct and determinate ideas. “In a pro- 

816 


phecy of such moment,” says he, “we cannot sup- 
pose a mere coacervation of synonymous terms, but 
each word is emphatic, and proper to its subject. 
The appropriate sense of each may be investigated, 
from their use and significance in other passages of 
Holy Scripture.” Accordingly, by the word trans- 
gression, he here understands man’s first disobe- 
dience, with its direful effects, the depravation and 
mortality of human nature. And by finishing this 
transgression he understands, “ cancelling the pri- 
meval guilt of Adam’s apostacy, and reversing the 
sentence of mortality then passed on all the human 
race.” In other words we may properly understand 
by the expression, the abolishing the guilt and fatal 
effects of that disobedience, in such a manner that 
no man shall perish eternally merely on account of 
the sin of our first parents, or the depravity entailed 
upon us thereby; to counteract the influence of 
which, sufficient grace is procured for us, and offered 
to us in the gospel of Christ. Concerning this first 
benefit of our redemption, the apostle treats explicit- 
ly Rom. vy. 12-21, a passage which the reader is par- 
ticularly requested carefully to consider, as contain- 
ing a full justification of the exposition here given 
of the first clause of this verse; man’s first disobe- 
dience, termed by the apostle the one offence, and 
the offence of one, being represented by him as in- 
troducing death into the world, and all our misery ; 
and the obedience, or righteousness of one, and the 
free gift, procured for all mankind, and actually 
conferred on all penitent believers, as the one meri- 
torious cause and source of our salvation. “No 
words can express, or thought conceive, the great- 
ness of this redemption. Imagination faints under 
the idea of a Divine Benefactor effacing sin, annihi- 
lating death, and restoring eternal life.” 

And to make an end of sins—“ As, in the appro- 
priate sense of the words, the transgression denotes 
one original act of apostacy and rebellion against a 
positive command of God; sins, in the plural, em- 
phatically express all the vices [offences] against 
conscience, all the crimes against civil society, and 
all sins against God, which have ever reigned among 
men. The redemption by Christ hath abolished all 
the fatal effects of moral evil, with respect to such 
as believe and obey the gospel ;” not only cancel- 
ling their actual guilt by a gracious remission, but 
even renewing their fallen nature, stamping them 
with the divine image, and thus both entitling them 
to, and preparing them for, the immortality lost by 
the fall. ote 

And to make reconciliation for iniquity—In these 
words is expressed the manner in which our re- 
demption from death and sin hath been effected. 
“The word 193, rendered reconciliation here, is the 
etymon of our English word, to cover. Its primary 
meaning is, to hide, or conceal, the surface of any 
substance, by inducing another substance over it. 


3 


*% ees e* a7 


T'he seventy weeks 


CHAPTER IX. 


of years interpreted. 


eee 2006: make reconciliation for iniquity, “and 
——_—— to bring in everlasting righteousness, 


A. M. 3466 


and to seal up the vision and * pro- 
B. C. 538. 


phecy, *and to anoint the Most Holy. 


“Tsaiah liii. 11; Jeremiah xxiii. 5,6; Heb. ix. 12; Revelation 
xiv. 6. 


™ Heb, prophet. x Psalm xlv. 7; Luke i. 35; John i. 41; 


Heb. ix. 11. 


Thus the ark iscommanded to be pitched, or covered, 
within and without, to secure it from the waters of 
the deluge. Sin, when grievous, and ripe for pun- 
ishment, is said to be before God, or in his sight: a 
propitiation is the covering of sin, [procuring] God’s 
hiding his face from our sins, and blotting out our 
iniquities: see Rom, ili. 23, 25. The word redemp- 
tion implies a price paid for those who are set at 
liberty: the price is the blood of Christ; that blood 
a sacrifice; and the sacrifice an expiation for sin- 
ners, that is, for all mankind. This is the first and 
leading notion of the divine expedient for saving 
sinners, the sacrifice and blood of Christ. The 
second principal idea under which this redemption 
is represented, is that of substitution, and satisfac- 
tion, by another’s suffering for our guilt; and in this 
way of stating the doctrine, still the principal and 
leading idea is that of a sacrifice, and the blood of a 
victim ;’ namely, Christ’s dying for the ungodly: 
see Rom. v, 6-9. Inasmuch as Chirist, by dying in 
our stead, “hath prevented either the extinction or 
[eternal] misery of a whole species, and hath ob- 
tained for us a positive happiness, greater than we 
lost in Adam; every considerate man must think it 
fit, that to effect such a redemption, some great ex- 
pedient should be proposed by God himself, to vin- 
dicate his wisdom and moral government, in suffering 
so much vice and confusion to end so happily.” . Add 
to this, that “so congenial to the most generous 
sentiments of the human mind is the idea of one 
devoting himself for another, for many, and for all, 
that all antiquity abounds with such examples and 
opinions. Not that the Scripture doctrine of Christ’s 
satisfaction, in itself so luminous, needs any support 
from foreign testimony ; but it is certain that a gen- 
eral consent, founded in nature, or divine institution, 
or both, hath led men to seek expiation of conscious 
guilt, in the way of voluntary substitution, and vica- 
rious deyotement. The chief reason of that preju- 
dice, which is by some entertained against a doctrine 
so essential to peace of conscience, is founded on 
inattention to ancient religious customs. By the 
sacrifice of Christ, victims and sacrifices are abol- 
ished; but all the ancient religions abounded with 
them to a degree which we should think astonishing, 
and scarcely credible. Oceans of blood flowed 
round their altars; and the Levitical rites were in- 
stituted on purpose to adumbrate Christ’s expiation, 
and to introduce all that admirable spirituality and 
[pious] devotion, which is now the distinguishing 
excellence of Christianity.”—Dr. Apthorp. 

To bring in everlasting righteousness—The three 
former particulars already considered import the 
removing the greatest evils; this, and the two follow- 
ing, imply the conferring of the greatest benefits, 
and all by Jesus Christ. This clause, says Dr. Ap- 
thorp, “may admit of two interpretations, which 


other: our justification by faith in him, and our sub- 
sequent study [practice] of personal virtue. The 
first is a gratuitous act of Christ; the second is 
characteristic of his true disciples. In the former 
sense, Jeremiah styles him by his divine title, Jeno- 
VAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. And in both senses Christ 
Jesus is made unto us wisdom and. righteousness, 
sanctification and redemption.” To speak a little 
more distinctly: to bring in everlasting righteous- 
ness, according to the gospel, evidently includes 
three things: lst, To bring in Christ’s righteousness, 
or his obedience unto death, as the ground of our 
justification and title to eternal life, he being the end 
of the law for righteousness to every one that be- 
lieveth. 2d,'To bring holiness, the divine nature, or 
the Spirit of God, with his various graces, into our 
souls, making us conformable to his image, as our 
meetness for that future felicity. And, 3d, For our 
direction in the way that leads to it; to lay before 
us, for our observation, a complete rule of life and 
manners. Of this last particular, which Dr. Apthorp 
includes in the everlasting righteousness here spoken 
of, as being immutable in its obligations, and eternal 
in its sanctions, he speaks as follows: “When we 
consider the Christian morality in its ground of 
obligation, [namely, the will of God, ] its principle of 
charity, and in its detail of special duties, we are 
struck with admiration at the simplicity and perfec- 
tion of a rule of life, which, without any artificial 
system, extended the Jewish law, and combined all 
the excellences of Gentile philosophy ; the elevation 
of Plato, without his mysticism; the reasonableness 
of Aristotle, without his contracted selfishness, and 
worldly views; tempering the rigour of Zeno with 
the moderation of Epicurus; while, by the greatness 
of its end, it reforms, refines, and elevates human 
nature from sense to spirit, from earth to heaven.” 
And seal up the vision and prophecy—Hebrew, 
way pin pnn)), to seal vision and prophet ; prophet 
being put for prophecy. The words are a Hebraism, 
and when expressed in modern language signify, Ist, 
The accomplishing, and thereby confirming, all the 
ancient predictions relating to the most holy person 
here intended. God had spoken of the Messiah, by 
the mouths of his holy prophets, from the founda- 
tion of the world; had foretold his coming, pointed 
out the place of his birth, and specified the extraor-, 
dinary circumstances of it; described the manner of 
his life, the nature of his doctrine, and the variety - 
and splendour of his miracles, with the treatment 
he should receive from his countrymen; had fore- 
told repeatedly, and set forth at large, his humilia- . 
tion, sufferings, and death, his resurrection, ascen- 
sion, and the glory that should follow. Now by 
making the events exactly to answer the predictions, 
he confirmed them, as the setting of a seal to any 
writing confirms its authenticity. 2d, To seal im- 


both concur in Christ, and are consistent with each || plies, to finish, conclude, and put an end to any 
3 


Vou. IT. ( 52 ) 


817 


The seventy weeks 


DANIEL. 


of years interpreted. 


A. M. 3466. 


25 Y Know therefore and understand, 
B. C. 538. 


that *from the going forth of the 


commandment 'to.restore and to wee aes 
build Jerusalem unto *the Messiah ———— 


¥ Verse 23; Matt. xxiv. 15. z Ezra iv. 24; vi, 1,153 vii. 1; 
Neh, ii. 1, 3, 5, 6, 8 


15 Or, to build again Jerusalem, as 2 Sam, xv. 25; Psa. lexi. 20 
a John 1.415 iv. 25. 


thing. Thus also were the vision and prophecy 
sealed among the Jews. They were shut up and 
finished. The privilege and use of them were no 
longer to be continued in their church. And this 
also happened accordingly; for, by their own con- 
fession, from that day to this they have not enjoyed 
either vision or prophet. But, 3d, To seal, is to 
consummate and perfect ; and to seal the vision and 
prophecy here, may include the adding the New 
Testament revelations and predictions to those of 
the Old, and thereby supplying what was wanting 
io perfect the book of God, and render it a complete 
system of divine revelation. It is only necessary 
to add, 4th, That as things are frequently sealed in 
order to their security, the preservation of the di- 
vine records and oracles included. in both Testa- 
ments may be also here intended by the expression. 

And to anoint the Most Holy—Hebrew, DwaIp wp, 
literally, the holy of holies; an expression often 
used of holy places, or things, especially of the most 
holy place of the Jewish tabernacle and temple. It 
is here very properly applied to the Messiah, whose 
sacred body was the temple of the Deity; agreeable 
io hisown declaration, Destroy this temple, pointing 
to himself by some expressive action, and in three 
days I will raise it up; and who was greater than 
the temple. Now this most holy person, in whom 
dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and who, 
even as man, had the Holy Spirit without measure, 
was by that divine unction (which is here principally 
intended) at once designated and qualified for the 
sundry offices he was to sustain, especially the pro- 
phetic, sacerdotal, and kingly offices, for the various 
characters he was to bear, and the work he was to 
do on earth, and is now doing in heaven, and hence 
is properly termed the Messiah, or the Anointed 
One. To this may be added, that, as the Jewish 
temple was evidently a type of the church of God, 
especially the Christian Church, termed in the 
Psalms and Prophets the city of God, and the holy 
place of the tabernacle of the Most High; by 
anointing the holy of holies here, may be also in- 
tended the effusion of the Holy Spirit, in his rich 
variety of gifts and graces, upon the Christian 
Church, foretold in innumerable. passages of the 
Prophets, and eminently fulfilled, as the Acts of the 
Apostles, the epistles contained in the New Testa- 
ment, and the writings of the ancient fathers abun- 
dant] © prove. 

Verse 25. Know therefore and understand— 
Learn therefore and retain; from the going forth of 
the commandment—From the publication of the 
edict by the Persian king; to restore and to build 
Jerusalem—Or, to build again Jerusalem: so the 
verb 2\¥ is translated in the latter part of the verse. 
Daniel had besought God to behold their desolations, 
and the ruins of the city which was called by his 
name, verse 18. In answer to this his supplication | 

818 


the angel acquaints him, that an order should be 
issued from the Persian king to rebuild both the 
city and its wall. Now when, after this, the com- 
mandment did actually go forth, the faith of God’s 
people would be greatly confirmed, respecting the 
accomplishment of this wonderful prophecy of the 
coming of the Messiah, the prescience of the end 
being confirmed by that of all the pail aban 
events, 

Four edicts of the kings of Persia, in favour of 
the Jews, mentioned in Scripture, are, Ist, That of 
Cyrus, Ezra i. 1. 2d, That of Darius Hystaspes, 
Ezra iv. 6; Hag. i. 1, 2. 3d, That of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus, in the seventh year of his reign, Ezra 
vii.; Esdras viii: and, 4th, That in the twentieth 
year of Artaxerxes, Neh. ii. 1. The first of these 
edicts cannot be applied to this prophecy, inasmuch 
as from the first of Cyrus, before Christ 586, to the 
death of Christ, A. D. 34, are 570 years. It was, 
however, the basis of liberty to the Jews, for all the 
indulgences granted them afterward, by the follow- 
ing kings of Persia, were founded on the precedent 
of this great monarch. So that he might well be 
considered as fulfilling the prophecy of Isaiah: He 
shall build my city, he shall let go my captives, Isa. 
xlv. 13. In consequence of this decree 50,000 Jews 
returned under Zerubbabel, and partly dispersed 
themselves in their several tribes, and partly settled 
at Jerusalem, and began to build both the city and 
temple. But this was in a very rude and tumult- 
uous manner, and they met with so many hin- 
derances from the Samaritans and others, that the 
decree was not carried into effect. This therefore is 
not the period we are to reckon from. The second, 
namely, that of Darius Hystaspes, was made about 
fourteen years after, preceding the death of Christ 
550 years. But neither was this efficacious. Besides, 
it related to the temple only, as appears from the 
letter of the Samaritan colony to Cambyses, Ezra 
iv. 11-16; neither therefore is this the period. The 
third decree, which was that of Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus, recorded at large Ezra vii. 12-26, “was of 
great solemnity and efficacy, importing no Jess than 
the restoration of the Jewish constitution, both civil 
and ecclesiastical, providing in the first place for the 
re-establishment of divine worship with becoming 
order and magnificence, exempting the priesthood 
from all taxes; then, for the civil-government of 
the people, the institution of tribunals, and the ad- 
ministration of justice, according to the law of 
Moses, This decree answers to all the characters 
of the prophecy, the restoring of the constitution, 
the rebuilding of the city, and the chronological 
periods distinctly specified,’ and is, no doubt, here 
chiefly intended. 

“Tt is not unpleasing to conjecture the cause that 
moved the Persian monarch thus to emulate and 


transcend the magnanimity of Cyrus. — 
( 52 ) 


The seventy weeks 


CHAPTER IX. 


of years interpreted, 


A. M. 3466. the Prince shall be seven weeks, 
and threescore and two weeks: the 
. . 


street 1° shall be built again, and the A. M. 3466, 


; ; B. C. 538. 
“wall, “even }8in troublous times. ~~" 


bIsaiah lv. 4——~'* Heb. shall return and be builded. 
breach, or, ditch. 


aa Oo 


with great probability, supposes the famous Esther 
to have been the queen of Artaxerxes. By her in- 
fluence both the edicts of the seventh and twentieth 
of his reign were obtained: which is almost demon- 
strable from Nehemiah’s prayer, chap. i. 5-11; and 
relation, chap. ii. 1-11. Thus the providence of 
God raised a Jewish heroine to the throne of Persia, 
first to preserve his people from massacre and ex- 
termination, and afterward to facilitate and com- 
plete their resettlement. Under these auspices, 
Ezra, like another Moses, became a second founder 
of the Jewish state: and his return with the captives 
to restore Jerusalem is the glorious epoch, from 
which the seventy weeks begin. God was pleased to 
reward the heroic virtue of Esther with a long and 
uninterrupted prosperity, being in full favour with 
the king from the seventh to the twentieth year of 
his reign, and perhaps earlier and later: and she 
had the felicity, than which none on earth can be 
greater, of having restored her nation to the full 
possession of their religion, laws, and liberties.” 

“The fourth and last edict was that which the 
same Artaxerxes granted to Nehemiah, in the twen- 
tieth year of his reign, to repair and rebuild the walls 
of Jerusalem. Between the two edicts of the seventh 
and the twentieth, the rebuilding had met with so 
much opposition and hostility, that Nehemiah had 
much of the fortifications to begin again: the temple, 
which is the essential part of the completion, being 
finished, in consequence of the former edict. It is 
easy to solve the seeming difficulty respecting the 
thirteen years between the two edicts; for the arch- 
angel commences the seventy weeks, not from the 
actual rebuilding the walls and streets, but from 
the going forth of tiie commandment to restore and 
rebuild them. So that the date of the first edict, not 
the work itself, is the epoch from whence begins 
the period of four hundred and ninety years. The 
work itself, though interrupted and resumed, pro- 
perly began with the permission to execute it. Ezra 
began the foundation of the temple; Nehemiah com- 
pleted the walls on the old foundations, and cele- 
brated the encenia, keeping the dedication with 
gladness and with thanksgivings, Neh. xii. 27. 
Thus, of the four edicts, the first two are excluded 
because they were not efficacious, and prolong the 
term to near six hundred years: and the fourth was 
only a confirmation of the third. No other com- 
mencement of the four hundred and ninety years 
agrees with the event, than that of the seventh of 
Artaxerxes: and this system is perspicuous, and 
free from all difficulties.”—A pthorp. 

In order to manifest the perspicuity of this expo- 
sition, and give it the greater evidence, it may be 
well to examine the distinct characters of each of 
the three intervals into which the seventy weeks 
are divided; namely, seven weeks, threescore and 
two weeks, and one week. The reason of this distri- 


3 


¢ Nehemiah iv. 8, 16, 17, 18.——1* Hebrew, in strait of times, 
Nehemiah vi. 15. 


bution into three intervals, flowing in uninterrupted 
succession, is not so obscure as to elude discovery. 
The first and third of these intervals are marked by 
great events; the restoration of the Jewish polity, 
the expiation of Christ’s passion, and his covenant 
with the Jews and Gentiles. The long interval which 
connects the two extremes, necessarily contains 
sixty-two weeks. “In our English version, the sense 
of the twenty-fifth verse is somewhat obscured by 
the punctuation. It is easily rectified thus: From 
the going forth of the commandment to restore and 
to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, shall 
be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks— 
The angel then specifies the great events of each of 
these intervals. In the first, of seven weeks, the 
street shall be built again, and the wall, even in 
troublous times. And thus it was; the city and the 
walls were rebuilt in forty-nine years, not without 
much opposition and various impediments. Nothing 
can be more-exact than this period of the completion, 
both for the interval of forty-nine years, ending with 
the sixteenth of Darius; and for the troublous times 
in which the Jewish patriots restored and rebuilt 
their city.”"—Dr. Apthorp. It must be observed here, 
Ist, That the restoring and rebuilding Jerusalem, 
here spoken of, though it may chiefly respect the 
laws and constitution, is not so merely figurative as 
to exclude the literal sense: for though the city it- 
self was in some degree rebuilt before this period, 
yet it was done so imperfectly, by reason of their 
poverty, and the opposition and envy of their neigh- 
bours, that the work was to be resumed in the 
seventh of Longimanus, whose long reign, and his 
favour to the nation of his queen, providentially ef- 
fected its complete restoration. 2d, The troublous 
times mentioned, refer both to the seven weeks and 
the sixty-two weeks. “The peculiarity in the appli- 
cation of these times to the seven weeks, consists in 
the almost continual obstructions which the restored 
Jews met with, chiefly from the Samaritans, and 
also from their idolatrous neighbours the Moabites, 
Ammonites, and others, in the difficult work of re- 
building the temple and walls of the new city; inso- 
much that the artificers were obliged to carry on 
their work with arms in their hands to repulse their 
assailants. But the troublous times here predicted 
have also an aspect on the long period of sixty-two 
weeks, in which the Jewish history abundantly veri- 
fied this sad circumstance. Not to mention their 
general calamities and subjection to their potent 
neighbours of Syria and Egypt, their city was taken 
and their temple profaned by Ptolemy I. by Anti- 
ochus, by Crassus, by Pompey, by Herod: and their 
state was often so critical, that a particular provi- 
dence was manifested in their preservation, especial- 
ly in raising them up those illustrious patriots, who 
so nobly resisted the tyranny and persecution of 
Antiochus. Few periods of history are more savage 
819 


The seventy weeks 


DANIEL. 


of years interpreted. 


26 And after threescore and two 
weeks ‘shall Messiah be cut off, * but 
19 not for himself: *°and ‘the people of the 
prince that shall come ® shall destroy the city 
hand the sanctuary; ‘and the end_ thereof 


A. M. 3466. 
B. C. 538. 


shall be *with a flood, and unto A. M, 3466. 
. B. C. 538. 

the end of the war 2' desolations are 

determined. ; : 

27 And he shall confirm ** the! covenant 

with ™many for one week: and in the midst 


4 Isaiah liii. 8; Mark ix. 12; Luke xxiv. 26, 46. © 1 Peter 
ii. 215 ili. 18. 19 Or, and shall have nothing, John xiv. 30. 
20 Or, and [the Jews] they shall be no more his people, Chapter 
xi. 17, or, and the Prince’s [Messiah's, verse 25] future people. 
f Matt. xxil. 7. 


and inglorious, more profligate and flagitious, than 
that of the successors of Alexander: and the Jewish 
government is not to be calumniated for their por- 
tion in the general calamities of those ages; while 
they are deserving of the highest admiration for 


their constancy, in being the only people on earth, 


who adhered to the exclusive worship of the onLy 
Gop.”—Apthorp. 

Verse 26. After threescore and two weeks (count- 
ing from the expiration of the first interval) shall 
Messiah be cut off—“ This long interval extends 
from the 93d Olympiad to the 202d Olympiad, or 
four hundred and thirty-four years; ending with the 
sixty-ninth [prophetic] week, and with the com- 
mencing of our Lord’s ministry. No prophetic 
characters are here given of the long interval; but 
they are supplied from other predictions of this great 
prophet, which respect the Roman people and em- 
pire, the Persian inonarchy, Alexander and his suc- 
cessors; particularly by that circumstantial pro- 
phecy in the eleventh chapter, respecting the Lagide 
and Seleucide, and extending to the antichristian 
persecutions and idolatries typified by those of An- 
tiochus Epiphanes. These four centuries include 
the most interesting periods of profane history, and 
their chronology is so well ascertained as to make 
the computation of Daniel’s weeks mathematically 
exact. For sixty-two weeks, or four hundred and 
thirty-four years, added to seven weeks, or forty- 
nine years, are equal to four hundred and eighty- 
three years. After which period, or in the last one 
week, containing seven years, the Messiah should be 
cut off. The title of Messian is, by way of emi- 
nence, peculiar to Christ. It was first used in this 
prophecy in that appropriate sense. No other ap- 
plication of this title ever obtained among the ancient 
Jews. Nor can it, without absurdity, be applied to 
any civil or ecclesiastical prince, much less to a suc- 
cession in the high-priesthood. It is here used per- 
sonally, proper to some one anointed; and to whom 
it is proper is decided by that emphatic circumstance, 
Messiah shall be cur orr, an expression used in 
Scripture to denote a judicial sentence and a violent 
death; Bur NoT FoR HIMsELF—Isaiah gives an exact 
comment on both these expressions, chap. liii. 8. 
fle was cur orr out of the land of the living ; For 
THE TRANSGRESSION OF MY PEOPLE was he stricken.” 
—Dr. Apthorp. 

And the people of the prince that shall come shall 
destroy the city, &e.—Thus to the death of Christ 
the angel immediately subjoins the excision of Jeru- 
salem. The people here spoken of are the Romans, 

820 


8 Luke xix. 44.—h Matthew xxiv. 2.——i Matt. xxiv. 6, 14. 
k Isa, vii. 7, 8; Chap. xi. 10, 22; Nah. i. 8.——*! Or, it shall be 
cut off by desolations. 22 Or, a.—! Isaiah xlii. 6; lv. 3; Jer. 
xxxi. 31; Ezek. xvi. 60, 61, 62.——™ Isa, lili. 1f; Matt. xxvi. 
28; Rom.'v. 15, 19; Heb. ix. 28. 


and the prince that should come, may mean, as 
some think, the Messiah; the Romans being called 
his people, both on account of their present subser- 
viency to his will, and their future conversion to his 
faith; He sent forth nis armies, and destroyed those 
murderers, and burned up their city, Matt. xxii. 7. 
Or, the prince that should come may be understood 
of Titus Vespasian, of whom the Roman writers 
speak as if his military glory chiefly resulted from 
the taking of Jerusalem. “The actions of this 
prince, in the conduct of this memorable siege, are 
related in the fifth and sixth books of Josephus; the 
most tragical event in history was effected by a 
prince whose clemency made him ‘the delight of 
human-kind, and who saw, with generous reluc- 
tance, the horrors of his own victory.—Jos., vii. 5. 2. 
It is thus Divine Providence distinguishes its coun- 
sels and instruments; and the vietor himself ac- 
knowledged that ‘God was his assistant, that none 
but God could have ejected the Jews from so strong 
fortifications,’ vi.9.1. They shall destroy the crry 
and the sancrvuary—The specification is remark- 
able ; as Jerusalem, in effect, sustained two separate 
sieges ; one, of the lower city; the other, of the 
temple, or sanctuary of strength, as our prophet 
elsewhere styles it, chap. xi. 31, as being not only a 
magnificent temple newly rebuilt, but a strong for- 
tress, which was consumed by their own fires, against 
the intention and efforts of their conqueror.—Jos., vi. 
4,7.” The end thereof shall be with a flood—The 
symbol of invading armies : 


Aggeribus ruptis cum spumeus amnis 

Exiit, oppositasque evicit gurgite moles, 

Fertur in arva furens cumulo, eamposque per omnes, 
Cum stabulis armenta trahit. Vira. Ain. ii. 496, 


Not with so fierce a rage the foaming flood 

Roars, when he finds his rapid course withstood ; 
Bears down the dams with unresisted sway, 

And sweeps the cattle and the cots away. Drypen. 


And unto the end of the war desolations are deter- 
mined—“ Which marks the irrevocable decree of 
Heaven, and the completeness of the devastation, 
after a continued war of more than seven years.”— 
Dr. Apthorp. 

Verse 27. And he shall confirm the covenant with 
many—* The covenant to be confirmed by the Mes- 
siah is not a civil, but a religious compact, as such, 
styled by Daniel himself, the holy covenant, chap. 
xi. 28, 30, 32, the covenant of grace; which, after 
the infraction of the first divine law of strict obedi- 
ence, was, of mere clemency, granted to all man- 

3 


The seventy weeks 


CHAPTER IX. 


of years interpreted. 


A. M. 3466. of the week he shall cause the sa- 
B. C. 538. . , 5 

———— crifice and the oblation to cease, *° and 
for the overspreading of “abominations, he shall 


make i¢ desolate, °even until the con- A. rs — 
summation, and that determined shall u 


be poured *4 upon the desolate. ‘ 


33 Or, and upon the battlements shall be the idols of the desolator. 
» Matt. xxiv. 15; Mark xiii. 14; Luke xxi. 20. 


kind by the mediation of Christ. He not only ex- 
piated the sins of the world by his death, which was 
the chief article of the federal system; but in per- 
son, by the energy of his miracles, by the efficacy 
of his doctrine, and, soon after his resurrection, by 
the gift of the Holy Spirit, he induced many myriads 
of the Jews to accede to this covenant, which the 
Prophet Jeremiah so admirably describes, chap. 
xxxi. 33, 34: compare Heb. viii. 6-13. He shall 
confirm this covenant with many, not with att, 
which marks the exclusion of the obstinate and im- 
pious Jews, whose fate is predicted in the prece- 
ding and following clause. Byan obvious analogy, 
the Christian covenant, though offered to all, is. still 
confirmed with many ; namely, those only who, by 
a rational faith and moral subjection, having his 
law written in their hearts, attain to that exalted 
privilege.” 

For one week—Christ’s personal ministry con- 
tinued to its fourth year. St. John (chap. ii. 13; v. 
1; vi. 4; xi. 15;) distinctly reckons four passovers; 
the first, A. D. 30, Feb. 15, and the first year of his 
ministry; the second, A. D. 31; the third, A. D. 32; 
the fourth, A. D. 33. The half year precedes: the 
first passover from his baptism. The first half week 
of Daniel is from the beginning of Christ’s first 
preaching, Mark i. 15, Repent ye, and believe the 
gospel, A. 30, to his death, April 3, A. 33; or rather, 
to the pentecost following, when all the Christian 


mysteries were completed. The duration of Christ’s | 


ministry is so ascertained by St. John; and is so 
suitable to the great events of his life as well as to 
this prophecy, that, as it needs not to be protracted, 
so it cannot be shortened with any degree of proba- 
bility. The second half week is from the feast of 
pentecost, (when St. Peter with so much energy 
conyerted three thousand of the Jews,) to the con- 
version of Cornelius, and the first-fruits of the Gen- 
tiles, by the same apostle. The best chronologers 
place the vision of St. Peter, and the conversion of 
Cornelius, in the fourth year after the passion; and 
in the same year we may place the foundation of 
the chureh of Antioch, where the disciples were first 
called CurisTians, Acts x.; xi. 26. Thus a prediction, 
which began with the happy event of rebuilding the 
earthly Jerusalem, sublimely terminates with the 
structure of the heavenly, built upon the foundation 
of the apostles and prophets, Jusus Curist himself 
being the chief corner-stone, Eph. ii. 20-22. The 
confirmation of the Christian covenant in one week, 
or seven years, includes its full effect, both in the 
conversion of many myriads of the Jews, and in 
the first-fruits of the Gentile Church.” 

And in the miner of the week he shall cause the 
sacrifice and the oblation to cease—“ The sacrifice 
here specified, with its attendant bread-offering, was 

3 


~ 


° Isa. x. 22, 23; xxviii. 22; Chap. xi. 36; Luke xxi. 24; Rom. 
xi. 26. 24 Or, upon the desolator. 


eucharistical, as well as propitiatory, being a slain 
victim, on which the offerers feasted in token of ami- 
ty and reconciliation with God. When Christ, in 
the mipst of the week, offered his own body, that . 
great sacrifice for the expiation of sin, to reconcile 
sinners to God; by that most holy and acceptable 
victim, he completed and abolished all the typical 
sacrifices of the law. The legal sacrifices, indeed, 
continued to be offered at the temple, for thirty-six 
years after Christ’s death ; but, in effect, they ceased, 
at that instant their efficacy was no more, after that 
Christ had given himself for us an offering and a 
sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour, Eph. 
v.2. Hence forward the Christian religion abrogated 
the Levitical sacrifices, as was accurately foretold by 
the psalmist, Psa. xl. 6, as commented by the in- 
spired writer to the Hebrews, chap. x. 5-10.” 

And for the overspreading of abominations he 
shall make it desolate—Or, more literally, And he 
shall be a desolator by: the wing of abominations. 
Or, And being a desolator, he shall command over 
a wing of avominations. The desolator is the Ro- 
man army of sixty thousand men: Jos., B. J. iii. 4. 2. 
The wing, as well as the flood, is the Hebrew meta- 
phor for great armies. Abominations, in the Jewish 
style, are idols. The word is so used by Daniel, 
chap. xi. 31, for the idol of the Olympian Jupiter, 
which Antiochus placed on God’s altar, 1 Mace. i. 57, 
In this prophecy, it denotes the standards of the 
Roman legions. To every legion was a golden eagle 
with expanded wings, grasping a thunder-bolt. The 
eagles, with the standards of the cohorts, ten in each 
legion, adorned with the image of the reigning Cesar, 
were deified, adored, and sworn by; each eagle was 
placed in a little temple, or shrine; and there was a 
chapel in the camp where all the eagles were adored. 
At Rome they were deposited in the temple of Mars. 
Such deified ensigns were an abomination to the 
Jews: see Jos. xvii. 7,2; xviii. 8. The prediction 
was minutely verified when the Romans, upon the 
flight of the seditious into the city, and upon the 
burning of the temple and adjacent buildings, brought 
the ensigns to the holy place, fixed them against the 
eastern gate, offered sacrifices to them, and hailed 
Titus Imperator, Jos. vi.6.1. The allusion to the 
Roman standards is observable in that prediction of 
Moses; T’he Lord shall bring a nation against 
thee from far, from the end of the earth, as the eagle 
flieth, a nation whose tongue thou shalt not under- 
stand, Deut. xxviii. 49: see also Matt. xxiv. 15, 16. 
The eagles, and the language, and the distance from 
Rome, discriminate the Romans from the Chaldeans, 
whose tongue was only a dialect of the Hebrew.” 

“The concluding clause, Even until the conswm- 
mation, and that determined, shall be poured upon 
the desolate, is elliptical. It may be thus literally 

821 


A divine messenger 


DANIEL. 


ts sent to Daniel. 


OO OOOO AaVas—————————’::730w00_a— a———— 


translated, and the ellipses supplied; Even wntil the 
consummation and excision, the divine wrath shall 
be poured on the desolate city, temple and people ; 
which expresses so complete a devastation, as can- 
not be described but in the emphatic words of Christ, 
when his disciples beheld with admiration the recent 
magnificence of Herod’s temple. See ye not all 
these things? Verily, I say unto you, there shall 
not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be 
thrown down. And, verse 21, T'hen shall be great | 
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of 
the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. Christ’s 
own prediction was memorably verified against the 
attempt of the apostate emperor, Julian, expressly to 
defeat it: an attempt which confirms the principle of 
prophecy, that the designs and counsels of God are in- 
dependent of the projects of men, either to frustrate or 
fulfilthem.” The war of Adrian, A. D. 133, may be 
also intended in this last clause of the prophecy; 
and the reduplication of images and expressions, | 
rising one above another, may relate to the two | 
completions. “It is worthy of attention, that the 
ancient prophecies, prior to this of Daniel, have no | 


such exact specification of the time of their comple- 
tion. Chronology was not reducible to historic cer- 
tainty prior to the Olympiads. When that era be- 
came the authentic measure of time, God was pleased 
to give this singular credential to the Christian reli- 
gion; whose author and original could not be more 
precisely ascertained than by a measure of time, 
adapted to the ideas of the Jewish law, including ten 
jubilees, or seventy sabbatic years, nearly commenc- 
ing with the war of Peloponnesus [between the 
Athenians and Lacedemonians;] in the recital of 
which, the unexampled accuracy of Thucydides led 
the example of the most exact notation of time to 
other historians. If chronology for six hundred 
years after Cyrus had been as perplexed as it was 
for six hundred years before, it would not have 
been possible to ascertain the completion of a pro- 
phecy, specifying so many particular dates.”—Dr. 
Apthorp. The reader will observe, that several 
false and evasive systems have been advanced on the 
subject of this prophecy; but it has not been judged 
proper to embarrass this exposition of the passage 
with a refutation of them. 


CHAPTER X. 


This chapter contains the preparatory circumstances to the final revelation that was made to Daniel in the last two chapters 


of the book: 


The vision was to be of great extent, and is therefore ushered in with a preface of considerable length ; in 


which are shown, (1,) The solemn humiliation and fasting of the prophet, before he received the vision, 1-3. (2,) A glo- 


rious appearing of a divine messenger to him, and the deep impression it made upon him, 4-9. 


(3,) The encouragement 


that was given him to expect a satisfactory and useful revelation of future events ; and that he should be enabled both to 
understand the meaning of this discovery, though difficult, and to sustain the lustre of it, though dazzling and dreadful, 


10-21. 


A. M. 3470. [N the third year of Cyrus king of 
B. C. 534. ; : 
Persia a thing was revealed unto 


Daniel, * whose name was called Bel- Sens 


teshazzar; » and the thing was true, ' 


a Chap. i. 7. 


> Chap. viii. 26; Rev. xix. 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X. 

Verse 1. In the third year of Cyrus king of Per- 
sta—That is, the third after the death of Darius. 
Daniel must now have been above ninety years of 
age. It is reasonable to suppose that, being a youth 
when he was carried captive, he must have been at 
least twenty years of age; and that was seventy- 
three years before the date of this vision, which was 
the last Daniel saw, and it is not likely he himself 
survived it long. A thing was revealed unto Daniel 
—A revelation of future things (namely, those con- 
tained in the two following chapters, to which this is 
as it were a preface) was made to Daniel. And the 
thing was true—Or plain, as the word truth, or true, 
is sometimes taken in the Hebrew. The meaning 
seems to be, that the things were not revealed to him 
enigmatically, or symbolically, under the types of a 
statue, or wild beasts, as they were before ; but as it 
were by an historical recital, and with more partieu- 
lar circumstances than before. It is the usual me- 
thod of the Holy Spirit, to make the latter prophe- 

822 


cies explanatory of the former ; and revelation is as 
the shining light, that shineth more and more unto 
the perfect day. The four great empires of the 
world, which were shown to Nebuchadnezzar in the 
form of a great image, were again more particularly 
represented to Daniel in the shape of four great 
wild beasts. In like manner, the memorable events 
which were revealed to Daniel, in the vision of the 
ram and the he-goat, are here again more clearly 
and explicitly revealed, in this last vision, by an an- 
gel; so that this latter prophecy may not improperly 
be said to be a comment upon, and explanation of, 
the former. But the time appointed was long— 
That is, the time when the things revealed were to 
come to pass, was at a great distance; “and conse 
quently,” says Bishop Newton, “the prophecy must 
extend further than from the third year of Cyrus to 
the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, which was not 
above three hundred and seventy years, In reality,” 
adds he, “it comprehends many signal events after 
that time to the-end of the world.” Aida eeder 


A divine messenger 


CHAPTER X. 


is sent to Daniel. 


A. M. 3470. 


© but the time appoi 1 . 
B. C. 534. ppointed was + long 


and “he understood the thing, and 
had understanding of the vision. 

2 In those days I Daniel was mourning three 
* full weeks. 

3 Late no ’ pleasant bread, neither came flesh 
nor wine in my mouth, ¢ neither did I anoint 
myself at all, till three whole weeks were 
fulfilled. 

4 And in the four and twentieth day of the 
first month, as I was by the side of the great 
river which és ‘ Hiddekel ; 


¢ Verse 14. 1 Hebrew, great. 
2 Heb. weeks of days. 
vi. 17. £Gen. i. 14. 
* Heb. one man. 


4 Chapter i. 17; viii. 16. 
3 Heb. bread of desires. ® Matthew 
£ Joshua v. 13. h Chap. xii. 6, 7. 


stood the thing, &c.—He had a clear view of the 
succession of the Persian and Grecian monarchies, 
and of the series of the kings of Syria and Egypt 
under the latter of them; although the remaining 
parts of the vision were obscure, especially with re- 
spect to their final event: see chap. xii. 8. 

Verses 2, 3. I Daniel was mourning—The reason 
of Daniel’s fasting and mourning might be, either be- 
cause many of the Jews, through slothfulness and 
indifference, still remained in the land of their cap- 


tivity, though they had liberty to return to their own | 


land, not knowing how to value the privileges offer- 
edthem; or, as Usher thinks, because he had heard 
that the adversaries of the Jews had begun to ob- 
struct the building of the temple. Calmet, however, 
is of opinion, that his sorrow arose principally from 
the obscurity which the prophet found in the pro- 
phecies revealed to him; which, indeed, may be 
partly collected from the angel’s touching upon no 
other cause of mourning. In consequence of Daniel’s 
fasting, &c., the angel appears, and explains to him, 
in a clearer manner, what had been more ®bscurely 
revealed in the preceding visions. Three full weeks 
—Hebrew, three weeks of days. So we read of a 
month of days, Gen. xxix.4; Num. xi. 20, where the 
English reads, a whole month. But the phrase may 
be used here to distinguish them from the weeks of 
years prophesied of in chap. ix. J ate no pleasant 
bread—“ There seems to have been two sorts of 
fasting among the Jews; either a total abstinence 
from food of all sorts for at least a whole day, which 
David observed at the funeral of Abner, 2 Sam. iii. 
35 or a partial abstinence from the better kinds of 
food, which lasted for a considerable time, as in the 
case before us. The prophet made likewise an al- 
teration in his dress, and did not anoint himself as 
usual after the eastern manner, 2 Sam. xii. 20; Matt. 
vi. 17; for the Jews never anointed themselves in 
times of mourning and humiliation.” 

Verse 4. In the four and twentieth day of the first 
month—* Nisan, if the Jewish computation be ad- 
mitted ; that is, the month in which was the paschal 
solemnity. Hence commentators: have observed, 


5 Then £ I lifted up mine eyes, and 5 7 — 
looked, and * behold a certain man ———— 
clothed in linen, whose loins were ‘ girded with 
* fine gold of Uphaz: 

6 His body also was ‘like the beryl, and his 
face ™as the appearance of lightning, " and his 
eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms ° and his 
feet like in colour to polished brass, ? and the 
voice of his words like the voice of a mul- 
titude. 

7 And I Daniel 4 alone saw the vision: for 
the men that were with me saw not the vision ; 


i Rey. i. 13, 14,15; xv. 6——* Jeremiah x. 9. | Ezekiel 
i. 16.——™ Ezek, i, 14. o Rev, i. 14; xix. 12. ° Ezekiel 
i. 7; Rev..i. 15. P Ezek. i. 24; Rev. i. 15. 4 2 Kings vi. 


bye aorsax, ts 


observe their festivals except in their own country, 
and in the place which God had appointed; but if 
the Persian computation should be followed, which 
seems not improbable, as the prophet dates his vision 
from the third year of Cyrus the Persian, then the 
month will be different.” J was by the side—Or, on 
the bank, of the great river Hiddekel—“ Syriac, the 
Euphrates ; but the Vulgate reads, the Tigris ; the 
Greek and Arabic, Tigris-eddekel. It was proba- 
bly near the junction of the two rivers, which was 
about Seleucia and Ctesiphon, in some part of Susi- 
ana, that the prophet was placed.”— Wintle. 

Verses 5, 6. I lifted up mine eyes—Being by the 
river-side, in deep contemplation, I looked up, and 
saw a person appear before me, clothed in linen, 
&c.—“ Who this certain person was we may be at 
no loss to determine, if we consider him as described 
in the attire of the high-priest, and compare the 
passage with Exod. xxviii. and xxix., and the descrip- 
tion of the Son of man by St. John in the Revelation, 
chap. i. 13. If, however, he were not the Son of 
God himself, he was probably an angel of the high- 
est order.”—Wintle. Concerning the fine gold of. 
Uphaz, see note on Jer. x. 9. His body was like the 
beryl—That is, cerulean, or of a bluish-green colour ; 
his face as the appearance of lighining—See Matt. 
xxviii. 3. By this was symbolically expressed his 
perspicacity, or quickness in discerning and know- 
ing every thing; and his eyes as lamps of fire—To 
signify the comprehensiveness and piercing terrible- 
ness of his knowledge; his arms and feet like po- 
lished brass—Of a bright flaming colour: see Rey. 
i.15. As the arms and feet in men are the instru- 
ments of action, by them we are here to understand 
his actions, the purity of which is meant to be ex- 
pressed by the shining brass; and the voice of his 
words like the voice of a multitude—By which 
greatness or terribleness of his voice was signified 
his denouncing terrible judgments on kings and 
kingdoms. 

Verses 7-9. The men that were with me saw not 
the vision—This was just as it happened to the com- 
pany who were with St. Paul, when he had a vision, 


from this fact of the prophet, that the Jews did not|| going to Damascus, Acts ix. 7. God can cast a 


823 


A divine messenger 


DANIEL. 


a 


A. M. 3170. but a great quaking fell upon them, 
BOOM 2g that they fled to hide themselves. 

8 Therefore I was left alone, and saw this 

great vision, and there remained no strength 
‘in me: for my ° comeliness * was turned in me 
into corruption, and I retained no strength. 

9 Yet heard I the voice of his words: t and 
when I heard the voice of his words, then was 
I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face to- 
ward the ground. 

10 4 "And behold, a hand touched me, 
which °set me upon my knees and upon the 
palms of my hands, 

11 And he said unto me, O Daniel, * a7 man 
greatly beloved, understand the words that I 
speak unto thee, and *stand upright: for unto 


thee am I now sent... And when he A. M. 3470 
had spoken this word unto me, I stood — 
trembling. 

12 Then said he unto me, ¥ Fear not, Daniel : 
for from the first day that thou didst set thy 
heart to understand, and to chasten thyself 
before thy God, * thy words were heard, and I 
am come for thy words. 

13 *But the prince of the kingdom of Persia 
withstood me one and twenty days: but lo, 
» Michael, one of the chief princes, came to 
help me; and I remained there with the kings 
of Persia. 

14 Now I am come to make thee understand 
what shall befall thy people ° in the latter days: 
for yet the vision 7s for many days. 


* Chap, viii. 27. 5 Or, vigour. 8 Chap. vii. 28.—+t Chap. 
viii. 18, u Jer. i. 9; Chapter ix. 21; Rev. i. 17. ® Heb. 
moved. x Chap. ix. 23. 7 Heb. a man of desires. ——® Heb. 
stand upon thy standing. 


y Rev. i. 17. z Chap. ix. 3, 4, 22,23; Acts x. 4.—— Verse 
20, b Verse 21; Chap. xii. 1; Jude 9; Rev. xii. 7——® Or, 
the first Gen. xlix. 1; Chap. ii. 28.——4 Chapter viii. 26 ; 
Verse 1; Hab, ii. 3. ' 


cloud before the eyes of any one when: he pleases, 
so that the organs may not be able to perform their 
usual functions; thus it is said, Luke xxiy. 16, of the 
two disciples going to Emmaus, that their eyes were 
holden that they should not know him. Buta great 
quaking fell upon them—Occasioned perhaps by 
their hearing some unusual and terrible sound. 
Thus the men with St. Paul heard a voice which 
struck them speechless, though they saw nothing. 
So that they fled to hide themselves—Through the 
terror and astonishment wherewith they were seized, 
they fled from the place, as from a place in which 
they were exposed to instant destruction. And there 
remained no strength in me—I fell into aswoon, or 
fainting-fit. My comeliness, or vigour, was turned in 
me tnlo corruption—Houbigant reads it, The flower 
of my strength withered, and allmy powers failed me. 
When Iheard the voice of his words—The very sound 
of his words deprived me of all sense and power of 
motion. Then was lin adeep sleep— Then I lay life- 
less, with my face prone upon the grownd.—Houb. 
Verses 10-12, And behold, a hand touched me— 
This was not the same angel, or personage, who is 
described verse 5, but some other of not so great 
brightness, probably the angel Gabriel in a human 
form, who had before been sent to Daniel on the 
like occasions. Whoever it was, his touch revived 
Daniel; and enabled him to stand upright. And 
when he had spoken, I stood trembling—Though 
Daniel was not so greatly disturbed and terrified as 
at the appearance described verse 5, yet he could 
not forbear trembling at the appearance of this angel, 
though of an inferior order, and probably in a hu- 
man form. T'hen said he, Fear not, Daniel—And 
his word was with power: see Matt. xxviii. 5-10; 
Luke ii. 10. From the first day thou didst set thy 
heart to understand—As soon as thou didst set thy 
mind to consider concerning the state of thy people, 
and bow, and in what degree, or time, their restora- 


824 


tion would be; and to chasten thyself before thy 
God—When thou didst begin to testify the concern 
thou wast in upon that account, by fasting and 
mourning, and didst humble thyself before God; 
thy words were heard—As God graciously answered 
those prayers which thou didst address to him in 
thy former humiliation, (see chap. ix. 2-22,) so now 
God is pleased, in answer to thy repeated humilia- 
tion, and solicitous concern for thy people, to send 
me, to inform thee what shall be their state and con- 
dition in after times. What an encouragement is 
this to us, to spread our wants before God, and pre- 
sent to him our lawful requests; for we find twice 
in this book an angel assuring Daniel, that as soon 
as he began to pray, God began to grant his petitions. 
Verses 13, 14. But the prince of the kingdom of 
Persia opposed me—Hebrew, 7337 12y, stood before 
me.—Purver. And so Jun. and Tremel., referring 
| it to an earthly prince. This is thought by some to 
be Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, intrusted with the 
management of affairs in the court of Persia when 
his father was absent on some expedition, and set 
against the Jews by their enemies, and now endea- 
vouring to embarrass their affairs: over his designs 
the angel had been watching, in order to defeat them. 
Others have thought there is an allusion in this 
verse, and at verse 20, to the guardian, or tutelary 
angels, of different countries; which doctrine seems 
to be countenanced by some passages in Scripture, 
and especially by Zechariah, chap. vi. 5. Grotius is 
of this opinion; and Bishop Neweome, on the last- 
/mentioned place, refers to the passage before us. 
| “That there were such tutelar angels,” says Lowth, 
“not only over private persons, Acts xii. 15, but like- 
| Wise over provinces and kingdoms, was an opinion 
generally received. The four spirits, mentioned 
Zech. vi. 5, seem to be the guardian angels of the 
four great empires.” This opinion supposes the 
| presiding angels, here mentioned, to be ened anaels 


_ 


is sent to Daniel. 


Another divine personage 


CHAPTER X. 


is sent to comfort Daniel. 


A.M. v0.) 15 And when he had spoken such 
B. C. 534. 


words unto me, ° I set my face toward 
the ground, and I became dumb. 

16 And behold, f one like the similitude of the 
sons of men * touched my lips: then I opened 
my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that 
stood before me, O my lord, by the vision " my 
sorrows are turned upon me, and [ haye retain- 
ed no strength. 

17 For how can ™ the servant of this my lord 
talk with this my lord? for as for me, straight- 


way there remained no strength in A.M. 3470. 
; y : B. C. 534, 
me, neither is there breath left in me. ————~ 

18 Then there came again and touch e 
one like the appearance of a man, and he. 
strengthened me, — 

19 ‘ And said, O man greatly beloved, * fear 
not: peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be 
strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I 
was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; 
for thou hast strengthened me. 

20 Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I 


¢ Verse 9; Chapter viii. 18 ——f Chap. viii. 15.——s Verse 10; 
Jeremiah i. 9. 


h Verse 8. i Verse 11, 


19 Or, this servant of my lord. 
k Judges vi. 23. 


but it is surely absurd to think that the holy angels 
are ever engaged in contending with each other; or 
that “one holy angel is set to oppose another holy 
angel.”—Scott. Others suppose the contest to be 
between a good and an evil angel, as in Zech. iii. 1, 
and Jude, verse 9, “ which latter opinion,” says Win- 
tle, “is perhaps the most just, as there should seem 
to be no dispute, or contest, between the ministering 
spirits of heaven, who are always obedient to the 
pleasure of their Lord. And when the Almighty 
sent a superior angel, Michael, whose name is some- 
times given to Christ himself, Rev. xii. 7, his office 
probably was to assist Gabriel in subduing the prince 
of the power of the air, the powers of this darksome 
world, or the spirits that rule over the children of 
disobedience, Eph. ii. 2. The opposition was made 
twenty-one days; and as this was exactly the num- 
ber of days that Daniel fasted, the contest may 
possibly have some allusion to this struggle. Daniel 
was certainly highly favoured, and the Almighty, 
who delights in hearing and answering the prayers 
of his servants, directs the angel to apologize (if I 
may so speak) for his delay in attending to the pa- 
tient solicitations of the prophet: the angel also is 
represented as pleading the difficulty of his task, 
and another higher power, or chief, in the regal 
court of heaven, favours his business, and comes 
in to his assistance. In whatever light this is to be 


understood, it is a strong and affecting, though less | 


gross, instance of the anthropopathia, or of the 
Deity’s accommodating himself and his measures to 
the manners of men.” See De Sacra Poes. Heb., 
Prel. 6. Houbigant is of opinion, that this prince 


of the kingdom of Persia was an evil angel, and in| 
agreement with it renders the last clause of the verse, | 


and Ihave now left him on the side of the kings of 


Persia. But it seems most proper to understand | 


Cambyses as meant. Now Iam come to make thee 


understand, &e.—I am now come to inform thee of | 
what shall befall thy people hereafter; for yet the | 


vision is for many days—For it will be a long 
course of time before the things I shall inform thee 
of shall come to pass. Daniel, we find, was in- 
formed by this vision, that the empire should be 
translated from the Persians to the Greeks, chap. xi. 


) th 


Jews under Alexander’s successors, the kings of Syria 
and Egypt. 

Verses 15-17. I set my face toward the ground— 
The fear with which Daniel had been struck at the 
sight of the angel Michael still continued in some 
degree, so that he was afraid to look up at this angel, 
or to speak to him. And behold, one like the simili- 
tude of the sons of men—Daniel, gathering courage 
to look up, perceived that the angel Gabriel had not 
that angelic form, or brightness, which Michael ap- 
peared in, verse 5, but that he was in a human form. 
Gabriel, then advancing, and touching Daniel’s lips, 
gave him the power of utterance, as he had before 
(verse 11) of standing on his feet. T'hen I opened 
my mouth, and said unto him that stood before me— 
This angel stood upon the earth near Daniel, not 
above the waters of the river, as the person did 
whose appearance was so glorious, verse 5. By the 
vision my sorrows are turned upon me—By behold- 
ing thee, although in a human form, I am greatly 
affected, or terrified. or how can the servant of this 
my lord talk, &c.—How can thy servant, a poor 
mortal man, maintain a discourse with a person of 
such rank and dignity? see Noldius, p. 353. The 
words may be translated thus: [How can the servant 


| of this my lord talk with that my lord? that is, with 


the other person that first appeared to me with so 
majestic a presence, at whose sight I was perfectly 
confounded, verses 5-9. Straightway there re- 
mained no strenglh in me—As soon as ever I saw 
him, all my strength went from me, and I could 
not support myself. Neither is there—Or rather, 
was there, breath left in me—I fell breathless in a 
swoon. 

Verses 18, 19. T'hen there came again, &c.— 
This seems to be spoken of the same angel, namely, 
the angel Gabriel, touching him again, whereby he 
was rendered more composed, and had his strength 
revived. And said, O man, &c., fear not—Thou 
needest not be under such terrible apprehensions, as 
if this vision did portend to thee some mischief; for 
it is a peculiar token of God’s favour to thee. 

Verse 20. Knowest thou wherefore I come unto 


ee2—Or, Thou knowest for what cause I am 
come, &e. “The angel, having strengthened the 


3; and then what should be the condition of the || prophet, presumes that he also understood the 


825 


A prediction of the 


DANIEL. 


Grecian monarchy. 


M. 


4 2470. come unto thee? and now will I re- 


534. 

turn to fight ' with the prince of Per- 
sia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince 
of Grecia shall come. 


A. 
B. 


1 Verse 13.—"! Heb. strengtheneth himself. 


general design of his errand. The Greek is, Ex ovdag, 
Surely thou knowest, according to a usual Hebrew 
idiom, And now will I return to fight with the 
prince of Persia—With the evil angel, who, under 
“the god of this world,” presides over Persia; or 
rather, with the present ruling prince of Persia, 
whether Cambyses or any other person then in- 
trusted with the chief power, whose designs against 
the Jews this angel was employed in counteracting, 
and would continue to counteract, as also those of 
every future prince of that kingdom, till it should 
be overturned by the Greeks. And when I am gone 
forth—Hebrew, xxv 09, and I going forth, name- 
ly, to execute my commission; or; when J am gone 
forth, having executed it, and their monarchy is 
brought down for their unkindness to the Jews, Jo, 
the prince of Grecia shall come—The Macedonian 
empire, under Alexander the Great and his suc- 
cessors, shall be established in Asia; and though 
favourable to the Jews at first, as the Persian was, 
yet will afterward become vexatious to them. 
“Such is the state of the church militant; when it 
has got clear of one enemy, it has another to en- 
counter; and such a hydra’s head is that of the old 
serpent; when one storm is blown oyer, it is not long 
before another rises.”—Henry. 

Verse 21. But I will show thee that which is noted 
in the Scripture, or writing, of truth—Namely, that 
which is certainly determined~by God. God’s de- 
erees are spoken of as if they were committed to 
Writing, and registered in a book. And there is none 
that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael 
your prince—This may mean that the Jews had no 


21 But I will show thee that which A, M. 3470 
is noted in the Scripture of truth: and 
there is none that holdeth with me in these 
things, ™ but Michael your prince. 


m Verse 13; Jude 9; Rev. xii. 7. 


friend in the court of Persia, who would co-operates 
with the angel, “to forward the prophet’s designs i in 
behalf of his people, but Michael, their prince ; and. 
that Daniel must depend on him alone to disappoint 
the devices which were forming against them.”— 
Scott. As this chapter is intended as an introduc- 
tion to the prophecies in the next two chapters, it 
may be observed that the sum of it is this: that the 
prayer of Daniel, in behalf of the Jews, had been 
heard ; but that the Jews would be crossed in their 
design of building the temple; that nevertheless God 
would protect them ; that the prince of Javan, or of 
the Greeks, that is, Alexander the Great, would 
come against the Persians; and that the principal 
angels, such as he was who talked with Daniel, and 
Michael the archangel, would be employed by God 
to defend and assist the Jews, and to strengthen the 
kings who were for the Jews, as, at the beginning of 
the following chapter, the angel who here speaks is 
said to have strengthened King Darius. The afflic- 
tion and fasting of Daniel, who mourned for three 
weeks, should be considered as the effect of his 
zeal for the glory of God, to be manifested in the 
restoration of the Jews; it being the character of 
pious and zealous persons to afflict themselves when 
the glory of God is obstructed, and to offer up fer- 
vent prayers for the peace and prosperity of their 
country. With respect to what the angel said to 
Daniel, of his labouring and striving for the Jews 
against those who sought their ruin, it is a proof that 
God makes use of the ministry of angels to execute 
his designs, and for the protection and benefit of 
| those whom he is pleased to bless. 


CHAPTER XI 


This and the following chapter contain the substance of Daniel's last vision, or a series of prophetical history, from 
the third year of Cyrus to the fall of Antiochus Epiphanes, if not also, as many suppose, to the final destruction of 


antichrist, and all the enemies of God’s church. 


To be more particular; here is, (1,) A brief prediction of the 


setting up of the Grecian monarchy, upon the ruins of that of the Persians, which had been but lately established, 


1-4. 
other, 5-20. 


(2.) A prediction of the affairs of the two Grecian kingdoms of Egypt and Syria. with reference to each 
(3,) Of the rise of Antiochus Epiphanes, and his actions and successes, 21-29. 


(4,) Of the great mis- 


chief that he should do the Jewish nation and religion, typical of the mischief that antichrist should do to the 


Christian Church, 30-39. 
and ruin of antichrist, 40-45, 


AM. 2470. LSO I, *in the first year of 

. & 

eas, Thavius the Mede, — even I, 
Shp im 1, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI. 
Verse 1. Also [in the first year of Darius, &e— 
This verse should have been joined to the last chap- | 
826 


(5,) Of his fall and ruin at last, when in the heat of his pursuits, an emblem of the fall 


stood to confirm and to strengthen AM. 3470 
him. Rada — 


> Chap. v. 31. 2 


ter. The meaning of what the angel ‘te Bays i is, 
that from the time that Daniel add nt 


prayers to God about the affairs of his 6; men 


A prediction of the 


A. M. 3470. 


OG wed 2 And now will I show thee the 


trath. Behold, there shall stand up 
yet three kings in Persia ; and the fourth shall 
be far richer than they all: and by his strength 
through his riches he shall stir up all against 
the realm of Grecia. 


© Chap. vii. 6; viii. 5. 


CHAPTER XI. 


Grecian monarchy.’ 


3 And °a mighty king shall stand A. M. 3470. 
up, that shall rule with great domi- Bis es 
nion, and ‘do according to his will. 

4 And when he shall stand up, * his kingdom 
shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the 
four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, 


4 Chap. vili. 4; Verses 16, 36.——e Chap. viii. 8. 


tioned ckap. ix., which was in the first year of 
Darius, from that very time uz (namely, the angel 
Gabriel) had strenuously co-operated with Michael, 
in working the deliverance of the Jewish nation. See 
here again the vast efficacy and power of prayer ; 
it engages God and angels to our assistance. 

Verse 2. And now I will show thee the truth— 
Now I will show thee future things plainly, not enig- 
matically, or under symbolicalrepresentations. Here 
this chapter should begin: what goes before should 
be added to the former chapter. Behold, there shall 
stand up yet three kings in Persia—“ According to 
the Canon, there were nine kings of the Persian 
empire from Cyrus to Codomanus, besides others, 
who, falling within a year, are not therein men- 
tioned, Interpreters have differed, therefore, in 
pointing out the kings that are here meant, or in fix- 
ing the commencement of the Scripture, or writing, 
of truth, mentioned chap. x. 21. But as the vision 
was revealed to Daniel in the third year of Cyrus, it 
is most natural to trace its beginning from that time; 
and then the three kings yet to stand up, or after the 
then reigning monarch, will be Cambyses, or the 
Ahasuerus, and Smerdis, or the Artaxerxes, of Ezra, 
chap. iv. 6, 7, and Darius Hystaspes; the second of 
whom, being a magian usurper, that reigned. scarce 
eight months, according to Herodotus, is not in the 
Canon.”—Wintle. And the fourth shall be far 
richer than they all—That is, Xerxes, the son and 
successor of Hystaspes, who had inherited great 
riches from his father, according to Auschylus, and 
had amassed much more. Of him Justin truly re- 
marks, “If you consider this king, you may praise 
his riches, not the general; of which there was so 
great abundance in his kingdom, that when rivers 
were dried up by his army, yet his wealth remained 
unexhausted.” Pythius, the Lydian, (according to 
Herodotus, book vii. see. 27,) was at that time the 
richest subject in the world. He generously enter- 
tained Xerxes and all his army, and proffered him 
two thousand talents of silver, and three millions nine 
hundred and ninety-three thousand pieces of gold, 
with the stamp of Darius, toward defraying the 
charges of the war. But Xerxes was so far from 
wanting supplies, that he rewarded Pythius for his 
liberality, and presented him with seven thousand 
darics, to make up his number a complete round 
sum of four millions. Each of these darics was 
worth better than a guinea of our money. Many 
great and rich provinces, as India, Thrace, Macedo- 
nia, and the islands of the Ionian sea, were added 
by Darius to the Persian empire. And by his 
strength he shall stir up all—Both subjects and 


allies; against the realm of Grecia—< Xerxes’s | 


expedition into Greece is one of the most memora- 
ble adventures in ancient history. Herodotus (book 
vii. sec. 20, 21) affirms, that Xerxes, in raising his 
army, searched every place of the continent, and it 
was the greatest army that ever was brought into 
the field; for what nation was there, says he, that 
Xerxes led not out of Asia into Greece? Herodo- 
tus lived in that age; and he, in the fore-mentioned 
place, recounts with great exactness the various 
nations of which Xerxes’s army was composed, and 
computes that the whole number of horse and foot, 
by land and sea, out of Asia and Europe, soldiers 
and followers of the camp, amounted to five millions 
two hundred and eighty-three thousand two hundred 
and twenty men. Nor was Xerxes content with 
stirring up the East, but was for stirring up the West 
likewise, (see Diod. Sic., book xi.,) and engaged the 
Carthaginians in his alliance, that, while he and his 
army overwhelmed Greece, they might fall upon the 
Greek colonies in Sicily and Italy: and the Car- 
thaginians, for this purpose, not only raised all the 
forces they could in Africa, but also hired a great 
number of mercenaries in Spain, and Gaul, and 
Italy; so that their army consisted of three hundred 
thousand men, and their fleet of two hundred ships. 
Thus did*Xerxes stir up all against the realm of 
Grecia: and after him no mention is here made of 
any other king of Persia. ‘It is to be noted,’ says 
Jerome, ‘that the prophet, having enumerated four 
kings of the Persians after Cyrus, slips over nine, 
and passes to Alexander; for the prophetic spirit 
did not care to follow the order of history, but only 
to touch upon the most famous events.’ Xerxes 
was the principal author of the long wars and inve- 
terate hatred between the Grecians and Persians ; 
and as he was the last king of Persia who invaded 
Greece, he is mentioned last. The Grecians then, 
in their turn, invaded Asia; and Xerxes’s expedition 
being the most memorable on one side, as Alexan- 
der’s was on the other, the reigns of these two are 
not improperly connected together.”—Bishop New- 
ton. 

Verses 3,4. And a mighty king shall stand up, 
&c.—Namely, from among the Grecians; that shall 
rule with great dominion—This is evidently descrip- 
tive of Alexander the Great; of the rapidity and 
success of whose conquests, see on chap. vii. 6, and 
viii. 5, 6. His success was indeed universal, none 
being able to put a stop to the progress of his victo- 
ries. So great was his dominion, that he ruled not 
only over Greece and the whole Persian empire, but 
likewise added India to his conquests. And that he 
did according to his will, is a fact too well known to 
require any particular proof; for none, not even his 

827 


oO the setsatind 


DANIEL. 


of Egypt and Syria. 


A.M. 3470. £ nor according to his dbtitinior! which 
B.C: 34 he ruled: for his kingdom shall be 
plucked up, even for others besides those. 

5 J And the king of the south shall be strong, 


£ Chap. viii. 22. 


friends, dared to contradict or oppose him, or if they 
did, like Clytus and Calisthenes, they paid for it with 
their lives. And when he shall stand wp—When he 
shall be in the height of his prosperity. Wintle 
renders it, when he shall be established ; his king- 
dom shall be broken—Alexander died in Babylon, 
having lived only thirty-two years and eight months, || 
of which he reigned twelve years and eight months. 
In so short a time did this sun of glory rise and set! 
And shall be divided toward the four winds of hea- 
ven—This is very significantly expressive of the vast 
empire which Alexander had brought under sub- 
jection to himself, being divided at his death among 
his four chief captains: see note on chap. vii. 6, and 
vill. 8. And not to his posterity—For these, with 
all his family, were cut off in a few years after his 
death. “His wife Statira, the daughter of Darius, | 
was murdered out of jealousy by his other wife! 
Roxana; and her body was thrown into,a well, and}, 
earth cast upon it. His natural brother Arideus 
who succeeded him in the throne by the name of | 
Philip, was, together with his wife Eurydice, killed 
by the command of Olympias, the mother of Alex- 
ander, after he had borne the title of king six years | 
and some months: and not long after Oly mpias her- 
self was slain in revenge by the soldiers of Cassan- | 
der. Alexander Agus, his son by Roxana, in the 
fourteenth year of his age was privately murdered, 
together w ith his mother, in the castle of Amphipo- \| 
lis, by order of Cassander. In the second year after | 
this, Hercules, the other son of Alexander, by B Bar- | 
cine, the w idow of Memnon, was also, with his || 
mother , privately murdered by Polysperchon. Such | 
was the miserable end of Alexander’s family! After 
which the governors assumed, each in his province, 
the title of king, from which they had abstained as) 
long as any just heir of Alexander was surviving. | 
Thus was Alexander’s kingdom broken and divided, | 
not to his posterity, but it was plucked wp even for| \| 
others.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verse 5. And the king of the south, &e.—“ Though 
the kingdom of Alexander was divided into four 
principal parts, yet only two of them have a place | 
in this prophecy, Egypt and Syria. These two were || 
by far the greatest and most considerable, and at one 
time were, in a manner, the only remaining king- 
doms of the four; the kingdom of Macedon “having 
been conquered by Lysimachus, and annexed to 
Thrace, and Lysimachus again having been con- 
quered by Seleucus, and the kingdoms of Macedon 
and Thrace annexed to Syria. These two, likewise, 
continued distinct kingdoms after the others were 
swallowed up by the power of the Romans. But), 
there is a more proper and peculiar reason for en-|| 
larging on these two particularly ; because Judea, 
lying between them, was sometimes in the posses- || 

828 


, || Asiatic provinces. 


deed a great dominion. 


and one of his princes; and he shall tig 
be strong above him, and have domi- ‘a 
nion; his dominion shall be a great dominion. 

6 And in the end of years they ‘shall join 


1 Heb. shall associate themselves. 


sion of the kings of Egypt, and sometimes of the 
kings of Syria; and it is the purpose of Holy Scrip- 
ture to interweave only so much of foreign affairs as 
hath some relation to the Jews; and it is in respect 
of their situation to Judea, that ‘the kings of Egypt 
and Syria are called the kings of the south and the 
north.”—Bishop Newton. 

The king of the south shall be strong, and one of 
his princes—That is, of Alexander’s princes. “There 
is manifestly either some redundance,” says Bishop 
Newton, “or some defect in the Hebrew copy, which 
should be rendered, asit is by the LXX., And the king 
of the south shall be strong, and one of his princes 
shall be strong above him.” The king of the south, 
Ptolemy, son of Lagus, called Soter, that is, saviour, 
the first king of Egypt, and the first founder of the 


famous library at Alexandria, was indeed very 


strong: for his dominion extended over Libya, Cy- 
rene, Palestine, Cyprus, some Grecian islands, and 
His wealth and strength are 
celebrated by Theocritus in one of his idyls, and by 
Appian the historian. But still the king of the north, 


|| or Seleucus Nicator, that is, dhe conqueror, was 


strong above him: for having annexed, as we have 
seen, the kingdoms of Macedon and Thrace to the 
crown of Syria, he had become master of three parts 


_out of four of Alexander’s dominions. All historians 


_agree in representing him, not only as the longest 
‘liver, but likewise as the most powerful of all Alex- 
|ander’s successors. Appian in particular, enume- 
rating the nations which he subdued, affirms that, 
after Alexander, he possessed the largest part of 


| Asia; for that all was subject to him from Phrygia 


to the river Indus, and beyond it. He built Seleucia 
on the Tigris, and many other very considerable 
cities in India, Scythia, Armenia, and various parts 
of his wide empire; so that his dominion was in- 
He was also, according to 
Appian, a person of such great strength, that, laying 
hold on a bull by the horn, he could stop him in his 
full career: the statuaries, for this reason, made his 
statue with two bulls’ horns on his head. This 
prince, “having reigned seven months after the 


| death of Lysimachus, over the kingdoms of Mace- 


don, Thrace, and Syria, was basely murdered ; and 
to him succeeded, in the throne of Syria, Antiochus 
Soter; and to him his son, Antiochus Theus. At 


/the same time, Ptolemy Philadelphus reigned in 


Egypt after his father, the first Ptolemy. There 
were frequent wars between the kings of Egypt and 
Syria, and particularly between Ptolemy Philadel- 


'phus, the second king of Egypt, and Antiochus 


Theus, the third king of Syria.” See Bishop New- 


ton and Wintle. . 
Verse 6. And in the end of years—That is, ad 
sabes ty ‘ 


several years, for these wars lasted | 


Of the kingdems 


CHAPTER XI. 


of Egypt and Syria. 


Sait 3470, themselves together; for the king’s| 
.C. 534 

——— daughter of the south shall come to 
the king of the north to make *an agreement : 
but she shall not retain the power of the arm; 
neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she 
shall be given up, and they that brought her, 
and *he that begat her, and he that strength- 
ened her in ¢hese times. 

7 But out of a branch of her roots shall one 
stand up ‘in his estate, which shall come with 
an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the 
king of the north, and shall deal against them, 
and shall prevail : 


2 Heb. rights. 


3 Or, whom she brought forth. * Or, in his 
place, or, office, Verse 20. 


5 Heb. vessels of their desire. 


shall join themselves together—Shall enter into a 
league or confederacy with each other. For the 
king’s daughter of the south, &e.—They agreed to 
make peace, upon condition that Antiochus Theus 
should put away his former wife, Laodice, and her 
two sons, and marry Berenice, the daughter of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus. Thus she came to the king 
of the north to make an agreement—For - Ptolemy 
her father brought her to Antiochus Theus, and with 
her an immense treasure, so that he received the 
appellation of the dowry-giver. But she shall not 
retain the power of the arm—That is, her interest 
and power with Antiochus; for after some time, ina 
fit of love, he brought back his former wife, Laodice, 
with her children, to court again. Neither shall he 
stand, nor his arm—Or seed, for Laodice, fearing 
the fickle temper of her husband, lest he should re- 
call Berenice, caused him to be poisoned; and 
neither did his seed by Berenice succeed him in the 
kingdom; but Laodice contrived to fix her eldest 
son, Seleucus Callinicus, on the throne of his ances- 
tors. But she shall be given up—For Laodice, not 
content with poisoning her husband, caused also 
Berenice to be murdered. And they that brought 
her—Or, her Egyptian women and attendants, en- 
deavouring to defend her, were many of them slain 
with her. And he that begat her—Or rather, as it 
is in the margin, he whom she brought forth; for 
the son was murdered as well as the mother, by 
order of Laodice. And he that strengthened her, 
&c.—Her husband Antiochus, as Jerome conceives ; 
or rather, her father, who died a little before, and 
was so very fond of her that he took care continually 
to send her fresh supplies of the water of the Nile, 


thinking it better for her to drink of that than any |) 
other river, as Polybius relates. See Bishop New- | 
|him in the throne, and, to distinguish him from 
| others of the same name, was denominated Cerau- 


ton. 

Verses 7, 8. But out of a branch of her roots shall 
one stand up—One of the same stock, or original, 
with Berenice, namely, her brother, Ptolemy Euer- 
getes, shall succeed his father in the government of 
Egypt, and shall revenge his sister’s quarrel, by in- 
vading the territories of Seleucus Callinicus, then 

3 


8 And shall also carry captives into A. M. 3470 
Egypt their gods, with their princes, ees 
and with *their precious vessels of silver and 
of gold; and he shall continue more years 
than the king of the north. 

9 So the king of the south shall come into 
his kingdom, and shall return into his own 
land. 

10 But his sons ° shall be stirred up, and shall 
assemble a multitude of great forces: and one 
shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass 
through: 7then shall he return, and be stirred 
up, » even to his fortress. 


® Or, shall war.—S Isaiah viii. 8; Chap. ix. 26. 
shall he be stirred up again. h Verse 7. 


7 Or, then 


reigning in Syria with his mother Laodice; and 
shall deal, or act, against them, and shall prevail 
—According to Justin and other authors, he pre- 
vailed so far, that he made himself master of Syria 
and Cilicia, and the upper parts beyond Euphrates, 
and almost all Asia. And shall carry captive, &e:— 
Jerome relates, out of authors extant in his time, 
that Ptolemy carried back with him into Egypt vast 
plunder from all the conquered provinces, upon the 
whole not less than forty thousand talents of silver, 
with “ precious vessels,” and two thousand five hun- 
dred “images of the gods:” among which were also 
those which Cambyses, after he had taken Egypt, 
had carried into Persia. And for thus restoring 
their gods, after many years, the Egyptians compli- 
mented him with the title of Ewergetes, or benefac- 
tor. “ Polybius, lib. v., observes, that he took the 
city Seleucia, which was kept for some years after 
by the garrisons of the kings of Egypt; and Justin 
gives us to understand, that all the fortified cities 
that had revolted surrendered to him. Archbishop 
Usher observes, from Josephus against Appian, that 
after Ptolemy had gained all Syria he came to Jeru- 
salem, and there offered many eucharistic sacrifices 
to God, and dedicated some presents suitable to his 
victory. And from hence we may collect a sufficient 
reason why he obtains a part in the angel’s narra- 
tive, as it may in general be observed, that the his- 
tory of the Jews is interwoven throughout the 
whole of it.’—Wintle. And he shall continue more 
years than the king of the north—He outlived Se- 
leucus four or five years, the latter dying in exile 


| of a fall from his horse. 


Verse 10. But his sons shall be stirred up—“ The 
sons of Seleucus Callinicus were Seleucus and An- 
tiochus, the elder of whom, Seleucus, succeeded 


nus, or the thunderer. He was indeed stirred up, 


and assembled a multitude of great forces, in order 


to recover his father’s dominions: but, being desti- 

tute of money, and unable to keep his army in obe- 

dience, he was poisoned by two of his generals, 
82 


be the kingdoms 


DANIEL. 


of Egypt and Syria. 


A. M, 3470. 
3. C, 534. 


11 And the king of the south shall 
be moved with choler, and shall 
come forth and fight with him, even with 
the king of the north: and he shall set 
forth a great multitude; but the multitude 


shall be given imto his hand. A.M. 3470. 

12 And when he hath taken away a 
the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and 
he shall cast down many ten thousands: but 
he shall not be strengthened by ié. 


after an inglorious reign of two or three years. 
Upon his decease, his brother, Antiochus the Great, 
was proclaimed king. The angel’s expression is 
very remarkable, that his sons should be stirred up, 
&e.; but then the number is changed, and only one 
(he says) shall certainly come and overflow, &¢.— 
Accordingly Antiochus came with a great army, 
retook Seleucia, and, by the means of Theodotus the 
/Mtolian, recovered Syria. Then, after a truce, 
wherein both sides treated of peace, but prepared 
for war, Antiochus returned, and overcame in battle 
Nicolaus the Egyptian general, and had thought of 
invading Egypt itself” He was stirred up even to 
his fortress—He made an attack on Raphia, a strong 
fortified town near the borders of Egypt. 

Verse 11, And the king of the south shall be 
moved with choler—The LXX. render it aypravOncerar, 
shall be made wild, or frantic ; namely, at the suc- 
cesses of Antiochus, and the revoltofhisfriends. This 
is spoken of Ptolemy Philopater, who was king of 
Egypt at that time, being advanced to the crown 
upon the death of his father Euergetes, not long 
after Antiochus the Great succeeded his brother on 
the throne of Syria. This Ptolemy was a most 
luxurious and vicious prince, but was nevertheless 
thus roused at length by the near approach of danger. 
And shall come forth and fight with him—He 
marched out of Egypt with a numerous army to 
oppose the enemy, and encamped not far from 


_ Raphia, which is the nearest town to Egypt from }; 


Rhinocorura. Thither likewise came Antiochus 
with his army, and a memorable battle was fought 
there between the two kings. And he—Namely, 
Antiochus; set forth a great multitude—Polybius 
hath recited the various nations of which his army 
was composed, and altogether it amounted to sixty- 
two thousand foot, six thousand horse, and a hun- 
dred and two elephants. But yet this multitude was 
given into his hand—That is, into the hand of 
Ptolemy, who obtained a complete victory. His 
forces, however, were still greater than those of 
Antiochus, namely, seventy thousand foot, five 
thousand horse, and seventy-three elephants. Of 
Antiochus’s army there were slain not much fewer 
than ten thousand foot, more than three hundred 
horse, and above four thousand men were taken 
prisoners; whereas of Ptolemy’s there were killed 
only one thousand five hundred foot and seven 
hundred horse. The author of the third book of 
the Maccabees ascribes this victory to the passionate 
importunity of Arsinoe, Ptolemy’s sister, who ran 
about the army with her hair about her shoulders, 
and, by promises and entreaties, engaged the soldiers 
to fight with more than ordinary resolution. Upon 
this defeat, Raphia and the neighbouring towns con- 


tration of the state, must certainly have much 
tended who should be the most forward to submit to || | weakened, and almost totally ruined i pa 


830 


the conqueror; and Antiochus was forced to retreat 
with his shattered army to Antioch, and from thence 
sent ambassadors to solicit a peace. 

Verse 12. When he hath taken away the multi- 
tude, his heart shall be lifted up—This is a descrip- 


tion of the effect which this victory would have on 
Ptolemy, namely, to puff him up with pride and in- 
solence: and so we are informed it did; for being 
freed by it from his fears, he now more freely in- 
dulged his lusts; and, after a few menaces and com- 
plaints, he granted peace to Antiochus, that he 
might be more at liberty to gratify his appetites and 
passions. He had before murdered his father, his 
mother, and his brother; and now he killed his wife, 
who was also his sister, and gave himself up entirely 
to the management of Agathoclea his harlot, and 
her brother, Agathocles, who was his catamite, and 
their equally vicious mother Oenanthe: and so, for- 
| getful of the greatness of his name and majesty, he 
-eonsumed his days in feasting, and his nights in 
‘lewdness, and became not only the spectator, but 
‘the master and leader of all wickedness. Alas! 
what availed it to have conquered his enemies, when 
| he was thus overcome by his vices; he was so far 
from being strengthened by it, that even his own 
subjects, offended at his inglorious peace, and more 
inglorious life, rebelled against him. 4 

After the retreat of Antiochus, Ptolemy visited the 
cities of Celosyria and Palestine, which had sub- 
mitted to him; and, among others, in his progress, 
he came to Jerusalem, “ where he took a view of the 
temple, and even offered sacrifices, &e., to the God 
of Israel. But, not being satisfied with viewing it 
only from the outer court, beyond which no Gentile 
was allowed to pass, he showed a great inclination to 
enter the sanctuary, and even the holy of holies 
itself. ‘This occasioned a great uproar all over the 
city ; the high-priest informed him of the holiness 
of the place, and the express law of God, by whick 
he was forbid to enter it. But every sort of opposi- 
‘tion only served to inflame his curiosity; he forced 
in as far as the second court, where, while he was 
preparing to enter the temple itself, he was struck 
by God with such terror, that he was carried off 
half dead. On this he left’ the city, highly exaspe- 
rated against the whole Jewish nation, and loudly 
threatening future vengeance.” At his return, there- 
fore, to Alexandria, he began a cruel persecution 
against the Jewish inhabitants of that city, and cast 
down many ten thousands ; for it appears from Eu- 
sebius, that, about this time, forty thousand Jews, or, 
according to Jerome, sixty thousand, were slain. 
The loss of so many of his Jewish subjects, and the 
. rebellion of the Egyptians, added to the maleadminis- 


oe ieee ot 


Of the kingdoms 


CHAPTER XI. 


of Egypt and Syria. 


A. M.3470. 13 For the king of the north shall 
~ return, and shall set forth a multitude 
greater than the former, and shall certainly 
come ‘after certain years with a great army 
and with much riches. 
14 And in those times there shall many 
stand up against the king of the south: also 
%the robbeis of thy people shall exalt them- 


but A. M. 3470. 


selves to establish the vision; 
B.C. 534, 


they shall fall. Siapeenece 
15 So the king of the north shall come, and 
cast up a mount, and take 1°the most fenced 
cities: and the arms of the south shall not 
withstand, neither "his chosen people, neither 
shall there be any strength to withstand. 
16 But he that cometh against him ‘shall do 


8 Hebrew, at the end of times, even years, Chapter iv. 16 ; xii. 7. 
9 Heb. the children of robbers. 


10 Heb. the city e munitions.——"! Heb. the people of his choices. 
1Chap. vill. 4, 7; Verses 3, 36. 


see Bishop Newton, Wintle, and the Univ. Hist., 
vol. ix. p. 220. 

Verse 13. For the king oF the north shall return 
—It is here foretold that “the war should be renewed 
between the two kings of the north and south, and 
that it should be begun by the former, who should 
aitempt another invasion of Egypt. ‘This came to 
pass accordingly, about fourteen years after. For 
Antiochus, having taken and slain the rebel Achzus, 
and put an end to the Asiatic war in which he had 
been engaged, and during which, by his martial ex- 
ploits against the Medes, Parthians, and others, he 
had acquired a distinguished reputation throughout 
Asia and Europe; and having also reduced and set- 
tled the eastern parts in*their obedience, he found 
himself at leisure to prosecute any enterprise he 
might think proper to undertake. And Ptolemy 
Philopater having died of intemperance and de- 
bauchery, and being succeeded by his son Ptolemy 
Epiphanes, now a child of only four or five years 
old, he judged it a favourable opportunity for recov- 
ering his lost provinces. Taking advantage, there- 
fore, of the infancy of Ptolemy, he returned to in- 
vade Egypt, and set forth a multitude greater than 
the former, engaging Philip, king.of Macedon, in 
his interest, and bringing with him powerful forces 
from the east; with much riches—With abundant 
supplies of all necessary provisions for his army; 
and especially with beasts of burden for removing 
their baggage, for that is the proper sense of the 
word w)D), here rendered riches. Polybius informs 
us, that from the king of Bactria, and from the king 
of India, he received so many elephants as made up 
his number one hundred and fifty, besides provisions 
and riches. Jerome affirms, from ancient authors, 
that he gathered together an incredible army out of 
the countries beyond Babylon; and, contrary to the 
league, he marched with his army, Ptolemy Philo- 
pater being dead, against his son, who was then a 
child. 

Verse 14. There shall many stand up against 
the king of the south—“ Antiochus was not the only 
one who rose up against young Ptolemy: others also 
confederated with him. Agathocles was in posses- 
sion of the young king’s person; and he was so dis- 
solute and proud in the exercise of his power, that 
the provinces which before were subject to Egypt 
rebelled, and Egypt itself was disturbed by seditions; 
and the people of Alexandria rose up in a body 
neva Lepiniciens and caused him, his sister and 


mother, and their associates, to be put to death. 
Philip too, the king of Macedon, entered into a 
league with Antiochus, to divide Ptolemy’s domin- 
ions between them, and each to take the parts which 
lay nearest and most convenient to him.” Also the 
robbers of thy people—Hebrew, Jr) "8172 732), lite- 
rally, the sons of the breakers, or, of the revolters, 
the factious and refractory ones, of thy people. The 
LXX. read it, oc vive tov Aoipwv tov Zaov cov, the 
sons of the pestilent ones of thy people. In the Vul- 
gate it is translated, the sons also of the prevarica- 
tors of thy people shall exalt themselves to esta- 
blish the vision—The Jews were at that time broken 
into factions, part adhering to the king of Egypt, and 
part to the king of Syria; but the majority were for 
breaking away from their allegiance to Ptolemy, and 
thereby contributed greatly, without their knowing . 
it, toward the accomplishment of this prophecy con- 
cerning the calamities which should be brought 
upon the Jewish nation, by the succeeding kings of 
Syria. But they shall fall—For Scopas came with 
a powerful army from Ptolemy, and, Antiochus be- 
ing engaged in other parts, soon reduced the cities 
of Celosyria and Palestine to their former obedience, 
He subdued the Jews in the winter season, placed a 
garrison in the castle of Jerusalem, and returned 
with great spoils to Alexandria—Bishop Newton. 
Verses 15, 16. So the king of the north shall come 
and take the most fenced cities—It was in the ab- 
sence of Antiochus that these advantages were ob- 
tained by the arms of Egypt; but his presence soon 
turned the seale, and changed the whole face of 
affairs: for being concerned to recover Judea, and 
the cities of Ceelosyria and Palestine, which Scopas 
had taken, he came again into those parts. Scopas 
was sent again to oppose him, but was defeated near 
the sources of Jordan, lost a great part of his army, 
and was pursued to Sidon, where he was shut up 


| with ten thousand men, and closely besieged. Three 


famous generals were sent from Egypt to raise the 
siege ; but they could not succeed, and at length, 


| Scopas was foreed by famine to surrender, upon the 


hard conditions of having life only granted to him 


/and his men; they were obliged to lay down their 


arms, and were sent away stripped and naked. Anti- 

ochus took also Gaza, and then all the other cities 

of that district, namely, Abila, Samaria, and Gadara; 

and afterward became master of the whole country. 

The arms of the south could not withstand him, 

neither his chosen people, neither Scopas nor the 
831 


Of the kingdoms 


DANIEL. 


of Egypt and Syria. 


ABB 430: according to his own will, and * none 
—" shall stand before him: and he shall 
stand in the ™ glorious’ land, which by his 
hand shall be consumed. 

17 He shall also ! set his face to enter with 
the strength of his whole kingdom, and ™ up- 


right ones with him; thus shall he Ame ea70 
do: and he shall give him the daugh- ————_ 
ter of women, *° corrupting her: but she shall 
not stand on his side, ™ neither be for him. 

18 After this shall he turn his face unto the 
isles, and shall take many: but a prince " for 


k Josh. i. 5. 12 Or, goodly land, Chap. viii. 9; Verses 41, 45. 
13 Heb, the land of ornament.——! 2 Chron, xx. 3, 


14. Or, much uprightness, or, equal conditions—— Hebrew, to 
corrupt.——™ Chap. ix. 26.——1* Heb. for him. 


other great generals, nor the choicest troops who 
were sent against him; but he did according to his 
own will, and none was able to stand before him— 
Among others the Jews also readily submitted to 
him, went forth in solemn procession to meet him, 
received him splendidly into their city, supplied him 
with plenty of provisions for all his army and ele- 
phants, and assisted him in besieging the garrison 
which Scopas had left in the citadel. ‘Thus he stood 
in the glorious land—And his power was established 
in Judea. Which by his hand shall be conswmed— 
This clause, thus rendered, may be considered as re- 
ferring to Antiochus’s maintaining his army with 
the provisions he drew from Judea, and thereby ex- 
hausting it; and to the distresses the country suffer- 
ed, by the marching and counter-marching of hos- 
tile armies through it. Thus Josephus: “ While 
Antiochus the Great was reigning in Asia, both the 
Jews and the inhabitants of Celosyria, by the laying 
waste of their countries, suffered many things. For 
when he carried on war against Ptolemy Philopater, 
and against his son, surnamed Epiphanes, it happen- 
ed, that whether he was conqueror or conquered, 
they suffered alike: so that they were like a ship at 
sea in a storm, tossed by the waves on both sides; 
for whether Antiochus prospered, or met with a re- 
verse, their sufferings were the same.” But then 
they could not be said to be consumed by the hand 
of Antiochus particularly ; they were consumed as 
much, or more, by Scopas: and the Hebrew, n93 
11'3, is capable of another interpretation; it may be 
translated, Which shall be perfected, or prosper, or 
flourish, in his hand ; a sense which agrees as well 
with the truth of the text, and better with the truth 
of history. For Antiochus, to reward and encourage 
the Jews in their fidelity and obedience to him, gave 
orders that their city should be repaired, and the 
dispersed Jews should return and inhabit it; that 
they should be supplied with cattle and other pro- 
visions for sacrifices ; that they should be furnished 
with timber and other materials for finishing and 
adorning the temple; that they should live all ac- 
cording to the laws of their country; that the priests 
and elders, the scribes and Levites, should be ex- 
empted from the capitation and other taxes; that 
those who then inhabited the city, or should return 
to it within a limited time, should be free from all 
tribute for three years, and that the third part of 
their tribute should be remitted to them for ever 
after ; and also, that as many as had been taken and 
forced into servitude should be released, and their 
substance and goods be restored to them: see Bishop 
Newton, ’ 


832 


Verse 17. He shall also set his face to enter with 
the strength of his whole kingdom—Or rather, He 
shall also set his face to enter, by force, the whole 
kingdom: and upright ones with him; thus shall 
he do—If this translation be right, the wpright ones 


| here intended are the Jews who marched under his 


banners, and are so denominated to distinguish them 
from the other idolatrous soldiers. But the LXX. 
read, kar evfeva ravra per’ avrov-rornoet, he shall make 
all things right, or straight, or make agreement 
with him, that is, with Ptolemy. So also the Vul- 
gate. Antiochus would have seized upon the king- 
dom of Egypt by force; but fearing, according to 
Appian, if he did so, he should bring the Romans 
upon him, he judged it better to proceed by strata- 
gem, and to carry on his designs by treaty rather 
than by arms. He therefore proposed a marriage 
between his own daughter Cleopatra and King 
Ptolemy, now sixteen years old, to be consummated 


| when they should come of age; which offer, made 
by Eucles of Rhodes, was accepted, and a contract 
fully agreed between them. ‘Thus the text, And he 


shall give him the daughter of women—His daughter, 
so called, as being one of the most eminent and beau- 
tiful of women. He himself afterward conducted 
her to Raphia, where they were married; and gave 
in dowry with her the provinces of Celosyria and 
Palestine, upon condition of the revenues being 
equally divided between the two kings. All this he 
transacted with a fraudulent intention, corrupting, 
or to corrupt, her, and induce her to betray her 
husband’s interests to her father. But his designs 
did not take effect: for it is here said, she shall not 
stand on his part, neither be for him—Ptolemy and 
his generals were aware of Antiochus’s artifices, and 
therefore stood upon their guard; and Cleopatra 
herself affected more the cause of her husband 
than of her father, insomuch that, as Livy relates, 
(lib. xxvii. cap. 3,) she joined with her husband in 
an embassy to the Romans, to congratulate them 
upon their victories over her father, and to exhort 
them, after they had expelled him out of Greece, to 
prosecute the war in Asia, assuring them, at the 
same time, that the king and queen of Egypt would 
readily obey the commands of the senate. 

Verse 18.” After this shall he turn his face unto 
the isles, and shall take many—After entering into 
this alliance, Antiochus fitted out a formidable fleet 
of one hundred large ships of war, and two hundred 
other lesser vessels, with a view to reduce under his 
power the maritime places of Asia, Thrace, and 
Greece ; and he took Samos, Eubeea, and many other 
islands, which was a great indignity and reproach 

7 
3 


Of the kingdoms 


CHAPTER XI. 


of Egypt and Syria. 


A. M. 3470. his own behalf shall cause "7 the re- 
B, C. 534. ; : 
proach offered by him to cease ; with- 
out his own reproach he shall cause 7¢ to turn 
upon him. 
19 Then he shall turn his face toward the 


fort of his own land: but he shall A. M. 3470. 
stumble and fall, "and not be found. echt 
20 Then shall stand up}*in his estate %a 
raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: 
but within few days he shall be destroyed, 


17 Heb. his reproach. 


0 Job xx. 8; Psalm xxxvii. 36; Ezek. 
xxvi. 21. 


offered to the Romans, when their confederates were 
thus oppressed; and the cities which they had lately 
restored to liberty were enslaved. But a prince, 
&c., shall cause the reproach to cease—This prince 
was Lucius Scipio, the Roman consul, who made 
the reproach, which Antiochus had offered to the 
Romans by invading their allies, to return upon his 
own head, by overthrowing him in battle at mount 
Sipylus, and forcing him to quit all the conquests he 
had made in the lesser Asia. In this battle Antiochus 
lost fifty thousand foot and four thousand horse; 
one thousand four hundred were taken prisoners, 
and he himself escaped with difficulty. From this 
great victory, whereby Asia was delivered out of 
the hands of Antiochus, Scipio obtained the surname 
of Asiaticus: see Livy, lib. xxxvii. cap 44. Anti- 
ochus, in consequence of this defeat, was obliged to 
sue for peace, and, to obtain it, was under the neces- 
sity of submitting to very dishonourable conditions ; 
namely, not to set foot in Europe, and to give up all 
he possessed in Asia on this side mount Taurus; to 
defray the whole expenses of the war, &c., and to give 
twenty hostages for the performance of these articles, 
one of whom was his youngest son Antiochus, after- 
ward called Epiphanes, By these means he and 
his successors became tributary to the Romans. So 
that nothing could be more fully accomplished than 
what is here said about the reproach he had brought 
upon others being turned upon himself. 

Verse 19. Then he shall turn his face toward the 
fort of his own land—The word rendered fort, 
‘yn, is plural, and would be more properly ren- 
dered, the fortresses. It is intended to signify, that 
he should return after the battle to some of his for- 
tified towns. And accordingly we find that he fled 
away that night, first to Sardes, and from thence to 
Apamea, and the next day came into Syria to An- 
tioch, a fortress of his own land; from whence he 
sent ambassadors to sue for peace; and within a 
few days after peace was granted, he sent part of 
the money demanded, and the hostages, to the Ro- 
man consul at Ephesus. Being under great diffi- 
culties how to raise the money which he had stipu- 
lated to pay to the Romans, he marched into the 
eastern provinces, to collect there the arrears of 
tribute, and amass what treasure he could; and at- 
tempting to plunder the rich temple of Jupiter 
Belus in Elymais, he was assaulted by the inhabit- 
ants of the country, and slain, together with his at- 
tendants. Such is the account given of the cireum- 
stances of his death by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, 
Justin, and Jerome. Aurelius Victor, however, re- 
ports it otherwise, affirming that he was slain by 
some of his companions, whom, in his liquor, he 

Vou, TI. ( 53 ) . 


18 Or, in his place, Verse 7. 19 Hebrew, one that causeth an 
exacter to pass over. 


had beaten at a banquet; but this account deserves 
not so much eredit as the concurrent testimony of 
earlier historians. However it was, his death was 
inglorious; he stumbled, and fell, and was no more 
found.—Bishop Newton. 

Verse 20. Then shall stand up in his estate— 
Hebrew, 13 5y, on his base; Vulgate, in his place ; 
or, shall succeed him ; a raiser of taxesin the glory 
of his kingdom—Or, as in the margin, one that 
causeth an exacter to pass over, &c., that is, one who 
will send the tribute-gatherers through his kingdom. 
This was a very just description of Seleucus Philo- 
pater, the son and successor of Antiochus, who op; 
pressed his people with most grievous taxes, that he 
might raise the tribute of one thousand talents, 
which he was obliged to pay annually to the Romans, 
as well as that he might support his own govern- 
ment. According to Jerome, he performed nothing 
worthy of the empire of Syria, and of his father, 
but reigned both idly and weakly, as Appian also 
testifies. He had an inclination, indeed, to shake off 
the Roman yoke, and therefore raised an army, with 
an intent to march over mount Taurus to the assist- 
ance of Pharnaces king of Pontus; but his dread 
of the Romans confined him at home within the 
bounds prescribed to him, and almost as soon as he 
had raised, he disbanded, his army. So that he was 
little more than a raiser of taxes all his days. He 
even sent his treasurer, Heliodorus, to seize the 
money deposited in the temple of Jerusalem. This 
was literally causing an exacter lo pass over the 
glory of the kingdom, when he sent his treasurer to 
plunder that temple which even kings had honoured 
and magnified with their best gifts. But within a few 
days—Or rather, years, according to the prophetic 
style, he was to be destroyed—And accordingly his 
reign was of short duration in comparison of his 
father’s, for he reigned only twelve years, and his 
father thirty-seven. Or perhaps the passage may 
mean, that within a few days, or years, after his at- 
tempting to plunder the temple at Jerusalem, he 
should be destroyed: and not long after that, as all 
chronologers agree, he was destroyed, neither in an- 
ger,nor in battle—Neither through rebellion at home, 
nor in war abroad; but by the treachery of his own 
treasurer Heliodorus; the same wicked hand that 
was the instrument of his sacrilege being also the 
instrument of his death. 
sent his only son Demetrius to be a hostage at 
Rome instead of his brother Antiochus, and An-, 
tiochus being not yet returned to the Syrian court, 
Heliodorus thought this a fit opportunity to despatch ' 


his master, and, in the absence of the next heir to 


the crown, to usurp it to himself. But he was disap 
3 


‘ 


“For Seleucus having _ 


. Of the rise of 


DANIEL, 


Antiochus Epiphanes. 


A. M. 3170. neither in anger, nor in battle. 
B.C. 3 91 4 And * in his estate °shall 
stand up a vile person, to whom they shall 
not give the honour of the kingdom: but he 
shall come in peaceably, and obtain the king- 
dom by flatteries. 

22 ? And with the arms of a flood shall they 
be overflown from before him, and. shall be 
broken ; 4 yea, also the prince of the covenant. 

23 And after the league made with him *he 


21 Or, in his place. © Chap. vii. 8; viii. 9, 
P Verse 10.——4 Chap. viii. 10, 11, 25. 


20 Heb. angers. 
93, 25. 


pointed in his ambitious projects, and only made 
way for another’s usurped greatness instead of his 
own.”—Bishop Newton. 

Verse 21. And in his estate shall stand up a vile 
person—This is a description of Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, the great persecutor of. the Jewish nation 
and religion, He is here called a vile person, not 
for any want of wit or parts, but for the extravagance 
of his life and actions, which made many doubt 
whether he had more of the fool or the madman in 
him: see note on chap. viii. 9, 23-26. T'o whom 
they shall not give the honour of the kingdom, 8&ce.— 
The right of succession belonged to Demetrius, the 
son of Seleucus Philopater, and nephew to An- 
tiochus; but he being a hostage at Rome when his 
father died by the treachery of Heliodorus, An- 
tiochus, who was now returned from thence, took 
advantage of his absence, and by courting Eumenes 
king of Pergamus, and Attalus his brother, with 
flattering speeches, and great promises of friendship 
and assistance against the Romans, prevailed with 
them to assist him against the usurper Heliodorus. 
He also flattered the Syrians, and with great show 
of clemency obtained their concurrence, He flat- 
tered the Romans likewise, and sent ambassadors to 
court their favour, to pay the arrears of tribute, to 
present them besides with golden vessels of five 
hundred pounds’ weight, and to desire their friend- 
ship and alliance. Thus he came in peaceably— 
And as he flattered the Syrians, the Syrians flattered 
him again, and bestowed upon him the title of Epi- 
phanes, or Illustrious ; but the epithet of vile, or 
rather despicable, here given by the prophet, agrees 
better with his true character. 

Verses 22-24. And with the arms of a flood, &e. 
—By arms here is signified force, or strength, and 
by an inundation, or flood, a great army. By which 
is here to be understood the forces of Attalus and 
Eumenes, who favoured Antiochus: by these they 
should be overflown, and broken, who were his com- 
petitors for the crown, namely, Heliodorus, the mur- 
derer of Seleucus, and his partisans, as well as those 
of the king of Egypt, Ptolemy Philometor, who had 
formed some designs upon Syria. Yea, also the 
prince of the covenant—That is, the high-priest of 
the Jews was broken. Thus Theodoret: “He speaks 
of the pious high-priest, Onias, the brother of Jason, 
and foretels that even he should be turned out of his 

834 


shall work deceitfully : * for he shall 
come up, and shall become strong 
with a small people. 

24 He shall enter ” peaceably even upon the 
fattest. places of the province; and he shall do 
that which his fathers have not done, nor his 
fathers’ fathers; he shall scatter among them 
the prey, and spoil, and riches: yea, and he 
shall ** forecast his devices against the strong 
holds, even for a time. 


A. M. 3470 
B. C, 534. 


* Fulfilled about B.C. 171.——** Or, into the 


he 28 Heb. think his thoughts. 


peaceable and fat. 


office.” As soon as Antiochus was seated in his 
throne, he removed Onias from the high-priesthood, 
and preferred Jason, Onias’s brother, to that dignity, 
not for any crime committed against him by the 
former, but for the great sums of money which were 
offered to him by the latter. For Jason offered to 
give no less than three hundred and sixty talents of 
silver for the high-priesthood, besides eighty more 
upon another account: and good Onias was not only 
displaced to make way for a wicked usurper, but 
after a few years, living at Antioch, he was, with as 
great treachery as cruelty, murdered by the king’s 
deputy. But though Antiochus had made a league 
with Jason the new high-priest, yet he did not faith- 
fully adhere to it, but acted deceitfully ; and substi- 
tuted his brother Menelaus in his room, by means 
of an armed force, because he offered him three hun- 
dred talents more than that which he had received 
from Jason. F'or—Or rather, And he shall come up, 
(forthe words do not assign a reason forany thing that 
precedes,) and shall become strong with a smail 
people—Antiochus had been many years a hostage 
at Rome; and, coming from thence with only a few 
attendants, he appeared in Syria little at first, but 
soon received a great increase, He shall enter 
peaceably into the fattest places of the province— 
By the friendship of Eumenes and Attalus he enter- 
ed peaceably upon the upper provinees, and likewise 
upon the provinces of Calosyria and Palestine. 
And wherever he came he outdid his fathers, and 
his fathers’ fathers, in liberality and profusion. 
He scattered among them the prey, and spoil, and 
riches—The prey of his enemies, the spoil of tem- 
ples, and the riches of his friends, as well as his own 
revenues, were expended in public shows, and be- 
stowed in largesses among the people. In the first 
book of Maccabees, clap. iii. 30, it is affirmed, that 
in the liberal giving of gifts he abounded above the 
kings that were before him. Polybius relates, that 
sometimes, meeting accidentally with people whom 
he had never seen before, he would enrich them 
with unexpected presents; and sometimes, standing 
in the public streets, he would throw about. his 
money, and ery aloud, “ Let him take it to whom for- 
tune shall give it.’ His generosity was the more 
requisite, to fix the provinces of Ceelosyria and 
Palestine in his interest, because they were claimed 
as of right belonging to the king of Egypt. An 
F ( 53* ) —— 


Of the rise of 


CHAPTER XI. 


Antiochus Epiphanes. 


A. M. 3470. 25 


* And he shall stir up his power 
B. C. 534, 


and his courage against the king of 
the south with a great army; and the king of 
the south shall be stirred up to battle with a very 
great and mighty army ; but he shall not stand : 
for they shall forecast devices against him. 

26 Yea, they that feed of the portion of his 
meat shall destroy him, and his army shall 
* overflow: and many shall fall down slain. 

27 And both these kings’ ** hearts shall be to 


do mischief, and they shall speak lies alge 
at one table; but it shall not prosper: — ; 
for “ yet the igs shall be at the time appointed. 

28 Then shall he return into his land with 
great riches; and Y his heart shall be against 
the holy covenant ; and he shall do exploits, 
and return to his own land. 

29 At the time appointed he shall return, 
and come toward the south; 7 but it shall not 
be as the former, * or as the latter. 


24 Heb. their 


* Fulfilled about B. C. 170.—+ Verses 10, 22. 
hearts. 


z Verse 


«Verses 29, 35,40; Chap. viii. 19.——Y Verse 22. 
23. a Verse 25. 


tiochus rejected this claim, and foreseeing that these 
demands would prove the occasion of a ‘new war 
between the two crowns, came to Joppa to take a 
view of the frontiers, and to put them into a proper 
posture of defence. In his progress he came to 
Jerusalem, and, as it was evening, he was ushered 
into the city by torch-light with great rejoicing. 
From thence he went to Phenicia to fortify his 
own strong holds, and to forecast his devices 


against those of the enemy ; the LXX. and Arabic | 


read, against Egypt. Thus he acted even for a 
time, and employed some years in his hostile pre- 
parations. 

Verses 25, 26. For he shall stir up his power, &c., 
against the king of the south—By the king of the 
south is meant the king of Egypt, namely, Ptolemy 
Philometor, who demanded the surrender of Ceelo- 
syria to him, as by right belonging to him, through 
virtue of the marriage articles between Ptolemy 
Epiphanes and Cleopatra; but Antiochus, instead of 
complying with his demand, invaded Egypt with a 
vast force both by sea and land. And the king of 
the south shall be stirred up, &c.—That is, the gene- 
rals of Ptolemy were stirred up to war with very 
many and exceeding strong forces; and yet could 
not resist the fraudulent counsels of Antiochus. 
The two armies engaged between Pelusium and 
mount Cassius, and Antiochus obtained the victory. 
The next campaign he had greater success, routed 
the Egyptians, took Pelusium, ascended as far as 
Memphis, and made himself master of all Egypt ex- 
cept Alexandria. These transactions are recorded 
Maccabees i. 16-19. ‘The misfortunes of Ptolemy 
are, by the prophet, ascribed to the treachery and 
baseness of his own ministers and subjects, verse 
26: and it is certain that Euleus was a very wicked 
minister, and bred up the young king in luxury and 
effeminacy, contrary to his inclination. Ptolemy 
Macron, too, who was governor of Cyprus, revolted 
from him, and delivered up that important island to 
Antiochus, Nay, even the Alexandrians, seeing the 


distress of Philometor, renounced their allegiance; 


and taking his younger brother Euergetes, or Phys- 
con, proclaimed him king instead of his elder 
brother. 

Verse 27. And both these kings’ hearts shall be to 
do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table— 
Antiochus and Ptolemy Philometor often met to- 

3 


gether at Memphis, and frequently ate at the same 
table as friends, Antiochus pretending to take care 
of the interests of his nephew Philometor, espe- 
cially after the Alexandrians had proclaimed his 
brother Euergetes king; and Philometor seemingly 
confiding in his uncle’s protection. But herein they 
were both insincere, designing to impose upon each 
other; Antiochus’s design being to seize the kingdom 
of Egypt to himself, and Philometor’s to disappoint 
that design, by coming to an agreement with Euer- 
getes and the Alexandrians. But still these artifices 
did not prosper on either side; for neither did An- 
tiochus obtain the kingdom, nor did Philometor ut- 
terly exclude him; but at last the pretended friend- 
ship broke out into open wars, which were not to 
have an end till the time appointed, which was not 
yet come. 

Verse 28. Then shall he return into his land with 
great riches—Namely, with the spoils taken in 
Egypt, which were of immense value. And his 
heart shall be against the holy covenant—“ While 
he was absent in Egypt a false report was spread of 
his death ; and Jason, thinking this a favourable op- 
portunity for recovering the high-priesthood, march- 
ed to Jerusalem witha thousand men, assaulted and 
took the city, drove Menelaus into the castle, and 
exercised great cruelties upon the citizens. Anti- 
ochus, hearing of this, coneluded that the whole na- 
tion had revolted ; and being informed that the peo- 
ple had made great rejoicings at the report of his 
death, he determined to take a severe revenge, and 
went up with a great army, as well as with great in- 
dignation, against Jerusalem. He besieged and took 
the city by force of arms, slew 40,000 of the inhabit- 
ants, and sold as many more for slaves, polluted the 
temple and altar with swines’ flesh, profaned the 
holy of holies by breaking into it, took away the 
golden vessels, and other sacred treasures, to the 
value of eighteen hundred talents, restored Mene- 
laus to his office and authority, and constituted one 
Philip, by nature a Phrygian, in manners a barba- 
rian, governor of Judea. When he had done these 
exploits he returned to his own land.”—Bishop 
Newton. 

Verses 29, 30, At the time appointed—Namely, by 
God. At the time determined by the divine pro- 
vidence, he shall return and come toward the south 
—He shall march into Egypt again. Antiochus per- 

835 


Of the antichristian 


DANIEL. 


power of the church. 


——- 


A. M, 3470. 30 9» For the ships of Chittim shall 
B.C. 3+ come against him: * therefore he shall 
be grieved, and return, and have indignation 


© against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he 


> Num. xxiv. 24; Jer. ii. 10.—* Fulfilled about B. C. 169. 


shall even return, and have intelli- A. M. 3470. ~ 


; . C. 534. 
gence with them that forsake the ———— 


holy covenant. 
31 t And arms shall stand on his part, ° and 


¢ Ver. 28.—+t Fulfilled about B.C. 168. € Ch, viii.11; xii. 11. 


ceiving that his fine-woven policy was unravelled, 
and that the two brothers, Philometor and Euerge- 
tes, instead of wasting and ruining each other in war, 
had laid aside their mutual dissensions, and provided 
for their common safety and interest by making 
peace, and agreeing to reign jointly, was so offended, 
that he prepared war much more eagerly and mali- 
ciously against both than he had before against one 
of them. Early, therefore, in the spring he set for- 
ward with his army, and passing through Celosy- 
ria, came into Egypt; and the inhabitants of Mem- 
phis submitting to him, he came by easy marches 
down to Alexandria, But it shall not be as the for- 
mer—That is, this expedition shall not be so success- 
ful as his former ones: for the ships of Chittim 
shall come against him—That is, the ships which 
brought the Roman ambassadors, namely, Popilius 
Lenas and his companions ; who came. from Italy, 
touched at Greece, and arrived in Egypt, at the sup- 
plication of the Ptolemies, to command a peace be- 
tween the contending kings: see an account of this 
matter in the note on chap. viii. 23. The reason of 
the Romans acting in this imperious manner, and of 
Antiochus so readily obeying, was, as Polybius sug- 
gests, the total conquests that Aimilius the Roman 
consul had just made of the kingdom of Macedonia. 
Therefore he shall be grieved and return—It was a 
great mortification to Antiochus to be so humbled, 
and so disappointed of his expected prey. He led back 
his forces into Syria, says Polybius, grieved anid 
groaning, but thinking it expedient to yield to the 
times for the present. Andhave indignation against 
the holy covenant—Or, the law of God. Antiochus 
being disappointed in his designs upon Egypt, vent- 
ed all his fury upon the Jews; for he detached Apol- 
lonius with an army of twenty-two thousand men, 
who coming to Jerusalem slew great multitudes, 
plundered the city, set fire to it in several places, 
and pulled down the houses and walls round about it. 
Then they built, on an eminence in the city of Da- 
vid, a strong fortress, which might command the 


temple ; and issuing from thence they fell upon those |, 


who came to worship, and shed innocent blood on 
every side of the sanctuary, and defiled it; so that 
the temple was deserted and the whole service 
omitted; the city was forsaken of its natives, and 
became a habitation of strangers. So shall he do 
he shall even return, &c.—After his return to An- 
tioch, he published a decree which obliged all per- 
sons, upon pain of death, to conform to the religion 
of the Greeks; and so the Jewish law was abro- 


Olympus. In the transacting of these matters he 
had intelligence with them that forsook the holy co- 
venant—Namely, Menelaus and the other apostate 


Jews of his party, who were the king’s chief insti- 
gators against their religion and country: see 1 Mac- 
cab. i. 41-64; 2 Maccab. vi. 1-9. “It may be pro- 
per to stop here, and reflect a little, how particular 
and circumstantial this prophecy is concerning the 
kingdoms of Egypt and Syria, from the death of 
Alexander to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes. 
There is not so complete and regular a series of their 
kings; there is not so concise and comprehensive an 
account Of their affairs, to be found in any author of 
those times. The prophecy isreally more perfect than 
any history. No one historian hath related so many 
circumstances, and in such exact order of time, as 
the prophet hath foretold them; so that it has been 
necessary to have recourse to several authors, 
Greek and Roman, Jewish and Christian; and to 
collect something from one, and something from 
another, for the better explaining and illustrating 
the great variety of particulars contained in this 
prophecy. The prophecy indeed is wonderfully 
exact, not only to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, 
but beyond that time.” So that we may conclude 
in the words of the inspired writer; No one could 
thus declare the times and seasons but He who hath 
them in his own power: see Acts i.'7; and Bishop 
Newton. 

Verse 31. And arms shall stand on his part— 
His arms shall so prevail as to make an entire con- 
quest of the Jews, to profane the temple, and cause 
the daily service performed there to cease: see note 
chap. viii. 11; and compare 1 Maccab. i. 39; and 2 
Maccab. v. 2-5. The temple is here called the 
sanctuary of strength, either because it was fortified 


_after the manner of a castle, or else because if was a 


token of the divine protection, as being the place 
God had chosen to be worshipped in. We are in- 


| formed by Josephus, by the author of the Macca- 


bees, and others, that Antiochus’s soldiers entered 
the temple and plundered it, and that afterward he 
ordered that the Jews should not be suffered to offer 
up the daily sacrifices, which, according to the law, 
they were accustomed to offer; that he compelled 
them also to omit their worship of the true God, 
and to pay divine honours to them whom he regard- 
ed as gods, and to make shrines in every city and 
village, and to build altars, and daily to sacrifice swine 
upon them: see Joseph. Anti. lib. xii. eap. 5, sec. 4. 
And they shall place the abomination that maketh 
desolate—In the Scriptures, idols are commonly 
called abominations. This was a prediction of the 


: _ great profanation Antiochus should cause to the tem- 
gated, the heathen worship was set up in its stead, |) ple, in placing an idol upon the altar of burnt-offer- 


and the temple itself was consecrated to Jupiter|| ings: see 1 Maccab. vi. 54, 59. 


It is probable, that 
the idol was Jupiter, because we find that they 
dedicated the temple anew to Jupiter Olympus: 


| see 2 Maccab. vi. 2. It is here called the abomina- 


3 


Of the antichristian 


CHAPTER XI. 


power in the church. 


le re they shall pollute the sanctuary of 

— strength, and shall take away the 
daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomi- 
nation that * maketh desolate. 

32 And such as do wickedly against the cove- 
nant shall he *° corrupt by flatteries: but the 
people that do know their God shall be strong, 
and do exploits. 

33 } And they that understand among the 


people shall instruct many: 
they shall fall by the sword, and by 
flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days. 
34 Now when they shall fall, they shall be 
holpen with a litile help: but many shall cleave 
to them with flatteries. 

35 And some of them of understanding 
shall fall, "to try "them, and to purge, and 
to make ¢hem white, ° even to the time of 


* vet ‘ M. 3470. 
. C. 534. 


26 Or, cause to dissemble-——i Mal. ii. 7. 
k Heb. xi. 35, 


25 Or, astonisheth. 


tion that maketh desolate, because it banished the 
true worship of God, and his worshippers, from the 
place. 

Verse 32. Such as do wickedly shall he corrupt 
by flatteries—This is a declaration, that there would 
be many wicked persons who would be enticed to 
this idolatry by Antiochus’s persuasions. Jason and 
Menelaus, who were made high-priests by Antio- 
chus for asum of money, afterward became his in- 
struments, and consented to the setting up of this 
idol: see 1 Maccab. i. 52; 2 Maccab. iv. 13-15; and 
vy. 15; and vi. 21. But the people that do know 
their God—That are savingly acquainted with him, 
and adhere to his true worship and service, shail be 
strong and do exploits—When others yield to the 
tyrant’s demands, and surrender their consciences 
to his impositions, these shall bravely keep their 
ground, resist the temptation, and make the tyrant 
himself ashamed of his attempt upon them. Good old 
Eleazar, one of the principal scribes, was one of these, 
rather choosing to suffer torments and death than de- 
file himself by eating any thing unclean: see 2 Mac. 
vi. 19. The mother and her seven sons resolutely ad- 
hered to their religion, though they knew they must 
be put to death for so doing, 2 Maccab. vii. This 
might well be called doing exploits; for to choose 
to suffer rather than to sin isa great exploit. And 
it was by being strong in faith that they did those 
exploits; and bore to be tortured, not accepting de- 
liverance, as the apostle speaks, Heb. xi. 25, “ And 
many in Israel were fully resolved and confirmed 
in themselves not to eat any thing unclean, where- 
upon they chose rather to die, that they might not 
be defiled with meats, and that they might not pro- 
fane the holy covenant,” 1 Mae. i. 62,63. Or, it 
may refer to the military courage and achievements 
of Judas Maccabeus and others, in opposition to 
Antiochus. Observe, reader, the right knowledge 
of God is and will be the strength of the soul, and 
through it gracious persons do exploits. They that 
know his name will put their trust in him, and by 
that trust will do great things. 

Verse 33. They that understand, &c., shall in- 
struct many—They that know their duty, and are 
zealous in doing it, that are holy in heart and life, 
shall instruct many in the righteous ways of God, 
and keep them from apostacy when others fall off. 
Such were Mattathias and his family, 1 Mac. ii. 1, &c., 
the good old seribe Eleazar, and the mother and her 

3 


. Chap. xii. 10; 1 Pet. i. 7. 27 Or, by them. 


© Chap. viii. 
17,19; Verse 40. 


seven children mentioned above. Yet they shall fall 
by the sword, &c.—This is descriptive of the suffer- 
ings which those who adhered to the divine law 
should undergo, through the persecution of Antio- 
chus, who ordered them, as Josephus relates, to be 
put to death with most horrid torments; for some 
of them, when they had had their bodies torn to 
pieces by cruel scourgings, were nailed to crosses, 
to expire there in the most intolerable agonies. 
Other cruelties of different kinds, but not less severe, 
were executed upon others; many days—This 
cruel persecution continued three years and a half, 
as the time is computed by Josephus, reckoning 
from the first beginning of it till the sanctuary was 
cleansed. 

Verse 34. Now when they shall fall—When they 
shall lie quite overcome and oppressed with these 
great miseries; they shall be holpen with a little 
help—This was fulfilled by Mattathias and his five 
sons, who, in the height of their misery, stood up 
with most wonderful zeal and courage, to oppose 
these cruelties of Antiochus by force of arms; and 
several times overthrew, with great slaughter, Antio- 
chus’s parties who were employed in harassing 
Judea. But many shall cleave to them with flatter- 
ies—That is, shall be pretended friends only. Such 
were Joseph and Azarias, who engaged in the com- 
mon cause out of ambition and a desire of fame, 
1 Mac. v. 56, 62. Such were they who, after their 
death, were found with idols consecrated under 
their clothes, 2 Mac. xii. 40. Such was Rhodocus, 
who disclosed their secrets to the enemy, chap. 
xiii. 21. 

Verse 35. Some of them of understanding shall fall 
—Some of the principal men for piety and know- 
ledge shall fall under. this persecution, and suffer 
grievous miseries and torments: see verse 33. To 
try them, and to purge, &c.—For the trial of their 
faith and patience, and to purge them from those 
corruptions which are the usual effects of prosperity : 
compare 1 Pet. i.7: and to make it the more evi- 
dent how sincere they were in their profession, and 
that no temptations or sufferings could induce them 
to violate God’s law, and act contrary to their duty. 
The persecutions which were to befall the church 
under antichrist were and are designed for the same 
purpose, as appears by comparing chap. xii. 10 with 
the words here; Antiochus’s persecution being a 
type and figure of that under antichrist. Even to 

837° 


Of the antichristian 


DANIEL. 


power wm the church. 


A.M. 3470. the end: Pbecause it is yet for a 

B. C. 534. |. . 

__——— time appointed. 

36 % And the king ‘shall do according to 
his will; and he shall *exalt himself, and 
magnify himself above every god, and shall 
speak marvellous things ‘against the God of 
gods, and shall prosper ‘till the indignation be 
accomplished : for that that is determined shall 


be done. 


P Verse 29.——4 Verse 16. * Chapter vii. 8, 25; viii. 25; 
2 Thess. ii. 4; Revelation xiii. 5, 6—* Chap. vill. 11, 24, 25. 
t Chapter ix. 27. “1 Timothy iv. 3.——* Isaiah xiv. 13; | 
2 Thess. ii. 4. 


the time of the end—Namely, the time appointed by 
God for the ending of these calamities. Because it 
is yet for a time appointed—lt will be still some 
time before a deliverance will be granted: or, these 
calamities are appointed to last for some time. Mr. 
Mede refers the latter part of this sentence to the 
following verse, and so connects the following pro- 
phecy with what went before, thus: “This persecu- 
tion shall last to the time of the end; for as yet, for 
a time appointed, a king shall do according to his| 
will.” 

Verse 36. The king shall do according to his 
will—He shall act arbitrarily; or, ali things shall 
succeed for a time according to his wish; and he 
shall exalt. himself, and magnify himself above 
every god—Antiochus, as heathen authors have re- 
corded, plundered almost all the temples of the gods 
which he came near, to whomsoever dedicated. And 
he shall speak marvellous things against the God 
of gods—Shall speak boasting and reproachful words 
against the true God. Antiochus is called a blas- 
phemer, 2 Mac. ix. 28; and frequent mention is 
made in these books of blasphemies committed in 
Judea and Jerusalematthattime %ll the indigna- 
tion be accomplished—Till the anger of God, namely, 
for the sins of the people, is at an end, and he sees 
fit to put a stop to those punishments which his wis- 
dom and justice induced him to inflict. For that 
that is determined shall be done—For the time that 
these evils shall last is fixed by the divine provi- 
dence; and they shall not be prevented, nor put an 
end to till that time. Many of the things that follow 
may be applied, by way of accommodation, to anti- 
christ, of whom Antiochus was an eminent type; 
but they seem principally to refer to Antiochus him- 
self. 

Verse 37. Neither shall he regard the God of his 
fathers—The god or gods worshipped in his own 
native country, namely, Syria. He made laws to 
abolish the religion of his country, and to bring in 
the idols of the Greeks. And though his predeces- 
sors had honoured the God of Israel, and given great 
gifts to the temple at Jerusalem, (2 Mac. iii. 2, 3,) he 
did the greatest indignities to God and his temple. 
Nor the desire of women—This, as some think, means, 
nor the god thatis loved and adored by women; and, 
taking the clause in connection with the context, this | 

‘838 


37 Neither shall he regard the God : . _ 
of his fathers, “nor the desire of wo- — 
men, * nor regard any god: for he shall mag 
nify himself above all. 

38 *° But in his estate shall he honour the 
god of °° forces :*! and a god whom his fathers 
knew not shall he honour with gold, and sil- 
ver, and with precious stones, and * pleasant 
things. 


28 Or, But in his stead.——*® Heb. as for the almighty God, in 
his seat he shall honour, yea, he shall honour a god, whom.—+*° Or, 
munitions. 31 Heb, Mauzzim, or, God’s protectors.——** Heb. 


things desired, Isa. xliv. 9. 


seems the most natural sense of it; for the whole 
verse speaks of the impiety, or irreligion, of Antio- 
chus, that he had no regard to any god whatever. 
What god this was that was the desire of women, 
cannot be certainly said; it is probable it was the 
moon, (the queen of heaven, as they used to call 
her,) or some other of the heavenly luminaries; for 
the Syrian women are described in Seripture as par- 
ticularly attached to these. Or the expression may 
refer to his barbarous cruelty, and be intended to 
signify that he should spare no age nor sex, and 
should have no regard to women, however lovely 
or amiable. In fact, the author of the Maccabees in- 
forms us, that by his command mothers were killed 
with their children; and that there was killing of 
young and old, men, women, and children, slaying 
of virgins and infants, 2 Mac. v.13. Nor regard 
any god: for he shall magnify himself above all— 
He shall not regard the gods of any country whatso- 
ever, but think himself above them, and treat them 
as if he were so. He was so proud, that he thought 
himself above the condition of a mortal man; that 
he could command the waves of the sea, and reach 
the stars of heaven, as his insolence and haughtiness 
are expressed 2 Mac. ix. 8, 10. 

Verse 38. But in his estate—Or jurisdiction. The 
LXX. render it, ex: rorov avre, in his place shall he 
honour the god of forces—Literally, the god Mahuz- 
zim. This seems to be either Jupiter Olympus, 
never introduced among the Syrians till Antiochus 


‘| did it, or, as others rather suppose, Mars, the god of 


war, whom Antiochus ordered to be worshipped in 
his dominions: which latter opinion seems the more 
likely, as Antiochus was almost always engaged in 
some war or other, and appears to have depended 
most upon his sword for raising himself to power 
and dignity. The Greek version, the Vulgate, and 
several other translations, retain the original word, 
without interpreting it. The word imports protec- 
tion, or @ protector, and is often rendered by the 
LXX., vrepacriornc, a defender, or champion. A 
god. whom his fathers knew not—Nor worshipped; — 
because he wished to be thought to excel his fathers 
in wisdom; shall he honour with gold, and silver, 
and pleasant things—The word nyv9n, rendered 
pleasant things, is used by the Prophet Isaiah (chap 
xliv. 9) to signify the costly ornaments with which 
= 


The final overthrow of 


CHAPTER XI. 


the king of the north. 


A. M. 3470. 39 Thus shall he do in the 3 most 
B. C, 534. 

——— strong holds with a strange god, whom 
he shall acknowledge and increase with glory : 
and he shall cause them to rule over many, 
and shall divide the land for ** gain. 

40 § ¥ And at the time of the end shall the 


king of the south push at him: and A. M. 3470. 
the king of the north shall come 0 
against him ? like a whirlwind, with chariots, 
“and with horsemen, and with many ships; 
and he shall enter into the countries, » and 
shall overflow and pass over. 


*3 Hebrew, fortresses of munitions——** Hebrew, a price. 
¥ Verse 35. 


the heathen decked their idols; and of such orna- 
ments it is to be understood here. And the god 
spoken of here, as honoured and ornamented by 
Antiochus, seems to have been Baal-Semon, the 
chief god of the Phenicians, who is with propriety 
said to be a god whom Antiochus’s father knew not; 
because there was no god of such name, nor sup- 
posed with the same power and attributes, among 
the Greeks, till (probably by Antiochus’s means) 
they followed the example of the Phenicians in 
worshipping such a god. 

Verse 39. Thus shall he do in the most strong 
holds—Or, fortresses of Mahuzzim; with a strange 
god, whom he shall acknowledge—The temple of 
Jerusalem, called the sanctuary of strength, (verse 
31, where the same word Mahuz is used: see also 
Psa. xxvii. 5,) seems to be here intended by the most 
strong holds, or fortresses of Mahuzzim, that is, of mu- 
nitions, or protections, as it is signified that he should 
set up the strange god there. Some read it, He shall 
commit the munitions of strength, that is, the city of 
Jerusalem, toa strange god: or, he shall put it under 
the protection of Jupiter Olympus. This god he 
shall not only. acknowledge, but shall increase with 
glory—Setting his image even upon God’s altar. 
And he shall cause them—That minister to this idol; 
to rule over many—Shall put them into places of 
power and trust; and they shall divide the land for 
gain—Shall be maintained richly out of the profits 
of the country. Thus we find Antiochus’s officers 
promising Mattathias, that if he would do according to 
the king’s commandment, he and his house should 
be in the number of the king’s friends, and should 
be honoured with silver and gold, and many rewards, 
1 Mac. ii. 18. The learned Mr. Mede, Bishop New- 
ton, and many other interpreters, think that St. Paul 
refers to this prophecy, 2 Thess. ii.3-12; and 1 Tim. 
jv.1-3. And it must be acknowledged that much of 
what is here said is very applicable to antichrist, or 
the Papacy, termed by the apostle, the man of sin, 
that exalteth himself above all that is called God, 
or that is worshipped, forbidding to marry, pretend- 
ing not to regard the desire of women, and honour- 
ing saints and angels, whom his followers take for 
their protectors, (as the heathen of old depended on 
their demons,) making them presidents of several 
countries. But however applicable this may be to 
the idolatry, superstition, and tyranny of the Church 
of Rome, and however Antiochus might be intended 
to be a type of that antichristian power, the pro- 
phecy does not appear to have been primarily de- 
signed to be understood of it, but to have been meant 
of Antiochus himself, that great enemy of God’s 

3 


2 Isaiah xxi.1; Zech. ix. 14. a Ezek. xxxviii. 4,15; Rev. 
ix. 16.——» Verses 10, 22. 


ancient church. For it would be a vast transition, 
and not at all according to the regular series or order 
of time, for the prophecy to pass at once from Anti- 
ochus to antichrist. And as these prophecies, or 
visions, are expressly said by the angel who was 
sent to explain them, (verses 10, 14,) to relate to the 
Jewish people, or to be concerning wHaT SHOULD 
BEFALL THEM, and antichrist does not concern them 
in particular, therefore it seems most consistent with 
reason to interpret what is said here of Antiochus, 
as there is not the least appearance of the subject of 
the prophecy being changed. Every one, who reads 
this chapter without prepossession, must conclude, | 
that the very same person is intended in this para- 
graph that is spoken of from verse 21; and that 
there is no intimation in any one of these verses that 
any other person is primarily intended. 

Verse 40. And at the time of the end—At the de- 
termined time, or when the time shall approach that 
God will put an end to these miseries of the Jews; 
shall the king of the south push at him—The king 
of the south, through all this prophecy, appears evi- 
dently to signify the king of Egypt, and if it be so 
interpreted here, this must relate to some new con- 
test between him and Antiochus. Historians, how- 
ever, make no mention of this, nor of any third 
expedition of Antiochus into Egypt. But it is not 
improbable that the king of Egypt, between whom 
and Antiochus there was enmity in the heart, though 
there was outward friendship, might make some 
efforts, of one kind or other, to injure Antiochus, 
which might induce him to make a third expedition 
into Egypt.. The want, however, of a certain know- 
ledge of this transaction of Antiochus, has been con- 
sidered by some as an additional reason for applying 
this, and the whole paragraph from the 36th verse, 
to antichrist, and the great apostacy of the middle 
ages of the Christian Church. Hence, by the king 
of the south here, Mr. Mede understands the Sara- 
cens, and by the king of the north, the Turks, who 
should both at different times afflict the western parts 
of the world, where he supposes the seat of antichrist 
to be. The Saracens he supposes to be called the 
king, or kingdom, of the south, because that people 
were inhabitants of Arabia Felix, which lay south- 
ward of Palestine, whereas the Turks were originally 
Tartars or Scythians. But the safest rule whereby 
to interpret the prophecies seems to be to apply 
them to events nearest to the times when they were 
uttered, unless they manifestly relate to more dis- 
tant times; and there is nothing said here but what 
might very probably relate to Antiochus, though, 
through the scantiness of the history of those times, 

839 


The final overthrow of 


DANIEL. 


the king of the north. 


a 


41 He shall enter also into the 
’ *3 glorious © land, and many cown- 
tries shall be overthrown: but these shall 
escape out of his hand, ° even Edom, and 
Moab, and the chief of the children of Am- 
mon. 

42 Heshall *"stretch forth his hand also upon 
the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not 
escape. 

43 But he shall have power over the treasures 
of gold and of silver, and over all the precious 


A. M. 3470. 
B. C. 534 


things of Egypt: .and the Libyans * make. 
and the Ethiopians shall be “at his ————— 
steps. 

44 But tidings out of the east and out of the 
north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go 
forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to 
make away many. 

45 And he shall plant the tabernacles of his 
palaces between the seas in * the ** glorious * 
holy mountain: f yet he shall come to his end, 
and none shall help him. 


35 Or, goodly land, Verse 16.—*%* Heb. land of delight, or, 
ornament.—— Isa. xi. 14.—37 Heb. send forth——4 Exod, xi. 
8; Judg. iv. 10. 


e Psalm xlviii. 2; Verses 16, 41; 2 Thess. ii, 4.——2* Or, 
goodly.—®* Heb. mountain of delight of holiness ——! 2 Thess. 
11. 8; Rev. xix. 20. 


we have not a knowledge of the facts to which some 
particular passages or expressions in the prophecy 
refer. And the king of the north—The king of 
Syria, Antiochus; shall come against him like a 
whirlwind—In a sudden and impetuous manner. 
And shall overflow and pass over—Shall over- 
spread the land, breaking in and opening himself 
a passage everywhere by the vast power of his 
forces. 

Verse 41. He shall enter into the glorious or plea- 
sant land—By this title it is beyond a doubt Judea 
is signified, chap. viii. 9, and therefore it is reason- 
able to conclude Judea is meant here; and this seems 
to be spoken of Antiochus’s sending his captains 
Apollonius, Lysius, and Gorgias into the land of 
Judea, of which we have an account in the books 
of the Maccabees; for a king is said to enter a coun- 
try when he sends his armies into it, though he be 
not there in person. And many countries shall be 
overthrown—Many of the neighbouring nations shall 
be cut off. But these shall escape out of his hand 
—These shall not be destroyed. Edom and Moab, 
and the children of Ammon—Grotius expounds the 
words to this sense, That Antiochus did not make 
war upon these people, because they readily com- 
plied with his commands, and joined with him 
against the Jews: for which cause Judas Maccabees 
made war upon them; see 1 Mac. v. 3, 4. 

Verses 42, 43. He shall stretch forth his hand also 
upon the countries—Namely, upon the countries near 
to Egypt, as well as upon Egypt itself. Some think 
that the occasion of Antiochus’s coming into Egypt 
this third time was a quarrel between Ptolemy Phil- 
» ometor and his brother Physcon, who set up against 
him; and that Antiochus sided with Physcon, and 
assisted him to expel Ptolemy. He shall have 
power over the treasures, §c., of Egypt—In intes- 
tine broils, those who are called in to the assistance 
of either party, generally make their market of it, 
and pay themselves with the riches of the country. 
This, from the character of Antiochus, we may well 
suppose he would do; and if Physeon stood in need 
of his assistance, he could not gainsay him. Poly- 
bius giving an account of the wealth of Antiochus in 
gold, silver, and precious stones, adds, “ Part of this 
he took from Egypt, breaking the covenant whieh 

840 


he had made with Ptolemy Philometor.” This tes- 
timony seems strongly to confirm, that what is said 
here is spoken of Antiochus: for the historian relates 
exactly the same thing that Daniel here foretels. 
And the Lybians and the Ethiopians shall be at his 
steps—Or, follow him; that is, as captives, being 
overcome in war; for that seems to be the meaning 
of the expression, be at his steps. It is very probable 
that Antiochus, from Egypt, made an incursion 
against those people, and gained some victories over 
them. 

Verses 44, 45. But tidings out of the east and out 
of the north shall trouble him—Historians relate, 
that the Parthians on the east, and the Armenians 
on the north, declared war against Antiochus about 
the same time; so that this may very reasonably be 
supposed to relate to this fact. And he shall plant 
the tabernacles of his palace—The word translated 
palace here, is a Syriac word, and therefore is very 
properly used when speaking of the Syrian king. 
The expression signifies, as we would speak now, 
his royal tent, or pavilion. By planting it between 
the seas, in the glorious holy mountain, is meant, his 
fixing it in Judea, called a mountain elsewhere, as 
well as here, because it is a mountainous country. 
The epithet glorious is the very same as Daniel 
generally uses in speaking of Judea as a peculiar 
mark of distinction. The epithet holy is also fre- 
quently applied to Judea, because the whole of it 
was dedicated to the true God, and was chosen by 
him for the residence of a nation which he intended 
to be aholy people. Judea is likewise situated be- 
tween two seas, namely, the Mediterrahean, and the 
sea of Sodom, or the Dead sea; which are its boun- 
daries on each side.- So the meaning of this sen- 
tence is, that Antiochus should place his royal pavi- 
lion in Judea, leaving there some of his principal 
generals, or officers, who should, by his command, 
keep up the pomp of majesty as if he himself were 
present. Yet he shall come to his end, and none 
shall help him—God ¢tall cut him off in the midst 
of his days, and none shall be able to prevent his 
fall. This is the same with what is foretold chap. 
Vili. 25, He shall be broken without hand; where see 
the note. Observe, reader, when God’s time is come 
to bring proud oppressors to their or e shal} 


Li. 


Gracious promises 


CHAPTER XII. 


to God’s people. 


be able, nor perhaps, inclined to help them, for those 
who, when they are in their grandeur, covet to be 
feared by all, will find, when they come to be in dis- 
tress, that they are loved by none: none will lend 
them so much asa hand, or a prayer to help them: 
forif the Lord do not help, who shall? Of the kings 
that came after Antiochus nothing is here prophe- 
sied, for he was the most malicious, mischievous 
enemy to the church, and a type of the son of per- 
dition, whom the Lord will consume with the breath 
of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his 


coming, and none shall help him. As a confirma- 
tion of the explanation of this prophecy given above, 
it may be proper to observe here, that Calmet, in like 
manner, confines the latter part of it to the persecu- 
tions of Antiochus against the Jews. He observes, 
-however, at the close of the chapter, it is necessary 
to acknowledge that Antiochus was one of the most 
manifest, and most expressive figures of antichrist, 
and that these things which the angel foretold of 
Antiochus will receive a further accomplishment be- 
fore the.end of the world. 


CHAPTER XII. 


After the prediction of the calamities which the Jews should suffer under Antiochus, prefiguring the troubles of the 
Christian Church, under the antichristian power, we have here, (1,) Consolatory promises for the support of God’s 
"people in those times of trouble and calamity: and they are such as might serve both for those former times of trou- 


ble under Antiochus, and those 1 which were prefigured by them, 1-4. 
and an angel, concerning the ti he continuance of these evenis, 5-7, 


that inquiry, 8-13. 


faction, and the answer he receiv 


A. M. 3470. A ND at that time shall * Michael 
B. C. 534. 5 : 
wen ict ae stand up, the great prince which 


standeth for the children of thy people: and 
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never 


a Chapter x. 13, 21.—— Isa. xxvi. 20, 21; Jer. xxx. 7; Matt. 
xxiv. 21; Rev. xvi. 18. © Rom. xi, 26. 


(2,) A conference between Christ 
(3,) Daniel’s inquiry for his own satis. 

a 
[was since there was a nation even to A. M. 3470. 
that same time: and at that time thy rabagt 
people ° shall be delivered, every one that shall 
be found 4 written in the book. 


4 Exodus xxxil. 32; Psa. lvi. 8; lxix. 28; Ezek. xiii. 9; Luke 
x. 20; Phil. iv. 3; Rev. iii. 5; xiii. 8. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. 

Verse 1. And at that time, &c.—Itis usual with 
the prophets, when they foretel the troubles of the 
church, to furnish it, at the same time, with proper 
supports and consolations; and none are so sove- 
reign, of such general application, so easily accom- 
modated to every case, and of such powerful effica- 
cy, as those that are fetched from Christ, and a 
future state revealed in his gospel. At that time— 
When the troubles are the greatest; shall Michael 
stand up—The word Michael signifies, Who is like 
God? which name, with the title here given him, 
The great prince which standeth for the children 
of thy people, manifestly points out the Messiah, and 
cannot properly be understood of a created angel. 
The angel had told Daniel, chap. x. 21, What a friend 
Michael was to the church of God, and henow in- 
forms him that he should interpose in a singular way, 
and work out deliverance for her. If this have any 
reference at all to the respite from trouble, and the 
deliverance wrought out for the Jews, after the death 
of Antiochus; yet that cannot be the primary inten- 
tion of the prediction. It evidently relates to the 
incarnation of the Son of God, which was to take 
place soon after the days of Antiochus; in order to 
the eternal salvation of God’s people. As if the 
angel had said, As after the signal judgment of God 
upon Antiochus, that persecutor of his people, they 
shall have some deliverance from their calamities; 
so there will be a yet far greater salvation wrought 
out for “wee: when Michael your prince shall appear 


for you. And there shall be atime of trouble, such 
as never was since there was a nation, &e.—This 
is not only applicable to, but evidently primarily in- 
tended of the calamities suffered by the Jews, before 
and during the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans; 
calamities brought upon them for their rejection and 
crucifixion of their own Messiah. Of this time of 
trouble Christ speaks in similar language, Matt. xxiv. 
21, when he says, Z"hen shall be great tribulation, 
such as was not since the beginning of the world to 
that time, no, nor ever shall be. Of which, see the 
notes on Deut. xxviii. 50-63. Of this the angel had 
spoken much, chap. ix. 26, 27; and it happened soon 
after the time in which Christ set up his gospel king- 
dom in the world. It may refer, however, also to 
the dreadful judgments which shall be executed on 
all antichristian powers, to make way for the wniver- 
sal spread of the gospel, and the final conversion 
/and restoration ef the Jews. Concerning which 
awful judgments, see Rev. xvi. 18-21, and xix. 17-21. 
The prediction may include likewise the judgments 
of the great and last day, the day that shall burn as 
an oven, when all the proud, and all that do wick- 
edly, shall be as stubble, and shall be consumed; that 
will be such a day of trouble as never was, to all 
those against whom Michael our prince shall stand. 
And at that time thy people shall be delivered, every 
one found written in the book—By those found 
written in the book, or, as it is expressed, Isa. iv. 3, 
written among the living in Jerusalem, may be 
understood, Ist, The pious Jews who should be pre 
841 


Gracious promises DANIEL. to God’s people.’ 
A. M. 3170. 2 And many of them that sleep in) that turn many to righteousness, *as A, M, 3470. 
B.C. 534 B.C. 534. 


_~““ the dust of the earth shall awake, 
*some to everlasting life, and some to shame 
f and everlasting contempt. 

3 And £they that be ! wise, shall *shine as 
the brightness of the firmament; ‘and they 


the stars for ever and ever. st da 

4 ! But thou, O Daniel, ™ shut up the words, 
and seal the book, even to the time of the end: 
many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall 
be increased. 


e Matt. xxv. 46; John v. 28,29; Acts xxiv. 15.——f Isaiah 
Ixvi. 24; Rom. ix. 21—s Chap. xi. 33, 35.——* Or, teachers. 
h Prov. iv. 18; Matt. xiii. 43, — 


i James y. 20.—* 1 Corinthians xv. 41, 42.—! Chapter 
viii. 26 ; Verse 9——™ Revelation x. 4; xxii. 10.——" Chapter 
x. 1; Verse 9. 


served from the mischief and ruin designed them by 
Antiochus; but more especially, 2d, Such as should 
believe in Christ when he appeared, embrace his 
gospel, and become his true disciples, who should 
escape both the temporal calamities coming on their 
countrymen, and obtain spiritual and eternal salva- 
tion through him. It includes, 3d, Those who should 
be converted in the latter days, and restored to their 
own land; and lastly, All that should be fownd writ- 
ten in the book of life at the day of final judgment, 
that is, all truly justified, regenerated, and pious 

epcrsons. Of the book of life, see notes on Exod. 
xxxii. 832; Psa. lxix. 28; Isa. iv. 3. 

Verse 2. And many that sleep in the dust of the 
earth shall awake—This may be understood, Ist, Of 
those saints who rose from the dead immediately 
upon the resurrection of Christ, spoken of Matt. 
xXXvil. 52, 53, where we read that the graves were 
opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept 
arose, and came out of their graves after his resur- 
rection, and went into the holy city, and appeared 
uniomany, 2d, It may be interpreted figuratively of 
the mystical resurrection of Jews and Gentiles from 
spiritual death to spiritual life, by the preaching of the 
gospel, or of their conversion to true Christianity. 
Calmet thinks that this, without all question, is the 
primary sense of the verse, and that it is only ina 
secondary sense that it can be understood of the 
resurrection of men’s bodies. Most commentators, 
however, are of a different opinion, and consider the 
words as being primarily intended of the general 
resurrection which will take place at the last day. 
And they think, that the next clause, some to ever- 
lasting life, and some to shame and everlasting con- 
tempt, requires this application of the words, and 
does not admit of any other interpretation. The 
Lord Jesus certainly seems to have referred to this 
passage, John v. 28, where he speaks of the resur- 
rection of life, and the resurrection of damnation; 
and upon the ground of it chiefly the Jews are said 
by St. Paul, Acts xxiv. 15, to expect a resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. And 
nothing could be brought in more seasonably than 
this doctrine is here ; for under Antiochus’s perse- 
cution some basely betrayed their religion, others 
bravely adhered to it. Now it would bea trouble to 
the upright and faithful among the Jews, that they 
could neither reward the one nor punish the other ; 
this therefore would be a satisfaction to them, that 
they would both be recompensed at the general 
resurrection. And the apostle, speaking of the pious 
Jews that suffered martyrdom under Antiochus, tells 

842 


* 


us, that though they were tortured, yet they accepted 
not deliverance, (namely, deliverance offered them 
on terms they could not conscientiously comply 
with,) because they hoped to obtain @ better resur- 
rection. In accordance with this sense of the words, 
which seems evidently to be that primarily intended, 
it must be observed, that the word many in the first 
clause of the verse must include all mankind, as it 
does in Rom. v. 19, where St. Paul says, By one 
man’s disobed MANY were made sinners. 

Verse 3. T hate: be wise—Namely, that are wise 
unto salvation gh faith in Christ, that are truly 
godly and righteous, shall shine as the brightness 
of the firmament—Shall be clothed with glory and 
immortality ; shall have bodies conformed to Christ’s 
glorious body; shall shine forth, says Jesus, as the 
sun in the kingdom of their Father, Matt. xiii. 43; 
and especially those shall be thus glorious who are 
wise to win souls ; who, being well instructed them- 
selves in divine things, shall lay themselves out to 
instruct, reclaim, and save others; such shall shine 
as the stars—That is, with a splendour like that of 
the luminaries of heaven, for ever and ever—To all 
eternity. This seems chiefly to refer to the teachers 
of divine truth, and especially to those who confirm 
their doctrine by their sufferings and example: such 


‘shall undoubtedly receive a distinguished reward, 


though not procured by their own merit. The Judge 
of all the earth will certainly do right; and when he 
cometh, his reward is with him, to give to every 
man according as his work shall be, Rev. xxii. 12. 
And as he hath given the fullest assurance that 


there is a reward for the righteous; so he hath as- 


sured us also that it will be augmented, in propor- 


tion as men have laboured to be more extensively 


useful, and to advance the real and best interests of 
their fellow-creatures, namely, their spiritual and 
eternakinterests. >is 

Verse 4. But thou, shut up the words, and seal 
the bookBy this was intimated, Ist, That the 
writing of truth (see chap. x. 21) was finished, and 
therefore the book that contained it is ordered to be 
closed; 2d, That the time of its full and final acecom- 
plishment Was distant; for the prophecies which 


_ were shortly to be fulfilled are forbidden to be sealed, 
| Rev. xxii. 10; 3d, That it would ina great measure 


remain obscure, and as a sealed book, till the events 
predicted were about to take place; 4th, That care ~ 
was to be taken to preserve this propheey safe and 
secure, as a treastire of great value, laid up for future 
ages, to Which it should be of great service. Tuli 
the time of the end—Or, the appointed tim s 


‘ 


Conference belween 


A. M. 3470. 


5 4 Then I Daniel looked, and be- 
B. C. 534. 


hold, there ‘stood other two, the one 
on this side of the * bank of the river, and the 
other on that side of the bank ° of the river. 

6 And one said to ? the man clothed in linen, 
which was *upon the waters of the river, 
4 How long shall it be to the end of these 
wonders ? 


© Chap. x. 4, P Chap. x. 5. 3 Or, from above. 
hap. viii, 13.—" Deut. xxxii. 40; Rev. x. 5, 6. 


2 Heb. te: 


things here foretold, begin to come to pass; that 
then thy prophecies may be compared with the 
events, and it may be seen how exactly they are 
fulfilled; and men may be struck with astonishment 
at the wisdom and knowledge of that God who 
could, so long beforehand, reveal such a variety of 
things to thee so fully and clearly. Many shall 
run to and fro—Many shall diligently search into 
these prophecies, and make use of all the means in 
their power to arrive at a true knowledge of them; 
shall improve all opportunities of getting their mis- 
takes rectified, their doubts resolved, and_ their 
acquaintance with divine things in general, and with 
these and the other prophecies of God’s word in 
particular, improved and perfected. And knowledge 
shall be increased—By these means great light shall 
ve thrown on every part of divine revelation, and 
especially on the parts that are prophetic: the more 
the predictions are accomplished, the better will 
they be understood; and future ages will receive 
more instruction and edification from them than we 
do. The words have an especial reference to gos- 
pel days; and the expression of running to and fro, 
doubtless points to the journeys, voyages, and la- 
bours of gospel ministers, whether apostles, evan- 
gelists, pastors, or teachers, who should traverse sea 
and land, and travel from place to place, from coun- 
try to country, to spread the knowledge of divine 
truth, and testify the gospel of the grace of God. 
Verses 5,6. Z'hen I, Daniel, looked—Here begins 
an account of a new vision that appeared to Daniel, 
confirming and explaining the former; for Gabriel, 
it seems, had finished his narrative, and what now 
follows is added by way of illustration. Some will 
have these other two angels to be the gua of 
Persia and Greece ; and from thence cna 
these two empires are the only ones conce in 
the preceding scripture, or writing, of truth. But 
this is mere conjecture, unsupported by the relation 
here given. TJ'he one on this side of the bank of 
the river, &c.—Namely, the river MWiddekel, or 
Tigris, of which mention is made chap. x. 4. And 
one said—Hebrew, And he said, that is, one of the 
angels. But the Syriac, Arabic, some of the Greek 
copies, and the Vulgate, read, And J said, meaning 
Daniel, to the man clothed in linen—Mentioned 
chap. x. 5, (where see the note,) which was upon, 
or rather, above, the waters of the river—Namely, 
the Son of God, our High-Priest, who rules the 
nations, of which standing wpon, or above, the waters, 
3 


CHAPTER XII. 


Christ and an angel 


7 And I heard the man clothed in A. M. 3470. 

linen, which was upon the waters of 2S 
, P 

the river, when he * held up his right hand and 
his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him 
‘that liveth for ever, ‘that i¢ shall be for a 
time, times, and ¢a half; "and when he shall 
have accomplished to scatter the power of * the 
holy people, all these things shall be finished. 


Chap. iv. 34.—+t Chap. vii. 25; xi. 13; Rev. xii. 14——4 Or, 
part. 4 Luke xxi. 24; Rev. x. 7. x Chap. viii. 24. 


was an emblem: see Psa. xxix. 10. As a figure of 
this, Christ, in the days of his flesh, walked upon 
the waters, Matt. xiv. 25. How long’ shall it be to 
the end of these wonders—-What is the time fixed in 
the divine counsels for the full accomplishment of 
these wonderful predictions? When shall these ex- 
traordinary events take place? 

Verse 7. And he held up his right hand and his 
left unto heaven—It was the general custom, in 


swearing, to lift up one hand to heaven: see Gen, . 


xiv. 22; Deut. xxxii. 40; but here Christ is repre- 
sented as holding up both his hands, as a greater 
confirmation of the truth and importance of what he 
was about to say; and sware by him that liveth for 
ever—By the self-existent and everlasting God. 
Thus the mighty angel, whom St. John saw, Rev. 
x. 5, 6, is brought in, with a plain reference to this 
vision here, standing with his right foot on the-sea 
and his left foot on the earth, and, with his hand 
lifted up to heaven, swearing that there should be 
no longer any delay of the execution of the divine 
counsels. hat it should be for a time, times, and 
ahalf, or, the dividing of time, as it is expressed 
in Chaldee, chap. vii. 25, where see the note, which 
contains, understood literally, three years and a 
half, during which time the public sacrifices and 
worship were discontinued through the persecution 
of Antiochus, the type of antichrist. But this line 
of time is expressly applied to the antichristian per 
secution, Rev. xii. 14, and is further explained in 
that chapter, verse 6, by one thousand two hundred 
and sixty days, which is three years and a half, 
reckoning three hundred and sixty days to a year: 
see note on chap. ix. 24. And if we suppose each 
day to signify a year, which is the prophetical 
sense of the word day, this period of time denotes 
one thousand two hundred. and sixty years: see 
note on chap. viii. 14. And when he shall have 
accomplished to disperse the power of the holy 
people—When the dispersions of the Jews shall be 
ended, then the most remarkable events contained 
in this prophecy shall be fulfilled. The restoration 
of the Jewish nation is foretold by the prophets, as 
one of those signal events to be brought to pass in the 
latter days, or times, of the world. Mr. Mede makes 


‘this parallel with those words of Christ, Luke xxi. 


24; Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the G entiles 
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled ; that is, 
till the times of the fourth monarchy and the reign 


,of antichrist be expired. Many commentators un- 


843 


Daniel's inquiry, and 


DANIEL. 


the answer he received. 


= 


— 


A. M. 3470. 
B. C. 534. 


8 And I heard, but I understood 
not: then said I, O my Lord, what 
shall be the end of these things 2 

9 And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the 
words are closed up and sealed ¥ till the time 
of the end. 

10 7 Many shall be sushi and made white, 


— 


and tried; * but the wicked shall do A. M. 3470. 

wickedly: and none of the wicked 

shall understand; but »the wise shallunderstand. 
11 And from that time ° ¢hat the daily sacri- 

fice shall be taken away, and * the abomina- 

tion that ®* maketh desolate set up, there shall 

be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. 


z Chap. xi. 35; Zech. xiii. 9. a Hosea xiv. 9; 
» Chap. xi. 33, 35; John vii. 17; 


y Verse 4. 
Rey. ix. 20; xxii. 11. 


viii. 47; xviii. 37. 4 Chap. viii. 11 5-xeas 
the abomination —— 6 Or, astonisheth. 


Heb. to set 


derstand this last clause, which speaks of accom- 
plishing to scatter the power of the holy people, not 
of the termination of the time of their dispersions, 
but of the begmning of it; and suppose that it will 
be one thousand two hundred and sixty years, from 
the beginning to the end of that time. But then, by 
the power of the holy people, they do not understand 
the Jews, but the Christians. »They do not, there- 
fore, calculate this period from the destruction of 
Jerusalem by the Romans, and the subsequent dis- 
persion of the Jews; but from the time when the anti- 
‘christian usurpers began to Séatter the power of 
true Christians, by false doctrines, persecutions, 
massacres, and religious wars; and they extend it to 
the period when these powers-shall be subverted. 

Verses 8,9. And I heard, but I understood not—I 
did not understand what time was allotted for bring- 
ing to pass this event, namely, the restoration of the 
Jewish nation, or the complete overthrow of all 
antichristian powers. The prophets, it must be 
observed, did not always receive the interpretation 
of what was revealed to them, as appears from 
1 Pet. i. 11,12. “Study and particular application 
were required, and often an immediate revelation. 
The evidence which appears to us so clearly, in tlie 
greater part of the prophecies which respect Jesus 
Christ, and the establishment of the church, was 
under an impenetrable obscurity before the event. 


cerned the persecutions of Antiochus. All this was 
most inexplicable to the Jews, before they saw the 
completion; and it is pretty nearly the same at pre- 
sent with us respecting some future events foretold by 
the prophets, particularly in the book of Revelation, 
which are yet to be accomplished, and which conse- 
quently are dark, and difficult to be understood.”— 
Calmet. And he said, Go thy way, for the words 
are closed up, &e.—Be content with what has been 
made known to thee; (see verse 13;) for the full 
explication is deferred, till the time of its accom- 
plishment draws near. 

Verse 10. Many shall be purified, and made 
white, and tried—See chap. xi. 35, where the same 
words are found, but in different order. They are 
words of general and ordinary use, expressive of the 
purification intended to be produced i in the minds of 
men by afflictions. If we would ascertain their im- 
port, the first word is borrowed from wheat, which 
is cleansed from the chaff; the second from cloth, 
which is whitened by the fuller; and the third fr 
metal, tried and separated from its dross by gold 


} 


smiths. I would refer the whole, says Wintle, to 
the righteous, who, it is here foretold, should be 


cleansed by various tribulations and trials ; but the 
| like discipline would have no effect on the wicked: 


see Rey. xxii. 11. Their wickedness would blind 
their minds, so that they would not understand, nor 
attend to these predictions, which the wise, that is, 
the considerate and divinely enlightened, should 
understand; should be fully instructed in them- 


selves, and so should be able to teach them to others: 
| see WwW intle. 


Verses 11, 12. And from the time that the daily 
sacrifice shall be taken away—lIt is here declared, 


that the whole time that these calamities would last, 
should run somewhat beyond a time, times, and 
half a time, namely, thirty days beyond it; for a 


time, times, and a half, signify only twelve hundred 
and sixty days, whereas here twelve hundred and 


ninety is mentioned as the term of duration; for 
_ which space of time, but not longer, the daily sacri- 
fice should be taken away, or prohibited, and an idol 


be placed in the temple. Blessed is he that waiteth, 
or survives, and cometh to the thousand three hun- 
dred and five and thirty days—This period is forty- 
five days longer than the term last mentioned, or the 
twelve hundred and ninety days; and, if taken lite- 
rally, and interpreted of the time of Antiochus’s per- 


_secution, is supposed to be spoken of the time of his 
It was the same with respect to those which con- || 


death, when the Jewish nation was not only deliver- 


ed from their calamities, but also from all fear of 
| their being renewed. 


Those who extend these predictions to the times 
of Popery and Mohammedanism, suppose that the 


expressions made use of to describe Antiochus’s per- 
/secutions are here applied to the desolations made 


by nrist, of which those made by Antiochus 
we gure: see note on chap. viii. 14, and xi. 36. 
An eed they are expressions evidently applica- 
ble to different events, and have been accomplished 
at different titnes. “The setting up of the abomina- 
tion of desolation,” says Bishop Newton, “appears 
to be a general phrase, and comprehensive of various 
events, It is applied by the writer of the first book 


of Maccabees, chap. i. 54, to the profanation of the 


temple by Antiochus, and his setting up the i image 
of Jupiter Olympus upon the altar of God. It is 
applied by our Saviour, Matt. xxiv. 15, to the de- 
struction of the city and temple by the ‘Romans, 
under the conduct of Titus. It may, for the same 
reason, be applied to the Emperor Adrian’s building 
a temple to Jupiter Capitolinug, in the —e 


The answer to 


CHAPTER XII. 


Damneel’s inquiry. 


12 Blessed ts he that waiteth, and 
cometh to the thousand three hundred 
and five and thirty days. 


A. M. 3470. 
B. C. 534 


13 But “go thou thy way till the . lh 
end be: ‘for® thou shalt rest, fand —— 
stand in thy lot at the end of the days. 


4 Verse 9.—" Or, and thou. 


where the temple of God had.stood; and to the 
misery of the Jews, and the desolation of Judea that 
followed. It may, with equal justice, be applied 
to the Mohammedans’ invading and desolating 
Christendom, atid converting the churches into 
mosques: and this latter event seems to have been 
particularly intended in this passage. If this inter- 
pretation be true, the religion of Mohammed will 
prevail in the East for the space of twelve hundred 
and sixty years, and then a great and glorious revo- 
lution will follow; perhaps the restoration of the 
Jews, perhaps the destruction of antichrist: but 


another still greater and more glorious will succeed; | 


and what can this be so probably as the full conver- 
sion of the Gentiles to the church of Christ, and the 
beginning of the millennium, or the reign of the 
saints upon earth? For, verse 12, Blessed is he 
that waiteth and cometh to the thousand three hun- 
dred and five and thirty days. Here, then, are 
three different periods assigned, twelve hundred and 
sixty, twelve hundred and ninety, and thirteen hun- 
dred and thirty-five years; but what is the precise 
time of their beginning, and consequently of their 
ending, as well as what are the great and signal 
events ‘which will take place at the end of each pe- 
riod, we can only conjecture, time alone can with 
certainty discover. It is, indeed, no wonder, that 
we cannot fully understand and explain these things: 
for, as the angel said to Daniel himself, though many 
should run to and fro, should inquire and examine 
into these things, and thereby knowledge should be 
increased ; yet the full understanding of them is re- 
served for the time of the end, to which time the 
words are closed up and sealed. But, however, 
the great uncertainty of these events, which re- 
main yet to be fulfilled, cannot shake the credit 
and certainty of those which have already been 
accomplished. 

“Upon the whole, what an amazing prophecy is 
this ! comprehending sO many various events, and 
extending through so many successive ages, from 
the first establishment of the Persian empire re 
five hundred and thirty years before Christ, 
general resurrection! And the farther it an. 
and the more it comprehends, the more amazing and 
the more divine it must appear. What stronger and 
more convincing proofs can be given or required of 
a divine providence, and a divine revelation; that 
there is a God who directs and orders the transac- 

3 


—— a 


° Isa, Wii. 2s ads xiv. 13.——f Psa, i..5. 


tions of the world; and that Daniel was a prophet 
divinely inspired by him, @ man greatly beloved, as 
he is often addressed by an angel! Our blessed Sa- 
viour hath bestowed upon him the appellation of 
Daniel the prophet, Matt. xxiv. 15, and that is au- 
thority sufficient for any Christian ; but, in the course 
of these notes, such instances and attestations of his 
being a prophet have been produced as an infidel 
cannot deny, or if he denies cannot disprove. In 


short, we see how well Daniel deserves the charac- 


ter which his contemporary, Ezekiel, hath given of 
him, chap. xiv. 14-20, and xxviii. 3, for his piety and 
wisdom; and these usually go together: for, as the 
angel says above, verse 10, None of the wicked shall 
understand, but the wise shall understand. Happy 
are they who both know the will of God and do it.” 
Verse 13. But go thou thy way till the end be— 
The prophet had been making inquiries respecting 
the end of these wonders; and the angel, having 
given him all the information that was needful either 
for himself or future times, now dismisses him, with 


an encouraging declaration concerning the happi- » 


ness which awaited him in the heavenly world. 
Thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of 
thy days—Daniel Was now ninety years of age, at 
least, and so could not expect to live mucli longer: 
and the angel here tells him, that after his life was 
ended, he should rest in peace with the righteous, 
namely, with respect to his soul; (compare Isa. lvii. 
2; Rev. xiv. 13;) and that at the resurrection, fore- 
told verse 2, of this chapter, he should obtain a share 
of that inheritance which is reserved for the faithful 
servants of God, and which shall be actually con- 
ferred upon them at the conclusion of the times here 
specified, verse 12, Observe, reader, our time and 
days, yea, and all time and days, will soon have an 
end, and we must every one of us stand in our lot at 
the end of the days. Inthe judgment of the great 
day we must have our allotment according to what 
we were, and what we did, in the body, and we must 
stand for ever in that lot. It was a comfort to 
niel, and it is a comfort to all the saints, that what- 
ever their lot is in the days of time, they shall have 
a happy lot in the end of the days. And it ought to 
be the great care and concern of every one of us, to 
secure a happy lot at that period;*and then we may 
well be content with our present lot, whatever it 
may be, welcoming the will of God, in all things, 
and at all times. 

845 


” 


THE 


BOOK OF HOSEA. 


ARGUMENT. 


Tue Twelve Prophets, whose prophecies must now come under our consideration, are called the 
Minor, or Lesser Prophets : not because their writings are of less authority or usefulness than those 
of the four preceding, but only because they are shorter. Their prophecies, Josephus tells us, were 
put into one volume, by “the men of the great synagogue,” in Ezra’s time: of which learned and 
pious body of men, the last three of these twelve are supposed to have been themselves members. 
St. Stephen is thought to have referred to this volume, when, quoting a passage from Amos, Acts 
vii. 42, he says, “ As it is written in the book of the prophets.” And it is certain that, in the early 
ages of the Christian Church, both Jews and Christians, in enumerating the canonical books of the 
Old Testament, reckoned the twelve minor prophets to be one book. ‘They are not arranged, either 
in the Hebrew or Greek copies, exactly in the order of time in which they lived; for Jonah, who 
was the oldest of them, is placed the sixth in order in these copies. Archbishop Newcome’s 
arrangement of them, according to the time in which they prophesied, is as follows: Jonah, Amos, 
Hosea, Micah, Nahum, Joel, Zephaniah, Habakkuk, Obadiah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. 

Hosea, whose prophecy first claims our attention, began his public ministry in the latter part of the 
reign of Jeroboam II. king of Israel, about 785 years before Christ, twenty before the Olympiads, 
and more than forty before the foundation of Rome ; and he continued to prophesy till the reign of 
Hezekiah king of Judah. And since he was of age to choose a wife for himself when he first 
entered upon his office, he must have lived to extreme old age. “If, as many commentators have 
supposed, he witnessed the accomplishment of the judgment which he denounced upon Samaria 
and the ten tribes, he must have attained his hundredth year at least. But it is more “ probable 
that he was removed before that event took place.. For in all his prophecies the kingdom of 
Samaria is mentioned, as sentenced indeed to excision; but as yet subsisting, at the time when 
they were delivered.” 

“Inasmuch as he reckons the time of his ministry by the succession of the kings of Judah, the 
learned have been induced to believe that he himself belonged to that kingdom. However this 
may be, it appears that he took a particular interest in the fortunes of the sister kingdom. For he 
describes, with much more exactness than any other prophet, the distinct destinies of the two great 
branches of the chosen people, the different judgments impending on them, and the different manner 
of their final restoration; and he is particularly pathetic in the exhortations he addresses to the 
ten tribes. It is a great mistake, however, to suppose that his prophecies are almost wholly against 
the kingdom of Israel; or that the captivity of the ten tribes is the immediate and principal subject, 
the destiny of the two tribes being only occasionally introduced. Hosea’s principal subject is that 
which is the principal subject indeed of all the prophets, the guilt of the Jewish nation in general, 
their disobedient, refractory spirit, the heavy judgments that awaited them, their final conversion 
to God, their re-establishment in the land of promise, and their restoration to God’s favour, and to 
a condition of the greatest national prosperity, and of high pre-eminence among the nations of the 
earth, under the immediate protection of Messiah, in the latter ages of the world. He confines 
himself more closely to this single subject than any other prophet. Comparatively, he seems to 
care but little about other people. He wanders not, like Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, into the 
collateral history of the surrounding heathen nations. He meddles not, like Daniel, with the reyo- 
lution of the great empires of the world. His own country seems to engross his whole attention ; 
her privileges, her crimes, her punishment, her pardon. He predicts indeed, in the strongest and 
clearest terms, the ingrafting of the Gentiles into the church of God. But he mentions it only 
generally; he enters not, like Isaiah, into a minute detail of the business. He alludes to the 
calling of our Lord from Egypt; to the resurrection on the third day; he touches, but only in 
general terms, upon the final overthrow of the antichristian army in Palestine, by the immediate 
interposition of Jehovah; and he celebrates, in the loftiest strains of triumph and exultation, the 
Saviour’s final victory over death and hell. But yet, of all the prophets, he certainly enters the 


least into the detail of 9 po of redemption. His country, and his kindred, are the subject 
8 = 


The title CHAPTER I. of the book. 


next his heart. Their crimes excite his indignation, their sufferings interest his pity, and their 
future exaltation is the object on which he fixes with delight.”—Bishop Horsley. Very similar is 
the character given of this prophecy by Archbishop Newcome, though in few words: “ He chiefly 
addresses Israel, but introduces frequent mention of Judah. He not only inveighs against the vices 
of the people, but sharply arraigns the conduct of their kings, princes, and priests. Like many of 
the Hebrew prophets, he tempers denunciations of God’s vengeance against an idolatrous and 
vicious people with promises of abundant mercies in store for them ; and his transitions from one 
of these subjects to the other are rapid and unexpected.” 

As to the style of Hosea, it indicates antiquity; it is nervous, acute, concise, strongly marked with 
the graces of poetry, and retains the sententious brevity of the more ancient prophets whose writings 
are handed down to us. Though this, doubtless, was at first esteemed a peculiar elegance, yet, in 
the present devastations of the Hebrew language, it is productive of obscurity ; and though the 
general subject of the prophet be plain enough, yet there is scarce any other so difficult and intri- 
eate: see Bishop Lowth’s Twenty-first Prelection. - « He delights,” says another acknowledged 
critic, “in a style which always becomes obscure when the language of the writer ceases to be 
a living language. He is commatic, to use 8t. Jerome’s word, that i is, concise, more than any other 
of the prophets. He writes in short, detached, disjointed sentences, not wrought up into periods, 
in which the connection of one clause with another is made manifest to the reader by an artificial 
collocation, and by those connective particles which make one discourse of parts which otherwise 
appear as a string of independent propositions. His transitions from reproof to persuasion, from 
threatening to promise, from terror to hope, and the contrary, are rapid and unexpected. His 
similes are brief, accumulated, and often introduced without the particle of similitude. Yet these 
are not the vices, but the perfections, of the holy prophet’s style; for to these circumstances it 
owes that eagerness and fiery animation which are the characteristic excellence of his writings, 
and are so peculiarly suited to his subject.” The same learned author observes elsewhere, ‘“ The 
style of Hosea is poetical in the very highest degree. In maxim, solemn, sententious, brief; in 
persuasion, pathetic ; in reproof, severe ; in its ‘allusions, always beautiful and striking, often 
sublime ; rich in its images ; bold in hyperbole ; artificial, though perspicuous, in its allegory ; ; pos- 
sessing, ‘in short, according to the variety of the matter, all the characters by which poetry, in any 
language, is distinguished from prose. And there cannot be a doubt that the composition was ori- 
ginally in the metrical form. But as the division of the hemistichs [verses] is not preserved in 
the MSS. nor in any of the versions, I consider the metrical form as lost.”—Bishop Horsley. We 
shall only add to the above, that, with respect to the alleged obscurity of Hosea’s style, this may 
easily be accounted for from the duration of his ministry, which, being prolonged during the reigns 
of four kings-of Judah, must, of course, include a very considerable space of time and a great 
variety of events, or matters, to which they refer, and we have now only a small volume of his 
principal prophecies ; and these transmitted to us in a continued series, with no marks of distinc- 
tion as to the times in which they were published, or the subjects of which they treat. ‘There is, 
therefore, no cause to wonder if, in perusing these prophecies, we sometimes find ourselves in a 
similar predicament with those who consulted the scattered leaves of the sibyl. 


CHAPTER I. 


In this chapter, after the title of the book, Hosea, (1,) At the command of God, marries a woman who had been, or afterward 
became, a harlot, to represent to the Israelites their base and idolatrous apostacy from God, who had espoused them, and 
taken them into covenant with himself as his people, 2,3. (2,) By naming her children Jezreel, Lo-ruhamah, and Lo-ammi, 
he represents God's cutting off the family of Jehu, and his wrathfully punishing the ten tribes of Israel, and casting 
them out from the covenant relation in which they had stood to him, 4, 6, 8,9. (3,) He foretels the miraculous deliver- 
ance of the Jews from the Assyrians, and the restoration of the Israelites after the captivity under Zerubbabel, and espe- 
cially in the apostolic and millennial periods under Jesus Christ, 7, 10, 11. 


+t rg 


(THE word of the Lorp that came 


B.C 
unto Hosea, the son of Beeri, in 


the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, ae 
and Saree kings of Judah, eam 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. The word of the Lord that came unto 
Hosea—The name of the prophet is the same with 
the original name of Joshua, and signifies a Sa- 
viour. The son of Beeri—This was the prophet’s 
surname ; for in those days they had their surnames 
either from their parents, as we have, or from the 

3 


places of their abode. Beeri signifies a well. Jn 
the days of Uzziah, &c.—* If we suppose,” says 
Archbishop Newcome, “that Hosea prophesied 
during the course of sixty-six years, and place him 
from the year 790 before Christ, to the year 724, he 
will have exercised his office eight years in the reign 
of Jeroboam the Second, thirty-three years in the 
847 


Hosea is commanded 


HOSEA. 


to marr, a harlot. 


A.M. 3219. in the days of Jeroboam the son of 
B.- 7 Joash king of Israel. 

2 | The beginning of the word of the Lorp 
by Hosea. And the Lorp said to Hosea, * Go, 


|take unto thee a wife of whoredoms ka eS 
and children of whoredoms; for >the ———— 
land hath committed great whoredom, depart- 


ing from the Lorp. 


a So Chap. ili. 1. 


reign of Uzziah, the entire reigns of Jotham and 
Ahaz, and three years in the reign of Hezekiah; 
but will not have survived the taking of Samaria.” 
It is probable, however, that he begun his ministry 
as early as the year 785; and therefore that he pro- 
phesied at least seventy, if not more, years. The 
Jews, indeed, suppose him to have prophesied near 
ninety years, and that he uttered much more than 
‘he wrote. If he exercised his office such a number 
of years, many of the other prophets, as Isaiah, Joel, 
Amos, Obadiah, and Micah, must have lived and 
prophesied during his time. ; 

Verse 2. The beginning of the word of the Lord 
by Hosea—Or, as some render it, to Hosea ; phrases 
however of different import ; for to speak ¢o a person, 
expresses that the discourse was immediately ad- 
dressed to him. 
him it was addressed to others. And that the 
speech so addressed to others was not the person’s 


own, but God’s; God using him as his organ of | 


speech to the people. This latter is evidently the 
meaning of the Hebrew phrase here used, which is 
not pur x, but yuna, and has been judiciously 
attended to by our translators, as it was also by the 
LXX., the Vulgate, the Chaldee, Luther’s Latin 
translation, Calvin’s, and Archbishop Newcome’s. 
And the Lord said, Go, take unto thee a wife of 
whoredoms—Commentators differ much with respect 
to the meaning of this eommand. Maimonides, a 
noted Jewish writer, supposes, that what was enjoin- 
ed was only to be transacted in a vision ; and many 
learned men, both ancient and modern, have been 
of his opinion. 
that the command refers to the spiritual fornication, 
or idolatry, of the Israelites: and that its meaning 
is only, “Go, join thyself in marriage to one of 
those who have committed fornication against me; 
and raise up children, who, by the power of ex- 
ample, will themselves swerve to idolatry:” see chap. 
v.7. Some others suppose, that God only enjoins 
the prophet to marry one, who, he foresaw, would 
afterward be unfaithful to him, and become a har- 
lot. Others again, and persons of great eminence 
for learning and Biblical knowledge, suppose the 
command implied, that he was to marry one who 
actually was at the time, or had been, a harlot. 
These different opinions, Bishop Horsley, in a pre- 
face to his translation of this prophecy, examines at 
large; and seems to have clearly proved, that the 
last-mentioned sense of the words is the true one. 
His train of reasoping on the subject is too long to 
find a place in these notes; a very short extract is 
all that can be inserted. “Here two questions arise, 
upon which expositors have been much divided; 1st. 
What is the character intended of the woman? 
What are the fornications by which she is charec- 
848 


To speak by him, that through | 


Archbishop Newcome supposes, | 


b Deut. xxxi. 16; Psa, lxxiii. 27; Jer. ii.13; Ezek. xxin. 3. 


terized? Are they acts of incontinence, in the lite- 
ral sense of the word, or something figuratively so 
called? And, 2d, This guilt of literal or figurative 
incontinence, was it previous to the woman’s 
marriage with the prophet, or contracted after it ? 
The Hebrew phrase, a wife of fornications, taken 
literally, certainly describes a prostitute; and chil- 
dren of fornications are the offspring of a promiscu- 
ous commerce. Some, however, have thought, that 
the expression may signify nothing worse ‘than a 
wife taken from among the Israelites, who were re- 
markable for spiritual fornication, or idolatry.’ And 
that children of fornications may signify children 
born of such a mother, in such a country, and likely 
to grow up in the habit of idolatry themselves, by 
the force of ill example. But the words thus inter- 
preted contain a description only of public man- 
ners, without immediate application to the character 
of any individual; and the command to the prophet 
will be nothing more than to take a wife. It is evi- 
dent, that a wife of fornications describes the sort 
of woman with whom the prophet is required to 
form the matrimonial connection. It expresses some 
quality in the woman, actually belonging to the pro- 
phet’s wife in her individual character. And this 
quality was no other than gross incontinence, in the 
literal meaning of the word. The prophet’s wife was, 
by the express declaration of the Spirit, to be the type, 
or emblem, of the Jewish nation, considered as the 
wife of God. The sin of the Jewish nation was idola- . 
try, and the Scriptural type of idolatry is carnal forni- 
cation; the woman, therefore, to typify the nation, 
must be guilty of the typical crime; and the only ques- 
tion that remainsis, whether the stain upon her charac- 
ter was previous to her connection with the prophet, 
or afterward? Ishould much incline to the opinion 
of Diodati, that the expression may be understood 
of a woman that was innocent at the time of her 
marriage, and proved false to the nuptial vow after- 
ward, could I agree to what is alleged in favour of 
that interpretation by Dr. Wells and Mr, Lowth, 
thatit makes the parallel more exact between God 
and his blacksliding people, than the contrary sup- 
position of the woman’s previous impurity ; especi- 
ally if we make the further supposition, that the pro- 
phet had previous warning of his wife’s irregulari- 
ties. But it seems to me, on the contrary, that the 
prophet’s marriage would be a more accurate type 
of the peculiar connection which God youchsafed to 
form between himself and the Israelites, upon the 
admission of the woman’s previous incontinence. 
God’s marriage with Israel was the institution of the 
Mosaic covenant, at the time of the exodus, Jer. ii. 
2; but it is most certain that the Israelites were 
previously tainted, in a very great degree, with the 
idolatry of Egypt, Lev. xvii. 7, and —T Josh 


Hosea marries Gomer, 


CHAPTER I. 


who bears a son. 


A. M.3219. 3 So he went and took Gomer the 
B. C. 785. : : 
—____—. daughter of Diblaim; which con- 


ceived, and bare him a son. 


¢ 2 Kings x. 11. 


xxiv. 14; and they are repeatedly taxed with this 
by the prophets, under the image of the inconti- 
nence of a young unmarried woman: see Ezek. 
xxiii. To make the parallel, therefore, exact in 
every circumstance between the prophet and his 
wife, God and Israel, the woman should have been 
addicted to vice before her marriage. The prophet, 
not ignorant of her numerous criminal intrigues, and 
of the general levity of her character, should never- 
theless offer her marriage, upon condition that she 
should renounce her follies, and attach herself, with 
fidelity, to him as her husband; she should accept 
the unexpected offer, and make the fairest promises, 
Exod. xix. 8, and xxiv. 3-7; Josh. xxiv. 24.. The 
prophet shouid complete the marriage contract, 
(Deut. vii. 6, and xxvi. 17-19,) and take the re- 
formed harlot with a numerous bastard offspring to 
his own house. There she should bear children to 
the prophet; (as the ancient Jewish Church, amidst 
all her corruptions, bore many true sons of God;) 
but in a little time she should relapse to her former 
courses, and incur her husband’s displeasure, who 
yet should neither put her to death according to the 
rigour of the law, nor finally and totally divorce her. 
Accordingly, Iam persuaded, the phrases "3131 Nwy, 
and "ni °4%", are to be taken literally, a wife of 
prostitution, and children of promiscuous inter- 
course ; so taken, and only so taken, they produce 
the admirable parallel we have described. 

“Tf any one imagines, that the marriage of a 
prophet with a harlot is something so contrary to 
moral purity as in no case whatever to be justified ; 
let him recollect the case of Salmon the Just, as he 
is styled in the Targum upon Ruth, and Rahab the 
harlot. If that instance will not remove his scruples, 
he is at liberty to adopt the opinion, which I indeed 
reject, but many learned expositors have approved, 
that the whole was a transaction in vision only, or in 
trance. I reject it, conceiving that whatever was 
unfit to be really commanded, or really done, was 
not very fit to be presented, as commanded, or as 
done, to the imagination of a prophet in his holy 
trance. Since this, therefore, was fit to be imagined, 
which is the least that can be granted, it was fit, (in 
my judgment,) under all the circumstances of the 
case, to be done. The greatness of the occasion, 
the importance of the end, as I conceive, justified 
the command in this extraordinary instance. The 
command, if it was given, surely sanctified the ac- 
tion: and, upon these grounds, till I can meet with 
some other exposition, which may render this typical 
wedding equally significant of the thing to be typified 
by it in all its cireumstances, I am content to take the 
fact plainly, as it is related, according to the natural 
import of the words of the narration; especially as 
this way of taking it will lead to the true meaning 
of the emblematical act, even if it was commanded 

Vo. III. ( 54 


4 And the Lorp said unto him, ee 
Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little fecder Sor 
while, ° and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel 


1 Heb. visit. 


and done only in vision. In taking it as a reality, I 
have with me the authority, not certainly of the 
majority, but of some of the most learned and 
cautious expositors; which I mention, not so much 
to sustain the truth of the opinion, as to protect 
myself, in the avowal of it, from injurious imputa- 
tions.” 

Verse 3. Sohe went and took Gomer, &c.—The, 
word Gomer signifies failing, or consuming, (see 
Psa. xii. 1,) so that the very name of the harlot, 
whom Hosea took, was symbolical, signifying that 
the kingdom of Israel would experience a great 
failing, consumption, or decrease of its people; 
which indeed it did, through the Assyrian kings’ car- 
rying away vast. numbers of them, from time to 
time, into captivity. The daughter of Diblaim— 
Diblaim signifies heaps of figs; this name, therefore, 
may be considered as expressing symbolically, that, 
as some figs are good, others bad, (see Jer. xxiv.,) so 
there were some good people, although the major 
part were bad, among the Israelites. Which con- 
ceived, and bare him a son—This, it seems, was a 
legitimate son born to the prophet. 

Verse 4. And the Lord said, Call his name Jez- 
reel—This name, compounded of the nouns yt, 
seed, and 5x, God, signifies the seed of God. The 
names, it must be observed, imposed upon the wo- 
man’s children by God’s direction, sufficiently de- 
clare what particular parts of the Jewish nation 
were severally represented by them. 'The persons 
signified by this the prophet’s proper son, says Bish- 
op Horsley, “were all those true servants of God, 
scattered among all the twelve tribes of Israel, who, 
in the times of the nation’s greatest depravity, wor- 
shipped the everlasting God in the hope of the Re- 
deemer to come. These were a holy seed, the 
genuine sons of God, begotten of him to a lively 
hope, and the early seed of that church which shall 
at last embrace all the families of the earth. These 
are Jezreel, typified by the prophet’s own son, and 
rightful heir, as the children of God, and heirs of the 
promises. For yet alittle while—And yet this little 
was a long while, through God’s gracious forbear- 
ance. As bad as this people were, they should not 
perish without warning. Ae: 0 Oeo¢ mpoonuacvery, 
God loves to premonish, or forewarn, says the hea- 
then historian, Herodotus. J will avenge the blood 
~—Hebrew, bloods of Jezreel: that is, says Bishop 
Horsley, “the blood of the holy seed, the faithful 
servants of God, shed by the idolatrous princes of 
Jehu’s family in persecution, and the blood of the 
children shed in their horrible rites upon the altars 
of their idols.” It must be observed further here, 
that this mystical name of the prophet’s son, Jezreel, 
was the name of a city in the tribe of Issachar, and 
of a valley, or plain, in which the city stood: the 
city famous for its vineyard, which cost its rightful 

849 3 


Destruction of the 


HOSEA. 


famaly of Jehu represented. 


the upon the house of Jehu, ‘and will 
_~*™ cause to cease the kingdom of the 
house of Israel. 


4 2 Kings xv. 10, 12. 


5 °* And it shall cume to pass at that A. 4 ag 
day, that I will break the bow of ———— 
Israel in the valley of Jezreel. 


e 2 Kings xv. 29. 


owner Naboth his life; and, by the righteous judg- 
ment of God, gave occasion to the downfall of the 
royal house of Ahab: the plain, one of the finest 
parts of the whole land of Canaan. As it was here 
that Jehu shed the blood of Ahab’s family with un- 
sparing hand, many modern expositors, “forgetting 
the prophet’s son, have thought of nothing in this 
passage but the place, the city or the plain.” And 
“by the blood of Jezreel, which God here threatens 
to avenge upon the house of Jehu, they have under- 
stood the blood of Ahab’s posterity ; because though, 
in shedding that blood, Jehu executed the judgment 
which God had denounced by Elijah against the 
house of Ahab, for the cruel murder of Naboth; yet, 
in doing that, he acted from a principle of ambition 
and cruelty, without any regard to God’s glory, 
whose worship he forsook, maintaining in the coun- 
try the idolatry which Jeroboam had first set up. 
Upon this exposition, Bishop Horsley remarks as 
follows: “It is true, that when the purposes of God 
are accomplished by the hand of man, the very same 
act may be just and good as it proceeds from God, 
and makes a part of the scheme of providence, and 
criminal in the highest degree as it is performed by 
the man, who is the immediate agent. The man 
may act from sinful motives of his own, without 
any consideration, or knowledge, of the end to 
which God directs the action. In many cases the 
man may be incited, by enmity to God and the true 
religion, to the very act in which he accomplishes 
God’s secret, or even revealed purpose. The man, 
therefore, may justly incur wrath and punishment 
for those very deeds in which, with much evil in- 
tention of his own, he is the instrument of God’s 
good providence. But these distinctions will not 
apply to the case of Jehu, in such manner as to 
solve the difficulty arising from this interpretation 
of the text. Jehu was specially commissioned by a 
prophet to smite the house of Ahab his master, to 
avenge the blood of the prophets, and the blood of all 
the servants of Jehovah, at the hand of Jezebel, 2 
Kings ix. 7. And however the general corruption 
of human nature, and the recorded imperfections of 
Jehu’s character, might give room to suspect, that in 
the excision of Ahab’s family, and of the whole fac- 
tion of Baal’s worshippers, he might. be instigated 
by motives of private ambition, and by a cruel, san- 
guinary disposition, the fact appears from the history 
to have been otherwise; that he acted, through the 
whole business, with a conscientious regard to God’s 
commands, and a zeal for his service, insomuch that, 
when the work was completed, he received the ex- 
press approbation of God; and the continuance of 
the sceptre of Israel in his family, to the fourth 
generation, was promised as the reward of this good 
and accepted service: see 2 Kings x. 30. And it 
cannot be conceived, that the very same deed, which 


was commanded, approved, and rewarded in Jehu, 
who performed it, should be punished as a crime in 
Jehu’s posterity, who had no share in the transac- 
tion. For these reasons, I am persuaded that Jez- 
reel is to be taken in this passage in its mystical 
meaning; and is to be understood of the persons 
typified by the prophet’s son—the holy seed—the 
true servants and worshippers of God.. It is threat- 
ened that their blood is to be visited upon the house 
of Jehu, by which it had been shed. The princes 
descended from Jehu were all idolaters; and idola- 
ters have always been persecutors of the true religion. 
In all ages, and in all countries, they have persecuted 
the Jezreel unto death, whenever they have had the 
power of doing it. The blood of Jezreel, therefore, 
which was to be visited on the house of Jehu, was 
the blood of God’s servants, shed in persecution, 
and of infants shed upon the altars of their idols, by 
the idolatrous princes of the line of Jehu. And so 
the expression was understood by St. Jerome and 
by Luther.” This threatening, denounced against 
the house of Jehu, was executed in the days of his 
great-grandson, the son of Jeroboam II., during 
whose reign Hosea received this prophecy from the 
Lord. For Zechariah, as we find 2 Kings xv. 10, 
was killed by a conspiracy of Shallum, who made 
himself king in his stead; and, no doubt, many of 
his kindred, who were of the house of Jehu, were 
slain with him, And will cause to cease the king- 
dom of the house of Israel—In the family of Jehu. 
Or rather, this is a prophecy of the destruction of 
the whole kingdom of Israel, which was in a de. 
clining condition from the death of Jeroboam, and 
the history of which, from the usurpation of Shallum, 
is little else than an account of conspiracies, murders, 
and usurpations, till it was entirely subverted by the 
Assyrians; and the people were carried captives into 
Assyria, and were dispersed through the various 
provinces of that empire. ‘ 
Verse 5. And it shall come to pass at that day, 
that I will break, &c.—This entire abolition of the 
kingdom of the ten tribes shall take effect at the 
time when I break the bow, &c. Here the breaking 
of the bow in the valley of Jezreel is the event that 
marks the date; and to that date, so marked, the 
threatened excision of the kingdom of the ten tribes 
is referred. And it was of moment to give the peo- 
ple warning, that the advantages, which the enemy 
would gain over them in that part of the country, 
would end in the utter subversion of the kingdom. 
For had this timely warning preduced repentance 
and reformation, the judgment, no doubt, would 
have been averted. St. Jerome says, the Israelites 
were overthrown by the Ass in a pitched bat- 
tle, in the plain of Jezreel. But of any such battle 
we have no mention in history, sacred or profane, 
But Tiglath-pileser took several of the ipal 
( 54* ) oa 


Destruction of the 


SHAPTER I. 


Samily of John represented 


A. M.3219. 


6 4 And she conceived again and 
B.C. 785. 


bare a daughter. And Giod said un- 
to him, Call her name * Lo-ruhamah: ‘ for 31 
will no more have mercy upon the house of 
Israel; *but I will utterly take them away. 

7 * But I will have mercy upon the house 


*That is, Not having obtained mercy. £2 Kings xvii. 6, 23. 
=! “Heb. i will not add any more to. 


of Judah, and will save them by the A. M. $210 
Lorp their God, and "will not save s 
them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by 
horses, nor by horsemen. 

8 % Now when she had weaned Lo-ruha- 
mah, she conceived, and bare a son. 


$2 Kings xix. 35, 


* Or, that I should altogether pardon them. 
h Zech. iv. 6; ix. 10. 


cities in that plain, in a reign of Pekah. And af- 
terward in the reign of Hoshea, Samaria was taken 
by Shalmaneser, after a siege of three years; and 
this put an end to the kingdom of the ten tribes. 
And the taking of these cities successively, and, at 
last, of the capital itself, was a breaking of the bow 
of Israel, a demolition of the whole military strength 
of the kingdom, in the valley of Jezreel, where all 
those cities were situated. For the breaking of a 
bow was a natural image for the overthrow of mili- 
tary strength in general, at a time when the bow 
was one of the principal weapons. ‘“ Although the 
valley of Jezreel is here to be understood literally 
of the tract of country so named, yet perhaps there 
is an indirect allusion to the mystical import of the 
name. 
of promise, the name, the vale of Jezreel, describes 
it as the property of the holy seed, by whom it is at 
last to be possessed. So that, in the very terms of 
the denunciation against the kingdom of Israel, an 
oblique promise is contained, of the restoration of 
the converted Israelites. The Israel which possessed 
it, in the time of this prophecy, were not the right- 
ful owners of the soil. It is part of the domain of 
the Jezreel, the seed of God, for whom it isreserved.” 
—Bishop Horsley. 

Verse 6. And she conceived again—It has been 
observed, that the children which the prophet’s wife 
bore represent certain distinct parts, or descriptions, 
of the Jewish nation, of the whole of which the 
mother was the emblem. Of her three children 
here mentioned, the eldest and the youngest were 
sons, the intermediate child was a daughter. “The 
eldest,” says Bishop Horsley, “I think, was. the 
prophet’s son; but the last two were both bastards. 
In this I have the concurrence of Dr. Wells, acutely 
remarking, that whereas it is said, verse 3, that the 
prophet’s wife conceived and bare a son to him, it is 
said of the other two children, only that she con- 
ceived and bare them; implying that the children 
she then bare, not being born, like the first, to the 
prophet, were not begotten by him.” Now, as the 
name imposed, by God’s direction, upon the eldest 
child, the prophet’s own son, typified the true chil- 
dren of God, and heirs of the promises among the 
Israelites; so the two bastard children, the bishop 
thinks, typified those parts of the Jewish people that 
were not Jezreel, or the seed of God. The first of 
these, the daughter, whose sex was the emblem of 
weakness, was called Lo-ruhamah, which signifies, 
unbeloved, or unpitied, or, as it is in the margin, in 
conformity with all the ancient visions, not having 
nea | mercy. “This daughter typified the people 


This being the finest spot of the whole land | 


of the ten tribes, in the enfeebled state of their de- 
clining monarchy, torn by their intestine commotions 
and perpetual revolutions, harassed by powerful in- 
vaders, empoverished by their tyrannical exactions, 
and condemned by the just sentence of God to utter 
excision as a distinct kingdom, without hope of 
restoration: for so the type is explained by God 
himself,” declaring, J will utterly take them away— 
That is, 1 will cause them to be carried into captivity, 
never to return again ina body; and will utterly put 
an end to them, considered as a kingdom, or people 
distinct from Judah. 

Verse 7. But I will have mercy upon the house 
of Judah—Including Benjamin, and such of the 
Levites as adhered to God’s law and worship, and 
as many of the other tribes as renounced the calves, 
Baal, and all idolatrous worship, and worshipped 
God alone as he required. On Judah, including all 
these, God had mercy in various respects, in which 
he had not mercy on Israel, prolonging that king- 
dom 132 years after Israel ceased to be a kingdom, 
preserving them from the combined powers of the 
king of Syria and the king of Israel, who united to 
destroy them, raising them up to greatness and glory 
in the reign of Hezekiah, in whose days the house 
of Judah was saved, by a wonderful miracle, from 
the power of Sennacherib the Assyrian king. Add 
to this, that Judah’s captivity was only for seventy 
years, whereas Israel’s continues to this day; Judah 
was restored to their own land, but Israel was not. 
By this, as the prophet would debase the pride of 
Israel, so possibly he intended to direct the well- 
disposed among them whither to go to find mercy. 
And wiil save them by the Lord their God, and not 
by bow, nor by sword, &c.-— These expressions,” 
Bishop Horsley thinks, “are too magnificent to be 
understood of any thing but the final rescue of the 
Jews from the power of antichrist in the latter ages, 
by the incarnate God destroying the enemy with the 
brightness of his coming, (2 Thess. ii. 8,) of which 
the destruction of Sennacherib’s army in the days 
of Hezekiah might be a type, but it was nothing 
more.” 

Verse 8. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, 
she conceived, &c.—The last child is a son, and the 
daughter was weaned before the woman conceived 
him. “ A child, when it is weaned,” says St. Jerome, 
“leaves the mother; is not nourished with the pa- 
rent’s milk; is sustained with extraneous aliments.” 
“This aptly represents the condition of the ten 
tribes, expelled from their own country, dispersed in 
foreign lands, no longer nourished with the spiritual 
food of divine truth by the ministry of the prophets, 

851 


Deliverance of the Jews | 


HOSEA. 


from the Syrians foretold. 


A. M. 3219. 


9 Then said God, Call his name 
B. C. 785 


_ 5J,o-ammi: for ye are not my people, 
and I will not be your God. 

10 4 -Yet ‘the number of the children of 
Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which 
cannot be measured nor numbered; * and it 
shall come to pass, that ®in the place where 
it was said unto them, 'Ye are not my 


5 That is, Not my people. i Gen, xxxii. 12; Rom. ix. 27, 28. 
k Rom. ix. 25, 26; J Pet, ii. 10——® Or, instead of that. 


and destitute of any better guide than natural reason 
and heathen philosophy. The deportation of the 
ten tribes, by which they were reduced to this 
miserable condition, and deprived of what remained 
to them, in their worst state, of the spiritual privi- 
leges of the chosen race, was, in St. Jerome’s notion 
of the prophecy, the weaning of Lo-ruhamah. The 
child, conceived after Lo-ruhamah was thus weaned, 
must typify the people of the kingdom of Judah, in 
the subsequent periods of their history. Or rather, 
his child typifies the whole nation of the children 
of Israel, reduced, in its external form, by the cap- 
tivity of the ten tribes, to that single kingdom. The 
sex represents a considerable degree of national 
strength and vigour, remaining in this branch of the 
Jewish people, very different from the exhausted 
state of the other kingdom previous to its fall. Nor 
have the two tribes ever suffered so total an excision. 
The ten were absolutely lost in the world soon after 
their captivity. They have been nowhere to be 
found for many ages, and know not where to find 
themselves; though we are assured they will be 
found of God, in the day when he shall make up his 
jewels. But the people of Judah have never ceased 
totally tobe. In captivity at Babylon they lived a 
separate race, respected by their conquerors. From 
that captivity they returned. They became an op- 
ulent and powerful state; formidable at times to the 
rival powers of Syria and Egypt; and held in no 
small consideration by the Roman people, and the 
first emperors of Rome. And even in their present 
state of ruin and degradation, without territory, and 
without a polity of their own, such is the masculine 
strength of suffering with which they are endued, 
they are still extant in the world as a separate race, 
but not as God’s people, otherwise than as they are 
reserved for signal mercy. God grant it may be in 
no very distant period! But at present they are 
roy x5, Lo-ammi, not my people. And so they have 
actually been more than seventeen centuries and a 
half; and to this condition they were condemned, 
when this prophecy was delivered. That these are 
typified by the child Lo-ammi, appears from the ap- 
plication of that name, in the tenth verse, to the 
children of Israel generally; whence it seems to 
follow, that the degenerate people of Judah were 
implicated in the threatenings contained in the for- 
mer part of the chapter. But in those threatenings 
they cannot be implicated, unless they are typified 


people, ¢here it shall be said unto A. mae 
them, Ye are ™the sons of the ———— 
living God. 

11 = Then shall the children of Judah and 
the children of Israel be gathered together, and 
appoint themselves one head, and they shall 
come up out of the land: for great shall be 
the day of Jezreel. 


1 Chapter ii. 23.——™ John i. 12; 1 John iii. 1——* Isa. xi. 12, 
13; Jer. iii. 18; Ezek. xxxiv. 23; xxxvii. 16-24. 


they are not typified in Jezreel; for the Jezreel is 
no object of wrath or threatening: not in Lo-ruha- 
mah ; for Lo-ruhamah typifies the kingdom of the 
ten tribes exclusively: of necessity, therefore, in 
Lo-ammi.”—Bishop Horsley. 

Verse 10. Yet the number of the children of Israel 
shall be as the sand of the sea—Though God casts 
off the ten tribes, yet he will, in due time, supply 
their loss, by bringing in great numbers of true 
Israelites into the church, not only of the Jews, but 
also of the Gentiles, and making them, who before 
were strangers to the covenants of promise, fellow- 
heirs with the Jews, Rom. ix. 25, 26; 1 Pet. ii. 10. 
“T think,” says Bishop Horsley, “this is to be under- 
stood of the mystical Israel; their numbers, con- 
sisting of myriads of converts, both of the natural 
Israel, and their adopted brethren of the Gentiles, 
shall be immeasurably great.” And in the place 
where it was said, Ye are not my people, &c.— 
“That is, at Jerusalem, or at least in Judea, where 
this prophecy was delivered, and where the execu- 
tion of the sentence took place: there, in that very 
place, they, to whom it was said, Ye are no people 
of mine, shall be called, the sons of the living God. 
This must relate, at least principally, to the natural 
Israel of the house of Judah; for to them it was 
said, Ye are no people of mine. And since they are 
to be acknowledged again as the children of the 
living God, in the same place where this sentence 
was pronounced and executed, the prophecy clearly 
promises their restoration to their own land.” 

Verse 11. Then shall the children of Judah and 
the children of Israel be gathered together—When 
the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, this will be 
a means of converting the Jews, and bringing them 
into the church. And when converts of the house 
of Judah shall have obtained a resettlement in the 
holy land, then a general conversion shall take place 
of the race of Judah, and the race of the ten tribes. 
They shall unite in one confession, and in one 
polity; and appoint themselves one head—The 
Lord Christ, called David their king, (chap. iii. 5,) 
shall become the chief and head of his church, com- 
posed of Judah and Israel, of Jews and Gentiles. 
This head is indeed appointed and set up over the 
church by God, Psa. ii. 6; Eph. i. 22. But the saints 
are said to appoint Christ their head, when they 
choose him and embrace him for their sovereign; 
when, with the highest estimation, most vigorous 


in some one, or more, of the typical children. But}, affections, and utmost endeavours of unfeigned obe- 
852 


—— 


Deliverance of the Jews 


CHAPTER II. 


From the Assyrians foretold. 


dience, they set him up in their hearts, and serve 
him in their lives, giving him the pre-eminence in 
all things. And they shall come up out of the land, 
&c.—That is, from all parts of the earth, to Jerusa- 
lem, there to join in the same way of worship (as 
once the twelve tribes did, before the schism under 
Jeroboam) with the Christian Church, and so pro- 
ceed on the way to the kingdom of heaven. Jeru- 
salem being situated upon an eminence, and in the 
heart of a mountainous region, which rose greatly 
above the general level of the country to a great 
distance on all sides, the sacred writers always 


speak of persons going to Jerusalem, as going wp. | 


For great shall be the day of Jezreel—That is, of 
the seed of God: see note on verse 4. “Great and 
happy shall be the day, when the holy seed of both 
branches of the natural Israel shall be publicly ac- 
knowledged of their God, united under one head, 
their King Messiah, and restored to the possession of 
the promised land, and to a situation of high pre- 
eminence among the kingdoms of the earth.” 

It must be observed here, that although this is an 
express prophecy of the final conversion and resto- 
ration of the Jews, it contains also a manifest allu- 
sion to the call of the Gentiles. For, “the word 
Jezreel, though applied in this passage to the devout 
part of the natural Israel, by its etymology is capa- 


ble of a larger meaning, comprehending all, of every | 


race and nation, who, by the preaching of the gos- 
pel, are made members of Christ, and the children 


of God. All these are a seed of God, begotten of | 
him by the Spirit to a holy life, and to the inherit- | 


ance of immortality. The words Ammi and Ruha- 
mah, (my people and beloved,) and their opposites, 
Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah, (not my people and not 
beloved,) are capable of the same extension; the 
two former to comprehend the converted, the two 
latter the unconverted, Gentiles. In this extent they 
seem to be used chap. ii. 23, which appears to be a 
prophecy of the call of the Gentiles, with manifest 
allusion to the restoration of the Jews.” Accord- 
ingly we find these prophecies of Hosea cited by 
St. Paul, to prove the indiscriminate call to salvation 
both of Gentiles and Jews. He affirms, that God 
has called us [that is, Christians] vessels of mercy 
afore prepared unto glory, # povov e& lovdawv ahaa 
wae e Over, not of the Jews only, but moreover of 


—— 


the Gentiles too, Rom. ix. 24.” “The allusion 
which is made to these prophecies by St. Peter, in 
his first epistle, (chap. ii. 10,) is not properly a cita- 
tion of any part of them, but merely an accommo- 
dation of the expressions, not my people, my people, 
not having oblained mercy, having obtained mercy, 
to the case of the Hebrews of the Asiatic dispersion, 
before and after their conversion.” Bishop Horsley, 
who adds, “it is surprising that the return of Judah 
from the Babylonian captivity should ever have 
been considered, by any Christian divine, as the 
principal object of this prophecy, and an event in 
which it has received its full accomplishment. The 
fact is, that this proph :cy has no relation to the re- 
turn from Babylon in a single circumstance. What 
was the number of the returned captives, that it 
should be compared to. that of the sands upon the 
sea-shore? The number of the returned, in com- 
parison of the whole captivity, was nothing. And 
how was Zorobabel (under whom the Jews returned 
from Babylon) one head of the rest of Israel, as 
wellas of Judah? To interpret the prophecy in this 
manner is to make it little better than a paltry quib- 
ble; more worthy of the Delphic tripod, than of 
the Scripture of truth.” Very judicious, upon this 
subject, are the remarks of the learned Houbigant 

“The prophet, in the tenth verse, passes from threat- 
enings to promises, which is the manner of the 
prophets, that the Jews might not think that, after 
the accomplishment of the threatenings, God would 
concern himself no more about their nation. Those 
promises seem to respect the final condition of the 
Jews, when they should collect under one head, the 
Messiah; that it might properly be said of them, 
Ye are children of the living God. It is difficult to 
accommodate the words of this passage to the re- 
turn from the Babylonian captivity. Those Jews, 
who returned from Babylon, were not so much as 
one-hundredth part of the whole Jewish race; so 
little were they to be compared with the sands of 
the sea: nor did they appoint themselves one head. 
Zorobabel was indeed their leader, but not their sin- 
gle leader; and their form of government hencefor- 
ward was not monarchical, but an aristocracy. Nor 
had they kings till the very last, when they were 
become unworthy to be called children of the living 
God.” 


CHAPTER II. 

n tis chapter, (1,) God charges the Israelites with their idolatries, their forgetfulness of him, and their obligations to him, 
1,2, 5,8. (2,) He threatens to take from them that abundance of outward mercies wherewith they had served their idols, 
and to abandon them to certain ruin, 3-7, 9-13. But, (3,) He promises, at last, to return to them in mercy, after they 
should be gathered from their dispersions, 14; to cure them of their wonted idolatry and wickedness, 7, 16, 17; and, for 
their complete safety, to render them his people, and make them share the blessings of his covenant, 18-20, 23; and bestow 
upon them all necessary benefits and comforts, temporal and spiritual, 15, 21, 22. 


853 


God charges the Israelites 


A. M. 3220. 


AY ye unto your brethren, ! Ami; 
B. C. 784. Ss Micciaeadth z ? 


and to your sisters, ? Ruhamah. 

2 Plead with your mother, plead; for * she 
as not my wife, neither am I her husband: let 
her therefore put away her » whoredoms out of 
her sight, and her adulteries from between her 
breasts ; 

3 Lest °I strip her naked, and set her as in 
the day that she was ¢ born, and make her ® as 


HOSEA. 


with their idolatry. 


a wilderness, and set her like a dry A. M. 3220 
land, and slay her with ‘ thirst. Aiba 

4 AndJ will not have mercy upon her chil- 
dren; for they be the * children of whoredoms. 

5 "For their mother hath played the harlot : 
she that conceived them hath done shamefully : 
for she said, I will go after my lovers, ‘that 
give me my bread and my water, my wool and 
my flax, mine oil and my ° drink. 


— 


That is, My people. *'That is, having obtained mercy. 
aTsa, 1, 1,——> Ezek. xvi. 25. ¢ Jer. xiii. 22, 26; Ezek. xvi. 
37, 39.—4 Ezek. xvi. 4. 


e Ezekiel xix. 13——f Amos viii. 11. 13,——8 John viii, 41. 
hJsa, i. 21; Jer. iil. 1, 6, 8,9; Ezek. xvi. 15, 16——* Verses 
8, 12; Jer. xliv. 17.——* Heb. drinks. a 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verses 1,2. Say to your brethren—Many inter- 
preters consider this verse as being connected with 
the preceding chapter, thus: When that general 
restoration of the Jewish nation shall take place; 
you may change your language in speaking to those 
of your brethren and sisters whom I had before dis- 


owned, and you may call them Ammi, my people, | 
and Ruhamah, she that hath obtained mercy. The | 


prophet alludes to the 6th and 9th verses of the pre- 
ceding chapter. Other expositors, however, with 
more apparent reason, consider this verse as con- 
nected with the following words, and translate it 
thus: “Ye that are my people, and have obtained 
mercy, speak to your brethren and sisters, and plead 
with your mother,” &c. “Although the Israelites, 
in the days of Hosea, were in general corrupt, and 
addicted to idolatry; yet there were among them, 
in the worst times, some who had not bowed the knee 
to Baal. These were always Ammi and Ruhamah ; 
God’s own people, and a darling daughter. God 
commissions these faithful few to admonish the inha- 
bitants of the land in general, of the dreadful judg- 
ments that would be brought upon them by the 
gross idolatry of the Jewish Church and nation ;” 
and to reprove, and use their best endeavours to 
reform that general corruption which the nation had 
contracted by its idolatry; whereby the people had 
broken the covenant God had made with them, and 
had caused a separation, or divorce, between him 
and them, Let her therefore put away her whore- 
doms, &c.—Let her leave off her idolatries. "These 
are often expressed in the Scriptures by the fondness 
and caresses which pass between unchaste lovers. 
Verse 3. Lest I strip her naked, &c.—The pun- 
ishment frequently inflicted upon harlots was, to strip 
them naked and expose them to the world. The 
punishment of adulteresses among the Germans is 
thus described by Tacitus, “ Accisis crinibus nuda- 
tam coram propinguis expellit domo maritus.” Or 
the allusion may be to the ignominy which brutal 
conquerors sometimes inflicted on the captives they 
took in war, by stripping them of their clothing and 
causing them to travel in that condition, exposed to 
the inclemency of the weather, and, which was yet 
worse, to the intolerable heat of the sun: see note 
on Isaiah iii. 17. Thus God threatens to deal with 
the Israelites: to deliver them into the hands of their 
854 


enemies, and carry them away naked into captivity, 
(see verse 9,) inas forlorn and desolate a condition as 
they were in during their bondage in Egypt. And 
make her as a wilderness—A state of captivity is 
fitly compared to being placed in a wilderness, in 
want of common necessaries: compare Ezek. xix. 
13. “It may seem harsh,” says Bishop Horsley, 
“to say of a woman that she shall be laid waste like 
a wilderness, and reduced to the condition of a 
parched land. But it is to be observed that the alle- 
gorical style makes an intercommunity of attributes 
between the type and the thing typified. So that 
when a woman is the image of a country or of a 
church, that may be said of a woman, which, in 
unfigured language, might be said of the country, or 
the church, which she represents. The country 
might literally be made a waste wilderness, by un- 
fruitful seasons, by the devastations of war, or of 
noxious vermin: a church is made a wilderness 
and a parched land, when the living waters of the 
Spirit are withheld.” itis 

Verses 4,5. And I will not have mercy on her 
children, &c.—As an injured husband has no regard 
for the children which his wife has had by another 
man; so neither will I have pity on thy ‘children 
which are trained up to practise thy idolatries. For 
they be the children of whoredoms—Spurious chil- 
dren, not knowing their father: so those might fitly 
be called who worshipped a plurality of gods; for 


by worshipping a multiplicity of them, they declared 


plainly, that they did not know to whom their wor- 
ship was due, or who was their Creator or original 
Father. or their mother hath played the harlot— 
This proves the truth of the above charge, and justi- 
fies the severity of the punishment. She that con- 
ceived them hath done shamefully—Hath acted like 
an impudent and shameless harlot, sinning openly 
andavowedly. She said, I will go after my lovers 
—By lovers here, are meant, first, The idols, with 
whom the Israelites committed spiritual adultery: 
see Jer. iii. 1; and then the idolatrous nations, whose 
alliance the Israelites courted, and, in order thereto, 
practised their idolatries: the word may be under- 
stood here in both senses; for they aseribed all the 
plenty they enjoyed chiefly to the favour of the 
idol-gods which they worshipped, Jer. xliv. 17; and 
then they placed their trust and confidence in the 
confederacies they had made with their neighbour- 
eS 


ee es 


2 
7" 


The Israelites 


A. M.3220. 6 Therefore, behold, * I will hedge 

B. C. 784. 

up thy way with thorns, and * make 
a wall, that she shall not find her paths. 

7 And she shall follow after her lovers, but she 
shall not overtake them; and she shall seek 
them, but shall not, find them: then shall she 
say, ‘I will go and return to my ™ first husband ; 
for then was it better with me than now. 

8 For she did not ™ know that °I gave her 
corn, and *wine, and oil, and multiplied her 
silver and gold, ° which they prepared for Baal. 


® Job iii. 23; xix. 8; Lam. iii. 7, 9. 4 Heb. wall a wall. 
1 Chap. v.15; Luke xv. 18.——™ Ezek. xvi. 8. o Tsaiah i. 3. 
© Ezek. xvi. 17, 18, 19. 5 Heb. new wine. 6 Or, wherewith 


ing idolaters; and thought the peace and plenty they 
possessed were very much owing to their alliance 
and protection. 

Verses 6, 7. Therefore I will hedge up thy way 
with thorns, &e.—That is, with difficulties and dis- 
tresses; and make a wali—Hebrew, 71), a stone 
fence. I will effectually block up her way, and sur- 
round her with great calamities. That she shall 
not find her paths—That she shall not know which 
way to turn to extricate herself from them. And 
she shall follow after her lovers—She shall seek for 
help of her idols, and her idolatrous allies, but shall 
receive none. Or, as Archbishop Newcome para- 
phrases the words, “ For some time she shall remain 
addicted to her Egyptian and Syrian idols, and to all 
her former idolatrous and immoral practices: but 
without carrying her evil wishes into execution.” 
She shall seek them, but not find them—A_ prover- 
bial expression denoting lost labour. She shall seek 
for favour and succour at her lovers’ hands, but all in 
vain, they shall all forsake her, and change their an- 
cient love into mortal hatred. “It is the usual prac- 
tice of the devil and his instruments,” says an old 
writer, “to bring men into the briers and thorns, and 
there to leave them to shift as they can. Thus the 
Pharisees dealt by Judas; What is that to us, say 
they, see thow to that; they left him when they had 
led him to his ruin’ God deals very differently 
with his people. Asin very faithfulness he afflicts 
them, that he may be true to their best interests: so 
when they follow hard after him, and seek him as 
David did, they are sure to find him; if they search 
Sor him with all their heart, Jer. xxix. 13. When 
they meet with disappointments it is in mercy, and 
they are chastened of the Lord, that they may not 
be condemned with the world. T'hen shall she say, 
Iwill return to my first husband, &e.—Her afflic- 
tions will bring her to a sense of her duty, and of 
the happiness she enjoyed as long as she cleaved 
steadfastly unto Jehovah the true God. 

Verses 8, 9. For she did not know—Or, as Bishop 
Horsley renders it, But she would not know, that I 
gave her corn, &¢.—She did not, or would not con- 
sider that all the necessaries she enjoyed, as well as 
her riches and ornaments, were my gifts, which yet 
she ungratefully employed in the service of her 

3 


CHAPTER II. 


threatened with ruin. 


9 Therefore will I return, and ?take a ai = 
away my corn in the time thereof, ———— 
and my wine in the season thereof, and will 
Trecover my wool and my flax given to cover 
her nakedness. 

10 And now ¢ will I discover her * lewdness in 
the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver 
her out of my hand. 

11 *I willalso cause all her mirth to cease, her 
* feast-days, her new-moons, and her sabbaths, 
and all her solemn feasts. 


they made Baal, Chap. viii. 4» Verse 3.——7 Or, take away. 
4 Ezek. xvi. 37; xxiii. 29.——® Heb, folly, or, villany.—t Amos 
vill. 10. 5] Kings xii. 32 ; Amos viii. 5. 


idols, and in making images of false gods to worship 
instead of me. J'herefore—Or, for the punishment 
of her ingratitude; will I take away my corn in the 
lime thereof—I will change my manner of acting 
toward her, and deprive her of the good things she 
hopes infallibly to enjoy. At the time when she ex- 
pects to reap the fruits of the earth, her enemies 
shall invade her and destroy them, or unfavourable 
seasons shall entirely blast them, or other causes 
prevent her enjoying them; and will recover my 
wool and my flax—Will take back again the proper 
materials I gave for clothing her. This verse, ac- 
cording to Bishop Horsley, speaks “of calamities 
already begun, and the next describes the progress 
and increase of them. It appears from all the pro- 
phets, and particularly from Amos and Joel, that the 
beginning of judgment upon this refractory, rebel- 
lious people, was in unfruitful seasons, and noxious 
vermin, producing a failure of the crops, dearth, 
murrain of the cattle, famine, and pestilential dis- 
eases.” 

Verses 10, 11. And now will I discover her lewd- 
ness, &e.—The folly and wickedness of her idola- 
tries shall appear by the punishments which I will 
inflict upon her, which shall be so remarkable that 
they shall be taken notice of by the idolatrous na- 
tions round about her, which have pretended a friend- 
ship fer her, and promised her great assistance and 
prosperity if she would worship the same gods that 
they worshipped ; but neither they nor any of their 
false gods shall save her from the calamities I will 
bring upon her. And I will cause all her mirth to 
cease—The mirth and jollity of Israel were greatly 
damped when Tiglath-pileser took Ijon and other 
cities, and subdued Gilead and Galilee, and all the 
land of Naphtali, and carried the people away cap- 
tive to Assyria, which he did but.a few years after 
this prophecy was uttered. And surely all their joy 
must have ceased about ten or twelve years after, 
when Samaria was taken, and Hosea and all Israel 
made captives. Her feast-days, her new-moons, 
&c.—Though apostate Israel was fallen to idolatry, 
and had renounced the true worship of God, yet by: 
this verse it appears they retained many of the rites 
and ceremonies that were used in Judah, or else they 
set up others like them. But God here threatens, 

855 


Promises 


HOSEA. 


of mercy. 


12 And I will °destroy her vines, 
and her fig-trees, ‘whereof she hath 
said, These are my rewards that my lovers have 
given me: and “I will make them a forest, 
and the beasts of the field shall eat them. 

13 And I will visit upon her the days of 
Baalim, wherein she burned incense to them, 
and she * decked herself with her ear-rings and 


A. M. 3220. 
B. C. 784. 


° Heb. make desolate. t Verse 5. 
v. 5. x Ezek. xxiii. 40, 42. 


1 Psa. Ixxx. 12, 13; Isa. 
y Ezek. xx. 35. 


her jewels, and she went after her A. M. 3220. 
lovers, and forgat me, saith the Lorp. . 

14 | Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and 
Ybring her into the wilderness, and speak 
10 comfortably 1! unto her. 

15 And I will give her her vineyards from 
thence, and 7 the valley of Achor for a door of 
hope: and she shall sing there, as in * the days 


11 Heb. to her heart.—— Josh. vii. 26; Isa, 
aJer. ii. 2; Ezek. xvi. 8, 22, 60. 


10 Or, friendly. 
lxv. 10. 


that in their captivity they should have no opportu- 
nity to celebrate them. 

Verses 12,13. And I will destroy her vines—Those 
blessings, or fruits of the earth, which she has attri- 
buted to her false gods, I will give to the beasts of 
the field to eat, making the whole land only a wilder- 
ness for beasts. Among other objects of their false 
worship, the Israelites worshipped the celestial lu- 
minaries, and, it is likely, attributed the fruits of the 
earth to them, as self-sufficient, or producing them 
by their own power, and not as mere instruments in 
the hands of Jehovah. And I will visit upon her 
the days of Baalim—I will punish her for all the 
idolatries she has committed from the days of Jero- 
boam, who first set up the worship of false gods: 
see chap. xiii. 1. The chief god of every country 
was called by the name of Baal, which means lord: 
so Baal-peor was the god of the Moabites, Baal-zebub 
was the god of Ekron, (2 Kings i. 2,) Baal-berith the 
god of the Phenicians, Judges viii. 33. These seve- 
yal deities are in the plural number called Baalim, 
lords ; for they had lords many, 1 Cor. viii. 5. And 
she decked herself with her ear-rings—She put on 
the richest ornaments on their idolatrous festivals. 

Verses 14, 15. Therefore, behold, I will allure 
her—As there is a plain alteration of the style here 
from threatenings to promises, so the first word of 
this verse should be translated nevertheless, or not- 
withstanding. And bring her into the wilderness 
—Or, afler Ihave brought her into the wilderness. 
The state of the Jews in captivity is elsewhere ex- 
pressed by a wilderness state: see note on Ezek. xx. 
35. It probably means here the dispersion of the 
ten tribes, after their first captivity by Shalmaneser, 
2 Kings xvii. 6. And speak cumfortably to her—In 
these words, and the preceding, J will allure her, 
there is an allusion to the practice of fond husbands, 
who, forgetting past offences, use all the arts of en- 
dearment to persuade their Wives, who have parted 
from them, to return to them again. So God will 
use the most powerful persuasions to bring the Israel- 
ites to the acknowledgment of the truth, notwith- 
standing all their former abuses of the means of 
grace. The Hebrew here, m9 dy 134, is literally, 
Iwill speak to her heart, that is, speak what shall 
touch her heart, in her outcast state in the wilder- 
ness of the Gentile world, by the proffers of merey 
in the gospel. “For the doctrine of the gospel,” 
says Luther on this place, “is the true soothing | 


speech, with which the minds of men are taken. For 
856 


it terrifies not the soul, like the law, with severe de- 
nunciations of punishment; but although it reproves 
sin, it declares that God is ready to pardon sinners 
for the sake of his Son; and holds forth the sacrifice 
of the Son of God that the souls of sinners may be 
assured that satisfaction has been made by that to 
God.” And I will give her her vineyards from 
thence—Or, from that time, as the word DW may 
be rendered: then I will restore her vineyards and 
fruitful fields which I had taken from her, verse 12: 
or, from that place; or, in consequence of these 
things; in which senses also the original word is 
used. God declares that from and through the wil- 
derness lies the road to a rich, fruitful country; that 
is, that the calamities of the dispersion, together with 
the soothing intimations of the gospel, by bringing 
the Jewish race to a right mind, will be the means 
of reinstating them in that wealth and prosperity 
which God hath ordained for them in their own land. 
And the valley of Achor—Or, of trouble, or tribula- 
tion, as the Hebrew word Achor signifies ; for a door 
of hope—The passage alludes to “the vale near Jeri- 
cho, where the Israelites, first setting foot within the 
holy land, were thrown into trouble and consterna- 
tion by the daring theft of Achan. In memory of 
which, and of the tragical scene exhibited in that 
spot, in the execution of the sacrilegious peculator | 
and his whole family, the place was called the vale 
of Achor, Josh. vii. And this vale of Achor, though 
a scene of trouble and distress, was a door of hope 
to the Israelites under Joshua ; for there; immediately 
after the execution of Achan, God said to Joshua, 
Fear not, neither be thow dismayed, (chap. viii. 1,) 
and promised to support him against Ai, her king, 
and her people. And from this time Joshua drove 
on his conquests with uninterrupted suecess. In 
like manner the tribulations of the Jews, in their 
present dispersion, shall open to them the door of 
hope.” And there—That is, in the wilderness, and 
in the vale of tribulation, under those circumstances 
of present difficulty, mixed with cheering hope; she 
shall sing as in the days of her youth—She shall 
express her joy in God, as her forefathers did after 
their deliverance at the Red sea; when God espoused 
them for his peculiar people, and entered into a 
covenant with them at mount Sinai, where they 
solemnly promised an entire obedience to him, And, 
or rather, even, as in the day when she came up out 
of the land of Egypt—“ This perpetual allusion to 
the exodus,” or coming out of Egypt, “to is cir- 


Promises 


CHAPTER II. 


of mercy. 


tal 3250. of her youth, and as in the day 

____ when she came up out of the land 
of Egypt. ~ 

16 And it shall be at that_day, saith the 
Lorp, ¢hat thou shalt call me Ishi; and 
shalt call me no more }° Baali. 

17 For ° I will take away the names of Baalim 
out of her mouth, and they shall no more be 
remembered by their name. 

18 And in that day will I make a ¢ covenant 
for them with the béasts of the field, and with 


the fowls of heaven, and with the A. M. 3220. 
creeping things of the ground: and es 
° I will break the bow and the sword and the 
battle out of the earth, and I will make them 
to f lie down safely. 

19 And I will betroth thee unto me for ever ; 
yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteous- 
ness, and in judgment, and in loving-kindness, 
and in mercies. 

20 I will even betroth thee unto me in faith- 
fulness: and & thou shalt know the Lorn. 


> Exod, xv. 1——** That is, My husband.——" That is, My 
lord ——* Exodus xxiii. 13; Joshua xxiii. 7; Psalm xvi. 4; 
Zechariah xiii. 2. 


4 Job v. 23; Isa. xi. 6-9; Ezek. xxxiv. 25.—=® Psa. xlvi. 9; 
Isa. ti. 4; Ezek. xxxix. 9,10; Zech, ix. 10— Lev. xxvi. 5; 
Jer: xxili. 6.— Jer. xxxi. 33,34; John xvii. 3. 


cumstances of the march through the wilderness, 
and the first entrance into the holy land, plainly 
points the prophecy to a similar deliverance, by the 
immediate power of God, under that leader, of whom 
Moses was a type.”—Horsley. 

Verses 16, 17. And at that day thou shalt call me 
Ishi, &c.—Ishi, my husband, is an appellation of 
love; Baali, my lord, of subjection and fear. God 
hath not given his people, whom he justifies, ac- 
cepts, and betroths to himself in righteousness, the 
spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a 
sound mind, 2 Tim. i. 7. As the words °w’s, ishi, 
and ~4y3, baali, in this verse, (both applicable to a 
husband, although in different views, the former sig- 
nifying a husband simply, the latter a husband under 
the idea of a lord, or master,) are manifestly appel- 
latives, and not proper names, they certainly ought 
to have been translated as appellatives; that is, the 
clause should have been rendered, T'how shalt call 
me my husband, thou shalt no more call me my 
lord, or master, Thus Houbigant, who adds, by way 
of explication, “because thou shalt love me, and 
serve me through affection, and not through fear.” 
For I will take away the names of Baalim—That 
is, Baals ; out of her mouth—The Jews were forbid- 
den to mention the names of the heathen idols, 
Exod. xxiii. 13; Josh. xxiii. 7; and therefore the 
name Baal, though capable of a good sense, as it 
signifies husband, or lord, must be avoided by them, 
because it was also the name of false gods, lest by 
using it they should he led into idolatry. And they 
shall be no more remembered—Or mentioned, as the 
Hebrew may be translated; by their name—“It is 
in vain,” says Bishop Horsley, “to look for a purity 
of religious worship, answerable to this prophecy, 
among the Jews returned from the Babylonian cap- 
tivity. This part of the prophecy, with all the rest, 
will receive its accomplishment in the converted 
race in the latter days. It is said, indeed, that, after 
the return from Babylon, the Jews scrupulously 
avoided idolatry, and have continued untainted with 
it to this day. But, generally, as this is asserted by 
all commentators, one after another, it is not true. 
Among the restored Jews there was, indeed, no pub- 
lie idolatry, patronized by the government, as there 
had been in times before the captivity, particularly 

3 


in the reign of Ahaz. But from the time of Antio- 
chus Epiphanes to the last moments of the Jewish 
polity, there was a numerous and powerful faction, 
which in every thing affected the Greek manners; 
and this Hellenizing party were idolaters to a man, 
The Jews of the present times, as far as we are ac- 
quainted with them, seem indeed to be free from the 
charge of idolatry, properly so called. But of the 
present state of the ten tribes we have no certain 
knowledge ; without which we cannot take upon us 
either to accuse or to acquit them.” 

Verse 18. And in that day will I make a covenant 
Sor them with the beasts of the field, &e.—That is, 
a covenant of security from the evils which, in the 
days of my vengeance, arose from beasts, and birds 
of prey, and venomous creatures. Or the words 
may be understood figuratively, of the final conver- 
sion of the most ignorant and vicious of the heathen 
to the true faith; the effect of which will be, that 
they shall live in peace and friendship with the re- 
established nation of the Jews. In this sense the 
passage is understood by Bishop Horsley. And I 
will break the bow, &c.—I will cause that there shall 
be no more wars, either foreign or domestic. A 
universal peace, and freedom from all enemies, is 
mentioned by the prophets, as a concomitant of that 
flourishing state of the church which shall com- 
mence at the restoration of the Jews, and the coming 
in of the Gentiles: see Isa. xi. 6,7. And will make 
them to lie down safely—Being gathered under the 
wings of my protection, they shall repose themselves 
upon my power and providence, committing them- 
selves to my care in well doing. Observe, reader, 
all true and solid security, all real peace, whether 
inward or outward, flows from God’s favour. 

Verses 19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever 
—I will treat thee, who hast been a harlot, like a 
wife, if hereafter thou become faithful to me. Yea, 
Iwill betroth thee unto mein righteousness, &e.— 
Bishop Horsley translates these verses thus: Zo 
myself, I say, I will betroth thee with justice, and 
with righteousness, and with exuberant kindness 
and with tender love. With faithfulness to myself, 
I say, I will betroth thee, and thow shalt know the 
Jehovah. The passage, it seems, may be paraphrased 
as follows: I will betroth, or take, thee unto me ina 

857 : 


Temporal and spiritual 


HOSEA. 


blessings promesed to Israel. 


M. 3220. 


ee 21 And it shall come to pass in that 


day, "I will hear, saith the Lorn, I 
~— 
will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the 
earth ; 

22 And the earth shall hear the corn, and the 
wine, and the oil; ‘and they shall hear Jezreel. 


Ae 
B. 


hb Zechariah viii. 12,——i Chapter i. 4 ——« Jeremiah xxxi. 27 ; 
Zechariah x. 9. 


way that shall display, or make manifest, my right- 
eousnss, or the regard I have to justice and holi- 
ness, my beneficence, or inclination to make my 
creatures happy, my mercy in forgiving offences 
committed against me, and my faithfulness in fulfil- 
ling my promises, and verifying my declarations. 
And thou shalt know the Lord—"Experience the 
exuberant goodness of Jehovah; shalt find that he is 
and wilt be a gracious Lord to thee. One especial 
part of the new covenant consists in imparting to the 
faithful a more perfect knowledge of God asa sin- 
pardoning God, and of his will and their own duty: 
see Jer. xxxi. 31-34. 
Verses 21, 22. I will hear the heavens—When 
they ask, as it were, to send their rain on the earth. 
And they shwll hear the earth—When it supplicates, 
as it were, for rain. Zhe earth shall hear the corn 
and the wine, &e.—When they wish, as it were, to 
supply the wants of man. And they shall hear 
Jezreel—All nature shall hear, and minister to, the 
people whom God shall restore to their own land. 
The Hebrew word, however, here rendered to hear, 
Dr. Waterland more properly renders to answer, 
thus: I will answer the heavens, and they shall 
answer the earth, &c. In other words, all creatures 
shall answer the desires and wants of my people: 
the heavens shall answer the wants of the earth, in 
sending down seasonable showers: and the earth 
shall answer the wants of mankind, in bringing forth 
corn, and wine, and other necessaries of life: and 
the fruits of the earth shall answer the wishes of my 
restored people, by giving them due nourishment : 
see the same sense more plainly expressed, Zech. 
viii. 12. Bishop Horsley reads, I will perform my 
part, saith Jehovah, upon the heavens; and they 
shall perform their part upon the earth; and the 
earth shall perform her part upon the corn, $c. ; 
and they shall perform their parts for the Jezreel 
[the seed of God.] “The primary and most proper 
meaning,” says he, “of the verb 73), [rendered to 
hear,|1 take to be to react. But more largely it 
predicates reciprocal, correspondent, or correlate 
action. Thus it signifies the proper action of one 
thing upon another, according to established physi- 
cal sympathies in the material world ; or, among in- 
telligent beings, according to the rule of moral order. 


CHAPTER IIL. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) Another type of the spiritual whoredom of Israel, 1-8. (2,) The punishment of, ityde (3) 
reformation, 5. 


858 


23 And *I will sow her unto me in A. M, 3220. 
the earth; ‘and I will have mercy alae 
upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I 
m will say to them which were not my people, 
Thou art my people; and they shall say, 
Thou art my God. 98 


1 Chapter i. 6.——™ Chapter i. 10; Zech. xiii. 9; Rom, ix. 26; 
1 Peter ii. 10. 


And in this passage it is applied first to the action of 
God upon the powers of nature; and then to the 
subordinate action of the parts of nature upon one 
another; and, last of all, to the subservience of the 
elements, and their physical productions, to the bene- 
fit of man; and ultimately, by the direction of God’s 
overruling providence, to the exclusive benefit of the 
godly.” The gradation of the prophet in the pas- 
sage is very elegant, and admirably denotes the con- 


‘cert, the harmony, the intelligence, which shall be 


between all parts of the universe, co-operating for 
the good of God’s people, who shall then no more 
see the heaven of iron and of brass withholding its 
dew and its rain ; nor the earth burned up by the sun, 
unable to nourish the plants, nor the fruits denied 


the succour of the earth, nor men deprived of their 


necessary aliments. The words probably allude also 
to the spiritual blessings of the Christian Chureh. 
Verse 23. And I will sow—Or plant, her unto me 


inthe earth, &e.—The original word, rendered so1, 


or plant, alludes to and explains the word Jezreel, 
or seed of God, as used chap. i. 4, 11, and here in the 
foregoing verse. The prophet foretels a plentiful 
increase of true believers, like to that of corn sown 
in the earth; and represents the converted Jews as 
being the seed from which an abundant harvest of 
Gentile converts should arise. “The myriads of the 
natural Israel,” says Bishop Horsley, “converted by 
the preaching of the apostles, were the first seed of 
the universal church, And there is reason to be- 
lieve, that the restoration of the converted Jews 
will be the occasion and means of a prodigious in- 
flux of new converts from the Gentiles in the latter 
ages, Rom. xi. 12, 15. Thus the Jezreel of the na- 
tural Israel, from the first have been, and to the last 
will prove, a seed sown of God for himself in the 
earth.” Iwill have mercy upon her that had not 
obtained mercy—I will have mercy both on the Jews 
and Gentiles, who shall obey the gospel eall, and be-. 
come true converts to the Christian faith. This was 
in part fulfilled at the first preaching of the gospel, 
whether in Judea or in other countries: see Rom. 
ix. 24-26. But it’shall receive amore perfect com- 
pletion at the restoration of the Jews, and the coming 
in of the fulness of the Gentiles: compare chap. i. 
10, 11. ox ogi) 
a SEPA 
‘<airdie. Ee 

aie 

un SNA» 
oly ya J 
Then 
“nal sight: 
a ae 


- 
Pa 
* 
i* af 
- 


A type of Israel’s 


CHAPTER ITI 


spiritual whoredom. 


A; M. 3221. 


HEN said the Lorp unto m 
B. C. 783. T “ Se oe’ 


* Go yet, love a woman beloved 
of her friend, yet an adulteress, according to the 
love of the Lorn toward the children of Israel, 
who look to other gods, and love flagons ! of wine. 


a Chap. i. 2.——» Jer. iii. 20." Heb. of grapes. 


SS 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verse 1. Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, 
ove a woman—This is the literal meaning of the 
Hebrew nw 378 79 Ty, and is the sense in which 
it is understood by the LXX., who read, ere ropevyre, 
kat ayarnoov yuvaixa; and by the Vulgate, which ren- 
ders it, Adhuc vade et dilige mulierem. A different 
woman from the person whom he had espoused be- 
fore seems evidently to be intended. Thus St. Je- 
rome and St. Cyril of Alexandria understand the 
words, considering the connection here spoken of as 
a new one, formed after the dismission of Gomer; 
in which opinion they are followed by Estius, Me- 
nochius, Tirinus, and many other expositors.. The 
injunction, Archbishop Newcome supposes, was 
given after the death of Hosea’s former wife. But 
if not, it was undoubtedly given after she was di- 
vorced for her unfaithfulness to her husband; in 


consequence of which, according to the law, he | 
Beloved of her | 
Sriend—That is, her husband. But the LXX. ren- | 


eould not take her back again. 


der the words, ayarwcav xovnpa, loving evil things ; 
a reading which accords with that of the Arabic and 
Syriac, and is approved both by Archbishop New- 
come and Bishop Horsley ; the former of whom ren- 
ders the clause, A lover of evil, and the latter, ad- 
dicted to wickedness, observing, “I adopt the render- 
ing of the LXX. and Syriac, which nothing opposes 
but the Masoretie pointing.” And an adulteress— 
That is, who had been such, and that not only in the 
spiritual sense, of forsaking God, but according to 
the carnal meaning of the term. According to the 
love of the Lord toward the children of Israel— 
After the manner of Jehovah’s love for the children 


of Israel, who look to other gods, or, although they | 


look to other gods, and are addicted to goblets of 
wine. So Bishop Horsley, who observes, that 
“children of Israel, and house of Israel; are two 
distinct expressions, to be differently understood, 
The house of Isracl, and sometimes Israel by itself, 
is a particular appellation of the ten tribes, a distinct 
kingdom from Judah. But the children of Israel, 
is a general appellation for the whole race of the Is- 
raelites, comprehending both kingdoms. Indeed it 
was the only general appellation, before the captivity 
of the ten tribes; afterward, the kingdom of Judah 
only remaining, Jews came into use as the name of 
the whole race, which before had been the appro- 
priate name of the kingdom of Judah, It occurs, 
for the first time 2 Kings xvi., in the history of Ahaz. 
It is true, we read in Hosea, chap. i. 11, of the chil- 
dren of Judah, and the children of Israel ; but this 
is only an honourable mention of Judah, as the prin- 
cipal tribe, not as a distinct kingdom. And the true 
exposition of the expression is, ‘the children of Ju- 
3 


2 So I bought her to me for fifteen A. M. 322" 

. - . C. 783 
pieces of silver, and for a homer of ————. 
barley, and a * half homer of barley: 

3 And I said unto her, Thou shalt ¢ abide for 
me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, 


2 Heb. lethech. ¢ Deut. xxi. 13. 


dah, and all the rest of the children of Israel’ We 
find Judah thus particularly mentioned, as a princi- 
pal part of the people, before the kingdoms were 
separated: see 2 Sam. xxiv. 1; 1 Kings iv. 20, 25. ~ 
And yet, at that time, Israel was the general name, 
1 Kings iv. 1.” The expression, And love flagons of 
wine, implies, that they loved to drink wine in the 
temples of their idols. They were wont to pour out 
wine to their false gods, and, it is probable, drank 
the remainder even to excess.’ The festivity, or 
rather dissoluteness, which was used by the heathen 
in the worship of their gods, seems to have been one 
principal thing that made the Israelites so fond of 
their rites of worship. Some think that the words, 
rendered here flagons, or goblets, of wine, should be 
translated cakes of dried grapes... The expression, 
according to the love of the Lord, &c., means, Let 
this be an emblem of my love to the children of Is- 
rael; or, By this I intend to let Israel know how I 
have loved them, and what returns they have made 
for my love. How great and constant my love has 
been to them, and how inconstant and insincere 
theirs has been to me. The words seem, in general, 
to express their leaving the service of the true God, 
and imitating the idolaters, in following after false 
gods, bodily delights and pleasures, as gluttony, 
drunkenness, and the like, which the service of idols 
did not only permit, but require. 

Verse 2. So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces 
of silver—That is, according to the ancient custom, 
T paid her dower. It was usual among the Hebrews 
for men to purchase, or pay a consideration for, their 
wives, either by money or labour; thus Jacob agreed 
to serve Laban seven years for Rachael. And for 
a homer of barley, &c.—Sir John Chardin observed 
in the East, that, in their contracts for temporary 
wives, there is always the formality of a measure of 
corn mentioned, over and above the stipulated sum 
of money.—Harmer, vol. ii. 513. The low price at 
which the prophet purchased this woman, was sig- 
nificative how base and of little yalue the Israelites 
were, since their apostacy from the worship of God 
to idolatry. Or, according to Calvin, “the parsimo- 
nious gift, asum of money which was but half the 
price of a female slave, and a pittance of black bar- 
ley bread, typified the hard fare which the Israelites 
were to expect at the hand of God in their state of 
exile.” 

Verse 3. And I said, T'hou shalt abide for me 
many days—The Vulgate renders this, Dies multos 
expectabis me, non fornicaberis, Thou shalt wait 
for me many days ; thou shalt not commit fornica- 
tion. The meaning is, that she should remain ina 
state of separation from the prophet, and every other 
man, sequestered and solitary, for many days, that 

859 


A type of Israel’s 


HOSEA. ° 


spiritual whoredom, 


A. M. 3221. and thou shalt not be for another 
BO. 788. | rans 86 will L also befor thee: 


4 For the children of Israel shall A.M, 9221 
abide many days ¢ without a king, ———— 


4 Chapter x. 3; Song of the 


three children, verse 15. 


there might be proof of her reformation. TJ'how 
shalt not be for another man, so will I also be for 
thee—As there is nothing in the Hebrew for the 
word another, so the sentence may be more accu- 
rately translated thus, Thou shalt not have a hus- 
band, neither will I have thee, namely, for a wife. 
Bishop Horsley renders it, And thou shalt not have 
to do with a husband, neither will I with thee; that 
is, thou shalt continue for some time in a state of 
widowhood, or without commerce with man. The 
Hebrew phrase here used, wxb yn x5, properly 
means, Thou shalt not have a husband, and is so 


rendered by our interpreters, Ezek. xliv. 25. And | 


to the same sense, without the negative particle, 
Ruth i. 12. Thus the LXX. render it, ovde uy yevn 
avdpi; (compare Rom. vii. 3;) and so also the Vul- 
gate, et non eris viro. By these conditions, which 
the prophet makes with the woman whom he takes, 


that she should humble herself and not go after other | 


men, as formerly, but remain separate from every 


man, must be meant, with respect to Israel, that | 


though God should separate himself from them for a 
long time, and humble them by reducing them to a 
low condition, and restraining them from their idol- 
atry and former luxury; yet he would not so utterly 
reject them, but that he would, in due time, upon 
their conversion, again receive them, This was in- 
tended, Ist, To be an emblem of the state of the 
Jews during the Babylonish captivity ; when snatch- 
ed, as it were by force, from the objects of their im- 
pure love, they continued in their exile equally sepa- 


rated from their God and their idols; but with this. 


difference, that their God retained toward them sen- 
timents of affection, expecting on their part true re- 
pentance. And, 2d, “The condition of the woman, 
restrained from licentious courses, owned as a wife, 
but without conjugal rites, admirably represents also 
the present state of the Jews, manifestly owned asa 
peculiar people, withheld from idolatry, but as yet 
Hb access to God, through the Saviour.”—Hors- 
ey. 

Verse 4. For the children of Israel shall abide 
many days—Here begins a more plain and full ex- 
plication of the symbolical action of the prophet, 
namely, that it signified what should befall the chil- 
dren of Israel; that they should continue many days 
in a state of captivity; without a king, as the woman 
continued without a husband ; without the means of 
worshipping God according to the rites of their law; 
and yet refraining from idolatry, as the woman re- 
frained from unfaithfulness to her betrothed hus- 
band. And this prediction was remarkably fulfilled 
upon the ten tribes, when made captives by Shalma- 
neser, (compare chap. ix. 4,) and upon the two re- 
main)ag tribes, after the destruction of their temple 


and commonwealth by Nebuchadnezzar, and during ) joyment of which they chiefly valued themselves. 


|| namely, that of the priesthood, and that of prophecy 
been fulfilled upon the whole nation of the Jews, | “ 


their captivity in Babylon. This prophecy has also 


860 


from the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus unto 
this day. From that time, they. have had no repub- 
lic, or civil government of their own; but have lived 
everywhere like so many exiles, only upon suffer- 
ance; they have had neither priest nor sacrifice, 
their temple being destroyed where only they were 
to offer sacrifices: and yet the want of a place where 
to perform the most solemn parts of their public 
worship, does not tempt them to idolatry, or make 
them fond of image-worship, or any such idolatrous 
practice, which was the epidemical sin of their fore- 
fathers. This seems the general import of this re- 
markable prophecy; but the several expressions 
must be more particularly explained. Without a 
king—Namely of their own; and without a prince 
—Without any civil magistrate of their own with 
supreme authority. And without a sacrifice—De- 
prived of the means of offering the typical sacrifices 
of the law, and having, as yet, no share in the true 
sacrifice of Christ. And without an image—Or, as 
the LXX. and Vulgate read, without an altar. The 
Hebrew word, 7239, here rendered image, seems 
properly to signify those pillars, which, in the patri- 
archal ages, were erected to the honour of God, and 
used as altars. Thus we read, Gen. xxviii. 18, that Ja- 


|| cob, after the divine vision he had had, took the stone 


that he had put for his pillow, and set it up for a 
PILLAR, (Hebrew, 7230, the same word which is used 
here,) and poured oil upon the top of it; that is, he 
made an altar of it to pour out a libation upon it, as 
a token of gratitude for the vision with which he had 
been favoured, and to ratify, in a solemn manner, his 
resolution of serving Jehovah. And again, Gen. 
xxxv. 14, we find the same word rendered pillar 
twice, and used in the same sense. And without an 
ephod—The ephod being one principal part of the 
high-priest’s garments of consecration and of ser_ 
vice, the saying here, that the children of Israel 
should be without an ephod, seems to. signify, that 
they should be without a high-priest to minister in 
the priest’s office. And without teraphim—Those 
interpreters who suppose that the different words 
here used denote the several ways of lawful worship 
practised among God’s ancient people, and the means 
they used of inquiring after the will of God, under- 
stand the word teraphim here as signifying the same 
with the Urim and Thummim, or the oracle placed 
in the breast-plate of the high-priest; which they 
think is fitly joined with the ephod, that being often 
put for the whole priestly habit, and used when there 
was occasion of consulting God by the high-priest : 
see 1 Sam. xxiii. 9, and xxx.7. This interpretation 
is followed by the LXX., and it makes an easy and 
natural sense of the text, namely, that God would 
deprive the Jews of the principal offices, for the en- 


The Jews had no succession of prophets, for a con- 
——_ 


CHAPTER IV. 


Israel's reformation. 


The prophet predicts 


without a prince, and without 
_ a sacrifice, and without *an image, 
and without an ° ephod, and without ‘ tera- 
phim: 


A. M. 3221. and 
B. C. 783 


© Exod. 


h Jer. 


* Heb. a standing, or, statue, or, pillar, Isa. xix. 19. 
XXvili. 6. f Judg. xvii. 5.——# Jer.1.4,5; Chap.v.6. 


5 Afterward shall the children of Is- A. M. 3221. 
rael return, and & seek the Lorp their = 
God, and » David their king; and shall fear 
the Lorp and his goodness in the ? latter days. 


xxx. 9; Ezek. xxxiv. 23, 24; xxxvii, 22, 24.——#i Isaiah ii. 2; 
Jer. xxx, 24; Ezek. xxxvili. 8,16; Dan. ii. 28; Mie. iv. 1. 


siderable time before Christ’s coming; and both 
kingdom and priesthood were taken away, within 
forty years after Christ’s death. 

The word teraphim, however, evidently signifies 
images, Gen. xxxi. 34, and, it seems, is used of idol- 
images, Judg. xvii. 5; and some commentators of 
great note understand it in the same sense here, and 
indeed interpret also the two preceding expressions 
as intended of the worship of idols. Thus Arch- 
bishop Newcome, “My opinion is, that the teraphim 
were objects of idolatrous worship; and such, in 
their state of captivity, the Israelites would not har- 
bour.” Thus also Bishop Horsley, “After much 
consideration of this passage, and of much that has 
been written upon it by expositors, I rest in the 
opinion strenuously maintained by the learned Po- 
cock, in which he agrees with many that went be- 
fore him, and has the concurrence of many that 
came after, Luther, Calvin, Vetablus, Drusius, Hou- 
bigant, and Archbishop Newconie, with many others 
of inferior note; I rest, I say, in the opinion, that 
statue, ephod, and teraphim, are mentioned as 
principal implements of idolatrous rites. And the 
sum of this 4th verse is this; that for many ages 
the Jews would not be their own masters; would 
be deprived of the exercise of their own religion, in 
its most essential parts; not embracing the Chris- 
tian, they would have no share in the true service ; 
and yet would be restrained from idolatry, to which 
their forefathers had been so prone.” As a con- 
firmation of this interpretation, the bishop observes, 
that this 4th verse is the exposition of the type of 
the prophet’s conduct toward his wife; and that, if 
the restriction of the Jews from idolatry is not men- 
tioned, we have nothing in the exposition answering 
to that article, T’how shalt not play the harlot.” 
“This is surely a most astonishing prophecy of 
events directly contrary to all human probability ; 
yet undeniably taking place, not on a particular oc- 
easion, or for a short time, but through very many 


revolving centuries. How could Hosea have fore- 
seen this, had not God inspired him? And does 
not this demonstrate the divine inspiration of this 
prophecy ?”—Scott. 

Verse 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel 
return— When they have lived a long time in this 
state, without any country or government of their 
own, without any temple or place of worship, and 
without the liberty and proper means for offering 
sacrifices; they shall be touched with a true re- 
morse for their former errors, and weary of this 
forlorn and desolate condition, shall bethink them- 
selves of Jehovah the true God, and shall seek unto 
him by prayer and supplication. And shall seek 
David their king—That is, the son of David, the 
Messiah, often called David by the prophets, as 
being not only descended from David, but the per- 
son in whom all the promises made to David were 
to receive their full and final accomplishment: see 
the margin. So the Chaldee paraphrase expounds 
this and the parallel texts. David was also a type 
of the Messiah, and therefore the latter is called by 
the name of David. ‘Thus John the Baptist is called 
Elias, Mal. iv. 5, because he was to resemble him, 
and to succeed him in his office of reproving the 
people, and calling them to repentance. The ex- 
pression cannot be literally understood here, David 
himself having been dead long before the uttering 
of this prophecy. And shall fear the Lord and 
his goodness in the latter days—That is, they shall 
reverence the Lord, stand in awe of him, and fear 
to offend him, and shall put their trust in and be 
grateful for his goodness, manifested in their re- 
demption, their illumination by the gospel, their 
conversion to God, and their restoration to their 
own land; and hence they shall yield an entire 
obedience to him, shall worship and serve him in 
spirit and in truth, and live to his glory. And this 
will come to pass in the latter days, or times, of the 
world: see notes on Isa. ii. 2; Dan. ii. 44. 


CHAPTER IV. 


In this chapter the prophet shows the numerous sins of the Israelites, and the judgments wherewith God would punish them, 
1-19. 


A. M. 3224. EAR the word of the Lorn, ye 
apes H children of Israel: for the Lorp 


hath a *controversy with the inha- a, Mises. 
bitants of the land, because there is ~~ 


xxy. 31; Chap. xii. 2; Mic. vi. 2. 


alsa. i. 18; iii. 13, 14; Jer. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 


Verse 1. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children 
of Israel—“ The prophet here begins a third dis- 
3 


course, which is manifestly distinct from the pre- 

ceding, both as to matter and manner. He was 

before predicting what should happen in future 
861 


God’s judgments on Israel 


HOSEA. 


Sor their numerous sins. 


A. M. 3224. no truth, nor mercy, nor » knowledge 

BC. 7. of God in the land. 

2 By swearing, and lying, and killing, and 
stealing, and committing adultery, they break 
out, and ? blood toucheth blood. 

3 Therefore, °shall the land mourn, and 
4 every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, 
with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls 


b Jer. iv. 22; v.4.——! Heb. bloods. 
Amos vy. 16; viii. 8. 


© Jer, iv. 28; xii. 4; 


times, by way of prophetic vision; here he re- 
proves those of the present time for such sins as 
then reigned among them; such as provoked God 
to send on them and their posterity the judgments 
foretold in the former chapter.” He seems to be 
addressing chiefly the Israelites of the ten tribes, 
though not exclusively, his reproofs and exhorta- 
tions being so formed and expressed as to suit the 
case of the Jews also. For the Lord hath a con- 
troversy, &c.—Hebrew, 2°, a cause, contention, or 
matter of debate. The LXX. render the word, 
Kptowc, judgment, or dispute; and so the Vulgate. 
The expression is taken from the actions, or pleas, 
which one man brings against another, for injuries 
or damages received: so here God is represented as 
entering into judgment, or bringing a-plea, or com- 
plaint, against the people of the ten tribes, for their 
injustice and other sins, as being so many injuries to 
his honour, for which he demands satisfaction. The 
other prophets bring the same charges against this 
people, as we find from their writings. Because 
there is no truth, &c.—No faithfulness in their 
minds, words, or works; they cover falsehood with 
fair words, till they can conveniently execute their 
designed frauds. It appears they had no sense of 
moral honesty; made no conscience of what they 
said or did, though never so contrary to uprightness, 
and injurious to their neighbours. Much less had 
they any sense of mercy, or of the obligation they 
were under to help the indigent and necessitous. 
There was neither compassion nor beneficence 
among them; they neither pitied nor relieved any. 
Nor knowledge of God in the land—Here we have 
the cause of their want of integrity and benevo- 
lence: they had not the true and saving knowledge 
of God, they were neither acquainted with him, nor 
with his will, and their own duty: hence they were 
destitute of true piety, and therefore also of true 
virtue. 

Verse 2. By swearing—False swearing seems to 
be here chiefly intended, which is here, as it is also 
elsewhere, joined with lying and stealing; be- 
cause, in the Jewish courts of justice, men that 
were suspected of theft were obliged to purge 
themselves by an oath; and they often ventured to 
forswear themselves, rather than discover the 
truth. The Hebrew word, 75s, here used, is ren- 
dered apa by the LXX., that is, execration, impre- 
cation, or cursing, as Bishop Horsley renders it. 
Profane swearing, however, or taking the name of 

862 


of heaven; yea, the fishes of thes sea A; oe. 
also shall be taken away. Pad 

4 Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another: 
for thy people are as they ° that strive with the 
priest. 

5 Therefore shalt thou fall fin the day, and 
the prophet also shall fall with thee in the 
night, and I will ? destroy thy mother. 


4 Zeph. i, 3——* Deut. xvii. 12.——f Jeremiah vi. avhs xy. 8 
2 Heb. cut off. * 


God in vain, is doubtless included. The next word, 
wn, rendered lying, means falsehood in general: 
and especially, as some think, the denying of de- 
posites which had been left in their hands, and which, 
when the owners came to claim them, they abso- 
lutely denied having received. And killing, com- 
mitting murders, either privately or with open vio- 
lence. J'hey break out—Hebrew, y8 45, they burst 
out, or overflow, a metaphor taken from rivers 
breaking their banks, and bearing down every ob- 
stacle by the impetuosity of their waters. The 
meaning is, There is an inundation of all manner 
of wickedness, and all law and equity is broken 
through and violated. And blood toucheth blood— 
One murder follows upon another, and many are 
committed in all parts of the country, and as it 
were, in aconstant series and succession. This 
was probably spoken with an especial reference to 
the murder of their kings by those who aspired to 
succeed them; as Zechariah by Shallum, Shallum 
by Menahem, Pekah by Pekahiah and Hoshea. In 
such civil broils a great many of their friends and 
dependants are commonly slain with the kings 
themselves. 

Verse 3. Therefore shall the land mourn—“De- 
solation, drought, and dearth shall come upon the 
whole land; shall consume both men, and beasts, 
and fowls, and shall even extend itself to the in- 
habitants of the waters.” A land is said, in Serip- 
ture language, to mourn, when it is deprived of its 
inhabitants, or lies desolate. A great part of the 
land of Israel was made thus desolate by Tiglath- 
pileser, and the rest by Shalmaneser. There may 
also be a reference to the drought foretold by Amos, 
chap. i. 2, or to the locusts, mentioned chap. ¥. 7. 
Every one that dwelleth therein shall languish—If 
any one remain therein, he shall languish for want 
of the proper necessaries of life. With the beasts 
of the field, and with the fowls of heaven— 
Even the beasts and birds shall pine away with 
want; not only the fruits of the earth, but the 
herbs and grass also, being eaten up or spoiled by 
the enemies’ armies. Yea, the fishes of the sea also 
shall be taken away—The fishes’of the rivers and 
great waters, called seas in the Hebrew language, 
shall be killed through drought, or so diminished that 
they shall not supply the wants of this rebelliovs 
people: see Zeph. i. 3. 

Verses 4,5. Yet let no man strive, nor rove 
another—Bishop Horsley translates this clause, By 

so 


The Lord threatens to reject CHAPTER IV. the people for ther sins. 
A. M, 3224. 6 4 © My people are *destroyed for |;that thou shalt be no priest to me: A. ete 


ee hey ck of knowledge: because thou 


hast rejected knowledge, I evil also reject thee, 


seeing thou hast forgotten the law of 
thy God, I will also forget thy children. 


& Isaiah v, 13. 


3 Heb. cut off. 


no means let any one expostulate, nor let any one 
reprove ; adding, by way of paraphrase, “For all 
expostulation and reproof will be lost upon this 
people, such are their stubbornness and obstinacy. 
For my people are as they that strive (Are exactly 
like those who will contend, Horsley ) with the priest— 
“To contend with the priest, the authorized interpret- 
er of the law, and the typical intercessor between God 
and the people, was the highest species of con- 
tumacy and disobedience, and by the law was a 
capital offence, Deut. xvii. 12. God tells the pro- 
phet that contumacy and perverseness, even in this 
degree, were become the general character of the 
people; that the national obstinacy, and contempt of 
the remonstrances and reproofs of the prophets, 
were such as might be compared with the stubborn- 
ness of an individual who, at the peril of his life, 
would arraign and disobey the judicial decisions of 
God’s priests.” In other words, that there was no 
modesty, nor fear of God or man, left among them, 
but they would contend with their teachers, re- 
provers, and counsellors. The LXX. translate this 
clause, O de Aaoc ws we avTireyopevog tepevc, My peo- 
ple are as a@ gainsaying priest, that is, as Houbi- 
gant interprets it, they follow the rebellion of, the 
priest: or, are as wicked as those priests who infa- 
mously desert the service of God for that of idols. 
Pocock on the place quotes a MS. Arabic version, 
which considers the words as declarative, and trans- 
lates them accordingly; a sense which is approved 
by Archbishop Newcome, who renders the verse, 
Yet no man contendeth, and no man reproveth ; and 
as is the provocation of the priest, so is that of my 
people. While every kind of wickedness abound- 
ed, and crimes of all sorts were openly committed 
from one end of the land to the other, there was no 
person, either prophet, priest, or magistrate, who 
protested against such vices, or steadily opposed 
them. Therefore shalt thou fall—The last sen- 
tence was addressed to the prophet, “'Thy people, 
O prophet ;” this to the people themselves, “'Thou, 
O stubborn people.” This sudden conversion of the 
speech of the principal speaker, from one to another 
of the different persons of the scene, is frequent in 
the prophets. In the day—Not for want of light 
to see thy way; but in the full daylight of divine 
instruction thou shalt fall. Even at the rising of 
that light which is for the lighting of every man 
thal cometh into the world. In this daytime, when 
our Lord himself visited them, the Jews made their 
last false step, and fell. Thou shalt fall when it is 
least probable; when thou thinkest thy state most 
secure and prosperous. And the prophet also, §c., 

in the night—“In the night of ignorance, which 
shall close thy day, the prophet shall fall with thee ; 
that is, the order of prophets among you shall 

3 


cease.” Thus Bishop Horsley, who understands 
the words as. spoken of true prophets, But it 
seems more probable that they are intended of false 
prophets, and that the meaning is, that their revela- 
tions, to which they pretended in the night, or in 
the darkness of ignorance and error, should be de- 
lusive and dangerous ones. Or, the people were to 
fall by day, the prophets by night, because the ruin 
of the latter would be the consequence of the ruin 
of the former: the prophets would then fall after 
the people, when the people, being destroyed, it 
should appear that the prophets had spoken falsely 
by predicting prosperity. And I will destroy thy 
mother—That is, the mother city, the metropolis. 
So Capellus, Houbigant, and Archbishop Newcome, 
If the prophet be considered as addressing the ten 
tribes only, Samaria is meant; but if he addressed 
the children of Israel in general, then Jerusalem 
must be intended: which city, and not Samaria, 
was the metropolis of the whole nation, 

Verse 6. My people are destroyed for lack of 
knowledge—The ignorance of the nature, necessity, 
and excellence of true religion, which prevailed 
among the Jews and Israelites, was one principal 
cause of those sins which drew down such heavy 
judgments upon them. Because thou hast rejected 
knowledge—That is, wouldest not use the means of 
knowledge which thou hadst. “But this lack of 
knowledge in the people was, in a great measure, 
owing to the want of that constant instruction which 
they ought to have received from the priests. The 
mention of it, therefore, occasions a sudden transi- 
tion from general threatenings to particular denun- 
ciations against the priesthood.” J will also reject 
thee—The high-priest for the time being, as the re- 
presentative of the whole order, seems to be here 
addressed; that thou shalt be no priest to me— 
“ Since the person threatened was to be rejected from 
being a priest, he was priest at the time when he was 
threatened ; otherwise he had not been a subject of 
rejection. The person threatened therefore must 
have been the head, for the time being, of the true 
Levitical priesthood, not of the intruded priesthood 
of Jeroboam. This is a proof, that the metropolis, 
threatened with excision is Jerusalem, not Samaria, 
and that the ten tribes exclusively are not the sub- 
ject of this part of the prophecy.”—Bishop Hors- 
ley. Seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God 
—Hast neither desired nor endeavoured to under- 
stand, or retain it in thy mind, nor to transmit the 
knowledge and remembrance of it to posterity. J 
will also forget thy children—Thy offspring, or 
the people whose priest thou art, and of whom thou 
oughtest to have taken a fatherly care ; I will not 
look upon them any longer as the seed of Abraham, 
and children of my covenant. 

863 


The priests and people 


HOSEA. 


threatened for their idolatry. 


A. M. 3224. 


7 » As they were increased, so they 
B. C. 780. 


sinned against me: ‘ therefore will 
I change their glory into shame. 

8 They eat up the sin of my people, and they 
* set their heart on their iniquity. 

9 And there shall be, * like people, like priest : 
and J will ° punish them for their ways, and 
§ reward them their doings. 

10 For ! they shall eat and not have enough : 


h Chapter xiii. 6——! 1 Samuel ii. 30; Malachi ii. 9; Phil. 
iii. 19.——* Heb. lift up their soul to their iniquity——* Isaiah 
xxiv. 2; Jeremiah v. 31——® Heb. visit upon, 


they shall commit whoredom, and A, M 3224. 
B. C. 780. 
shal: not mcrease: because they have 
left off to take heed to the Lorn. ? 
11 Whoredom and wine and new wine ™ take 
away the heart. 
12 “| My people ask counsel at their ® stocks, 
and their staff declareth unto them: for ° the 
spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and 
they have gone a whoring from under their God. 


6 Heb. cause to return.——| Lev. xxvi. 26; Mic. vi. 14; Hag. 
i. 6 ——™ Isa. xxviii. 7; Eccles. vii. 7.——® Jer. ii. 27; Hab. 
:19; © Isa, xliv. 20; Chap. v. 4. 


Verse 7. As they were increased, so they sinned 
—Or, The more they were increased, the more they 
sinned against me—The greater the favours were 
which I heaped upon them, and the more I multi- 
plied them, the more presumptuously they sinned 
against me: see chap. xiii. 6. Instead of, as they 
were increased, Bishop Horsley reads, In propor- 
tion as they were magnified, (a translation the 
Hebrew word, T35, will well bear,) “the priest- 
hood,” he observes, “among the Jews was, by God’s 
appointment, a situation of the highest rank and 
authority ; and the complaint is, that, in proportion 
as they were raised in dignity and power above the 
rest of the people, they surpassed them in impiety.” 
Therefore will I change their glory into shame— 
Therefore I will divest them of all those glories for 
which they pride themselves, and lead them away 
in a poor and miserable condition into captivity. 

Verses 8-11. They eat up the sin of my people— 
These priests, mentioned verse 6, live upon the sin- 
offerings of the people; and are so far from restrain- 
ing them, that they take delight in seeing them 
commit iniquity, because the more they sin, the 
greater is the number of their sin-offerings, which 
are the priests’ portions. Bishop Horsley translates 
the verse, “ Every one of them, while they eat the 
sin-offerings of my people, sets his own heart upon 
the crime ;” that is, while they exercise the sacred 
function of the priesthood, and claim its highest pri- 
vileges, their own hearts are set upon the prevailing 
idolatry. And there shall be, like people, like priest 
—“The people’s sins deserve to be punished with 
such priests ; and such priests have helped to make 
the people thus wicked.”—Bishop Hall. Or, rather, 
the sense is, Jt shall be, as with the people, so with 
the priest; that is, as they are alike in sinning, so 
shall they be alike in punishment, which shall be 
correspondent to their crimes. For they shall eat 
and not have enough—Or, not be satisfied, as the 
word, \y.w", is elsewhere translated. The expres- 
sion may signify, either that their food should not 
afford due nourishment, for want of God’s blessing. 
or that they should be afflicted with a famine or 
scarcity, so that they should not have food enough to 
satisfy their craving appetites. The contrary phrase 
To eat and be full, or satisfied, denotes plenty, 
They shallcommit whoredoms, &c., and not increase 


—Though they think to multiply by taking a plural- 
ity of wives, or concubines, yet in this they shall 
find their expectations disappointed. Because they 
have left off to take heed to the Lord—Here the 
reason is given why they should eat and not have 
enough, &c., namely, because they had apostatized 
from the love and service of God; for how ready so 


ever we may be to attribute every thing to the ope- 


ration of natural causes, yet the Scriptures always 
speak of God’s co-operation with them as necessary 


‘in order to the producing of their desired effects. 


Whoredom and wine, §c., take away the heart— | 
Deprive men of their judgment, and darken their 
understandings. So a gift is said to destroy the heart, 
Eccles. vii. 7, that is, to bereave men of the use of 
their discerning faculties. 

Verse 12, My people ask counsel at their stocks— 
Hebrew, 1¥y3, at their wood, that is, the images of 
their idols made of wood; these they consulted as 
oracles, that they might foretel to them what was 
to come, or give them advice, what measures to take, 
And their staff declares unto them—They seek to 


know things by means of rods, by which they think 


they can divine. This refers to a kind of divination 
by rods or staves, which was anciently practised in 
the East, of which different accounts are given by 
ancient writers. Some say, the person consulting 
measured his staff by spans, or by the length of his 
finger, saying as he measured it, “ I will go, or I will 
not go; I will do such a thing, or I will not do it;” 
and as the last span fell out so he determined. 
Others, however, as Cyril and Theophylact, give a 
different account of the matter, and say, it was per- 
formed by erecting two sticks, after which they 
muttered forth a certain charm, and then according 
as the sticks fell backward or forward, to the right 
or left, they gave advice in any affair. The same 
kind of divination seems to be intended with that 
used by the Chaldeans, concerning which see the 
note on Ezek. xxi. 21. For the spirit of whoredoms 
hath caused them to err—For their fondness for idol- 
atry hath caused them to fall into all these absurd 
errors, through the example of the idolatrous nations 
whom they loved to imitate. They have gone a 
whoring from their God—They have left their God, 
the true God, and his laws, to follow the worship, 
customs, and rites of heathen idolaters,. = ; 
a 


The priests and people 


CHAPTER IV. 


threatened for their idolatry. 


A. M. 3224, 
B. C. 780. ‘ : 
———— of the mountains, and burn incense 
upon the hills, under oaks, and poplars, and 
elms, because the shadow thereof is good: 
4 therefore your daughters shall commit whore- 
dom, and your spouses shall commit adul- 
tery. 

14 71 will not punish your daughters when 
they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when 
they commit.adultery : for themselves are sepa- 


13 They sacrifice upon the tops |{rated with whores, and they sacrifice A. M. 3224. 


: . C. 780. 
with harlots: therefore the people —— ~~ 


that * doth not understand shall *fall. 

15 4 Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, 
yet let not Judah offend; *and come not ye 
unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to * Beth-aven, 
"nor swear, The Lorp liveth. 

16 For Israel *slideth back as a backsliding 
heifer: now the Lorp will feed them as a 
lamb in a large place. 


P Isa. i. 29; lvii. 5,7; Ezek. vi. 13; xx. 28——4 Amos vii. 
17; Rom. i. 28.——" Or, shall I not——* Verses 1, 6.——® Or, 
be punished. 


8 Chapter ix. 15; xii. 11; Amos iv. 4; v. 5.—t 1] Kings xii. 
29; Chap. x. 5. 4“ Amos vili. 14; Zeph. i. 5. * Jer. ili. 6; 
vii. 24; vili. 53; Zech. vii. 11. 


Verse 13. T'hey sacrifice upon the tops of the 
mountains—The sacrificing upon the mountains and 
in shady groves was an ancient piece of idolatry, 
often mentioned and reproved by the prophets. They 
seem to have made choice of the tops of hills and 
mountains for their sacrifices and religious rites, as 
places nearer heaven; but what could be more ab- 
surd than to think that God, who is omnipresent, 
was nearer to them on the bills or mountains than 
in the valleys? Israel, says St. Jerome, loves high 
places, for they have forsaken the high God, and 
having left the substance are attached to the sha- 
dow. And burn incense under oaks, poplars, and 
elms—Under high and spreading trees. Because 
the shadow thereof is good—Extremely grateful in 
those hot countries, Hence the Israelites were in- 
clined to worship there. Therefore your daughters 
shall commit whoredom—Therefore your punish- 
ment shall be agreeable to your sin. As ye have 
committed spiritual whoredom, and have gone after 
idols, and have not regarded the commands of God ; 
so your daughters shall go after their lusts, and com- 
mit whoredom, without any heed to your commands 
and exhortations. Great depravity and corruption 
of manners are generally the consequence of a dis- 
regard of God and religion. 

Verse 14. Iwill not punish your daughters, &c.—I 
willsuffer your daughters to go on in their iniquity, 
and to fall from one degree of wickedness to an- 
other. For themselves—That is, for yourselves; 
are separated with whores—That is, you go aside 
and retire with the women who prostitute them- 
selves in the groves, or in the precincts of the idola- 
trous temples. And sacrifice with harlots—Hebrew, 
MwWapT oy, with women set apart, or consecrated to 
prostitution. The meaning is, that the people par- 
took in those rites of idolatrous worship in which 
prostitution made a stated part of the religious festi- 
vity. Such lewd practices were frequent in the hea- 
then temples dedicated to Venus and other impure 
deities. The expressions seem to allude to the 
practice mentioned Baruch vi. 43, and minutely 
described by Herodotus, lib. i. cap. 199. Therefore 
the people that doth not understand shall fall—He- 
brew, 02°, shall be thrown down, prostrated, dashed 
to the ground, or beaten, as the Vulgate renders it. 

Verse 15. Though, &c—‘ Here,” says Bishop 

Vow Ill, (55) 


|of the temple service. 


Horsley, “a transition is made, with great elegance 
and animation, from the general subject of the whole 
people, in both its branches, to the kingdom of the 
ten tribes in particular.” T'hough thou, Israel, play 
the harlot—Though thou followest after idols; yet 
let not Judah offend—Let not Judah do so too: at 
least let her keep herself pure. Let her not join in 


the idolatrous worship at Gilgal or Beth-aven, or 


mix idolatry with the profession of the true religion.’ 
The kingdom of Judah still retained, in a great de- 
gree, the worship of the true God, and the ordinances 
Therefore the prophet ex- 
horts that people not to be led away by the bad 
example of their brethren of the ten tribes. Gilgal, 

it must be observed, was remarkable for being the 
place where the Israelites renewed their rite of cir- 
cumcision, when they first passed over Jordan; but 
after Jeroboam set up idolatry, it became famous for 
the worship of false gods. And it appears, from this 
prophet and Amos, that it was particularly so in this 
period of the Jewish history. Beth-aven was the 
same with Beth-el, and was the place where one of 

Jeroboam’s calves was worshipped. The word 
Beth-el signifies the house of God, and was the name 
given to that place by Jacob, because of God’s ap- 
pearing to him there, Gen. xxviii. 17. But when it 
became a place noted for idolatrous worship, the 
worshippers of the true God called it, in detestation 

Beth-aven, that is, the house of vanity. Nor swear, 
The Lord liveth—Do not mingle the worship of the 
true God with idolatrous rites, nor dare to swear by 
his name while worshipping idols, or before the 
calves, as if they represented him; for he abhors 
every such coalition. 

Verse 16. For Israel slideth back, &c.—As if the 
Lord had said, As for Israel, I give him up to a repro- 
bate mind. And now the discourse passes naturally 
into the detail and amplification of Israel’s guilt. 
Bishop Horsley renders this clause, T'’ruly Israel is 
rebellious like an unruly heifer; observing, “I re- 
store the rendering of the Bishops’ Bible, and the 
English Geneva.” Certainly the word 770, here 
used, properly means headstrong, wntractable, or 
refractory, and describes a heifer, “indocili jugum 
collo ferens,” untamed to the yoke, which she will 
neither bear, nor be confined in her allowed pasture. 
Now the Lord will feed them as a are sheep, 

865 


Threatenings against 


HOSEA. 


the ten tribes. 


A.M. 3224. 17 Ephraim is joined to idols: ¥ let 
B.C, 780, 1. 

—___— him alone. 

18 Their drink %is sour: they have com- 
mitted whoredom continually: * her ' ru- 


lers with shame do love, Give ye. dX. oA, 
19 * The wind hath bound her up ———— 
in her wings, and ’ they shall be ashamed 
because of their sacrifices. 


y Matthew xv. 14.——® Hebrew, is gone.——? Micah iii. 11; 
? vii. 3. 


10 Heb, shields, Psalm Ixxiv. 9——* Jeremiah iv. 11, 12; li. 1, 
b Isa. i. 29; Jer. 11. 26. 


solitary, timid, defenceless, and exposed to various 
beasts of prey; in a large place—That is, “In an 
unenclosed place, a wide common. They shall no 
longer be fed with care in the rich enclosures of 
God’s cultivated farm, but be turned to browse the 
scanty herbage of the waste. That is, they shall be 
driven into exile among the heathen, freed from 
what they thought the restraints, and of consequence 
deprived of all the blessings and benefits of religion. 
This dreadful menace is delivered in the form of 
severe derision; a figure much used by the prophets, 
especially by Hosea. Sheep love to feed at large. 
The sheep of Ephraim shall presently have room 
enough. They shall be scattered over the whole 
surface of the vast Assyrian empire, where they 
will be at liberty to turn very heathen. It is re- 
markable, however, that it is said that even in this 
state, Jehovah will feed them. They are still, in 
their utmost humiliation, an object of his care.”— 
Horsley. 

Verses 17, 18. Ephraim, &c.—The Ephraimites 
were numerous and potent, and are here put for the 
whole ten tribes. Is joined to idols—The word 
ca'ay¥y, here rendered idols, properly means, sor- 
rows and pains, idols being the cause of much 
misery to their worshippers. Bishop Horsley reads 
the verse, A companion of idols is Ephraim; leave 
him to himself. Leave him undisturbed in his idola- 
trous course. Heisirreclaimable. Z'heir drink is 
sour—Hebrew, is gone, turned, or vapid. “The 
allusion is to libations made with wine grown dead, 
or turning sour. The image represents the want of 
all spirit of piety in their acts of worship, and the 
unacceptableness of such worship in the sight of 
God; which is alleged as a reason for the determi- 
nation, expressed in the preceding clause, to give 
Ephraim up to his own ways. ‘ Leave him to him- 
self? says God to the prophet, ‘his pretended devo- 
tions are all false and hypocritical. _ I desire none of 


them.’”—Horsley. T'’hey have committed whoredom 
continually—They have gone on in a course of 
idolatry: or carnal whoredom may be intended. 
Her rulers with shame do love, Give ye—Their 
rulers, to their shame be it spoken, are continually 
asking or expecting bribes, or are greedy of gifts. 
The Hebrew word translated rulers, properly signi- 
fies shields: it is taken for rulers in Psa. xlvii. 9, as 
well as here. f 

Verse 19. The wind hath bound her up in her 
wings—Or rather, binds, or, is binding her up, the 
present tense being put to denote instant futurity. 
The passage is strongly figurative, to signify that 
they should be suddenly taken away out of their 
country, and carried with irresistible force, and in- 
credible speed, into a distant land. It is not unusual, 
in other writers, to attribute wings to the winds, to 
express their swiftness; and when any thing is said 
to be bound up in the wings of the wind, the expres- 
sion must signify its being taken far away with great 
celerity. “An admirable image this,” says Bishop 
Horsley, “of the condition of a people, torn by a 
conqueror from their native land, seattered in exile 
to the four quarters of the world, and living thence- 
forward without any settled residence of their own, 
liable to be moved about at the will of arbitrary mas- 
ters, like a thing tied to the wings of the wind, 
obliged to go with the wind which ever way it set, 
but never suffered for a moment to lie still. The 
image is striking now; but must have been more 
striking when a bird with expanded wings, or a huge 
pair of wings, without head or body, was the hiero- _ 
glyphic of the element of the air, or rather of the 
general mundane atmosphere, one of the most irre- 
sistible of physical agents.” And they shall be 
ashamed because of their sacrifices—They shall be 
confounded to find, by experience, that all their sa- 
crifices to idols have profited them nothing, but 
brought severe calamities upon them. 


CHAPTER V. m 


The scope of this chapter likewise is, to discover the sins of Israel and Judah, and to denounce the judgments of God 
against them, with @ promise of mercy upon their humiliation, confession of sin, and seeking reconciliation with God, 


1-15. 


A, M. 3229. 


are HEAR ye this, O priests; and 


hearken, ye house of Israel ; and 


NOTES ON PSALM V. 
Verse 1. Hear this, O ye priests—Or rather, 


give ye ear, O house of the king; A. M, 3229, 
; : B. C, 775. 
for judgment is toward you, because 


which agrees better with the house of the king that 
follows, and the word admitting of both significa- 


princes, as Dr. Waterland renders (3'373, a reading || tions. For judgment is toward you—Or, denounced 


( 55% ) 


i 


Tke people are reproved 


CHAPTER V. 


for idolatry and pride. 


. a “ye have been a snare on Mizpah, 
-_—— and a net spread upon Tabor. 

2 And the revolters are » profound to make 
slaughter, ‘though I have been *a rebuker of 
them all. 

3 °I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid 
from me: for now, O Ephraim, ‘thou commit- 
test whoredom, and Israel is defiled. 

4 ® They ‘ will not frame their doings to turn 
unto their God: for ® the spirit of whoredoms is 


a Chapter vi. 9.——» Isa. xxix. 15.——! Or, and.——? Heb. a 
correction.——¢ Amos iii. 2.——4 Ezek. xxiii. 5; Chap. iv. 17. 
*Heb. They will not give. 
—— eS eee 


in the midst of them, and they have A. M. 3229. 
not known the Lorp. Tone 

5 And ‘the pride of Israel doth testify to his 
face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall 
in their iniquity; Judah also shall fall with 
them. 

6 & They shall go with their flocks and with 
their herds to seek the Lorp; but they shall 
not find him ; he hath withdrawn himself from 
them. 


* Or, Their doings will not suffer them. e Chapter iv. 12, 
£ Chap. vii. 10. & Prov. i. 28; Isa, i.15; Jer. xi. 11; Ezek. 
viii. 18; Mie. iii. 4; John vii. 34. 


against you, as Archbishop Newcome renders it, a 


translation favoured by the LXX., xpo¢ yuag eatu To | 


«pa; by Houbigant, who reads, adest vobis judi- 
cium, judgment is at hand to you, or hangs over 
you. Because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, 
and upon Tabor—Mizpah (a name derived from 
m5D¥, to watch, namely, from an eminence) was a 
mountain, and probably a city too, of Gilead. Ta- 


bor was a beautiful and fruitful mountain in the tribe | 
These places being much frequented | 
by hunters and fowlers, many snares and nets were | 


of Zebulun. 


laid in them to catch birds and beasts: and with an 
allusion to this the Israelites are here described as 
insnaring men on these places into idolatry, because 
many of the tribe of Judah had been seduced, or 
drawn into idolatry, by their bad example. 

Verse 2. And the revolters—Hebrew, Uw, de- 


clinantes, the persons declining, turning aside, and | 
departing out of the way appointed them to walk in, | 
are profound to make slaughter—Or, have gone deep | 


in slaughter, as iprasn noNw may be properly ren- 
dered. The words may be intended either of the 
slaughter of idolatrous sacrifices, or of men. It 
seems most likely, however, that the latter is meant, 


and that these wicked priests and princes laid plots | 


io cut off such as adhered to the worship of the true 
God, and opposed their idolatry. The LXX. sup- 
pose the allusion to hunting is still carried on, and 


render the clause, al aypevovTeg THYv Onpav KateTn Sav, } 


the hunters have pierced the prey. Though I have 
been a rebuker of them all—Though I have reproved, 
exhorted, and instructed them by the prophets whom 
I raised up among them, even after they turned to 
idolatry. They had, in particular, two very extra- 
ordinary prophets, Elijah and Elisha, who were 
endued with a greater power to work miracles, 
whereby to prove their divine commission, and to 
convince the people of the certain truth and deep 
importance of their messages, than any one who 
had been raised up either among the Jews or Israel- 
ites since the days of Moses. Dr. Waterland and 
Calmet, however, translate this clause, J will call 
them all to discipline ; and Newcome and Horsley, 
IT will bring a chastisement on them all; which the 
latter interprets, “I will be a chastisement to them, 
as they have been a net and a snare to others.” 
Verses 3-5. I know Ephraim—I am perfectly 
3 


well acquainted with the actions of Ephraim, the 
head of the ten tribes; and Israel is not hid from 
me—And the actions of the other nine tribes are no 
less known to me. Now, O Ephraim, thou commit- 


test whoredom—Even now, at this time, thou goest 


on in thy idolatry, notwithstanding all my rebukes 
and exhortations. T'hey will not frame their doings 
to turn unto their God—They are so wholly inclined 
to idolatry, and it has got so fixed a root in their 
affections, that they cannot think of turning to the 
pure worship of the true God. And it even extin- 
guishes all true knowledge and sense of him among 
them. Bishop Horsley renders the verse, T'heir 
perverse habits will not permit them to return unto 
their God; for a spirit of wantonness is within 
them, and the Jehovah they have not known. The 
pride of Israel doth testify to his face—The inso- 
lent behaviour of Israel toward God, whose worship 
they despise, both discovers itself in all their con- 
duct, and testifies that their guilt is great, and de- 
serves severe punishment. Archbishop Newcome 
renders this clause, The pride of Israel shall be 
humbled to his face; and Waterland, Shall be 
brought down in his sight. Therefore shall Israel 
and Ephraim fall, &c.—Be brought to utter ruin; 
Judah also shall fall with them—And the other two 
tribes of Judah and Benjamin, having followed their 
bad example, shall also be severely punished as 
well as they. 

Verse 6. They shall go with their flocks and 
herds to seek the Lord—They shall seek to make 
their peace with God, and to induce him to be 
favourable to them by a multitude of sacrifices; but 
they shall not find their expectations answered. 
This is spoken of the people of Judah, mentioned ir. 
the latter part of the foregoing verse; who, though 
they attended the temple worship, yet did it with- 
out any true sense of nah op which the Pro- 
phets Isaiah and Jeremiah ticularly reproyve 
them. The prophecy seems to look forward to the 
times of Hezekiah and Josiah, declaring that the at- 
tempts of those pious kings to reclaim the people 
from idolatry, and to restore the true worship of 
God, would fail of any durable effect, and would not 
avail to reverse the doom pronounced upon the 
guilty people. He hath withdrawn himself from 
them—God is said to hide and withdraw hims lf, 

867 


Judgments denounced 


HOSEA. 


against the peopte. 


A. M, 3229. 7 They have "dealt treacherously 

— against the Lorp: for they have 
begotten strange children: now shall ‘a month 
devour them with their portions. 

8 ‘Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the 
trumpet in Ramah: ‘cry aloud a¢ ™ Beth- 
aven, " after thee, O Benjamin, 

9 Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of 
rebuke : among the tribes of Israel have I made 
known that which shall surely be. 


10 The princes of Judah were like A.M. 3229. 

C,. 775. 

them that °remove the bound: ¢here- - 

fore Twill pour out my wrath upon them like 
water. 

11 Ephraim is ” oppressed and broken in 
judgment because he willingly walked after 
4 the commandment. 

12 Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as 4 
moth, and. to the house of Judah "as * rotten- 
ness. 


h [saiah xlviii. 8; Jeremiah iii. 20; v. 11; Chapter vi. 7 
Malachi ii. 11.— i Zech. xi. 8——* Chap. viii. 1; Joel ii. 1. 
lJsaiah x. 30. 


m Josh. vii. 2; Chap. iv. 15. n Judg. v. 14——® Deut. xix. 
14; xxvii. 17.—p Deut. xxviii. 33——9 1 Kings xii. 28; Mic. 
vi. 16. tT Prov. xii. 4. 5 Or, a worm. 


when he will not answer men’s prayers, nor afford 
them seasonable relief in time of need. Hebrew, 
on yon, he hath disengaged, or loosened himself 
from them, or hath taken himself away. 

Verse 7. T'hey have dealt treacherously against 
the Lord—The word 333, rendered, to deal treacher- 
ously, signifies properly, a wife’s being false to’ her 
husband ; see Jer. iii. 20; from whence it is applied 
to the sin of idolatry, which was being false to. the 
true God, or giving to creatures, or mere imaginary 
beings, the affection and regard due to him, and 
therefore it is often in Scripture styled spiritual 
whoredom. 
dren—A race of aliens, as Bishop Horsley renders 


it: that is, children trained from their earliest in-| 


fancy in the habits and principles of idolatry, and 
growing up aliens with respect to God, (for all are 
not Israel that are of Israel,) alienated from him in 
their affections, and in their sentiments and practice 
mere heathen. 
not lawfully begotten, or not born in wedlock. Now 


shall a month devour them—A very short time shall | 
It shall be sudden and | 
With their portions—That is, their 


complete their destruction. 
unexpected. 
allotments. “They shall be now totally dispossessed 
of their country, and the boundaries of the separate 
allotments of the several tribes shall be confounded 
and obliterated, and new partitions of the land into 
districts shall be made, from time to time, at the plea- 
sure ofits successive masters. The captivity of the ten 
tribes was completed soon after Hezekiah’s attempt- 
ed reformation, and the kingdom of Judah not long 
survived Josiah’s.” It is probable the month alludes 
to these events. 

Verses 8,9. Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, &€— 
The prophet here calls upon the watchmen of Judah 
and Israel to sound amalarm, and give notice of the 
approach of the en: compare Joel ii. 1. It was 
usual in those dayS¥when a country was invaded, 


or was on the point of being so, to give notice of | 


it by sounding cornets and trumpets from the towers 
and high places, on which the watchmen or sentinels 
were placed. Gibeah and Ramah were towns in 
the tribe of Benjamin; and Beth-aven, or Bethel, 
was in the territory of the ten tribes, so that order- 
ing the sounding of an alarm in those places, signi- 
fied that both kingdoms should be hostilely invaded, 
868 


For they have begotten strange chil-' 


The expression alludes to children | 


After thee, O Benjamin—Or, Look behind thee, O 
Benjamin: see Pocock. The words present the 
image of an enemy in close pursuit, ready to fall 
upon the rear of Benjamin. Ephraim shall be de- 
solate—God’s judgments shall likewise overtake 
Israel, or the ten tribes, as well as Judah. Jn the 
day of rebuke—At the time when God shall punish 
them for the provocations which he has received. 
This seems to be intended of the invasion of the 
kingdom of Israel by Shalmaneser king of Assyria. 
Among the tribes of Israel Ihave made known, &c. 
—I have denounced my judgments against the 
whole kingdom of Israel, as well as that of Judah, 
and given them warning, that they may escape them 
by a timely repentance. 

Verse 10. T'he princes of Judah, &e.—The pro- 
phet in this chapter passes frequently from the one 
kingdom to the other, that he might set forth the 
crimes, and foretel the punishments of both, unless 
they averted them by their repentance. Instead of 
the princes, Bishop Horsley reads, the rulers of 
Judah, observing, “I prefer the word rulers to 
princes, because, in the modern acceptation of the 
word princes, royalty, or at least, royal blood, is in- 
cluded in the notion of it. But these ‘Ww, saree, 
[princes, | of the Old Testament, were not persons of 
royal extraction, or connected by blood or marriage 
with the royal family ; but the chief priests and elders, 
who composed the secular as well as the ecclesiasti- 
cal magistracy of the country.” Like them that 
remove the bound—They have violated the most 
sacred laws of God: upon which, not only the ordi- 
nances of his worship, but likewise the rights and 
properties of men depend, and are become guilty 
of the same injustice and confusion with those that 
remove the ancient bounds and landmarks, Ezek. 
xlvi.18. Therefore I will pour out my wrath upon 
them like water—That is, with great violence, like 
an impetuous torrent, or the hasty unexpected oyer- 
flowing of a river, which overwhelms every thing 
near. Great calamities are often compared to the 
overflowing of water. 

Verses: 11, 12. Ephraim is oppressed and broken 
in judgment—He is delivered over to oppressors by 
God’s just judgment. Such were Pul and Tiglath- 
pileser, kings of Assyria. Archbishop Newcome 
distinguishes between these phrases thus: _ op- 


Promise of mercy 


CHAPTER V. 


upon repentance. 


A. M. 3229. 


13 When Ephraim saw his  sick- 
B. C. 775 


ness, and Judah saw his * wound, 
then went Ephraim ‘to the Assyrian, "and 
sent ®to King Jareb: yet could he not heal 
you, nor cure you of your wound. 

14 For *I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, 
and as a young lion to the house of Judah: 


8 Jer. xxx. 12——t2 Kings xv. 19; Chapter vii. 11; xii. 1. 
« Chapter x. 6——® Or, to the king of Jareb, or, to the king that 
should plead. 


pressed with a heavy weight of calamity; he is 
crushed, or broken in his judicial contest with God ; 
because he willingly walked after the command- 
ment—Because he willingly submitted to, or com- 
plied with Jeroboam’s command, requiring his sub- 
jects to worship the calves which he had placed at 


Dan and Beth-el, and to conform to all his idolatrous: 


institutions, in opposition to the law of God. Of this 
kind were the statutes of Omri, mentioned Mic. vi. 
16. The reading of the LXX. here is different, 
namely, Karenaryoe To Kplya, ort npfato Topeverdat 
omioa tov patawv, He trode judgment under foot, 
because he began to walk after vain things; that 
is, after idols. They seem either to have read ww, 
shave, (vanity,) for 13, tzave, (commandment,) or 
else to have supposed the latter word to be put for 
the former, there being frequent instances in the 
Hebrew text of letters being changed, one for 
another, which have nearly the same sound: see 
the Arabic, Syriac, Chaldaic, Houbigant and others, 
in Poole’s Synopsis, who read syw, vanity. T'here- 
_ fore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth—My judg- 
ment shall consume both Israel and Judah as a moth 
fretteth a garment, or as rottenness consumes the 
flesh, from small and unperceived beginnings, work- 
ing slow, but certain and complete destruction. 
Verses 13,14. When Ephraim saw his sickness 
—When the king of Israel, namely, Menahem, saw 
himself too weak to contend with Pul, king of As- 
syria, he sent an embassy to him to make him his 
ally, and, in order to do it, became his tributary, 
that his hand might be with him to confirm his 
kingdom to him, 2 Kings xv. 15. And Judah his 
wound—Hebrew, his ulcer, or corrupted sore. So 


in like manner shall Ahaz, king of Judah, implore |! 


the assistance of Tiglath-pileser against his enemies. 
For, after the words, then went Ephraim to the As- 
syrian, the word Judah should be supplied, and the 
clause should be read, And Judah sent, (or, shall 
send,) to King Jareb. Thus Secker and Pocock 
understand the passage. The word Jareb means 
one that will plead for a person, and defend his 
cause against any that may oppose him, or an 
avenger, or helper. And it does not appear to be 
here a proper name. Bishop Horsley renders it, 
The kiag who takes up all quarrels, and observes, 
“Thue describes some powerful monarch who took 
upon him to interfere in all quarrels between infe- 
rior powers, to arbitrate between them, and compel 
them to make up their differences upon such terms 


YT, even I, will tear and go away; A. M. 3229 

. B. C. 75. 
I will take away, and none shall ——*™ 
rescue him. 

15 {Twill go and return to my place, ’ till 
* they acknowledge their offence, and seek my 
face: *in their affliction they will seek me 
early. 


x Lam. iii. 10; Chap. xiii. 7, 8——y Psa. 1. 22.——? Heb. till 
they be guilty.—— Lev. xxvi. 40, 41; Jer. xxix. 12,13; Ezek 
vi. 9; xx. 43; xxxvi. 31.—— Psalm Ixxviii. 34. 


as he thought proper to dictate: whose alliance was, 
of course, anxiously courted by weaker states. Such 
was the Assyrian monarch in the times to which the 
prophecy relates. His friendship was purchased by 
Menahem king of Israel,” (as observed above,) “and 
in a later period solicited by Ahaz, 2 Kings xvi.. 
5-9.” Yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of 
your wound—Those foreign alliances proved to be 
of no benefit either to Israel or Judah. It is ex- 
pressly said of Tiglath-pileser, 2 Chron. xxviii. 20, 
that when he came to Ahaz, under colour of help- 
ing him according to the terms of their agreement, 
at a time when Judah was brought low, he distress- 
ed him, but strengthened him not. And though 
Ahaz gave him presents out of the house of the 
Lord, out of the house of the king, and of the 
princes, still he helped him not. And as to the ten 
tribes, the Assyrian kings were so far from helping 
them really, that they destroyed numbers of them 
from time to time, and at last carried them all away 
into captivity. So weak often is human policy! I 
will be unto Ephraim as a lion—The Vulgate reads, 
leena,alioness, and the LXX.a panther. The sense 
of the verse is, that it was in vain for either Israel or 
Judah to expect help from men, since God had de- 
termined to destroy or take them away, as with the 
impetuosity of a panther flying upon his prey, or 
the fury of a lion, tearing it in pieces. 

Verse 15. I will go and return to my place—I 
will withdraw myself from them, and give them up 
to exile and punishment, till they acknowledge their 
offence and seek my face: that is, till they confess 
their sins, and, by a sincere humiliation, and in fer- 
vent prayer, implore my favour. The Chaldee 
paraphrase expresses the sense thus: “I will take 
away my majestic presence, or shechinah, from 
among them, and will return into heaven.” Thus 
Ezekiel describes the destruction of the temple and 
kingdom, by God’s removing his glory from the 
sanctuary and city: see Ezek, x. 4, and xi. 23. Jn 
their affliction they will see early—That is, 
without delay, and earnestl , with great dili- 
gence and assiduity. Observe, reader, when we 
are under the corrections of the divine rod, our 
business is to seek God’s face, that is, an acquaint- 


'ance with him, a token of his being at peace with 


us, and a manifestation of his favour. And it may 
reasonably be expected that affliction will bring 


| those to God who had gone astray, and kept at a dis- 


For this reason God turns away 
869 


tance from him. 


An exhortation 


HOSEA. 


to return to God. 


from us, that he may turn us to himself, and then 
may returntous. Js any among you afflicted? Let 
him pray. The first three verses of the next chapter 


should bave been joined to this. So the LXX. 
thought, connecting the last verse of this with the 
first of the next, by the participle Aeyorrec, saying. 


CHAPTER VI. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) An exhortation of the prophet; or the resolution of some real penitents to return to God, and 


the considerations wherewith they encourage themselves in their return, 1-3. 


(2,) The instability of many of the people, 


both of Israel and Judah, in their professions and promises of repentance, and the severe course which God, therefore, took 
with them, 4, 5. (3,) The covenant God made with them, and his expectations from them, 6: and their violation of that 


covenant, and frustrating of those expectations, 7-11. 
COME, and let us return unto the 
Lorp: for *he hath torn, and 


»he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will 
bind us up. 


A. M, 3229. 
B. C. 775. 


2 ° After two days will he re- thea 
vive us: in the third day he ————_ 
will raise us up, and we shall live in his 
sight. 


a Deut, xxxii. 39; 1 Sam. ii. 6; Job v. 18 ; Chap. v. 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verse 1. Come, let us return, &c.—Bishop Hors- 
ley considers the prophet as speaking here in his 
own person, to the end of the 3d verse, and taking | 
occasion, from the intimation of pardon to the peni- 
tent, given in the conclusion of the preceding chap- . 
ter, to address his countrymen in words of mild, 
pathetic persuasion, and to exhort them to return to 
the worship and service of God. But many other | 
commentators rather think these are to be considered 
as the words of the repenting and returning Jews) 
and Israelites in their exile, who, it is said, in the last | 
clause of the foregoing chapter, would in their afflic- . 
tion seek God, which they are here represented as | 
encouraging one another to do, saying, Come, &¢.— | 
Not only the LXX., but, according to Houbigant, 
the Arabic, Syriac, and Chaldee, supply the word | 
saying, before this verse. Whether they did this as _ 
interpreters, which, says Archbishop Newcome, is| 
my opinion, or whether. they read in their copy of | 
the Hebrew text, 1285, (saying,) is uncertain. Let 
us return wnto the Lord, &c.—He it is who hath | 
brought us into this estate under which we groan; 
and he is able, if he think fit, to deliver us from it in | 
a short time: nothing is difficult to him. Full of | 
mercy as he is, he will not permit us to continue 
long in captivity and oppression, wherein we are 
buried like the dead in the tomb. He hath torn, and 
he will heal us, &c.—The same God that punisheth 
us can only remove his judgments, and show us 
mercy. The expression, He hath torn, relates to 
what was said chap. y, 14. 

Verse 2. After two days he will revive us—A de- 
liverance from miseries or calamities, from which 
men had despaired of a recovery, is often repre- 
sented as restoring them to life after death: see Psa. 
xxx. 3, and Ixxi. 20, and Ixxxvi. 13; particularly 
the restoration of the Jewish nation is often de- 
scribed, as if it were a resurrection from the dead: 
see note on Ezek. xxxvii. 11. J'wo, or three, in 

870 


'|completed in that of the two. 


> Jer. xxx. 17. ©) Cor. xv. 4. 


Scripture, denote a small number. wo are put for 
a few, 1 Kings xvii. 12. One and two for a few, Isa. 
vii. 21; Jer. iii. 14. Two or three for a few, Isa. 
xvii. 6. Accordingly, here the expression signifies 
a short space of time. Compare Luke xiii. 32, 33. 
The primary and obvious sense, therefore, of this 
verse, taking it in reference to the others, is, that 
they expected God would, in a short time after they 
should repent and turn to him, free them from their 
captivity, which might be looked upon as a state of 


death; and would return again to them, and exhibit 


the signs of his presence among them, his chosen 
people: so that, being converted and restored, they 
should live in his sight, and should attain to that 
true knowledge of God which they had not possessed 
before. Added to this, Bishop Horsley thinks these 
days denote three distinct periods of the Jewish 
people. His view of the subject he explains as fol- 
lows: “The first day is the captivity of the ten tribes 
by the Assyrians, and of the other two under the 
Babylonians, considered as one judgment upon the 
nation; beginning with the captivity of the ten, and 
The second day is 
the whole period of the present condition of the 
Jews, beginning with the dispersion of the nation by 
the Romans. The third day is the period yet to 


| come, beginning with their restoration, to the second 


advent. R.Tanchum,as he is quoted by Dr. Pocock, 
was not far, I think, from the true meaning of the 
place. ‘The prophet, he says, ‘points out two 
things—and these are, the first captivity, and asecond, 
After which shall follow a third, [time,] redemption: 
after which shall be no depression or servitude.’ 
And this I take to be the sense of the prophecy, in 
immediate application to the Jews. Nevertheless, 
whoever is well acquainted with the allegorical style 
of prophecy, when he recollects that our Lord’s 
sufferings and death” were endured for our sakes, 
“and that he, rising on the third day, raised us to 
the hope of life and immortality, will easily per- 
38 


Ephraim and Judah 


CHAPTER VI. 


are reproved. 


— 


A.M. 3229. 


B. C. 775. 3 °'Then shall we know, if we fol- 


low on to know the Lorn: his going 
forth is prepared °as the morning; and ‘he 
shall come unto us Sas the rain, as the latter 
and former rain unto the earth. 

4 4°O Ephraim, what shall I do unto 
thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? 


for your ' goodness is ‘as a morning A. M, 3229 
cloud, and as the early dew it goeth meh wh 
away. 

5 Therefore have I hewed them *by the 
prophets ; I have slain them by ! the words of 
my mouth: *and thy judgments are as the 


light that goeth forth. 


4 Isa. liv. 13.——* 2 Sam. xxiii. 4 —f Psa. Ixxii. 6.——s Job 
xxix. 23,— Chap. xi. 8——1! Or, mercy, or, kindness. ° 


i Chap. xiii. 3——* Jer. i. 10; v. 14. Jer. xxiii. 29; Heb. 
iv. 12,——* Or, that thy judgments might be. 


ceive no very obscure, though but an oblique, allu- 
sion to our Lord’s resurrection on the third day; 
since every believer may speak of our Lord’s death 
and resurrection, asa common death and resurrection 
of all mankind.” 

Verse 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on, 
&¢e.—Hebrew, nyt> aI] Ny7n, And we shall 
know, we shall follow on to know the Lord. Then, 
when we have returned unto the Lord, verse 1, in 
sincerity and truth; when he hath torn and healed 
us, hath smitten and bound us up, hath convinced 
us of and humbled us for our sins, and converted us 
to himself, and created us anew; when he hath re- 
vived us, raised us up, and made us live; then shall 
we experimentally know the Lord, as merciful to 
our unrighteousness, Jer. xxxi. 34; we shall taste and 
see that he is good; we shall not only be raised out 
of deep afflictions, wherein we lay as in a state of 
death, but we shall live in his sight, a life of union 
and communion with him, a life of faith, love, and 
obedience ; we shall know Him whom to know is 
life eternal. And we shall prosecute that knowledge; 
we shall follow on to know him, not content with 
any measures of the knowledge of him already at- 
tained. We shall proceed therein, and make pro- 
gress, as the morning light doth to the perfect day. 
For, his going forth to visit, deliver, and comfort his 
people, to manifest himself to them, to refresh and 
save them; or, his going forth before his people, in 
his gracious, faithful, holy, just, and wise providence, 
for their benefit and comfort, is prepared as the 
morning—As sure, beautiful, grateful, reviving, and 
clear, with a continually increasing light, which 
proclaims his own approach and progress. And he 
shall come unto us as the rain unto the earth— 
Which refreshes it, renders it fruitful, a we it, 
and gives it a new and smiling face. As the latter 
and former rain—Or, as the words should rather be 
rendered, the harvest rain, and the rain of seed- 
time: see notes on Deut. xi. 14, and Prov. xvi. 
15. For, as Bishop Horsley justly observes, the 
Hebrew words here used have nothing of latter or 
former implied in their meaning. And these ex- 
pressions convey a notion just the reverse of the 
truth to the English reader. For what our translation 
here terms the latter rain, wyp'n9, is literally, as the 
bishop terms it, the crop rain, which fell just before 
the season of the harvest, to plump the grain before 
it was severed: that is, it fell in what we term the 


spring, and consider as the former part of the year; | 


{ 


our March, according to the old style. The other, 
nv, which we term the former rain, and which is 
literally the springing rain, or the rain which makes 
to spring, fell upon the seed newly sown, and 
caused the green blade to shoot up out of the ground: 
that is, it fell about the end, or middle, of our Octo- 
ber, which we consider as the latter end of the year. 
These rains, of seed-time and harvest, are the veroc 
Tpuruoc Kat oytuoc, the early and latter rain, of St. 
James, chap. v. 7. But the apostle’s epithets have 
reference to the order of the husbandman’s expecta- 
tions, not to the civil division of the year. 

Verse 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? 
—Or rather, what shall I do for thee? Here the 
Lord takes up the discourse again in his own person, 
and gives an answer to the prayer, or promises, of ~ 
Judah and Israel: as if he had said, How can I 
give either of you, O Israel and Judah, any tokens 
of my favour, since there is no sincerity or stability 
to be found in you? Such is the essential benefi 
cence of God, that he delights to bestow favours on 
all his creatures; and here, and elsewhere in the 
Scriptures, represents himself as it were concerned, 
whenever their conduct is such that it becomes in- 
consistent with his attributes, as the all-righteous 
governor of the universe, to bestow his blessings 
upon them. Thus we find Christ lamenting over 
Jerusalem, Matt. xxiii. 37; and Isaiah, chap. lix. 1,2 
representing men’s iniquities as the sole cause of 
God’s hiding his face from them, and not hearing 
their prayers: see also Deut. v.29. Your goodness 
is as a morning cloud, &e.—Your goodness is of a 
short continuance, and gives way to every tempta- 
tion, like as the cloud of the morning, and the dew, 
are dispersed at the first approach of the sun. 

Verse 5. Therefore have I hewed them by the 
prophets—Severely reproved and threatened them ; 
or cut them off, as the word, "nxn, may be properly 
rendered: that is, I have denounced against them 
great destruction. The prophets, and God by the 
prophets, are said’ to do those things which they 
foretel, or denounce: see notes on Jer. i. 10, and v. 


(14. Ihave slain them by the words of my mowh—- 


that is, I have declared, or denounced, the slaughter 
of them. God’s word is described as sharper than 
a two-edged sword, because his judgments, de- 
nounced by his messengers, are like the sentence 
of a judge, which shall certainly be followed with 
execution, And thy judgments are as the light 
when it goeth forth—These may be considered as 


for the harvest in Judea began about the middle of |, the words of the prophet addressing God, and signi 


87h 


Ephraim and Judah 


HOSEA. 


are reproved. 


A.M, 3229. 6 For I desired ™mercy, and ™ not 
sl sacrifice ; and the ° knowledge of God 
more than burnt-offerings. 

7 But they *like men ’ have transgressed the 
covenant: there 4 have they dealt treacherously 


against me. 


De 


8 "Gilead is a city of them that A. M. 3229. 
work iniquity, and és * polluted with Na sal 
blood. 

9 And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so 
‘the company of priests murder in the way ° by 


consent : for they commit ° lewdness. 


™] Samuel xv. 22; Eccles. v. 1; Micah vi. 8; Matt. ix. 13; 
xii, 7.——" Psa. 1.8, 9; Prov. xxi. 3; Isa. i.-11. © Jer. xxii. 
16; John xvii. 3. 3 Or, like Adam, Job xxxi. 33. 


p Chap. viii. 1.—9 Chap. v. 7.——* Chap. xii. 11.——*4 Or, 
cunning for blood.— Jer. xi. 9; Ezek, xxii. 25; Chap. v. 1, 2. 
5 Heb. with one shoulder, or, to Shechem.——® Or, enormity. 


fying that his judgments against the people were, 
though gradually, yet as certainly approaching as 
the morning light; and that the justice of them 
would appear as clear as the light of the rising sun, 
Or they may be considered as addressed to Israel, 
and then the meaning of them must be, The punish- 


ment which shall come upon thee, O Israel, will) 


clearly appear to be perfectly just; nor shall any 
thing happen to thee, but what thou hast been fully 
and repeatedly warned of. Bishop Horsley, how- 
ever, connecting these words with the following, 
gives themadifferentsense. Taking the word ]}vdaw», 
here rendered thy judgments, to signify thy precepts, 
he renders the clause, And the precepts given thee 
(namely, given to the people) were as the onward- 
going light, &c., “that is, as light, of which it is 
the nature and property to go forth, to propagate it- 
self infinitely, and in all directions; a most expressive 
image of the clearness of the practical lessons of the 
prophets.” The word, adds he, in his Critical Notes, 
“signifies a fixed principle, or rule, in any thing, to 
which principle and rule can be applied. Here I 
take it for the practical rules of a moral and godly 
life, as delivered by the prophets; and so Calvin 
expounds it: ‘ Judicia tua, hoe est, ratio pié vivendi,’ 
Thy judgments, that is, the method of living pious- 
ly. Significat hic Deus se regulam pié et sancte 
vivendi monstrasse Israclitis, God here signifies that 
he had shown to the Israelites the rule of a pious 
and holy life.” 


Verse 6. Mor I desired mercy, and not sacrifice— | 


That is, rather than sacrifice, this being spoken 
comparatively. I am better pleased with true good- 
ness than with the most exact observance of the 
external duties of religion: see Micah vi. 6-8. The 
Jews use to express comparison by negatives, or 
rejecting the thing less worthy: so we are to under- 
stand that expression of the Prophet Joel, chap. ii. 
13, Rend your heart, and not your garments ; and 
those words of Christ, John vi. 27, Labour not for 
the meat which perisheth, but for that which en- 
dureth to everlasting life: that is, for this rather 
than the former. By mercy is here meant, not only 


creatures, and members of civil society; but also 
those aets of benevolence, which, though not claim- 
able on principles of justice, yet must be performed 
py us, as we have opportunity, if we would be the 
children of our Father who is in heaven: see Matt, 
vi. 45. Indeed, the word 12h, here used, and ren- 
dered mercy, includes piety toward God, as well as 
henevolence to man; or the performance of all the 
R72, 


| 


duties‘of the moral law. “I can find no single 
word,” says Bishop Horsley, “to answer to it, but 
charity ; for charity, in the evangelical sense, is the 
love of man, founded upon the love of God, and 
arising out of it.” And the knowledge of God more 
than burnt-offerings—Namely, that knowledge of 
God, which is his super natural gift, through the in- 
fluence of his enlightening Spirit, Eph. i. 17; and 
which is always productive of a filial confidence in 
him, love to him, and obedience to his command- 


| ments; (see Psa. ix. 10; 1 John ii. 3, 4, and iv. 7,85) 


and which is always attended with a true, sincere, 
internal, spiritual worship of him, and reverence for 
him. ‘This is infinitely more pleasing to God, and 
more essential to true religion, than any ceremonial 
observances whatever; yea, than all sacrifices and 
burnt-offerings. 

Verse 7. But they like men have transgressed tre 
covenant—That is, as all corrupt men are prone to 
do; and as other men, who are not under such 
strong obligations to keep covenant with me, use 
to do. In the Hebrew it is, like Adam: and it would 
have been better, it seems, to have rendered it so; 
the sense appearing to be, that their transgression 
of the covenant God had made with them, or of the 
commandments which he had given them, was very 
similar to the transgression of Adam in paradise. 
“As Adam transgressed a plain command, so the 
Israelites transgressed the plainest and the easiest 
precepts. As Adam’s crime was not to be excused 
by any necessity or want, so the Israelites, secure 
under the protection of Jehovah, had they continued 
faithful to him, had no excuse in seeking other aids. 
Adam revolted from God to Satan; so the Israelites 
forsook God to worship devils. Adam broke that 
one command, on which the justification of himself 
and his posterity depended; so the Israelites broke 
the one precept of charity,” on their observing which 
depended their continuance in the divine favour, and 
their right to the blessings of the Mosaie covenant: 
see Horsley. There have they dealt treacherously 
against me—There, even in that very delightful and 


: | plentiful land, which I gave them to encourage them 
all that is due from man to man, considered as fellow- | 


to obedience, a land like unto Eden itself, they have 
transgressed my law, as Adam did in paradise, and 


have behaved themselves falsely and ungratefully 


toward me; and that even with all the advantages 
of the prophetic teaching, and in spite of all admo- 
nition and all warning. ; 

Verses 8, 9. Gilead is a city of them that work 
iniquity, &e,—Archbishop Newcome translates these 
two verses very literally thus: Gilead is a@ city of 

tea 


c.. 


A complaint of the iniquity 


CHAPTER VII. 


of Ephravm and Samarta. 


see, 10 I have seen ta horrible thing in 
“the house of Israel: there is the 


whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled. 


A. M. 
B. C. 


— 


11 Also, O Judah, *he hath set a A. M. 3229. 
B.C. 775. 

harvest for thee, » when I returned 

the captivity of my people. 


— 


t Jer. v. 30. x Jer. li, 33; 


" Chap. iv. 12, 13, 17. 


Joel iii. 13; Micah iv. 12; Rev. xiv. 15.——y Psa. exxvi. 1. 


them that work iniquity: sheis marked with foot- 
steps of blood. And as bands wait for a man, a 
company of priests murder in the way to Shechem. 
“Tf Gilead be put here for Ramoth-gilead, (and I 
know not,” says Bishop Horsley, “what other city 
can be meant,) it was a.city of refuge, Deut. iv. 43; 
and such also was Shechem, or Sichem, Josh. xx. 7; 
both, therefore, inhabited by priests and Levites. 
By describing the first of these two cities as polluted 
with blood, and the high-road to the other as beset 
with knots of priests, like robbers, intent on blood, 
and murdering on the whole length of the way, up 

to the very walls of the town, the prophet means to 
represent the priests as seducers of the people to that 
idolatry which proved the ruin of the nation. —Inso- 
much that, like a man who should be murdered in a 
place of religious retreat, or upon his way to it, the 
people, under the influence of such guides, met their 
destruction in the quarter where, by God’s appoint- 
ment, they were to seek their safety.” The word 
m2, rendered by consent, in verse 9, signifies to- 
ward Shechem. For they commit lewdness—He- 
brew, Wy Mot, they work enormity, or that which 
is wicked and abominable. 

Verses 10,11. [have seen a horrible thing—Such 
an apostacy from God as cannot be mentioned with- 
out horror. There is the whoredom of Ephraim— 
Or rather, ¢here, namely, in the house of Israel, sy 
the whoredom of Ephraim, that is, by the idolatry 
of Jeroboam, who was of that tribe, and first began 
the worship of the golden calves; Israel is defiled— 
The whole ten tribes are corrupted: for they soon 
all followed the example of Jeroboam in this idola- 
trous worship. Also, O Judah, he—That is, Ephraim ; 
hath set a harvest for thee—For Ephraim, or Israel, 
had corrupted Judah by leading them into idolatry, 
and into the vices connected therewith, in conse- 


quence of which they were made ripe for destruc- 
tion: for that the harvest is often a type of judg- 
ment is evident, among many other passages that — 
might be adduced, from those quoted in the margin, 
When I returned the captivity of my people—Or 
rather, the Hebrew being in the future tense, when 
I shall turn, &c., (so the Vulgate,) or, more literally, 
and as the Seventy render it, in my turning the cap- 
tivity of my people. According to this interpreta- 
tion, the phrase of turning the captivity of God's’ 
people is not to be taken in the sense in which the 
same phrase is generally understood in the Scrip- 
tures, namely, for bringing them out of captivity ; 
punishment, and not a blessing, being supposed to 
be predicted: but the sense of the expression will be, 
When I shall return to make captives of my peo- 
ple; or, as Archbishop Newcome proposes render- 
ing it, When Ilead away the captivity of my people ; 
that is, after I have again caused the Israelites to be 
carried into captivity. ‘'Tiglath-pileser first carried 
a part of them into captivity; then Shalmaneser 
carried away the remainder; and after this came 
Sennacherib, who wasted Judea, and laid siege to 
Jerusalem. Some eminent commentators, however, 
are of opinion, that not a judgment, but a blessing, is 
predicted to be conferred on Judah in this passage. 
They therefore translate the verse thus: But for 
thee, O Judah, a harvest is prepared ; then when I 


| shall bring back the captivity of my people: see 


Houbigant and Horsley. Mr. 8, Clark’s note on the 
verse takes in both interpretations, thus: “And as 
Israel has been drawn to idolatry by Jeroboam, 
(verse 10,) so hast thou, Judah, too: and therefore 
God has prepared a harvest of sorrow and sufferings 
for thee too, by sending thee into captivity; which 
yet afterward shall be turned into a harvest of joy, 


when thou shalt be returned out of captivity again.” 


CHAPTER Vil. , 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A general charge brought against Israel for those crimes by which they had obstructed the 
course of God's favours to them, 1,2. (2,) A particular accusation of the court, the kings, princes, and judges, 3-7. Of 
the country for various sins and follies, which are particularly mentioned, and for which they are threatened with a severe 
chastisement to humble them; and if that should not have its desired effect, with utter destruction, particularly of their 


princes, 8-16. ; 
A. M. 3239. HEN I would have healed Israel; 
B. C. 765 REY Le ai 
then the iniquity of Ephraim 
was discovered, and the ! wickedness of Sama- 


1 Heb. evils—— Chap. v. 1; vi. 10. 


‘ria: for * they commit falsehood : 
_the thief cometh in, and the troop of 


and A. M. 3239, 
B. C. 765. 


robbers * spoileth without. 
—————————— naa 
2 Heb, strippeth. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. 
Verse 1. When I would have healed Israel— 
When I would have reclaimed them from their sins, 
3 


and in consequence thereof have averted their judg 


ments. The Hebrew, sxd2, is, as J was healing: 
dum in eo essem ut sanarem. At the very time 
873 


A complaint of the iniquity 


HOSEA. 


of the kings, princes, &c. 


A. M. 3239. 


2 And they ‘consider not in their 
B. C. 765. 


hearts, that I remember all their 
wickedness: now ° their own doings have be- 
set them about; they are “before my face. 

3 They make the king glad with their wick- 
edness, and the princes * with their lies. 

4 ‘ They are all adulterers, as an oven heated 


by the baker, ‘who ceaseth ° from i ere 
raising after he hath kneaded the ———— 
dough, until it be leavened. 

5 In the day of our king the princes have 
made him sick ® with bottles of wine; he 
stretched out his hand with scorners. 


6 For they have 7 made ready their heart like 


b Jer. xvii. 1. 


3 Heb. say not to. 
4 Psa. xe. 8. 


¢ Psa. ix. 16; Prov. vy. 22. 
& Rom. i. 32. 


5 Or, from waking. 
7 Or, applied. 


f Jer, ix. 2. *Or, the raiser will. cease. 
6 Or, with heat through wine. 


when I was about to heal them; or, as the Seventy 
render it, Ev tw cacadac pe tov IopanrA, When I was in 
the very act of healing Israel. Then the iniquity 
of Ephraim was discovered—Literally, was wnco- 
vered, or made bare, that is, showed itself openly, or 
was avowed and undisguised. The people gave me 
fresh provocations, especially the inhabitants of Sa- 
maria, the principal seat of the kingdom. For they 
commit falsehood—Or, carry on delusion ; literally, 
practise deceit, or alie. “The thing meant here 
seems to be the carrying on of a premeditated plot, 
or scheme, for the subversion of the true religion, 
and the establishment of idolatry. And the le, 
falsehood, or delusion which they wrought, was 
every thing that was seductive in the external rites 
of the false religions:” see Horsley, who, ina note on 
this passage, observes, “The particular time alluded 
to is, I think, the reign of the second Jeroboam, 
when the kingdom of Israel seemed to be recovering 
from the loss of strength and territory it had sus- 
tained in the preceding reigns, by the encroach- 
ments of the Syrians; for Jeroboam restored the 
coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto 
the sea of the plain, 2 Kings xiv. 25. Thesuccesses 
vouchsafed to this warlike prince against his ene- 
mies were signs of God’s gracious inclination to 
pardon the people, and restore the kingdom to its 
former prosperity. For the Lord saw the affliction 
of Israel that it was bitter, &e. See 2 Kings xiv. 
26,27. But these merciful purposes of God were 
put aside by the wickedness of the king and the peo- 
ple. For this same Jeroboam did that which was 
evil in the sight of the Lord, he departed not from 
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, §c.” And 
the thief cometh in, and the troop of robbers, &e.— 
They are guilty both of the secret methods of fraud, 
and the open violence of rapine and oppression, 
Verse 2. And they consider not in their hearts— 
They do not seriously reflect; that I remember all 
their wickedness—To call them to an account, and 
to punish them for it. Now their own doings— 
Their studied wickedness, their contrived iniquities: 
their own, not those of their fathers, as the incorri- 
gible are ready to complain; have beset them about 
—Namely, as an enemy invests a town on every 
side. The meaning is, the guilt and punishment of 
their sins shal] surround them on all sides, and seize 
upon them that they shall not escape. Some think 
that by this expression of besetting them about, the 
prophet alludes to the future siege of Samaria, 


so straitly beset by the enemy, that they could not 
flee, nor escape the being either taken or destroyed. 

Verse 3. They make the king glad with their 
wickedness—They study to please their kings and 
great men, by complying with the idolatry they have 


‘set up. The Seventy (with whom agree the Syriac 


and Arabic) read Baccderc, kings, in the plural num- 
ber, meaning the succession of the kings of Israel 
from Jeroboam. And the princes with their lies— 
Which they speak to please and flatter them. But 
the word lie sometimes signifies an idol, and the 
practice of idolatry, as being set up in direct opposi- 
tion to the true God and his truth. Bishop Horsley 
renders the verse, By their evil doings they plea- 
sure the king, and by their perfidies the rulers, 
namely, their perfidies toward God, in deserting his 
service for idolatry. 

Verse.4. They are all adulterers—The expres- 
sion may be here metaphorical, implying that they 
were apostates from God, to whose service they 
were engaged by the most solemn bond and cove- 
nant: compare Jer.ix.2; Jamesiv. 4. Ifthe words 
be understood literally, the prophet compares the 
heat of their lust to the flame of an oven heated ; or, 
as Bishop Horsley renders it, “ Over-heated by the 
baker.” Who ceaseth from raising afler he has 
kneaded the dough, until it be leavened—Vulgate, 
Donec fermentaretur totum, wntil the fermentation 
of it be complete. When an oven is sufficiently 
heated, the baker does not increase the fire, but 
thinks what he has made sufficient to keep the oven 
hot till the dough be fit to be put into it, “An 
oven in which the heat is so intense as to be too 
strong for the baker’s purpose, insomuch that it 
must be suffered to abate before the bread can be set 
in, is certainly a most apt and striking image of the 
heart of the sensualist inflamed with appetite by re- 
peated and excessive indulgence, so that it rages by 
the mere lust of the corrupted imagination, even in 
the absence of the external objects of desire that 
might naturally excite it; and works itself up to an 
excess which is even contrary to the purpose for 
which the animal appetites are implanted.”—Hors- 
ley. ; ‘ 

Verses 5-7. In the day of our king—Probably the 
anniversary of his birth, or coronation; the princes 
have made him sick with bottles of wine—Or, when 


the princes began to be hot with wine, (so New- 


come,) he stretched out his hand with scorners— 
Deriders of God and man. Some recent and noto- 


wherein these sinners against their own souls were || rious act of contempt to God, or to his prophets, or . 


874 


A complaint of the iniquity 


CHAPTER VII. 


> 


of the kings, princes, Fe. 


A. M. 3239. an oven, while they lie in wait: their 
B. C. 765. ; : 
_____— baker sleepeth all the night; in the 
morning it burneth as a flaming fire. 

7 They are all hot as an oven, and have * de- 
voured their judges; £all their kings ® are fallen : 
‘there is none among them that calleth unto me: 

8 Ephraim, he * hath mixed himself among 
the people; Ephraim is a cake not turned. 

9 ! Strangers have devoured his strength, and 


he knoweth i¢ not: yea, gray hairs A. M. 3239. 
are Shere and there upon him, yet he ca 
knoweth not. 

10 And the ™ pride of Israel testifieth to his 
face: and *they do not return to the Lorp 
their God, nor seek him for all this. 

11 4 ° Ephraim also is like a silly dove with- 
out heart: ? they call to Egypt, they go to As- 
syria. 


* Fulfilled about 773.——s Chap. viii. 4.——h2 Kings xy. 10, 14, 
25, 30.——i Isa. lxiv.7.——* Psa. evi. 35.——! Chap. viii. 7. 


to public justice, is here alluded to. “ Those,” says 
Bishop Horsley, “who in their cups made a jest of 
the true religion, and derided the denunciations of 
God’s prophets, the king distinguished with the most 
familia: marks of his royal favour; in this way car- 
rying on the plot of delusion.” Z'ey—Those lux- 
urious and drunken princes; have made ready their 
heart like an oven—Hot with concupiscence, ambi- 
tion, revenge, and covetousness. While they lie in 
wait—Against the life or estate of some of their 
subjects. 
having kindled a fire in his oven, goes to bed and 
sleeps all night, and in the morning finds his oven 
well heated, and ready for his purpose; so these, 
when they have laid some wicked plot, though they 
may seem to sleep for a while, yet the fire is glow- 


ing within, and flames out as soon as ever there is | 


opportunity for it. They are all hot as an oven— 
The whole people are inflamed with bad passions, 
and have followed the ill example of their princes 
and great men. Or, the flame of civil discord is 
spread among the people in general; and, as fire de- 
vours, so has this destroyed their judges and rulers 
by conspiracies and assassinations. All their kings 
are fallen—An anarchy continued for eleven years 
after the death of Jeroboam II., and the six following 
kings, the last who reigned in Israel, fell by conspi- 
rators, namely, Zechariah, Shallum, Menahem, Peka- 
hiah, Pekah, and Hoshea. T'here is none among 
them that calleth unto me—And yet these plain 
signs of my indignation have not brought either 
kings or people to a due humiliation and sorrow for 
their sins. 

Verses 8-10. Ephraim, he hath mixed among the 
people—By his alliances with the heathen, and by 
imitation of their manners, he is himself become 
one of them. He has thrown off all the distinctions, 
and forfeited the privileges of the chosen race. 
“The Hebrew word here rendered people, Tn)’, is 
in the plural, and, when applied to bodies politic,” 
saves bishop Horsley, “always signifies the various 
nations of the earth, the unenlightened nations, in 
opposition to God’s peculiar people, the Israelites.” 
He therefore renders the word peoples here, 
“though,” as he observes, “not without some viola- 
tion of the propriety of the English language, which 
disowns the word in the plural form.” Ephraim is 
a cake, or, like a cake, not turned—Burned on one 
side, and dough on the othr, and so good for 


Their baker sleepeth, &c.—As a baker, / 


8 Heb. sprinkled. m Ch. v. 5.  Tsa. ix. 13. © Ch. xi. 11. 
P2 Kings xv. 19; xvii. 4; Chap. v. 13; ix. 3; xii. 1. 


nothing on either; always in one extreme or the 
other. An apt image of a character that is all in- 
consistency. Such were the ten tribes of the proph- 
et’s day; worshippers of Jehovah in profession, but 
adopting all the idolatries of the neighbouring nations, 
in addition to their own semi-idolatry of the calves. 
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he 
knoweth it not—His national strength is impaired 
and decaying, and he acts as if he were insensible 
of it. The Syrians, in the time of Jehoahaz, re- 
duced them very low, 2 Kings xiii. 7. Afterward 
they became tributaries to Pul, king of Assyria; and 
at length were carried captives by Shalmaneser, 
(chap. xvii.,) and yet the afflictions that befell them 
did not make them sensible of the ill state of their 
affairs, and that the hand of God was against them. 
Yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him— 
The symptoms of decay. He declines in strength 
and power, like a man worn out with age. Rome, 
in the midst of great calamities, is thus described by 
Claudian: 


Humeris vix sustinet egris 
Squalentem clypeum; laxata casside, prodit 
Canitiem. 


And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face—Or, 
witnesseth against him. » Their insolent and obsti- 
nate behaviour, and continuance in sin, notwith- 
standing the warnings and admonitions they have 
had, sufficiently show how deserving they are of 
punishment; and they do not return, §c., nor seek 
him for all this—Notwithstanding such severe de- 
nunciations against them, and that they are fore- 
warned of approaching calamities, yet they do not 
return to God in true repentance, nor make their 
supplication to him to avert his wrath. 

Verses 11, 12. Ephraim is like a silly dove with- 


|out heart—Which has neither courage to defend it- 


self, nor cunning to prevent its falling into the snares 
that are laid for it. T'hey call to Egypt, &e— 
Sometimes they seek the alliance of one nation, and 
sometimes of another, all equally unserviceable to 
them; but are under no concern to seek the favour 
and protection of God, which alone can be of real 
and lasting benefit tothem. When they shall go— 
When they shall do every thing their inclinations 
lead them to do, make the alliances they desire, and 
seek for safety in all the ways their imaginations 
can invent; J will spread my net upon them—I will 
875 


Reproof for manifold sins, 


HOSEA. 


7 


especially for hypocrisy.- 


. M. 12 When they shall go, %I will 
— spread my net upon them; I will 
bring them down as the fowls of the heaven ; 
I will chastise them, ‘as their congregation 
hath heard. 

13 Wo unto them! for they have fled ‘eae 
me: °destruction unto them! because they 
have transgressed against me: though ‘I have 
redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies 
against me. 

14 t And OEY have not cried unto me with 


their heart, when they howled upon A 
their beds: they assemble themselves . 
for corn and wine, and they rebel against me. 

15 Though I 'have bound and strengthen- 
ed their arms, yet do they imagine mischief 
against me. 

16 * They return, bué not to the Most High: 
*they are like a deceitful bow: their princes 
shall fall by the sword for the ¥rage of their 
tongue: this shall be their derision *in the 


land of Egypt. 


4 Ezekiel xii. 13. 
; 2 Kings xvi. 


t Leviticus xxvi. 14; Deuteron. xxviii. 
13,” 18; ® Hebrew, spoil. s Micah 


entengie and dietppcianh Piste in their dosigtat exe- 
cute my decrees upon them, and bring them to de- 
struction, like as birds are taken in the snares of the 
fowler, although they have 
ger. 7 will chastise them as their congregation 
hath heard—I will bring those calamities upon them 
which I have denounced in. my laws against the 
whole people of Israel, whenever they should for- 
sake me; and also have repeatedly denounced them 
by my prophets. 

Verses 13, 14. Wo unto them, &c.—These are 
words both of menace and lamentation. The pro- 
phet at once foretels and bewails their miseries. 
For they have fled from me—As if it had not been 
enough that they at first left my government, temple, 
and worship, they have gone still further from me 
by their sinful and idolatrous courses. Destruction 
unto them—The ruin of their country and common- 
wealth will be the consequence of their apostacy. 
Because they have transgressed against me—Re- 
belliously cast off my authority andlaws. Though 
Ihave redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies, &c. 
—Though I delivered them from the Egyptians, and 
afforded them many other signal deliverances, yet 
they have not given me true glory, but have likened 
me to golden calves, and other images. Idolatry is 
frequently called in Scripture a lie, because it gives 
false representations of things; attributing power, 
&c., to things which, in their own nature, have no 
such power, or representing the Deity by forms 
which he is in no way like; therefore it was, pro- 
perly speaking, changing the truth. and glory of 
God into a lie, or, speaking lies against him. They 
also belied his corrections, as if not deserved; they 
belied the good which God had done them, as if it 
were too little, or not done by him, but by their idols. 
And they have not cried unto me, when they howled, 
&e.—When they bemoaned their calamities, as sick 
men bewail themselves upon their beds of sickness; 
yet they did not call upon me heartily and sincerely. 
They assemble, &c., for corn and wine, and they 
rebel, &c.—When they assemble fhemeely es to de- 
precate a famine, they still retain the same disobe- 
dient temper toward me. 


Verses 15, 16. Though I have bound, &e.— 
Though, after bringing them low, I have given them 


876 


wings to fly out of dan- |) 


t Job xxxv. 9, 10; Psa. Ixxviii. 36; Jer. iii. 10; Zech. vii. 5. 
16 Or, chastened. 4 Ch. xi. 7. x Psa. lxxviii. 57—— Psa. 
Ixxiil. 9. z Chap. ix. 3, 6. 


new strength and vigour; yet do they imagine mis- 
chief against me—Y et they are continually devising 
some new idolatrous inventions, whereby they may 
dishonour me. The word ‘n1d°, rendered J have 
bound them, more properly signifies, I have chas- 
tised them, and is so rendered by Archbishop 
Newcome, Bishop Horsley, and others. The 
general sense of the verse is, Whether I inflict 
punishment on them, or show them favour, they 
are still the same, and reject me for their idols. 
They return, but not to the Most High—Their ¢on- 
version is only outward, not inward and sincere. 
When they left the worship of Baal, they turned to 
the worship of the calves; and now they rest in an 
external reformation, or some ceremonial observ- 
ances, and do not come up to true repentance, spirit- 
| ual worship, or holy obedience. ‘This seems to be 
the meaning of the clause, according to our transla- 
tion of it. But the Hebrew text, 5 x9 425u", is 
very obscure, and variously rendered by interpreters. 
Grotius and the Vulgate read, Reversi sunt ut essent 
absque jugo, They have returned that they might 
be without yoke, that is, without the restraint of 
God’s law. Which is thus expounded by Grotius, 
“Denuo voluerunt esse absque jugo,” T'hey would 
beagain without yoke. The LXX. render it, Anecpa- 
oyoa ec edev, They have been turned away to 


| 


nothing. Thus also the Syriac, or, as Bishop Hors-» 
ley interprets it, They fall [have fallen] back into” 
| nothingness of ponditioa On which he remarks as 
follows: “The situation of the Israelites, as the 
chosen people of God, was a high degree; a rank of 
| distinction and pre-eminence among the nations of 
the earth. By their voluntary defection to idolatry, 
they debased themselves from this exaltation, and 
returned to the ordinary levelof the heathen, so far 
above which the mercy of God had raised them. 
_Asif a man, ennobled by the favour of his sove- 
| reign, should renounce his honours, and, of his 
own choice, mix himself with the laweat dregs 
of the people. Thus, voluntarily descending from 
) their nobility of condition, the Israelites returned 
to not high; for so the Hebrew literally sounds.” 
The bishop observes elsewhere, that the Hebrew 
words will certainly bear the interpretation given 
by Grotius and the Vulgate; “and of that 


Hosea declares the iniquities 


CHAPTER VIII. 


of Israel and Judah. 


have been proposed,” says he, “it seems the best 
sense, next after that which I have given in my 
translation, which is R. 'Tanchum’s, and in my judg- 
ment the best of all. Thus we say in common 
speech, of a man who by misconduct has lost all! es- 
teem and credit in the world, ‘He has brought him- 
self to nothing”” They are like a deceitful bow— 
Which seems bent for and aiming at the mark, yet 
is too weak to carry the shaft to it; or, is false, and 
instead of directing the arrow straight to the mark, 
shoots it on one side or the other. Their princes 
shall fall, §c., for the rage of their tongue—For the 


dishonour which they have done me by blasphe- 
mous speeches; or, shall fall by conspiracies, stirred 
up and fomented by murmurings and seditious ex- 
pressions. This shall be their derision in the land 
| of Egypt—Their frequent rebellions and conspira- 
cies against their kings, shall make them the deri- 
sionof Egypt. Houbigantrendersit, For the wanton- 
ness of their tongues, they shall be a derision in the 
land of Egypt. It is probable that many of the ten 
tribes fled to Egypt when invaded by the Assyrians; 
and that their blasphemies, and other enormities com- 
mitted there, brought them under deserved reproach. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


In tas chapter the idolatries and other impieties of Israel and Judah are set forth, and the judgments of God are denounced 
against them, 1-14. 


A. M. 3244. SZ T *the trumpet to 1 thy mouth. 
B. C. 760. s 
He shall come as an eagle 
against the house of the Lorn, because * they 
have transgressed my covenant, and _trespassed 
against my law. 
2 “Israel shall cry unto me, My God, ° we 
know thee. 


® Chap. v. 8——" Heb. the roof of thy mouth——— Deut. xxviii. 
49; Jer. iv. 13; Hab. i. 8. © Chap. vi. 7. 4 Psa. Ixxviii. 


that A. M. 3244. 
B. C. 760. 


3 Israel hath cast off the thing 
is good: the enemy shall pursue him. 

4 ‘They have set up kings, but not by me: 
they have made princes, and I knew i not: 
® of their silver and their gold have they made 
them idols, that they may be cut off. 

5 Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off; 


34; Chap. v. 15. © Titus i. 16.—*! 2 Kings xv. 13, 17, 25; 
Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah. € Chap. il, 8; xiii. 2, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. 

Verse 1. Set the trumpet to thy mouth—The Vul- 
gate renders it, In guttere tuo sit tuba ; that is, Let 
thy throat, or mouth, sound like a trumpet. God 
speaks in these words, says Grotius, to the prophet, 
and commands him to proclaim, with a very loud 
voice, both the sins of the people, and the evils about 
tocome upon them, He shall come as an eagle 
against the house of the Lord—The words, he shall 
come, are not in the Hebrew, and seem to be impro- 
perly supplied by the translators; the sense of the 
words appearing to be, that the prophet should warn 
the people, and denounce the judgments of God 
against them for their sins, with a voice so loud that 
it might be heard as far as the ery of the eagle, fly- 
ing over, or sitting upon, the top of the temple. 
Because they have transgressed—Or rather, that 
they have transgressed my covenant. ‘Hoc enim 
ipsum est quod proclamari vult Deus;” for this is 
the thing which God commanded to be proclaimed. 
—Grotius. Namely, that they had transgressed 
against God’s covenant, and violated his law. 

Ver. 2-4. Israel shall cry unto me—Namely, when 
calamities come upon them, My God, we know thee 
—Thou art our God in covenant with us, and we 
make profession of thy name, and own thee for the 
only true God: see Matt, vii. 21,22. Israel hath 
cast off the thing that is good—They have not walk- 
ed agreeably to their profession, but have cast off 


obedience to my laws. This is a declaration, that 
all the worship of Israel, or their crying, My God, 
was vain, since their actions were wicked, or 
they had cast off what was good. Christ has made 
a declaration to the same purpose, to warn us of fall- 
ing into the like error, in the passage above referred 
to. They have set up kings—Made a defection from 
the house of David, formed themselves into a distinct 
kingdom, and chosen what kings and governors they 
pleased, without ever asking my advice or consent, 
Not by me—Not by my warrant or order. Shallum, 
and Menahem, and Pekah, usurped the kingdom by 
murder and treason, 2 Kings xv. 13, 14, 25, not by 
any declaration of God’s will, as Jeroboam and Jehu 
did; nor were any of the kings between Jeroboam 
and Jehu, nor any after the posterity of Jehu, made 
by God’s appointment. They have made princes 
and I knew it not—They have appointed judges, or 
magistrates, such as I approved not of, and had no 
hand in raising up to that dignity. Of their silver, 
§c., they have made themselves idols—They heve 
abused their wealth to idolatry, which will be the 
oceasion of their destruction: see chap. ii. 8. 
Verses 5,6. Thy calf, O Samaria—Here God him- 
self, who is the speaker, turns short upon Samaria, 
or the ten tribes; and, in a tone of dreadful indigna- 
tion, upbraids their corrupt worship. Hath cast thee 
off —That is, “ will profit thee nothing in dangers.” 
—Grotius. As if he had said, As the people of Sa- 
877 


God’s bile denounced 


HOSEA. 


against Israel and Judah. 


a. M, 3244. mine anger is kindled against them : 
BO 7 how lodg will it be ere they attain 
to innocency ? 

6 For from Israel was'it also: the workman 


shall reap the whirlwind: it hath no A. M. 3244. 
; C. 760. 

* stall: the bud shall yield no meal: 

if so be it yield, * the strangers shall swallow 

it up. 


made it; therefore it zs not God: but the calf || 8 ‘Israel is swallowed up: now aout 

of Samaria shall be broken in pieces. shall they be among the Gentiles ies 
7 For ithey have sown the wind, and they ||™as a vessel wherein zs no pleasure. 

h Jeremiah xiii. 27. i Proverbs xxii. 8; Chapter x. 12, 13. || * Chapter vii. 9——! 2 Kings xvii. 6 ——™ Jeremiah xxii. 28; 


2 Or, standing corn. 


maria hath cast off that which is good, verse 3, so 
the calf, which they worship, shall not protect or de- 
liver them from the evils coming upon them, now 
my anger is kindled against them. 
it be ere they attain to innocency ?—How long will 
it be ere they repent and reform? Bishop Horsley 
renders it, How long will they bear antipathy to pure 
religion? The Hebrew word, 1°p3, signifies purity, 
or cleanness generally ; hence moral purity, inno- 
cence. But here, says he, “I think it particularly 
denotes pure religion, or the purity of worship; 
pure religion and undefiled, in opposition both to 
the superstitious practices of idolaters, and the false 
show of hypocrites. For from Israel was it also— 
Or, “from Israel came even this; this thing, vile 
and abominable as it is, was his own invention ; not 
a thing that he had learned or borrowed from any 
other nations. Archbishop Newcome indeed says, 
‘The Israclites may have originally borrowed this 
superstition from the Egyptians;’ for in Egypt, he 
observes, ‘this species of animals were worshipped, 
the Apis at Memphis, and the Mnevis at Heliopolis.’ 


But the prophet expressly says, that the Israelites | 
borrowed this superstition from: nobody ; it was all | 


their own. Indeed, what they had seen in Egypt 
was the worship of a living calf, not of the lifeless 
image of a calf, or of any other animal.”—Bishop 
Horsley. The workman made it, therefore it is not 
God—It is no more than the work of man, and there- 
fore there is no divine power in it. But the calf of 
Samaria—Or, the calf of Beth-el, in the kingdom of 


Samaria, shall be broken in pieces—Whereby it | 
is nothing divine in | 


shall be proved to all, that there 
it. Horsley renders it, Verily, the calf of Samaria 
shall be reduced to atoms. So also Grotius under- 
stands the Hebrew expression, 177 (*22w, inter- 
preting the noun 22y, as signifying, “minimum 
quidque in re quavis: ut scintille, fragmenta, seg- 
menta ;” the smallest particle in any thing, as sparks, 
shivers, shreds; Jerome says, atoms. This was done 
by the Assyrians, when they made an entire con- 
quest of the ten tribes. 

Verse 7. For they have sown the wind, and they 
shall reap the whirlwind, &e—A proverbial ex- 
pression, to signify, that as men’s works are, so must 
their reward be; that they who sow iniquity shall 
reap vanity, Prov. xxii. 8. Their labour shall 
be fruitless, or shall turn to their hurt and damage: 
As if he had said, All the pains which the kings 
of Israel and their subjects had taken to enrich them- 
selves, and to strengthen their kingdom, being built 

878 


How long will) 


| 
i 
j 


xlviii. 38. 


upon the foundation of apostacy and idolatry, shall 
turn to no better account, than countrymen expect 
from a blasted crop of corn; and whatever advan- 
tage they make, it shall at last be a prey to foreigu- 
ers, to the kings of Syria and Assyria. 

Verse 8. Israelis swallowed up—Under this image 
the Hebrew language, the Greek, and our own, de- 
scribe any sudden destruction, so complete as to 
leave no visible vestige of the thing remaining, 
The prophet speaks of what was future, as though 
it were already present; and signifies that the Is- 
raelites would be as certainly carried captives into 


Assyria, as if they were already gone thither into 


captivity. Now shall they be among the Gentiles 
as a vessel, &c.—In a short time they shall be de- 
spised, as a vessel or utensil that is broken, or be- 
come useless. For they are gone up to Assyria— 
Namely, of their own accord, as the original expres- 
sion, by Mn, seems to imply. So do also the ver- 
sions of the "LXX. and the Vulgate; the former 
read, avrox aveycav ere Aacuptove, ipst ascenderunt 
ad Assur ; they themselves have gone up to Assyria. 
This is not meant of their going into captivity. The 
captivity, though near at hand, was yet to come; 
but this going up was past. It was a voluntary go- 
ing up, and a crime; a going up both for alliance, 
and also for idolatrous commerce. The captivity was 
to be the punishment. A wild ass alone by himself 
—The meaning is, that Ephraim was such; that is, 
as Archbishop Newcome interprets it, Ephraim was 
like the solitary wild ass, he was as untamed to the 
yoke, and traversed the desert as earnestly in pur- 
suit of idols, as the wild ass in quest of his mates. 
“Though wild asses,” says Pocock, “ be often found 
in the deserts in whole herds, yet it is usual for some 
one of them to break away, and separate himself 
from his company, and run alone at random by him- 
self; and one so doing is here spoken of.” Ephraim 
hath hired lovers—He alludes to the flagitiousness 
of adulteresses hiring men to have commerce with 
them, to which he compares Israel’s procuring fo- 
reign allies with great expense, and relying on them, 
and not on God, for suecour and protection. And 
the reference may be, not only to the bargain with 
Pul, but to the general profusion of the government 
in forming foreign alliances; in which the latter 
kings, both of Israel and Judah, were equally cul- 
pable, as appears by the history of the collateral 
reigns of Ahaz and Pekah. It must be observed, 
“ every forbidden alliance with idolaters was a rt of 
the spiritual incontinence of the nation.”— 


Destruction is threatened to Israel 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Sor their impiety and idolatry. 


A. M. 3244, 


9 For ™ they are gone up to Assy- 
B..C. 760. y <4 P y 


ria, °a wild ass alone by himself: 
Ephraim ° hath hired 3 lovers. 

10 Yea, though they have hired among the 
nations, now ‘will I gather them, and they 
shall * sorrow °a little for the burden of * the 
king of princes. 

11 Because Ephraim hath made * many altars 
to sin, altars shall be made unto him to sin. 


n2 Kings xv. 19. 


© Jer. ii, 24.——P? Isa. xxx. 6; Ezekiel 
xvi. 33, 34. 3 Heb. loves. 4 Ezekiel xvi. 37; Chap. x. 10. 
Or, begin. 5 Or, ina little while, as Hag. ii. 6. risa. x. 8; 
Ezek. xxvi. 7; Dan. ii. 37——* Chap. xii. 11—t Deut. iv. 6, 
8; Psa. exix. 18; exlvii. 19, 20. 


Verse 10. Yea, though they have hired—Namely, 
allies ; among the nations—And have been no way 
solicitous to gain my favour or help; now will I ga- 
ther them—I will now (though they make so little 
account of my power) bring those very allies, name- 
ly, the Assyrians, against them. Here God tells them, 
that whatever sums they might offer, or expense 
they might be at, in order to raise armies of foreign 
auxiliaries, he would imbody those armies, he 
would press the men, paid by their money, into 
his own service against them. And they shall sor- 
row a little—Or, in a little time; for the burden of 


the king of princes—“ They shall be severely galled | 


by the yoke of the Assyrian king, and of the princes 
set over his several provinces.”—Newcome. Bishop 
Horsley, who thinks that the kings and princes, or 
rulers, of Israel are here intended, renders this 
clause differently, thus: And ere long they shall sor- 
row on account of the burden, the king and the ru- 
lers: that is, “ Ere long the king and the rulers will 
lament the impolitic expense incurred in gifts and 
presents to their faithless allies, and the burden of 
taxes for that purpose laid upon the people.” The 
reading of Tw), and rulers, “is supported,” says 
he, “by such a weight of authority, that I cannot 
but adopt it; and yet there is no difficulty in the 
construction of the common text. For it might be 
thus rendered: And ere long the rulers shall sorrow 
Sor the burden of the king, that is, for the burden 
imposed by the king [namely, the king of Israel] in 
taxes.” 

Verses 11, 12. Because Ephraimhath made many 
altars to sin—‘ Since the Israelites, forsaking that 
one altar at which alone God required them to serve 
him, idolatrously multiplied altars to themselves,— 

altars against God’s command; (to do which was 
manifestly asin in them;) therefore shall those, 
their beloved altars, be accordingly occasions of 
great sin, and as such imputed to them to their con- 
demnation.”. The meaning is, that “God would 


give them up, to run on in their evil courses, till 


their iniquity was full, and they were ripe for de- 

struction; and then that God would deliver them 

into the hands of their enemies, who should com- 

pel them to do that service at, and to, ‘heir idol- 

atrous altars, which should appear a manifest punish- 

ment to them for those of their own. So should they | 
3 


. 


12 I have written to him * the great A. M. 9344, 
B, C. 760, 
things of my law, but they were 
counted as a strange thing. 

13 "They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices 
of mine offerings, and eat i¢ ; * but the Lorp 
accepteth them not; now will he remember 
their iniquity, and visit their sins: ” they shall 
return to Kgypt. 

14 * For Israel hath forgotten » his Maker, 


u Jeremiah vii. 21; 


Zechariah vii. 6. 5 Or, In the sacrifice 
of mine offerings they, &ce. 


* Jer. xiv. 10,12; Ch. v. 6; ix. 45 


Amos vy. 22. y Chap. ix. 9; Amos viii. "7.——* Deut, xxviii. 
68 ; Chap. ix. 3,6; xi. 5. “a Deut. xxxii. 18. b Isa. xxix, 
23; Eph. ii. 10. 


be punished by that wherein they had offended.” 
—Pocock. Ihave written to him the great things 
of my law—Or, many things, as °3 may be trans- 
lated. The Vulgate renders it, multiplices leges 
meas, my manifold laws. 'That law which IT gave 
them by Moses, containing rifles excellent in them- 
selves, and such as would have made them great in 
the eyes of their neighbours, they have disregarded, 
as if it had neither reason nor authority, and did not 
concern them: see Deut. iv. 6, 8. : 

Verse 13. They sacrifice flesh, §c., and eat it, but 
the Lord accepteth them not—They offer sacrifices 
indeed, but their sacrifices are not acceptable to God, 
not being offered with a pious and devout mind. Dr. 
Wheeler translates the clause, They have sacrificed 
the choicest sacrifices, and have eaten flesh: Jeho- 
vah taketh not delight therein. Now will he remem- 
ber their iniquity, &e.—God supported the Jews, 
that they might support the true religion; which as 
they had now neglected to do, there was no reason 
why God should support and defend them against 
their enemies. They shall return to Egypt—Going 
into Egypt seems to have been a proverbial expres- 
sion for extreme misery; and may here denote, that 
they should go into a state of captivity and bondage 
as bad as that which their forefathers had suffered 
in Egypt. Or else, taken literally, it might be in- 
tended to signify, that they should seek the alliance 
and friendship of Egypt, contrary to the faith they 


had given to the Assyrians, which would bring on 


their destruction. 'This proved to be the case, as the 
reader will see by consulting 2 Kings xvii. 4,5, “ The 
king of Israel sent messengers to So, king of Egypt, 
and brought no presents to the king of Assyria, as 
he had done year by year; therefore the king of 
Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison. Then 
the king of Assyria came up throughout the land, 
took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria.” 

Verse 14, For Israel hath forgotten his Maker— 
Hath forgotten him who formed them into a people, 
preserved and advanced them, and conferred on 
them all those privileges wherein they excelled all 
other nations: either they have not remembered 
him at all, or have done it without reverence, grati- 
tude, love, or consideration of the duty and service 
which they owe him. And buildeth temples—For 
idolatrous worship. And Judah hath multiplied 

879 


Judgments of God denounced 


A. M. 3244. and © buildeth temples; and Judah 
B. C. 760. 


HOSEA. 


Sor the idolatry of the people. 


will send a fire upon his cities, and it A. ay aet4. 
shall devour the palaces thereof. i 


— hath multiplied fenced cities: but ¢1 


©] Kings xii. 31. 


Senced cities—To secure themselves from the inva- 
sion of the enemy. When the Jews saw what incur- 
sions were made upon the Israelites, or the ten 
tribes, by the Assyrians, they diligently set about 
fortifying their cities, thinking to find security in so 
doing, and putting greater confidence in their fortifi- 
cations than in God’s protection. But I will send a 


4 Jer. xvii. 27; Amos ii. 5. 


Jire upon his cities—My judgments shall destroy 
them, as surely asif a fire had been kindled in them. 
Or the threatening may be interpreted literally ; for 
when Sennacherib took all the fenced cities of Ju- 
dah, except Jerusalem, he undoubtedly set fire to 
many of them, as conquerors were wont to do in 
| those days. 


CHAPTER IX. 


The prophecy contained in this and the following chapter seems to regard the kingdom of Israel principally. Here, (1,) The 
Israclites, for their idolatry, are threatened with famine, captivity, want of divine ordinances, and the desolation of their 
country, 1-6. (2,) Because of the wickedness of their prophets and their own, by which they were filling up the iniquaties 


of their fathers, they are condemned to utter ruin, 7-10. 


(3,) For contempt of God’s word and rod, corruption of his 


worship, and the wickedness of their rulers, they are threatened with the destruction of their children, and the rooting out 


of theor posterity, 11-17. 


A.M. 3241, 1 EJOICE not, O Israel, for joy, as| 
eee is other people: for thou * hast 


gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved 
a reward ! upon every corn-floor. 
2° 'The floor and the ? wine-press shall. not 


a Chap. iv. 12; v. 4, 7.——» Jeremiah xliv. 17; Chap. ii. 12. 
1 Or, in. © Chap. ii. 9, 12——* Or, wine-fat——4 Lev. xxv. 
23; Jer. ii. 7; xvi. 18. 


feed them, and the new wine shall A. M. 3244. 
aa a B. C. 760. 
fail in her. i Sana 
3 They shall not dwell in 4 the Lorp’s land ; 
°* but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and ‘ they 
shall eat unclean ¢ings ® in Assyria. 


e Chapter viii. 13; xi. 5; Not into Egypt itself, but into an- 
other bondage as bad as that,——f Ezekiel iv. 13; Daniel i. 8, 
€ 2 Kings xvii. 6; Chap. xi. 11. ‘ 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX, 

Verses 1,2. Rejoice not, O Israel—It should seem 
that this prophecy was delivered at a time when the 
situation of public affairs was promising ; perhaps 
after some signal success, which had given eecasion 
to public rejoicings. As other people—Hebrew, 
T'nyd, as, or like, the nations, that is, the héathen 
nations, or the peoples, as Bishop Horsley renders it, 
paraphrasing the words thus: “'Those national suc- 
cesses, Which might be just cause of rejoicing to 
other people, are none to thee; for thou liest under 


the heavy sentence of God’s wrath, for thy disloyal- | 


ty to him; and all thy bright prospects will vanish, 
and terminate in thy destruction. The Gentiles 
were not guilty in an equal degree with the Israel- 
ites; for, although they sinned, it was not against 
the light of revelation, in contempt of the warnings 
of inspired prophets, or in breach of any express 
covenant.” For thou hast gone a whoring from thy 
God—Hast been alienated from the love and service 
of God, and hast broken covenant with him by serv- 
ing other gods, and thereby hast exposed thyself to 
his just displeasure. T'how hast loved a reward— 
Or hire, (such as was given by adulterers to lewd 
women,) upon every corn-floor—Thou hast loved to 
see thy floor full, and hast attributed thy plenty to 
thy idols, and rejoiced before them at the ingather- 
ing of thycorn. Bishop Horsley renders the clause, 


Thou hast set thy heart upon the fee of prostitution, 
8380 


namely, says he, “the fruits of the earth; which 
they ascribed to the heavenly bodies, and other phy- 
sical agents which they worshipped.” Zhe floor— 
The corn which is gathered into the floor; and the 
wine-press—The wine that is pressed out into it; 
shall not feed them—Shall not nourish and strength- 
en the idolaters. And the new wine shall fail in 
her—Samaria and all Israel expect a full vintage ; 
but they expect it from their idols, and therefore 
shall be disappointed. Arehbishop Newcome ren- 
ders it, The choice wine shall deceive them, or, shall 
lie unto them, as the word may be rendered. We 
find similar expressions in Horace, as fundus men- 
daz, the lying farm, and spem mentita seges, the 
crop-deceiving hope. 

Verse 3. T'hey shall not dwell in the Lord’s land, 
but Ephraim shall return into Egypt—God will 
turn them out of that inheritance he gave to their 
fathers, and they shall be carried -into captivity or 
become exiles a second time in Egypt. When Shal- 
maneser made the ten tribes captive, such as were 
able to escape the conqueror fled into Egypt, having 
implored the aid of that country against the Assy- 
rians. And they shall eat unclean things in Assyria 
—They have transgressed my law, in eating unclean 
things in their own land; and the time shall come 
when they shall be forced by their imperious mas- 
ters the Assyrians to eat unclean things, whether 
they will or not. They will have no “a 


Judgments of God denounced 


CHAPTER IX. 


_ for the idolatry of the people. 


A. M, 3244. 4 » They shall not offer wine-offer- 

ae ings to the Lor», ' neither shall they 
be pleasing unto him: * their sacrifices shall be 
unto them as the bread of mourners; all that 
eat thereof shall be polluted: for their bread 
‘for their soul shall not come into the house 
of the Lorn. 

5 What will ye doin ™the solemn day, and 
in the day of the feast of the Lorp ? 


4 Chapter iii. 4. i Jer. vi. 20; Chapter viii. 13. 
xxvi. 14,——! Ley. xvii. 11——™Chap. ii. 11.—* Heb. spoil. 
» Chap. vil. 16; Verse 3. 


& Deut. 


6 For lo, they are gone because A. M. 3244. 
of * destruction: " Egypt shall gather enribicn 
them up, Memphis shall bury them: ‘ the 
pleasant places for their silver, °nettles shall 
possess them: thorns shall be in their taber- 
nacles. 

7 The days of visitation are come, the days 
of recompense are come ; Israel shall know i¢: 
the prophet és a fool, °the spiritual man és 


_* Or, their silver shall be desired, the nettle, &c. 5 Heb, the de- 
sire. © Isa. v. 6; xxxii. 13; xxxiv. 13; Chap. x. 8. 6 Heb. 
man of the spirit. P Ezek. xiii. 3; Mic. ii. 11; Zeph. iii. 4. 


them, but, as slaves, will be forced to eat what is given 
them, 

Verse 4. They shall not offer wine-offerings to 
the Lord—They have omitted to make wine-offer- 
ings to the Lord when they had it in their power, 
and when it was their duty to do it; and in the time 
of their captivity they will be willing to do it, but 
shall not have it in their power. Wine-offerings 
were appointed to be offered with the morning and 
evening sacrifice; the sacrifice representing Christ, 
and pardon by him, and the wine-offering the Spirit 
of grace. The daily repetition of the sacrifice con- 
tinued their pardon and peace. All this, it is here 
threatened, should be withheld from these captives. 
Neither shall they be pleasing unto him: their sa- 
crifices shall be, &c.—The words in this sentence are 
somewhat transposed in our translation. They stand 
otherwise in most other versions, namely, Neither 
shall their sacrifices be pleasing unto him, but as 
the bread of mourners among them—That is, their 
sacrifices shall be no more pleasing to God than if 
they were the bread of mourners, or that which is 
prepared for those who are mourning for the dead, 
of which no part was ever offered, or so much as 
brought into the temple. Mourners for the dead 
were, during their time of mourning, unqualified to 
attend upon God’s service; and any thing they had 
eaten of was accounted unfit to be offered to God: 
see note on Deut. xxvi. 14, All that eat thereof— 
Namely, of the sacrifices here spoken of; shall be 
polluted—Rendered impure. For their bread for 
their soul—The offerings they make for the expia- 
tion of their sin, or for an atonement for their souls, 
(see Lev. xvii. 11,) shall not come into the house of 
the Lord—Shall not be fit to be brought into the 
temple. 

Verses 5, 6. What will ye do in the solemn day— 
What will you do in your captivity, when any of 
your solemn or festival days come? When you 
shall find yourselves far from your own country, 
without temple, without prophets, without priests, 
without sacrifices, without solemn assemblies ; what 
will be your sentiments? You will doubtless be 
willing to abstain from labour on those days, as you 
were wont to do; but your masters will not permit 
that, but force you to your wonted employments. 
Though the Israelites of the ten tribes were schis- 
matics, and did not go up to the temple at Jerusalem, 

Vou. IIL. ( 56 ) 


they omitted not to celebrate, in their own manner, 
the feasts of the Lord in their own country ; and as 
these solemnities were always accompanied with 
festivity and rejoicing, it must have been a great mor- 
tification to them to be no longer able to celebrate 
them in the land of their captivity: see Calmet. 
For lo, they are gone because of destruction—Some 
are already withdrawn, because of the desolation 
that cometh. A> great.many of the ten tribes fled 
into Egypt, when they saw their country laid waste 
by the Assyrians. 
these, that they should have no better a fate than 
their brethren who were carried away into Assyria; 
but should die in Egypt, and never see their native 
country any more. Egypt shall gather them up— 
Or, gather them, as the word is translated Ezek. 
xxix. 5. It signifies the same in both places, as if it 
had been said they should be buried there. The 
pleasant places, §c., nettles shall possess them— 
Their fine houses, which they have purchased at 
vast prices, shall be ruined, and lie in rubbish till 
they be overrun with nettles. This signified a vast 
desolation.. These two verses are thus translated by 
Bishop Horsley: “ What will ye do for the season 
of solemn assembly, and for the festival of Jehovah ? 
Behold, all are gone! Total devastation! Egypt 
shall gatherthem. Memphis shall bury them. Their 
valuables of silver! The nettle shall dispossess 
them, and the thistle, in their dwellings.” 

Verse 7. The days of visitation are come—The 
days of punishment, or retribution, are athand. This 
resembles the well-known line of Virgil :— 


Venit summa dies et ineluctabile tempus 
Dardaniz.—— Zin. lib. ii. 1. 324. 
The fatal day, th’ appointed hour is come, 
The time of Troy’s irrevocable doom. 


Israel shall know it—The Hebrew is only, Jsrael 
shall know, namely, that I have spoken the truth ; 
that is, in denouncing misery and calamity against 
them, as the Chaldee supplies the ellipsis. God’s 
judgments upon the ten tribes shall be so evident, 
that the most incredulous shall not be able to deny 
it. Others interpret this clause in connection with 
the following words, thus: Israel shall know that 
the prophet was foolish, that the man of the spirit 
was mad, namely, who encouraged the Israelites to 
continue in their sins, by promising them wae and 
831 


The prophet here threatens - . 


Judgments denounced 


HOSEA. 


against Ephraim. 


A.M. 3244. mad, for the multitude of thine ini- 

BoC. 70. - , 

——__—. quity, and the great hatred. 

8 The % watchman of Ephraim was with 
my God: but the prophet is a snare of a fowler 
in all his ways, and hatred 7in the house of 
his God. 


9 *They have deeply corrupted themselves, || 


as in the days of *Gibeah: ‘therefore he 
will remember their iniquity, he will visit their 
sins, 

10 I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness ; 
I saw your fathers as “the first ripe in the fig- 
tree * at her first time: but they went to Y Baal- 


aJer.vi.17; xxxi.6; Ezek. iii.17; xxxiii. 7——7 Or, against. 
* Isa. xxxi.6; Chap. x. 9.—— Judg. xix. 22.,——+ Chap. viii. 13. 
« Isa, xxviii. 4; Mic. vii. 1-——* Chap. ii. 15——¥ Num. xxv. 
3; Psa. evi. 28, 2 Chap. iv. 14. 


a Jer. xi.13; Judg. vi. 32. || 28 


peor, and ? separated themselves * un- A. M, 3244. 
to that shame; » and their abomina- dha 
tions were according as they loved. 

11 As for Ephraim their glory shall fly away 
like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, 
and from the conception. 

12 ° Though they bring up their children, yet 
4 will I bereave them, that there shall not bea 
man left: yea, ° wo also to them when I‘ de- 
part from them ! 

13 Ephraim, % asI saw Tyrus, zs planted in 
a pleasant place: "but Ephraim shall bring 
forth his children to the murderer. 


b 1 Pealin Ixxxi. 12; Ezek. xx. 8; Amos iy, 5.——* Job xxvii. 
14.——4 Deut. xxviii. 41, 62.——* Deut. xxxi. 17; 2Kings xvii. 
18; Chap. v. 6——f 1 Sam. xxviii, 15, 16,——s Ezek. xxvi. 27, 
h Verse 16; Chap. xili. 16. 


prosperity notwithstanding their corrupt manners. 
Bishop Horsley’s translation of the passage is pecu- 
liarly spirited and sublime: Zhe daus of visitation 
arecome! The days of retribution arecome! Is- 
rael shall know it. Stupid is the prophet! The 
man of the spirit is gone mad! “Stupid,” he re- 
marks, “if he himself discerneth not the signs of 
the times. Gone mad, if, aware of the impending 
judgment, he flatters the people with delusive hopes ; 
and by that conduct makes himself an instrument in 
bringing on that public ruin, in which he himself 
must be involved.” Jor the multitude of thine ini- 
quity, and the great hatred—Namely, which thou 
deservest. Or probably the sense is, as Bishop 
Horsley’s version gives it, In proportion to the great- 
ness of thine iniquity, great also is the vengeance. 
Verses 8,9. "he watchmanof Ephraim was with 
my God—Or, as some read it, on the authority of 


divers MSS., yrds, his God, or, as the LXX. read it, | 
“The watchman i is here evidently a title \| 


with God. 
by which some faithful prophet is distinguished from 
_ the temporizers and seducers. But who in particu- 
lar is this watchman, thus honourably distinguished, 
and how is he with his God? I think,” says Bishop 


Horsley, “the allusion is to Elijah, and his miracu- | 
‘Elijah, that faithful watchman, 


lous translation. 
that resolute opposer of idolatry in the reign of Ahab 
and Jezebel, is now with God, receiving the reward 
of his fidelity in the enjoyment of the beatific vision. 
But the prevaricating prophets, which now are, are 
the victiins of judicial delusion” ” They have deeply 
corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah— 
They have not only sinned lightly, or trivially, but 
have sunk into the deepest wickedness, and have be- 
eome as bad altogether as the men of Gibeah were in 
former times: see Judg. xix. 15, &e. Therefore he 
will remember their iniquity, &c.—God, who hateth 
such workers of iniquity, will not pardon their crimes, 
but severely punish them. 

Verse 10. J found Israel like grapes in the wil- 
derness—The sense is, as the traveller, passing 
through the deserts of Arabia, is greatly delighted if 

882 


'he happen to find in his way vines bearing grapes, 
| so was Israel anciently delighted in by God. This 


relates particularly to their first entering into cove- 
nant with God, and their promises of ready obedi- 
ence: see Exod. xix. 8, and xxiv. 3; Deut. y. 27-29. 
I saw your fathers—Whom I brought out of Egypt; 
as the first ripe in the fig-tree at her first time—As 


, figs of the first season, and the earliest of that growth, 
| which are the most valued and desired. But they 


went to Baal-peor—To the temple and worship of 
the god of the Moabites; and separated themselves 
unto that shame— That obscenity, so Horsley; that 
is, they consecrated themselves to that shameful idol; 
such as its worshippers ought to have been ashamed 
of, and as finally would cause shame to them. The 
word 17135, chey were separated, alludes to the order 


|| of the Nazarites, who were in a peculiar sense set 


apart for God’s service; and, in like manner, these 
separated, or dedicated, themselves to the service of 
that filthy idol, Baal-peor, that shame, or shameful 
thing, as it is expressed Jer. xi. 13. And their 
abominations were according as they loved—They 


| set up and worshipped other idols, according to their 


own fancies. Houbigant reads this clause, Abomi- 
nations became as their love: and Bishop Horsley, 
As my love of them, so were their abominations ; and 
he remarks, “ the love gratuitous, the abominations 
without inducement, but from mere depravity; the 
love the most tender, the abominations enormous.” 
Verses 11-13. As for Ephraim, or, Ephraim! 
their glory shall fly away like a bird—What they 
make their boast of so much shall depart from them. 
The fruitfulness of their women seems to be the 
thing here spoken of. From the birth—Their chil- 
dren shall die soon after they are born; from the 
womb—They shall be untimely births, or ‘abortions; 
and from the conception—They shall not even be 
conceived as they were wont to be. Dr. Wheeler 
renders this clause, T'hey shall not bring forth, nor 
bear in the womb, nor conceive. Though they bring 
up, &e.—-If some of them happen to bring up their 
children to a state of youth, or manhood, yet will I 
( 56* ) 38 


Judgments denounced 


CHAPTER IX. 


agaist Ephraim. 


‘ et pong 14 Give them, O Lorn: what wilt 

——__. thou give? give them ‘a ® miscarry- 
ing womb and dry breasts, 

15 All their wickedness *is in Gilgal: for 
there I hated them : ! for the wickedness of their 
doings I will drive them out of my house, I 
will love them no more: ™all their princes are 
revolters. 


i Luke xxiii. 29, 


® Heb, that casteth the fruit Chap. iv. 
355 xii. 1: ! Chap. i. 6. 


bereave them—Yet still shall they be deprived of 
them, for they shall be slain in war, or carried away 
captive. Yea, wo also to them when Idepart from 
them—They shall suffer still greater and greater mi- 
series when I wholly withdraw my protection from 
them, Deut. xxxi.17; 2 Kings xvii. 18-23. Ephraim, 
as Isaw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place— 
The situation of Ephraim, and particularly of the 
royal city, Samaria, is as pleasant as that of Tyre: 
see Ezek. xxvii.3. But Ephraim shall bring forth, 
§c., to the murderer—Shall be obliged to deliver up 
his children to his enemies. Instead of J'yre, some 
interpreters render the word ‘¥, @ rock, which 
it generally signifies, and translate the passage, 
Ephraim, which, when I looked upon him, was as a 
rock planted in a pleasant place, shall bring forth, 
&e. So Houbigant, and to the same sense Newcome 
and Horsley. 

Verse 14. Givethem,O Lord: what wilt thou give? 
—The prophet here: speaks as one greatly agitated, 
and at a loss what to say upon what he had just 
heard; but at last concludes with beseeching God 
rather to let the women be barren, or miscarry; or, 
if they brought forth children, have no milk in their 
breasts to give them, that they might die soon after 
their birth, rather than that they should grow up to 
be slain by their enemies before their parents’ eyes, 
or carried into captivity; or, as it is expressed in the 
foregoing verse, that their parents should be driven 
to the hard necessity of bringing them forth for the 
murderer. Some interpret the verse thus: Give them 
a miscarrying womb, &c., “as a punishment for 
having inhumanly exposed their infants to death, by 
sacrificing them to their false gods; or, for having 
exposed them to the cruelty of the Assyrians, who 
destroyed them in war. The present passage is 
strikingly emphatical. But it is to be considered 
rather as a prediction of what was to happen as a 
punishment of their crimes, than as an impreca- 
tion.” 

Verses 15-17. All their wickedness is in Gilgal— 
Gilgal is notorious, and has been’ so of old, for the 
wickedness of its inhabitants. T'here I hated them 
—T here of old (or therefore) they were an abomi- 
nation tome. “The first great offence of the Israel- 
ites, after their entrance into the Holy Land, was 
committed while they were encamped in Gilgal ; 
namely, the sacrilegious peculation of Achan, (Josh. 

' 3 


16 Ephraim is smitten. their root A. M, 3244 
is dried up, they shall bear no aat 
fruit: yea, "though they bring forth, yet 
will I slay even %the beloved fruit of their 
womb. 

17 My God will cast them away, because they 
did not hearken unto him: and they shall be 
° wanderers among the nations. 


m Tsaiah i. 23. 


. Verse 13.—® Heb. the desires, Ezek. xxiv. 
Zi, © Deut. xxviil. 64, 65. 


———$— 


vii.,) and to this, it seems, these words allude. There, 
says God, of old, was my quarrel with them.” It 
must be observed further here, that “ Gilgal was the 
place where the armies of Israel, upon their entering 
Canaan, first encamped; where Joshua set up the 
twelve stones, taken by God’s command out of the 
midst of Jordan, in memorial of the miraculous pas- 
sage through the river. There the first passover 
was kept, and the fruits of the promised land first 
enjoyed. There the captain of the Lord’s host ap- 
peared to Joshua. There the rite of circumcision, 
which had been omitted during the forty years of 
the wandering of the people in the wilderness, was 
renewed. And, in the days of the prophet Samuel, 
Gilgal appears to have been an approved place of 
worship and burnt-offering. But,.in later times, it 
appears from Hosea, and his cotemporary, Amos, 
that it became a place of great resort for idolatrous 
purposes. And these are the wickednesses in Gilgal, 
of which the prophet here speaks.’—Horsley. J 
will drive them out of my house—That is, I will no 
longer consider them as my family, my children, and 
my servants. All their princes are revolters—All 
their chief men, their rulers and magistrates, have 
revolted from me and my commands; either by 
worshipping false gods, or by likening me to images 
of their own forming, and by worshipping me under 
the emblems of them. Ephraim is smitten, &e.— 
Or rather, shall be smitten, namely, with barrenness ; 
for that is the punishment which is here chiefly 
mentioned. Bishop Horsley renders the clause, 
Ephraim is blighted ; their root is dried up, they 
shall produce no fruit: or, according to the con- 
struction and rendering of the Syriac, Ephraim is 
smitten at the root, he is dried up ; so that he shall 
bear no fruit ; which is also, in substance, the version 
of the LXX. Yea, though they bring forth—And 
if any should bring forth; yet will Islay the beloved 
fruit, &ce.—I will soon take away the children, 
whose birth afforded them great joy and satisfaction, 
and in whom they placed their delight. My God 
will cast them away—The prophet here calls Jeho- 
vah his God; as much as to say he would no longer 
be the God of the Israelites in general, and no more 
own them for his people, but leave them to wander 
and be dispersed among the other nations. They 
were afterward called by the name of the Acaozopa, 
or dispersed among the Gentiles. 
883 


Ruin threatened to the Israelites 


HOSEA. 


Sor their contempt of God. 


CHAPTER X. 


In this chapter, (1,) God charges thz people of Israel with many sins: in particular, with gross corruptions in the worship 
of God, and in the administrati’ n of the civil government, and also with imitating the sins of their fathers; on all which 
accounts he threatens them wit « humbling and destructive judgments, 1-11. (2,) He earnestly exhorts them to repentance 
and reformation, and threate’.s them with ruin if they did not comply with the exhortation, 12-15. > 


4. se, SRAEL is * an? empty vine, he 
_—__—. ~ bringeth forth fruit unto himself: 
according to the multitude of his fruit ® he hath 
increased the altars; according to the good- 
ness of his land * they have made goodly * im- 
ages. 

2 3 Their heart is ¢ divided ; now shall they be 


found faulty: he shall + break down A, M. s28e 
their altars, he shall spoil their images. ———— 
3° For now they shall say, We have no king, 
because we feared not the Lorp; what then 
should a king do to us? 
4 They have spoken words, swearing falsely 
in making a covenant: thus judgment spring- 


a Nah. ii. 2——! Or, a vine emptying the fruit which it giveth. 
» Chap. viii. 11; xii, 11.——* Chap. viii, 4.——* Heb. statues, 
or, standing images, 


3 Or, He hath divided their heart——4 1 Kings xviii. 21 ; Matt. 
vi. 24. 4 Heb. behead. ¢ Chapter iii. 4; xi. 5; Mie. iv. 9; 
Verse 7. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X. 

Verse 1. Israel is an empty vine—The Hebrew, 
pp)? |23, may either signify, an empty, or emptying 
vine. If we take it in the former sense, the mean- 
ing is, Israel is a vine which has no fruit on it; that 
is, that they brought forth no fruit to God, had no 
true worshippers of him among them, none that 
truly served and glorified him; for it is said in the 
following words that he brought forth fruit unto 
himself. If the expression be understood in the 
other sense, and be rendered an emptying vine, the 
sense of the clause is, Israel is a vine which casteth 
its grapes, that is, does not bring them forth to per- 
fection. And by the next words, he bringeth forth 
Sruit unto himself, may be understood, not only that 
they used the blessings which God had given them 
according to their pleasure, and to the gratification 
of their lusts, but that their apparent good works 
proceeded from selfish motives, aud not from a re- 
gard to the glory and will of God. The LXX. give 
the expression yet another sense, Aumedog evkAnua- 
Teoa, a vine well furnished with branches: with 
which accords the Vulgate, vitis frondosa. Thus 
interpreted, the words may be considered as indica- 
tive of their national prosperity, increasing popula- 
tion, and military strength. According to the multi- 
tude of his fruit—By the fruit here spoken of we 
are not to understand good works, but their abun- 
dant crops, numerous flocks and herds, and public 
opulence; he hath increased the altars—When their 
land yielded a most plentiful harvest, and their flocks, 

"and herds, and wealth increased, this plenty was em- 
ployed on multiplying their idols. Their idolatrous 
altars were as numerous as their national prosperity 
was great, and were increased in proportion thereto. 
And according to the goodness, §c., they have made 
goodly images—Imagining that the goodness of their 
land was a blessing from their idols, Bishop Hors- 
ley reads here, Like the beauty of his land he made the 
beauty of his images, interpreting the meaning to be, 
“That the exquisite workmanship of his images was 
as remarkable as the natural beauty of his country.” 

Verses 2,3. Their heart is divided—Between God 
and their idols, or between God and the world. Now 

884 


shall they be found faulty—As this was their sin, 
so itis here threatened, that the effects thereof should 
prove, and be an open manifeststion of their guilt. 
The Hebrew Yawn mn, may be rendered, now 
shall they be punished, or, treated as guilty. So 
the Vulgate, nunc interibunt, now, that is, forthwith, 
shall they perish. He shall break down their altars, 
&c.—That is, God shall cause their idolatrous altars 
to be broken down, namely, by the Assyrians. Jor 
now they shall say—They shall see and feel, and be 
compelled to own; We have no king—Absolutely 
none, or no such king as we need and expected. 
This is thought by some commentators to relate to 
the time of anarchy, or the interregnum which con- 
tinued for eight or nine years between the murder 
of Pekah and the settlement cf Hoshea on the throne; 
because we feared not the Lord—They shall be sen- 
sible that their forsaking the Lord for idols, and their 
casting off his fear, is the true cause of all their 
calamities ; and particularly of their being deprived 
of the blessing of a wise, just, and good civil goy- 
ernment. What then—Or rather, But what should 
aking do forus? A king could not save us without 
the help of God. The verse, however, seems rather 
to refer to the time of their captivity, and the sense 
probably is, “After Israel shall be carried captive 
into the country of their enemies, and shall have no 
king over their nation, they shall then acknowledge 
that this misfortune has happened to them through 
their own fault, and because they have not feared 
the Lord. And they shall acknowledge that it would 
profit them nothing to have kings, without having 
also the protection of God.”—Calmet. 

Verse 4. T'hey have spoken words—Mere empty 
words ; swearing falsely in making a covenant— 
This may be spoken either of their breaking their 
solemn covenant with God, (see chap. v. 7,) or of 
their treachery toward their kings, against whom 
they had formed several conspiracies: see 2 Kings 
xv. 10, 14, 25, 30. Thus judgment—Divine ven- 
geance; springeth up as hemlock, &e.—Destruc- 
tive calamities, inflictea by the righteous judgment 
of God, will necessarily abound, as hemlock does 
in the furrows of a field. Bishop Horsley renders 

= 


Ruin threatened to the Israelites 


CHAPTER X. 


Sor their contempt of God 


A. M. 3258. eth up ‘as hemlock in the furrows of 

B. C. 746. 

the field. 

5 The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear be- 
cause of *the calves of ® Beth-aven: for the 
people thereof shall mourn over it, and the 
priests thereof ¢hat rejoiced on it, ' for the glory 
thereof, because it is departed from it. 

6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria, for a 
present to * King Jareb: Ephraim shall receive 
shame, and Israel shall be ashamed ! of his 
own counsel. 


7 ™ As for Samaria, her king is cut A. M. 3258. 
off as the foam upcn °the water. levine the 

8 ™'The high places also of Aven, ° the sin of 
Israel, shall be destroyed: ? the thorn and the 
thistle shall come up on their altars; 4and 
they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and 
to the hills, Fall on us. 

9 *O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days 
of Gibeah: there they stood: *the battle in 
Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not 
overtake them. 


f Deut. xxix. 18; Amos v. 7; vi. 12; Acts viii. 23; Heb. xii. 
15.——41 Kings xii. 28, 29; Chap. vili. 5, 6.——» Chap. iv. 15. 
5 Or, Chemarim, 2 Kings xxiii. 5; Zeph. i. 4.——i 1 Sam. iv. 21, 
22; Chap. ix. 11. 


the verse, Negotiate, (or, talk words,) swear false 
oaths, ratify a treaty ; nevertheless judgment shall 
sprout up, like hemlock over the ridges of the field. 
Which version he paraphrases thus: “ Negotiate al- 
liances with one power after another; make a treaty 
with the Assyrians; bind yourselves to it with an 
oath; break your oath, and make a new alliance 
with the Egyptian. In spite of all measures of 
crooked policy, all acquisitions of foreign aid and 
support, judgmentis springing up.” 

Verse 5. T'he inhabitants of Samaria—That is, 
the kingdom of Israel; shall fear—“Be in a con- 
sternation.”—Horsley. Because of the calves of 
Beth-aven—The Jewish writers have a tradition, 
that the golden calf at Dan was taken away by Tig- 
lath-pileser, when he subdued Galilee, 2 Kings xv. 
29; and the other at Beth-el, (here calfed Beth-aven: 
see note on chap. iv. 15,) by order of Shalmaneser, 
of which probably this isa prophecy. Jor the peo- 
ple thereof shall mournover it—Hebrew, voy 93%, 
shall grieve for him; and the priests thereof that 
rejoiced in it—Being fed, clothed, and enriched by 
it, shall now sorrow over it; for the glory thereof— 
The riches of its temple; because it is departed— 
The Assyrians either broke it, or carried it away 
into Assyria. Both priests and people shall mourn 
and be distressed when they see it disgraced. 

Verses 6-8. Ji—The golden calf; shall be carried 
into Assyria—It was the custom of the eastern peo- 
ple, and also of the Romans, to carry away the gods 
of the conquered countries. For a present to King 
Jareb—See note on chap. v. 13. The king of Assy- 
ria is meant, whose dependant and tributary the king 
of Israel now was. Ephraim shall receive shame 
—They shall be ashamed to find that the idol in 
which they trusted could not defend them or itself 
from being disgraced and taken away. Bishop Hors- 
ley’s version here is, Ephraim shall be overtaken 
in sound sleep, namely, in a dream of security, when 
nothing will be less in his thoughts than danger; 
and Israel shall be disgraced by his own politics ; 
that is, the politics of the treaties of alliance, men- 
tioned verse 4. An impolitic alliance with the king 
of Egypt was the immediate occasion of Shalmane- 
ser’s rupture with Hoshea, which ended in the cap- 
tivity of the ten tribes. As for Samaria, her king 

3 


k Chap. v. 13. 1 Pane xi. 6.——™ Verses 3, 15,——® Heb, 
the face of the water. «Chap. iv. 15. © Deut. ix. 21; 1 Kings 
xii, 30, P Chap. ix. 6. 4Isa. ii. 19; Luke xxiii. 30; Rev. 


vi. 16; ix. 6.—" Chap. ix. 9. 


Ss Judg. xx. 


is cut off—Or, more literally, according to the He- 
brew, Samaria is cut off, (or destroyed,) with her 
king ; or, by a small alteration of the pointing, Her 
king is as the foam upon the water—Namely, as a 
bubble, which no sooner swells than it bursts: as if 
he had said, Many of her kings have rapidly passed 
away by assassination: and Hoshea shall soon be cut 
off by the king of Assyria. TJ'he high places also 
—The temples and altars dedicated to idolatrous 
worship, and usually placed on hills and mountains $5 
of Aven—Or, Beth-aven; the sin of Israel—That 
is, the temples and altars, in and by which Israel has 
so greatly sinned, shall be destroyed, shall be en-~ 
tirely demolished; so that the thorn and the thistle 
shall come wpon their altars—That is, their altar 
shall become such heaps of ruins, and the places 
around them be made so desolate, that thorns and 
thistles shall overrun and cover them. And they 
shall say to the mountains, Cover us—These words 
express the confusion and despair to which the Isra- 
elites should be reduced by the destruction of their 
country. Our Lord has made use of the same words, 
to denote the extremity of the Jews in the last siege 
of Jerusalem; and St. John, in the Revelation, to 
set forth the terror of the wicked in the day of judg- 
ment. They express also the great consternation of 
the wicked when any of God’s singular judgments 
overtake them, whose guilt prompts them to endea- 
vour to hide themselves, and they even run into the 
darkest caves and holes of rocks to secure them- 
selves. 

Verse 9. O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days 
of Gibeah—This is not the first of thy sinning, O 
Israel, for long ago there was the greatest corruption 
of manners, and the most flagrant wickedness in 
Gibeah ; and thou hast continued to be wicked ever 
since that time: see Judg. xix. Some render the 
words, T'hou hast sinned more than in the days of 
Gibeah, Thou hast been guilty of more atrocious 
crimes than that committed in that place. _ There— 
That is, upon that occasion, namely, the quarrel with 
the tribe of Benjamin, on account of the outrage of 
the men of Gibeah. They stood—lIsrael stood there 
in array, prepared for the attack. This relates to 
the war which the rest of the Israelites made against 
the Benjamites, because they would not deliver up 


The prophet exhorts to 


HOSEA. 


repentance and reformation. 


A.M. 3258. 10 * J¢ is in my desire that I 
B.C. 746. should chastise them; and “the peo- 


ple shall be gathered against them, *? when 
they shall bind themselves in their two fur- 
rows. 

11 And Ephraim is as *a heifer that is 
taught, and loveth to tread out che corn ; but I 


t Deut. xxviii. 63. u Jer. xvi. 16; Ezek. xxiii. 46, 47; Ch. 
viii. 10.——7 Or, when I shall bind them for their two transgres- 


Sher fair neck: I A.M. 3258 


assed over upon 
P P B. C. 746. 


will make Ephraim to ride; Judah 
shall plough, and Jacob shall break his clods. 

12 ¥ Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap 
in mercy ; *% break up your fallow ground: for i¢ 
is time to seek the Lor», till he come and rain 
righteousness upon you. 


8 Heb. the beauty of her neck. 


the men of Gibeah, who had so shamefully and 
cruelly abused the Levite’s concubine: see Judg, xx. 
The battle in Gibeah, §c., did not overtake them— 
By them here is meant not the children of iniquity, 
but the Israelites who warred against the Benjamites, 
because they would not deliver up these sinners ; 
and the sense of the expression, the battle did not 
overtake them, is, that they were not overcome in this 
their attempt to inflict a just punishment on the per- 
petrators of a flagrant iniquity; for, though they 
were overcome in two battles, yet at last they gained 
an entire victory, and cut off all the Benjamites but 
six hundred: see notes on Judg. xx. 

Verse 10. It is my desire that I should chastise 
them—Then I protected and gave them success, but 
now it is my desire that they should suffer due pun- 
ishment; and I will bring punishment upon them. 
And the people shall be gathered against them— 
Kither the Assyrians, whose alliance they formerly 
sought after; or those people whose idolatry they 
had complied with. When they shall bind them- 
selves in their two furrows—The LXX. give a much 
plainer and easier sense of the words, who follow 
the marginal reading of the Hebrew, and render it, 
When I shall chastise them for their two iniquities ; 
namely, the calves of Dan and Beth-el. Bishop 
Horsley, however, understands the passage in a 
sense somewhat similar to that given in our transla- 
tion. His version of it is, When they are tethered 
down to their two furrows, which he explains as 
follows: “When they are tied to their two faults; 
that is, when they are reduced to a situation of such 
difficulty and danger, as to have no hope of deliver- 
ance by any measures of human policy, in which 
alone they place their confidence, but by choosing 
one or other of two alliances, the Egyptian or the 
Assyrian; in the forming of either of which they are 
criminal, having been repeatedly warned against all 
foreign alliances,” 

Verse ll. Ephraim is a heifer that is taught— 
Or, that is teachable; and loveth to tread out the 
corn—In opposition to ploughing; that is, loves the 
booty not gained by its own labour; or to tread out, 
and freely eat of the corn which is not its own. The 
mouth of the ox which trod out the corn was not 
muzzled. But J passed over—Or caused a yoke to 
pass over; her fair neck—Laid a light yoke upon 
her. Ephraim being here compared to a heifer, 
every thing that is said about him is therefore ex- 
pressed in the same way as if a heifer were really 
spoken of. The meaning, laying aside the figurative 
expression, is, that God imposed a law upon Eph- 

88 


raim, or the Israelites, to direct and govern them. 
Will make Ephraim to ride—It seems this should 
rather be rendered, J will ride upon Ephraim, that 
is, I will be his ruler or director: those who had the 
management of oxen or heifers in those countries, 
used often to ride upon them. Thus Bishop Hors- 
ley: “This and the following clause give the image 
of a husbandman mounting his bullock to direct it 
over the corn.” Judah shall plough, and Jacob 
shall break his clods—By Jacob here is meant Israel, 
or the ten tribes, as separated from the two tribes of 
Judah and Benjamin; and the clause seems to sig- 
nify that the kingdom of Judah should be superior 
to that of Israel. Or, the general sense of the verse 
may be, that the descendants of Jacob should be 
employed in servile offices by their enemies. Bishop 
Horsley interprets this difficult passage differently, 
thus: “The first three clauses of this verse ex- 
press what had been done for the instruction of 
Ephraim by the Mosaic institution. The last two 
predict the final conversion of the Ephraimites, with 
the rest of the people, and their restoration to a con- 
dition of national splendour and prosperity. As if 
he had said, Notwithstanding the judgments that are 
to fall upon Ephraim, he was long under the train- 
ing of my holy law; and the effect of that early dis- 
cipline shall not be ultimately lost. I will, in the 
end, bring Ephraim to obedjence. Judah shall be 
diligent in the works I prepare for him; and the 
whole race of Jacob shall take part in the same la- 
bours of the spiritual field, with profit and advantage 
to themselves.” 

Verse 12. Sow to yourselves in righteousness.— 
Exercise yourselves in the works of righteousness 
and holiness, in the performance of all duties due 
both to God and man. Reap in mercy—And then 
God, of his grace and mercy, will, in due time, be- 
stow an abundant reward upon you. Break up your 
fallow ground—Y our hearts are as ground overrun 
with weeds, which have need to be ploughed and 
broken up by conviction, humiliation, and godly sor- 
row for sin, that good seed may be sown in them. 
For it is time—High time, if you mean to do it at 
all, and a fit season for it, 2 Cor. vi. 2, now that trou- 
bles are near; lo seek the Lord—To seek recon- 
ciliation and peace with him, to seek his favour, and 
a conformity to his will. Seek him, with earnest 
desire and persevering diligence, in the use of 
all the means which he hath appointed. Till he 
come and rain righteousness upon you—That is, 
pour down his grace and blessings upon you, ac- 
cording to what he has promised. . 


3 


Ruin is threatened 


CHAPTER XI. 


to the Israelites, 


A.M. 3258. 13 


* Ye have g i ss 
S abery ploughed wickedness, 


ye have reaped iniquity; ye have eaten 
the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy 
way, in the multitude of thy mighty men. 

14 ° Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy 
people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as 


3 Job iv. 8; Proverbs xxii. 8; Chapter viii. 7; Gal. vi. 7, 8. 
> Chap. xill. 16. 


Shalman spoiled * Beth-arbel in the A. M. 3258. 
day of battle: “the mother was dash- a 
ed in pieces upon her children. 

15 So shall Beth-el do unto you because of 
° your great wickedness: in a morning ° shall 
the king of Israel utterly be cut off. 


c2Q i xvill. 34; xix. 13.——4 Chap. xiii. 16——® Heb. the 
evil of your evil. © Verse 7. 


Verses 13-15. Ye have ploughed wickedness—In- 
stead of working righteousness, (verse 12,) you have 
taken a great deal of pains in the service of sin, to 
compass your wicked designs. Ye have reaped int- 
quity—Ye have, in return, received the fruit of ini- 
quity, namely, punishment, or calamity. Ye have 
eaten the fruit of lies—Fed yourselves with vain 
hopes, which have deceived and will deceive you. 
Or, you have trusted to that which has been only 
specious, not really satisfying or profitable. Because 
thou didst trust in thy way—Thy own carnal pro- 
jects and sinful contrivances, particularly the idol- 
atry at. Dan and Beth-el. In the multitude of thy 
mighty men—The next lie, or false ground of their 
confidence, was the wisdom and valour of their great 
men. Therefore shall a tumult arise—A terrible 
outery, as of men affrighted at the news of the ene- 
mies’ approach. And all thy fortresses shall be 
spoiled, &ce.—This seems to be a prophecy of the 
taking of Samaria by Shalmaneser, which puta final 
period to the kingdom of Israel, 2 Kings xvii. 6. It 
held out a siege of three years, which probably pro- 
voked Shalmaneser to treat it with the severity 
which he used, when he made himself master of it. 
The only difficulty in this verse is, what place or 
person is alluded to by the words, as Shalman 
spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of battle. It is sup- 
posed that by Shalman is meant Shalmaneser; and 
that Beth-arbel was a place in Armenia which he 
took and spoiled, puttitig the inhabitants to the sword 
without any distinction either of age or sex. But it 
cannot be said with certainty, that this supposition 
is founded on fact. Some other conquest, by some 
other person, might possibly be meant. But it is 
not material to know this. It was some place which 
had been treated with great severity by the con- 
queror, and such treatment the prophet denounces 
Samaria should meet with. It is worthy of remark, 


however, that the Vulgate, St. Jerome, and the LXX. 
(see the Alexandrine MS.) suppose that the history 
alluded to is Gideon’s destruction of Zalmunna. So 
shall Beth-el do unto you—“ This is the fruit of your 
worshipping the golden calves at Beth-el and Dan. 
As it happened to the city above mentioned, so shall 
it happen to you, because of your iniquities.” Jn a 
morning—That is, suddenly, quickly, and unex- 
pectedly; or after a night of adversity, when they 
thought the morning of prosperity was come; shall 
the king of Israel be cut off—And the whole state 
and government of Israel be put an end to along 
with him, This seems to be spoken of Hoshea, the 
last king of Israel, who, in the sixth year of his reign, 
was shut up in prison by the king of Assyria, who, 
in three years more, made himself master of the 
whole kingdom of Israel, and carried the inhabitants 
of it into captivity. The Vulgate, (which, with the 
LXX. and the Syriac, carries this clause to the next 
chapter,) instead of Mw, in the morning, seems to 
have read nw, as the morning, rendering the 
clause, sicut mane transit, pertransit rex Israel: 
“As the morning passes away, sO passes away the 
king of Israel.” This reading Bishop Horsley adopts, 
and translates to nearly the same sense, thus: As the 
morning is brought to nothing, to nothing shall the 
king of Israel be brought: observing, “The sudden 
and total destruction of the monarchy of the ten tribes 
is compared to the sudden and total extinction of the 
beauties of the dawn in the sky, by the instan- 
taneous diffusion of the solar light: by which the 
ruddy streaks in the east, the clow of orange-co- 
loured light upon the horizon, are at once obliterated, 
absorbed, and lost in the colourless light of day. 


|The change is sudden even in these climates; it 


must be more sudden in the tropical; and in all 
it is one of the most complete that nature pre- 
sents.” 


CHAPTER XI. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The great goodness of God toward his people Israel, and their ungrateful conduct toward him, with 


threatenings of wrath against them for their ingratitude and treachery, 1-7. 


(2,) Mercy remembered in the midst of 


wrath, 8,9. (3,) Promises of what God would yet do for them, 10, 11. (4,) An honourable character given of Judah, 12. 


3 


887 


The prophet rehearses the 


HOSEA. 


govdness of the God of Israel. 


A. M. 3274, 
B.C. 730. 


WHEN “Israel was a child, then 
T loved him, and called my 
© son out of Egypt. 

2 As they called them, so they went from 
them: “they sacrificed unto Baalim, and burn- 
ed incense to graven images. 

3 °T taught Ephraim also to go, taking them 


by their arms; but they knew not A. M, 3274. 
that ‘I healed them. a 
4 I drew them with cords of a man, with 
bands of love: and *I was to them as they 
that ‘take off the yoke on their jaws, and »I 
laid meat unto them. 

5 4 ‘He shall not return into the land of 


2 Chapter ii. 15.——» Matthew ii. 15——* Exodus iv. 22, 23. 
¢2 Kings xvii. 16; Chap. ii. 13; xiii. 2. € Deut. 1.31; xxxil. 
10; 11, 12; Isa. xlvi. 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI. 

Verse 1. When Israel was a child, &c.—“ The 
Israel of this chapter is the whole people, composed 
of the two branches, Judah and the ten tribes. But 
the house of Israel is the kingdom of the ten tribes, 
as distinct from the other branch.”—Horsley. By 
the time of Israel’s childhood is meant the patri- 
archal age, and the time of their continuance under 
the Egyptian bondage. Then J loved him—Mani- 
fested a tender and paternal affection to him, in- 
creasing him in numbers, wealth, and honour. And 
called my son out of Egypt—Namely, by Moses, 
whom God commanded to acquaint the Israelites 
that they must remove out of Egypt. Israel is called 
God’s son, and his firstborn, Exod. iv. 22, 23; and 
therein was an eminent figure of the Messiah, in 
whom all God’s promises were fulfilled. This pro- 
phecy, therefore, is applied by St. Matthew, chap. ii. 
15, to our Lord’s return out of Egypt, after his being 
taken thither by his parents in his infancy, and kept 
there some time for fear of Herod. And the strict, 
literal sense of the words, more properly belongs to 
him than to Israel. And this is observable in many 
other prophecies, which can but improperly be ap- 
plied to those of whom they were at first spoken; 
and, taking them in their strict, literal sense, are only 
fulfilled in.Christ: see particularly Psa. xxii. 16, 18. 
“ Although the son,” says Bishop Horsley, “here 
immediately meant, is the natural Israel, called out 
of Egypt by Moses and Aaron; there can be no 
doubt that an allusion was intended by the Holy 
Spirit to the call of the infant Christ out of the same 
country. In reference to this event, the passage 
might be thus paraphrased: ‘God in such sort set 


his affection upon the Israelites, in the infancy of. 


their nation, that, so early as from their first settle- 
ment in Egypt, the arrangement was declared of the 
descent of the Messiah from Judah, and of the call- 
ing of that son from Egypt. ” 

Verse 2. As they called them, so, &c—Or, The 
more they called them, or, they were called, so much 
the more they went from him; that is, the more 
earnestly the prophets called upon them to cleave 
steadfastly to the true God, (see verse 7,) the more 
they were bent to depart from him to the worship 
of idols. They sacrificed to Baalim—See note on 
chap. ii. 18. And burned incense to graven images 
—“We read frequently, in our English Bibles, of 
graven images, and of molten images. And the 
words are become so familiar, as names of idolatrous 
images, that, although they are not well chosen to 
express the Hebrew names, it seems not advisable 

888 


f Exodus xv. 26. & Leviticus xxvi. 13. Hebrew, lift 
up. Psalm Ixxviii. 25; Chapter ii. 8 ——iChapter viii. 13; 
ix. 3. 


to change them for others, that might more exactly 
correspond with the original. The graven image 
was not a thing wrought in metal by the tool of the 
workman we should now call an engraver; nor was 
the molten image an image made of metal, or any 
other substance melted, and shaped ina mould. In 
fact, the graven image and the molten image are the 
same thing under different names. The images of 
the ancient idolaters were first cut out of wood by 
the carpenter, as is very evident from the Prophet 
Isaiah. The figure of wood was overlaid with plates, 
either of gold or silver, or sometimes, perhaps, of an 
inferior metal. And in this finished state it was 
called a graven image, (that is, a carved image,) in 
reference to the inner solid figure of wood, and a 
molten (that is, an overlaid, or covered) image in 
reference to the outer metalline case, or covering. 
And sometimes both epithets are applied to it atonce;” 
see Nah. i. 14; Hab. ii. 18, and Bishop Horsley. 

Verses 3, 4. I taught Ephraim also to go—He- 
brew, TomMAND sndaan, J directed the feet of 
Ephraim. In this time of Ephraim’s childhood, I 
supported and directed his steps, as a mother or 
nurse those of a child whom she is teaching to walk. 
Taking them by their arms--To guide them, that 
they might not stray from the right way; and to 
hold them up, that they might not stumble and fall: . 
see notes on Deut. i. 31, and xxxii. 11, 12; Isa. lxiii. 
Thus did God deal with Israel in the wilderness; 
and thus he directs and supports the steps of his spi- 
ritual Israel, amidst all their difficulties and dangers. 
But they knew not that [healed them—They did not 
acknowledge this my care over, and kindness to, 
them. J drew them with cords of a man—I made 
use of those means of drawing them to myself, 
which were most proper to work upon them as 
creatures possessed of understanding and affection. 
The explanation in the Chaldee is just and beautiful: 
“ As beloved children are drawn, I drew them by the 
strength of love.” And J was to them as they that 
take off the yoke on their jaws—Or rather, on 
their cheek. As a careful husbandman, in due 
season, takes the yoke from his labouring oxen, and 
takes off the muzzle with which they were kept from 
eating when at work; so compassionately did I give 
relief to, and provide sustenance for Israel. J laid 
meat unto them-——Brought them provision in their 
wants. God seems here to allude to the manna and 
quails which he provided for his people in the wil- 
derness. -! 

Verses 5, 6. He shall not return into the land of 
Egypt—They were desirous of making their escape 

3 


The ingratitude of Israel, 


CHAPTER XI. 


and God’s mercy to them. 


4M. gars. Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his 

——— king, * because they refused to return. 

6 And the sword shall abide on his cities, and 
shall consume his branches, and devour them, 
1 because of their own counsels.* 

7 And my people are bent to ™backsliding 
from me: "though they called them to the 
Most High, ? none at all would exalt him. 

_ 8 4 ° How shall I give thee up, Ephraim ? 

how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I 


make thee as P Admah? how shall I set thee as 


Zeboim? 4my heart is turned within A. M. 3274. 
me, my repentings are kindled toge- aeaes 
ther. 

9 Iwill not execute the fierceness of mine 
anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim . 
‘for I am God, and not man; the Holy One 
in the midst of thee: and I will not enter into 
the city. 

10 They shall walk after the Lorp: ‘he 
shall roar like a lion: when he shall roar, 
then the children shall tremble t from the west. 


k2 Kings xvii. 13, 14-——! Chapter x. 6. —-* About 728, they 
became tributaries to Salmaneser. m Jer. iii. 6; vili. 5; 
Chap. iv. 16.——® Chap. vii. 16——* Heb. together they exalted 
not. © Jer. ix. 7; Chap. vi. 4. 


thither, and many families perhaps effected it: see 
note on chap. ix. 6. But it is here threatened, that 
the nation in a body should not be permitted so to 
escape. But the Assyrian shall be his king—They 
shall be wholly in the power of the king of Assyria, 
and be carried away captive into his dominions; be- 
cause they refused to return—Namely, to the true 
worship of God, and obedience to his laws, notwith- 
standing the many calls, reproofs, admonitions, and 
exhortations given them by the prophets. Their ob- 
stingy ‘n ‘dolatry is the cause of all the calamities 
coming upon them. And the sword shall abide on 
his cities—His cities shall be destroyed by the con- 
queror’s sword; and shall consume his branches— 
The lesser towns and villages. Thus the word "42 
is expounded, in a marginal note of the Bishops’ 
Bible. It often means the arms, or principal branch- 
es, of a great tree, and is twice translated staves, Ex. 
xxvii. 6. In this place some interpreters render it 
bars ; and Abarbanel expounds it of the strong and 
valiant men of the nation, observing, that the chief 
branches of the people in a kingdom are the valiant 
men. Rabbi Tanchum explains it of their children; 
the branches, as he observes, springing from their 
fathers. The word, however, also signifies lies, and is 
so rendered Isa. xvi. 6, and Jer. xlviii. 30. Bishop 
Horsley translates it diviners, deriving it from 173, he 
was solitary, because they affected a solitary, ascetic 
life; asense which he thinks, of all others, most appo- 
site to the context. He acknowledges, however, that 
to render it branches, limbs, or bars, is admissible, and 
may very well suit the place. 

Verse 7. My people are bent to backsliding from 
me—Many versions render this clause, Nevertheless, 
my people are in suspense (or hesitate) about return- 
ing tome; though they called them to the Most High 
—Though my prophets, and other pious persons, in- 
vited and exhorted them to return to my worship and 
service ; none’ at all would exalt him—Scarce any 
would hearken and obey. The word him not being 
in the Hebrew, some versions read, None would raise 
himself up, or advance ; that is, come forward to 
obey and serve me. 

Verses 8,9. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim— 
To utter destruction? God’s mercy is here pathet- 

3 


P Genesis xiv. 8; xix. 24, 25; Deut. xxix. 23; Amos iv. 11. 
4 Deut. xxxii. 36; Isa. xiii. 15; Jer. xxxi. 20—- Num. xxiii. 
19; Isaiah lv. 8,9; Mal. iii. 6 —— Isa. xxxi.4; Jer. xxv 30; 
Joel iii. 16 ; Amos i. 2.—t Zech. viii. 7. 


ically described as contending with his justice, to 
show that he does not willingly destroy, or even 
afflict, or grieve, the children of men, Lam. iii. 33. 
How shall I make thee as Admah? &c.—How shall 
I give thee up to a perpetual desolation? Admah 
and Zeboim were two cities which were wholly de- 
stroyed, together with Sodom and Gomorrah. My 
heartisturned withinme—Or, upon me ; so Horsley. 
My repentings are kindled together—Not that God 
is ever fluctuating or unresolved; but these are ex- 
pressions after the manner of men, to show what se- 
verity Israel had deserved, and yet how divine grace 
would be glorified in sparing them. Thus God’s 
compassion toward sinners is elsewhere expressed 
by the sounding, or yearning, of his bowels, Isa. lxiii. 
15; Jer. xxxi. 20; a metaphor taken from the natu- 
ral affection which parents have fortheirchildren. I 
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger—I will 
not punish to the utmost strictness of justice; J will 
not return to destroy Ephraim—I will not carry it 
so far as to make a second destruction of Ephraim; 
so as to cut off those who escaped the first infliction 
of my punishments, and thereby wholly destroy 
them. Conquerors, that plunder a conquered city, 
carry away the wealth of it, and, after some time, 
often return to burn it. God will not thus utterly 
destroy Israel. For I am God, and not man— 
Therefore my compassions fail not; the Holy One 
in the midst of thee—A holy God, and in covenant, 
though not with all, yet with many among you, and 
present with you to preserve a remnant to be my 
faithful servants. And I will not enter into the city 
—As an enraged enemy to destroy your cities, as I 
did Sodom. 

Verses 10,11. They shall walk after the Lord— 
The remnant shall hearken to God’s call, and shall 
comply with his commands, when he shall convert 
them by the powerful preaching of his gospel, and 
the efficacious influence of his grace. He shall roar 
like a lion-- That is, he will show terrible signs of 
his anger, and then they will fear and obey him. 
God’s voice is elsewhere compared to the roaring of 
a lion, because of the terror which accompanies it: 
see the margin. The Chaldee says, T'he word of the 
Lord shall roar as a lion, and the words may be in 

889 


T he prophet bears an 


HOSEA. 


honourable testimony for Judah. 


A, M. 3274. 11 They shall tremble as a bird out 
ee = 0h Egypt, "and as a dove out of the 
land of Assyria: *and I will place them in 


their houses, saith the Lorn. 


12 % ¥ Ephraim compasseth me A. M, 3274. 
about with lies, and the house of Is- fh lad 
rael with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with 
God, and is faithful * with the saints. 


ufsa. lx. 8; Chap. vii. 11—* Ezek. xxviii. 25, 26; xxxvil. 


terpreted of the powerful voice of the gospel, sent 
forth, and sounding all over the world, and calling 
sinners to repentance. “'Fhe most learned com- 
mentators agree,” says Bishop Horsley, “ that this 
roaring of the lion is the sound of the gospel; and 
that the subject of this and the following verse is, its 
promulgation and progress, the conversion of the 
Gentiles, and the final restoration of the Jews. 
‘Clara et maxima voce predicabit evangelium,’ With 
a loud and most powerful voice shall he preach the 
gospel, says Piscator. And to the same effect Rivetus 
and Bochart. As a lion, by its roaring, calls animals 
of its own kind to a participation of the prey; so 
Christ, by the powerful voice of the gospel, shall call 
all nations to the fellowship of eternal life.—Livelye. 
The preaching of the gospel, reaching the remotest 
corners of the earth, is frequently represented under 
the image of the loudest sounds. And this loudness 
of the sound alone might justify the figure of the 
roaring lion. Buta greater propriety of the figure 
will appear, if we recollect, that the first demonstra- 
tions of mercy to the faithful will be, the judgments 
executed on the anti-christian persecutors; to whom 
the sound of the gospel will be a sound of terror.” 
When he shall roar, then the children shall tremble 
from the west—The word 117m, rendered, shall 


tremble, describes the motion which a bird makes | 


with its wings when it flies. Dr. Waterland renders 
it, shall come fluttering, and Bishop Horsley, shall 
hurry. The primary sense of the passage may be, 
that at this efficacious call of God, the remnant of 
Israel, who shall be accounted his children, and heirs 
of the promises made to their fathers, shall come in 
haste from the several places of their dispersions, and 
particularly from the western parts of the world, (see 
Zech. viii. 7,) called the sea in the original, and ex- 
pressed in Isaiah by the islands of the sea: see Isa. 
xi, Ll, and xxiv. 14. They shall tremble as a bird 
oul of Egypt—That is, fly with haste, as above. As 
a dove out of the land of Assyria—Great numbers 
of the Jews were exiles in Egypt and Assyria; and 
therefore, when the restoration of the Jews is spoken 
of, Egypt and Assyria are mentioned as countries 
from whence a great number of them should return. 
And Iwill place them in their houses—I will bring 
them back to their own country and habitations, like 
as the stork returns to her nest, and the dove to the 
dove-cot. This prophecy may be considered as re- 
ceiving its completion in part when some of the Is- 
raelites, being recovered to the worship of the true 
God, returned to Judea with the two tribes of Judah 
and Benjamin, brought back to their own land from 
their captivity in Babylon. But the full accomplish- 
ment of it will not take place till the latter days, when 
the fulness of the Gentiles being brought in by the 
preaching of the gospel, all Israel shall be saved, 
890 


21, 25.——y Chap. xii. 1——* Or, with the most holy. 


Thus Bishop Horsley. These verses “contain a 
wonderful prophecy of the promulgation and pro- 
gress of the gospel, and the restoration of the race 
of Israel. The first clause of the tenth verse states 
generally that they shall be brought to repentance. 
In what follows, the circumstances and progress of 
the business are described. First, Jehovah shall 
roar; the roaring is unquestionably the sound of the 
gospel. Jehovah himself shall roar; the sound shall 
begin to be uttered by the voice of the incarnate God 
himself. The first effect shall be, that children shall 
come fluttering from the west; a new race of chil- 
dren, converts of the Gentiles.” For, “it is remark- 
able, that the expression is neither their children, nor 
my children, but simply children. 'The first would 
limit the discourse to the natural Israel exclusively ; 
the second would be nearly of the same effect, as it 
would express such as were already children at the 
time of the roaring. But the word children, put na- 
kedly, without either of these epithets, expresses 
those who were neither of the natural Jsrael, nor 
children at the time of the roaring, but were roused 
by that sound, and then became éhildren, that is, 
adopted children, by natural extraction Gentiles.” 
These shall come “chiefly from the western quar- 
ters of the world, or what the Scriptures call the 
west; for no part, I think, of Asia Minor, Syria, or 
Palestine, is reckoned a part of the east, in the Jan- 
guage of the Old Testament. Afterward the natural 
Israel shall hurry from all the regions of their dis- 
persion, and be settled in their own dwellings. It is 
to be observed that the roaring is mentioned twice. 
It will be most consistent with’the style of the pro- 
phets to take this as two roarings; and to refer the 
hurrying of the children from the west to the first, 
the hurrying from Egypt and Assyria to the second 
The times of the two roarings are, the first and se- 
cond advent. The first brought children from the 
west; the renewed preaching of the gospel, at the 
second, will bring home the Jews. And perhaps this 
second sounding of the gospel may be, more remark- 
ably even than the first, a roaring of Jehovah in 
person.” With this verse the chapter is closed in 
the Hebrew text and the Syriac version, and the fol- 
lowing verse is given to the next chapter. But the 
division of the LXX., Vulgate, and Chaldee, which 
our public translation follows, seems preferable. 
Verse 12. Ephraim compasseth me about with 
lies—Ephraim and Israel are hypocrites; they pro- 
mise much and perform nothing; they draw near to 
me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.. 
But Judah yet ruleth with God—Judah kept close 
to that kingly government which God had settled in 
David’s family, and faithfully observed those ordi- 
nances which God had given to his people, here 
termed saints, as they are also Deut. xxxiii, 3; and else- 
2 


Ephraim and Judah 


CHAPTER XII. 


reproved for their sins. 


wherea holy nation, and peculiar people. This seems 
to relate to the times of Hezekiah, who restored the 
pure worship of God in Judah; at which time the 
ten tribes were flagrantly wicked, and wholly addicted 
to an idolatrous worship. Instead of saints, Bishop 
Horsley reads, holy ones, and interprets the expres- 
sion of the persons of the Trinity. His translation 
of the verse is, “Ephraim hath compassed me about 
with treachery, and the house of Israel with deceit. 
But Judah shall yet obtain dominion with God, and 


shall be established with the holy ones.” He consi- 
ders the expression, shall obtain dominion, &c., as 
“a promissory allusion to a final restoration of the 
Jewish monarchy ;” and the remaining clause, shall 
be established, &c., as signifying “either the con- 
staney of Judah’s fidelity to the Holy Ones, or the 
firmness of the support which he shall receive from 
them.” And he thinks that “by the use of this plural 
word, Holy Ones, the prophecy clearly points to the 
conversion of the Jewish people tothe Christian faith.” 


CHAPTER XII. 


In this chapter, (1,) God reproves Ephraim and Judah for their sins, particularly thew covenanting with the Assyrians, and 


declares his resolution to punish them, 1, 2. 


(2,) By his former mercies he exhorts them to repentance, 3-6. 


(3,) He 


charges Ephraim with the sin of fraud, injustice, and ingratitude, as particularly provoking to God, and calling for wrath 


and punishment, 7-14. 
+ Me, 3379. F,PHRAIM ® feedeth on wind, and 

ea followeth after the east wind: he 
daily increaseth lies and desolation ; ° and they 
do make a covenant with the Assyrians, and 
© oil is carried into Egypt. 

2 The Lorp hath also a controversy with 


a Chapter viii. 7——> 2 Kings xvii. 4; Chapter v. 13; vii. 11. 
© Isa. xxx. 6; lvii. 9. 4 Chap. iv. 1; Mic. vi. 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. 

Verses 1,2. Ephraim feedeth on wind—Flatters 
himself with vain, delusive hopes, of receiving ef- 
fectual support from the alliances which he forms. 
It is a proverbial expression to signify labour in 
vain, or pursuing such measures as will bring dam- 
age rather than benefit. And followeth the east 
awind—Pernicious, destructive counsels and courses. 
The east wind was peculiarly. parching and noxious, 
blasting the fruits of the earth; thence it denotes de-_ 
solation and destruction. He daily increaseth— 
Hebrew, 72%, multiplieth, lies and desolation—Or, 
falsehood and destruction ; so Horsley: that is, in 
multiplying his falsehood, he multiplies the causes 
of his own destruction. And they do make a cove-| 
nant with the Assyrians, and oil is carried into 
Egypt—Here is an example given of their false- 
hood, or deceit: while they were in covenant with 
the Assyrians, having engaged themselves to be. 
tributaries to them, they were secretly and perfid- | 
iously seeking to make an alliance with the Egyp- 
tians, and for that purpose sent oil as a present to 
the king of Egypt, endeavouring to persuade him | 
to assist them in shaking off the yoke of the king | 


of Assyria: see the margin. The land of Judah) 
avounded with excellent oil, which was much want- |) 
ed in Egypt. The Lord hath also a controversy 
with Judah—Though Hezekiah had abolished idol- 
atry, and restored God’s worship in the temple, 
2 Chron. xxix. 3, and xxxi. 1, yet there were much 


Judah, and will } punish Jacon ac- A.M. 3279. 
cording to his ways; according to ae 
his doings will he recompense him. 

3 4 He took his brother ° by the heel in the 
womb, and by his strength he ? had‘ power 
with God : 


2 Heb. was a prince, or, 


1 Heb, visit upon. © Gen. xxv. 26. 
£ Gen, xxxiii. 21, 


behaved himself princely. 


his subjects; for which God’s judgments are here 
threatened, and the invasion of Sennacherib was 
actually inflicted, 2 Kings xviii. 18, &c. 

Verse 3. He took his brother by the heel in the 
womb—From the mentioning of Jacob in the fore- 
going verse, the prophet takes occasion to put his 
posterity in mind of the particular favours God had 
bestowed upon him; partly with a view to encour- 
age them to imitate him in endeavouring to obtain 
the like blessings, and partly to convince them of 
their ingratitude and degeneracy from him. His 
taking his brother by the heel, signified his striving, 
by a divine instinct, for the birthright and blessing. 
Even before his birth he reached forth his hand to 
catch hold of it, as it were, and if possible to pre- 
vent his brother. It denoted, also, that he should 
prevail at last, gain his point, and in process of 
time become greater than his brother. And this 
prognostic of his prevalence and superiority was 
the effect of God’s will and power, and not of Ja- 


| cob’s, who was not then in a capacity of acting of 


himself: see note on Gen. xxv. 26. It is justly ob- 
served here, by Bishop Horsley, that his “taking 
his brother by the heel is not mentioned in dis-_ 
paragement of the patriarch. On the contrary, the 
whole of these two verses is a commemoration of 
God’s kindness for the ancestor of the Israeites, 
on which the prophet founds an animated exhorta- 
tion to them, to turn to that God from whom they 
might expect so much favour. By his strength he 


hypucrisy and great corruption in the manners of ||had power with God, &c.—This alludes to his 
3 


8YL 


An exhortation 


HOSEA. 


to repentance. 


gel, and prevailed : he wept, and made 
supplication unto him: he found him in * Beth- 
el, and there he spake with us ; 


4 Yea, he had power over the an- 


M. 3279. 


5 Even the Lorp God of hosts; the A. 
B. C. 725. 


Lorp is his ® memorial. a3 Som 
6‘ Therefore, turn thou to thy God: keep mercy 
and judgment, and * waitonthy Godcontinually. 


s Gen. xxviii. 12, 19; xxxv. 9, 10, 15, ——» Exod. iii. 15. 


wrestling with the angel, as recorded Gen. xxxii. 


That bodily strength, wherewith he was endued by | 
God, and enabled to wrestle with this heavenly | 
being, was a token of the strength of his faith, and | 
This is} 


of the fervency of his spirit in prayer. 
mentioned here by the prophet, as another instance 
of God’s favour to Jacob. He not only, when an 
infant in the womb, was enabled to perform the 
emblematical action just mentioned; but, in his 
adult age, he was endued with such supernatural 
strength of mind and body, that he was enabled to 
continue wrestling till he obtained the blessing. 
The prophet, in this clause, alludes to those words 


of his, J will not let thee go except thou bless me; | 


intimating the strength of his faith, and prevalency 
of his prayers with God. The words, He had 
power with God, and those that follow, He had 
power over the angel, are equivalent; and plainly 
prove that this person, who assumed a human 
shape, was really God, that is, the Son of God, and 
the angel of the covenant, by whom all the divine 
appearances recorded in the Old Testament were 
performed; the affairs of the church being ordered 
by him from-the beginning. ‘This subject is learn- 
edly handled by Dr. Allix in his Judgment of the 
Jewish Church, against the Unitarians, chap. xiii- 
xv., by Archbishop Tenison in his Discourses of 
Idolatry, chap. xiv., and by Bishop Bull in his De- 
Sence of the Nicene Faith. 

Verses 4,5. He had power over the angel —Call- 
ed God, verse 3, and Jehovah, God of hosts, verse 5, 


namely, God by nature and essence, and an angel | 


by office and voluntary undertaking. He wept and 
made supplication unto him—He prayed with tears 
from a sense of his own unworthiness, and with 
earnestness for the mercy he desired. Jacob’s wrest- 
ling with the angel’ was, as has been just intimated, 
not only a corporal conflict, but likewise a spiritual 
one; from bodily wrestling he betook himself to 
spiritual weapons; he poured forth tears with ear- 
nest supplications and prayers, and strove, not so 
much for victory, as for a blessing: the only way 
‘for a feeble, impotent creature, to prevail over his 
Creator. The observations of Luther, upon this 
extraordinary conflict between Jacob and the person 
called the angel, are so excellent, that the intelligent 
reader will be glad to be presented here with a 
translation of them. “ Different views are wont to 
be entertained concerning the nature of this wrest- 
ling. But the history shows that Jacob had come 
int? imminent danger of his life, and was assaulted 
by an unknown antagonist with his whole power. 
He therefore himself also exerted his bodily 
strength to the utmost against this antagonist, that 
he might defend his life. Nevertheless, he did not 
contend only with the strength of his body; his 
892 


i Chap. xiv. 1; Mic. vi. 8 ——* Psa. xxxvii. 7. 


faith also wrestled: and first, in such an immediate 


danger, he comforted himself that he had been or: 
dered by God to return into the land of Canaan [to 
which country, in obedience to God, he was now 
journeying.| Then with his whole heart he laid 
hold on the promise made him by ‘the Lord in 
Beth-el, where he was fully assured of the divine 
protection. When therefore he was in distress, and 
assaulted by an unknown enemy with all his might, 
although he used his own strength, yet he contended 
more strenuously by faith, beholding the promise, 
and concluding with certainty that God, according 
to his word, would be present with him in so great 
a danger, and would save him. And with this faith, 
[so to speak, ] he prevailed over God; for although 
Christ tried Jacob in this conflict, nevertheless he 
could do nothing against, or contrary to, his word, 
on which Jacob relied.” Jacob’s supplication and 
tears, here mentioned, probably refer to those earnest 
prayers which he poured out to God, as is recorded 
Gen, xxxii. 9-11. The conflict here spoken of, in 
which Jacob had power with God, ended in an as- 
surance that his prayers were-answered, He found 
him in Beth-el—This refers to God’s appearing to 
Jacob after the former vision, as is related Gen. 
xxxv. 9, 14, when God renewed his promise of 
giving the land of Canaan to his posterity. The 
prophet takes particular notice of the place where 
God appeared to him; as if he had said, He appear- 
ed in that very place where you worship a golden 
calf as your god! And there he spake with us— 
Who were then in Jacob’s loins. The Alexandrian 
copy, however, of the LXX. reads, There he spake 
with him ; as if the expression alluded to the above- 
mentioned passage, where God is said to have talked 
with Jacob. But the present Hebrew reading con- 
tains a very important meaning, signifying, that God 
did not only speak to him there, but likewise did, by 
so doing, instruct his posterity to the latest genera- 
tion. Certainly the things spoken concerned Ja- 
cob’s posterity, as much, or more, than himself. 
Even the Lord God of hosts—He that appeared and 
spake, who promised the blessing, and commanded 
the reformation at Beth-el, was Jehovah, the eternal 
and unchangeable God; who can perform his pro- 
mise, and execute his threat; who is a most terrible 
enemy, and a most desirable friend. The Lord is 
his memorial—That is, the name Jehovah is God’s 
memorial; his appropriate, perpetual, incommuni 
cable name, expressing his essence; the name by 
which he will be known and remembered to all 
generations; the name which especially distinguish- 
es him from all false gods, and sets forth his glory 
more than any other name whatsoever: see note on 
Exod. iii. 14, : 
Verse 6. Therefore turn thou to thy God—*Thou 
3 


Ihe sin and CHAPTER XII. 
he M. a 7 9% fe is 8a merchant, 'the ba- 


lances of deceit are in his hand: 
he loveth to * oppress. 

8 And Ephraim said, ™ Yet I am become 
rich, I have found me out substance : ° in all my 


labours they shall find none iniquity in me. 


that were sin. 
9 And *I that am the Lorn thy God from 


ingratitude of Ephraim. 


the land of Egypt ° will yet make A. M. 3279. 


B. C. 725 
thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the 


days of the solemn feasts. 

10 ? I have also spoken by the prophets, and I 
have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, 
7 by the ministry of the prophets. 

11 4 Js there iniquity in Gilead? surely they 
are vanity: they sacrifice bullocks in * Gilgal ; 


2Or, Canaan; Ezek. xvi. 3.——! Prov. xi. 1; Amos viii. 5. 
4Or, deceive. m Zech. xi. 5; Rev. iii. 17. © Or, all my la- 
bours suffice me not, he shall have punishment of iniquity in whom 
is sin. 


6 Hebrew, which. » Chapter xiii. 4. © Ley. xxili. 42, 43; 
Neh. viii.17; Zech. xiv. 16.——P 2 Kings xvii. 13. 7 Heb. by 
the hand.»~—4 Chapter v. 1; vi. 8. * Chapter iv. 15; ix. 15; 
Amos iv. 4; v. 5. 


sharia el O Israel, encouraged by the memory of 
God’s love to thy progenitor, and by the example 
which thou hast in him, of the efficacy of weeping 
and supplication, turn to thy God in penitence and 
prayer, and in the [practice of] works of righteous- 
ness.”—Horsley. Leave your idolatries and all 
your sins. Jacob worshipped God alone, do you 
so; he cast all idols out of his family, do you so 
too; be Jacob’s children herein. Keep mercy and 
judgment—Show kindness to all who need it, and 
do wrong to none; but, with justice in all your 
dealings, in judicatures, and public offices, render 
to all their due, And wait on thy God continually 
—In public worship, and private duties, serve and 
trust in God alone: let not idols have either sacri- 
fice, prayer, praise, or trust from you, and let your 
hope and worship be ever continued. 

Verses 7,8. Heis a merchant, &c.—Bishop Hors- 
ley renders this verse thus: Canaan the trafficker ! 
The cheating balances in his hand! He has set 
his heart upon over-reaching! On which the 
bishop observes, “God says to the prophet, Instead 
of turning to me, and keeping to works of charity 
and justice, he is a mere heathen huckster. Thou 
hast misealled him Jacob: he is Canaan. Not Ja- 
cob the godly, the heir of the promise: Canaan the 
cheat, the son of the curse.” The Hebrew word 
1¥39, rendered merchant, is both a proper name and 
an appellative. And to preserve the ambiguity in 
his translation, the bishop joins the appellative and 
the proper name together. Without this, as he 
justly observes, the whole spirit of the original 
would be lost to the English reader. All the ancient 
versions, except the Chaldee, give the proper name. 
The first words of the verse, He is, not being in the 
Hebrew, some interpreters, without supplying any 
thing, render the clause, T'he balances of deceit are 
in the hand of the merchant; that is, instead of 
practising just and fair dealing, which was the way 
to please God, they made use of unjust weights and 
measures, and practised frauds, deceits, and cun- 

-ning, in buying and selling; depreciating those 
things they wanted to buy, below what they knew 
they were really worth; and setting a greater value 
on, and saying more in praise of, those things they 
wanted to sell, than they really deserved. These 


used among us now, though God has so strongly |, 


declared his abhorrence of them in the Scriptures. |, 


He loveth to oppress—The Hebrew rather signifies, 
He loveth to defraud ; to use the arts of cozenage. 
And Ephraim said—Rather, Nevertheless Ephraim 
said, I am become rich—I have gotten riches, how- 
ever, by my cunning and deceit, and as that is the 
case, I have no need to concern myself; for, so I 
have but riches, none will ask how I came by them. 
In this description of Ephraim, we may see but too 
like a picture of many in our times; for riches are 
too generally and too much the pursuit of mankind, 
and are generally too much prized; so that if men 
have but riches, they think they have every thing 
that is to be desired. Bishop Horsley presents us 
with a different interpretation of this verse, thus: 
Nevertheless, Ephraim shall say, that is, the time 
will come when Ephraim will repent, and say, Al- 
though I became rich, I acquired to myself [only] 
sorrow ; allmy labours procured not for me what 
may expiate iniquity. Thus interpreted, the words 
contain the penitent confession of the Ephraimites 
in the latter days, wrought upon at last by God’s 
judgments and mercies. 

Verses 9, 10. I that am the Lord thy God from 
the land of Egypt—From the time I brought thee 
out of it: will yet make thee to dwell in tabernacles 
—That is, in thy habitations, quietly and joyfully, 
as in festival times. The word tabernacles is here 
put for houses, or habitations; because at first the 
Israelites dwelt in tabernacles, or tents. This must 
be taken as a promise of the restoration of the Is- 
raelites to their own land, after their being carried 
into captivity, provided they turned to God, and to 
his worship and service, in true repentance, and new 
obedience. Ihave also spoken by the prophets, &c. 
—‘WHere are three species,of prophecy distinctly 
mentioned: Ist, Immediate suggestion, or inspira- 
tion, when God dictates the very words which the 
prophet is to deliver: 2d, Vision, or a representa- 
tion made of external objects to the imagination, in 
as lively a manner as if they were conveyed to the 
senses: and, 3d, Parables, and apt resemblances, 
such as that of God’s church to a vineyard, Isa. y.1, 
of the destruction of Jerusalem toa forest set on 
Jire, Ezekiel xx. 46, 49, and to a seething-pot, 
chapter xxiv. 3. Hosea himself was a parable, or 


type, to the Jews, in taking a wife of whoredoms, 
deceits in buying and selling are but too much} 


to represent the idolatries of the house of Israel.”— 
Lowth. 
Verses 11-13. Is there iniquity in Gilead ?—Qr 
893 


© 


The sin and 


HOSEA. 


ingratitude of Judah. 


A. M.3279. yea, *their altars are as heaps in the 
BO: “farrows of the fields, 

12 And Jacob * fled into the country of Syria, 
and Israel ® served for a wife, and for a wife he 
kept sheep. 

13 * And by a prophet the Lorp brought 


s Chapter viii.11; x. 1.—t Genesis xxvili. 5; Deut. xxvi. 5. 
u Gen. xxix. 20, 28,——* Exod. xii. 50, 51; xiii, 3; Psa. Ixxvii. 
20; Isa. Ixiii. 11; Mic. vi. 4. 


| Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet A. M. 3279. 
B. C. 725. 

was he preserved. , i 
14 Y Ephraim provoked him to anger * most 
bitterly: therefore shall he leave his ° blood 
upon him, 7 and his *reproach shall his Lord 


return unto him. 


y 2 Kings xvii. 11-18.—® Hebrew with bitterness——® Heb. 
bloods, Ezek. xviii. 13 ; xxiv. 7, 8——? Dan. xi. 18.—— Deut, 
xxviii. 37. 


Was there idolatry in Gilead? as the word }1x often 
signifies. Surely they are vanity, §c., in Gilgal— 
The tribes settled about Gilead beyond Jordan, were 
already captivated by Tiglath-pileser. And God 


declares here by the prophet, that the idolatry still 


practised in Gilgal was equally abominable, and 
would bring down similar judgments upon the 
remaining tribes on the west of Jordan. Yea, 
their altars are as heaps—Notwithstanding this 
judgment of God upon Gilead, they continue to 
offer sacrifices to their idols in Gilgal; and their al- 
tars stand so thick, that they are discernible as stones 
gathered up, and laid in heaps in the fields. Some 
understand the sentence as containing a threatening 
that their altars should be demolished, and become 
so many ruinous heaps, 2 Kings xix. 25. But Jacob 
fled into the country of Syria, &e.— So opposite to 
yours was the conduct of your father Jacob, that he 
fled into Syria to avoid an alliance with any of the 
idolatrous families of Canaan ; and, in firm reliance 
on God’s promises, submitted to the greatest hard- 
ships.” 
reward of his faith, God did such great things for 
his posterity, bringing them out of the land of Egypt, 


And therefore by a prophet, &c.— And, in | 


and Jeading them through the wilderness like sheep 
by the hand of his servant Moses.”’—Horsley. 

Verse 14. Ephraim provoked him to anger, &c.— 
Notwithstanding all God’s favours showed to these 
| people and their ancestors, they provoked him by 
their idolatries and other sins in a most outrageous 
manner. The word (7h, translated,.most bit- 
| terly, some render, with his bitterness; that is, by 
his wicked or impious deeds; and Schindler ren- 
ders it, by his heaps, that is, his altars. T'herefore 
shall he have his blood wpon him—The Chaldee 
paraphrase renders it, His blood shall return wpon 
him. Ephraim’s wickedness, and in particular the 
innocent blood he has shed, shall bring down pun- 
ishment or destruction upon him, And his reproach 
shall his Lord return unto him—The reproach 
which Ephraim hath cast upon the prophets, upon 
the worshippers of God, and on God himself, in pre- 
ferring idols before him, shall God, who is Lord of 
all, recompense upon him, in making him a reproach 
and by-word among the heathen. Instead of his 
Lord, Bp. Horsley reads, his Master, that is, says he, 
“his conqueror, who shall hold him in servitude, and 
be the instrument of God’s just vengeance to him.” 


CHAPTER XIII. 
In this chapter, (1,) The people of Israel are reproved and threatened for their idolatry, 1-4. (2,) For their wantonness, 


pride, luxury, and other abuses of their wealth and prosperity, 5-8. 
and all their other sins, is foretold as very terrible, 12, 13, 


(3,) The ruin that is coming upon them for these, 


15, 16. (4,) Those among them who yet retained a respect 


for their God are encouraged to hope that he would yet appear for their relief, though their kings and princes, and all their 


other supports and succours, failed them, 9-11, 14. 


ie My tan. W HEN Ephraim spake trembling, 
<a he exalted himself in Israel ; 


but * when he offended in Baal, he A. M. 3279. 
died. B. C. 725. 


a2 Kings xvii. 16, 18; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIII. 

Verse 1. When Ephraim spake trembling, he 
exalted himself—While he behaved himself submis- 
sively and obediently, and humbled himself before 
God, he was reckoned among the principal tribes of 
Israel. Here Ephraim is spoken of as distinct from 
the other tribes: in other places of this prophecy 
he is put for the whole kingdom of the ten tribes. 
But when he offended in Baal, he died—When he 

894 ¢ 


Chapter xi. 2. 


~¢ 


gave himself to idolatry, his strength immediately 
declined, and had manifest symptoms of ruin and 
destruction. Bishop Horsley’s version of the verse 
is, When Ephraim spake there was dread: he was 
exalted in Israel. But he offended in Baal and 
died—* The former part of the verse describes the 
consequence and pre-eminence of Ephraim in his 
own country, and among the neighbouring nations ; 
| the latter part, his diminution and loss of onegeruanee 


The ten tribes ave reminded of 


CHAPTER XIII. 


mercies which they have abused. 


eg 2 And now 'they sin more and 
iit more, and » have made them molten 
images of their silver, and idols according to 
their own understanding, all of it the work of 
the crafismen: they say of them, Let ? the 
men that sacrifice * kiss the calves. 

3 Therefore they shall be “as the morning 
cloud, and as the early dew that passeth away, 
® as the chaff ¢haé is driven with the whirlwind 
out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the 
chimney. 

4 4 Yet ‘I am the Lorn thy God from the 
land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no god 


A. N 
B.C 


but me: for 
besides: me. prea ue 
5 » I did know thee in the wilderness, iin the . 
land of * great drought. 
6 * According to their pasture, so were they 
filled ; they were filled, and their heart was ex- 
alted: therefore | have they forgotten me. 
7 Therefore ™ I will be unto them as a lion : 
as "a leopard by the way will I observe them. 
8 I will meet them °as a bear that is be- 
reaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul 
of their heart, and there will I devour them like 
a lion: * the wild beast shall tear them. 


Sthere is no saviour A. M. 3279. 
B.C. 725. 


_— 


1 Hebrew, they add to sin. & Chap, ii. 8; viii. 4. ? Or, 
the sacrifices of men. ¢ 1 Kings xix. 18—4 Chapter vi. 4. 
€ Dan. ii. 35. flsa. xliii, 11; Chap. xii. 9—# Isa. xliii. 11; 
xiv. 21. h Deut. ii. 7; xxxii. 10. 


by his idolatry.” The word Baal is here taken in 
a general sense for all false gods or idolatrous ways 
of worship, so as to comprehend the worship of the 
golden calves, though they were designed for sym- 
bolical representations of the true God. 

Verse 2. And now they sin more and more—They 
did not content themselves with worshipping the 
golden calves only, which they made to be symbols 
of Jehovah the true God, but made themselves 
images of various idols after the manner of the hea- 
then nations; which were nothing more than merely 
pieces of handicraft work. They at first worshipped 
Jehovah under the images of the golden calves, but 
at last they came to worship the mere images them- 
selves. Thus do men sink deeper and deeper into 
vice, folly, and ignorance, whenever they depart 
from the right way! Instead of, according to their 
own understanding, Bishop Horsley reads, In their 
great wisdom they made themselves images, &c., 
considering the words as spoken ironically. They 


say of them—Of the idols; Let the men that sacri- | 
fice, kiss the calves—Let all that bring their offer- | 


ings to these idols worship and adore, and show 
they do so by kissing the calves. Among the an- 
cient idolaters, to kiss the idol was an act of the most 
solemn adoration. Thus we read, 1 Kings xix. 18, 
of all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and 
every mouth which hath not kissed him. And so Job 
describes the adoration which the idolaters of his 
time paid to the heavenly bodies, chap. xxxi. 27. 
Tully mentions a brazen statue of Hercules at Agri- 
gentum, in which the workmanship of the mouth 


was sensibly worn by the frequent kisses of the | 


worshippers. And, in allusion to this rite, the holy 
psalmist, calling upon the apostate faction to avert 
the wrath of the incarnate God, by a full acknow- 
ledgment of his divinity, bids them kiss the Son, 
that is, worship him. 

Verses 3-5. T'herefore they shall be as the morn- 
ing cloud, &c.—All the comparisons in this verse 
are intended to express a quick destruction, or that 
they should soon come to nothing. Y et Tam the 
Lord thy God, &c.—Notwithstanding thy recourse 

3 


i Deut. viii. 15; xxxii. 10. 3 Heb, droughts. k Deut. viii. 
12, 14; xxxii. 15. 1 Chap. viii. 14. ™ Lam. iii. 10; Chap. 
v. 14, n Jeremiah v. 6.——®° 2 Sam. xvii. 8; Prov. xvii. 12. 
4 Heb. the beast of the field. 


to idols, I am the Lord thy God, who delivered thee 
out of the bondage of Egypt. And thow shalt 
know—That is, thou oughtest to acknowledge; no 
god but me—For thou hast never yet proved, and 
thou never wilt prove by experience, the power and 
protection of any other. Those whom thou callest 
thy gods will be able to do nothing for thee; for 
there is no saviour besides me—No one who can dee 
liver, or preserve thee from evil as I have done. I 
did know thee in the wilderness, &c.—That is, I 
acknowledged thee as my peculiar people, by my 
watchful care of thee. I was attentive to thee, pro- 
tecting thee in all dangers, and supplying all thy 
wants. 

Verses 6-8. According to their pasture, &c.—As 
I was their shepherd, and provided pasture for them, 
so they were fully fed; they had an abundant plenty 
of all things. And their heart was exalted—The 
consequence of their having this plenty was, that 
from thence they grew proud and high-minded. 
Therefore they have forgotten me—They so abused 
my kindness to them, as to make it the occasion of 
their ingratitude; “for in the pride of their heait, 
which the miraculous supply of their wants for so 
long a time produced in them, they forgot their bene- 
factor.” Therefore I will be unto them as a lion— 
That suddenly seizes upon and tears his prey: that 
is, I will utterly consume them from being a nation, 
and give them up into the hands of such enemies as 
will show them no mercy; asa leopard by the way 
—That lies in wait by the way; will I observe them 
—Watch for them, that I may be sure to take them, 
or watch all opportunities to destroy them. J will 
meet them as a bear, &c.—In the greatest fury ima- 
ginable; bereaved of her whelps—A circumstance 
which adds a particular degree of fierceness. “'They 
never.venture to fire upon a young bear when the 
mother is near: for if the cub drop, she becomes 
enraged to a degree little short of madness; and if 
she get a sight of the enemy, will only quit her 
revenge with her life.”—Cook’s Voyage, vol. iii. page 
307. And will rend the caul of their heart—The 
seat of the blood, with which wild beasts love to glut 

895 


Threatenings 


HOSEA. 


and promises. 


A. M, 3279. 


9 7 O Israel, ? thou hast destroyed 
B.C. 725. 


thyself; 4 but in me ° és thy help. 

10 °1 will be thy king: * where is any other 
that may save thee in all thy cities? and thy 
judges, of whom ‘thou saidst, Give me a king 
and princes ? 


11 ‘I gave thee a king in mine AeM, 9279. 
anger, and took him away in my ———— 
wrath. 

12 " The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up ; 
his sin zs hid. 

13 * The sorrows of a travailing woman shall 


P Proverbs vi. 32; Chap. xiv. 1; Malachi i. 9.——4 Verse 4. 
5 Heb. in thy help. § Rather, Where is thy king ? King Hoshea 
being then in prison, 2 Kings xvii. 4. 


themselves. J'he wild beast shall tear them—The 
Assyrian shall prove as a wild beast to them. The 
word Dypan, here used, signifies, shall cleave them, 
or rip them. Bishop Horsley renders it, shall tear 
them limb from limb; observing, “'The verb expresses 
a violent distraction and severing of united parts in 
any manner; and is to be differently rendered with 
regard to the particular agent and patient. When 
the agent is a wild beast, and the patient the beast’s 
prey, it must be tearing limb from limb: tearing, 
by itself, is inadequate.” 

Verse 9. O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself— 
Thy sins have brought down destruction upon thee, 
and it is from me only thou canst expect any help, 
which I will in due time afford thee. The Hebrew 
of this verse is capable of different versions. That 
of the Vulgate, Destruction is thy own, O Israel: 
only in me is thy help, seems one of the most literal ; 
unless, taking ]>nw for a verb, we prefer rendering 
the first clause, It has destroyed thee, O Israel ; 
that is, all that sin and folly of thine, with which 
thou hast been before charged. As thy own wicked- 
ness has many a time corrected thee, so it has now 
at length destroyed thee. Observe, reader, wilful 
sinners are self-destroyers; obstinate impenitence 
is the grossest self-murder. Those that are destroy- 
ed of the destroyer, have their blood upon their own 
heads: they have destroyed themselves. Observe, 
also, that the case of such is not yet desperate: God 
will be their help if they will make application to 
him. This is a plank thrown out after shipwreck ; 
and greatly magnifies not only the power of God, 
that he can help when things are at the worst, can 
help those that cannot help themselves; but the 
riches of his grace, that he will help those who have 
destroyed themselves, and therefore might justly be 
left to perish, and even those that had long refused 
his help. Dr. Pocock reads this verse, O Israel, 
this has destroyed thee, that in me is thy help. 
And R. Tanchum interprets it to the same effect. 
They understand the sentiment to be, “that the 
cause of the destruction of Israel was, his presum- 
ing upon God’s readiness to help him. They har- 
dened themselves in their corrupt practices, in the 
confidence that God would never give them up; 
that, notwithstanding the severity of his threaten- 
ings, he would interpose, as upon so many occasions 
he before had done, to rescue them from their ene- 
mies when things came to an extremity. The pas- 
sage, thus understood is a cool reflection upon the 
fatal effects of God’s kindness upon the perverse 
minds of the Israelites.’—Horsley. 

896 


| 


r Deut. xxxii. 38; Chap. x.3; Verse 4.——* ] Sam. viii. 5, 
19. t1 Sam. viii. 7; x. 195; xv. 22,23; xvi.1; Chap, x. 3. 
«Deut. xxxii. 34; Job xiv. 17. x Isa, xili. 8; Jer. xxx. 6. 


Ver. 10, 11. I will be thy king—I would have been 
thy king to save and govern thee, but thou refusedst 
me in both respects: yet I will be thy king to judge 
me and punish thee. The LXX. and all the ancient 
versions interpret the clause differently, and give 
the interrogative, Where? Where is thy king now, 
that he may serve thee? They seem to have taken 
the word ‘nx, J will be, for 7s, where, by a trans- 
position of letters, as the same word is used again, 
verse 14. Bishop Horsley understands the words 
in the same sense, and reads, Where is thy king ? 
Where now is he? To save thee forsooth in all thy 
cities—and thy judges?—“ This vehement, re- 
doubled interrogation,” says he, “seems to suppose 


||a denial, on the part of the Israelites, of the help- 
less, ruined state, asserted in the former verse, as 


the consequence of God’s withdrawing his protec- 
tion. Do you deny this? Do you pretend that you 
have still means of defence, hope of deliverance? 
You rely upon the policy or prowess of your 


/monarch. Where is he, this wise and mighty king ? 
Tell me in what quarter? Your judges, your pro- 


vincial rulers, where are they? Let us see what 
deliverance this king and these rulers can effect.” 
The words seem to be spoken with a reference to 
the Israelites desiring a king to be set over them, 
instead of continuing under the theocracy, or the 
immediate government of God, who raised them up 
from time to time, as he saw most fit for them, de- 
fenders and protectors, and endued them with ex- 
traordinary abilities for the purpose. But the Israel- 
ites foolishly thought they should thrive better under 
a kingly government, such as the rest of the nations 
around them were under, which is expressed in the 
latter part of this verse, Of whom thou saidst, Give 
me a king and princes—That is, a king and such 
principal officers as he shall appoint. This is what 
is meant by the word judges in this verse. J gave 
thee a king in mine anger—Being angry at your 
sins and ‘provocations, I gave you a king at first, and 
have since suffered you, by seditions and conspira- 
cies, to change your kings according as you pleased, 
whereby your state hath received more and more 
damage, and now I will take away your present 
king by the hand of the Assyrians. 

Verses 12,13. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound 
up—This verse may be better rendered, The ini- 
quity of Ephraim is treasured up, his sin is laid 
up—That is, laid up in my memory, as that which 
ought to be punished at a proper time. The sen- 
tence is manifestly equivalent to that expression in 
Job xiv. 17, My transgression is sealed up in a bag ; 

~ 3 


A glorious promise of the 


CHAPTER XIII. 


general resurrection. 


A.M. 3279. come upon “him: he is ¥ an unwise 

“son; for he should not *stay 7 long 
in ¢he place of the breaking forth of children. 

14 *I will ransom them from * the power of 
the grave; I will redeem them from death : 
>O death, I will be thy plagues, O grave, I will 
be thy destruction : ° repentance shall be hid 
from mine eyes. 

15 4% Though ¢he' be fruitful among his bre- 
thren, °an east wind shall come, the wind of 


the Lorp shall come up from the A, M. 3279. 
wilderness, and his spring shall be- Bad Sees 
come dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: 
he shall spoil the treasure of all ° pleasant 
vessels. 

16 * Samaria shall become desolate ; ‘for she 
hath rebelled against her God : * they shall fall 
by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in 
pieces, and their women with child shall be 


ripped up. 


¥ Prov. xxii. 3——* 2 Kings xix. 3. 7 Heb. a time.—— Isa. 
xxv. 8; Ezek. xxxvii. 12. 8 Heb. the hand. b1 Cor. xv. 
54, 55.—¢ Jeremiah xv. 6; Romans xi. 29.4 Genesis xli. 
52; xviii. 19. 


e Jeremiah iv. 11; Ezekiel xvii. 10; xix. 12; Chapter iv. 19. 
® Heb. vessels of desire, Nahum ii. 9:—* Fulfilled about B.C. 
721; 2Kings xvii. 6. £2 Kings xviii. 12.—£2 Kings viii. 12; 
xv, 16; Isa. xiii. 16; Chap. x. 14,15; Amos i. 13; Nah. iii. 10, 


that is, thou keepest an exact account of it, as men 
do of money which they seal up in a bag, to be forth- 
coming on a proper occasion. To the same purpose 
are those words, Deut. xxxii. 34, Js not this laid up 
in store for me, and: sealed among my treasures ? 
To me belongs vengeance, &c. The sorrows of a 
travailing woman—Grievous sorrows, or pains, 
shall come upon him—Great calamities are often 
compared to the pains of child-bearing. He is an 
unwise son: for he should not—Or rather, else he 
acould not, stay long, &c.—As a child, if it could be 
supposed to have understanding, would deliver itself 
out of the womb, and not tarry there to the manifest 
danger of itself and the mother; so if Ephraim or 
Israel had acted wisely, they would have prevented 
their approaching destruction by a speedy reforma- 
tion. Horsley’s version is, He is of the thoughtless 
race, for it is the critical moment, when he ought 
not to stand still; the children are in the aper- 
ture: Hebrew, in the breach. “They are actually 
passing through the opening of the parts distended 
by the throes of labour. It is the very moment 
when the pains must terminate in the delivery or 
the death of the woman. A proverbial expression, 
for a crisis of extreme danger and doubtful catas- 
trophe: see Isa. xxxvii. 3. At such a moment as 
this, thoughtless Ephraim is supine and uncon- 
cerned,” 

Verse 14. I will ransom them from the power of 
the grave—If we apply this promise to Ephraim, or 
the Israelites spoken of before, it may signify, that 
though they should be in never so desperate a con- 
dition, God would in due time deliver them out of 
it: see the like expressions, Psa. xxx. 3, and Ixxi. 
20, and Ixxxvi. 13. But there isa more sublime and 
spiritual sense contained in the words, as appears 
by the following clause. O death, I will be thy 
plagues—It is usual for the prophets, when they 
foretel temporal deliverances, to be carried away 
by the influence of the prophetic spirit, to predict 
the greater mercies and deliverances which belong to 
the gospel state: so here the prophet takes occa- 
sion, from foretelling temporal mercies, to enlarge his 
views, and set forth that great and final deliverance 
of the faithful from the power of sin and death, which 
shall be completed by Christ, when he shall swallow 

Vou. IIL. ( 57 


up death in victory, 1 Cor. xv.54. ThatSt. Paul un- 
derstood the words in this sense appears from the 
next verse of the same chapter, O death, where is 
thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? which 
is almost an exact quotation of the Septuagint trans- 
lation of this passage of the prophet. For the word 
‘8, which we translate, J will be, is rendered by 
them, where, as it also signifies, verse 10th of this 
chapter, ‘The apostle, indeed, seems to have quoted 
the text from his memory, and therefore rather gives 
the sense than keeps exactly close to the letter of it. 
Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes—I will 
never alter my purpose concerning these mercies 
prepared for my people. 

Verse 15. Though he be fruitful among his 
brethren—The name Ephraim denotes fruitfulness, 
and this tribe answered its name, being the most 
numerous of all-the ten tribes. An east wind shall 
come—The east wind was often pestilent and de- 
structive in Judea and the countries about it; there- 
fore this expressed that destruction was coming 
upon Ephraim and likewise pointed out the quarter 
from whence it was to come, namely, from Assyria, 
which lay eastward of Judea. It is called the wind 
of the Lord, in the next words, because the destruc- 
tion which the king of Assyria was to make of 
Ephraim was to be brought about by the divine will 
and providence. It is said to come up from the wil- 
derness, because the way of the Assyrian army to 
Samaria lay through the desert part of Syria. His 
spring shall become dry, &c. 'The Assyrian king 
being spoken of as an east wind, which in those 
countries is very hot and drying; therefore the de- 
struction, or desolation he was to make, is described 
by drying up the springs and fountains. He shall 
spoil the treasure—The same enemy shall plunder 
all their treasures and take away their rich and costly 
furniture, as the word ‘52 is translated, Nah. ii. 9. 

Verse 16. Samaria shall become desolate, for she 
hath rebelled, &c.—The prophet foretels the final 
destruction of Samaria, for her idolatry and other 
impieties, by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria. T'heir 
infants shall be dashed in pieces, &c.—These were 
the barbarous practices of conquerors when they 
took cities by storm, or put all to the sword without 
distinction of age or sex: see the margin. 

897 3 


God will heav 


HOSEA. 


Tsrael’s backsliding. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


~ 


In this chapter we have, (1,) Directions how to repent, 1-3. (2,) Encouragements to repent, 4-9. 


A. M, 3279. 
B.C 


ae ISRAEL, ? return unto the Lorp 
« 140. 


thy God; » for thou hast fallen 
by thine iniquity. 

2 Take with you words, and turn to the 
Lorp: say unto him, Take away all ini- 
quity, and receive us graciously: so will 


we render the °calyes of our lips, 4; M. 3279. 

3 * Asshur shall not save us; °we -———— 
will not ride upon horses: £ neither will we say 
any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our 
gods: £ for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy, 


4 {| IL will heal » their backsliding, I will love 


a Chapter xii. 6; Joel ii. 13——» Chapter xiii. 9——"* Or, 
give good. © Heb. xiil. 15. 4 Jeremiah xxxi. 18; Chap. v. 
Hs xii: 1, 


e Deut. xvii. 16; Psa. xxxiii. 17; Isaiah xxx. 2, 16; xxxi. 1. 
f Chap. ii. 17; Verse 8.——5 Psa. x. 14; Ixviii. 5——* Jer. v. 
6; xiv..7; Chap. xi. 7. x 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIV. 
Verses 1, 2. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God 


—0O Israel, return now at length, after thou hast suf- | 


fered so many evils, to the Lord by true repentance 
and reformation of conduct. The whole family of 
Israel, in both its branches, seems to be here ad- 
dressed. For thou hast fallen—From God’s love 
and favour into his displeasure, and consequently 
into misery, by thine iniquity—Which has involved 
thee in endless troubles, and will be the cause of thy 
destruction. 
confessions, present your petitions, ‘and signify your 
promises and resolutions unto God, not only in your 


thoughts, but also by words well chosen and digest-| 
ed; sanctioned by the Holy Scriptures, and agree-| 
able to the willof God. The prophet here prescribes | 


a form of confession, petition, and supplication very 
proper to be used upon their repentance and conver- 
sion. It implies in substance, Confess your sins, en- 
treat for pardon, and promise amendment. And 


turn to the Lord—In heart and life, in faith, love, | 


and new obedience, otherwise your confessions and 
prayers will be to little purpose. Say, T'ake away 
all iniquity, &c.—Deliver us from the guilt and 
power of our sins, internal and external; take en- 
tirely away the sinful principle within us, the carnal 
heart of the old Adam. Create in me aclean heart, 
O God, and renew a right spirit within me; and 
receive us graciously—Accept our persons and per- 
formances of thy mere grace and favour, thy un- 
merited mercy and love. But this clause may be 
rendered, Give us what is good; that is, be- 
stow thy grace and blessing upon us: or, accept the 
good ; that is, when we are begotten again unto holi- 
ness by thy Spirit, accept, as good, what we, thus re- 
generated, shad be enabled to perform. So will we 
render the calves of owr lips—That is, the sacrifices 
of praise and thanksgiving uttered by our lips. By 
calling vocal devotions calves, (or bullocks, as Bishop 
Horsley renders the word (33,) “is shown, that 
this form of supplication is prepared for those times, 
when animal sacrifices will be abolished, and prayer 
and thanksgiving will be the only offering.” 

Verse 3. Asshur shall not save us—We will not 
rely on Assyria for protection and help. The Israel- 
ites frequently sought-the alliance of the Assyrians, 
and are often reproved by the prophets for so doing. 
We will not ride upon horses—We will not implore 
the help of Egypt, as we did formerly, nor depend 

898 


Take with you words—Make your | 


} 


on horses brought thence, or on any of our military 
preparations. It was chiefly on account of their 
cavalry that the Jews and Israelites courted the help 
of Egypt, having no cavalry of their own. This is 
the first part of the people’s repentance. It consists 
in their renouncing all dependance on foreign alli- 
ances, and on every arm of flesh.¢ The second is, 
their renouncing every species of idolatry and 
image-worship, expressed in the nextelause, Neither 
will we say, &c., to the work of our hands, Ye are 
our gods—This is often spoken of in the prophets, 
as an introduction to that state of the church which 
is to commence from the time of the conversion of 
the Jews: see notes on chap. ii. 17; and Jsa. i. 29. 
For in thee the fatherless findeth mercy—Thou art 
the helper of the weak and friendless; of us, who 
are unable to help ourselves, and are exposed to the 
injuries of others, having none to defend us. Observe, 
reader, God never fails to be the helper of all that 


are destitute of strength in themselves, and destitute 


of help from others: and who, being sensible of their 
helpless condition, look for it from God, who hath 
sufficient power, mercy, and wisdom to help. 

Verse 4, I will heal their backsliding—1 will de- 
liver them from a backsliding heart and way, and 
remove those judgments they have brought upon 


| themselves thereby. The Lord says, J will heal, 


&c., a usual metaphor in Scripture, because sin is 
our disease, and God is the physician who healeth 
us, Psa. ciii. 3; Jer. iii. 22; and he doth it through 
Christ, in whom this promise is made to returning 
backsliders. God makes this promise to the Israelites 
by his prophet, to encourage them to hearken to his 
advice, given in the preceding verses. J will love 
them freely—That is, of my own mere grace, and 
favour, and liberality. Bishop Horsley renders this 
verse, I will restore their conversion ; (that is, as he 
understands it, their converted race, taking conver- 
sion as a collective noun for converts ; like captivity 
for the captives ; and dispersion for the dispersed ;) 
I will love them gratuitously; for mine anger is 
departed from me. In these words, God promises, 
he says, to restore the converted nation [of the 
Israelites] to his favour, and a situation of prosperity 
and splendour. On the word gratuitously he quotes 
the following passage from Luther’s commentary on © 
this chapter: “Are good works then nothing? you — 
will say. Is there no place at all for them in the — 
doctrine of repentance? I answer, that othe ~ 


( 57 ) 


Encouragements 


CHAPTER XIV. 


to repentance, 


A. 
ee ee od away from him. 

5 I will be as * the dew unto Israel: he shall 
2 grow as the lily, and ‘cast forth his roots as 
Lebanon. 


6 His branches ¢ shall spread, aind his beauty 


M, 3279. them ' freely: for mine anger is turn-||shall be as the olive-tree, and ™his AnH, 3270 


smell as Lebanon. eae 

7 »'They that dwell under his shadow shall 
return; they shall revive. as the corn, and 
° grow as the vine: the ° scent thereof shall be | 
as the wine of Lebanon. 


* Eph. i. 6——* Job xxix. 19; Prov. xix. 12. 
* Heb. strike.——* Heb. shall go. 


2 Or, blossom. 


discourse hath been about remission of sins, and the 
- gift of the Holy Ghost. These are entirely gratui- 
tous, and not of our merit, but simply of the inex- 
haustible goodness and compassion of God. There- 
fore, when we speak of the remission of sins, it is 
right to be silent about our own works; which, be- 
cause they are done without the Holy Spirit, al- 
though with regard to civil society they may not be 
bad, yet cannot be called good, and ought not, be- 
cause of the unclean heart from which they pro- 
ceed. But when through faith we have received 
remission of sins, and, together with that, the gift 
of the Holy Ghost, forthwith from the heart, as 
from a pure fountain, come forth works also good, 
and well-pleasing to God. For although, by reason 
of the remains of original sin, the obedience even 
of the saints is not perfectly pure, yet, on account 
of faith in Christ, it is pleasing and acceptable to 
God.” 
Verses 5, 6. I will be as the dew unto Israel— 
These verses contain gracious promises of God’s fa- 
your, and of blessings upon Israel’s conversion, 
represented by different metaphors. These are first 
described by that refreshment which copious dews 
give to the grass in the heat of summer. And if we 
consider the nature of the climate, and the necessity 
of dews in so hot a country, not only to refresh, but 


» 


likewise to preserve life; if we consider also the 


beauty of the oriental lilies, the fragrance of the 
cedars which grow upon Lebanon, the beauteous ap- 
pearance which the spreading olive-trees afforded, 


the exhilarating coolness caused by the shade of such | 


trees, and the aromatic smell exhaled by the cedars; 
we shall then partly understand the force of the 
metaphors here employed by the prophet; but their 
full energy no one can conceive, till he feels both 
the want, and enjoys the advantage of the particulars 
referred to, in that climate where the prophet wrote. 
See Bishop Lowth’s xiithand xixth Prelection. Mr. 
Harmer’s illustration of this passage will be accepta- 
ble to the reader. “The image in general,” says he, 
“made use of here by Hosea, is the change that 
takes place upon the descent of the dew of autumn 
on the before parched earth, where every thing ap- 
ake dead or dying; upon which they imme- 
tely become lively and delightful. Israel, by 
their sins, reduced themselves into a wretched, dis- 
graceful state, like that of the earth, when no rain 
_or dew has descended for a long time; but God 
promised he would heal their backslidings, and 
restore them to a flourishing state. ‘The gentleman 
that visited the holy land in autumn 1774, found the 
dews very copious then, as well as the rain, and 


= 


| 


| 


| green oaks. 


1 Psa. lii. 8; exxviii. 3, m Gen, xxvii. 27; Canticles iv. 1]. 
n Psa. xci. 1. ——® Or, blossom. § Or, memorial. 


particularly observed, in journeying from Jerusalem, 
avery grateful scent arising from the aromatic herbs 
growing there, such as rosemary, wild thyme, balm, 
&e. If the fragrant. herbs between Jerusalem and 
Joppa afforded such a grateful smell, as to engage 
this ingenious traveller to remark it in his journal, 
the scent of Lebanon must have been exquisite ; for 
Mr. Maundrell found the great rupture in that moun- 
tain, in which Canobin is situated, had ‘both sides 
exceeding steep and high, clothed with fragrant 
green from top to bottom, and everywhere refreshed 
with fountains, falling down from the rocks, in 
pleasant cascades; the ingenious work of nature.’” 
This sufficiently illustrates the clause, His smell, 
that is, his fragrance, shall be like that of Lebanon. 
To illustrate the clause, He shall grow as the lily, 
and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, Mr. Harmer 
quotes a passage from Dr. Russell’s account of the 
natural history of Aleppo, vol. i. c. 3: ‘After the 
first rains in the autumn, the fields everywhere 
throw out the autumnal lily daffodil; and the few 
plants which had stood the summer now grow with 
fresh vigour.” ‘The other trees of Lebanon, as well 
as the cedars, are admired by travellers on account 
of their enormous size. So de la Roque, describing 
his ascending this mountain, says, the farther they 
advanced, the loftier were the trees, which, for the 
most part, were plane-trees, cypresses, and ever- 
And Rauwolff, after mentioning several 
kinds of trees and herbs which he found there, goes 
on; But chiefly, and in the greatest number, were 
the maple-trees, which are large, high, and expand 
themselves very much with their branches: but, 
above all, the size of the cedar attracts admiration. 
“T measured,” says Maundrell, “ one of the largest, 
and found it twelve yards six inches in girt, and yet 
sound; and thirty-seven yards in the spread of its 
boughs. At about five or six yards from the ground it 
was divided into five limbs, each of which was equal 
to a great tree.’ The beauty of the olive-tree 
is frequently mentioned in Scripture, and has come 
under our observation before: see note on Psa, 
CXXViii. 3. 

Verse 7. They that dwell under his shadow shall 
return—“ Not only was Israel to regain its former 
prosperity, but those smaller tribes of people that 
were connected with Israel, and shared in its de- 
pression, which are here described by dwelling 
under his shadow.” But many versions translate 
this clause, They shall return and dwell under his 
shadow. That is, they shall return to their own 
country, and rest safely under the protection of the 
Almighty. They shall revive as the corn—They 

899 


Gracious promises 


HOSEA. 


to Ephraim. 


. M. 3279. 
Cc. 


A 8 Ephraim shall say, ° What have 
B.C. 725. 


I to do any more with idols? PI 
have heard him, and observed him: FI am 
like a green fir-tree. 4 From me is thy fruit 
found. 


9 * Who is wise, and he shall un- 
derstand these ¢iings ? prudent, and 
he shall know theta? for ‘the ways of the 
Lorn are right, and the just shall walk in 
them: but the transgressors shall fall therein. 


A.M. At 
sel Aas 


® Verse 3.——>? Jer. xxxi. 18.——4 James i, 17.——" Psa. evii. 
43; Jer. ix. 12; Dan. xii. 10; John viii. 47; xvii. 37, 


8 Proverbs x. 29; Luke ii. 34; 2 Corinthians ii. 16; 1 Peter 
i. 7, 8, 


shall arise out of their calamities: this is properly 
expressed by reviving as the corn, because the corn 
is buried, and lies as it were dead in the earth, till, 
after some time, it springs forth. And grow as the 
vine—Which in winter seems dead, but yet has life, 
sap, and a fructifying virtue in it. The reference 
here is to a vine that had been stripped of its leaves, 
and afterward flourishes again, recovering its lost 
verdure. A lively emblem this of the Jewish nation, 
arising from a state of great depression and affliction, 
and recovering its former prosperity and dignity. 
And a still more lively image of the revival and in= 
crease of true religion in the church of God, and of 
the graces and virtues of its members after a time of 
barrenness and unprofitableness. T'he scent thereof 
shall be as the vine of Lebanon—Their wisdom, 
holiness, and usefulness, their piety and virtue, 
shall diffuse an agreeable fragrance far and wide, 
and shall be acceptable both to God and man. Mr. 
Harmer produces several testimonies in proof of the 
excellence of the wine of Lebanon above all the 
wines of that part of the world: and indeed above 
those which have been most celebrated elsewhere. 
Verse 8. Ephraim shall say, &e.—The words, shall 
say, are not in the Hebrew. The clause is there- 
fore translated thus by Bishop Horsley, Ephraim ! 
What have Ito do any more with idols, “ an exulta- 
tion,” says he, “of Jehovah over idols. Ephraim! 
even he is returned to me. I have no more contest 
to carry on with idols. They are completely over- 
thrown. My sole Godhead is confessed.” J have 
heard him, and observed him—It is I, not his idols, 
who have heard his petitions and watched over him 
to preserve him. JI am like a green fir-tree—If 
these be understood as the words of God, the mean- 
ing is, It is I, who am ever-existing, and have it in 
my power to give my people blessings at all times; 
as the fir is ever green and flourishing, and affords 
its shelter, not only in the summer, but in the winter 
too, when all the rest of the trees are stripped of their 
leaves and can afford no shelter at all. In other 
words, As a weary traveller finds rest and safety 
under a green, thick, and flourishing tree, so there 
are safety and refreshment under the protection of 
Jehovah. But some understand these as the words 
of Ephraim, or Israel, acknowledging that he is ina 
flourishing condition; and then God reminds him in 
the next words, that his fruitfulness and prosperity 
are wholly owing to the divine blessing. Thus the 
church of God, and all the members thereof, how 
much soever they may abound in the fruits of 
righteousness, and in the comforts connected there- 
with, must confess, that from Christ the true and 
900 ° 


living vine is their fruit found ; and they must not 
fail to give him the glory thereof, remembering, that 
without him they can do nothing excellent or praise- 
worthy; nothing that will ultimately promote the 
glory of God, or their own salvation. 

Verse 9. Who is wise, &c.—That is, who is so truly 
wise as duly to weigh and consider the important 
things contained in this prophecy, the duties pre- 
scribed, the blessings promised to the obedient, and 
the judgments threatened to the disobedient? The 
prophet’s words imply, that there were but few that 
were endued with such spiritual wisdom and under- 
standing as to do so; but that those who were, would 
seriously consider and be affected by these things. 
He shall understand—he shall know them—Those 
that set themselves to understand and know these 
things, thereby make it appear that they are truly ~ 
wise and prudent, and will thereby be made more 
so; and ‘that many do not understand and know 
them, is because they are inconsiderate and unwise. 
Those that are wise in the doing of their duty, that 
are prudent in practical religion, are most likely to 
know and understand both the truths and provi- 
dences of God, which are a mystery to others. The 
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. For 
the ways of the Lord are right—“ The ways of the 
Lord are both the ways which he himself takes in 
his moral government of the world, and the ways 
of godliness which he prescribes to man. These, 
taken together, are the ways of the Lord, and they 
are right, or straight,” (as Sw" may be properly 
rendered,) “because they go straight forward, with- 
out deviation, to the end,—the happiness of man, 
and the glory of God.” And the just shall walk 
therein—The truly righteous will conform to the 
will of God, both in his precepts and in his provi- 
dences, and shall have the comfort of so doing. 
They shall well understand the mind of God, both 
in his word and in his works, shall be well reconciled 
to both, and shall accommodate themselves to God’s: 
intentionin both. The righteous shall walk in those 
ways toward their great end, and shall not come 
short of it. Bishop Horsley renders this clause, 
And in them shall the justified proceed, but revolters 
shall stumble. “Tn the ways of God,” says he, “as 
they have been described, the justified, these who 
by faith in Christ have obtained remission of their 
sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost, shall proceed; 
they will be making daily and hourly approaches to 
their journey’s end. They shall be able to advance 
continually in the understanding of the ways of 
Providence, and of the way laid out by Jehovah for 
them, But to the incorrigible enemies of God, the 

3 


Conclusion of 


CHAPTER XIV. 


the book of Hosea 


very scheme of mercy itself will be a cause of 
error, confusion, and ruin.” Thus also Mr. Lowth: 
“They who are sincerely desirous to know and do 
the will of God, will be fully satisfied of the reason- 
ableness of his laws, and the methods of his provi- 
dence, and will readily comply with the directions 
of both, to the securing of their own eternal happi- 
ness; Whereas men of perverse and disobedient 
tempers take offence at God’s commands, and repine 
against his providence, to their own ruin and perdi- 
tion. The same sense is expressed in that observa- 
tion of the son of Sirach, Ecclus. xxxix. 24, As God's 
ways are plain to the holy, so they are stumbling- 


| blocks to the workers of iniquity. To the same pur- 
pose are those words of Christ, Every one that is of 
the truth heareth my voice, John xviii. 37; and, He 
that is of God heareth God’s word, chap. viii. 47. 
And St. Peter says, that Christ is become a stone 
| of stumbling and a rock of offence to the disobedient, 
|1 Pet. ii. 8. The observation of Grotius is very re- 
markable upon this subject, De Verit. Christian. 
| Relig., lib. ii.c. ult. The doctrine of the gospel was 
designed to be ‘tanquam lapis Lydius, ad quem 
‘ingenia sanabilia explorarentur, as a touchstone to 

try the tempers of men, whether they were corrigi- 
| ble or not.” 


901 


THE 


BOOK OF JOR Lam 


; ARGUMENT. 


Tuere is much uncertainty as to the exact time when Joel prophesied. Some think he was ‘cotent- 
porary with Hosea: and that as Hosea prophesied chiefly to the ten tribes, so Joel addressed chiefly 
the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin. It seems most probable, from some parts of this prophecy, 
that it was delivered in the reign of Ahaz, after the Edomites had smitten Judah, and used great 
violence ; (compare 2 Chron. xxviii. 17, and "Joel iii. 19 ;) and after the Philistines had invaded their 
cities, and slain or expelled their inhabitants, (compare 2 Chron. xxviii. 18, and Joeliii. 4,) and were 
both of them triumphing in their success: upon which account God particularly threatens them by 
this prophet. And as to the Philistines, Joel’s prediction was executed against them in Hezekiah’s 
reign, who succeeded Ahaz; it being expressly predicted of him by Isaiah, chap. xiv. 29, that he 
should dissolve and destroy them, which we find from his history he actually did. The rophecy 
consists of four parts: 1st, The prophet describes and bewails the destruction which should be 
made by locusts, and the distress ‘the country should be in through an excessive drought, ‘chap. 

iii. 12. 2dly, He calls the people to repentance, to which he encourages them with promises 
of a removal of the judgment, and of God’s taking them into his favour on their complying with 
his exhortation, chap. ii} 12-27. | 3dly, He foretels ‘the plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit, which 
should take place in the latter days, namely, in the days of the Messiah, chap. ii. 28-32. 4thly, 
He proclaims God’s judgments against the neighbouring nations, which had unjustly invaded, plun- 
dered, and carried his people into captivity : and foretels glorious things of the gospel Jerusalem, 
und of the prosperity and perpetuity of it, chap. iil. 

The style of Joel is essentially different from that of Hosea; but the genera: character of his diction, 
though of a different kind, is not less poetical. He is elegant, perspicuous, copious, and fluent ; 
he is also sublime, animated, and energetic. In the first and second chapters he displays the full 
force of the prophetic poetry, and shows how naturally it inclines to the use of metaphors, alle- 
gories, and comparisons. Nor. is the connection of the matter less cleat and evident than the 
comple xion of the style: this is exemplified in the display of the impending evils whieh gave rise 
to the prophecy ; the exhortation to repentance ; the promises of happiness and success, both ter- 
restrial and eternal, to those who become truly penitent; the restoration of the Israelites; and the 
vengeance to be taken of their adversaries. But while we allow this just: commendation to his 
perspicuity, both in language and arrangement, we must not deny that there is, sometimes great 


obscurity observable in his subject, and particularly i in the latter part of the prophecy. a Bishop 
Lowth, De Sacra Poesi Hebreorum, Prelec. xxi. 


‘ r 


CHAPTER I. : : 


In thas chapter is contained, (1,) A description of an unparalleled devastation of the country by locusts, caterpillars, 
ge 1-7. (2,) A call to drunkards and persons of all ranks, afflicted by the calamity, to consider and bewail it, 
5, 8-13, (3,) An exhortation to the people to fast and pray, and humble themselves before God, on acount of the 
famine and drought, which the very beasts of the field are represented as bewailing, 14-20 


A. M. 3262. HE i} 2 a 
Me aoe T word of the Lorn that came || inhabitants of the land. Hath this went a 


to Joel the son of Pethuel. been in your days, or even -in the ~——— 
2 Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye||days of your fathers? - 


a Chap. || ii. 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. in your days, &¢,—Give attention; ane 
Verses 1-3. Hear this, ye old men—Ye that have || have heard and considered, say wh 
seeni and remember many things. Hath ihis been || like the calamities which I am abe 


- all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new 


» earth; which makes this judgment so strange and 


i 


7 He hath £ laid my vine waste, and ? barked 


_ prophecies be handed down to distant generations, 


_ comments thus on the place: “You, who accustom 


A prediction of the ruin 


CHAPTER I. 


of the country by locusts. 


7 wes. 3 >Tell ye your children of it, and 
——— let your children ¢ell their children, 


and their children another generation. 

4 © That! which the palmer-worm hath left 
hath the locust eaten ; and that which the locust 
hath left hath the par an eaten; and that 
which the canker-worm hath left “rath the 
caterpillar eaten. 

5 Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, 


wine; ‘for it is cut off from your mouth. 

6 For °a nation is come up upon my land, 
strong, and without number, ‘ whose teeth are 
the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth 
of a great lion. : 


my fig-tree: he hath made it clean bare, and 


cast i¢ away; the branches thereof A. M. 3262. 
are made white. pee: 

8 4 Lament like a virgin girded with sack- 
cloth for ‘ the husband of her youth. 

9 * The meat-offering and the drink-offering 
is cut off from the house of the Lorp; the 
priests, the Lorn’s ministers, mourn. 

10 The field is wasted, ! the land mourneth ; 
for the corn is wasted: ™ the new wine is ° dried 
up, the oil languisheth. 

11 "Be ye ashamed, O ye husbatidmeg 
howl, O ye vine-dressers, for the wheat and fit 
the barley; because the harvest of the field is 
perished. 

12 °'The vine is dried up, and the fig-tree_ 
languisheth ; the pomegranate-tree, the palm- 
tree also, and the apple-tree, even all the trees 


b Psalm Ixxviii. 4 ——e Deuteron. xxviii. 38 ; Chapter i ii. 25. 
1 Hebrew, the residue of the palmer-worm.——4 Isaiah xxxii. 10. 
e Proverbs xxx. 25, 26, 27; Chap. ii. 2, 11, 25. Rev. ix. 8 
€ Jsaiah v. 6. 


? Hebrew, laid my fig-tree for a barking. ‘Isaiah xxii. 12. 
i Prov. ii. 17; i Jer. ii. 4. k Verse 13; Chap. ii. 14. 1 Jer. 
M11.) 02 5x30, m Tsa, xxiv. 73 Verse 12. 3 Or, ashamed. 
a Jer. xiv. 3; te © Verse 10. 


hath ever happened in your days, or in the days of 
your fathers. In this way the prophet shows how 
great and unparalleled this dearth, which he fore- 
tels, would be. Tell ye your children—Let these 


and also an account of the events; that, the events 
being compared with the prophecy, it may be seen 
how exactly they were foretold. 

“Verse4. That which the palmer-worm hath left | 
hath the locust eaten—A succession of noxious 
éreatures hath perfectly destroyed the fruits of the | 


remarkable. It is usual with the prophets to speak 
of things which were certainly about to take place, 
as already come to pass; and it is likely that te 
prophet speaks thus here; and that the sense is, That 
which the palmer-worm shall leave the locust shall | 
eat. Bochart hath assigned many probable reasons 
to show that the four Hebrew words here used sig- 
nify four species of locusts. 

Verse 5. Awake, ye drunkards—From the long 
sleep occasioned by your intoxication. Kimchi 


yourselves to get drunk with wine, awake out of 
your sleep, and weep night and day; for the wine 
shall fail you, because the locust shall devour the 
grape.” The exhortation implies, that the calamity | 
should particularly affect those who were given to| 
an excess of drinking, and that it. should touch them 
in @ tender part; the wine which they loved so well 
should be cut off from their mouths. Observe, 
reader, it is just with God to take away those com-| 
forts which are abused to luxury and excess. 

Verse 6. For a nation is come up upon my land 
_ —Thsects are deseribed as a nation or people march- 
ing in order under their leaders, both by sacred and 
profane writers, because of their power to do mis- 
chief, age their being irresistible by human strength | 


or art. Whose teeth are the teeth of a lion—They 
devour every thing that comes in their way, and 
there is no possibility of rescuing it from them. 
Pliny and other writers tell us, that they will not 
only destroy the leaves and fruits of the trees on 
which they fasten, but will even devour the very 
bark and stock thereof. 

Verse 8. Lament, &c.—The prophet here calls 
upon the inhabitants of Judea to deprecate this 
grievous judgment, by humiliation and unfeigned 
sorrow for their sins; like a virgin for the husband 
of her youth—TVhat is, bitterly, and from the very 
heart; for the grief of a woman is generally very 
poignant and sincere for the loss of her first husband, 
to whom she was married in her youth. .The ex- 
pression is still stronger, if we suppose it spoken of a 
virgin betrothed to.a man she loves, and whom she 
loses before they come together as man and wife. 

Verses 9, 10. The meat-offering and the drink- 
offering—These offerings always accompanied the 
daily sacrifice: see Num. xxviii. 4,7. The word 
here and elsewhere translated meat-offering, pro- 
perly signifies the bread-offering, which was made 
of flour. It is here foretold, that these daily sacri- 
fices could not be offered as they were wont to be, 
on account of the scarcity of corn and wine. The 
field is wasted, &c.—The fields and the whole land 
have a mournful appearance, being altogether bare, 
and destitute of fruit for the food of either man or 
beast. The oil languisheth—The olive-tree fadeth 
and produceth no fruit. 

Verses 11, 12. Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen 
—Be struck with confusion to see all your hopes dis- 
appointed, and no fruit arising from your labour; to 
find nothing of that which you had made yourselves 
sure of. Howl, O ye vine-dressers—This is to be 
referred to what is said in the next verse, and nat to 
the words immediately following, which belong to 


All conditions of men are 


JOEL. 


‘ 


exhorted to seek the Lord. 


A. M. 3262. of the field, are withered: because 
B.C. 42, 3 : : 
~ P joy is withered away from the sons 


of men. 

*3 9Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: 
howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie all 
night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: 
for the meat-offering and the drink-offering is 
withholden from the house of your God. 

14 “J * Sanctify ye a fast, call ta solemn as- 
sembly, gather the elders ard “all the inhabit- 
ants of the land into the house of the Lorp 
your God, and cry unto the Lorn. 

15 «Alas for the day! for ¥the day of the 
Lorp is at hand, and as a destruction from 
the Almighty shall it come. 

16 Is not the meat cut off before our eyes, 


yea, *joy and gladness from the ee 
house of our God ? & -hataanas 

17 The ° seed is rotten under their clods, the 
garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken 
down ; for the corn is withered. 

18 How do *the beasts groan! the herds of 
cattle are perplexed, because they have no pas- 
ture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate. 

19 O Lorp, ” to thee will I cry: for ° the fire 
hath devoured the ° pastures of the wilderness, 
and the flame hath burned all the trees of the 
field. . 

20 The beasts of the field “ery also unto 
thee: for ® the rivers of waters are dried up, 
and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the 
wilderness. 


P Isaiah xxiv. 11; Jer. xlviii. 33; Psalm iv. 7; Isaiah ix. 3. 
9 Verse 8; Jer. iv. 8. r Verse 9. 82 Chronicles xx. 3, 4; 
Chap. ii. 15, 16. t Levit. xxiii. 36. 4 Or, day of restraint. 
u 2 Chron. xx, 13. x Jer. xxx. 7. 


y Isaiah xiii. 6, 9; Chapter ii. 1. 
dd? ¥4,.153 5 Heb. grains. 
¢ Jer. ix. 10; Chap. ii. 3. 
41; Psa. civ. 21; exlv. 15. 


z Deut. xii. 6, 7; xvi. 
a Hosea iv, 3.——» Psa. 1. 15. 
6 Or, habitations ——4 Job xxxviii. 
© 1 Kings xvii. 7; xviii. 5. 


the husbandmen, as the subject for their lamentation ; 
as the vine, being dried up, was the cause of the 
sorrow of the vine-dressers. Because joy is wither- 
ed away from the sons of men—Through want of 
food and wine. Or, he refers to the joy they used 
to show at the gathering in of the fruits of the earth. 

Verse 13. Gird yourselves—Namely, with sack- 
cloth; and lament, ye priests—Because the meat- 
offerings and drink-offerings were cut off: see verse 
9. Lie all night in sackcloth—Let those priests, 
whose turn it is to keep the night-watches in the 
temple, cover themselves with sackcloth, as is usual 
in times of the greatest’ calamity ; and let them not 
put it off when they betake themselves to rest, but 
sleep in sackcloth instead of their ordinary gar- 
ments, 

Verse 14. Sanctify ye a fast, &e—In order to 
avert God’s wrath and deprecate his judgments. 
Gather the elders, §c., into the house of the Lord— 
The house where God hath placed his name, and 
where he hath promised to hear the prayers which 
are addressed to him by his people, when they are 
afflicted with judgments of this kind: see 1 Kings 
viii. 37. 

Verses 15-17. Alas for the day!—Wo to us! 
The time in which God will inflict on us the punish- 
ments we have long deserved is now near; and if 
they be not averted by our repentance, they will 
fall upon us in an irresistible manner, and will end 
in our utter destruction, as coming from a God who 
is infinite in power, and terrible in his judgments. 
Is not the meat cut off before our eyes—Hebrew, 
before your eyes, namely, devoured by locusts or 
withered with drought. Yea, joy and gladness from 
the house of our God—The dearth hath obliged us 
to discontinue our daily offerings for want of eorn 
and wine; and has deprived us of those rejoicings, 
wherewith we used to keep our solemn feasts at 


' 


Jerusalem, and partake of the saerifices there offer- 
ed. It must be remembered, that the prophet all 
along speaks of the calamity as present, although, 
most probably, as was said before, this is a prophecy 
of what was tocome. The seed is rotten under the 
clods—The corn which is sown dies away and rots 
in the ground, so that the barns and granaries be- 
come useless and desolate. 

Verse 18. How do the beasts groan!—“ How 
erievous will be the distress of the beasts of the 
field! How sadly will they complain through the 
vehemency of thirst! How will the herds of cattle 
be troubled and perplexed! For their verdant pas- 
tures shall be all scorched up, and they will have 
none wherein to feed. The flocks also shall be de- 
solate, and ready to perish.” Scaree any thing can 
be more strongly or more movingly descriptive of 
the effects of a dearth and drought than this is. 

Ver. 19, 20. O Lord, to thee will 1 ery--The pro- 
phet carries on the beautiful hypotyposis, (or de- 
scription of the calamity, painted in such strong and 
bright colours as rendered it, as it were, present be- 
fore the eyes of the people,) by representing himself 
as a sharer in the calamity. And by erying to God 
himself, he endeavours to stir up the people to ery 
tohim. For the fire hath devoured the pastures of 
the wilderness—The fiery drought hath burned up 
all the pasture-grounds, , The wilderness is some- 
times opposed to the hills and mountains, and then 
it signifies the plains and places for pasture. Or, if 
the expression be here understood of deserts, it must 
be observed, that there were spots in them where 
flocks and herds might feed. The beasts of the field 
also cry unto thee—Even the cattle and wild beasts 


‘utter their complaints, and express their want of 


food by the mournful noise which they make, as. it 

were beseeching thee to have pity on them and re- 

lieve their wants. Even they have a voice to cry, 
3 


t 
, 


, ul 
ae + 


~as well as an eye to look to God. 


A further description of 


CHAPTER II. 


the desolation of the land. 


water are dried up—The drought drying up the 
springs, the rivers have failed, and have little or no 
water in them. Thus, throughout the chapter, the 


The rivers of || prophet foretels a drought, as well as a plague of 


locusts; and these two calamities often go together, 
a great increase of locusts, according to Pliny and 
Bochart, being occasioned by heat. 


’ CHAPTER IL 
This chapter contains, (1,) A further description of the desolation of the land, 1-11. (2,) An earnest call to repent- 


ance, 12-17. (3,) A promise of all good things to the penitent, 18-27. 


28-32, 


A. M. 3262. 
B. C. 742. 


—— 


Blow “ye the ‘trumpet in Zion, 
and ’ sound an alarm in my holy 
mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land 
tremble: for * the day of the Lorp cometh, for 
tt is nigh at hand; 
2 “A day of darkness and of gloominess, a 
day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the 


(4,) A prophecy of the Messiah’s kingdom, 


morning spread upon the mountains : ba 
°a great people and a strong; ‘there ———— 
hath not been ever the like, neither shall be 
any more after it, even to the years ?of many 
generations. 

3 8A fire devoureth before them; and behind 
them a flame burneth: the Jand is as * the 


a Jeremiah iv. 5; Verse 15. 1 Or, cornet. b Numbers 
a a, O: © Chapter i. 15; Obadiah 15; Zephaniah i. 14, 15. 
4 Amos v. 18, 20. 5 


e Verses 5, 11, 25; Chap. i. 6.——f Exodus x. 14. 2 Heb. 
of generation and generation. & Chap. i. 19, 20.—— Gen. il. 
8; xii. 10; Isa. li. 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verse 1. Blow ye the trumpet in Zion—The pro- 
phet, having in the preceding chapter described the 
locusts and caterpillars as a mighty army sent by 
God, in pursuance of this metaphor now exhorts the 
people to prepare to meet them, in the same terms 
as if they were alarmed to oppose an enemy, which 
was always done by the sound of the trumpet. 
Danger is proclaimed in this way, Ezek. xxxiii. 3,5; 
Hos. v.8; Amos iii. 6. Natural means were wont 
to be used, to prevent the devastations of locusts ; 
pits and trenches were dug, bags were provided, 
and combustible matter was prepared and set on fire: 
see Shaw’s Travels, 4to. p. 187. Let all the inha- 
bitants of the land tremble—Let them be seized 
with as terrible an apprehension of this approaching 
judgment, as if they saw an enemy invading their 
country. 

Verse 2. A day of darkness and of gloominess— 
A day of great calamity and trouble, which is often 
expressed in the Scripture by darkness. Or, per- 
haps, the prophet’s words are to be taken here in the 
literal sense; for it is certain that, in the eastern 
countries, locusts will sometimes, on a sudden, cover | 
the sky like a cloud, intercept the light of the sun, 
and diffuse a darkness on the tract of country over | 
which they are flying. “Solem obumbrant,” They 
darken the sun, says Pliny, Nat. Hist. lib. xi. 28. 
Thuanus, (lib. xxxiv. 7, p. 364, vol. v.,) describing a | 


calamity of this kind, says, Laborabat eo tempore, 
&c. “Syria was afflicted at that time with the want 
of every kind of forage and provisions, on account 
of such a multitude of locusts as was never seen | 
before in the memory of man, which, like a thick | 
cloud, darkening the light in mid-day, flying to and | 
fro, devoured the fruits of the ground everywhere.” | 
And Adanson, in his Voyage to Senegal, p. 127, says, ) 
3 


“Suddenly there came over our heads a thick cloud, 
which darkened the air and deprived us of the rays 
of the sun. We soon found that it was owing to a 
cloud of loeusts.’ And in Chandler, on verse 10, 
Hermanus is quoted, as saying that “locusts obscure 
the sun for the space of a mile;” and Aloysius, “ for 
the space of twelve miles.” Fora further account 
of them, see note on Exod. x. 5,13. As the morn- 
ing spread upon the mountains—This signifies, that 
the darkness occasioned by the locusts should be 
very diffusive or general; that they should spread 
themselves everywhere, as the rays of the morning 
do upon the mountains. A great people and strong 
—The locusts, being represented as a great army 
coming to destroy, are here termed a great and 
strong people: see note on chap.i.6. There haih 
not been ever the like, &c.—The locusts which 
plagued Egypt are described after the same manner, 
Exod. x. 14. The expression in both places seems 
to be proverbial, and intended to set forth the extra- 
ordinary greatness of the judgment; but is not to be 
understood too strictly, according to the grammati- 
cal sense of the words. Thus we read of Hezekiah, 
that after him there was none like him among all 
the kings of Judah, 2 Kings xviii.5; and yet the 

same character is given of Josiah, chap. xxiii. 25. 
Verse 3. A fire devoureth before them, &c.—They 
consume like a general conflagration. “They de- 
stroy the ground,” says Sir Hans Sloane, (Natural 
History of Jamaica, i. 29,) “not only for the time, 
but burn trees for two years after.” “ Wheresoever 
they feed, says Ludolphus, ( History of Ethiopia, lib. 
i. c. 18,) “their leavings seem, as it were, parched 
with fire.” Pliny bears the same testimony, xi. 29, 
Multa contactu adurentes, “Burning things up by 
the touch.” The land is as the garden of Eden 
before them, &c.—The land of Judea, so famous for 
905 


Terrific description 


A.M, 3262. garden of Eden before them, ‘and 
Bo 7 Dehind them a desolate wilder ness ; 
yea, and nothing shall escape them. 

4 * The appearance of them zs as the appear- 
ance of horses; and as horsemen so shall they 
run. 

5 | Like the noise of chariots on the tops of 
mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a 
flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, ™as a 
strong people set in battle-array. 


JOEL. 


of a host of locuss. 


6 Before their face the people shall As ra apee, 
be much pained: "all faces shall Steere 
gather ° blackness. 

7 They shall run like mighty men ; they shall 
climb the wall like men of war; anid they shall 
march every one on his ways, and they shall 
not break their ranks : 

8 Neither shall one thrust another; they shall 
walk every one in his path: and when they fall 
upon the 4 sword, they shall not be wounded. 


i eechorish vii. 14. —— Revelation ix. 7——! Revelation ix. 9. 
m Verse 2. 


its fertility and pleasantness, shall be turned into a 
desolate wilderness by the ravages they will make. 
The garden of Eden is a proverbial expression for 
a place of pleasure and fruitfulness, in which sense 
we commonly use the word paradise. And nothing 
shall escape them—Namely, which the ground pro- 
duces. “After devouring the herbage,” says Adanson, 
as above, “with the fruits and the leaves of the 
trees, they attacked even the buds and very bark. 
They did not so much as spare the reeds with which 
the .huts were thatched.” Thus also Ludolphus: 
“Sometimes they enter the very bark of trees, and 
then the spring itself cannot repair the damage.” 
“Omnia morsu erodentes, et fores quoque tectorum,” 
says Pliny, xi.20. ‘“ Consuming all things, even the 
doors of the houses.” In the Philosophical Trans- 
actions, No. 112, A. D. 1686, we have an account of 
the locusts in Languedoc, being about an inch in 
length, ofa gray colour. ‘“ The earth,” itis observed, 
“in some places, was covered four inches thick 
with them, in the morning, before the heat of the 
sun was considerable ; but as soon as it. began to 
grow hot they took wing, and fell upon the corn, 
eating up both leaf and ear; and that with such 
expedition, by reason of their number, that in three 
hours they would devour a whole field, after which 
they again took wing, and ‘their swarms were so 
thick, that they covered the sun like a cloud, and 
were whole hours in passing. After having eaten 
up the corn, they fell upon the vines, the pulse, the 
willows, and even the hemp, notwithstanding its 
great bitterness; after this these insects died, and 
stunk very much.” ° 

Verses 4-6. The appearance of them is as the 
appearance of horses—Bochart and many other 
writers mention the resemblance which the head of 
a locust bears to that of a horse; whence the Italians 
call them cavaleite. Like the noise of chariots on 
the mountains shall they leap—Or, as the clause 
may be better rendered, They shall leap on the tops 
of mountains with the sidiee of chariots. The locusts 
being represented as an army attacking the country, 
and chariots being anciently a part of warlike pre- 
parations, the text says that these locusts shall re- 
semble them in their swiftness, noise, and terror. 
Pliny mentions (Natural History, lib. xl. cap. 29) 
locusts “ making a noise with their wings, as if they 


were winged fowls,” Like the noise of a flame of || remarkable, before the body of them « 
906 ; 


en viii. 21; Lam. iv. 8; Nahum ii. 10.—% Heb. pot. 
4Or, daxti 


Sire, &c.—Like the crackling of the fire burning up 
stubble. Cyril says of them, that while they are 
breaking their food with their ‘teeth, the noise is like 
that of flame driven about by the ’ wind. See Bo- 
chart on the place. The Baron de Tott, quoted by 
Harmer, speaking of the clouds of locusts coming 
from ‘Tartary toward Constantinople, observes, 
“To the noise of their flight sueceeds that of their 
devouring activity; it resernbles the rattling of hail- 
stones, but its consequences are infinitely more de- 
structive. Fire itself eats not so fast, nor is there a 
vestige of vegetation to be found, when they again 
take their flight, and go elsewhere to produce like 
disasters.” As a strong people set in battle array— 
Their noise is like that of the shouts of an army 
| going to be engaged. These expressions are un- 
doubtedly hyperbolical; but yet the noise which 
such a vast multitude of locusts would make must 
needs be very great. Before their face the people 
shall be much pained—At seeing their vast multi- 
titudes, and the havoc they make of the fruits of 
the earth, the inhabitants of the land shall be in great 
pain and anguish, and shall be seized with such a 
dread and fear as shall make their visage look black 
and ghastly, like that of persons who are dying. 
Verses 7, 8. They shall run like mighty men— 
They shall proceed everywhere like stout and 
| mighty men, who are afraid of nothing. ‘The de- 
| scription here given agrees perfectly to locusts, as 
Bochart has shown. “First, They shall run. Now 
their manner of fighting is thus described: They 
strike, or wound, not as they stand, but as they run. 
Secondly, They run as mighty men. What are 
more innumerable or strong than locusts, says St. 
Jerome, which no human pains can resist? Thirdly, 
They shall march every one in his way, and not 
break their ranks: and in the next verse, Neither 
' shall one thrust or press his comrade. St. Jerome, 
in his notes on this place, observes, ‘This we lately 
saw in our part of the country; for when swarms of 
locusts came and filled the lower region of the air, 
they flew in such order, by the divine appointment, 
and kept their places as exactly, as when several 
tiles, or party-coloured stones, are skilfully 7 
ina ‘pavement, so as not to be a hair’s breadth out of 


their several ranks’” The same is’ observed by 


other writers cited by Bochart: and 


ve 


| § Jer. xxv. 30; Chap. iii. 16; Amos i. 2—t 


An earnest call 


-- 


A. M. 3262. 9 They shall run to and fro in the 
we, |. 

city; they shall ran upon the wall, 
they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall 
®enter in at the windows ? like a thief. 

10 “The earth shall quake before them ; the 
heavens shall tremble: ™the sun and the moon 
shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their 
shining : . 

11 ‘And the Lorp shall utter his voice before 
this army: for his camp is very great: " for 
he is strong that executeth his word: for the 
*day of the Lorp zs great and very terrible ; 
and ¥ who can abide it ? 


CHAPTER II. 


to repentance. 


12 § Therefore also now, saith the A. M. 3262. 
: B, C.742. 
Lorp, *'Turn ye even to me with 
all your heart, and with fasting, and with 
weeping, and with mourning : 

13 And *rend your heart, and not » your 
garments, and turn unto the Lorp your God: 
for he zs ° gracious and merciful, slow to anger, 
and of great kindness, and repenteth him of 
the evil. 

14 4 Who knoweth 7f he will return and re- 
pent, and leave ° a blessing behind him ; even 
fa meat-oflering and a drink-offering unto the 
Lorp your God ?’ 


© Jer. ix. 21.—? John x. 1.——14 Psa. xviii. 7.-—— Isa. xiii. 
10; Ezek. xxxii.7; Verse 31; Chap. iii. 15; Matt. xxiv. 29. 
Ver. 25. u Jer. 
1. 34; Rev. xviii. 8. x Jer. xxx. 7; Amos v. 18; Zeph. i. 15. 
y Numbers xxiv. 23; Mal. iii. 2. z Jer. iv. 1; Hosea xii. 6; 


place, they send scouts and messengers, as it were, 
to view the ground, and measure it out for their use; 
as the same last-mentioned writer remarks from 
Sigibertus, concerning the locusts which destroyed 
France in the year 874. When they fall wpon the 
sword they shall not be wounded—By reason of their 
lightness and nimbleness, and the hardness and 
smoothness of the outward coat of their skin. It! 


“refers,” says Newcome, “to the scales with which | 


jocusts are covered as with a coat of mail.”  “ Most 
animals retreat at the sight of a man, but it is the 
reverse with locusts, for they will studiously attack. 
Where they collect in numbers, the inhabitants 


retire into their dwellings as. fast as possible, lest | 


by appearing abroad they might provoke their anger. | 
They show no fear, and, from their slender shape, 
frequently elude the blow aimed at them.” 

Verses 9,10. They shall run to and fro in the | 
city—No place shall be inaccessible to them, nor free | 
from them. “#ivery place,” says St. Jerome, “lies 
open to them; for they infest not only the fields, 
and the fruits of the earth, but creep into cities, | 
houses, and the most secret recesses.” 
shall quake before them—The inhabitants of the 
land of Judea shall be seized with a horrible dread 


The earth || 


at their approach. ‘The heavens shall look dark and 
dismal, because they shall come in such swarms as 
to intercept the rays of the sun, and the light of the | 
moon and stars. By the expression, The heavens 
shall tremble, is either meant, that the whole state | 


-of the kingdom of Judah, of the very highest in rank | 


and dignity, as well as the meanest, should be struck 
with a panic at this unusual judgment; or else that 
the locusts should so fill the sky, that, at a great 
height, it would appear as if the heavens themselves 
trembled» 

Verse 11. And the Lord shall utter his voice be- 
fore his army—God, who can make the meanest 
parts of the creation the instruments of his vengeance, 
is here sublimely introduced, like a leader or general, 
commanding and animating this his army by his 
woice. For his camp is very great—That is, his 

3 


x1Vo 8. 2 Psalm xxxiv. 18; li. 17-——» Genesis xxxvil. 34; 
2 Sam. i.11; Job i. 20. ¢ Wxod, xxxiv. 6; Psa. lxxxvi. 5,15; 
Jonah iv. 2—4 Josh. xiv. 12; 2 Sam, xii. 22; 2 Kings xix. 4; 
Amos y. 15; Jonah iii. 9; Zeph. ii. 3. ¢ Jsaiah Ixv. 8; Hag. 
ii. 19.—f Chap. i. 9, 13. 


army is very great and terrible, making whatsoever 
havoc he orders them, and wheresoever. For the 
day of the Lord is great, &c.—The time of God’s 
particular judgments, as well as that of his general 


| one, is commonly expressed by the day of the Lord, 


the former being an earnest and imperfect represent- 
ation of the latter. 

| Verses 12-14. Therefore, also now, &c.—Or, 
Nevertheless, also now, saith the Lord, &c.—Here 
/a method is pointed out, whereby they might still 
‘have hopes of avoiding the calamity denounced 
| against them, namely, by turning to God sincerely, 


and publicly testifying their inward repentance and 


grief for their sins, by outward expressions of sorrow 
|and humiliation. And rend your heart—Rending of 
the garments was customary in times of great sor- 
row and afiliction, not only among the Jews and 
Israelites, but among almost all the ancient nations, 
The prophet here does not absolutely forbid their 


| using this outward sign of sorrow, but exhorts them 
5 ? 


to attend more to inward contrition and humiliation, 
without which the outward signs of them were of 
no signification before God. The Hebrew writers 
often signify the preference that is due to one thing 
above another in terms which express the rejecting 
of that which is less worthy. Thus we read, Hos. 
vi. 6, J will have mercy and not sacrifice; that is, 
I require mercy rather than sacrifice. In the same 
sense we are to understand the text before us. God 
prefers a broken and a contrite heart far before all 
outward expressions of humiliation and grief. For 
he is gracious and merciful, &e—These words 
allude to God’s own declaration of himself, Exod. 
xxxiv. 6, on which they might with good reason 
| ground hopes of forgiveness on their repenting un- 
\feignedly of their sins, and bringing forth fruit 
| worthy of repentance. And repenteth him of the 
| evil—That is, of the evil which he had threatened to 
_ inflict in case those, against whom his threatenings 
| were denounced, did not turn to him in true repent- 
/ance. God is in Scripture said to repent when the 
| humiliation of sinners and the refurmation of their 
907 


Promases to 


JOEL. 


the penitent 


A. M. 2262. 15 9 Blow the trumpet in Zion, 
Be. 742 5 

_— sanctify a fast, call a solemn as- 
sembly : 


16 Gather the people, ‘sanctify the congre- 
gation, * assemble the elders, ! gather the chil- 
dren, and those that suck the breasts: ™ let the 
bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the 
bride out of her closet. 


17 Let the priests, the ministers of the Lorp, 
£ 


& Num. x. 3; Verse 1. Chap. i. 14——’ Exodus xix. 10, 
22. k Chapter i. 14——1 2 Chron. xx. 13. ™ ] Cor, vii. 5. 
= Ezek. vill. 16; Matt. xxiii. 35. 


conduct make it unfit. that he should inflict the 
punishment threatened by him. Who knoweth if he 
will return, and repent—God’s own nature, and the 
former instances we have found of his merciful dis- 
position, encourage us to hope, that our sincere 
repentance may avail to avert his wrath, and engage 
him to restore his blessings upon us and our land. 
The prophet expresses himself between hope and 
fear of what might be the event, lest he should fill 
them with too much security on one hand, or drive 
them on the other, by a despair of pardon, to have 
no thoughts of repentance or amendment, but to go 
on still in their sins. Even a meat-offering and a 
drink-offering unto the Lord your God—At least 
sufficient provision to supply the necessary parts of 
God’s public worship, which since the dearth had 
been necessarily omitted. 

Verses 15, 16. Blow the trumpet in Zion—This 
was a signal for assembling the people at the solemn 
times of public worship. Sanctify a fast, call a 
solemn assembly—Or, appoint ye a fast, proclaim 
a solemn day: so Archbishop Newcome. Sanctify 
the congregation—Let the people prepare them- 
selves for this solemn time of humiliation, not only 
py washing themselves and their clothes, and cleans- 
ing themselves from all legal impurities, as is re- 
quired Exod. xix. L0-15, but by true contrition of 
heart, godly sorrow for, and forsaking all known 
sin, as also by abstaining from all sensual pleasures, 
however innocent and allowable at other times. 
Absolute self-denial is but a reasonable preparation 
for keeping a day of solemn humiliation before God, 
on account of national sins or calamities. This kind 
of abstinence was recommended among the hea- 
then as a necessary preparation for solemn worship. 
Assemble the elders, gather the children, and those 
that suck the breasts—Let both young and old join 
in this duty, for all ages joining in it will add much 
to the solemnity of it, and is very proper to work in 
men’s minds that sincere contrition, which may 
avert those judgments which threaten the whole na- 
tion, and in which their posterity may suffer. Let 
the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the 
bride out of her closet-—Even on the day of their 
marriage, or during the marriage-feast. Let newly- 
married persons disregard the concerns and enjoy- 
ments peculiar to their situation, and afflict them- 
selves with the rest of the people. 

908 


weep “between the porch and the tats 9260, 
altar, and let them say, °Spare thy ———— 
people, O Lorn, and give not thy heritage to 
reproach, that the heathen should * rule over 
them: ? wherefore should they say among the 
people, Where ts their God? 

18 4 Then will the Lorn ‘be jealous for his 
land, * and pity his people. 

19 Yea, the Lorn will answer and say unto 

o Exod. xxxii. 11,12; Deut. ix. 26-29.——® Or, use a by-word 


against them. P Psa. xlii. 10; lxxix. 10; exv.2; Mice. vii. 10. 
4 Zech. i. 14; viii. 2. T Deut. xxxii. 36; Isa. Ix. 10. 


Verse 17. Let the priests, the ministers of the 
Lord, weep between the porch and the altar—The 
priests, being in a peculiar sense the Lord’s servants, 
are here required to take the lead in this sacred 
work of penitence, and to stand weeping and pray- 


|jng between the porch and the altar; thatis, in the 


open court, just before the porch of the temple built 
by Solomon, (see 1 Kings vi. 3,) and the altar of 


_burnt-offerings. This was called the priests’ court, 
: and was the place where the greatest part of those, 
whose course it was, gave their attendance. Here- 
upon this is mentioned as the most proper place for 


the priests to stand in, while they addressed thei. 
prayers and intercessions to God in behalf of the 
people; because here they could best be seen and 
heard by all the assembly, and here they had before 
| Offered the sacrifices proper for such an occasion. 
And let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord—It was 
usual to prescribe certain forms of prayer or praise 
| to the priests, in their public ministrations: see Hos. 
“xiv. 2; 1 Chron. xvi. 86. Such was this here men- 
, tioned, wherein they beseech God to deliver his peo- 
ple, not for any merit of theirs, but for his own 
glory, lest the heathen round about them should take 
occasion to blaspheme his name, as if he were not 
able to protect his worshippers. That the heathen 
should rule over them—This translation of the He- 
brew verb 5>w, favours their interpretation, who 
understand by the army, at the beginning of the 
chapter, an invading human enemy. But if ex- 
pounded of a plague of locusts, still this translation, 
as Archbishop Newcome justly observes, may be 
supported, because, when the people were distressed 
by the locusts, they would be an easier prey to their 
enemies. But, to make a proverb of them, or to use 
a by-word against them, as the margin reads, is the 
more natural translation: for to have their country 
destroyed by locusts would naturally make them the 
subject of their enemies’ scorn and derision, as if 
they were forsaken by the God whom they wor- 
shipped; and the Hebrew verb above mentioned is 
indifferently taken in either sense. ~ 
Verses 18-20. T'hen will the Lord be jealous for 
his land—If you do what I propose to you, if you 
sincerely humble yourselves before God, confess 
your sins, and truly repent of them, turning to God 
in newness of life, then will the Lord be concerned 
for the honour and welfare of that land whieh—he 
3 


A 


moirs, part ii. p. 58-60. They frequently then, ac- 


Promises to 


A. M. 3262. 
B. C. 742. 


his people, Behold, I will send you 
‘corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall 
be satisfied therewith: and I will no more 
make you a reproach among the heathen : 

20 But ‘I will remove far off from you "the 
northern army, and will drive him into a land 


CHAPTER II. 


the penitent. 


barren and desolate, with his face A, M. 3262. 

[ ‘ . B. C. 742. 

«toward the east sea, and his hinder ———— 

part Ytoward the utmost sea; and his stink 

shall come up, and his ill savour shall come 
up, because *he hath done great things. 

21 4 Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: 


* Chapter i, 10; Malachi iii. 10, 11, 12——t Exodus x. 19. 
u Jeremiah i. 14. 


x Ezekiel xlvii. 18; Zech. xiv. 8. y Deut. xi. 24.——® Heb. 
he hath magnified to do. 


has chosen to settle his worshippers in. Yea, the 
Lord will say, Behold, I will send you corn, &e.— 
I will restore your former plenty, and the nations 
about you shall have no more occasion to reproach 
your desolate condition. But I will remove far off 
from you the northern army—Or, enemy, nation, or 
people; that is, the locusts, which might enter 
Judea by the north, as Circassia and Mingrelia 
abound with them. Because Joel represents this 
army as coming from the north, some have been 
ready to imagine, that he was speaking not of real 
locusts, but of the Chaldeans, or some other deso- 
lating army of men that should come from that 
quarter. “But the Baron de Tott assures us, in a} 
late publication of his, that he found locusts coming | 
in great numbers from Tartary toward Constanti-_| 
nople, which lies to the south of that country. ‘I. 
saw,’ says he, ‘no appearance of culture on my 
route, because the Noguais (the Tartars) avoid the | 
cultivation of frequented places. Their harvest by 
the sides of roads would serve only as pasture to} 
travellers’ horses. But if this precaution preserves | 
them from such kind of depredation, nothing can 
protect their fields from a much more fatal scourge. 
Clouds of locusts frequently alight on their plains; 
and, giving the preference to their fields of millet, | 
ravage them in an instant. Their approach darkens | 
the horizon, and so enormous is their multitude, it | 
hides the light of the sun. When the husbandmen | 
happen to be sufficiently numerous, they sometimes | 
divert the storm by their agitation and cries; but 
when they fail, the locusts alight on their fields, and | 
there form a bed of six or seven inches thick. This. 
plague, no doubt, would be more extensive in coun- | 
tries better cultivated; and Greece and Asia Minor 
would be more frequently exposed, did not the 
Black sea swallow up most of those swarms which 
attempt to pass that barrier. I have often seen the 
shores of the Pontus Euxinus, toward the Bospho- 
rus of Thrace, covered with their dried remains, in 
such multitudes, that one could not walk along the 
strand without sinking half-leg deep into a bed of 
these skinny skeletons. Curious to know the true 
cause of their destruction, I sought the moment of 
observation, and was a witness of their ruin by a. 
storm, which overtook them so near the shore, that 
their bodies were cast upon the land while yet entire. 
This produced an infection so great, that it was seve- 
ral days before they could be approached.’—Me- 


cording to this writer, in that part of the world, 

pass, or attempt to pass, from north to south. In 

Judea they have been supposed to go from the south- 
3 


'| their nostrils, Ibid. 125. 


eastward in a contrary direction. And if this is the 
common route they take there, it must have struck 
the Jews very much, when they found the prophet 
predicting the going of the locusts to the southward ; 
and still more so when they found it exactly accom- 
plished, as it was a demonstration of the perfect 
foreknowledge of Jehovah, perhaps of his guiding 
and directing those vast bodies of insects. The 
locusts, it is said, have no king, yet go they forth by 
bands, Prov. xxx. 27. But if they have no king of 
their own species, they are undoubtedly under the 
direction of the God that made them: he is their 
king.”—Harmer, vol. iv. obs. 146. 

Some of the locusts, which here are the subject 
of Joel’s prophecy, were to be driven by the wind 
into the desert, or, as it is here styled, a land barren 
and desolate ; some into the Dead sea, called here 
the east sea, lying eastward of Jerusalem; some 
into the Mediterranean, or western sea, called here 
the utmost sea. By his face toward the east sea, 
and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, is de- 
scribed the extent of the body, or army of locusts; 
the face meaning the foremost of them, and the 
hinder part the hindmost of them. And his stink 
shall come up—“ That a strong and _ pestilential 
smell,” says Newcome, “arises from putrefied heaps 
of locusts, whether driven upon land or cast up 
from the sea in which they have perished, appears 
from the testimony of many writers. Among va- 
rious other authorities to the same effect, St. Jerome 
is quoted by Bochart as saying, that in his time those 
troops of locusts which covered Judea were cast by 
the wind in mare primum et novissimum; and that, 
when the waters threw them up, their smell caused 
a pestilence. Thevenot says of them, They live not 
above six months; and when dead, the stench of 
them so corrupts and infects the air, that it often oc- 
casions dreadful pestilences—City Remem. i. 123. 
There came such a stench from those which ap- 
peared at Novogorod in 1646, as not only offended 


_ the nose, but the brain: it was not to be endured: 
/men were forced to wash their noses with vinegar, 


and hold handkerchiefs dipped in it continually to 
In Ethiopia, when they die 
and rot, they raise a pestilence ——Mead, i. 36.” Be- 
cause he hath done great things—That is, com- 
mitted great devastation. Or rather, although he 


hath done great things: though this army of insects, 


by God’s appointment, has made such destruction in 
the land, yet it shall come to this shameful end. 
Verses 21, 22. Fear not, O land, &e.—“In the 
former part of this prophecy the land is elegantly 
represented as mourning, the beasts groaning, and 


Promises te 


JOEL. 


the penitent, | 


A. M. 3262. for the Lorp will do great things. 

B.C. 7 92 Be not afraid, * ye beasts of the 
field: for *the pastures of the wilderness do 
spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig- 
tree and the vine do yield their strength. 

23 Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and 
»rejoice in the Lorp your God: for ‘he hath 
given you ‘the former rain * moderately, and 
he © will cause to come down for you “the rain, 
the former rain, and the latter rain in the first 
month. 

24 And the floors shall be full of wheat, and 
the fats shall overflow with wine and oil. 


25 And Iwill restore to you the ime oe, 
years °that the locust hath eaten, ——— 
the canker-worm, and the caterpillar, and the 
palmer-worm, ‘my great army which I sent 
among you. 

26 And ye shail * eat in plenty, and be satis- 
fied, and praise the name of the Lorn your 
God, that hath dealt wondrously swith you: 
and my people shall never be ashamed. 

27 » And ye shall know that I am ‘in the 
midst of Israel, and that *1 am the Lorp your 
God, and none else: and my people shall never 
be ashamed. 4 


z Chap. i. 18, 20. a Zech. viii. 12; Chap. i. 19.—— Isaiah 
xli. 16; lxi: 10; Hab. iii. 18; Zech. x. 7——’ Or, a teacher of 
righteousness. 5 Heb. according to righteousness, © Levit. 
xxvi. 4; Deut. xi. 14; xxviii. 12. 


4 James v. 7.——* Chap. i, 4——f Verse 11,—= Ley. xxvi. 
5; Psa. xxii. 26; Lev. xxvi. 26; Mic. vi. 14— Chap. iii. 17. 
i Lev. xxvi, 11,12; Ezek. xxxvii. 26, 27, 28— Isa. xlv. 5, 
21, 22; Ezek. xxx. 22, 28. 


the herds of cattle as greatly distressed; the rivers 
of water dried up, and the pastures of the wilder- 
ness as all consumed. In the same elegant strain he 
calls upon the land to rejoice, and the beasts of the 
field to be glad; because the rain should descend, 
the trees yield their increase, the earth its plenty, 
and every thing minister to the joy and comfort of 
the inhabitants: so that though the threatening ran, 
that the land (which looked, before the locusts in- 
vaded it, like the garden of Eden) should appear 
behind them like a desolate wilderness; the blessing 
intimated upon their repentance is, that the desolate 
wilderness should be again turned into a garden of 
Eden, and abound with every thing for usefulness 
and pleasure.” For the Lord will do great things 
—God will magnify himself, and show his power as 


much in acts of mercy as he did before in the} 


strokes of his justice. Be not afraid, ye beasts of 
the field—As the cattle and the wild beasts had their 
share in the dearth, (chap. i. 18, 20,) so now even 
they shall receive comfort, in the return of plenty. 
The fig-tree and ihe vine do yield their strength— 
That is, bear fruit according to their kind, in great 
abundance. 

Verse 23. He hath given you the former rain 
moderately—The season of the former rain was 
about the middle of October. The Hebrew word 
mpis, rendered moderately, literally signifies, ac- 
cording to righteousness, and is equivalent with 
according to judgment. Archbishop Neweome ren- 
ders it, in just proportion: and he will cause to 
come the latter rain in the first month—Which was 
Nisan, partly answering to our March. The regu- 
lar season for this rain was three months before 
harvest, Amos iv. 7; that is, before wheat-harvest, 
which was later than the barley-harvest in Judea. 
Of the former and latter rain, see note on Hosea 
vi. 3. ; 

Verses 25-27. And I will restore to you the years 
that the locust hath eaten—I will compensate you, 
or make you amends, for what the locusts have eaten 
in the foregoing years, ae extraordinary plenty 


of the fruits of the earth. This verse proves, beyond 
a doubt, that they mistake who interpret this pro- 
phecy of a hostile invasion of Judea; for it seems to 
be a general rule in the prophecies, that when any 
thing of a common nature is expressed by meta- 
phors, that which is the literal sense of these meta- 
phors is generally signified in the conclusion, that 
there may be no mistake about it. Of this many in- 
stances have been given; and perhaps no instances 
of the use of metaphors in the prophetic writings, 
about things of a common nature, can be brought, 
but that in the end the metaphor is explained, and 
what’is meant by it expressly declared. But here, 
instead of any indication in the conclusion of a me- 
taphor’s being used, or what is meant by that meta- 
phor, the locust is literally spoken of as being the 
cause of that calamity, and, indeed, in such very 
express terms, that the passage cannot, without great 
violence, be interpreted of a hostile invasion. “We 
have here,” says Archbishop Neweome, “a key to 
the grand and beautiful description which runs 
through these two chapters. And if we consider 
verse 7, and the propriety of the adjuncts, as appli- 
cable to locusts, and often to loeusts only, there can 
remain no doubt but that the prophet is to be under- 
stood in a literal sense, as foretelling a plague of 

locusts. Every reader of taste must be struck with 
the poetical and sublime manner in which the alle- 
ery is conducted. There is not a more splendid 

piece of poetry extant.” And my people shall never 
be ashamed—Provided they continue to serve me. 
And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel 
—God’s giving tokens of his especial blessing and 
protection to his people, is expressed by his dwell- 
ing among them, or in the midst of chap. iii. 
17; Lev. xxvi. 11, 12; Ezek. xxxvii, 26. his is a 
favour he never promises, but upon condition of 

their sincere and steady obedience, as appears in the 

fore-cited places. And that I am the Lord your God, 

and none else—You will then be convinced that I 

am always ready to protect you, and you d not 

apply yourselves to any other gods in Sour wants or 

\ 


* 


1 
‘ 4 
—— oo 


A prophecy of 


CHAPTER II. 


the Messiah’s kingdom. 


A. M, 2202. 28 “|! And it shall come to pass 
———- afterward, that I ™ will pour out my 
Spirit upon all flesh; "and your sons and 
® your daughters shall prophesy, your old men 
shall dreani dreams, your young men shall see 
visions : 


29 And also upon ? the servants ¥ on 
and upon the handmaids in those a 
days will I pour out my Spirit. 

30 And ‘I will show wonders in the heavens 
and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of, 
smoke. 


Tse. xli. 17; av. 33 Brek: XXXvVi. 25; XXxix, 29; Tees j i. 17, 
m Zechariah xii. 10; John vii. 39. Ss ‘liv. 13 


| Acts xxi. 9.—? 1 Corin. xii, 13; Gal. iii. 28; 


Col. iii. 11. 
4 Matt. xxiv. 29; Mark xiii. 24; Luke xxi. i, 25. 


troubles. And my people shall never be ashamed— 
Shall not be any more disappointed of the trust they 
place in me, nor be reproached by the heathen, as if 
J had forsaken them. 

Verses 28, 29. And it shall come to pass afterward 
—Some versions begin the third chapter with this 
verse; and indeed the subject which is begun here 
is of so different a nature from what goes before, that 
it seems evident a new chapter ought to be begun 
here. The Jewish Rabbi Kimchi says here, that the 
expression afterward signifies the same as in the 
latter days, Isa. ii. 2, and that whenever the words 
oecur, they denote thé times of the Messiah; and 
therefore he refers this prophecy to his days, and 


makes it descriptive of the event which is foretold. 


Isa. xi. 9, T'he earth shall be full of the knowledge 
of the Lord. This is unquestionably the true mean- 
ing of it, and thus itis explained by St. Peter, Acts 
ii, 17. “And though the things here prophesied of 
were not to happen till several ages afterward, yet 
was the prophecy highly proper to encourage the 
minds of the pious Jews; as it was an assurance to 
them that, let them be brought ever so low by this 
or any other calamity, yet God would preserve them 
a people, till all the promises made to their forefa- 
thers should: he actually accomplished ; and espe- 
cially till the Messiah should come, under whom the 
knowledge offGod- should spread itself among all 
the nations ofthe earth, and the gifts of the Spirit of 
God should be, poured out in a much more abundant 
manner than éver they were before:” see Chandler. 
Iwill pour out my Spirit—In extraordinary gifts on 
the first preachers of the gospel, and in various 
graces on sil believers ; wpon all flesh—Upon be- 
lieving Gentiles, as well as believing Jews. In former 
times those gifts were confined to one particular 
nation, but now they shall be extended to those of 
all sabins that will apply unto God for them through 
faith in the Messiah. 
Holy Spirit is often represented by the prophets as 
the peculiar cliaracter of the gospel state, and is else- 
where compared to the pouring out of waters upon 
the thirsty ground, and thereby rendering it fruitful: 

see the passages referred to in the margin, and com- 
pare them with John vii. 39. That this prophecy 
was in a great measure fulfilled in the days of the 
apostles and first messengers of the Lord Jesus, we 
have abundant proof from the Acts of the Apostles 
and the epistles of the New Testament. We need 
not, however, confine this prophecy to those early 
times, but, since many prophecies have gradual com- 
pletions, we may understand this as implying that 
there shall be another remarkable effusion of the 

a 


The plentiful effusion of the | 


Holy Spirit upon the Jews, in order to their conver- 
sion in the latter times of the world. This exposi- 
tion, which is favoured by some expressions in this 
prophecy, renders its connection with, the contents 
of the following chapter more manifest. And your 
sons and your daughters shall prophesy—The gift 
of prophecy was bestowed upon some women under 
the Old Testament, as upon Miriam, Exod. xv. 20; 
upon Deborah, Judg. iv. 14; and Huldah, 2 Kings 
xxii.14. But this gift was more frequently conferred 
upon that sex in the times of the New Testament. 
Thus we read of four daughters of Philip the Evan- 
gelist who prophesied, Acts xxi, 9; and church history 
affords us several other instances; such as Perpetua 
and Felicitas, who were martyrs for the Christian 
faith; Potamiena, mentioned by Eusebius, lib. iv. 
cap. 5, and others. Your old men shall dream 
dreams—Divine dreams, either imparting unto them 
the knowledge of future events, or discovering to 
them the will of God in other respects. By this me- 
thod God often made known his will to the patriarchs 
and prophets, impressing their minds, while they 
were asleep, with the things he intended to commu- 
nicate ; sometimes directly, without any parabolical 
representation, which was a pure dream ; as to Solo- 
mon and others: sometimes under representations 
and images, which might be a vision and dream 
mixed, as in the case of Pharaoh, Joseph, Daniel, 
and others. Your young men shall see visions—In 
visions, distinguished from dreams, the inspired per- 
son was awake, but his external senses being bound 
up, and, as it were, laid in a trance, (see Num. xxiv. 
4,) he had a distinet knowledge of the things re- 
vealed to him, and that sometimes accompanied with 
external representations: such was that vision of St. 
Peter’s, mentioned Acts x. 11. And in this way St. 
John seems to have received all his revelations. 
From visions being applied to young men, and 
dreams to old men, some have observed that the 
imagination is stronger in those that are young than 
in the old; so that their senses need not be bound 
up With sleep, in order to make them capable of re- 
ceiving heavenly visions. Also upon the servants 
and upon the handmaids—Even persons of the 
lowest condition shall be made partakers of the 
saving graces of the Holy Spirit, and in many in- 
stances also of his extraordinary gifts. The poor 
have the gospel preached to them, and all the bless- 
ings of the gospel, whether ordinary or extraordi- 
nary, are as free for the poor as the rich, and are 
more commonly desired and received by them than 
by the rich. 

Verse 30. And I will show wonders in the heavens 


JOEL. 


the Messiah’s kingdom. 


A prophecy of 
A. M. 3262. 31 "The sun shall be turned into 


B. C. 742. ; 
— == darkness, and the moon into blood, 


*before the great and the terrible day of the 
Lorp come. 
32 And it shall come to pass, that * whoso- 


ever shall call on the name of the oe ee. 
Lorp shall be delivered: for "in ———— 
mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliver- 
ance, as the Lorp hath said, and in *the 
remnant whom the Lorp shall call. 


r Verse 10; Isaiah xiii. 9,10; Chapter iii. 1, 15; Matthew 
xxiv. 29; Mark xiii. 24; Luke xxi. 25; Revelation vi. 12. 
+ Malachi iv. 5. 


t Rom. x. 13.——" Isaiah xlvi. 13; lix. 20; Obad. 17; Rom. 
xi, 26. x Isa. xi, 11, 16; Jer. xxxi. 7; Mic. iv. 7; v. 3,7, 8; 
Rom. ix. 27; xi. 5, 7. 


and in the earth, &c.—Whoever will be at the pains 
to compare this prediction with the prophecy of 
Christ, Matt. xxiv., and Luke xxi., will have no doubt 
concerning the application of it. It principally and 
evidently refers to the destruction of the city and 
temple of Jerusalem, and the desolation of Judea 
by the Romans; a judgment justly inflicted upon 
the Jewish nation for their rejecting and crucifying 
their Messiah, resisting the Holy Spirit, contemning 
the gospel and the means of grace connected there- 
with, and persecuting the apostles and God’s other 
messengers. Thus Malachi, after he had foretold 
the coming of the Messiah, preceded by that of his 
forerunner John the Baptist, (chap. iii. 1,) imme- 
diately adds, that his coming should be attended 
with terrible judgments upon the disobedient, verses 
2-5, and chap. iv. 1. The prophet in the next clause 
predicts also the extraordinary signs which were to 
be forerunners of that destruction, by blood, and 
fire, and pillars of smoke, meaning probably the 
great slaughter which should be made of men, and 
the burning of the townsand cities of Judea, events 
which preceded that last and finishing stroke of the 
divine vengeance, the destruction of Jerusalem. 
He may also refer, perhaps, in the last expression, 
to the comet which hung over their city, and the 
fearful sights seen in the air some time before, which 
are mentioned by Josephus, and were foretold by 
Christ, Luke xxi. 11; and of which the reader may 
see an account in the note on Isa. Ixvi. 6. 

Verse 31. T'he sun shall be turned into darkness, 
and the moon into blood, &c.—Particular judgments 
upon kings and nations are often described in such 
terms as properly belong to the general judgment 
and conflagration of the heavens and the earth, as 
has been observed on verse 10th of this chapter. 
The expressions here used, in their literal sense, 
import the failing of light in the sun and moon, 
whether by eclipses or any other cause, such as per- 


haps, at the time here referred to, by the prodigious . 


quantity of smoke arising from the burning of cities, 
towns, and villages on every side, and also of Jeru- 
salem itself, which undoubtedly was sufficient to 
obscure the heavenly luminaries for some time. Or, 
the expression in this verse may be interpreted figu- 
ratively of the dark and melancholy state of publie 
affairs before and at the destruction of the Jewish 
nation sy the Romans, and of the utter overthrow 
of their state and government: see note on Isa. xiii. 
9,10. The last destruction of Jerusalem, the deso- 
lation of Judea, and the prodigious slaughter made 
of the Jews, might with great propriety be called, 
as it is here, T'he great and terrible day of the 
912 


| 


! 


, being preserved from the wrath to come. 


Lord; since the divine justice was then executed 
with a severity which had never been used before 
toward the Jewish people. The calamities of those 
times were indeed dreadful, almost beyond deserip- 
tion, and seem to have exceeded any thing that any 
other nation had ever suffered; which was agreea- 
ble to what Moses, in the very beginning of their 


state, had foretold should happen to them, if ever, 


by their disobedience to God’s commands, and their 
other crimes, they should fill up the measure of their 
iniquity: see notes on Deut. xxviil. 

Verse 32. And whosoever shall call on the name 
of the Lord—Whosoever, having heard the gospel, 
shall repent and believe in Christ, and call on him, 


| or shall make application to God in prayer through 


him, shall be delivered—Namely, from temporal and 
eternal destruction: thus St. Paul interprets this 
passage, Rom. x. 18. For to believe in Christ, give 
ourselves up to him, and profess ourselves his disci- 
ples, is the most effectual, and indeed the only effect- 


/ ual means of escaping the judgments coming upon 


the unbelieving and disobedient, and likewise of 
The pre- 


| diction, as it stands here in the prophecy, chiefly 


refers to those in Jerusalem who believed in Jesus 
as the true Messiah; for these, having a firm faith in 
what he had said, upon seeing some of the signs 
come to pass which he had foretold should precede 
the destruction of Jerusalem, they quitted the city 
in time, and so saved their lives, and escaped all those 
dreadful calamities which the unbelieving Jews suf- 
fered during the siege. For in mount Zion, §c., 
shall be deliverance—The gospel is described as 
taking its rise from Jerusalem, and as being from 
thence carried to all nations. The deliverance, 
therefore, here said to be in mount Zion, is deliver- 
ance by embracing the gospel, which had its rise 
there. Or mount Zion and Jerusalem may be here 
put for the gospel church, the mystical Jerusalem, 
the city of the Messiah, the only place of salvation 
present and eternal. As the Lord hath said—That 
is, according to his promises and declarations by his 
prophets. And in the remnant—Or, among the 
remnant, whom the Lord shall call—Namely, to be- 
lieve in Christ, and by him to wait for eternal life. 
Or, whom the Lord shall appoint to be preserved. 
This may primarily be understood of those who 
were converted by the preaching of Christ and his 
apostles, and who therefore escaped the vengeance 
which involved the rest of the nation, Acts ii. 40; 
1 Thessaloniansii. 16. These are called the owfopevor, 
such as should be saved, or delivered, Acts ii. 47. 
But there is another remnant of the Jews” 


Threatenings against CHAPTER III. idolatrous nations. 


in this promise, who shall be converted at the end 
of the world, when the obstinate and incorrigible 
shall be destroyed. In this sense the word remnant 


is often understood: see the margin. This sense of 
the word agrees well with what follows in the next 
chapter. 


CHAPTER II. 


This chapter contains a prophecy, (1,) Of God’s reckoning with the enemies of his people, 1-8. (2,) Of his openly 
judging all nations, 9-17. (3,) Of the provision he has made for his people, 18-21. These contents of the chapter 


have been partly fulfilled in the several deliverances of the Jews, and will have their full accomplishment at the 
great day of final accounts. 


ee OR behold, *in those days, and|jpeople and for my heritage Israel, » 4 Me 3202. 
ace ets in that time, when I shall bring |} whom they have scattered among "~~ 
again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, _||the nations, and parted my land. 

2 °J will also gather all nations, and will|| 3 And they have °cast lots for my people; 
bring them down into ° the valley of Jehosha- ||and have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a 
phat, and ‘will plead with them there for my || girl for wine, that they might drink. 


a Jeremiah xxx.3; Ezekiel xxxviii. 14.——» Zechariah xiv. || ¢2 Chron. xx. 26; Verse 12.——4 Isa. Ixvi. 16; Ezek. xxxviii. 
© Obad. 11; Nah. iii. 10. 


2, 3, 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. the battle of Gog and Magog, described Ezek. xxxix., 
Verses 1, 2. For, &c.—This particle shows the | and that of Armageddon, spoken of Rev. xvi. 14, 16. 
connection of this chapter with the latter part of the || And J will plead with them—I will require of them 
preceding: as if he had said, As an earnest of the | the reason why they thus used my people. God 
accomplishment of these predictions, my people || pleads with men, and vindicates the cause of op- 
shall be restored to their own land, and then their || pressed truth and righteousness by his judgments. 
enemies shall be humbled: see note on chap. ii. 28. || Then the consciences of the guilty fly in their faces, 
In those days, when I shall bring again—Namely, || and force them to acknowledge the justice of the 
out of Babylon, (to which deliverance this promise || punishments they suffer. For my people and for 
seems primarily to refer,) the captivity of Judah || my heritage Israel, &c.—The prophets in the Old 
and Jerusalem—As the type of the whole remnant ||'Testament often denounced judgments against 
which shall be saved. J will also gather all nations || Edom, Moab, and other hostile neighbours of the 
—lIn the type the expression means, all those nations || Jews, who took advantage of their calamities to vent 
that had oppressed Judah; in the antitype, all the || their spite against them. But since all nations are 
nations that had been enemies to Christ and his || summoned to answer the impeachment here men- 
church. And will bring them down into the valley || tioned, we may suppose the word Israel to compre- 
of Jehoshaphat—That is, into the place of judgment; || hend the faithful of all ages; and then we may ob- 
for the word Jehoshaphat signifies divine judgment, || serve, that the judgments denounced against the 
or, the place where Jehovah will execute judgment. church’ $ enemies, are chiefly for their hatred and 
Thus the valley of Jezreel signifies the place where || cruelty toward God’s servants. 
God’s arm, or strength, would exert itself. The|| Verse 3. They have cast lots for my people—It 
expression likewise alludes to the valley of Bera-|| was customary with conquerors, in those days, to 
chah, or of blessing, as it was afterward called, || dividé the captives, taken in war, among themselves 
mentioned 2 Chron. xx. 26, the place in which Je- || by lot, and so did these enemies of the Jews. And 
hoshaphat obtained a remarkable victory ; or, where ||have given a boy for a harlot—By this is meant, 
God, by his miraculous interposition, so infatuated || that they exchanged, or gave away, Jewish boys, in- 
the enemies of his people, that they destroyed one ||stead of money, for harlots. And sold a girl for 
another, and few or none of them that came against || wine, that they might drink—For a draught of wine, 
Judah escaped. Archbishop Newcome considers it |! as it were; that is, ata very vile and low rate. These _ 
as a prediction of an extraordinary battle which was || instances are mentioned, to signify the contempt in 
to be won in that valley, probably, he thinks, by Ne- || which these enemies of the Jews held the worship- 
buechadnezzar, which would utterly discomfit the || pers of the true God; they parted with them, when 
ancient enemies of the Jews, and resemble that vic- || they had taken them captives, upon the vilest terms, 
tory of Jehoshaphat. But it seems more probable || as setting little or no value upon them. In Mingre- 
that the prediction principally refers toa general dis- || lia, according to Sir John Chardin, they sell captive 
comfiture of the enemies of God’s church in the lat- || children for provisions and for wine: see Harmer 
_ ter days, probably to that foretold Isa. lxvi. 16, or to || vol. ii. p. 374. 
Vou. IL, ( 58 ) 913 8 


Threatenings against 


JOEL. 


idolatrous nations. 


A. M. 3262, 


4 Yea, and what have ye to do 
B. C.°742. 


with me, £O Tyre, and Zidon, and 
all the coasts of Palestine? & will ye render me 
a recompense ? and if ye recompense me, swiftly 
and speedily will I return your recompense upon 
your own head ; 

5 Because ye have taken my silver and my 
gold, and have carried into your temples my 
goodly ' pleasant things. 

6 The children also of Judah and the chil- 
dren of Jerusalem have ye sold unto *the 

Grecians, that ye might remove them far from 
their border. 


f Amos i. 6, 9. & Ezek. xxv. 15, 16, 17. 1 Heb, desirable, 
Dan. xi. 38.——* Heb. the sons of the Grecians. —— Isa. xiii, 
5, 6; xlix. 12; Jer. xxiii. 8. 


Verse 4. O Tyre, and Zidon, &c.—“* When the 
Babylonians, the appointed instruments of my ven- 
geance, afflict my land, why do you also, and the 
bordering nations, assist them? Do you take this 
occasion of avenging the former victories of my 
people over you? [If so, this your act of revenge 
shall be speedily punished.,—Newcome. The ex- 
pression which he here uses, What have ye to do 
with me? signifies the same as that other so com- 
mon in the sacred books, What have I to do with 
you? that is, What is the reason of your so fre- 
quently invading, and plundering my land and 
people? 

Verse 5. Because ye have taken my silver and 
my gold—Have taken out of my temple the silver 
and golden vessels dedicated to my service; and 
have carried into your temples my goodly pleasant 
things—Hebrew, my destrable goodly things. 
God’s temple was several times despoiled of its orna- 
ments by the Chaldeans. Once in the reign of Je- 
hoiakim, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 7, Then in the short reign 
of Jehoiachin, 2 Kings xxiv. 18, before the last de- 
struction of it, recorded 2 Kings xxv. 18. Some 
part of the furniture might probably be sold to the 
merchants of Tyre and Sidon. The profanation of 
God’s temple, and the sacrilegious robbing it of its 
vessels and ornaments, were crimes remarkably 
punished by God in heathen and infidels: see Jer. 1. 
28, and li. 11. So it was in Belshazzar, Dan. v. 1; 
in Antiochus Epiphanes, 1 Mac. vi. 12; and after- 
ward in Pompey and Crassus. And no "wonder, for 
God had given remarkable proofs of his divine pre- 
sence being in that place; and the heathen them- 
selves might have discovered, by the light of nature, 
that there was but one true and living God. 

Verse 6. The children also of Judah, §c., have ye 
sold unto the Grecians—The descendants of Javan, 
Gen. x. 2,5. They trafficked with Tyre, and traded 
in slaves, "Ezek. xxvil. 13, It was customary for the 
merchants of the neighbouring countries, particular- 
ly of Tyre and Sidon, to buy the children of Israel 
for slaves of their conquerors, in order to sell them 
again: see 1 Mae. iii.41. The histories which re- 

914 


7 Behold, I will raise them out of A. ya _ 
the place whither ye have sold them, 
and will return your Toco ara upon your 
own head: 

8 And I will sell your sons and your daugh- 
ters into the hand of the children of Judah, and 
they shall sell them to the ‘ Sabeans, to a people 
K far off: for the Lorp hath spoken iz. 

9 !Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles ; 
’Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let 
all the men of war draw near; let them 
come up: 

10 ™ Beat your plough-shares into Ghee and 


i Ezekiel xxiti. 42.—* Jer. vi. 20.— Isa. viii. 9,10; Jer. 
xlvi. 3,4; Ezek. xxxviii. 73——® Heb, sanctify.——® Isa. ii. 4 ; 
Micah iv. 3. 


cord the calamities of the Jews, speak of great num- 
bers of them being made captives, and then sold and 
dispersed into foreign countries. Thus forty thou- 
sand were sold by Antiochus Epiphanes, 2 Mae. v. 
14; and about ninety-seven thousand at me destrue- 
tion of Jerusalem by Titus, 

Verses 7,8. Behold, I will raise them, &e. —I will 
restore them, or their posterity, out of their several 
captivities whither their enemies have dispersed them. 
Grotius on this place mentions, that Alexander and 
his successors set at liberty many Jews, who were 
slaves in Greece. Many also, on occasion of Cyrus’s 
decree, might return to their country, from such 
parts of Asia Minor and the Ionian islands as were 
subject to that monarch. And will return your re- 
compense upon your own head—Will inflict upon 
you the punishments mentioned in the following 
verse. Iwill sell your sons, &c.—This was fulfilled 
when Alexander took Gaza, Zidon, and Tyre, and 
made a great multitude of captives, of whom he is 
said to have sold thirty thousand for slaves. These 
captives the Jews, who were in favour with him, 
had the liberty of buying, and probably afterward 
sold many of them, by way of traffic, to the Ara- 
bians, here meant by the Sabeans, 

Verses 9,10. Proclaim ye this among the Gen 
tiles—“ God having foretold these judgments against 
Tyre and Sidon, the Philistines, and the neighbour- 
ing nations, who had used the Jews with injustice 
and cruelty, proceeds here to confirm his people in 


the belief of the certainty of their destruction; which 


he tells them should be as sure as though they - 
themselves had gathered them together by proclama- 
tion for it: for so are these words, Proclaim ye, &ec., 

to be understood. Not as commanding what they | 
were actually to do, but in order to excite their at-— 
tention, and to let them know that God was as cer-_ 
tainly preparing to bring this vengeance on their ene- 
mies, as though he had actually sent messengers 
from the Jews to proclaim it among them:” see 
Chandler. Prepare war, wake up the mighty men 
—Rouse and bring forward into the field your strong 
and valiant men. In these words ae ineng 

{ 58* ) 


Threatenings against 


CHAPTER III. 


idolatrous nations. 


A. M. 3262. 


\, M; $282. your * pruning-hooks into spears: "let 


the weak say, I am strong. 

11 ° Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye 
heathen, and gather yourselves together round 
about: thither °cause ?thy mighty ones to 
come down, O Lorp. 

12 Let the heathen be wakened, 4and come 
up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will 
I sit to "judge all the heathen round about. 

13 * Put ye in the sickle, for t the harvest is 
ripe: come, get you down ; for the " press is full, 
the fats overflow ; for their wickedness is great. 


* Or, scythe; Zech. xii. 8. © Verse 2,5 Or, the 
LORD shall bring down ——? Psalm ciii. 20; Isaiah xiii. 3. 
4 Verse 2. Psa. xevi. 13; xeviii. 9; cx. 6; Isa. ii. 4; iii. 
13; Mic. iv. 3.—=s Matt. xiii. 39; Rev. xiv. 15, 18.—+ Jer. 
li, 33; Hos. vi. 11. 


ironical manner, encourages them to make their ut- 
most effort to oppose the designs of Providence; but 
signifies that it should be all in vain. For, should 
they strengthen themselves by all the means in their 
power, yet they should be overcome and punished. 
Beat your plough-shares into swords, &c.—That is, 
make all the provision and preparation for war, or 
for your own defence, that you possibly can. Fora 
people to beat their very plough-shares into swords, 
&c., signifies a general arming of themselves, much 
beyond what had been usual. 

Verses 11,12. T'hither cause thy mighty ones to 
come down, O Lord--After the prophet has given 
warning, in the way of irony, to the nations to pro- 
vide for their defence by all possible means, and to 
assemble themselves together from all parts, that 
they might strive with their united force; he, in the 
conclusion of the verse, calls upon God to cause those 
to come whom he had appointed to overcome these 
nations. Some, however, render the clause, the Lord 
shall cause thy mighty ones to come down, or to be 
brought low. Let the heathen be awakened—-Let 
their courage be roused up; and come to the valley 
of Jehoshaphat—To the place of divine judgment. 

Verse 13. Put ye in the sickle—Ye executioners 
of divine. vengeance: begin to reap; cut down sin- 
ners ripe for judgment; let the king of Assyria and 
his soldiers cut down Syria and its king, for their 
violence against my people. Let Cyaxares and his 
armies cut down Assyria. Let Nebuchadnezzar cut 
down Moab, Ammon, mount Seir, Egypt, Tyre, 
Zidon, and the Philistines. After this, let Cyrus 
destroy the Babylonians, and Alexander the Medes 
and Persians. And let the divided Grecian captains 
cut down one another, till the Romans cut them 
down. And when this is done, God will have mighty 
ones still to eut down his enemies till the final judg- 
ment, wherein they all shall for ever be destroyed. 
For the harvest is ripe—That is, they are fit for de- 
struction, as the ripened corn for reaping. Come, 
get you down—Namely, into the appointed valley ; 

as though they were going into a vineyard to gather 
giipes. Here the prophet uses another metaphor to 
3 


14 Multitudes, multitudes in * the A. M. 3262, 
valley of °decision: for ¥the day of bait haa 
the Lorp is near in the valley of decision. 

15 The * sun and the moon shall be darken- 
ed, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. 

16 The Lorp also shall *roar out of Zion, 
and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and » the 
heavens and the earth shall shake: * but the 
Lorp will be the * hope of his people, and the 
strength of the children of Israel. 

17 So ‘shall ye know that I am the Lorp 
your God dwelling in Zion *my holy moun- 


w[saiah xiii. 3; Lam. i. 15; Rey. xiv. 19, 20. 
6 Or, concision, or, thrashing. y Chap. ii. 1. 


x Verse 2. 
z Chap. ii, 10, 


31. a Jer. xxv. 30; Chap. ii. 11; Amos i, 2. Hag. ii. 6, 
¢ Isa. li. 5, 6. 7 Heb. place of repair, or, harbour. 4 Chap. 
li. 27. e Dan. xi. 45; Obad. 16; Zech. viii. 3. 


express the cutting off the church’s enemies; for the 
press is full ; the fats overflow—That is, as it is im- 
mediately explained, their wickedness is great—lt is 
come to its full measure. And as the grapes in the 
press are trodden, so the enemies of God’s people 
are to be trodden in the wine-press of his dis- 
pleasure. 

Verses 14,15. Multitudes, &c.—These are Joel’s 
words, exclaiming, with prophetic warmth and agita- 
tion, Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of deci- 
ston !—As though he had said, See what astonishing 
numbers are brought together for their destruction! 
The sentence, thus abrupt and broken, is very strong 
and emphatical. The place is called the valley of 
decision, because in it the cause would be decided 
between God and his enemies, and there he would 
execute judgment upon them. Houbigant reads, the 
valley of excision, that is, of cutting off: and Chand- 
ler, the appointed valley, namely, where God had 
appointed to execute his judgments. TJ'he sun and 
the moon shall be darkened—States and kingdoms 
shall be overthrown; and the stars shali withdraw 
their shining—Kings and princes shall be cast down 
from their state of dignity and pre-eminence, and 
shall be deprived of their power and glory. Or the 
meaning is, This particular judgment shall be a fore- 
runner of the general one, when the whole frame 
of nature shall be dissolved. 

Verse 16. The Lord shall roar out of Zion—He 
shall strike the enemies of his people with astonish- 
ment, as the roaring of the lion astonishes the 
weaker beasts of the forest. And the heavens and 
the earth shall shake--The destruction shall be as 
certain and dreadful as though God’s enemies were 
destroyed by thunder and lightning from heaven. 
But the Lord will be the hope of his people-—Though 
the heaven and the earth gh etek his word and 
promise, given to his servants, shall not pass away. 

Verse 17. So shall ye know that I am the Lord 
dwelling in Zion—Very graciously present with 
you, and ever watching over you and delighting to 
save you. Then shall Jerusalem be holy—After 
the church’s enemies are destroyed, the Messiak is 

915 


Judgments threatened, 


A. M. 3262. tain: then shall Jerusalem be ® holy, 
Bice, and there shall ‘no strangers pass 
through her any more. 

18 4 And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that the mountains shall *drop down “néw 
wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and 
all the rivers of Judah shall ° flow with waters, 
and ‘a fountain shall come forth of the house 
of the Lorn, and shall water *the valley of 
Shittim. 


8 Heb. holiness. £ Isa, xxxv. 8; lii. 1; Nah. i.15; Zech. 
xiv. 21; Rev. xxi. 27. g Amos ix. 13.——4 Isaiah xxx. 25. 
» Heb. go. —— Psa. xlvi. 4; Ezek. xlvii.1; Rech, xiv. 8; Rev. 


xxii. 1.—* Num. xxv. J. 


come, and the remnant saved, the people of God 
shall be holy. There shall no strangers pass 
through her—No profane or unclean person shall be 
found in the church of Christ.. 

Verse 18. The mountains shall drop down new 
wine—Namely, the vines planted upon the mount- 
ains. Zhe hills shall flow with milk—So fruitful 
shall the hills be, that milk shall abound everywhere. 
And all the rivers, &c.—These expressions are all 
figurative, and highly poetical, and, according to 
Calmet, symbolical. of the doctrine of the gospel; 
which, accompanied by the Spirit of grace, was to 
flow forth from Jerusalem, and to water the Gentile 
world, which had been as a barren and uncultivated 
land. 

Verses 19, 20. Egypt shall be a desolation, and 
Edom, &c.—These two people were remarkable for 
the spite they bore to the Jews. The Egyptians 
were their oppressors when they first became a na- 
tion, and afterward exercised great cruelties upon 
them, during the reign of the Egyptian kings who 
were Alexander’s successors, The Idumeans are 
often reproved and threatened with judgments by 
the prophets, for the malice they took all occasions 
to vent against the Israelites, though nearly related 
to them: see the margin. These two nations, 

916 


JOEL. 


and mercies promised. 


19 ! Egypt shall be a desolation, and A. Bf, Gp. 
m Edom shall be a desolate wilder- ——~ 
ness, for the violence against the children of 
Judah, because they have shed innocent blood 
in their land. 

20 But Judah shall 1° dwell * for ever, and 
Jerusalem from generation to generation. 

21 For I will ° cleanse their blood that I have 
not cleansed: ? for “the Lorp dwelleth in 
Zion. 


1 Isa. xix. 1, &e. m Jer. xlix.17; Ezek. xxv. 12,13; Amos 
i. 11; Obad. 10. 10 Or, abide. » Amos ix. 15. © Isa. iv. 
4.—? Ezek. xlviii. 35; Verse 17; Rev. xxi. 3——" Or, even 
I the LORD that dwelleth in Zion. 


therefore, are taken, in a general sense, for the ene- 
mies of God’s people. But Judah—The redeemed 
of the Lord, his church, shall dwell, or continue, 
for ever—Free from the annoyance of enemies. 
The Christian Church is evidently intended, in- 
cluding probably the conversion and final restora- 
tion of the Jews. 

Verse 21. J will cleanse their blood, &c.—The 
word blood seems here to signify pollution in gene- 
ral; and the promise implies, that God would per- 
fectly purge away the guilt and defilement of all the 
sins of his people, by a free pardon and entire sanc- 
tification. Calmet, who applies this to the times of 
the gospel, thus interprets the verse: “Jesus Christ 
cleanses, by the new law, the blood which remained 
unclean under the old. We find in the sacrament 
of the new law that real purity, of which the legal 
ceremonies and purifications were only a figure.” 
For the Lord dwelleth in Zion—And his presence 
shall be a source of purity, as well as of consolation 
to his people. “It is uncertain,” says Archbishop 
Newcome, “whether we have the key to this diffi- 
cult chapter; which may not be fully understood 
till Jerusalem is rebuilt, and till the prophecies, 
Ezekiel xxxix. 5, 11; Revelation xx. 8, 9, are ac- 
complished, ” 

3 


an 


THE 


BeQ:QeK.QO FF AM O-S. 


ARGUMENT. 


Amos was a herdsman of Tekoa, a small town about four miles southward of Jerusalem, and a 
gatherer of sycamore fruit. Rural employments, however, were general and honourable among 
his countrymen. When he says, “I was no prophet, neither was I the son of a prophet,” chap. 
vii. 14, he seems to distinguish himself from those who were educated in the schools instituted by 
Samuel. God, however, constituted him a prophet, and sent him, in the reign of Jeroboam the son 
of Joash, to uttet is prophecies in the kingdom of Israel, in which he seems to have dwelt, (see 
chap. vii. 12,) though born and brought up in the tribe of Judah. He appears to have been cotem- 
porary with Hosea; although it is likely he began to prophesy before him, and continued in his 
office a much shorter time. Some have confounded him with Amoz, the father of Isaiah ; but their 
names, in the original, are very different, and their famil.es too of a different character ; for Isaiah 
was a courtier, Amos a countryman. St. Jerome gives this character of him, that “though he was 
rude in speech, yet not in knowledge.” And many, following the authority of St. Jerome, have 
spoken of him as if he were quite rude and ineloquent, and destitute of all the embellishments of 
composition. The matter, however, is far otherwise. [et any person, who has candour and per- 
spicacity enough to judge, not from the man, but from his writings, open the volume of his predic- 
tions, and he will find that this shepherd is not a whit behind the very chief of the prophets. Ue 
will agree, that as, in elevation of sentiments and loftiness of spirit, he 1s almost equal to the 
greatest; so in splendour of diction, elegance of expression, and beauty of composition, he is 
scarcely inferior to any. The same celestial Spirit, indeed, actuated Isaiah and Daniel in the 
court, and Amos in the sheepfolds ; constantly selecting such interpreters of the divine will as 
were best adapted to the occasion; and sometimes, from the mouths of babes and sucklings, per- 
fecting praise: occasionally employing the natural eloquence of some, and occasionally making 
others eloquent. See Bishop Lowth, De Sacra Poesi Hebreorum, Prelec. xxi. ‘ He borrows,” 
says Archbishop Newcome, “many images from the scenes in which he had been engaged ; but 
he introduces them with skill, and gives them force and dignity by the eloquence and grandeur of 
his manner. We shall find in him many affecting and pathetic, many elegant and sublime passages. 
No prophet has more magnificently described the Deity ; or more gravely rebuked the luxurious ; 
or reproved injustice and oppression with greater warmth, and a more generous indignation.” He 
begins with predictions of ruin.to the Syrians, Philistines, Tyrians, Edomites, Ammonites, and 
Moabites. He next inveighs against the idolatry, the oppression, carnal confidence, wantonness, 
selfishness, and obstinacy of Israel and Judah; and threatens them with distress, ravage, captivity, 
and desolation, on account thereof ; and particularly predicts, that the family of Jeroboam, however 

+ then prosperous, should be quickly cut off by the sword. He concludes his work with a prophecy 
of the Jews’ return from Babylon; of the gathering of the Gentiles to Christ; and of the conver- 
sion of Israel and Judah; and their restoration to, and establishment in their land, in the beginning 
of the glorious millennium. It is probable he lived to see a great part of his predictions fulfilled, 
namely, in the civil wars that took place in Israel, and the captivity of the ten tribes. ~ 


CHAPTER I. 


In ths chapter we have the general title and scope of this prophecy, 1,2. God's controversy with Syria, 3-5; with 
Palestine, 6-8; with Tyre, 9, 10; with Edom, 11, 12; and Ammon, 13-15. 
3 917 


Threatenings against 


A. M. 3217. THE words of Amos, ? who was 
< ce among the herdmen of ” 'Tekoa, 
which he saw concerning Israel ° in the days 
of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of 
4Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, 
two years before the ° earthquake. 

2 And he said, The Lorp will f roar from 
Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem ; and 
the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, 
and the top of & Carmel shall wither. 

3 4 Thus saith the Lorp; For three trans- 
gressions of " Damascus, ? anil for four, I will 


a Chap. vii. 14. b2 Sam. xiv. 2; 2 Chron. xx. 20. © Hos. 
i, 1.——4 Chapter vii. 10. e Zech. xiv. 5.——f Jer. xxv. 30; 
Joel iii. 16.—s1 Sam. xxv. 2; Isa. xxxili. 9. h Isa. vill. 45 
xvii. 1; Jer. xlix. 23; Zech. ix. 1— Or, yea, for four. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. The words of Amos—This inscription, 
and some similar ones prefixed to some of the books 
of the prophets, seem to have been formed by those 
who collected their writings together. Which he 
saw—Received by revelation; concerning Israel— 
Namely, the kingdom of the ten tribes, to which 
this prophecy chiefly refers; although the prophet 
briefly denounces God’s judgments against Judah, 
and also against the Syrians, Philistines, and other 
neighbouring countries. In the days ‘of Uzziah 
king of Judah—Called Azariah in the second book 
of Kings, chap. xv. And in the days of Jeroboam 
—The great-grandson of Jehu. Two years before 
the carthquake—Of which only this text, and Zech. 
xiv. 5, make particular mention; but it is thought to 
be referred to, Isa. v. 25. And Josephus, who at- 
tributes it to Uzziah’s invasion of the priest’s of- 
fice, recorded 2 Chron. xxvi. 16, gives us some ac- 
count of its effects. 

Verse 2. The Lord will roar from Zion—This 
and the next clause occur, Joel iii. 16, and a similar 
one, Jer. xxv. 30, where see the notes. The mean- 
ing is, that God would soon spread terror, like beasts 
of prey when they roar, chap. iii. 8: or, that he 
would soon display his power in executing judg- 
ment. And utter his voice from Jerusalem—The 
city God had chosen, where he dwelt; the seat of 
his instituted worship, and the royal seat of the 
kingdom, as God had settled it, but from which, in 
both respects, the ten tribes had revolted. The 
habitations of the shepherds shall mourn—The 
shepherds were wont to pitch their tents where 
they found pasturage, and to dwell therein, that they 
might attend their flocks. But it is here foretold, 
that the pasture-ground should wither and become 
barren, through a drought which would take place, 
and of which the prophet speaks, chap. iv. 7, 8. 
Carmel was a mountainous tract of ground, which 
ran through the two tribes of Tnendhar and Zebulon. 
It is often described as one of the most fruitful 
places in all Judea: see Isa, xxxiii. 9, and xxxy. 2: 
upon which account the word is sometimes taken 
appellatively, and translated a fruitful field. 

918 


AMOS. 


the Syrians. 


not ?turn away’ the punishment secret 
thereof; ‘ because they have thrashed 

Gilead with thrashing instruments of iron : 

4 * But I will send a fire into the house of 
Hazael, which shall devour the palaces of 
Ben-hadad. 

5 Iwill break also the bar of Damascus, 
and cut off the inhabitant from *the plain of 
Aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from 
* the house of Eden: and ™the people of Syria 
shall go into captivity "unto Kir, saith the 
Lorp. 


2 Or, convert it, or, let it be quiet, and so versé 6.——i 2 Kings 
x. 33; xili. ’7—— Jer. xvii. 27; xlix. 27; Verses 7, 10, 12; 
Chap. ii. 2, 5.——! Jer. li. 30; Lam. ii. 9. %Or, Bikathaven. 
. On. Beth-eden.—» Fulfilled, 2 Kings xvi. 9.—— Chap. ix. 7, 


Verse 3. For three transgressions, &e.—The 
prophet first denounces judgments against foreign 
countries, and afterward comes to Judah and Israel. 
He begins with Syria, the head or capital city of 
which was Damascus. By the expression, for three 
transgressions and for four, used here, and repeat- 
edly afterward, he means, many or multiplied trans- 
gressions, a certain number being put, according to 
a very common way of speaking, for an uncertain. 
So we read, Job. v. 19, He shall deliver thee in sir 
troubles ; yea, in seven no evil shall touch thee: see 
the like phrase, Prov. vi. 16; Eccl. xi. 2; Mie. v. 5. 
Once and twice are used, Psa. Ixii. 11; twice and 
thrice, Job xxxiii. 29, (Heb.) So that the meaning 
here is, that on account of the frequent transgres- 
sions of Damascus, God was now resolved no longer 
to spare it. Because they have thrashed Gilead, 
&e.—This alludes to the thrashing-drag, or thrash- 
ing-wain, used in the eastern countries, and de- 
scribed in the note on Isa, xxviii. 27, which see. 
These instruments, being drawn by horses, or oxen, 
over the corn-sheaves spread on the floor, were 
proper and significant emblems of the tyrannical 
power of Syria, which cruelly oppressed and crush- 
ed the weak Gileadites, and other Israelites. It is 
probable that the cruelties exercised on them by 
Hazael and Ben-hadad, kings of Syria, are chiefly 
intended. ‘The fact is recorded 2 Kings x. 32, 33, 
and xiii. 3-7, where it is said that Hazael made, 
them like the dust by thrashing. 

Verses 4, 5. But I will send a fire into the house 
of Hazael —God’s judgments are often compared 
to fire. But perhaps the-expression may here sig- 
nify, that the fine palaces of Hazael, and his son 
and successor Ben-hadad, should be burned down, as 
they probably were in the taking of Damascus by 
Tiglath-pileser. J will break also the bar of Da- 
mascus—The gates and fortifications thereof, in 
which its strength consists, shall be broken down: 
and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven— 
Or, Bikath-aven. The word signifies, the plain o 
vanity; from whence some conjecture rows 


place in Syria remarkable for idolnten is Retheel 
was called Beth-aven for the idolatry practise.. 


to 


on 
* 
a 


ON OS ae ee 


Threatenings against the 


CHAPTER I. 


Edomites and Ammonites. 


A. M. 3217. 


6 % Thus saith the Lorn; For 
B. C. 787. 


three transgressions ‘of ° Gaza, and 
for four, I will not turn away the punish- 
ment thereof: because they * carried away cap- 
tive the whole captivity, to deliver them up to 
Edom : 

7 2 But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, 
which shall devour the palaces thereof: 

8 And I will cut off the inhabitant * from 
Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from 
Ashkelon, and Iwill ‘turn my hand against 
Ekron: and ‘the remnant of the Philistines 
shall perish, saith the Lord Gop. 

9 § Thus saith the Lorp; For three trans- 
gressions of *'Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn 
away the punishment thereof: * because they 


°2 Chron. xxviii. 18; Isa. xiv. 29; Jer. xlvii. 4,5; Ezekiel 
xxv 15; Zeph. ii. 4. 5 Or, carried them away with an entire 
captivity, 2 Chronicles xxi. 16,17; Joel iii. 6. P Verse 9. 
4 Jeremiah xlvii. 1. t Zeph. ii. 4; Zech. ix. 5. 5 Psalm 
lxxxi. 14. Jeremiah xlvii. 4; Ezekiel xxv. 16. 4 Tsaiah 
xxiii. 1; Jeremiah xlvii. 4; Ezek. xxvi.; xxvii.; xxvilil.; Joel 
iii. 4, 5.——* Verse 6. 


delivered up the whole captivity to 4 ¥ pee) 
Edom, and remembered not ®the ———— 
brotherly covenant : 

10 ¥ But I will send a fire on the wall of Ty- 
rus, which shall devour the palaces thereof. 

11 4 Thus saith the Lorp; For three trans- 
gressions of * Edom, and for four, I will not 
turn away the punishment thereof: because 
he did pursue *his brother » with the sword, 
and.’ did cast off all pity, ° and his anger did 
tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath for ever :» 

12 But ¢T will send a fire upon Teman, 
which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah. 

13 4 Thus saith the Lorn; For three trans- 
gressions of ° the children of Ammon, and for 
four, I will not turn away the punishment 


5 Heb. the covenant of brethren, 2 Samuel v. 11; 1 Kings v. 1; 
ix. 11-14. y Verses 4, 7. z Isaiah xxi. 11; xxxiv. 5; Jer. 
xlix. 8, &c.; Ezekiel xxv. 12, 13,14; xxxv. 2; Joel iii. 19; 
Obad. 1; Mal. i. 4. 2Gen. xxvii. 41; Deut. xxiii. 7; Mal. 
i, 2—— 2 Chron. xxviii. 17. 7 Heb. corrupted his compassions. 
© Ezek. xxxv. 5——4 Obad. 9, 10.—® Jer. xlix. 1,2; Ezek. 
xxv. 2; Zeph. ii. 9. 


there. And him that holdeth the sceptre from the 
house of Eden—That is, the house of pleasure. 
Probably one of the pleasant palaces of the kings 
of Syria is intended. But Eden was likewise a 
country bordering on Syria, mentioned 2 Kings xix. 
12; Ezek. xxvii. 23. And the people of Syria shall 
go into captivity—All this was fulfilled when Tig- 
fath-pileser took Damascus, and carried the people 
captive to Kir, and slew Rezin their king: see the 
margin. 

Verses 6-8. For three transgressions of Gaza, 
&c.—F rom Syria he passes to Palestine, upon the 
coast of which Gaza was situated. It is one of the 
places threatened by Joel, chap.iii.6. Because they 
carried away the whole captivity—Or, a peaceable 
captivity, as Mr. Locke renders Mmm 153; that 
is, a captivity not taken in war, but by deceit: or, a 
perfect captivity, that is, not to be recovered. It 
appears, from 2 Chron. xxi. 16, and xxviii. 18, that 
the Philistines (for the town of Gaza belonged to 
them) made frequent incursions upon the Jews and 
Israelites. And it is probable from this passage that 
they were guilty of some injustice and cruelty, be- 
yond the usual practice of war, in making captives, 
perhaps taking the peaceable inhabitants and all 
without distinction, the old and infirm as well as the 
young and healthy: or, making these incursions 
when Judah and Israel were at peace with them. 
Or, perhaps, their cruelty consisted in selling those 
they made captives to the Edomites, whom they 
knew to be mortal enemies of the Jews, and conse- 
quently, they might reasonably suppose, would treat 
them with great severity and tyranny. But I will 
send a fire, &c.—What is here foretold respecting 
the destruction of the cities of the Philistines, was 
fulfilled by Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 8. The same 
was predicted by Isaiah, chap. xiv. 29. And the 

a 3 


were cut off by the Assyrians: see Isa. xx. 

Verse 9. For three transgressions of Tyrus, &c. 
—This prediction is probably to be understood of 
the destruction of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar, as fore- 
told by Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel: see the mar- 
gin. Because they delivered up the whole captivity 
to Edom—Without doubt the Edomites used the 
Jewish captives with great barbarity, as the deliver- 
ing of these captives up to them is also assigned as 
a principal reason of the punishment of Tyre, as it 
was of the punishment of Damascus, verse 6. And 
remembered not the brotherly covenant—That strict 
league and friendship begun between David and 
Hiram, king of Tyre, and afterward continued by 
Solomon, (see the margin,) Hiram giving Solomon 
the title of My brother, as we read 1 Kings ix. 13. 

Verses 11, 12. For three transgressions of Edom, 
&c.—The Edomites, or Idumeans, are often threaten- 
ed for their enmity against the Israelites, because 
they took all oceasions to oppress and insult over 
them in their distress. Because he did pursue his 
brother with the sword—The Edomites retained the 
same hatred and animosity against their brethren, 
the Israelites, which their father Esau had expressed 
against his brother Jacob. But I will send a fire 
upon Teman, &c.—Teman and Bozrah were two 
principal cities of Idumea. The destruction here 
denounced against them was afterward brought 
upon them, in some degree, by Sennacherib, but 
more especially by Nebuchadnezzar: see notes on 
Jer. xlix. 7-22, and Ezek. xxv. 15. 

Verses 13-15. For three transgressions of the chil- 
dren of Ammon—The Ammonites descended from 
Lot; see Gen. xix. 38. Their country lay to the 
east of Jordan, in the neighbourhood of Gilead. 
Because they have ripped up the women with child 

919 


Threatenings against 


AMOS. 


7 


Moab and Judah. 


AM. 3217. thereof: because they have ‘ripped 
aa taal up the women with child, of Gilead, 
€ that they might enlarge their border : 

14 But I will kindle a fire in the wall of 
» Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces there- 


of, ‘with shouting in the day of AIG, 7. 
battle, with a tempest in the day of ———— 
the whirlwind : 

15 And * their king shall go into captivity, he 
and his princes together, saith the Lorp. 


8 Or, divided the bow ger Hosea xiii. 16——s Jeremiah 
xlix. 1. 


= 


h Deut. iii. 11; 2Sam. xii. 26; Jeremiah xlix. 2; Ezek. xxy. 5. 
i Chap. ii. 2-— Jer. xlix. 3. 


—Hazael, king of Syria, grievously afflicted the 
Israelites that lay eastward of Jordan, particularly 
the Gileadites: see 2 Kings x. 33. The low condi- 
tion to which these countries were hereby reduced, 
might probably encourage the Ammonites to possess 
themselves of Gilead, and to destroy the inhabitants 
in the cruel manner here stated. But I will kindle 
a fire in the wall of Rabbah—The chief city of the 
Ammonites, With shouting in the day of battle— 


This was intended to express the great violence with 
which this city should be attacked; and with a tem- 
pest in the day of the whirlwind—The destructions 
of war are often compared to the devastations caused 
by whirlwinds and tempests; and the metaphor is 
here introduced very naturally and sublimely. And 
their king shall go into captivity, he and his 
princes together, saith the Lord—Foretold also, 
Jeremiah xlix. 3. 


CHAPTER II. 


We have here God's controversy with Moab, 1-3; with Judah, 4,5; and with Israel, 6-8. The aggravations of their 
sins, 9-12. God complains of them, and threatens their ruin, 13-16. 


A. M. 3217, THUS saith the Lorp; For three 

B. C. 787. : 
ia transgressions of * Moab, and for 
four, I will not turn away the punishment 
thereof, because he » burned the bones of the 
king of Edom into lime : 

2 But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it 
shall devour the palaces of ° Kirioth: and 
Moab shall die with tumult, ¢ with shouting, 
and with the sound of the trumpet : 

3 And I will cut off *the judge from the 


midst thereof, and will slay all the A. M. 3217. 
princes thereof with him, saith the ———— 
Lorp. 

4 § Thus saith the Lorp; For three trans- 
gressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn 
away the punishment thereof; ‘because they 
have despised the law of the Lorn, and have 
not kept his commandments, and & their lies 
caused them to err, " after the which their fa- 
thers have walked : 


xxiv. 17; Jer. xlviii. 7——f Leviticus xxvi. 14,15; Daniel ix. 11. 
@ Isa. xxviii, 15; Rom. i. 25. h Ezek. xx. 13, 16, 18, 24, 30. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IL. 

Verses 1-3. For three transgressions of Moab— 
Moab and Ammon being nearly related, (see Gen. 
xix. 37,) and bordering upon each other, they are 
usually joined together in the threatenings of the 
prophets. Because he burned the bones of the king 
of Edom to lime—To plaster the walls of his house 
with it, as the Chaldee paraphrase explains the text, 
which was most ungenerously and cruelly insulting 
over the dead. A like story is told by Sir Paul 
Rycaut (Present State of the Greek Church, chap. 
ii.) of the walls of the city Philadelphia, made of the 
bones of the besieged, by the prince that took it by 
storm. I will send a fire upon Moab—Moab was con- 
quered by Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. xxvii. 3,6. It shall 
devour the palaces of Kirioth—A principal city of 
thiscountry.. And Moab shall die with tumult—The 
Moabites shall be destroyed in the tumult of war. 
And I will cut off the judge in the midst thereof— 
Probably the chief magistrate or king is intended. 

Verses 4, 5. For three transgressions of Judah, 

920 


&c.—Having denounced judgments against the hea- 
then nations, he now proceeds to denounce them 
against God’s professing people, who were more 
guilty and inexcusable, as sinning against greater 
light, and abusing greater advantages than those 
with which the heathen were favoured. Because 
they have despised the law of the Lord—The law 
which was holy, just, and good, and which raised 
them in dignity above every other nation. In despis- 
ing this law they depised the wisdom, justice, and 
goodness of the Law-maker; and this they did, in 
effect, when they observed not the commandments 
of it, and made no conscience of keeping them, or 
acquainting themselves therewith. And their lies 
—Vulgate, Jdola sua, their idols, or fictitious deities, 
have caused them to err—Their idolatry blinded 
them, partly from the natural tendency of this sin, 
and partly from the just judgment of God. After 
the which—Idols; their fathers have walked—Suc- 
cessively, one generation after another, notwith- 
standing all the warnings I have given — 


ae 


Threatenings against 


A. M. 3217. 


“tage 5 ‘But I will send a fire upon Ju- 


dah, and it shall devour the palaces 
of Jerusalem. 

6 4 Thus saith the Lorp; For three trans- 
gressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn 
away the punishment thereof: because * they 
sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a 
pair of shoes ; 

7 That pant after the dust of the earth on the 
head of the poor, and 'turn aside the way of 
the meek: ™ and a man and his father will go 


CHAPTER II. 


the ten tribes. 


in unto the same ' maid, ™to profane A. M, 3217. 
my holy name : bas cea 

8 And they lay hemselves down upon clothes 
° laid to pledge ? by every altar, and they drink 
the wine of * the condemned in the house of 
their god. 

9 4 Yet destroyed I the *Amorite before 
them, * whose height was like the height of the 
cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet I 
‘destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots 
from beneath. * 


i Jeremiah xvii. 27; Hosea viii. 14.——* Isaiah xxix. 21; 
Chapter viii. 6——! Isaiah x. 2; Chapter v. 12.——™ Ezekiel 
xxii. 1l.—" Or, young woman.—— Lev. xx. 3; Ezek. xxxvi. 
20; Rom. ii. 24. 


° Exod. xxii. 26. P Ezek. xxiii. 41; 1 Cor. viii. 10; x. 21. 
2 Or, such as have fined, or, mulcted. 4 Num. xxi, 24; Deut. 
ie 31; Josh. xxiv. 8.——r Num. xiii. 28, 32, 33.——= Isa. v. 24; 
al. iv. 1. 


prophets. But Iwill send a fire upon Judah, &c.— 
Nebuchadnezzar’s army was this fire, that burned 
many cities of Judah, and at last Jerusalem itself. 
Verses 6,7. For three transgressions of Israel 
—Amos, having first prophesied against the Syrians, 
Philistines, &c., who dwelt in the neighbourhood of 
the twelve tribes, and who had occasionally become 
their enemies and oppressors; and having thus not 
only taught his countrymen that the providence of 
God extended to other nations, but conciliated at- 
tention to himself by such interesting predictions; 
“he briefly mentions the idolatries and consequent 
destruction of Judah, and then passes on to his pro- 
per subject, which was to reprove and exhort the 
kingdom of Israel, and to denounce judgments 
against it. The reason why that kingdom was par- 
ticularly addressed seems to have been, that Pul in- 
vaded it in the reign of Uzziah, 2 Kings xv. 19; 
and that in less than half a century after the first 
Assyrian invasion, it was subverted by Shalmaneser, 
2 Kings xvii. 6.’—Newcome. Because they sold the 
righteous for silver, &c.—They perverted the cause 
of the righteous, and gave forth unjust sentences 
against them for bribes of the smallest value, even 
for a pair of shoes or sandals. T'hat pant after the 
dust of the earth—That is, silver and gold, white 
and yellow dust: they covet it earnestly, and levy it 
on the heads of the poor by their unjust exactions. 
The Vulgate, however, gives another sense to this 
sentence. Qui conterunt super pulverem terre 
capila pauperum: who tread down the heads of the 
poor into the dust of the earth: that is, they throw 
them into the dust and then trample upon them. 
And turn aside the way of the meek—From right 
and justice. They contrived to do injuries to those 
who they knew were mild and patient, and would 
bear injuries; invading their rights, and obstructing 
the course of justice. Observe, reader, the more 
patiently men bear the injuries that are done them, 
the greater is the sin of those that injure them. 
and the more occasion they have to expect that God 
will do his people justice, and take vengeance for them. 
And a man and his father will go in to the same 
maid—Or, young woman; to profane my holy name 
—To the great reproach of my name and religion: 
3 


being such an instance of fornication as is scarce 
heard of among the more civilized heathen, as St. 
Paul observes, 1 Cor. v. 1. 

Verse 8. T'hey lay themselves down upon clothes 
laid to pledge—The Jews as well as the Romans 
used to lie along at their meals on couches, as ap- 
pears by this verse, compared with chap. vi. 4: a 
custom which was continued in after times, as is 
evident by divers passages in the gospels, read in the 
original, which speak, not of persons sitting, but 
lying down, or reclining, at meat. As the prophet 
here speaks of their laying themselves down by 
every altar, it is manifest he refers to the feasts 
which were made of part of their idolatrous sacri- 
fices, and were eaten in some of the apartments of 
their temples, according to the custom both of the 
Jews and Gentiles, And the prophet reproves them 
for three abuses. Ist, That they kept the clothes 
which they had received as pledges from the poor, 
contrary to the law, which commanded that the 
clothes received in pledge should be returned by the 
going down of the sun: see Exod. xxii.6. 2d, That 
they made feasts in the houses, or temples, of their 
idols, or golden calves, no longer coming to the 
temple at Jerusalem; and, as if to insult the holiness 
of God’s laws, and to carry the marks of their 
iniquity even to the feet of their altars, they sat 
down in their temples upon the garments which 
they had received in pledge from the poor. 34d, 
That they caroused at the expense of those on 
whom they had unjustly laid fines, or, as it is ex- 
pressed in the text, They drank the wine of the 
condemned in the house of their god—As drink- 
offerings, made with wine, were a necessary part of 
the sacrifices, so some portion of these was like- 
wise reserved for the entertainments that followed. 
And this the prophet here signifies was bought with 
the fines or mulcts laid on the innocent. 

Verse 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them 
—Namely, when they came out of Egypt. The 
Amorites include the rest of the Canaanites, and are, 
here mentioned rather than the others, as being the 
mightiest nation of them all. Here the benefits which 
God had bestowed upon the Israelites are mentioned 
that it might appear how great their ingratitude was 

921 


Judgments denounced 


A. M. 3217. 


10 Also tI brought you up from the 
B. C. 787. 


“ land of Egypt, and "led you forty 
years through the wilderness, to possess the 
land of the Amorite. 

11 And I raised up of your sons for prophets, 
and of your young men for * Nazarites. Js at 
not even thus, O ye children of Israel? saith 
the Lorp. 

12 But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink ; 
and commanded the prophets, ¥ saying, Pro- 
phesy not. 

13 7 Behold, *I am pressed under you, as a 


t Exodus xii. 51; Micah vi. 4. 
x Numbers vi. 2; Judges xiii. 5. 
Chap. yii. 12, 13; Mie. ii. 6. 


4 Deuteron. ii. 7; viii. 2. 
¥ Isa. xxx. 10; Jer. xi. 21; 
z Isa.-i. 14. 


AMOS. 


agavnst Israel. 


cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. + 3 = 

14 * Therefore the flight shall perish ————. 
from the swift, and the strong shall not 
strengthen his force, > neither shall the mighty 
deliver * himself : 

15 Neither shall he stand that handleth the 
bow ; and he that is swift of foot shall not de- 
liver himself : ° neither shall he that rideth the 
horse deliver himself. 

16 And he that is *courageous among the 
mighty shall flee away naked in thtit day, saith 
the Lorp. 


3 Or, I will press your place, as a cart full of sheaves presseth. 
a Ch. ix. 1, &c.; Jer. ix. 23.——> Psa. xxxiii. 16.——* Heb. his 
soul, or, life. ‘e Psa, xxiii. 17.——* Heb. strong of his heart. 


toward him. Whose height was like that of the ce- 
dars—Who were men of a vast stature, and remark- 
able strength. The image is agrand and natural one. 
Virgil makes the same comparison, speaking of the 
Titans, Zneid, lib. iii. verse 677. 


“Concilium horrendum, quales cum vertice celso, 
Aerie quercus, aut coniferee Cyparissi 
Constiterunt, sylva alta Jovis, lucusve Diane.” 


“ A dreadful council, with their heads on high, 
Not yielding to the tow’ring tree of Jove, 
Or tallest cypress of Diana’s grove.” Dryprn. 


Yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots 
from beneath—The prophet diversifies and conti- 
nues the image with great beauty. See similar ones, 
Homer’s Ji., xiii. 389, and Hor. Od., 1. iv.6. So Vir- 
gil compares the destruction of Troy to the cutting 
down a mouniain ash; and the fall of Entellus to 
that ofa pine. Zn., ii. 626; v. 447. 

Verses 11, 12. Ir aised up your sons for prophets 
—Such were Moses, Joshua, Samuel, and many 
others; and of your young men for ‘Nazarites— 
Who, by devoting themselves to my service in a 
peculiar manner, and by observing peculiar rites, were 
anhonourto you. But ye gave the Nazarites wine— 


Ye tempted the Nazarites to violate their vow and con- 
temn God’s law, persuading them to drink wine; and 
commanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not—Y ou 
bid the prophets hold their peace, and notspeak against 
your actions, nor denounce any punishments against 
you for them. An example of this we have in Amos 
himself, chap. vii. 

Ver. 13-16. Behold Iam pressed under you—Y our 
sins have quite tired out my patience, and Iam weary 
with bearing them: compare Isa. xliii. 24; Mal. ii. 
17. In this sense the clause is understood by the 
LXX. and Vulgate. The marginal reading, however, 
is preferred by many commentators. Archbishop 
Newcome renders the verse, Behold, I will prese 
your place as a loaded corn-wain presseth its 
sheaves ; and Secker observes, The next verse being 
joined to this by the connective particle (and) makes 
it more natural that thisshould begin to express their 
punishment. Therefore flight shall perish from the 
swift—Even flight shall not secure the swift, for 
their enemies shall be swifter than they. The 
strong shall not strengthen his force—Their natural 
strength of body shall not deliverthem. And he that 
is courageous shall flee away naked—Having cast 
away his armour, or upper garments, for greater ex- 
pedition. j 


CHAPTER III. 


Here, (1,) Judgments are denounced against Israel, 1-8. 


(2,) They are shown, that unless they repented and reform- 


ed their conduct, those judgments would certainly fall upon them, 9=15, ‘ 


A. M. 3217. 


he Me HEAR this word that the Lorp 


hath spoken against you, O 
children of Israel, against the’ whole family 


7187 


2 Deut. vii. 6; x. 15; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verses 1;2. Hear this word against the whole 
Samily, &c.—All that family of which Jacob, or Is- 
rael, was the head. The word family is equivalent 

922 


which I brought up from the land A. M. s2lt, 


of ore saying, i RE 
* You only have I known of all the families 


Psblad exlvii. 19, 20. 


to people here and in the following verse. You only 
have I known—Acknowledged, by re myself 
to you, protecting you, and conferring on pecu- 
liar privileges. Therefore will I punish ee 


Judgments denounced 


CHAPTER III. 


against Israet. 


ajjaaooaalal‘qeneleleooeeeeeeeooooooeeeee 


aE of the earth: ” therefore I will * pun- 
————_ ish you for all your iniquities. 

3 Can two walk together, except they be 
agreed ? 

4 Will a lion roar in the forest, when he hath 
no prey? willa young lion * cry out of his den, 
if he have taken nothing ? 

5 Cana bird fall in a snare upon the earth, 
where no gin is for him? shall one take up a 
snare from the earth, and have taken nothing 
at all? 

6 Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and 


6 Daniel ix. 12; Matthew xi. 22; Luke xii. 47; Rom. ii. 9; 
1 Pet. iv. 17.——" Heb. visit upon. 2 Heb. give forth his voice. 
3 Or, not run together. © Isa, xlv. 7. 


the people *not be afraid? ¢ shall A. M. 3217. 
there be evil in a city, and the Lorp =— viii 
hath not done it 2 

7 Surely the Lord Gop will do nothing, but 
“he revealeth his secret unto his servants the 
prophets. : 

8 © The lion hath roared, who will not fear ? 
the Lord Gop hath spoken, f who can but pro- 
phesy ? 

9 9 Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and 
in the palaces of the land of Egypt, and say, 
Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of 


4Or, and shall not the LORD do somewhat !——4 Gen. vi. 13; 
xviii. 17; Psa. xxv. 14; Johr xv. 15. © Chap. i. 2——t Acts 
iv. 20; v. 20, 29; 1 Cor. ix. 16. 


sins, therefore, shall be punished, and that in an ex- 
emplary manner; because you have sinned against 
greater light and higher obligations than other na- 
tions are or have been favoured with; and yon have 
manifested an ungrateful, as well as a disobedient 
spirit. For the same reason the angel is command- 
ed to begin his execution at the sanctuary, Ezek. ix. 
6; andSt. Peter observes, that judgment must begin at 
the house of God, 1 Pet. iv. 17: see also the margin. 

Verse 3. Can two walk together—Comfortably as 
friends; except they be agreed—Except they be in 
peace with each other? So neither can I conduct 
myself toward youas a friend or benefactor, nor can 
you have my presence with you, while you walk so 
contrary to me, and act in such perfect opposition to 
my nature and laws. 

Verses +6. Will a lion roar, &c., when he hath 
no prey?—“ Naturalists assert that when the lion 
sees his prey, he roars before he rushes on it; and 
that at this roaring many animals show great fear. 
He likewise roars over his prey. The sense seems 
to be, As the lion roareth on account of his prey, so 
by my prophets I ery aloud against you, because ye 
are the objects of my vengeance.”—Newcome. Can 
a bird fail in a snare where no gin is for him—As 
a bird does not fall into a snare, unless one has been 
laid for him, so the people of Israel and Judah would 
not fall into the ¢alamities coming upon them, had 
not God, for their ingratitude and other sins, brought 
these punishments upon them. Figuratively speak- 
ing, the Assyrians and Chaldeans were gins or snares 
which God had laid to take the Israelites, Shall one 
take up a snare and have taken nothing—As it is not 
usual for the fowler or hunter to take up the snares 
he has laid, till he has taken something in them ; so 
neither will the enemies which God will bring upon 
Israel and Judah depart from them without exe- 
cuting the purpose for which they were brought, 
namely, makinga conquest of the country, and spoil- 
ing its inhabitants. Or, God will not remove his 
judgments when they have begun to take place, till 
they have attained their proper end, the people’s re- 
pentance andreformation. Shall a trumpet be blown 
und the people not be afraid?—Will not the people 

3 


of the city, when they first hear the alarm-trumpet 
blown, be affected with the danger, and run to their 
arms? and will not ye be moved by the warnings 
God gives you of approaching judgments? and will 
ye not bestirred up to repent and amend your ways? 
Shall there be evil—Such as famine, plague, and 
war; in a city—Or country ; and the Lord hath not 
done i1t?—Kither immediately by his own hand, or 
by the hands of those whom he employs. Who- 
ever are the instruments of chastising a people, 
God is the principal agent. The meaning here is, 
You may be assured that the calamities you feel, or 
have just cause to fear, are not the effect of chance, 
but come upon you by the special direction of Provi- 
dence. . 

Verses 7, 8. The Lord will do nothing, but he re- 
vealeth, &c.—As if he had said, You cannot com- 
plain of your not being forewarned of these calami- 
ites coming apon you, for God hath not done, nor 
will do any thing, without revealing it to his prophets, 
and by them to you; so that you have now warning 
of all that he intends to do, unless you prevent it by 
an alteration in your behaviour. It may be observed 
further on this verse, that there was no great revo- 
lution in the affairs, either of the kingdoms of Judah 
and Israel, or in those of the neighbouring nations, 
which the prophets of God did not foretel; in order 
that the Jews might constantly be reminded of their 
God, either as a rewarder or punisher. Zhe lion 
hath roared, who will not fear?—As when a lion 
roars, no one who hears can avoid fearing, so now, 
God having threatened, all who are made acquainted 
with the threatening ought to be alarmed and to stand 
inawe. The Lord God hath spoken, who can but 
prophesy?—When God himself speaks, or com- 
mands, who will dare to do otherwise than obey ? or, 
what prophet will have courage to refuse or forbear 
uttering what God reveals to him, and orders him to 
utter; for if the anger of a lion is to be feared, how 
much more the anger of God ? 

_ Verses 9-11. Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, 

&e.—God here orders the prophet to invite the Phi- 

listines and Egyptians, the inveterate enemies of 

God’s Israel, to come and behold what great wick- 
923 : 


Judgments denounced 


AMOS. 


against Israel. 


Aaa ak, Samaria, and behold the great tu- 
mults in the midst thereof, and the 
5 oppressed in the midst thereof. 

10 For they # know not to do right, saith the 
Lorp, who store up violence and ® robbery in 
their palaces. 

11 Therefore thus saith the Lord Gop; * An 
adversary there shall be even round Hott the 
land; and he shall bring down thy strength 
from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled. 

12 Thus saith the Lorn: As the shepherd 
7 taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, 
or a piece of an ear: so shall the children of 


Israel be taken out that dwell in Aad: 205. 
Samaria in the corner of a bed, and — 
Sin Damascus in a couch. 

13 Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, 
saith the Lord Gop, the God of hosts, 

14 That, in the day that I shall ® visit the 
transgressions of Israel upon him, I will also 
visit the altars of Beth-el: and the horns of 
the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground. 

15 And I will smite ‘the winter-house with 
k the summer-house ; and ! the houses of ivory 
shall perish, and the great houses shall have 
an end, saith the Lorp. 


. Or, oppressions.—— Jer. iv. 22.——§ Or, spoil.——h 2 Kings 
xvil. 3,6; xviil. 9, 10, 11——” Heb. delivereth. 


edness was among them, and what cause he had to 
execute what he had threatened, and to mark the 
calamities coming upon them, as the punishment of 
that wickedness, that these heathen might hereby 
take warning. Say, Assemble yourselves upon the 
mountains of Samaria—That is, in the kingdom of 
the ten tribes, whose capital city was Samaria, built 
upon a hill of the same name. Or, the mountains 
of Samaria may be equivalent to the mountains of 
Israel, mentioned Ezek. xxxvi. 8,and xxxvii.22; Sa- 
maria being often taken for the whole kingdom of Is- 
rael. Behold the great tumults in the midst thereof— 
The seditious councils and rebellious conspiracies 
amongthem. And the oppressed in the midst thereof 
—The multitude of oppressed ones throughout the 
whole kingdom; for the usurpers took it to be their 
interest to crush all they feared or suspected. For 
they know not to do right—That is, they will not 
know nor learn to do their duty. Who store up 
violence, &c.—Who store up in their houses riches 
gotten by violence and injustice. T'herefore, An 
adversary shall be even round about the land—Shal- 
maneser the king of Assyria shall invade the land on 
every side, shall dismantle its fortresses, and plunder 
its wealthy palaces. 

Verse 12. As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth 
of the lion two legs, &c.—When a lion hath for 
some time ravaged the flock, but is at last frighted 
away by the noise of the shepherds and their dogs, 
or by darts and other offensive weapons thrown at 
him, then all that, in such a case, the shepherd can 
hope to save will be but some poor remains of the 
prey that the lion hath seized. And thus shall it be 
at the taking of Samaria: only a small remainder 


8 Or, on the bed’s feet. ° Or, punish Israel fm ——i Jer, xxxvi. 
22. k Judg. iii. 20.——! 1 Kings xxii. 39. 


of the inhabitants shall escape the search of their 
enemies, though they try to hide themselves in their 
most retired apartments. Jn the corner of a bed— 
In some dark corner behind a bed; and in Damas- 
cus—Supposing some of them have fled thither; iz 
a couch—Some few of the poor may escape when 
the enemy finds them sick upon their couches. But 
the marginal reading, on the bed’s feet, is thought by 
some to give a better sense: or, as the word rendered 
Damascus also signifies a corner, the clause may be 
properly rendered, In the side or corner of a couch, 
an interpretation approved by Aben. Ezra. See 
Buxtorf. 

Verses 13-15. Hear ye, and testify, &c.—These 
words are directed to the prophets whom God sends 
to declare his will. Jn the day that I shail visit, 
&c.—In the general destruction of the ten tribes, 
my judgments will be particularly visible upon the 
places dedicated to idolatrous worship, especially 
Beth-el, the principal place of that kind. And the 
horns of the altar shall be cut off—These were 
squares placed at the four corners of the altar, and 
hollow in the middle, into which some of the blood 
of the sacrifices was poured, And I will smite the 
winter-house with the summer-house—The kings and 
great men had different houses and apartments for 
spending the winter and summer in. These were 
placed and made suitable to those different seasons. 
And the houses of ivory shall perish—We read 
1 Kings xxii. 49, that King Ahab built himself an 
ivory house, that is, a house ceiled or wainscoted 
with ivory, or at least inlaid in some parts of it with 
ivory; and it is probable that aia great men fol- 
lowed his example. 


CHAPTER IV. 


fn this chapter we have, (1,) Threatenings denounced against oppressors, 1-3. 


abandoned to their idolatry, A, 5. 


(2,) A declaration that idolaters are 


(3,) A representation of the incorrigibleness of the people of Israel, 6-11. 


(4,) They are called to humble Abmtigibes before God in the view of the terrible judgments which were approaching, 


12, 13. 
° 924 


Sh ee 


Against oppressors 


CHAPTER IV. 


and idolaters. 


A. M. 3217. EAR this word, ye * kine of Ba- 
B. C. 787. ; . 
soa shan, that are in the mountain 
of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush 
the needy, which say to their masters, Bring, 
and let us drink. 

2 »'The Lord Gop hath sworn by his holiness, 
that lo, the days shall come upon you, that he 
will take you away ° with hooks, and your 
posterity with fish-hooks. 

3 And ‘ye shall go out at the breaches, every 


a Psalm xxii. 12; Ezekiel xxxix. 18.——> Psalm Ixxxix. 35. 
© Jer. x. 16; Hab. i. 15.—4 Ezekiel xii. 5, 12—!Or, ye 
shall cast away the things of the palace. © Ezekiel xx. 39. 
f Hos. iv. 15; xii. 11; Chap. v. 5. 


cow at that which is before her; and A. M. 3217. 
tye shall cast ¢hem into the palace, oe 
saith the Lorp. 

4 “1° Come to Beth-el and transgress: at 
fGilgal multiply transgression; and & bring 
your sacrifices every morning, » and your tithes 
after * three years : 

5 i And ‘offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving 
with leaven, and proclaim and publish * the 
free-offerings: ‘for ‘this liketh you, O ye 


s Num. xxviii. 3, 4. ——» Deut. xiv. 28. 2 Heb. three years 
of days. i Lev. vii. 135 xxiii. 17. 3 Heb offer by burning. 
k Lev. xxii, 18, 21; Deut. xii. 6——1! Psa, lxxxi, 12——* Heb. 
so ye love, 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verse 1. Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan— 
Bashan was famous for its flocks and herds, Deut. 
xxxii. 14; Ezek. xxxix. 18. The proud and luxu- 
rious matrons of Israel may be here described. In 
this sense the words are understood by Grotius, and 
some other commentators. Thus rich, proud, and 
tyrannical men are compared, Psa. xxii. 13, to the 
bulls of Bashan ; because cattle fed in the pastures 
of Bashan, which were remarkably rich, were more 
than commonly large, and wanton, or headstrong, 
by reason of their full feeding. Which say to their 
masters—To their husbands; Bring, and let us 
drink—From these expressions we may infer the 
dissoluteness and intemperance of the women. And 
it may be observed here also, that even the women 
are accused of oppressing the poor, and crushing 
the needy; from whence we may gather to how 
great a height cruelty, oppression, and insolence were 
grown among them, since even the women were 
guilty of these vices. Some, however, think that 
the description contained in this verse is not to be 
confined to the matrons, but that the rich, luxurious, 
and profligate rulers and nobles are also and even 
especially intended; and that these might be repre- 
sented as kine rather than bulls, in order to reprove 
their effeminacy and cowardice when assaulted by 
their enemies; while at the same time they crushed 
and trampled on their unresisting brethren, and sold 
them for slaves, saying to the masters who bought 
them, Bring, and let us drink. Waving made the 
iniquitous bargain, perhaps, on low terms, they 
required from the purchaser to be treated with wine. 
This is Mr. Scott’s view of the passage. 

Verse 2. The Lord hath sworn by his holiness— 
As sure as God is holy and true, so certainly will he 
bring the threatened jrvdgment upon you; that he 
will take you away with hooks—“ The original word 
in the masculine is used for thorns ; but in the femi- 
nine it signifies shields. So that, perhaps, a fishing 
instrument may be denoted, which, like some now 
in our use, resembled a shield, or a basket, in its 
form. Our translators render the word hooks, from 
their analogy to thorns.”.—Newcome. And your 
posterity—Or remainder ; with fish-hooks—Invaders 
and spoilers are often compared to fishers. The | 

3 


sense here seems to be, that the several invaders of 
Israel, coming after one another, should make an 
entire riddance of the whole nation, so that their 
posterity, or remainder, which had escaped the first 
invaders, should certainly fall into the hands of those 
that came after. 

Verse 3. And ye shall go out at the breaches, 
every cow, &c.—The prophet pursues the metaphor 
taken from the kine of Bashan, verse 1, and tells 
the people, that as cattle strive to get out at every 
breach they can find in a mound or fence, so should 
they, with all possible haste, endeavour to make their 
escape at the several breaches which should be made 
in the walls of Samaria. And ye shall cast them 
into the palace—The marginal reading is preferable, 
Ye shall cast away the things; namely, the riches 
and ornaments, of the palace. Or the clause may 
be rendered, Ye shall cast out yourselves, that is, ye 
shall with haste betake yourselves to Harmon: so 
the Vulgate, Et projiciemini in Armon, that is, says 
Grotius, “into Armenia. So the Hebrews under- 
stand it.” 

Verses 4,5. Come to Beth-el—The known place 
of the calf-worship; and transgress—A strong irony, 
giving them over as incorrigible: like that of Ezek. 
xx. 39, Go ye, serve every man his idols. At Gilgal 
multiply transgression—This place also, as well as 
Beth-el, was the scene of idolatry, as appears from 
the cotemporary Prophet Hosea. And bring your 
sacrifices every morning—According to the law of 
the daily burnt-offering, Num. xxviii. 4, which they 
observed in the worship of the golden calves. The 
prophet continues in the same strain of irony to re- 
prove their idolatry, though in it they imitated the 
instituted worship at Jerusalem. And your tithes 
after three years—God had commanded, Deut. xiv. 
28, that every third year all the tithe of that year 
should be brought and laid up in a public storehouse, 
upon which account the third year is called the year 
of tithing. And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving 
with leaven—Or, with leavened bread, as the law 
prescribes, Lev. vii. 18. And proclaim the free- 
offerings—Or freewill-offerings, as the word is trans- 
lated in other places. For this liketh you, &e.— 
Vulgate, sic enim voluistis, for such is your will, or 
so it pleases you to act. Your hearts are so set upon 

925 ; 


God’s mercies to the people, 


AMOS. | 


and their rebellion. 


ee 
——————— a aT 


A.M. 3217. children of Israel, saith the Lord 
B. C. 787. 
po thd eae 

6 § And I also have given you cleanness of 
teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in 
all your places: ™yet have ye not returned 
unto me, saith the Lorn. 

7 And also I have withholden the rain from 
you, when ¢here were yet three months to the 
harvest : and I caused it to rain upon one city, 
and caused it not to rain upon another city: 
one piece was rained upon, and the piece where- 
upon it rained not withered. 

8 So two or three cities wandered unto one 
city, to drink water; but they were not satis- 
fied: * yet have ye not returned unto me, saith 
the Lorp. 

9 °I have smitten you with blasting and 
mildew: when your gardens, and your vine- 


yards, and your fig-trees, and your ee a af 
olive-trees increased, ?the palmer- a. 
worm devoured them: yet have ye not re- 
turned unto me, saith the Lorn. 

10 I have sent among you the pestilence 
Safter? the manner of Egypt: your young 
men have I slain with the sword, 7 and have 
taken away your horses ; and I have made the 
stink of your camps to come up unto your nos- 
trils: ‘yet have ye not returned unto me, saith 
the Lorp. 

11 Lhave overthrown some of you, as God 
overthrew *Sodom and Gomorrah, tand ye 
were as a fire-brand plucked out of the burn- 
ing: “yet have ye not returned unto me, saith 
the Lorp. 

12 Therefore, thus will I do unto thee, O 
Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, 


_—— 


m Jsaiah xxyi. 11; Jeremiah v. 33 Hag. bye Wg Verses 8, 9. 
» Verses 6, 10, 11. © Deut. xxviii. 22; Hag. ii. 17. 5 Or, 
the multitude of your gardens, §:c., did the palmer- -worm.—? Joel 
i. 45 ii. 25.—® Or, in the way. 


4 Exod, ix, 3,6; xii. 29; Deut. xxviii. 27, 60; Psalm Ixxviii. 
50.” Heb. with the captivity of your horses, 2 Kings xiii. 7. 
t Verse 6. ® Genesis xix. 24, 25; Isa. xiii. 19; Jer. xlix. 18, 
t Zech. ili. 2; Jude 23. u Verse 6. 


your idolatrous worship, that it is in vain to use any 
arguments to dissuade you from it. 

Verses 6-8. And I also have given you—Or, for 
this cause I have given you, cleanness, of teeth—An 
expression signifying a scarcity of food, or a famine. 
The famine which we read of 2 Kings vill. 1, seems 
to be that which is here referred to. Yet have ye 
not returned unto me—Nevertheless ye have not 


been brought to a sense of your sins, to any sorrow || 


for them, or to any sincere purpose of amendment. 
Also I have withholden the rain, when there were 
yet three months to the harvest—At a season when 
your country most needed it, and when it had been 
wont to fall most plentifully. And I caused it to 
rain upon one city, and not wpon another—And, to 
make it more remarkable, I caused it to. rain upon 


cities or places adjoining to yours, at the same time || 


that the drought was so great on all your territories. 
This may import that God punished them with 
drought at the same time when he sent rain upon the 
cities of Judah ; making a remarkable difference be- 
tween Israel and Judah, like that which he formerly 
made between Egypt and the land of Goshen. One 
piece was rained upon, &c.—This seems to be 
spoken of those parts which lay quite contiguous to 
the lands of other nations, of which parts, though 
they touched each other, yet rain fell upon the one 
and not upon the other; the consequence of which 
was, that the one piece of land was withered, or 
scorched up for want of moisture, while the adjoin- 
ing one was green and flourishing. So two or three 
cities wandered, &c.—So the inhabitants of several 
of your cities went to some city or other without 
your territories for the sake of getting water to 
quench their thirst. But they were not satisfied— 
They could not obtain a sufficient quantity. 
926 


Verses 10,11. Ihave sent among you the pestilence 
after the manner of Egypt—I have sent such pes- 
tilence among you as I formerly sent upon Egypt: 
Or, such as has frequently taken place in Egypt. 
“The unwholesome efiluvia, on the subsiding of the 
Nile, caused some peculiarly malignant diseases in 
this country.’—Newcome. Maillet also tells us, 
(Lett. i. page 14,) that “ the air is bad in those parts, 
where, when the inundations of the Nile have been 
very great, this river, in retiring to its channel, leaves 
marshy places, which infect the country round 
about, The dew is also very dangerous in Egypt.” 
Your young men have I slain, &e.—I have 
caused your young men to fall in battle with your 
enemies. And have taken away your horses—Have 
enabled your enemies to take them from you. 
Horses being very scarce in the land of Israel, the 
loss of them was a great affliction. J have madethe 
stink of your camps, &c.—I have sent diseases into 


| your camps; so that they have been rendered quite 


noisome by the smell of the dead carcasses, or so 
great has been the slaughter in your camps, that 
there were not a sufficient number left alive to bury 
the slain. The Syrians made frequent incursions on 
the Israelites, which obliged the latter to be often 
encamped. J have overthrown some of you, &¢.— 
Some of your cities I have caused to be burned with 
fire and utterly consumed, as Sodom and Gomorrah 
were. And ye were as a firebrand plucked out of 
the burning—Those that remained very narrowly 
escaped, A proverbial expression, used both by sa- 
cred and profane authors, to signify a narrow sarage 
out of imminent danger. 

Verses 12, 13. Therefore thus will I a thee 
—I will continue to send these several judgments 
upon thee till I entirely destroy thee, “he 


7. 


The deplorable 


CHAPTER V. 


condition of Israel. 


* prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. | 
13 For lo, he that formeth the 
mountains, and createth the § wind, ¥ and de- 
clareth unto man what is his thought, * that 


A. M. 321” 
1 Aw As 


87. 


maketh the morning darkness, *and A. M. 3217. 
5 B..C, 787. 

treadeth upon the high places of the 

earth, » The Lorp, The God of hosts is his 

name. 


* Ezekiel xiii. 5; xxii. 30; Luke xiv. 31, 32. 


i © Or, spirit. 
y Psa. exxxix. 2; Dan. ii. 28. 


or, forasmuch, as I will do this unto thee, prepare to 
meet thy God, O Israel—Expect that he will come 
to take full vengeance upon thee, and consider whe- 
ther thou art able to contend with him; (so the 
expression of meeting an adversary is understood, 
Luke xiv. 31 ;) or if that be impossible, endeavourto 
avert his anger by confession of sin, humiliation, 
repentance, and reformation, before it actually break 
out upon thee. For lo, he that formeth the moun- 
tains, &e.—For lo, I am he that formeth the moun- 
tains, and createth the wind—I am the former of all 
things, both those which are seen, and those which 
are so fine and subtle as to escape the discernment 
of man. And declareth unto man what is his 
thought—Who can search into the very thoughts of 
man, and declare what they are before they are put 
into execution, or are expressed in words. That 


z Chap. v. 8; viii. 9. Deut. xxxii. 13; xxxiii. 29; Mic. i. 3, 
> Isa. xlvii. 4; Jer. x. 16; Chap. v. 8; ix. 6. 


maketh the morning darkness—The Vulgate reads, 
Forming the morning cloud. WHoubigant and Gro- 
tius, however, with some others, read, He that 
maketh the morning, and the darkness, namely, the 
day and the night, or, as the latter interprets it, gives 
prosperity to the godly, and adversity to the wicked, 
as the Chaldee here explains it. And treadeth upon 
the high places of the earth—That is, says Grotius, 
Who treadeth under foot the proud: in other words, 
who can humble the great and mighty, and over-- 
throw the strongest fortresses, or places of strength. 
The Lord, The God of hosts is. his name—Whose 
sovereign power all creatures obey, and act for or 
against us as he willeth. Let us humble ourselves 
before this God, and give all diligence to make him 
our God. For happy are the people whose God he 
is, and who have all this power engaged for them! 


CHAPTER V. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The deplorable condition of Israel, 1-3. 


(2,) An exhortation to them to seek God, 4-15. 


(3,) Judgments denounced, 16-20; notwithstanding their outward services, 21-27. 


feed HEAR ye this word which I * take 
‘2 SP up against you, even a lamenta- 
tion, O house of Israel. 

2 The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no 
more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; 
there is none to raise her up. 


A. 
B. 


3 For thus saith the Lord Gop; nde or 
The city that went out by a thou- —— 
sand shall leave a hundred, and that which 
went forth dy a hundred shall leave ten, to the 
house of Israel. 

4 4 For thus saith the Lorp unto the house 


a Jeremiah vii. 29; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER V. 

Verses 1-3. Hear ye, &c.—It is justly obsérved 
by Grotius, that this verse would be translated more 
according to the Hebrew thus; Hear ye this word, 
even a lamentation, which I take wp over you—It 
alludes to the lamentations made at funerals: -so here 
the prophet bemoans the state of the kingdom of Is- 
rael as dead. The virgin of Israel—Such she was 
when first espoused to God, achaste virgin toa hus- 
band: she was then peculiarly beloved and delighted 
in, and was under the peculiar protection and care 
of her heavenly Lord; but she is now fallen from 
her glory and felicity, and for her idolatries and 
other sins delivered up to the will of her enemies. 
She shall no more rise—That is, says Grotius, non 
iterum surget; she shall not rise again, namely, if 
she so goes onin the wicked way in which she now 
walks: for it was always understood in God’s threat- 
enings against the Jewish people, that if they turned 
to him in true repentance they might, by that means, 
3 


Ezek. xix.1; xxvii. 2. 


avert the judgments threatened. And there are re- 
peated promises of the restoration of Israel as well 
as Judah; but these were all made on the condition 
of their repentance and reformation, which as they 
never performed in general, so they have not been 
restored in general, as the two tribes of Judah and 
Benjamin were. She is forsaken*upon her land— 
She is abandoned of all, and there is none to assist 
her to rise up again: like an infant that is fallen 
upon the ground and hath none to take it up; or, 
broken to pieces upon her own land; and so left, as 
a broken vessel. T'he city that went out by a thou- 
sand, &¢c.—A city which was able to send out a 
thousand men fit for war, shall have but a hundred 
of them left. And so it shall be in proportion for 
any less number; only one in ten of them shall es- 
cape the sword and other chances of war. 

Verses 4,5. For—Or rather, nevertheless, seek ye 
me, and ye shall live—That is, ye shall be prosper- 
ous again; for life, in the Scripture language, is 

927 


An exhortation 


AMOS. 


to seek God. 


A.M. 3217. of Israel, Seek ye me, °and ye 

B. C. 787. 

—__—— shall live: 

5 But seek not 4 Beth-el, nor enter into Gil- 
gal, and pass not to ° Beer-sheba: for Gilgal 
shall surely go into captivity, and f Beth-el shall 
come to naught. 

6 & Seek the Lorn, and ye shall live; lest he 
break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and 
devour i, and there be none to quench 7 in 
Beth-el. 

7 Ye who * turn judgment to wormwood, and 
leave off righteousness in the earth, 

8 Seek him that maketh the ‘ seven stars and 


Orion, and turneth the shadow of A. me =. 
death into the morning, * and maketh ———— 
the day dark with night: that 'calleth for the 
waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon 
the face of the earth: ™'The Lorp is his 
name : 

9 That strengtheneth the ‘spoiled against 
the strong, so that the spoiled shall come against 
the fortress. 

10 " They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, 
and they ° abhor him that speaketh uprightly. 

11 Forasmuch, therefore, as your treading zs 
upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens 


b 2 Chron. xv. 2; Jer. xxix. 13; Verse 6. 
4 Chapter iv. 4. i 
§ Verse 4, 


¢ Isaiah lv. 3. 
e Chapter viii. 14——f Hosea iv. 15; x. 8, 
4 Chap. vi. 12. 


used to express prosperity, or happiness. 
shows, that what was said in the 2d verse, of their 
being fallen to rise no more, is to be taken as it is 
there explained ; namely, in case they did not repent, 
but continued in their wickedness. _ But seek not 
Beth-el, nor enter into Gilgal, &c.—The places here 
named, it is probable, were all seats of idolatrous 


worship. The sense of the verse, therefore, is, that | 


if they continued in their idolatries they should cer- 
tainly be carried into captivity, and come tonaught— 
For it was only by returning and seeking God’s fa- 
vour by true repentance and humiliation, and ceasing 
from their idolatry, that they could be saved from 
ruin. 

Verse 6. Seek the Lord, and ye shall live—He 
repeats his exhortation, and also the promise of a 
good issue on their complying with it. 


the kingdom of the ten tribes, the chief whereof was 
Ephraim the son of Joseph. And there be none to 
quench it in Beth-el—As if he had said, If once this 
fire break out, all your idols in Beth-el shall not be 
able to quench it. A proper caution this to the Is- 
raelites, not to trust in their idolatrous worship for 
their safety, because it would be so far from averting 
the divine wrath, or saving them from God’s judg- 
ments, that it would provoke that wrath still more, 
and hasten the execution of his judgments. 

Verses 7-9. Ye who turn judgment to wormwood 
—Or into hemlock, as the word here used is trans- 
lated, chap. vi. 12. Ye judgesand rulers that pervert 
the law that was designed to protect innocence, and 
«uder colour of it exercise the greatest oppression. 
True or just judgment is sweet or pleasing ; corrupt 
judgment, mere bitterness. And leave off righteous- 
ness—That is, leave off to practise it, or make it to 
cease in your courts of judicature. Seek him that 
maketh the seven stars and Orion—Concerning 
these constel’ations see notes on Job ix. 9; and 
xxxviii. 31. These and the other constellations were 
commonly thought to have great influence upon the 
seasons; and therefore their rising and setting used 
to be particularly taken notice of by husbandmen 
and shepherds; whose employments lying abroad, 

928 


This ||: 


Lest he) 
break out like fire in the house of Joseph—That is, | 


‘render the earth fruitful. 


i Job ix. 9; xxxvili. 31.——* Psalm civ. 20.—! Job xxxviii. 
34; Chap. ix. 6. m Chap. iv, 13.——? Heb. spoil.——® Isaiah 
xxix. 21. ©] Kings xxii. 8. 


the heavenly bodies. So this was a dispensation 
of providence, which it was very suitable for one of 
Amos’s profession to mention. “But in Arabia and 
the neighbouring countries, to this present day, not 
only the shepherds, but the men in general, the wo- 
men and children, know the names of the stars. 
Sanctius assures us, that the shepherds in Spain 
know perfectly well the stars of Ursa Major, Orion, 


the Pleiades, &c., and that they generally measure 


the time of night by the course of these stars.”— 
Dodd. And turneth the shadow of death into the 
morning—The greatest adversity into as great pros- 
perity; and maketh the day dark with night— 
Changes prosperity into adversity: that calleth 
for the waters of the sea, and poureth them upon 
the earth—Who commandeth the seas and the rivers 
to overflow the earth in great inundations ; or rather, 
commands the vapours to ascend from the sea, turns 
them into rain, and then pours it from the clouds, to 
That strengtheneth the 
spoiled against the strong—Who giveth strength to 
him that hath been conquered and spoiled, and ena- 
bles him to subdue his conquerors, and become master 
even of the strongest places. This was very proper- 
ly mentioned here as one act of God’s great power, 
because it implied, that the deplorable state of the 
Israelitish affairs might be retrieved if they sought 
to him. 

Verse 10. They hate him that rebuketh in the gate 
—The usual place of administering justice, and of 
reproving and passing judgment on iniquity. The 
prophet now, after having deseanted upon God’s 
wondrous power, returns to enumerate the crimes 
of the Israelites; and begins with telling them, that 
they in general hated the judges who reproved them 
for their injurious conduct and acts of fraud or vio- 
lence, and endeavoured to do justice to the oppressed. 
And besides this, they hated the prophets and pri 
vate persons who rebuked ungodliness and unright 
eousness, and exhorted men to the practice of piety 
and virtue. 

Verses 11-13. Forasmuch, therefore, as your 


treading is upon the poor—It appears by this, that 
3 


a 


Te 


Judgments denounced 


A. M. 3217. of wheat: ? ye have built houses of 
. C. 787. j 
———— hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in 
them; ye have planted ? pleasant vineyards, 

but ye shall not drink wine of them. 

12 For 1 know your manifold transgressions 
and your mighty sins: ‘they afflict the just, 
- they take %a bribe, and they ‘turn aside the 
poor in the gate from their right. 

13 'Therefore, *the prudent shall keep silence 
in that time; for it 7s an evil time. 

14 Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: 
and so the Lorn, the God of hosts, shall be with 
you, ‘as ye have spoken. 

15 * Hate the evil, and love the good, and 


P Deut. xxviii. 30, 38,39; Mic. vi. 15; Zeph. i. 13; Hag. i. 6. 
2 Heb. vineyards of desire. 4 Chap. il. 26. 3 Or, a ransom. 
r Isa. xxix. 21 ; Chap. ii. 7——* Chap. vi. 10. t Mic, iii. 11. 
u Psa. xxxiv. 14; xevii. 10; Rom. xii. 9. 


their acts of oppression were more than ordinarily 
proud and tyrannical. They were the effect of fraud 
executed with insolence, as the word treading, and 
the subsequent clause, added in explanation of it, 
signify. And ye take from him burdens of wheat— 
This expresses the most grievous inhumanity, im- 
plying that they took from the poor their very sus- 
tenance by acts of injustice and violence. Ye have 
built houses of hewn stone, but shall not dwell in 
them—God often threatens to deprive men of the en- 
joyment of their ill-gotten substance. For I know 
your manifold transgressions and mighty sins— 
Your daring impieties, your sins of the first magni- 
tude, such as idolatry and oppression, reproved in 
the foregoing part of this chapter. Therefore the 
prudent shall keep silence in that time—So great is 
the corruption of manners, and such the insolence 
of power, that the prudent man, though he be vir- 
_ tuous, and abhor such doings, yet will incline to be 
silent, perceiving that his speaking by way of re- 
proof or exhortation to others will only bring dan- 
ger on himself, and be of no real use. 

Verses 14, 15. Seek good, and not evil—Give your 
minds to the practice of true piety and virtue. Do 


that which is just and good, and endeavour to make | 


others do the same. That ye may live—That it 
may be well with you, your families, and the whole 
’ kingdom. And so the Lord God of hosts—The eter- 
nal, glorious God,who is Lord of all, and can help you, 
having all the hosts of heaven and earth at his dis- 
posal; shall be with you—To bless and save you 
yet, notwithstanding all your former sins. As ye 
have spoken—You have boasted of his being with 
you, you think he is with you, and is bound to be 
with you, and own you: so he will indeed, but it is 
on condition that you repent and turn from your 
idols and violence. Hate the evil—Practised either 
by yourselves or others. And love the good—Cleave 
to and practise it yourselves, and commend, encou- 
rage, defend, and reward it in others. Let your 
hearts be toward good things and good men. Es- 
Vou. IIL. ( 59 ) 


CHAPTER V. 


against Israel. 


establish judgment in the gate: * it et beds 
may be that the Lorp God of hosts —— 
will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. 

16 Therefore the Lorp, the God of hosts, 
the Lord, saith thus; Wailing shall be in all 
streets ; and- they shall say in all the high- 
ways, Alas! alas! and they shall call the 
husbandman to mourning, and ¥such as are 
skilful of lamentation to wailing. 

17 And in all vineyards shall be wailing: for 
1 will pass through thee, saith the Lorn. 

18 * Wo unto you that desire the day of the 
Lorp! to what end is it for you? » the day of 
the Lorn is darkness, and not light. 


x Exodus xxxii. 30; 2 Kings xix. 4; Joel ii. 14.——y Jer. ix. 
17. z Exod. xii. 12; Nah. 1. 12. a Tsaiah v. 19; Jer. xvii. 
15; Ezek. xii. 22,27; 2 Pet. iii. 4. b Jer. xxx. 73; Joel ii. 2; 
Zeph. i. 15. 


tablish judgment in the gate—Set up honest and up- 
right judges in the gates of your cities, and see that 
true judgment be there administered. By this it is 
evident, that the prophet speaks chiefly to governors 
and persons in authority among them. Jt may be 
the Lord will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph 
—To those small remains of the ten tribes which 
the civil wars and the invasions of your enemies 
have spared. Asif he had said, Your case is not so 
desperate but repentance may yet avert God’s judg- 
ments, and he may show himself gracious to those 
that are left of you. 

Verses 16,17. Therefore the Lord saith thus— 
The prophet, foreseeing their obstinacy, proceeds in 
denouncing judgments against them: and the word 
therefore, which introduces his threatenings, is to be 
referred to the twelfth verse, and not to the verses 
immediately foregoing. Asif he had said, It is on 
account of your evil deeds, and because you will not 
be persuaded to hate the evil and love the good, that 
the Lord saith thus. Watling shall be in all streets, 
and in all the highways—There shall be a general 
lamentation of all orders and degrees of men; of the 
citizens, for the loss of their wealth and substance, 
plundered by the conquerors; of the husbandmen 
and vine-dressers, for the loss of the fruits of the 
earth, destroyed or eaten up by the enemies’ 
army. And such as are skilful of lamentation 
—Let those, whose profession it is to make la- 
mentation at funerals, join in this public mourning, 
to make it more solemn. And in all vineyards shall 
be wailing—Where there used to be shouting and 
rejoicing, when the summer-fruits were gathered in. 
For I will pass through thee, saith the Lord—To 
punish all everywhere: I will act like an enemy 
that invades and destroys a country as he marches 
through it. 

Verses 18-20. Wo unto you that desire the day 
of the Lord—Scoffingly, not believing any such day 
will come: for this seems to be spoken of some 
among them, who, in mockery, expressed - desire 

929 


Judgments denounced 


AMOS, 


agaunst Israel. 


19 ° As if a man did flee from a 
~ lion, and a bear met him; or went 
into the house, and leaned his hand on the 
wall, and a serpent bit him. 

20 Shall not the day of the Lorn be dark- 
ness, and not light? even very dark, and no 
brightness in it ? 

21 4 TI hate, I despise your feast-days, and 
eT will not * well in your solemn assem- 
blies. 

22 ‘ Though ye offer me burnt-offerings and 


A. M. 3217. 
B.C. 7 


your meat-offerings, I will not accept A. ea 
them; neither will I regard the 
5 peace-offerings of your fat beasts. 

23 'Take thou away from me the noise of thy 
songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy 
viols. 

24 ® But let judgment ®run down as waters, 
and righteousness as a mighty stream. 

25 » Have ye offered unto me sacrifices anc 
offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house 
of Israel ? 


¢ Jer. xlviii. 444 Prov. xxi. 27; Isa. i. 11-16; Jer. vi. 20; 
Hosea vi. 6; viii. 13. e Ley. xxvi. 31, é Or, smell your 
holy days. £ Isa, lxvi. 3; Mic. vi. 6, 7. 


of seeing those things which the. prophet predicted 
brought to pass. Or, it may respect those who, not- 
withstanding all the prophet had said, still expected 
God would appear in their favour, not to their de- 
struction: see Isa. v.19. To what end is it for 
you2?—To what purpose should you desire to see 
the day of the Lord? The dayof the Lord is dark- 
ness—Adversity, black and doleful, and not light— 
No joy or comfort in it. It will certainly bea very 
dismal time to you, and. indeed to all in the country, 
when evils shall succeed one another so fast, that he 
who seeks to escape one, shall fall into a greater. As 
ifa man did flee from a lion—A creature that has 
something of generosity in his nature; and a bear 
met him—Which never spares any thing that comes 
inits way. Or went into the house—Namely, for 
fear of being devoured by beasts, or to avoid some 
other danger which threatened him without; and a 
serpent bit him—And a viper, whose sting is incu- 
rable, shorld creep out of the wall and bite him. 
Serpents sometimes concealed themselves in the 
holes and chinks of the walls of the eastern houses. 
Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness—It might 
indeed well be described as darkness; even very 
dark, without any brightness in ti—Since it was to 
be no less than the destruction of the towns and 
cities, the desolation of the country, the slaughter- 
ing of the people, or the carrying of them into cap- 
tivity, and even the overturning of the whole king- 
dom. 

Verses 21-24, [hate and despise your feast-days 
—This and the three following verses are the same 
in sense with Isa. i, 11-16, and the other texts refer- 
red to in the margin, on which the reader is desired 
to consult the notes. They all show of how little 
signification the external rites of religion are, unless 
they be accompanied with living faith in, and sincere 
love to God, and a universal obedience to his will; 
or without holiness of heart and life. Take away 
from me the noise of thy songs—The psalms and 
hymns sung with vocal and instrumental music, the 
usual accompaniments of sacrifices among the J ews 
and heathen. As the worshippers at Beth-el imi- 
tated the temple worship in other particulars, (see 
chap. iv. 4,) so it is likely they did in this part of the 
public worship: see chap. viii. 3. The prophet calls 

930 


5 Or, thank-offerings ——§ Hosea vi. 6; Mic. vi. 8 —S Heb, 


roll. Deut. xxxii. 17; Josh. xxiv. 4; Ezek, xx. 8, 16, 24; 


Acts vii. 42, 43; Isa. xliii. 23. 


their songs a noise, like that of an untuneful voice, 
because their melody, not proceeding from a true 
principle of religion, was not grateful toGod. There 
are great authority and majesty in this passage, verses 
21-24; and the grandeur of the image in the follow- 
ing words, with which it closes, must strike every 
reader. But let judgment run down as waters— 
Rather, let justice have its free course, so that the 
meanest persons may feel the benefit of it; and let 
your benignity be great and universal to your fellow- 
creatures. 

Verse 25. Have ye offered—Or, did you offer, 
unto me sacrifices and offerings—“ Verborum em- 
phasis in rut sita est,” says Spencer: The emphasis 
of the passage liesin me. “Did ye offer such sacri- 
fices as were acceptable to mp; such an entire and 
undivided service as I enjoin?”—Newcome. Cer- 
tainly they did not. They offered sacrifices indeed, 
but in general did not offer them in a right manner, 
in a true spirit of piety ; in the genuine fear and love 
of God, and with an upright intention to glorify him. 
On the contrary, they joined the worship of idols 
with the worship of God, and thereby polluted it, 
and rendered it insignificant in God’s sight. Thus 
Dr. Whitby: “This question is a strong negative, 
importing, that though they really did offer sacri- 
fices, as he had commanded, yet he did not accept, 
or look upon them, as offered to him. The expres- 
sion is like that of the Prophet Zechariah, chap. vii. 
5, When ye fasted, &c., did ye at all fast to me, even 
to me? And this is here denied, Ist, Because God 
will accept of no worship as done unto him, which is 
not done unto him alone; and when any other is 
worshipped with him, he looks upon himself as not 
worshipped at all. So, of those nations which came 
from Assyria into the eities of Samaria, it is said, 
2 Kings xvii. 33, They feared the Lord, and served 
their own gods ; and then it is added, verse 34, They 
feared not the Lord. 2d, Because God will not 
own any worship as performed to him, while men 
continue in their disobedience to his laws, and in 
their hearts depart from him. Thus the Jews, in 
Zechariah, are said not to fast to him, because they 
would not ‘hearken to nor obey his words; and he is 
said to have been angry with them in the wilderness 
forty years, because they ‘ie Srom him -in their 

’ 59* ‘ 


3 


i 


The gross idolatry 


CHAPTER VI. 


of the people. 


A. M. 3217. 


“26 But ye have borne 7 the taber- 
B. C. 787. z 


nacle ‘of your Moloch and Chiun 
your images, the star of your god, which ye 
made to yourselves. 


7 Or, Siccuth your king —— 2 Kings xi, 33. 


hearts ; that is, says the Chaldee, they had their 
idols in their hearts.” 

Verse 26. But ye have borne, or did bear, the 
tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun—Your an- 
cestors manifested their want of true devotion to- 
ward me, in that they were so prone to practise 
those idolatries which they learned in Egypt, or 
which they saw practised in the countries through 
which they passed: see Num. xxv. 2; Josh, xxiv. 14; 
Ezek. xx. 7,16; and xxiii. 3,8. As these words are 
quoted by St. Stephen, (Acts vii. 42, 43,) to prove 
that God gave them up to worship the host of heaven, 
it is probable that by Moloch is meant the sun, which 
the whole East worshipped in ancient times, called 
also, as almost all interpreters agree, Baal, Bel, or 
Belus: Baal, the Lord, (as the word signifies,) and 
Moloch, the king of heaven, being the same. As for 
the other word, Chiwn, rendered by the LXX. 
Rephan or Remphan, according to Vossius, it sig- 
nifies the moon; but Aben Ezra understands it of 
Saturn, an interpretation which many learned men 
approve: see particularly Lud. de Dieu, upon Acts 
vii. 43, and Dr. Spencer, De Leg. Hebr., lib. iii. cap. 
3, where it is shown that Saturn was called Rephan, 


27 Therefore will IT cause you to A. M. 3217. 
go into captivity * beyond Damascus, ee 
saith the Lorp, ' whose name is The God 
of hosts. 


k 2 Kings xvii. 6——! Chap. iv. 13. 


or Remphan, by the Egyptians. Your images— 
They had images of these supposed deities, that of 
Moloch representing the sun, and that of Chiun the 
star Saturn: see Seldon, ii. 396. These images 
were placed in shrines, here termed N13), a taberna- 
cle, or tabernacles, and these they used to carry 
about with them, as Grotius and Dr. Hammond, on 
Acts vii. 43, have proved. 

Verse 27. Therefore will I cause you to go into 
captivity beyond Damascus, saith the Lord, whose 
name is, &c.—Ye shall be removed further from 
your own country, than when Hazael, king of 
Syria, carried away so many Israelites captives to 
Damascus, (see 2 Kings x. 32, 33,) and consequent- 
ly shall have less hopes of returning home. The 
king of Assyria carried the ten tribes captive as far 
as Media, 2 Kings xvii, 6. Therefore St. Stephen, 
in the passage above quoted, expressing rather the, 
sense than the words, reads, J will carry you away 
beyond Babylon, Media being at a much greater dis- 
tance than Babylon. Both readings imply, that the 
captivity of the ten tribes would be far worse than 
that of the two remaining, and likely to be of much 
longer duration. ; 


CHAPTER VI. 


Here, (1,) The people of Israel and Judah, confiding in their privileges and power, and wallowing in carnal plea- 
sure, are represented as contemning God’s threatenings, and the judgments which had already begun to be exe- 
cuted, 1-6. (2,) God shows what terrible calamities hung over their heads, and would certainly fall heavy upon, 


and overwhelm them and their country, 7-14, 


4c. Sal. O *to them ¢hat }are at ease 
pei” in Zion, and trust in the 


a Luke vi. 24. Or, are secure. 


mountain of Samaria, which are A.M. oe 
named chief? of the nations, to gs 


b Exod. xix. 5,——? Or, first-fruits. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verse 1. Wo to them that are at ease in Zion— 
Who are secure, as the margin reads, continuing in 
their sins, fearless of God’s judgments, and resolved 
to indulge themselves in that voluptuousness and 
ease which their riches give them an opportunity 
of enjoying, notwithstanding the evident tokens of 
God’s displeasure against the whole nation, both Is- 
rael and Judah. For these and the following words 
contain a threatening against both kingdoms, al- 
though the chief design of this prophecy is against 
the kingdom of Israel. Because the word D°23Nv, 
which our translation renders at ease, signifies also 
to be insolent, therefore the LXX. translate the 
Clause, Ovac tore efovBevovor Siwv, Wo unto them that 
despise Zion, in which sense the words may fitly 

3 


belong to the ten tribes, who despised Zion, and the 
temple, though God had chosen it to place his name 
there. And trust in the mountain of Samaria—In 
the strength of their capital city, built on the hill of 
Samaria. Which are named chief of the nations, to 
whom the house of Israel came— Zion, or Jerusa- 
lem, and Samaria, were the chief seats of the two 
kingdoms, whither there was the greatest resort of 
the whole nation. The Chaldee interprets it, ‘Who 
give names to their children, according to the names 
of the chief of the heathen, to whom the house of 
Israel apply themselves for protection.’ Thus, in 
later times, some of the Jews took the names of 
Alexander, Antipater, Agrippa, and the like, to com- 
pliment some great men among the Greeks or Ro- 
mans of those names.”—Lowth. 
931 


Tile gross — 


AMOS. 


of the people. 


ASMSS2E 
Baw: 79%. 


"ahha the house of Israel came! 
2 ° Pass ye unto ? Calneh,* and see ; 
and from thence go ye to * Hamath the great: 
then go down to ‘Gath of the Philistines: 
& be they better than these kingdoms? or their 
border greater than your border ? 
3 Ye that » put far away the ‘ evil day, * and 
cause | the * seat of violence to come near ; 
-4 That lie upon beds of ivory, and # stretch 
themselves upon their couches, and eat the 
lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the 
midst of the stall ; 


5 ™'That ®chant to the sound of A. M. 3217. 
: : : C. 787. 

the viol, and invent to themselves in- 

struments of music, ® like David ; 

6 That drink ®wine in bowls, and anoint 

themselves with the chief ointments: ° but 

they are not grieved for the ‘affliction of 


Joseph. 


7 “ Therefore now shall they go captive 
with the first that go captive, and the banquet — 
of them that stretched themselves shall ‘be 
removed. 

8 ?' The Lord Gop hath sworn by himself, 


¢ Jeremiah ii. 10.——~4 Isa. x. 9. ——* Taken about B, OC. 794. 
€2 Kings xviii. 34——'2 Chron. xxvi. 6.——s Nahum ii. 8. 
h Ezek. xii. 27.——i Chapter v. 18; ix. 10.—* Chapter v. 12; 
Verse 12, 


1 Psa. xeiv. 20.——* Or, habitation. 
fluities — Isa. v. 12,—® Or, quaver. 
*Or, in bowls of wine.——° Gen. xxxvil. 25. 
P Jer. li. 14; Heb. vi. 13, 17. 


*Or, abound with super- 
2] Chron. xxi. 5. 
7 Heb, breach. 


Verse 2. Pass ye unto Calneh—To check their 
pride and carnal security, the prophet bids them 
consider the state of those cities in the neighbour- 
hood of Canaan that had been as illustrious in their 
time as ever Zion and Samaria were, and yet had 
been destroyed. Calneh, called Calno, (Isa. x. 9,) 
was a city in the land of Shinar, or the territory of 
Babylon, (Gen. x. 10,) supposed by St. Jerome to be 
the same as Ctesiphon; and, it seems, had been 
taken and destroyed, probably by some king of As- 
syria, not long before the uttering of this prophecy. 
Thence go ye to Hamath the great—A city of Syria, 
on the Orontes. It was conquered by Jeroboam 
2 Kings xiv. 25; and by the Assyrians, chap. xix. 
34. It is called here Hamath the great, to distin- 
guish it from another Hamath, mentioned verse 14, 
which was the northern boundary of Palestine. 
Then go down to Gath—This city was taken by 
Uzziah, in whose reign Amos prophesied, 2 Chron. 


aR 


xxvi.6. Be they better than these kingdoms ?—The | 


kingdoms of Judah and Israel? The answer seems 
to be, Yes; they were better, and their border 
greater than your border. So that they had more 
reason to be confident of their safety than you have; 
yet you see what is become of them, and dare you 
be secure? Thus Nahum asks Nineveh, (chap. iii. 


&,) Art thou better than populous No, that was situ- | 
. } 
ate among the rivers, whose rampart was the sea? 


eC. 3 yet she was carr ted away, she went into cap- 
tivity. By these examples, then, learn to amend 
your ways, or expect to perish in them. Or, the 
sense may be, Were these cities more favoured of 
God than Israel and Judah? or had they a larger 
and more fertile country to live in, and therefore 
were more deserving of the wrath of God for their 
ingratitude ? or had they greater riches to tempt the 
avarice of invaders ? 
Newcome seems to have understood the passage, 
and therefore Me yA the prophet to ask, “ Why 
then do ye worship their gods? and why are ye 
not grateful to Jehovah?’ 'The prophet, however, 


seems to have intended rather to check and reprove | 


their presumption than their ingratitude, as appears 
by the next verse. 
932 


Verses 3-6. Ye that put far away the evil day— 
Ye who persuade yourselves that God’s judgments 
will not overtake you so soon as the predictions of 
the prophet import. And cause the seat of violence 
to come near—Who take every opportunity of per- 
verting justice by pronouncing unrighteous decrees, 
and of turning the seat of justice into the seat of 
oppression. Or, this latter clause may be interpret- 
ed of the Israelites’ bringing the Assyrians, who 
were to be their destroyers, upon them, by continu- 
ing in their sins, and thereby provoking God’s wrath 
more and more; or by their imprudence, such as 
that of Menahem, who, having got possession of the 
throne by slaying Shallum, gave Pul, the king of 
Assyria, a thousand talents of silver, that his hand 
might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his 


hand, 2 Kings xv. 19. That lie upon beds of ivory 


--This and the two following verses are an elegant 
description of the bad use men too often make of a 
plentiful fortune ; so that it shuts out all serious con- 
sideration, and makes them void of compassion to- 
ward persons in want and misery, and to regard 
nothing but their present gratification ; eat the lambs 
out of the flock—The choicest and best of them. 
That chant to the sound of the viol, &e.—Who, 
though but priyate persons, make use of all manner 
of musical instruments, the same as David did, when 
he was a king; and employ as great a variety of 
music for their own diversion as he did in the ser- 
vice of God. That drink wine in bowls—Not in 
small, but in large vessels; that is, who drink to 
excess, and in all respects live very luxuriously. 
But they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph 
—Do not humble themselves under God’s afflicting 
hand, nor lay to heart the calamities which the di- 


| vine judgments have brought, and are still bringing 
In this sense Archbishop 


more and more upon the kingdom of Israel, called 
by the name of Joseph. The words allude to the, 
afflicted state of Joseph, when he was sold by his 
brethren into Egypt. 

Verses 7, 8. Therefore now shall they go.captive 
with the first, &c.—As they were reckoned the first 
among the people, and claimed the preference in 
every thing, so now shall they be the first that shall 

3 


Various woes denounced 


CHAPTER VI. 


against the wicked. 


A. M. 3217. saith the Lorp, the God of hosts, I 

. abhor ‘the excellency of Jacob, and 
hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver up the 
city with all ® that is therein. 

9 And it shall come to pass, if there remain 
ten men in one house, that they shall die. 

10 And a man’s uncle shall take him up, 
and he that burneth him, to bring out the 
bones out of the house, and shall say unto 
him that is by the sides of the house, Is there 
yet any with thee? and he shall say, No. 
Then shall he say, * Hold thy tongue: * for 
®we may not make mention of the name of the 
Lorp. 

11 For behold, the Lorp commandeth, * and 


4 Psa. xlvii. 4; Ezek. xxiv. 21; Chap. viii. 7——® Heb. the 
fulness thereof: * Chap. v. 13.—=s Chap. viii. 3. gp dae: 
they will not, or, have not. 


be carried into captivity. And the banquet of them 
that stretched themselves shall be removed—They 
who indulged themselves in ease and luxury shall 
haye no more costly banquets spread before them: 
all their luxurious living shall be at anend. The 
Lord hath sworn by himself—And will not violate 
his oath; J abhor the excellency of Jacob—What- 
ever the kingdoms of Israel and Judah value them- 
selves for is hateful to me, as having been abused by 
them, and made instrumental in dishonouring me. 
Or, the words should rather be rendered, J abhor the 
pride of Jacob. Inhumanity and hardness of heart, as 
well as many other vices, are generally the compan- 
ions of pride; and therefore God always expresses, 
in the Seriptures, the utmost abhorrence of that 
sin. Therefore I will deliver up the city—Name- 
ly, the city of Samaria first, and then that of Jeru- 
salem. 

Verses 9-11, If there remain ten men in one house, 
&c.—Those that escape the hands of the enemy 
shall die by the pestilence. And a man’s uncle (or 
kinsman) shall take him up—Some friend or rela- 
tion, whose duty it is to perform the last offices for 
the deceased, shall take him wp directly and burn 
him: for soitshould be rendered, and not, anD HE THAT 
burneth him. The meaning is, that he should not stay 
to perfume the body with rich ointments, as was the 
usual custom; nor should he bury it, but burn it to 
ashes, to prevent infection. 0 bring out the bones 
out of the house, &c.—Or rather, that he may bring 
out, &e., that is, that he may, as soon as possible, 
cleanse the house by the removal of the body. All 
that is said here, is strongly expressive of what is 
the case where a deadly pestilence rages. And shall 
say unto him that is by the sides of the house—Or 
near the house, out of which the bones are carried; 
Ts there any yet with thee—Is there any yet living 
besides thyself belonging to this house? And he 
shall say, No—A\l\ the inhabitants of the house are 
dead. Then shall he say, Hold thy tongue ; for we 
may not make mention of the name of the Lord— 

3 


he will smite the great house with A. M. 3217. 
10 breaches, and the little house with kata 
clefts. 

12 9 Shall horses run upon the rock? will 
one plough there with oxen? for *ye have 
turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of 
righteousness into hemlock : 

13 Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, 
which say, Have we not taken to us horns by 
our own strength ? 

14 But behold, ¥ I will raise up against you a 
nation, O house of Israel, saith the Lorn, the 
God of hosts; and they shall afflict you from 
the “entering in of Hamath unto the ™ river of 
the wilderness. 


t Isa. lv. 11. u hep. iii. 15. 10 Or, droppings. * Hos. 
x. 4; Chap. v. 7. y Jer. v. 15. z Num. xxxiv. 8; 1 Kings 
viii. 65. 11 Or, valley. 


As this clause has no immediate connection with, or 
relation to, the negative answer contained in the pre- 
ceding clause, it is to be supposed that when the per- 
son has given that answer, and said that there was 
none left alive in the house, he utters, as is natural, 
some prayer to God for mercy or deliverance; on 
which the other speaks to him in this manner: as 
much as to say, It is in vain now to pray, or make 
supplication; for God will not now hear us, but we 
also shall be cut off by this dreadful pestilence, as 
the rest have been. Archbishop Newcome puts a 
different sense on the last clause, thus: “Solitude 
shall reign in the house; and if one is left, he must 
be silent (see chap. viii. 3) and retired, lest he be 
plundered of his scanty provisions.” or behold, 
the Lord commandeth—Gives forth his commands 
to the enemy, namely, the Assyrians, to come against 
Israel. And he will smite the great house, and the 
little house, &e.—People of all ranks, high and low, 
shall be sufferers in the common calamities. 

Verse 12. Shall horses run wpon the rock?—“Is 
it possible that horses should run upon the steep and. 
craggy cliffs? So impossible is it that ye Israelites 
should continue to prosper, while.ye remain thus 
sinful."—Bishop Hall. Or, “as horses and oxen are 
useless in such places, so are ye evidently useless to 
God.”—Grotius. Several other interpretations are 
given of this obscure verse. Mr. Scott’s is, “It was 
as perilous to endeavour to reform the people as it 
would be to ride a race on the top of a craggy rock, 
where both horses and horsemen would be in dan- 
ger of being killed; and as vain as to plough there 
with oxen, when no impression could be made or 
increase expected.” For ye have turned judgment 
into gall, &e.—Ye have rendered the administration 
of public justice as bitter as gaily and the fruit of 
righteousness, or the observance of religious cere- 
monies, as poisonous as hemlock. : 

Verses 13, 14. Ye which rejoice in a thing of 
nanught—Ye who place confidence in your strength, 
which will avail you nothing when God withdraws 

933 


Judgments denounced 


AMOS. 


against Israel. 


his blessing from you; which say, Have we not 
taken to us horns by our strength 2—Have we not, 
by our strength, been victors over our neighbours ? 
This boast seems chiefly founded upon the success 
which Jeroboam II. had in restoring the ancient do- 
minion of Israel, and recovering it from the Syrians, 
who had brought them very low: see 2 Kings xiii. 3, 
7, and xiv. 15. But behold, I will raise up against 
you a nation, &c.—The Assyrians were the nation 


here spoken of, who, it is here denounced, should 
afflict them from one end of the land to the other; 
which they accordingly did some time after, making 
an entire conquest of the country. Hamath was the 
boundary of the land of Israel to the north: see 
Num. xxxiv. 8; 2 Kings xiv. 25: and the river of 
the wilderness, by which is meant the river Nile, or, 
as it is called, Josh. xv. 47, the river of Egypt, was 
the southern boundary. 


CHAPTER VII. 


This chapter represents, (1,) God contending with the Israelites by lesser judgments, and removing them at the 
prayer of Amos, 1-6; but at last abandoning them, as incorrigible, to utter destruction, 7-9. (2,) Amaziah, the 
idolatrous priest of Beth-el, accusing the prophet to King Jeroboam, and advising him, and charging him to leave 
the country and return to Judea, 10-13. (3,) Amos vindicating his office, and denouncing ruin to Amaziah, and 


his family and nation, 14-17. 


—— rpHus hath the Lord Gop showed 
pat Vita vl unto me ; and behold, he formed 
1 grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting 
up of the latter growth ; and lo, ¢¢ was the lat- 
ter growth after the king’s mowings. 

2 And it came to pass, that when they had 
made an end of eating the grass of the land, 
then I said, O Lord Gon, forgive, I beseech 
thee: *by? whom shall Jacob arise? for he is 
small. 


3 >The Lorp repented for this: ie El 
It shall not be, saith the Lorp. aha 

4 % Thus hath the Lord Gop showed unto 
me: and behold, the Lord Gop called to con- 
tend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and 
did eat up a part. 

5 Then said I, O Lord Gop, cease, I beseech 
thee: ° by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is 
small. 


6 The Lorp repented for this: This also 


1 Or, green-worms. a Isaiah li. 19; Verse 5.——® Or, who of 


(or, for) Jacob shall stand? 


b Deuteron, xxxii. 36; Verse 6; Jonah iii. 10; James v. 16. 
¢ Verses 2, 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. 

Verse 1. Thus hath the Lord showed unto me— 
The Lord also showed me the following things. 
Here the prophet mentions the first of five prophetic 
representations of what was coming upon this peo- 
ple. He formed grasshoppers in the beginning of 


the latter growth—He appeared to me as bringing a) 
vast multitude of grasshoppers upon the land at the) 


season when the grass begins to shoot again after 


the first mowing. Though this be spoken ina literal | 
sense of a plague of grasshoppers, yet some com-| 
mentators think it is to be understood metaphorically, | 


and that by the grasshoppers is meant the army of 
Pu), king of Assyria, mentioned 2 Kings xv. 19. 
After the king’s mowings—It is supposed that the 
first crop of grass was set apart for the use of the 
king’s stables. 

Verses 2, 3. When they had made an end of eat- 
ing the grass—With us grasshoppers are not hurt- 
ful, but those in our text were locusts, as the word 
°22, here used, A aehli Isa. xxxiii. 4: in which 
sense the word is understood by the Vulgate and 


Houbigant:,see also Nah. iii. 17. By whom shall 


Jacob arise 2—Or, who shall raise up Jacob ; for he 
is small ?—If thou suffer these calamities to proceed 


to extremities, by what means shall the small re-|! 


934 


mains of the riches and strength of the kingdom he 
rescued from utter destruction? The Lord repented 
for this, &e.—The prophet here informs us, that it 
was represented to him in his vision, that the Lord 
was pleased to hearken to his earnest supplication, 
and to promise that the threatened judgment should 
not proceed to an utter destruction of the whole 
kingdom, Those who suppose all this to be meta- 
phorically expressed, understand this of Pul’s being 
induced by a sum of money -to depart out of the 
land, as we read 2 Kings xv. 20: but it may be un- 
derstood of a threatened judgment of locusts and 
other insects, which was deprecated by the pro- 
phet’s prayers, and so not executed. 

Verses 4-6. The Lord God called to contend by 
Sire, &c.—This represented a sorerjudgment than the 
former, and, in the opinion of some expositors, de- 
noted the invasion of Tiglath-pileser, who carried a 
sreat part of Israel away captive, 2 Kings xv. 29, and 
so was properly represented by a raging fire, which 
consumed the sea by turning it into vapours, and 
then devoured a great part of the land. Then said 
I, O Lord God, cease, I beseech thee, &e.—Here the 


'| prophet observes, that upon this judgment being re- 


presented to him in his vision, he made supplication 
to God as he had done before, and that God heark- 


3 


Judgments denounced 


CHAPTER VII. 


against Amaziah. 


.|| house of Israel: the land is not able Figs gab 


A. M. 3217. shall not be, saith the Lord Gop 
7 “I Thus he showed me: and be- 

hold, the Lorp stood upon a wall made by a 
plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand. 
-8 And the Lorp said unto me, Amos, what 
seest thou? and I said, A plumb-line. Then 
said the Lorp, Behold, *I will set a plumb- 
line in the midst of my people Israel: ° I will 
hot again pass by them any more: 
'9 f And the high places of Isaac shall be de- 
solate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be 
laid waste ; and *I will rise against the house 
of Jeroboam with the sword. 

10 4 Then Amaziah * the priest of Beth-el 
sent to ' Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos 
hath conspired against thee in the midst of the 


oe 


to bear all his words. So LN 

11 For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die 
by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led 
away captive out of their own land. 

12 Also, Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou 
seer, go flee thee away into the land of Judah, 
and there eat bread, and prophesy there : 

13 But ‘prophesy not again any more at 
Beth-el: | for it is the king’s * chapel, and it zs 
the * king’s court. 

14 4 Then answered Amos, and said to 
Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was 1™ a 
prophet’s son ; "but I was a herdman, and a 
gatherer of ® sycamore fruit : 

15 And the Lorp took me °as I followed the 


42 Kings xxi. 13; Isaiah xxviii. 17; xxxiv.11; Lam. ii. 8. 
© Chap. vili. 2; Micah vii. 18. Beer- sheba, Gen. xxvi. 253 
xlvi. 1; Chapter v.53 viii. 14.——= Fulfilled, 1 Kings xv. 10. 
by} Kings xii, 32.——i 2 Kings xiv. 23. 


k Chap. ii. 12.——1 1 Kings xii. 32 ; xiii. 1 —9 Or, sanctuary. 
*Heb. house of the kingdom.~ m] Kings xx. 35; 2 Kings ii. 5; 
iv. 38; vi. 1. Chap. i. 1; Zech. xiii. 5. 's Or, wild fies. 


5 Heb. ” from behind. 


ened to him in this instance also, and promised that 
this judgment should not be executed, or should 
have a stop put to it. 

Verses 7-9. The Lord stood upon a wall made by 
a plumb-line—A wall strongly and beautifully built. 
God’s judgments are sometimes represented in Scrip- 
ture by a line and a plummet, to denote that they 
are measured out by the exactest rules of justice. 
Behold, I will set a plumb-line in the midst of my 
people Israel—I will exactly measure my people 
Israel; I will take a particular view of the whole 
kingdom of the ten tribes, and notice how far it 
is right, or how far it is out of order, and will judge 
and punish according to their sins. J will not again 
pass by them any more—I will not any longer pass 
over their transgressions. JT'he high places of Isaac 
shall be desolate—The idolatrous altars and groves 
which they have erected at Beer-sheba, where their 
holy ancestor Jacob erected an altar to the true 
God, and devoutly worshipped him, shall be entirely 
spoiled and made desolate. And the sanctuaries of 
Israel shall be laid waste—All the other places in 
Israel, set apart for idolatrous worship, shall also be 
entirely destroyed. 

Verses 10, 11. T’hen Amaziah the priest of 
Beth-el sent to Jeroboam—This was a priest not of 
the tribe of Levi, but such a one as those were whom 
Jeroboam J. had consecrated to*perform the idola- 


trous services at Beth-el: see 1 Kings xii. 31. Amos | 


hath conspired against thee in the midst, &c.— 
That is, in an open and barefaced manner. He re- 


presents the prophet as exciting sedition, because he | 


denounced destruction against the kingdom, and 
threatened the house of Jeroboam. The same crime 
was objected to Jeremiah, chap. xxvi. 9, 10; to Christ, 
Luke xxiii. 2; and to St. Paul, Acts xxiv. 5. T'he 
land is not able to bear all lis words—The friends 
of the government cannot patiently hear his words, 
and the enemies of it will take advantage from them 
3 


to make some disturbance. If he proceed to speak 
in this manner, the inhabitants will be moved to take 
up arms against each other. For Amos saith, Jero- 
boam shall die by the sword—This was a perverting 
of the prophet’s words; for he did not prophesy 
against the king himself, but against his family, or 
posterity. 

Verses 12, 13. Amaziah said, O thou seer, go 
flee, &e.—Thou that sayest thou art a prophet, get 
thee hence, where thou signifiest that thou art so 
much displeased with the actions of the people, and 
go into the land of Judah—Where it is likely thou 
wilt be better entertained than thou art here. And 
there eat bread, &c.—There they will feed thee well, 
because thou pretendest to be a prophet. Prophesy 
not at Beth-el, for itis the king’s chapel, &e.—This 
is the place where the king performs his religious 
worship in person, and often resides here with his 
court, that he may the better attend upon the service 
performed at this place; (see 1 Kings xili. 1;) and 
therefore thou oughtest to reverence it, and not utter 
thy sham prophecies here. 

Verses 14, 15. I was no prophet—Not originally, 
or by study, or by any human designation; neither 
was Ia prophel’s son—Neither was I bred up at the 
schools of the prophets; as those usually were who 
took that office upon them. But f was a herdman 
—By breeding and occupation I was, and still am, a 
herdman; and a gatherer of sycamore fruit—I got 
my livelihood also in part by gathering wild figs for 
those who had occasion forthem. T'he Lord took 
me, &¢.—As I was following my flock, and thinking 
of nothing else; and said unto me—By an extraor- 
dinary irradiation, or impulse of his Divine Spirit; 
Go, prophesy unto my people—Go, and as a prophet 
divinely commissioned, reprove, instruct, exhort, and 
warn my people of the calamities impending over 
them, and which will assuredly fall upon them, unless 


they avert them by turning to me in true repentance, 
935 


Israel threatened with 


AMOS. 


still heavier judgments, 


A. M. 3217. flock, and the Lorp said unto| 

B, C. 787. 

me, Go, prophesy unto my people! 
Israel. 

16 % Now, therefore, hear thou the word of 
the Lorn: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against | 
Israel, and ° drop not thy word against the 
house of Isaac. 


© Rzekiel xxi. 2; Micah ii. 6——? Jeremiah xxviii. 12; xxix. 
215,25 31,' 32: 


Verses 16, 17. Now, hear thou the word of the 
Lord—Who hath sent me, and whom thou contra- 
dictest; from him I have a message to thee also, 
which much concernsthee. T'hou sayest, Prophesy 
not against Israel—Thou usest thy power to silence 
me; therefore thus saith the Lord—Because thou 
hast so directly and wilfully opposed the Lord; Thy 
wife shall be a harlot in the city—Shall be treated 
as a harlot in this very city of Beth-el. The mean- 
ing probably is, that she should be abused, or ravished, 


17 ? Therefore thus saith the Lorp ; li 
4'Thy wife shall be a harlot in the ———— 
city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall 
by the sword, and thy land shall be divided 
by line ; and thou shalt die in a polluted land: 
and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth 
of his land. 


aIsaiah xiii. 16; Lamentations v. 11; Hosea iv. 13; Zechariah 
xiv. 2. 


by the Assyrian soldiers, when they should take 
Beth-el. Thy land shall be divided by line—Con- 
querors were used to divide conquered lands in por- 
tions among their soldiers, which was done by . 
measuring out every one’s part by a line; so that 
this expression signified, his land should be divided 
among the enemy. And thou shalt die in a polluted 

| land—Thou shalt be carried captive from thine own 
country, and die in a land where the inhabitants are 
idolatrous. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


In this chapter, (1,) By the vision of a basket of summer fruit, the prophet is shown the certainty and nearness of ihe 
destruction of the ten tribes, 1-3. (2,) For their oppression of the poor, profanation of the sabbath, and injustice 


in traffic, they are threatened .with the most ruinous and mournful calamities, 4-10. 


(3,) For their idolatrous 


worship they are threatened with an utter deprivation of the word and ordinances of God, 11-14, 


* 3 ih Hus hath the Lord Gop showed 
eh RL unto me: and behold a basket 
of summer fruit. 

2 And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And 
I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said 
the Lorp unto me, * The end is come upon 


a Ezek. vii. 2.——» Chap. vii. 8. 


¢ Chap. v. 23. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. 


my people of Israel; >I will not A. M. 3217. 
: B. C. 787. 
again pass by them any more. weenie 
3 And °the songs of the temple ‘shall be 
howlings in that day, saith the Lord Gop: 
there shall be many dead bodies in every place ; 
‘they shall cast ¢hem forth ? with silence. 


1 Heb. shall howl. 


4 Chap. vi. 9, 10.—? Heb. be silent. 


Jeroboam II. all things became worse and worse, till 


Verses 1, 2. Behold a basket of summer fruit— 
This symbolically denoted that Israel’s sins were now 
ripe for judgment, and that as the fruit, when it is 
ripe, is taken from the trees, so, their iniquity being 
now ripe, they should be taken off the land in which 
they dwelt. The two Hebrew words, yp, kaits, 
summer fruit, and YP kets, an end, have an affinity 
in their sound. Such paronomasias occur in other 
passages of Scripture: see Isaiah xxiv. 17; Jer. i. 11. 
Instead of summer fruit, Houbigant reads, “ autum-| 
nal fruit, or, fruit of the last season of the year ; 
and so in the next verse, where, instead of the end, 
he reads the last end, in order to keep up the allu- 
sion, and the play of the words in the original: | 
whereby is signified, that as after the autumnal fruits, | 
no others are produced from the earth, or gathered | 
from the tree, so should it come to pass, that the | 
kingdom of Israel should no more produce any | 
fruit, nor reflourish in the following years. After | 

036 


the kingdom of Israel was totally destroyed:” see 
Jer. xxiv. 

Verse 3. And the songs of the temple shall be 
howlings, &c.—Houbigant renders it, And the 
singers of the palace shall howl, the word 52", 
signifying palace as well as temple; and as Amos_ 
prophesied against Israel, not against Judah, the 
temple, properly so called, could not be meant here. 
There shall be many dead bodies in every place— 
In cities, towns, and the country; in all places shall 
the bloody effects produced by the enemies’ sword, 
and by famine and pestilence, be seen. They shail 


'| cast them forth with silence—The enemy will make 


| such slaughter among the people, and the dead will 
be so numerous, that there will be no opportunity of 
using public mournings, or lamentations, at funerals, 
as had been usual in other cases; but the friends of 
the deceased will be glad to hurry them to their 


_ graves with as much silence and privacy — 


Israel threatened with 


CHAPTER VIII. 


still heavier judgments. 


A. M, 3217. 


“le et 4 @ Hear this, O ye that ° swallow 


up the needy, even to make the poor 
of the land to fail, : 

5 Saying, When will the *new-moon be 
gone, that we may sell corn ? and ‘ the sabbath, 
that we may ‘set forth wheat, making the 
ephah small, and the shekel great, and ° falsify- 
ing the balances by deceit ? 


© Psalm xiv. 4; Prov. xxx. 14, % Or, month—— Neh. xiii. 
15, 16.——* Heb. open.—— Mice. vi. 10, 11. 


6 That we may buy the poor for sical 
silver, and the needy for a pair of ———— 
shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat ? 

7 The Lorn hath sworn by ‘ the excellency 
of Jacob, Surely *I will never forget any of 
their works. 

8 ! Shall not the land tremble for this, and 


every one mourn that dwelleth therein? and 


5 Heb. perverting the balances of deceit, Hos, xii. 7——» Chap. 
ii. 6.—— Chap, vi. 8. ——* Hos. viii. 13; ix. 9.——! Hos. iv. 3. 


Verses 4-6. Hear, O ye that swallow up the needy 
--That greedily and cruelly devour such as would 
have been objects of your compassion, had you been 
just and merciful as well as rich and great. He al- 
ludes to the greater fish swallowing up the lesser. 
To make the poor of the land to fail—Either to root 
them out or to enslave them. Saying, When will 
the new-moon be gone—This was one of their solemn 
feasts, the use of which they retained with their 
idolatrous worship; that we may sell corn—It seems 
they were prohibited during this feast, and probably 
in their other solemn feasts, from every kind of 
traffic, even the selling of corn; and these covetous 
wretches thought the time during which they were 
so restrained long and tedious, wishing to be again 
at liberty to trade and get gain. Making the ephah 
small, and the shekel great—The ephah was the 
measure whereby they sold corn, &c., containing 
about one of our bushels. This they made smaller 
than the just standard, and so cheated in the quantity 
of what they sold. The shekel was the money they 
received for the price of their goods, and by weigh- 
ing this by too heavy a weight, they diminished its 
real value, and so cheated also in the sum they re- 
ceived. So that both ways they over-reached those 
that dealt with them, who received less of what they 
bought than it was their right to receive, and paid 
more than they ought to pay forit. T'hat we may 
buy the poor for silver—That we may, by these 
* unjust dealings, soon get the poor so much into our 
debt, that they may not be able to discharge it, but 
be obliged to surrender themselves to us as slaves, 
and that for a very trifling consideration in reality. 


So that these avaricious and merciless men wished | 


the new-moon and sabbaths to be over, that they 
might go to market, as it were, and buy the poor ; 
and when these poor owed but for a very trifling 
article, as suppose a pair of shoes, they would take 
adyantage against them, and make them sell them- 
selves to pay the debt. Or, to buy any thing for a 
pair of shoes, was a proverbial expression to signify 
getting it ata very vile, or low price. It was the 
custom of those times when a man could not dis- 
charge his debts, for him to surrender up himself 
and family to his creditor as bond-servants. By this 
the rich increased their power, as well as their 
wealth; and such was their inhumanity, that they 
practised every art of fraud and extortion to reduce 
the needy to this miserable condition. Yea, and 
sell the refuse of the wheat—Not content with de- 
3 


| 


frauding in the measure and price, ye mix the chaff, 
or refuse, such as is not fit to make bread, and sell it 
together with the wheat. This was another kind of 
oppression ; corrupted wares were sold to those that 
were necessitous. ; 

Verse 7. The Lord hath sworn by the excellency 
of Jacob—That is, by himself; Surely I will never 
forget any of their works—God is said to remember 
men’s sins when he punishes them. We may learn 
by this passage, and many others in Scripture, that 
however slightly men may think of it, God takes par- 
ticular notice of, and will certainly punish, all etor- 
tions and over-reachings in trade, and more particu- 
larly when they are used in regard of the poor. They 
shall have judgment without merey, who have 
showed no merey. It is to be wished that persons 
would always consider themselves as the fathers of 
the poor, when they deal with them; and rather 
give them measure pressed down and running over, 
than mete to them with @ scanty hand. 

Verse 8. Shall not the land tremble—Shall not 
the state, or government, and all the people of the 
land, be terribly afraid, and greatly troubled ; for 
this— This, that you have done, O house of Israel, 


| in sinning, and this that God will do in punishing ? 


And every one mourn that dwelleth therein—Shall 
not all be deeply concerned and distressed, since all 
have sinned and deserved punishment, and all will 
suffer in the approaching calamity? Certainly they 
shall. Observe, reader, those that will not tremble 
and mourn as they ought for national sins, shall be 
made to tremble and mourn for national judgments; 
those that look unconcerned upon the sins of op- 
pressors, which should make them tremble, and 
upon the miseries of the oppressed, which should 


/make them mourn, God will find out a way to make 


them tremble at the fury of those that oppress them, 
and mourn for their own losses and sufferings by it. 
And it shall rise wp wholly as a flood—The LXX. 


| read, with a very small alteration in the Hebrew 


points, Kae ava@noerat we roTapoc ovvtedeia, Destruc- 
tion shall rise up like a flood ; that is, the judgment, 
the calamity of a hostile invasion by the Assyrians, 
shall be like an inundation, which in a short time 
overflows a whole country. And it shall be cast 
out and drowited—The inhabitants of the land shall 
be cast out of their possessions, or the land itself 
shall be overwhelmed as by the flood, or rather, the 
river of Egypt, that is, as Egypt is by the inunda- 
tion of the river Nile. Thusthe Chaldee paraphrase: 
Ry : 


Israel threatened with 


AMOS. 


still heavier judgments. 


A. M. 3217. it shall rise up wholly as a flood: and 
BO: 7S" it shall be cast out and drowned, ™ as 
by the flood of Egypt. 

B. 6.791. 9 And it shall come to pass in that 
day, saith the Lord Gop, * that I will 
cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will 
darken the earth in the clear day : 

10 And I will turn your feasts into mourning, 
and all your songs into lamentation; Pand I 


will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, A. M. pe. 
and baldness upon every head; %and ‘ 
I will make it as the mourning of an only son, 
and the end thereof as a bitter day. 

11 | Behold, the days come, saith the Lord 
Gop, that I will send a famine in the land, not 
a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but 
tof hearing the words of the Lorp: 

12 And they shall wander from sea to sea, 


m Chap. ix. 5. 
xv. 9; Micah iii. 6. 


n Job v. 14; Isaiah xiii. 10; lix. 9,10; Jer. 
p Isaiah xv. 2,3; Jer. xlviii. 37; Ezek. 


vii. 18; xxvii. 314 Jeremiah vi. 26; Zechariah xii. 10. 
r] Sam. ili. 1; Psa. Ixxiv.9; Ezek. vii. 26, 


He shail make a king come up against it [the land] 
with a numerous army like a flood, and he shall | 
drive out the inhabitants thereof, and [the land | 
itself] shall be drowned as when the flood of Egypt 
[overflows. | 

Verse 9. Iwill cause the sun to go down at noon | 
—Calamitous times are often expressed in the Scrip- 
tures by the failing of the light of the sun, and the | 
day’s being overspread with darkness. So Israel’s 
sun did begin to go down, as at noon, under the 
dark cloud of conspiracies and civil wars by Shallum, | 
Menahem, Pekah, and Hoshea, till it entirely set 
and total darkness came on through the Assyrian | 
invasions by Pul, Tiglath-pileser, and Shalmanezer. 
and by the entire desolation and destruction of the) 
country produced thereby. And I will darken the 
earth—By bringing a thick cloud of troubles and 
afflictions over it; 7m the clear day—When they 
think all is safe, well settled, and hopeful. 

Verse 10. I will turn your feasts into mourning 
—God commanded the Jews to celebrate their festi- | 
vals with joy and gladness; but this it would be im- 
possible for them to do under such melancholy cir- 


cumstances and manifestations of the divine dis- || 


pleasure. And all your songs into lamentation— 
The particular psalms and hymns which used to be 
sung at the great festivals are here alluded to. 
And I will bring wp sackcloth wpon all loins—All 
sorts of persons shall put on mourning. And bald- 
ness wpon every head—Shaving the head and beard |, 
was a sign of the greatest sadness. Jwill make it as | 
the mourning, rather, as in the mourning of [or for] || 
an only son—That is, amost heavy mourning; for the 
death of an only son generally occasions the severest | 
grief; and the end thereof as a bitter day—A sor- 
rowful day, which you shall wish you had never 
seen, shall succeed your dark night. 
the calamities shall increase more and more ; so that 
the last part of these grevious times shall be far 
more distressing than any that had preceded. This 
undoubtedly was the case, as the carrying them into 
captivity would occasion a separation of friends | 
from friends, children from parents, wives from 
husbands, than which it is not easy to conceive any 
thing more deplorable. 

Verse ll. Behold the days come, saith the Lord 
—This is spoken of events which were yet at some 
distance. That Iwill send a famine in the land, 


| his messengers. 
1 ties that were upon them truly melancholy; that 


1 —the heaviest judgment. 


| this threatening was intended to look further than 
In other words, | 


not of bread, §¢., but of hearing the words of the 
938 


Lord—When Amos prophesied, and for a consider- 
able time after, there were several prophets, and 
abundant opportunities of hearing the word of the 
Lord, in season and out of season: they had precept 
upon precept and line upon line. Prophecy was” 
their daily bread ; but they despised it as Israel did 
the manna in the wilderness; and therefore God 
threatens that he would hereafter deprive them of 
this privilege. It appears that there were not so 
many prophets in the land of Israel, about the time 
that their destruction came upon ‘them, as there 


» | Were in the land of Judah; and after the ten tribes 


were carried away captive, they saw not their signs ; 


, | there were no more any prophets among them; none 


to show them How long ; Psa. Ixxiv.9. The Jewish 
chureh also, after Malachi, had no prophets for 
many ages. Now, Ist, This was the departure of a 
great part of their glory: what especially made 


|| their nation great and high was, that to them were 
| committed the oracles of God: but when these were 


taken from them their beauty was stained, and their 
honour laid in the dust. 2d, This was a token of 
God’s highest displeasure against. them: surely he 
was angry indeed with them, when he would no 
more speak to them as he had done; and had aban- 
doned them to ruin, when he would no more reprove 
them for their sins, and call them to repentance by 
3d, This made all the other calami- 


| they had no prophets to instruct and comfort them 
‘from the word of God, nor to give them any hopeful 
| prospect. We should say at any time, and sliall be 
compelled to say in a time of trouble, ‘that a famine 
, of the word of God is, of all others, the sorest famine 
It is not improbable that 


to the judgment now referred to, even to the blind- 
ness which has in part happened to Israel, in the 
days of the Messiah, and the veil that is on the 
hearts of the unbelieving Jews. They reject the 
gospel, and the ministers of it, which God sends to 
them, and covet to have prophets of their own, as 
their fathers had; but they shall have none, the 
kingdom of God being taken from them and given 
to another people. 

Verses 12, 13. And they shall wand 2r from. sea to 
sea—From the sea of Tiberias to the great 
one border of the country to another. 
the north even to the east—The prophet om 


Judgments 


CHAPTER IX. 


threatened, 


A. M. 3217. and from the north even to the east ; 
———— they shall run to and fro to seek the 
word of the Lorn, and shall not find it. 
13 In that day shall the fair virgins and 
' young men faint for thirst. 


5 Hosea iv. 15. 


* Deut. ix. 21.——® Heb. way, Acts 


14 They that * swear by t the sin of A. M. 3217. 
Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan, ui aha 
liveth; and, The manner "of Beer-sheba 
liveth ; even they shall fall and never rise up 
again. 


ix. 23; xvili. 25; xix. 9, 23; xxiv. 14, 


4 Chap. v. 5. 


the south, because the idolaters, to whom he directs 
his discourse, would choose to inquire anywhere 
rather than of the true prophets of the Lord, who 
dwelt in the tribe of Judah, which was situated to the 
south of the ten tribes. They shall run to and fro, 
to seek the word of the Lord—To inquire if there be 
any prophet, any prophecy, any message from God, 
any divine direction what course to take in their 
distress—any encouragement to expect deliverance 
from their calamities, and happier times. Jn that 
day shall the fair virgins, &c.—They who are in 
the bloom of their youth and in the strength of their 
age, shall faint, and be dispirited like those that want 
necessary refreshment. 
Verse 14. T'hey that swear by the sin of Samaria 
—That is, by the calf which Jeroboam set up as an 
object of worship at Beth-el, not far from Samaria, 
committing a great sin in so doing, and making Israel 
to sin. Swearing, according to the sense in which 
the word is here taken, is a solemn invocation of the 


name of God, and an appeal to him; and, as such, is 
a proper part of divine worship, (see Deut. vi. 13, 
and x, 20,) and therefore ought not to be given to 
idols. And say, Thy God—Or, As thy God, O Dan, 
liveth—That is, who say in the way of an oath, As 
the god who is worshipped in Dan liveth: at Dan 
was placed another of Jeroboam’s calves. And, The 
manner of Beer-sheba liveth—The LXX. render it, 
the god of Beer-sheba liveth; expressing the sense 
rather than the words of the original. The way or 
manner signifies the same with the way of worship; 
so that the people swore by the religion of Beer- 
sheba, or the manner of worship used there, which 
they looked upon as sacred. Thusthe Papists swear 
by the mass: but they who thus give that honour to 
idols which is due to God alone, will find the God 
whom they thus affront is made their enemy. And 
they shall fall, &e.—And the gods they serve can- 
not raise them up; so that without better help they 
shall never rise again. 


CHAPTER IX. 


Tn this chapter we have, (1,) Judgments threatened which sinners shall not escape, 1-4; which shall be inflicted by 
an Almighty power, 5, 6; and are deserved by the people, 7,8; which nevertheless should not be the utter ruin of 
their nation, for a remnant of pious persons should escape them, while the wicked should perish, 9,10. (2,) Mercy, 
a restoration, and great prosperity promised, 11-15; which blessings were to be bestowed in the latter days, the 
days of the Messiah, Acts xv. 16; and with these comfortable promises, after the foregoing rebukes and threaten- 


ings, the book concludes. 


ee I SAW the Lorp standing upon the 

vor altar: and he said,. Smite the 
‘lintel of the door, that the posts may shake : 
and *cut* them in the head all of them; and 


'|I will slay the last of them with the 4. M, 3217. 
| sword: » he that fleeth of them shall 
|/not flee away, and he that escapeth of them 


‘shall not be delivered. 


1 Or, chapiter, or, knop. 2 Or, wound them. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 
Verse 1. £ saw—Namely, in a vision or ecstasy ; 


| 
| 
— 
a Psa. Ixviii. 21 ; Hab. iii. 13.——» Chap. ii. 14. 
p 


_of the house of Israel, like that of the house of Eli, 
| should not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for 


the Lord—That is, the glory and majesty of the | ever.” And he said—To an angel, as Jerome ex- 
Lord, as Isaiah did, chapter vi. 1, orabright glorious || plains it; or rather God here speaks to his people’s 
light, indicating the presence of God; standing wpon enemies, and gives them a commission to destroy 
the altar—Resting upon, or over the altar. The themandtheirtemple. Smite the lintel of the door— 
altar of burnt-offering seems to be meant here, and | This signified that the temple, which was then repre- 
the glory of God resting upon it to have denoted | sented to the prophet, should be destroyed. Whether 
that his justice demanded the lives of the sinners | this was the temple at Beth-el, or that of Jerusalem, 
here spoken of to be cut off. “He stands upon the} is not quite certain. The Chaldee understands the 
altar,” says Henry, “to show that the ground of his | vision of the kingdom of Judah; if so, the temple at 
controversy with this people was their profanation || Jerusalem is undoubtedly intended. And even if 
of his holy things: here he stands to avenge the |i the vision relates, as most suppose, to the kingdom 

quarrel of his altar; as also fo signify, that the sin of Israel, yet still the VER of Jerusalem may be 

3 


Judgments shall be inflicted 


A. M. 3217. 
B. C. 787. 


2 °Though they dig into hell, 
thence shall my hand take them; 
4though they climb up to heaven, thence will 
I bring them down: 

3 And though they hide themselves in the 
cop of Carmel, I will search and take them out 
thence; and though they be hid from my sight 
in the bottom of the sea, thence will 1 command 
the serpent, and he shall bite them : 

4 And though they go into captivity before 
their enemies, ®* thence will I command the 
sword, and it shall slay them: and ‘I will set 


a 
¢ Psalm exxxix. 8. 4 Job xx. 6; Jeremiah li. 53 ; Obad. 4. 
e Lev. xxvi. 33; Deut, xxviii. 65; Ezek. v. 12. Lev. xvii. 
10; Jer. xliv. 11. 


here spoken of, and the scene be laid there, because 
Israel had forsaken this altar and temple and set up | 
others in opposition to them; and here God, in his 
jealousy, appears prepared to take vengeance. Pos- 
sibly, the vision might also be designed to intimate 
his future departure from Judah too, There Ezekiel, 
chapter ix. 2, saw the slaughter-men stand. By the 
lintel of the door, the chapiter, knop, or ornament 
that was upon the lintel,is intended, namely, of the | 
door of the gate of the temple, or possibly of the | 
gate that led into the priests’ court. That the posts 
may shake—The posts were the strength and beauty | 
of the gate, and by these the princes, the door-posts || 
as it were of the nation, are supposed to be repre- | 
sented, as the king is by the lintel of the door. And’ 
cut them, wound them deep in the head—That is, | 
the people who were represented in the vision as | 
standing in the court of the temple. He says in the || 
head, more fully to signify the destroying of the 
chief or heads of this sinful people. All of them— 
Spare not one of them; let the destruction be general. | 
And I will slay the last of then—That is, their pos- 
terity and their families—them, and all that remain | 
of them, tillit come to the last man. Observe, reader, 
there is no living for those of whom God hath. said, 
I will slay them; no standing before his sword. He 
that fleeth of them shall not flee away—That is, 
shall not escape. He that escapeth of them shall 
not be delivered—That is, he that escapeth in battle, 
or escapes one or two, or even several judgments, 
shall, nevertheless, not escape finally ; but shall fall 
in some other way, or be made captive. The greatest 
precaution, and the highest station in life, will not 
avail a man any thing when’ God is resolved to 
punish. This is intended for a warning to all that 
provoke the Lord to jealousy: let sinners read it and 
‘tremble. As there is no fighting it out with God, so 
there is no fleeing from him. His judgments, when 
they come with commission, as they will overpower 
the strongest, who think to withstand them, so they 
will overtake the swiftest, who think to outrun 
them. 

Verses 2-4, Though they dig into hell, &e.— 
Here the subject is enlarged upon to impress it more 


AMOS. 


|| animal. 


by an Almighty power. 
SSS SS SSS es: 
mine eyes upon them for evil, and A. M. 3217. 

B. C. 787. 
not for good. a 

5 And the Lord Gop of hosts is he that 
toucheth the land, and it shall melt, ® and all 
that dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall 
tise up wholly like a flood ; and shall be drown- 
ed, as by the flood of Egypt. 

6 Jt is he that buildeth his * stories +‘ in the 
heaven, and hath founded his 5 troop in the 
earth; he that *calleth for the waters of the 
sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the 
earth : | The Lorp és his name. 


& Isa. Ixii. 1,2 ; Heb. ii. 10; Micah i, 4: Chapter viii. 8. 
3 Or, spheres. 4 Heb. ascensions.——' Psa. civ. 3, 13.—* Or, 
bundle. * Chap. v. 8.—! Chap. iv. 13. 


Though they hide themselves in the deepest holes 
or caverns of the earth, (see Isa. ii. 19,) or take 
refuge in the highest fortresses, they shall not escape 
my vengeance, but shall be brought forth’to de- 
struction or captivity. And though they hide them- 
selves in the top of Carmel—There were great 
caves formed by nature in the tops of some moun- 
tains, where men used to secure themselves in the 
times of danger. Such was the cave in a mountain 
of the wilderness of Ziph. J will search and take 
them out thence—Neither the thickest bushes nor 
the darkest caves shall serve to hide them. Though 
they be hid in the bottom of the sea—The Chaldee 
reads, in the islands of the sea; but the expression | 
is rather to be understood metaphorically, as signi- 


| fying that they should not, by any means whatso- 
ever, be able to escape the calamities which God 


had determined to bring upon them. The word 
rendered serpent in our translation, is in some ver- 
sions rendered a whale. Without doubt it should 
be translated here by the name of some great sea 
And though they go into captivity, thence 
will I command the sword, &e.—The same judg- 
ment is denounced against them in the passages re- 
ferred to in the margin. 

Verses 5, 6. And—Or, for, the Lord toucheth the 
land, and it shall melt—The least token of God’s 
displeasure is sufficient to put the whole frame of 
nature out of order. See the margin. And when 
God’s hand is visibly stretched out against a people, 
they become altogether dispirited ; the stoutest men 
lose their courage, their hearts failing them for fear, 
and out of a dreadful expectation of the miseries 
which are coming upon them. See the explanation 
of the next clause, chap. viii. 8. He that buildeth 
his stories in the heavens—This is an awful deserip- 
tion of God’s power, discovering itself in the works 
of the creation, particularly in his making several 


| regions of the air as so many apartments which lead 


to the highest heavens, the seat of his glory. Arch- 
bishop Neweome renders it, He buildeth his upper 
chambers in the heavens ; ‘alluding to the cireum- 
stance of the chief and most ornamented ir ; 
in the East being upper rooms. And hath fo 


deeply on the minds of all that read or hear it, 
940 


his troop in the earth—Or, as the old Engl te 


Promises of the 


—, 
— 


CHAPTER IX. 


\ restoration of Israel. 


a a a, 7 Are ye not as children of the 
—__— Ethiopians unto me, O children of 


Israel? saith the Lorp. Have not I brought 
up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the 
™ Philistines from ™ Caphtor, and the Syrians 
from ° Kir? 

8 Behold, ? the eyes of the Lord Gop are 
upon the sinful kingdom, and I4 will destroy it 
from off the face of the earth; saving that I 


will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, 


saith the Lorp. 


m Jer. xlvii. 4. n Deut. ii. 23; Jer. xvii. 4. ° Chap. i. 5. 
P Verse 4.——4 Jer. xxx. 11; xxxi. 35, 36; Obad. 16; 17. 


lation renders the clause, And hath laid the founda- 
tion of his globe of elements in the earth; the 
word rendered troop being taken to signify the col- 
lection of elements and other creatures, which fur- 
nish the earth, expressed by the word N23, host, 
Gen. ii. 1. Many learned interpreters, however, 
render the word his storehouses, supposing that 
there is an allusion to repositories in the lower parts 
of houses, or to such as were sometimes dug in the 
fields. ‘Thus Capellus: The heaven is, as it were, 
Gods place of dwelling, his principal apartment; 
the earth is that to him which the cellars are in a 
large house. He that calleth for the waters, &c.— 
See onchap.v.8. “The power and sure vengeance 
of the Deity,” says Bishop Newcome, “are very 
sublimely described in this and the four preceding 
verses.” 

Verse 7. Are ye not as the children of the Ethio- 
pians, &c.—The prophet, to take away from the 
Israelites their false confidence, that the Lord was 
ioo much interested in their preservation to permit 
their total ruin, says, that in consequence of their 
idolatry and other sins, they were no more esteem- 
ed by him than the Ethiopians, a barbarous and 
cruel race of people: as if he had said, You have 
rendered yourselves unworthy the name of my 
people; you have renounced, by your idolatry, the 
privileges of my covenant; you have given up me, 
and I give you upinmy turn. You may think my 
former kindness in delivering you out of the Egyp- 
tian bondage, and giving you the land of Canaan, 
obliges me still to continue to be your protector. 
But I have showed the like favour to other nations, 
particularly to the Philistines, who had their original 
from Caphtor, and afterward dispossessed the old 
inhabitants of Palestine, and dwelt in their stead ; 
and to the Syrians, whom I brought from Kir; and 
yet against these very nations have I denounced my 
judgments for their sins. 

Verses 8-10, The eyes of the Lord are upon the 
sinful kingdom—See verse 4. Saving that I will 
not utterly destroy the house of Jacob—God still pro- 
mises to preserve a remnant in the midst of his 
heaviest judgments, that he may perform the pro- 
mises made to their fathers. Lo, J will sift the house 
of Israel among all nations—I will mingle, or scat- 


9 For lo, I will command, and I will A.M. 3217 
S sift the house of Israel among all Reh es 
nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet 
shall not the least 7 grain fall upon the earth. 

10 All the sinners of my people. shall die by 
the sword, * which say, The evil shall not over- 
take nor prevent us, 

11 9 *In that day will I raise up the taber- 
nacle of David that is fallen, and ® close up the 
breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, 
and I will build it as in the days of old: 


® Heb. cause to move. 7 Heb. stone. t Chap. vi. 3. 5 Acts 


xv. 16, 17,——8 Heb. hedge, or, wall. 


and bad grain are mingled in a sieve; but will so or- 
der it, that none of the good grain shall be lost or 
fall to the ground. Though the good shall be in- 
volved in the calamities which are sent to punish 
the wicked, yet shall they be preserved from destruc- 
tion. All the sinners of my people shall die by the 
sword—Those unbelieving and obstinately wicked 
men who have paid no regard to the warnings of the 
prophets, and have given no credit to their predic- 
tions, shall all perish by the sword, or by some judg- 
ment sent by me. Which say, The evil shall not 
overtake us—Who indulge themselves in their car- 
nal security, without any dread or apprehension of ~ 
the divine judgments denounced against them. 
Verse 11. In that day—In this and the following 
verses, to the end of the chapter, we have a most con» 
solatory conclusion of this prophecy in sundry evan- 
gelical promises, after so many very severe and sharp 
menaces. The phrase, in that day, signifies here the 
same as afterward, or, after this, for so St. James 
interprets it when quoting this very verse, Acts xv. 
16. And there are other places of Scripture where 
then, or in that day, signifies afterward. Will I 
raise up the tabernacle of David—This promise 
seems, at least in the first place, to be intended of the 
return of the Jews from the land of their captivity, 
their resettlement in Judea, rebuilding Jerusalem, 
and attaining to that height of power and glory 
which they enjoyed in the days of the Maccabees. 
This restoration was an event so extraordinary, and 
the hope of it so necessary to be maintained in the 
minds of the Jewish people, in order to their support 
under the calamity of their seventy years’ captivity, 
that God was pleased to foretel it by the mouth of 
all his prophets. And though we suppose the pro- 
phecy before us to appertain chiefly to the kingdom 
of Israel, yet a promise of a future restoration was 
no less proper and necessary, in order to their en- 
couragement, to be annexed to God’s threatenings 
against them: because it was his purpose to restore 
Israel in general, that is, the whole twelve tribes, 
and to make them one nation, as they were before 
their unhappy division. The edict of Cyrus was 
general, giving liberty to all the posterity of Jacob, 
wheresoever dispersed, to return to Judea. And 
many of the ten tribes certainly did return, though 


ter, the Israelites among other nations, just as good || the main body of those who returned consisted of 
3 941 


Promises of the 


AMOS. 


restoration of Israel. 


A. M. 3217, . 


ORC 12 That they may possess the 


’ remnant of " Edom, and of all the 
heathen ° which are called by my name, saith 
the Lorp that doeth this. 

13 Behold, * the days come, saith the Lorp, 
that the ploughman shall overtake the reaper, 
and the treader of grapes him that °soweth 
seed ; Yand the mountains shall drop ' sweet 
wine, and all the hills shall melt. 

14 And I will bring again the captivity 


of my people of Israel, and * they i 3 Ag 
shall build the waste cities, and 

inhabit them; and they shall plant vine- 
yards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall 
also make gardens, and eat the fruit of 
them. 

15 And I will plant them upon their land, 
and ° they shall no more be pulled up out of 
their land which I have given them, saith the 
Lorp thy God. > 


t Obadiah, 19. 
my name is called. 
y Joel iii, 18. 


« Numbers xxiv. 18. ° Heb. upon whom 
x Lev. xxvi. 5——"® Heb. draweth forth. 


the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin. This pro- 
phecy, however, must also be extended to the days 
of the Messiah, and to the calling of the Gentiles to 
the knowledge of the true God: and so St. James 
expounds it, Acts xv. 16; for this was, emphatically 
speaking, raising up the tabernacle of David, both in 
the person of Christ, who is frequently styled David, 
and the seed of David in the prophets, and also in 
respect to what peculiarly distinguished David and 
Israel in God’s sight, namely, their having the know- 
ledge of the true God, and worshipping of him 
alone. 

Verse 12.. That they may possess the remnant of 
Edom—This the restored Jews did in the time of 
Hyrcanus, when they made an entire conquest of 
Edom, as Josephus relates. And of all the heathen 
(or nations) which are called by my name—Or ra- 
ther, which have been called by my name ; for so it 
is rendered inother versions. ‘The Ishmaelites, Am- 
monites, Moabites, and other neighbouring nations, 
were in the beginning worshippers of the true God, 
as being descendants from Abraham, Lot, &c., with 
whom the knowledge of the true God was preserved. 
And the Jews subdued a considerable part of these 
nations in the times of the Maccabees. But this is 
also a prophecy of setting up the kingdom of the 
Messiah, and bringing in the Gentiles. 

Verse 13. Behold the days come—Here we have 
another promise, literally to be understood of the 
abundant plenty which God would bestow on the 
returned captives, and mystically of the abundant 
grace given and blessings conferred in gospel days. 
T hat the ploughman shall overtake the reaper—He 


who breaks up the ground, and prepares it for the | 


seed, shall be ready to tread on the heels of the reap- 

er.3 who shall have a harvest so large, that before he 

can gather it all in, it shall be time to plough the 

ground again. And the treader of g grapes him that 

soweth seed—This is to be understood in the same 
942 


11 Or, new wine, 2 Jeremiah xxx. 3—— Isaiah 1xi. 
Ixv. 21; Ezek. xxxvi. 33-36. Isaiah lx. 21; Jer. Xxxil. re 
Ezekiel- xxxiv. 28; Joel iii. 20. 


sense as the foregoing clause: so great shall their 


vintage be, that before the treaders of grapes can ~ 


have finished their work, the seedsman shall be 
sowing his seed against the next season. And the 
mountains shall drop sweet wine—The vineyards 
shall be so fruitful, and shall produce such abundance 
of grapes, that wine shall appear to be as plentiful as 
if it ran down from the mountains. And all thehills 
shall melt—Hebrew, shall flow. 'The meaning is, 
that they should afford such plenty of rich feeding 
to the cattle, that they should in consequence thereof 
give a large quantity of milk. The parallel expres- 
sion to this, in the prophecy of Joel, is, The hills 
shall flow with milk. As these predictions were not 
fulfilled in their literal sense between the time of the 
return of the Jews from Babylon and the coming of 
Christ, it is evident they are either to be figuratively 
understood of gospel blessings, or, if taken in their 
literal sense, they respect the happy state of things 
during the millennium, which may be supposed to 
begin after the future restoration of the Jews to their 
own country. See notes on Joel iii. 18. The pro- 
phets, it may be observed, frequently describe the 
days of the Messiah in terms similar to those which 
the poets used in describing the golden age. 

Verses 14, 15. I will bring again the captivity of 
my people—I will restore them to their own country, 
and settle them in it. See the following verse, and 
notes on Isa. xi. 12; and Ezek. xxviii. 25. They 
shall build the waste cities, &e.—Compare the texts 
referred to in the margin. This and the following 
part of the verse contains a promise that they should 
enjoy the fruit of their labours, in opposition to that 
curse denounced against them, chap. v. 11; Deut, 
Xxviil. 30, that they should build houses and not 
dwellin them. I will plant them, §c., they shail no 
more be pulled up—This part of the prophecy will 
receive its completion on the fut‘ire restoration of the 


| Jews to their own land. ‘ 


THE 


BsQs@ Ko Orbs O. BAD] A H. 


™~ 


ARGUMENT. 


We have no certain information in the Scriptures, or elsewhere, concerning the life or death of this 
prophet, of the time when he lived, or of his country or mission. It has been generally thought, 
indeed, that he was cotemporary with Hosea, Joel, and Amos; at least this was the opinion of St. 
Jerome, Grotius, Huetius, and Dr. Lightfoot. But the reason which they allege for it is only the 
supposition that the compilers of the Old Testament canon had a regard to the order of time in 
their placing of the books of the minor prophets. But this reason, as Lowth justly observes, is 
of little force, since we find Jonah placed the fifth in order, nay, the sixth, in the Greek copies, 
who was confessedly more ancient than any of those that are placed before him. The most proba- 
ble opinion seems to be, that he was cotemporary with Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and prophesied 
about the time of the taking of Jerusalem; or, as Archbishop Newcome thinks, between that time 
and the destruction of Idumea by Nebuchadnezzar ; which latter event probably took place a very 
few years after the former. It is certain he foretels the destruction of Edom, and that in doing 
this he uses several expressions which Jeremiah had used before him, speaking upon that subject. 
Compare verses 1, 8, with Jeremiah xlix. 9-11. Ezekiel agrees with Jeremiah and Obadiah, in 
assigning the same reason for the judgments threatened against the Edomites, namely, their 
insulting over the Jews in the time of their distress. 
f & 


After the preface, 1, we have, (1,) Threatenings against Edom, 2-16. (2,) Gracious promises to Israel, 17-21. 


A. M. 3417. 


HE vision of Obadiah. 'Thus 
B. C. 587. 


saith the Lord Gop * concerning 
Edom; » We have heard a rumour from the 
Lorp, and an ambassador is sent among the 
heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her 
in battle. \ 

-2 Behold, I have made thee small among the 
heathen: thou art greatly despised. 


aJsaiah xxi. 11; xxxiv. 5y Ezek. xxv. 12,13, 14; Joel iii. 19; 
Mal. i. 3.—— Jer. xlix. 14——* 2 Kings xiv. 7. 


3 4 The pride of thy heart hath A. M. Pall 
deceived thee, thou that dwellest in dis 
the clefts °of the rock, whose habitation is 
high; ‘that saith in his heart, Who shall 
bring me down to the ground ? ' 

4 ° Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, 
and though thou ‘set thy nest among the stars, 
thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lorp. 


dJsaiah xiv. 13, 14,15; Rev. xviii. 7.——¢ Job xx. 6; Jer. xlix. 
16; li. 53; Amos ix. 2.——f Hab. ii. 9. 


NOTES ON OBADIAH. 

Verses 14. The vision of Obadiah—The name 
of this prophet signifies, a servant, or a worshipper, 
of the Lord. Such he undoubtedly was, and also a 
prophet, but what he was in other respects we are 
not informed. Itisnotimprobable that he had other 
visions, or revelations, from God, besides this which 
is here recorded, but this only has been preserved 
for the benefit of future ages. T'hus saith the Lord 
—This declaration includes his commission and au- 
thority to prophesy, together with the certainty of 
what he declares; concerning Edom—Or, against 

3 


Edom ; that is, both the people and the country, so 
named from their progenitor Esau, ealled dom, 
Gen. xxv. 30. This country, which was a part of 
Arabia Petraa, is called Idumea, Isa. xxxiv. 5, 6. 
We—That is, other prophets, as well as I, have 
heard a rumour—Not an uncertain report, but a true 
and important revelation from God. And an am- 
bassador is sent among the heathen—Or nations. 
For an explanation of this and the three following 
verses, see notes on Jer. xlix. 14-16, where nearly 
the same words occur ; only what Jeremiah speaks 
in the singular number, is expressed here in the 
943 


The prophecy 


OBADIAH. 


against Edom. 


A. M. 3417. 


5 If & thieves came to thee, if rob- 
B, C. 587. 


bers by night, (how art thou cut off!) 
would they not have stolen till they had enough? 
if the grape-gatherers came to thee, > would 
they not leave ! some grapes ? 

6 How are the things of Esau searched out! 
how are his hidden things sought up! 

7 All the men of thy confederacy have 
brought thee even to the border : * the ' men that 
were at peace with thee have deceived thee, 
and prevailed against thee ; ° they that eat thy 
bread have laida wound under thee: * there is 
none understanding * in him. 


g Jer. xlix. 9. 4 Deut. xxiv. 21; Isaiah xvii. 6; xxiv. 13. 
1 Or, gleanings. 2 Heb. the men of thy eace. i Jer. xxviii. 
22.——* Heb. the men of thy bread. sa. xix. 11, 12. aOr, 
of it——! Job v. 12, 13; Isa. xxix. 14; ten mlixy Ts 


8 ! Shall I not in that day; saith A. M. 3417. 
the Lorn, even destroy the wise men 29 
out of Edom, and understanding out of the 
mount of Esau ? 

9 And thy ™mighty men, O * Teman, shall 
be dismayed, to the end that every one of the 
mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter. 

10 % For thy ° violence against thy brother 
Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and ? thou shalt 
be cut off for ever. 

11 In the day that thou stoodeew on the other 
side, in the day that the strangers ® carried away 
captive his forces, and foreigners ‘entered into 


m Psa. Ixxvi. 5; Amos ii. 16. 2 Jer. xlix. 7——®° Genesis 
xxvii. 11; Psalm exxxvii. 7; Ezekiel xxv. 12; xxxv. 5; Amos 
Bs p Ezekiel xxxv. 9; Malachi i. 4. ——® Or, carried away 
his substance. 


plural, to intimate that Obadiah had received the 
same commission from God which was signified to 
Jeremiah before. I have made thee small among 
the heathen—Or, nations. Thou art centemptible in 
the sight of the Chaldeans and their confederates, 
who think they can easily subdue thee. “Idumea 
was a country, if compared with the dominions of 
flourishing states, very moderate in extent, and in- 


conveniently situated. 'The land of Moab occupied | 


the eastern part of the sea of Sodom. Next to this 
country Idumea turned toward the south; though 
it did not border on all Canaan southward, but only 
on its eastern part. The rest lay open to Arabia 
Petraa, by which Idumea was situated southward, 
made a partof it, and went far into it.”—Vitringa, on 
Isa. xxxiv. 6. “The country of the Idumeans was 
properly circumscribed by that mountainous tract 
which enclosed Canaan to the south near the sea of 
Sodom, as appears from the whole sacred history: 
whence mount Hor, situated there, is said to have 
been on the edge, border, or extremity of the land 
of Edom, Num. xx. 23. It is true, that about the 
time of Solomon, the Idumeans occupied some part 
of the Elanitic gulf of the Red sea, whence a tract 
of that coast was called the land of Edom, 1 Kings 
ix. 26._ But all the prophets who speak of Edom 
about these times, restrain their lands to mount Seir, 
in the tract which I have marked out. Vitringa, on 
Isa. xxi. 1.”—Archbishop Newcome. "he pride of 
thy heart hath deceived thee, &e—Thou valuest 
thyself too much upon the strength of thy situation, 
being placed among rocks which’ thou thinkest i inac- 
cessible by theenemy. That saith in his heart, 
Who shall bring me down?--Namely, from those 
lofty rocks in which I dwell? Who can climb up 
to them but myself? Or who can find out the way 
into the secret caverns where I have made my habit- 
ation? Though thou exalt thyself as the edgle, &e. 
—Upon the highest mountains, that seem to reach 
up to heaven ; thence will J bring thee down—From 
thy height,of power and pre-eminence. 

Verses 5-9. If thieves come unto thee—See note 
on Jer. xlix.9. How are his hidden things sought 

944 


up !—Those treasures and riches which he took all 
possible care to conceal, that they might not be dis- 
covered by the enemy. All the men of thy confed- 
eracy have brought thee even to the border—Thy 
confederates marched out with thee, until thou wast 
come to the borders of thy country, and then they 
perfidiously joined with the enemy’s forces, and 
thereby deceived thee. And prevailed against thee 
—Namely, treacherously. They that eat thy bread 
have laid a wound under thee—Those that were 
maintained at thy cost, as thine allies, have given 
theeasecret blow. There is noneunderstanding— 
Thou wast not aware of it. Shall Inot, in that day, 
even destroy the wise men, &c.—At that time, when 
these evils shall come upon them, their prudence and 
skill shall altogether forsake them, and the wisest 
among them shall not know what to do, or shall give 
unsatisfactory, or foolish, counsel. When God de- 
signs a people for destruction, he causes such cir- 
cumstances to arise, such a multiplicity of dangers, 
and so unexpectedly, to surround them, that their 
greatest wisdom is confounded, and the most skilful 
among them are quite ata loss howtoact. See note 
on Jer. xlix.7. And thy mighty men, O Teman, 
shall be dismayed, &c.—Teman was one of the 
grandsons of Esau, after whom some city and dis- 
trict in Idumea was named. Here it seems to be 
used to signify the whole country of Idumea. Cer- 
tain it is that the Idumeans were Jooked upon as a 
strong and valiant people. Josephus says, they went 
as unconcernedly and as cheerfully into battle as to a 
banquet; but here it is threatened that a panic fear 
should seize upon this courageous nation, so that they 
should be entirely discouraged, and not able to stand 
against their enemies, or defend themselves ; the con- 
sequence of which would be, a great slaughter of them. 

Verses 10, 11. For thy violence against thy bro- 
ther Jacoh—Becausé of the injury thou hast done to 
the people of Judea, who are descended from Jacob, 
the brother of Esau, your progenitor: see note on 
Amos i. 11. Shame shall cover thee—Contempt and 
reproach shall be cast upon thee by all that hear of 
thy conduct ; and thou shalt be cut off for ever—So — 

3 


if 


The prophecy 


OBADIAH. 


against Edom. 


—eeeeeeeeee oC 


Path 2417. his gates, and 4 cast lots upon Jerusa-||laid hands on their ®substanc 


~ lem, even thou wast as one of them. 

12 But *thou shouldest not have * looked on 
*the day of thy brother in the day that he 
became a stranger; neither shouldest thou 
have ‘rejoiced over the children of Judah in 
the day of their destruction; neither shouldest 
thou have ‘spoken proudly in the day of 
distress. 

13 Thou shouldest not have entered into the 
gate of my people in the day of their calamity ; 
yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their 
affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have 


9 Joel iii. 3; Nahum iii. 10.—* Or, do not behold, &c. 
* Psalm liv. 7; lix. 10; xcii. 11; exii. 8; Micah iv. 11; vii. 10. 
* Psa. xxxvii. 13; exxxvii. 7——t Job xxxi. 29; Micah vii. 8; 
Prov. xvii. 5; xxiv. 17, 18. 


ea 


great a slaughter shall be made of thy inhabitants, 
that thou shalt never recover it; and at last thou 
shalt be quite dispossessed of thy country: see note 
on Ezek. xxxv. 7-9. In the day that thou stoodest 
on the other side—Or, in the day that thou stoodest 
against him. That strangers carried away captive 
his forces—This may refer to the time when the 
Syrians spoiled Judea, overcame the Jewish forces, 
and made many captives of them. And foreigners 
entered into his gates—That is, into his cities. This 
seems to be spoken of the cities of Judea, which the 
Syrians took when they had spoiled the country, 
and laid siege to Jerusalem, as recorded in 2 Kings 
xvi. 5. And cast lots upon Jerusalem—Either this 
means that the Syrians and Israelites, whose armies 
_ Were joined together, cast lots which of them should 
make the first assault on that city: or else, they cast 
lots about the spoils of Jerusalem, before they had 
taken it, making themselves quite sure of it, though 
the event proved they were mistaken. Or,as many 
learned men think, the taking of Jerusalem by Ne- 
buchadnezzar is here referred to; an event at 
which, as we learn from Psa. exxxvii., the Edomites 
rejoiced : and then probably lots were cast what cap- 
tives should fall to the share of each of the com- 
manders. T'how wast as one of them—Thou, that 
wast a brother by birth, wast as cruel and injurious 
in thy actions as these strangers, and joined with 
them in every thing against thy brother. 

Verse 12. But thou shouldest not have looked 
upon the day of thy brother—On his evil day. Thou 
oughtest not to have taken pleasure at the sight of 
thy brother’s calamity. So the expression of looking 
upon an enemy signifies, in many passages of Scrip- 

‘ture, the beholding his fall with satisfaction; see the 
margin. Jn the day that he became a stranger— 
When he was driven from his own inheritance, and 
went captive into a strange land. Neither shouldest 
thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah, &¢.— 
In the day when many of themwere slain; norhave 

ken proudly in the day of distress—Neither 
ouldest thou have insulted over them when they 

Vou. IL. ( 60 ) 


e in A. M. 3417 
the day of their calamity ; NN ASh 

14 Neither shouldest thou have stood in the 
cross-way, to cut off those of his that did 
escape ; neither shouldest thou have ° delivered 
up those of his that did remain in the day of 
distress. 

15 “For the day of the Lorn is near upon 
all the heathen: * as thou hast done, it shall be 
done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon 
thine own head. 

16 ¥For as ye have drunk upon po ses, 
my holy mountain, so shall all the 


7 Heb. magnified thy mouth. Or, forces: ® Or, shut up, 
Psa. xxxi. 8. “Ezek. xxx.3; Joel ili. 14, x Ezek. xxxv. 


15; Hab. ii. 8. y Jeremiah xxv. 28, 29; xlix. 12; Joel iii. 17; 
1 Pet. iv. 17. 


were in calamity, boasting of thy own felicity, while 
they were groaning under misery. 

Verses 13, 14. Thou shouldest not have entered 
into the gate of my people, &e.—Thou shouldest not 
have entered into the cities of my people by way of 
spoiling them, or of feasting thy eyes with the 
slaughter, when their enemies made themselves mas- 
ters ofthem. Neither shouldest thou have stood in 
the cross-way—Or, in the goings forth; to cut off 
those that did escape—Thou shouldest not have 
posted thyself in the passages that were left un- 
guarded by the enemy, in order to cut off those who 
endeavoured to escape by such ways. Neither have 
delivered up those—Or shut up those, as the margin 
reads it, that did remain—The word 530, here used, 
signifies to shut up all the ways of escaping to the 
conquered, in order to deliver them up to the enemy. 

Verses 15, 16. For the day of the Lord is near 
upon all the heathen—The sacred writers call that 
the day of any persons, in which they do or suffer 
any thing very remarkable. Thus, verse 13, the day 
of thy brother, signifies that time in which he was 
remarkably afflicted. So the day of the Lord signi- 
fies that time in which he does something extraordi- 
nary; and here it means the time in which. God 
would inflict a remarkable vengeance upon the ene- 
mies of Judah. By all the heathen, ismeant all those 
nations who, together with the Idumeans, insulted 
over the calamities of the Jews, or had waged war 
against them without any just cause. As thou hast 
done, it shall be done unto thee—As thou hast re- 
joiced at the calamities of others, so shall others re- 
joice at thine: and as thou hast spoiled and plun- 
dered thy neighbours, so shalt thou be served thy- 
self: see the margin. For as ye have drunk upon 
my holy mountain, &¢.—Here is a sudden apostrophe 
to the Jewish people, who are here addressed. The 
sense is, As ye, who dwell on the mount which is 
sacred to me, have drunk of the cup of my indigna- 
tion, or have suffered grievous calamities from my 
just displeasure, so also shall the nations among 
whom I am not known. They shall drink and 

3 


Gracious promises 


OBADIAH. 


4 M par, heathen drink continually, yea, they 
__— shall drink, and they shall ?° swallow 
down, and they shall be as though they had 
not been. 

17 4% *But upon mount Zion *shall be " de- 
liverance, and there shall be holiness; and 
the house of Jacob shall possess their pos- 
sessions. 

18 And the house of Jacob » shall be a fire, 
and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house 
of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in 


% Joel ij. 32,.——* Amos ix. 8.——"! Or, they 


10 Or, sup up. 
Saar 12 Or, it shall be holy, Joel iii. 17. 


that escape. 


swallow down—Or, they shall drink large draughts 
of it, even to the very dregs. By this is expressed 
their suffering calamities in an extraordinary degree. 
They shall be as though they had not been—They 
shall be utterly destroyed, so that there shall be no 
remains of them. 

Ver. 17,18. But upon mount Zion shall be deliver- 
ance—Literally taken, this refers to the Jews; mys- 
tically, to the gospel church. By deliverance here 
may be first meant an asylum, or place of refuge, to 
escape the evil; and it may be spoken with a refer- 
ence to the invasion of Judea by Sennacherib, and 
his being prevented by God from taking Jerusalem, 
(though he took all the other fenced cities of Judah,) 
so that all persons of the neighbouring places found 
a deliverance, or an asylum, there; and so escaped 
falling into the enemies’ hands. It may also, per- 
haps, chiefly refer to the restoration of the Jews 
from the captivity of Babylon. But yet this promise 
was more remarkably verified in the time of the first 
preaching of the gospel, when God’s law went forth 
out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusa- 
lem, Psa. c. 2; Isa. ii. 3; and when, through believ- 
ing in Christ, and embracing the gospel, the Chris- 
tians escaped the destruction that came upon the 
Jewish nation, concerning which see note on Joel ii. 
32. And there shall be another and more glorious 
completion of it at the restoration of the Jewish na- 
tion, which is foretold in this and the following 
verses, as it is in many other places. And there 
shall be holiness—So far as this refers to the Jews 
returned from captivity, it signifies that the temple, 
the city, and the people should be holy to the Lord. 
But the words more especially refer to gospel days; 
and are intended to express the holiness of the Chris- 
tian Church, particularly after the conversion of the 
Jews, and during the millennium. The house of Ja- 
cob shall possess their possessions—Shall remain in 
possession of their own land or territories. The 
house of Jacob shall be a fire, &e.—This was ful- 
filled in part by the Jews under Hyreanus and the 
Maccabees, who made great slaughter of the Idu- 
means; here expressed by the strong image of their 
being the fire and flame, and the Idumeans stubble. 
But the passage will be more fully accomplished 
when the Lord shall make his church as a fire to all 
its enemies. 

946 


them and devour them; and there A. M. 3417. 
shall not be any remaining of the tnd 
house of Esau; for the Lorp hath spoken 7¢. 
19 And they of the south ° shall possess the 
mount of Esau; ‘and ¢éhey of the plain the 
Philistines: and they shall possess the fields 
of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and 
Benjamin shall possess Gilead. 

20 And the captivity of this host of the 
children of Israel shall possess that of the 
Canaanites, even * unto Zarephath ; and the 


b Isaiah x. 17; Zech. xii. 6——° Amos ix. 11—4 Zeph, ii. 7. 
© 1 Kings xvii. 9, 10. 


Verse 19, And they of the south shall possess the 
mount of Esau—The Jews that dwell in the southern 
parts of Judea, next Idumea, shall, after their return 
and victories over the Edomites, possess the mount- 
ainous part of their country, elsewhere called mount 
Seir: see Mal. i. 3, And they of the plain—The 
Jews who dwell in the plain country, lying toward 
that of the Philistines, shall possess their territories 
together with their own ancient inheritance. The 
Philistines were likewise ill neighbours to the Jews, 
who, it is here foretold, should at last conquer them 
and possess their land. The former part of this pre- 
diction was fully accomplished by Hyreanus. And 
if this were the time of fulfilling the one, doubtless 
it was the time of fulfilling the other also. And they 
shall possess the fields of Ephraim, &c.—All the 
land which belonged to the ten tribes shall be pos- 
sessed by the Jews after their restoration to their 
own country. And Benjamin shall possess Gilead 
—Benjamin, although one of the smallest tribes, 
shall enlarge his borders as far as the land of Gilead 
beyond Jordan. Here a larger possession is pro- 
mised than ever they had before the captivity. But 
if Judah be considered as united with Benjamin, 
which perhaps it is, as those two tribes made but one 
people, all this was completely fulfilled in the time 
of Hyreanus, as appears from Josephus, lib. xii. ; xxii. 
But no doubt the great enlargement of the church 
of Christ, in the times of the gospel, is mystically 
pointed out in this passage. 

Verses 20, 21. And the captivity of this host, &c. 
—Those of the ten tribes that were carried away 
captive by Shalmaneser; shall possess that of the 
Canaanites—That is, all the countries they anciently 
possessed, with this addition, that what the Canaan- 
ites held by force, and the Israelites could not take 
from them, shall now be possessed by these returned 
captives, Even unto Zarephath—Or Sarepta, a city 
near Sidon, in the northern borders of Judea, 1 
Kings xvii. 9. The Canaanites, properly so called, 
were the ancient inhabitants of that district: see 
Judg. i. 832; Matt. xv. 21,22. And the captivity of 
Jerusalem—The two tribes of Judah am Mehetnic, 
carried captive from Jerusalem by N ; 
which is in Sepharad—That is, as some suppose, a 
province of Babylon, in which the ais resided 


during their captivity. Shall possess the cities-of 
( 60* ) 3 


to the Israelites. 


Gracious promises 


OBADIAH. 


to the Israelites. 


te hee captivity of Jerusalem, ' which is in 


- Sepharad, ‘ shall possess the cities of 
the south. 


13 Or, shall possess that which is in Sepharad.—— Jer. xxxii. 44. 
Tim. iv. 16; James v. 20. 


the south—All the cities which were once their own. 
And saviours shall come upon mount Zion, &c.— 
That is, deliverers. Taken literally, the expression 
may mean, the leaders of those captive troops who 
were to return from Babylon, such as Zerubbabel, 
Ezra, and Nehemiah. If understood mystically, 
these saviours are Christ, his apostles, and the other 
preachers of the gospel. J'o judge the mount of, 
Esau—To avenge Israel upon the Edomites, or. 
figuratively speaking, the church of Christ upon all 
its enemies, here represented by Edom. Instead of 
3 


21 And *saviours shall come upon A M. 3417. 
; ; B. C. 587. 

mount Zion to judge the mount of 
Esau; and the kingdom shall be the Lorn’s. 


Psalm xxii. 28; Daniel ii. 44; vii. 14,27; Zechariah xiv. 95 
Luke i. 33's Rev. xi. 153 xix. 6. 


saviours, the LXX., with a small alteration of the 
Hebrew points, read avacwlouevor, those that are 
saved, or escape: namely, the same with the rem- 
nant often mentioned in the prophets, and particu- 
larly Joel ii. 32, where see the note. And the king- 
dom shall be the Lord’s—This will be fulfilled when 
the last of the four monarchies, foretold Dan. ii. 7, 
are destroyed, and the stone which smote the image 
becomes a great mountain, and fills the whole earth; 
when the God of Israel shall be honoured, obeyed, 
and worshipped by all mankind. 
947 


THE 


B O:.00K “-OeB«JoO°N: Ace 


ARGUMENT. 


Jonau was the most ancient of all the prophets whose writings have come down te us. He is sup 
posed to have prophesied in the latter end of Jehu’s or the beginning of Jehoahaz’s reign; at 
which time the kingdom of Israel was brought very low, by the oppressions of Hazael, king of 
Syria, 2 Kings xiii. 22. This might be the chief reason why Jonah was raised up to foretel the 
success which Jehoahaz’s grandson Jeroboam should have, in restoring the coasts of Israel, 2 Kings 
xiv. 25, where we learn that he was of Gath-hepher, a town in the tribe of Zebulun, called 
Gittah-hepher, Josh. xix. 13, a place not far from Sephorim, or Diocesarea, as St. Jerome informs 
us in his commentary upon Jonah: who adds, that Jonah’s sepulchre was showed there in his 
time. This town was situated in Galilee, and so confutes that observation of the Pharisees, that 
out of Galilee there arose no prophet, John vii. 51. This book, which is rather a history than a 
prophecy, informs us of Jonah’s being sent to Nineveh to denounce destruction on that city within 
forty days’ time, if they repented not. But his preaching produced such a reformation, that God 
was graciously pleased to defer the execution of his judgments for the present, and indeed till 
about one hundred and fifty years afterward, when the great increase of their iniquities made them 
ripe for destruction, as we shall see more particularly when we come to the prophecy of Nahum, 
The narrative contained in this book is, in.some parts of it, of such an extraordinary nature, that 
some have been induced to consider it as an allegory, while others have presumed profanely to 
ridicule it. But it must be remembered, that our Lord hath several times borne testimony to the 
truth of the narration; and hath*shown, that the most wonderful of the events recorded in it was 
intended to be a type of his own death, burial, and resurrection on the third day. ‘They who have 
faith in the power of Ged, as set forth in all parts of the Scripture, will not call in question what 
is here recorded of a miraculous nature. And they who thoroughly know themselves, and the 
weakness of fallen man, will not wonder at the very extraordinary conduct of the prophet himself. 


CHAPTER I. 


this chapter we have, (1,) God’s command to Jonah to go to Nineveh and warn its inhabitants to repent, 1, 2. 
(2,) His disobedience to God, and flight from his land, 3. (3,) God’s pursuit and arrest of him by a storm, in 
which he was asleep, 4-6. (4,) His disobedience discovered by the heathen mariners to be the cause of the storm, 
7-10. (5,) With great reluctance the mariners cast him into the sea, as the only means of obtaining a calm, 11-16. 
(6,) A great fish, by swallowing him up, preserves him for future service, 17. 


A. M. 3142, 


B. C. 862. Now the word of the Lorp came 


unto * Jonah? the son of Amit- 
tai, saying, 


2 2 Kings xiv. 25——' Called, Matt. xii. 39, Jonas. 
x. 11, 12; Chap. iii. 2,3; iv. 11. 


+ Gen. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verses 1, 2, Now the word of the Lord—An im- 
pulse or revelation from the Lord, significative of his 
will; came unto Jonah, *he son of Amittai—Of 
whom see 2 Kings xiv. 25. It is probable he had 
been before acquainted with the word of the Lord, 
and knew his voice from that of a stranger. Arise, 

8 


2 Arise, go to Nineveh, that ° great A. M. 3142, 
city, and cry against it; for °their —_~_—~ 
wickedness is come up before me. 


© Genesis xviii. 20,21; Ezra ix. 6; James v.4; Revelation 
xviii. 5. 


goto Nineveh, that great city—The capital of the 
Assyrian empire: see notes on chap. iii. 3; iv. 11; 
and Nah. i. 1; iii. 18. And cry—Proclaim as a pro- 
phet, against it—Or concerning it. He must witness 
against their great wickedness, and warn them of the © 
destruction that was coming upon them for it. And 
this he must do, not privately in corners, but publicly — 
3 : 


Jonah’s disobedience to God, 


A. M. 3142. 


3 But Jonah ‘rose up to flee unto 
B.C. 862. 


Tarshish from the presence of the 
Lorp, and went down to ° Joppa; and he 


found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid 


the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go 
with them unto Tarshish ‘from the presence 
of the Lorn. 

4 4 But *the Lorp *sent out a great wind 
into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest 


4 Chap. iv. 2. —e Josh. xix. 46; 2 Chron. ii. 16; Acts ix. 36. 
f Gen. iv. 16; Job i. 12; ii. 7——* Psa. evii. 25. 


in the streets, and must cry aloud, that all might 
hear. For their wickedness is come up before me— 
Is manifest in my sight, and calls aloud for ven- 
geance. 

Verse 3. But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish 
—It is not to be wondered at that Jonah should be 
averse to undertake this mission. He probably con- 
sidered it as a dangerous one, and might be tempted 
to think it would be unprofitable, and answer no va- 
luable end. The journey was long, and the perils 
and hardships of it, he supposed, would be great. 
The inhabitants of the city were idolaters, and knew 
nothing of Jehovah, in whose name the warning was 
to be given, and the destruction denounced. The 
city was proud as well as idolatrous, and would look 
down with contempt on an Israelite, coming from a 
distant country, hardly known to many of them, or 
at least despised by them. And he had every reason 
to suppose that the delivery of such an unpleasant 
message would draw upon him the resentment both 
of the rulers and multitude. Indeed, “when we re- 
flect how such a message would be received in the 

‘streets of London at this day, we shall not wonder 
that he was extremely reluctant to undertake the 
service. Strong faith and a habit of unreserved obe- 
dience were necessary to overcome the reluctance 
that he must have felt: and perhaps he was a young 
man, and notas yet inured to perilous employments.” 
—Scott. And, besides this, Jonah himself assigns 
another reason, chap. iv. 2, namely, that he knew 
God’s mercifulness to be great, and that it was pro- 
bable God would be moved to forbear executing the 
judgments denounced; and so he would have the 
shame of being accounted a false prophet. This and 
other parts of his conduct, however, deserve censure. 
But, as Bishop Newcome observes, “men endued 
with extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, and made the 
instruments of declaring God’s will to mankind, have 
occasionally been subject to great human infirmities, 
and have even contracted great guilt.” Of Tarshish, 
see note on Isa. ii. 16. From the presence of the Lord 
—That is, to be at a distance from the land of Israel, 
the immediate residence of God, as Grotius and 
Locke interpret the expression. Houbigant how- 
ever reads, through fear of the Lord; and what he 
feared is shown chap. iv. 2. Perhaps Jonah hoped, 
if he were ata greater distance, God would send some 
other prophet to preach repentance to the Ninevites. 
And went down to Joppa—A well-known haven on 

3 


CHAPTER I. 


and flight from his land. 


in the sea, so that the ship * was like A. M. 3142. 
to be broken. aera s 

5 Then the mariners were afraid, and cried 
every man unto his god, and * cast forth the 
wares that were in the ship into the sea, to 
lighten i¢of them. But Jonah was gone down 
‘into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and 
was fast asleep. 

6 So the ship-master came to him, and said 


2 Heb. cast forth. 3 Heb. thought to be broken. So Acts 
xxvii. 18, 19, 38.—— 1 Sam. xxiv. 3. 


the Mediterranean. And he found a ship going to 
Tarshish—Bound for, and ready to sail to the place 
he designed. Thus Providence seemed to favour 
his design, and to give him an opportunity to escape. 
Observe, reader, we may be out of the way of duty, 
and yet may meet. with apparently favourable pro- 
vidences. So he paid the fare thereof, and went 
down into it—He lost no time, for he was in haste to 
get at a distance from the presence of the Lord. 
Here we see what the best of men are when God 
leaves them to themselves, and what need we have, 
when the word of the Lord comes to us, to have the 
Spirit of the Lord to come along with the word, to 
bring every thought within us into obedience to it. 
Let us learn from hence to cease from man, and not 
to be too confident either respecting ourselves or 
others in time of trial, but let him that thinks he - 
stands, take heed lest he fall. 

Verses 4,5. But the Lord sent out a great wind— 
The extraordinary greatness of it, with the sudden- 
ness of its rising, and the terrible effects it was likely 
to produce, showed that it was supernatural, and 
came from God, displeased with all, or with some one 
in the ship. Zhen the mariners were afraid—As 
they had great reason to be, since this preternatural 
tempest fell upon them with such great violence; and 
cried every man unto his god—To their several idols, 
as being heathen and ignorant of the true God. And 
cast forth the wares that were in the ship—By 
which they showed in what extreme danger they 
judged even their lives to be. But Jonah was gone 
down into the sides of the ship—Into a cabin in one 
of the sides of the ship. And he lay, and was fast 
asleep—This profound sleep of Jonah seems to have 
been caused by his weariness, labour, and anxiety: 
it was “not the sleep of security,” says St. Jerome, 
“but of sorrow;” like that of the apostles, Matt. 
xxvi. 40. 

Verse 6. So the ship-master—Who had the con- 
duct of the vessel, and from whose mouth such a 
reproof was seasonable; came and said to him, 
What meanest thou, O sleeper?—A just and ne- 
cessary reproof this. We cannot but pity Jonah, 
who needed it: as a prophet of the Lord, if he had 
been in his place, he might have been reproving 
the king of Nineveh; but, being out of the way of 
his duty, he himself lies open to the reproof of a 
sorry ship-master. See how men, by their sin and 
folly, make themselves mean! Yet we must admire 

949 


Jonah 1s awaked from his sleep, 


a anne him, What meanest thou, O 

‘sleeper? arise, * call upon thy God, 
lif so be that God will think upon us, that we 
perish not. 

7 And they said every one to his fellow, 
Come, and let us ™cast lots, that we may 
know for whose cause this evil is upon us. 
So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. 

8 Then said they unto him, ® Tell us, we 
pray thee, for whose cause this evil 7s upon us: 
What is thine occupation ? and whence comest 
thou? what is thy country? and of what 
people art thou ? 

9 And he said unto them, I am a Hebrew; 
and I fear ‘the Lorn, the God of heaven, 


k Psalm evii. 28.—! Joel ii. 14, m Joshua vii. 14, 16; 
1Samuel x. 20, 21; xiv. 41,42; Proverbs xvi. 33; Acts 1. 26. 
® Josh. vil. 19; 1 Sam, xiv. 43. 4 Or, JEHOVAH. 


JONAH. 


and the lot falls upon hum. 


° which hath made the sea and the A. Se Re. 
dry land. ha 

10 Then were the men * exceedingly afraid, 
and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? 
For the men knew that he fled from the 
presence of the Lorn, because he had told 
them. 

11 4 Then said they unto him, What shall 
we do unto thee, that the sea ®may be calm 
unto us? for the sea ? wrought,® and was tem- 
pestuous, 

12 And he said unto them, ? Take me up, 
and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the 
sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my 
sake this great tempest 7s upon you. 


° Psalm cxlvi. 6; Acts xvii. 24——® Heb. with great fear. 
§ Heb. may be silent from us.—" Or, grew more and more tem- 
pestuous. 8 Heb, went.——P John xi. 50. 


God’s goodness in sending him this seasonable 
reproof; for it was the first step toward his recovery; 
as the crowing of the cock was to Peter. “Those 
that sleep in a storm,” says Henry, “may well be 
asked what they mean.” Arise, call upon thy God— 
We are here crying every man to his god, why dost 
thou not get up and ery to thine? Art thou not 
equally concerned with the rest both in the danger 
dreaded, and in the deliverance desired? Jf so be 
that God will think upon us—With pity, care, and 
favour; that we perish not—That the ship, goods, 
and men also may not be lost. The word rendered 
God being in the plural number, and the ship-master, 
the mariners, and others in the ship being, it appears, 
idolaters, and knowing nothing of the one living and 
true God, this clause should undoubtedly be rendered, 
If so be that the gods will think upon us, &e. 

Verses 7, 8. Come, and let us cast lots—“ The sailors 
betake themselv es to this practice, because they see 
that there is something supernatural in the tempest: 
whence they conclude that it arose on account of 
some wicked person who sailed with them. Thus 
the sailors who carried Diagoras in their vessel, con- 
cluded that the tempest which assailed them was 
principally on account of this philosopher, who 
openly professed atheism. God was pleased so to 
order the lots, that Jonah was found to be the guilty 
person: not to favour such vain practices of the 
heathen; but that, after Jonah had made known to 
the mariners that the God of heaven and earth, 
whom .e worshipped, had sent this storm, they 
might be brought to understand that the true God i is 
the only director of lots; which indeed they seemed 
to have well understood, as appears from the end of 
this chapter.” See Calmet and Houbigant Then 
said they, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause 
this evil is come upon us—This should rather be 
rendered, for what cause; for they already knew 
for whose cause it was, by the lot falling upon Jonah; 
their inquiry now was, what he had done to occasion 
divine vengeance to follow him. 

950 


Verses 9,10. And he said, I am a Hebrew—-One 
descended from Heber, whose offspring by Abraham 
are well known. And J fear the Lord—Or rather 
Jenovan, the God of heaven, Jehovah being the pe- 
culiar name of the true God, by which he was dis- 
tinguished from those who had the name of gods and 
lords among the heathen. Which hath made the 
sea and the dry land—These words, as Mr. Locke 
observes, are a further distinction between the true 
God and the gods of the heathen; as if he had said, 
I worship and serve the one living and true God; 
that eternal and almighty Being, who made and 
ruleth the heavens and the earth, and all creatures 
therein. Then were the men exceedingly afraid— 
And with good reason, for they perceived that God 
was against them, even the God that made the world 
and governs all things, and that this tempest pro- — 
ceeded from his offended justice. Hence they inferred 
that their case was perilous in the extreme. And 
having learned from Jonah that he had disobeyed 
this Almighty God, and fled from his presence, they 
said unto him, Why hast thou done this?—How 
couldst thou dare to behave in such a manner, or 
disobey his commands, whom thou acknowledgest 
to be so great and powerful a Being, and Lord 
of all? 

Verses 11, 12. Then said they, What ‘shall we 
do unto thee, &c.—They perceived that Jonah was a 
prophet of the Lord, and therefore they would not 
do any thing to him without consulting him. He 
appeared to be a delinquent, but he appeared also to 
be a penitent: and therefore they would not insult 
over him, or offer him any rudeness. They would 
not east him overboard, if he could think of ahy © 
other expedient by which to save the ship. And he 
said, Take me up, and-cast me into the sea—It is 
probable the conviction in Jonah’s mind of his guilt — 
was so strong, at this time, as to make him certain — 
that God had raised this tempest on his account; or 
he might have a revelation from God that it was so: : 
in either case he might think it his duty to offer him- 


hd 


Jonah is cast 


eis. 13 Nevertheless, the men ° rowed 
——_— hard to bring i¢ to the land; 4 but 
they could not: for the sea wrought, and was 
tempestuous against them. 

14 Wherefore they cried unto the Lorn, and 
said, We beseech thee, O Lorp, we beseech 
thee, let us not perish for this mans life, and 
‘lay not upon us innocent blood for thou, O 
Lorp, * hast done as it pleased thee. 


® Heb. digged. Proverbs xxi. 30. r Deuteron. xxi. 8. 
5 Psalm exv. 3.——' Psalm Ixxxix. 9; Luke viii. 24.——1° Heb. 
stood, 


self to death to save the rest that were in the ship. 
For if it be lawful, and even praise worthy for one 
man, though guiltless, to sacrifice his life to save the 
lives of many; how much more may and ought a 
person to do this who knows that he is the cause of 
imminent danger, which threatens immediate de- 
struction to many others. 
Verses 13, 14. Nevertheless, the men rowed hard, 
&c.—Whoever these mariners were, they are to be 
admired for their generosity ; for though Jonah had 
told them that he was the cause of the tempest, and 
had advised them to cast him into the sea, yet they 
were very unwilling to do it, and generously 
redoubled their efforts, strained every nerve, and 
exposed themselves unto still greater danger of 
sinking, for some time longer, in order, if possible, to 
gain the shore without throwing him overboard. 
Wherefore they cried unto the Lord—Hebrew, unto 
Jrnovan, the Maker of heaven and earth. They 
were convinced, by the account which Jonah gave 
of himself, that the God whom he worshipped, verse 
9, had brought this tempest upon them; therefore 
they made their petitions to him. Let us not perish 
Sor this man’s life—For doing that to him which in 
all probability will proye his destruction. And lay 
not upon us innocent blood—Although this man has 
committed nothing against us worthy of death, ac- 
cording to human laws, and nevertheless we are 
about to take away his life; yet do not impute to us the 
erime of shedding innocent blood, inasmuch as we 
take it away through extreme necessity to save our 
own lives, and by his own desire. For thou, O Lord, 
hast done as it pleased thee—“ Who hast raised this 
storm manifestly extraordinarily, who hast caused 
the lot to fall upon Jonah, who hast compelled him 
to confess himself to be guilty, and the cause of this 
calamity.”—Grotius. Or, as Bishop Newcome ex- 
presses their meaning, “ Punish us not as murderers 
of an innocent man: for we judge, from the whole 
transaction, that we are conforming ourselves to thy 
will.” 
Verse 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceed- 
ingly—They were convinced of the power and 
3 ; 


CHAPTER I. 


into the sea. 


15 So they took up Jonah, and cast a ei 
him forth into the sea: ‘and the sea ——__ 
ceased from her raging. 

16 Then the men "feared the Lorp exceed- 
ingly, and ™ offered a sacrifice unto the Lorn, 
and made vows. 

17 4% Now the Lorp had prepared a great fish 
to swallow up Jonah. And * Jonah was in the 
12 belly of the fish three days and three nights. 


1 Heb. sacrificed a sacrifice 
x Matt. xii. 40; xvi. 45 


u Mark iv. 41; Acts v. 11. 
unto the LORD, and vowed vows. 
Luke xi. 30. 12 Heb. bowels. 


greatness of that God whom Jonah worshipped: 
which appeared both in raising this storm, and in so 
suddenly laying it. And offered sacrifice unto the 
Lord—Or Jeuovan; and made vows—As it is not pro- 
bable that they offered a sacrifice on shipboard, this 
seems to be spoken of what they did when they 
came safe to the port for which they were bound; 
namely that they made a public acknowledgment, 
by sacrifice and other religious acts, of the mercy 
they had received of God, and of his wonderful 
power, the effects of which they had witnessed. 
Verse 17. Now the Lord prepared a great fish, 
&c.—We have but an imperfect acquaintance with 
the natural history of fishes. However, it is a well- 
attested fact, that there are fishes, sharks, for in- 
stance, that grow to a size capable of swallowing and 
containing aman. The Scripture calls this a great 
fish in the general, and therefore there is no need to 
confine it to a whale; in which view, much of the 
wit thrown out by persons disposed to be merry on 
the Scripture is quite foreign to the purpose. See 
more in the note on Matt. xii. 40, in Calmet’s disser- 
tation on the subject, and in Scheuchzer. And Jo- 
nah was in the belly of the fish three days and three 
nights—“ The Hebrew language,” says Lowth, “has 
no one word to express what we call a natural day ; 
so that what the Greeks express by Nvy@npuepor, they 


| denote by a day and a night. Therefore the space 


of time consisting of one whole revolution of twenty- 
four hours, and a part of two others, is fitly ex- 
pressed in that language by three days and three 
nights. Such a space of time our Lord lay in the 
grave;” (that is, one whole vvyquepov, or natural 
day, and part of two others;) “and we may from 
thence conclude that Jonah, who was an eminent 
figure of him in this particular, was no longer in the 
fish’s belly.” This miracle of preserving Jonah was 
evidently very importanf. It served to spread the 
knowledge of the true God, the whole transaction 
having this tendency: see verse 16. And it also 
taught Jonah, and in him the whole prophetical’ 
order, God’s power and determination to enforce his 
commands. 
951 


Jonah’s prayer in 


JONAH. 


the fish’s belly. 


CHAPTER IL. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) Jonah’s prayer in the fish’s belly, representing the danger and distress he was in, 2, 3, 
5, 6; the despair to which he was almost reduced, and the encouragement he took to himself in this deplorable con- 


dition, 4-7. (2,) His warning to others, 8. 
safely restored to dry land by the fish, 10. 


A. M. 3142. TPHEN Jonah prayed unto the Lorp 
patie his God out of the fish’s belly, 

2 And said, I *cried 1 by reason of mine af- 
fliction unto the Lorn, "and he heard me; 
out of the belly of * hell cried I, and thou 
heardest my voice. 

3 ° For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in 
the *midst of the seas; and the floods -com- 
passed me about: ‘all thy billows and thy 
waves passed over me. 

4 © Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; 
yet I will look again ‘ toward thy holy temple. 

5 The % waters compassed me about, even to 
the soul: the depth closed me round about, the 
weeds were wrapped about my head. 


a Psalm exx. 1; exxx. 1; exlii. 1; Lam. lili. 55, 56. 1 Or, 
out of mine ort > Psalm Ixv. 2. 2 Or, the grave, Isa. 
xiv. 9. sa. lxxxvill. 6. 3 Heb. heart. 4 Psa. xlii. 7. 


© Psa, xxxi. 22.——f 1 Kings viil. 38. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verses 1,2. Then Jonah prayed—Those devout 
thoughts and feelings which he had at that time, he 
afterward digested into the following prayer, and 
added a thanksgiving for his deliverance at the end 
of it. So several of David’s Psalms were probably 
composed after his trouble was over; but in a man- 
ner suitable to the thoughts he had at the time of his 
affliction; and with a grateful sense of God’s mer- 
cies for his deliverance out of it: see Psa. liv. and 
exx. And he heard me—He thanks God that, in 
consequence of his prayer, his life is wonderfully 
preserved. Out of the belly of hell cried I—The 
word >)xw signifies the state of the dead. So it may 
most properly be rendered the grave here, as the 
margin reads: the belly of the fish was to J onah in- 
stead of a grave. 

Verses 4-7, Then I said, I am cast out, &e.— 
“My first apprehensions were, that as I had justly 
forfeited thy favour by my disobedience, so thou 
wouldest cast me out of thy protection ; yet, upon 
recollecting myself, I thought it my duty not to de- 
spair of thy mercy, but direct my prayer toward thy 
heavenly habitation."—Lowth. The waters com- 
passed me even to the soul—Or life; that is, to the 
extreme hazard of my life; and I thought of nothing 
more than losing my life among the waves. T went, 
&c.—I went down to the bottom of the sea, where 
the foundations of the mountains lie. Or, the fish 
carried mé down as deep in the sea as are the bot- 
toms of the mountains. The earth with her bars 
was about me—I found myself enclosed on every 
side, without any way for escape; and should have 
been enclosed for ever, had not thy power interposed. 

952 


(3,) His ascription of praise and thanksgiving to God, 9. (4,) He is 


6 I went down to the ‘bottoms of A. M. 3142 
q . C. 862. 
the mountains; the earth with her 
bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou 
brought up my life ® from *corruption, O Lorp 
my God. 

7 When my soul fainted within me I remem- 
bered the Lorn: ‘and my prayer came in unto 
thee, into thy holy temple. 

8 They that observe * lying vanities, forsake 
their own mercy. 

9 But I will ' sacrifice unto thee with the voice 
of thanksgiving ; I will pay that that I have 
vowed. ™Salvation is of the Lorn. 

10 { And the Lorn spake unto the fish, and 
it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. 


& Psa. Ixix. 1; Lam. iii. 54——* Heb. cuttings off— Psa. 
xvi. 10.—® Or, the pit. ny xviii. 6.— 2 Kings xvii. 155 
Ye xxxi. 6; Jer. x. 85; xvi. 1 Psa, 1. 14, 233 exvi. 17, 

; Hos. xiv. 2; Heb. xiii. ies" Psa. iii. 8. 


Yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption— 
But, notwithstanding it was involved in all these ter 
rible circumstances, which seemed to preclude all 
possibility of its being preserved, yet thou, O my 
God, by thy power didst save my life from destrue- 
tion. When my soul fainted within me—When I 
seemed just expiring, and lost all hopes of being pre- 
served; I remembered the Lord—I thought of thy 
almighty power and boundless mercy, O Jehovah, 
who causest to be whatsoever thou willest; and my 
prayer came in unto thee—And therefore I address- 
ed my prayer to thee, as being persuaded that thou 
couldest still preserve me, even in the most extreme 
dangers; and my faith was not disappointed; for I 
found, by the event, that thou couldest deliver me, 
as I believed thou wast able to do. 

Verses 8,9. They that observe lying giants, &e. 
—They that seek to, or trust in, idols, (often called 
by the names of vanity and lies,) forsake their own 
mercy—Forsake him who alone is able to show 
mercy to them, and preserve them in time of danger: 
who, to all that depend upon him, is an eternal foun- 
tain of mercy, even a fountain of living waters which 
flow freely to all that seek unto him for them. But 
Iwill sacrifice unto thee, &c.—I will offer to thee 
those thanks which I solemnly promised to pay in 
the time of my trouble, and which will be as accept- 
able to thee as the sacrifices of slain beasts. 

Verse 10. And the Lord—This should rather have 
been rendered, For the Lord ; because what follows 
was not done after the preceding thanksgiving, but 
before it; and it is mentioned here only to show the 
cause or subject of the thanksgiving. The Lord 


spake unto. the fish, &c.—God’s almighty power is 


a 


Jonah is sent 


represented in Scripture as bringing things to pass 
by his bare will and command: see Gen. i. 3. He 
willed that the fish should cast Jonah up on the dry 
land, and the fish did so. Various are the traditions 
of the Orientals respecting the place where Jonah 
was disembogued; but, as Calmet well observes, 
amidst such doubt and obscurity, the best part is ab- 
solute silence, and the sincere declaration that the 
matter is entirely unknown. “The fame of Jonah’s 
deliverance appears to have spread among the hea- 
then nations; and the Greeks, who were accustomed 


CHAPTER III. 


again to Nineven. 


to adore the memory of their heroes by every re- 
markable event and embellishment which they could 
appropriate, added to the fictitious adventures of 
Hercules, that of his having continued three days, 
without injury, in the belly of a dog, sent against 
him by Neptune.”—Gray’s Key. Huetius (De- 


| monst. Evang., Prop. 4) supposes that Jonah’s de- 


liverance from the whale’s belly gave occasion to 
the Greek story of Arion, who, after he was cast 
into the sea, was conveyed by a dolphin to the port 
of Corinth. . 


CHAPTER III. 


We have here, (1,) Jonah’s mission renewed and executed, 1-4. (2,) The humiliation and reformation of the Ninevites, 


5-9. 


& okey AND the word of the Lorp came 

Sorta: unto Jonah the second time, 
saying, 

2 Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and 
preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. 

3 So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, 
according to the word of the Lorp. Now 
Nineveh was an ! exceeding great city of three 
days’ journey. 


1 Heb. of God, so Gen. xxx. 8; Psa, xxxvi. 6; Ixxx. 10. 

NOTES ON CHAPTER III. , 

Verses 1-3. And the word of the Lord, &c.—After 
Jonah had been well chastised for his disobedience, 
and was set at liberty, as recorded in the preceding 
chapter, the divine call to him to prophesy was re- 
peated. He had rebelled against God’s command 
the first time, but now, being humbled and better 
prepared, he is tried again. So—Hebrew, And, Jonah 
arose and went into Nineveh—He now obeys with- 
out reluctance. Such was the blessed fruit of the 
correction which he had received. Now Nineveh 
was an exceeding great city—The Hebrew reads, 
A great city to God: so the mountains of God are 
the same with great mountains, Psa. xxxvi. 6, and 
the cedars of God are translated goodly cedars, Psa. 
Ixxx. 10. Nineveh was the greatest city in the 
known world at that time; greater than Babylon, 
whose compass was then three hundred and eighty- 
five furlongs; but Nineveh was in compass four hun- 
dred and eighty furlongs, which makes something 
more than sixty of our miles. It is said that its walls 
were one hundred feet in height, and broad enough 
for three coaches to meet and pass safely by each 
other: that it had one thousand five hundred towers 
on its walls, each two hundred feet high. Diodorus 
Siculus represents it as an oblong figure, the two 
longer sides of which measured one hundred and 
fifty stadia, and the two shorter ninety. “Ninus,” 
says he, “hastened to build a city of such magni- 
tude, that it should not only be the greatest which 
then existed in the whole world, but that none in 

3 


(3,) Their sentence revoked, 10. 


4 And Jonah began to enter into A. M. 3142. 

2 ’ B. C. 862. 
the city a day’s journey, and *he ———— 
cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh 
shall be overthrown. 

5 I So the people of Nineveh ” believed God, 
and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, 
from the greatest of them even to the least of 
them. 

6 For word came unto the king of Nineveh, 


a Deut. xviii. 22.—— Matt. xii. 41; Luke xi. 32. 


succeeding ages, who undertook such a work, should 
easily surpass it; and his expectation has not been 
deceived. For no one has since built so great a city ; 
both as to the extent of its circuit, and the magnifi- 
cence of its wall.” According to a report recorded 
by Eustathius, fourteen myriads of men were em- 
ployed for eight years in building this city. It is 
here said, that it was of dhree days’ journey; and 
Diodorus asserts the same; that is, of three days’ 
journey in circuit, allowing twenty miles to each 
day. 

Verse 4. And Jonah began to enter into the city a@ 
day’s journey—That is, he proceeded into the city 
as far as he could go inaday. And he cried, Yet 
forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown—The 
threat is express; but there was a reserve with God 
on condition of repentance. And it must be observed, 
that in most of the threatenings of God there is a 
condition expressed or understood. This is the ge- 
neral rule for interpreting all such denunciations, as 
has been observed in the note on Jer, xviii. 8, unless 
where God makes an express declaration that the 
iniquity of the people against whom he denounces 
his judgments is full, and that he will not spare them; 
or, as it is expressed by our Saviour, with regard to 
Jerusalem, that the things which belong unto their 
peace are then hid from their eyes. 

Verses 5, 6. So the people of Nineveh believed 
God, &c.—* The fame,” says Lowth, “of the won- 
derful works God had wrought for the Jews, was 
spread over the eastern parts of the world. This 

953 


The Ninevites repent, 


JONAH. 


A. M. 3142. and he arose from his throne, and he 
B.C 5 aid his robe from him, and covered 
him with sackcloth, * and sat in ashes. 

7 “And he caused it to be proclaimed and 
2 published through Nineveh by the decree of 
the king and his ° nobles, saying, Let neither 
man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing : 
let them not feed, nor drink water : 

8 But let man and beast be covered with 
sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, 


¢ Job ii. 8. 2 Chron. xx. 3; Joel ii. 15——? Heb. said. 
3 Heb. great men. © Isa. lviii. 6. 


and are saved, 


*let them turn every one from his A. M. 3142. 
evil way, and from ‘the violence that abe 
is in their hands. 

9 & Who can tell 7f God will turn and repent, 
and turn away from his fierce anger, that we 
perish not ? : 

10 4 "And God saw their works, that they 
turned from their evil way; and God repented 
of the evil that he had said that he would do 
unto them ; and he did 7 not. 


f Isaiah lix. 6—— 2 Sam. xii. 22; Joel ii. 14——+ Jeremiah 
xviii. 8; Amos vii. 3, 6. 


might make the Ninevites hearken to a man of that 
nation, that came to them as sent by God. And it is 
likely that he gave them an account of the miracu- 
lous circumstances which attended his own mission. 
But, without question, a sense of their own guilt, 
and their deserving whatever punishment Heaven 
could inflict, was a principal reason that moved them 
to have a regard to this message. And by the men 
of Nineveh’s repenting at the preaching of Jonah, 
God designed to upbraid the stubbernness of his 
own people, and shame them, as it were, into re- 
pentance; lest the men of Nineveh should rise up 
in judgment against them, as our Saviour speaks of 
the Jews in his own time, Matt. xii. 41.” And pro- 
claimed a fast—The king and his nobles, or those 
in authority, ordered that every one should fast for 
three days, and put on habits of sorrow and humilia- 
tion. For word came unto the king of Nineveh— 
Archbishop Usher, in his Annals ad A. M. 3233, 
supposes this prince to have been Pul, the king of 
Assyria, (Nineveh being then the capital city of that 
empire,) who afterward invaded the kingdom of 
Israel, in the days of Menahem, 2 Kings xv. 19: it 
being very agreeable to the methods of Providence 
to make use of a heathen king, that was penitent, to 
punish the impenitence of God’s own people Israel. 
And he arose from his throne, &¢e.—He laid aside 
all his state, and put on the habit of a penitent. 
Verses 7-9. Let neither man nor beast taste any 
thing—This was ordered to add the greater solemni- 
ty to the humiliation, and that men might be affected 
by the mournful cries of the cattle under such re- 
straints, and thereby be moved to greater sorrow and 
contrition. It was, however, carrying their absti- 
nence to a greater severity than we find practised 
among the Jews; for though, in times of public 
calamity, and on the day of solemn expiation, they 
made their children fast, as we may gather from 
Joel ii. 16, yet we nowhere read of their extending 
that rigour to cattle. But let man and beast be 
covered with sackcloth—Their horses and camels, 
both which they had been accustomed to adorn with. 
rich and costly elothing, they must now clothe with 
sackcloth, in testimony of a hearty repentance; 
the clothing of the beasts must witness for the men. 
Thus, in funerals, the covering horses and mules 
954 


with sackcloth adds to the solemnity of the oceasion, 
and tends to increase the sorrow. And cry mightily 
--That is, let the men ery; for though the men and 
beasts are spoken of promiscuously in this proclama- 
tion, yet there are some expressions which are to be 
applied peculiarly to themen. Yea, let every one 
turn from his evil way—Let every one forsake his 
vicious practices. And from the violence that is in 
their hands—Let him cease to defraud or oppress 
his fellow-creatures, and desist from all acts of vio- 
lence; yea, and let him restore what he has gotten 
by such practices, Natural religion instructed them, 
that their earnest prayers, without true amendment, 
would not avail them before God; nor would their 
repentance be thought sincere, unless they restored 
to the true owners what they had gained by violence 
and injustice. Who can tell if God will turn and 
repent 2—That is, whether he will change his way 
toward us, and revoke the sentence gone forth 
against us. It was a great thing for these heathen 
to give such proofs of repentance, under an uncer- 
tain hope of pardon. 

Verse 10. And God saw their works—He not only 
heard their good words, by which they professed 
repentance, but saw their good works, by which they 
brought forth fruits meet for repentance. He saw 
that they turned from their evil way—And that was 
what he looked for and required. If he had not 
seen that, their fasting and sackeloth would have 
been as nothing in his account. Observe, reader, 
God takes notice of every instance of the reforma- 
tion of sinners, even of those instances which fall 
not under the observation of the world. He sees 
who turn from their evil ways and who do not; and 
meets those with favour that meet him in a sincere 
conversion. When men repent of the evil of sin 
committed by them, he repents of the evil of judg- 
ment pronounced against them, Thus he spared 
Nineveh, and did not the evil which he said he 
would do against it. Here were no sacrifices offered 
to God, that we read of, to make atonement for sin; 
but the sacrifice of God is a broken spirit; a broken 
and a contrite heart, such as the Ninevites now had, 
is what he will not despise: on the contrary, it is 
what he will give encouragement to, and put honour 


upon. rie 
oh 


" 4 ° 


‘ 
= 


‘ Fe —— 


.Jonal’s repining at 


CHAPTER IV. 


God’s mercy to Nineveh. 


CHAPTER IV. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) Jonah’s repining at God's mercy to Nineveh, 1-3. 


tt, 4. 


(3,) His discontent at the withering of his gourd, and his justifying himself in that discontent, 5-9. 


(2,) The gentle reproof God gave him for 
(4,) God’s 


improving his concern for his gourd, to convince him of the propriety of saving Nineveh, 10, 11. 


A. M. 3142. 


oe aes Bet it displeased Jonah exceeding- 


ly, and he was very angry. 

2 And he prayed unto the Lor», and said, I 
pray thee, O Lorp, was not this my saying, 
when I was yet in my country? Therefore I 
"fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that 
thou art a ” gracious God, and merciful, slow 
to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest 
thee of the evil. 

3 ° Therefore now, O Lorp, take, I beseech 
thee, my life from me; for 4 i¢ is better for me 
to die than to live. 

4 4 Then said the Lorn, 1 Doest thou well 
to be angry ? 


* Chap. i. 3.——» Exod. xxxiv. 6;. Psa. Ixxxvi. 5; Joel ii. 13. 
© 1 Kings xix. 4——4 Verse 8. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verses 1-3. But it—The divine forbearance in 
sparing Nineveh; displeased Jonah exceedingly— 
“Seeing that what he had foretold against the Nine- 
vites did not happen, he was afraid lest he should 
pass for a false prophet and a deceiver, his ministry 
be despised, and his person exposed to the violence 
of the Ninevites. He was therefore very peevish 
and impatient, and he vents his complaints in the 
following verse.” And he prayed unto the Lord— 
He uttered expostulations and complaints in_ his 
prayer to God, wherein he pleaded an’excuse for his 
former disobedience to God’s commands. O Lord, 
was not this my saying—Did I not think of this, 
and suppose that it would be the case, that thy par- 
don would contradict my preaching? Therefore I 
fled before unto Tarshish-—Namely, to avoid coming 
_ upon this message, for I knew that thou art a gra- 
cious God—I knew by the declarations thou madest 
to Moses, (Exod. xxxiv. 6,) and by several instances 
of thy mercy, that thou dost not always execute the 
punishments thou threatenest against sinners; being 
moved by thy essential goodness and mercifulness 
to spare them. Therefore now, O Lord, take, I 
beseech thee, my life from me--“I cannot survive 
the confusion of seeing my prediction vain and to 
no effect; I cannot bear to live under the imputation 
of being a false prophet.” For it is better for me 
to die than to live—We may learn from this, that 
Jonah was naturally a man of a hasty, impatient 
temper; for he here shows himself to have been 
exceedingly vexed without any just cause. For it 
does not appear that the Ninevites would have de- 
spised him, or looked upon him as a false prophet, 
though the city was not destroyed; because their 
having recourse to fasting, humiliation, and turning 
from their evil ways, was in order to avert the wrath 


5 So Jonah went out of the city, ey 9 
and sat on the east side of the city, ——— 
and there made him a booth, and sat under it 
in the shadow, till he might see what would 
become of the city. 

6 And the Lorp God prepared a ? gourd,’ 
and made i¢ to come up over Jonah, that it 
might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him 
from his grief. So Jonah 4 was exceeding glad 
of the gourd. 

7 But God prepared a worm when the morn- 
ing rose the next day, and it smote the gourd 
that it withered. 

8 And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, 


3 Hebrew, 


1 Or, Art thou greatly angry ? 2 Or, palmerist, 
Kikajon. Re Heb. rejoiced with great joy. 


of God, that he might repent and turn from his 
fierce anger, and they perish not ; see chap. iii. 9; 
and therefore they would, in all probability, have 
attributed the city’s preservation to this their humil- 
iation and repentance, and have still looked upon 
Jonah as one that was divinely commissioned. So 
that he was indeed moved to these passionate ex- 
pressions and exclamations purely by his own hasty 
disposition, and not from any just cause given him. 
Verses 4-9. Doest thou well to be angry ?—What 
a mild reproof was this from God, for such a pas- 
sionate behaviour as Jonah manifested! Here the 
prophet experienced that Jehovah was a gracious 
God, merciful, and slow to anger. Here we learn 
by the highest example, that of God himself, how 
mild and gentle we ought to be if we would be like 
him, even to those who carry themselves toward us 
in the most unreasonable and unjustifiable manner. 
So Jonah went out of the city—The words should 
rather have been rendered, Now Jonah had gone 
out of the city: for the particulars related in the 
foregoing verses took place after his departing out 
of the city, and sitting somewhere in view of it, ex- 
pecting some extraordinary judgment to come upon 
it; but being disappointed, he broke out into that 
expostulation with God already mentioned. We 
may observe, in this book, several instances of facts 
related first, and then the manner how these facts 
were brought about explained afterward. And sat 
on the east side of the city—Probably in a place 
where he could best see*the city; and there made 
him a booth—A little cot, or shed of twigs. Or, @ 
shelter, as Bishop Newcome translates the word, 
observing, that it signifies both an artificial cover, 
such as a tent, or booth, and also a natural one, as 
Job xxxviii. 40; Jer. xxv. 38, where it is used of the 
covert ofalion. The LXX. render it cxyvy, a tent; 
955 


Jonah grieves 


JONAH. 


concerning the gourd. 


A.M. 3142. that God prepared a * vehement east 

neha wind; and the sun beat upon the 
head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in 
himself to die, and said, ° J¢ is better for me 
to die than to live. 

9 And God said to Jonah, ® Doest thou well to 
be angry for the gourd? And he said, 7I do 
well to be angry, even unto death. 

* 10 Then said the Lorn, Thou hast ® had pity 


6 Or, Art thou greatly angry? 


5 Or, silent. © Verse 3. 
® Or, spared. 


7 Or, Iam greatly angry. 


and the Vulgate, wmbraculum, a little shed. And 
the Lord prepared a gourd—This is supposed to be 
spoken of a shrub growing in Palestine, bearing 
broad and very thick leaves, so that it affords a great 
shade. Bochart, Hiller, and Celsius say, that the 
ricinus, or palma-christi, is here meant; a supposi- 
tion which is favoured by its height, which is that 
of the olive, the largeness of its leaves, which are 
like those of the vine, and the quickness of its 
growth: see Pliny, Nat. Hist., lib. xv. cap. '7. What- 
ever kind of plant it was that shaded Jonah, we may 
justly attribute a miraculous growth to it. Indeed 
the relation in the text evidently supposes that, say- 
ing that God made it to come up over Jonah: that 
it might be a shadow, &c., to deliver him from his 
grief—That. is, from the inconvenience which he 
felt from the heat. So Jonah was exceeding glad 
of the gourd—As vehement in his joy now as in his 
grief before. His passions were strong, and easily 
moved by trifling events, whether of an agreeable 
or disagreeable nature. We are not told that Jonah 
saw the hand of God in this plant’s rising up so sud- 


denly to shelter him, or that he was thankful to God | 


for it. But God prepared—Thatis, sent, or excited, 
a worm—By the same power which caused the 
gourd suddenly to spring up and spread itself. And 
it smote the gourd—Karly next morning it bit the 
root, so that the whole gourd withered. And when 
the sun did arise—That is, when it was got to some 
height; for the day-break is spoken of before, and 
this seems to signify some space of time after that: 
besides, the sun’s being described as beating on the 
head of Jonah, shows that an advance in the day is 
here intended; God prepared a vehement east wind 
—The winds in the hot countries, when they blow 
from the sandy deserts, are oftentimes more suffo- 
cating than the heat of the sun, and they make the 
sun-beams give a more intense heat. ‘Zhe sun beat 
upon the head of Jonah that he fainted—Was over- 
powered by the heat, and ready to faint. And wished 
himself to die—As he had done before; and said, 
It is better for me to die than to live—But Jonah 
must be made more wise, humble, and compassionate 
too, before it will be better for him to die than to 
live. And before God hath done with him, he will 
teach him to value his own life more, and to be more 
tender of the lives of others. And God said, Doest 
thou well to be angry for the gourd ?—For an insig- 
956 


on the gourd, for the which thou A, M. 3142 
hast not laboured, neither madest it ————— 
grow; which ° came up in a night, and perish- 
ed in a night: 

11 And should not I spare Nineveh, ‘that 
great city, wherein are more than sixscore thou- 
sand persons £ that cannot discern between their 
right hand and their left hand, and also much 
® cattle ? 


* Hebrew, was the son of the night.—— Chapter i. 2; iii. 2, 3 
& Deut. i. 39.—— Psalm xxxvi. 6; exly. 9. 


nificant, short-lived plant? God adds this cireum- 
stance to the question before proposed, that Jonah 
might be his own judge, and at once condemn his 
own passions, justify God’s patience and mercy, and 
acquiesce with satisfaction in God’s merciful deal- 
ings with the inhabitants of Nineveh. And he said, 
Ido well to be angry—When a similar question was 
asked before, he was silent ; but now he is out of all 
patience, and quarrels openly and rudely with God, 
who had spared Nineveh, which Jonah thought 
ought to have been consumed as Sodom, or as the 
old world was. Even unto death—I have just cause 
to be angry, even to that degree as to wish myself 
dead. The prophet here records his own sin, with- 
out concealing any circumstance of it, as Moses and 
other holy writers have done. 

Verse 10. Then said the Lord—Jonah having 
thus showed his love and pity for the gourd, God 
proceeds to judge him out of his own mouth; J'how 
hast had pity on the gourd, &e.—Thou deplorest 
the loss of the gourd, and thinkest it a severe mis- 
fortune to thee, and hard that thou shouldest be de- 
prived of it, though it was not made by thee, came 
up without any labour of thine, and was by its nature 
of a short duration :—if this is the case with thee in 
regard to a mean, short-lived plant, think how un- 
justly thou judgest, when thou condemnest my 
mercy toward the Ninevites! How much more 
severe would it have been to have destroyed a whole 
city, in the ruin of which many innocent creatures, 
as children and brute animals, must necessarily have 
been involved; and, what is still more awful, many 
immortal beings have been plunged into everlasting 
misery! If thou supposest I ought to have spared 
or preserved the gourd, because it shaded thee from 
the heat; think how much more my essential good- 
ness and kindness toward my creatures, the work of 
my hands, must incline me to spare them whenever 
it can be done any way consistently with my justice 
or the laws of my government. 

Verse 11. And should not I—The God of infinite 
compassion; spare Nineveh, that great city?— 
Wouldest thou have me to be less merciful to such 
a large and populous city as Nineveh, than thou art 
toashrub? Surely the lives of so many thousand 
men, to say nothing of their immortal souls, are 
much more valuable than the life of a single con- 
temptible plant. Wherein (in which city) ry more 


Conclusion of the 


CHAPTER IV. 


book of Jonah. 


than siz-score thousand persons that cannot discern, 
&c.—That is, infants, who have no knowledge be- 
tween good and evil, as it is expressed Deut. i. 39. 
If we compute these as a fifth part of the inhabitants 
of Nineveh, the whole sum will amount to six hun- 
dred thousand persons, which are as few as can well 
- be supposed to have inhabited a city of such large 
dimensions. And also much cattle—Besides men, 
women, and children in Nineveh, there are many 
other of my creatures that are not sinful, and my 
tender mercies are, and shall be, over all my works. 
If thou wouldest be their destroyer, yet I will be 
their saviour. Go, Jonah, rest thyself content, and 
be thankful that the goodness which spared Nineveh 
hath spared thee, in this thy inexcusable froward- 
ness, peevishness, and impatience. I will be to re- 
penting Nineveh what I am to thee, a God gracious 
and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, 
and I will turn from the evil which thou and they 
deserve. This reasoning seems to have silenced 
3 i i 


Jonah’s complaints, and made him sensible of his 
fault in repining at God’s mercy. It has been ob- 
served, that the book of Jonah ends as abruptly as 
it begins. It begins with a conjunction copulative, 
And the word came unto Jonah, &c., which has 
made some commentators think that it was but an 
appendix to some of his other writings: and it ends 
without giving us any manner of account, either of 
what became of the Ninevites, or of Jonah himself 
after this expedition. It is likely, mdeed, from the 
compassionate expressions which God makes use of 
toward the Ninevites, that for this time he reversed 
their doom; and it is not improbable that Jonah, 
when he had executed his commission, and been 
satisfied by God concerning his merciful procedure, 
returned into Judea. We may presume, however, 
that the repentance of the Ninevites was of no long 
continuance; for, not many years after, we find the 
Prophet Nahum foretelling the total destruction of 
that city. See Calmet and Bishop Newton. 
957 


THE 


BOOK OF MICAH. 


ARGUMENT. 


. . 

Mrcau, ot whose family nothing certain is known, was a Morasthite, or of Moresa, a village near 
Eleutheropolis, in the south of Judah. He was cotemporary. with Isaiah, began to prophesy a 
little after him, and continued in the prophetic office about fifty years. What we find here in 
writing seems to be an abstract of what he preached during that time. He had seen the prophe- 
cies of Isaiah, and has introduced whole passages verbatim into his own. Compare Isa. ii. 2, with 
Mic. iv. 1; and Isa. xli. 15, with Mic. iv. 13. “The style of Micah,” says Bishop Lowth, “is, 
for the most part, close, forcible, pointed, and concise ; sometimes approaching the obscurity of 
Hosea: in many parts animated and sublime, and in general truly poetical.” “ Like Amos and 
Hosea ;” says Archbishop Newcome, “he reproves and threatens a corrupt people with great spirit 
and energy. See chap. ii. 1-10; iii. 2-4; vi. 10-16; vii. 2-4. And, like Hosea, he inveighs 
against the princes and prophets with the highest indignation. See chap. iii. 5-12; vii. 3. Some 
of his prophecies are distinct and illustrious ones, as chap. ii. 12,13; ii1.12; iv. 1-4,10; vy. 2-4; 
vii. 8-10.” In many passages, “ we may justly admire the beauty and elegance of his manner ; 
—his animation ;—his- strength of expression ;—his pathos ;—his sublimity.” The scope of his 
whole book is, 1. To convince Israel and Judah of their sins, and of the judgments of God ready 
to break in upon them; 2. To comfort the righteous with promises of mercy and deliverance, and 
especially with an assurance of the coming of the Messiah. ‘To be more’ particular, In the first 
chapter of his prophecies he foretels the calamities of Samaria, which was some time after taken 
and spoiled by Shalmaneser ; and then prophesies against Judah, denouncing the evils which were 
accordingly brought upon it by Sennacherib, in the reign of Hezekiah. In the second chapter he 
inveighs against those who devised evil against others, and who coveted and took away by violence 
other men’s possessions, &c. In the third chapter he reproves the heads of Jacob, and the 
princes of the house of Israel, for their avarice, injustice, and oppression of the people; and also 
the false prophets, for their deceiving of the people ; and tells them that they will be the occasion 
of Jerusalem’s being reduced to a heap of rubbish. After these terrible denunciations, in chapters 
fourth and fifth he speaks of their restoration, and, under the figure of that, of the times of the 
Messiah. In the sixth and seventh chapters the sins of the people are reproved, and threatenings 
denounced against them ; but with promises of better things on their amendment. This prophet 
is cited by Jeremiah, (chap. xxvi. 18,) which shows that he prophesied before Jeremiah. “It is 
related by Epiphanius, and the Greek writers who copied him, that Micah was thrown from a 
precipice and killed by Jehoram, the son of Ahab, whom he erroneously calls king of Judah, but 
who was really king of Israel ; and whose grandson Jehoram lived at least one hundred and thirty 
years before Micah. But these writers seem ‘to have confounded Micah with Micaiah the son of 
Imlah, who flourished in Israel, and prophesied evil of Ahab. Micah does not appear to have 
suffered martyrdom, as may be collected from Jer. xxvi. 18, 19, but probably died in peace in the 
reign of Hezekiah. St. Jerome says, that his tomb was at Morasthi, and converted into a church 
in his time : and Sozomen professed to have heard, that his body was shown, in a divine vision, to 
Zebennus, bishop of Eleutheropolis, in the reign of Theodosius the Great, near a place called 
Berathsatia, which probably might be a corruption of Morasti, since Sozomen describes it to have 
been at nearly the same distance from Jerusalem that St. Jerome places Morasthi.”—Gray’s Key. 


CHAPTER I. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The time when Micah prophesied, and ademand of attention, 1,2. (2,) A solemn warning of 
the desolations impending over Israel and Judah, for their abounding sins, 3-7. (3,) The greatness of the destruction 
manifested by the prophet’s sorrow for it, 8, 9; and by the general sorrow that should be produced by it in the several 
places that should share in it, 10-16. : 

958 3 


——_ 


Prophecies against 


CHAPTER I. 


Samaria and Jerusalem. 


a é. ag HE word of the Lorn that came 
ae Se to * Micah the Morasthite in the 


days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of 
Judah, » which he saw concerning Samaria and 
Jerusalem. 

2 4j } Hear, all ye people ; ° hearken, O earth, 
and ? all that therein is: and let the Lord Gop 
“be witness against you, the Lorn from ° his 
holy temple. 

3 For behold, f the Lorn cometh forth out of 
his § place, and will come down and tread upon 
the " high places of the earth. 

4 And ‘the mountains shall be molten under 
him, and the valley shall be cleft, as wax be- 
fore the fire, and as the waters that are poured 
down *a steep place. 


a Jer, xxvi. 18.——» Amos i. 1.——! Heb. Hear, yetpeople, all 


of them.——* Deut. xxxii. 1; Isaiah i. 2. 2 Heb. the yuinert 
thereof—— Psa. 1.7; Mal. iii. 5. e Psa. xi, 4; Jonah ii.7; 
Hab. ii. 20,—— Isa. xxvi. 21. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 


Verse 1. In the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Heze- | 


kiah—Micah is thought to have prophesied about 
sixteen years in Jotham’s time, as many under Ahaz, 
and fourteen under Hezekiah : in all, forty-six years. 
And he survived the captivity of Israel ten years, 
which he lamented as well as foretold. Which he 
saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem—Con- 
cerning both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, 
whereof Samaria and Jerusalem were the capital 
cities. It is said, Which he saw, &c., because the 
prophets having the general name of seers, every 
_kind of prophecy, in whatever way delivered, seems 
to have been generally called a vision. 

Verses 2-4. Hear, all ye people—All ye of Israel 
and Judah. Hearken, O earth—Or, O land, [of Is- 
rael,] and all that therein is—That is, all its inhab- 
itants. Let the Lord be witness against you—“I 
call him to witness, that I have forewarned you of 
the judgments that hang over your heads, unless you 
speedily repent. And he himself will become a 
witness against you, and convince you of your sins 
in such a manner that you shall not be able to deny 
the charge.” The Lord from his holy temple— 
Heaven, his holy habitation. The Lord cometh forth 
out of his place—God is said, in Scripture, to come 
out of his place, or heaven, when he makes his judg- 
ments or mercies to be remarkably conspicuous, by 
visible effects on the earth. And will tread upon the 
high places of the earth—He will cause places of 
the greatest strength to be destroyed, and men of the 
highest rank to be brought down. And the mount- 
ains shall be molten under him, &c.—An allusion to 
God’s coming down upon mount Sinai, when thun- 
der and lightning shook the mountain, and violent 
rains, which accompanied this tempest, made the 
hills look as if they were melted down. Or the 
words may be referred to the general judgment, of 
which all particular judgments are an earnest, when 

3 


5 For the transgression of Jacob is A. M. 3254, 
all this, and for the sins of the house pas 
of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob ? 
ts i not Samaria? and what are the high 
places of Judah ? are they not Jerusalem ? 

6 Therefore, I will make Samaria * asa heap 
of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard: 
and I will pour down the stones thereof into 
the valley, and I will ! discover the foundations 
thereof. 

7 And all the graven images thereof shall be 
beaten to pieces, and all the ™hires thereof 
shall be burned with the fire, and all the idols 
thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered i¢ 
of the hire of a harlot, and they shall return to 
the hire of a harlot. 

& Psa. exv. 3.—» Deut. xxxii. 13; xxxiii. 29; Amos iv. 13. 
i Judges v.5; Psa, xevii.5; Isaiah lxiv. 1,2, 3; Amos ix. 5; 


Hab. iii. 6, 10. 3 Heb. a descent. k 2 Kings xix. 25; Chap. 
iii, 12——! Ezek. xiii. 14. m Hos. ii. 5, 12. 


the heavens and the earth shall be dissolved at 
Christ’s appearing. 

Verse 5. For the transgression of Jacob—That is, 
of the sons of Jacob; for the many transgressions 
committed among them; 7s all this—All these 
many, great, and irresistible judgments of God fore- 
told and excecuted. What is the transgression of 
Jacob—Where is the chief cause of Israel’s sin and 
apostacy?. Is it not Samaria—Is it not in that city, 
the chief seat of the kingdom, the residence of the 
king and his princes, who have set up the idolatry 
of the golden calves, and made it the established re- 
ligion of the kingdom? What are the high places 
of Judah, &e.—Doth not the idolatrous worship, 
practised in the high places of Judah, receive its 
chief encouragement from the city of Jerusalem, 
even from Ahaz, and the great men who there join 
with him in that idolatry ? 

Verses 6,7. Therefore Iwill make Samaria as 
a heap—A heap of ruins. And as plantings of a 
vineyard—As in planting vineyards men dig the 
earth, and cast it up in hillocks, so shall they make 
this city. The Vulgate reads, [will make Samaria 
as a heap of stones in a field, when a vineyard is 
planted. Iwill pour down the stones thereof, &c. 
—The stones of it shall be tumbled down, from the 
lofty eminence on which it is situated, into the val- 
ley beneath, and shall leave the foundations thereof 
naked and bare. All this, and what follows, was 
fulfilled by Shalmaneser, who made a conquest of 
Samaria. And all the graven images thereof— 
Whether made of gold, silver, brass, wood, or stone ; 
shall be beaten to pieces—Shall be pulled out of 
their chapels, shrines, or repositories, by their con- 
quering enemies, and shall be trampled upon and 
broken, either out of contempt, or that the rich ma- 
terials of which they are made may be carried 
away. And all the hires thereof shall be burned 
with fire—The rich gifts, given for the honour and 

V5 


Various cities threatened 


MICAH. 


with desolation. 


8 Therefore "I will wail and how! ; 
°[ will go stripped and naked : PI will 
make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning 
as the ‘ owls. 

9 For ®her wound zs incurable; for 4it is 
come unto Judah ; he is come unto the gate of 
my people, even to Jerusalem. 

10 4 * Declare ye z¢ not at Gath, weep ye not 


A, M. 3254. 
B. C. 750. 


n Isaiah xxi. 3; xxii. 4; Jer. iv. 19.—° Isaiah xx. 2, 3, 4. 
P Job xxx. 29; Psalm cii. 6. * Heb. daughters of the owl. 
5 Or, she is grievously sick of her wounds. 42 Kings xviii. 13; 
Isa. viii. 7, 8.——" 2 Sam. 1. 20. 


service of the idols by the deceived idolaters, shall 
be consumed. This seems to be spoken of the gifts 
sent to their temple by the Assyrians, whose wor- 
ship they imitated. For she gathered it of the hire 
of a harlot, &e.—She got it by the gifts of idola- 
ters, and it shall return to those idolaters again. 

Verses 8, 9. Therefore I will wail and howl—I 
will mourn and lament. J will go stripped and 
naked—That is, without an upper garment; or, 
with garments rent and torn. This would fitly de- 
note the naked condition to which the ten tribes 
were to be reduced by their enemies. J will make 
a wailing like dragons—The word rendered dra- 
gons, according to Pocock on the place, may “ sig- 
nify a kind of wild beast like a dog, between a dog 
and a fox, or a wolf and a fox, which the Arabians, 
from the noise which they make, call Ebn Awi, (filius 
Eheu,) and our English travellers jackals; which, 
abiding in the fields and waste places, make in the 
night a lamentable, howling noise:” see Encycl. 
Brit. And mourning as the owls—Or rather, os- 
triches: see note on Job xxx. 29. “It is affirmed 
by travellers of good credit,” says Pocock, “that 
ostriches make a fearful, screeching, lamentable 
noise.” Shaw also observes, that “during the lone- 
some part of the night, they often make a very dole- 
ful and hideous noise ;” and that he had “often heard 
them groan, as if they were in the greatest agonies.” 
For her wound is incurable—The wound of Sama- 
ria and Israel, namely, their own sins and God’s just 
displeasure: the calamities coming upon them will 
end in their destruction: nothing can prevent it. Jt 
is come even unto Judah—The contagion of her 
sins, and the indignation of God against them, have 
reached to Judah also, yea, to Jerusalem. This was 
accordingly fulfilled: for a few years after the Assy- 
rians had destroyed Samaria, and spoiled all the land 
of Israel, their conquering army, led by Sennacherib, 
entered ‘the kingdom of Judah, and took all the 
fenced cities; and a part of it, termed a great host, 
was sent up to the gates of J erusalem, as is related, 
2 Kings xviii. 17. 

Verses 10-12. Declare ye it not in Gath—Lest 
the Philistines triumph. The words seem to be 
taken out of David’s lamentation over we and Jona- 
than, 2 Sam. i. 20, where see the note. Weep ye not 
at all—Or, weep ye not with loud per Ss, as Arch- 
bishop Newcome renders it. Do not make any loud 
lamentations, lest the evil tidings be spread. Jn the 

960 


at all: in the house of ® Aphrah ‘roll A. fat f5: 3254. 
thyself in the dust. a —— 

11 Pass ye away, ’thou * inhabitant of Sa- 
phir, having thy ‘shame naked: the inhabit- 
ant of 9 Zaanan came not forth in the mourn- 
ing of 1° Beth-ezel; he shall receive of you his 
standing. 

12 For the inhabitant of Maroth 1 waited 


® That is, dust. 


8 Jer. vi. 26.—" Or, thou that dwellest 


fairly. 8 Heb. inhabitress. t Isaiah xx. 4; xlvii. 2,3; Jer. 
xiii, 22; Nah. iii. 5. 9 Or, the country of flocks. ——io Or, 
place near. 11 Or, was grieved. 


house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust—Or, wal- 
low in the ashes, as was commonly practised in times 
of great mourning. The word Aphrah signifies 
dust ; and the prophet, it is likely, puts it here for 
Ophrah, a town in the tribe of Benjamin, that the 
name might better suit their present condition. Pass 
ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir—Houbigant 
says that Eusebius places this city, the name of 
which signifies fair, or elegant, in the tribe of Ju- 
dah, between Eleutheropolis and Askelon. Some 
think, however, that Saphir is not a proper name, 
and that there was no place so called in Judea; but 
that the clause ought to be rendered, Pass away, 
thou inhabitant of a delightful place, that is, Sama- 
ria, which was very pleasantly situated. The pro- 
phet here threatens the inhabitants of that place 
that they should go into captivity, in a way very un- 
suitable to their former softness and Inxury, even 
stripped by the conquering enemy, and without so 
much as a covering to hide their nakedness. The 
inhabitant of Zaanan—-A place in the tribe of Ju- 
dah, called Zenan, Josh. xv. 37; came not forth in 
the mourning of Beth-ezel—“ There was no burial 
of her dead with solemn mourning out of the pre- 
cincts of her city, but she was besieged and put to 
the sword.”—Newcome.. Or, the meaning may be, 
the inhabitants of Zaanan were so much concerned 
to provide for their own safety, that they took no 
notice of the mournful condition of their near neigh- 
bour Beth-ezel, which seems to have been a place 
near Jerusalem, termed Azal, Zech. xiv. 5. Gro- 
tius, however, supposes Zaanan to denote Zion, and 
Beth-ezel to signify Beth-el, called here by another 
name, importing the house of separation, because it 
was the principal seat of idolatrous worship. He 
shall receive of you his standing—The standing, or 
encamping of an army against the city; that is, the 
enemy shall encamp among you, shall stand on your 
ground, so that you will have no opportunity of 
coming out to the help of your neighbours. For the 
inhabitant of Maroth—A town in Judea, (the same 

probably that is called Maarath, Josh. xv. 59,) wait- 
ed, &c.—-Or rather, as the words 1 may be translated, 
Althoug oh the inhabitant of Maroth waited for good, 
yet evil came, §c., unto the gate of Jerusalem—Such 
a calamity as stopped not at Maroth, but reached 
even to Jerusalem. By Maroth, which signifies bit- 
terness, or trouble, Grotius understands Ramah, or, 


expressed as it often is in the plural, Ramoth,aplace 
3 


Judgments threatened against 


— 


CHAPTER IT. 


the plotters of wickedness. 


AM. 9254, carefully for good: but “evil came 
——*" down from the Lorp unto the gate 
of Jerusalem. 

13 O thou inhabitant of * Lachish, bind the 
chariot to the swift beast: she is the begin- 
ning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for 
the transgressions of Israel were found in thee. 


14 Therefore shalt thou ¥ give presents !to 


Moresheth-gath: the houses of “Achib A. M. 3254. 
* shall be a lie to the kings of Israel. Wa 
15 Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O in- 
habitant of * Mareshah : ™ he shall come unto 
> Adullam the glory of Israel. 
16 Make thee ° bald, and poll thee for thy 
“delicate children ; enlarge thy baldness as the 


jeagle ; for they are gone into captivity from thee. 


4 Amos ili. 6.—~* 2 Kings xviii. 14, 17,——y 2 Sam. viii. 2; 
2 Kings xviii. 14, 15, 16. are for: 13 That is, a lie. 
2 Josh. xv. 44. Josh. xv. 44. 


4 Or, the glory of Israel shall come, &c,— 2 Chron. xi. 7. 
¢ Job i. 20; Isa. xv. 2; xxii. 12; Jer. vii. 29; xvi. 6; xlvii. 5; 
xlviii. 37, Lam. iv. 5. 


in the tribe of Benjamin, near Beth-lehem, and not 
far from Jerusalem. 

Verses 13-15. O thou inhabitant of Lachish— 
This was a strong fortress in the tribe of Judah: see 
Josh. xv. 39. Bind the chariot to the swift beast—In 
order to flee from the approaching enemy. Lachish 
was one of the first cities that Sennacherib besieged, 
when he invaded Judea. She is the beginning of 
the sin to the daughter of Zion—She was the first 
among the cities of Judah which practised those 
idolatries which the kings and people of Israel had 
begun. Therefore shalt thou give presents to Mo- 
resheth-gath—Or, to Moresheth of Gath ; that is, to 
the Philistines of that country, either to defend thee 
against the enemy, or to receive thee under their 
protection. The houses of Achzib shall be a lie to 
the kings of Israel—The word Achzib signifies a 
lie. There was a town of that name in the tribe of 
Judah, mentioned Josh. xv. 44. This place, the pro- 
phet here foretels, will answer its name, and disap- 
point the kings of Israel that depended upon its 
strength and assistance: see 2 Chron. xxi. 3; and 
_ xxvill. 19. Israelis sometimes used for Judah, and 

80 it may probably be taken here. Yet will J bring 
an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah—This 
was another town belonging to Judah, mentioned 


Josh. xv. 44, The name signifies an inheritance ; 
so here, by way of allusion, it is said, that a new heir 
or master should come and take possession of it, 
namely, aconquering enemy. He shall come unto 
Adullam the glory of Israel—Or, The glory of Is- 
rael shall come to Adullam ; the Assyrians, whom 
Israel once gloried in as their ally, shall come to 
Adullam. This was a town in Judah not far from 
Lachish: see Josh. xv. 35. Some think the mean- 
ing of this clause is, that the chief men of Israel 
should be forced to hide themselves from their ene- 
mies in the cave of Adullam, as David did when he 
fled from Saul, 1 Sam. xxiii. 

Verse 16. Make thee bald—O Judah and Israel, 
tear off thy hair; and poll thee—Shave what thou 
canst not tear off; for thy delicate children, &e.— 
For the loss of them, some being slain, others starved 
or swept away by pestilence, and the residue car- 
ried into captivity. Cutting the hair, or shaving it 
close, were expressions of mourning and lamenta- 
tion anciently used among most nations. Enlarge 
thy baldness as the eagle—When she moults her 
feathers; for they are gone into captivity, &¢e.—By 
these phrases the prophet signifies, that the calami- 
ty would be so great as to deserve the strongest ex- 
pressions of grief. . 


CHAPTER IL. 


We have here, (1,) A representation of the sins of Israel, and of the judgments hanging over them, 1-11. 


(2,) Gracious 


promises of comfort to the pious, 12, 13. 


A. M. 3274. 


O to them * that devise iniquity, 
B. C. 730, 


< - Mcaba and work evil upon their 
beds! when the morning is light, they practise 
it, because ° it is in the power of their hand. 


2 And they covet @ fields, and take A. M. 3274. 
. C. 730. 

them by violence; and houses, and 
take them away : so they ‘oppress a man and 
his house, even a man and his heritage. 


a Hos. vii. 6——> Psa. xxxvi. 4. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verses 1, 2. Wo to them that devise iniquity— 
That design and frame mischief; and work evil upon 
their beds—Contrive how to work it, and actually 
execute their plans when they rise in the morning. 
Because it is in the power of their hand—Because 
they can do it; because there is none that can hin- 

Vor. SIT. ( 61 ) 


© Gen. xxxi. 29.—4 Isa. v. 8——" Or, defraud. 


der them. They make their strength the law of jus- 
tice; and do whatsoever they have a mind to do, 
whether right or wrong, because they have power 
in their hands. And they covet fields—Set their 
minds upon the estates of their meaner neighbours, 
thinking how convenient they lie to theirs, as Ahab 
thought concerning the field of Naboth. _ take 
961 


The wickedness 


MICAIL 


of Israel. 


3 Therefore thus saith the Lorn; 
~ Behold, against ° this family do I de- 
vise an evil, from which ye shall not remove 
your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: 
ffor this time zs evil. 

4 J In that day shall one & take up a parable 
against you, and » lament ? with a doleful la- 
mentation, and say, We be utterly spoiled: 
‘he hath changed the portion of my people: 
how hath he removed ¢ from me! * turning 
iway he hath divided our fields. 

5 Therefore, thou shalt have none that shall 
«cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the 
Lorp. 


A. M. 3274. 
B. C. 730 


6 * Prophesy * ! ye not, say they to AGM, $274 
them that prophesy: they shall not ————— 
prophesy to them, ¢hat they shall not take 
shame. 

7 4 O thou that art named The house of 
Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lorn ° straitened ? 
are these his doings? do not my words do 
good to him that walketh 7 uprightly ? 

8 Even %of late my people is risen up as an 
enemy: ye pull off the robe ® with the gar- 
ment from them that pass by securely as men 
averse from war. 

9 The 1° women of my people have ye cast 
out from their pleasant houses; from their 


e Jer. viii. 3—f Amos v. 13; Eph. v. 16. £ Hab. ii. 6. 
h 2 Samuel i. 17. 2 Heb. with a lamentation of lamentations. 
i Chapter i, 15. 3 Or, instead of restoring. k Deuteronomy 
xxxii. 8, 9. 


them by violence—By power wrest the estates out 
of the hands of the owners of them.- And houses, 
and take them away—They take both houses and 
lands. So they oppress a man and his house—They 
not only do injustice to-a man himself, but to his 
whole family also, by taking away his heritage, 
whereby his family, as well as himself, and his pos- 
terity after him, were to be supported. 

Verse 3. T'herefore, behold, against this family 
do I devise evil—As they devise mischief against 
others, so will I devise an evil against them, asa due 
punishment for their sin. As they have unjustly 
deprived others of their inheritances, so a conquer- 
ing enemy shall dispossess them and carry them 
into captivity. The word family is equivalent to 
people, as appears from Jer. i. 15. From which ye 
shall not remove your necks—They laid snares for 
others, where open force would not suffice, so that 
the poor could not get out of their hands, but were 
empoverished and enslaved ; and God here threatens 
that he will deal thus with them by the Assyrians, 
from whose power they should. not be able to de- 
fend themselves or to escape. Neither shall ye go 
haughtilyj—You have made others hang down their 
heads, and so shall you now; for this time is evil— 
You have made it an evil time for sins committed 
against me, and against the poor and innocent: and 
{ will make it an evil time for calamities and mise- 
ries on the whole family of Jacob. 

Verses 4-6. In that day shall one take wp a para- 
‘ble—Shall use a figurative speech, against you—A 
parable signifies a speech out of the ordinary way, 
-as the Grosk word rapoipuia imports, and illustrated 
with metaphors or rhetorical figures. So speaking 
in parables is opposed to speaking plainly, John xvi. 
25, 29. And lament, &c.—Your friends for you, and 
youfor yourselves. Hehath changed the portion of my 
people—Their wealth, plenty, freedom, joy, and ho- 
nour, into poverty, famine, servitude, grief, and dis- 
honour. How hath he removed it—How dreadfully 
hath God dealt with Israel; removing their persons 

2 


4 Or, Prophesy. = as they prophesy.——® Heb. Drop, &c.; 
Ezek. xxi. 2. Isa. xxx. 10; Kinos ii. 12; vii. 16.——® Or, 
shortened. Het. upright. 8 Heb. yesterday. * Heb. over 
against a garment. 10 Or, wives. 


into captivity, and transferring their possessions to 
their enemies! Turning away he hath divided our 
fields—Turning away from us in displeasure, God 
hath divided our fields among others. Thou shalt 
have none that shall cast a cord—None that shall 
ever return to this land, to see it allotted by line, and 
given them to possess it. Inthe congregation of the 
Lord—They shall no more be the congregation of 
the Lord, nor their children after them. They shall 
not prophesy—The people often said to the prophets, 
Prophesy ye not; and God here declares that he 
would, in his displeasure, grant their desire: and 
that the time should come, when the prophets should 
no longer prophesy unto them, that they might no 
longer bring contempt upon themselves, or be igno- 
miniously treated by the people, as they had long 
been. 

Verse 7. O thou that art named The house of 
Jacob-—But dost not act suitably to the piety of thy 
father Jacob, and therefore, though thou art in name, 
yet not in truth the genuine seed of Jacob. Js the 
Spirit of the Lord straitened—Is God’s hand short- 
ened? Are his power, wisdom, and kindness less 
now than formerly? Are these his doings—Are 
these severe proceedings the doings your God de- 
lights in? Are the judgments he brings upon you 
the genuine effects of his power and goodness? and 
not rather such acts as your sins do, in a manner, 
constrain him to exercise? Thus punishments are 
called his strange work, Isa, xxviii. 21. Do not my 
words do good to him that walketh uprightly?—Cer- 
tainly, both God’s laws, and the words delivered by 
his prophets, would do you great and lasting good if 
you would obey them. 

Verses 8,9. Of late my people is risen up as an 
enemy—AGAINST ME is to be here understood, 
namely, against God; for this is still spoken in the 
person of God. The sense is more evident in the 
Hebrew than in our translation, namely, But they 
who were yesterday (or lately) my people rise up 
(now, or to-day) as an enemy. Ye pull off the robe 

(61° “3 


Gracious promises of 


CHAPTER II. 


comfort to the prous. 


A. M. 3274. children have ye taken away my 

_—*" glory for ever. 

10 Arise ye, and depart ; for this is not your 
™Yrest: because it is ™ polluted, it shall destroy 
you, even with a sore destruction. 

11 Ifa man “walking °in the spirit and 
falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophesy unto 
thee of wine and of strong drink ; he shall even 
be the prophet of this people. 

12 4 ?1 will surely assemble, O Jacob, all 


" Lev. xviii. 25, 28; Jer. iii. 2.——™ Or, walk 
with the wind, and le falsely. 


™ Deut. xii. 9. 


with the garment—Ye are guilty of grievous op- 
pression and inhumanity: ye are not content with 
spoiling the poor, and those who are weaker than 
yourselves, of their cloak, but take their coat also. 
Taking the robe with the garment, or the cloak and 
coat also, seems to have been a proverbial expression 
to signify a high degree of oppression and injury. 
From them that pass by securely—Who, fearing no 
evil, are going about their private affairs; as men 
averse from war—W ho are willing to live peaceably 
with you, and give you no manner of provocation: 
even these, you ina violent manner strip of all their 
substance, even to their wearing apparel. The wo- 
men of my people have ye cast out, &c.—The wi- 
dows, wives, and daughters of my people have you, 
by acts of injustice and oppression, turned out of 
their habitations, which to them were pleasant, and 
in which they delighted. From their children have 
ye taken away my glory for ever—You have 
robbed their children, or posterity, of their houses 
and estates, which were secured to them by the law 
of God from any sale or alienation beyond the year 
of jubilee, which was the glory of my bounty to 
them: yet you have confiscated these their inherit- 
ances for ever. Or, as some think, the sense 
of this clause may be, “When you plunder their 
houses you take away their children, and sell them 
to strangers and idolaters; and they are no. longer 
esteemed my children, because they become the 
worshippers of false gods.” 

Verse 10. Arise ye, and depart—Ye Israelites 
prepare for your departure out of this land, for it 
shall be no longer yours; it is not your rest, because 
it is polluted—Though it was given to the posterity 
of Jacob for a place of rest, under my protection, 
yet this was on condition of their continued obe- 
dience. And because you have polluted it by your 
sins—You shall be cast out of it, or shall be de- 
stroyed in it; even with a sore destruction—This 
threatening is to the same effect with the declaration 
made by Moses concerning the Canaanites whom 
God drove out before Israel. The land is defiled, 
therefore do I visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and 
the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants. And it 
accords with the solemn caution which God then 
gave his people, saying, Ye shall therefore keep my 
statutes, and shall not commit any of these abomi- 
nations ; that the land spew not you out also, when | 

3 


of thee ; I will surely gather the rem- aa 
nant of Israel; I will put them to- ———— 
gether 1as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in 
the midst of their fold: * they shall make great 
noise by reason of the multitude of men. 

13 The breaker is come up before them: they 
have broken up and have passed through the 
gate, and are gone out by it; and ‘their king 
shall pass before them, ‘and the Lorp on the 
head of them. 


© Ezek. xiii. 3——? Chap. iv. 6, 7.——4 Jer. xxxi. 10, t Ezek. 


xxxvi. 37:—— Hos, iii. 5. —t Isa. lii. 12. 


ye defile it, as it spewed out the nations that were 
before you, Lev. xviii. 25-28. 

Verse 11. If a man walking in the spirit and 
falsehood—If a man falsely pretending to have the 
spirit of prophecy, do ie—Speak things very false, 
and utter pretended predictions of events that shall 
never take place. Saying, I will prophesy unto thee 
of wine and strong drink—I will discourse to you 
of sensual efjoyments: or,I will give you assurance 
of peace, prosperity, and plenty. You shall live long, 
eat, drink, and be merry. He shall even be the pro- 
phet of this people—Such as they like and choose, a 
man perfectly to their minds. Some render the 
clause, J will prophesy unto thee for wine and strong 


drink, understanding Micah (who here speaks in 


his own person) as telling them, if he were one who 
would prophesy lies unto them, and bring them 
pleasing tidings, however false, for the sake of having 


| his belly filled with wine and strong drink; that then 


they would extol him,and look upon him as a choice 
prophet; for that such a one only as spoke smooth 
things unto them, with whatever selfish views it was 
apparent he did it, was a prophet to their liking; and 
that, therefore, if he had been a false prophet, he 
should have prophesied so as to get wine and strong 
drink of them instead of reproaches. 

Verses 12,13. J will surely assemble, O Jacob, 
all of thee, &c.—Many commentators, connecting 
these verses with the preceding, interpret them as a 
prediction of the captivity of Israel and Judah. By 
assembling all of Jacob,and gathering the remnant 
of Israel, as a flock in the midst of their fold, they 
understand bringing them together into Samaria and 
Jerusalem, to be besieged in those cities, and thence 
taken out for slaughter or captivity. By the breaker 
being come up before them, breaking wp and pass- 
ing through the gate, they understand the enemies 
assaulting their cities, (namely, the Assyrians and 
Chaldeans,) breaking down their walls, and entering 
in and going out the gates of them, just as the citi- 
zens used to do; and by their king passing before 
them, his being carried into captivity along with 
them. By the Lord on (or, at) the head of them, . 
they understand, God being on the side of, or pros- 
pering the Assyrians and Chaldeans in their attempts 
against the Israelites and Jews. Others, however, 
interpret these verses of the restoration of the Jew- 
ish people from captivity, and therefore understand 

963 


The prophet reproves 


MICAH. 


oppressing princes. 


by the breaker coming up before them,him who was 


to break the bonds of their captivity, or break through | 
all obstacles that hindered their restoration, and open | 


to them the way home. The following expressions, 
They have broken up, and have passed through the 
gate, and are gone out by it, they consider as meta- 
phorical, describing their return, in allusion to a flock 
of sheep, which, as soon asa passage is opened for one 
to get out, do all of them follow; and that these ex- 
pressions are made use of because it is said, in the 
foregoing verse, that they should be put or gathered 
together as a flock of sheep in the midst of their folds. 
The last clause they render, Their king shall pass 
before them, even the Lord on the head of them— 
That is, the Messiah, who is both the Lord and their 
King, shall lead and conduct them as their captain- 
general. Thus the Jewish commentators generally 
understand the breaker and their king of the same 
person, namely, the Messiah, as may be seen in Dr. 
Pocock on the place. Bishop Pearson cites the 


words of Moses Hadarson to the same purpose, in 
his exposition of the Sixth Article of the Creed. It 
may be observed further, that most of those who un- 
derstand the Messiah as being meant by the breaker 
and their king, though they consider the promise as 
receiving its first accomplishment in the restoration 
of the Jews from Babylon, yet suppose it will receive 
a much-more complete fulfilment in the latter days, 
when the general conversion of the Jews and Israel- 
ites, and their restoration to their own land, shall 
take place; it being very usual with the prophets, 
after they have denounced the destruction of the 
Jewish republic, to foretel their grand and spiritual 
deliverance; that the people might not think them- 
selves entirely forsaken of God, before the promises 
made to their fathers were completed. As this pas- 
sage is so extremely obscure, it has been thought 
best to lay both these interpretations before the read- 
er, that he may judge which is most ecusistent with 
the words of the text. 


CHAPTER III. 
In this chapter the prophet reproves oppressing princes, 1-4; and false prophets, 5-7; and threatens both, 8-12. é 


A. M. 3278. 


erie dl ND I said, Hear, I. pray you, O 


heads of Jacob, and ye princes 
of the house of Israel: * Js it not for you to 
know judgment ? 

2 Who hate the good, and love the evil; who 
pluck off their skin from off them, and their 
flesh from off their bones ; 

3 Who also ? eat the flesh of my people, and 
flay their skin from off them; and they break 


their bones, and chop them in pieces, A. 6 A978. 
as for the pot, and °as flesh within 
the caldron. 

4 Then “shall they cry unto the Lorp, but 
he will not hear them: he will even hide his 
face from them at that time, as they have be- 
haved themselves ill in their doings. 

5 § Thus saith the Lorp * concerning the 
prophets that make my people err, that ‘ bite 


a Jer. v. 4, 5.—— Psa. xiv, 4. ¢ Ezek. 
xviii. 41; Proverbs i. 28; Isaiah i. 15; Ezekiel viii. 18 ; Zech. 


xi. 3, '7,——4 Psa. | 


vii. 13. © Isaiah lvi. 10, 11; 
ee: ii. 11; Matt. vii. 15. 


Ezekiel xiii. 10; xxii. 25. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER HI. 


Verses 1-4. Hear, O heads of Jacob, &e.—That | 


the justice of God, in bringing upon them the pun- 
ishments which he had threatened, might more evi- 


dently appear, the prophet here shows that there was | 
no rank of them free from very grievous crimes; 


that even those, who ought to have excelled others 
in piety and virtue, were the first in offences. 
find Ezekiel making the same complaint, chap. xxii. 
6, &e. 


of your God? You princes, magistrates, and ruling 
Officers, ought of all men to know and do right. 
And, as it is your province to judge and punish 
those who break human laws, this ought to make 
you reflect that God will certainly execute judgment 
on the breakers of his laws. If you make any re- 
flection, you must needs be sensible, that punish- 
ment must await you for your crimes. Who hate 
the good—Ye who hate, not only to do good, but the 
good which is done, and those that do it; and love 
the evil—Choose and delight in both evil works and 
964 


We. 


| among themselves. 
| heads of the people and princes spoken of above ; 


evil workers ; who pluck off their skin from off them 
—Who use the people, whom you govern, as cruel- 
ly as the shepherd would use his flock, who, instead 
of shearing the fleece, would pluck the skin and flesh 
from off their bones. Who eat the flesh of my peo- 
ple, &c.—Who devour the goods and livelihood of 
your brethren. And break their bones, &e—An 
allusion to lions, bears, or wolves, which devour 


|| the flesh, and break the bones of the defenceless 
Is it not for you to know judgment—Ought | 
not you to understand and conform to the just laws 


lambs. And chop them in pieces as for the pot, 
&c.—All these are metaphorical expressions, to sig- 
nify the oppressions of the people by their heads, 
or great men; and how they, by one means or other, 
deprived them of their substance, and divided it 
Then shall they—Namely, the 


cry unto the Lord—When these miseries come upon 
them ; but he will not hear them, he will even hide, 


_&c.—As they have showed no pity to others, he 
|| will have no pity on them. 


Verse 5, T'hus saith the Lord concerning the 
prophets—As the prophets prophesied falsely, and 
3 


Princes and false 


CHAPTER III. 


prophets reproved. 


A. M. 3278. with their teeth, 


an 
fee 98 d cry, Peace; and 


5 he that putteth not into their meni 
‘hey even prepare war against him: 

6 » Therefore, night shall be unto you, } that 
ye shall not have a vision ; and it shall be dark 
unto you, ? that ye shall not divine; ‘and the 
sun shall go down over the prophets, and the 
day shall be dark over them. 

7 Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the 
diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover 
their *lips ; * for there is no answer of God. 


£ Ezek. xiii. 18, 19——* Isa. viii. 20, 22; Ezek. xiii. 23, 24; 
Zech. xiii. 4 —" Heb. from a vision. 2 Heb. From diving. 
i Amos viii. 9.——* Heb. upper lip—— Psalm Ixxiv. 9; amos 


8 4 But truly I am full of power A. M. 3278. 
by the Spirit of the Lorn, and of ao 
judgment, and of might, 'to declare unto Ja- 
cob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. 

9 Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house 
of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that 
abhor judgment, and pervert all equity. 

10 ™ They build up Zion with * blood,‘ and 
Jerusalem with iniquity. 

11 ° The heads thereof judge for reward, and 
® the priests thereof teach for hire, and the pro- 


2 Ezek. xxii. 27; 
° Isaiah i, 233 
Chap. vii. 3.——» Jer. vi. 13. 


viii. 11. Isa, lviii. 1——™ Jer. xxii. 13. 
Hab. ii. 12; Zeph. iii. 3——* Heb. bloods. 
Ezek. xxii. 12; Hos, iv. 18; 


it was chiefly through their means that the princes 
bere rule, the prophet next addresses them, and lets 
them hear their doom; that make my people err— 
That lead them into mistakes, both concerning what 
they should do, and what God would do with them: 
that tell them they do well, and all shall be well with 
them, whereas they are in the paths of sin, and 
within a step of ruin. It is ill indeed with a people | 
when their leaders cause them to err, and those draw | 
them out of the way that should guide them and 
go before them in it. That bite with their teeth, 
and ery, Peace—Who speak smooth things, and 
promise peace and prosperity to the people, while 
they are bringing destruction upon them; or, who 
compliment and flatter those that will furnish them 
with gifts, and feed them well. And he that putteth 
not into their mouths—That will not entertain them 
at his table, and treat them with wine and strong 
drink ; they even prepare war against hin—They 
raise false accusations against him, as if he were an | 
enemy to the government, and thereby bring him) 
into trouble; or in some other way do him all the 
mischief they can. 

Verses 6,7. Therefore night shall be unto you— 
Darkness, uncertainty, perplexity, and heavy trou- 
bles, shall be to you prophets ; that ye shall not have 
a vision—You shall see your predictions so fully 
confuted, that you shall no more pretend to have a 
vision, or dare to foretel any thing. And the sun 
shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall 
be dark, &c.—As they shall have no light, or reve- 
lation, from heaven ; so dark days, or dismal cala- 
mities, shall overtake them, as a just punishment for 
their frauds and impostures. Or, if the prophet be 
considered as addressing the people, the meaning of | 
the verse is, Since ye have given ear to such pro- 
phets, and rejected the true ones, the time shall 
come when there shall be no true vision among you, 
no divine counsel to direct you; but ye shall be in- 
volved in darkness and uncertainty, without know- 
ing what course to take. Then shall the seers be) 
ashamed, &e.—For the false pretences which they 
have made to the gift of prophecy; yea, they shall 
cover their lips—Covering the lips, or lower part of 
the face, was used as a sign to express being under 
some great affliction, or shame; for there is no an- 


swer of God—Because the answer, which they pre- 
tended to be from God, now appears not to have 
been from him. 

Verse 8. Truly Iam full of power by the Spirit 
of the Lord—Here Micah speaks of himself by way 
of contrast to the false prophets, and declares that he 
was filled with a divine prophetic infiuence, and not 
with dainties, wine, and strong drink, like those 
false pretenders to prophecy ; and of judgment—To 
discern truth from error, right from wrong, and to 
judge properly of times and seasons, and improve 
them accordingly. And of might—Of courage, con- 
staney, and resolution to speak whatever God com- 
mands me, without being deterred from it by the 
fear of any one, however great, or in whatever sta- 
tion. 

Verses 9-11. Hear this, ye heads of the house of” 
Jacob, &c.—This address to the great men, shows 
the prophet’s courage and impartiality. Z'hat abhor 
judgment, &c.—Who do not love to pass a right 
judgment in matters that come before you, because 
you make no advantage to yourselves by so doing; 
but covet to have large bribes given you, to pervert 
equity, and make wrong decisions. They build up 
Zion with blood, &e.—Who build houses with the 
riches gotten by violence, and by the condemnation 
of the innocent. T'he heads thereof judge for re- 
ward—The judges pass sentence, not according to 
the right of the case, but according as they have been 
bribed. T'he priests thereof teach for hire—The 
priests for the sake of lucre teach those things which 
are agreeable to the kings and people, and not what 
God hath commanded to be taught. It was the duty 
of the priests to instruct the people, as well as to 
attend upon the service of the temple; for which 
cause they had cities allotted to them in all parts of 
the land: but, not being content with that plentiful 
revenue which the law allowed them, they made a 
corrupt gain of their office. And the prophets divine 
for money—This is to be understood of the false pro- 
phets. Yet will they lean upon the Lord—Pretend 
to trust in him, and expect his favour, protection, 
and blessing. And say, Is not the Lord among us— 
As our God and our shield? None evil—Such as 
war, famine, and captivity, con come upon us— 
While we have him with us to defend and help us. 

965 


Prosperity of the 


MICAH. 


church predicted. 


A.M. 3278. phets thereof divine for money: ¢ yet 
a ae 7 

——_——. will they lean upon the Lorp, * and 
say, Js not the Lorp among us? none evil 


can come upon us. 


4Isa. xlviii. 2; Jer. vii. 4; Rom. ii, 17. 


5 Heb. saying. 


12 Therefore shall Zion for your A.M. 3278 
sake be * ploughed as a field, * and Je- — 
rusalem shall become heaps, and * the mountain 
of the house as the high places of the forest. 


r Jer. xxvi. 18; Chap. i. 6——* Psa. lxxix. 1——t Chap. iv. 2. 


Verse 12. T'herefore shall Zion for your sake— 
That is, because of your transgressions, ye judges, 
priests, and prophets; be ploughed as a field—“ There 
is nothing which hinders us from referring this pro- 
phecy to the first destruction of Jerusalem: for 
though the foundations of the walls were left, yet a 
great number of houses within the city were over- 
turned, as well by the Chaldeans as by the Jews 
themselves; who possibly used the materials to re- 
pair the breaches made in the walls during the long 
siege they underwent; when there could be no 
wonder if many places were ploughed as a field, for 
the purposes of corn, which before were gardens and 
houses: see 1 Mac. iv.38. The prophecy, however, 
may have a further respect to the total destruction of 


Jerusalem when Terentius Rufus, by the order of 
Titus, ploughed up the very foundations of it.” See 
Houbigant and Calmet. And Jerusalem shall be- 
come heaps—The word heaps alludes to the heaps 
of stones laid up together in fields newly ploughed. 
And the mountain of the house—That is, of the 
Lord’s house; as the high places of the forest—The 
place where the temple stood, which was upon 
mount Moriah, shall be overrun with grass and shrubs, 
like mountains situated in a forest. This is that 
passage, quoted Jer. xxvi. 18, which Hezekiah and 
his princes took in good part, yea, it seems, they 
believed and laid it to heart, in consequence whereof 
they repented, and so the execution of it did not 
come in their days. 


CHAPTER IV. 
im this chapter we have a prediction, (1,) Of the prosperity of the church, 1-10. (2,) Of the destruction of her enemies, 


1l- 


APM. B24. UT *in the last days it shall 

‘arcade come to pass, that the mountain 
of the house of the Lorp shall be established 
in the top of the mountains, and it shall be 
exalted above the hills ; and people shall flow 
unto it. 

2 And many nations shall come, and say, 
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the 
Lorp, and to the house of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will 
walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth 
of Zion, and the word of the Lorp from 
Jerusalem, 


13. 


| 3 4 And he shall judge among A. M. 3284. 
B. C. 720. 
many people, and rebuke strong na- 
tions afar off; and they shall beat their swords 
into > ploughshares, and their spears into ? pru- 
ning-hooks: nation shall not lift up a sword 
against nation, ° neither shall they learn war 
any more. 

4 “But they shall sit every man under his — 
vine and under his fig-tree; and none shall 
make them afraid: for the mouth. of the Lorp 
of hosts hath spoken iz. 

5 For * all people will walk every one in the 
name of his god, and ‘ we will walk im the 


alsa. ii. 2, &c.; Ezek. xvii. 22, 23. b Isa. ii. 4; Joel iii. 10. 


1 Or, scythes. 


¢ Psa. Ixxii. 7——4 1 Kings iv. 25; Zech. iii. 10.—e Jer. ii. 
11.—— Zech. x. 12. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verses 1-5. In the last days it shall come to pass, 
&e,—The first three of these verses are the same as 
Isa. ii. 2-4, where sce the notes. They evidently 
“contain a propheey which was to be fulfilled by the 
coming of the Messiah; when the [believing] Gen- | 
tiles wereto be admitted into covenant with God, and 
the apostles were to preach the gospel, beginning | 
at Jerusalem ; when Christ was to be the spiritual | 
Judge and King of many people, was to convince 
many nations of their errors and vices, and was to 
found a religion which had the strongest tendency | 


to promote peace.”—Newcome. They shall sit 
every man under his vine, &¢.—This shall be the 
effect of that peace foretold in the foregoing verse, 
every man shall securely enjoy his own possessions, 
and the fruits of his labours. The expressions are 
figurative, signifying a state of uninterrupted tran- 


|| quillity. All people will walk every onein the name 


of his god—It is the practice of all people to serve 
their gods, and to be attached to the religion of their 
forefathers, though false and absurd. And surely it 
much more becomes us to cleave steadfastly to the 
service of the true God, and not to dis peste 


Prosperity of the church, and 


CHAPTER IV. 


destruction of her enemies. 


e pes 3284. name of the Lorp our God for ever 
and ever. 

6 4 In that day, saith the Lor», £ will I as- 
semble her that halteth, "and I will gather 
her that is driven out, and her that I have 
afflicted ; 

7 And I will make her that halted ‘a rem- 
nant, and her that was cast far off a-strong 
nation: and the Lorn ‘shall reign over them 
in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever. 

8 And thou, O tower of * the flock, the strong 
hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it 
come, even the first dominion ; the kingdom 
shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem. 


& Ezek. xxxiv.16; Zeph. iii. 19. Psa. exlvii. 2; Ezek. 
xxxiv. 13; XXxvil. 21. —i Chapter 1 ets Reddy, ty OS, vil. 18. 
K Isa, ix. 6; xxiv. 23; Dan. vii. 14,27; Luke i. 33 ; Rey, xi. 15. 


9 Now, why dost thou cry out aloud? A. M. 3284. 
‘is there no king in thee? is thy po ech 
counsellor perished? for ™ pangs have taken 
thee as a woman in travail. 

10 Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O 
daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: 
for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and 
thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go 
even to Babylon ; there shalt thou be delivered ; 
there the Lorp shall redeem thee from the 
hand of thine enemies. 

11 4 ™ Now also many nations are gathered 
against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and 
let our eye ° look upon Zion. 


2 Or, Edar, Genesis xxxv. 21.—! Jer. viii. 19. 1 Tsaiah 
xili. 8; xxi. 3; Jeremiah xxx. 6; 1. 43. n Lament. ii. 16. 
° Obad. 12; Chap. vii. 10. 


or forsake his ordinances, as we have too often done. 
This prophecy will be remarkably fulfilled at the 
time of the general conversion of the Jews, as has 
been observed in the notes on the parallel place in 
Isaiah. 

Verses 6, 7. In that day—At that time; will I as- 
semble her that halteth—Or, her that is weak, or 
bowed down ; namely, the Jewish people, weakened 
with the hard usage of oppressing conquerors. And 
Iwill gather her that is driven out—Captive Judah, 
driven out from their own land. And her that I 
have affticted—That I have subjected to great cala- 
mities. The calamity of the seventy years’ captivity 
in Babylon seems to be chiefly referred to: as.if he 
had said, “‘Though I have broken the power of my 
people, removed them into captivity afar off, and 
afflicted them; yet will I restore them to their coun- 
try, I will send them the Messiah, and will be always 
their king.” J will make her that halted aremnant 
—aA part of them shall be preserved, as a seed which 
shall take root and increase, which shall continue to 


the coming of the Messiah, and in which the designs | 


of my providence shall be accomplished. 

Verse 8. And thou, O tower of the flock—Or, of 
Eder, as Archbishop Newcome and many others 
translate the word, considering it as a proper name; 
a tower in or near Beth-lehem; see Gen. xxxv. 21. 
Or, as some think, a tower near the sheep-gate in 
Jerusalem, (Neh. iii. 1, 32,) put here for the whole 
city. The word signifies a flock ; the strong hold of 
the daughter of Zion—Hebrew, Ophel, a strong 
fort. Both expressions seem to be put for the whole 
sity. Untothee shall it come, even the first dominion 
—This was intended to signify the great honour 
coming to mount Zion, that the former dominion, the 
government, after seventy years’ captivity, should 
return to the former royal family, the house of Da- 
vid, and continue in it till Shilo came. This, in the 
type, was fulfilled after the restoration of the Jews 
to their own land under Zerubbabel and his success- 
ors; but the whole antitype concerns the Messiah’s 
kingdom. 

3 


Verses 9, 10. Now—Now I have promised such 
great things to you, why dost thou cry out aloud— 
As a woman in the anguish of her travail? Here 
the Jewish people are addressed, as bewailing them- 
selves under the miseries of their captivity. Js 
there no king in thee ?—Thou hast lost the king 
Zedekiah, but thy God, thy king, is with thee. Js 
thy counsellor perished?—Hast thou none among 
thy wise counsellors left? Yet the Wonderful 
Counsellor is with thee. Messiah, the wisdom of 
the Father, hath the conduct of thy sufferings, de- 
liverance, and re-establishment, For pangs hath 
taken thee as a woman in travail—This may be un 
derstood of the time when Zedekiah and his coun 
sellors were seized by the Chaldeans. Be in pain, 
and labour to bring forth—Be like a woman in her 
pangs; bow thyself down, and show all the signs of 
excessive pain, for there is a sufficient cause, For 
now shalt thou go forth out of the city, &e.—Thou 
shalt not only have troubles, sorrows, and dangers, 
in the wars against the Babylonians; but shortly 
thou shalt be driven out from thy city and country, 
and have no habitation of thy own, but be forced to 
dwell in a foreign land. The Jews’ captivity is ex- 
pressed thus, because their city and temple being 
destroyed, they should live in anobscure state. The 
same condition is elsewhere expressed by their liv- 
ing in the wilderness, Ezek. xx. 35. And thou shalt 
go even to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered— 
Thou shalt be carried away, even as far as Babylon; 
but there, where, according to all human probability, 
and the expectations of thine enemies, thou mayest 
seem to be cut off from all relief, even there shalt 
thou be delivered :—such is the power, and loving- 
kindness, and faithfulness of Jehovah thy God. 

Verses 11, 12. Now also—The time is at hand; 
many nations are gathered against thee—This may 
be understood of the Chaldeans and their associates, 
who pleased themselves with the thoughts of pro- 
faning the temple, laying waste the city of Jerusalem, 
and looking upon it in that condition. Or, it may 
be understood of the heathen nations round about 

967 


The Messiah shall come 


MICAH. 


from Beth-lehem Ephratah. 


A. M. 3284. 


ha, 3254 12 But they know not ? the thoughts 


of the Lor», neither understand they 
his counsel: for he shall gather them ‘as the 
sheaves into the floor. 

13% Arise and thrash, | O daughter of Zion : 


4 Isa. xxi. 10. 
Jer. li, 33. 


P Isa. lv. 8; Rom. xi. 33. 


rTsa. xli. 15, 163; 


Jerusalem, who should take occasion to insult the 
Jews in their calamity, should please themselves 
with seeing the temple profaned, and should gratify 
their spite with viewing Jerusalem in a forlorn con- 
dition. To look upon an enemy, signifies, in Scrip- 
“ture phrase, to behold his fall with delight. But 
they know not the thoughts of the Lord—But while 
they act in such a manner, and take pleasure in 
insulting over thee in thy calamitous condition, they 
are altogether ignorant of God’s designs in permit- 
ting this, and what is soon to follow, namely, that 
he will gather them as sheaves tnto the floor, to be 
trodden under foot, and broken in pieces, while he 
will deliver and restore to their own land his peo- 
ple, whose miseries these their enemies now please 
themselves with the thoughts of beholding. 

Verse 13. Arise and thrash, O daughter of Zion— 
The daughter of Zion means the Jewish people, 
whose power and victory over their enemies are here 
foretold. 'The expressions made use of are figurative, 
alluding to the manner of separating the corn from 
the chaff in Judea, which was done chiefly by tread- 
ing it with the feet of oxen. The purport of the 
passage is, that the Jews are here called upon to 
arise and tread down their enemies. For J will 
make thy horn iron, and thy hoofs brass—Thou 
shalt be enabled to do this with ease and safety. 
And thou shalt beat in pieces—Or, shalt bruise, 
many people—This might be spoken of the victories 
which the Jewish people, some time after their 


for I will make thy horn iron, and I A. 3 wit 
will make thy hoofs brass: and thou 

shalt * beat in pieces many people: * and I will 
consecrate their gain unto the Lor», and their 


'substance unto "the Lorp of the whole earth. 


u Zech, 


8 Dan. ii. 44." Isa. xviii. 7; xxiii. 18; lx. 6, 9.— 
iv. 14; vi. 5. ’ 


return, were to gain over the neighbouring nations, 
especially under the Maccabees and their successors. 
But the prophecy does not appear to have had a full 
accomplishment in these victories: nor has any event 
yet occurred in the history of the Jewish people 
which fully answers to it. This consideration has 
induced some commentators to expound the passage 
in a spiritual sense, namely, of bringing the Gentiles 
into subjection to Christ and his gospel, and of the 
victory which the Christian Chureh should obtain 
over her persecuting enemies after the conversion of 
the Roman emperor Constantine to the faith of Christ. 
Thus Dr. Pocock, Lowth, and many others under- 
stand it. The nations thought to have ruined 
Christianity in its infancy, but it proved victorious 
over them; those that persisted in their enmity were 
broken to pieces, Matt. xxi. 44; particularly the 
Jewish nation: but multitudes, by divine grace, 
were gained to the church, and, as is signified in the 
next clause, they and their substance were con- 
secrated to the Lord Jesus, the Lord of the whol 

earth. We have reason to believe, however, that 
this prophecy will have a still more eminent and 
evident accomplishment, when all the enemies of 
the church shall be subdued, and the saints reigning 
with Christ shall have complete power over the 
nations, and shall rule the refractory with a rod of 
iron, Rev. ii. 26,27: compare this text with chap. 
v. 8-15 of this prophecy, and with Isa. xiv. 2; xli. 
15; lx. 12; lxi. 5; on which places see the notes. 


CHAPTER V. wi 


In this chapter we have, (1,) The troubles of Israel, 1. 


mies, 7-15. 


NOW gather thyself in troops, O 
daughter of troops ; he hath laid 
siege against us: aid shall *smite the judge 


A. M. 3284. 


B. C. 720, 


(2,) The birth and advancement of the Messiah, 2-4. 
protection of his people, and victory over their enemies, 5, 6. 


(3,) His 
(4,) The increase of the church and destruction of her ene- 


of Israel with a rod upon the cheek. A. ee: 
2 But thou, ? Beth-lehem Ephratah, ve 
though thou be little *°among the * thousands 


ran ili. 30; Matt. v. 39; xxvii, 30,—> Matt. in. 6; 


John vii. 42. 


¢] Sam. xxiii. 23——4 Exod. xviii. 25. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER Vv. 

Verse 1. Now gather thyself, &e.—It seems this 
verse ought to be joined to the foregoing chapter, as 
it evidently belongs to it, and not to this, which is 
upon a quite different subject. Thus considered, 
after the promises given of a restoration from the 
captivity into which they should be carried, and of 
victory over their surrounding enemies, the pro- 


968 


phecy concludes with bidding them first expect an 
enemy to come against them, who should lay siege 
to their chief city, and carry their insolence so far 
as to treat the judge of Israel in the most indignant 
and despiteful manner, such as striking him on the 
cheek, or face, with a rod, or stick. This, it is 
likely, was fulfilled on Zedekiah, who was treated 
in a contumelious manner by the Cheldegepipese + 


. natural meaning, or deprived of their full force. or! 


Birth and advancement 


CHAPTER V. 


of the Messiah. 


Ais 2206. of Judah, yet out of thee shall he 
~ C. 720. 
come forth unto me that isto be. 
® Ruler in Israel; ‘whose goings forth have 
been from of old, from everlasting. 
3 Therefore will he give them up, until the 


© Gen. xlix® 10; Isa. ix. 6.——f Psa. xc. 2; Prov. viii. 22, 23; 
John i. 1.—* Heb. the days of eternity. 


had been a common captive, 2 Kings xxv. 6, 7. 
And as the singular number is often used for the 
plural, by the judge of Israel may be meant the 
judges of Israel, including their principal men, as well 
as the king, for they doubtless were treated no better 
than he was; nay, probably, still more indignantly. 
Verse 2. But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah—Here 
we have evidently the beginning of another subject, 
quite different from any thing that the first verse can 
relate to, and with which it seems to have no con- 
nection, The word Ephrah, or Ephratah, is here 
added, to distinguish Beth-lehem in the tribe of 
Judah, from another Beth-lehem in the tribe of) 
Zebulun. It is called Ephratah, from the fruitful- 
ness of the land where it stood: the word whence 
that term is derived importing fruitfulness. Though 
thou be little—The word though is not in the 
Hebrew, but supplied by our translators. And the 
sense of the sentence, it seems, is unnecessarily 
altered by its introduction. Many interpreters ren- 
der the clauses interrogatively, thus; Art thow little 
among the thousands of Judah?. The expression, 
the thousands of Judah, seems to have been used in 
allusion to the first division of the people, into thou- 
sands, hundreds, and other subordinate divisions. 
The rendering of the clause thus, Art thou little, &c., 
which implies the contrary, thow art not little, is 
ceriainly the right way of rendering it, because St. 
oe understood it, and quotes it, in this sense, | 
chap. ii. 6, And thou ’ Beth-lehem, in the land of { 
Judah, ps ‘not the least among the princes of Judah. 
Bishop Newcome’s translation of the clause accords 
still more exactly with St. Matthew’s, “Thou, Beth- 
lehem Ephratah, art thou too little to be among the) 
leaders of Judah? Out of thee shall come, &c.,” the 
word ‘25x, rendered thousands, often signifying 
heads of shousarids. ‘et out of thee, &c.—The| 
word yet also is not in the Hebrew; and if the pre- 
ceding clause be rendered, as is here proposed, in- 
terrogatively, it is not necessary to complete the 
sense of the verse; indeed, it would only obscure it. | 
Out of thee shall come forth, §c., that is lo be ruler | 
in Israel—This prophecy can be applied, with no 
propriety, to any other but the Messiah. The words) 
must be very much wrested: and changed from their 


signification, before they can be applied to any 
other person, The Jews, even the most learned 
ones, before and at our Saviour’s time, understood 
this to be spoken of the Messiah; for St. Matthew 
informs us, chap. ii, 5, 6, that when Herod inquired 
of the chief. priests and seribes, assembled together, 
to give him information where Christ should be born, 
they agreed unanimously that it was in Beth-lehem 


- 


time that &she which travaileth hath A. M. 3284. 
brought forth: then * the remnant of ; 
his brethren shall. return unto the children of 
Israel. 

4 § And he shall stand and ? feed: in the 


& Chap. iv. 10.——» Chap. iv. 7. 2 Or, rule. iTsa, xl. 11; 
xlix. 10; Ezek. xxxiv. 23; Chap. vii. 14. ; 


of Judea, alleging these very words as a certain 
and undeniable proof of it. And so did the generality 
of the Jews of that age, who speak of it as an un- 
doubted truth, that Christ was to come of the seed 
of David, and of the town of Beth-lehem, where 
David was, John vii. 42. The Chaldee agrees with 
their sentiments, and expressly applies the prophecy 
to the Messiah; and our Lord was born at Beth-lehem 
by an especial act of Providence, that this prophecy 
might plainly be fulfilled in him: see Luke ii. 4. 
The expression, come forth, is the same as to be 
born. Whose goings forth have been of old from 
everlasting—Hebrew, cody mn tpn, rendered 
by the LXX., am ayne, e& nyewy atovoc; and exactly 
in the same sense by the Vulgate, ab initio, a diebus 
aternitatis, from the beginning, from the days of 
eternity. So these Hebrew expressions must of ne- 
cessity signify in divers places of Scripture, being 
used to signify the eternity of God: see Psalm lv. 19, 
and xc. 2; Prov. viii. 23; Hab. i. 12. The words 
naturally import an original, distinct from the birth 
of Christ mentioned in the foregoing sentence, which 
original is here declared to be from all eternity. 

Verse 3. Therefore will he give them up—The 
particle 139 rendered therefore, should rather be 
here rendered, nevertheless. The meaning is, Not- 
withstanding the promise of so great a blessing, God 
would give up his people into the hands of their 
enemies, or leave them to be exercised with troubles 
and afflictions, till the appointed time of their deli- 
verance should come. Until the time that she which 
travaileth hath brought forth—Until the daughter of 
Zion, compared here to a woman in travail, shall be 
delivered out of captivity. Or rather, till the church 
of God, of which the daughter of Zion was atype, 
shall bring forth spiritual children of Jew and Gen- 
tile extraction unto God, by the preaching of the 
gospel; see Gal. iv. 27. This prophecy will be 
more fully completed in the gener al conversion and 
restoration of the Jewish nation in the latter days: 
see Isa. Ixvi. 7-11. Then the remnant of his 
brethren—The brethren of the Messiah, those of 
Judah and Benjamin especially, who were carried 
captive; shall return unto the children of Israel—Or, 
be converted with the children of Israel. Then the 
remnant of the dispersed Jews, upon their conver- 
sion, shall join themselves to the true Israelites, and 
make one church with them. Both the LXX. and 
Chaldee read, the remnant of their brethren: but if 
we follow the present Hebrew, we may widerstand 
it of the believers that were to be added to the 
church; for Christ vouchsafes to call all believers his 
brethren: see Heb. ii. 11; Matt. xii. 50. 

Verse 4. And he shall stand and feed—Or rule 

969 


Christ’s protection of his people, 


MICAH. 


and victory over their enemies. 


A. M. 3284. strength of the Lor», in the majesty 
BC. 0. of the name of the Lorp his God ; 
and they shall abide: for now ‘shall he be 
great unto the ends of the earth. 

5 And this man shall be the peace, when 
the Assyrian shall come into our land: and 
when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall 


A. M. 3284, 


we raise against him seven shep- ten 


herds, and eight * principal men. eal 

6 And they shall * waste the land of Assyria 
with the sword, and the land of ™ Nimrod ° in 
the entrances thereof: thus shall he * deliver ws 
from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our 
land, and when he treadeth within our borders. 


“ ® Psa, lxxii. 8; Isa. lii. 13; Zech. ix. 10; Luke i. 32.—| Psa. 
Ixxii.7; Isa. ix. 6; Zech. ix. 10; Luke ii. 14; Eph. ii. 14. 


3Heb. princes of men.—4 Heb. eat wp—m™ Gen. x. 8, 10,11. 
5 Or, with her own naked swords. n Luke i. 7]. 


as the word my, here rendered feed, often signifies: 
that is, he shall go on, he shall continue to rule, or 
feed, his people. Christ shall diligently perform the 
office of a shepherd, or governor, over his church. 
In the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the 
name of the Lord—God, or the indwelling Deity, 
strengthening and exalting his human nature. The 
expression, the name of the Lord his God, might be 
intended to signify the Messiah’s acting by commis- 
sion from the Father, in whose name he came, 
preached, wrought miracles, and instituted his gos- 
pel church. And they shall abide—His church, 
made up of converted Jews and Gentiles, shall con- 
tinue; the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 
For now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth 
—Some interpret this as signifying the making the 
true God known over all the earth: but it seems 
rather to be intended of the Messiah; for the angel, 
who foretold his conception to his virgin mother, as 
is related Luke i. 32, 33, seems plainly to allude to 
this prophecy, saying, He shall be great, and shall 
be called the Son of the Highest, &c. And he is 
dignified with such titles as were never given to 
any creature, as the apostle proves at large, He- 
brews i. 4-14. 

Verse 5. This man shall be the peace—Christ is 
our peace as a priest, making atonement for sin, and 
reconciling us to God: he is our peace asa king, 
conquering our enemies, protecting us against their 
attacks, and preserving our minds in peace and tran- 
quillity. In this latter sense the expression seems to 
be taken here: as if he had said, The Messiah, in all 
ages, whether before or after his incarnation, secures 
the peace and welfare of his church and people, 
against all the attempts of his and their enemies. 
When the Assyrian, &c.—After the illustrious pro- 
phecy relating to the Messiah, in the foregoing verses, 
the prophet passes on to the subversion of the As- 
syrian empire, and, under the type of that ancient 
enemy of God’s people, foretels the overthrow of 
all their enemies, especially of the antichristian 
powers which should attack his church in the latter 
days. Shall come into our land—As Sennacherib 
did with an overwhelming army, within a few years 
after this prophecy was delivered, when, by the 
power and authority of the Messiah, the Son of God, 
in his pre-existent state, (see verse 2,) the Assyrian 
army was defeated, and Judea’s peace secured. 
When he shall tread in our palaces—Which Sen- 
nacherib did in all the eities of Judah, except Jeru- 
salem, against which he could not prevail, beeause 

970 


Immanuel was with Hezekiah and that city, as fore- 
told Isa. viii. 8-10, and xxxvii. 32-35, where see the 
notes. Then shall we raise against him—Namely, 
Hezekiah, and with him the prophets and people, by 
prayer shall prevail with God to send deliverance. 
This seems primarily to refer to the deliverance of 
Hezekiah and his kingdom from the Assyrian army 
who invaded them, Seven shepherds and eight 
principal men—Or, seven rulers and eight princes 
of men, as Archbishop Newcome renders it, who 
thinks the prophet means the chiefs of the Medes 
and Babylonians, the prefects of different provinces, 
who, some time after the fall of Sennacherib, took 
Nineveh, overthrew the Assyrian empire, and there- 
by delivered the Jews from that oppressive power. 
Their number, he thinks, may have been what is 
here specified. Or, seven and eight may stand 
for an indefinite number, as similar expressions 
often do, 

Verse 6. And they—The seven shepherds and 
eight principal men; or, the rulers and princes of 
men, mentioned in the preceding clause; those great 
and successful instruments of God’s revenge, and 
his church’s deliverance, shall waste the land of As- 
syria wilh the sword—Which the Medes and Baby- 
lonians did, under the conduct of Merodach-bala- 
dan, king of Babylon, who, taking advantage of the 
weakness of the Assyrian kingdom, humbled partly 
by the great destruction of Sennacherib’s army, and 
the murder of that mighty monarch, and partly by 
the civil wars which ensued between the regicides 
and Esar-haddon, took arms, and sueceeded in the 
attempt of subduing the Assyrian kingdom, with 
much slaughter and bloodshed. This Merodach- 
baladan was the person who sent the congratulatory 
letter and embassy to Hezekiah, lately cured by a 
miracle of his otherwise mortal disease, and deliver- 
ed from the Assyrian power, Isa. xxxix. 1,2. And 
the land of Nimrod—The same with the land of 
Assyria. In the entrances thereof—The fortified 
frontiers, the garrisons, which kept all the entrances 
of the kingdom. Or, by the land of Nimrod, the 
Babylonish empire may be understood, which after- 


ward by Nebuchadnezzar’s hand destroyed the 
Jews, Jerusalem, and the temple, and was over- 
thrown by the Medes and Persians, whom God 
raised up to punish Babylon, and release the Jews. 
Thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian—W he- 
ther considered literally as the present enemies of 


God’s people, or as types of all their other and 
future enemies, 


Sain 


: 
3 


Bs a 


The increase of the church, 


CHAPTER V. 


and destruction of her enemies 


* ri = 7 And °the remnant of Jacob shall 


—— be in the midst of many people ? as a 
dew from the Lorn, as the showers upon the 
grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for 
the sons of men. 

8 “| And the remnant of Jacob shall be 
among the Gentiles in the midst of many peo- 
ple as a lion among the beasts of the forest, 
asa young lion among the flocks of ®sheep: 
who, if he go through, both treadeth down, 
and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. 

9 Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine 
adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be 
cut off. 

10 “And it shall come to pass in that day, 
saith the Lorn, that I will cut off thy horses out 


© Verse 3.—? Deut. xxxii.2; Psalm lxxii. 6; cx. 3.——® Or, 
goats. 4 Zech. ix. 10. Isa. ii. 6. s Zech, xiii. 2. 


of the midst of thee, and I will destroy A. M. 3284. 
thy chariots: este Be 

LL And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and 
throw down all thy strong holds: 

12 And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy 
hand; and thou shalt have no more * sooth- 
sayers : 

13 *Thy graven images also will I cut off, 
and thy 7 standing images out of the midst of 
thee; and thou shalt ‘no more worship the 
work of thy hands. 

14 And I will pluck up thy groves out of the 
midst of thee: so will I destroy thy ® cities. 

15 And I will “execute vengeance in anger 
and fury upon the heathen, such as they have 
not heard. 


tIsa. ii. 8.——8 Or, enemies. 
Verse 8; 2 Thess. i. 8. 


7 Or, statues. 


u Psa. cxlix. 7; 


Verse 7. And the remnant of Jacob—Those who 
remained after the Assyrian invasion in the days of 
Hezekiah and Josiah, in whose reigns a considerable 
reformation was ‘effected; and the remnant that 
should be carried captive into Babylon, who during 


their captivity should contribute to spread the know- | 
ledge of the one true God among the Chaldeans; | 


(see Dan, ii. 47, and iii. 29, and iv. 34, and vi. 26;) 
and more especially those that should return from 
captivity under Zerubbabel; shall be in the midst of 
many people as the dew, &c.—Shall multiply, and 
become numerous as the drops of dew. Or rather, 


as the dew refreshes and fertilizes the earth, so shall | 


they be a blessing to all around them that use them | 


friendly. The remnant, however, here principally | 
meant, is that spoken of by Joel, chap. ii. 32, the 
remnant which the Lord should call, on which the | 


Spirit should be poured out, and which should be | 
saved, (Rom. ix. 27,) namely, the Jewish converts | 


to Christianity, among whom were the apostles, 


evangelists, and other first ministers of the word. | 
These, dispersed through divers countries, like the | 


drops of dew, or showers of rain scattered over the | 


face of the earth, and refreshing and fertilizing the 


vegetable creation, shall, by their doctrine, example, | 


exhortations, and prayers, refresh and render fruit- 
ful, in piety and virtue, the formerly barren nations, 
and make them grow in grace and goodness, like the 
grass that tarrieth not for man, but flourishes in 
places.on which man bestows no culture, only by 
the divine blessing. Thus shall God, by the gospel 
of his grace, and the influence of his Spirit, unaided 
by human wisdom or power, render the barren de- 
serts of the Gentile world fruitful to his praise, in a 
large increase of spiritual worshippers, and holy 
faithful servants to him. 


Verse 8. And the remnant of Jacob shail be | 


among the Gentiles as a lion—For strength and 
courage, which the beasts of the forest dare not op- 
pose, and cannot resist. This seems to be a predic- 


} 


tion of what was to be effected in the times of the 
Maccabees, and those following them, when the 
Jewish people gained great advantages over the Idu- 


| means, Moabites, Ammonites, Samaritans, &e. Or, 


as the former verse describes the benefits which 
the converted Jews should bring to those Gentiles 
that were disposed to embrace the gospel; this shows 
us what the enemies and opposers of the truth had 
to expect: see notes on Psa. ii. 5,9; Isa. lx. 12. 
Verses 10, 11. And in that day—Namely, in that 


| time when the threatenings against the enemies, and 


the promises to the people of God shall be made 
good; I will cut off thy horses, &ce.—Not in judg- 
ment, but in mercy, for there shall be no need of 
| them, nor shall the church of God any more rely on 
them. And will destroy thy chariots—Chariots pre- 
pared for war. And JI will cut off the cities, &e.— 
Cut off the occasion of fortifying thy cities: thou 
shalt need no other defence than what 1 will be to 
thee. * And throw down all thy strong holds—De- 
molish thy forts, watch-towers, and garrisons. In 
the preceding verse, offensive preparations for an- 
noying the enemy are intended; here, means of de- 
fence against the assaults of the enemy; in both 
which Israel had too much trusted. But in that 
time of peace and safety here spoken of, as there 
would be no enemy to invade the Israel of God, or 
put them on their defence; so neither should they 
have any need to make an attack upon any enemies. 

Verses 12-15. And J will cut off witchcrafts, &e. 
—Here is foretold the downfall of all unlawful arts 
and devices, which had been used by the Jews in 
former ages, to obtain the knowledge of future 
events: that God would, in mercy to his people, take 
away these occasions of sinning. Thy graven 
images also will I cut off—I will abolish every 
species of idolatry. This was effected, even among 
the Jews, by that severe judgment the Babylonish 
captivity, from which time they have abhorred the 
use of images in divine worship, and indeed have 

971 


God chargas his people 


MICAH. 


with ingratitude. 


been kept from worshipping any false god. And I 
will pluck up thy groves—The usual scenes of idol- 
atrous Worship. It is justly observed by Mr. Scott 
here, that though the reformation of the Jews, after 
their return from Babylon, might be alluded to in 
this passage, yet the purification of the Christian 
Church from all antichristian corruptions of faith 
and worship, and all idolatry and superstition, seems 
more immediately to be predicted. “The reliance 
on human merits for justification, the external pomp 
used in worship, and the oppressive exercise of hu- 
man authority in mere matters of conscience, will 


be entirely destroyed by the clear light of divine 
truth, and the power of divine grace; and simplicity 


|and purity in doctrine, worship, and practice, will 


prevail, when the enemies of the chureh shall be 
destroyed.” And I will evecule vengeance in anger, 
&e.—When I have purged my people from their 
corruptions, I will severely vindicate their cause, to 
the utter destruction of all their unbelieving ene- 
mies. Such as they have not heard—In an unpre- 
cedented manner. God will give his Son either the 
hearts or necks of his enemies, and make them 
either his friends or his footstool. 


CHAPTER VI. 


In this chapter God, (1,) Charges his people with ingratitude, 


A. M.3294. LT EAR 


ye now what the Lorp 
B. C. 710. 


saith; Arise, contend thou + be- 
fore the mountains, and let the hills hear thy 
voice. ' 

2 * Hear ye, O mountains, > the Lorp’s con- 
troversy, and ye strong foundations of the 
earth: for ° the Lorp hath a controversy with 
his people, and he will plead with Israel. 

3 O my people, 4 what have I done unto 


1-5. (2,) Shows them the way to please him, 6-8. (3,) Sets 
their sins in order before them, and the ruin coming upon them, 9-16. 


thee ? and wherein have I wearied A. M. 3294. 
thee? testify against me. <a 

4 ¢ For I brought thee up out of the land of 
Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house 
of servants; and I sent before thee Moses, 
Aaron, and Miriam. 

5 O my people, remember now what ‘ Balak 
king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the 
son of Beor answered him from & Shittim unto 


1 Or, with. 
b Hosea xii. 2. 
4 Jer. ii. 5, 31. 


2 Deut. xxxii. 1; Psalm |. 1,45 Isaiah i. 2. 
¢Jsa,i, 18; v. 3,43 xliii. 26; Hosea iv. 1. 
€ Hixod. xii. 51; xiv. 30; xx. 2; Deuteron. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 

Verses 1, 2. Hear now what the Lord saith—Here 
begins a new discourse, respecting the causes of the 
evils which hung over the Jewish nation. Arise— 
This is God’s command to Micah; contend thgu be- 
fore the mountains—Argue the case between God 
and thy people; and speak as if thou wouldest make 
the mountains hear thee, to testify for me. Hear, 
O ye mountains—God often appeals to inanimate 
creatures for the justice of his proceedings, thereby 
to upbraid the stupidity of men; the Lord’s contro- 
versy—Or the Lord’s cause or matter of complaint. 
Here the prophet begins to execute what he had 
been commanded in the preceding verse. And ye 
strong foundations of the earth—He alludes toa 
fabric raised on immoveable foundations, but, strict- 
ly speaking, 


“The earth self-balanced on her centre hangs.” 


For the Lord hath a controversy with his people-- 
He will enter into judgment with them, for their 
impieties, as being injurious to his honour, and for 
which his justice demands satisfaction. 

Verses 3,4. O my people, what have I done unto 
thee?—What injustice or unkindness? Wherein | 
have I wearied thee?—What grievous, burdensome | 

972 


A a Sr 


iv. 20; Amos ii, 10— Num. xxii. 5; xxiii, 7; xxiv. 10, 11; 
Deut. xxiit. 4,5; Joshua xxiv. 9,10; Rev. ii, 14.—s Num. 
xxv. 1; xxxiil. 49; Josh. iv. 19; v. 10. 


impositions have I laid upon thee? Or, what have 
I done, or said, or enjoined, to cause thee to be weary 
ofme? The words allude to the forms of courts of 
justice, wherein actions are tried between man and 
man. God allows his people to offer any plea which 
they could in their own behalf. For I brought thee 
out of Egypt, &e—Here, on the other hand, God 
puts them in mind of the great favours he had be- 
stowed upon them in delivering them out of the 
Egyptian bondage, by the conduct of Moses and 
Aaron, and Miriam their sister, who is here men- 
tioned as having been endued with the spirit of pro- 
phecy, and raised up to be an assistant to her brothers, 
and an example and counsellor to the women. 
Verse 5. O my people, remember, &e.—Call to 
remembrance what Balaam said in answer to Balak, 
when he consulted him, namely, that there was no 
enchantment against Jacob, &c., nothing that could 
be done against them, nothing that could overthrow 
them but their own sins; that they were blessed, 
and it could not be reversed by any thing but their 
own forsaking God and his service, under whose 
particular protection they were. From Shittim 
unto Gilgal—From the eneampment at Shittim, 
Num. xxv. 1, on the way to that at Gilgal, Josh. iv. 
19. Balaam gave different answers in the a 


He shows them the 


A. M. 3294. Gilgal; that ye may know "the 

ay a 
———— righteousness of the Lorn. 

6 4% Wherewith shall I come before the Lorn, 
and bow myself before the high God? shall I 
come before him with burnt-offerings, with 
calves * of a year old? 

7 ‘ Will the Lorn be pleased with thousands 
of rams, or with ten thousands of ‘rivers of 
oil? ‘shall I give my firstborn for my trans- 


CHAPTER VI. 


way te please him. 


gression, the fruit of my * body for A.M. 3294. 
: B. C. 710. 
the sin of my soul ? Saba eae 
8 He hath “showed thee, O man, what is 
good ; and what doth the Lorn require of thee, 
but ™to do justly, and to love mercy, and to 
4 walk humbly with thy God ? 
9 The Lorn’s voice crieth unto the city, and 
5 the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear 
ye the rod, and who hath appointed it. 


APsa, 159s i105 


b Judg. v. 11. 2 Heb. sons of a year ? 
Isa, i. 11.—* Job xxix. 6——! 2 Kings xvi, 3; xxi. 6; xxiii. 
10; Jer. vii. 31; xix. 5; Ezek. xxiii. 37——* Heb. belly. 


. Gen. 
5 Or, 


m Deut. x. 12; 1 Sam. xv. 22; Hos. vi. 6; xii. 6. 
xviii. 19; Isa. i. 17.——* Heb. humble thyself to walk. 
thy name shall see that which is. 


between those places. But some think this sentence 
should not be connected with what goes before, but 
that it begins a new sentence, the purport of which 
is, Remember, O my people, from Shittim unto Gil- 
gal; that is, what things I did, what benefits I be- 
stowed upon you, from the time you were at Shit- 
tim till you came to Gilgal. God had indeed before 
bestowed upon them great benefits, but at this par- 
ticular time they received more than ordinary in- 
stances of his kindness toward them, particularly in 
causing the waters of Jordan to run back, to let 
them pass through; and in the fall of the walls of 
Jericho. That ye may know the righteousness of 
the Lord—His mercy, justice, truth, and faithful- 
ness. 

Verses 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the 
Lord—After the preceding reproof of the people’s 
ingratitude, they are here introduced as anxiously 
inquiring how they may propitiate God’s displea- 
sure, and avert his judgments. They intimate that 
they are ready to offer any expiatory sacrifices, 
though never so costly, for that purpose. Shall I 


come before him with burnt-offerings, &e.—Will | 


God accept of the ordinary sacrifices, such as we 
have offered on other occasions, as an atonement for 
sin? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of 
rams, &c.—With a prodigious number; or ten thou- 
sands of rivers of oil—Were it possible to give 
them? Doth he expect more costly sacrifices than 
ordinary? We are ready, if that will appease him, 
to offer up to him multitudes of rams, and to add 
meat-offerings, prepared with oil, in proportion, 
though it should cost us an immeasurable quantity 
of that article. Shall I give my firstborn, &c.— 
The dearest of my offspring, or any other of my 
children, to Jehovah, by way of atonement for niy 
transgression? It is well known that the Pheni- 
cians, and their descendants the Carthaginians, sacri- 
ficed their children to Saturn or Molech, and in their 
great dangers they were wont to offer the dearest of 
them. And some of the idolatrous Jews and Israelites 
imitated this horrid practice: see note on Lev. xviii. 
21, where God ina solemn manner prohibits it, as 
he frequently does elsewhere. ‘These two verses 
give us an exact description of the character of 
hypocrites and habitual sinners, who hope to obtain 
God’s fayour by performing certain external cere- 
monies; and are willing to purchase their own par- 
3 


don upon any terms, except that of reforming their 
lives. 

Verse 8. He hath showed thee, O man, what is 
good—He hath showed thee that there is no forgive- 
ness without repentance, and that repentance is but 
a name, unless there be a ceasing to do evil, and 
learning to do well: and that this implies the prac- 
tice of every branch of piety and virtue; the per- 
formance of every duty that we owe to God, our 
neighbour, and ourselves; 1st, Z'’o do justly—To ren- 
der to all their dues, to superiors, equals, inferiors ; 
to be true and just to all, and to oppress none, in 
their persons, property, or reputation ; in our deal- 
ings with others to carry a chancery in our own 
breasts, and to act according to équity. 2d, Zo love 
mercy—Not to use severity, or exercise malice, 
envy, revenge, enmity, or hatred toward any, but to 
be compassionate, merciful, forgiving, kind, and ~ 
beneficent toward all, according to ourability. And, 
3d, Zo walk humbly with thy God—To humble thy- 
self before the holy and just God, under a deep 
sense of thy past guilt and present unworthiness, 
renouncing all high thoughts of thyself, and all de- 
pendance on thy own righteousness for justification 
before him, but relying solely on his mercy, through 
the Mediator. The words imply, too, that we should 
keep up constant communion with God, by the 
exercise of an humble, holy, loving, and obedient 
faith, serving the Lord, as the apostle says of him- 
self, in all humility of mind, and with continual re- 
verence and godly fear. “See here the true spirit 
of the divine law! See here what makes a true 
Israelite ! a truth which the carnal Jews could never 
comprehend: in vain did their legislator and their 
prophets inculcate it upon every occasion. They 
always had recourse to their gross conceptions, their 
attachment to sacrifices, and merely external ser- 
vices: herein they imagined their perfection to con- 
sist; while they neglected the more essential duties of 
man, and the practice of the most solid virtues, jus- 
tice, benevolence, and piety.” 

Verse 9. The Lord’s voice crieth—Either by his 
judgments, each of which is his voice, or by his 
prophets; wnto the city—To every city in Israel 
and Judah, but principally to Jerusalem and Samaria. 
The man of wisdom—Every wise man; shall see 
thy name—Will perceive God in thatcry. Hear ye 
the rod, and who hath appointed it—Who hath 

973 


God shows the people 


MICAH. 


the ruin coming upon them. 


A, M. 3294. 
B.C. 71. of wickedness in the house of the 
wicked, and the 7scant measure ° that is abo- 
minable ? 

11 ® Shall I count them pure with ? the wick- 
ed balances, and with the bag of deceitful 
weights ? 

12 For the rich men thereof are full of violence, 
and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, 
and ‘ their tongue és deceitful in their mouth. 

13 Therefore also will I * make thee sick in 
smiting thee, in making thee desolate because 
of thy sins. 

14 * Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and 


10 § ° Are there yet the treasures) thy casting down shall be in the A. M. 3294. 


midst of thee; and thou shalt take 8 dal 


hold, but shalt not deliver; and that which 
thou deliverest will I give up to the sword. 

15 Thou shalt t sow, but thou shalt not reap ; 
thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not 
anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but shalt 
not drink wine. 

16 4 For ° the statutes of "Omri are * kept, 
and all the works of the house of ¥ Ahab, and 
ye walk in their counsels ; that I should make 
thee 7a !° desolation, and the inhabitants there- 
of a hissing: therefore ye shall bear the *re- 
proach of my people. 


6 Or, Is there yet unto every man a house of the wicked. 7 Heb. 
measure of leanness, Amos viii. 5. © Deut. xxv. 13, 16; Prov. 
Bhd XE 23. 8 Or, Shall I be pure with. P Hos. xii. 7. 
4 Jer. ix. 3, 5, 6, 8, ¥ Leviticus xxvi. 16; Psalm evii. 17, 18. 
8 Lev. xxvi. 26; Hos. iv. 10. 


chosen it out, and strikes with it; that is, Hear ye the | 


voice of God in the punishments he is now sending. 
Or, Hear what severe judgments are threatened 
against you, and who it is that threatens them, and 
is able to put them in execution. 

Verses 10-12. Are there yet the treasures of 
wickedness, &c.—Notwithstanding all the express 
laws, the exhortations and reproofs given you upon 
this subject, and so many examples of punishment 


set before you; still are there many that use unjust | 


and fraudulent means to enrich themselves? who 
keep scant measures to sell their goods by, which 
the law of God often declares to be an abomination 


to him? The reproof is the same with that of Amos, | 


chapter viii. 5, where see the note. Shall Icount 
them pure with the wicked balances, &c.—Shall I 
approve or acquit them, as if they were righteous? 
For the rich men thereof—Namely, of the city, 


spoken of verse 9; are full of violence—Not only of | 
fraud and injustice, but oppression, tyranny, and | 


cruelty. And the inhabitants have spoken lies— 
Have gone aside from truth, integrity, and fidelity, 
and have deceived each other by falsehood. 

Verses 138-15. Therefore will I make thee sick in 
smiting thee—Therefore, upon account of these thy 


sins, I will, ere long, so smite thee, O Israel, that | 


the strokes shall reach thy heart, and make thee 
sick unto death of thy wounds. Or, the punishment 
wherewith I will afflict thee shall waste thy strength 
like a consuming sickness which preys upon the 
vitals. Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied—See 
note on Hos. iv. 10. And thy casting down shall be 
in the midst of thee—Thou shalt be depressed within 
thee, or haye no courage, or spirits, left to support 
thee. T'how shalt take hold, but not deliver, &e.— 
Thou shalt lay hold on things to secure them to thee, 
but thou shalt not be able to save them from the 
enemy, All the advantages that thou hast made by 
any means shall become a prey to them. Archbishop 
Newcome translates it, Zhow shalt take hold, but 
shalt not carry away; contrary to what is said of 
974 


t Deut. xxviii. 38, 39,40; Amos v.11; Zeph. i. 13; Haggai 
i. 6.——* Or, he doth much keep thee. “1 Kings xvi. 25, 26. 
x Hos. v. 11.—y 1 Kings xvi. 30; xxi. 25, 26; 2 Kings xxi. 3. 
21 Kings ix. 8; Jer. xix. 8.——1° Or, astonishment.—— Isaiah 
xxv. 8; Jer. li. 51; Lam. v. 1. 


thy enemies, Isa. v.29; They shall lay hold of the 
prey, andcarry it away safe, and none shall deliver 
it, or retake it. T'how shalt sow, but shalt not 
reap—Thou shalt not enjoy the fruit of thy labour: 
a curse often threatened for disobedience. 

Verse 16. For the statutes of Omri are kept—An 
idolatrous king, of whom it is said, 1 Kings xvi. 25, 
that he did worse than all that were before him, 
and therefore we may judge of the corruption 
of the people who imitated the example, and 
followed the institutions of such a one. By his 
statutes, seem to be intended some idolatrous rites, 
which he instituted while he was king of Israel. 
And all the works of the house of Ahab, &¢.—Ahab 
was the son of Omri, and exceeded his father and all 
his predecessors in impiety. He did more (it is 
said, 1 Kings xvi. 33) to provoke the Lord God than 
all the kings of Israel that were beforehim. For 
he not only walked in the sins of Jeroboam, who in- 
stituted the worship of the golden calves, under 
which idolatrous representation Jehovah was wor- 
shipped, but he also went and served Baal, a false 
god, and built a house, or temple, and erected an 
altar for him in Samaria, &¢., 1 Kings xvi. 30-33. 
But, impious as Ahab was, he found imitators, not 
only in Israel, where he had power to command, but 
also in Judah. It is said, The works of the house of 
Ahab, because all his posterity followed his example 
in idolatry. And we learn, 2 Kings xxi. 3, that even 
the king of Judah, Manasseh, reavred.up an altar for 
Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab king of 
Israel. That I should make thee a desolation— 
The event will be, that the country and city shall be 
laid desolate; and the inhabitants thereof a hissing 
—That is, a subject of scorn and derision to their 
enemies. Therefore ye shall bear the reproach of 
my people—This is addressed to the rich men, 
spoken of verse 12, and the meaning is, that the 
people in general should reproach them with be- 


ing the principal cause of their calamities and deso- 
lation = 
3 


The prophet laments the 


CHAPTER VII. 


total corruption of the people, 


— 


CHAPTER VII. 


In this chapter the prophet, (1,) Laments the total corruption of the people, 1-6. 


(2,) Directs those who feared God to take 


courage, to be patient, but to expect long trouble, 7-13. And, (3,) To encourage themselves with God’s promises and 
Saithfulness, and the future downfall of their enemies, 14-20. 


’ A. M. 3294, 


O is me! for I am as !y 
B. C. 710. W f s “when 


- they have gathered the summer 
fruits, as *the grape-gleanings of the vintage: 
there is no cluster to eat: » my soul desired the 
first ripe fruit. 

2 The °good? man is perished out of the 
earth: and there is none upright among men: 
they all lie in wait for blood; ‘ they hunt every 
man his brother with a net. 

3 4 That they may do evil with both hands 


1 Heb. the gatherings of summer. 
b Isa. xxviii. 4; Hos. ix. 10. 
Jlvii. 1. 


4JTsaiah xvii. 6; xxiv. 13. 
© Psa. xii. 1; xiv. 1,33; Isaiah 
2 Or, godly, or, merciful. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VII. 
.. Verses 1, 2. Wo is me, &c.—Judea, or rather the 
prophet himself, is here introduced as complaining, 
that though good men once abounded in the land, 
there were now few or none to be found. J am as 
when they have gathered the summer fruits, &e.—I 
am like one who gathers up the ears of corn after 
the harvest, or grapes after the vintage: who meets 
with very few. There is no cluster, &e—Good 
men, that used to be found in clusters, are now as 
the grape-gleanings of the vintage, here and there a 
berry. No societies of pious men are to be found, 
assembling together for the purposes of devotion 
and mutual edification: those that are such, are in- 
dividuals, unconnected with, and standing aloof from 
each other. And these are but very imperfectly 
pious, like the small withered grapes, the refuse, left 
behind, not only by the gatherer, but by the gleaner. 
My soul desired the first ripe fruit—I wish to see 
such worthy good men as lived in the former ages, 
were the ornaments of the primitive times, and as 
far excelled the best of the present age, as the first 
and full ripe fruits do those of the later growth, that 
never come to maturity. To meet with such as 
these would be a refreshment, to me like that which 
a thirsty traveller receives when he finds the early 
fruits in the summer season. Zhe good man--He- 
brew, 170M, the pious, kind, merciful, and beneficent ; 
is perished out of the earth-Rather, out of the land, 
namely, Judea. There are few or none that are so 
truly and consistently pious as to delight in doing 


good to others, or making them as happy as lies in| 


their power. And there is none upright“ As the 
early fig, of excellent flavour, cannot be found in the 
advanced season of summer, or the choice Cluster 
of grapes after vintage, so neither can the good and 
upright man be discovered by diligent searching in 
Israe].”.—Newcome. They hunt every man his 
brother, &c.—They make a prey, each one of his 
neighbour, or those they have to do with, and use 
all arts to deceive and injure them. 

Verses 3,4 That they may do evil with both 

3 


” 


earnestly, ®the prince asketh, ‘and A. M. 3294. 
the judge asketh for a reward; and 2 EDS 
the great man, he uttereth ° his mischievous 
desire: so they wrap it up. 

A The best of them & is as a brier: the most 
upright 7s sharper than a thorn-hedge: the day 
of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh ; 
now shall be their perplexity. 

5 "Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not 
confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy 


4 Hab. i. 15. © Hosea iv. 18, Isa. i. 23; Chap. iii. 11, 
3 Heb. the mischief of his soul. £2 Sam. xxiii. 6,7; Ezekiel 
ii. 6; Isa. lv. 13. h Jer, ix. 4. 


hands, &c.—With all diligence; earnestly—He- 
brew, 2°0°N, to good it ; that is, to do it thoroughly 
and effectually. “Their hands are bent on iniquity, 
to execute it fully.” So Dr. Wheeler. TJ'he prince 
asketh—Namely, a gift; to do any one a favour, or 
good, And the judge asketh for a reward—And the 
judge will not pass a decision till he has had a bribe 
to engage him to do it. And the great man ultereth 
his mischievous desire—The great man at court, 
who can do what he will there, is bold to declare 
plainly his unjust, oppressive design; or, the mis- 
chief of his soul, as W531 NIN properly signifies. So 
they wrap it wp—The prince, the judge, and the 
great man, agreeing in their ill designs, make a three- 
fold cord of iniquity: or, they twist one sin upon 
another, the latter to maintain or cover the former, 
and all jointly promote injustice, violence, and cru- 
elty. The best of them is a brier—Or, like a brier. 
They catch fast hold on, and retain, whatever they 
ean lay their hands on. J'he most upright is 
sharper than a thorn—Even the best among them 
would wound and injure on every side all that come 
near them. The day of thy watchmen—The day 
in which they shall sound the alarm; and thy visita- 
tion cometh—Namely, surely and speedily. The 
time of vengeance is coming, which hath been fore- 
told by the prophets of former times, as wellas the 
present, called here watchmen, as they are by Eze- 
kiel, chap. iii. 7, and by Hosea, chap. ix. 8; then God 
will visit for all the sins thou hast committed against 
him. Watchmen may signify magistrates as well as 
prophets, (see note on Isa. lvi. 10,) and then the words 
import the time when God will call both princes and 
prophets to account for their unfaithfulness in the 
discharge of their several offices. Wow—When that 
day is come; shall be their perplexity—They shall 
be so entangled and insnared, as not to know what 
way to take. 

Verses 5-7. Trust ye not in a friend—This and 
the next verse are descriptive of a general corruption 
of manners; so that all ties and duties of consan- 
guinity were trampled upon, or paid no regard to. 

975 


An exhortation 


A.M. 3294. mouth from her that lieth in thy 

B. 0. 71°. bosom. 

6 For ‘the son dishonoureth the father, the 
daughter riseth up against her mother, the 
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a 
man’s enemies are the men of his own house. 

7 Therefore * I will look unto the Lorn; I 
will wait for the God of my salvation; my 
God will hear me. 

8 4 1 Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: 
™ when I fall, Ishall arise; when I sit in dark- 
ness, ® the Lorp shall be a light unto me. 

9 °I will bear the indignation of the Lorn, 
because I have sinned against him, until he 
plead my cause, and execute judgment for 
me: ? he will bring me forth to the light, and 
I shall behold his righteousness. 


i Ezek. xxii. 7;_ Matt. x. 21, 35, 36; Luke xii. 53; xxi. 16; 
2 Tim. iii. 2, 3s Isa. viii. 17. -—! Prov. xxiv. 17; Lam. iv. 
21. m Psalm xxxvil. 24; Prov. xxiv. 16. ss Psa. xxvii. 1, 
© Lam. ili. 39. P Psa. xxxvii, 6. 4 Or, And thou wilt see her 
that is mine enemy and cover her with shame. 4 Psa. xxxv. 26. 


MICAH. 


to patience and courage. 


10 *#Then she that is mine enemy A. me on 
shall see it, and 4 shame shall cover 
her which said unto me, * Where is the Lorp 
thy God? *mine eyes shall behold her: now 
5 shall she be trodden down ‘as the mire of the 
streets. 

11 Im the day that thy "walls are to be 
built, a that day shall the decree be far re- 
moved. 

12 In that day also * he shall come even to 
thee from Assyria, °and from the fortified 
cities, and from the fortress even to the river, 
and from sea to sea, and from mountain to 
mountain. 

13 7 Notwithstanding, the land shall be deso- 
late because of them that dwell therein, ¥ for 
the fruit of their doings. 


r Psa, xlii. 3,10; Ixxix. 10; exv. 2; Joel ii. 17.——* Chap. 
iv. 11.——® Heb. she shall be for treading down.——t 2 Samuel 
xxii. 43; Zech. x. 5——* Amos ix. 11.—*Isaiah xi. 16; xix. 
23; xxvii. 13 ; Hos. xi. 11.—* Or, even to. 7 Or, After that 
it hath been. y Jer. xxi. 14; Chap. iii. 12. ; 


The friend proved treacherous to his friend, the wife 
to her husband: children set at naught their parents, 
and a man’s own family, or domestics, plotted his 
injury, or destruction, or acted as enemies toward 
him. Wherefore will I look unto the Lord—The 
church here expresses her confidence in God alone, 
since no trust could be placed in man, Or, they may 
be considered as the words of the prophet, and of 
those who feared God in Israel. 

Verses 8, 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine 
enemy—Here begins a new subject; the Jewish na- 
tion in general being here introduced speaking in 
their captivity, and addressing themselves to the 
Chaldeans. When I fall I shall rise—Or, because 
Lam fallen; for I shall rise. When I sit in dark- 
ness, the Lord shall be a light unto me—Neither re- 
joice nor triumph over me, because I at present sit in 
darkness, or misery, for Jehovah will again make 
me prosperous. J will bear the indignation of the 
Lord—I will patiently, or without repining, bear the 


affliction, or punishment, Jehovah has inflicted upon | 


me. Because Ihave sinned against hin—Because 
I am sensible I have highly offended him by my 
idolatry, injustice, and unmercifulness. Until he 
plead my cause, and execute judgment for me— 
Until he shall be pleased to acknowledge my cause, 
in consequence of my repentance and perseverance 
in the worship of him, and avenge my injuries on 
my enemies. It may well be supposed that the 
Chaldeans made a mock of the Jews for persevering 
in the worship of Jehovah, or that God who (as 
they supposed) had not been able to deliver them, 
his worshippers, out of their hands, the worshippers 
of Bel and Nebo; whom therefore they esteemed 
more powerful. He will bring me forth to the light— 
He will again bring me into a prosperous condition. 
And I shall behold his righteousness—Or rather, his 
976 


‘dition as ever they had reduced God’s people. 


goodness. What we render righteousness, often 
signifies, according to the Hebrew, beneficence, or 
goodness. 

Verses 10-13. Then she that is mine enemy— 
Namely, the Chaldean nation. Which said unto 
me, (namely, when she held me eaptive,) Where is 
the Lord thy God?2—Where is now Jehovah, whom 
thou worshippest, and sayest is the only God? Why 
does he not now deliver thee? Why does he not 
free thee from my hands, who am not his worship- 
per? Mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be 
trodden down, &c.—As the heathen beheld the de- 
solations of God’s church and temple with delight, 
(see chap. iv. 11,) so it shall come to my turn to see 
God’s judgments executed upon the Babylonish em- 
pire, which shall be brought down to as low a con- 
In 
the day that thy walls shall be built, &e—When 
God shall visit his people, and repair their decayed 
estate, (compare Amos ix. 11,) then the tyrannical 
edicts of their persecutors shall be utterly abolished: 


| This may partly relate to the recalling those edicts, 


which put a stop to the rebuilding of the city and 


‘temple of Jerusalem: see Ezra iv. 23, 24, and vi. 14; 


Neh. ii.8,17. In that day—aAt that jime also; he shall 
come even to thee from Assyria, &e—This may be 
rendered, T'hey shall come, &c. ; that is, thy restored 
inhabitants; and from the fortress—Or rather, from 
Egypt, even unto the river—That is, the Euphrates; 
for the word 13>, which we translate fortress, like- 
wise means Egypt. All this signifies the return of 
the Jews from the various parts to which they had 
been scattered. Notwithstanding, the land shall be 
desolate, &¢e.—-Nevertheless the land shall, before 
this, be reduced to a state of desolation, on account 
of the heinous wickedness of those who at present 
inhabit it. 
3 


—— 


# 


An exhortation to 


294, 


as 14 4% ®° Feed thy people with thy 


rod, the flock of thy heritage, which 
dwell solitarily i *the wood, in the midst of 
Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, 
as in the days of old. 

15 4 * According to the days of thy coming 
out of the land of Egypt will I show unto him 
marvellous things. 

16 The nations ’shall see, and be con- 
founded at all their might: ° they shall lay 
their hand upon their mouth, their « ears shall 
be deaf. 


CHAPTER VII. 


trust in God’s faithfulness. 


17 They shall lick the 4 dust like A. M. 3294. 
B. C. 710. 
a serpent, °they shall move out of 
their holes like ®° worms of the earth: ‘they 
shall be afraid of the Lorp our God, and shall 
fear because of thee. 

18 % & Who ts a God like unto thee, that 
» pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the trans- 
gression of ‘the remnant of his heritage? * he 
retaineth not his anger for ever, because he 
delighteth in mercy. 

19 He will turn again, he will have compas- 
sion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities ; 


§ Or, Rule, Psa. xxviii. 9; Chap. v. 4. 2 saiah xxxvii. 24. 
2 Psa. Ixviii. 22; Ixxviii. 12. > Isa. xxvi. 11.—+¢ Job xxi. 5; 
xxix. 9.——# Psa. Ixxii. 9; Isa. xlix. 23. ¢ Psa. xviii. 45. 


® Or, creeping F shinge f Jer. xxxiii. 9.——& Exodus xv. 11. 
h Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7; Jer. 1. 20,——i Chapter iv. 7; v. 3, 7, 8 
k Psa. ciii. 9; Isa. Wii. 10; Jer. iii. 5. 


Verse 14. Feed thy people with thy rod, &e.— 
This seems to be a prayer which the prophet broke 
out into on this occasion, beseeching God to take 
his people again under his peculiar protection and 
care; which is the meaning of feeding them with his 
rod, or pastoral crook: the flock of thy heritage, 
which dwell solitarily—That is, that peculiar people, 
which thou hast separated from the rest of the 
world, or caused to live apart by themselves, that 
they might maintain among them, and preserve un- 


corrupted, thy pure worship. Jn the wood, in the| 


midst of Carmel—Called the forest of Carmel, Isa. 
xxxvil. 24, and spoken of as a place remarkable for 
its fruitfulness. Therefore, to feed in the midst of 
Carmel, implied giving them great plenty. Let 
them feed in Bashan and Gilead, &e.—These parts 
of Canaan were noted for their rich pastures, and 
therefore this implies the same as the foregoing sen- 
tence, namely, Bless them with plenty of every 
thing, as was the case formerly. 

Verses 15, 16. According to the days of thy coming 
—These words are an answer to the prophet’s prayer 
in the foregoing verse ; 
the wonders he will perform in bringing back his 
people into their own country shall be as conspicu- 
ous as those which he showed in their deliverance 


out of Egypt, and giving them the first possession | 


of it. The sense is equivalent to that of Psa. Ixviii. 
22, The Lord hath said, I will bring my people 
again, as I did from Bashan, §c. The nations 
shall see, and be confounded at all their might— 
The heathen shall feel the same confusion as men 
do under a great disappointment. Or, the meaning 
may be, They shall be ashamed of their might; 
namely, to see all the might of the Chaldean empire 
so soon laid low. This seems to be spoken of the 
nations in alliance with, or who were friends to, the 
‘Chaldeans. Others, by their might, understand the 
might and power of God’s people, ‘whom no force 
will be able to withstand: see chap. v. 8. They 
shall lay their hand upon their mouth—The evident 
tokens of God’s presence with his people shall strike 
their adversaries with astonishment. Their ears 
shail be deaf—They shall be so struck with surprise, 


as not to hear what is said to them: or, they shall | 
( 


Vou. UI, 


wherein God tells him that | 


hardly believe their own ears, when they hear of 
those wonderful works which God will work for his 
servants. 

Verse 17. They shall lick the dust like a serpent— 
They shall fall to the earth through fear, and carry 
themselves very humbly and submissively toward. 
God’s people. They shall move out of their holes 
like worms—They shall be afraid to stir out of their 
lurking-holes ; and if they creep out like worms, 
they shall presently hide their heads again. They 
shall be afraid of the Lord our God—Overthrowing 
the Babylonish empire by Cyrus. Thisisexpressed 
Isa. xlv. 1, by loosing the loins of kings. And fear 
because of thee—When they shall see Almighty God 
appear so conspicuously in thy favour. The text is 
parallel to that of Jeremiah, chap. xxxiii.9, They 
shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and the 
prosperity that I procure unto it; that is, unto Je- 
rusalem. Or, if the prophet be considered as ad 
dressing God, the meaning is, When they under- 
stand that it was long before denounced by the pro- 
phets that destruction should come upon them, and 
thy people be delivered, and they see all things tend 
ing to bring this to pass, then shall they begin to be 
afraid of thy power. 

Verses 18,19. Who is a God like unto thee—That 
is, there is no God like unto thee ; that passeth by the 
transgression of the remnant, &c.—That pardons 
the offences of the remainder of his people, namely, 
of those that shall survive the various punishments 
and destructions brought upon their forefathers for 
their sins. He retaineth not his anger for ever— 
Though in his just displeasure he suffered their ene- 
mies to destroy their city, and lay their country 
desolate, and sent them into captivity ; yet will he 
restore them again, and raise them to a state of great 
prosperity. He will chastise, but not consume his 
remnant. Because he delighteth in mercy—Because 
it is his nature to delight in pardoning the penitent, 
and communicating blessings; whereas to punish, 
or inflict evil, is contrary to it. He will turn again, 
he will have compassion—Or, he will again have 
compassion upon us. He will subdue our iniquities 
—He will deliver us not only from the guilt, but also 
from the power of them, so that they shall not have 


¢ 3 


God’s faithfulness 


MICAH. 


to his promises. 


A M- me and thou wilt cast all their sins into 
———— the depths of the sea. 
20 ! Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, 


1 Luke i, 72, 73. 


dominion over us. Thou wilt utterly destroy them, 
as thou didst destroy Pharaoh and his army in the 
Red sea: a victory this, which can only be obtained 
by the merits of Christ, and the grace of the gospel. 
And therefore the remnant, here spoken of, to which 
God will show such mercy, seems to be chiefly those 
Jews which should be reserved to be made partakers 
of the benefits which should be conferred on that 
nation, upon their conversion to Christianity. Then 
especially shall God make manifest his mercy to- 
ward them, in pardoning all their former stubborn- 
ness and disobedience, and receiving them into his 
favour as formerly; and that in a degree greater 
than was ever experienced in the preceding ages of 
their church. 

Verse 20. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob— 
Thou wilt perform to his posterity what thou didst 

978 


and the mercy to Abraham, ™ which A. M. 9294 
thou hast sworn unto our fathers ———— 


from the days of old. 
m Psalm cy. 9, 10. 


promise to Jacob. And the mercy to Abraham—As 
the promises given to Abraham were made to him 
and to his seed after him, so the Scriptures speak 
of the blessings bestowed upon his children, as if 
they were actually made good to him their progeni- 
tor. Among the promises made to Abraham and 
the other patriarchs, one important one was, that 
their seed should possess the land of Canaan. This 
promise, with those of a spiritual nature, will receive 
its final accomplishment in the conversion and re- 
storation of the Jewish nation in the latter times, 
That people are said to be beloved for their fathers’ 
sakes, Rom. xi. 28; and therefore we have reason to 
expect, that the mercies promised to their fathers 
will be made good to them, in God’s due time ; for 
the gifts and callings of God are without repent- 
ance, Rom, xi. 29. ; 
( 62 ) 3 


THE 


BOOK OF NAHUM. 


ARGUMENT. 


Nanum was a native of Elkoshai, or Elkosh, a little village of Galilee, the ruins of which remained 
in the time of St. Jerome. - It appears, from chap. ii. 2, that he prophesied after the captivity of the 
ten tribes, which took place in the ninth year of Hezekiah, and after the war of Sennacherib in 
Egypt, because he speaks of the taking of No-ammon in that country as of an event past, chap. 
ili. 8. But it is probable that the first chapter at least of this prophecy was delivered before the 
invasion of Judah by Sennacherib, as in the latter part of it, namely, from verses 8-15, he seems to 
predict that attempt, and the defeat thereof. “And probably,” says Henry, “it was delivered a 
little before it, for the encouragement of God’s people in thattime of treading down and perplexity.” 
The other two chapters are thought by some to have been delivered some years after, perhaps in 
the reign of Manasseh; in which reign the Jewish chronologers generally place this prophet, 
somewhat nearer the time when Nineveh was conquered. He must have prophesied, however, 
before the captivity of the two tribes, as he supposes them to be still in their own country, and there 
celebrating their festivals as usual. 

The subject of this prophecy is, the destruction of Nineveh, and the overthrow of the Assyrian 
empire, which Nahum describes in a manner so pathetic and picturesque, and yet so plain, 
as is not to be exceeded by the greatest masters of oratory. And all his predictions were exactly 
verified in the siege and taking of that city, by Nabopolassar and Astyages, in the year of the 
world 3378, about 100 years after they were uttered. ‘ The conduct and imagery of this prophet- 
ical poem,” says Archbishop Newcome, “are truly admirable. The exordium grandly sets forth 
the justice and power of God, tempered by lenity and goodness, chap. i. 2-8. A sudden address 
to the Assyrians follows; and a prediction of their perplexity and overthrow, as devisers of evil 
against the true God, verses 9-11. Jehovah himself then proclaims freedom to his people from 
the Assyrian yoke, and the destruction of the Assyrian idols ; upon which the prophet, in a most 
lively manner, turns the attention of Judah to the approach of the messenger who brings such glad 
tidings; and bids her celebrate her festivals, and offer her thank-offerings, without fear of so 

werful an adversary, verses 12-15. In the next place, Nineveh is called on to prepare for the 
approach of her enemies, as instruments in the hand of Jehovah ; and the military array and mus- 
ter of the Medes and Babylonians, their rapid approach to the city, the process of the siege, the 
capture of the place, the captivity, lamentation, and flight of the inhabitants, the sacking of the 
wealthy city, and the consequent desolation and terror, are described in the true spirit of eastern 
poetry, and with many pathetic, vivid, and sublime images, chap. ii. 1-10. A grand and animated 
allegory succeeds this description, and is explained and applied to the city of Nineveh, verses 
11-13. The prophet then denounces a wo against Nineveh for her perfidy and violence; and 
strongly places before our eyes the number of her chariots and cavalry, her burnished arms, and 
the great and unrelenting slaughter which she spread around her, assigning her idolatries as one 
cause of her ignominious and unpitied fall, chap. iii. 1-7.” ‘To overthrow her false confidence 
in her forces and alliances, he reminds her of the destruction of No-ammon, her rival in populous- 
ness, confederacies, and situation, which had shared a fate like that which awaited her ; beautifully 
illustrating the ease with which her strong holds should be taken, and her pusillanimity during the 
siege, verses 8-13. “He pronounces that all her preparations, her numbers, her opulence, her 
multitude of chief men, would be of no avail, and that her tributaries would all desert her, verses 
14-18. He concludes with a proper epiphonema; the topics of which are, the greatness and in- 
curableness of her wound, and the just triumph of others. over her, on account of her extensive 
oppressions, verse 19.” ‘To sum up all with the decisive judgment of an eminent critic : “ None 
of the minor prophets seem to equal Nahum, in boldness, ardour, and sublimity. His prophecy 
too forms a regular and perfect poem; the exordium is not merely magnificent, it is truly majestic ; 
the preparation for the destruction of Nineveh, and the description of its downfall and desolation, 
are expressed in the most glowing colours, and are bold and luminous in the highest degree. 
Prel. Hebr. xxi. p. 282. 

3 979 


. 


Description of 


NAHUM.: 


the glory of God, 


CHAPTER I. 


We have here, (1,) The inscription of the book, 1. 


(2,) A magnificent description of the glory of God, in his just wrath 
against his enemies, and merciful kindness lo his people, and of lis majesty and power in both, 2-8. 


(3,) A particular 


application of this to the destruction of Sennacherib's army, 9-15. 


A. M, 3284. rPHE burden *of Nineveh. The 
Resi be book of the vision of Nahum the 
Elkoshite. 


2 1God is "jealous, and ° the Lorp reven- 
geth ; the Lorp revengeth, and ?is furious ; 
the Lorn will take vengeance on his adversa- 
rtes, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies. 

3 The Lorp is “ slow to anger, and ° great in 
power, and will not at all acquit the wicked : 
fthe Lorp hath his way in the whirlwind and 

in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his 
feet. 


Ss 


4 & He rebuketh the sea, and maketh A. M, 3284. 
: f : . C. 720. 
it dry, and drieth up all the rivers: 

4 Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the 
flower of Lebanon languisheth. 

5 i The mountains quake at him, and *the | 
hills melt, and ! the earth is burned at his pre- 
sence, yea, the world, and all that dwell 
therein. 

6 Who can stand before his indignation ? 
and ™ who can ‘abide in the fierceness of his 
anger ? “his fury is poured out like fire, and 
the rocks are thrown down by him. 


a Zeph. ii. 13——! Or, The LORD is a jealous God, and a 
revenger, &c:——> Exod. xx. 5; xxxiv.14; Deut. iv. 24; Josh. 
xxiv. 19. ¢ Deut. xxxii. 35; Psalm xciv.1; I[saiah lix. 18. 
2 Heb, that hath fury. 4 Exod. xxxiv. 6,7; Neh. ix.17; Psa. 
ciii. 8; Jonah iv. 2. 
\ 


e Job ix. 4. — Psalm xviii. 7, &c.; xevii. 2; Hab. iii. 5, 
11, 12.——s Psalm evi. 9; Isa. 1.2; Matt. viii. 26——" Isaiah 
Xxxili. 9.——! Psalm Ixviii. 8 Judg. v. 5; Psalm xevii. 5; 
Micah i. 4. 12 Pet. iii. 10.——m Mal. iii, 2——* Heb. stand 
up. 2 Rey. xvi. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. T'he burden of Nineveh—Of Nineveh, 
see note on Jonah iii.3. When the prophets were 
sent to denounce judgments against a nation, or 
city, their message, or prophecy, was usually called 
the burden of that people, or place: see note on Isa. 
xiii. 1. The book of the vision—As_ prophets were 
of old called seers, so their prophecies were called 
visions: of Nahum—Nahum, according to St. Je- 


rome, signifies a comforter: for the ten tribes being | 


carried away by the king of Assyria, this vision was 
to comfort them in their captivity: nor was it less a 
consolation to the other two tribes, who remained in 
the land, and had been besieged by the same ene- 
mies, to hear that these conquerors would in time be 
conquered themselves, their city taken, and their 
empire overthrown.—Bishop Newton. 

Verses 2, 3. God is jealous—For his own glory; 
and the Lord revengeth—Or rather, avengeth, 
namely, the cause, or ill treatment, of his people, as 
being the Supreme Governor, who, by office, is 
bound to deliver the oppressed, and punish the op- 
pressor: he also vindicates his own insulted honour. 
And is furious—Or rather, is angry. In the He- 
brew it is literally, And is the Lord of anger, or 
wrath ; that is, can easily give effect to his anger, or 
execute what it prompts him to. It would be well 
if the epithet furious were for ever banished from 
the sacred writings; and, indeed, from all others, 
when speaking of God. He reserveth wrath for his 
enemies—There is nothing in the Hebrew to answer 
the word wrath ; itis only, He reserveth for his ene- 
mies. Some supply the word punishment ; He has 
punishment in store to execute upon his enemies, 
when he pleaseth. T'he Lord is slow to anger, and 
great [rather, although he be great] in power, and 
Lor, but] will not at all acquit the wicked—The 

980 


sense of the clause seems to be, that although God 
defers punishment, yet he has it in his power to in- 
flict it at all times; and though it be long delayed, 
yet it will, in the end, overtake the wicked, unless 
the long-suffering of God lead them to repentance. 
The Lord hath his way—The method of his provi- 
dence; in the whirlwind—Which often riseth sud 
denly, and beareth before it all things that stand in 
its way. Thus God’s judgments often come unex 
pectedly, and are irresistible, and most terribly de- 
structive. And the clouds are the dust of his feet— 
He makes the clouds his chariot, and employs them 
to whatever purpose he pleases. This and the two 
following verses are a very noble and majestic de- 
scription of the power of the Almighty. 

Verses 4-6. He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it 
dry—The rivers and the sea itself are dried up at his 
rebuke, as the Red sea and Jordan were of old; and 
the most pleasant and fruitful countries, such as Ba- 
shan, Carmel, and Lebanon, are parched up with 
drought when he is displeased. The mountains 
quake at hin—See notes on Psa. exiv. 3-8. And 
the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world 
—The brightness of his presence is sufficient to set 
the whole world on fire, with all that is in it.. This 
is, indeed, a most magnificent description of the om- 
nipotence of God. He walketh, or rideth, amidst 
the whirlwind, or in the storm; the clouds are but 
the dust of his feet ; the sea is dried up at his word , 
the mountains are moved, and tremble at his pre- 
sence; and the whole earth is consumed with the 
brightness that is before him. Who can stand be- 
Sore his indignation ?—Who, or what people, how- 
ever strong they may think themselves, can with- 
stand the effects of his power when he is angry with 
them, and is determined to execute his wrath upon 
them? His fury—Rather, his cir, 


Destruction of Sennacherib’s 


CHAPTER I. 


army foretold. 


A. M. 3284. 7 ° The Lorp 


; > 4 
7 is good, a *strong 


hold in the day of trouble ; and he 
knoweth them that trust in him. 

8 But with an overrunning flood he will 
make an utter end of the place thereof, and 
darkness shall pursue his enemies. 

9 * What do ye imagine against the Lorn? 
*he will make an utter end: affliction shall not 
rise up the second time. 


10 For while they be folden toge- A. M. 3284. 
ther ‘ as thorns, * and while they are ft nd 
drunken as drunkards, * they shall be devoured 
as stubble fully dry. 

11 There is one come out of thee, ¥ that ima- 
gineth evil against the Lorn, a wicked coun- 
sellor. 

12 Thus saith the Lorp; ® Though ¢hey be 
quiet, and likewise many, yet thus * shall they 


°1 Chron. xvi. 34; Psa. c. 5; Jer. xxxiii. 11; Lam. iii. 25. 
* Or, strength——P Psa. i. 6; 2'Tim. ii. 19.——4 Dan. ix. 26; 
xi. 10, 21, 40.—- Psa. ii. , eae Sam. iii. 12——t 2 Sam. 


xxiii. 6, Fst Chap. iii. 11. x Mal. iv. 1. 


¥ 2 Kings xix. 22, 23. 5 Heb. a counsellor of Belial. 6 Or, 
If they would have been at peace, so should they have been 
many, and so should they have been shorn, and he should hate 
passed away. 2 2 Kings xix. 35, 37. “ 


ardour of his anger; is poured out like fire, &c.—Is 
as consuming in its effects as fire. And the rocks are 
thrown down by him--That is, as fire is of sufficient 
force to dissolve the hardest rocks, so God’s power 
overthrows all opposition, however strong ; and his 
vengeance, with infinite ease, can humble the most 
obdurate sinners. 

Verse 7. The Lord is good—But thoven God is 
thus terrible in his power, yet he is merciful, gra- 
cious, and beneficent in his nature, and is a sure re- 
fuge and protection to those who worship and serve 
him sincerely, and put their trust in him; and he 
knows and pays a particular regard to all such, so 
that they are never overlooked or neglected by him; 
he approves, owns, and preserves them. 

Verse 8. With an overrunning flood he will make 
an ulter end—This seems to be spoken of Nineveh, 
and Bishop Newton is of opinion that the words 
allude to the manner in which it was taken. “ Dio- 
dorus informs us,” says he, “that there was an old 
prophecy, that Nineveh should not be taken till the 
river became an enemy to the city; and in the third 
year of the siege, the river, being swollen with con- 
tinual rains, overflowed part of the city, and broke 
down the wall for twenty furlongs; then the king, 
thinking that the oracle was fulfilled, and the river 
become an enemy to the city, built a large funeral 
pile in the palace, and, collecting together all his 
wealth, and his concubines and eunuchs, burned him- 
self and the palace with them all; and the enemy 
entered the breach that the waters had made, and 
took the city.” Or, as a great destruction, or an army 
overrunning a country, is often compared to an in- 
undation, the meaning of the passage may only be, 
that God’s judgments, like a mighty flood, which 
overflows all banks, should overwhelm and swallow 
up both Nineveh and the whole Assyrian empire. 
And darkness shall pursue his enemies—That is, 
troubles and destructive calamities. 

Verses 9,10. What do ye imagine against the 
Lord?—Having declared the dreadfulness of God’s 
power and anger against the wicked, his goodness 
toward his people, and denounced future destruction 
against the Ninevites; he now expostulates with 
them, inquiring what it is they design against God, 
and on what ground they flatter themselves into 
such an attempt: as if he had said, What a foolish 
and wicked thing it is for you to plot against Jeho- 

3 


vah, as if you could outwit infinite wisdom, and over- 
come almighty power. 
—He will cause your utter desolation to be the issue 
of your projects, and the punishment of your sins. 
Affliction shall not rise wp the second time—God 
will at once, and for ever, destroy your city and 
empire. He will lay you low at one stroke, so that 
there will be no occasion to repeat it. For while 
they be folden together as thorns—Or, For as thorns 
folden or entangled together are thrown into the fire 
all at once, and easily burned, yea, help to destroy 
each other; so shall the Ninevites be easily and 
surely destroyed. And while they are drunken as 
drunkards—As men drunken and unable to help 
themselyes; who, when any sudden danger arises, 
are all involved in the same fate. They shall be de- 
voured as stubble fully dry—Which soon catches 
fire, and breaks out into a flame. The meaning of 
the whole verse is, that on a sudden they should be 
involved in a general destruction. Diodorus relates, 
it was while all the Assyrian army were feasting for 
their former victories, that their enemies, being in- 
formed by some deserters of the negligence and 
drunkenness in their camp, “assaulted them unex- 
pectedly by night, and falling orderly on them dis- 
orderly, and prepared on them unprepared, became 
masters of the camp, slew many of the soldiers, and 
drove the rest into the city.” 

Verses 11-13. There is one come out of thee—Or, 
one hath gone forth of thee. This is probably meant 
of Sennacherib, who uttered so many reproaches 
and blasphemies against the true God, one of whose 
royal seats was Nineveh, and who probably went 
forth from thence to invade Judea. But the term, a 
wicked counsellor, seems to be intended of Rabsha- 
keh, whom Sennacherib sent against Jerusalem, 
while. he himself warred against Lachish, and who 
uttered those blasphemous speeches against God, of 
which we have an account 2 Kings xviii.19. Though 
they be quiet—Though the Assyrians be secure, and 
fear no danger. And likewise many—An immense 
host; yet shall they be cut down—Irresistibly, sud- 
denly, and universally ; when he shall pass through 
—When the angel of the Lord shall pass through 
their camp, in which he slew in one night 185,000 
men: see Isa. xxxvii. 36. T'hough I have afflicted 
thee—O Israel, I will afflict thee no more—I will no 
more chastise thee by the Assyrian, the rod of mine 

981 


He will make an utter end . 


* 


God proclaims deliverance 


NAHUM. 


to his people. 


soy, ek be ‘cut down, when he shall * pass 
——— through. Though I have afflicted 
thee, I will afflict thee no more. 

13 For now will I» break his yoke from off 
thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder. 

14 And the Lorp hath given a command- 
ment concerning thee, that no more of thy 


name be sown: out of the house of thy gods 


will I cut off the graven image and A. M. 3284. 
the molten image: ° I will make thy scsi 
grave; for thou art vile. 

15 Behold “upon the mountains the feet of 
him that bringeth good tidings, that publish- 
eth peace! O Judah, * keep thy solemn feasts, 
perform thy vows: for ® the * wicked shall no 


more pass through thee: ‘he is utterly cut off. 


7 Heb. shorn.—— Isaiah viii. 8; Dan. xi. 10.——> Jer. ii. 20; 
xxx. 8, ¢ 2 Kings xix. 37. 


anger, by Sennacherib or his forces. For now I 
will break his yoke from off thee—Hezekiah and his 
people shall no longer be tributaries to the king of 
Assyria, as they have been for a considerable time: 
see 2 Kings xviii. 14.. The words may also be con- 
sidered as promising relief to the Israelites of the 
ten tribes, who were jn a state of actual captivity 
among them at this time. 

Verse 14. And the Lord hath given a command- 
ment—God hath determined, concerning thee, that 
» no more of thy name be sown—The meaning of this 
seems to be, God had decreed that Sennacherib’s 
family should not long preserve their royal dignity. 
His son and successor, Esar-haddon, was now proba- 
bly at man’s estate, for he succeeded his father in a 
little time after his defeat, (2 Kings xix. 37,) and 
reigned with great prosperity for many years. But 
his next successor, or the next but one, was dispos- 
sessed of his kingdom by Nabopolassar, father to 
Nebuchadnezzar, whose family enjoyed the empire 
of Assyria, or Babylon, as it came then to be called, 
till the conquest of it by Cyrus. Out of the house 
of thy gods will I cut off the graven image, &c.— 
All the images which thou worshippest will I destroy. 
The army of the enemy shall lay all waste, and not 
spare even the images of thy gods. J will make thy 
grave, &c.—The sense must be supplied from the 
former sentence: as if he had said, The house of 
thine idol shall become thy grave. There Senna- 
cherib was dishonourably slain by his own sons, and 
there, some suppose, he was buried. For thou art 
vile—Held in no esteem, not even by thine own off- 
spring, but disgracefully murdered by them, as 
having lost all interest even in their natural affection. 
Or the words may be interpreted of the ignominious 
fall of the Assyrian monarchy itself, upon the ruins 


4Jsaiah lii. 7; Rom. x. 15.——® Heb. feast.m—® Heb. Belial. 
€ Verses 11, 12.—— Verse 14. 


of which that of Babylon was raised. Observe, reader, 
those that make themselves vile by scandalous sins, 
God will make vile by shameful punishments. 

Verse 15. Behold upon the mountains—Which 
surrounded Jerusalem; the feet of him—Of the mes- 
senger; that bringeth good tidings—Tidings that 
Nineveh is destroyed; that publisheth peace-—De- 
liverance from the tyranny and oppression of the 
Assyrians, through the destruction of their capital 
city, and the overthrow of their empire; or safety 
and prosperity to the Jews, which the word peace 
often signifies. Compare Isa. lii. 7, where the same 
expressions are used with relation to the destruction 
of Babylon, the overthrow of the Chaldean empire, 
and the release of the Jews, and their restoration to 
their own land. These deliverances being typical 
of the great redemption wrought out for us by the 
Messiah, the words are applied by the apostle (Rom. 
x. 15) to the gospel, which brings us glad tidings of 
that redemption, and of all the spiritual and eternal 
blessings consequent upon it. O Judah, keep thy 
solemn feasts-—-As thou now hast liberty to do, and 
mayest do with joy and gladness, being freed from thy 
fears; and to do which thou art now under peculiar 
obligations, having been so wonderfully delivered 
from the oppressive power of thy enemies; and 
having solemnly vowed to God, when thou wast in 
distress, that thou wouldest worship and serve 
him according to the precepts of his law, if thou 
shouldest be delivered from any further fear of thy 
oppressors. For the wicked shall no more pass 
through thee--The impious Assyrians, who set at 
naught and blasphemed Jehovah, thy God, shall no 
more come against thee. He is utterly cut off—The 
oppressor is taken away, and the Assyrian empire 
| utterly and for ever ruined. 


CHAPTER I. 


Here is foretold, (1,) The approach of the enemy that should destroy Nineveh, and the terror of his military preparations 
1-5. (2,) The taking of the city, the captivity of the queen, the flight of the inhabitants, the seizing of all the wealth of 


at, and the mighty consternation it should be in, 6-10. 
God's appearing against them, 11-18. 
982 


(3,) The true cause of all this, their sinning against God, ana 


2 


« 


The approach of the enemies 


CHAPTER II. 


of Nineveh described. 


A. M, 3294. Ki 'that* dasheth in pieces is 

B. C. 710. 
sneer come up before thy face: » keep 
the munition, watch the way, make ¢hy loins 
strong, fortify chy power mightily. 

2 ° For the Lorn hath turned away ? the ex- 
cellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel : 
for “the emptiers have empted them out, and 
ma-red their vine-branches. 

3 The shield of his mighty men is made 
® red, the valiant men are °in scarlet: the cha- 
riots shall be with * flaming torches in the day 
of his preparation, and the fir-trees shall be 
terribly shaken. 


10r, Lhe disperser, or, hammer. a Jer. 1, 23.——» Jer. li. 
11, 12; Chap. iii. 14——¢ Isaiah x. 12; Jer. xxv. 29.——? Or, 
the pride of Jacob as the pride of Israel. 4 Psalm Ixxx. 12; 
Hosea x. 1. © Isaiah lxiii. 2, 3. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verse 1. He that dasheth in pieces is come up be- 
fore thy face--This is addressed to the city of Nine- 
veh, and explains more fully how the change, de- 
scribed in the foregoing chapter, should be brought 
about. It begins with telling Nineveh, that he who 
should break down her walls, and discomfit her in- 
habitants, was coming against her, and was, as it 
were, already in sight. Keep the munition, watch 
the way--Use thy utmost industry to defend thyself, 
by strengthening thy garrisons, and guarding the 
passes. Make thy loins strong—Stir up all thy 
strength and courage. Fortify thy power mightily 
—Increase thy forces as much as thou canst. The 
meaning of this is, that let the Ninevites take all the 
precautions they could, and strengthen themselves 
to the utmost, yet it would be all in vain. 

Verses 2-4. For the Lord hath turned away the 
excellency of Jacob—Jacob and Israel stood in a 
nearer relation to God than Nineveh; yet God hath 
punished them: much more will he punish Nineveh. 
By the excellency of Jacob, the wealth, the strength, 
the valiant men, all that Jacob gloried in is here 
meant. For the emptiers have emptied them out— 
This is spoken of the Assyrians having spoiled the 
kingdoms of Israel and Judah. And marred their 
vine-branches—Ruined their towns and _ villages. 
Judah, or Israel, sometimes, is represented in the 
prophetic writings under the emblem of a vine, or 
vineyard; of consequence her towns and villages 
are her vine-branches. Some think, however, that 
the expression signifies here, their being bereaved 
of their children by the Assyrian conquerors. The 
shield of his mighty men is made red—Is stained 
with blood; this appears to be a description of the 
Chaldeans, or Medes, assaulting Nineveh. T'he 
valiant men are in scarlet—The eastern people 
were very fond of dressing themselves in scarlet, as 
we learn from Herodotus. Or, “ As the preparation 
for battle is described, we may suppose,” says Bish- 
op Newcome, that “it was customary among those 
who fought against Nineveh to carry red shields and 

3 


4 The chariots shall rage in the 4. M. 3294. 
streets, they shall justle one against pla 
another in the broad ways: * they shall seem 
like torches, they shall run like the light- 
nings. 

5 He shall recount his © worthies: they shail 
stumble in their walk; they shall make haste 
to the wall thereof, and the 7 defence shall be 
prepared. 

6 The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and 
the palace shall be ° dissolved. 

7 And °Huzzab shall be led away captive, 
she shall be brought up, and her maids shall 


3Or, died scarlet. 4 Or, fiery torches. 5 Heb. their show. 
® Or, gallants. 7 Heb. covering, or, coverer. 3 Or, molten. 
*Or, that which was established, or, there was a stand made. 
10 Or, discovered. 


to wear scarlet.” The chariots shall be with flam- 
ing torches—Rather, the chariots shall shine like the 
fire of torches, in the day that they prepare them- 
selves—Namely, by the wheels continually striking 
fire against the stones and pavement by the quick- 
ness of the motion. “And the fir-trees shall be ter- 
ribly shaken—Namely, by the rattling of the chariot 
wheels, in running up and down. Or this may be 
interpreted of the pikes and lances used by the 
Chaldeans, and made of fir, and here called fir-trees 
on account of their length and largeness. The 
chariots shall rage in the streets—They shall drive 
furiously one against another. T'hey shall seem 
like torches, &c.—See on the -preceding verse. 
They runlike the lightnings—Or, with the swiftness 
of lightning. ; 

Verses 5, 6. He—The enemy that attacks Nine- 
veh, namely, the king of Babylon; shall recount his 
worthies--Shall select some of his choicest troops 
for the siege of it. They shall stumble in their 
walk—They shall show such forwardness, and be 
so eager to begin the attack of the city and mount 
the walls, that they shall stumble. and throw one 
another down in their haste. Zhe defence shall be 
prepared--Hebrew, 200, the covering. So the 
Vulgate, preparabitur umbraculum: “Testudo qua 
tecti subruant meenia.”—Grotius. “The testudo, or 
fence, with which being covered, they might under- 
mine and throw down the walls.” The gates of 
the river shall be open—See note on chap. i. 8. 
The palace shall be dissolved--Or, molten ; shall 
be consumed with fire. 

Verse 7. And Huzzab shall be led away captive 
—By Huzzab the Chaldee understands the queen, 
who, without due respect to her royal dignity, should 
be hurried away, among other captives, into astrange 
land; and exposed, as they, to danger and insolence. 
And her maids—The ladies that waited on her in 
her state of royalty, shall now be her companions in 
her captivity; shall lead her—Shall support their 
sorrowful, weary, and fainting queen, spent with 
such travel as she had not been used to; with the 

983 


The capture and 


NAHUM. 


ruin of Nineveh. 


A.M. 3294. lead her as with the voice of ‘doves, 

B. C. 710. y ; 

—_———_ tabering upon their breasts. 

8 But Nineveh zs ™ of old like a pool of wa- 
ter: yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, 
shall they cry ; but none shall ! look back. 

9 Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil 
of gold: ' for there is none end of the store 
and glory out of all the ™ pleasant furniture. 

10 She is empty, and void, and waste: and 
the *heart melteth, and "the knees smite to- 
gether, ‘and much pain is in all loins, and 
* the faces of them all gather blackness. 

11 Where ts the dwelling of ! the lions, and 


f Tsa. xxxvili. 14; lix. 11. 
been. 
store, &c. 


11 Or, from the days that she hath 
12. Or, cause them to turn. 13 Qr, and their infinite 
14 Heb. vessels of desire. £ Isa. xiii. 7, 8. 


the feeding-place of the young lions, rosy 
where the lion, even the old lion, ~— 
walked, and the lion’s whelp, and none made 
them afraid ? 

12 The lion did tear in pieces enough for his 
whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled 
his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. 

13 ™Behold, I am against thee, saith the 
Lorp of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in 
the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy 
young lions: and I will cut off thy prey from 
the earth, and the voice of ™thy messengers 
shall no more be heard. 


h Dan. v. 6. i Jer. xxx. 9. Joel ii. 6——! Job iv. 10, 
11; Ezek. xix, 2-7. m Bzek, xxix. 3; xxxvili. 3; xxxix. 1; 
Chap. iii. 5. 12 Kings xviii. 17, 19; xix. 9, 23. 


voice of doves, tabering, &c.—Mourning like doves, 
and beating their breasts, instead of musical instru- 
ments. But, asthe word Huzzab signifies a strong, 
or impregnable fortress, some understand thereby 
Nineveh itself. If this be the meaning of the term, 
Nineveh is here figuratively represented as a great 
princess carried captive, with her maids of honour 
attending her, and bewailing hers and their own con- 
dition, with every sign and expression of lamenta- 
tion: whereby was denoted, that the lesser cities 
under her jurisdiction should be sharers with her in 
her calamity. Thus Babylon is represented by 
Isaiah as a tender and delicate lady, undergoing the 
hardships of a captivity, chap. xlvii. 1-8. 

Verse 8. But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water 
—“Td est, supra modum populosa, nam aque popu- 
li.” That is, above measure populous, for waters 
signify people.—Grotius. Yet they shall flee away 
—But they shall all flee for fear of the enemy, and 
run away like water: compare Psa. lvili. 7. Stand, 
stand, shall they cry, but none shall look back— 
Their commanders shall call out to them to stand, 
but none shall pay any regard to them, or cease to 
flee. The Hebrew is peculiarly animated, and highly 
poetical. It is literally, Nineveh ts as a pool of wa- 
ter: waters is she, and they run away: Stand, 
stand, but none looketh back. As if he had said, 
Their commanders might as easily stop the flowing 
waters by bidding them stand, as cause the Ninevites 
to stand to their arms and resist the enemy. The 
words allude to what was foretold chap. i. 8, where 
see the note, 

Verses 9,10. Take ye the spoil of silver, of gold 
—Here the Babylonians are addressed as if they 
had just entered the city; and are bid to take the 
spoil of it, there being none to make any resistance. 
We read in Diodorus, that Arbaces carried many 
talents of gold and silver to Ecbatana, the royal city 
of the Medes. for there is none end of the store, &¢. 

984 


—The Vulgate reads, There is no end of the riches, 
from all the desirable vessels. The sense of the 
Hebrew, however, is, The glory (namely, of their 
riches) is above all precious vessels; that is, be- 
yond all that is generally esteemed precious, and 
greatly coveted. Sheis empty, and void, and waste 
—She is spoiled of every thing. And the heart 
melteth——The inhabitants have no heart, or courage, 
to defend themselves, but leave the city to be plun- 
dered and laid waste by the enemy. The knees 
smite together—They are quite overcome with fear, 

Verses 11-13. Where is the dwelling of the lions 
—Where is the lion-like courage and strength, 
which formerly characterized the king of Nineveh 


;and his people? What is become of the stately pa- 


laces of the king and princes of Nineveh? who, like 
so many lions, cruel, violent, and irresistible, knew 
no other law than their pride and ambition; prey- 
ing upon their own people, and the neighbouring 
countries, and filling their houses with the spoils 
they took from them, as the lions fill their dens with 
their prey. J will burn her chariots in the smoke— 
Or, even unto smoke. The LXX. read, wae exxavow 
ev karva TAndo¢ cov, I will burn thy multitude in the 
smoke. Some again render the clause, J will burn 
thy seat, or thy habitation, observing, that the simile 
taken from lions is continued; and therefore that the 
word chariots is quite improper here; the expres- 
sion referring to the den or habitation of lions, which 
he threatens to suffocate with fire and smoke in their 
subterraneous caverns. The sword shall devour thy 
young lions—Shall destroy thy young people, and 
the most vigorous of thy soldiers. J will cut off thy 
prey from the earth—I will prevent thy spoiling any 
country any more. And the voice of thy messen- 
gers shall no more be heard—Thou shalt no more 
send ambassadors with thy orders to distant coun- 
tries, either to encourage thine allies or to terrify 
thine enemies. - 


The sins of Nineveh, and 


CHAPTER III. 


judgments pursuing them. 


CHAPTER IIL 
Here we have, (1,) The sins of Nineveh, and judgments pursuing them, 1-7. (2,) Instances of similar judgments for the 
hike sins, 8-11. (3,) The overthrow of all those things wherein they trusted, 12-19. 


A. M. 3294. O to the 


a “ peeks 
B.C 710. bloody * city! it is all 


full of lies and robbery; the 
prey departeth not ; 

2 The noise of a whip, and the noise of the 
rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing 
horses, and of the jumping chariots. 

3 The horseman lifteth up both *the bright 
sword, and the glittering spear: and there is a 
multitude of slain, and a great number of car- 
casses ; and there is none end of their corpses; 
they stumble upon their corpses : 

4 Because of the multitude of the whore- 
doms of the well-favoured harlot, ° the mis- 
tress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations 
through her whoredoms, and families through 
her witchcrafts. 


5 * Behold, I am against thee, saith A, M. 3294, 
the Lorp of hosts; and °I will dis- pal 
cover thy skirts upon thy face, fand I will : 
show the nations thy nakedness, and the king- 
doms thy shame. 

6 And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, 
and & make thee vile, and will set thee as *a 
gazing-stock.  * 

7 And it shall come to pass, thaé all they 
that look upon thee ‘shall flee from thee, and 
say, Nineveh is laid waste: * who will bemoan 
her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee ? 

8! Art thou better than *° populous* ™ No, 
that was situate among the rivers, that had 
the waters round about it, whose rampart was 
the sea, and her wall was from the sea ? 


1 Heb. city of bloods ——* Ezek. xxii. 2,3; xxiv. 6,9; Hab. 
ii. 12,—— Jer. xlvii. 3. 2 Heb. the flame of the sword and 
the lightning of the spear. ¢Jsa, xlvii. 9,12; Rev. xviii. 2, 3. 
4 Chap. ii. 12. f 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IIT. 

Verse 1. Wo lo the bloody city—Here God shows 
the cause of his bringing destruction on Nineveh, 
and overthrowing the Assyrian empire. And first, 
it is declared, that Nineveh was a city in which acts 
of cruelty abounded, and innocent blood was fre- 
quently shed; that it was also full of deceit, false- 
hood, and rapine ; unjustly and continually increas- 
ing its riches by the plunder of the neighbouring 
countries, which had done them no injury. 

Verses 2, 3. The noise of a whip, &c—These 
verses are highly poetical; the prophet tells them, 
that he already hears the sound of the whips driving 
on the horses, and the rattling of the chariot wheels, 
&c., of their enemies coming against them. The 
horseman lifteth up both the bright sword, &e.—In 
the Hebrew it is, Z"he horseman lifteth up the flame 
of the sword, and the lightning of the spear, which 
is more poetical than our rendering. 'The style of 
the whole passage is extremely fine; scarce any thing 
can be more picturesque, or strongly descriptive of 
‘a victorious army. 

Verse 4. Because of the multitude, &c.—That is, 
this judgment is executed upon Nineveh because of 
the multitude of her whoredoms, by which idolatrous 
rites seem to be meant, for they are generally called 
whoredoms in the Scripture. Nineveh is called a 
well-favoured harlot, because, by her example and 
influence, she drew in other places to practise the 
same idolatries and other vices of which she was 
guilty. That selleth nations through her whore- 
doms—That makes whole nations a prey to their 
enemies, by encouraging them to worship idols, and 
thereby exposing themselves to the wrath of God: 
or by teaching them the arts of softness and effemi- 

3 


e Isa. xlvii. 2,3; Jer. xiii. 22,26; Ezek. xvi. 37; Mic. i. 11. 
f Hab. ii. 16.——s Mal. ii. 9. h Heb. x. 33. i Rev. xviii. 10. 
k Jer. xv. 5.——! Amos vi. 2. 3 Or, nourishing. 4 Heb, No- 
amon. m Jer. xlvi. 25, 26; Ezek. xxx. 14-16. 


nacy, and so rendering them weak and defenceless. 
As the violence and injustice of the Ninevites had 
been represented under the emblem of a lion, the 
prophet here paints their irregularities, their idola- 
try, and corruption, under the idea-of a prostitute 
enticing men to commit lewdness. 

Verses 5-7. Behold, I will discover thy skirts, 
§c., wpon thy face—Nineveh, as a harlot, had been 
proud, and appeared beautiful and gay in the gifts of 
her lovers, but now God would deal with her accord- 
ing to her ways, would send her into captivity naked 
and bare, exposed to the greatest infamy, or would 
deal with her as inhuman soldiers deal with captive 
women. And I will show, &e.—I will expose thy 
shame to the world, a punishment often inflicted 
upon harlots: see note on Ezek. xvi. 37. J will cast 
abominable filth wpon thee—I will deprive thee of 
all thine ornaments, and cover thee with shame and 
reproach. And will set thee as a gazing-stock—I 
will make a public example of thee. All they that 
look upon thee shall flee from thee—As being affright- 
ed at the sight of thy dismal condition, and not will- 
ing to lend thee any assistance. Who will bemoan 
her? &c.—Thou didst so offend all people in thy 
prosperity, that all will rejoice at thy fall, and none 
will be found to lament or condole with thee. 

Verses 8-10. Art thow better than populous No— 
Art thou in a better or safer condition; or hast thou 
more merit than the famous populous city of No? 
The Hebrew reads, No-ammon, the same city which 
is spoken of Jer. xlvi. 25; and Ezek. xxx. 15; where 
see the notes; and where our version reads, the 
multitude of No, as here, populous No, Itis thought 
by some, that the place took its rise from Ham, by 
whose posterity Egypt was peopled, (thence called 

985 


The siege of Nineveh, and 


NAHUM. 


the preparations for tt. 


A. M, 3294. 9 Hthiopia and Egypt were her 
B. C. 710. : LHR? 
———— strength, and 2 was infinite; Put 


and Lubim were *thy helpers. 

10 Yet was she carried away, she went into 
captivity: "her young children also were dash- 
ed in pieces ° at the top of all the streets: and 
they ? cast lots for her honourable men, and all 
her great men were bound in chains. 

11 Thou also shalt be 4 drunken: thou shalt 


be hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of 
the enemy. 

12 All thy strong holds shall be like * fig-trees 
with the first ripe figs: if they be shaken, they 
shall even fall into the mouth of the eater. 

13 Behold, *thy people in the midst of thee 
are women: the gates of thy land shall be set 


wide open unto thine enemies: the A. M. 3294. 
fire shall devour thy * bars. Tcl al 

14 Draw thee waters for the siege, “fortify 
thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the 
mortar, make strong the brick-kiln. 

15 There shall the fire devour thee ; the sword 
shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like * the 
canker-worm: make thyself many as the can- 
ker-worm, make thyself many as the locusts. 

16 Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above 
the stars of heaven: the canker-worm ®spoil- 
eth, and flieth away. 

17 » Thy crowned are as the locusts, and 
thy captains as the great grasshoppers, which 
camp: in the hedges in the cold day, but 
when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their 


5 Heb, in thy help. n Psa, exxxvii. 9; Isa. xiii. 16; Hosea 
xiii. 16—° Lam. ii. 19.——P Joel iii. 3; Obad. 11.——4 Jer. 
xxv. 17,27; Chap. i. 10. 


the land of Ham, Psa. evi. 22,) and who was wor- 
shipped under the name of Jupiter-ammon. Ac- 
cordingly the LXX. render it Diospolis, that is, the 
city of Jupiter. That-.was situate among the 
rivers—Which was defended by the river Nile on 
the one side, and the Red sea on the other, as by so 
many walls and ramparts. Ethiopia and Egypt 
were her strength—Their forces defended this city. 
And it was infinite—Houbigant renders the verse, 
The Ethiopians and Egyptians, who are innumer- 
able, were her strength; the Africans and Libyans 
were her helpers.. Yet was she carried away—Itis 
evident that Nahum does not here foretel the destruc- 
tion of No-ammon as an event yet to come, but 
speaks of it as a transaction past, although but late- 
ly. It therefore cannot be attributed to Nebuchad- 
nezzar, for that would suppose it to have happened 
after the destruction of Nineveh, instead of before it. 
Dr. Prideaux, with more reason, believes that it was 
effected by Sennacherib, about three years before he 
besieged Jerusalem, in the time of Hezekiah. At 
that time Sevechus, the son of Sabaccon, or So, 
mentioned 2 Kings xvii. 4, was king both of Egypt 
and Ethiopia; so they are mentioned here as con- 
federates, and Isaiah foretels that they should be 
vanquished by Sargon, or Sennacherib. They cast 
lots for her honourable men—Conquerors used to 
east lots what captives should come to each man’s 
share: see note on Obad, 11. 

Verses 11-13. T'how also shalt be drunken—Thou 
shalt drink deep of the bitter cup of God’s displea- 
sure. Thou shalt be hid, &¢e—Thou shalt not dare 
toappear in the open field. T'hou shalt seek strength 
because of the enemy—Thou shalt retire into thy 
strong holds, or fortified places, for fear of the ene- 
my. All thy strong holds shall be like fig-trees— 
As figs when quite ripe drop off from the trees by 


the least shaking, so shall thy strong holds fall into 
the enemies’ hands upon the first assault. The gates | 


* Rev. vi. 13.—= Jer. 1. 37; li. 30.— Psa, exlvii. 13; Jer 
li. 30. « Chap. ii. 1.——* Joel i. 4.—* Or, spreadeth himself. 
¥ Rev. aS ae 


passages, by which the enemy may invade thee, 
shall be open to them, either through fear or trea- 
chery, or shall be easily forced. The fire shall de- 
vour thy bars—With which the gates were shut and 
strengthened. 

Verses 14,15. Draw thee waters for the siege—Fill 
all thy cisterns, and draw the waters into the ditches. 
Go into the clay, &c.—Set thy brickmakers on work 
to prepare store of materials for thy fortifications. 
There shall the fire devour thee—After all that thou 
canst do, the fire of the enemy shall reach even thy 
inmost works, and their darts shall drive off the de- 
fenders of them. Zhe sword shall cut thee off— 
The Hebrew word, which we render here sword, 
properly signifies any kind of dart; and this seems 
to be spoken of the fire, and missile weapons which 
the enemy should throw, in order to burn their in- 
ner works, or drive them from off them. Jt shall eat 
thee up like the canker-worm—The sword of the 
enemy shall destroy thee, as the canker-worm eats 
up the fruits of the earth. Or, as some interpret the 
expression, Thou shalt be devoured as the canker- 
worm is eaten up; because the Assyrians were 
wont to eat these kinds of worms, which were a spe- 
cies of locusts, which are still eaten in the eastern 
countries. Make thyself many as the canker-worm 
—Thovugh thou multiply thine armies like locusts, or 
caterpillars, yet the enemy shall destroy them. 

Verses 16,17. Thou hast multiplied thy merchants 
above the stars—Thou hast drawn more merchants 
to thee than there are stars in the heavens. This is 
a hyperbolical expression, to signify the great num- 
ber of them. T'he canker-worm spoitleth, and fleeth 
away—As the locusts destroy the fruits of the earth, 
and then fly away to another place; so shall thy 


soldiers pillage all the wealth thou hast gained by 


traffic, and then leave thee. T'hy crowned (or, thy 


princes) are as the locusts, &c.—For as they fly away 


when the heat comes on, so thy princes and captains 


of thy land shall be set wide open, &c.—The several |, will fly away from the heat of battle, or danger. — 
3 


986 


The overthrow of all those 


CHAPTER III. 


things wherein they trusted. 


A. M. 3294. 


ait. 2094 place is not known where they are. 


18 *'Thy shepherds slumber, O 
* king of Assyria : thy 7 nobles shall dwell in the 
dust: thy people is » scattered upon the moun- 
tains, and no man gathereth them. 


2 Exodus xv. 16; Psa. Ixxvi. 6. 
7 Or, valiant ones. 


a Jer.1.18; Ezek. xxxi. 3. 
+] Kings xxii. 17. 


19 There is no *healing of thy A.M. 3294. 
a Se dan tie. 
bruise ; ° thy wound is grievous: ‘all — 
that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands 
over thee : for upon whom hath not thy wick- 


edness passed continually ? 


© Mic. i. 9.——4 Lam. ii. 15; Zeph. ii. 15; 
Isaiah xiv. 8. 


® Heb. wrinkling. 


Verses 18, 19. T'hy shepherds slumber, O king of 
Assyria—Thy rulers and counsellors are remiss, 
heartless, ordead. T'hy nobles—Or valiant ones, shall 
dwell in the dust—These words are not in the He- 
brew, but are supplied by our translators. The strict 
rendering of the Hebrew would rather be, Have lain 
down, as Grotius renders it; that is, have indulged 
themselves in-ease, and not concerned themselves 
about the public. affairs. The Vulgate, however, 
renders this former part of the verse, T'hy shepherds 
have slept, thy princes shall be buried: understand- 
ing it, probably, of their being slain in battle, or 
having died through famine or pestilence during the 
siege. Thy people is scattered upon the mountains || 
—Thy people, or common soldiers, for want of com- || 
manders, are scattered about, and there is no chief 
officer, or head commander, to collect them toge- 
ther. There is no healing of thy bruise—Or bind- 
ing up of thy wound. Thy destruction is inevitable. 
The state of thy affairs is so bad, that there is no | 
hope of recovering them. All that hear the bruit 
of thee—That is, the report of thee ; (as the obsolete 
word bruit signifies;) all to whom the account of 
thy fall shall come; shall clap the hands over thee— || 
Namely, for joy. For wpon whom hath not thy wick- 
edness, &¢.—To whom hast thou not been injurious? |, 

Thus it is evident, upon the whole of this prophecy 
_ of Nahum, that the entire desolation and complete 
destruction of Nineveh were most expressly and par- 
ticularly foretold therein: yet one can hardly ima-! 
gine any event more improbable than this was, at 
the time when Nahum predicted it. Surely there 
was no probability that the capital of a great king- 
dom, a city which was sixty miles in compass, a city 
which contained so many myriads of inhabitants, || 
which had walls one hundred feet high, and so | 
thick that three chariots could go abreast upon them, 
and which had one thousand five hundred towers of |! 
two hundred feet in height; surely there was no 
probability that such a city: should ever be totally | 
destroyed ; and yet so totally was it destroyed, that 
authors are not agreed aboutits situation. From the! 
general suffrage, indeed, of ancient historians and 
geographers, it seems to have been situated upon the 
Tigris; but yet no less authors than Ctesias and Dio- || 
dorus Siculus represent it as situated upon the river | 
Euphrates. Nay, authors differ, not only from one), 
another, but also from themselves. For the learned | 
Bochart hath shown, that Herodotus, Diodorus Sicv- | 
lus, and Ammianus Marcellinus, all three speak dif- 
ferently of it, sometimes as if it was situated upon 
the river Tigris, and sometimes as if upon the river | 
Euphrates. So that, to reconcile these authors with | 
themselves and with others, it is supposed by Bo- || 

3 


‘ not. 


chart that there were two Ninevehs, and by Sir 
John Marshman that there were three; the Syrian, 
upon the river Euphrates; the Assyrian, upon the 
river Tigris; and a third, built afterward upon the 
Tigris by the Persians, who succeeded the Parthians 
in the empire of the East in the third century, and 
were subdued by the Saracens in the seventh cen- 
tury after Christ: but whether this latter Nineveh 
was built in the same place as old Nineveh is a ques- 


‘tion that cannot be decided. Lucian, who flourished 


in the second century after Christ, affirms, that 
Nineveh was utterly perished, and there was no 
footstep of it remaining, nor could one tell where 
once it was situated. And the greater regard is to 
be paid to his testimony, as he was a native of Sa- 


| mosata, a city upon the river Euphrates; and, coming 


from a neighbouring country, he must have known 
whether there had been any remains of Nineveh or 
“Even the ruins,” says Bishop Newton, “of 
old Nineveh have been, as I may say, ruined and 


| destroyed; such an utter end hath been made of it, 


and such is the truth of the divine predictions! This, 
perhaps, may strike us the more strongly, by sup- 
posing only a parallel instance: let us, then, sup- 


| pose that a person should come in the name of a 


prophet preaching repentance to the people of this 


| kingdom, or otherwise denouncing the destruction 


of the capital city within a few years. I presume 
we should look upon such a prophet as a madman, 
and show no further attention to his message than 
to deride and despise it: and yet such an event would 
not be more strange and incredible than the destruc- 
tion and devastation of Nineveh. For Nineveh was 
much the larger, and much the stronger and older 
city of the two; and the Assyrian empire had sub- 
sisted and flourished more ages than any form of 


| government in this country; so that we cannot ob- 


ject the instability of the eastern monarchies in this 
case. Let us, then, since this event would not be 
more improbable and extraordinary than the other, 
suppose again, that things should succeed according 
to the prediction, the floods should arise, and the 
enemy should come, the city should be overflowed 
and broken down, be taken and pillaged, and de- 
stroyed so totally, that even the Jearned could not 
agree about the place where it was situated. What 
would be said or thought in such a case? Whoever 
of posterity should read and compare the prophecy 
and event together, must they not, by such an illus- 


| trious instance, be thoroughly convinced of the pro- 


vidence of God, and of the truth of this prophet, and 
be ready to acknowledge, Verily this is the word 
that the Lord hath spoken! Verily there is a God 
who judgeth in the earth!” ; 

987 


’ 


THE 


BOOK OF °HA'BA.K KOUGK 


ARGUMENT. 


Tue Prophet Habakkuk is said to have been of the tribe of Simeon, and a native of Beth-zaker. ~ 
As he makes no mention of the Assyrians in his prophecy, and speaks of the invasions of the 
Chaldeans as near at hand, it is probable he prophesied after the destruction of Nineveh, and the 
overthrow of the Assyrian empire, and not long before the kingdom of Judah awas destroyed by 
Nebuchadnezzar. It seems he was cotemporary with Jeremiah, and prophesied in the reign of 
Josiah, probably toward the close of his reign, and in the beginning of Jehoiakim’s. ‘The subject 
of his prophecy is the same with that of Jereiniah, and upon the same occasion ; namely, the destruc- 
tion of Judah and Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, for their idolatries and other heinous sins and provo- 
cations. ‘This destruction he foretels in the first chapter, as also that of the adjacent countries. 
In the second, he predicts the overthrow of the Chaldeans, for their unprovoked imvasion of other 
nations, and their various acts of violence, oppression, and bloodshed, and he encourages the Jews 
patiently to wait for it. Thus, as the preceding prophet, Nahum, foretold the destruction of the 
Assyrians, who carried the ten tribes captive; so Habakkuk foretels the judgments that should 
come upon the Chaldeans, who completed the captivity of the two remaining tribes. In the third 
chapter, he, in a most lofty manner, celebrates God’s former appearances for Israel, in bringing 
them through the Red sea; in giving his law to them; and in casting out the Canaanites before 
them : he professes his terrible apprehension of the Chaldean invasion; begs the Lord would at 
least mitigate the stroke ; and concludes, rejoicing in God his Saviour. Habakkuk is repeatedly 
quoted as an inspired writer in the New Testament, as the reader will see if he will compare 
chap. i. 5, with Acts xiii. 40, 41; and ii. 3, 4, with Rom. i. 17; Gal. iii. 11; Heb. x. 37, 38: and 
“his predictions of the devastations” that should be made by the Chaldeans, and of the judgments 
that would be inflicted on them, are considered by many as foretelling also “ the temporary success 
and final ruin of the oppressors and corrupters of the Christian Church, and the final and universal 
prevalence of true religion throughout the earth.”—Scott. ‘“ The Prophet Habakkuk,” says Arch- 
bishop Newcome, “stands high in the class of the Hebrew poets. The beautiful connection 
between the parts of his prophecy, its diction, imagery, spirit, and sublimity, cannot be too much 
admired.” Bishop Lowth bears a similar testimony, observing, “ The style of Habakkuk is poetical, 
especially in his ode, chap. iii., which may deservedly be accounted among the most perfect speci- 
mens of that class.” See his 21st Prelection. 


CHAPTER I. 


In this chapter, (1,) The prophet complains to God of the injustice and violence practised among the Jews, and of the suf- 
ferings hereby brought upon the righteous, 1-4. (2,) God by him foretels the punishment of this abuse of power by the 
sword of war, and the desolations which the army of the Chaldeans should make among them, 5-11. (3,) The prophet 
complains of the mischief done by the Chaldeans, and prays for his own people and against their enemies, 12-17. 


ee THE burden which Habakkuk || 2 O Lorp, how long shall I ery, A.M. 3378. 
. C. 626. ; : B. C. 626. 
im the prophet did see. “and thou wilt not hear! even ery ———— 


a Lam. || iii. 8. , 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. This burden, or prophetic vision, communicated to — 

Verse 1. T'he burden—The grievous calamities, || Habakkuk, was against the Chaldeans as well as the 
or heavy judgments; which Habakkuk did see—|| Jews. For while the prophet was complaining of 

That is, foresee, and wamgeeap enone to foretel. || iniquity among the Jews, Ist, God foreshows him — 

a, SI 


oil 


Frofligacy of the Jews, 


—SSSSSS Se 


CHAPTER I. 


and their punishment. 


A. M. 9378. out unto thee of violence, and thou 
~ wilt not save! 

3 Why dost thou show me iniquity, and cause 
me to behold grievance? for spoiling and vio- 
lence are before me: and there are that raise 
up strife and contention. 

4 'Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment 
doth never go forth: for the » wicked doth com- 
pass about the righteous; therefore ' wrong 
judgment proceedeth. 

5 4° Behold ye among the heathen, and re- 
gard, and wonder mar AIT : for J will work 


a work in your days, which ye will not A. M, 3378. 
believe though it be told yozt. bE aes 
6 For lo, ay? raise up the Chaldeans, that 
bitter and hasty nation, which shall march 
through the * breadth of the land, to possess the 
dwelling-places that are not theirs. 

7 They are terrible and dreadful: ‘their 
judgment and their dignity shall proceed of 
themselves. 

8 Their horses also are swifter than the 
leopards, and are more § fierce than the ° even- 
ing wolves: and their horsemen shall site 


> Job xxi. 7; Psa. xciv. 3, &c.; Jer. xii. 1—" Or, wrested. 3 Heb. breadths. 4 Or, from them shall a ae the ae 
© Isa. xxix. 14; Acts xiii. 41.——4 Deut. xxviii. 49, 50; Jer. v. of these, and the captivity of these. 5 eb. s hen jee v. 
15.— Fulfilled, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6. ; Zeph. iii. 3. 
the desolations which the Chaldeans would make in || credible. For I will work a work, §c.. which ye 


Judea and the neighbouring countries, as the minis- 
ters of divine vengeance: and, 2d, Upon the pro- 
phet’s falling into an expostulation with God about 
these proceedings, moved thereto probably by his 
compassion for his own people, God shows him the 
judgments which he would execute upon the Chal- 
deans. . 

Verses 2-4. O Lord, how long shall I cry, &e.— 
How long shall I complain unto thee of might over- 
coming right, and thou wilt not save or prevent it? 
The prophet here proposes the common objection 
against Providence, taken from the prosperity of the 
wicked, and their oppression of the righteous, which 
has often been a stumbling-block even to good men: 
see Jer. xii. 1; Job xii.6; and xxi. 7; Psa. xxxvii., 
Ixxiii. Why dost thou show me iniquity?—Why 
hast thou caused me to live in such times of iniquity ? 
for I see nothing but scenes of rapine, and the most 
unjust oppression. And there are that raise up 
strife, &c.—Or, there is strife, and contention car- 
ries it. 'There is much cause for complaining, but 
those best skilled in the arts of contention carry the 
eause. Therefore the law is slacked—The divine 
Jaw, given us for the regulation of our conduct, hath 

lost its force. And judgment doth never go forth— 
Causes remain undetermined, and justice is not 
duly administered. For the wicked, &c.—For the 
wicked, by their deceitful arts, prevail against the 
righteous, and overpower them; therefore [rather, 
moreover) wrong judgment proceedeth—Not only 
judgment is delayed, but, what is still worse, unjust 
judgment is given, and causes are evidently decided 
in a manner quite contrary to what is equitable and 
just. 

Verse 5. Behold, &e.—For a punishment of such 
exorbitant practices, behold, God is about to make 
the heathen the instruments of his vengeance. Ye 
among the heathen, and regard—Consider and 
weigh it well, in its nature and consequences ; for it is 
intended as a warning to you, and assures you that 
judgment will overtake you also. And wonder 
marvellously—As astonished at judgments too great 
to be described, and so strange that they will appear 
to many, even of God’s professing people, to be in- 


will not believe—The judgment shall be such, as you 
despisers of God’s word will not believe to be coming 
upon you. These words are referred to, and indeed 
quoted, by St. Paul, Acts xiii. 41; not, however, ac- 
cording to the Hebrew text, but the translation of 
the LXX., who, instead of 1132, begoim, among 
the heathen, seem to have read (1933, begadim, 
despisers, or perfidious persons. This reading of 
the LXX. is preferred by Grotius, because, he ob- 
serves, “ God addresses the Jews who were despisers 
of his deity.” 

Verse 6. For lo, raise up the Chaldeans—This 
is spoken of as a matter of great wonder and as- 
tonishment, because the Chaldeans, in the times of 
Hezekiah, Manasseh, and Josiah, were allies of the 
Jewish nation, and seemed linked to them in the 
greatest friendship; so that they had no fear on that 
side, but all their fear was from the Egyptians. 
Therefore the coming of the Chaldeans into the 
country is spoken of here as a thing entirely new, 
and as if that people had been called into existence 
for the very purpose of punishing the Jewish nation. 
There is a prophecy similar to this in Isaiah, with 
regard to the Assyrians, in whom the Jewish nation 
then placed their chief confidence, and thought of 
nothing less than of the evils which Isaiah threaten- 
ed should be brought upon them by that nation: so 
weak and short-sighted often is human policy! see 
Isa. vii. That bitter and hasty nation—That peo- 
ple cruel in their disposition, quick in executing 
their purposes, and hasty in their marches, Isa. v. 
26, 27; Jer. v.16, 17. Which shall march through 
the breadth of the land, to possess, &¢c.—This is 
spoken of the Chaldeans extending their conquests 
to a vast distance from the original seat of their 
empire. 

Verses 7-9. Their judgment, §c., shall proceed of 
themselves—They will judge themselves of what 
they shall do, without paying regard to any thing 
but their own will, and shall have power to put 
in execution whatever they resolve upon. T'heir 
horses also are swifter than the leopards—“ Leopards 
tamed and taught to hunt are, it is said, made use of 
[iu Palestine] for hunting, ‘and seize the prey with: 


*, 


The Babylonians attribute their 


HABAKKUK. 


successes to their idols, 


Se 


A. M. 3378. themselves, and their horsemen shall 
B, ©. 06. come from far ; fthey shall fly as the 
eagle that hasteth to eat. 

9 They shall come all for violence: ° their? 
faces shall sup up as the east wind, and they 
shall gather the captivity as the sand. 

10 And they shall scoff at the kings, and the 
princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall 
deride every strong hold; for they shall heap 
dust, and take it. 


11 Then shall his mind change, A. M. 3378. 
and he. shall pass over, and offend, =. 
£ imputing this his power unto his god. 

12 {| » Aré thou not from everlasting, O Lorp 
my God, my Holy One? We shall not die. O 
Lorp, ‘thou hast ordained them for judgment ; 
and, O ®mighty God, thou hast ° established 
them for correction. 

13 * Thou art of purer eyes than to behold 
evil, and canst not look on ?° iniquity : ' where- 


= 


f Jer. iv. 13. 6 Or, the supping up of their faces, &c., or, their 
Faces shall look toward the east. 7 Heb. the opposition of their 
faces toward the east. & Dan. v. 4. h Psa. xe, 23 xclil, 2; 


Lam. v. 19.——i 2 Kings xix. 25; Psa. xvii. 3; Isa. x. 5, 7; 
Ezek. xxx. 25. 
k Psa. v. 5. 


10 Or, grievance——! Jer. xii. 1. 


surprising agility. When the leopard leaps, he 
throws himself seventeen or eighteen feet at a time.” 
—Harmer, ii. 438. And are more fierce than the 
evening wolves--Which, having fasted in the day, 
were wont to come forth in the evening fierce and 
ravenous. And their horsemen shall spread them- 
selves—Namely, all over the land; that is, they shall 
bevery numerous. They shall come all for violence 
—-To enrich themselves by making a prey of all. 
Their faces shall sup up as the east wind—They 
shall destroy every thing where they march, as the 
east wind blasts the fruits of the earth. And they 
shall gather the captivity [or, captives] as the sand 
—Not only in Judea, but in all the neighbouring 
countries which they conquer. Houbigant renders 


the clause, A burning wind goes before them, and 


gathers captives as the sand. They shall carry 
desolation, destruction, and fire, everywhere before 


them. The winds which blew from Arabia the! 


Desert were extremely hot, and very dangerous, not 
only on account of their own heat, but on account 
of the dust and sand which they brought with 
them. 

Verses 10, 11. And they shall scoff at the kings, 
&c.—The Hebrew use the singular number here, 
(He shall scoff, &c.,) as well as in the following 
verse, and it is to be understood of the king of Baby- 
lon, who treated the kings he conquered with scorn 
and contempt: so he used Zedekiah and his princes. 


They shall deride every strong hold—They shall | 
contemn, or count ‘as nothing, the most strongly | 


fortified places. They shall heap dust and take it 
—-They shall cast up mounds against them, and so 
take them. Then shall his mind change, and he 
shall pass over—Rather, And shall pass over, (with- 
out the personal pronoun he,) that is, his mind shall 
change, and pass beyond the bounds of moderation. 
By this and the next clause, imputing this his power 
unto his god, was foretold that the king of Babylon 
should be made arrogant by his victories, and should 
impute them tothe power of the false gods he wor- 
shipped. This was remarkably true of Belshazzar, 
Nebuchadnezzar’s successor, who, with his thousand 
lords, when he was drinking wine in the golden and 
sitver vessels taken out of God’s temple, and was 
thereby triumphing over Jehovah and his people, 


praised the gods of aa and silver, &e., as the | evii—Thou art of too just and pure a nature to-ap- 
3 


| 


authors of their successes and victories. It was also 
remarkably verified in Nebuchadnezzar himself, who, 
as we find from Dan. iii., cast three otherwise inno- 
cent persons, and faithful to him, into a furnace of 
fire, because. they would not fall down before the 
idol which he had set up. But Grotius, and many 
others, interpret the latter part of the verse thus: 
Saying this his strength is his god ; that is, imput- 
ing all his suceess to his own skill and prowess; a 
sense of the words which answers remarkably to the 
character of Nebuchadnezzar, as given in the book of 
Daniel: see chapter iii. 17, and iv. 30, and v. 20. Pro- 
bably the extraordinary insanity which befell Nebu- 
chadnezzar, as the punishment of his pride and arro- 
gance, might be also here intended in the first clause 
of this verse, which in the Hebrew is, Then shall his 
spirit change and pass over, &c. Here, then, is a re- 
markable proof of what the psalmist says, namely, that 
God understandeth our thoughts afar off: for here 
the alteration that should in after times be made in 
Nebuchadnezzar’s mind by his prosperity is ex- 
pressly foretold, together with the punishment that 
should follow upon it. 

Verse 12. Art thou not, &c.——Here the prophet, 
upon being made sensible that the king of Babylon 
should attribute all his victories to some false or 
fictitious deity, or to his own abilities, breaks out 
into a passionate exclamation to Jehovah, Art thou 
not from everlasting, O Lord my God?—Art not 
thou he, who only hath been from everlasting ; 
while all others that are called gods have had a 
beginning, and there was a time when neither they 
nor the men that set them up had any being? Thou, 
therefore, art infinitely superior, both to the most 
powerful men, and to all that are called gods. We 
shall not die--We shall not utterly perish by the 
Chaldeans, though we shall suffer severely from 
them. Or, as Secker renders it, Let us not die. 
Thou hast ordained them for judgment—Thou 
hast appointed the Chaldeans to execute thy judg- 
ments on sinners. And, O mighty God—Whose 
sovereignty is unquestionable, and power irresistible; 


thou hast established them for correction—The He- 


brew is, thou hast founded them as a rock for cor- 
rection, namely, of the Jewish people. 
Ver. 13-17. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold 


8 Heb. rock, Deut. xxxii. 4. ——® Heb. founded. — 


The prophet waits on 


CHAPTER II. 


God to know his will. 


MM, 7s. fore lookest thou upon them that deal 

——— treacherously, and holdest thy tongue 
when the wicked devoureth the man that is 
more righteous than he ? 

14 And makest men as the fishes of the sea, 
as the " creeping things, that have no rule over 
them ? 

15 They ™ take up all of them with the angle, 


11 Or, moving. ——™ Jeremiah xvi. 16; Amos iv. 2.——!2 Or, 
Slue-net. 


prove of wickedness: it must ever be an abomination 
tothee. Thou canst not look upon iniquity—Except 
with infinite abhorrence. Wherefore lookest thou 
upon them—Seemest to connive at, or dost not show 
any particular dislike at the violence of those idola- 
trous Chaldeans? And makest men as the fishes of 
the sea, &c.—By delivering them to Nebuchadnezzar, 
who takes them in his net, as a fisherman takes 
fishes; which creatures suffer themselves to be taken 
without resistance, because they have no power to 
defend themselves. As the creeping things that have 
no ruler, &c.—No chief to conduct or guard them. 
The Hebrews give the common name of reptiles to 
all fishes. They take up all of them with the angle 
—The prophet, having in the preceding verse com- 
pared men to fishes, continues here, by way of 
metaphor, to describe the advantages which the 
Chaldeans gained over other nations, by the several 
ways used by fishermen in taking fishes, as by 
catching them with the angle, enclosing them in nets, 
and gathering them in drags. Therefore they re- 
joice and are glad—On account of the prey they 


they catch them in their net, and A. M. 3378 
gather them in their drag: there- Bicerltee i 
fore they rejoice and are glad. 

16 Therefore ® they sacrifice unto their net, and 
burn incense unto their drag; because by them 
their portion zs fat, and their meat ' plenteous." 

17 Shall they therefore empty their net,and not 
spare continually to slay the nations ? 


» Deut. viii. 17; Isaiah x. 13; xxxvii. 24, 25.——15 Or, dainty. 
14 Heb. fat. 


take; that is, the Chaldeans rejoice in taking a great 
number of captives, and gathering rich spoils, as 
fishermen rejoice when they catch a great number 
of fishes. Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, 
&c.—They impute all their victories to their own 
strength and skill, or to idols of their own making, 
and render no acknowledgments to God for their 
success. Because by them their portion is fat, &e.— 
Because by means of their victories they get abun- 
dance of rich spoil. Shall they therefore empty 
their net—Carry away the riches and spoils of their 
conquests, (see 2 Kings xxiv. 13,) in order to under- 
take more; just as fishermen empty their nets to fill 
them again. But the words may be properly ren- 
dered, Shall he therefore spread his net? in which 
sense the Vulgate, as also the Greek and Chaldee, 
here interpret the Hebrew verb py, a word often 
used of drawing or unsheathing a sword or spear. 
And not spare continually to slay the nations—Wilt 
thou suffer them to go on to make havoc continually 
of all other nations? Shall they never be stopped 
in their career ? 


CHAPTER. II. 


Here, (1,) God answers the complaints of the prophet made in the foregoing chapter, telling him that in due time, after he 
has sufficiently tried the faith of his people, and distinguished hypocrites from saints, he will reckon with the proud 


Chaldeans, and bring them to ruin for their oppressions and murders, 1-8. 


(2,) He denounces fearful curses against 


them and their associates in wickedness ; as being greedy of wealth and honour, 9-11; injurious and oppressive raisers 
of estates by injustice, rapine, and robbery, 12, 13, 17; promoters of drunkenness, and destroyers of others, 15-17; and 


worshippers of idols, 18, 19. 
self among the nations, 14-20, 
A. M. 3378. 7. WILL *stand upon my watch, 
B. C. 626. : ‘ 
and set me upon the ! tower, » and 
will watch to see what he will say ? unto me, 


aTsaiah xxi. 8, 11.——* Heb. fenced place———> Psalm Ixxxy. 8. 
2 Or, in me. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 

Verse 1. I will stand upon my watch—The He- 
brews often express one thing by a multiplicity of 
words, as here several expressions are used to 
signify the same thing, namely, watching. As the 
prophets were considered as watchmen, and as the 
watchmen were placed on high towers, and it was 

3 


(3,) He promises that by these judgments he would spread the knowledge and fear of him- 


and what I shall answer * when‘ I A. M. 3378. 
B. C. 626. 

am reproved. 
2 § And the Lorp answered me, and said, 


3Or, when I am argued with—* Hebrew, upon my reproof, 
or, arguing. 


their duty to look around very diligently to see what 
messengers or enemies, or what dangers or deliver- 
ances were approaching, and to continue steadfast 
in their posts; so here the prophet declares that he 
would as diligently watch and wait for God’s answer 
to what he had complained of in the foregoing 


chapter, namely, the great success of the Chaldeang 
991 


God answers the 


HABAKKUK. 


complaints of the people. 


= _-T__".-""-RMS.OONONNTNNR“R#e#}OOOONN0w0w0w@wO0Swo>S SS So 


A. M. 3378. ° Write the vision, and make 7 plain 
ae upon tables, that he may run that 
readeth it. 

3 For ‘the vision is yet for an appointed 
time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie : 


© Heb. x. 37. 


¢ Tsa. viii. 1; xxx.8.——4 Dan. x. 14; xi. 27, 35. 


though it tarry, wait for it; because A. M. 3378. 
it will ° surely come, it will not tarry. — 

4 Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not 
upright in him: but the | just shall live by his 
faith. 


f John iii. 36; Rom. i. 17; Gal. iii, 11; Heb. x. 38. 


though they were guilty of greater crimes than the 
Jewish nation. And what I shall answer when I 
am reproved—Or rather, As to what I have argued, 
meaning the expostulations which he had uttered 
just before. Archbishop Newcome, who renders 
the verbs in the first three clauses of this verse in 
the past time, (namely, J stood on my watch-tower, 
&c.,) interprets the latter part of it thus: And J 
looked to see what he would speak by me, and what 
I should reply to my arguing with him; that is, 
what I should reply, “to my own satisfaction, and 
to that of others, as to the difficulties raised chap. i. 
13-17, why the idolatrous and wicked Chaldeans 
and their king are to be prosperous and triumphant.” 

Verses 2,3. The Lord said, Write the vision— 
Write down what I am going to say. Every divine 
communication, by whatever means made, is often 
spoken of in the prophetic writings under the title 
of a vision. When the prophets were commanded 
to write any thing, it denoted the great importance 
of it, and that the fulfilling of it was at some distance. 
Make it plain upon tables—Write it in legible 
characters; that he may run that readeth—That it 
may be read with ease. For the vision ts yet for an 
appointed time—What I am now about to reveal to 
thee will not be fulfilled till a certain time which 
God hath appointed, but which is yet at a distance. 
As this vision undoubtedly related to the destruction 
of the Babylonish monarchy, which is plainly fore- 
told from verse 5 to the end of the chapter, so that 
event was not to take place till about one hundred 
years from this time. But at the end it shall speak 
—When the period appointed by God shall come, it 
shall be accomplished, and not disappoint your ex- 
pectation. The Hebrew is, At the end it shall break 
forth, namely, as the morning light, which the word 
m5", here used, properly and emphatically expresses: 
that is, the event spoken of shall break forth, or 
appear, with great clearness and evidence, and then 
this prophecy shall be proved a true one. Though 
it tarry, wait for it—Although it may be long de- 
ferred, and much time may intervene before it be 
accomplished; yet, nevertheless, continue confidently 
to expect it; because it will surely come, it will not 
tarry—Hebrew, n»* x, It will not be prolonged, or 
go beyond, namely, the appointed time; that is, it 
will certainly be fulfilled at the time that is appointed. 
The word here used is not the.same with that ren- 
dered tarry in-the former clause. All this is 
addressed to the Jewish nation in answer to their 
complaints, represented in the foregoing chapter, re- 
specting the success and prosperity of the Chaldeans, 
notwithstanding their crimes; in reply to which, God, 


Chaldean nation should not go unpunished at the 
appointed time, namely, when they had filled up the 
measure of their iniquity, but they should be involved 
ina much greater destruction than the nations which 
they had conquered; that most of these nations 
would survive to see the entire overthrow and final 
ruin of the Chaldeans. Though God may defer the 
execution of his promises and threatenings a long 
time, according to our computation, yet they are no 
less sure than if they were immediately accom- 
plished ; and indeed it is only Jong with respect to our 
finite and narrow capacities ; for with God, the Scrip- 
tures tell us, a thousand years are but as one day. 
Verse 4. Behold, his soul which is lifled up— 
That does not humbly adore and acquiesce in the 
justice and wisdom of the divine dispensations, but 
contends against them, and provides for his safety 
in a way of his own devising. The Vulgate renders 
this clause, Ecce qui incredulus est, non erit recta 
anima ejus in semetipso, “Behold he who is unbe- 
lieving, his soul will not be right in him.” And the 
version of the LXX. differs still more from our trans- 
lation, Eav vrocretanrat, ove evdoxer 7 pryn Mov ev avTw, 
Tf he (that is, the just man, as it follows) draw back, 
my soul shall have no pleasure in him. As these 
translations do not accord with the present Hebrew 
text, it is supposed by some learned men that it was 
written otherwise in the ancient copies; especially 
as the rendering of the LXX. is sanctioned by the 
author of the epistle to the Hebrews, chap. x. 38. 
According to this translation the sense of the pas- 
sage is, that God having, in the foregoing verse, 
ordered the Jewish nation confidently to expect the 
fulfilling of the prophecy, and assured them that it 
would most certainly come to pass, he in this verse 
declares that his soul should have no pleasure in the 
man who should draw back, or whose faith should 
fail him in waiting for the fulfilling of the prophecy ; 
but that the just should live by his faith—That 
is, that the truly righteous man, as both the Hebrew 
and Greek expression signifies, namely, the humble 
and upright one, who, adoring the depths of the di- 
vine dispensations, and being persuaded of the truth 
of God’s promises, should confide in him for the 
fulfilment of them, and remain constant in the ex- 
pectation thereof, as well as of whatever else God 
had spoken; that he should thereby be supported 
under all the seeming irregular and-trying dispensa- 
tions of providence, and also be blessed with God’s 
favour and peculiar love, through the means of his 
faith. Our rendering, however, (namely, his soul 
which is lifted up, &c.,) “furnishes,” as Bishop 
Newcome observes, “a good sense, if we understand 


by a prophetic vision, oe the prophet, that the || the passage of the Chaldeans; who, as appears 


_ and as far from saying, It is enough, as the grave is. 


: 


cannot be satisfied—All is too little for him. But 


The fearful end of 


CHAPTER II. 


the Chaldean monarchy. 


8S8S————————0—08—O390—0—_0_O“NOooOooOo*T‘eqOQO=~=~=~=~=~qumuomomom 


A. M. 3378. 
B. C. 6: 


: 5 4° Yea also, because he trans- 
~ gresseth by wine, he is a proud man, 
neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his 
desire * as hell, and is as death, and cannot be 
satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, 
and heapeth unto him all people : 

6 Shall not all these "take up a parable 
against him, and a taunting proverb against 
him, and say, ® Wo to him that increaseth that 


> Or, How much mores Proverbs xxvii. 20; xxx. 16. 
h Micah ii. 4. 
from chap. i. '7, 12, 15-17, may be addressed in the 
singular number throughout this chapter, though 
Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar (Dan. v.) may be 
alluded to at the same time. But the idea of elation 
of mind does not occur in the ancient versions or 
paraphrase.” 
Verse 5. Yea also, because he—Namely, the king 
of Babylon ; transgresseth by wine—Hereby Bel- 
shazzar, his city and kingdom, fell a prey to Darius 
and Cyrus. He is a proud man—Insolent in his 
behaviour toward all, whether subjects, strangers, or 
conquered enemies; such pride shall have a fall. 
Neither keepeth at home—Is always abroad, warring 
upon some nation or other. The sense, some think, 
would be plainer, if the words were thus translated: 
Moreover, like a man transgressing by wine, he is 
proud, and shall not continue, or prosper. So the 
Chaldee paraphrase and Vulgate interpret the words. 
Who enlargeth his desire as hell—Or rather, as the 
grave. He is most insatiably greedy to devour all, 


And is as death—As pernicious and ravenous. And 


gathereth unto him all nations—Addeth one after 
another of the neighbouring nations to his kingdom; 
and heapeth unto him all people—Another expres- 
sion of the same import. Now all these things, pre- 
dicted of the future disposition of the kings of Baby- 
Jon and their kingdom, were sure presages of their 
not continuing long in power and grandeur, but that 
divine vengeance would soon overtake them. Ac- 
cordingly at this verse begins the denunciation 
against the Chaldean, or Babylonian empire, which 
is spoken of as comprised under one head, who is 
described as intoxicated with his successes, and not 
knowing how to set any bounds to his ambition ; but 
still, as his conquests enlarged, his desire of having 
more increased. Death and the grave are proverbial 
emblems of am insatiable temper. 
Verse 6. Shall not these take up a parable against 
(or, concerning) him, and a taunting proverb—A 
parable, or proverb, signifies a metaphorical or 
figurative saying, out of the common way. And say, 
Wo to him that increaseth, &c.—Wo to him that is 
still increasing his own dominions, by invading those 
of his neighbours, How long ?—Namely, will he be 
permitted to dothis? Surely he will not be suffered 
to continue to act thus, without some remarkable 
‘heck from Providence: and so what he thus in-| 
Vou. III. ( 63 ) 


which is not his! how long? and ay 
to him that ladeth himself with ——~ ~~ 
thick clay ! 

7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall 
bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and 
thou shalt be for booties unto them ? 

8 ‘ Because thou hast spoiled many nations, 
all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee ; 


* because of men’s “blood, and for the violence 


® Or, Ho, he——i Isaiah xxxiii. 1—— Verse 17.——7 Heb. 
bloods. 


creases will not be his, or for himself, (for so the 
words in the former part of the sentence may be 
translated,) but for the Medes and Persians, who 
shall conquer him, and énrich themselves with his 
spoils: see the following verse. And to him that 
ladeth himself with thick clay—Gold and silver, so 
called, being nothing originally but earth, or clay, 
and what should not turn to his benefit, but rather 
be his burden; adding weight to his sins and punish- 
ment. 

Verses 7,8. Shall they not rise wp suddenly that 
shall bite thee 2—Is it not just, or what thou deserv- 
est, that others should suddenly rise against thee, 
and bite and tear thee? It is a metaphor taken from 
the hunting of wild beasts. And awake that shall 
vex thee—As thou hast been a vexation to others by 
thy tyranny and cruelty. And thow shalt be for 
booties unto them—Unto the Medes and Persians. 
The expression, rise up suddenly, very fitly describes 
the suddenness with which the Babylonian empire 
was afterward overthrown. For though Cyrus 
could not be said to come upon them suddenly, or 
unexpectedly, yet the blow, whereby the Baby- 
lonian empire was overturned, was struck extremely 
suddenly; for, after all Cyrus’s victories, they thought 
themselves very secure within the walls of Babylon; 
and that Cyrus must be wearied out, and his army 
mouldered away, before he could make himself mas- 
ter of it: but by an unexpected stratagem, in drain- 
ing the Euphrates, he got possession of the city, and 
destroyed the king and all his principal men ina 
few hours time: see notes on Isa. xiii. 20; Jer. 1.38; 
and Dan. v. 30. Because, &c.—The prophet pro- 
ceeds to give an account of the reasons on which 
divine vengeance proceeded in this affair. T'how 
hast spoiled many nations—Hast slain or led captive 
their people, destroyed their cities, robbed their trea- 
suries, deposed their kings; and hast done this to 
many nations, whose cry for vengeance is come up 
toheaven, All the remnant of the people shall spoil 
thee—Now shalt thou be paid in thine own coin: the 
remnant of the nations, unspoiled by thee, shall com- 
bine against thee, and execute the Lord’s just sen- 
tence upon thee. This was evidently verified inthe 
destruction of the Babylonian empire; for Cyrus’s 
army was made up of a great many different nations. 
Because of men’s blood—As a just return for thy 
cruelty, in the slaughter thou hast made of mankind. 
And for the violence of—Or rather, against, the land 

993 3 


The fearful end of 


HABAKKUK. 


the Chaldean monarchy. 


A.M. 2379. of the land, of the city, and of all 

B.C. ©. that dwell therein. 

9 % Wo to him that ! coveteth an evil covet- 
ousness to his house, that he may ™set his nest 
on high, that he may be delivered from the 
° power of eyil ! 

10 Thou hast consulted shame to thy house 
by cutting off many people, and hast sinned 
against thy soul, 

11 For the stone shall cry out of the wall, 
and the 1° beam out of the timber shall * an- 
swer it. 

12 Y Wo to him that buildeth a town with 
" blood, !2 and establisheth a city by iniquity ! 


1 Jer, xxii. 13,——* Or, gaineth an evil: gain. m Jer, xlix. 
16; Obad. 4. °Heb. palm of the hand. 10 Or, piece, or, 
fastening. 11 Or, witness snot it. u Jer, xxii. 13; Ezek. 
xxiv. 9; Mic. iii. 10; Nah. ii. 


—And particularly for the violence offered to the 
land of Judea, and the city of Jerusalem, and its 
temple and inhabitants. 

Verses 9-11. Wo to him that coveteth an evil co- 
vetousness to his house—“‘ Which Nebuchadnezzar 
strove to aggrandize, and which Cyrus cut off.”— 
Newcome. The translation of the LXX. accords 
exactly with ours: but the Hebrew, y1 yl psa, 
seems to be more exactly rendered by Dr. Wheeler, 
“Wo unto him that procureth wicked gain for his 
family: that is, who endeavours to raise it toa 
state of wealth and pre-eminence by sinful means. 
That he may set his nest on high—May exalt him- 
self and his family to such power and greatness, that 
they shall be out of the reach of all their enemies; 
that he may be delivered from the power of evil— 
May be kept secure and out of danger from all be- 
low him. This ig spoken of Nebuchadnezzar, his 
family and kingdom; that as birds, guided by in- 
stinct, build their nests on the top of rocks and trees, 
or other places; so the king of Babylon thought, by 
getting possession of many places strong by their 
situation, on lofty eminences difficult to come at, as 
well as by their fortifications, that he, his family, and 
kingdom, should always be safe and out of danger 
from any enemy; or, as it is expressed in the text, 
from the hand of evil. Thou hast consulted shame 
to thy house by cutting off many people, &e.—Thy 
‘cruelty toward others will turn at last to thy own 
confusion, and utter extirpation. And hast sinned 
against thy own soul—Hast done that which will 
bring destruction on thyself. For the stone shall 
ery out of the wall, &e—The walls of so many 
cities thrown down, and the ruins of a multitude of 
houses, will bear witness of thy injustice and 
cruelty. 

Verses 12-14. Wo to him that buildeth a town 
with blood—Wo to those mighty conquerors who 
have augmented Babylon by unjustly spoiling and 
ruining many other cities, and destroying their in- 
habitants. Here we see that God does not approve 

994 


13 Behold, is i¢ not of the Lorp A.M. — 
of hosts ° that the people shall labour ———— 
in the very fire, and the people shall weary 
themselves } for very vanity ? 

14 For the earth shall be filled ™ with the 
? knowledge of the glory of the Lor», as the 
waters cover the sea. 

15 4 Wo unto him that giveth his neighbour 
drink, that puttest thy ‘bottle to him, and 
makest him drunken also, that thou mayest 
‘look on their nakedness ! 

16 Thou art filled with shame for glory: 
* drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be unco- 
vered: the cup of the Lorp’s right hand shall 


— Se 
12 Heb. bloods. Jer. li. 58.—*8 Or, in vain. Or, ty 
knowing the glory of the . LORD.—+ Isa. xi. 9.—4 Hos. vii. 

t Genesis ix. 22.——15 Or, more with shame than with glory. 
s Jeremiah xxv. 26, 27; li. 57. 


of those mighty conquerors who ravage the world, 
or carry their arms into divers countries. Though 
he makes use of them for the wise purposes of his 
providence, in chastising or punishing the wicked, 
yet, amidst all the pomp of their victories, they are 
often hateful in his sight; and, while they are in the 
midst of their triumphs, he is preparing the sword 
to.cut them off. What is said in this verse is appli- 
cable to all covetous, unjust, and oppressive methods 
whatever of raising a fortune. Behold, is it not of 
the Lord that the people shall labour in the very 
Sire? &c.—The latter part of the verse occurs with 
very little alteration Jer. li. 58; where the destruc- 
tion of Babylon is described: see the note there. 
The sense is, All the pains which the Chaldeans 
have taken, in enlarging and beautifying their city, 
shall be lost in the flames, which shall consume their 
stately buildings; and nothing of ail that they have 
obtained, or collected, by their toilsome victories, 
shall be of any use to them. For the earth shall be 
Jilled—For God’s power and providence, in govern- 
ing the world, shall conspicuously appear, and be 
widely displayed in the humiliation of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, (Dan. iv. 37,) in the downfall of the Chal- 
dean empire, and the destruction of Babylon; espe- 
cially as it is described in the prophets as an earnest 
and type of the fall of mystical Babylon, which will 
be a decisive stroke of divine justice, that will tho- 
roughly vindicate oppressed truth and innocence, 
and open the way for the universal spread of true 
religion: see note on Isa. xi. 9. 

Verses 15,16. Wo unto him that giveth his neigh- 
bour drink—By the metaphorical expressions used 
in this verse is signified the perfidy of Nebuchadnez- 
zar and the Chaldeans, who gained advantage over 
other nations by cunning arts of policy, and taking 
them off their guard by pretences of friendship, and 
the like; just as some men gain advantage over 
others by persuading them to drink too much. 
Thou art filled with shame for glory, &e.—Thy 
glory shall now be turned into shame, Perhaps 

( 63* ) A 


i 


The vanity and 


CHAPTER III. 


Solly of idolatry. 


A. M. 3378. be turned unto thee, and shameful 
B. C. 626. i 
spewing shall be on thy glory. 

17 For the violence of Lebanon shall cover 
thee, and the spoil of beasts, which made them 
afraid, ‘because of men’s blood, and for the 
violence of the land, of the city, and of all that 
dwell therein. 

18 J * What profiteth the graven image that 
the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten 


image, and a *teacher of lies, that A. M. 3378. 
the maker of his work trusteth 2° °* 
therein, to make ¥ dumb idols ? 

19 Wo unto him that saith to the wood, Awake ; 
to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach! Be- 
hold, it zs laid over with gold and silver, ? and 
there is no breath at all in the midst of it. 

20 But *the Lorn is in his holy temple: 
7 Jet > all the earth keep silence before him. 


t Verse 8, « Tsa. xliv. 9, 10; xlvi. 2.—— Jer. x. 8, 14; Zech. 
x, 2——"® Heb. the fashioner of his fashion——Y Psalm exv. 5; 


this might be intended to signify the rejoicing of 
the nations at the downfall of the Chaldean empire. 
Drink thou also—Now it is come to thy turn to 
drink of the cup of God’s anger. Be thou also 
naked, as thou hast made others naked. ll this is 
spoken in derision, or by way of mockery. Zhe 
cup of the Lord’s right hand shall be turned wnto 
thee—Or, upon thee; that is, thou shalt drink out 
the whole cup, or experience all the indignation of 
God. “Grotius justly observes, that these two 
verses contain an allegory. The Chaldeans gave to 
the neighbouring nations the cup of idolatry and of 
deceitful alliance, and in return they received from 
Jehovah the cup of his fury.”.—Newcome. 

Verse 17. For the violence of Lebanon [that is, 
the violence done to Lebanon] shall cover thee— 
That is, says Grotius, thou shalt suffer the punish- 
ment of having destroyed the temple, which is here 
called Lebanon, because it was built, in a great 
measure, with the cedars of Lebanon. And the 
spoil of beasts, which made them afraid—tThe rela- 
tive which, added by our translators, obscures the 
text, which might be more plainly rendered, The 
spoil of (or, made by) beasts shall make them 
afraid, or make thee afraid, as the LXX. and 
Chaldee, with very little alteration, read the text. 
As thou hast spoiled others, without any sense of 
common humanity, so the army of the conqueror 
shall deal by thee, and shall tear thee in pieces as 
wild beasts do their prey. See Isa. xiii. 15-18. Be- 
cause of men’s blood—See note on verse 8. 

Verses 18,19. What profiteth the graven image— 
The last sin that the prophet takes notice of, for which 
God would execute his judgments upon Babylon, is 
idolatry. Compare Jer. 1. 2; and li. 44, 47. But 
what he says was not intended to be confined to 
Nebuchadnezzar and the idols of Babylon: it is 
equally applicable to idols in general. What will 
they avail their worshippers in the day of danger, 
and when the Lord ariseth to take vengeance on 
them? The molten image, and a teacher of lies— 


1 Cor, xii. 2. z Psa. exxxv. 17. a Psa. xi. 4.17 Heb. be 
silent all the earth before him.—— Zeph. i. 7; Zech. ii. 13. 


Rather, a molten image, teaching lies. This was 
avery proper epithet for the image of an idol; be- 
cause the worshippers of them thought that a deity, 
or a divine power, resided in them, when there was 
no such thing;:and that God was like the work of 
men’shands. Thatthe maker of his work trusteth 
therein—Or, that the maker trusteth in his work ; 
that any one should be so unreasonable and foolish 
as to trust in that as a god which he has made and 
fashioned withhis own hands! To make him dumb 
idols—Which have mouths and speak not; which. 
can neither hear nor answer his prayers, nor do him 
good or harm. Behold, it is laid over with gold 
and silver—They are beautified with a great deal of 
cost, on purpose to delude their ignorant worship- 
pers, and make them fancy some divinity lodges 
within them. And there is no breath at all, &e.— 
They are altogether without life, sense, and motion. 

Verse 20. But the Lord is in his holy temple—But 
Jehovah, the true God, is not like one of these, but 
lives for ever in his holy temple, the heavens, from 
whence he beholds and governs all things, and is the 
fountain of being, life, power, and salvation to his 
people. Let all the earth keep silence before him— 
Or, as the LXX. render it, stand in awe, or fear be- 
fore him. The consideration of his infinite perfec- 
tions, his self-existence, independence, supremacy, 
immensity, eternity ; his omnipresence, omniscience, 
and omnipotence; his unspotted holiness, his invio- 
lable truth, and impartial justice ; and especially his 
sovereign authority and dominion, should strike all 
men with a reverential awe, and should dispose 
them to the most perfect submission toward him; 
particularly when they see him executing his judg- 
ments in the world, as he would shortly do upon the 
Chaldeans. The expression is taken from the rever- 
ent behaviour which young persons, servants, and 


| others are wont to manifest by keeping silence in 
the presence of their superiors. 


Or, it alludes to 
such a silence as is kept in courts of justice, when a 
judge pronounces the sentence. 


CHAPTER III. 


This chapter contains Habakkuk's prayer, in which he, (1,) Earnestly begs that God would help and relieve ns affhcted 
people, 1,2. (2,) Calls to mind God's glorious and gracious appearances for the Israelites in bringing them out of Egypt 
and into Canaan, 3-15. (3,) Deeply affected with the impending troubles of his nation, he comforts himself and others 
that, even without any visible means, God could and would bring every thing to a happy issue, 16-19. 


995 


The prayer 


HABAKKUK. 


of Habakkuk. 


A. M. 3378. 


A PRAYER of Habakkuk the 
B. C. 626. 


prophet * upon? Shigionoth. 

2 O Lorp, I have heard *thy speech and 
was afraid: O Lorp, ° revive » thy work in the 
midst of the years, in the midst of the years make 


known; in wrath remember mercy. A. M. 3378 

3 4% God came from *'Teman, * and = 
the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His 
glory covered the heavens, and the earth was 


full of his praise. 


a Psa. vii. title. 1 Or, according to variable songs, or, tunes, called 
in the Hebrew Shigionoth. 2 Heb, thy report, or, thy hearing. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verse 1. A prayer of Habakkuk, &c.—The word 
prayer is here taken ina general sense for an act or 
exercise of devotion, including adoration, praise, and 
thanksgiving. The word shigionoth signifies wan- 
derings, and may denote “cantio erratica, vel 
mixta,” adesultory, various, or mixed hymn ; or, as 
Bishop Newcome thinks, “a musical instrument of 
great compass, with which the Jews accompanied 
this piece of poetry.” 

Verse 2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech and 
was afraid—I have heard what thou hast revealed 
to me concerning thy judgments to be executed, 
first upon thy own people, and afterward upon their 
enemies the Chaldeans, and the terribleness of them 
hath filled me with a reverential awe and dread. O 
Lord, revive, or preserve alive, thy work in the 
midst of the years—Habakkuk having understood, 
by divine revelation, that some time would intervene 
between the desolation of Judea and the punishment 
of the Chaldeans, here entreats God, that, during 
that interval, he would preserve or take care of his 
work; that is, his Israel, that work of his hands 
which he had formed for himself, that they might 
show forth his praise: (see Isa. xliii. 21; xlv. 11:) 
together with the work of his grace in and among 
them; that he would keep that spark alive amidst 
the waters of tribulation and temptation through 
which they had to pass. Although all men are the 
work of God. yet the Jews might be called so more 
emphatically, because he had, by many extraordi- 
nary interpositions, raised them to be a peculiar 
people to himself, and had formed them such by 
laws given to them in.a singular manner, not used 
with regard to any other people. Jn the midst of 
the years make known; in wrath remember mercy 
—Or, as Grotius interprets the clause, In that inter- 
vening time show, that although thou art angry, 
thow rememberest mercy. In the midst of these 
years of calamity let thy people experience, that 
even in thy indignation thou thinkest upon mercy, 
and dost not lay more upon them than thou enablest 
them to bear. The years here referred to seem 
plainly to be those in which the Jews were under 
the power of the Chaldeans, and Judea lay desolate. 
Mr. Green translates the verse, O Jehovah, I have 
heard thy report: (that is, what thou hast revealed 
concerning the captivity:) I am in pain, O Jeho- 
vah, for thy work: (that is, the Jewish people:) in| 
the midst of the years revive it: (restore the Jews 
to their own land before the years appointed for 
their captivity are expired:) in the midst of the, 
years show compassion; in wrath remember | 
mercy. | 

996 


3 Or, preserve alive. b Psalm Ixxxv. 6.——* Or, the south. 
¢ Deut. xxxiii. 2; Judg. v.4; Psa. Ixviil. 7. 


Verse 3. God came from Teman, &c.—Bishop 
Lowth observes, that “this chapter affords us a re- 
markable instance of that sublimity which is pecu- 
liar to the ode, and which is principally owing to a 
bold and yet easy digression, or transition. The 
prophet, foreseeing the judgments of God, the ca- 
lamities which were to be brought upon his coun- 
trymen by the Chaldeans, and then the punishments 
which awaited the Chaldeans themselves; partly 
struck with terror, partly revived with hope and 
confidence in the divine mercy, he prays that God 
would hasten the redemption and deliverance of his 
people, verse 3. Now here immediately occurs to 
every one’s mind a similitude between the Baby- 
lonish and Egyptian captivity; that it was possible 
an equal deliverance might be procured by the help 
of God; and how aptly the prophet might so have 
continued his prayer, namely, that God, who had 
wrought so many miracles in ancient days for the 
sake of his people, would likewise continue his 
providential regard toward them; and how much 
it would contribute to confirm and strengthen the 
minds of the pious, who shouid remember, that the 
God who formerly had manifested his infinite power 
in rescuing the Israelites out of such great calam- 
ities, was able to do the same by avenging their 
posterity likewise. But the prophet has omitted all 
these topics, for this very reason, because they so 
readily occur to the mind; and instead of expatia- 
ting in so large a field, he bursts forth with an unex- 
pected impetuosity, God came from Teman, &c.”— 
Prel. Heb, 28. Habakkuk, therefore, having offer- 
ed up his petitions to God for the preservation and 
support of his people during their captivity, pro- 
ceeds, from hence to verse 16, to recount, for their 
encouragement, the wonderful works which Jeho- 
vah had formerly wrought for them to deliver them 
from Egyptian slavery, and to put them in posses- 
sion of the land of Canaan, intimating by this, that 
he would in due time show himself equally power- 
ful in delivering them from the Babylonish eaptivity, 
and restoring them to their own land. In recount- 
ing these wonderful works he first exhibits a deserip- 
tion of Jehovah, as king and commander of the thou- 
sands of Israel, marching at their head in a pillar of a 


_ cloud, to conduct them, and put them in possession of 


the promised land. When Jehovah sets out from 


-Teman and Paran, so great is the majesty and glory 


with which he is arrayed, that the heaven and the 
earth are too little to contain them, verse 3. His 


| brightness, like that of the meridian sun, is insupport- 


able, and his power irresistible, verse 4. The prsti- 

lence and devouring fire attending him to do execu- 

tion upon the enemy at his command, verse 5,_As 
3 


God’s miraculous interpositions 


CHAPTER III. 


Sor his people. 


oe 4 And his brightness was as the 


lead light ; he had Shorns coming out of 
his hand; and there was the hiding of his 
power. 

5 * Before him went the pestilence, and * burn- 
ing °* coals went forth at his feet. 

6 He stood, and measured the earth: he be- 


5 Or, bright beams out of his side——4 Nah. i. 3. 


© Or, burning 
diseases, Deut. xxxii. 24. 


held, and drove asunder the nations; A. M. 3378. 
f and the § everlasting mountains were pte Ante 
scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways 
are everlasting, 

7 I saw the tents of 7Cushan in affliction : 
and the curtains of the land of Midian did 
tremble. 


e Psalm xviii. 8. £ Nahum i. 5.——s Gen. xlix. 26.——’ Or, 
Ethiopia. ——® Or, under affliction, or, vanity. 


soon as he enters the land of Canaan, (verse 6,) he 
takes possession of it as rightful Lord; and the 
seven nations of Canaan, conscious that they had 
forfeited it by their wickedness, flee at the sight of 
him. ‘The mountains of the land disperse to make 
way for him, the hills bow to pay him obeisance, and 
the highways own him for their Lord; and so great 
is the dread of him, that the neighbouring nations 
tremble while he passes by, verse 7. “Throughout 
the whole passage the prophet preserves the same 
magnificence with which he begins, choosing the 
noblest images which so copious a subject could af- 
ford, and illustrating them with the most splendid 
colours, images, figures, and the most elevated style. 
What crowns the sublimity of this piece, is the sin- 
gular elegance of the close; and were it not that 
antiquity hath here and there thrown its veil of ob- 
scurity over jt, there could not be conceived a more 
perfect and masterly poem of the kind.”--Bishop 
Lowth. “The grandest images,” adds Bishop New- 
come, “are selected; and the diction is as splendid 
as the subjects.” Zeman is thought to have been 
first the name of an encampment, and afterward of 
an Idumean city: see Job ii. 11; Jer. xlix. 7. Pa- 
_ ran was a part of Arabia Petrza, near mount Sinai: 
see Gen. xxi. 21; Deut. xxxiii. 2. His glory covered 
the heavens—-That excessive splendour which filled 
the air when God descended on mount Sinai, in 
flames of fire, lightnings, and thunders, to give the 
- law to his people. And the earth was full of his 
praise—Green reads, And his glory filled the earth. 

Verses 4,5. And his brightness was as the light 
—Green renders this verse thus: His brightness was 
as the brightness of the sun; he had rays of light 
beaming from his hand; and there was the hiding- 
place of his power. The Hebrew word x, here 
rendered light, is translated the sun, Job xxxi. 26; 
and that rendering seems to improve the sense here. 
The word D°3p, rendered horns, being derived from 
TP, to shine, or emit rays of light, is much better 
rendered rays, or splendours, here, than horns: see 
Parkhurst on the word. In this illustrious passage, 
then, we see the brightness, or splendour, poetically 
represented as streaming from the hand of God, that 
awful hand which is mighty in operation, and which 
has so often manifested the divine power to a won- 
dering world. Or, as others explain it, The Shechi- 
nah, or symbol of the divine presence, had rays of 
light issuing out on every side, and yet that was but 
ahiding, or veil, to the Divine Majesty, who covereth 
himself with light as with a garment, (Psa. civ. 2,) 
and who dwelleth in light inaccessible, or of too re- 

3 


splendent brightness to be approached, or gazed at, 
by mortals. Before him went the pestilence—Occa- 
sionally inflicted on the Israelites for their guilt: see 
Num. xi. 33, and xiv. 37, and xvi. 46. And burning 
coals—Or rather, as the expression would be better 
translated, devouring fire, or lightning, went forth 
at his feet—See Lev. x. 2; Num. xi. 1, and xvi. 35, 
in which passages we read of the Israelites being 
consumed by a fire which went out from Jehovah. 
And (Lev. ix. 24) we learn, that the burnt-offering 


|; Was consumed by a fire which came out from before 


him. 

Verse 6. He stood and measured the earth—* It 
was customary for a conqueror, as soon as he became 
possessed of a country, to measure it out, and divide 
it among his people. Thus David, (Psa. Ix. 6,) £ 
will divide Shechem,and mete out the valley of Suc- 
coth. Hence Jehovah, who takes possession of the 
land of Canaan, upon the flight and cession of its 
guilty inhabitants, is represented as dividing it 
among the tribes of Israel.’—Green, who translates 
the former part of the verse thus: He stood and 
measured out the land; he beheld and scattered the 
nations: the eternal mountains dispersed, the per- 
petual hills bowed. The passage is certainly ex- 
tremely poetical; representing, not only the inhabit- 
ants of Canaan, but the land itself, as struck with 
conscious terror at the approach of Jehovah. His 
ways are everlasting—His purposes, foreknown 
from all eternity, will infallibly be executed in their 
appointed time: or, his wisdom, goodness, justice, 
holiness, and power, exerted and manifested in 
governing his people, are immutable and eternal. 

Verse 7. I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction 
—Since Moses’s wife, who was a Midianite, is called 
(Num. xii. 1) a Cushite, Cushan may be here 
another name for Midian, and then the two members 
of this period will be equivalent; but if they be 
different, then the Cushites must have been an 
Arabian nation who dwelt in tents near the Midian- 
ites, and were seized with the same consternation, 
at the approach of Jehovah and his people Israel, as 
the latter were. The total overthrow which the Is- 
raelites gave the Midianites and their allies, as re- 
corded Num. xxxi. 7-12, is probably here referred 
to. We can never sufficiently admire the strength 
and spirit, as well as justness and propriety, of this 
whole description. “The glory with which Jehovah 
is arrayed, is such as fills the heaven and the earth; 
a glory arising not from the pomp of external gran- 
deur, and the parade of honourable followers, but 
from himself. His power is the terror of all the 

997 


God’s miraculous interpositions 


HABAKKUK. 


for his people. 


A. M. 3378 


8 Was the Lorp displeased against 
B. C. 62 


the rivers? was thine anger against 
the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, 
hthat thou didst ride upon thy horses, and ° thy 
chariots of salvation ? 

9 Thy bow was made quite naked, accord- 
ing to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. 
Selah. '°'Thou! didst cleave the earth with 
rivers. 

10 *The mountains saw thee, and they 
trembled: the overflowing of the water passed 


by: the deep uttered his voice, 
‘}ifted up his hands on high. a 

11 ™The sun and moon stood still in their 
habitation: “at the light of thine *™arrows 
they went, and at the shining of ay glittering 
spear. 

12 Thou didst march through the land in 
indignation, °thou didst thrash the heathen in 
anger. _ 

13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of 
thy people, even for salvation with thine anoint- 


and A. M. 3378. 
B. C. 626. 


b Deuteron. xxxiii. 26, 27; Psa. Ixviii. 4; civ.3; Verse 15. 
* Or, thy chariots were salvation. 10 Or, Thou didst cleave the 
rivers of the earth. i Psa. Ixxviii. 15, 163; cv. 41. & Exod. 
xix. 16, 18; Judges v. 4,5; Psalm lIxviii. 8; Ixxvii. 18; 


world around him; the insignia of it being, not the 
sword or the fasces, but the pestilence and devour- 
ing fire; and so great is the dread of him, that the 
Canaanites flee at his approach, the land trembles at 
his presence, and the nations around are not able to 
hide their dismay. Such is Habakkuk’s description 
of Jehovah, simple and plain, but yet grand and sub- 
lime; as much excelling every pagan description of 
Jupiter, as light surpasses darkness.”—Green and 
Houbigant. i 

Verses 8-10. Was the Lord, &c.—After the de- 
scription of Jehovah, given in the preceding verses, 
tne first of his wonderful works, recounted by the 
prophet, is the passage through the Red sea, where 
he represents the Lord as appearing at the head of 
the Israelites in his chariot of war, with his bow 
drawn in his hand, to rescue them from their cruel 
oppressors the Egyptians, and to give them the land 
of Canaan, according to the oath which he sware 
unto them, verses 8, 9. The next is his giving them 
water to drink in the wilderness, where the mount- 
ains moved at his presence. The next, his passage 
over Jordan, where the waters, testifying their ready 
obedience to his will, opened to the right and left to 
make way for his people to pass through. The next, 
his interposition at Joshua’s engagement with the 
Amorites, when the sun and moon stood still to give 
them time to discomfit their enemies, verses 9-11. 
The last wonderful works which the prophet re- 
counts were performed after this engagement, when 
Jehovah marched before them to execute vengeance 
on the Canaanites, and to protect -the Israelites; de- 
stroying utterly the princes of Canaan and their 
states, at a time when they made sure of Israel for 
their prey ; and giving his own people entire pos- 
session of their country, from the river Jordan on 
the east, to the Mediterranean sea on the west, verses 
12-15.— Green. 

Was the Lord displeased against the rivers— 
Can it be imagined, that when God caused the Red 
sea to be dry in the midst of it, and the waters of the 
river Jordan to stop, it was done out of displeasure 
against the waters? Surely not. But it was done 
out of God’s singular care of, and regard for, his peo- 
ple, for whose deliverance he appeared in as illus- 
trious a manner, as if he had been seen riding in the 

998 


exiv. 4, 1 Exod. xiv. 22; Josh. iii. 16.——™ Josh. x. 12, 13. 
1 Or, thine arrows walked in the light, &e.—® Joshua x. 11; 
Psalm xviii. 14; Ixxvii. 17, 18. © Jeremiah li. 33; Amos i. 
3; Micah iv. 13. 


clouds, (here termed his horses,) and carried upon 
the wings of the wind as in a chariot: see notes on 
Deut. xxxiii. 26; Psa. civ. 3; Isa. xix. 1. Thy bow 
was made quite naked—Or, Thou didst lay bare thy 
bow, to fight for Israel; that is, thou didst fight for 
Israel, as evidently as if thou hadst been seen with a 
bow in thy hand; according to the oath, &e.—That 
thou mightest fulfil the oaths and promises which 
thou hadst made, to give the tribes of Israel full pos- 
session of Canaan. T'hou didst cleave the earth 
with rivers—Thou didst cleave the hard rocks, and 
the earth about them, and make the waters to run 
down in great streams, like rivers, which followed 
them a great part of their journey. T’he mountains 
saw thee, and they trembled—Mount Sinai, and the 
hills adjoining, felt the effects of thy presence. The 
overflowing of the water passed by—Or, hasted 
away, as Green renders it. “ At the season when 
the Israelites passed over Jordan, this river over- 
flowed its banks; but as soon as the priests who bare 
the ark entered into it, the waters, rearing them- 
selves upon the right hand and upon the left, parted 
asunder with a mighty noise; here nobly described 
by the deep uttering its voice, and lifting up its 
hands on high: see Josh. iii. 15, 16. 

Verses 11, 12. The sun and moon. stood still in 
their habitation—At the command of Joshua. At 
the light of thine arrows they went—Or rather, by 
their light (namely, the light of the sun and meon) 
thine arrows flew abroad, and by their shining, thy 
glittering spear. It was to give the Israelites time 
for the destruction of their enemies, that God caused 
the sun and moon to stand still; and while these 
gave them light, Jehovah sent out his arrows and 
scattered them, &c., Psa. xviii. 14. He alludes to 
God’s casting down great hailstones and lightnings 
from heaven, to discomfit the Amorites: see the mar- 
gin. Thou didst march, &e.—Jehovah is here re- 
presented as marching before his people, through 
the land of Canaan, in his chariot of war, and 
trampling under foot those that rose up against him ; 
which seems to be the meaning of the second clause, 
Thou didst thrash, &c. 

Verses 13-15, ‘Thou wentest forth fae the salva- 
tion of thy people—For their deliverance and wont 
tection; even for salvation with thine anoint 


The prophet’s faith in the 


CHAPTER III. 


mercy and goodness of God. 


A. M. 3378. ed 


Gand ; > thou woundedst the head out of 


the house of the wicked, ™ by disco- 
vering the foundation unto the neck. Selah. 

14 'Thou didst strike through with his staves 
the head of his villages: they ! came out as a 
whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as 
to devour the poor secretly. 

15 *'Thou didst walk through the sea with 
thy horses, throwgh the “heap of great 
waters. 

16 When I heard, * my belly trembled; my 
lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered 


into my bones, and I trembled in A. M. 3378. 
myself, that I might rest in the day Bcstatbit 
of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, 
he will invade them with his troops. 

17 4 Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, 
neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour 
of the olive shall '° fail, and the fields shall 
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from 
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the 
stalls : 

18 * Yet I will ‘rejoice in the Lorp, I will 
joy in the God of my salvation. 


P Josh. x. 24; xi. 8,12; Psalm Ixviii. 21——'® Heb. making 
penta eee Hebrew, were tempestuous.———4 Verse 8; Psalm 
xvii. 19. 


With those appointed and qualified to be leaders and 
rulers of thy people; suchas Moses, Joshua, Samuel, 
and David. J'how woundedst the head out of the 
house of the wicked——That is, the heads, or confed- 
erate princes, of the Canaanites, Josh. x. 3, and xi. 1; 
by discovering the foundation unto the neck—Or, as 
Green renders it, Thou rasedst the foundations even 
to the rock. Thou didst strike through with his 
staves, &e—Waterland reads, Thou didst strike 
through the head of his warriors among his tribes: 
and Houbigant, Thou, with thy sceptre, didst strike 
through the head of his princes. Thou didst dis- 
comfit all the petty kings of the several clans carry- 
ing on the war against Joshua. They came out as 
a whirlwind to scatter me—The prophet here as- 
sumes the person of the Israelitish people, and 
therefore says, J'hey came out to scaller me. Ar- 
mies are sometimes spoken of as whirlwinds: see 
Zech. ix. 14. Their rejoicing was as to devour the 
poor secretly—Or, in secret, that is, to devour those 
who were weak and defenceless, and should keep 
themselves in secret for fear. So the enemies of 
the Israelites, who came out as a whirlwind to scat- 
ter them, thought that they were not able to oppose 
them, but would hide themselves through fear; and 
they therefore exulted, as if they were marching to 
certain victory. Thou didst walk through the sea 
* with thy horses—This seems to be a highly figura- 
tive expression, to signify God’s dividing the waters 
of the Red sea and the river Jordan, and making them 
to stand on a heap, while the Israelites went through 
with as much safety as if they had rode on horses. 

Verse 16. When Iheard, my belly trembled--The 
prophet, having recounted, for the present encour- 
agement of the faithful, the wonderful works which 
God had formerly wrought for his people, here re- 
turns again to his first subject, namely, the revela-|| 
tion whieh he had received from God, concerning || 
the calamities which should be brought on the Jew- 
ish people by the Chaldeans. My belly trembled, 
my lips quivered, &c.—A consternation and shaking 
seized me, and I could not speak for grief and as- 
tonishment, at being informed what great miseries 
were coming upon my nation. J?ollenness entered 
into my bones—I could no more stand than a person 

3 


14 Or, mud. r Psa. exix. 120; Jeremiah xxiii. 9. t§ Or, 
cut them in pieces.——*® Heb. lie——s Job xiii. 15— Isaiah 
xli. 16; Ixi. 10. 


whose bones are rendered rotten by disease. That 
I might rest in the day of trouble—These words are 
interpreted in different ways: some suppose that the 
prophet here expresses a desire of being gathered 
to his fathers in peace, before the king of Babylon 
should invade Judea, and carry the people away 
captive; and that he adds, as a reason of his prayer, 
a description of the desolation which should then 
come upon the land. In this sense the clause is un- 
derstood by Mr. Green, who therefore interprets it, 
O that I might be at rest before the day of distress, 
when the invader shall come up against the people 
with his troops! But Noldius, whose interpretation 
is approved by Lowth, reads, Yet J shall rest in the 
day of trouble, when he shall come up against the 
people, even he who shall invade them with his troops. 
The prophet may be considered as speaking in the 
person of every truly pious Jew; I shall rest secure 
under the divine protection, when the Chaldeans 
shall come to invade Judea. This sense of the 
clause accords well, perhaps better than any other, 
with the following verses ; in which we have a plain 
and noble description of the confidence we ought to 
have in God, in the most trying times, and when in- 
volved in the greatest calamities. 

Verses 17, 18. Although the fig-tree shall not 
blossom—Though all outward means of support 
should fail, yet will I still have a firm confidence in 
the power, goodness, and faithfulness of God, that he 
will preserve me, and supply me with all things ne- 
cessary; and therefore, amidst the most threatening 
appearances of affairs, I shall still preserve inward 
peace and serenity of mind, as; trusting in him ix 
whom is everlasting strength, Isa. xxvi. 3,4. The 
state of the land during the captivity may be here 
prophetically described, when the vineyards, olive- 
yards, fields, and pastures, would be in a desolate 
and barren state: or the prophet may be considered as 


| declaring, that even such circumstances should not 


shake his confidence in God. Yet will I rejoice in 
the Lord—I shall have him to rejoice in, and will 
rejoice in him, J will joy in the God of my salva- 
tion—In the knowledge and love, the favour and 
friendship, the care and kindness of him in whom 
I have present, and hope to have future and eternal 


The prophet’s faith in the 


HABAKKUK, 


mercy and goodness of God. 


A. M. 3378. 


19 The Lord Gop is * my strength, 
B. C. 626. 


and he will make my feet like 
*hinds’ feet, and he will make me to ¥ walk 


u Psa, xxvii. 1——* 2 Sam. xxii. 34; Psa. xviii. 33. 


upon my high places. 'To the chief ce el 
singer on my 7 stringed instru- ———— 
ments. 


y Deut. xxxii. 13; xxxili. 29.——*" Heb. neginoth, Psa. iv. title. 


salvation, Observe: reader, this is the principal 
ground of our joy in God, that he is the God of our 
salvation ; our everlasting salvation, the salvation 
of our souls; and if he be so, we may rejoice in him 
as such in our greatest distresses, since by them our 
salvation cannot be hindered, but may be furthered. 
Instead of, the God of my salvation, the LXX. read, 
emt To Oew Tw owTnpt pov, in God my Saviour; and 
the Vulgate, in Deo Jesu meo, in God my Jesus, or, 
in Jesus my God. “That Jesus,” says Calmet, 
“who is the joy, the consolation, the hope, the life 
of believers; without whom the world can offer us 
nothing but false joys; who was the object of the 
desires, and the perpetual consolation of the prophets 
and patriarchs:” see Joon viii. 56. 

Verse 19. The Lord God is my strength—He 
that is the God of our salvation in another world, 
will be our strength in this world, to carry us on in 
our journey thither, and help us over the difficulties 
and oppositions we meet with in our way, even then 
when provisions are cut off, to make it appear that 
man does not live by bread alone, but may have the 
want of bread supplied by the graces and comforts 
of God’s Spirit. Observe, reader: Ist, We may be 

1000 


strong for our spiritual warfare and work, The Lord 
God is my strength, the strength of my heart, Psa. 
Ixxiii. 26. 2d, We may be swift for our spiritual 
race, He will make my feet like hinds’ feet, that 
with enlargement of heart I may run the way of his 
commandments. 3d, We may be successful in our 
spiritual enterprises, He will make me to walk wpon 
my high places: that is, I shall gain my point, shall 
be restored unto my land, and tread upon the high 
places of the enemy: see the notes on Psa. xviii. 
33 ; Deut. xxxii. 13, and xxxili. 29. Thus the prophet, 
who began his prayer with fear and trembling, con- 
cludes it with joy and triumph; for prayer is the 
support and consolation of a pious soul. And as he 
seems to have had the beginning of Moses’s bless- 
ing in his eye, at verse 3, so in this he alludes to the 
conclusion of it. Some think it appears from the 
last words, To the chief singers, &e., that this 
prayer was sung in the temple service. Houbigant, 
however, gives the last words another turn, render- 
ing them thus: And shall bring me to the tops of the 
mountains to victory in my song; or, that I may 
overcome, when those things whieh I here sing shall 
have their completion. 
3 


ed 


THE 


BOOK OF ZEPHANIAH. 


ARGUMENT. 


Accorpine to Epiphanius, Zephaniah was of the tribe of Simeon. 


He prophesied in the reign of 


Josiah, as he himself tells us, verse 1, but in what part of his reign is not certain; although it is 
probable, from the description which he gives of the disorders which prevailed in Judea in his time, 
that it was before the eighteenth year of it: that is, before that prince began to exert himself to 
effect a reformation in his kingdom, according to what we read, 2 Kings xxii., xxiii. Some think, 
however, that Zephaniah uttered these prophecies toward the close of Josiah’s reign, when religion 
had greatly declined among the Jews, through the hypocrisy of those who had at first concurred 
with that pious king, in endeavouring to bring about a reformation. The first chapter of this 
prophecy contains divers threatenings against the kingdom of Judah in general, and the city of 
Jerusalem in particular. In the second he calls the people to repentance, and prophesies against the 
Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, Assyrians, &c. The third and last consists of two parts: the 
first, a prophecy against Jerusalem and its inhabitants ; the second, a promise of a return from their 
captivity upon their repentance, and a restoration of the Jewish state to a flourishing condition. 
The style of this prophet is poetical; but his book contains nothing remarkable or striking, either 
with respect to the arrangement of his matter, or the colouring of his diction. His method and 
his subject bear so near a resemblance to those of Jeremiah, that St. Isidore asserts him to have 
been his abbreviator. Nor is this the only prophet whom Zephaniah resembles, as every one must 
own who compares him with Joel. See Calmet and Bishop Lowth. 


CHAPTER IL. 


In this chapter, after an account of the prophet, and the date of his mission, we have, (1,) Denunciations of utter destruction 


to Judah and Jerusalem, particularly to such as worshipped idols, and neglected the worship of God, 2-6. 


(2,) A com- 


mand to submit to the divine judgments in silence, because they had greatly sinned, 7-9, 12,17; and to howl, because 
the judgments would extend to all ranks and all places, and would be most terrible and unavoidable, 10-18. 


A. M. 3374. "THE word of the Lorp which 
whi ad came unto Zephaniah the son 
of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 


Verse 1. The word that came to Zephaniah— 
The divine revelation that was made to him. 


were not prophets, as the Jewish doctors make them, 
ye* tis probable they were persons of some note 
in Judah. The son of Hizkiah——Although both the 
letters and points of this name in the Hebrew are 
the same with those of King Hezekiah, and some 


therefore have thought that the prophet was his. 
great-grandsou; yet that could not be the case, be- | 
cause there was not a sufficient distance of time | 
between King Hezekiah and Josiah, in whose time | 


The | 
son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, &c.—If these | 


} 


Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the A. M. 3374. 
days of Josiah the son of Amon, — Hace 
king of Judah. 


Hezekiah’s having any son but Manasseh. Jn the 
days of Josiah—The Jews were wont to allege, that 
their kings obliged them to practise idolatry, and 
rendered them in other respects corrupt in their 
manners; but God, by raising up the pious Josiah 
to be their king, deprived them of that excuse. For 
so far was he from encouraging them in any branch 
of impiety or vice, that he used his utmost efforts to 
effect a thorough reformation among them, although, 
alas! to little purpose, for they continued to be ex- 
ceeding corrupt, both in their principles and prac- 
tices; or, if any change took place among them for 
the better, it seems to have been but very partial, 


he flourished, for four descents: nor do we read of || and of very short duration. 


3 


1001 


Denunciations of destruction 


ZEPHANIAH. 


to Judah and Jerusalem. 


A. M. 3374, 


2 911 will utterly consume all things 
B. C. 630 


from off * the land, saith the Lorn. 
3 *I will consume man and beast; I will 
consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes 
of the sea, and »the *stumbling-blocks with 
the wicked ; and I will cut off man from off the 
land, saith the Lorn. 
4 J will also stretch out my hand upon Judah, 
and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 
and ° I be cut off the remnant of Baal fom 


this place, and the name of “the es 
Chemarims with the priests ; 

5 And them ° that worship the host of heaven 
upon the house-tops; ‘and them that worship 
and ® that swear * by the Lorp, and that swear 
“by Malcham ; 

6 And ‘them that are turned back from the 
Lorp; and those that * have not sought the 
Lorp, nor inquired for him. 


7 1 Hold thy peace at the presence of the 


' Heb. By: taking away Twit make an end. 
of the land. a Hosea iv. 3. 
Matt. xiii. 41..—% Or, idols. 
2 Kings xxiii. 4, 5 


2 Heb. the face 
+ Ezekiel vii. 19; xiv. 3,4, 7; 
© Fulfilled about B. Cc. 624: 
e 2 Kangs xxiii. 12: 


Jeremiah xix. 13—f 1 Kings xviii. 21; 2 Kings xvii. 33, 41. 
& Isa. xlviii. 1; Hos. iv. 15—* Or, to the LOR: fe hae 
pec Oy ee 1 Kings xi. 33.—— Isaiah i. 4, Jer. ii. 13, 17; xv. 6. 

k Hos. vii. 7——! Hab. ii. 20; Zech. ii. i3, 


Verses 2, 3. Iwill utterly consume all things, &e. 
—That is, I will make the land of Judea quite deso- 
late. J will consume man and beast, &c.—That is, 
beasts of the tame and domestic kind. J will con- 
sume the fowls of the heaven and the fishes of the 
sea—Or of the waters, as we are wont to speak, for 
the Jews called every large collection -of waters a 
sea. The meaning is, I will bring a judicial and ex- 
traordinary desolation on the land, which shall ex- 
tend itself even to the birds-and fishes: see notes on 
Hos. iv. 3; Jer. iv. 23-25. Virgil speaks of pestilen- 
tial disorders affecting both the fishes of the sea and 
the fowls of the heaven. 


“Jam maris immensiprolem, et genus omne natantum 
Litore in extremo, ceu naufraga corpora, fluctus 
Proluit.” Grore. ili. 1. 541. 


“Tpsis est aér avibus non equus; et ille 
Precipites alta vitam sub nube relinquunt.” 
Tb. 1. 546. 
“The scaly nations of the sea profound, 
Like shipwreck’d carcasses, are driven aground: 
And mighty phoce, never seen before, 
In shallow streams, are stranded on the shore. 
To birds their native heavens contagious prove, 
From clouds they fall, and leave their souls above.” | 
DryDEN. 
“Tt is known,” says Bishop Newcome, “that birds 
are affected by pestilential disorders arising from pu- 
trified carcasses. They fall dead when they alight on 
bales of cloth infected by the plague.” And St. Je- 
rome upon this place says, that there are sufficient || 
proofs when cities are laid waste, and great slaughter 
is made of men, that it creates also a scarcity or soli- 
tude of beasts, birds, and fishes; and he mentions 
several places which, in those days, bore witness to 
this, where he says, there was nothing left but earth 
and sky, and briers and thick woods. And the stum- || 
bling-blocks with the wicked—In the Hebrew it is, 
The offences witi the wicked; that is, the idols 
with their worshippers. J will cut off man from the 
land—The land shall be depopulated, either by its 
inhabitants being slain, or carried away captive. 
Verses 4-6. J will also stretch out my hand wpon || 
Judah—I will manifest my power upon Judah, as I 


| formation that Josiah had made. 
| of religious worship, or a solemn invocation of God, 
as a witness and a judge, Deut. 


have done upon Israel. And L will cut off the rem- 
1002 


nant of Baal—The altars, or places of worship, de- 
dicated to Baal, which still remain in this place, 
namely, Jerusalem ; and the name of the Chemarims 
—Of the idolatrous priests, for so the same word is 
rendered 2 Kings xxiii. 5, where see the note; with 
the priests—That is, I will destroy these together 
with the priests of the tribe of Levi, who have been 


| joined in the worship of idols, in which, as we learn 
from Ezek. viii. 11, xxii. 26; some of them were 


joined. And them that worship the host of heaven 


_upon the house-tops—They were wont to worship the 
moon and stars upon the roofs of their houses, which 


were made flat. And that swear by the Lord, and 
by Malcham—That join the worship of idols to that 


of the true God. Malcham is the same with Moloch, 
|to whom many of the people of Judah continued to 


offer their children, as Jeremiah upbraids them, 
chap. vii.31; xix. 5; and that, it seems, after the re- 
Swearing is an act 


x. 20; and therefore 
the Israelites were expressly forbidden to swear by 
idols, Josh. xxiii. '7. And them that are turned back, 


| &¢c.—That are apostates to idolatry. And those that 
‘have not sought the Lord—That live without any 
sense of religion, and, as it were, without God in the 


world. 
Verse 7. Hold thy peace at the presence of the 
Tord—Keep silence in token of an awful reverence 
toward God. For the day of the Lord is at hand— 


| Now he is coming to execute his judgments upon 


the land. Humble thyself under his mighty hand, 


without repining or murmuring at his corrections, 


which thy sins do so justly deserve. Dor the Lord 


hath prepared a sacrifice—The slaughter of the 


wicked is called a sacrifice, because it is, in some 


'sense, an atonement to God’s justice. He hath bid 


his guests—This is an allusion to the custom of 
those who offered sacrifices, which was to invite 
their friends to partake of the feasts which accom- 
panied them. So here God is said to” invite his 
guests, that is, the Babylonians, who were to reap 


‘the spoils of the destruction of Judah and Easter 


and of the desolation of Judea: or, as so’ 
it, the guests may mean ravenous birds 


and dogs, collected to devour the a : 


Denunciations of destruction 


CHAPTER I. 


to Judah and Jerusalem 


A. M. 3374. Lord Gop: 


A Fd mfor the day of the 


Lorp is at hand: for ™the Lorp 
hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath *bid his 
guests. 

8 And it shall come to pass in the day of the 
Lorp’s sacrifice, that I will ® punish ° the 
princes, and the king’s children, and all such 
as are clothed with strange apparel. 

9 In the same day also will I punish all 
those that leap on the threshold, which fill 
their masters’ houses with violence and de- 
ceit. 

10 And it shall come to pass in that day, 
saith the Lorn, that there shall be the noise 
of a cry from ? the fish-gate, and a howling 


from the second, and a great crash- A. M. 3374. 
ing from the hills. bc bataine 

11 1 Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all - 
the merchant people are cut down; all they 
that bear silver are cut off. 

12 And it shall come to pass at that time, that 
I will search Jerusalem with candles, and pun- 
ish the men that are ‘settled? on their lees: 
‘that say in their heart, The Lorp will not do 
good, neither will he do evil. _ 

13 Therefore, their goods shall become a 
booty, and their houses a desolation : they shall 
also build houses, but * not inhabit.chem ; and 
they shall plant vineyards, but * not drink the 
wine thereof. 


= Isa. xxxiv.6; Jer. xlvi. 10; Ezek. xxxix- 
5 Heb. sanctified, or, prepared. ® Heb. 
© Jer. xxxix. 6. 


m Isa. xiii, 6. 
17; Rev. xix. 17. 
wisit upon. 


p 2 Chron. xxxili. 14.——4 James v. 1—? Heb. curded, or, 
thickened. r Jer. xlviii. 11; Amos vi. 1. Ss Psalm xciv. 7, 
t Deut. xxviii. 30, 39; Amos y. 11. 4 Mic. vi. 15. 


Verses 8, 9. In that day I will punish the princes 
and the king’s children—In 2 Kings xxv. 7, 21, 
we read of the fulfilling of both these particulars; 
the sons of King Zedekiah, and the principal officers 
of the state, being slain by the order of the king of 
Babylon. And all such as are clothed with strange 
apparel—Used for idolatrous purposes: see Deut. 
xxii. 11. There were peculiar vestments belonging 
to the worship of each idol; hence the command of 
Jehu, 2 Kings x. 22, Bring forth vestments for all 
the worshippers of Baal. The text may likewise be 
explained of such men as wore women’s apparel, 
and such women as wore that of men, which was 
contrary to an express law, Deut. xxii. 5, and was a 
rite observed in the worship of some idols. Jn the 
same day will I punish all those that leap on the 
threshold—Or rather, over the threshold. The ex- 
pression is thought to denote some idolatrous rite, 
like that which was practised in the temple of Dagon, 
where the priests did not tread upon the threshold, 
1 Sam. v. 5. Thus the Chaldee paraphrast inter- 
prets it of those who walked after the laws or rites of 
the Philistines. Capellus, however, understands it 
of those who invaded the house of their neighbours, 
joyfully bounding on the threshold. “This sense is 
favoured by what follows.”.—Newcome. Which fill 
their masters’ houses with violence and deceit—- 
Who enter into other men’s houses, and take away 
their goods by fraud or violence, and carry them to 
the houses of their masters. The iniquitous oflicers 
of the kings and princes seem to be here intended, 
who employed all the arts of deceit and oppression, 
as well as of open violence, to fill their master’s 
coffers. 

Verses 10, 11. Tn that day there shall be the noise 
of acry from the fish-gate—Mentioned Neh. iii. 3 
It was opposite to Joppa, according to Jerome, and 
at the entering of the city,from that quarter. The 
sundry expressions of this verse are intended to de- 
scribe the cries and shrieks that should arise from 
all parts of the city, upon the taking of it by the Ba- 


bylonians. The great crashing from the hills might 
be intended to signify the noise that should be heard 
from the palace and temple, which were situated on 
the mountains, Zion and Moriah. Howl, ye inhabit- 
ants of Maktesh—The inhabitants of some particu- 
lar part in or near Jerusalem. The Chaldee inter- 
prets it of the inhabitants near the brook Cedron, 
Bishop Newcome renders the clause, Howl ye inha- 
bitants of the lower city, understanding it of the val- 
ley in Jerusalem, which divided the upper from the 
lower city, “’This,” says he, “is agreeable to the ety- 
mology of the word, which signifies a hollow place, 
amortar.” Jn this sense the word is understood by 
Buxtorf. For all the merchant people are cut down 
—All they who used to traffic with you shall be de- 
stroyed. All they that bear silver are cut off—All 
the money-changers: the rich merchants in general, 
or the money-changers in particular, may be meant. 

Verses 12, 13. At that time, I will search Jerusa- 
lem with candles—I will deliver up Jerusalem into 
the hands of the Chaldeans, who shall let no corner 
of it escape them, but shall diligently search the 
houses, even with lights or torches, that they may 
plunder them of every thing. And punish the men 
that are settled on their lees—Who live securely in 
ease and plenty: see notes on Jer. xlviii. 11, and 
Amos vi. 1. That say in their heart, The Lord 
will not do good, &e.—Who have not God in all 
their thoughts, or imagine that he doth not con- 
cern himself with the affairs of the world, and that 
neither good nor evil is brought to pass by his provi- 
dence. The prophet especially describes those men, 
who, trusting in their riches, paid very little regard 
to the threats of the prophets, and seemed entirely 
safe in their own eyes, while they kept their beloved 
treasures. Therefore their goods shall become a 
booty, &c.—The enemy shall plunder their goods, 
and turn them out of their houses and possessions, 
so that they shall not inherit the houses they have 
built, nor drink the wine of the vineyards which 
they have planted. 

1003 


An earnest exhortation 


ZEPHANIAH. 


to repentance, 


14 *'The great day of the Lorp is 
near, i¢ is near, and hasteth greatly, 
_ even the voice of the day of the Lorn: the 

mighty man shall cry there bitterly. 

15 ¥ That day zs a day of wrath, a day of 
trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and 
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a 
day of clouds and thick darkness, 

16 A day of 7 the trumpet and alarm against 
the fenced cities, and against the high towers. 


A. M. 3374. 
B. C 


x Joel ii. 1, 11——¥ Isaiah xxii. 5; Jeremiah xxx. 7; Joel 
ii. 2,11; Amos v. 18; Verse 18. z Jer. iv. 19. a Deut. 
xxvill. 29 ; Isa. lix. 10. 


17 And I will bring distress upon A, Mages. 
men, that they shall * walk like blind ————_ 
men, because they have sinned against the 
Lorp: and ? their blood shall be poured out as 
dust, and their flesh ° as the dung. 

18 ? Neither their silver nor their gold shall be 
able to deliver them in the day of the Lorn’s 
wrath; but the whole land shall be * devoured by 
the fire of his jealousy: for ‘he shall make even a 
speedy riddance of all them that dwell inthe land. 


b Psalm lxxix. 3. ¢ Psalm Ixxxiii. 10; Jeremiah ix. 22; 
xvi, 4. ——4 Proverbs xi. 4; Ezekiel vii, 19.——® Chapter iii. 8, 
f Verses 2, 3. 


Verses 14-16. The great day of the Lord is near— 
The time of God’s executing his terrible judgments is 
nigh athand. Even the voice, &c.—The word even 
is not in the Hebrew. This latter part of the sen- 
tence may, it seems, be better rendered thus: J'he 
voice of the day of the Lord is bitter, and it vehe- 
mently resoundeth there. Or, Then the mighty 
man crieth ouf. The general sense is, that great 
noise, or distraction, should attend the taking of Je- 
rusalem by the Chaldeans. That day is a day of 
wrath, &ce.——That time will be a time of executing 
wrath. A day of wasteness and desolation—He- 
brew, ANNWD) NW, of tumult and devastation. A 
day of darkness and gloominess, &¢c.--Of perplexity, 
terror, and dismay. A day of the trumpet and alarm 
against the fenced cities—A day of attacking and 
taking fortified cities and strong holds, the attacks 
on which were used to be made by the sound of trum- 
pets; and probably trumpets sounded all the time of 
the attack, as also when an entrance was gained into 
them. 

Verses 17, 18. I will bring distress, &c., that they 
shall walk as blind men—I will bring them into such 
straits that they shall no more know: whither to turn 
themselves, or which way to go for safety, than ifthey 
were blind: cornpare Deut. xxviii. 29, and Isa. lix. 


10; in both which places the image is heightened 
by the circumstance of groping, or stumbling, like 
the blind, even at noon-day. And their blood shall 
be poured out as dust--'That is, as if it were of no 
value at all; and their flesh as dung—The inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem shall be slain in the streets of the 
city, and their carcasses left there to rot and putrefy. 
Neither their silver nor gold shall deliver them— 
This is spoken of the merchants, and other rich citi- 
zens. The whole land shall be devoured by the fire 
of his jealousy—God’s vengeance is frequently com- 
pared to fire: see Nah. i. 6. This, it is here threat- 
ened, should consume the Jand and its inhabitants for 
their heinous offences, and chiefly for their idolatry ; 
because that sin gives that honour which is only due 
to the one living and true God, to images, or fictitious 
gods, and therefore, in a peculiar manner, intrenches 
on God’s glory; is so contrary in its nature to the 
truth and fitness of things, and to all that is reason- 
able, just, and proper; has so great a tendency to 
corrupt and debase men’s minds, and the practice of 
it is so unfit in every point of view, that the Serip- 
tures, to give men some idea how odious it is, and 
what a great provocation to the Most High, represent 
him as jealous of having that honour which is only 
due to him, given to another, 


CHAPTER II. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) An earnest exhortation to the Jews to repent, and make their peace with God, i order to pre- 


vent the judgments threatened before it was too late, 1-8. 


(2,) A denunciation of desolating judgments to the neighbour- 


ing nations, which had assisted in bringing calamities on Israel, or had rejoiced therein ; particularly the Philistines, 


4-7; the Moabites and Ammonites, 8-11 ; 
A. M. 3374. ATHER *your g 
BG. 000 GC yourselves together, 


yea, gather together, O nation 


1 not desired ; 


the Ethiopians and Assyrians, 12-15, 


1. Ag 


2 Before the decree bring forth, A ey Soa 


before the day pass “as the chaff, 
before ° the fierce anger of the’ Loads come 


a Joel ii. 16.— Or, not desirous. + Job xxi. 18; Psalm 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 
Verses 1, 2. Gather yourselves together, &e.— 
Assemble yourselves to make a public humiliation: 


|i.4; Isaiah xvii. 13; Hosea xiii. 3. 


© 2 Kings xxiii. 26. 


‘as the word 5033 properly signifies. The Vulgate 


| renders it, non amabilis, not lovely ; ; and the Greek, ro 


arasdevrov, uninstructed, or, that will not receive in-_ 


see Joel ii. 16. O nation not desired—Or coveted, | struction; that is, not to be amended but by the dis- 
3 


1004 


A denunciation of judgments 


CHAPTER II, 


to the neighbouring nations. 


A. M. 3374. upon you, before the day of the 
28 Lorv's anger come upon you. 

3 “Seek ye. the Lon; * all ye meek of the 
earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek 
righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye 
shall be hid in the day of the Lorp’s anger. 

4 ¥ For ¢ Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ash- 
kelon a desolation: they shall drive out Ash- 
dod "at the noon-day, and Ekron shall be 
rooted up. 

5 Wo unto the inhabitants of ‘ the sea-coasts, 
the nation of the Cherethites ! the word of the 
Lorp is against you ; O * Canaan, the land of 
the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that 
there shall be no inhabitant. 

6 And the sea-coast shall be dwellings, and 
cottages for shepherds, ! and folds for flocks. 

7 And the coast shall be for ™the remnant 
of the house of Judah; they shall feed there- 


upon: in the houses of Ashkelon A. M. 3374. 
shall they lie down in the evening: Take SS 
* for the Lorp their God shall " visit them, and 
°turn away their captivity. 

8 4 PI have heard the reproach of Moab, 
and ¢ the revilings of the children of Ammon, 
whereby they have reproached my people, and 
‘magnified themselves against their border. 

9 Therefore, as I live, saith the Lorn of 
hosts, the God of Israel, Surely * Moab shall 
be as Sodom, and ‘the children of Ammon as 
Gomorrah, "even the breeding of nettles, and 
salt-pits, and a perpetual desolation: * the 
residue of my people shall spoil them, and the 
remnant of my people shall possess them. 

10 This shall they have for their pride, 
because they have reproached and magnified 
themselves against the people of the Lorn of 
hosts. 


4 Psa. ev. 4; Amos v. 6. © Psa. Ixxvi. 9.—f Joel ii. 14; 
Amos vy. 15; Jonah iii. 9.——8 Jer. xlvii. 4,5; Ezek. xxv. 15; 
Amos i. 6,7,8; Zech. ix. 5,6.— Jer. vi. 4; xv. 8.— i Ezek. 
xxv. 16.—— Josh. xiii. 3——! Isa. xvii. 2; Verse 14. m Isa, 
xi. 11; Mic. iv. 7; v. 7,8; Hag. i. 12; ii. 2; Verse 9, 2 Or, 
wehen:; 2 Ezek. iv. 31; Luke i. 68. 


° Psalm exxvi. 1; Jeremiah xxix. 14; Chap. iii. 20.—? Jer. 
xlvili. 27; Ezek. xxv. 8, zek, xxv. 3, 6—" Jer. xlix. 1. 
s Isa. xv.; Jer. xlviii.; Ezek. xxv. 9; ‘Amos ii. 1.—t Amos 
i. 13. “ Genesis xix. 25; Deuteron. xxix. 23; Isaiah xiii. 19; 

xxxiv. 13; Jer. xlix. 18; 1. 40.—— Verse 7.-—¥ Isa. xvi. 6; 
Jer. xlviii. 29, 


Wie of God’s judgments. Before the decree bring 
Sorth, before the day, &c.—Before the decree of God 
shall bring forth the day that shall be like the pass- 
ing of chaff; that is, wherein the wicked shall be dis- 
persed, as the chaff isby the wind. God’s consuming 
the wicked is often compared in Scripture to the 
dispersing of chaff. 

Verse 3. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek—Here the 
prophet addresses some others, different from those 
addressed before, namely, the few pious, who still 
remained in Jerusalem and Judah amidst the gene- 
ral corruption; which have wrought his judgment— 
Who have obeyed his laws, and done his will. Seek 
righteousness—That is, continue to seek it; perse- 
vere in the practice of every branch of piety and vir- 
tue. Seek meekness—Patiently wait on the holy 
and gracious God. Jt may be ye shall be hid, &c.— 
That ye shall be protected and preserved by the di- 
vine providence, amidst the dangers and calamities 
of that dreadful time, when God shall execute his 
judgments. 

Verses 4-7. For Gaza shall be forsaken—The 
prophet digresses here to foretel the fate of some 
cities and nations bordering on Judea; probably with 
a view to show that when Judea should be invaded, 
and Jerusalem attacked, there would be no place for 
the Jews to escape to, since all the neighbouring 
cities would be brought to ruin, as well as those of 
Judea. Nebuchadnezzar, as history informs us, took 
many of the cities of the Philistines. Wo to the in- 
habitants of the sea-coasts—Wo to the Philistines 
who live upon the coast of the Mediterranean sea: 
compare Ezek. xxv. 16, where, as well as here, they 
are called Cherethites, or Cherethims. The LXX. 

3 


read, mapocxot Kpytov, strangers of the Cretans. 
They are supposed to have been a colony removed 
from Crete to Palestine. O Canaan, the land of the 
Philistines, I will even destroy thee—The Canaan- 
ites, properly so called, were the same with the Phi- 
listines, and seated in that part of Palestine: see 
Josh. xiii. 3. And the sea-coast shall be dwellings 
Sor shepherds—The merchants, who inhabited there 
before, being driven far away by the calamities of 
the times, or carried into captivity, and no others re- 
sorting thither. And the coast shall be for the rem- 
nant of the house of Judah—This is a declaration 
that the sea-coasts, of which the Philistines should 
be dispossessed, should afterward come into the 
possession of the Jewish people, namely, after 
their return from their captivity; and that they 
should feed their flocks there, which should lie down 
in the evening in the desolate or ruined houses of 
Ashkelon. 

Verses 8-11. Ihave heard the reproach of Moab, 
and the revilings of Ammon—These countries were 
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, about five years after 
the destruction of Jerusalem: see the places referred 
to in the margin, where, as well as here, they are 
threatened with destruction, for their insulting over 
the Jews in their calamities, © And magnified them- 
selves against their border—Have invaded their 
territories: see Jer. xlix. 1. Surely Moab shall be 
as Sodom, and Ammon as Gomorrah—Proverbial 
expressions signifying utter destruction; and a per- 
petual desolation—That shall never more be pos- 
sessed by its former inhabitants. T'he residue of 
my people shall spoil them—Judas Maccabeus and 
his brethren subdued the Ammonites: see 1 Mac, y. 6 

1005 


Dacrecoin i denounced 


i The Lorpv wiil be terrible unto 
them; for he will *famish all the 
gods of the earth; *and men shall worship 
him, every one from his place, even all * the 
isles of the heathen. 

12 4 > Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain 
by © my sword. 

13 | And he will stretch out his hand against 
the north, and ¢ destroy Assyria; and will make 


A. M. 3374. 
B. C. 630. 


* Heb. make clean. 2 Mal. i. 11; John iv. 21. @ Genesis 
x5. Isa. xviii, 1; xx.4; Jeremiah xlvi. 9; Ezek. xxx. 9. 
¢ Psalm xvii. 13.——¢ Tsaiah x. 12 ; ; Ezek. xxxi, 3; Nah. i. 1; 


x “But this ind the seventh verse,” says Lowth, “will 
receive their utmost completion at the general resto- 
ration of the Jewish nation. Those that then es- 
cape, and return from their several dispersions, are 
elsewhere called by the name of the residue, and 
the remnant :” compare chap. iii. 13; and see note 
on Mic. iv.'7. The Lord will be terrible unto them 
—Or, The Lord, who is to be feared, is against, or 
above them, and will make it appear that_he is terri- 
ble inhis judgments. For he will famish all the 
gods of the earth—Such as Dagon, Chemosh, Mo- 
loch, &c., all those that are gods nowhere else but 
upon the earth, among the deceived sons of earth, 
vile, spurious gods. ‘Though their altars are now 
filled with sacrifices, and their bowls run over, as if 
it were designed to make them fat, they shall be 
famished, or starved, by being deprived of their 
sacrifices and drink-offerings. Instead of, He will 
famish, Houbigant reads, He will disstpate: but it 
is justly observed by Bishop Warburton, that the ex- 
pression, as it stands in our version, is noble, alluding 


ceived that the gods were nourished by the steam 
of sacrifices. And men shall worship him, every one 
From his place—Or, in his place: that is, not only 
at Jerusalem, but everywhere: see the margin. 
Even all the isles of the heathen—“ By the earth the 
Jews understood the great continent of all Asia and 
Africa, to which they had access by land; and by 


the isles of the sea they understood the places to | 


which they sailed by sea, particularly all Europe.” 
—Sir I. Newton, on Daniel, p. 216. Chrysostom 
cites this passage, according to the version of the 
LXX., and applies it to gospel times, as an argument 
against the Jews, and surely it was chiefly meant of 
those times; for never were the false gods so fam- 
ished, or so destroyed, as they were by the preach- 
ing of the gospel. Then especially did men, in every 
place where the gospel prevailed, w orship the true 
God alone. It is true, many of the people, among 
whom the Jews were dispersed in the time of their 
captivity, and also with whom they had commerce 
after their return, were instructed by them in the 
knowledge of the one living and true God; yet, 
what is said here seems to be much more applicable 
to the times of the gospel, than to any conversion of 
the heathen to the worship of Jehovah, which was 
ever effected by the Jews, before Christ sent out his 
apostles to preach his gospel through all the world. 
1006 


ZEPHANIAH. 


on Ethiopia and Assyria. 
Nineveh a desolation, and dry like A.M re as 
a wilderness. 

14 And ° flocks shall lie down in the midst 
of her, all ‘the beasts of the nations: both 
the * cormorant £ and the bittern shall lodge in 
the upper lintels of it; ¢heir voice shall sing 
in the windows; desolation shall be in the 
thresholds: * for he shall uncover the *cedar- 
work. 


ii. 10; iii. 15, 18. © Verse 6.——1 Isa, xiii. 21, 22.——* Or, 
pelican. {saiah xxxiv, 11, 14.——® Or, knops, or, or 
® Or, when he hath uncovered. ah Jer. xxii. 14, 


Verse 12. Ye Ethiopians also shall be slain— 
Here a denunciation of divine wrath is uttered 
against the Ethiopians, as, yerse 8, against the Moab- 
ites and Ammonites. It is said that they should be 
slain by God’s sword ; because Nebuchadnezzar, 
who was to subdue them, was raised up by the divine 
providence, in order to execute its purposes; and to 
cut off those whose wickedness called for the inflic- 
tion of divine vengeance. 'This denunciation against 
the Ethiopians was fulfilled by Nebuchadnezzar, by 
whom they were overthrown, when they came to 
assist the king of Egypt against him. 

Verses 13, 14. And he will stretch out his hand 
against the north—Nor will the southern nations 
only be punished, but judgments will be executed by 
the divine justice on the nations lying toward the 
north; and will make Nineveh a desolation—W hat 
is here foretold was fulfilled before the predictions 
recorded in the foregoing verses. Dr. Pridedux ob- 
serves, that “Chyniladanus being king of the Assy- 


|| rian and Babylonian empire, Nabopolassar, his gene- 
to the popular superstitions of paganism, which con- | 


ral, took the latter from him, in the sixteenth year 


| of Josiah; fourteen years after which Saraceus the 


king was slain, and Nineveh destroyed, which com-: 
pleted the fall of Assyria.” And dry like a wilder- 
ness—A multitude of people are often compared to, 
and called waters, in Scripture language; and there- 
fore, figuratively speaking, to make Nineveh dry 
like a wilderness, may signify depopulating her. Or 
the words may be taken literally; for “Rauwolff ob- 
serves, in his Travels, that on this side the river Ti- 
gris, in Mesopotamia, the ground is so sandy and 
dry, that you would think you were in the middle 
of the deserts of Arabia.”—Prid. Con., Ann. 612 and 
626. And flocks shall lie down, §c., ‘all the beasts 
of the nations—The several kinds of wild beasts that 
are in the country. What is said in this verse, is 


| descriptive of a place lying in ruins and desolation ; 


for in such a case it soon becomes a haunt of wild 
beasts and birds of every kind. Both thecormorant 
and the bittern, &c.—Bishop Neweome reads, Both 
the pelican and the porcupine shall lodge in the 
carved lintels thereof; observing of the former, 
“These birds fed in the Tigris, and made their nests 
in the deserted ruins of the city.” The next clause 
he renders, A cry shall resound in the window: the 
raven shall be in the porch. Forhe shall uncover— 
Or lay bare, the cedar-work—God will reduce the 


\\houses of Nineveh to such a state of desolation, that 3 
3 1 


Jerusalem reproved 


CHAPTER III. 


Sor her impiety. 


>= NT“ 


Bolt. 5374. 15 This is the rejoicing city ‘that 
—+—— dwelt carelessly, * that said in her 


heart, I am, and there is none besides me: how 


iTsa. xlvii, 8 Rey. xviii. 7——! Job xxvii. 23; 


the floors and ceilings of cedar shall lie open to the 
injuries of the weather, and to birds to roost and | 
build their nests there. “This reference” (in men- 
tioning cedar-work) “to the former elegance of the 
city, is finely introduced ; and, in the next verse, the 
grand and affecting description of her desolate state 
is beautifully contrasted, by her late festivity and 
pride.” 

Verse 15. This is the rejoicing city—This is sup- 
posed to be said by those who should pass by it after its 
desolation; that said in her heart, I am, and there is 


is she become a desolation, a place for A. M. 3374. 

: : B. C. 630. 
beasts to lie down in! every one that __ 
passeth by her ! shall hiss, and ™ wag his hand. 


Lam. ii. 15; Ezek. xxvii. 36.——™ Nahum iii. 19. 


none besides me——Its inhabitants indulged themselves 
in their ease and pleasures ; and they arrived at that 
degree of presumption, as to fancy that no strength 
or power could bring them down from the height of 
grandeur at which they were arrived. Babylon is 
charged with the same degree of pride and carnal 
security, Isa. xlvii.8. Every one that passeth by 
her shall hiss, &c—In astonishment at the condi- 
tion to which she is reduced: see a like topic, of a 
great city laid waste, pursued in a train of images full 
of sublimity and terror, Isa. xxxiv. 11-17. 


CHAPTER II. 


Returnng to Jerusalem, God, by his prophet, (1,) Sharply reproves and threatens her for the abundance of wickedness found 
in her, of which divers instances are given, with their aggravations, 1-7. (2,) He exhorts the people to wait on him, gra- 
ciously promising to destroy their enemies, 8, 15,19; to reform their manners, 9-13; and restore their happiness and 


honour, 14-20. 


WwW? to ther? that is filthy and 

polluted, to the oppressing city. 

2 She * obeyed not the voice; she ” received 

not *correction; she trusted not in the Lorn ; 
she drew not near to her God. 

3 ° Her princes within her are roaring lions ; 

her judges are ‘evening wolves; they gnaw 
not the bones till the morrow. 


A. M. 3374. 
B. C. 630. 


1 Or, gluttonous. 2 Heb. craw. a Jer. xxii. 21.— Jer. 
v. 3.—— Or, instruetion. ¢ Ezek. xxii. 27; Mic. iii.-9, 10, 11. 
4 Hab. i. 8.——* Jer. xxiii. 11, 32; Lam. ii. 14; Hos. ix. 7. 


A Her ° prophets are light and trea- ie 
cherous persons: her priests have ———— 
polluted the sanctuary, they have done £ vio- 
lence to the law. 

5 ® The just Lorp "is in the midst thereof ; 
he will not do iniquity: ‘every morning doth 
he bring his judgments to light, he faileth not ; 
but ‘the unjust knoweth no shame. 


£ Ezek. xxii. 26.——£ Deuteron. xxxii. 4 —— Verses 15, 17; 
Mice. iii. 11.—+ Heb. morning by morning. ——i Jeremiah ili. 3; 
vi. 15; viii. 12. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verses 1, 2. Wo to her that is filthy—(Bishop 
Newcome reads, rebellious, and the Vulgate, pro- 
voking,) and polluted—That is, defiled with various 
crimes ; to the oppressing city—It is well deserving 
of our notice, that the oppression of the poor is 
always ranked by God among those things which 
are most offensive to him. She obeyed not the voice 
—Namely, of God’s messengers, the prophets. She 
received not correction—Or instruction, as 2 may 

-be rendered: she did not attend to it; was not 
amended by it. She trusted not in the Lord—Did 
not place her confidence and hopes in the power and 
goodness of God, but in other things. She drew not 
near to God—In prayer and praise, and other acts 
of worship. ‘ 

Verses 3, 4. Her princes are roaring lions—Are 
like devouring lions, who roar in the act of seizing 
their prey. Her judges are evening wolves—Like 
so many beasts of prey. The princes and judges 
devour the people by injustice and oppression. They 

aie : 


a 


gnaw not the bones till the morrow—That is, they 
greedily devour every thing immediately, as soon as 
they lay hold on it. This expresses very forcibly 
the violence and oppression of which the great men 
in Jerusalem were guilty toward the poor, and their 
greediness after gain. Her prophets are light and 
treacherous persons—This is to be understood of the 
false prophets, who seduced the people by lying pre- 
tences to inspiration. Her priests have polluted the 
sanctuary, &¢c.—They have presumed to attend 
upon my service in the temple, after they had pol- 
luted themselves with idolatry, and thereby have 
profaned my holy place, (see chap. i. 4,) and have 
broken the ordinances of my law in many things. 
Verse 5. T'he just Lord is in the midst thereof— 
Namely, of Jerusalem, and sees all these things. He 
will not do iniquity—He is just and holy, and will 
do nothing but what is right; nor will he suffer wick- 
edness to pass unpunished. Every morning doth he 
bring his judgment to light—“ The sense is, not a 
day passes but we see instances of his goodness to 
; 1007 


ZEPHANIAH. 


to wait on God. 


An exhortation 
A. M.3374. 6 Lhave cut off the nations: their 


B. C. 630. ; 
—_——— ‘towers are desolate; I made their 


streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities 
are destroyed, so that there is no man, that 
there is none inhabitant. 

7 “I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt 
receive instruction ; so their dwelling should not 
be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but 
they rose early, and! corrupted all their doings. 

8 4 Therefore,™ wait ye upon me, saith the 


Lorp, until the day that I rise up to A. M, 3374, 
B. C. 630. 
the prey: for my determination és to 
» gather the nations, that I may assemble the 
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, 
even all my fierce anger: for all the earth 
° shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. 
9 For then will I turn tothe people ?a pure 
Slanguage, that they may all call upon the 
name of the Lorp, to serve him with one? 
consent. 


5 Or, corners.——* So Jer. viii. 6. ——! Gen. vi. 12.——™ Psalm 
Xxvil. 14; xxxvil. 34; Prov. xx. 22. 


righteous men, and of his vengeance on the wicked.” 
—Newcome. The expression, every morning, al- 
ludes to the custom of the Jews and neighbouring 
nations, who passed judgment only in the morning. 
He faileth not—He never omits thus to act. But the 
unjust knew not shame—The wicked continue to be 
hardened in their sins, and will not be induced to 
forsake them by any consideration, either of the 
baseness and evil of their conduct, or of the judg- 
ments of God continually inflicted on transgressors. 
Verses 6, 7. Ihave cut off the nations—I have ex- 
ecuted vengeance upon that great city Nineveh, 
cnap. ii. 15, and have brought my judgments nearer 
to you, by giving up your brethren of the ten tribes 
into the hands of Shalmaneser; who hath put an end 
to that kingdom, and hath carried its inhabitants eap- 
tive into astrange land: see 2 Kings xvii.6. J said, 
Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruc- 
tion—This is addressed to the city of Jerusalem. 
And God is here introduced as speaking after the 
manner of men, and signifying what effect it was 
reasonable to conclude the execution of his judg- 
ments upon the ten tribes would have had upon the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem ; that it would have caused 
them to fear him, and to have taken example, from 
the destruction of their brethren, to avoid similar 
crimes, and obey the laws which God had given 
them. So their dwelling should not be cut off—In 
order that by that means their city and country 
might be saved from destruction. But they rose 
early, and corrupted all their doings—But they, as 
it were with diligence and assiduity, corrupted their 
ways, and daily proceeded to greater and greater 
acts of wickedness. The expression, to rise early 
to do a thing, signifies to do it with assiduity, and 
with a great inclination, or good-will toward it. 
Verse. 8. Therefore—Rather, Nevertheless, wait 
ye upon me, saith the Lord—“ Notwithstanding these 
provocations, saith God, I exhort the godly among 
you to expect the fulfilment of the promises I have 
made, of restoring the Jewish nation to my wonted 
favour in the latter ages of the world: in order to 
which great crisis, I will execute remarkable judg- 
ments upon the unbelievers and disobedient.” Thus 
Lowth. It is very common with the prophets to 
subjoin the most comfortable promises to the most 
fearful threatenings, and, after having denounced 


1008 


© Chap. i. 18.—— Isaiah xix. 18——® Heb, lip. 
™ Heb. shoulder. 


n Joel iii. 2. 


but the prophet here seems to look further, even to 
the gospel times, and perhaps to the future and final 
restoration of the Jews. Until the day that I rise 
up to the prey—Until, as an enemy, I rise up to de- 
stroy first, and next to take the spoil: as if he had 
said, Since you, by your sins, continue to be mine 
enemies; so I will, by my judgments, show myself 
in arms against you as your enemy, namely, by the 
Chaldeans, who shall invade your country, and de- 
stroy and spoil you. For my determination—My 
fixed purpose, that which I have unalterably resolved 
on; is to gather the nations, &c.—All that are sub- 
ject to the Chaldean monarchy; with all that are 
confederate with, or tributary to, the king of Baby- 
lon; to pour upon them—Upon the obstinate, incor- 
rigible, and impious Jews first; mine indignation— 
Which by their sins they have kindled against them- 
selves; for all the earth——Or, all the land, namely, 
the whole land of Judea, and her cities ; shall be de- 
voured—-Consumed, as if burned up; with the fire 
of my jealousy—That jealousy wherewith God is 
concerned for his own glory, for his ordinances and 
statutes, which the Jewish people, their princes, pro- 
phets, and priests, had notoriously violated. Lowth 
thinks this may perhaps be meant of the same gen- 
eral summons which Joel speaks of, whereby the 
nations of the earth shall be gathered into the valley 
ef Jehoshaphat: see notes on Joel iii. 2, 12, 

Verse 9. For then—Or, afterward, as the particle 
™® seems to signify here, will I turn, or restore, to 
the people a pure language—I will turn them from 
their idolatries, and other wickedness, (see verse 13,) 
to glorify me with one mind and one mouth. The 
same thing is expressed by speaking the language 
of Canaan, Isa. xix. 18. This promise seems pri- 
marily to respect the Jewish captives in Babylon, 
and to imply that God would,-by the captivity, and 
other methods of his providence, so reform them ~™ 
and wean them from their idolatries and other sins, 
that they should, upon their return to their own land, 
all join together to glorify him with one mind and 
one mouth, and serve him alone in sincerity and 
truth. And this was accordingly, in a great measure, 
accomplished. For they never after their restora- — 
tion worshipped different gods, as they had done be- 
fore; but all joined, as well those of the ten tribes 
that returned, as those of Judah and Benjamin, in 


the captivity, to foretel the deliverance of his people; || the worship of Jehovah alone; nor did the nation 
~_ 3 = 


ce 


Gracious promises 


CHAPTER III. 


of restoration. 


A. M. S374. 10 %From beyond the rivers of 
~ Ethiopia my suppliants, even the 
daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine 
offering. 

11 In that day shalt thou not be ashamed 
for all thy doings, wherein thou hast trans- 
gressed against me: for then I will take away 
out of the midst of thee them that * rejoice in 


thy pride, and thou shalt no more A. M. 3374 
be haughty *®because of my holy ee 
mountain. 

12 I will also leave in the midst of thee * an 
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in 
the name of the Lorp. 

13 *The remnant of Israel "shall not do 


iniquity, * nor speak lies; neither shall a de- 


4 Psalm Ixviii. 31; Isaiah xviii. 1, 7; lx. 4; Mal.i. 11; Acts 
viii. 27.——*' Jer. vii. 4; Micah iii. 1; 8 Heb. 
in my holy. 


in general ever afterward fall into gross idolatry. 
And it is not to be doubted that their morals in gen- 
eral were much more pure when they returned from 
Babylon, than at the time they were carried thither. 
It is, however, generally supposed by commentators, 
that the full accomplishment of this promise is re- 
served for the latter days, after the conversion of the 
Jews, and the coming in of the fulness of the Gen- 
tiles, when there shall be one Lord, and his name 
one, Zech. xiv. 9. Accordingly the word rendered 
people in the first clause is in the plural, Dy, peo- 
ples, I will restore to the peoples a pure language: 
an expression which could hardly be intended of the 
Jews only, but seems evidently to include the Gen- 
tiles also. Toservehim with one consent—Hebrew, 
with one shoulder; that is, unanimously, and with 
joint endeavours. The metaphor is taken from 
beasts drawing together in one yoke, or men setting 
their shoulders together to one burden. 

Verse 10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia— 
The expression, 139, rendered from beyond, may 
be translated, from the borders of, as it signifies in- 
differently the hither or further side of a river. In 
the war with Pharaoh-necho, king of Egypt, many 
of the Jews were made captive and carried into 
Egypt, and from thence were sold into Ethiopia, 
properly so called. This prophecy, therefore, in its 
primary sense, seems to signify, that the posterity of 
these, termed here by God the daughter of his dis- 
persed, should bring him an offering, namely, into 
his temple. And accordingly Cyrus, entering into 
an alliance with the Ethiopians, obtained that the 
Jews, who were captives among them, should have 
their liberty restored to them, that so they might 
return with others to their own country. In like 
manner Ptolemy Philadelphus, as Josephus relates, 
purchased the liberty of a vast number of the Jews, 
who were captives, or slaves, in very distant coun- 
tries. Thus were the prophecies of bringing them 
from the east and the west, and from the north and the 
south, and from beyond the sea, very remarkably 
‘fulfilled. There can be no doubt, “however, that this 
promise ultimately relates to the time when all Israel 
shall be saved, Rom. xi. 26; when “the Jews, who 
are dispersed in the most distant countries, such as 
was Ethiopia, which lay beyond Egypt, shall come 
into the Christian Church, and make their religious 
acknowledgments there.”—Lowth. 

Verse 11. Inthat day—Or, after that time; shalt 

Vou. HI. ( 64 ) 


Isaiah xiv. 32; Zech. xi. 11; Matt. v.3; 1Cor. i. 27, 28 ; 
Jam. ii. 5. t Mic. iv. 7; Chap. ii. 7. Isa. lx. 21, «Isa, 
Ixiii. 8; Rev. xiv. 5. 


thou not be ashamed for all thy doings—Thy guilt 
and thy punishment shall cease: thou shalt be par- 
doned and reformed. For then will I take away 
them that rejoice in thy pride—Or, greatness: 
or, as some render it, that exultin their pride. And 
thow shalt no more be haughty because of my holy 
mountain—That is, because of mount Zion, my tem- 
ple, the sacrifices offered there, and the ordinances 
of my worship. I will purge out from thee those 
hypocrites who continue in their sins, unconcerned 
and unreformed, and yet rely on outward privileges, 
ordinances, and forms of worship. Thus Jeremiah 
represents them as exclaiming, Z'he temple of the 
Lord! the temple of the Lord! while they little 
regarded the Lord of the temple. Thus the Popish 
clergy cry out, Zhe church, the church, the Catholic 
Church! while in the mean time they neither enter 
into the true church themselves, nor permit those to 
enter that are so inclined. 

Verses 12, 13. I will also leave in the midst of 
thee—Of Judea and Jerusalem; an afflicted and 
poor people—Hebrew, 971 3) DY, a people humble, 
or meek, and poor. When the Chaldeans carried 
away the Jews into captivity, they left of the poor of 
the land for vine-dressers and husbandmen; and 
such as returned from the Babylonish captivity were 
generally both poor and lowly, and dead to all confi 
dence in external privileges. These were a type 
and figure of God’s spiritual remnant, who, at the 
coming of the Messiah, should believe on him, and 
embrace his gospel; who were both poor in spirit, 
and generally poor as to this world, and were meek 
and lowly in heart, and very different in their dis- 
positions from the proud, self-righteous Pharisees, 
who rejected Christ on account of his appearing 
among them in a state of poverty, reproach, and 
humiliation. And they shall trust in the name of 
the Lord—Not in their descent from Abraham, their 
rite of circumcision, their city or temple, or any of 
their civil or religious advantages, but-only in the 
Lord, in his mercy, power, and faithfulness. The 
remnant of Israel—Preserved in the captivity and 
dispersion, purified in the furnace of affliction, and 
now restored to their own land ; shall not do iniquity 
—Shall not commit the sins they formerly commit- 
ted, nor provoke God with their idolatries and other 
abominations as before; they shall be reformed and 
righteous. Nor speak lies—Nor shall they deceive 
each other, as they had been wont to do: they shall 

1009 3 


Graciwus promises 


A. M. 3374. ceitful tongue be found in their 
B.C. 0. mouth: for ¥they shall feed and lie 
down, and none shall make ¢hem afraid. 

14 ¥ 7Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O 
Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, 
O daughter of Jerusalem. 

15 The Lorp hath taken away thy judg- 
ments, he hath cast out thine enemy: * the 
King of Israel, even the Lorn, ? is in the midst 
of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more. 


16 In that day ° it shall be said to Jerusalem, 
hae 


ZEPHANIAH. 


of restoration. 


——eeeeoeaeow—w—"3=q=>»09ayuuaeeeeeE nee 
Fear thou not: and to Zion, * Let A. iat, 9874. 
not thy hands be ° slack. a 

17 The Lorp thy God ° in the midst of thee 
is mighty ; he will save, fhe will rejoice over 
thee with joy; !he will rest in his love, he 
will joy over thee with singing. 

18 I will gather them that ® are sorrowful for 
the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom 
“ the reproach of it was a burden. 

19 Behold, at that time I will undo all that 


afflict thee: and I will save her that ™ halteth, 


¥ Ezek. xxxiv. 28; Mie. iv. 43; vii. 14. z Isa. xii. 6; liv. 1; 
Zech. ii. 10; ix. 9. 4 John 1, 49.——> Verses 5, 17; Ezek. 
xlviii. 35; Revelation vii. 15; xxi, 3, 4. c Isaiah Xxxv. 3, 4, 
4 Heb. xii. 12 


9 Or, faint. e Verse 15.—f Deut. xxx. 9; Isaiah ]xii. 5; 
Ixv. 19; Jer. xxxii. 41. 10 Heb, he will be silent——s Lam. 
ii. 6.——"! Heb. the burden upon it was reproach Ezekiel 
xxxiv. 16; Mic. iv. 6, 7. 


be honest and upright, men of veracity and fidelity. 
Neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their 
mouth—Their spirit being without guile, their speech 
shall be without deceit. For they shall feed—Or, 
They shall also feed, and lie down—That is, they 
shall abound in necessary things, andlive securely ; 
a blessing which shall be added as a crown of their 
piety and truth. And none shall make them afraid— 
So as to induce them to commit iniquity, or speak 
lies: or, they shall be in no fear of any of the neigh- 
bouring nations, but shall have perfect peace on all 
sides. But this promise undoubtedly was to receive 
its full accomplishment only in the holy and happy 
state of the Christian Church, fed and protected by 
the good Shepherd, and safe under his watchful 
care; especially in the latter days, and during his 
millennial reign. Compare the places referred to 
in the margin. 

Verses 14,15. Sing, O daughter of Zion--At that 
time, O daughter of Zion, thou shalt break forth into 
loud and joyful praises to Jehovah, for his goodness 
toward thee ; and thou mayest even now do it, for 
thou shalt certainly enjoy this prosperous state. 
The injunction here to Zion, to be thankful and joy- 
ful, is trebled, sing, shout, and rejoice, as it is else- 
where in both Testaments; and it is a sin for the 
people of God not to rejoice, as well as not to repent. 
Thus, after the promises to take away sin, here fol- 
low promises of the taking away of trouble; for 
when the cause is removed, the effect will cease. 
What makes a people holy, will make them happy 
of course. But the precious promises here made to 
God’s purified people, although in some measure 
fulfilled to the Jews at their return from captivity, 
yet, in their full propriety of meaning, belong to the 
times of the gospel, and have their full accomplish- 
ment only in the comforts and joyful hopes of future 
felicity, which are the portion of the true disciples 
of the Lord Jesus. T'he Lord hath taken away 
thy judgments—That is, thy punishments. The 
prophet speaks of what was future, as though it 
were already past; of what God certainly would do, 
as if it were done already. He hath cast out thine 
enemy—Hath taken away the power of hurting thee 
from those who were before injurious to thee; or, 

1010 


hath removed thine enemies, who were the instru- 
ments of his vengeance. T'he King of Israel, ¢c., 
is in the midst of thee—He is returned to redeem 
and save thee, and gives manifest tokens of his pre- 
sence in thee, and protection overthee. Z'how shalt 
not see evil any more—While thy conduct is as be- 
comes my presence with thee, thou shalt neither feel, 
nor have cause to fear, such evils as thou hast for- 
merly suffered. 

Verses 16, 17. In that day—Or, time of restitu- 
tion, when the captives shall return and be settled in 
their own land; it shall be said to Jerusalem—-By 
prophets, or by friends congratulating and encourag- 
ing them; Fear thou not—Disquiet not yourselves 
with unnecessary fears, though you may apprehend 
some danger from Sanballat, Tobiah, and the Samar- 
itans: see Neh. iv. 1,2; and though you shall have 
troublesome times, Dan. ix. 25. Let not thy hands 
be slack—In the work of the Lord, in rebuilding the 
city and temple, and restoring the worship of God. 
The Lord—Hebrew, Jehovah ; thy God—Thine in 
a covenant never to be repealed or forgotten; in the 
midst of thee is mighty--He can and will restrain 
and destroy thine enemies, and support and defend 
his own people. He will save, &ce.—Will deliver 
thee from thy fears, and thine enemies’ rage. Will 
rejoice over thee with joy—Will greatly rejoice in 
thee, and take pleasure in blessing and doing thee 
good. He will rest in his love—Will continue pecu- 
liarly to love thee, and will take satisfaction in so 
doing. These promises also, in their full sense, be- 
long only to the Christian Church, composed of 
converted Jews and Gentiles, and shall be completely 
fulfilled during the millennium, when believers will 
have, as it were, a heaven on earth. 

Ver. 18-20. I will gather them that are sorrowful 
for the solemn assembly —I will collect together 
those Israelites who are dispersed in their several 
captivities, both that of Babylon, and those of fol- 
lowing times; who mourn for the loss of the public 
ordinances, and are grieved at the reproaches where- 
with their enemies upbraid them, as if they were 
utterly forsaken of God. Behold—Mark well; at 
that time Iwill wndo all that afflict thee—I will 
break the power, and dissolve the kingdom of of thy 

( 64* ) 3 


Promises of favour and prosperity 


A. M. 3374. and 


a gather her that was driven out ; 


and J will get them praise and 
fame in every land where they have been 
put to shame. 

20 At that time ‘ will I bring you again, even 


14 Hebrew, I will set them for a praise, 
shame. 


13 Hebrew, of their 


enemies and oppressors, particularly of the Babylo- 
nians. And I will save her that halteth—Who is in 
trouble, and ready to fall; and gather her that was 
driven out—Into remote countries. And J will get 
them praise, §c., where they have been put to shame 
—I will cause them to have fame, even in those 
places where they have been scoffed at and held in 
contempt. J will make you a name, §c., when I 
turn back your captivity—When I cause you to re- 
turn out of captivity, I will make your name great, 
and ye shall be the subject of men’s praise among all 
3 


CHAPTER III. 


in the days of the Messiah. 


in the time that I gather you: for I A. M. 3374. 
: 2 B. C. 630. 

will make you a name and a praise 

among all people of the earth, when I turn 

back your captivity before your eyes, saith the 

Lorp. 


ilsaiah xi, 12; xxvii. 12; lvi.8; Ezek. xxviii. 25; xxxiv. 13; 
Xxxviil. 21; Amos ix. 14, 


the nations around. So the Christian Church was, 
when it was made to flourish in the world, for there 
is that truth and grace, that piety and virtue in it, 
which may justly recommend it to the value and 
esteem of all the people of the earth; and so the 
universal church of the firstborn will be in the great 
day, when the saints shall be brought together to 
Christ, that he may be admired and glorified in them, 
and they admired and glorified in and through him, 
before angels and men, Then will God’s Israel be 
a name and a praise to all eternity. 
1011 


wet 4 —— 


THE . 


BOOK OF HAGGAT. 


ARGUMENT. 


Tue nine preceding minor prophets preached before tne captivity ; but the last three some time 
after it. Haggai was the first that was sent to the Jews, after their return to their own land. It is 
thought that he was born in Chaldea, and that he came from thence into Judea with Zerubbabel. 
He began his public work of prophesying and preaching in the sixth month of the second year 
of Darius Hystaspes, about seventeen years after the return of the captives. He, together with 
Zechariah, who, about two months after, was raised up to second him, mightily excited and en- 
couraged the Jews to resume and proceed with the work of rebuilding the temple, which they had 
intermitted for fifteen or sixteen years. He remonstrated how improper it was for them to let the 
temple lie in ruins, while their own houses were finished and elegantly adorned; and that their 
neglect of God’s house and honour had provoked him to blast their outward enjoyments. To stir 
them up to use greater diligence in this work, he assured them from God, that, after terrible con- 
vulsions of the nations, the Messiah should appear in the flesh, should teach in the courts of this 
latter temple, and thereby render it more glorious than the first. It appears that all Haggai’s proph- 
ecies, that are recorded, were delivered in the second year of Darius, and within the space of 
four months. Zechariah, however, prophesied longer, for we have prophecies delivered by him 
which were dated two years after. ‘The Jews ascribed to these two prophets the honour of being 
members of the great synagogue, as they call it, which was formed after the return from captivity. 
But it is more certain, and doubtless it was much more to their honour, that they both prophesied 
of Christ. Haggai spoke of him, as has just been observed, as the glory of the latter house ; and 
Zechariah, as the man, the Branch, that should build the spiritual temple of the Lord, should bear 
the glory, should sit and rule upon his throne, and be a priest upon his throne. In and by these 
two prophets, and Malachi, who succeeded them, the light of the morning-star shone more bright 
than in and by the foregoing minor prophets, as they lived nearer the time of the rising of the Sun 
of righteousness, and saw more clearly than their predecessors had done his day approaching. 
The LXX. make Haggai and Zechariah to be the penmen of Psalms ecxxviii., exlvi., and the two 
following. 


CHAPTER I. 


In this chapter, afler an account of the date and direction of this prophecy, we have, (1,) A sharp reproof of the Jews from 
the Lord, for their delay in building the temple, which had provoked God to punish them with a famine; and an exhorta- 
tion earnestly to resume and finish that work, 1-11. (2,) An account of their ready obedience, and of the Lord's further 
animating and encouraging them to their work, 12-15. 


A. M. 3484. 
5O 


N *the secon ari 
By 550, [ e second year of Darius the 


king, in the sixth month, in the 


first day of the month, came the word A. ah au. 
of the Lorn * by Haggai the prophet ———— 


1 Heb. by the hand of Haggai. 


a Ezek, iv. 24; v.1; Zech. i. 1. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verse 1. In the second year of Darius—Namely, 
the son of Hystaspes, king of Persia. Blair places 
the second year of his reign five hundred and twenty 
years before Christ. In the sixth month, in the first 
day of the month-—Therefore, about two months 
before Zechariah received a similar commission, for 

1012 


| the word of God came to him in the eighth month 
of the same year: see Zech. i.1. These two pro- 
' phets were sent to the Jews chiefly, it seems, to ex- 
hort them to go on with the rebuilding the temple. 
And the historical book of Ezra records, chap. v., 
that the rebuilding of the temple was resumed and 
carried on again through the exhortations and en- 
3 


The prophet reproves the Jews 


CHAPTER I. 


for delay in rebuilding the temple. 


A. M, 3484. unto » Zerubbabel the son of Sheal- 

- tiel, * governor of Judah, and to 
Joshua the son of 4 Josedech, the high-priest, 
saying, 

2 4 Thus speaketh the Lorp of hosts, say- 
ing, This people say, The time is not come, the 
time that the Lorn’s house should be built. 

3 Then came the word of the Lorp ° by 
Haggai the prophet, saying, 

4 ‘ Js it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your 
ceiled houses, and this house lie waste ? 

5 Now, therefore, thus saith the Lorp of 
hosts ; * Consider * your ways. 

6 Ye have » sown much, and bring. in little ; 
ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but 
ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, 


but there is none warm; and ‘he A. M. 3484. 
that earneth wages, earneth wages to adh 
put vt into a bag * with holes. 

7 4 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts; Consider 
your ways. 

8 Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and 
build the house ; and I will take pleasure in it, 
and I will be glorified, saith the Lorn. 

9 * Ye looked for much, and lo, i¢ came to 
little ; and when ye brought i¢ home, !I did 
>blow upon it. Why? saith the Lorp of hosts. 
Because of my house that 7s waste, and ye run 
every man unto his own house. 

10 Therefore, ™the heaven over you is stayed 
from dew, and the earth is stayed from her 
fruit. 


51 Chron. iii. 17,19; Ezra iii. 2; Matt. i. 12; Luke iii. 27. 
2 Or, captain. ——¢ Ezra iii. 2; v. 2.——4 1 Chronicles vi. 15. 
¢ Ezra v. 1.—S 2 Sam. vii. 2; Psalm exxxii. 3. 3 Heb. Set 
your heart on your ways. = Lam. iii. 40; Verse 7. 


h Deut. xxviii. 38; Hos. iv. 10; Mic. vi. 14, 15; Chap. ii. 16. 
i Zech. viii. 10.——* Heb. pierced through Chapter ii. 16. 
1 Chap. ii. 17.——* Or, blow it away— Lev. xxvi. 19; Deut. 
Xxviil. 23 ; 1 Kings viii. 35. 


couragements of these prophets. Unto Zerubbabel 
son of Shealtiel—And grandson of Jeconiah, who 
was carried captive to Babylon: see the margin. It 
is likely that Zerubbabel was regarded with as much 
respect by the Jews as if he had been their king, 
being of the royal family of David; but they did not 
give him the title of king, or invest him with the 
splendour of royal dignity, for fear of giving offence 
to the Persian kings, under whose protection they 
lived, and upon whom they were in a great measure 
dependant. And to Joshua the son of Josedech— 
Son of Seraiah, who was high-priest when Jerusalem 
was taken, and who was slain at Riblah : see 1 Chron. 
vi. 14; 2 Kings xxv. 18-21. Haggai seems to have 
addressed Zerubbabel and Joshua probably in the 
hearing of the people: see verse 12. 

Verses 2-4. This people say, The time is not 
come, &c.—They had no just cause for saying this; 
but their own private concerns and conveniences (as 
appears from what follows) employed all their 
thoughts, and they preferred them to the rebuilding 
of the temple. 7Z'ien—-When the people were thus 
sluggish, made excuses, and delayed the work ; came 
the word of the Lord to Haggai—To reprove them 
for their neglect, and excite them to their duty. Js 
it time for you, &c.—You think it full time to build 
your own houses: you judge it seasonable enough 
to lay out much cost on adorning them; what pre- 
tence then can you make, that it is not seasonable to 
build my house? Ought not that first to be set 
about, and the ornamenting of your own houses to 
be left till afterward? The reproof here given 
seems to allude to the different spirit with which 
David was actuated, Psa. exxxii., who vowed that 
he would not come into the tabernacle of his house, 
§c., until he found out a place for the Lord. It 
certainly argues a contempt of God, when men give 
the preference to themselves before him, or think no 


meanest accommodation good enough for the service 
of God. It is true an humble and devout mind is 
the only temple which God delights to dwell in; and 
he dwells not in, nor regards, temples made with 
hands; but yet, for the public solemnization of his 
worship, and as an outward testimony of men’s re- 
spect toward him, it is proper that places should be 
erected for, and appropriated to his worship; which 
places ought not to be neglected, but made as decent 
and becoming the design of their erection as the 
circumstances of things will admit of. 

Verses 5, 6. Therefore consider your ways—Re- 
flect seriously upon this affair, whether it is con- 
sistent with the reason of things, or whether you 
have even promoted your own happiness by it as 
you thought todo. Ye have sown much, and bring 
in little—Namely, into your barns. Ye eat, but ye 
have not enough—To satisfy your hunger; ye drink, 
but ye are not filled—Ye have not wine enough for 
your support. Ye clothe you, but there is none 
warm—Ye have not been able to get sufficient 
clothing to keep yourselves warm. And he that 
earneth wages, &c.—And whatever you gain by your 
Jabour, it is very quickly required for your necessary 
expenses, every thing being at a very dear rate. 
This has been the case with you, and this has arisen 
from your neglect of rebuilding God’s temple; for 
as you have neglected him, so hath he withdrawn 
his blessing from you; the consequence of which 
has been, that nothing has prospered with you. 

Verses 8-11. Go up to the mountain—Go to any 
of the forests upon the mountains: see Neh. ii. 8: 
and cut down timber to carry on the building; or go 
to the mountain of Moriah, which I have chosen to 
buildmy temple upon it ; and I will take pleasure in 
it—I will accept your offerings, and hear your 
prayers. And I will be glorified—Will show my 
majesty, and account myself glorified by you also, 


cost or grandeur is too much for themselves, but the || Ye looked for much and lo, it came to little—It did 
1013 


T he people encouraged to proceed 


HAGGATL. 


with the building of the temple. 


A. M. 3484. 
B.C. 520 


11 And I * called for a drought upon 
~ the land, and upon the mountains, 
and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, 
and upon the oil, and upon ¢hat which the 
ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon 
cattle, and ° upon all the labour of the hands. 
12 4 » Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, 
and Joshua the son of Josedech, the high- 
priest, with all the remnant of the people, 
obeyed the voice of the Lorp their God, and 
the words of Haggai the prophet, as the Lorp 
their God had sent him, and the people did 
fear before the Lorn. 


a] Kings xvii. 1; 
v. 2. 


Binge viii. 1. on ii. 17.—— Ezra 


13 Then spake’ Haggai the Lorp’s & i ay 
messenger in the Lorp’s message 
unto the people, saying, 1 I am with you, saith 
the Lorp. 

14 4 And ‘the Lorp stirred up the spirit of 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, * governor of 
Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Jo- 
sedech, the high-priest, and the spirit of all 
the remnant of the people; ‘and they came 
and did work in the house of the Lorp of hosts, 
their God. 

15 In the four and twentieth day of the sixth 
month, in the second year of Darius the king. 


2 Chron. xxxvi. 22; Ezra i. 1.—=s Chapter ii. 21——t Ezra 
v. 2, 8. 


not answer the expectation you had formed. When 
ye brought it home, I did blow upon it—I blasted it; 
or, blowed it away: when you brought your gains 
home, I caused them to be soon scattered again, or 
expended. The dearth with which God punished 
them for their neglect of rebuilding the temple, 
made all the necessaries of life so dear, that what- 
ever gains they got were quickly expended. Why? 
saith the Lord, &c.—For what reason have ye been 
visited with this calamity? Because of my house 
that ts waste—-All this evil is come upon you for 
your ungodly neglect of my house, leaving it waste. 
And ye run every man to his own house—You with 
eagerness carry on your own particular buildings, 
and mind only your own private affairs, and you 
take no manner of care about those things which 
concern my worship. TZ'herefore the heaven over 
you is stayed from dew—I have punished you with 
great drought, wherein the dew itself has ceased to 
fall: see 1 Kings xvii. 1. And the earth is stayed 


from her fruit—From bringing forth those fruits 
which otherwise it would have produced. And J 
called for a drought—I caused a dearth of every thing 
in the land, or a general barrenness to take place. 
And upon the mountains—Upon the hills, where 
your cattle and flocks used to feed, and to find suf- 
ficient nourishment; wpon the new wine, and upon 
the oil—Upon your vineyards and olive-yards; and 
upon men, and upon cattle—I made both men and 
cattle unfruitful. Or the meaning is, their very 
constitutions were changed, and many diseases af- 
flicted them, 

Verses 12, 138. Then Zerubbabel, §c., obeyed 
the voice of the Lord—Compare Ezra vy. 1, 2; where 
see the notes. J'hen spake Haggai the Lord’s 
messenger—Or prophet; in the Lord’s message— 
That is, who spake what follows, not if his own 
name, but in the name of God, saying, I am with 
you, saith the Lord—To afford you all the help you 
need, and to give success to your undertaking. 


CHAPTER IL. 
Haggai assures the builders, (1,) That the glory of this house should exceed the glory of the former, 1-9. (2,) That God 


would bless them and give them success, 10-19. 


A. M. 3484. 
B. C. 520. 


[N the seventh month, in the one 
and twentieth day of the month, 

came the word of the Lorp 'by the Prophet 

Haggai, saying, 

2 Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of 


2 Heb, il the hand oft 


NOTES ON ‘CHAPTER Il, 

Verses 1-3. In the seventh month, &c.—For the 
further encouragement of the people to proceed 
in rebuilding the temple, Haggai was sent again to 
them, about a month after he had been sent the first 
time, to assure them from God, that the glory of 

1014 


(3,) That he would peculiarly bless Zerubbabel, 20-23. 


Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to A. M. 3434, 

Joshua the son of Josedech the high- eo 

priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, 
3 *Who is left among you that saw this 


house in her first glory ? and how do ye see it 


a Ezra iii. 12. 


this latter temple, how little appearance soever there 

might be of it now, should be greater than that of 

the former. This message, or prophecy, of Haggai, 

was communicated a little before Zechariah was sent 

to them for the like purpose. Who is left among 

you that saw this house in her first glory ?—About 
8 ; 


The people encouraged to proceed 


CHAPTER II. 


with the building of the temple. 


Ag M2454. now ? »ds it not in your eyes in com- 
—_——. parison of it as nothing ? 


4 Yet now °be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith 
the Lorp; and be strong, O Joshua, son of 
Josedech the high-priest ;. and be strong, all ye 
people of the land, saith the Lorn, and work: 
for 1 am with you, saith the Lorn of hosts : 

5 4 According to the word that I covenanted 
with you when ye came out of Egypt, so ° my 


b Zechariah iv. 10.—¢ Zech. viii. 9——4 Exod. xxix. 45, 46 ; 
Jer. vii. 23.——* Neh. ix. 20; Isa. Ixiii. 11. 


sixty-six years had elapsed from the destruction of 
the former temple, (before Christ 587,) to the time 
when this prophecy was delivered; (see notes on 
Ezra vi. 15, and Blair’s tables ;) nevertheless, it appears 
by this question of the prophet, that some of the 
Jews there present had seen the former temple when 
young, before they were carried to Babylon, and 
could remember what a magnificent building it was. 
Ts it not in your eyes as nothing—That is, in com- 
parison of the former. The words are an elegant 
Hebraism. We learn from Ezra iii. 12, (where see 
the note,) that when the foundation of the second 
temple was laid, in the second year of Cyrus, many 
of the ancient men, that had seen the first house, 
wept to see how much this second was likely to fall 
short of the glory of it. Undoubtedly the slender 
substance of the Jews at this time, and the haste 
they were in to rebuild the temple, that they might 
have a place for public worship, made them lay the 
foundation of it at first of much smaller dimensions 
than those of the former temple, and also to build it 
with less strength and magnificence. 

Verses 4, 5. Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel— 
Do thou and all the rest of you exert yourselves, and 
proceed in rebuilding the temple with spirit and 
pleasure; for Tam with you, saith the Lord of hosts 
—And will enable you to bring the work to a happy 
issue. According tothe word that I covenanted with 
you—I will fulfil to you what I promised to your 
ancestors, namely, that I would be their God, and 
that it should be well with them, if they obeyed my 
voice; that I would keep them from evil, and more- 
over, bless and prosper them; (see the margin;) and 
so will I act toward you upon the same conditions, 
namely, your obeying my voice. So my Spirit 
remaineth—Rather, So my Spirit shall remain 
among you, namely, as a source of strength and 
courage, of wisdom and understanding, of zeal and 
fervency, to carry you through this work. ear ye 
not—Let no discouraging fears or apprehensions 
have place in your minds, or weaken your hands. 

Verses 6,7. Yet once—Or, once more, ert araé, as 
the LXX. render it, whom St. Paul follows, Heb. 
xii. 26. The phrase implies such an alteration, or 
change of things, as should be permanent, and 
should not give place to any other, as the apostle 
there expounds it. The expression, says Bishop 
Newcome, “has a clear sense, if understood of the 
evangelical age: for many political revolutions suc- 

3 


Spirit remaineth among you; fear A. M. 3484. 
ye not. ee. 

6 For thus saith the Lorp of hosts; £ Yet 
once, it is a little while, and & I will shake the 
heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry 
land ; 

7 And I will shake all nations, and the De- 
sire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this 
house with glory, saith the Lorn of hosts. 


f Verse 21; Heb. xii. 26.——£ Joel iii. 16——» Gen. xlix. 10; 
Mal. iii. 1. 


ceeded, as the conquest of Darius Codomanus, and 
the various fortunes of Alexander’s successors; but 
only one great and final religious revolution ;” 
namely, a revolution, not introductory to, but con- 
sequent upon the coming of the Messiah; the change 
of the Mosaic economy for that of the gospel. A 
little while—Though it was five hundred years 
from the time of the uttering of this prophecy to 
the coming of the Messiah, which was the event here 
intended, yet it might be called a short time, when 
compared with that which had elapsed from the 
creation to the giving of the law, or from the giving 
of the law to the return of the Jews from Babylon, 
and the erection of this second temple. And I will 
shake the heavens and the earth, &c.—These and 
similar figurative expressions are often used in the 
prophetical Scriptures, to signify great commotions 
and changes in the world, whether political or reli- 
gious. The political ones here intended began in 
the overthrow of the Persian monarchy by Alex- 
ander, within two centuries after this prediction, 
which event was followed by commotions, destruc- 
tive wars and changes among his successors, till the 
Macedonian empire, which had overturned the Per- 
sian, with the several kingdoms into which it was 
divided, was itself subdued by the Roman. The 
expressions, the sea and the dry land, are added as 
a particular explication of what is meant by the 
general term earth, and signify only what is ex- 
pressed without a figure in the next clause. J will 
shake all nations—All nations were more or less in- 
volved in, and shaken by, the wars that overthrew 
the Persian kingdom, and still more in and by those 
that overturned the empire of the Greeks. Grotius 
explains this prophecy as being, in part, at least, ac- 
complished by the extraordinary phenomena in the 
heavens, and on the earth, at the birth, death, and 
resurrection of Christ, and mission of the Holy Sp - 
rit. But certainly the other is the interpretation 
chiefly intended. And the Desire of all nations— 
Christ, most desirable to all nations, and who was 
desired by all that knew their own misery, and his 
sufficiency to save them ; who was to be the light of 
the Gentiles, as well as the glory of his people Is- 
rael: such a guide and director as the wise men 
among the heathen longed for; and whose coming 
was the expectation of the Jewish nation, and the 
completion of all the promises made to their fathers. 
And I will fill this house with glory—A glory nos 
1015 


The latter temple shall exceed 


HAGGAI. 


the former in gtory. 


A. M. 3484. § 'The silver 7s mine, and the gold 
Be, 520.: é 
is mine, saith the Lorn of hosts. 

9 i The glory of this latte» house’ shall be 
greater than of the former, saith the Lorn of 
hosts: and in this place will I give * peace, saith 
the Lorp of hosts. 

10 % Inthe four and twentieth day of the 
ninth month, in the second year of Darius, 
came the word of the Lorp by Haggai the 
prophet, saying, 

11 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, ! Ask now 
the priests concerning the law, saying, 

12 Lf one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his 


} John i. 14.——k Psalm Ixxxv. 8,9; Luke ii. 14; Ephesians 
ii. 14, 


garment, and with his skirt do touch A. M. 3484. 
bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or te Teel 
any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests 
answered and said, No. 

13 'Then said Haggai, If one thatis ™ unclean 
by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be 
unclean? And the priest answered and said, 
It shall be unclean. 

14 Then answered Haggai, and said, *So is 
this people, and so is this nation before me, 
saith the Lorn; and so is every work of their 
hands ; and that which they offer there is un- 
clean. 


1 Lev. x..10, 11; Deut. xxxiii. 10; Mal. ii. 7——™ Num. xix. 11. 
» Titus i. 15. 


consisting in the magnificence of its structure, its 
rich ornaments, or costly sacrifices, which would 
have been only a worldly glory; but a glory that 
was spiritual, heavenly, and divine. 

Verses 8,9. J'he silver is mine—Solomon’s tem- 
ple was more richly adorned with silver and gold 
than this, and I, that am the Lord of all the world, 
could easily command the riches of it, and bring 
them together for beautifying this my house, if I 
took delight in, or wanted any thing of this sort. A 
like expression as this is used, Psa. 1. 10, with regard 
to sacrifices. The glory of this latter house, &¢.— 
The glory of this second temple shall exceed that of 
the former, not in riches or costly ornaments, but in 
this, that there the Prince of peace shall make his 
appearance, and there the gospel of peace shall be 
preached and published. See Isa. ix.6; Mic. v. 5; 
Eph. ii. 14. “ Notwithstanding the former temple 
had the Urim aid Thummim, the ark containing 
the two tables of the law, (written with the finger of 
God,) the pot of manna, Aaron’s rod that budded, and 
the cloud that overshadowed the mercy-seat, and was 
the symbol of the divine presence; yet the glory of 
this latter house shall be greater by the appearance, 
doctrines, and miracles of Christ. Some interpret 
this passage of the richer decorations in the latter 
temple; but it may well be doubted whether the se- 
cond temple could exceed that of Solomon in the 
splendour and costliness of its ornaments. The pre- 
sumption is, that the former temple was more mag- 
nificent and sumptuous in its furniture than the lat- 
ter, though inferior to it in point of magnitude. 
Prideaux values the gold, with which the holy of 
holies alone was overlaid, at four million three hun- 
dred and twenty thousand pounds sterling. P.I.B. 
iii. Ann. 534.”—Newcome. What were the magni- 
ficence and beauty which adorned the former tem- 
ple? What was even the Shechinah, the resplend- 
ent cloud of glory, which rested upon the mercy- 
seat, compared with the emanations of the divine 
perfections from Immanuel: the almighty power 
and boundless goodness exerted in acts of benefi- 
cence which shone forth in Christ, when the blind 
and the lame came to him in the temple, and he 

1016 


healed them; and the infinite wisdom displayed in 
his divine discourses, when he taught daily in the 
temple, Luke xix. 47, and his doctrine dropped as 
the rain, and his speech distilled as the dew? And 
never, surely, was such peace given to men by any 
other as was imparted by and through him; peace 
between God and man, between Jews and Gentiles, 
and between man and man, wherever his religion is 
received in the truth and power of it: peace, spirit- 
ual, internal, and heavenly; peace of conscience, 
tranquillity of mind, serenity of heart; a peace which, 
as the apostle observes, passeth all understanding, 
all purely rational conception, or, which no one can 
comprehend, save he that receives it. 

Verses 10-14. In the four and twentieth day of 
the ninth month—At which time, as appears from 
verses 16, 19, (the materials being collected,) they 
began to go on again with the building of the temple. 
Ask now concerning the law—What the law saith in 
this case. The question was put to the priests, 
whose office it was to put a difference between holy 
and unholy, between clean and unclean, Ley. x. 10: 
that is, to be thoroughly acquainted with all the ce- 
remonial laws, and to instruct others concerning 
them. Jf one bear, or carry, holy flesh—Part of the 
sacrifice, legally sanctified, or made holy, by the 
altar on which the whole was sanctified ; in the skirt 
—In the lap; of his garment—Or in any other cloth; 
and if this cloth touch any common thing, as bread, 
&c., shall that become legally holy ? And the priests 
said, No—By the answer of the priests in this, com- 
pared with the following verse, we find, that legal 
holiness was not so easily communicated as legal 
impurity: for the holy flesh did not make any thing 
that was touched by it holy ; but the touch of a per- 
son who-was unclean rendered holy things unclean, 
Thus is vice much more easily contracted than vir- 
tue! Broad and easy is the way that leadeth to sin, 
but narrow and difficult is that which leads to holi- 
ness! Then said Haggai—Now a second case is 
proposed; Jf one that is unclean by a dead body 
touch any of these—Namely, the things mentioned 
in the former verse, bread, pottage, wine, &c.; shall 
it be unclean?—Shall that which the unclean per- 

3 


Promises of 


CHAPTER ILI. > 


“ 


Sruitful seasons. 


aM. ase. 15 And now, I pray you, ° consider 
; from this day and upward, from be- 
fore a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple 
of the Lorn: 

16 Since those days were, » when one came 
to aheap of twenty measures, there were but 
ten: when one came to the press-fat for to draw 
out fifty vessels out of the press, there were aiid 
twenty. 

17 “1 smote you with blasting, and with mil- 
dew, and with hail, in all the labours of your 
hands; ‘yet ye ¢ened not to me, saith the 
Lorp. 

18 Consider now from this day and upward, 
from the four and twentieth day of the ninth 


© Chapter i. 5. ? Chap. i. 6,9; Zech. viii. 10—a Deut. 
aie 22; 1 Kings viii. 37; ‘Chap. i. 9; Amos iv. 9.——" Chap. 
. U— Jer. v. “33 Amos iv. 6-11. 


son doth touch become unclean? Though a touch 
of what is holy will not make holy, yet, will not a 
touch of what is polluted defile? and the priests an- 
swered, It shall be unclean—The law was plain in 
this case: see Num. xix. 11. The least defect is 
sufficient to make a thing evil, whereas, to make it 
good and perfect, a concurrence of all good qualities 
is requisite. So is this people before me—In like 
manner, saith God, your neglect of my temple, and 
your disregard of my worship, have made you un- 
clean, as if you had contracted legal pollution by 
touching a dead body; and rendered every thing 
you undertake, even the sacrifices you offer on my 
altar, unclean and unacceptable. 

Verses 15-17. And now, consider from this day, 
&c.—Reflect on what has happened to you, from the 
time that a stop was put to the building of the tem- 
ple, after the first foundation of it was laid, till you 
began again to rebuild it. And upward—Or, for- 
ward. He had bid them look back, chap. i. 5, 7; 
now he bids them look forward. Since those days 
—All the time the temple lay neglected. When 
one came to a heap—Namely, of corn, which seem- 
ed likely to produce twenty measures; there were 
but ten—Only half the quantity expected was found 
to be produced, through the poverty of the ear. 
The verse, it must be observed, according to the 
present rendering, is very elliptical; but if the first 
clause be explained by the second, which it ought to 
be, the sense will clearly appear to be this: When 
one came to a heap for twenty measures ; that is, 
when a person came to a heap of corn on his floor, 
either of sheaves unthrashed, or of corn unwinnow- 
ed, and expected that it would have produced twenty 
measures after it was thrashed and winnowed, to 
his great disappointment he had but ten out of it. 
Such also was the case of those who came to draw 
out fifty measures of wine from the wine-press. J 
smote you with blasting—Burning and scorching 
winds; and with hail—Which even in cold coun- 
tries many times destroys corn, fruits, and trees, by 


month, even from * the day that the AT YE. 
foundation of the Lorp’s temple was —_— : 
laid, consider it. 

19 “Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet 
the vine, and the fig-tree, and the pomegra- 
nate, and the olive-tree, hath not brought forth : 
from this day will I bless you. 

20 4 And again the word of the Lorp came 
unto Haggai in the four and twentieth day of 
the month, saying, 

21 Sea to Zerubbabel, * governor of Judah, 
saying, YI will shake the heavens and the 
earth ; ‘ 

22 ‘And  [ will overthrow the throne of king- 
doms, and I will destroy the strength of the 


t Zechariah viii. 9. 4 Zechariah viii. 12. 
14.—~y Verses 6, 7; Hebrews xii. 26. 
Matthew xxiv. 7. 


x Chapter i. 
z Daniel ii. 44; 


its violence ; but in those hot countries does it much 
oftener. Jn all the labours of your hands—In all 
that you sowed or planted; yet ye turned not to me 
—Ye did not lay my judgments to heart, nor con- 
sider that they were inflicted for your sin, in neglect- 
ing to rebuild my temple, and restore my worship 
in it. 

Verses 18, 19. Consider now, from this day and 
upward—That is, forward. In the 15th verse the 
prophet exhorted them to reflect upon the calami- 
ties they had suffered, from the time the rebuilding 
of the temple was intermitted. Now he bids them 
look forward, from the day the building was recom- 
menced, (see chap. i. 15,) and they would find a 
visible change in their affairs for the better. Even 
Srom the day that the foundation was laid, &c.—'The 
prophet expresses the carrying on of the building 
as if it were laying the foundation anew, because 
the work had been so long interrupted; (compare 
Zech. viii. 9;) but yet there is no doubt to be made 
that they built upon the same foundation which had 
been laid some years before, of which we have an 
account Ezra iii. 8, and did not lay a new founda- 
tion. Js the seed yet in the barn—Is the harvest 
already laid up in the barn? or any fruits of the earth 
gathered in? No, eertainly : for thisis but the ninth 
month, (answering to our November,) whenno judg- 
ment can be formed what will be the increase of the 
year following; yet, from this time, I promise you 
the blessing of a fruitful year, as an encouragement 
to you to carry on the building. Yea, as yet the 
vine and the fig-tree hath not brought forth—No 
sign yet appears what vintage you shall have, what 
store of wine, oil, figs, and pomegranates; yet by 
tht word of God I tell you, you shall be blessed in 
them all, and have a large produce. 

Verses 20-22. Again the word of the Lord came 
unto Haggai—Probably on the same day that he 
uttered what precedes, from verse 10 ; speak to Ze- 
rubbabel, governor of Judah—The same title which 
is given to him chap. i. 1; in which character he was 

1017 


> 


Predictions of 


A. M. 3484. kingdoms of the heathen; and *I 
snes will overthrow the chariots, and those 
that ride in them; and the horses and their 
riders shall come down, every one by the sword 
of his brother. 


* Micah v. 10; Zech. iv. 65 ix. 10. 


HAGGAT. 


mighty revolutions. 


23 In that day, saith the Lorp of A. M. 3484. 
hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, ™ © 
my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the Lorn, 
band will make thee as a signet; for °I have 


chosen thee, saith the Lorn of hosts. 


> Cant. viii. 6; Jer. xxii. 24. ¢ Isa. xlii. 1; xliii. 10. 


the type of the Messiah, to whom the following 
words chiefly belong. J will shake the heavens and 
the earth—I will cause great commotions, and bring 
great things to pass. J will overthrow the throne of 
kingdoms—This is supposed to be spoken of the 
overthrow of the Persian empire, in Egypt, which, 
lying near to the Jewish territories, was regarded 
by them with great awe; and therefore its subver- 
sion was foretold to them, to encourage them to go 
on in the rebuilding of the temple. J will destroy 
the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen—Or, of 
the nations. The strength of the Persians, whose 
empire consisted of many kingdoms, or nations, was 
broken in a most remarkable manner by the little 
country of Greece. Such vast overthrows, both by 
sea and land, as they received from the Greeks, are 
scarcely to be paralleled. The horses and their 
riders shall come down—Shall fall to the earth; 
every one by the sword of his brother-—That is, of 
his fellow-creature. Perhaps the different nations 
which should be concerned in these commotions, 
namely, the Persians, Egyptians, and Greeks, are 
here called brothers, because they were all idolaters, 
or worshippers of fictitious gods, 

Verse 23. In that day will I take thee, O Zerub- 
babel, &c.—Amidst the commotions which I will 
cause in the world, I willso order it, that Judea shall 
remain safe under thy government, O Zerubbabel, 
and thy successors, and be molested by none. A 
signet, or seal, particularly a royal one, is kept with 
great care; therefore the promise of making Zerub- 

1018 


babel as a signet, signified keeping him safe, or pre- 
serving him as a person of great estimation. For I 
have chosen thee—To be the ruler of my people. 
This whole prophecy, from verse 21, addressed to 
Zerubbabel, is considered by Bishop Chandler, Mr. 
Lowth, and many others, as parallel to that contain- 
ed in verses 6-9; that the same commotions and 
shaking of nations are intended in both passages ; 
and therefore that by Zerubbabel here, the Messiah, 
typified by him, is chiefly intended. That the pre- 


| diction could not be properly and fully accomplished 


in Zerubbabel, personally considered, is evident, as 
in all likelihood he did not live many years after the 
finishing of the temple, and certainly did not see any 
of those great changes here foretold ; and therefore 
the Messiah must be here described under the name 


| of Zerubbabel, as he elsewhere is under that of Da- 


vid. He is, indeed, the signet on God’s right hand ; 
for all power is given to him, and derived from him, 
he being constituted Head of the church, and Judge 
of the world. In himthe great charter of the gospel 
is signed and sanctified, and it is in him that all the 
promises of God are yea and amen. And what is 
foretold, verse 22, respecting the overthrow of the 
throne of kingdoms, may probably ultimately refer 
to his second coming, or to that illustrious dis- 
play of divine power, whereby a period shall be 
put to all anti-christian empires, and the kingdoms 
of this world shall be made the kingdoms of our 
God and of his Christ, Daniel ii. 44; Revelation 
xb. 
3 


THE 


BOOK OF ZECHARIAH. 


ARGUMENT 


Zecuarran, one of the last of that succession of prophets whom God sent at sundry times to sig- 
nify his will to the Jewish nation, was the son of Barachiah, and the grandson of Iddo, mentioned 
Ezra v.1; vi. 14. He is, indeed, in these passages, called simply the son of Iddo; but that is 
merely because a person’s descendants, though remote, are frequently termed his sons, or daughters, 
in the Scriptures. The time and place of his birth are not certainly known. Dr. Blayney, how- 
ever, thinks it unquestionable, that he was of the number of the captives who returned from Baby- 
lon to Jerusalem in consequence of the decree of Cyrus; but that he was very young when he 
came thither, being styled tyin, a youth, chap. ii. 4, sixteen or seventeen years afterward, even 
when he had begun to exercise his prophetical function ; a title which would scarcely have been 
given him had he much exceeded the age of twenty. “Tt was in the eighth month of the second 
year of the reign of Darius Hystaspes, king of Persia, that is, about the year 520 before the 
Christian era, that he first opened his divine commission with a serious and solemn call to re- 
pentance. In the same year he is found, together with the Prophet Haggai, employed in assisting 
the endeavours of Zerubbabel and Joshua, to excite and animate the people at Jerusalem to a vig- 
orous prosecution of the work of rebuilding their temple. For this purpose he communicated the 
visions which are contained in the first six chapters, and which he was favoured with on the 24th 
day of the 11th month, in the year aforesaid ; all evidently calculated to inspire the strongest hopes 
and assurance of future prosperity, through the returning favour of the Almighty. ‘The same de- 
sign is further carried on in a subsequent revelation, made to him about two years afterward ;” as 
is recorded chap. vii., viii. But though the time and occasion of this former part of his prophecies 
be thus ascertained, by the dates annexed to them, we have not the same certainty with respect to 
those that follow. “It is, however, highly probable, from the apparent difference both of style and 
subject, that they came forth at a different and more advanced period of our prophet’s life. This 
difference, indeed, has been urged as a proof that the last six chapters are not Zechariah’s, but by 
a different hand. But the argument is inconclusive ; for it is very possible for the same man to 
alter his style, and write differently at different periods of time. Nor would it be at all surprising 
if this writer, as he advanced in years and dignity, should have learned to express himself in a tone 
of more elevation and energy.” At such distant periods also, as we suppose, the subject of his 
predictions and discourses would be materially changed. For he would no longer have occasion 
to stimulate his countrymen to the building of the temple, which was already completely finished ; 
but he was actually engaged in predicting some remarkable occurrences that would distinguish his 
own and the neighbouring nations in remote periods, some of them perhaps not yet arrived ; and in 
urging an immediate reformation of national manners. In so doing, what more natural to expect, 
than that he would encounter hatred and opposition from those whose .corruptions he was called 
upon to censure and repress. “'The sequel,” says Dr. Blayney, “may easily be guessed at; for 
from similar causes, similar effects may naturally be looked for. His enraged adversaries, after 
thwarting and defeating all his endeavours for the public good, at length so far succeeded as to 
turn the tide of popular prejudice and resentment against him ; and he was barbarously murdered, 
as his namesake Zechariah the son of Jehoiada had been, for the same cause, and in the self-same 

lace, between three and four hundred years before. For this we have no less authority than that 
our blessed Lord himself, who expressly calls the person of whom he speaks, Matt. xxiii. 35, 
echarias, son of Barachias, distinguishing him from the before-mentioned Zechariah son of Jeho- 
jada by his patronymic as effectually as two men bearing the same Christian name in our days 
would be distinguished by their family names. That the Scriptures of the Old Testament are silent 
in regard to this latter instance can be no objection, if it be considered that a very small portion 
of them was written after the supposed date of this transaction; and that nothing occurs in this 
part which would naturally lead to the mention of it. But no sooner is ae of sacred history 
3 ‘ 


An awakening ZECHARIAH. call to repentance, 


resumed in the New Testament, than we find the subject brought forward with such precision, that 
it requires no small degree of prejudice to controvert it. Add to this, how very improbable it is 
that our Saviour, who has taken his first term from the earliest date of history, should have chosen 
for his last one which would not include the whole series of prophets and divine messengers, 
who suffered for their testimony to the cause of religious truth.” In this particular, however, it 
must be observed, Dr. Blayney’s opinion differs from that of many commentators, who suppose that 
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada is intended in the passage of St. Matthew’s gospel above referred 
to, and that the expression, the son of Barachias, was the officious addition of some early transcriber 
of that gospel, and not inserted by St. Matthew himself. See the note on Matt. xxiii. 35. 

It has been urged by some, that many parts of this book are very hard, if not impossible, to be 
understood. ‘That Zechariah is in some degree obscure,” says Dr. Blayney, “is not to be ques- 
tioned. And which of the ancient prophets is not so? It is of the nature of prophecy to affect a 
degree of enigmaticalness previous to the accomplishment, in order not to clash with the freedom 
of human agency. And there is no doubt, that some of Zechariah’s predictions relate to matters 
that are still involved in the womb of futurity. No wonder, then, that these fall not within the 
reach of our perfect comprehension. Others there are, which we have good reason to believe 
have already been fulfilled, but do not appear with such a degree of evidence, as they probably 
would have done if we had been better informed concerning the times and facts to which they re- 
late. With respect to the emblems and types that are exhibited, they are most of them of easy and 
determinate application. And, in favour of the importance of his subject matter, it must be ac- 
knowledged that, next to Isaiah, Zechariah is the most evangelical of all the prophets ; having 
more frequent, and more clear and direct allusions to the character and coming of the Messiah, and 
his kingdom, than any of the rest. Nor in his language and composition do we find any particular 
bias to obscurity ; except that the quickness and suddenness of the transitions are sometimes apt 
to confound the boundaries of discourse, so as to leave the less attentive reader at a loss to whom 
the several parts of it are to be ascribed. But, upon the whole, the diction is remarkably pure, the 
construction natural and perspicuous, and the style judiciously varied, according to the nature of 
the subject; simple and plain in the narrative and historical parts; but in those that are wholly 
prophetical, the latter chapters in particular, rising to a degree of elevation and grandeur scarcely 
inferior to the sublimest of the inspired writings.” 


CHAPTER I. 


In vhis chapter, after the wntroduction, 1, we have, 1st, An awakening call-to a sinful people to repent, and to return to God, 
1-6. 2d, Great encouragement to hope for mercy, (1,) By a vision of horses and their riders among the myrile-trees, 
7-11. (2,) By the prayer of an angel for Jerusalem, and the answer to that prayer, 12-17. (3,) By a vision of four 


carpenters, that were employed to cut off the four horns with which Judah and Jerusalem were scattered, 18-21, 
A. M, 3484, 


[SN the eighth month, * in the second 
B. C. 520. : 

___ ~ year of Darius, came the word of 
the Lorn Punto Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, 


a Ezra iv. 24; Hag. i. 1. 


the son of Iddo the prophet, saying, A pans. 
2 The Lorp hath been ‘sore dis) ~~~ 
pleased with your fathers. 


> Ezra v.1; Matt. xxiii. 35.——' Heb. with displeasure. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER I. 

Verses 1, 2. In the eighth month—This month, 
according to that reckoning which begins the year 
with the month Abib, or Nisan, Exod. xii. 2, falls in 
with the latter part of our October, and the begin- 
ning of November. Haggai had begun to exhort 
the Jews to resume the work of building the temple 
two months before this, and they had actually re- 
sumed it on the 24th day of the sixth month, that is, 
in the beginning of September. In the second year 
of Darius—That is, Darius the son of Hystaspes, as 
Dr. Blayney and many other learned men have 
proved to a demonstration. Came the word of the 
Lord to Zechariah—Here we see the prophet did 
not run before he was sent, or undertake a work to 

1020 


which he was not called: as also, that what he com- 
municated to the people, was first communicated to 
him by the Lord. Saying, The Lord, &ce.—Blay- 
ney here supplies, Speak wnto all the people of the 
land, saying, &c. He supposes that some words, 
expressive of that or a similar sense, have been 
omitted by the carelessness of some transcriber. 
The Lord hath been sore displeased with your 
fathers—He was so long and so.,much provoked, 
that his displeasure at last broke out into that flame 
which consumed your city and temple, and even 
desolated your country, nay, and punished the inhab- 
itants thereof, and their children, with the captivity 
of seventy years; yet now he declares himself willing 
to be reconciled to you upon your repentance. 
= 


Vision of aman 


CHAPTER I. 


riding upon a red horse. 


Rom. Meet. 3 Therefore say thou unto them, 

___ "Thus saith the Lorn of hosts; Turn 
* ye unto me, saith the Lorn of hosts, and I 
will turn unto you, saith the Lorn of hosts. 

4 Be ye not as your fathers, 4 unto whom the 
former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith 
the Lorp of hosts; *°'Turn ye now from your 
evil ways, and from your evil doings: but 
they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith 
the Lorn. 

5 Your fathers, where are they ? and the pro- 
phets, do they live for ever ? 

6 But ‘my words and my statutes, which I 
commanded my servants the prophets, did 
they not * take hold of your fathers? and they 


returned and said, ® Like as the Lorn A. M. 3484. 
of hosts thought to do unto us, accord- =. 
ing to our ways, and according to our doings, so 
hath he dealt with us. 

7 4 Upon the four and twentieth 
day of the eleventh month, which is 
the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, 
came the word of the Lorn unto Zechariah, the 
son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, 
saying, 

S I saw by night, and behold 'a man riding 
upon a red horse, and he stood among the 
myrtle-trees that were in the bottom ; and be- 
hind him were there ‘red horses, * speckled, 
and white. 


About 
B. C. 519 


¢ Jeremiah xxv. 5; xxxv. 15; Micah vii. 19; Malachi iii. 7; 
Luke xv. 20; James iv. 8.242 Chronicles xxxvi. 15, 16. 
© Isaiah xxxi. 6; Jeremiah iii. 12; xviii. 11; Ezekiel xviii. 30; 


Hosea xiv. 1——f Isaiah lv. 1. 2 Or, overtake. & Lament. 
aise in: Er, h Joshua v.13; Revelation vi. 4——! Chap. vi. 
2-7. 3 Or, bay. 


Verses 3-6. Therefore say—Rather, but say thou 
unto them, Thus saith the Lord, Turn ye unto me 
—The word turn, as it related to the people, signified, 
that they should change their corrupt manners and 
turn to God in newness of life; and by God’s turn- 

“ing to them, was meant, that he would take them 
again into his favour, and perform for them acts of 
manifest kindness, instead of displeasure. Be ye 
not as your fathers—Do not persist in impenitence 
as your fathers did. Instead of being hardened in 
your evil courses by the example of your fathers’ 
sin, rather be deterred from those courses by the 
example of your fathers’ punishment. Your fathers, 
where are they—Where are your disobedient fathers ? 
Were they not consumed with famine and the sword, 
as God threatened them? And the prophets, do they 
live for ever—Though the prophets, and those to 
whom they delivered their message, are dead, yet the 
commandments delivered by their ministry still con- 
tinue in full force; which appears by the judgments 
that came upon your fathers, for not hearkening to 
them; as they themselves could not but acknow- 
ledge. And the same punishments will overtake 
you, if you continue disobedient. But my words— 
The dreadful menaces which I delivered; and my 
statutes—The decreed judgments which I resolved 
to execute on them: did they not take hold on your 
fathers ?—Overtake them as a pursuing enemy 
overtakes and seizes on the object of his hostility ? 
In other words, Did not the evils which I had de- 
nounced by the prophets come upon your fathers ? 
And they returned, &c.—They were forced to ac- 
knowledge with sorrow, that all those calamities 
which I had threatened against them, and fore- 
warned them of, if they did not obey my voice, 
were actually come upon them. 

Verses 7, 8. Upon the four and twentieth day of 
the eleventh month—That is, about three months 
after he had received the former vision; which is 
the month Sebat—This was the Chaldee or Syriac 


This month corresponded with the latter end of 
January and the beginning of February. Came the 
word of the Lord unto Zechariah—This second 
revelation contains eight distinct visions, following 
each other in the same night. “The first vision is 
of an angel in a human form, sitting on horseback, 
in a low valley among myrtle-trees, attended by 
others upon horses, of different colours. The prophet 
asks the meaning, and is informed that they were 
the ministers of Providence, sent to examine into 
the state of the whole earth, which they report to 
be quiet and tranquil. The angel hereupon inter- 
cedes for Judah and Jerusalem, which he represents 
to have suffered under the divine indignation seventy . 
years. He receives a consolatory answer. The 
prophet is directed to proclaim, that God’s wrath 
against Judah was at an end; that he would cause 
the temple and Jerusalem to be rebuilt; and would 
fill the country with good, as a token and conse- 
quence of his renewed favour, verses 7-17.’—Blay- 
ney. Saying, I saw, &c.—That is, the word came 
to the prophet, who said, I saw, &c., or, thus recited 
the divine vision which had been sent him. What 
now follows (which extends to the end of the sixth 
chapter) was uttered when the people had made a 
great progress in the work of the temple, and were 
now to be excited to the new labour of fortifying 
Jerusalem. And behold a man—The prophet terms 
him so, according to his appearance ; till, perceiving 
by his answer, verse 10, that he had a divine com- 
mission, he afterward gives him the respectable title 
of the angel, or messenger of Jehovah; riding upon 
a red horse—A horse of a red or bloody colour was 
an emblem of the slaughters of war, as appears from 
Rev. vi. 4. But the myrtle being a tree of pleasure, 
and an emblem of peace, therefore the red horse 
appearing among the myrtle-trees, signified that the 
slaughters of war were, or soon would be, repressed 
or restrained by a profound peace, namely, in the 
Persian empire, for that is here referred to: and ac- 


name of the eleventh month, not the Hebrew name || cordingly there was a profound peace in it in the 


3 


1021 


Signification of the 


ZECHARIAH. 


“ 


vision of the horses. 


A.M, 2484. 9 Then said I, O my Lord, what 
———— _ are these? And the angel that talked 
with me said unto me, I will show thee what 
these be. 

10 And the man that stood among the myr- 
tle-trees answered and said, * These are they 
whom the Lorp hath sent to walk to and fro 
through the earth. 

‘11 !And they answered the angel of the 
Lorp that stood among the myrtle-trees, and 


said, We have walked to and fro A. M. 3484. 
through the earth, and behold, all the ——- 
earth sitteth still, and is at rest. 

12 4 Then the angel of the Lorp answered 
and said, ™O Lorp of hosts, how long wilt 
thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on 
the cities of Judah, against which thou hast 
had indignation ™these threescore and ten 
years ? , 


® Heb. i. 14.——! Psa. ciii. 20, 21.—— Psa. cii. 13; Rev. vi. 10. 


fourth, fifth, and sixth yearsof Darius. It is doubtful 
what angel or other being was represented by the 
figure of aman on this red horse. Some suppose 
Michael, whom the Prophet Daniel seems to mention 
as the guardian angel of the Jews, or the angel pre- 
siding, under God, over the affairs of their nation, 
and taking care of them. Others suppose the Aoyoc, 
or Son of God, is meant; which opinion seems pro- 
pable. ‘The reason of his appearing in @ bottom, or 
low place, amidst myrtles planted by the waters, is 
thought to have been to mark out the affliction, hu- 
miliation, and sorrow to which Judea was reduced. 
The myrtle flourishes best in shady and watery 
places. Littora myrtetis letissima, says Virgil. 
See Calmet. Behind him were red horses—With 
riders on them, as appears from verse 10, “ who were 
angels, verse 11. They had horses to show their 
power of celerity ; and horses of different colours, 
to intimate the difference of their ministries.”— 
Newcome. Or, as others explain it, to signify the 
various events of the wars waged by Darius, which 
Were sometimes fortunate, at other times unsuc- 
cessful. 

Verses 9-11. T'hen said I, O my Lord, what are 
these—What is the meaning of these appearances, 
or visions? And the angel that talked with me said 
—“This was another heavenly minister, sent, proba- 
bly, to present the visions to the prophet’s imagina- 
tion, as well as to explain them. Angelus comes et 
interpres, “an accompanying angel and interpreter.” 
And under his direction the prophet receives satis- 
factory information from the mouth of the first angel 
and his attendants."—Blayney. J will show thee 
what these be—“TI will cause that it shall be explain- 
ed to thee by the angel who stands first among the 
myrtles. This may have been done by a sign given 
to that angel, or by words omitted in the relation.” 
—Newcome. And the man that stood among the 
myrtle-trees—This was an angel of an order supe- 
rior to him mentioned in the preceding verse, who 
either prevents that angel, and takes upon him to re- 
turn an answer to the prophet’s question, or else 
sends his answer to Zechariah by that angel, as 
Christ sent his revelation to St. John by an angel, 
Rey.i.1. These are they whom the Lord hath sent 
—They are the messengers or ministering spirits of 
Jehovah, And they—The rest of the angels, implied 
at the end of verse 8, and who came after the first; 
answered, We have walked to and fro through the 

1022 


13 And the Lorp answered the angel that 


» Jer. xxv. 11, 12; Dan. ix. 2; Chap. vii. 5. 


earth—We have been diligent to execute that office 
which was allotted to us. And behold all the earth 
silteth still, &e.—This must be understood here, and 
in many other places, in a restricted sense, for all 
the nations with whom the Jews had a connection. 
It means here chiefly the Persian empire, which en- 
joyed peace at that time. But the state of the Jews 
was unsettled: see verse 16: which circumstance 
gives occasion to the following intercession. 

Verse 12. Then the angel of the Lord said— 
“Christ the mediator,” as Bishop Hall explains it, 
“prayed for the salvation of his church, which was 
now troubled, when all the countries around were at _ 
rest.” But, as we find by the next»verse that God’s 
answer to this petition was given to the angel inter- 
preter, or the angel who talked with the prophet, 
this seems to determine that the petition was made 
by that angel. How long wilt thou not have mercy 
on Jerusalem—At this time Jerusalem lay without 
any walls or defence, and was not wholly rebuilt; 
and on the cities of Judah—These still lay wholly 
inruins; against which thou hast had indignation 
these threescore and ten years—There are three 
ways of computing the seventy years of the captivi- 
ty, taken notice of in Scripture. The first is, begin- 
ning from the fourth year of Jehoiakim to the first 
of Cyrus: this is Jeremiah’s account, chap. xxv. 1, 
11; which Daniel follows, chap. ix. 2. Anothermay 
be computed from the besieging of Jerusalem in the 
ninth year of Zedekiah, in the tenth month, for 
which a solemn fast was kept by the Jews: compare 
2 Kings xxv. 1, with Zech. viii. 19. This computa- 
tion ends with the second year of Darius, which is 
the reckoning Zechariah here follows. Or lastly, if 
we compute the beginning of the seventy years from 
the destruction of Jerusalem and the first temple, 
which came to pass in the eleventh year of the same 
reign, they will be accomplished in the fourth year 
of Darius, and this computation agrees with what is 
said chap. vii. 1,5. The last two ways of reckoning 
the seventy years may be reduced to one, only by 
supposing, that the prophet, in this verse, sets down 
a complete for an incomplete number, and ealls that 
space of time seventy years, which wanted but little 
of it: a way of speaking of which several instances 
may be produced. 

Verses 13-17. And the Lord answered the ange. 
—By a voice, or impulse; and the angel commu- 
nicated the reply to Zechariah.”—Newcome. So the 


’ 


Visions of the four horses 


CHAPTER I. 


and of the four carpenters. 


3.0 Oowwo=*=e*=>=—emeO~=OoooooooooooooasGoOowooewnases ESE eee 


sats M, 3484. talked with me with ° good words|| be spread abroad ; 


~ and comfortable words. 

14 So the angel that communed with me 

said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith 
the Lorp of hosts; Iam ? jealous for Jerusa- 
lem and for Zion with a great jealousy. 
_15 And Iam very sore displeased with the 
heathen ¢hat are at ease: for 41 was but a 
little displeased, and they helped forward the 
affliction. 

16 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; "I am 
returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house 
shall be built in it, saith the Lorn of hosts, 
and ‘a line shall be stretched forth upon 
Jerusalem. 

17 Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the Lorn of 
hosts; My cities through ‘ prosperity shall yet 


‘and the Lorp A. M. 3484, 
shall yet comfort Bite and “shall 2% © 
yet choose Jerusalem. 

18 4 Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, 
and behold four horns. 

19 And I said unto the angel that talked 
with me, What be these? And he answered 
me, * These are the horns which have scat- 
tered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. 

20 And the Lorp showed me four carpenters. 

21 Then said I, What come these todo? And 
he spake, saying, These are the horns which 
have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift 
up his head: but these are come to fray them, 
to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which 
Y lifted up ¢heir horn over the land of Judah to 
scatter it. 


° Jer. xxix. 10.—? Joel ii. 18; Chap. viii. 2.——4 Isa. xlvii. 6. 
T Isa. xii. 1; liv. 8; Chap. ii. 10; viii. 3.—* Chap. ii. 1, 2. 


angel said, Cry thou—Now publish what thou hear- 
est, and assure God’s poor, captive, empoverished 
church, that he will do her good. Saying, Thus 
saith the Lord of hosts—The God of armies, and the 
Father of his people; J am jealous for Jerusalem— 
I have been jealous against, but now am jealous for 
Jerusalem; my love is now raised to a very high 
degree of compassion for my people, and of indigna- 
tion against her enemies and oppressors. The words 
may be rendered, J am jealous for Jerusalem with 
great zeal, for so the word 3p often signifies. So 
that the meaning is, I have a great concern for the 
welfare of my people, and I will not any longer suf- 
fer them to be ill treated. J am very sore displeased 
with the heathen, &c.—The remnant of the Baby- 
lonians, Philistines, Edomites, Samaritans, &c., 
which had not been made such examples of God’s 
severity as the Jews were. For I was but a little 
displeased—Namely, with the Jewish nation; and 
they—Namely, their enemies; helped forward the 
affliction—They added to, or lengthened out, the 
time of the affliction, namely, by hindering the ac- 
complishment of Cyrus’s decree in favour of the 
Jews: see Ezra iv. 1-6. Or the meaning is, “ Mine 
anger did not rise so high, as the punishment which 
the enemies of my people inflicted.’ I made the 
Babylonians instruments of my vengeance ; but they 
exceeded their commission, and acted as they were 
prompted by their own ambition and cruelty; and 
I was displeased with them for their extreme cruel- 
ty, and with the nations who insulted over my peo- 
ple in their distress. T'herefore I am returned to 
Jerusalem with mercies—I will have compassion on 
Jerusalem, and cause her to experience the effects of 
my favour. And aline shall be stretched forth upon 
Jerusalem—That is, the architect’s measuring-line, 
for laying out the buildings. And Jerusalem shall 
be wholly rebuilt, and fortified with walls, &c. This 
accordingly was fulfilled not many years after, as 
3 


* Heb. good.—* Isa. li. 3 4Tsa. xiv. 1; Chap. ii. 12; iii. 2. 
x Ezra iv. 1, 4, 7: v. 3. y Psa, Ixxv. 4, 5. 


we read Neh. iii., iv. My cities through prosperity 
shall yet be spread abroad—Over the face of Judea: 
or, the cities of Judea shall be rebuilt, enlarged, and 
adorned, throughout the land. And the Lord shall 
yet comfort Zion—By showing his wonted kindness 
to her after her affliction. 

Verses 18-21. Then, behold, fowr horns—Horns 
often signify the power of princes or people, the 
metaphor being taken from those cattle whose 
strength lies in their horns. The horns here men- 
tioned denote the powers which had scattered Israel 
and Judah, or that should scatter them, as a bull, in 
his fury, tosses into the air whatever opposes him. 
It is uncertain whether the number four is here used 
indefinitely, or to denote that specific number; and 
if the latter, what particular powers are pointed out 
by it. Calmet supposes the Assyrians, Chaldeans 
Persians, and Egyptians. But “the most ancient 
and prevailing opinion among the Jews themselves, 
and perhaps the most probable of any, is, that the 
four great empires, the Assyrian, or Babylonian, the 
Persian, Grecian, and Roman, are intended; name- 
ly, the empires alluded to by the four beasts, Dan. 
vii. By each of these the Jewish nation hath been 
in turns oppressed, and all of them have been suc- 
cessively brought down and annihilated; although, 
from the depression of the last, the Jews have not as 
yet apparently derived any considerable advantage.” 
—Blayney. The Lord showed me four carpenters 
—Or workmen, as Bishop Newcome renders the 
word, observing, “ Vitringa supposes that the horns 
were iron, and that these were fabri ferrarii malleis 
dolabris que intructi,” blacksmiths furnished with 
hammers and axes. J'hen said J, What come these 
to do?—He inquires not who or what they were, but 
what was their business and design. And he spake, 
(or said,) These are the horns—In order to satisfy 
the inquiry of the prophet, the angel first points to 
the four horns, mentioned verses 18, 19, as if he had 

1023 


ZECHARIAH. 


measuring-line in his hand. 


Vision of a man with a 


said, See, there are four horns, which have scattered 
Judah. The LXX. add, xa: tyv Iopana Kareagav, and 
have broken Israel. Instead of which addition the 
Arabic has, and destroyed Jerusalem. So that no 
man did lift up his head—No one had either strength 
or courage to make any resistance: so dispirited and 
dejected were all the people. But these are cometo 
fray them—These are principal commanders, or 
powers, raised up by God to dismay and deter them. 
To cast out the horns of the Gentiles—To break, or 


cast down, the power‘of these nations; which lifted 
up their horn over the land of Judah—Who em- 
ployed their strength, and used all possible efforts, to 
hinder the Jewish people from flourishing again in 
Judea. Observe, reader, in what way soever the 
church is threatened with mischief, and whatever 
opposition is given to its interests, God ean find out 
ways and means to check the force, or restrain 
the wrath of its enemies, and make it turn to his 
praise. 


CHAPTER II. 


In thas chapter we have a third vision; (1,) In conformity to what was said chap. i. 16, a man, or angel, appears with a 
measuring-line in his hand, going to take the dimensions of Jerusalem, in order to its being rebuilt, according to its for- 


mer extent, 1, 2. 
its perfect security under the divine protection, 3-5. 
punishment of those that oppressed them, 6-9. 
sion of many heathen nations, 10, 11. 


(2,) A message is delivered to the prophet, showing the great increase of its population and wealth, and 
(3,) The recall of the Jewish exiles from the north country, and the 
(4,) The return of God's presence to dwell in Jerusalem, and the conver- 
(5,) The reinstatement of Judah and Jerusalem in the full possession of all their 


ancient privileges ; and a warning to all men not to prescribe to or limit God, but patiently to wait for the fulfilment of 


his promises, 13. 


I LIFTED up mine eyes again, and 
looked, and behold * a man witha 
‘measuring-line in his hand. 

2 Then said I, Whither goest thou? and he 
said unto me, »'T’o measure Jerusalem, to see 
what is the breadth thereof, and what is the 
length thereof. 


as 3484. 
B.C. 620. 


a Ezek. xl. 3.-——® Rev. xi. 1; xxi. 15, 16. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IL. 

Verses 1-5. J lifted up mine eyes, §c., and behold 
a man—An angel in the form of a man, probably 
representing Nehemiah, under whose direction the 
wall was rebuilt, according to the ancient line 
marked out by the ruins. See Nehemiah lii., &c., &c. 
And the angel that talked with me went forth— 
Went away from me, as if he had performed his 
commission in ‘regard to me, and was to commune 
with me no longer. And another angel went out to 
meet him—But, as he was going away, I saw another 
angel meet him. This appears to have been an an- 
gel sent with fresh commands, from the superior 
personage among the myrtle-trees, to the angel who 
communed with the prophet. And said, Run, speak 
to this young man—Hasten with all diligence, and 
communicate to the young and inexperienced 
prophet what will check his fears, and encourage 
him to proceed in the execution of his prophetie of- 
fice. Saying, Jerusalem—Which hath so long lain 
in ruins, and seemed to be in a hopeless state, shall 
be inhabited as towns, &c.—Shall overflow with in- 
habitants, who shall occupy spaces beyond the cir- 
cuit of the walls: that is, its inhabitants will multi- 
ply so fast, that the ated within the walls will not 
be able to contain them, and they will be obliged to || 
seek habitations in the neighbouring country in vil- || 


1024 


3 And behold, the angel that talked Wa M. Ang 
with me went forth, and another angel 
went out to meet trad 

4 And said unto him, Run, speak to this 
young man, saying, ° Jerusalem shall be inha- 
bited as towns without walls for the multitude 
of men and cattle therein : 


¢ Jer. xxxi. 27; Ezek. xxxvi. 10, 11. 


which, although without walls, shall be safe and 
secure against the attacks of enemies; their own 
multitude of men being a sufficient defence to them. 
And their cattle will increase in proportion, That 
this was a fact with regard to Jerusalem, see Jo- 
sephus, De Bell. Jud., lib. v. chap. 4, where we 
learn that “the city, overflowing with its number of 
inhabitants, by degrees extended itself beyond its 
walls;” and that Herod Agrippa fortified the new 
part called Bezetha. For J, saith the Lord, will be 
unto her a wall of fire—Which cannot be scaled or 
undermined, as it would soon consume any that 
might attempt to do the one or the other. Thus, in 
regard to her inhabiting without walls, God engages 
to secure her as effectually as if she were surrounded 
with a.wall of fire. “The image is most sublime, 
and expresses very strongly the protection of God. 
It must have reminded the Jews of the pillar of fire 
by which God directed and defended their ances- 
tors..—Newecome. He says, Round about, to sig- 
nify that no part should be left unguarded, or open 
to the enemy. And will be the glory in the midst 
of her—My presence and favour shall render her 
glorious. He alludes to the symbol of the divine 
presence in the holy of holies. Observe, reader, 
| hase that have Jehovah for their God have him 
| for their glory: and they that have him in the midst 


lages, which shall be of as great extent as towns, |, | of them have glory in the midst of them. And all 
3 


Prosperity of the Jews after 


CHAPTER II. 


their return from Babylon. 


She og 5 For I, saith the Lorn, will be 
~ unto her “a wall of fire round about, 
* and will be the glory in the midst of her. 

6 WY Ho, ho, come forth, and flee ‘from the 
land of the north, saith the Lorn: for I have 
®spread you abroad as the four winds of the 
heaven, saith the Lorp. 

7 * Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with 
the daughter of Babylon. 

8 For thus saith the Lorn of hosts: After 
the glory hath he sent me unto the nations 


which spoiled you: for he that A.M. 3484. 
‘toucheth you, toucheth the apple piscine 
of his eye. 

9 For behold, I will ‘shake my hand upon 
them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants : 
and 'ye shall know that the Lorp of hosts 
hath sent me. 

10 4 ™Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: 
for lo, I come, and I * will dwell in the midst 
of thee, saith the Lorp. 

11 ° And many nations shall be joined to the 


4Jsaiah xxvi. 1; Chap. ix. 8, e Isa. lx. 19; Rev. xxi. 23. 
f Isa. xlviii. 20; lii. 11; Jer. i. 14; 1.8; li. 6, 45. 8 Deut. 
xxviii. 64; Ezek. xvii. 21—— Rev. xviii. 4. —i Deut. xxxii. 
10; Psa. xvii. 8; 2 Thess. i. 6. 


those persons and places that have God in the midst 
of them, have him fora wall of fire round about 
them ; for wpon all that glory, there is, and shall be, 
a defence, Isa. iv. 5. This prophecy was fulfilled in 
part in that Jerusalem, which, in process of time, 
became a very flourishing city, and made a very 
great figure in those parts of the world, much be- 
yond what could have been expected, considering 
how low it had been brought, and how long it was 
before it recovered itself. But it was to have its full 
accomplishment in the gospel church, which is ex- 
tended far, like towns without walls, by the admis- 
sion of the Gentiles into it; and which hath the Son 
of God, and God himself, for its prince and protector. 

Verses 6-9. Ho, Ho!—Ye sleepy Jews, come forth 
—Come out from your prisons; and flee—Make all 
the haste you can, from the land of the north— 
From Chaldea, and Babylon, the chief city of it, 
which lay northward of Judea. The Jews, who 
still remained in those parts, are here exhorted to 
return with all speed from them, for areason assigned, 
verse 9. For I have spread you abroad—As I exe- 
cuted my threats in scattering you, and your 
brethren of the ten tribes, all over the world; so, in 
due time, I will gather you from your several dis- 
persions, of which your present restoration from 
Babylon shall be an earnest. Deliver thyself, O 
Zion, &e.—O ye citizens of Zion, that still dwell in 
Babylon, make haste to come out from thence. 
For after the glory hath he sent me unto the na- 
tions which spoiled you—After that he is become 


your glory, saith the angel, Iam to avenge you of 


your enemies. Or, the words may be considered as 
spoken by the prophet, and then the sense is, (as the 
Chaldee explains it,) “After Ihave given you the 
promise of restoring Jerusalem to such a glorious 
state, I (the Prophet Zechariah) am sent to execute 
God’s judgments, that is, to foretel that they shall 
be executed, upon the Chaldeans, who spoiled you 
of your wealth and ornaments. For he that touch- 
eth you, &c.—God is very sensible of every injury 
offered to his people. See Psa. cv. 15. It is like 
hurting the eye, which is the most tender and sensi- 
ble part of the body: compare Psa. xvii. 8. And 
though he made the Babylonsans instruments of his 
Vou. IIL. ( 65 ) 


_k Isaiah xi. 15; xix. 16, 1 Chap. iv. 9—— Isaiah xii. 6; 
liv. 1; Zeph. iii. 14. a Lev. xxvi. 12; Ezekiel xxxvii. 27; 
Chap. viii. 3; John i. 14; 2 Cor. vi. 16, oTsaiah ii. 3; xlix. 
22; Ix. 3; Chap. viii. 22, 23. } 


vengeance, yet now he will call them to an account 
for exceeding their commission.”—Lowth. See 
note on chap. i. 15. For behold, I will shake.my 
hand upon, or over them, &c.—Namely, the nation 
that doth violence to my people, meaning chiefly 
the Babylonians. And they shall be a spoil to their 
servants—They shall be spoiled by, or become sub- 
ject to, those to whom they were superior, and who 
were their servants. This seems to be a prediction 
of some new calamity to be brought upon the 
Babylonians, And accordingly we find from histo- 
ry, that, very soon after this time, the Babylonians 
revolting from Darius, he marched against Babylon 
with a great army; and having, after a siege of 
twenty months, made himself master of it, beat 
down its walls, put 3,000 of its principal inhabitants 
to death, and made captives, or slaves, of a great 
number. Before Cyrus, the Persians were subject 
to the Babylonians, and therefore are here called 
their servants. And ye shall know that the Lord of 
hosts hath sent me—'These words are a continuation 
of the prophet’s speech: as if he had said, When 
this judgment is executed upon the Chaldeans, it 
will be an undoubted sign and proof of the truth of 
my mission. Compare Ezek. xxxiil. 33. 

Verses 10-12. Sing and rejoice, &c.—Here the 
prophet calls the daughter of Zion, or the whole 
Jewish nation, being redeemed and restored, to re- 
joice in the goodness showed them, and to proclaim 
the praises of Him who showed it. For lo, J come, 
&c.—To execute judgments on thine adversaries, 
and to complete thy deliverance and salvation. 
And I will dwell in the midst of thee—To defend 
and bless thee. Thie was fulfilled in part to the 
Jews, but more fully to the gospel church. And 
many nations shall be joined to the Lord—The 
church shall be greatly enlarged by the accession 
of the Gentiles to it; and shall receive a still further 
increase when, upon the conversion of the Jews, 
the fulness of the Gentiles shall be brought in. And 
shall be my people—My true worshippers, subjects, 
and servants. This promise relates chiefly to the 
latter times. Compare chap. viii. 21-23. And thou 
shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me— 
| The fulfilling of these my words shall be an unde 

1025 3 


Zechariah, in a vision, 


ZECHARIAH. 


sees Jonah, the high-priest. 


A. M. 3484. Lorp Pin that day, and shall be 
ee my people: and I will dwell in the 
midst of thee, and "thou shalt know that the 
Lorp of hosts hath sent me unto thee. 

{2 And the Lorp shall ‘inherit Judah his 


| portion in the holy land, and * shall A. M. 3484. 

; B. C. 520. 

choose Jerusalem again. » label 

13 "Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lorn: 

for he is raised up *out of ‘his holy habit- 
ation. 


p Chap. iii. 10. 
5 Deut. xxxil. 9. 


4 Exod. xii. 49. ——t Ezek. xxxiii. 33; Ver. 9. 
t Chap. 1. 17. « Hab. ii. 20; Zeph. 1. 7. 


x Psalm Ixviii. 5; Isaiah lvii. 15.——" Heb. the habitation of his 
holiness, Deut. xxvi. 15; Isa. lxiii. 15. 


niable evidence that my mission is divine. And the 
Lord shall inherit Judah his portion—Shall claim, 
recover, possess, and delight in Judah, as a man 
doth in his paternal inheritance. God will give 
visible tokens that the land of Judea is, in a peculiar 
sense, his land; and its inhabitants his peculiar 
people, according to the tenor of the covenant he 
made with their fathers, And shall choose Jerusa- 
lem again—Will have a regard to Jerusalem, as he 


formerly had. This prophecy will be more fully 
accomplished at the general restoration of the Jewish 
nation. 

Verse 13. Be silent—Reverence and adore God, 
and expect the accomplishment of his word. O all 
flesh—Both Jews and Gentiles. He is raised up 
out of his holy habitation—God is engaged in this 
work already, and will not rest till he has accom- 
plished his whole work. 


CHAPTER III. 


In this chapter, (1,) Zechariah sees Joshua the high-priest standing before an angel of the Lord, as it were soliciting to be 


admitted to the discharge of his sacred functions, and Satan standing by in the act of opposing Iam, 1. 


(2,) The adver- 


sary receives a rebuke from the Lord himself, by whose special command Joshua is stripped of his filthy garments, and 


invested with the priestly robes of service, 2-5. 


(3,) The angel delivers to him a solemn charge, 6,7. (4,) A clear and 


interesting prediction of the coming of the Messiah follows, and of the establishment of his church; and pardon and 
peace are held forth as the blessed effects of Christ’s coming, 8-10. 


A. M. 3484. 
B. C. 520. 


AND he showed me * Joshua the 
high-priest standing before the 
angel of the Lorn, and ” Satan? standing at 
his right hand ? to resist him. 
2 And the Lorp said unto Satan, ° The 
Lorp rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lorp 


that “hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke A. M. 3484. 
thee:-°%s not this a brand plucked ———— 
out of the fire ? 

3 Now Joshua was clothed with ‘ filthy gar- 
ments, and stood before the angel. ; 

4 And he answered and spake unto those 


a Haggai i. 1. b Psalm cix. 6; Rev. xii. 10. 
adversary. 


1 That is, an 
2 Heb, to be his adversary. 


— 


¢ Jude 9.-——4 Chapter i. 17; Rom. viii. 33.——®e Amos iy. 11; 
Rom. xi. 5; Jude 23.—— Isa. lxiv. 6. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verse 1, And he showed me—He, that is, the an- 
gel, who talked with him, after delivering the message 
in the preceding chapter, proceeded to another repre- 
sentation; Joshua the high-priest, &c—We find 
from Haggai, that Joshua the son of Josedech was 
at this time high-priest. He stands here as repre- 
senting the whole Jewish people. Standing before 
the angel of the Lord—This angel was Christ, or 
the Logos, mentioned chap. i. 11, and called the 
Lord in the following verse, whose minister, or ser- 
vant, the high-priest was, as well as a type of him. 
And Satan—Or the adversary, as the word may be 
rendered; standing at his right hand to resist him 
—That is, to be his accuser, as he is called Rev. xii. 
10. “So here he is represented as aggravating the 
faults of Joshua, the representative of the whole 
body of the Jews, (see verse 2,) by this means to 
prevail with God to continue the Jews under the 

1026 


power of their adversaries. It was the custom in 
courts of judicature, for the accuser to stand at the 
right hand of the accused.”—See Lowth, and notes 
on Job i.6; and Psa. cix. 6, “It appears to me,” 
says Blayney, “the most probable, that by Satan, 
or the adversary, is here meant the adversaries of 
the Jewish nation in a body, or perhaps some lead- 
ing person among them, Sanballat for instance, who 
strenuously opposed the rebuilding of the temple, 
and of course the restoration of the service of the 


sanctuary, and the re-establishment of Joshua in the 
exercise of his sacerdotal ministry.” 

Verses 2-5, And the Lord said, &e.—The Logos, 
or Son of God, said unto Satan; 7'he Lord—Namely, 
God the Father; rebuke thee—And not suffer thy 
mischievous imagination against Jerusalem and the 
temple to prosper. Even the Lord that hath chosen 
Jerusalem—Who hath chosen that place for his espe- 
cial residence. Christ, as a mediator, rather cheoses 

( 65* ) 3 | 


Joshua receives 


CHAPTER III. 


a solemn charge. 


ded 3454. that stood before him, saying, Take 

away the filthy garments from him. 
And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused 
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will 
clothe thee with change of raiment. 

5 And I said, Let them set a fair ® mitre upon 
his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his 
head, and clothed him with garments. And 
the angel of the Lorp stood by. 


6 “| And the angel of the Lorn pro- A. M. 3484. 
tested unto Joshua, saying, re ae 
7 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; If thou wilt 
walk in my ways, and if thou wilt ‘ keep my 
* charge, then thou shalt also * judge my house, 
and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give 
thee # places to walk among these that ! stand by. 
8 “| Hear now, O Joshua the high-priest, 
thou and thy fellows that sit before thee: for 


€ Isaiah lxi. 10; Rev. xix. 8; Luke xv. 22.——h Exod. xxix. 6; 
Chap. vi. 11.—— Lev. viii. 35; 1 Kings ii. 3; Ezek. xliv. 16. 


to rebuke the adversary in his Father’s name than in 
his own. Js not this a brand plucked out of the 
Jire—“Ts not this small remnant returned from cap- 
tivity,” represented here by Joshua, “ miraculously 
rescued from utter destruction, like a brand plucked 
out of the fire? and can it be thought that God will 
not preserve them?” Now Joshua was clothed with 
filthy garments—Denoting the sins and pollutions 
of the people, of whom he was the representative. 
And he spake unto those that stood before him— 
Christ spake to the inferior angels, his servants; 
Take away the filthy garments from him—Remeve, 
or cause them to be removed. These filthy gar- 
ments those angels removed, but another and supe- 
rior hand takes away the sins and pollutions signified 
by that emblem. And he—Namely, Christ, the 
Lamb of God; said, Behold, I have caused thine 
iniquity to pass from thee—I have, by my merits 
and Spirit, removed the guilt, power, and pollution 
of thine iniquity. And J will clothe thee with change 
of raiment—With other garments, namely, such as 
are not filthy or polluted, but clean and rich, an em- 
blem of holiness. As the filthy garments denoted 
the sins of the people, whose representative Joshua 
was, the taking them away denoted God’s pardon- 
ing their public and national transgressions, and his 
restoring them to his favour and protection. “The 
Jews used to change their garments under any pub- 
lie calamity; which calamity being over, they ex- 
pressed the change of their condition, and the great- 
ness of their joy, by clothing themselves in garments 
adapted to their circumstances :” see Calmet. And 
I said—tI, the Lord, further said, or commanded. 
The LXX. omit these words, prefixing and to the 
following expression: and the Syriac and Vulgate 
read, He said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his 
head—As the new garments put upox. Joshua were 
such as belonged to the high-priest, and were con- 
trived for glory and beauty, Exod. xxviii. 2, so the 
mitre was the proper ornament for his head. And 
the angel of the Lord stood by—Namely, Christ, 
through whose mediation, and at whose command, 
the above was done. 

Verses 6,7. And the angel of the Lord protested— 
Solemnly declared; wnto Joshua, If thou wilt walk 
in my ways—If thou wilt diligently observe the 
commandments of my law ; and wilt keep my charge 
—The special charge and office of the high-priest. 
Then thou shalt also judge my house—Thou shalt, 

3 


4 Heb. walks. 


3 Or, ordinance. & Deut. xvii. 9; Mal. ii. 7. 


1 Chap. iv. 14; vi. 5. 


for a long time, be ruler in my temple, and exercise 
all the authority and jurisdiction which belongs to 
the high-priest’s office; and shalt also keep my 
courts—Not as a servant, but as the chief, on whom 
others wait, and at Jast thou shalt have a place among 
my angels: so many interpret the following clause. 
Some, however, render it, And I will appoint thee 
ministers among those that stand by; and by the 
ministers, Blayney understands, “not the angels at- 
tending upon God’s throne, but some of the subor- 
dinate priests who attended upon Joshua;” observing, 
“as it is promised to him that he should be rein- 
stated in the honours of his high office, so it is also 
added, that he should be waited upon by those infe- 
rior priests, whose business it was to officiate in the 
service of the temple, under the authority of the 
high-priest.. And the same persons are presently 
after designed, under the name of the companions 
of Joshua, that sat before him.” 

Verse 8. Hear now, O Joshua, and thy fellows 
that sit before thee—The angel directs his speech to 
Joshua and his assessors, or assistants in council. 
“ Possibly these may have been some of those who 
were called chief priests; who, though subordinate to 
the high-priest, were entitled by their rank to assist 
in his councils.”—Blayney. The rabbins call these, 
of whom doubtless Zerubbabel was one, the heads of 
the captivity, and the nen of the great synagogue, 
by whom they suppose the Jewish affairs, both ee- 
clesiastical and civil, to have been settled after the 
captivity, and the canon of the Old Testament to 
have been completed. The angel bespeaks their 
attention to what follows, as containing matter of 
great importance. For they are men wondered at— 
Hebrew, ‘w3x NNN Nd, men of wonder, or, men of 
sign are they: men intended for signs or tokens, or 
typical men, as some render the phrase. ‘Thus 
Isaiah, walking naked and barefoot, was for a sign 
and wonder, or rather a type or example, to Egypt 
and Ethiopia, Isa. xx. 3; that is, a sign, or emblem, 
that they should be carried away without covering. 
So Ezekiel, in digging through the wall, &c., (as 
commanded chap. xii. 7-12,) and in not mourning 
for his wife, chap, xxiv. 24, was to be a sign, type, or 
emblem, to the Jews: in all which passages the 
same word, Ndi, is used in the original. To this 
sense the Vulgate translates it here, virt portenden- 
tes, men foreshowing, namely, something to come, 
that is, the men that composed this council, with 

1027 


ZECHARIAH. 


concerning the Messiah. 


Illustrious prophecy 

A. M. 3484. they are ™men® wondered at: for 
: behold, I will bring forth ® my servant 

The ° BRANCH. 


© Heb. men of wonder, 
xii. 11; xxiv. 24.1 Isa. xlii. 1; xlix. 3, 5; 
Ezek. xxxiv. 23, 24, 


m Psa. Ixxi. 7; Isa. viii. 18; xx. 3. 
or, sign, as Ezek. 
ii. 13; liii. 11; 


Joshua at the head of them, were an emblem, or 
figure, of the restoration of the church, under the 
government of the Messiah. Their wonderful de- 
liverance from the Babylonish captivity; the forti- 
tude and resolution which they manifested in return- 
ing to Jerusalem, when it lay in ruins; their perse- 
verance amidst the various difficulties, hardships, 
and perils, which they had to encounter on their 
journey, and when they arrived in Judea; their pre- 
servation among their numerous, powerful, and inve- 
terate enemies; not only rendered them objects of 
wonder to many, but proper types of the deliverance, 
restoration, and preservation of the church of God 
under the Messiah. 

The next clause points out the person, of whom 
Joshua was to be a figure; as the verse following 
does those of whom his companions were to be re- 
presentatives, or signs. For behold, I will bring 
forth my servant the Brancup—Namely, the Mes- 
siah, to whom this title, die Brancu, is often given 
in the prophets, as descended from the stock of Da- 
vid: see the places referred to in the margin; in all 
which the word in the original is ND, tsemach, as 
here; and all which texts the Chaldee explains of 
the Messiah ; who is elsewhere called God’s servant 
in an eminent sense, because he was sanctified and 
sent into the world upon a message of the highest 
importance. Some, indeed, would explain this pas- 
sage, and chap. vi. 12, of Zerubbabel; but, as Dr. 
Blayney justly observes, there is no reasonable 


ground to conclude that he is designed in either | 


place. “It is true he was a descendant from David, 
and appointed under the authority of the kings of 
Persia to be a subordinate governor of the Jews 
who returned from Babylon, and in that capacity he 


presided, and took an active part with Joshua the) 


high-priest, and with the chief of the fathers, in for- 
warding the building of the temple. But there 
surely does not appear, in what we know of his 
character or performances, any thing to merit the 
particular notice imagined to be here taken of him. 
The same person must needs be intended here as is 
spoken of under the same title Jer. xxiii. 5; nor is 
it conceivable that terms so magnificent as those 
used in this latter place especially can be applicable 
to one of so limited power and authority as Zerub- 
babel enjoyed. Besides, it is evident that the Branch 
is promised as one that was to come, or be brought 
forth, and not as one that had already enjoyed his 
estate, such as it was, for many years past. In short, 
for these and for many other reasons, it may be con- 
cluded against Zerubbabel ; and, I think, against any 
other of less consequence than the great Messiah 
himself, through whom alone iniquity is put away, 
and the reign of perfect peace and righteousness is 
_to be established: compare Psa. cxxxii. 17; Isa. iy. 


|| saved.”—Henry. 


1 


9 For behold the’ stone that I have A. hid 
laid before Joshua; ? upon one stone 
shall be % seven eyes: behold, I will engrave 


12; Luke i.78. sa Psa. exvill, 22; Isa.” xxvill. 16 =A 


°Isaiah iv. 2; xi. 1; Jeremiah xxiii. 5; xxxiii. 15; Chap. vi. 
Chap 
iv. 10; Rev. v. 6. 


2; Jer. xxxiii. 15, 16.” The word which here, and 
in the places above referred to, is translated Branch, 
is by the LXX, rendered Avarodn, the east, or sun- 
rising, from whence it is applied to Christ, Luke i. 
78, and is translated there the day-spring. Hence 
the name of Oriens was probably given to the sup- 
posed king of the Jews by the Roman writers: see 
Tacit, Hist., lib. v. cap. 13. 

Verse 9. For behold the stone, &e. —Or, as some 
render the former part of the verse, For this is the 
stone which I lay before Joshua; there are in the 
same stone seven eyes: I will engrave it with its 
engravings, saith the Lord—There seems to be an 
allusion in these words to the foundation, or chief 
corner stone of the temple, which probably was laid 
with great solemnity in the presenee of Joshua. 
Christ is not only the rod out of the stem of Jesse, 
and the branch that should grow out of his roots, the 
fruit of which is excellent and comely for the rem- 
nant of Israel that escape the corruption which is in 
the world, but the foundation of the spiritual temple 
laid in Zion. And it is here foretold, that when he 
should be brought forth, seven, that is, many, eyes 
should be upon him. “The eye of the Father was 
upon him, to take care of him and protect him, espe- 
cially in his sufferings. The eyes of all the prophets 
and Old Testament saints were upon this one stone: 
Abraham rejoiced to see Christ’s day, and he saw it 
and was glad. The eyes of all believers are upon 
him, as the eyes of the stung Israelites were upon 
the brazen serpent. They look unto him and are 
Or, the seven eyes upon this 
stone may be explained, as the eyes upon the wheels 
in Ezekiel’s vision: they may signify the perfection 


and plenitude of knowledge and wisdom which were 


in Jesus Christ for the good of his chureh, and his 
ever watchful care of his people: or the various gifts 
and graces of the Holy Spirit, with which he was 
endued: for he hath the seven spirits of God, as 
well as the seven stars, Rev. iii. 1; and his eyes are 
as a flame of fire, piercing through all disguises, and 
searching the reins and the heart of every human 
creature, and especially of every one that professes 
to be his disciple. “The Branch and the Stone,” 


;says Dr. Dodd, “are the same; which stone hath 


seven eyes, because the Messiah is the searcher of 
hearts, whom God engraved with his engraving; as 
in John the evangelist, him the Father sealed, en- 
dowed him with those gifts, virtues, and powers of 
the Spirit, which the prophets had foretold should 
be in the Messiah, by whom, dying on the cross, God 
removed the iniquity of that land in one day. Ina 
day when every man (verse 10) called his neigh- 

bour, &c., that is, when the whole world was in pro- 
found peace. ” But, instead of, Upon one stone shall 
be seven eyes, Blayney reads, From one —— 


cide 2 


Illustrious prophecy 


CHAPTER IV. 


concerning the Messiah, 


A. M. 3484. 


ravi : 
B.C. 520 the graving thereof, saith the Lorp 


~ of hosts, and * I will remove the ini- 
quity of that land in one day. 


10 ‘In that day, saith the Lorn of A. M, 3484. 
. fn) By G80 
hosts, shall ye call every man his neigh- ——~—— 


bour ‘ under the vine and under the fig-tree. 


t Jer. xxxi. 34; 1.20; Mic. vii. 18, 19; Chap. xiii. 1. 


fountains, the word py signifying a fountain as 
well as an eye. “It seems,” says he, “as if the pro- 
phet saw in his vision a stone or rock, set before 
Joshua, with seven fountains springing out of it, 
which God says were opened by himself.” There is, 
he thinks, here “a plain allusion to the rock which 
Moses smote in the wilderness, and brought waters 
out of it for the refreshment of the people of God; 
and that rock, St. Paul says, was Christ, 1 Cor. x. 4. 
In speaking of which transaction, the psalmist says, 
He opened the rock and the waters gushed out, 
Psalm cy, 41:” in which passage the same verb, 
mn9, is used, which in the next clause is translated, 
Twill engrave, &c., which Blayney renders, Behold, 
Topen the passage thereof; that is, the hole or ori- 
fice through which the fountains shall flow. Again, 
it is said, Isa. xli. 18, J will open rivers in the high 
places, where not only the same verb is used, but is 
followed by the same preposition as is here placed 
before the word rendered stone. And it is said chap. 
xiii. 1, In that day shall there be opened a fountain 
(the same verb being again used) to the house of 
David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. For 
what purpose? for sin and for uncleanness. “This 
was spoken of the gospel times; and, in like man- 
ner, it is here said of the same, And I will remove, 
or take away, the iniquity of the land in one day, 
namely, that one day on which Christ died to put 
away sin by the offering of himself. There cannot, 
surely, remain a doubt of what is intended, nor that 
Dyy must signify fownlains of living waters, issu- 
ing from Christ. The living waters are the doc- 
trines of the gospel, and the fountains, the dis- 
pensers of them, the apostles and evangelists, who 
are said to be fellow-workers with Christ, and there- 
fore aptly represented by the companions of Joshua. 
The number seven is frequently used in Scripture to 


8 Chap. ii. 11.— 1 Kings iv. 25; Isa. xxxvi. 16; Mic. iv. 4. 


denote multitudes, 1 Sam. ii, 5; Jer. xv. 9, &e., &c.” 
It must be observed, however, that both the LXX. 
and the Vulgate read seven eyes, and not seven foun- 
tains. 

Verse 10. In that day—In the day of removing 
the sins of my people; literally referring to the re- 
turned captive Jews, and mystically to the whole 
church in gospel days, when Christ the chief corner 
stone should have purged away sin and established 
his church; and when sinners should come to him 
in repentance and faith, and obtain reconciliation 
with God and peace of conscience; shall ye call 
every man his neighbour—Invite, with love and 
kindness, such as become neighbours by partaking 
of the same divine grace and blessing of the gospel; 
under the vine, and under the fig-tree—To associate 
together in holy duties and godly fellowship, sitting 
under the shadow of the true vine with delight, and 
finding its fruits sweet to your taste; as in Judea 
men used to feast together under the shade, and 
upon the fruit of their vines and fig-trees. When 
the guilt and power of iniquity are taken away, and 
we are in Christ new creatures, we receive precious 
privileges and blessings, as the fruit of our justifica- 
tion, regeneration, and union with Christ; yea, more 
precious than the products of the vine or fig-tree. 
And we repose ourselves in sweet tranquillity under 
his protection and care, being saved from the fear of 
evil, and possessed of a peace that passeth all under- 
standing. ‘“'This may perhaps have a special refer- 
ence to that day when the eyes of the Jews shall be 
fixed upon Christ, the precious corner stone, which 
they have hitherto rejected. Then their load of 
national guilt shall at once be removed; and they 
shall enjoy spiritual peace and temporal security 
in their own land, as in the days of Solomon.”— 
Scott. 


CHAPTER IV. 


In this chapter the prophet is called to contemplate a fifth vision of the most sublime and mysterious import. 


(1,) He sees a 


candlestick of pure gold, with its seven lamps, communicating, by seven pipes, with a bowl at the top, which serves for a 
reservoir, and is constantly supplied with oil from two olive-trees standing on each side of the candlestick, 1-3. (2,) He 


inquires into the meaning of the vision, and receives an answer, which, though it might, in some sort, apply to the circum- 
stances of the temple then building, yet, from the solemnity of the manner and terms used, must be considered as pointing 
to something far higher, even the final and complete establishment of Christ's holy, catholic church, not by any human 
means, but by the power of the Holy Spirit, surmounting all obstacles thrown in the way, 4-7. (3,) A special prediction 
ts annexed, that Zerubbabel, who had begun, should have the honour of finishing the building of the temple; the accom- 
plishment of whichis made a sign, or proof, of Zechariah’s divine mission, 8-10. (4,) The meaning of the seven lamps 
ts explained, and of the two over-hanging branches of the olive-trees on each side of the candlestick, 11-14: see Blayney. 


1029 


Vision of the golden candlestick 


ZECHARIAH. 


and the two olive-trees. 


M. 3484. 
C. 520. 


ND a the dazed that talked with 
me came again, and waked me, 
>as aman that is wakened out of his sleep, 

2 And said unto me, What seest thon? And 
I said, I have looked, and behold ° a candle- 
stick, all of gold, } with a bowl upon the top 
of it, ¢and his seven lamps thereon, and ? seven 
pipes to the seven lamps, which are upon the 
top thereof : 

3 ° And two olive-trees by it, one upon the 


A. 
B. 


a Chap. ii, 3——? Dan. viii. 18. ¢ Exod. xxv. 31; Rev. i. 12. 
1 Heb. with her bowl. 4 Exod. xxv. 37; Rev. iv. 5. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verses 1-3. And the angel came again, and waked 
me—This seems to indicate, that the prophet’s atten- 
tion was very deeply engaged by the foregoing 
vision; that all the powers of his mind were wholly 
engrossed by it; so that he had even fallen into a 
kind of trance, or ecstasy, when he was roused 
again by the angel, to attend to what follows. And 
said unto me, What seest thou2—Thus the angel 
still further excites his attention. And I said, Be- 
hold a candlestick of gold—This represented the 
church of God, Jewish and Christian, set up for the 
enlightening of this dark world, by diffusing the 
light of divine truth. The candle, or lamp, is God’s, 
the church is but the candlestick; but it is all of 
gold, signifying the great worth of the church, com- 
posed of the excellent of the earth. This golden 
candlestick had seven lamps, branching out from it 
by so many sockets, in each of which was a burning 
and shining light. ‘The Jewish Church was but one; 
and though the Jews that were dispersed had pro- 
bably synagogues in other countries, yet they were 
but as so many lamps belonging to one candlestick ; 
but now, under the gospel, Christ is the centre of 
unity, and not Jerusalem, or any one place; and, 
therefore, seven particular churches are represented, 
not as seven lamps, but as seven several golden can- 
dlesticks, Rev. i. 20. This candlestick had one bovl, 
or common receiver, on the top, into which oil was 
continually dropping; and from it, by seven pipes 
or conduits, it was conveyed to the seven lamps; so 
that, without any further care, they received oil as 
fast as they wasted it, and so were kept always burn- 
ing. And the bowl too was continually supplied, 
without any care or attendance of man, from two 
olive-trees, (verse 3,) one on each side of the can- 
dlestick, which were so fat and fruitful, that, of their 
own accord, they poured plenty of oil continually 
into the bowl. So that nobody needed to attend to 
this candlestick, to furnish it with oil; it tarried not 
for man, nor waited for the sons of men: the scope 
of which is to show, that God easily can, and often 
doth, accomplish his gracious purposes concerning 
his church by his own wisdom and power, without 
any art or labour of man. And though sometimes 
he makes use of instruments, yet he neither needs | 


them, nor is confined to them, but can do his work | | would, not by those human means, in 


1030 


right side of the bowl, and the other A. M. 3484. 
upon the left side thereof. saad 

4 So I answered and spake to the angel 
that. talked with me, saying, What are these, 
my lord ? 

5 Then the angel that talked with me an- 
swered and said unto me, Knowest thou not 
what these be? and I said, No, my lord. 

6 Then he answered and spake unto me, 
saying, This zs the word of the Lorp unto 


2 Or, seven several pipes to the lamps, &c.—- Verses 11, 12; 
Revelation xi. 4, 


without them, and will, rather than it shall remain 
undone. 

Verses 4, 5. So I answered, &c.—Namely, after I 
had seen and discerned; What are these, my lord 
—Observe how respectfully he speaks to the angel, 
calling him his lord; those that would be taught, 
must give honour to their teachers. He saw what 
these things were, but inquired what they signified. 
It is very desirable to know the meaning of God’s 
manifestations of himself, and of his mind, both in 
his word and by his ordinances and providences. 
The angel answered, §c., Knowest thou not what 
these be?—This might be said, not with a view of 
reflecting on the prophet’s want of discernment, but 
merely to excite his attention: so Capellus observes. 
Blayney, however, thinks that, by this question, the 
angel meant to censure the prophet’s dulness in not 
perceiving “ what a reasoning and reflecting mind, 
versed in the allegories of prophecy, might in some 
measure at least have discovered.” ‘Thus also Hen- 
ry: “If he had considered and compared spiritual 
things with spiritual, he might have guessed at the 
meaning of these things: for he knew that there 
was a golden candlestick in the tabernacle, which it 
was the priest’s.constant business to supply with oil, 
and to keep it burning; when, therefore, he saw in 
vision such a candlestick, with lamps always burn- 
ing, and yet no priests to attend it, nor any occasion 
for them, he might discern the meaning of this to be, 
that though God had set up the priesthood again, yet 
he could carry on his own work for and in his peo- 
ple without them.” And I said, No, my lord—He 
makes an ingenuous confession of his ignorance. 

Verse 6. T'hen he answered, Not by might nor by 
power, &c.—That is, Zerubbabel and Joshua, with 
| the Jews under their conduct, shall finish the temple 

and re-establish the Jewish state, not by force of 
arms, nor by human power, but by the aid of my 
providence and grace; just asthe lamps are supplied 
with oil in a secret and invisible manner, without 
the help of man. Thus the angel answers the pro- 
phet’s question, “not by descending to an explana- 
tion of particulars, but by giving the general purport 
of the vision; the design being, not to gratify a par- 
tial curiosity, but to comfort and encourage an 
almost desponding people by the assurance that God 
ey 


A special prediction 


CHAPTER IV. 


concerning Zerubbabel. 


at 5454 Zerubbabel, saying, f Not by * might, 
nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith 
the Lorp of hosts. 

7 Who art thou, O great mountain ? before 
Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he 
shall bring forth ® the headstone thereof ‘ with 
shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it. 

8 Moreover the word of the Lorp came unto 
me, saying, 


9 The hands of Zerubbabel * have A. M. 3484 
laid the foundation of this house; rie 
his hands ‘shall also finish it; and ™thou 
shalt know that the " Lorp of hosts hath sent 
me unto you. 

10 For who hath despised the day of ° small 
things? ‘for they shall rejoice, and shall see 
the ° plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with 
those seven; ” they are the eyes of the Lorn, 


f Hosea i. 7—— Or, army,—% Jeremiah li. 25; Mal. xxi. 
21,——+ Psa. exviii. 22. 1 Ezra ili. 11, 18. — Ezra iii. 10. 
1 Ezra vi. 15.——* Chap. ii. 9, 11; vi. 15. 


Isaiah xlviii. 16 ;. Chap. ii. 8——° Hag. ii. 3. 
the seven eyes of the LORD shall rejoice. 
p2Chron. xvi. 9; Prov. xv. 3; Chap. iii. 9. 


4 Or, since 
5 Heb, stone of tin. 


were sufficiently sensible of their own deficiency, 
but by his own Spirit, render his church triumphant 
over all opposition.”—Blayney. We may observe 
further here, that what is.done by God’s Spirit, is 
done by might and power; but this stands in oppo- 
sition to visible force. Israel was brought out of 
Egypt, and into Canaan, by might and power: but 
they were brought out of Babylon, and into Canaan 
the second time, by ¢he Spirit of the Lord of hosts ; 
working upon the spirit of Cyrus, and inclining him 
to proclaim liberty to them, and upon the spirits of 
the captives, inclining them to accept the liberty 
offered them. It was by the Spirit of the Lord that 
the people were excited and animated to build the 
temple, and therefore they are said to be helped by 
the prophets of God, Ezra v. 2; because by their 
mouths the Spirit of God spoke to the people’s 
hearts. It was by the same Spirit that the heart of 
Darius was inclined to favour and further that good 
work, and that the sworn enemies of it were infat- 
uated in their counsels, so that they could not hinder 
it as they designed. Observe, reader, the work of 
God is often carried on very successfully, when yet 
it is carried on very siléntly, and without the assist- 
ance of human force: the gospel temple is built, not 
by might or power, for the weapons of our warfare 
are not carnal, but spiritual; namely, the force of 
truth and love, which, through the Spirit of the Lord, 
are mighty to pull down strong holds, and bring 
men’s hearts and lives into captivity to the obedience 
of Christ. Thus the excellency of the power is of 
God, and not of man. 

Verses 7-9. Who, rather, What art thou, O great 
muountain—O great obstacle, apparently as insur- 
mountable and immoveable as a high mountain. 
Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain—Thou 
shalt sink into nothing. The obstacle shall give 
way, the difficulty vanish, the opposition cease. 
Removing mountains, or levelling them into plains, 
are proverbial expressions, denoting the overcoming 
the greatest difficulties, and removing all obstacles. 
So that the angel here encourages Zerubbabel to go 
on with his undertaking of rebuilding the temple, 
and restoring the Jewish state, assuring him that all 
the endeavours of the Samaritans, and of others of 
the neighbouring people to hinder him, would be 
fruitless, and that nothing should be able to with- 
stand him. As the words of the text proceed imme- 
- diately from Jehovah, Blayney thinks they appear 

3 


more dignified, if considered as expressing the same 
sense by an interrogation, closed by a brief answer, 
thus: “ What art thou, O great mountain? Before 
Zerubbabel, a level plain.” He shall bring forth the 
headstone—Namely, of the temple. He shall lay 
the top or headstone upon the walls of the temple: 
agreeably to what is said in the next verse, that he 
should finish the temple, as well as lay the founda- 
tion of it; with shoutings, crying Grace, grace unto 
it— Which action of Zerubbabel shall be accompanied 
with the joyful acclamations of the people, as also 
with their earnest prayers, wishing all prosperity, 
and along continuance of it, to the temple, and those 
that should worship God therein. As if he had said, 
As the free favour of God began and fini$hed the 
building, may the same favour ever dwell in it and 
replenish it. But although this be the literal sense 
of the passage, it has undoubtedly also a mystical 
meaning. As Christ is figuratively intended by the 
stone laid before Joshua, (chap. iii. 9,) so here it is 
figuratively signified that God would bring forth, 
or bring into the world, the Messiah, as the top, or 
headstone, the last or finishing ornament of the 
church, God’s spiritual house, Eph. ii. 21. To this 
sense the Chaldee paraphrase expounds the words: 
“His Messiah shall come forth, who was named 
from all eternity, and shall obtain the empire of all 
the kingdoms of the earth.” And St. Jerome tells us 
upon the place, that the ancient Jews explained it so. 
His hands also shall finish—He shall have the hap- 
piness of seeing the great work, which he hath 
begun, finished and brought to perfection. And thow 
shalt know, &c.—These may either be the words of 
the prophet to Zerubbabel, signifying, that when the 
prediction now uttered was accomplished, it would 
evidently appear to have been delivered by a divine 
commission, in which sense’ similar words must be 
understood, chap. ii. 9. Or they may be the words 
of the angel to the prophet, signifying that when the 
promise made in the preceding clause was fulfilled, 
then he would know that God had sent this divine 
instructer to him, and that the vision was really from 
God. : 
Verse 10. For who hath despised—The sense 

would be plainer if the particle for were omitted, 
as it is in most other versions; namely, thus: Who 
hath despised the day of small things? they shall 
rejoice, &e.—That is, who, or where are they, who 
despised the small beginnings of my temple, when 

10381 


The angel's explanation of the 


ZECHARIAH. 


candlestick and two olive-trees. 


A. M. 3484. which run to and fro through the 
B. C. 520 
whole earth. 

11 4 Then answered I, and said unto him, 
What are these 4 two olive-trees upon the right 
side of the candlestick and upon the left side 
thereof ? 

12 And I answered again, and said unto him, 
What be these two olive-branches which 


4 Verse 3. 


® Heb. by the hand.——’ Or, empty out of them- 
selves oil into the gold.—® Heb. the gold. 


the foundations of it were laid again in order to 
rebuild it? They shall be made glad, or they shall 
now have occasion to break out into joyful acclama- 
tions; instead of sorrowing, as many of them did, 
Ezra iii. 12, on account of what seemed contempti- 
ble in their eyes. In the work of God, the day of 
small things is not to be despised. God often 
chooses weak instruments to bring about mighty 
things: and though the beginnings be small, he can 
make the latter end greatly to increase. Though 
many of the Jews undervalued the mean and un- 
promising appearance of the second temple when it 
began to be built, yet, it is here foretold, that when 
finished they should rejoice init. “By the day of 
small things,” says Blayney, “I suppose to be meant 
the time when the resources of the Jewish nation 
appeared in the eyes of many, even well wishers, so 
small and inadequate to the building of the temple, 
against a powerful opposition, that they despaired of 
seeing it carried into effect. Such persons would, 
of course, rejoice, when the event turned out so con- 
trary to their expectations.” Shall see the plummet 
in the hand of Zerubbabel—The perpendicular line 
with which he should try the finished work; with 
these seven—In subordination to the divine provi- 
dence, expressed by the seven eyes which were on 
that stone. And those that have the plummet in 
their hand must look up to these eyes of the Lord, 
must have a constant regard to the divine provi- 
dence, and act in dependance upon its conduct, and 
in submission to its disposals. But both the LXX. 
and the Vulgate render this clause more agreeably 
to the Hebrew, dividing it into two distinet sentences, 
thus: They shall rejoice, and see the plummet in the | 
hand of Zerubbabel. Those seven (namely, eyes] 


are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro |) 


through the whole earth ; that is, his wise and watch- 
ful providence is always attentive to the concerns of 


his church, and is continually superintending and | 
_ having again acknowledged his ignorance, the angel 


ordering all events for its benefit. It must be 
observed, however, that here again, as in chap. iii. 
9, (where see the note,) Blayney reads fountains 
instead of eyes, observing, “The lamps, considered 
as part of the furniture belonging to the candlestick, 
that is, the church, can represent no other than the 
ministers and dispensers of evangelical light and 
knowledge: in which sense our Saviour says of |, 


“ditongh the two golden pipes 7 empty Ae M, 2486. 
8 the golden oil out of themselves ? ara 
13 And he answered me and said, Knowest 

thou not what these be 2 And I said, No, my 

lord. 

14 Then said he, * These are ye two ° anoint: 
ed ones, * that stand by * the Lorn of the whole 
earth. 


r Rey. xi. 4. —® Heb. sons of oil.——* Chap. iii. 7; Luke i. 19. 
t Josh. iii. 11, 13; Chap. vi. 5. 


duits, for conveying and communicating to others 
the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, with which 
they are replenished themselves. And as fountains 
they are said to run to and fro through the whole 
earth, which was, in an eminent degree, seen in the 
apostles and first preachers of the gospel; whose 
sound went into all the earth, and their words unto 
the ends of the world, Rom. x. 18.” 

Verses 11-14. T'hen answered I--Or, Then spake 
JT, the Hebrew word 73y being not only used of 
giving an answer to a question, but likewise of 
beginning or continuing a discourse. What are 
these two olive-trees, &c.—The prophet had learned 
|the meaning of the candlestick and its lamps, and 
now wants to know what the two olive-trees 
signify; and no answer being given to his question, 
| he immediately proceeds to ask another; and in the 
answer given to it he acquiesces. Observe, reader, 
those that would be acquainted with the things of 
God, must be inquisitive concerning them. They 
|must inquire of those who understand them, and 
they shall receive information; and if satisfactory 
answers be not given them at first, or quickly, let 
them renew their inquiries, praying for light from 
God, and the vision shall at length speak, and not lie. 
The prophet’s second question differs a little, yet not 
much, from the former. 

I answered again, says he, What be these two 
| olive-branches 2—Two principal branches, one from 
each tree, extending to the golden candlestick, and 

communicating to it, through two golden pipes, 
fastened to the golden bowl, the golden oil, out of 
themselves—That is, the clear, bright oil, the best of 
its kind, and of great value. And he answered, 


| Knowest thou not what these be?—If thou knowest 


the candlestick to be the church, must thou not sup- 
“pose that the olive-trees and the olive-branches are 
emblems of the means which God hath provided to 
communicate to it his truthand grace? The prophet 


‘says, These are the two anointed ones—Hebrew, 
N37 732, sons of oil, as in the margin. As by the 
‘candlestick we understand the visible church, par- 
‘ticularly that of the Jews at that time, for whose 
comfort this vision was primarily intended, these - 
| sons of oil, that stand by the Lord of the whole 
earth, are the two great ordinances and of 


them, Ye are the light of the world, Matt. v. 14. 

These, taken in conjunction with their pipes, may 

not improperly be represented as fowntains, or con- 
1032 


| 


the magistracy and ministry, at that time lodged i in 
the hands of those two great and good men, Zerub- 
babel and Joshua. This prince, this i Nc were 


| 


- 


Vision of the CHAPTER V. Slying roll. 
sons of oil, anointed of God, or endued with the || but in his mysterious person, as God and man, is the 
gifts and graces of his Spirit, to qualify them for the || good olive to his church, supplying it with the golden 
work to which they were called. They stood be-|| oil of saving grace, and communicating to believers 
fore the Lord of the whole earth, to minister to him, | out of his fulness the unction, or anointing of the 
and to receive direction from him; and a great in- | Holy Spirit, John i. 16; 1 John ii. 20-27. 

fluence they had upon the affairs of the church at Dr. Blayney, however, gives a different explana- 
that time; for their wisdom, courage, and zeal were | tion of this passage. By the candlestick, indeed, he 
continually emptying themselves into the golden | understands the church of God, both under the 
bowl, to keep the lamps burning; and when they | Jewish and Christian dispensations: but, in verse 12, 
should be removed, others would be raised up to | instead of two olive-branches, he reads, two orderers 
carry on the same work, and Israel should not be || of the olive-trees, understanding by the olive-trees 
left without prince and priest. Thus Grotius, || “the two dispensations of the law and the: gospel, 
Lowth, Henry, Dodd, and several later interpreters, || under which were communicated the precious oracles 
understand the clause. By the two anointed ones, || of divine truth, which illuminate the soul, and make 
says Archbishop Newcome, “Zerubbabel and Joshua || men wise unto salvation ;” and by the orderers, or 
may be meant; who presided over the temporal and | directors, of these dispensations, Moses and Christ, 
spiritual affairs of the Jews; were the ministers, or || the two sons of oil, or anointed ones, that stand by 
vicegerents, of Jehovah; and acted not by their own || the Lord of the whole earth, fulfilling his will and 
strength, but by the divine assistance;” verse 6. | executing his commands. “Of the latter of these,” 
“Tt is plain,” adds he, “that the golden candlestick || says he, “it is expressly said, Isa. Ixi. 1, The Spirit 
is the Jewish state, both civil and religious: and that | of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord hath 
the oil, with which the lights are supplied, is the || anointed me, &c. Nor do I conceive that any other 
Spirit of God, in opposition to human efforts.” But | can be meant by the two witnesses, appointed to 
though the candlestick herg may primarily signify || prophesy for a certain time, clothed in sackcloth, 
the Jewish Church, yet, in a secondary sense, it was || Rev. xi. 3; the next verse plainly showing, that an 
also undoubtedly intended to be a figure of the || allusion is there made to this prophecy of Zechariah, 
Christian Church; and Zerubbabel and Joshua were || concerning the candlestick and olive-trees, though 
types of the Messiah, and their offices emblematical || not with all that accuracy of citation which we 
of his offices, who, as is said chap. vi. 18, sits and | should look for at present. "hese are the two olive- 
rules upon his throne, and is a priest upon his | trees and the two candlesticks, standing before the 


throne: who is not only the anointed one himself, ) God of the earth, Rev. xi. 4.” 


CHAPTER V. 


In this chapter the prophet is shown two visions, (1,) That of an immense roll, or book, like that which Ezekiel describes, 
chap. ii. 9, 10, filled with curses, and in the act of flying, to denote the celerity and speed, as well as the certainty with 
which the thief and false swearer would be visited to their utter destruction, 1-4. (2,) The vision of an ephah, or mea- 
sure, in which sat a woman representing a nation, whose wickedness was arrived at such a height as required an imme- 
diate check. Accordingly a heavy cover is cast over her, and she is carried into exile in a distant land, there to abide the 
full time allotted for her punishment, 5-11. 


ee eaet. "THEN I turned, and lifted up mine || 2 And he said unto me, What A.M. 3484. 


ae Fee. eyes, and looked, and behold a|/seest thou? And I answered, I see 
flying * roll. a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty 
a Ezek. ii. 9. 
NOTES ON CHAPTER V. approaching prosperity. But, lest they should grow 


Verse 1. Then I'turned and lifted up—Or, again || presumptuous and careless of their conduct, it was 
T lifted up, mine eyes—For the verb 21¥, to return, || thought proper to warn them of the conditions on 
is often used adverbially ; and behold a flying roll— || which their happiness would depend; and to let 
That is, a roll of a book, as the expression is Jer. || them see, that however God was at present disposed 
xxxvi. 2; Ezek. ii. 9; the ancient way of writing || to show them favour, his judgments would assuredly 
being upon long scrolls of parchment, which used || fall upon them with still greater weight than before, 
to be rolled up. This roll contained an account of || if they should again provoke him by repeated acts 
the sins and punishments of the people, and is de- || of wickedness.” Accordingly, this warning and in- 
scribed as flying, both because it was open, and to || formation are given them by the visions of this chap- 
denote the swiftness of God’s judgments. Hitherto, | ter, which are of a very different kind from the pre- 
from the beginning of this prophecy, “all has been | ceding ones.—Blayney. ; ; 
consoling, and meant to cheer the hearts of the Jew-'| Verses 2-4. The length thereof is twenty cubits, 
ish people, by holding forth to them prospects of || &c.—Such scrolls for ee were usually longer 

3 


Vision of 


ZECHARIAH. 


the ephah. 


A. 
2 ~ cubits. 
3 Then said he unto me, This is the » curse | 
that goeth forth over the face of the whole 
earth: for ' every one that stealeth shall be cut 


off as on this side, according to it; and every 


ligeony cubits, and the breadth thereof ten | 
ey 


one that sweareth shall be cut off as on that 
side, according to it. 

4 1 will bring it forth, saith the Lorn of 
hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the 
thief, and into the house of © him that swear- 
eth falsely by my name: and it shall remain 
in the midst of his house, and ¢ shall consume it 
with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. 


> Mal. iv. 6——" Or, every one of this people that stealeth holdeth 
himself guiltless, as it doth. 


than they were broad; so this was represented as ten 
yards in length, and five in breadth. The roll was_| 
very large, to show what a number of curses would | 
come upon the wicked. 
curse, &¢.—This roll, or book, contains the curses, | 
or judgments, due to sinners, particularly sinners of | 
the Jews, who have been favoured with greater light 
and privileges than other people, and whose sins, 
therefore, are the more inexcusable. T'hat goeth 
over the face of the whole earth—Or rather, of the | 
whole land ; for the land of Judea only seems to be | 
here meant. 


both sides, as that mentioned Ezek. ii. 10: and on| 
one side were contained the judgments against steal- 
ing, and on the other against false swearing. These 
two sins are joined together, because in the Jewish 
courts men were compelled to purge themselves by 
oath, in case they were accused of theft; and they 
often would forswear themselves rather than disco- 
ver the truth. Considering the time when Zecha- 
riah prophesied, it seems probable, that those who 
made use of fraud with respect to what had been | 
dedicated to the rebuilding of the temple, and re-| 
storing the service of God, are here particularly 
referred to. According to Calmet, under the two} 
names of theft and false swearing, the Hebrews and 
Chaldeans included all other crimes ; theft denoting | 
every injustice and violence executed against men, 
and perjury all crimes committed against God. In- 
stead of on this side, and on that side, Newcome 
reads, from hence, namely, from the land. And in- 
stead of shall be cut off, the Vulgate reads, judica- | 
bitur, shall be judged; and Houbigant, shall be 
pushed. It must be acknowledged, however, that 
the Hebrew word 7p), so rendered, rather means, 
carries himself as innocent, or, asserts himself to be 
innocent; or, is declared innocent, or, left unpu- 
nished, namely, by the magistrate. Blayney therefore 
translates the clause, Because, on the one hand, 
every one that stealeth is as he that is guiltless ; 
and, on the other hand, every one that sweareth is 
as he that is guiltless. On which he observes, 
1034 


Then said he, This is the | 


Every one that stealeth shall be cut | 
off as on this side, &e—The roll was written on )) 


5 % Then the angel that talked A, M. 3484. 
with me went forth, and said unto “ 
me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what is 
this that goeth forth. 

6 And I said, What ts it? And he said, This 
isan ephah that goeth forth. He said more- 
over, This is their resemblance through all the 
earth. 

7 And behold, there was lifted up a ? talent 
of lead: and this ts a woman that sitteth in the 
midst of the ephah. 

S And hesaid, This is wickedness. And he 
cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast 
the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof. 


¢ Ley. xix. 12; Chapter viii. 17; Mal. iii, 54 Lev. xiv. 45. 
2 Or, weighty piece. 


“The reason assigned for the curse going forth 
through the whole land is, that the good and the bad, 
the innocent and the guflty, were in every part of it 
looked upon and treated alike; so that it was time 
for the divine justice to interpose, and make the 
proper distinction between them.” And it shall 
enter, &¢c.—This curse shall come with commission 
from me ; into the house of the thief—Where he had 
laid up that which he got by theft, thinking to enjoy 
it to his satisfaction. Or, by his house may be un- 
derstood his family, estate, and goods: it shall take 
hold of him, and all that belong to him, and shall 
never leave them till they are utterly destroyed. 
And it shall remain in the midst of the house—It 
shall stick close to them and theirs, as Gehazi’s le- 
prosy did to him and his posterity; or, like the 
leprosy that infects a house, and cannot be purged 
till the house itself be pulled down. 

Verses 5-8. T'he angel that talked with me went 
forth—Or rather, went on, as the verb xx often 
signifies ; (see 2 Chron. xxi. 19; Jer. xxv. 32;) and 
so it may signify at the end of this verse, and in the 
next, where it occurs again, And I said, What is 
it2—What does this signify, or, what thing is this? 


| And he said, This is an ephah—An ephah was a 


measure containing somewhat Jess than our bushel, 
and consequently too small for a woman to sit in ; 
we must therefore understand here a measure, in the 
form only of an ephah, but of a larger size, which 
was probably the reason why Zechariah did not 
know what it was: and being the measure whereby 
they bought and sold dry things, it seems to have 
been intended to denote the unjust dealings of the 
Jews in buying and selling; their fraud, deceit, and 
extortion in commerce, were sins abounding among 
them; as they are among that people at this day. 
He said moreover, T'his is their resemblance—Or, 
as the LXX. render it, This is their iniq<uity (read- 
ing Cony, instead of DIY) through all the earth— 
Or, through all the land ; that is, by this you may 
make an estimate of their unjust dealings all over 
the land. Besides the intimation given by this vision 


of the ephah, that the dealings of the —— 


Signification of the 


CHAPTER V. 


vision of the ephah. 


A. M. 3484. 
B.C. 


B48 9 Then lifted I up mine eyes, and 


’ looked, and behold, there came out 
two women, and the wind was in their wings ; 
for they had wings like the wings of a stork: 
and they lifted up the ephah between the earth 
and the heaven. 


10 Then said I to the angel that A.M. 3484. 
talked with me, Whither do these = 
bear the ephah ? 

11 And he said unto me, T'o ° build it a house 
in fthe land of Shinar: and it shall be esta 
blished, and set there upon her own base. 


e Jeremiah xxix. 5, 28, 


other were unjust, its largeness and its going forth 
corresponded with the iniquities that prevailed in 
the land, both as exceeding the ordinary measure, 
and also as continually increasing, so as already to 
have arisen to such a pitch as made it necessary to 
repress them. And behold there was lifted up a 
talent—Or, a huge mass; of lead—This seems to 
have been intended to denote the weight, or severity, 
of the judgments here threatened. And this is a 
woman, &c.—What thou seest besides, isa woman 
sitting carelessly upon the ephah, and fearing no 
evil. So Grotius, “super epha, superba et nihil 
mali metuens.” That she appeared at first sitting 
upon the ephah, is evident from what is said in the 
following words, namely, that the angel cast her into 
the midst of the ephah ; which implies that she was 
not there before. And he said, This is wickedness 
—This woman denotes wickedness: or, this is ini- 
quity itself, or corruption of heart, the mother or 
spring of thefts, perjuries, and all kind of crimes. 
Blayney renders it, 7'his is the wicked one. Public 
states, or societies, are often represented by women, 
as the mothers of their people, as we see in the an- 
cient coins. By the same analogy, corrupt societies 
are expressed by harlots, and women of lewd cha- 
racters ; so here, the corrupt state of the Jews is 
set forth by a wicked woman. And he cast it—Ra- 
ther, he cast her, into the midst of the ephah—So 
the LXX., eppnbev avrnv ec pecoy Te peTp#. So also 
the Vulgate. Newcome renders it, He cast her within 
the ephah, that is, (as he explains it,) “ caused her to 
contract herself within the compass of the vessel, 
denoting the check given to her further progress.” 
And he cast the weight of lead wpon the mouth 
thereof—That is, of the ephah, ne quis esset eaitus, 
says Grotius, that there might be no exit, or way of 
escape. Or to signify, that when a people have filled 
up the measure of their iniquities, they sink under 
the weight of their sins, and cannot escape the judg- 
ment of God, and that thus it should fare with the 
Jewish people. 

Verses 9-11. T'hen lifted I up mine eyes, &e.— 
Great difficulties attend the interpretation of this 
part of the vision, and commentators are much di- 
vided upon it. According to Calmet, the woman en- 
closed in the ephah denoted the iniquity of Babylon ; 
the mass of lead which fell down upon her was the 
vengeance of the Lord; and the two women who 
lifted her up into the air were the Medes and Per- 
sians, who destroyed the empire of Babylon. Hou- 
bigant, however, observes, “that nobody has yet 
found out, nor ever will find out, why these women 

3 


f Genesis x. 10. 


should carry the ephah into the land of Shinar, or 
of the Chaldees, if Shinar be understood literally, 
and not metaphorically. The Jews were not again 
carried captive into the land of the Chaldeans, after: 
the rebuilding of the temple by Zerubbabel; nor 
can the Chaldeans be understood by the ephah which 
is carried into the land of Shinar with the woman, 
who abused it to fraudulent purposes ; for the ephah 
isa Hebrew measure; and this woman, who is kept 
shut up in the ephah, is carried into a land not her 
own. Shinar will be more properly understood, as 
spoken metaphorically of the last captivity, under 
which the Jews now live; being, in the several king- 
doms of the world, in the same state of servitude as 
they lived in under the kings of the Chaldeans; 
having their dwelling everywhere, with the deceit- 
ful ephah, to denote their usury and fraud. There — 
is no necessity to be anxious about explaining why 
the ephah was to be carried by two women, and not 
by one only, or more, for the empire of the Greeks 
and Romans is not denoted hereby, but two women 
pertain only to the parable; as it might have seemed 
too much for one to have carried into a distant 
country an ephah burdened with lead, and with a 
woman shut up in it.’ Archbishop Newcome un- 
derstands the words in this sense: considering the 
two women as “mere agents in the symbolical 
vision;” the meaning of which, he says, seems to 
be, “ that the Babylonish captivity had happened on 
account of the wickedness committed by the Jews ; 
and that a like dispersion would befall them, if they 
relapsed into like crimes. Thus the whole chapter 
would be an awful admonition that multiplied curses, 
and particularly that dispersion and captivity, would 
be the punishment of national guilt.” Blayney inter- 
prets the vision ina similar way. “These, [namely, 
two women, | and the other circumstances mentioned 
verse 9, seem to indicate nothing more particular, 
than that Providence would make use of quick and 
forcible means to effect its purpose.” Hence these 
women are said to have had wings like the wings of 
a stork; the stork, like other birds of passage, being 
provided with strong wings. Though the land of 
Shinar signifies, as he observes, the land of Baby- 
lon, (see Gen. xi. 2,) yet “this does not necessarily 
imply that Babylon would be the scene of the next 
captivity; but only that the people, in case of fresh 
transgression, might expect another severe captivity, 
like that in Babylon, but of still longer duration. In 
this manner Egypt is used proverbially for any 
grievous calamity, inflicted by the judgment of God: 
see Deut. xxviii. 68; Hos. viii. 13, and ix. 3.” 
1035 


Vision of the 


ZECHARIAH. 


Sour chariots. 


CHAPTER VI. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A vision of four chariots, drawn by horses of different colours, representing the four great em- 
pires of the world, rising in succession, and distinguishable, both by their order and by their attributes, 1-8. (2,) The pro- 
phet is commanded by God, in the presence of witnessess, and for a memorial to them, to place a crown, or crowns, upon 
the head of Joshua the high-priest, thereby constituting him a type of Christ, the Branch, whom he proclaims, as about to 
come to build the spiritual temple of Jehovah, and to preside over it, both as king and priest, for the great purpose of 


peace, 9-14. 
phet’s divine mission, 15. 


A. B.C, bt = ANP I turned, and lifted up mine 
eyes, and looked, and behold, 

iiss came four chariots out from between two 
mountains; and the mountains were mount- 
ains of brass. 

2 In the first chariot were *red horses; and 
in the second chariot » black horses ; 

3 And in the third chariot * white horses; and 
in the fourth chariot grizzled and ! bay horses. 


* Chap. i. 8; Revelation vi. 4 Rev. vi. 5. 
1Or, strong. —! Chap. vy. 10. 


© Rey. vi. 2. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VI. 
Verse 1. And I turned and looked, &c.—“ The 


main design of this eighth and Jast vision is to con- || 


‘firm the Jews in their faith in, and dependance upon 
God, by showing them that, weak and defenceless as 
they seemed to be, they had nothing to fear from 
the greatest earthly powers, while they remained 
under the divine protection; since all those powers 


originally proceeded from the counsels of the Al- | 


mighty, were the instruments of his providence, and 
could not subsist, nor act, but under his permission.” 
—Blayney. And behold there came four chariots— 
Horses and chariots are the usual emblems of con- 


querors: see Isa. xxi. 7-9; Zech. x. 3. The four |) 


chariots, here mentioned, denoted the four great 
empires, which either had subdued, or were to sub- 
due the greater part of the then known world, name- 
ly, the Assyrian, or Babylonian, the Persian, Gre- 
cian, and Roman. They are here represented as 
coming from between two mountains, because moun- 
tains are the natural barriers which divide kingdoms; 
which, though they be strong as brass, are here 
supposed to be broken through by those that invade 
and conquer their neighbours. And it is observable, 
that several of the mighty conquerors of the world 
owed the beginning of their greatness to their suc- 
cessful passage through the straits of mountains, 
_ Whereasmall force might have maintained the passes 
against a powerful army. Thus the beginning of 
Alexander’s success against the Persians, was his 
passing without opposition through the straits of 
Cilicia ; 
Persians had passed before, when they marched into 
Syria and Judea. . 

Verses 2, 3. In the first chariot were red horses 
—This meant the Chaldean empire, the bloody eru- 


through which also the Babylonians and | 


elties of which were signified by the red colour of | 


the horses. This empire being overthrown, and its 

power extinct, when the prophet had this vision, it 

is only mentioned by-the-by, for the sake of order, 
1036 


(3,) The accession of strangers to assist in building the temple is foretold, and given as a proof of the pro- 


4 'Then I answered ¢ and said unto A. M. 3484. 
the angel that talked with me, What 
are these, my lord ? © 

5 And the angel answered and said unto me, 
° These are the four *spirits of the heavens, 
which go forth from f standing before the Lorp 
of all the earth. 

6 The black horses which are hiatal go 
forth into * the north country; and the white 


e Psa. civ. 4; Heb. i. 7, 14. 2 Or, winds ——f 1 Kings xmii. 
19; Dan. vii. 10; Chap. iv. 14; Luke i. 19.——s Jer. i. 14. 


and nothing further is said of it. And in the second, 
black horses—We find by the Apocalypse, chap. vi. 5, 
that a black horse was an emblem of famine, or 
dearth, so that the chariot with black horses seems 
to have signified the Persian empire, which brought 
desolation on many countries, as appears from the 
history of Darius and Xerxes. And in the third 
chariot white horses—Conquerors used to ride on 
white horses, when they were triumphing on account 
of victories gained over their enemies. This, there- 
fore, aptly denoted the almost continual victories 
of Alexander, who in a few years overturned the 
Persian empire, and set up the Macedonian. And 
in the fourth chariot—Representing the Roman 
empire; grizzled and bay horses—Denoting the va- 
rious forms of the Roman government. 

Verse 5. T'hese are the four spirits of the hea- 
vens—Or rather, The four winds, as the word 
nny very frequently signifies, and as it is here 
rendered in the margin, and also by the LXX. and 
the Vulgate: that is, these chariots are the four em- 
pires in the different parts of the world. Thus 
Daniel, beginning to foretel the rise of these four 
great empires, chap. vii. 2, observes, Behold, the 
four winds of heaven strove upon the great sea. 
But how, it may be asked, could these chariots be 
| said to be winds? Like strong winds they rushed 
violently on, and produced great agitations and com- 
motions in the earth, resembling the effects of strong 
winds, both by sea and land. These winds are said 
to go forth from standing before the Lord of all 
the earth, to signify that, as winds are frequently 
made God’s ministers, and fulfil his word, (Psa. 
exlviii. 8,) so these. empires, as his servants, ’should 
do his pleasure, and execute his purposes, whether 
of judgment or mercy, upon the different nations of 
the earth. In other words, they should be made 
subservient to the designs of his providence. — 

Verses 6,7. T'he black horses go forth into the 
north country—The Persians (signified, pai 


Vision of the 


CHAPTER VI. 


four chariots. 


A. M. 3484. 


Sada 8 forth after them; and the grizzled 


go forth toward the south country. 

7 And he bay went forth, and sought to go 
that they might " walk to and fro through the 
earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and 
fro through the earth. So they walked to and 
fro through the earth. 

8 Then cried he upon me, and spake unto 
me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the 
north country have quieted my ‘spirit in the 
north country. 


h Gen. xiii. 17; Chap. i. 10.— i Judg. viii. 3; Eccles. x. 4. 


observed, by the black horses) marched from Per- 
sia into Chaldea, which lay north of Judea, and is 
commonly denominated the north country. And 
the white go forth after them—Alexander, with his 
Macedonians, signified, as we have said, by the white 
horses, marched from Greece through Asia Minor to 
Babylon, after the Persians, who retired before his 
victorious army. And the grizzled go forth toward 
the south country—This probably was intended to 
denote the Romans conquering Egypt, frequently 
called the south country in Scripture: see Dan. xi. 6. 
This was the last country the Romans subdued, 
under Augustus, whereby they became masters of 
the greatest part of the known world. And the bay 
sought to go, &c., that they might walk to and fro 
through the earth—As the bay horses, as well as the 
grizzled, belonged to the fourth chariot, representing 
the Roman empire, (see note on verse 3,) and the 
bay horses are mentioned after the grizzled, this verse 
may be intended to describe the ambition of the 
Romans, especially under the last form of their 
government, the imperial, to extend their conquests 
to every quarter of the globe; and the divine per- 
mission granted them so to do, signified in the latter 
part of the verse. Or, as Lowth supposes, a dif- 
ferent branch of that empire may be here intended, 
which should arise and extend its conquests.in the 
latter times; namely, the empire of the Goths and 
Vandals, whose power rose out of the ruins of the 
first Roman empire, and who set up the kingdom of 
the ten horns, mentioned Rev. xiii. 1, and xvii. 3. 
Verse 8. Then cried he unto me, Behold, these 
that go toward the north—Namely, the black horses, 
denoting the Persian empire; have quieted my spirit 
in the north country—That is, by conquering the 
Babylonians, and executing upon them the punish- 
ment which they deserved for their cruelty and 
other crimes, they have satisfied the wrath which I 
had conceived against that people. So the LXX., 
averavoay Tov Yuuov pov ev yn Boppa, they have caused 
my wrath to cease in the land of the north. Instead 
of these that go toward the north, it would be better 
to translate the words, those who have gone toward 
the north; because it is spoken of the Persians over- 
turning the Babylonian empire, which happened be- 
fore the prophet was favoured with this vision. 
Verses 9-11. And the word of the Lord came unto 


9 4 And the word of the Lorp elk arog 
came unto me, saying, ewes! 

10 Take of them of the captivity, even of 
Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are 
come from Babylon, and come thou the same 
day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of 
Zephaniah ; 

11 Then take silver and gold, and make 
K crowns, and set them upon the head of 
Joshua the son of Josedech, the high-priest ; 

12 And speak unto him, saying, Thus speak- 


k Wxod. xxviii. 36; xxix.6; Lev. viii. 9; Chap. iii. 5. 


me, &c.—The prophet here proceeds to relate how 
he was favoured with another revelation, respecting 
a kingdom very different from the preceding; say- 
ing, Take of them of the captivity, &c.—That is, 
receive from the captivity, from Heldai, from Tobi- 
jah, &c. The exiles who remained in Babylon, 
showed their regard for the temple that was then 
building, by sending their gifts and oblations to Jeru- 
salem, for carrying on the work, and adorning the 
temple after it was built. These offerings, it is to be 
supposed, they sent about the time when the prophet 
had this vision, by the persons here named, as they 
did afterward by Ezra and his companions: see 
Ezra vii. 16, and viii. 25, 26. And go into the house 
of Josiah—This was probably one who came from 
Babylon along with those before mentioned, namely, 
Heldai, &c.; for in other versions the words, which 
are come from Babylon, are put at the end of the 
verse. J'hen take silver and gold—That is, receive 
from them silver and gold, namely, of that which 
they had brought for the service of the temple, from 
those who remained still in Babylon. And make 
crowns—“ That is, cause to be made by the artist.”— 
Newcome, who observes that Josiah, above men- 
tioned, was probably a worker in gold and silver. 
Some versions read, not crowns, but a crown. It 
seems, however, more probable, that “ two crowns 
are here ordered to be made, and both of them to be 
placed upon the head of Joshua; to signify that the 
Messiah, the branch, spoken of in the next verse, 
of whom Joshua was a type, should be both a king 
and a priest, and so should have a right to wear the 
two crowns that belonged to these offices. One 
crown was probably made of silver, and the other 
of gold; or both silver and gold might be used on the 
same crown; the silver denoting the human nature 
of the Messiah, and the gold the divine; or the 
former the exercise of his offices of priest and king 
on earth, and the latter the exercise of them in hea- 
ven. Or, as some think more probable, both crowns 
were made of gold, and the silver was employed for 
some different sacred use, especially as the high- 
priest’s crown, inscribed with Hotiness ro THE Lorn, 
was to be entirely made of pure gold. 

Verse 12. And speak unto him, saying—Bishop 
Chandler justly observes, that the prophet’s speech 
is directed to Joshua only ; ; the two crowns are put 

1037 


Prophecy concerning 


ZECHARIAH. 


the Messiah. 


Ay ey eth the Lorn of hosts, saying, Be- 
———— hold !the man whose name is The 
™ RRANCH; and he shall *grow up out of 
his place, "and he shall build the temple of 


the Lorp: 


13 Even he shali- build the temple 4. 9454. 
of the Lorn; and he ° shall bear the 
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne : 
and ” he shall be a priest upon his throne: and 
the counsel of peace shall be between them both. 


1 Luke i. 78; John i. 45——™ Chap. iii. 8——® Or, branch up 
from under him. 


2 Chap. iv.9; Matt. xvi. 18; Eph. ii. 20, 21, 22; Heb. iii. 3. 
o Isa. xxii. 24.—P Psa. ex. 4; Heb. Br ie 


only on the head of Joshua; to him only it is said, 
Behold the man whose name is The Branch—As 
much as to say, “Behold the sign of the Branca, 
the person whom I promised to David in Solomon, 
and by the prophets after David to the Jews, by the 
name of the Brancu.” “ There cannot be a doubt,” 
says Blayney, “that the same person is meant by 
the Brancu here, who is so called chap. ili. 8, and 
this has beem already shown to be, not Zerubbabel, 
but the Messiah himself; of whom Joshua is made 
the type, or representative, by the crown placed on 
his head. For to what end should he have been 
called in to represent Zerubbabel, who was his co- 
temporary, and altogether as ready at hand as him- 
self. Nor will the passage, strictly and literally trans- 
lated, answer to any other but him who was at once 
both king and priest, and, by uniting both characters 
in himself, was completely qualified to bring about 
the counsel of peace, or reconciliation between God 
and man.” It must be observed, however, that the 
human nature of our Lord is here chiefly intended 
by the expression, 7"he man, the Brancu. For, con- 
sidered in his divine nature, he is not the branch out 
of the stem of Jesse, or David, but their root, as he 
is termed Isa. xi. 10; Rev. v. 5, and xxii. 16. In this 
his human nature, he was small in his beginning, 
even as to his kingdom as well as his person; and 
mean in his appearance, as a mere bud or sprout, 
but gradually flourishing and becoming great and 
fruitful. Asa branch, he was to be cut off, but would 
produce sprouts, branches, and trees of righteousness 
innumerable. He shall grow up out of his place— 
Out of the tribe and family, and in the place fore- 
told; as if he had said, Though you may suspect the 
root to be dry and dead, yet assuredly it is not: the 
branch will spring up, the Messiah, who shall be both 
priest and king, will make his appearance in due 
time. The Hebrew, mos’ nnnn, is literally, He 
shall spring up, or flourish, from under himself ; 
by his own power, or by the power of his own 
Spirit, he shall be both stock and stem to himself. 
The words seem evidently to express his miraculous 
conception. He shall build the temple of the Lord | 
—As the preceding clause speaks of his person, his 
conception, and birth, so this describes his work; as 
if he had said, He it is that stands by you, though 
unseen, and enables you to build this material tem- 
ple; which neither Zerubbabel, nor Joshua, nor all 
the Jews uniting with them, would be able to com- 
plete without him. This, however, is a temple far 
inferior to that spiritual building, the gospel church, 
which the Messiah will in due time raise, beautify, 
preserve, and honour; the spiritual house, in which 
he will dwell, 1 Pet. ii. 4; the temple built on the 
1038 


foundations laid in Zion, where he will manifest his 
grace and glory, and be worshipped in Spirit and in 
truth, 1 Cor. iii. 9-16; 2 Cor. vi. 16; Eph. ii. 19-22. 
Verse 13. Even he shall build the temple of the 
Lord—Here we have a sentence omitted by the 
LXX., Syriac, Arabic, and one MS., and which 
Archbishop Newcome proposes to expunge, as being 
only a different reading of the foregoing clause. 
“But, in arrest of judgment,” says Dr. Blayney, “I 
would beg leave to plead, that, in my opinion, the 
clause is not superfluous, but highly emphatic, im- 
plying that Even ue, the self-same person, who 
should build the temple of Jehovah, 81m), EVEN HE, 
should have the honour of governing and presiding 
in it, as both king and priest, in both capacities ad- 
vancing the peace and prosperity of his people.” 
Or, perhaps,. the prediction is repeated, chiefly in 
order to confirm the Jews in the assured expectation 
of what is promised. And he shall bear the glory 
—The glory of the priesthood and royalty had been 
divided between the house of Aaron and that of 
David: but now, he alone shall bear the glory of 
both. Glory, in general, is a burden, and this dou- 
ble glory would be a doublé burden; but not too 
heavy for him to bear who wpholdeth all things. 
He bore the cross, which was his glory, and he bears 
the crown, an exceeding great and eternal weight 
of glory. They shall hang on him all the glory of 
his Father’s house, &c., Isa. xxii. 24. He shall bear 
such glory that the glory of the latter house shall be 
greater than that of the former. Thushe shall raise, 
or lift up (Hebrew, sw) the glory. The glory of 
Israel hath been thrown down and depressed, but he 
shall raise it out of the dust. And shall sit and 
rule upon his throne—He shall have.a throne: the 
government shall be on his shoulders; which de- 
notes both dignity and dominion, exalted honour 
and extensive power: he hath a name above every 
name; all power is his in heaven and on earth, 
And this throne is his: by birth-right; by donation 
of his Father; by purchase; by conquest: it is his 
‘shall undoubted right. And its being said that he 
shall sit and rule wpon his.throne, signifies at once 
| his royal magnificence, the perpetuity thereof, and 
the ease with which he shall rule, namely, the world, 
by his providence, judging and punishing, or sparing 
and pardoning nations, families, or individuals; or 
the church, and all the members of it, by his word, 
especially his laws, his Spirit, and the exercise of 
discipline. Observe well, reader, eee is 


ordained to offer sacrifice for us, is» to 
give law tous. He will not save us, we be 
willing he should govern us, Heb. vy. 9. r has 


prepared him a throne in the heavenraameett we 


Prophecy concerning 


A. re 3484, 14 And the crowns shall be to He- 
. lem, and to 'Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, 
and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, 4 for a me- 
morial in the temple of the Lorn. 
15 And * they ¢hat are far off shall come and 


CHAPTER VII. 


the Messiah. 


M. 3484, 


build in the temple of the Lorp ; and _ 
B. C. 520. 


sye shall know that the Tee of 
hosts hath sent me unto you. And ¢his shall 


come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the 


voice of the Lorp your God. 


4 Exod. xii. 14; Mark xiv. 9. 


t Isa. lvii. 19; 1x. 10; Eph. ii. 13, 19——* Chap. ii. 9; iv 9. 


would have any benefit by that, we must prepare 
him one in our hearts, and be willing and glad that 
he should sit and rule there, and to him must every 
thought be brought into subjection. And he shall be 
a@ priest upon his throne—-With the majesty and 
power of a king, he has the tenderness and sympathy 


of a priest, who, being taken from among men, is | 


ordained for men, that he may offer both gifts and 
sacrifices for men; who can have compassion on 
the ignorant, &c., Heb. v. 1, 2. In all the acts of his 
government as a king, he prosecutes his intentions 
asa priest. Let not those, then, that believe in, and 
are subject to him, look on his throne, though a 
throne of glory and of judgment, with terror and 
amazement. For as there is a rainbow round about 


the throne, so there is a priest upon the throne. And | 
his office as a priest is no diminution to his dignity | 
asaking. But his dignity as a king gives efficacy | 


to his intercessions and services asa priest. TJ'he 
counsel of peace shall be between them both—Be- 
tween Jehovah on the one hand, and the man, whose 
name is the Branch, on the other. That is, the 
counsel concerning the peace to be made between 
God and man, by the mediation of the Messiah, shall 
be, or rather, shall appear to have been, concerted by 
infinite wisdom, in the covenant of redemption; and 
that the Father and the Son understood each other 
perfectly in that matter. So some interpret the 
words. But it seems more probable that the kingly 
and priestly offices of Christ. are here referred to, 
and that the meaning is, that the peace made for 
God’s people shall rest on these two offices; that 
Christ, by his priestly office, should make peace for 
them with God, and by his kingly office should de- 
liver them from their spiritual enemies: that by the 
former he should expiate sin, and by the latter extir- 
pate it; that as a priest he should make, and as a 
king maintain peace. 


Verses 14, 15. And the crowns—The two crowns 
before mentioned, made of the gold and silver 
brought from Babylon, verse 11; shall be to Helem 
and to Tobijah, &c.—Of these persons we know no 
more, with any certainty, than their names. Jor a 
memorial in the temple of the Lord—Namely, of this 
transaction, of the pious liberality of those men, who 
had presented the gold and silver of which they 
were made, and especially of the Messiah’s certain 
and speedy coming. And they that are far off 
shall come and build, &e.—Though this verse, in its 
literal sense, may refer to the Jews who lived in dis- 
tant parts, and other artificers, coming to Jerusalem 
to assist in building the, material temple, yet, in its 
mystical and ultimate meaning, it refers to the con- 
version of the Gentiles to Christ, and to that true 
temple, the Christian Church, in helping to erect, 
enlarge, and beautify which, thousands and myriads 
of the Gentiles have co-operated, and still more, in 
ages to come, will co-operate. And ye shall know 
that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you—And 
the event of things, which, if not prevented by your 
disobedience, will be agreeable to my predictions, 
shall prove to you, beyond all doubt, that I was di- 
vinely inspired, and commissioned to declare these 
things to you: that is, the prediction, as far as it was 
intended to be understood literally, shall be accom- 
plished in your days ; and, in its mystical sense also, 
it shall be fulfilled in its season: the Gentiles shall 
come in and be united with you as brethren, and will 
help you to build the spiritual temple; 7f ye will 
diligently obey the voice of the Lord—For I must 
again desire you to observe, that the accomplishment 
of these promises depends on the condition of your 
obedience: for if you rebel and obey not, you 
shall even be cast out of God’s church, shall be de- 
prived of his protection and care, and the Gentiles 
shall be taken to be his peculiar people in your place. 


CHAPTER VII. 


In this chapter, (1,) A case of conscience is proposed to the prophet, by some Jews sent from a distant place, concern 
ing fasting, namely, whether they should continue to observe their annual fasts in the fifth and seventh months, 


which had been appointed on the occasion of the destruction of Jerusalem and the ensuing captivity, 1-3. 


(2,) The 


prophet reproves them sharply for their selfish and carnal manner of observing their fasts, regardless of the instruc- 


tions which God had given them by former prophets, 4-7. 
the practice of justice, mercy, and love toward each other, how obstinately their fathers had hardened their heart 


(3,) He reminds them how they had been exhorted to 


ae 


and huw God, in wrath, rejected their prayers, destroyed or scattered them, and laid their land utterly desolate, 


8-14, 
3 


1039 


The prophet is consulted 


ZECHARIAH. 


concerning fasting. 


A. mo 3486. 


me t 
earns AND it came to pass in the fourth 


a oe year of King Darius, that the 
word of the Lorp came unto Zechariah in the 
fourth day of the ninth month, ever in Chisleu ; 

2 When they had sent unto the house of God 
Sherezer and Regem-melech, and their men, 
‘to pray before the Lorn, : 

3 And to * speak unto the priests which were 
in the house of the Lorn of hosts, and to the 
prophets, saying, Should 1 Weep in * the fifth 


t Heb, to entreat the face of the LORD, 1 Samuel xiii. 12; 
Chapter viii. 21, a Deuteronomy xvii, 9-11; xxxiii. 10; 
Malachi ii. 7. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIL. 
Verses 1-3. T'he word of the Lord came unto 
Zechariah, &c.—In this and the next chapter is 
contained a third and distinct revelation made to 
Zechariah, about two years after the former; of 


which the occasion and matter are as follows: A| 
considerable progress having, by this time, been | 
made in the rebuilding of the temple, and affairs | 


going on pretty smoothly, the hopes of the Jewish 
nation began to revive, and a deputation was sent to 


inquire of the priests and prophets, whether it was | 


God’s will that they should still observe the fast, 
which had been instituted on account of the destruc- 
tion of the city and temple by the Chaldeans. To 
this inquiry, the prophet is directed in these chap- 
ters how to answer; and his answer is given not all 
at once, but, as it seems, by piece-meal, and at seve- 
raltimes. For here are four distinct discourses that 
have reference to this case. In the fourth day of 
the ninth month, even in Chisleu—This month cor- 
responded with the latter part of our November and 
the beginning of December. 
—The Hebrew verb here used is in the singular 
number, he had sent, or one had sent; but our trans- 
lators very properly interpret it plurally, by the 
figure termed an enallage of the number, which is 
often used in the Hebrew; and the Vulgate renders 
it in the same sense. This is understood by some 
to be spoken of the Jews who still remained in 
Chaldea; but it seems more probable that those are 
meant who dwelt in the towns or villages at some 
distance from Jerusalem. T'hese sent unto the house 
of God—That, is unto the temple, where the build- 
ing was still carried on with success; Sherezer and 
Regem-melech—Men of note among them; and their 
men—Servants, or persons of less rank, who accom- 
panied them; to pray before the Lord—To offer up 
prayers for themselves and their friends. "The tem- 
ple was the only place where they could offer sacri- 
fices and oblations, to which solemn prayers were 
always wont to be joined. And to speak unto the 
priests and prophets—It was the office of the priests 
_ toresolve any doubts that might arise respecting 
the worship of God, or any part of his law, whether 
moral or ceremonial, and the people were com- 
manded to consult them, and to act according to 
their determination, And since the Prophets Hag- 
1040 


When they had sent | 


month, separating myself, as I have oe 
done these so many years ? a 

4 4% Then came the word of the Lorn of 
hosts unto me, saying, 

5 Speak unto all the people of the land, and 
to the priests, saying, When ye ° fasted and 
mourned in the fifth “and seventh month, *even 
those seventy years, did ye at all fast f unto me, 
even to me ? 


6 And when ye did eat, and when ye did 


ee lii. 12; Chapter viii. 19. © Isaiah lviii. 5—_a Jer. 
xli. 1; Chapter vii. 19. e Chapter i. Bt Romans 
xiv. 6. 


gai and Zechariah were at this time residing in Je- 
rusalem, it was proper to inquire of them, who 
might probably give them an immediate answer to 
their inquiry from God himself. Should I weep in 
the fifth month—The fast in the fifth month was 
kept because in that month, answering to our month 
of July, the city and temple were burned by the 
Chaldeans, 2 Kings xxv. 8; in memory of which 
grievous judgment, the people instituted a solemn 
fast, which, it appears, they had observed from that 
time until the times here spoken of; refraining from 
all worldly business and pleasure, and employing 
themselves in the religious exercise of prayer and 
humiliation: see chap. xii. 12-14. The question 
they now proposed, was, whether it were proper 
for them still to continue this fast, when the ecclesi- 
astical and civil state was in a great measure re- 
stored, and the judgment for which they mourned 
was removed. 

Verses 4-6. J'hen came the word of the Lord 
unto me—When these men had proposed their case, 
and were expecting the priests’ answer, God com- 
missioned his prophet to give them the answer con- 
tained in the subsequent part of this and in the fol- 
lowing chapter; saying, Speak unto all the people 
of the land—Let all the people in general, and not 
only those who have proposed the question, know 
what I am now about to say to thee, in answer to it. 
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and 
seventh month—“'The Jews not only observed 
those fasts which were instituted by God himself, 
but likewise added others, in commemoration of 
great calamities. The exiled Jews instituted four 
of these fasts; one in the fourth month, (June 17,) 
in commemoration of the breach of the wall, men- 
tioned Jer. lii.'7; one in the fifth month, (July 4,) 
in commemoration of the burning of the temple, 
Jer. lii. 12; one in the seventh month, (September 
3,) for the murdering of Gedaliah, Jer. xli. 2; and 
one in the tenth month, (December 4,) in commem- 
oration of the beginning of the siege, 2 Kings xxv. 1. 
These fasts were observed, not only in their captiv- 
ity, but likewise in Judea, between the reigns of Cy- 
rus and Darius the son of Hystaspes; the Jews there- 
fore, as we have remarked, particularly inquired con- 
cerning the observation of the fast on account of the 
| brrning of the temple, because that temple was now 


He reproves the people 


CHAPTER VII. 


Sor their wickedness. 


Ree aes. drink, * did not ye eat for yourselves, 

3 and drink for yourselves ? 
_7 ? Should ye not hear the words which the 
Lorp hath cried * by the former prophets when 
Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, 
and the cities thereof round about her, when 
men inhabited * the south and the plain ? 

8 4 And the word of the Lorp came unto 
Zechariah, saying, 

9 Thus speaketh the Lorn of hosts, saying, 
» Execute ° true judgment, and show mercy and 
compassions every man to his brother : 


? Or, be not ye they that, &c.——* Or, Are not these the words. 
4Heb. by the hand of, &.—+ Jer. xvii. 26.— Isa. lviii. 6, 7; 
Jer. vii. 23 ; Mic. vi. 8; Chapter viii. 16; Matthew xxiii. 23. 
® Heb. Judge judgment of truth——i Exod. xxii. 21, 22; Deut. 
xxiv. 17; Isaiah i. 17; Jeremiah v. 28. 


rebuilding; for they might doubt whether it was 
not improper to retain it any longer, as the reason 
had ceased which gave rise to it; or, whether the 
eommemoration of past calamities was not of great 
utility to the morals of mankind.” See Grotius, and 
Calmet’s Dictionary on the word Fasrs. Did ye 
fast at all untome—Blayney renders it, Did ye fast 
any fastings of mine? Or, Did ye fast my fast- 
ings, mine? When ye fasted, were those fastings 
observed as mine, my ordinances? No: you did 


not fast with an intention to obey me, or from reli-| 


gious motives, and with sincere purposes of repent- 
ance and reformation. You lamented more the 
losses, inconveniences, and miseries you suffered, 
than the sinfulness of your conduct which brought 
these calamities upon you. And when ye did eat, 
did ye not eat for yourselves?—Did you not seek 
your own pleasure and convenience, and not my 
glory? J was as little regarded by you in your 
fasts as in your feasts. 

Verse 7. Should ye not hear the words—You 
needed not to have thus inquired, had you regarded 
the words spoken by my prophets, who have borne 
testimony to the real excellence and absolute neces- 
sity of obedience to the great and momentous pre- 
cepts of my law, and who have called for true re- 
pentance and sincere love to God and man, with 
their proper fruits, and have shown how light and 
insignificant all ceremonies and formal services are 
in comparison thereof. When Jerusalem was in- 
habited and in prosperity—He puts them in mind 
of the reproofs, warnings, and exhortations of Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, and others of the former prophets, deliver- 
ed to them when they were in a state of compara- 
tive prosperity, in which state they would have been 
continued, if they had hearkened to these prophets, 
and been obedient to the Lord’s voice uttered by 
them. As if he had said, This is what you should 
have done on your fast-days; it was not enough to 
weep and separate yourselves on those days in token 
of your sorrow for the judgments that had come 
upon you; but you should have searched the Scrip- 
tures of the prophets, that you might have seen 

Vou. Il, ( 66 ) 


|| 10 And ‘oppress not the widow, A. M. 3486. 


B. C. 518, 
nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor fiinllod 


the poor; *and let none of you imagine evil 
against his brother in your heart. 

11 But they refused to hearken, and ! pulled ® 
away the shoulder, and 7 stopped™ their ears, 
that they should not hear. 

12 Yea, they made their ™ hearts as an ada- 
mant-stone, ° lest they should hear the law, and 
the words which the Lorn of hosts hath sent 
in his Spirit * by the former prophets: ? therefore 
came a great wrath from the Lorp of hosts. 


k Psa. xxxvi. 4; Mie. ii. 1; Chap. viii. 17. 1 Neh. ix. 29; 
Jeremiah vii. 24; Hos. iv. 16——® Heb. they gave a backsliding 
shoulder. 7 Heb. made heavy. m Acts vil. 57. » Ezekiel 
xi. 19; xxxvi. 26. ° Neh. ix. 29, 30.—® Heb. by the hand of. 
p 2 Chron. xxxvi. 16; Dan. ix. 11. 


what was the ground of God’s controversy with 
your fathers, and might have taken warning by 
their miseries, not to tread in the steps of their in- 
iquities. You ask, shall you do as you have done 
in fasting? No; you must do that which you have 
not yet done; you must repent of your sins, and 
reform your lives; that is it that we now call you 
to, and it is the same that the former prophets called 
your fathers to. To affect them the more with a 
sense of the mischief that sin had done them, and to 
bring them to true repentance, he reminds them of 
the former flourishing state of their country; Jeru- 
salem was then inhabited, and in prosperity, but is 
now desolate and in distress ; the cities round about, 
that are now in ruins, were then inhabited too, and 
in peace; the country likewise was very populous. 
But then God by the prophets cried to them, as one 
in earnest, and was importunate with them to mend 
their ways, and their doings, or else their prosperity 
would soon be at an end. Now, says the prophet 
you should have taken notice of that, and have in- 
ferred, that what was required of them for the pre- 
venting of the judgments, and which they did not 
perform, is required of you for the removal of the 
judgments; and if you do it not, all your fastings 
and weeping signify nothing. 'The sowth was that 
tract of land called the wilderness of Judea, Matt. 
iii. 1; part of which, or near to it, was the hill eoun- 
try, mentioned Josh. xxi. 11; Luke i. 39. The LXX, 
here render it Opecvy, the hill country. The plain 
was that open country, called the plains of Jericho, 
2 Kings xxv. 5; and the plain of the valley of Jeri- 
cho, Deut. xxxiv. 3; and reached as far as the salt 
sea, or the lake of Asphaltites, called the sea of the 
plain, Deut. iii. 17; compare Jer. xvii. 26, 

Verses 9-12. T'hus speaketh the Lord of hosts— 
Or did speak, that is, to your fathers, and thus he 
speaks to you now; Ewecute true judgment—I often 
put your fathers in mind that judgment and mercy © 
were more acceptable to me than fasting, or any ex- 
ternal performances; (see the margin ;) and I repeat 
the same admonition to you of the present age. And 
let none of you imagine evil against his ietiad 

04. 


Gracious promises relative 


ZECHARIAH. 


to the city of God. 


Ae M2406. 13 Therefore it is come to pass, that 
_~*"_ as he cried, and they would not hear ; 
so *they cried, and I would not hear, saith the 
Lorp of hosts: 


14 But "I scattered them with a whirlwind 


4 Prov. i. 24-28; Isaiah 1.15; Jer. xi. 11; xiv. 12; Mic. iii. 4. 
Deut. iv. 27; xxviii. 64; Ezek. xxxvi. 19; Chap. ii. 6. 


&c.—Neither think ill of, nor wish ill to, nor plot evil 
against one another. But they refused to hearken 
—But your fathers refused to obey the admonitions 
of the former prophets, and were often reproved by 
them for their refractory disposition; and pulled 
away the shoulder—Withdrew their shoulder from 
the yoke of the law. The metaphor is taken from 
oxen that refuse to put their necks under the yoke. 
See the margin. Yeu, they made their hearts as an 
adamant-stone—So that no arguments could make 
any impression upon them; lest they should hear 
the law—Of God by Moses, which they were per- 
emptorily required to do, but to do which they as 
peremptorily refused; and the words—The coun- 
sels and commands; which the Lord hath sent in 
his Spirit by the former prophets—Inspired and 
commissioned his prophets to declare; therefore— 
For this great obstinacy; came a great wrath— 
Which consumed the whole land, and burned against 
the people that had inhabited it’seventy years to- 
gether in Babylon; from the Lord of hosts—In all 


A. M. 3486, 


among all the nations * whom they 1 Mess 


knew not. Thus ‘ the land was de- 
solate after them, that no man passed through 
nor returned: for they laid * the ® pleasant land 
desolate. 


8 Deut. xxviii. 33——t Leviticus xxvi. 22. % Daniel viii. 9. 


° Heb. land of desire. 


which the hand of the Lord was most evidently seen, 
rendering unto them according to their ways. 
Verses 13, 14. T'herefore—On this very account ; 
as he cried—As I, by my Spirit in my prophets, 
called, warned, entreated, and urged them to repent, 
obey, and live, but they would not; so they cried— 
In their deep distress, and amidst their overwhelm- 
ing calamities; and I would not hear—Would not 
answer, or regard their prayer. But I scattered 
them—Cast them out of their habitations, and dis- 
persed them through distant countries; with a 
whirlwind—Suddenly and irresistibly; among all 
the nations—All the heathen, that hated them and 
their ways. . Thus the land—Onee flowing with 
milk and honey ; once full of cities, men, and cattle ; 
was desolate after them—Became waste as a wil- 
derness after they were cast out; that no man pass- 
ed through—An entire riddance was not only made 
of its inhabitants, but the very highways were deso- 
late, so that none passed and repassed: and that which 
was before a pleasant land, became a mere desert. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The prophet, having accounted for God's past severity to the Jews, proceeds, in this chapter, (1,) To inform them, that 
the anger of the Lord was now appeased ; and that he was again disposed to be gracious unto his people, and to 
restore Jerusalem, 1-8. He therefore, (2,) Exhorts them to proceed vigorously with the building of the temple, 
and assures them that they would, from that instant, experience a happy revolution in their affairs, 9-15. 
(3,) He renews his exhortation to the practice of moral righteousness, and promises that, on that condition, their 
fasts should be turned into joyful feasts; and they should be so distinguished by the divine favour, that many na- 


tions would be eager to embrace their religion, and sue for their alliance, 16-23, : 


A. M. 3486. A GAIN the word of the Lorp of 
B.C. 518. : 

by: ave hosts came to me, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; *I was 


a Nahum i. 2; 


NOTES ON CHAPTER VIII. 

Verse 2. I was jealous for Zion with great 
jealousy—With great care that she should not, as 
formerly, sin against my love and her own welfare, 
and with a great desire to do her good, and rescue 
her from her enemies. Jealousy is properly the 
passion of a lover, or husband, made up of love, 

- eare, and anger, in their highest degrees, for his be- 
loved, and against all that he thinks hurtful to her. 
Thus God had greatly loved Zion, had been careful 
of her honour and welfare, and displeased with her 

1042 


A.M. 


jealous for Zion with great jealousy, a shes, 


and I was jealous for her with great 
fury. 


Chapter 1. 14. 


sins, which first hurt her, and then with the Chal- 
deans, who violated her. And I was jealous for 
her—Or toward, or against her, as 79 may be ren- 
dered; with great fury—Hebrew, nnn, heat, or 
wrath, namely, for her sins. In a note on chapter 
i. 14, Blayney gives it as his opinion, that the jealousy 
there spoken of was God’s resentment against his 
people for their disloyalty and misbehaviour toward 
him. “In this opinion,” he here says, “I m con- 
firmed by the present passage, where not the least 
mention is made of the persecuting nations. That 
( 66* ) T= 


Gracious promises relative 


CHAPTER VIII. 


to the city of God 


A. M. 3486. 3 Thus saith the Lorp; >I am re- 

: ~ turned unto Zion, and ° will dwell in 
the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem ¢ shall 
be called, A city of truth; and * the mountain 
of the Lorp of hosts, f The holy mountain. 

A 'Thus’ saith the Lorn of hosts; & There 
shall yet old men and old women dwell in the 
streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his 
staff in his hand ! for very age. 

'5 And the streets of the city shall be full of 


__ >Chap. i, 16——¢ Chap. ii. 10.—4 Isa. i. 21, 26. © Isa, 
ii. 2, 3.—f Jer. xxxi. 23. &1Sam. ii. 3] ; Isa. Ixv. 20, 22; 
Lam. ii. 20; vy. 1l-14——" Heb. for multitude of days. a Ore 


hard, or, difficult. 


boys and girls playing in the streets A. M. 3486. 
thereof. oe Ae 

6 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; If it be 
* marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this 
people in these days, should it also be mar- 
vellous in mine eyes? saith the Lorp of hosts. 

7 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; Behold, iI. 
will save my people from the east country, and 
from *the west country. 


8 And I will bring them, and they shall 


h Genesis xviii. 14; Luke i. 37; xviii. 27; Romans iv. 21. 
ilga. xi. 11,12; xliii. 5,6; Ezek. xxxvii. 21; Amos ix. 14,15. 
3 Heb. the country of the going down of the sun, Psa. 1.13 exiii. 
oo Meal, ao Lt.) |. 


God’s jealousy bespeaks wrath toward the object of 
it, needs no other proof than his own words, Num. 
Seve.” 

Verse 3. I am returned unto Zion—“1I have 
punished her infidelities with all the rigour of de- 
spised and abused love; but, though sensible of her 
fault, my tenderness has continued, and my love is 
rekindled for her, upon her change in conduct, and 
return in true repentance to me. I have received 
her, restored my love to her, and will render to her 
my former kindnesses.” And will dwell in the 
midst of Jerusalem—Once more, as of old, I will 
manifest my presence and fix my residence there: 
according to my promise, repeated to my people, 
Jerusalem shall be my dwelling-place: see the note 
on chap. ii. 10. Jerusalem shall be called, A city of 
truth—That is, it shall be such: the truth of God 
shall be known, believed, loved, and adhered to 
therein; the true God, and he only, shall be wor- 
shipped there, and that in sincerity and truth, and in 
the manner which he hath prescribed. Its citizens 
shall love and speak the truth, shall practise and 
execute true justice and judgment, and be faithful 
to Jehovah; and the mountain of the Lord, The holy 
mountain—On account of the pure and holy wor- 
ship performed there, and the holy conduct of its 
inhabitants. We see a shadow of the accomplish- 
ment of this prophecy in the Jews, after their return 
from captivity; but this faithful city, this city of 
fruth and holiness, in the strictness of the letter, is 
no other than the Christian Church, that chaste and 
faithful spouse of Jesus Christ, Eph. v. 27. 

Verses 4,5. There shall yet old men, &c., dwell 
in Jerusalem—Namely, both at this time and after- 
ward. Formerly war, or famine, or pestilence, or 
wasting diseases cut off men and women before they 
grew to old age; but now it shall be otherwise: I 
will bless the people with a state of peace, and with 
health and long life. And every man, or, every 
one, Man or woman, with his staff in his, or her, 
hand for very age—It shall not be from weakness 
and diseases that théy lean upon their staves, but 
mere old age shall bring them to do it. And the 
streets, §&c., shall be full of boys and girls—Strong, 
brisk, and lively; playing in the streets—As in a 
time of perfect peace and security. 

3 


Verses 6, 7. If it be marvellous—If these things 
promised appear difficult, and in a manner impos- 
sible; in the eyes of the remnant of this people—In 
the judgment and opinion, or rather to the unbelief, 
of this people, who are few in number, exceedingly 
poor, and perpetually surrounded with dangers ; iz 
these days—Which are days of small things; should 
it also be marvellous in mine eyes—Impossible, or 
so much as difficult to me, who am the Almighty 
God. Thus saith the Lord of hosts—Here God 
engages his almighty power to make good his pro- 
mise. Behold, I will save my people—Or, bring 
them safe; from the east country—From Persia and 
Media, which lay east from Jerusalem, and were 
now masters of Babylon; and from the west coun- 
try—From the countries of Europe, in which many 
of the Jews were, or would afterward be dispersed. 
The original words may be literally rendered, From 
the rising to the going down of the sun, including 
all parts of the world. This implies the general re- 
storation of the Jewish nation from all their disper- 
sions: an event foretold by most of the prophets of 
the Old Testament: see note on Isa. xi. 11. The 
west country here mentioned, has a particular rela- 
tion to their present dispersion, great numbers of 
them being, in these latter ages, settled in the western 
parts of the world. “The Jews, upon the comple- 
tion of the Babylonish captivity, returned from the 
north, or from the east, but not from the west: nor 
can any other time here be pointed out, than the last 
return of the Jews; when they shall flow from all 
parts of the world to the New Jerusalem, and there 
constitute a new republic, the fame of whose sanctity 
shall allure and draw to it many nations, as is fore- 
told at the end of this chapter. We cannot under- 
stand this either of the Jews or of the Gentiles, who 
embraced the faith upon the preaching of the apostles. 
Not of the Jews, because the Lord did not save at 
that time the Jewish nation, which he was about to 
disperse ina very short period ;--not of the Gentiles, 
because the Gentiles were not the people of God, 
(my people,) before he had called them from the east 
and from the west.”—Dodd. 

Verse 8. And I will bring them—Though many 
things interpose to hinder, none shall prevent their 
returning ; I will lead the way, guard them in it 

1043 


The people encouraged 


ZECHARIAH. 


A.M. $486. dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; 

——_—— and they shall be my people, “iif 
I will be their God, 'in truth and in righteous- 
ness. 

9 4 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; ™ Let 
your hands be strong, ye that hear in these 
days these words by the mouth of the pro- 

-phets, which were in °the day that the foun- 
dation of the house of the Lorn of hosts was 
laid, that the temple might be built. 

10 For before these days * there was no ? hire 
for man, nor any hire for beast; ? neither was 
there any peace to him that went out or came 
in because of the affliction: for I set all men 
every one against his neighbour. 


11 But now Iwill not be unto the residue of | 


this people as in the former days, saith the 
Lorp of hosts. 


to build the temple. 
12 * For the seed shall be ® prosper- A. M. 3486. 
B. C. 518. 


ous; the vine shall give her fruit, 
and ‘the ground shall give her increase, and 
‘the heavens shall give their dew; and I will 
cause the remnant of this people to possess all 
these things. 

13 And it shall come to pass, that as ye: were 
“a curse among the heathen, O house of 
Judah, and house of Israel ; so will I save you, 
and * ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but ¥ let 
your hands be strong. 

14 For thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 7 As I 
thought to punish you, when your fathers pro- 
voked me to wrath, saith the Lorp of hosts, 
and I repented not: 

15 So again have I thought in these days to 
do well unto Jerusalem and to the house of 
Judah: fear ye-not. 


1 Jer. iv. 2. 
m Haggai ii. 4; "Werse 18.- ~o- Haggai ii. 18. 
*Or, ‘the hire of man became nothing, &¢e.——? Haggai 1. 6, 9,10; 
ii. 16. 4 2 Chron. xv. 5, 


supply their necessities, give strength to the weak 
and support to the dejected, and bring them safe to 
the end of their journey. 
the midst of Jerusalem—They shall inhabit their 
capital city asin old times. And they shall be my 
people, &c.—They shall duly perform their duty to 
me, and I will perform my promises to them ; they 
shall truly worship me, and I will protect and bless 
them. Jn truth and in righteousness—If we refer 
these words to God only, the word righteousness is 
equivalent to mercy, as it is often used; and, joined 


And they shall dwell in | 


with truth, implies God’s faithfulness in performing | 


his gracious promises. Or, this may be understood of 
the people, implying that, as God was faithful to 
them, so they should live in obedience to him. 
Verses 9, 10. Let your hands be strong—Be of 
good courage, and go on with resolution and perse- 
verance in the work you have begun, the rebuilding of 
the temple, since you have received such assurances 
from God’s prophets, even from the very first of 
your entering upon it, that he would prosper you in 
it, enable you to finish it, and bless you on account 
of your labour bestowed on it. Ye that hear 
these words of the prophets—He refers to the pro- 
phecies of Haggai, as well as those of Zechariah ; 
which were in the day, or, who spake in the day, 
that the foundation of the house was laid—The 
prophet speaks of the carrying on of the building as 
if it were the laying a new foundation: see Hag. ii. 
18. For before these days there was no hire for 
man, &c.—Or rather, T’here was no reward for 
man, nor any reward for beast: so the word 72, 
here used, often signifies; that is, the fruits of the 
earth would not pay for the labour of those who 
cultivated it: see the margin. For I set all men 
every one against his neighbour—I suffered many 
1044 


* Hos. ii. 21,22; Joel ii. 22; Hag. ii. 19—— * Fieb; of peace. 
s Psa. Ixvii. 6! Hag. i. 10. en. Xil. 
2; Ruth iv. 11, 12; Isa. xix. 24, 25; Zeph. iii, 20; Has. ii, 19. 
y Verse 9. 2 Jer. xxxi. 28.2 2 Chron, xxxvi. 16; Ch. i. 6 


molestations to be given you. The enemies of the 
Jews ceased not to molest them from without, Ezra 
iv. 1, &c.; and civil dissensions, it seems, prevailed 
within. 

Verses 11-13. But now I will not be as in the 


| former days—But now, seeing that ye have pro- 
| ceeded in rebuilding my temple, I will order, by my 


divine providence, that things shall happen other- 
wise to you than they did before, or that your affairs 
shall be more prosperous. Fer the seed shall be 
prosperous—This in the Hebrew is, For the seed 
shall be of peace, which seems intended to express 
that they should have peaceable times, or be a seed 
or nation at peace. And, as ye were a curse—A 
standing form of imprecation ; among the heathen— 
Who wished that their enemies might be as misera- 
ble as the Jews. This was to be changed into a 
blessing, to the contrary effect; May you be as 
happy as the Jews who are restored. See Grotius 
and Calmet. O house of Judah and house of Israel 
—By Israel may be understood here those of the ten 
tribes who returned to Judea with the two tribes of 
Judah and Benjamin. But the mentioning both 
Judah and Israel, which had been so long separated, 
shows that both the curse and the blessing here 
spoken of, in their ultimate sense, belong to the 
whole body of the Jews, who, as they are public in- 
stances of God’s judgments now, so shall they be 
hereafter of his blessings; namely, at the general 
restoration and conversion of that nation, to which 
several promises in this chapter relate. 

Verses 14, 15. As J thought to punish you—As 
my wisdom saw it to be fit and necessary to punish 
your nation; and I accordingly did punish it, when 
your fathers transgressed my laws in such a manner 
that my justice and wisdom could no et 


Israel shall be instrumental 


CHAPTER VIII. 


in the conversion of many © 


A. M. 3486. 


B. C. 518. 16 “| These are the things that ye 


shall do; » Speak ye every man the 
truth to his neighbour ; ® execute the judgment 
of truth and peace in your gates : 

17 ° And let none of you imagine evil in your 
hearts against his neighbour; and ‘love no 
false oath: for all these are things that I hate, 
saith the Lorp. 

18 “| And the word of the Lorp of hosts 
came unto me, saying, 

19 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; *The 
fast of the fourth month, ‘and the fast of 
the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, * and 
the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house 


and A. M. 3486 


of Judah ‘joy and gladness, ka 


cheerful 7 feasts; * therefore love the 
truth and peace. 

20 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts: J¢ shall 
yet come to pass, that there shall come people, 
and the inhabitants of many Cities : 

21 And the inhabitants of one city shall go to 
another, saying, !Let us go ® speedily ® 1° to pray 
before the Lorn, and to seek the Lorn of hosts: 
I will go also. 

22 Yea, ™many people and strong nations 
shall come to seek the Lorp of hosts in Jeru- 
salem, and to pray before the Lorp. 

23 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts; In those 


> Chap. vii. co; Verse 19; Eph. iv. 25.——® Heb. judge truth, 
and the judgment of peace. © Proverbs iii. 29; Chap. vil. 10. 
4 Chap. v. 3, 4. e Jer. lii. 6, 7. f Jer. lii. 12, 13; Chapter 
vii. 3, 5.——s 2 Kings xxv..25; Jer. xli. 1,2. 


it; So again, &c.—So now my wisdom sees it to be 
fit, since you have been reformed by your sufferings, 
that I should be favourable to you, bestow my bless- 
ings upon you, and protect you from your enemies. 

Verses 16, 17. These are the things that ye shall 
do, &e.—But these my promises of good to you are 
conditional, and the performance of them will de- 
pend upon your observing the laws of justice and 
righteousness ; Speak ye every man the truth to his 
neizhbour—Let no one deceive another by guile or 
falsehood. Ewecute the judgment of truth—True 
judgment; and peace in your gates—Use all means 
to restore and establish peace among you. Or, Let 
those who have the administration of justice com- 
mitted to their charge endeavour to search out the 
truth from the witnesses, in the trials which come 
before them; and decide according to the law, and 
do all in their power to uphold truth and integrity, 
and maintain the public peace. The judges, it is to 
be remembered, used to execute their office at the 
gates of each city, and therefore itis said here, Ex- 
ecule judgments, §c., in your gates. Let none of 
you imagine evil in your hearts—See note on chap. 
vii. 10. And love no false oath—See note on chap. 
y.3, 4. For all these are things which I hate—God, 
as he essentially, by his nature, loves that which is 
good and excellent, so must he hate that which is 
the contrary. 

Verse 19. The fast of the fourth month and of 
the fifth, &c.—See the note on chap. vii. 5. The 
siege of Jerusalem was begun in the tenth month, 


and in the fourth of the year following the city was | 


taken. God here informs the people, by his prophet, 
in answer to the question proposed, chap. vii. 3, that 
they might now disuse these fasts, and lay aside the 
mournful ceremonies with which they had been 
solemnized, the judgments, which had given occa- 
sion to them, being removed. T'herefore—Rather, 
but, love the truth and peace—But take care to have 
a regard to truth in your dealings and conversation 
with each other; and cultivate a meek and peacea- 
ble disposition; which will be far more pleasing to 
3 


h Jeremiah lii. 4. 


i Esther viii. 17; Isa. XXXV. 10" Or, 
solemn, or, set times. k Verse 16.—! Isa. ii. 3; Mic. iv. 1, 2. 
8 Or, continually. ° Heb. going.——"® Heb. to entreat the face 
of the LORD, Chap. vii. 2. m Isa. lx. 3, &c. ; Ixvi. 23. 


God than any of your outward performances. 
Such divine instructions as these prepared men’s 
minds for the reception of the gospel. See Jer. 
Xxxi, 33, 

Verses 20-22. It shall yet come t6 pass, &e.—The 
design of this and the three following verses is evi- 
dently to show the high degree of estimation in 
which Jerusalem and the Jews would hereafter be 
held, by foreign nations, when those among them, 
who were piously disposed to worship Jehovah the 
true God, would come to worship him at Jerusalem, 
as a place of peculiar sanctity; and those who 
wanted protection would humbly sue to the Jews 
for it, convinced that the men of that nation were 
especial objects of divine favour. It must be ob- 
served, however, that though the prediction con- 
tained in these verses might, in the primary sense, 
refer to those times of the Jewish republic which 
should precede the coming of the Messiah, and to 
the proselytes, which should then be made to the 
Jewish religion; yet the expressions are such, that 
it can scarce be doubted that the times of the gospel 
are also and more especially intended, when many 
more, of various nations, should be brought to the 
knowledge of the true God, and engaged to worship 
him in an acceptable manner. ‘T'here shall come 
people, and the inhabitants of many cities—Great 
multitudes of different cifies and nations. Saying, 
Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord—The 
expressions allude to the Jews going up in compa- 
nies to Jerusalem at the solemn feasts. J will go 
also—So every single person shall express his will- 
ingness to go along with them. Many people, &c., 
shall come to seek the Lord in Jerusalem—Un- 
derstanding the words literally, we find the first- 
fruits of these mentioned Acts ii. 10-12; but mys- 
tically Jerusalem means the church of Christ. To 


| pray before the Lord—To perform all parts of gos- 


pel worship. 

Verse 23. In those days ten men—That is, many 
men, a definite number being put for an indefinite. 
Out of all languages of the nations—From many 

1045 


Threatenings against 


A.M. 3486. days it shall come to pass, that ten 
———— men shall "take hold, out of all 
languages of the nations, even shall take hold 


n Tsaiah iii. 6; iv. 1. 


different and remote countries, no nation being any 
longer excluded; shall take hold of the skirt of him 
that is a Jew—Christians are sometimes called by 
the name of Jews, as being confessors of the true 
religion, and those to whom the promises, made to 
the fathers of the Jewish nation, chiefly belong. In 
this sense especially the word is here to be taken. 


ZECHARIAH. 


the Syrians, Sidomans, &c. 


of the skirt of him that is a Jew, A. M. 3486. 
saying, We will go with you: for naa 
we have heard ° that God ts with you. 


© 1 Cor. xiv. 25. 


To take hold of another is a gesture of entreating his 
friendly assistance: see the notes on Isa. ili. 6, and 
iv. 1. The meaning of the passage, therefore, is, 
that the heathen should apply themselves to the 
Christians, particularly to Christian pastors and minis- 
ters, for instruction, in order to qualify themselves 
for admittance into the church. 


CHAPTER IX. 
In this chapter, (1,) The prophet announces the fate of the Syrians, Sidonians, and Philistines, contrasted with the better 


prospects of the Jewish nation, 1-8. 
dom, 9, 10. 
prosperity, 11-17. 


HE *burden of the word of the 
Lorp in the land of Hadrach, 
and » Damascus shall be the rest thereof: 
when ° the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of 
Israel, shall be toward the Lorp. 

2 And * Hamath also shall border thereby ; 
° T'yrus and ‘ Zidon, though it be very & wise. 


A. M. 3494. 
B. C. 510. 


(2,) He foretels the coming of the Messiah to Jerusalem, and the peace of his king- 
(3,) Predicts the restoration of Israel and Judah, together with a series of glorious victories, and great 


3 And Tyrus did build herself a A.M. 3494. 
strong hold, and » heaped up silver eee 
as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the 
streets. 

4 Behold, ithe Lorp will cast her out, and 
he will smite * her power in the sea; and she 
shall be devoured with fire. 


© 2 Chron. xx. 12; Psalm 
© Isa. xxili.; Ezek. xxvi.; 


a Jer. xxiii. 33.——® Amos i. 3. 
exly. 15. 4 Jeremiah xlix, 23. 
XXVii. 5 Xxvili. ; Amos i. 9. 


f 1 Kings xvii. 9; Ezek, xxviii. 21; Obadiah 20.——8 Ezek. 
xxviii. 3. h Job ‘xxvii. 16; Ezekiel xxviii. 4, 5.—— Isaiah 
Xxili. 1.— Ezek. 3 XXVi. . 17. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IX. 

Verse 1. The burden, &c.—A heavy judgment 
appointed of God to be borne: or, a prophecy of a 
calamitous kind. See*the note on Isa. xiii. 1. The 
word of the Lord in the land of Hadrach—Hadrach 
is not elsewhere mentioned as the name of a country ; 
the context however shows it must have been some 
part of Syria, of which Damascus was the capital 
city. According to some Jewish rabbis it was a 
place near Damascus. The prophecy is thought to 
relate to Alexander the Great conquering Syria; 
Damascus being at the same time betrayed to him, 
and all Darius’s treasure, which was laid up there, 
delivered into his hands. And Damascus shall be 
the rest thereof—Or, It shall rest upon Damascus ; 
that is, the burden of the word of the Lord. Da- 
mascus shall in particular be afflicted with the judg- 
ment now threatened ; wken—Or rather, for the eyes 
of man, as of all Israel, shail be toward the Lord— 
For as all men’s appeals, in case of wrong, are 
made to Heaven, so they who have been wronged by 
Syrian injustice shall look to Heaven for right, and 
the Lord willright them. The words however may 
be better translated: When the eyes of men, even 
of all the tribes of Israel, &c.; when the Jews 
saw the conqueror approach Jerusalem it was proper |, 

104 


for them to looks up to God, and to 1 imiplore his pro- 
tection. This, according to Josephus, (Antigq., lib. 


'xi. cap. 8,) when Alexander was besieging Tyre, 


Jaddua the Jewish high-priest did, and was directed 
by avision to meet the conqueror in his pontifical 
robes, by whom he was received yery. graciously. 
The clause however will admit of yet another trans- 
lation, namely, For the eyes of the Lord are upon 
man, as well as upon all the tribe’ of Israel. ‘That 
is, God i is the ruler and judge of all the nations of 
the earth, as well as of the tribes of Israel, and will 
punish the heathen for their sins, as well as his pro- 
fessing people. This, considering the context, seems 


| to be the most probable interpretation. 


Verses 2-5. And Hamath also shall border there 


by—Or, Hamath also shall be within its borders. 


That is, the borders of this prophecy. Hamath 
shall be involved in the calamities which this 
prophecy denounces. “I suppose,” says Newcome, 
“that Hamath on the river Orontes is meant.” It 
was the capital of one part of Syria, and formed, 
some time, an independent kingdom. See note on 
Jer. xlix. 23. T'yrus and Zidon—These cities also 
shall be reached by the judgments threatened in this 
prophecy; though it be very wise—Although Zidon 
prides itself so much for its skill and 


Threatenings against 


CHAPTER IX. 


the Philistines. 


en ne ee ee eee ee 


¥ u, us, 5 | Ashkelon shall see i¢, and fear ; 
——_— Gaza also shall see it, and be very 
sorrowful, and Ekron ; for her expectation shall 
be ashamed ; and the king shall perish from 
Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited. 


1 Jer. xlvii. 1,5; Zeph. ii. 4. 


things, and puts much confidence in its crafty coun- 
sels. Blayney renders the latter clause of this verse 
and the next, And Sidon, though she be very wise, 
and hath built Tyre, a fortress, for herself; and 
hath heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as 
the mire of the streets. Zidon was the capital of 
Phenicia, and mother of Tyre. For Justin informs 
us, (lib. xviii. cap. 3,) that the Sidonians, when their 
city was taken by the king of Ascalon, betook 
themselves to their ships and built Tyre. Hence 
Tyre is called the daughter of Sidon, Isa. xxiii. 12. 
The Sidonians were famous all over the world for 
their knowledge and skill in arts and sciences, and 
for their great riches, acquired by their traffic: see 
notes on Isa. xxiii. 2, 4, 12; Ezek. xxvii. 8, and 
XXvili. 2. 

Behold, the Lord will cast her out—Will cast 
out her inhabitants. And he will smite her power 
in the sea, &c.—The Sidonians, according to Dio- 
dorus Siculus, (lib. xvi. p. 116,) on the approach 
of the army sent against them by Ochus, king of 
Persia, first of all destroyed their shipping at sea; 
and then retiring within the walls of the city, when 
they found they could hold out no longer, set fire to 
their houses, and burned themselves with all their 
families and effects together. Thus their wealth was 
effectually smitten, when by burning their ships 
their commerce, the source of their riches, was an- 
nihilated ; and this last act of desperation completely 
fulfilled the remaining part of the prophecy. No 
wonder if their neighbours, the Philistines, (as is 
signified in the next verse,) were struck with con- 
sternation at seeing the disastrous fate of those on 
whose assistance they depended. See Blayney. 
Probably also the destruction of Tyre by Alexander 
the Great may be predicted in these verses; of which 
see the places referred to above. Ashkelon shall 


Sear; Gaza also be very sorrowful, and Ekron— | 


These cities flattered themselves, that if Tyre could 
withstand Alexander, they also should be able to 
escape his hand; but Tyre being taken, all these 
hopes vanished. Alexander made himself master 
of Gaza immediately after the taking of Tyre; 
10,000 of the inhabitants were slain, and the govern- 
or Betis dragged round the city wall till he was 
dead. Hing is a general word for any governor, in 
Hebrew, as has been before observed. Strabo, 
speaking of Gaza, lib. xvi., says, “It was formerly a 
city of note, but was destroyed by Alexander the 
Great.” Or, according to Josephus, having suffered 
severely, upon being taken by Alexander, it was at 
length totally ruined and destroyed by Alexander 
Jannzus, one of the Asmonean kings of Judah. 
Hence we read, Acts viii. 26, Gaza which is desert. 
And Ashkelon shall not be inhabited—Blayney 
3 


6 And a bastard shall dwell ™in A.M. 3494, 
Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride ee 
of the Philistines. 

7 And I will take away his ‘blood out of 
his mouth, and his abominations from between 


m Amos i, 8.—1" Heb. bloods. 


reads, shall not be established ; literally, shall not 
stt. “Ashkelon, and the other cities of the Philis- 
tines, having been subjugated by Nebuchadnezzar, 
as foretold Jer. xlvii., never recovered their former 
independence, but, falling under. the dominion of the 
great empires in succession, were almost continually 
involved in their wars, and suffered considerably, 
till by degrees they dwindled away, and at last sunk 
to nothing.” 

Verses 6,7. And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod 
—Newcome reads, strangers, understanding by the 
expression, “a strange and spurious race; a despica- 
ble race; born of harlots.” But Blayney, who reads, 
a stranger, observes, that the Hebrew word, 77793 
here used, does not imply an illegitimate offspring 
In proof of which he quotes Psa. lxix. 8, where 1119, 
a word from which the above is derived, is translated 
a stranger, so that he supposes the sense of this 
clause to be, that the city of Ashdod should be peo- 
pled with strangers, not descended from its present 
possessors. The LXX. and Chaldee understand the 
expression in the same sense. And I will cut off the 
pride of the Philistines—Ashdod, or Azotus, was 
burned and destroyed by Jonathan, brother of Judas 
Maccabeus, and eight thousand of its men burned or 
slain, 1 Mac. x. 84, 85. These were probably in- 
tended here by the pride of the Philistines, that is, 
the pride, or excellence, of the ancient inhabitants, 
in whose room the strangers were introduced. And 
I will take away his blood out of his mouth—The 
Philistine shall be brought down so low, that he 
shall not be in a condition to molest or threaten 
slaughter to his neighbours, as he did formerly. And 
his abominations from between his teeth—He shall 
be reduced to such poverty, that he shall no more 
make banquets in honour of his idols, and feast upon 
them. “The idolatrous and abominable practices 
of the Philistines shall cease. The metaphor is 
taken from beasts of prey, who gorge themselves 
with blood.” Ashdod is mentioned by Josephus 
among the cities of the Phenicians which were un- 
der the dominion of the Jews; and it is well known 
that they exacted of all who were under their autho- 
rity, a conformity, in a certain degree, to their reli- 
gious rites and ceremonies. This will explain what 
is meant by taking his blood, &c. 'The stranger 
was required to abstain from eating blood, and from 
such things as were held in abomination by the Jew- 
ish law. But he that remaineth, even he shall be for 
our God—This was fulfilled in the times of the Mac- 
cabees, and also in the times of Alexander Janneus, 
who subdued their principal cities, as Josephus re- 
lates, (Antigq., lib. xiii. cap. 23,) and made them part 
of the Jewish dominions, the inhabitants of several 
of which embraced the Jewish religion. And he 

1047 


A promise of the 


ZECHARIAH. 


advent of the Messiah.’ 


3 a ee his teeth ; but he that remaineth, even 
———_—_ he shall befor our God, and he shall 
be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a 
Jebusite. 

8 And "I will encamp about my house be- 
cause of the army, because of him that passeth 


by, and because of him that returneth: and 


u Psa. xxxiv. 7; Ch. ii. 5. © Isa. Ix. 18; Ezek. xxviii. 24. 
P Exod. iii. 78——4 Isa. lxii. 11; Chapter ii. 10; Matt. xxi. 5; 


shall be as a governor in Judah—Shall be regarded 
and honoured. Blayney renders it, Shall be as a 
citizen in Judah, considering the expression as be- 
ing used-in contrast to the word which he renders | 
stranger, verse 6; and signifying that the stranger 
who should come to dwell in Ashdod, would, after | 
renouncing all his heathenish practices, become a 
convert to the true God, and, as a governor in Judah, 
entitled to all the same privileges in that city, as a 
prime citizen enjoyed among the Jews: terms these 
which exactly correspond with those used by St. 
Paul, who, having called the unconverted Gentiles, 
§evor kat raporrot, strangers and foreigners, entitles 
them, after their conversion, cvpzrodirat Tov aytwv Kat | 
ouxetos Te Oca, fellow-cilizens with the saints, and 
of the household of God, Eph. ii. 19. And Ekron.as 
a Jebusite—And the Philistines shall have the same 
privileges allowed them, and be put on the same | 
footing, as the Jebusites, the ancient inhabitants of 
Jerusalem were, when the Israelites conquered 
them: see Judg. i. 21. 


Verse 8. J will encamp about my house—About || 


this temple, and my church, of which this temple is 
an emblem, that I may defend it from all its enemies, 
Because of the army—The Persian and Grecian 
army marching to and fro through Judea. The He- 
brew is literally, J will encamp about my house as a| 
garrison, the word 723, here used, meaning pro- 


perly a military guard set to keep watch and ward || 


against any hostile approach. “The purport of this 
passage is, that, while these revolutions were 
taking place in the neighbouring states, God would 


act as a guard in favour of his household, or family, | 
against the armies that were marching forward and || 


backward, so as not to suffer any enemy to come 
near to molest them; for which purpose his eyes, 
he says, were now, that is, at the time he was speak- 
ing of, continually upon the watch.”—Blayney. | 


Many think this alludes to the Maccabees, who were | 


defenders of the house of God against Antiochus 
Epiphanes. They were as a wall of brass round | 
about the sanctuary. From their days God preserved 
the temple against the profanation of strangers, till || 
after the death of Jesus Christ, when he forsook it| 
entirely ; choosing the Christian Church for his tem- | 
ple, and making it his peculiar care to watch over, 
encamp round about, and protect it. And _no op- 
pressor ‘shall pass through any more—Or rather, 
any longer. None of those that now threaten to in- 
yade or oppress them shall prosper in their attempts |, 
against them. Jor now have I seen with mine eyes | 
1048 


. M. 3494, 


no oppressor shall pass through ee 


them any more: for now ? have I 
seen with mine eyes. 

9 4 ‘Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; 
shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, *thy 
King cometh unto thee: he is just, and 
*having salvation; lowly, and riding upon 


John xii. 15. t Psalm ii. 7; Jer. xxiii. 5; xxx. 9; Hos. iii 5; 
John i. 49; Luke xix. 38. 2 Or, saving himself. ‘ 


—I am not regardless of my people, but. look upon 
their condition with an eye of pity and compassion. 

Verse 9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion— 
To give still greater encouragement to God’s people, 
the prophet, after uttering the foregoing promises, 
was carried on by the Divine Spirit, which influenced 
him, to announce a still more remarkable instance 
of God’s special kindness to them, namely, the 
coming of their Messiah, or king, with reference to 
which this passage is cited in two places of the New 
Testament, Matt. xxi. 5; John xii. 15; so that we 
can have no doubt of the application. But, from 
comparing these three texts, we may perceive that 
the evangelical writers were not over-scrupulous of 
adhering to the exact words of their original, whether 
they cited from the Hebrew or from the Greek ; but 
were satisfied with giving the true sense of the pas 
sage, and taking more or less of it, as circumstances 
/seemed to require. Behold, thy king cometh wnto 
| thee—He that is so often described in the prophets 
as the king of Israel; that was known by that name 
| among the Jews in our Saviour’s time, and is repeat- 


| edly called by the name of David their king: see the 


|margin. ‘lo him the kingdom did properly belong, 


| and to him the gathering of the people was to be, 
|| Gen. xlix. 10. He is just, and having salvation— 


Or, He is righteous, and the Saviour, as the ancient 
| versions have it. He is that righteous branch, and 
the Lord our righteousness, as he is described by 
| Jeremiah, chap. xxiii. 5; who was to execute justice 

and judgment in the earth; and the righteousness 
_and salvation, that is, the Righteous One and Sa- 
viour, promised Isa. lxii.1. Unlike the proud and 
destructive conquerors of the earth, he shall not en- 


| ter with a mighty cavalcade of horse, but shall come 


lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the 
foal of an ass. Although it is certain that the an- 
cient Jews understood this prophecy of the Messiah, 
yet that this divine person, this king of Israel, should 
come unto them riding upon an ass, which, notwith- 
standing that in former ages patriarchs and judges 
‘thought it no disgrace to ride upon them, yet was 
then looked upon as below the dignity of any person 
of eminence, must, at the uttering of. this prophecy, 
,have appeared a very mysterious and improbable 
‘circumstance. But we who know that the only time 
when the Lord Jesus entered publicly into Jerusa- 
lem, he thought proper, as an example of humility 
‘and meekness, and of indifference to hie Sogn 
to ride upon a young ass, or colt; and_ 
‘same time, the whole multitude were 


The Lord’s gracious 


CHAPTER IX. * 


promises to his people. 


A. M. 3494. an ass, 
. C. 510. 

eo. egos. 
10 And I ‘will cut off the chariot from 

Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and 

the battle-bow shall be cut off: and he shall 


speak * peace unto the heathen: and his domi- 


and upon a colt the foal of 


nion shall be “from sea even to sea, A. M. 3494. 
and from the river even to the ends ”_2 > 
of the earth. 

11 As for thee also, >by the blood of thy 
covenant I have sent forth thy * prisoners out 
of the pit wherein 7s no water. 


8 Hosea i. 7; ii. 18; Micah v. 10; Haggai ii, 22.——t Eph. ii. 
- 14, 17.——" Poa. Ixxii. 8. 


such a sudden and extraordinary impulse of joy, that 
they spread their garments in the way, and cut 
down branches of trees and strowed them in the way, 
shouting unanimously, Hosannau, BLEssEp Is TH 
Kine WHO COMETH IN THE NAME oF THE Lorp—w 
that know this remarkable circumstance, cannot but 
be greatly struck with this prophecy, as an admira- 
ble instance of the divine prescience, and a strong 
proof of the truth of Christianity. 

Verse 10. And I will cut off the chariot from 
Ephraim—This plainly shows that the character 
given of the Messiah, that he should ride on an ass, 
was in opposition to the pride of their warlike kings, 
to set an example of humility, and to show that his 
kingdom was not of this world. To the same pur- 
pose speaks the Prophet Hosea, chap. i. 7; and Mi- 
cah, chap. v. 10, 11: passages which mutually sup- 
port and east light on each other, and show undeni- 
ably what the prophet had in view when he foretold 
that the Messiah should ride on an ass. “This verse 
is also intended to signify that the kingdom of the 
Messiah should be a kingdom of peace, by which 
characteristic it is frequently described in the pro- 
phetie writings. Not that wars were immediately to 
cease on the earth at his coming, but because his | 
doctrine, example, and grace, naturally tend to pro- 
duce and promote universal peace and harmony ; to 
diffuse among men a spirit of benevolence and hu- 
mility, of meekness and forbearance; of doing to 
others, in every case, as we would they should do 
unto us in the like case. So that, if Christ’s religion 
were truly and universally received and practised, 
certain it is there would be a universal peace among 
men, and we should no longer see or hear of wars 
and slaughters. And undoubtedly, before the con- 
summation of all things, his religion will diffuse 
peace oyer all the earth. Another thing intended in 
this prediction is, that Christ’s kingdom should not 
be set up, nor advanced, by external force and vio- 
lence, by carnal weapons, or an arm of flesh; but 
by the power of truth and grace. For it follows, He 
shall speak peace unto the heathen, or, unto the na- 
tions, as the Hebrew is, namely, to the Gentile na- 
tions that were afar off, as well as to the Jews that 
were nigh; his gospel being the gospel of peace, pro- 
claiming and ensuring peace to all the truly penitent 
that believe in him with their heart wnto righteous- 
ness; even peace with God, peace of conscience, 
tranquillity of mind, and a disposition, as far as pos- 
sible, to live peaceably with all men. And his do- 


minion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the 
river, &c.—As was foretold by David, Psa. lxxii. 8, 
from whence these words are taken: see the note 


3 Or, whose covenant is my blood, Exodus xxiv. 8; Heb. x. 29; 
xiil. 20. * Isa. xlit 73. li. 145 1xi. 1. 


there. The sense is, his kingdom shall extend itself 


to all parts of the world, in defiance of the opposi- 
tion made to ite” The preachers of his gospel sha 
carry it from one country to another ; from one 
island and continent to another; till the remotest 
parts of the earth are enlightened, and reduced by it 
to the obedience of the faith, and the practice of love. 
d holi apne 
Verse 11. As for thee also—O Jerusalem, or church 
of God; for the prophet, speaking in the name of 
God, must be supposed to direct his discourse to her, 
the pronoun and the affixes, in the Hebrew, being in 
the feminine gender; by the blood of thy covenant 
—By the blood of the Messiah, in which thy cove- 
nant is confirmed: for though it is God’s covenant as 
made by him, and Christ’s as made in and through 
him, it is Zion’s covenant as made for her. J have 
sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, &c.—By the 
prison here, Blayney thinks the land of Egypt is 
metaphorically intended, in which Israel were here- 
tofore detained as in a prison, until God delivered 
them out of it, and at the same time entered into 
covenant with them. But it seems more probable 
the deliverance from Babylon, so lately experienced, 
is referred to. So most interpreters understand the 
passage. Bishop Hall paraphrases it thus: “As for 
thee, O Zion, whose covenant with me is made, and 
confirmed by the precious blood of the Messiah. I 
do herein give thee a type of thy future deliverance 
from all thy spiritual miseries, in that I have brought 
forth thy captives out of the miserable captivity at 
Babylon.” Deep, dry pits, says Capellus, were fre- 
quently prisons in the East. Or by the pit here may 
be meant the lowest part of the prison, called the 
dungeon, (see Isa. li. 14,) as the Hebrew word 113 
is translated; Jer. xxxvii. 16; xxxviii. 6; Lam. iii, 
53-55, where see the notes. Into one of these pri- 
sons Jeremiah was cast. But something further, and 
more interesting to the human race than the deliver- 
ance of God’s ancient people either from Egypt or 
Babylon, is evidently here intended to be signified, 
even the deliverance of mankind in general from the 
bondage of sin and guilt, and of depravity, weakness, 
and wretchedness, that miserable prison in which 
all are naturally detained, into the glorious liberty 
of the children of God, by virtue of the covenant 
sealed with the blood of Christ the Mediator: see Isa, 
Ixi. 1-3; Heb. xiii. 20. Observe well, reader, a state 
of sin and guilt is a state of bondage ; it isa-spiritual 
prison; itis a pit, or a dungeon, in which there is 
no water, no comfort to be had: we are all by nature 
prisoners in this pit; the Scripture has concluded us 
all under sin, and bound us over to the justice of 
1049 


as 


The Lord’s gracious 


* ZECHARIAH. 


promses to his people. 


A. M. 3494, 


12 4 Turn you to the strong hold, 
B. C. 510. 


Y ye prisoners of hope: even to-day 
do I declare that *I will render double unto 
thee ; 

13 When I have bent Judah for me, filled 
the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy 
sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, 
and made thee as the sword of a mighty man, 

14 And the Lorn shall be seen over them, 
and * his arrow shall go forth as the lightning : 


and the Lord Gop shall blow the A. M. 3494. 
trumpet, and shall go » with whirl- —- 
winds of the south. 

15 The Lorp of hosts shall defend them ; 
and they shall devour and * subdue with sling- 
stones; and they shall drink, and make a 
noise as through wine; and they *shall be 
filled like bowls, and as ° the corners of the 
altar. 

16 And the Lorp their God shall save them 


¥ Isa. xlix. 9. z Isa. lxi. 7——* Psalm xviii. 14; Ixxvii. 17; 


exliv. 6.— Isa. xxi. 1. 


* Or, subdue the stones of the sling —® Or, shall fill both the 
bowls, &c. ¢ Lev. iv. 18, 25; Deut. xii. 27. 


God. God has been pleased to deal with these pri- 
soners upon new terms, to enter into another cove- 
nant with them; the blood of Christ is the blood of 
that covenant, having purchased it and all its benefits 
for us; and by that blood effectual provision is made 
for the sending forth of these prisoners upon easy 
and honourable terms: anda proclamation of liberty 
to the captives is issued from the court of heaven, 
followed by the opening of the prison to them that 
were bound, (like Cyrus’s proclamation to the Jews 
in Babylon,) which all those, whose spirits God stir- 
reth up, ought to come and take the benefit of. 
Verse 12. Turn you to the strong hold—To Zion, 
to the church of God, the strong city, mentioned Isa. 
xxvi. 1, which has salvation for walls and bulwarks; 
to the name of the Lord, which is a strong tower, his 
mercy, truth, and grace: ye that are under any bond- 
age o2 Oppression, any trouble or distress, do not 
despair, be not discouraged, but apply to and rely 
upon the blood of the new covenant; hasten to 
Christ, through whose blood alone you can have re- 
demption, reconciliation, peace, and comfort. Ye 
prisoners of hope—Captives, yet not without hope. 
The Jews that were returned out of captivity into 
their own land were yet, in effect, but prisoners, ser- 
vants, as they confess themsélves to be, even in the 
land which God had given them, Neh. ix. 36; yet 
prisoners of hope, or expectation, for God had given 
them a little reviving in their bondage, Ezra ix. 8,9. 
Those that continued still in Babylon, detained by 
their affairs there, yet lived in hope, some time.or 
other, to see their own land again: now both these 
descriptions of Jews are here directed 1o turn their 
eyes to the Messiah, set before them in the promise, 
as their strong hold, to take shelter in him and stay 
themselves upon him, for the perfecting of the mer- 
cy which, by his grace, and for his sake, was so glo- 
riously begun, But, as their deliverance was typical 
of our redemption by Christ, verse 11, so this invita- 
tion to the strong hold speaks the language of the 
gospel call. Sinners are prisoners, but they are pri- 
soner3 of hope; their case is sad, but it is not despe- 
rate ; there is yet hope in Israel concerning them. 
Christ is a strong hold for them, a strong tower, in 
whom they may be safe and quiet from the fear of 
the wrath of God, the curse of the law, and the as- 
saults of their spiritual enemies: to him they must 
1050 


turn by a lively faith, to him they must flee, and in 
his name they must trust. 

Even to-day—In this day of lowest distress, when 
things appear to be at the worst, and you think your 
case deplorable to the last degree, J declare—I su- 
lemnly promise, that Iwill render double unto thee— 
To thee, O Jerusalem, to every one of you prisoners 
of hope ; I will give you comforts double to the sor- 
rows you have experienced; or blessings double to 
what I ever bestowed upon your fathers, even when 
their condition was at the best; the glory of your 
latter state, as well as of your latter house, shall be 
greater, yea, twice as great as that of your former. 
Now this it was no otherwise than by the coming of 
the Messiah, the preaching of the gospel, and the set- 
ting up of his kingdom. ‘These spiritual blessings 
in heavenly things were double to what they had 
ever enjoyed in their most prosperous state. Nowas 
a pledge of this, to be enjoyed in the fulness of time, 
God in the next verses promises to the Jews victory, 
plenty, and joy, in their own land, which yet would 
be but a type and shadow of more glorious victories, 
riches, and joys, in the kingdom of Christ. 

Verses 13-16. When Ihave bent Judah for nie— 
“A strong and sublime manner of expressing that 
God would use Judah and Ephraim as his instru- 
ments of destruction."—Newcome. As if he had 
said, When I have made Judah my bow, and Ephraim 
my arrow, have used them as my instruments of 
war. Judah and Ephraim are equivalent to Judah 
and Israel. The men of Ephraim being expert arch- 
ers, the expression of filling the bow with Ephraim, 
seems to allude to that circumstance. And raised 
up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece— 
Enabled the Jews, under the conduct of the Macca~ 
bees, to destroy the forces of the Syrian kings, An- 
tiochus Epiphanes, and others, who were the success- 
ors of Alexander, the founder of the Grecian mo- 
narchy: see note on Dan. viii. 22. And made thee 
as.the sword of a mighty man—Given success to 
thy arms, that none shall withstand thee. And the 
Lord shall be seen over them—Shall give conspicu- 
ous tokens of his presence with them, and his pre- 
siding over them and directing them in all their en- 
terprises, leading them on and protecting them, as 
when they came outof Egypt. And his arrow shall 
go forth as the lightning—He shall fight for them 

we 


God to be acknowledged 


CHAPTER X. 


in all events. 


A. M. 3494. in that_day as the flock of his peo- 


Mase: ple: for “Zey shall be as the stones 


of a crown, ° lifted up as an ensign upon his 
land. 


17 For ‘ how great is his goodness, A. M. 3494. 
oie site B. C, 510. 
and how great is his beauty! £ corn 
shall make the young men ° cheerful, and new 
wine the maids. 


4 Isa. Ixii. 3; Mal. iii. 17.—— Isa. xi. 12.—f Psa. xxxi. 19. 


with a force that shall be irresistible: the lightning 
1s often called God’s arrow. And the Lord shall 
blow the trumpet—Shall give the signal of war, shall 
animate them to, and assist them in battle. And 
shall go with whirlwinds of the south—Shall dis- 
comfit his enemies as a whirlwind tears in pieces 
every thing that stands in its way; or shall scatter 
them as the dust is scattered by the whirlwind. The 
most vehement storms to which Judea was subject 
came from the great desert country to the south of 
it: see note on Isa. xxi. 1. The Lord of hosts shall 
defend them—The hand of God shall visibly appear 
in protecting the Maccabees. And they shall devour 
and subdue with sling-stones—They shall conquer 
their enemies with as unequal a force as that of Da- 
vid, in respect of Goliath, when he subdued him with | 
asling-stone. And they shall drink and rejoice— | 
In their festivals, when they shall offer sacrifices of 

thanksgivings for their victories; and make a noise 

as through wine—Raise shouts of triumph, as men | 


are wont to do whose hearts are glad with success, | 


and cheered with wine. And they shall be filled 
like bowls, &c.—They shall be filled, or shall fill) 
themselves, with the spoil of their enemies; and as, 
the corners of the altar—As the horns of the altar. 
are with the blood of the victims. And the Lord 
shall save them as the flock of his people—Or, shall 


save them, his people, as a flock. He shall take care | 


& Joel iii. 18; Amos ix, 14-——$ Or, grow, or, speak. 


of them and preserve them, as a shepherd does his 
flock. They shall be as the stones of a crown— 
Precious ‘in his sight; lifted wp as an ensign, or 
trophy, upon his land—In other words, God shall 
make it known to the world how dear they are to 


him, and his favour toward thei shall be an encour- 


agement to others to hecome proselytes to the true 
religion: see Isa. lxii. 3; Mal. iii. 17. 

Verse 17. How great is his goodness—Infinite 
goodness is the fountain of all the good done for his 
people. And how great is his beauty—How won- 
derful is the beauty of divine providence in Israel’s 
deliverance and salvation. Corn shall make the 
young men cheerful—Plentiful harvests shall make 


| the young men cheerful in sowing, reaping, and par- 


taking of the fruits thereof. And new wine ‘the: 
maids—There shall be such plenty of wine that all, 
young and old, shall be cheered with it. Or rather, 
new wine is put here for the grapes which make it, 
_as bread is frequently put for bread-corn, and then 
the sense will be, that the young men, employed in 
bringing in the harvest, should rejoice at seeing the 


| great plenty of it, and the young women, occupied 


in gathering the grapes, should be as cheerful on 
account of the plenty of the vintage: or that, by the 
| divine blessing, both those who reaped the corn, and 
| those who gathered in the vintage, should thrive 
and be happy in their respective occupations. 


CHAPTER. X. 


This chapter is a continuation of the prophecy begun in the preceding one; and goes on to encourage the Jews that were 
returned with hopes, that though they had been under divine rebukes for their negligence in building the temple, and were 
now surrounded with enemies and dangers, yet, that God would make them prosperous at home, and victorious abroad. 
(1,) They are directed to eye the great God in all events ; and both in the evils they suffered, and the comforts they desired, 


to acknowledge his hand, 1-4. 


(2,) They are encouraged to expect strength and success from him in all their struggles 


with the enemies of their church and state, and to hope that the issue would be glorious at last, 5-12. 


A. M, 3494, 


7 a b . 
B. C. 510. ASK ye “of the Lorp ° rain 


the time of the latter rain; 


a Jer. xiv. 22.—» Deut. xi. 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER X. 

Verse 1. Ask ye of the Lord rain, &c.—Make 
supplication to Jehovah, and not to idols. The 
promise of future plenty made in the preceding | 
verse, with which this appears to be closely connect- 
ed, suggested the mentioning the means by which it 
might be procured. Asif he had said, The fulfilling 
of the promise of fruitful seasons depends on the 
people’s asking them of God, who will hear their 

3 


© in| 
‘|clouds, and give them showers of —~ 


‘so the Lorp shall make ‘bright A. M. 3494. 
) B. C. 510. 


| 


| ¢ Job xxix. 23; Joel ii. 23.—— Or, lightnings, Jer. x. 13. 


petitions if offered to him with sincerity and fervour, 
and will give them both the former and the latter 
‘rain in its season. Of which rains see notes on 
Deut. xi. 14; Hos. vi. 3. So the Lord shall make 
bright clouds—Or lightnings, as the margin reads, 
_and as the word is rendered Job xxviii. 25. Great 
rains usually accompany thunder and _ lightning. 
| And give them—Namely, the Jews; showers of rain 
|—Or rather, abu=dance of rain, as the Hebrew 
1051 


God's judgments against 


ZECHARIAH. 


Salse prophets and bad kings. 


A.M. 3 


Mat, aed: rain, to every one grass in the field. 


2 For the “idols? have ‘spoken va- 
nity, and the diyiners have seen a lie, and 
have told false dreams; they ° comfort in 
vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, 
they ? were troubled ‘because there was no 
shepherd. 

3 4% Mine anger was kindled against the 
shepherds, & and I * punished the goats: for the 
Lorp of hosts " hath visited his flock the house 


of Judah, and ‘ hath made them as his goodly | 


horse in the battle. 

4 Out of him came forth™* the corner, out of 
him ! the nail, out of him the battle-bow, out of 
him every oppressor together. 


5 % And they shall be as mighty aM. 24094. 
men, Which ™ tread down their ene- Tama 
mies in the mire of the streets in the battle: 
and they shall fight, because the Lorp is 
with them, and *the riders on horses shall 
be confounded. 

6 And I will strengthen the house of Judah, 
and I will save the house of Joseph, and *I 
will bring them again to place them; for I 
° have mercy upon them: and they shall be as 
though I had not cast them off: for I am the 
Lorp their God, and ? will hearthem. 

7 And they of Ephraim shall be like a 
mighty man, and their * heart shall rejoice as 
through wine: yea, their children shall see 


4 Jer. x. 8; Hab. ii. 18. 2 Heb. teraphims, Judges xvii. 5. 
eJob xiii. 4-—? Or, answered that, &¢.— Ezek. xxxiv. 5. 
& Ezekiel xxxiv. 17. 4 Heb. visited upon. i Luke i. 68. 
Canticles i. 9. 


k Num. xxiv. 17; 1 Sam. xiv. 38; Isa. xix. 13——1 Isa. xxii. 
23, Psalm xviii. 42.—— Or, they shall make the riders on 
fies ashamed. 0 Jer. iii..18 5 "Ezek, xxxvil. 21.—° Hosea 
P Chap. xiii. De Psa. civ. 15; Chap. ix. 15. 


means; to every one grass in the field—Or, to 
every man the herb, or fruits of the field, as the 
original word signifies. The sense is, that God, 
upon their asking it of him, would give plenty of all 
kinds of herbs and fruits that were useful to men, or 
to the animals which men make use of. 

Verse 2, For the idols have spoken vanity—W hat 
I have said will certainly be verified when, with sin- 
cere and pious minds, you apply to God in prayer 
for his blessing on you and your land; but the case 
Was quite otherwise when your fathers asked for 
any thing of idols; the priests, who answered in the 
names of the idols, could oniy give vain answers, 
which were not fulfilled by the events according to 
their promises. And the diviners have seen a lie— 
Those who pretended to divine, or predict future 
things, have uttered falsehoods. -J’hey comfort in 
vain—Rather, they comfort vainly, or with vain 
words. This they certainly did, because they pro- 
mised prosperity to the people though they. contin- 
ued in their sins. 


brought into great distress, as sheep are driven away 
and seattered, when there is no one to guide or take 
care of them. Because there was no shepherd—No 
ecclesiastical or civil governors, that would faithful- 
ly do their duty. 

Verse 3. Mine anger was kindled against the 
shepherds—Against the kings, princes, and priests. 
These were the leaders of the Jewish people into 
idolatry and vice. The word shepherds is beautiful- 
ly taken up from the preceding verse. And I pun- 
ished the goats— The chief ones, as Newcome ren- 
ders it. The principal men are meant. Foer—Or 
rather, but, the Lord of hosts hath visited his flock 
—In mercy. He hath now given his people mani- 
fest tokens of his favour and protection. And hath 
made them—Or, will make them, as his goodly horse 
in the battle—Will give them strength and courage, 
This must relate to the times of the Maccabees, and 

1052 


Therefore they went their way as | 
a flock—They were carried into captivity, and| 


afterward, when God punished several nations by 
the hands of the Jewish people. 

Verse 4. Out of hin—From God, came forth—Or 
rather, shall come forth the corner —The prince or 
ruler, who is in a body politic, as a corner stone ina 
building; the nai/—Which fastens the tents of war, 
or the timber together in a house; the battle-bow— 
All warlike provision both of men and arms. Out 
of him every oppressor—Officer, exactor, or collect- 
or of tribute. It was from God that Nebuchadnez- 


| zar mightily prevailed and oppressed Israel; and it 
| was from God also that Judah grows ap to such 


power as to be able to cope with his adversaries, and 


| to impose tribute on them. Newcome reads, From 
him shall go forth every ruler together, observing, 


that the word which we translate oppressor is also 


/used in a good sense Isa. Ix. 17: that is, Judah shall 
| furnish both civiland military governors. 


Blayney’s 
interpretation of the verse is, Out of it, that is, out 
of the house of Judah, shall go forth @ corner, the 
commander-in-chief ; out of it a nail, the officers 
next in rank; the bow of battle, the archers; out of 
it all that Shot near together; so he renders 93 
yy wi3, instead of every oppressor, or ruler, to- 
gether. “Tn the house, or building,” says he, “the 


| words would denote the stones of common use, 


placed contiguous, or close in order, one by another. 
Correspondently in the army must be meant, the 
close-imbodied phalanx, or main body of men of 
war, advancing on together in regular order to meet 
the enemy. a 

Verses 5-7. And they—The Jews, under the con- 
duct of their captains ; shall be asmighty men which 
tread down their enemies—God shall inspire them 
with courage to subdue their enemies, and trample 
upon their carcasses. This it seems must be under- 
stood of the victories obtained by the Jews under 
the Maccabees, or of those which they 
over their enemies in the latter ti 
latter part of the chapter seems ultit 


Promises of the 


CHAPTER X. 


restoration of the Jews. 


A.M. $494. it, and be glad; their heart shall 
“rejoice in the Lorp. 

8 I will* hiss for them, and gather them; for 
I have redeemed them: ‘and they shall in- 
crease as they have increased. 

9 And ‘I will sow them among the people: 
and they shall * remember me in far countries ; 
and they shall live with their children, and turn 
again. 

10 *I will bring them again also out of the 
land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assy- 


® Jea. v. 26. 
u Deut, xxx. 1. 


SIsa. xlix. 19; Ezek. xxxvi. 37——t Hos. ii. 23. 
xJsa. xi. 11,16; Hos. xi. 11. 


ria; and I will bring them into the A. M. 3494. 
land of Gilead and Lebanon; and bawutae 3 
¥ place shall not be found for them. 

11 * And he shall pass through the sea with 
affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, 
and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and 
*the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, 
and » the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away. 

12 And I will strengthen them in the Lorn ; 
and ¢ they shall walk up and down in his 
name, saith the Lorp. 


y Isa. xlix. 20.— Isa. xi. 15, 16. 2 Isa. xiv. 25.—> Ezek. 
xxx. 13. © Mic, iv. 5. 


And the riders on horses shall be confounded—The 
cavalry of Antiochus seems to be intended by this. 
We have a description of this cavalry in some hea- 
then writers, which shows it to have been a very 
formidable one. And I will strengthen the house of 
Judah—I will not only give courage to attempt, but 
also strength to go through with and finish the un- 
dertaking. This was remarkably verified in the 
wars of the Jews against the Seleucid, in which 
wars they had wonderful difficulties, and as wonder- 
ful courage and success. And I will save the house 
ef Joseph—The remnant of the kingdom of Israel, 
the residue of the ten tribes. And J will bring them 
egain—Both Judah and Joseph, out of captivity, or 
from their various dispersions; to place them—In 
their own land and in their own cities. This pro- 
misé is understood by many interpreters to relate to 
the general restoration of the Jewish nation upon 
their conversion, a subject which seems to be treated 
of in many passages of the Old Testament, in which 
Judah and Israel are represented as equal sharers of 
this blessing: see the note on Isa. xi. 11, and com- 
pare Ezek, xxxvii. 16. And they shall be as though 
I had not cast them off—They shall be in as flourish- 
ing a condition as they were before I cast them off. 
And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man— 
Ephraim is put here for the ten tribes, as the house 
of Joseph is, verse 6. And their heart shall rejoice 
as through wine—Their heart shall be made as glad 
by their victories, as if they had been made merry 
through wine. Yea, their children shall see it and 
be glad—The children and youths, not yet fit for 
war, shall partake of their fathers’ joy. 

Verses 8-10. Iwill hiss for them—Rather, whistle, 
as the word pow should be here translated. I will 
call them from distant countries, as a shepherd calls 
his flock together with his whistle. For I have re- 
deemed them--For I have, and will, by the workings 
of my divine providence, deliver and redeem them 
out of their enemies’ hands, and from those who 
hold them captives. And they shall increase as 
they have increased—Namely, in the most flourish- 
ing times, such as were the reigns of David and Sol- 
omon. J will sow—Rather, I have sown, them 
among the people—Or nations, for it appears beyond 
a doubt that what had been formerly done is here 
spoken of. And they shall remember me in far 

3 * 


countries-— Whithersoever they were driven. J will 
bring them again also out of the land of Egypt-- 
Ptolemy Philadelphus, one of the kings of Egypt, 
redeemed no fewer than 100,000 of the Jews, and 
sent them home; God, no doubt, inclining him to be 
thus remarkably favourable and kind to them. For 
this, we have the testimony of Josephus’s history ; 
as also, that other kings released many of those who 
still remained slaves, or servants in Egypt, and sent 
them back to their own Jand. And gather them out 
of Assyria—This was done by Alexander, the son 
of Antiochus Epiphanes, and by both the Deme- 
triuses, as Josephus relates. This redeeming and re- 
leasing of the Jews, who were captives or servants 
in divers countries, by several kings, and sending 
them home at their charge or expense, which Jose- 
phus affirms to haye-been done, is a fact so very ex- 
traordinary that it deserves to be attended to; for it 
is a certain proof that the divine providence can ac- 
complish whatever it pleases. And as this extraor- 
dinary particular was repeatedly foretold and pro- 
mised by God’s prophets, Jong before it took place, 
and when there was not the least human probability 
of it, it is a striking proof of the truth and divine 
inspiration of the Holy Scriptures. J will bring 
them unto the land of Gilead and Lebanon—Gilead 
was taken by the arms of the Maccabees, and the 
cities of Syria, (here signified by Lebanon, a famous 
mountain in Syria,) by Hyrcanus and his successors. 
Gilead and Lebanon were countries remarkable for 
their fruitfulness. And place shall not be found for 
them—The land shall be too narrow for them, But 
this verse, and indeed the whole paragraph, has a 
further and mystical meaning. It relates to the suc- 
cess of the gospel, and the bringing in of the Jews 
and Gentiles into the Christian Church; and proba- 
bly also to the restoration of the Jews, and of the 
whole remnant of the house of Israel from their 
present dispersions to their own land, as has been 
observed on verse 6, 

Verses 11, 12. And he shall pass through the sea 
with affliction—The sense might be more properly 
expressed, And he [Israel] shall pass through the 
straits of the sea: so the LXX. and the Vulgate un- 
derstand the word. And [God] shall smite the 
waves of the sea, &c.—The expressions allude to 
the miraculous passage of the Israelites through the 

1053 


T he disobedient threatened 


ZECHARIAH. 


with destruction. 


Red sea, and the river Jordan; and to God’s de- 
stroying the Egyptians, and the Assyrian, or Baby- 
lonian empire, in order to the deliverance of his 
people. And the verse imports that God would, in 
a future time, do as great things for them as he had 
done formerly for their fathers. In this sense the 
Chaldee expounds the word. Egypt and Assyria, it 
must be observed, being two potent kingdoms, bor- 
dering upon Judea, and being by turns either allies 
to the Jews, or their conquerors; and the Jews fre- 
quently either going thither for refuge, or being car- 
ried thither as captives; therefore, when the pro- 
phets foretel the general restoration of the Jewish 
nation, they often express it by their returning from 
Egypt and Assyria. We may observe, likewise, 
that God’s bringing his people again from these 
countries, and especially from Egypt, was a pro- 


verbial expression io signify any deliverance, as 
great or greater than these. Thus, the next clause, 
And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, 
and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart, signifies, 
the enemies of God and his truth shall all be sub- 
dued, and broken in pieces, when Christ shall come 
in his glorious power to set up his kingdom on the 
earth: see Dan. ii. 33, 34; Isa. lx. 12. 

And I will strengthen them in the Lord—That 
is, I will strengthen them in myself, or I will be 
their helper, and give them all needful strength 
and protection. And they shall walk up and down 
in his name, saith the Lord—Their evils and ac- 
tions shall be under the influence of his grace, 
and under the government of his laws, and he shall 


give them success answerable to their upright in- . 


tentions. 


CHAPTER XI. 
In the three preceding chapters Zechariah speaks of the advantages and prosperities of Judah and Jerusalem, after the re- 


turn from Babylon, both before and after the times of the Maccabees. 
Here he predicts the ruin of the temple, the reprobation of the Jews, and their subjection to the Romans, 


different nature. 


But this chapter contains a prophecy of a very 


1-3. But previous to these calamities taking place, this flock of God is delivered into the hands of the Messiah, typified 
by the prophet, who is charged with the custody of it, 4-6. This he undertakes, and bears rule for some time; but at 
length, finding them perverse, he gives up the care of them, and as a token of it, breaks his shepherd’s staves, resenting 
the contempt put upor him, and the indignities done him, 7-14. After this the prophet is held forth as the type of a 
worthless shepherd, or a succession of evil governors, who, heedless of the flock, or seeking only to oppress it, at once ruin 


the flock and bring destruction on themselves, 15-17. 


AS “ 3494. 
B. C. 510. 
: the fire may devour thy cedars. 

2 Howl, fir-tree, for the cedar is fallen; be- 


cause the 1 mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye 


a Chap. x. 10.—" Or, gallants. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XI. 

Verse 1. Open thy doors, O Lebanon—The pro- 
phet, having signified in the foregoing prophecy 
that the Jewish nation should recover its prosperity, 
flourish for some time, and become considerable ; 
and having announced to Zion the coming of Mes- 
siah her king, and congratulated her on the peacea- 
ble nature and great extent of his kingdom, with the 
blessed effects which his rule should produce, pro- 
ceeds now to foretel the ruin which should come on 
the body of the Jewish nation for rejecting him, 
with the destruction of their temple and capital city. 
To this only can the first three verses of this chap- 
ter relate ; for no calamities happened to that people, 
from the time of Zechariah till that event, of which | 


the expressions here used can with propriety be un- 
dersiood. Lebanon itself cannot be here addressed, 
which had no doors or gates: but it is figuratively 
put, either for the temple, built of the cedars of Le- 
banon, as it is Ezek. xvii. 3; and Hab. ii. 17; or for 
the city of Jerusalem, whose lofty buildings resem- 
bled the stately ranks of trees in a forest: but the 
former is more probably intended. And, if the Jew- 
1054 


, 


PEN * thy doors, O Lebanon, that Loe of Bashan; ° for * the forest of a a oes. 


the vintage is come down. een 
3 There is a voice of the howling of the 
shepherds ; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of 


> Isa. xxxii. 19.——? Or, the defence forest. 


ish writers may be credited, such was the applica- 
tion made of this prophecy by the Rabbi Johanan, 
when the doors of the temple opened of their own 
accord, a little before the temple was burned, a cir- 
cumstance attested by Josephus, Bell. Jud. lib. vi. 
eap. 5: “Then R. Johanan, a disciple of R. Hillel, 
directing his speech to the temple, said, ‘I know thy 
destruction is at hand, according to the prophecy 
of Zechariah: Open thy doors, O Lebanon, ¢c.” 
T hat the fire—Either, figuratively, the wrath of God 
and the rage of the enemy, or, literally, fire kindled 
by the enemy ; may devour thy cedars—Thy palaces 
and other fabrics built with cedars. 

Verses 2, 3. Howl, fir-tree—By the several sorts 
of trees here mentioned, seem to be meant the 
several orders and degrees of men, who should be 
sharers in the common destruction: see Isa. ii. 13; 
x. 33, 34; and the notes. The fir-tree seems to de- 
note the lower people, who are bid to howl because 
even their superiors, signified by the cedar, could 
not withstand the storm. Howl, O ye oaks of Ba- 
shan—O ye rich, great, and pote people of the 
land; Bashan was famous for its ‘stately For 

; we — 


T he disobedient threatened 


4, ME. 404, the roaring of young lions; for the 


——__ pride of Jordan is spoiled. 

4 4 Thus saith the Lorp my God; ° Feed 
the flock of the slaughter ; 

5 Whose possessors slay them, and ¢ hold 
themselves not guilty: and they that sell them 
*say, Blessed be the Lorn; for I am rich: 
and their own shepherds pity them not. 


¢ Verse 7.——14 Jeremiah ii. 3; 1. 7——® Deuteron. xxix. 19; 
osea xii. 8. 


the forest of the vintage—Or rather, a forest, the 
fenced one, is come down—“ As the inhabitants are 
represented under the image of the trees, the city 
is aptly denoted by a forest ; to which is added by 
way of distinction 1¥17, the fenced one, the article 
m being emphatic, and marking the extraordinary 
strength of its fortifications, or fence, which, how- 
ever, proves insufficient for its security.” T'here is 
a voice of the howling of the shepherds—That is, of 
the princes and rulers of the people. For their glo- 
ry is spoiled—Their magnificent houses are destroy- 
ed. A voice of the roaring of young lions—Those 
who are in the foregoing sentence called shepherds, 
are here called young lions, because they were de- 
vourers of the people by their extortions and op- 
pressions. The pride of Jordan is spoiled—By 
the pride of Jordan, those woods and thickets are 
primarily intended that rose proudly above the banks 
of that river, and greatly decorated the scene. But 
as these were the receptacles of lions, they are here, 
in a secondary and metaphorical sense, put for the 
residences of those princes and grandees, who are 
denominated lions in the preceding clause for the 
reason now mentioned. 

Verses 4-5. Feed the flock of the slaughter—That 
is, the people, who are so denominated, because 
they were devoted to ruin by the following mis- 
chievous counsels of their false teachers, and the 
oppressions of their rulers. This command seems 
to be addressed to Zechariah; but an insuperable 
objection lies against its being understood as given 
to him in his own person, because he did not live in 
such times as are here described; for Zerubbabel 
the governor, and Joshua the high-priest, it appears, 

_ were men of extraordinary piety and virtue; and no 
doubt the rest of the princes or rulers of the people 
at this time were good men. We can, therefore, 
understand it in no other manner, as addressed to 
Zechariah, than as he typified Christ; and so God 
commanded him to do that which he had appointed 
Christ to do, namely, to gather and feed the lost 
sheep of Israel, which their shepherds scattered and 
destroyed. Whose possessors slay them—Whose 
governors and teachers are the cause of their de- 
struction. Those are not improperly said to do a 
thing who are the cause of its being done. And hold 
themselves not guilty—Are not aware of the great 
guilt of their conduct; or, act as if they thought they 
might lawfully make merchandise of men’s bodies 
or souls, for their own lucre or advantage. See 2 


CHAPTER XI. 


with destruction. 


6 For I will no more pity the inha- A. M. 3494. 
bitants of the land, saith the Lorn: nie 
but lo, I will *deliver the men every one into 
his neighbour’s hand, and into the hand of his 
king: and they shall smite the land, and out 
of their hand I will not deliver them. 

7 And I will ‘feed the flock of slaughter, 
* even you, £O poor of the flock. And I took 


3 Heb, make to be found.—t Verse 4——* Or, verily the poor. 
€ Zeph. iii. 12; Matt. xi. 5. 


Peter ii. 3. And they thai sell them—Who betray 
their persons, or liberty, or property, for profit; or 
sell them for slaves to foreigners; or, by their exac- 
tions and oppressions, reduce them to such poverty 
that they are obliged to sell themselves; say, Bless- 
ed be the Lord, for I am rich—That is, they hypo- 
critically and impiously pretend to return God 
thanks for having put it in their power to acquire 
riches by such ungodly practices! And their own 
shepherds—That is, their chief priests, princes, and 
rulers, as above ; pity them not—Destroy them with- 
out remorse.. In Christ’s time, which seems to be 
here referred to, “the chief priests and the elders, 
who were the possessors of the flock, by their tra- 
ditions, the commandments of men, and their impo- 
sitions on the consciences of the people, were be- 
come perfect tyrants, devouring their houses, en- 
grossing their wealth, and fleecing the flock instead 
of feeding it. The Sadducees, who were Deists, 
corrupted their judgments; the Pharisees, who were 
bigots for superstitious observances, corrupted their 
morals by making void the commandments of God, 
Matt. xv. 6. Thus they slew the sheep of the flock ; 
thus they sold them. They cared not what became 
of them, so they could but gain their own ends, and 
serve their own interests.”—Henry. 

Verse 6. I will no more pity the inhabitants of 
the land—I will no more spare them than their 
shepherds do. T'he inhabitants of the land are to 
be distinguished from the poor of the flock in the 
next verse. By the former are meant those who 
in their respective stations were as wicked as the 
rulers, chief priests, and others, termed their shep- 
herds, ver. 5; by the latter, those who were oppressed 
and were piously disposed. But I will deliver the 
men every one into his neighbours hand—“ This 
verse assigns the reason for calling the people, the 
flock of slaughter. Nor can words more aptly de- 
scribe the calamities which befell the Jews in the war 
which ended in the taking of Jerusalem by the Ro- 
mans; when the people, having first, by their intes- 
tine broils, destroyed one another, as is set forth at 
large by Josephus, at length fell into the hand of 
him whom they had owned for their sovereign, (‘we 
have no king but Cesar, John xix. 15,) and who 
completely desolated the land for their rebellion 
against him.”—Blayney. 

Verse 7. And—Or rather, but, I will feed the flock 
of slaughter, even you—Or, especially you, O poor 
of the flock—Zechariah here, representing Christ 

1055 


The symbol of 


ZECHARIAH. 


the two staves. 


the one I called 
Beauty, and the other I called * Bands; 

and I fed the flock. 
S Three shepherds also I cut off ™in one 


A. M. 3494. unto me two staves ; 
B. C. 510 


5 Or, Binders. h Hos. v. 7. 


thé true shepherd, says, he will enter upon his of- 
fice, and undertake the care of the flock appointed 
for the slaughter; ever you, O poor of the flock— 
This clause is explicatory of the former, and by the 
repetition of it we are shown, that God, in his 
charge to the prophet, as a type of Christ, and to 
Christ the antitype, distinguishes clearly between 
different sorts of people among the Jews; between 
those that were poor, despised, weak, and humble, 
and those that were tyrannical, proud, and cruel, 
and made a prey of their inferiors: these were left 
out of the pastoral charge; the others were to be 
taken care of. And I took unto me two staves— 
These were the proper accoutrements of a shep- 
herd, and these the prophet assumed as a badge of 
his office, and gave them significant names, which 
are partly explained, verses 10-14. “The shepherds 
of old time,” says Lowth, “had two rods, or staves, 
one turned round at the top, that it might not hurt 
the sheep: this was for counting them, and sepa- 
rating the sound from the diseased, Lev. xxvii. 32; 
the other had an iron hook at the end of it, to pull 
in and hold the straying sheep. The psalmist men- 
tions both these, Psa. xxiii. 4, Z"hy rod and thy staff 
comfort me.” The one I called Beauty—Or, plea- 
santness, or, delight, as the word Ty] may be 
rendered, signifying, says Lowth, his favour, gentle- 
ness, or kindness toward his people; which was 
remarkably verified in Christ, whose gracious words, 
and beneficial works, were conspicuous through the 
whole course of his life. 


the new covenant, whereby he intended to unite 
both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah under him- 
self, as their head and king, Ezek. xxxvii. 22; and 
then afterward to unite the Jews and the Gentiles 
into one church, by breaking down the partition 
wall that was between them. 


its inhabitants had kept their covenant with God.” 
The other, Bands, “as signifying the union which 
ought to have subsisted between Judah and Israel.” 
Mr. Scott explains “the former word of the honour, 
privilege, and ornament which the Jews possessed, 
according to their national covenant, in the oracles, 
instituted worship, and temple of God; and espe- 
cially by the ministry of Christ and his apostles, 
who preached the gospel to them first.” The other, 
he thinks, means, “the connection of the nation un- 
der one government, and the harmony that had, in 
some measure, hitherto united them, as the flock of 
God.” Many other interpretations are given of these 
two names, but as they all are, and must be, in a 
great measure, founded on conjecture, the reader is 
not here troubled with them. 
1036 


T he other I called Bands | 
—Which the same author interprets of the bond of | 


Newcome considers | 
the former, Beauly, as intended to “denote how | 
beautiful and pleasant the land would have been, if | 


| 


j 


month; and my soul ® loathed them, A. M. 3494. 
. C. 510. 

and their soul also abhorred me. i 
9 Then said I, I will not feed you: ‘that 

that dieth, let it die; and that that is to be cut 


® Heb. was straitened for them.—— Jer. xv. 2; xliii. 11. 
Verse 8. Three shepherds also I cut off in one 
month—The prophet may be said to do what God 
did; either in the punishment of certain false pro- 
phets, or of certain wicked governors. Some think, 
that by these three shepherds were figuratively sig- 
nified the chief priests, scribes, and elders of the Jews. 
Christ exposed these as blind guides, and thereby 
lessened their authority among the people, which 
contributed very much to the spreading of the gos- 
pel. Blayney, who thinks the common translation 
encumbered with insuperable difficulties, renders 
the clause, and I set aside the authority of the shep- 
herds in one month, Wis reasons for this interpret- 
ation have certainly considerable weight, but can- 
not with propriety be introduced here. One argu- 
ment, however, in favour of it, to which he appeals, 
may be noticed. It evidently suits that application 
of the prophecy which most commentators adopt. 
“Let us now see,” says he, “what happened to him, 
of whom Zechariah is evidently set forth as the type. 
Our Saviour’s teaching was ina style so far superior 
to that of the professed guides of the people in his 
days, that, stung with jealousy, they exclaimed, Per- 
ceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Ye have lost all 
your wonted influence; behold the world is gone 


| after him, John xii. 19. Even so it may be presum- 


ed the purity and disinterestedness of Zechariah’s 
instructions may“have gained so far upon the minds 
of the people as to deprive the corrupt and selfish 
teachers of that ascendency which they once pos- 
sessed.” And my soul loathed them—Or, was 
straitened toward them, as the Hebrew, [73 AWwpn, 
may be literally translated, that is, I was straitened 
in my affections to them. I was less tender toward - 
them than toward the poor of the flock, because they . 
showed themselves to be averse from my person 
and doctrine. So the Vulgate, contracta est anima 
mea in eis. The LXX., however, read, BapyyPycerat 
n wuyn pov, my soul shall be burdened ; and Bishop 
Newcome, my soul was grieved at them. The 
word nono, rendered abhorred, in the next clause, 
does not occur elsewhere in the Scriptures, but, ac- 
cording to Bishop Newcome, bears that sense in the 
Syriac. The LXX. render it, ac puxat avtwr exwpvovro 
ew eus, Their souls howled, bellowed, roared, or, 
raised a horrible outcry against me, an expression 
strikingly descriptive of the fierce and vehement 
accusations of the Jewish chief priests, scribes, and 
elders against Christ, and of the violent, loud, and 
oft-repeated clamours of the people for his condem- 
nation and crucifixion. Of which see Luke xxiii. 5, 
10, 18-24. 

Verse 9. T'hen said I, Iwill not feed you—I will no 
longer exercise a tender paternal care over you; that 
that dieth, let it die—Or rather, the dying et il die ; 


that which has a deadly disease, let it a 


yo —_— 


The symbol of 


CHAPTER XI. 


the two staves. 


A. M. rie off, let it be cut off; and let the rest 
_—_ eat, every one the flesh 7of another. 
10 And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut 

it asunder, that I might break my covenant 

which I had made with all the people. 
11 And it was broken in that day: and ®so 

Kthe poor of the flock that waited upon me 


7 Heb. of his fellow, or, neighbour Or, the poor of the flock, 
. c., certainly knew. 


-disease. Or, that which is ready to die, and will 
not be cured, but hath rejected the shepherd’s love 
and skill, let it die. Thus Jesus said, Jf ye believe 
not, ye shall die in your sins. For this seems to be 
spoken of the miseries to which the Jewish people 
were delivered up for their manifold sins, and in 
parti¢ular for their rejection of Christ, which filled 
up the measure of their iniquity. And that that is 
to be cut off—Namely, by the sword of the enemy; 
let it be cut off ; and let the rest eat every one the 
. flesh of another—Either live to be besieged till hun- 
ger and famine make the living eat the dead, or 
cruelly kill their children and others, that they may 
eat their flesh; a calamity threatened, Deut. xxviii. 
52-58; or else, by seditious and bloody intestine 
quarrels, destroy each other; all which happened 
to them in the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans. 
Verses 10, 11. And I took my staff, even Beauty 
—Or, pleasantness, or delight. See note on verse 
7: emblematical, as of God’s favour, gentleness, or 
kindness to his people, and of the honour and privi- 
lege which they possessed in his oracles, instituted 
worship, and femple; so especially of God’s cove- 
nant with them, and all the blessings of it. And cut 
it asunder—To signify that, as they had rejected 
God and his favour, and refused to comply with the 
terms of his covenant, so that God had now annul- 
led it, and rendered it utterly void. That I might 
break my covenant—This, in some measure, illus- 
trates what is meant by the staff Beauty. While it 
was unbroken, the covenant between God and the 
Jews was whole and unbroken. And it is to be 
observed, Christ calls it his covenant, for he was the 
mediator of it: namely, to bring us to God in repent- 
ance, faith, and holy obedience; and to reconcile 
God to us in mercy and grace. Which Ihad made 
with all the people—Hebrew, Tony 49, literally, all 
people, that is, all the tribes of Israel; and all other 
people that, by being proselyted to their religion, 
were incorporated into their nation. The Jewish 
Church is thus represented as being now stripped of 
all its glory, its crown profaned and cast to the 
ground, and all its honour laid in the dust, God 
being departed from it, and resolved no more to 
own it for his church. When Christ told the Jews 
that the kingdom of God should be taken from 
them, and given to another people, then he broke 
the staff of Beauty, Matt. xxi. 43. And it was 
broken in that day, though Jerusalem and the Jew- 
ish people were spared yet forty years longer; and 
though the great men did not, or would not, under- 
Vou. I. ( 67 ) 


knew that it was the word of the A.M. 3494. 
ON B. C. 510, 
12 And I said unto them, *If ye think good, 
give me my price; and if not, forbear. So 
they ' weighed for my price thirty pieces of 
silver. 
13 And the Lorp said unto me, Cast it urito 


k Zeph. iii. 12; Verse 7. ® Heb. If it be good in your eyes. 
1 Matt. xxvi. 15; Exod. xxi. 32. 


stand Christ’s words uttered on that occasion as a 
divine sentence, but thought to put it by with a 
cold, God forbid, Luke xx. 16.' Yet the poor of the 
flock, that waited upon him—Namely, who knew 
the Messiah, believed in him, observed his doctrine, 
miracles, and life, and obeyed him; who understood 
with what authority he spoke, and could distinguish 
the voice of their shepherd from that of a stranger; 
knew that he was the word of the Lord—Saw and 
acknowledged God in all this, trembled at his word, 
and were confident that it would not fall to the 
ground. 

Verses 12,13. And I said unto then—Namely, 
upon parting. The prophet, still personating Christ, 
or acting as a type of him, reminds the Jews of his 
concern for their welfare, the care he had taken of 
them, and the labour he had bestowed on instructing 
them; and refers it to them whether his services 
had not deserved some reward, and, if they had, 
what that reward ought to be; saying, Jf ye think 
good, give me my price—Or rather, my wages or 
hire of service, as the word 73v undoubtedly signi- 
fies; and if not, forbear—If you dismiss me with- 
out wages I shall be content. So they weighed for 
my price thirty pieces of silver—That is, as is sup- 
posed, thirty shekels, of the value of about 2s. 4d. 
each, which was the price ofa slave. This showed 
how little they regarded him, or his labours; that 
is, how little value the Jews would put on the mi- 
nistry of Christ; or on his labours and sufferings 
for their salvation. For, according to St. Matthew, 
chap. xxvi. 15; xxvii. 9, this symbolical action was 
fulfilled when the chief priests and elders of the 
Jews paid that sum to Judas for betraying Christ to 
them, and putting his life in their power. And the 
Lord said unto me—Unto the prophet, personating 
Christ ; Cast it unto the potter—Hereby intimating 
that it was a reward only suitable to a potter’s labour, 
and a price only adequate for such wares as he sold, 
which were of the meanest value. A goodly price 
that I was prized at of them—Thus the progpet 
ironically remarks on the high estimation in which 
he and his services were holden: or rather, God 
here upbraids the shepherds of his people, who 
prized the great Shepherd no higher. And J cast 
them to the potter, &¢e.—Or, cast them into the house 
of the Lord for the potter: I cast them back into 
the treasury in the temple, whence afterward they 
were taken, and laid out in purchasing the potter’s 
field. This whole transaction, performed by Zecha- 
riah in a vision, as Lowth, Doddridge, and many 

1057 3 


The type and curse of - 


ZECHARIAH. 


a foolish shepherd. 


A. M. 3494. the ™ potter: a goodly price that I was 
i he prized at of them. And I took the 
thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the 
potter in the house of the Lorn. 

14 Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even 


m Matt. xxvii. 9, 12. 


other interpreters suppose, or, as others think, in 
reality, “ was designed to be an exact representation 
of the several circumstances that should attend the : 
betraying of Christ by Judas, the price the chief |) 
priests would put upon him, (to whom, as the || 
governors of the temple, the money was returned,) | 
and the use to which the money would be applied. | 
And this whole prophetic scene was transacted in 
the single person of Zechariah, just as Ezekiel sus- 
tained the type or figure both of the Chaldean army 
that should besiege Jerusalem, and of the Jews 
themselves that should be besieged, Ezek. iv. 1-12.” 
So Lowth, who adds, “This is one of those prophe- | 
cies whose literal sense is fulfilled in our blessed 
Saviour, and cannot be applied to any.other person 
but in a very remote or improper sense.” The like) 
instances may be seen Psa. xxii. 16-183 Ixix. 21 
Hos. xi. 1. The Jews themselves have expounded | 
this prophecy of the Messiah. “There can be no) 
doubt,” says Blayney, “that this is the passage re-| 
ferred to Matt. xxvii. 9, though under the name of 


;| Bands. 


Jeremiah, (put by mistake of some transcriber of |! 
But a | 


St. Matthew’s gospel,) instead of Zechariah. 
question arises, how the transaction related by the | 


evangelist can be said to be a fulfilling of that || 


which was spoken by the prophet, considering the || 
striking difference in some of the circumstances. In 
the one case, thirty pieces of silver were given as 
wages for service; in the other, they were paid as 
the priee of a man’s blood: in the one they were 
thrown with contempt to the potter; in the other, 
they were cast down in the temple ina fit of remorse, 
and taken up by others, who employed them in the 
purchase of the potter’s field. But notwithstanding 
these differences, considering that all passed under 
the special direction of Divine Providence, it is im- 
possible not to conclude, from a review of both trans- 
actions, that there was a designed allusion of the 
one to the other, and not a mere accidental resem- 
blance between them. But the quotation, it is said, 
is not just: for no such words are to be found in the 
prophet, which the evangelist hath pretended to | 
cite from him. To this it may be answered, that 

gh not the precise words, the substance of them 
is given, so that the passages are at least equiva- 
lent,’ as a collation of them in the original will 
show: see the note on Matt. xxvii. 9. 

Verse 14. Then—As soon as I saw what little 
value they put upon me, and my pastoral care over 
them, and services for them; J cut asunder mine 
other staff, even Bands—The prophet did this in 
type, and Christ in reality; that I might break the 
brotherhood between Judah and Israel—That I 
might declare, or foreshow, that the friendship and 

1058 


10 Bands, that I might break the bro- A. M. a 
therhood between Judah and Israel. 

15 4 And the Lorp said unto me, ® Take 
unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shep- 
herd. 


10 Or, Binders. = Ezek. xxxiv. 2, 3, 4. 


union which had existed between the two tribes and 
the remnant of the ten tribes, was broken. “ From 
the time that the people returned from Babylon, the 
Jews and Israelites had formed one society, both of 
religion and polity, which society continued till the 
last destruction of Jerusalem, when, the Jewish 
kingdom being subverted, the bands were broken, 
and a disunion in religion was made; some of the 
Jews continuing attached to their ancient law as 


/much as they could without the temple, and others 
‘professing the Christian faith.”—Houbigant. 


The 
design of the prophet’s commission, says Blayney, 
was to endeavour to bring about a reformation, upon 
which would depend the continuance of the brother- 
hood, or political union, between Judah and Israel. 
The second crook, or staff, was therefore called 
But when the commission ended without 
producing its effect, the breaking of the crook pre- 
figured the dissolution of that brotherhood. What 
that brotherhood was, is well explained by Mr. 
Lowth, who says, that “upon the destruction of 
Jerusalem, which was the bond and cement of all 
their tribes, being the seat and centre both of their 
civil power, and of the divine worship, (Psa. exxxii. 
3-5,) the consequence was the entire dissolution of 
the nation, and the dispersion and confusion of all 


their tribes, whose families could no longer be dis- 


tinguished after the loss of their genealogies.” Cal- 
met thinks that, in this verse, Israel denotes the 
unbelieving Jews, who rejected Christ, and Judah 
the faithful ones who believed in him. 

Verse 15. And the Lord said, Take thee yet [or 
once more] ¢he instruments of @ foolish [or unwise] 
shepherd—The prophet, having hitherto represented 
the good shepherd, is now directed -to assume the 


/dress and equipage of one of a contrary character. 


As folly in the Scripture is equivalent to wickedness, 
by a foolish shepherd here may be meant, not only 
unskilful, but likewise ill-designing governors, or 
teachers, who should only intend their own advan- 
tage, and have no regard for the good of the flock, or 
people committed to their charge. The instruments 
of such a shepherd must be suitable to his own dis- 
position and indiscretion, such as a crook armed with 
iron, which, whenever it was used, would wound the 
flock; and a scrip, or bag, which contained nothing 
useful for the sheep, and the like. The prophet here 
follows the order of time, that he may foretel the 
madness and blindness of the shepherds ; that is, of 
the priests, rulers, and teachers of the Jewish nation, 
till the last destruction of Jerusalem; who not only 
disregarded religion, and the safety ‘and welfare of 
the sheep, but even devoured such of ba gh 


worth devouring. ; ‘ 
( 67") ~ 3 wal : 


— =e 


The type and curse of 


CHAPTER XI. 


a foolish shepherd. 


A. M. 2494. 16 For lo, I will raise up a shep- 
-—_——— herd in the land, which shall not 
visit those that be ' cut off, neither shall 
seek the young one, nor heal that that 
is broken, nor ™ feed that that standeth 
still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, 


11 Or, hidden. 12 Or, bear. 


Verse 16. For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in 
the land—A shepherd, in the singular number, de- 
notes a succession of such shepherds as are described 
in the following words. So a succession of priests 
is represented under the single person of Levi, Mal. 
il. 5,6. Since the Jews had rejected the true Shep- 
herd, God threatens to send, or permit to arise, among 
them, such shepherds to rule or teach them as 
should be notorious for their negligence and avarice, 
their cruelty and oppression, This may be under- 
stood either of the blind guides of whom Christ 
speaks, and whose character he describes at large, 
Matt. xxiii. 13-33; namely, the scribes and Phari- 
sees, the priests and doctors of their law; or of the 
avaricious, tyrannical, and unmerciful princes, that 
should rule them with rigour, and make their own 
land as much a place of bondage to them as ever 
Egypt or Babylon had been. And when they had | 
rejected him by whom princes decree justice, it was | 
just that they should be given over into the power 


of those who should decree unrighteous decrees. It), 


is probable, also, that there is a reference here to the | 
false prophets and false Christs, which, as our Lord | 
foretold, Matt. xxiv. 5, should arise. Many such} 
there were, who, by their seditious practices, pro-| 


voked the Romans, and hastened on the ruin of the | 


Jewish nation: but it is very remarkable that they) 
were never deceived by a counterfeit Messiah till | 
they had refused and rejected the true Messiah. The 
prophet proceeds to describe the character of these 
foolish shepherds, in the following words: Ist, They | 
should be negligent; which shall not visit those that 
be cut off—Or, as the LXX. render it, ro ex2curavor, | 
that which is missing, or has wandered from the 
flock ; and it may signify that which is ready to. 
perish. Neither shall seek the young ‘ileal 
are most apt to perish through weakness ; he alludes 
to the lambs which, on account of their tender age, 
are not able to follow the flock. Nor heal that 
which is broken—Which has received some hurt, 
but shall leave it to die of its wounds. Nor feed that 
that standeth still—Not able to go forward. Blayney 
renders the word, made to stand, or set up again 
after sickness. “Such,” says he, “ it is well known, 
require much care to nourish and support them, in 
order to their regaining strength ; a care which the 
foolish shepherd will not bestow upon them.” Or, 
as the LXX. render it, ro oX%oxAnpov # un Karevdvrn, 
nor shall direct that which is whole, mentioned in 
opposition to those that wander, or are diseased. 
2d, These shepherds would be luxurious; he shall 
eat the flesh of the fat—That is, instead of pre- 
serving the best of his flock, in order to increase it, 
3 


and tear their claws in pieces. As Ma Sth 

17 ° Wo to the idol shepherd that ———— 
leaveth the flock! the sword shall be upon 
his arm and upon his right eye: his arm shall 
be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be 
utterly darkened. 


© Jer. xxiii. 1; Ezek. xxxiv. 2; John x. 12, 13. 


he kills them to indulge his own appetite: or, en- 
riches himself by oppressing, or otherwise taking 
from those that are persons of property: like that 
wicked servant that said, My lord delays his co- 
| ming, he eats and drinks with the drunken, serving 
his own belly. 3d, They are tyrannical and cruel 
|to the flock. And tear their claws [or, as it ought to 
_ be rendered, break their hoofs] in pieces—This im- 
| plies the same as when it is said (Ezek. xxxiv. 4) of 
/such shepherds, With force and with cruelty have 
| ye ruled them. The unwise shepherd, instead of 
being tender and gentle with his flock, is supposed 


| to drag them about with his iron crook, or to over-* 


drive them in rough and stony ground, so as to break 
their hoofs. Or, he imposes burdens and hardships 
upon them that they are unable to bear. Upon 
the whole, a sluggish, negligent, covetous, riot- 
ous, oppressive, and cruel government, priesthood, 
or ministry, is here shadowed out by a foolish shep- 
herd. 

Verse 17. Wo to the idol shepherd—Or the shep- 
herd of nothing, or of no value, as xn ‘py should 
be translated ; he who calls himself the shepherd, 
ruler, or teacher of the people, but is in reality no- 
thing less. So ox °sa7, Job xiii, 4, signifies phy- 
sicians of no value. That leaveth the flock—Who 
taketh no care of the flock, and minds nothing but 
making his own profit out of them. Such a shep- 
herd is no better than an idol, that is profitable for 
nothing, (Isa. xliv. 10,) and hath only the outward 
form and appearance of a shepherd. The sword 
shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye—As 
he has abused his power and his understanding, sig- 
nified by his arm and his right eye, God shall, in 
his just judgment, deprive him of the use of both 
those faculties. 'The sword is put for any instrument 
of the divinevengeance. As the word 235m, here ren- 
dered sword, also means desolation, Blayney renders 
the clause, Because of his arm is desolation, and be- 
cause of his right eye: observing, “The purport of 
| the passage is, that since, through the misapplication 
_of his power, and through his negligence in watch- 
ing over the flock, they are subjected to desolati 
or the sword; therefore, as of strict justice, he shall 
be punished with a deprivation at least of those fac- 
ulties which he so fatally misused.” Some think 
the right arm and right eye of the people are in- 
tended, and observe, that the arm of the Jews was 
dried up from that time when they were no longer 
able to bear arms, or to defend themselves; as their 
right eye has been darkened to the true knowledge 
of the Scriptures, which they read as with a veil be- 
fore them. 


1059 


T he burden of the word 


ZECHARIAH. 


of the Lord for Israel. 


CHAPTER XII. 


“ The former part of this chapter,” says Lowth, “relates to an invasion made upon the inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem, 
in the latter times of the world, probably after their return to, and settlement in, their own land, which is often spoken of 


by the prophets. 
ters of Ezekiel.” 


It is probably the same attempt that is more largely described in the thirty-cighth and thirty-ninth chap- 
Be this as it may, it scems at least probable, that the conilition of the Jewish nation, after the present 


dispersion, and of the gospel church, either in the apostolic or millennial periods, is here spoken of. It is promised, 
(1,) That all the attempts of their enemies to destroy them would issue in their own danger and ruin, 1-4, 6,9. (2,) That, 
trusting in the Lord, they should subdue their opposers, and even the weakest of them be marvellously saved and strength* 


ened by God, 5, 7, 8. 


(3,) That to prepare them for, and help them to improve, these mercies, they should be blessed in a 


remarkable degree with a spirit of prayer, faith, and repentance for sin, 10-14. 


A. M. 3494. 


[THE burden of the word of the 
B. C. 510. 


Lorp for Israel, saith the Lorn, 
*which stretcheth forth the heavens, and 
layeth the foundation of the earth, and » form- 


jjeth the spirit of man within him. £04. 
2 Behold, I will make Jerusalem ——_—— 


°a cup of ‘ trembling unto all the people round 
about, ? when they shall be in the siege both 


>» Num. xvi. 
© Isa. li. 17, 


aJsa. xlii.5; xliv. 24; xlv. 12, 18; xlviii. 13. 
22; Eccles. xii. 7; Isa. lvii. 16; Heb. xii. 9. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XII. 

Verse 1. The burden of the word of the Lord for 
Israel—Or, toward Israel ; that is, as some interpret 
it, the prophecy which containeth the words of the 
Lord to Israel. 


Sorth the heavens—Who hath spread out the hea-| 
And layeth the founda- | 


vens to such a vast extent. 
tion of the earth—Hath assigned to the earth a fixed 
place in the creation, or regulates all its motions by 
fixed laws, which cannot be altered by the power of 
any creature. And _formeth the spirit of man within 
him—Who gave life to the first man, and created the 
soul, and united it to the body. All these things are 
mentioned as undeniable instances of God’s almighty 
power, and are made use of as arguments to en- 
courage men to rely on his word for the fulfilment 
of such promises as might seem to the understand- 
ing of man most unlikely to be brought to pass. 
Verse 2. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of 
trembling—“ An inebriating and stupifying potion 
of the strongest liquor and drugs. Jerusalem shall 
strike the nations with dread and astonishment.” 
When they shall be in the siege—“ A future siege, 
after the final restoration of the Jews.”—Newcome. 
See on chap. xiv. 3; Rev. xx. 9. “It is not difficult 
to perceive,” says Blayney, “ that the prophecies in 


this and the two following chapters relate to future || 


times, and most probably to those predicted by Eze- 
kiel in the xxxviiith and xxxixth chapters; where it 
is said that Israel, after their restoration and return 
to their own country, would be assailed by a combi- 
nation of many nations. Such an invasion is also 
here foretold; but it is not to be expected that all 
MP particulars of a distant prophecy should be clearly 
understood, before the time of its accomplishment. 
It is at least likely that when the time shall come for 
the re-establishment of the Jews, (of which sufficient 
intimation is given in the prophecies both of the Old 
and New Testaments,) and they shall begin to col- 
lect themselves, and attempt a settlement in their 
ancient possessions, such a measure will create jea- 
lousy and uneasiness, in those powers more especial- 
ly who are interested in the dominion over those 


countries. The Turks, we know, are at present, and |! 


1060 


Saith the Lord, which stretcheth | 


22, 23. 1 Or, slumber, or, poison. 2 Or, and also against 
Judah shall he be which shall be in siege against Jerusalem. 


long have been, in possession of the country of Pa- 
lestine; and in the opinion of many, who have 
brought specious arguments to justify it, particularly 
of the learned Joseph Mede, (p. 674 and 816,) their 
prince is intended by Gog, prince of Meshech and 
|| Tubal, Ezek. xxxviii. 2, &c.; and by the king of the 


|| north, Dan. xi. 40, &c.; concerning whom the like 
| things are prophesied in those chapters respectively. 
|| Now should that power subsist at the time, it may 
| fairly be presumed, that he, and any other power in 
|| the like circumstances, would oppose with all their 
| might an attempt to set up an independent sove- 
|| reignty in those parts. But, without pretending to 
|| determine precisely concerning the invaders, the 
' substance of the prophecy in this, and on to the se- 
/venth verse of the next chapter, will be found to 
-amount to this; that Jerusalem will be besieged by 
/a multitude of hostile nations, to the great terror of 
| the people in its vicinity, as well as of Judah itself; 
| but that the attempts of those nations will be frus- 
| trated through the special interposition of the Deity, 
/and will terminate in their total discomfiture and 
' ruin, and in the permanent peace and prosperity of 
| the victorious Jews. After which, the Jews will be 
| brought at length to see and lament the sin of their 
| forefathers in putting their Messiah to death, and 
thereupon will have the means of purification and 
atonement afforded them; and, being thus cleansed 
from past guilt, will renounce all their former of- 
fensive practices, and carefully abstain from a future 
| repetition of them.” To these views of Dr. Blayney, 
| on the important subject of the restoration of the 
Jews to their own land, however probable upon the 
whole, there seems to be one great objection. Inas- 
/much as God cast the Jews out of their land for 

rejecting and crucifying the Messiah, it seems highly 
improbable that he should restore them to it while 
| they remain in impenitence and unbelief, and in a 
state of enmity to that Messiah. It appears much 
more4dikely that, previous to their restoration, they 
must be made sensible of the great guilt which their 
nation contracted by the commission of that sin, and 


of the various other sins which pierre It; and 
that they must be truly humbled brought to a 
3 


God's interposition 


CHAPTER XII. 


in favour of the Jews. 


Aaa obs. against Judah and against Jerusalem. 
——— 3 ‘And in that day will I make 
Jerusalem * a burdensome stone for all people : 
all that burden themselves with it shall be cut 
im pieces, though all the people of the earth be 
gathered together against it. 
“A In that day, saith the Lorn, {I will smite 
every horse with astonishment, and his rider 
with madness : and I will open mine eyes upon 
the house of Judah, and will smite every horse 
of the people with blindness. 


4 Verses 4, 6, 8, 9, 11; Chapter xiii. 1; xiv. 4, 6, 8, 9, 13. 
© Matt. xxi. 44——f Psa. Ixxvi. 6; Ezek. xxxviii. 4. 


thorough repentance as-a people, before God will 
open the way in any degree for their restoration. It 
is certain that, as they were carried captive into 


Babylon chiefly to punish them for the sin of idola- | 


try, so no way was made for their restoration from 
that captivity, till they were generally humbled and 
made truly penitent for that sin. 


Verse 3. J will make Jerusalem a burdensome | 


stone—Jerusalem is here compared to a stone -of 
great weight, which, being too heavy for those who 


attempted to lift it up, or remove it, falls back upon | 


them and crushes them to pieces, St. Jerome, in a 
note on the place, speaks of an exercise, which, he 
says, was common in Palestine, and throughout all 
. Judea, in his days, in which the young men, who 
were ambitious to show their strength, used to lift up 
stones of enormous weight, as high as they could, 
some to their knees, others to their navel, their 
shoulders, and even their heads; and some placed 
them on the top of their heads, with their hands erect 
and joined together. Inthis exercise, itis evident, they 


must have been in great danger of the stone’s falling | 


upon them and bruising them, or even crushing them | 


to pieces. Mr. Lowth, who quotes this passage from 
Jerome, remarks that, to the same sense, Christ saith, 
Matt. xxi. 44, On whomsoever this stone shall fall, it 
will grind him to powder. All that burden them- 
selves with it shall be cut in pieces—All that 
undertake to contend with Jerusalem shall be either 
destroyed or greatly injured, as men will have their 
flesh torn or bruised that let a heavy stone fall upon 
them. Though all the people of the earth be 
gathered together against it—It is obvious, that by 
all, here is meant only many people, as it is 
expressed Ezek. xxxviii. 6,9, 15, Thou, and many 
people with thee. 

Verses 4, 5. In that day—This expression, in the 
prophetical writings, is of large extent, and not only 
signifies that particular point of time last spoken of, 
but some time afterward. J will smite every horse 
with astonishment—Many commentators explain 
this of the victories which Judas Maccabeus gained 
over Antiochus’s captains, whose chief force consisted 
in cavalry. But, as Archbishop Newcome observes, 
the language is much too strong, as it is also verses 
6-9, to denote the successes of the Maccabees against 
the Seleucide. This prophecy therefore, he thinks, 

3 


5 And the governors of Judah shall A. M. 3494. 
say in their heart, * The inhabitants Ber Marr 
of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lorp 
of hosts their God. 

6 4 In that day will I make the governors 
of Judah #like a hearth of fire among the 
wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and 
they shall devour all the people round about, 
on the right hand and on the left: and Jeru- 
salem shall be inhabited again in her own 
place, even in Jerusalem. 


3 Or, There is strength to me and to the inhabitants, &c., Joel iii, 
16. § Obadiah 18. 


remains to be accomplished. And many com- 
mentators, who are of the same opinion, consider it 
as a prediction of victories that will be obtained over 
Gog and Magog by the Jews, upon their restoration 
to their own land. One circumstance in favour of 
this interpretation is, that Gog and Magog are repre- 
sented, Ezek. xxxviii. 15, as riders on horses. And 
if by that people the Turks be intended, we know 
that they have been, and still are, famous for their 
cavalry, wherein chiefly the strength of their armies 
consists. But it is here foretold, that in order to 
their discomfiture God will send such distraction 


|, among their horses and their riders, and throw them 


into such a state of confusion, that they shall fall 
foul one upon another, (see chap. xiv. 13,) and not 
be able to distinguish between their friends and 
their foes. And I will turn mine eyes upon the 
house of Judah—I will have an especial concern for 
their preservation. And the governors of Judah 
shall say in their heart—Shall say within them- 
selves, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my 
strength in the Lord—* 'The text here,” says Blay- 
ney, “has been supposed corrupt, and many attempts 
have been made to amend it. But, without any 
alteration, it well expresses the sentiments of the men 
of Judah, concerning the interest they had in the 
safety of Jerusalem and its inhabitants, on which 
their own strength and security depended in a great 
degree; so that they would, of course, be influenced 
to bring that assistance, the efficacy of which is set 
forth in the verse that follows.” 

Verse 6. Jn that day will I make the governors of 
Judah like a hearth of fire, &e—The word may 
be rendered, a pot. The Arabs, according to Har- 
mer, (vol. i. p. 233,) make a fire in a great stone 
pitcher, and when it is heated, spread paste upon it, 
which is baked almost in an instant. By a hearth 
of fire, however, here may be meant, a firebrand 
taken from the hearth, which, though small, will set 
other things on fire, and even whole cities. This is 
thought by some to be a very apt resemblance of 
the mischief done by the small forces of the Jews, 
under Judas Maccabeus, to the armies of Antiochus. 
It may, however, be a resemblance equally, and 
even more apt, of the destruction made of Gog and 
Magog, in the latter days, by the Jews restored to 
their own land. And they shall devour all the peo- 

1061 


God will destroy the nations ZECHARIAH. that come against Jerusalem. 


ign 7 The Lorp also shall save the 
———\ tents of Judah first, that the glory of 
the house of David and the glory of the inha- 
bitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves 


against Judah. 


David ; and the house of David shal] A. M. 3494. 
be as God, as the angel of — Pe . Schaae 
one them. 
9 And it shall come to — in that day, that 
I will seek to ‘ destroy all the nations that come 
8 In that day shall the Lorp defend the} against Jerusalem. 
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and "he that is|| 10 4 *And I will pour upon the house of 
* feeble * among them at that day shall be as| David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 


b Joel iii. 10. 


*Or, abject. 


S880, SS eee 
5 Heb. fallen. i Has. ii. 22; | Comes 3 eee xxxi. 9; 1.4; Ezek. xxxix. 29; Joel ii. 28. 


ple round about—They shall destroy all the enemies | | the Christian Chureh, and particularly that of the 
that annoy them; on the right hand and on the or heen | converted Jews, seems to be chiefly intended. And 
That is, on the south and on the north: see note on | he that is feeble among them shall be as David— 
Ezek. xvi. 46. The Targum explains the righi | The feeblest among them shall be men of war, bold 
hand and the left, of the south and the north. And || and brave, skilful and strong: shall enterprise and 
Jertsalem shall be inhabited again in her own} || accomplish great things, as David did, and become 
place—Shall be situated and inhabited on the very |) as serv iceable to Jerusalem in guarding it as David 
spot where she formerly stood: see note on chap.) || himself was in founding and enlarging it, and as 


xiv. 10. 
Verse 7. The Lord shall save the tents of Judah || 


Jirst—Some MSS. and versions read 73WN1D, as at | 


the first ; “ but the meaning here is, that God ‘would 


save the tents of Judah first, or previously to any || 


other; and for this the reason immediately follows, 


that the house of David and the inhabitants of Jeru-| 


salem might not be tempted to value themselves too 
highly on the preference given to them (supposing 
that had been the case) above the rest of Judah.”— 
Blayney. 
glory in the honour of their being descended from 


him, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to value them- | 


selves above their brethren, because their city was 
the place of God’s peculiar residence, and the seat 
of the royal family; therefore, to take away all 
occasion of any such glorying and emulation, God 
here promises that he would first appear in behalf of 
those Jews that should live in the open country, in 
cottages or tents, in places unfortified. He will first 


and more honourable. 
evidently looks forward to gospel times, seems prin- | 
cipally to imply, that the conversion of the nation to 


As the house of David were wont to) 


| formidable as he was to the enemies ofit. Observe, 
reader, God helps and defends his chureh and peo- 
ple by giving them courage and strength to defend 
and help themselves. He enables them to do their 
part, and then he is not wanting to do his. And the 
| house of David shall be as God—Or, as angels, as 
the word Do7>x, Elohim, is rendered, Psa. viii. 3. 
As the angel of the Lord before them—Or, at the 
head of them ; as that angel (so some interpret it) 
which went before the people of Israel through the 
wilderness, Exod. xxiii. 20. God will inerease the 
gifts and abilities, both of the people and princes, in 
proportion to the respective services for which they 
are designed. It was said of David, that he was as 
an angel of God, to discern good and bad, 2 Sam. 
xiv. 17; such shall now the house of David be. But 
| this was to have its full accomplishment in Christ: 
now the house of David looked little and mean, and 
‘its glory was eclipsed, but in Christ the house of 


|| David was to shine more bright than ever. In him 
save the weaker and despised, and then the stronger | 
But this promise, which | 


it was to become more blessed, and more a blessing 
than ever it had been. And J will seek to destroy 
all the nations, &c.—See notes on verses 3-6. 

| Verse 10. And I will pour, &e—God’s signal 


Christianity will begin among the more poor, low, | interposition in behalf of Judah and Jerusalem, after 

and obscure Jews, and not among the rich, great, | their future restoration, having been foretold, the 

and learned; lest the latter should glory over the || | prophet proceeds to foretel their conversion to 

others, as if the change among the people had been Christianity. But though the prophet speaks of 

effected by their power, wisdom, or influence; or || this after he has foretold their restoration, it does 

should assume any improper ascendency over their H not follow that it shall take place after that event. 

inferiors: in other words, that the wise man might || It is certainly much more probable that they will 

not glory in his wisdom, neither the mighty man || first be brought to repentance for the 

in i might, nor the rich man in his riches ; and and crucifying their Messiah, and to believe in him - 
that no flesh might glory in God's presence, but that | with their heart unto righteousness, and then that 


he that should glory might glory only in the Lord, 
Jer. ix. 23. 

Verses 8, 9. In that day shall the Lord defend 
ihe inhabitants of Jerusalem—Not only Jerusalem 
tself from being taken and destroyed, but all the in- 
habitants of it from being in any way injured: he 
will not only be a wall of fire about the city to fortify 
- jt, but he will compass particular persons with his 
favour as with a shield. The mystical Jerusalem, 

1062 


God will bestow upon them that great merey of re- 
establishing them in the possession of Canaan: see 
note on verse 2. “The Jews had stumbled and 
fallen at the stone of mene om 
the Messiah, in his humble appearane aiah 
foretold. That no one might be 
sudden change of their affairs, [n: . 
tion to their own land, and their pros 
Zechariah tells us, they s it 


A mourning in 


CHAPTER XII. 


Jerusalem predicted. 


A. M. 3494. the spirit of grace and of supplica- 
BC. 510... 

————— tions: and they shall ! look upon me 
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn 
for him, ™as one mourneth for his only son, 
and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that 


is in bitterness for Azs firstborn. 


1 John xix. 34,37; Rev. i. 7——™ Jer. vi. 26; Amos viii. 10. 
2 Acts ii. 37. 


changed, and repent heartily of that sin which had 
been the cause of their fall, for God should pour out 
on them the spirit of grace and supplication, that 
they might look with compunction of heart on him 
whom they had pierced ; and he should, by his Spirit, 
improve those good dispositions into a thorough 
conviction of his being the Messiah, whom they had 
rejected: for this they should weep bitterly, verse 
11, and make earnest supplications till received 
again into his grace and favour. This done, it fol- 
lows, chap. xiii. 1, Jn that day shall a fountain 
be opened, &e. Now who were they whose sin and 
uncleanness were washed away, but the house of 
David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; the same 
who had sinned, and mourned, and repented, and 
were therefore pardoned? What did they mourn 
for, but for him whom they had pierced, and whose 
death they had bewailed with all the solemnities of 
true mourners? It was then the act and sin of the 
house of David, and of the inhabitamts of Jerusalem, 
that they pierced and slew him whom they now 
looked upon; for which their land waS treated as 
polluted, and removed out of God’s sight into 
captivity, not to be restored to them till their sin 
Was remitted upon their true repentance. Thus 
much is evident from the context:” see Chandler’s 
Defence, and Dodd. 

But though this passage may chiefly relate to the 
future and general conversion of the Jews to the 
Christian faith, which St. Paul calls life from the 
dead, and therefore will not receive its full accom- 
plishment till that event takes place; yet it may also 
be understood of some other prior conversions of the 
Jewish people, and particularly of those of the many 
thousands brought to repentance by the preaching 
of John the Baptist, of Christ, and his apostles. For 
it appears from the accounts we have in the New 
Testament, that though the rulers and leading men 
among the Jews were not converted in that age of 
the Christian Church, yet awast number of the peo- 
ple were. So that this prophecy has, in some de- 
gree at least, been already fulfilled, and the spirit 
of grace and supplication hath been poured out in 
a measure, if not upon the house of David, yet upon 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. In the expression, 
They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, 
(the words being spoken by God,) is implied, that 
in the piercing of Christ, God himself, figuratively 
speaking, was pierced through the wounds of his 
beloved Son, he being infinitely dear to his heavenly 
Father, and his cause the cause of God. This pas- 
sage is undoubtedly cited in St. John’s gospel, chap. 
xix. 37. Oyovra: eg dv efexevtycav, They shall look 

3 


| 


11 In that day shall there be a great A. M. 3494 

° i B. C. 510. 

"mourning in Jerusalem, °as the ———— 

mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of 
Megiddon. 

12 ? And the land shall mourn, ° every family 

apart ; the family of the house of David apart, 


°2 Kings xxiii. 29; 2 Chron. xxxv. 24. P Matthew xxiv. 30 
Rev. 1. 7.——® Heb. families, families. 


on him whom they have pierced. For although the 
present Hebrew text is, ‘ox wan, They shall look 
unto me, between forty and fifty MSS. are produced 
which read 15x, wnto him, with the concurrence of 
other authorities. They shall mourn for him— 
They shall heartily lament the crucifying of the Lord 
Jesus, not only as the sinful, cruel act of their 
fathers, but as that in which their sins had a great 
share. As one mourneth for his only son__With an 
unfeigned and real, a great and long-continued, a 
deep and lasting sorrow, such as is the sorrow of a 
father on the death of an only son: they shall re- 


| tain it inwardly, and express it outwardly, as in the 


funeral mournings on such occasions. And shall be 


| in bitterness for him—True repentance will bitterly 


lament the sins that brought sorrows and pain upon 
the Son of God. / 
Verses 11-14. In that day—When the Jews shall 
mourn for their sins, and for that great sin, the 
crucifying the Lord of glory; there shall be a great 
mourning tn Jerusalem—A mourning expressed by 
the greatest the Jews ever experienced, the mourn- 
ing for Josiah slain in Hadadrimmon, a town in the 
valley of Megiddon. ‘There the lamentations for 
that good prince began, and were continued for many 
days from thence to Jerusalem, whither his body 
was carried to be interred in the sepulchre of his 
fathers; and there all Judah and Jerusalem mourned 
for him, and appointed the day to be annually ob- 
served with lamentations: so that from thencefor- 
ward the mourning for Josiah became a proverb for 
an extraordinary lamentation. And the land shall 
mourn, every family apart—The whole land shall 
mourn in a most solemn manner: and every family 
shall sequester themselves from business and con- 
versation for that purpose. TJ'he house of David 
apart, and their wives apart—Those of the royal 
family, who have rejected Christ, shall lead the way 
Even husbands and wives shall abstain from 
each others company, as was usual in times of 
solemn humiliation. Or, as some learned men sug- 
gest, in solemn processions, it was usual for the 
several orders of men to go distinctly, and likewise 
for the women to go in ranks by themselves, each 
tribe, or order of men and women, using a distinct 
form of lamentation, and expressing their sorrow in 
different words. This was probably done in the 
mourning for Josiah, and observed in the times 
after the return from captivity: see 2 Chron. xxxv. 
25, to which ceremonies the expressions of text may 
allude. T'he family of Nathan apart—David had 
a son named Nathan, 2 Sam. vy. 14. This branch of 
the royal family seems to be here meant, as that by 
1063 


A promise of pardon 


ZECHARIAH. 


proclaimed to the Jews. 


are and their wives apart; and the fa-; 
__— mily of the house of 4 Nathan apart, 
and their wives apart ; 
13 The family of the house of Levi apart, | 


A. 
B. 


42 Sam. v. 14; Luke iii. 31. 


Solomon is implied in the preceding clause. “It is 
possible,” says Newcome, “that at the final restora- 
tion of the Jews, the genealogies of some tribes may | 
be found to have been preserved; and that the} 
family of David may be traced up to more than one 
of its collateral branches; each of which, on account | 
of its distinguished eminence, is to mourn apart.” | 
The house of Levi apart—If the tribe of Levi be} 
intended, it may be observed, the sacerdotal tribe | 
were the most bitter persecutors of Christ; they | 
hired the traitor, they sought witnesses; the high-| 
priest, the head of that family, condemned him to} 
die: for all which sins they shall one day be called . 
upon to reckon with God, and therefore, above | 
other tribes, are particularly named as chief mourn- 
ers, for their injustice and cruelty to their Messiah. 
But probably a Levi, mentioned Luke iii. 29, is} 
meant. The family of Shimei apart—For Shimei, | 
the LXX., Arabic, and Syriac have Simeon. “As 
Nathan, Simeon, and Levi, are all reckoned among | 


and their wives apart; the family 7 of feng 
Shimei apart, and their wives apart; }$———— 

14 All the families that remain, every family 
apart, and their wives apart. 


7 Or, of Simeon, as LXX. 


the progenitors of Christ, Luke iii. 29-31, may not 
their families be mentioned by name as more parti- 
cularly concerned in the guilt to be lamented? For 
neither did his brethren believe in him, John 
vii. 5."—Blayney. All the families that remain, 
every family apart, and their wives apart—Thus, 
after the mention of four particulars, he completes 
the induction bya general clause. As if he had said, 
It would be tedious to mention every family and 
their wives, though but once, therefore a general 
comprehensive account may suffice: some of every 
family, of the whole remnant of Israel, shall mourn, 
look to, believe in, and obey Christ. Thus the 
mourning of the Jews for their Messiah shall bear 
some proportion to their violence and cruelty against 
him; and they, through faith, shall live by the death 
of him whom they slew, and rise to glory by him 
whom they loaded with reproaches! What will 
|not grace do, when it converts, accepts, comforts, 
_and glorifies such offenders! 


| 


CHAPTER XIII. 


In this chapter we have, (1,) A general promise of pardon proclaimed to the Jews upon their conversion, and of their being 


cleansed from idolatry, and false pretences to prophecy, upon their believing in Christ, 1-6. 


(2,) A clear prediction of 


the sufferings of Christ, the destruction of the bulk of the Jewish nation, and the purifying of a remnant, 7-9. 


A.M. 3494. TN *that da 


y there shall be a 
B. C. 510. 


fountain opened to the house of 


David and to the inhabitants of Je- A. M. 3494. 
: : B. C. 510. 
rusalem. for sin and for ! uncleanness. 


2 Chap. xii. 3——® Heb. ix. 14; 1 Pet. i. 19; Rev. i. 5. 


1 Heb. separation for uncleanness. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIIL 

Verse 1. In that day—When the Lamb of God 
shall be offered up a sacrifice for mankind, and the . 
gospel shall be preached, in which the glad tidings | 
of our redemption are published. This seems to be 
a continuation of the prophecy begun at the ninth | 
verse of the preceding chapter; and the meaning to_ 
be that, through the atoning sacrifice of the Messiah, | 
the repentance and humiliation there described | 
should be accepted of God, and followed with a full | 
pardon and gracious communication of sanctifying 
grace to the penitent. There shall be a fountain | 
opened—* The blood of Christ, which cleanseth from | 
all sin, (1 John i. 7,) is manifestly here intended, | 
the Jews being, upon their repentance and conver- | 
sion, to be admitted to all the privileges of the Chris- 
tian covenant.” Probably there may be an allusion . 
in the words “to the one great spring at Jerusalem, 
(mentioned Isa. vii. 3,) which served the uses of | 
king and people.” See Vitringa. The spouse of | 
Christ, his church, is @ + shut up, a fountain | 

1 


sealed, Cant. iv. 12; but Christ is to sinners a foun- 
tain opened: under the law, he was as the waters of 
the temple for the Jews; but now his merits are 
opened to us Gentiles, free for all, and of easy access, 
‘and of sovereign virtue to heal. For sin and for 
_uncleanness—The original words here used, nxn 
and 73, are “legal terms; the former denotes sin 
generally, or any transgression of the law which re- 
quired atonement, and is sometimes put for the 
means of purification from it, Num. xix. 9-17; the 
‘latter is used for that uncleanness, or legal defile- 
ment, which secluded a man from all intercourse 
with God, and holy things. Now whatever efficacy 
‘the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of a 
heifer, sprinkled on the unclean, had to purify from 


legal sin and defilement, the same is ascribed to the 


blood of Christ in the Christian dispensation, for 
_ purging the conscience of a sinner from the of 
dead works, or moral pollution.”— . The 
legal washings were but shadows and types of this 
matchless, healing, purifying fountain, \ never 


Destruction of 


CHAPTER XIII. 


idolatry foretold. 


#.. M. 3494, 


will *cut off the names of the idols out of the 
land, and they shall no more be remembered : 
and also I will cause “the prophets and the 
unclean spirit to pass out of the land. 

3 And it shall come to pass, that when any 
shall yet prophesy, then his father and _ his 
mother that begat him shall say unto him, 
Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in 


2 And it shall come to pass in that | the name of the Lorn: and his father A. M. 3494 
’ day, saith the Lorp of hosts, that || and his mother that begat him ° shall 


5 


thrust him through when he ater 

4 And it shall come to pass in that day, thaz 
fthe prophets shall be ashamed every one of 
his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither 
shall they wear £a? rough garment ° to deceive: 

5 » But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am 
a husbandman; for man taught me to keep 
cattle from my youth. 


© Exodus xxiii. 13; Josh. xxiii. 7; Psalm xvi. 4; Ezek. xxx. 


13; Hosea ii. 17; Micah v. 12, 13: ~ 42 Pet. il. 1. © Deut. 
xiil. 6, 8; xviii. 20. 
fails to heal all those that apply to it. It must be 


observed, likewise, that spiritual graces and influ- 
ences, communicated by the Holy Spirit, are also 
compared to a fountain, Joel iii. 17; and by these 
sinners are represented as being washed and cleansed, 
Ezek. xxxvi. 25; Titus iii. 5. 

Verse 2. I will cut off the names of the idols—I 
will utterly destroy idols and idolatry. The Jews 
were forbidden to mention the names of the heathen 
idols, Exod. xxiii. 13; Josh. xxiii. 7; and when 
idolatry should be utterly extirpated, the names of 
the idols should be buried in oblivion. “It has 
been urged, in proof that this prophecy was uttered 
before the Babylonish captivity, that idolatry and 
groundless pretensions to prophecy were com- 
mon among the Jews at that time, which has not 
been the case since. But, admitting the Jews 
not to have been addicted to idolatry, or false 
prophesying, at any particular period, [since the 
Babylonish captivity,] who can say they will not 
fall into both those transgressions at some future 
time? It is probable they will do so; for Ezekiel, 
confessedly prophesying of the latter times, when 
Israel and Judah, incorporated again into one nation, 
shall return into their own land, says, to the same 
effect as Zechariah, Neither shall they defile them- 
selves any more with their idols, nor with their de- 
testable things, nor with any of their transgres- 
sions, Ezek. xxxvii. 23. But besides, supposing the 
Jews themselves to remain untainted with those 
corruptions, it surely will not be denied that they 
do and may still prevail among other nations, who 
may be included in the term y1"7, taken in its most 
general sense, the earth; and so I conceive it should 
be: for we are taught to expect that the conversion 
of the Jews will be followed by a further reforma- 
tion in the world, Rom. xi. 15; and that the time 
will come, when the kingdoms of this world shall 
become the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, 
Rev. xi. 15; and the beast, the emblem of idolatry, 
and with him the false prophet, shall be cast into a 
lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. xix. 2.’—Blayney. 
I will cause the prophets—The false prophets; and 
unclean spirit—This seems to mean those that pro- 
phesy by means of an unclean spirit: see Acts xvi. 
16; Rev. xvi. 13; and what is said in the next verse 


__£ Micah iii. 6, 7. 
iii. 4. 2 Heb. a garment of hair. 
vil. 14. 


& 2 Kings i. 8; Isaiah xx. 2; Matthew 
3 Heb. to lie—— Amos 


of those that undertake to prophesy by means of an 
impure spirit, or other false pretences. 

Verse 3. And when any shall yet prophesy— 
Namely, falsely; then his father and his mother 
shall say wnto him—His dearest friends shall dis- 
course with him, and inform him what the law of 
Moses directs in this case; Thou shalt not live— 
This probably is not to be considered as the con- 


| demnatory sentence; for, being private persons, they 


had no right to pronounce such a sentence; but it is 
a repetition of the law, which saith, that a false pro- 
phet ought not to be suffered to live, Deut. xiii. 6-8. 
For thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord— 
Thou fallest under the sentence of the law. Andhis 
father and his mother shall thrust him through— 
Even the parents of such a person shall be forward 
to put in execution against him the penalties inflicted 
by the law upon false prophets and seducers. “They 
shall treat such a one in the same manner as their 
fathers did the true prophet, the Messiah; they shall 
pierce or thrust him through.”—Lowth. The pur- 
port of this passage seems to be, that very vigorous 
and decisive measures shall then be taken against 
every kind and degree of idolatry. 

Verses 4,5. The prophets shall be ashamed every 
one of his vision—That is, of the extraordinary com- 
munication which he pretended to have received, 
when he uttered a prophecy which he knew to be 
false. Neither shall they wear a rough garment to 
decetve—The true prophets were wont to wear 
rough or hairy garments, and therefore the false 
ones did the same, in order to pass off their impos- 
tures; but the words here imply that they should do 
this nolonger. But he shall say, Iam no prophet— 
The name they so much affected before, they shall 
quite disown. J am a husbandman; man taught 
me to keep cattle from my youth—Disclaiming all 
pretensions to the character of a prophet, he shall 
profess himself to be no other than a plain, ordinary 
labouring man, employed in husbandry from his 
youth. Mr. Harmer’s observations on this passage, 
which he justly parallels with the declaration of 
Amos, chap. i. 14, go to show the incompatibility of 
such active and laborious employments with the re- 
tired and sedentary life of those who were trained 
up in the schools of the prophets, in order to qualify 


of any one that shall prophesy, must be understood || themselves for that profession. 
3 


1065 


_ 


A predictittn of the 


ZECHARIAH. 


sufferings of Christ. 


A. M. 3494. 


6 And one shall say unto him, 
B. C. 510. 


What are these wounds in thy 
hands? Then he shall answer, J'hose with 
which I was wounded iz the house of my 
friends. 

7 % Awake, O sword, against ‘my Shepherd, 


the Lorp of hosts: ‘smite the Shepherd, and 
the sheep shall be scattered ; and I will turn my 
hand upon ™ the little ones. 


and against the man * ¢hat is my fellow, saith 
: 
| 


i fsa. xl. 11; Ezek. xxxiv. 23.——* John x. 30; xiv. 10, 11; 
Phil. ii. 61 Matt. xxvi. 31; Mark xiv. 27._—_™ Matt. xvii. 
10, 14; Luke xii. 32. 


| 1.15; xei. 15; Chapter x. 6. 


8 And it shall come to pass, that in gly 3404. 
all the land, saith the Lorp, two : 
parts therein shall be cut off and die; ™but the 
third shall be left therein. 

9 And I will bring the third part ° through 
the fire, and will ? refine them as silyer is 
refined, and will -try them as gold is tried: 
4 they shall call on my name, and Twill hear 
them: ‘I will say, It is my people; and they 
shall say, The Lorn is my God. 


= 


© Isa. xlviii. 10.——? 1] Pet. i. 6, 7——1 Psa. 
® Psa. exliv. 15; Jer. xxx. 22; 
| Baek. xi 20; ” Hos. ii. 23; Chap. viii. 8 


2 Rom. xi. 5. 


Verse 6. What are these wounds in thy hands 
—“Two ancient usages,” Blayney thinks, “are al- 
luded to; the one, that of the idolatrous priests and 
prophets, who gought to engage the attention and fa- 
vour of their deity by cutting and: slashing them-| 
selves, as the priests of Baal did, 1 Kings xviii. 28; || 
the other, that of those who cut themselves, as al 
token of their grief and mourning for their deceased | 
relations and friends:” see note on Jer. xvi. 6. It} 
appears, also, from Jer. xlviii. 37, that these cuttings 
were performed on the hands in particular. “ When 
therefore the man, now ashamed of. his pretensions | 
to prophesy, came to be challenged for those scars 
that were visible on his hands, he would deny them 
to hgve proceeded from any idolatrous cause; but 
would have them thought to be marks left by those’ 
wounds which he gave himself in the house of his 
relations and friends, in the paroxysms of his grief || 
for the loss of them.” The word m3, however, | 
here rendered wounds, may be translated strokes, or 
marks, and is thought by many learned interpreters 
to signify some particular marks or characters, im-| 
printed on the body of the person here spoken of, in |, 
honour of the particular God he worshipped. Thus || 
the worshippers of Bacchus had an ivy leaf imprint- 
ed on their bodies. These impressions were most 
frequently made on the hands, to which the expres- |) 
sion, Rev. xiii. 16, receiving the mark of the beast | 
on the right hand, alludes; so that, according to this 
interpretation, the meaning of whatis said here must 
be that, in the times here spoken of, inquiry would 
be made of those in whose hands any marks or cha- | 
racters were perceived, by what.means they came 
there, and what they signified. These marks, Bishop | 
Lowth observes, on Isa. xliv. 5, “were made by | 
punetures rendered indelible by fire, or by staining 
thus the slave was marked with the name of his| 
master; the soldier of his commander; the idolater | 
with the name or ensign of his god. And the Chris- | i 
tians seem to have imitated this practice, by what | 
Procopius says, ‘Because many marked their wrists, : 
or their arms, with the sign of the cross, or with the 
name of Christ?” Then he shall answer, Those | 
with which I was wounded in the house of my 
JSriends—This is given as the answer which the per- 
son who had been addicted to idolatry, and had re- 
ceived the marks of some false god in his hands, 

1066 


‘would make to the above-mentioned inquiry; he 
| would conceal the truth, and pretend that they were 
| not marks belonging to any god, but marks which he 
wore in his flesh by way of honour to, or in token 


of, his dependance on the family which had taken 
him under their patronage. Several interpreters un- 
derstand this verse of the wounds of Christ, and the 


rather because a remarkable prophecy of his being 


wounded for our transgressions, by the sword of di- 
vine justice, follows in the next verse. And certainly 
the passage is very capable of such an interpreta- 
tion; for, as the Jews professed to be the friends of 
the promised Messiah, and he had conducted himself 
in the most friendly manner toward them; when he 
was scourged, nailed to the cross, and pierced, he 
might, with great propriety, be said to have been 


| wounded in the house of his friends. 


Verses 7-9. Awake, O sword, against my shep- 
herd—Here “the prophet goes back to the great 
subject of prophecy, the Messiah, after having fore- 
told some events posterior to his appearance ; and 
he then proceeds to other events subsequent to that 


| grand epocha in the history of the Jews, and of man- 


kind ; some near it, and some remote.”—Newcome. 


| That ‘the sufferings and death of Christ are here pre- 
| dicted, is certain from Christ’s having applied this 


prophecy to himself, a few hours before he was ap- 
prehended in order to be put to death,as St. Mat- 


| thew (chap. xxvi. 31) and St. Mark (chap. xiv. 27) 


inforin us, where, foretelling to his disciples that 


they should all be offended because of him tha. 


night, he added, For it is written, I will smite the 
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered; and his 
applying it so directly to himself and his disciples, 
is as much asif he had said, in direet terms, that this 
| Was a prediction of what should happen to himself 
and them; so that it seems an entire perversion of 
the passage to apply it to any other subject. He 
alone, strictly speaking, was and is God’s 

and the man, his fellow, or friend, or very near to 
him, as Houbigant renders nny, and as it certain) 
properly signifies, no thing or person being so ened 
and dear to Ged as his beloved Son ; the a 
of whose crucifixion was the scattering fe 

of his disciples. And J will turn 

the little ones—Houbigant reads, instead 
will smite the shepherd ; but I will turn, 


é 
The destruction of CHAPTER XIV. Jerusalem foretold. 


back, my hand upon the little ones: that is, upon|| were to be cut off, and die ; a third only left, which 
that third part of the people, which was to be tried || was to be brought through the fire, refined as silver, 
as gold in the furnace. This is that part which, it is|| and tried as gold. Then it follows, verse 9, They 
said, verse 9, shall call on the name of the Lord: shall call, &c. The like events happened under the 
whence it is justly inferred that the two other parts |; gospel: the shepherd was smitten, the sheep were 
of the Jewish nation, which were to perish, were || scattered, they were to endure severe trials, and 
those Jews who received not the gospel, and who|| their faith was to be more precious than gold ‘tried 
were slain by the Romans: for it is said of the third || with fire. To the Jews, our Saviour said, Behold, 
part, They shall call on my name, in opposition to || your house is left unto you desolate ; and verily I 
the two parts who should be cut off and die, verse 8. || say unto you, ye shall not see me until the lime 
But, even of that third, many Jews, who had be-/|| come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh 
lieved the gospel, fell away, as when gold or silver is || in the name of the Lord. Our Saviour here foretels 
tried, much dross is-found among it. So that the || the desolation and destruction of Jerusalem; and, 
number of Jews who should continue in the faith || instead of comforting the Jews with the prospect of 
of the gospel is left very small; which the event} a third temple, and the restoration of bloody sacri- 
sufficiently proves, as we learn from the Acts of the || fices, in some future age, or advent of the Messiah, 
Apostles: see Houbigant. Upon the whole we learn | he expressly declares they shall see him no more, 
from these verses, as Dr. Sharpe observes, the follow- || till they shall acknowledge him by saying, Blessed 
ing particulars: “ That the shepherd, called the fel-|| is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.”—Dy. 
low of God, was to be smitten ; the sheep were tobe || Sharpe’s 2d Argument, p. 356. 

scallered; two parts of all that inhabited the land 


‘ 


pie CHAPTER XIV. 


In this chapter we have a continuation of the prophecy begun in the last two verses of the preceding chapler. Here 19 
(1,) The taking and spoiling of Jerusalem by many and cruel enemies, 1,2. (2,) The Lord coming forth to fight agaist 
the nations who had been the instruments of his vengeance, 3, 4. (3,) The manifestation of the kingdom of God, and the 
great increase of spiritual light and grace, till the name and majesty of Jehovah are acknowledged. through the whole 
earth, 5-9. (4,) The rebuilding, replenishing, and final establishment of Jerusalem in security, 10,11. (5,) Dreadful 
judgments inflicted upon all who fought against her, 12-19. (6,) The extraordinary holiness of the church in the latter 
days, 20, 21. 


A. - ae | BEHOLD, “the day of the Lorp||taken, and the houses rifled, and, = M. 3494, 
B.C 510. 
y are cometh, and thy spoil shall be ||the women ravished; and half of 2 

divided in the midst of thee. the city shall go forth into captivity, and the 
2 For I will gather all nations against || residue of the people shall not be cut off from 
Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be || the city. 


a Isa. xiii. 9; Joel ii: 31; Acts ii. 20. b Joel iii. 2. 


¢ Tsa. xill. 16. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER XIV. Nebuchadnezzar is said to fight against Jerusalem 

Verses 1, 2. Behold, theday of the Lord cometh— || with all the kingdoms of the earth.”—Lowth. And 
A day of the Lord’s great wrath and indignation will || the city shall be taken—For God is its enemy, and 
soon overtake you, O sinful, unthankful, bloody || who can stand before him, or before nations gathered 
Jews! A day remarkable for the execution of || by him? Where he gives commission, he will give 
divine vengeance upon you, and your city, Jerusa- || success. And the houses rifled, and the women 
lem. This chapter ought to have been joined to the || ravished—The Roman soldiers shall exercise those 
preceding ; for here the prophet continues to foretel || acts of lust and violence which are too frequent 
the execution of the threatenings contained in the || among conquerors. That all the outrages were 
latter part of the former chapter ; namely, how the || committed, and the miseries endured, which are 
unbelieving Jews should be destroyed by the Ro- || here predicted, when the Romans took Jerusalem, 
mans. Thy y spoils shall be divided in the midst of || we have abundant proof from Josephus and other 
thee—All that thou hast, O Jerusalem, shall become || historians: see notes on Deut. xxviii. And half of 
a prey to thine enemies, who shall be such absolute | ) the cily shall go into captivity—The Hebrew word 
masters of thee, that, in the greatest security, they || rendered half, may be translated a portion. It must 
shall divide among themselves whatever spoil they || be observed, that the city only is here spoken of; 
take from thee, in the very place where they take it. | but chap. xiii. 8, where mention is made of two parts 
For I will gather all nations—* The Romans, being | being eut off and dying, refers to the whole land. 
lords of the known world, had the strength of all na-' And the residue of the people shall not be cut off— 
tions united in their forces. Thus, (Jer. xxiv. 1 ) || “The Romans spared ~~ and useful part of 

3 1 


Display of God’s power 


A. 
Ache fight against those nations, as 
when he fought in the day of battle. 

4 And his feet shall stand in that day ¢ upon 
the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusa- 
lem on the east, and the mount of Olives 
shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the 
east and toward the west, ° and there shall be 


4 Ezekiel xi. 23.——* Joel iii. 12, 14. 


1 Or, my mountains. 


the Jews: Josephus, Bel. Jud., vi. ix. 2. However, 
these were either condemned to the mines in Egypt, 
or exposed to the sword and to wild beasts in the 
provincial theatres, or sold for slaves. Ibid. It must 
be observed, that the forty thousand who were per- 
mitted to go where they pleased, were Idumeans: 


Bel. Jud., vi. viii. 2.,—Newceome. “Butitis probable | 


that the remnant of the Jews, who: survived this 
almost exterminating destruction, and their descend- 
ants, who have forso many centuries been preserved 
a distinct people, in order to their future restoration, 
are intended.”—Scott. 

Verse 3. Then shall the Lord—After he hath 
sufficiently punished Jerusalem and the rest of the 
Jewish nations; go forth—Out of his holy place, as 
a warrior prepared for battle. This is spoken after 
the manner of men; and fight against those nations 
—Which had taken and destroyed Jerusalem, and 
oppressed his people. As when he fought in the 
day of battle—As in those days when he evidently 
fought for his people. The meaning is, that in after 
times God would discomfit and destroy the posterity 
of these nations, namely, the Roman idolaters and 
those under their empire; that when he had made 
use of them as a scourge to his people, he would ex- 
ecute his judgments upon them, as when he fought 
against the enemies of his church formerly, the 


Egyptians, Canaanites, and others. Observe here, | 


reader, the instruments of God’s wrath will them- 
selves be made the objects of it; for it will come to 
their turn to drink of the cup of trembling; and 
whom God fights against, he will be sure to over- 
come. It is observable that the Roman empire never 
flourished after the destruction of Jertsalem as it 


had done before; but God evidently fought against | 
it, and against all the nations under its dominion, or | 


in alliarice with it, till at last it was subverted and 
destroyed, its richest cities taken and plundered, and 
its various provinces ravaged by the Goths and Van- 
dals, and other barbarous invaders. 

Verses 4,5, And his feet shall stand in that day 
upon the mount of Olives, &c.—It is very difficult to 
say to what time this prediction refers, or what is its 
precise meaning. Commentators are not atall agreed 
on the subject. Some think the passage refers to 
the time immediately subsequent to the destruction 
_ of Jerusalem, foretold in verses 1, 2, and that it is to 
be understood figuratively, namely, Ist, That by the 
Lord’s standing before Jerusalem on the east, is 
meant, his drawing peculiarly near to his church 

1068 


ZECHARIAH. 


in the latter days. 


_— 


||a very great valley; and half of the sae, Sts. 
mountain shall remove toward the ———— 
north, and half of it toward the south. 

5 And ye shall flee ¢o the valley of » © 5i0, 
‘the mountains ; *for the valley of — 
the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye 
shall flee like as ye fled from before the ‘ earth- 
quake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah: 


| 


2 Or, when he shall touch the valley of the 


| separated. 


mountains to the place he 
f Amos i. 1. 


| and people, here, as frequently elsewhere, signified 
| by Jerusalem; and that he would be at hand to suc- 
| cour and save them; and would give success to, and 
be manifested in, the gospel preached by his apos- 
| tles, who received their commission on that mount 
before Christ’s ascension. 2d, That by the cleaving 
of the mount of Olives in the midst, toward the east . 
_and toward the west, so as to make a very great 
_ valley, is meant the removing of the ceremonial law, 
| which was like an aspiring mountain, or partition 
| wall, between the Jews and Gentiles, and a great 
| obstruction to the conversion of the latter, and their 
entrance into the church of God? but that, by the 
destruction of Jerusalem, this mountain should be 
| made to cleave, as it were, in the midst, this parti- 
| tion wall be broken down, and God’s church, the spi- 
| ritual Jerusalem, made of easy access to the Gen- - 
tiles. Thus the way of the Lord would be prepared, 
every mountain and hill brought low, and a plain 
and pleasant valley, or open way of communication, 
_be found in the place of them: see Isa. xl. 4. 3d, That 
by the valley of the mountains, is meant the gospel 
church, to which, as a place of refuge, many of the 
| Jews should flee, as people fled formerly from before 
the earthquake here mentioned, and should hasten 
| into it together with the Gentiles. 4th, That by this 
valley reaching to Azal, or, to the separate place, as 
_the word signifies, is signified that the privileges of 
_the church should not be limited, as formerly, to any 
| particular nation, or people, but should be extended 
| to all those who, in obedience to the eall of God, 
|| should come out from the world, separate themselves 
| from sinners, devote themselves to God, and become 
| his peculiar people. And, 5th, That by the Lord’s 
coming, and all his saints with him, is signified the 
spiritual coming and extension of his k m, 
whereby a multitude of converts, both of Jewish and 
Gentile extraction, should be made, who, 
faith working by love, should become saints, or ho. 
persons. This, in substance, seems to be Henr 
view of the passage, as it is that of many others. 
Lowth, on the other hand, interprets it literally, as 
follows: His feet shall stand upon the mount of 
Olives—* The glory of the Lord, that is, the She- 
chinah, or symbol of God's presence, when it de- 
parted from the city and temple, settled itself upon 
the mount of Olives, Ezek. xi. 23; so when Go 
shall return to Jerusalem, [that is, to Jerusal 
built and inhabited by the converted Jews res 
to their own land, at the beginning of f 


Display of God’s power 


CHAPTER XIV. 


in the latter days. 


- sae and the Lorp my God shall come, 
and “all the saints with thee. 
6 And it shall come to pass in that day, * that 
the light shall not be * clear, nor * dark : 
& Matt. xvi. 27; xxiv. 30,31; xxv. 31; Jude 14.— Joel 


iii. 11. * That is, it shall not be clear in some places, and 
dark in other places of the world. 


nium,] and make it the seat of his presence again, it 
[the Shechinah] shall return by the same way it de- 
parted, Ezek. xliii. 2. We may add, that when our 
Lord ascended from the mount of Olives, the angels 
told his disciples, he should come again in like man- 
ner, that is, in a visible and glorious appearance, at 
the same place, Acts i. 11,12. And the mount of 
Olives shail cleave, &c.—By an earthquake, such 
as was in the time of King Uzziah: see Amosi. 1. 
The middle of mount Olivet shall cleave asunder, 
and sink into a deep valley, so as to leave the two 
points, or tops of the hill, north and south, still stand- 
ing. For mount Olivet, as we learn from Maundrel, 
had three tops, or eminences; one on the north side, 
another on the south, and a third in the middle, from 
whence Christ ascended, and where the Christians 
in after times erected a cross, in memory of his as- 
cension there. And ye shall flee to the valley of the 
mountains—When ye see the mount of Olives cleave 
asunder, ye shall flee toward the valley for fear. 
The margin reads, The valley of my mountains, 
which may be understood of Zion and Moriah; but 
the Chaldee and LXX. read, T'he valley of my 
mountains shall be filled wp; for the valley of the 
mountains shall join even to Azal, it shall even be 
Jilled up, as it was by the earthquake in the days 
of Uzziah. Josephus writes, (Ant. Jud., lib. ix. cap. 
10,) ‘That before the city, at a place called Eppwyn, 
[or the cleft,] one half of the mountain, on the west- 
ern side, was broken off, and having rolled four fur- 
longs toward the eastern mountain, stopped, so that 
the roads were choked up, and the king’s gardens.’ 
And the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints 
[Lor holy ones] with thee—Or with him, as the Chaldee 
and LXX, read.” “The words,” Lowth adds, “are 
a description of Christ’s coming to judgment, attend- 
ed with all the holy angels, as the writers of the New 
Testament express it, the word (’w7p, translated 
saints, often signifying angels: see Deut. xxxiii. 2; 
so the word saints seems to be used 1 Thes. iii. 13; 
and St. Jude, verse 14, quoting the prophecy of 
Enoch, says, T'he Lord cometh with ten thousand of 
his saints, or holy ones: a place exactly parallel with 
this of the text.” 

One observation seems needful to be made here: 
if the visible and personal coming of Christ be in- 
tended in these verses, it certainly cannot be his 
coming to raise the dead and judge the world in 
righteousness, because that view of the passage 
would not, by any means, be consistent with what is 
said in the two next verses concerning the continu- 
ally increasing light of knowledge, holiness, and 
happiness in the gospel church, till, at length, at 
evening time it shall be quite light: but it must 
rather be understood of his coming to introduce, 

3 


-7 But °it shall be ‘one day * which A. M. 3494 
shall be known to the Lorn, not day, soll Ys 
nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at 
evening time it shall be light. 


4 Heb. precious. 
one.—— Rey. xxil. 5- 
lx. 19, 20; Rev. xxi. 23. 


establish, and perfect his millennial reign, believed 
in and expected generally in the first Christian 
church. ‘The reader will consider these different 
interpretations, and will of course adopt that which 
he thinks the most probable. 

Verses 6,7. And it shall come to pass in that day 
—Namely, when the Lord shall come forth to fight 
against the enemies of his church, the nations that 
fought against Jerusalem, as foretold verse 3; or, in” 
that day when he shall come to convert and restore 
the Jews, and spread his gospel through all the 
world; the light—Namely, of knowledge, holiness, 
and happiness in his church; shall not—Namely, at 
first; be clear—Like that of the perfect day ; nor dark 
—As perfect night, but shall be a kind of twilight, a 
raixture of light and darkness, of knowledge and 
ignorance, as to divine things, of holiness and sin, of 
happiness and misery, or of prosperity and adversity. _ 
But it shall be one day—One continued day ; there 
shall be no setting of the sun to make it quite night; 
but God will invariably pursue the end he has in 
view, and always act in order to it, namely, the full 
salvation of his spiritual Jerusalem. Which shall be 
known to the Lord—The Lord will always have his 


5 Heb. thickness. § Or, the day shall be 
: y 
k Matt. xxiv, 36.—! Isaiah xxx. 26 ; 


.eye upon this progressive day, and upon all the 


events of it. He will continually take notice of them, 
and order and dispose of all for the best, according 
to the counsel of his own will. But at evening time 
—When natural days end, and when, perhaps, the 
shades of the evening may appear to be coming on, 
and there may be an apprehension of returning dark- 
ness; it shall be light—This spiritual day shall be 
full of light and glory, Isa. xlvili. 8; and Ix. 19-21. 
Mr. Scott considers these verses as containing a com- 
pendious prophecy of the state of the church, from 
its establishment in the apostles’ days, to those glo- 
rious times which are expected; a prophecy fore- 
telling that, “for a long season, the light would nei- 
ther be clear nor dark: it would be greatly obscured 
by ignorance, heresy, superstition, and idolatry, yet 
not wholly extinguished: and the state of the church 
would be much deformed by sin and calamities ; yet 
some holiness and consolation would be found. ‘This 
period could neither be called a clear, bright day, 
cheered and illumined by the shining of a summer’s 
sun, nor would it be dark, as if the sun were set or 
totally eclipsed; but it would contain a great mix- 
ture of truth and error, of holiness and sin, of happi- 
ness and misery. Yet it would form one day, and 
never be interrupted by a night of total darkness. It 
would also be known unto the Lord, as to the degree 
of its light, and the term of its continuance; and he 
would watch over, and take care of, his cause and 
people all the time of it. But his people would 
hardly know whether to call it day or night, or a 
1069 


Display of the divine power ZECHARIAH. on in the latter days. 
Mia. 8 And it shall be in that day ¢hat||and it shall be lifted up, and 4inha- A. Lent eins 


“A. 
oat) cin living ™ waters shall go out from Je- 
rusalem ; half of them toward the 7 former sea, 
and half of them toward the hinder sea: in 
summer and in winter shall it be. 

9 And the Lorp shall be ® King over all the 
earth: in that day shall there be ° one Lorp, 
and his name one. 

10 All the land shall be ® turned ? as a plain, 
from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem: 


m Ezek. xlvii. 1; Joel iii. 18; Rev. xxii. 1. 
Joel ii. 20, . Daniel ii. 44; Rev. xi. 15. 
® Or, compassed. 


7 Or, eastern, 
© Eph. iv. 5, 6, 


bited °in her place, from Benjamin’s 
gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the 
corner-gate, ‘and from the tower of Hananeel 
unto the king’s wine-presses. 

11 And men shall dwell in it, and there shall 
be *no more utter destruction; * but Jerusalem 
10 shall be safely inhabited. 

12 4 And this shall be the plague wherewith 
the Lorp will smite all the people that have 


P Isa. xl. 4 ——4 Chap. xii. 6——® Or, shall abide.——" Neh. 
iii. 1; xii. 39; Jeremiah xxxi. 38.—+ Jer. xxxi. 40.—* Jer. 
xxiii. 6. xO Or, shall abide. 


compound of both: yet, at length, toward the even- 
ing of the world, the Sun of righteousness would | 
break forth and shine with unclouded splendour, dis- 
pelling the gloom of ignorance, heresy, idolatry, and 
superstition, and illuminating the church and the) 
earth with knowledge, righteousness, peace, and 
consolation,” 

Verses 8,9. And it shall be in that day—-Spoken 
of verse 6, when the light shall not be elear, nor | 
dark, that is, during the whole of the forementioned 
period; living waters shall go out from Jerusalem— 
The enlightening, quickening, and saving truths of 
Christianity, accompanied by the power of the Holy 
Spirit, shall proceed from the church of Christ, the | 
true spiritual Jerusalem; half of them toward the 
former sea--The eastern sea; and half of them 
toward the hinder sea--The western sea. They | 
shall spread themselves eastward and westward, and | 
on al] sides; and even the sea, whether on the east | 
or west, shall not be able to obstruct their progress ; | 
but, having watered and refreshed, enlightened, re- 
newed, and cheered the continent, they shall make | 
their way into the islands, and diffuse their renovat- 
ing and gladdening influence even over them. Jn. 
summer and in winter shall it be—Perpetually, | 
without intermission; these waters shall never dry 
up, be obstructed in their course, or lose their heal- | 
ing, fructifying, and refreshing virtue. In other 
words, “the gospel, attended by the influences of | 
the Holy Spirit, having begun its progress from | 
Jerusalem, shall continue its course on every side, 
amidst all those changes of which summer and win- 
.ter are an emblem: so that nothing shall totally 
impede its progress, till the Lord shall become Hing 
over all the earth, not only in right but in fact; till 
neither idols, false religion, nor antichristian power, | 
shall remain as his rivals; till all princes shall sub- 
mit to and serve him; and all the earth shall agree 
in one object and way of worship, and unite in sub- | 
mission and obedience to one Lord.”—Scott. 

Verses 10, 11. All the land—The whole land of | 
Judea, a type of the whole earth, the seat of the uni- 
versal church, filled with the knowledge of God, and 
abounding with multitudes of converts: shall be’ 
turned as a plain—All high, uneven places, all rocky | 
and barren grounds, shall be changed into fruitful | 
vineyards. So the church of Christ shall be fruit- | 
ful humble, and lovely. From Geba--The north | 

1070 


boundary of the land; to Rimmon—The south 
boundary. And it—That is, Jerusalem ; shall be lift- 
ed up—Raised out of the dust, to which its enemies 
had brought it, through God’s permission. Jerusa- 
lem, taken mystically, is the church of Christ in 
gospel days; and by the repair of all parts of this 
Jerusalem, as here described, is shadowed out the 
complete building of the church on all sides, north, 
south, east, west. From Benjamin’s gate—That is, 
this gate was probably to the north of Jerusalem ; 
unto the place of the first gate—Or, as Newcome 
reads it, the former gate, supposed to be that called 
the old gate, Neh. iii. 6; xii. 39, placed by Lightfoot 
toward-the south-west. Unto the corner-gate—See 
2 Kings xiv. 13. And from the tower of Hananeel— 
Placed by Cocceius eastward; who observes, that 
the tower and corner-gate seem mentioned as two 
extremities of the city. Unto the king’s wine-presses 


| —Near the king’s garden southward. So Cocceius, 


“These points are given, no doubt, to signify that 
Jerusalem shall again occupy as much space as ever 
it did in its most flourishing times. ‘The same in- 
tention appears Jer. xxxi. 38-40. Both these places 
may derive some illustration from comparing them 
together, and at the same time inspecting the plan of 
Jerusalem in the Ancient Universal History, Vol. i. 
b. i, which seems to have been laid down pretty 
accurately, according to the circuit of the walls, 
made by the two companies, Neh. xxxi. 40, and the 
information collected from other parts of Scripture.” 
—Blayney. And men shall dweli in it—Many, for 
number; eminent, for worth. And there shall be 
no more utter destruction—They that dwell in it 


| shall dwell securely, and there shall be none to make 


them afraid. There may be afflictions, but there 
shall be no more of that utter destruction that form- 
erly laid both town and countrywaste. There shall 
be no more curse, as the latter part of the sentence 
may be translated. In the new state of things, here 
foretold, the curse which sin brought into the world 
shall be, at least in a great measure, if not entirely, 
removed. Similar words, recorded Rey. xxii. 3, 
seem to be taken from this place. But Jerusalem 
shall safely be inkabited—A promise often repeated 
by the prophets. See Jer. xxiii. 6, and the note there. 
Verses 12, 13. And this shall be the plague, &¢e.— 
Those that do not die in battle, nor fall by the hand 
of their brethren, shall be destroyed by eo 


-_» 


Display of the divine power 


CHAPTER XIV. 


in the latter days. 


ee eS 


A. M. 3494. 
510. 


or fought against Jerusalem ; Their flesh 


shall consume away isla they stand 
upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume 
away in their holes, and their tongue shall 
consume away in their mouth. 

13 And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that “a great tumult from the Lorp shall be 
among. them; and they shall lay hold every 
one on the hand of his neighbour, and * his hand 
shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour. 

14 And "Judah also shall fight at Jeru- 
salem; Yand the wealth of all the heathen 
round about shall be gathered together, gold, and 
silver, and apparel, in great abundance. 

15 And *so shall be the plague of the horse, 


u] Samuel xiv. 15, 20.——* Judges vii. 22; 2 Chron. xx. 23; 
Ezek. xxxviii. 21. 11 Or, thou also, O Judah, shalt. 13 Or, 
against. ¥ Ezek. xxxix. 10, 17, &e.—— Verse 12. 


consumption. Their flesh shall consume away 
while they stand upon their feet—They shall be 
miserably emaciated, even while they stand in arms 
ready to fight; or so suddenly, that they shall hardly 
have time to lie or sit down. And their eyes shall 
consume away in their holes—A dreadful and exem- 
plary blindness shall seize them. A great tumuli— 
That is, confusion ; from the Lord—Hebrew, of the 
Lord, that is, one caused or permitted by him; shall 
be among them—Shall take place and prevail, as a 
punishment of their hostility to God’s church. Those 
that are confederated and combined against God and 
his people, will be justly separated, and set against 
one another; and their tumults raised against God 
will be avenged in tumult among themselves. And 
they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his 
neighbour—That is, they shall seek help from one 
another, but instead of helping they shall turn their 
arms against one another. And his hand shall rise 
up, &c.—The sum of the verse is, that intestine di- 
visions and hostilities shall be added to the foregoing 
divine judgments. 

Verses 14, 15. And Judah also shall fight at [or 
rather, for] Jerusalem—The meaning seems to be, 
that while the enemies of Jerusalem are engaged in 
fighting with each other, Judah also (Hebrew, 2) 
n77,) will come up and join their forces with those 
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, will fall upon the 
weakened nations, and take from them great spoil. 
And the wealth of all the heathen, §c., shall be 
gathered together—And shall fall into the hands of 
God’s people. Thus the wealth ofthe sinner is often 
laid up for the just; and the Israel of God are en- 
riched with the spoil of the Egyptians. And so 
shall be the plague of the horse, &c.—The very cat- 
tle shall share in the plagues with which the enemies 
. of God’s church shall be cut off, as they did in divers 
of the plagues of Egypt. 

Verse 16. And every one that is left of all the 
nations—Such as escape the fore-mentioned strokes 
of divine judgment, and are by mercy preserved; 

3 


of the mule, of the camel, and of the A. M. 3494 - 
ass, and of all the beasts that shall be ee 
in these tents, as this plague. 

16 {And it shall come to pass, that every 
one that is left of all the nations which came 
against Jerusalem, shall even *go up from 
year to year to worship the King, the Lorp of 
hosts, and to keep ” the feast of tabernacles. 

17 ¢And it shall be, that whoso will not 
come up of ali the families of the earth unto 
Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lorp of 
hosts, even upon them shall be no rain. 

18 And if the family of Egypt go not up, 
and come not, that? have no rain, there 
shall be the plague wherewith the Lorp will 


* Isa. Ix. 6, 7,9; xvi. 23——» Lev. xxiii. 34, 43; Neh. viii. 
14; Hos. xii. 9; John vii. 2—« Isa. lx. 12——1 Heb. upon 
whom there is not. 4 Deut. xi. 10. 


of all the nations which came against Jerusalem— 
That is, many among all these nations shall consider 
God’s hand, repent, and submit to his law. Such a 
change shall the grace of God, sanctifying his judg- 
ments, make upon them, Of Christ’s foes, as some 
shall be made his footstool, so others shall be made 
his friends; and when the principle of enmity is 
slain in them, their former acts of hostility are par- 
doned to them, and their services are accepted as 
though they had never fought against Jerusalem. 
Shall even go up to worship, and keep the feast of 
tabernacles—That is, they shall join in the solemn 
acts of Christian worship. The prophets, as we 
have repeatedly had occasion to observe in the 
course of these notes, often describe the state of 
the gospel by the usages of their own times. ‘The 
feast of tabernacles, being kept in remembrance of 
God’s conducting and preserving the Israelites forty 
years in the wilderness, and afterward bringing them 
into the promised land, was observed with extraor- 
dinary expressions of rejoicing. Here this one 
solemn festival is, by a figure, put for all the days 
consecrated to God for holy worship ; and that very 
properly, because of those two great graces which 
were, ina special manner, signified and required in 
that feast, namely, contempt of the world and joy in 
God, Neh. viii. 17. The life of a true Christian is a 
constant feast of tabernacles, and in all our acts of 
devotion we must retire from the world and rejoice 
in the Lord, or worship as the truly pious did in that 
feast. 

Verses 17, 18. Whoso will not come up of all the 
families of the earth—If there be any remiss here- 
in, and neglect to worship the Lord ; even upon them 
shall be no rain—They shalt be punished with want 
of rain, and of the blessings which plentiful and 
seasonable rains produce; their land shall be barren, 
and they shall suffer a famine. “ Tliere is a restrie- 
tion, verse 16,” says Newcome, “to such nations as 
warred against Jerusalem.” “But if, according to 
the opinion of many commentators, by going up to 

1071 


A+ 


Great spread of holiness in 


ea smite the heathen that come not up 

: . to keep the feast of tabernacles. 

19 This shall be the * punishment of Egypt, 
and the punishment of all nations that come 
not up to keep the feast of tabernacles, 

20 4 In that day shall there be upon the 
bells of the horses, *HOLINESS UNTO 
THE LORD; and the pots in the Lorn’s 


ZECHARIAH. 


¥ 


the church tn the latter days. 


house shall be like*the bowls before A. M. 3494. 
the altar. tea 

21 Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah 
shall be holiness unto the Lorn of hosts: and 
all they that sacrifice shall come and take of 
them, and seethe therein: and in that day 
there shall be no more the f Canaanite in * the 
house of the Lorn of hosts, 


T 
14 Or, sin. © Isa. xxiii. 18.—f Isa. xxxv. 


15 Or, bridles. 


Jerusalem to worship, and to keep the feast of taber- 
nacles, be only meant a conformity to the established 
worship of the one true God, or, which is the same 
thing, to the Christian religion, there can be no ob- 
jection to understanding a strict universality of the 
nations. For it is repeatedly foretold, that a time 
would come, when all the ends of the world shall 


_ remember and turn unto the Lord, and all the fam- 


ilies of the nations. shall worship before him, Psa. 
xxii. 27."—Blayney. And if the family of Egypt 
go not up, that have no rain—Where, by the situa- 
tion of the country, there is no rain; there shall be 
the plague wherewith the Lord will smite the hea- 
then—-That is, although they be not visited in the 
same manner as the other nations, namely, witha 
want of rain, which of itself would be no punish- 
ment to that country; yet, as it follows.in the next 
versé, they shall not be exempt from the same pun- 
ishment with the other nations that sinned in like 
manner, namely, famine, “ which would be the sure 
consequence if the rains did not fall in Ethiopia, so 
as to cause an overflowing of the Nile.’—Newcome. 
The reader will observe, respecting these predictions, 
that the prophet, “foretelling the blessings arising 
from the restoration of the Jews, and the conversion 
of the Gentiles to the Christian faith, draws his 
images from the old dispensation; and, as is usual 
throughout the prophetic writings, expresses the re- 
wards and punishments of the new dispensation, 
under figures borrowed from the old.” 

Verses 20, 21. In that day—When the nations are 
converted to God, as is foretold verse 16; shall there 
be upon the bells of the horses—Written, as it were, 
on every common thing ; Hottess uno THE Lorp— 
This was the inscription on the mitre of the Jewish 
high-priest, denoting the great holiness of his office, 
and how he ought to conduct himself in a holy 
manner in all things, especially in those relating to 
divine worship. Now in these days of the gospel, 
when the Jews shall be converted to Christ, and the 
fulness of the Gentiles brought in, and made a holy 
nation, a royal priesthood, the grace of God shall be 
so abundant and efficacious, that common ordinary 
things in the hands of Christians, much more their 
persons, shall bear the dedicating inscription of Ho- 
LINEss ‘To THE Lorp, and by their study and practice 
of holiness they shall make good their motto; they 


‘shall honour and glorify God in all circumstances 


and situations, times and places, and use every thing 

in a holy manner. .And the pots in the Lord’s house 

—The meanest utensil employed in his service; 
* 1072 


8; Joel iii. 17; Rev. xxi. 27; xxii. 15 ——s Eph. ii..19-22. 


shall be like the bowls before the altar—Shall be as 
the vessels of silver and gold used in the solemn 
sacrifices, Yea, every pot in Jerusalem shall be 
holiness unto the Lord—The utensils of private 
houses shall all be dedicated to God’s service, and 
employed in his fear and to his glory; with such so- 
briety and temperance, such devotedness to God, 
and such a mixture of pious thoughts and expres- 
sions, that even their meals shall look like sacrifices ; 
they shall not eat and drink to themselves, but to 
Him that spreads their tables and fills their cups. 
And all they that sacrifice—In allusion to sacrifices, 
the prophet expresses all religious affections, prac- 
tice, and worship, which shall be as pleasing to God 
as were the sacrifices of his people, offered up with 
divine warrant and approbation. Shall come and 
take of them—Of those pots and vessels, freely and 
without scruple; and seethe therein—The ceremo- 
nial distinction between holy and unholy places and 
things shall cease with the ritual law on which it 
was founded. One place shall be as acceptable to 
God as another, and one vessel or instrument of di- 
vine service as holy as another. For the true awor- 
shippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in 
truth, and men shall pray and give thanks every- 
where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and 
doubting. Little regard shall be had to the cireum- 
stance, provided there be nothing indecent or disor- 
derly, while the life, and soul, and substance of divine 
worship and service are religiously preserved and 
adheredto. And there shall be no more the Canaan- 
ite in the house of the Lord—There shall be no more 
a profane or impious person in the societies of the 
faithful. For though persons that were Canaanites, 
strangers, and foreigners, should be brought into the 
house of the Lord, yet they should cease to be Ca- 
naanites; they should have nothing of the spirit or 
disposition of Canaanites, or heathen, in them. And 
though in gospel times people should be indifferent 
as to holy vessels and holy places, yet they should 
be very strict with respect to chureh discipline, and 
careful not to admit the profane to saered ordinances, 
or to Christian fellowship with them, but should se- 


parate between the precious and the vile, between ~ 


Israelites and Canaanites. Yet this will not have 
its perfect accomplishment short of the heavenly 
Jerusalem, that house of the Lord of hosts into 
which no unclean thing shall enter. For at the end 
of time, and not before, Christ shall gather out of 
his kingdom every thing that offends; and the tares 
and wheat shall be perfectly and corn 


. ° ‘ 


. i 
on ey 


THE 


Bit Bd Jeb. MOA dy AvGs Eds 


ARGUMENT. 


TxovcH Malachi is the last of those divinely-inspired prophets whose writings have been transmitted 
to posterity, and in him prophecy ceased ; yet the spirit of prophecy appears to have shone as clear, 
bright, and strong in him as in any that preceded him. The Jews call him, The seal of prophecy, 
because in him the succession of prophets came to a period; God wisely ordering, that prophecy 
should cease some ages before the Messiah came, that he might appear the more conspicuous, and 
be the more welcome. Nothing is known respecting the country or parentage of this prophet, nor 
even whether Malachi, a word that means my angel, or my messenger, was his proper name, or 
only a generical name, signifying that he was the messenger of the Lord. The LXX. have ren- 
dered the Hebrew word, ayyedoc avrs, his angel, instead of my angel; and several of the fathers 
have quoted this prophet as the angel of the Lord. Justyn Martyr, however, and most of the 
primitive fathers, have considered Malachi as a proper name, (as it probably was,) and taken this 
prophet to have been cotemporary with Nehemiah, and to have prophesied a little after Haggai 
and Zechariah, as his prophecy supposes the temple to be already rebuilt, and the worship of God 
established there. For whereas Haggai and Zechariah reprove the people for delaying to build the 
temple, Malachi reproves them for their neglect of it, now it was built, and for their profanation of the 
temple service. And the other sins for which he rebukes them are those complained of by Ne- 
hemiah. He appears, indeed, to have prophesied when great disorders had begun to take place 
among both the priests and people, whom he charges with rebellion, sacrilege, adultery, profane- 
ness, and infidelity, and condemns the priests for being scandalously careless in their ministry ; at 
the same time not forgetting to encourage the pious few, who, in that corrupt age, maintained their 
integrity. And since prophecy was now to cease, he speaks more clearly of the Messiah than 
almost any other of the prophets had done; and concludes with a prediction of terrible judg- 
ments about to be executed on such Jews and others as should reject him when he came, and of 
signal mercy to such as should believe on him. In the mean time, till the Messiah should appear, 
he admonishes them carefully to observe the law of Moses, and to .look for no other prophet till 
Elias, that is, John the Baptist, the forerunner of the Messiah, should come. He prophesied about 
the year of the world 3604, and 400 years before Christ. As to his style, Bishop Lowth says, it 
shows him to have lived in the decline of the Hebrew poetry; which, from the time of the Baby- 
lonish captivity, had been decaying very much, and fast \erging toward a state of debility. 


CHAPTER I. 


In this chapter, (1,) The prophet shows how much Jacob and the Israelites were favoured by God, beyond Esau and the 
Edomites, 2-5. (2,) He reproves the Jews for their ungrateful and unbecoming deportment toward God, 6-10. (3,) He 
intimates that the Gentiles should be called to be the church of God in their room, 11. (4,) He charges the Jews with pro- 
fanation and weariness of the worship of God, and with offering him sacrifices blemished and corrupt, 12-14. 


A. M. 3604. (THE burden of the word of the|| ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? A. M, 3604 
Phere Lorp to Israel } by Malachi. Was not Esau Jacob’s brother? saith —— : 
_ 2 *Thave loved you, saith the Lorp. Yet||the Lorp: yet I loved Jacob. 


1 Heb. by the hand of Malachi. a Deut. vii. 8; x. 15——» Rom. ix. 13. 
NOTES ON CHAPTER I. phecy ; to Israel—To those of all the tribes that were 


Verses 1-3. T'he burden of the Lord—The word || returned from captivity. J have loved you, saith the 
burden is here, as often elsewhere, equivalent to pro- || Lord—That is, in a particular and extraordinary de- 
: 1073 


Vou. IIL. ( 68 ) 


God's displeasure tgainst 


MALACHI. 


Esau and the Edomites 


A. M. 3604. 


' 3 And I hated Esau, and ° laid his 
B.C.400, 


mountains and his heritage waste for 
the dragons of the wilderness. 

4 Whereas Edom saith, We are empover- 
ished, but we will return and build the deso- 
late places; thus saith the Lorp of. hosts, 
They shall build, but I will throw down; and 
they shall call them, The border of wicked- 


¢ Jeremiah xlix.18; Ezek. xxxv. 3, 4, 7, 9,14, 15; Obadiah 10. 
4 Psalm xxxv. 27. 


ness, and, The people against whom A. eng 
the Lorp hath indignation for ever. : 

5 And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, 
¢'The Lorp will be magnified ? from * the bor- 
der of Israel. 

6 4 Ason *honoureth Ais father, and a ser- 
vant his master: ‘if then I be a father, where 
is my honour? and if I be a master, where és 


2 Or, upon.——* Heb. from upon——* Exod, xx. 12, Luke 
vi. 46. 


gree; not only as men, but above the rest of men, 
and above the other posterity, both of Abraham and 
Isaac, Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us ?— 
That is, wherein does thy particular love to us ap- 
pear? What proofs hast thou given of loving us in 
an extraordinary degree? Us, who have been cap- 
tives, and have groaned under the miseries of cap- 
tivity and bondage all our days till of late? Is this a 
proof of thy love to us? 

Was not Esau Jacob’s brother? saith the Lord— 
Did not one father beget them, and one mother bear 
them? Yet [loved Jacob—Namely, more than Esau; 
I preferred him to the honour and privileges of the 
birthright, and this of free.love. I loved his person 
and his posterity. Here God is introduced as an- 
swering the question, which, in the preceding clause, 

they are represented as asking g, namely, wherein 
his particular regard to them appeared. But it must 
be well observed, that Jacob and Esau, as elsewhere 
Israel and Edom, are put to signify the whole poste- 
rity arising from these two persons, namely, the Is- 
raelites and Idumeans. And in asking, Was not Esau 
.Jacob’s brother? God reminds them that the Idume- 
ans, as they themselves very well knew, were de- 
scended from Abraham as well as they, and froma 
progenitor who was own brother to their progenitor 
Jacob. And I hated Esau—I loved not Esau’s pos- 
terity as I loved Jacob’s. By hating here is only 
meant, having a less degree of love, for in this sense 
the expression is frequently used. Thus, Gen. xxix. 
31, Jacob’s loving Leah less than Rachel is termed 
hating her; and Luke xiv. 26, the loving father and 
mother, wife and children, less than we love Christ, 
is termed the hating of them. That this is the mean- 
ing of the expression hating, there, is evident from 
the parallel text, Matt. x. 37, 38, where we read, He 
that loveth father or mother Morr than me, is not 
worthy of me, &c. From these, and other passages 
that might be produced, it is evident that the expres- 
sion, hating, is frequently used to signify no more 
than loving in a less degree, or showing less regard 
or fayour to one than another. Indeed, as it may be 
further added, it would be doing a high dishonour to 
the nature of God to suppose that the expression, as 
here applied to Jacob and Esau, is to be taken in the 
strict sense of the word hating. And laid his moun- 
tains and his heritage waste—In these words the 
Lord shows in what sense he had hated Esau, that 
is, his posterity; he had given him a lot inferior to 
that which he had conferred on Jacob. Idumea had 

: 1074 ‘ 


been laid waste by the arms of Nebuchadnezzar, five 
years after the taking of Jerusalem; and whereas 
Jacob’s captivity, or that of the Israelites, were re- 
stored to their own land, and their cities rebuilt, 
Esau’s never were. For the dragons of the wilder- 
ness—Creatures which delight in desolate places, by 
which the utter desolation of Idumea is signified. 
The Hebrew word tan, or nian, here rendered 
dragons, signifies any large creature of the creeping 
kind, whether by land or sea. In this place itis taken 
for a great serpent, such as are commonly found in 
deserts and desolate places. 

Verses 4, 5. Edom saith, We are empoverished, 
[or, brought low,] but we will return and build the 
desolate places—This they accordingly did, as we 
learn from the history of those times ; and undoubt- 
edly thought to become a flourishing people again, 
and to continue so. But God had determined other- 
wise, as is here declared. Thus saith the Lord, 
They shall build, but I will throw down—This was 
accordingly done by God’s giving success, first to 
the arms of Judas Maccabzeus, and afterward to those 
of Hyrcanus, by whom Edom was spoiled and laid 
waste again. And they shall call them, The border 
of wickedness—They shall be called, or accounted 
by others, a wicked nation, or a country of wicked 
men, and therefore deservedly laid waste. And ye 
shall say, The Lord will be magnified—Or, rather, 
Let the Lord be magnified; from the border of Is- 
rael—Namely, from that border whieh extended 
even to Idumea. 

Verse 6. A son honoureth his father, &e.—Since 
it is evident I am not only your Lord, and have a 
right to govern and command you by my creation 
of you, but also may be esteemed your Father, on 
account of the extraordinary benefits I have bestow- 
ed upon you, where are those proper dispositions 
which I might expect to find in youin return? name- 
ly, reverence for me, and fear of offénding me, as 
your Lord and Master, and love and honour toward 
meas your Father. Unto you, O priests, &e.— What 
is here said is addressed in particular to you priests, 
because, being chosen and appointed, according to 
your office, to honour and glorify me, you ought to. 
have been the first and most forward to do it; but, 
instead of that, you have been the to dishonour 
me. Had undutifulness been found among the igno- 
rant people, it might have been, in some measure, 
excusable; but you, whose calling and business it is 
to know, love, and serve me, are — 

- (168? ) 


7 > eee ue 


. 


The Jews reproved for their neglect 


CHAPTER I. 


and profanation of God’s worship. 


persons? saith the Lorn of hosts. 


so. my fear? saith the Lorp of hosts)|7 by your means: will he regard your A. M 3604. 
unto you, O priests, that despise my Ie 
name. £ And ye say, Wherein have we de- 


spised thy name ? 

7 *Ye offer polluted bread upon mine 
altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted 
thee? In that ye say, ‘ The table of the Lorp 
is contemptible. 

8 And “if ye offer the blind ° fer sacrifice, is 
i¢ not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, 
is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor ; 
will he be pleased with thee, or } accept thy per- 
son? saith the Lorn of hosts. 

9 And now, I pray you, beseech * God that 
he will be gracious unto us: ™this hath been 


10 Who is there even among you that would 
shut the doors for naught? *neither do ye 
kindle fire on mine altar for naught. I have 
no pleasure in you, saith the Lorp of hosts, 
°neither will I accept an offering at your 
hand. 

11 For, ? from the rising of the sun even 
unto the going down of the same, my name 
shall be great Yamong the Gentiles; ‘and in 
every place ‘incense shall be offered unto my 
name, and a pure offering: * for my name shall 
be great among the heathen, saith the Lorp of 
hosts. 


s Chapter ii. 14,17; iii. 7, 8, 13. 4 Or, Bring unto, &c. 
h Deut. xv. 21.——‘ Ezekiel xli. 22; Verse 12. k Lev. xxii. 
22; Deut. xv. 21; Verse 14. 5 'Heb. to sacrifice ——! Job 
xlii. 8. —* Heb. the face of God. . 


cause, like Eli’s sons, you have despised me your- 
selves, and made others do so too. The prophet 
adds, that perhaps they would have the assurance 
to pretend they had not done it, and to ask in 
what particular such a charge could be alleged 
against them? if so, he would enumerate the particu- 
lars to them, which he does accordingly in the fol- 
lowing verses. 

Verses 7,8. Ye offer polluted bread wpon mine 
altar—By this seems to be meant, the bread- 
offering, or the cake of fine flour, which was to be 
offered with the continual sacrifice in the morning 
and evening of every day. By being polluted is to 
be understood, that it was not such as the law re- 
quired. They diminished something, either in the 
quality or quantity of what the law commanded them 
to offer; either the bread was not made of good flour, 
or mixed with the required quantity of good oil. And 
ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee?—Or dis- 
honoured, or had thee in contempt? The answer is 
ready, In that ye say, T'he table of the Lord is con- 
temptible—Y ou pretend, as a cover for your avarice, 
that the table or altar of the Lord is despised among 
the people, and that therefore they do not bring to 
it, by way of offering, that quantity of flour and oil 
which they should. Or the meaning is, By your ac- 
tions you declare how little value you have for the 
worship of God, since you care not in how slight 
and contemptuous a manner it is performed. And 
if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil?— 
The beasts to be offered were required to be perfect 
and without blemish, Lev. xxii. 21, 22. Offer it now 
tothy governor ; will he be pleased with thee?—Wilt 
thou be acceptable or welcome unto him, bringing 
him such a worthless present? It argues a great 
contempt of Almighty God, when men are less 
careful in maintaining the decencies of his worship 
than they are in giving proper respect to their supe- 
rlors. 

Verses 9,10. And now, I pray you, beseech God, 

3 


m Hos. xiii. 9.——"Heb. from your hand.—* 1 Cor. ix. 13. 
°Tsa.i. 11; Jer. vi. 20; Amos v. 21. P Psa. exili.3; Isaiah 
lix. 19.4 Isaiah lx. 3, 5.—" John iv. 21, 23; 1 Tim. ii. 8. 
5 Rev. viii. 3. Isa. Ixvi. 19, 20. 


&c.—And now I beseech you, (for you cannot deny ~ 


that ye have done as I have said,) that you would 
supplicate God to pardon the nation in general, as 
well as yourselves, for what offences have been com- 
mitted against his laws; for ye have been the prin- 
cipal cause of them, by the disregard you had for 
God’s service. Willheregard your persons ?—This 
ought rather to be rendered, Jf, perhaps, he may re- 
gard your persons. Who among you would shut the 
doors for naught2—All those pretences which you 
make use of to excuse yourselves, for presenting unto 
God improper and worthless offerings, are quite vain, 
for it is plain that a general avarice prevails, and is 
practised among you; for even the officers, or minis- 
ters, whose duty it is to open and shut the doors of 


the temple, and to kindle fire on the altar, will not. 


perform their office without making a gain of it, or 
receiving fees for it. Thaveno pleasure in you, saith 
the Lord—I cannot take pleasure in men so intent 
upon their own profit as ye are; and under the gos- 
pel I will put an end both to your priesthood and the 
sacrifices which youoffer. This is implied in the next 
verse. . 
Verse 11. For fromthe rising of the sun, §c., my 
name shall be great among the Gentiles—You may 
perhaps think, if I will not accept an offering from 
your hands, that I shall have none; but in this you 
err greatly ; for know that my name shall be great, 


or highly reverenced, among all the nations of the © 


earth, who will worship me, not as you do, as if it 
were a labour for which they ought to be paid; but 
with pure minds, inflamed with love toward me and 
zeal for my glory. And in every place incense shall 
be offered to my name—Prayers and praises shall be 
presented before me as incense. For here the pro- 
phet describes the Christian sacrifice of praise and 
thanksgiving by the outward rites of the Jewish wor- 
ship: see note on Zech. xiv. 16. Indeed, incense 
was considered by the Jews themselves as a figure 
or emblem of prayer and praise: see Psa, cxli. 2 
1075 e 


wee, 


The Jews reproved for their neglect 


A, M. 3604, 


B. C. 400. i? But ye have profaned it, in that 


ye say, " The table of the Lorp is 
polluted ; and the fruit thereof, even his meat, 
is contemptible. 

18 Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness 
is it! Sand ye have snuffed at it, saith the 
Lorp of hosts; and ye brought that which was 
torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye 


MALACHI. 


and profanation of God’s worship. 


brought an offering: * should I accept A. oe 
this of your hand? saith the Lornp, .———— 

14 4 But cursed be ¥ the deceiver, * which 
hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and 
sacrificeth unto the Lorp a corrupt thing: for 
I am a great King, saith the Lorp of hosts, 
and my name is dreadful among the hea- 
then. 


«Verse 7.—* Or, whereas ye might have blown it away. 
x Lev. xxii. 20. 


Luke i. 10. This spiritual service, the prophet says, 
shall be offered in every place, whereas the Jewish 
worship was confined to the temple. The words of 
Christ, John iv. 21, 22, are a good commentary upon 
this text; where to worship in spiri¢ is opposed to 
the carnal ordinances of the Jewish service, such as 
meats and drinks and bloody sacrifices, or to mere 
external worship; and in truth, to the types and 
ceremonies of the Mosaic law, which were only 
shadowy representations of things to come. And a 
pure offering—Namely, the offering of prayer and 
praise, of faith, love and obedience, of the heart and 
life, the body and soul, to be dedicated to and. em- 
ployed for God. Such, also, are the oblations of real 
Christians for the support of God’s worship, the 
maintenance of a gospel] ministry, or the relief of the 
poor. Thus, in this verse, two important points of 
our religion are declared in the fullest manner: the 
abolition of the sacrifices and ceremonies of the an- 
cient law, and the pure and spiritual nature of the 
Christian worship and service. 

Verses 12, 13. But ye—O priests, and the people, 
by your example; have profaned it—Namely, my 
great name. You have used it as a common thing, 
and as of no importance or consideration. In that ye 
say—Namely, by your deportment; T'he table of 
the Lord is polluted—Not a sacred thing, or a thing 
to be revered; and the fruit thereof, his meat, is 
contemptible—Kither the meat which fell to the 
priests’ share, or the portion which was laid upon 
the altar. They were neither pleased with that 
which the Lord reserved for himself, nor with that 
which he gave to them, but they found fault with 
both ; the latter, in particular, they termed contempt- 
ible, a poor, sordid allowance, scarce fit for meaner 
persons and less service. Ye said also—Tothesins 
before mentioned, the priests chiefly, and the people 


y Ver. 8.— Or, in whose flock is——* Psalm xlvii. 2; 1 Tim 
vi. 15. 


with them, added this also, that they openly com- 
plained of God’s service. Behold what a weariness 
—What a toil and drudgery is it to observe every 

oint of the law! Ye have complained of the con- 
stant attendance upon my altar as a wearisome em- 
ployment. And ye have snuffed—Have expressed 
your disgust, at it. And ye have brought that which 
was torn—Ye have brought into the temple, for 
victims, that which had been torn by wild beasts, 
&c. It was forbidden even to eat in common that 
which had been torn, Exod. xxii. 31, and therefore 
nothing could show higher contempt than to bring 
such things for offerings to God. 

Verse 14. But cursed be the deceiver—The hypo- 
crite, that deceives man, and seems as if he would 
be glad to deceive God; the false heart, that intends 
one thing and pretends another, would appear to 
offer a sacrifice of the best, but puts God off with 
the worst. Which hath in his flock a male—A per- 
fect male, such as God requireth; and sacrificeth 
unto the Lord a corrupt thing—Such as the Lord 
hath declared he will not accept. The former re- 
proofs related only to the priests; here the prophet 
reproves those in general who showed a contempt 
of God by vowing unto him, upon any occasion, the 
worst of their flock. It seems to be spoken of such 
offerings as any of the people, of their own accord, 
vowed to God: see Lev. xxii. 19. And if they did 
not think fit to vow such things as God directed, 
they would have done less dishonour to him not to 
have vowed at all. For J ama great King, saith 
the Lord, and my name is, or shall be, dreadful—As 
God is the great King over all the earth, and will be 
acknowledged as such among the Gentiles under the 
gospel, (verse 11,) so men’s religious services ought 
to be performed with a reverence suitable to the 
greatness of his majesty. 


CHAPTER IL. 


In this chapter, (1,) The prophet reproves the priests for profaning the holy things of God, and neglecting to instruct the 
people, 1-10. (2,) He rebukes both priests and people for various abuses with regard to the marriage of strange wives 


and divorces, 11-17. 
1076 


* 


The priests CHAPTER II. reproved and threatened. 
Ph 04, AND now, O ye priests, this com-};might be with Levi, saith the Lorp A. i. Me 


mandment ts for you. 

2 “If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it 
to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the 
Lorp of hosts, I will even send a curse upon 
you, and I will curse your blessings ; yea, I have 
cursed them already, because ye do not lay i¢ to 
heart. 

3 Behold, I will ‘corrupt your seed, and 
2 spread dung upon your faces, even the dung 
of your solemn feast; and *one shall » take 
you away with it. 

4 And ye shall know that I have sent this 
commandment unto you, that my covenant 


of hosts. | eaten ie =| 

5 © My covenant was with him of life and 
peace; and I gave them to him ¢ for the fear 
wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before 
my name. 

6 ° The law of truth was in his mouth, and 
iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked 
with mein peace and equity, and did ‘turn 
many away from iniquity. 

7 For the priest’s lips should keep know- 
ledge, and they should seek the law at his 
mouth: © for he is the messenger of the Lorp 
of hosts. 


a Lev. xxvi. 14; Deut. xxviii. 15. 1 Or, reprove. 2 Heb. 
scatter.—— Or, it shall take you away to it. > | Kings xiv. 10, 
¢ Num. xxv. 12; Ezek. xxxiv. 25; xxxvii. 26. 


4 Deut. xxxiii. 8, 9. © Deut. xxxiii. 10.— Jer. xxiii. 22; 
James v. 20,—s Deut. xvii. 9, 10; xxiv. 8; Lev. x. 11; Ezra 
vii. 10; Jer. xviii. 18; Hag. ii. 11, 12—» Gal. iv. 14. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER II. 
' Verses 1-4. O ye priests, this commandment is 
Sor you—Or decree, rather, for properly speaking no 
commandment is here given to the priests, only pun- 
‘ishment is denounced upon them if they did not re- 
pent. 


ed, by your irreverent performance of my service, 


chap. i.6. J will send a curse upon you—I will | 


send poverty and affliction upon you, and you shall 
not prosper in any thing. And I will curse your 
blessings—I will turn your blessings into curses, or 
rather, remove your blessings and send curses.and 
calamities in their stead; behold, I will corrupt 
your. seed—The seed wherewith you sow your 
ground: I will cause it to rot so that it shall bring 
forth little or nothing. And spread dung upon your 


Jfaces—I will make you as contemptible and vile as | 
if some one had covered your faces with filth and | 


dung. And one shall take you away with it—You 
shall be cast out of the temple as so many nuisances, 
only fit to be removed out of sight. 
know that I have sent this commandment unto you— 
By the punishment which will follow upon your ne- 
glecting to lay what hath been said to heart, and to 
give glory unto my name, as you are here enjoined: 
see verses1,2. That my covenant might be with 


If ye will not hear, §c., to give glory unto| 
my name—W hich you have despised and dishonour- | 


And ye shall | 


Levi—That the covenant which I made with the 
tribe of Levi, that they should be mine, and employ- | 
ed in my service, might continue firm to their pos- | 
terity. Some render the clause, Because my cove-| 


nant was with Levi, for the breach of which you | 
are accountable. 

Verses 5, 6. My covenant was with him—The | 
prophet here speaks of the succession of the ancient | 
priests, such as Aaron, Eleazar, Phineas, and their | 
successors, as of one single person, under the name | 
of Levi, (see Zech. xi. 16,) and says, I gave him my 
covenant of life and peace, or of happiness and se-_ 
curity; or I promised him a secure enjoyment of | 
his office of the priesthood, on his due administra- 
tion of his office before me. The words allude to 

3 : 


s 


Num. xxv. 12, 13, where God says concerning Phi- 
neas, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace, 
and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even 
the covenant of an everlasting priesthood ; because 
he was zealous for his God, and made an atone- 
ment, &ce. Or, as it is here expressed, For the fear 
wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my 
name—Here God declares what was the foundation 
of the terms upon which he entered into this cove- 
nant with Phineas and his successors in the priest- 
hood, namely, an awful reverence of him, and zeal 
for his honour and service. The law of truth, &e. 
—In this verse is described how Phineas and others, 
who were his successors in piety as well as in the 
priesthood, behaved in their office: and Ist, The 
law of truth was in his mouth—He taught the peo- 
ple that which was agreeable to the divine laws, that 
is, Aaron, Eleazar, Phineas did this; and every one 
of those priests or Levites, in whatever age they 
lived, who feared God and were obedient to him. 
2d, Iniquity was not found in his lips—He neither 
liv ed himself in any known sin, nor did he mix any 
thing with the instructions he gave the people which 
was false, and calculated to mislead them, but de- 
clared to them the pure word of God, or the divine 
laws, without any false glosses or comments. The 
words may also mean, He judged, without respect 
of persons, in all the causes between man and man 
which came before him. 3d, He walked with mein 
peace and equity—He made my word the rule, and 
my glory the end of all his actions, and discharged 
his duty with fidelity and care, maintaining peace 
|) with me, and endeavouring to live peaceably with all 
men. And, 4th, Did turn many away from iniqut- 
ty—He was not content with being pious and vir- 
tuous himself, but endeavoured, by his instructions 
and admonitions, to make others pious and virtuous, 

Verses 7-9. For the priest’s lips should keep 
knowledge—Preserve and store up, so as to distri- 
bute it. Itis his duty to understand the meaning of 
the law of God: and people ought to resort to him 
for instruction in any difficulty that arises concern- 


“« 


ral 


s 


* 


‘ 


Y ° 


The people reproved for 


MALACHI. 


marrying strange women. 


A.M, 


3604, — 
B.C. 400. ‘8 But ye are departed out of the 


way; ye ‘have caused niany to 
*stumble at the law; * ye have corrupted the 
covenant of Levi, saith the Lorp of hosts. 

9 Therefore ‘have I also made you con- 
temptible and base before all the people, ac- 
cording as ye have not kept my ways, but 
5 have® been partial in the law. 

10 4 “Have we not all one father? " hath 
not one God created us? why do we deal 
treacherously every man against his brother, by 
profaning the covenant of our fathers ? 


i1 Samuel ii. 17; Jeremiah xviii. 15. * Or, fall in the law. 
& Neh. xiii. 29-——1 1 Samuel ii. 30.——* Or, lifted up the face 
against. ® Heb. accepted faces. 


ing the sense of it. For he is the messenger of the 
Lord of hosts—He is appointed to declare God’s 
will unto the people, and to enforce upon them obe- 
dience to it. But ye are departed out of the way— 
Ye act in a quite different manner from that which 
was the original design of your office, and which 
those observed who were first instituted into it. Ye 
have caused many to stumble at the law—You have 
either perverted the sense of the law, or encouraged 
others to break it by your bad example; ye have 
corrupted the covenant of Levi—By your evil prac- 
tices you have broken or rendered void that cove- 
nant: by your not performing that part of the cove- 
nant which the tribe of Levi was bound to perform, 


you have disengaged me from performing my part, | 


or fulfilling those promises which I had engaged to 
make good to them on the performance of certain 
conditions on their side. Zherefore have JI also 
made—Or rather, will make, (a future event being 
evidently foretold,) you contemptible and base—The 
indignities which the priests were to receive in the 
times of Antiochus, seem to be here intended. Ac- 
cording as ye have not kept my ways—Have not 
been careful to walkin them. But have been par- 
tial in the law—Or, accepted faces, or persons, in 
the law, as the Hebrew signifies, that is, have wrest- 
ed the sense of the law in favour, or to please great 
men, or to serve some unworthy design of particular 
persons. 

contempt of the clergy,” ought we to forget this? 
Verse 10. Have we not all one father?—Here a 
new section begins, wherein the prophet severely 
censures: the intermarriages of Israelites with wo- 
men of another country, which Moses had forbidden, 
Deut. vii. 3; and also divorces, which seem to have 
been multiplied for the purpose of contracting these 
prohibited marriages. The former of these evils 
was much practised in Ezra’s and Nehemiah’s time, 
who expressed great detestation of it: Ezra ix. 1; 
Neh. xiii. 23... The prophet begins his expostulation 
with putting them in mind that they were not only 
descended from one progenitor, Abraham, or Jacob, 
with whom God made the covenant by which their 
posterity were constituted a peculiar people; but 
they owned one God and Father, in opposition to 
1078 ; 


% 


| 


| 


11 Judah hath dealt treacherously, A. M. 3604. 

ane : 3 = BB, ©, 400. 

and an abomination is committed in ——W—— 

Israel and in Jerusalem ; for Judah hath pro- 

faned the holiness of the Lorp which he 

loved, °and hath married the daughter of a 
strange god. 

12 The Lorn will cut off the man that doeth 
this, ®the master and the scholar, out of the 
tabernacle of Jacob, ? and him that offereth an 
offering unto the Lorp of hosts. 

13 4 And this have ye done again, covering 
the altar of the Lorp with tears, with weep- 


m1] Cor. viii. 6; Eph. iv. 6——* Job xxxi. 15.——’ Or, ought 
to love. © Ezra ix. 1; x.2; Neh. xiii. 23——® Or, him that 
waketh and him that answereth——P Neh. xiii. 28, 29. 


the idols of the heathen, and therefore should deal 
with one another as brethren, being nearly allied by 
a spiritual as well as fleshly relation. Why do we 
deal treacherously, §c., profaning the covenant of 
our fathers?—By these marriages with strangers, 
we deal falsely and injuriously with our countrymen 
and brethren, by the ill treatment of their daughters 
or sisters, whom we took to marriage, (see verse 14,) 
and we violate that covenant which God made with 
our fathers, whereby he separated us from the rest 
of the world, and, in order to preserve that distine- 
| tion, forbade us to intermarry with idolaters. 

Verses 11-13. Judah hath profaned the holiness 
of the Lord which he loved—As if he had said, 
“This sin,” says Lowth, “ implies the profanation of 
God’s holy people, which he set apart for his own 
worship and service; a profanation of the temple, 
when the priests who officiated there were guilty of 
| the same crime; (see verse 12;) and lastly, a profana- 
tion of that covenant God made with the Jews, verse 
/10; God hath expressed a tender regard for these 
three sorts of holiness, and threatened severe pun- 
ishments to those that break the laws made to pre- 
serve them.” And hath married the daughter of a 
strange god—That is, one who worships a strange 
god. For as gods were called fathers by their wor- 


! 
| 


|, shippers, (Jer. ii. 27,) therefore those who worship- 


ped them might properly be called their children. 
When we inquire into “the reasons of the | 


The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this—Will 
take him away by death; the master and the scholar 
—Him that persuades and instructs others that these 
marriages are lawful, and him that follows such ad- 
vice. The expression seems. to comprehend both 
the priest and the people. The Hebrew is, he that 
wakes and he that answers. An instructer is de- 
| scribed, (Isa. 1. 4,) as one that wakeneth the ear of 
| his disciple. The meaning is, there shall be left 
neither any to teach nor any to learn. And him 
that offereth an offering—Although he should make 
great offerings, yet that would avail him nothing if 
he continued in his sin, and did not put away his 
strange wife. Perhaps this might be intended 
chiefly of the priests, many of whom were guilty 


of this crime. And this have ye done—Or, “This ~ 


also you have done: you have covered the il 


\° 


. 
eed a, sf 
pa 


The people are reproved 


CHAPTER II. 


Sor their cruel divorces. 


nye ing, and with crying out, insomuch 
.C.400. : 
——— that he regardeth not the offering 
any more, or receiveth i¢ with good-will at 
your hand. 

14 Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the 
Lorp hath been witness between thee and 
%the wife of thy youth, against whom thou 
hast dealt treacherously : * yet is she thy com- 
panion, and the wife of thy covenant. 

15 And *did not he make one? Yet had he 
the °residue of the Spirit. And wherefore 
one? ‘That he might seek 'at godly seed. 
Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let 


4 Proy. v. 18.— Prov. ii. 17.——* Matt. xix. 4, 5. © Or, 
excellency——"® Heb. a seed of God.——* Ezra ix. 2; 1 Cor. vii. 
14.—" Or, unfaithfully. 


the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with groan- 
ings; so that no respect is now had to your offering, 
nor is any thing accepted from your hand. The 
priests not only had married strange wives, but also 
had divorced those of their own country whom they 
had married; with whose tears the altar was imbued, 
when these wives offered up their sacrifices to God, 
entreating him to give their husbands a better mind; 
whom God heard so effectually, that he would not 
accept the sacrifices of their husbands on account of 
the tears and just complaints of their wives.”—Hou- 
bigant. The complaints of the distressed, if made 
known to God in prayer, will be heard, and redress 
granted. 

Verses 14, 15. Yet ye say, Wherefore—Ye will, 
perhaps, still inquire wherefore God regards not 
your offerings; if so, the answer is ready, namely, 
because the Lord hath been witness between thee and 
the wife of thy youth—Because the Lord sees how 
you act toward your wives; that when you have 
enjoyed the flower of their youth, and they begin to 
grow old, you contemn them, and use them ill. Yet 
is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant 


—Yet didst thou thyself make choice of her to be!! 


thy companion through life; and didst enter into 
covenant or contract with her, to live with her in 
true love and affection. And did not he make one, 
&e.—* Among various interpretations of the words,” 
says Lowth, “this seems the most probable, that the 
prophet puts the Jews in mind of the first institution 
of marriage in paradise, (as Christ did afterward 
upon a like occasion, Matt. xix. 5,) and tells them 


God made but one man at first, and made the woman | 


out of him, when he could have created more wo- 
men if he had pleased; to instruct men that this was 
the true pattern of marriage, ordained for true love 
and undivided affection, and best serving the chief 
end of matrimony, namely, the religious education 
of children, whereas in polygamy, the children are 


none deal “ treacherously against the ay 
wife of his youth. ; ne 

16 For "the Lorn, the God of Israel, saith . 
® that he hateth } putting away : for one cover- 
eth violence with his garment, saith the Lorp 
of hosts : therefore take heed to your spirit, that 
ye deal not treacherously. 

17 4 “Ye have wearied the Lorp with your 
words. Yet ye say, Wherein have we wea- 
ried him? When ye say, Every one that 
doeth evil zs good in the sight of the Lorn, 
and he delighteth in them; or, Where is the 
God of judgment ? 


uDeut. xxiv. 1; Matt. v. 32; xix. 8, 
put her away.—t Heb. to put away. 
11. 13; Chap. iii, 13, 14, 15. 


12 Or, if he hate her, 
x Isa. xlili. 24; Amos 


brought up with more or less care in proportion to 
the affection men bear to their wives.” Jherefore 
take heed to your spirit—Do not give way to an in- 
ordinate and irregular passion. 

Verse 16. For the Lord God of Israel saith that 
he hateth putling away—He allowed the Jews liber- 
ty of divoree only for the hardness of their hearts, 
| Matt. xix. 8, not that it was a thing pleasing to him. 
| For one covereth violence with his garment—Or, 
And when one puts violence upon his garment, or 
covers his garment with violence, as Dr. Pocock 
| translates it, who hath given the clearest sense of 
this phrase, and showed, out of several eastern 
| writers, that they usually call a wife by the name 
of a garment; the expression of Moses, Deut. xxii. 
30, agreeing with this way of speaking. According 
to this interpretation, the sense of the text will be, 
that God hates divorcing a former wife to take in one 
of astrange nation: and he hates that any should 
bring into his family an illegitimate wife, over and 
| above one that he had legally married before. 

Verse 17. Ye have wearied the Lord with your 
| words—You have tired his patience by your blas- 
| phemous speeches, charging his providence with in- 
justice. Yet ye say—Ye persist to say; Wherein 
have we wearied him?—See on chap. i.6. When 
ye say—When your discourse and reasoning tend 
to overthrow (if it were possible) all piety and mo- 
rality; while you affirm, Every one that doeth evil 
| is good in the sight of God—A repetition of the old 
objection against providence, taken from the pros- 
| perity of the wicked, which implied, as they thought, 
| either that their works were pleasing to God, or else 
|| that he disregarded human affairs, and would never 
|| call men to account for their actions; and he de- 
| lighteth inthem—As appears, said these atheists, by 
his prospering them. Or, Where is the God of 
judgment ?—If he is in the world, judging and go- 
| verning it, why does he not punish these men ? 
1079 


: 


¢ 


. . * 


The coming of Christ 


Tnsthi 

‘ 
© Potlato 
with a solemn charge to them to repent and amend, and 
7-12, 


_ such as spake for him, 13-18. 


ae a EHOLD, ?I will send my mes- 
eg ts ‘ senger, and he shall ° prépare the 


Matt. xi. 10; Mark i.2; Luke i. 76; vii. 27. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER III. 

Verse 1. Behold, &c.—To silence the cavils of 
unbelievers, spoken of in the last verse of the pre- 
ceding chapter, the prophet here foretels the coming 
of the Messiah, who should set things in order; and 
of his harbinger, who should prepare men for his re- | 
ception. J will send my messenger—It is God who | 
speaks here, for John the Baptist, who is here in- 
tended, was God’s messenger, and had his commis- 
sion from heaven and not of men, Matt. xxi. 25, 26; 
being sent by the same divine authority by which 
the prophets were sent, and for the same purposes, 
namely, to call men to repentance and reformation ; 
and he shall prepare the way before me—Before 
Jehovah, the fulness of whose Godhead dwelt in | 
Christ bodily. Whoever compares this verse with 
Isa. xl. 3, &c., will easily see that both passages speak 
of the same person. The messenger here spoken of 
as sent to prepare the way before the Lord, who is 
described as coming immediately after this his fore- 
runner, is represented in Isaiah as preparing the 
way of the Lord, who is spoken of as coming, and 
his glory as just ready to be revealed, verses 5-9, 
Both passages, according to the evangelists, were in- 


MALACHI. 


tended of John the Baptist, and indeed are applica- 
ble to no other person whatever. He is promised 
under the name of Elias in the following chapter, 
whom all the Jews, both ancient and modern, ex- 
pected should come as the forerunner of the Mes- 
siah. This messenger, or prophet, (see the note on 
chap. ii. 7,) here represented as the Lord’s harbin- 
ger, was to be as much inferior to the Lord himself, 
as servants are to a great person, of whose arrival | 
they give notice. This John himself often confess- 
ed, Matt. iii. 11; John i. 26, and iii, 28; andso much 
appears by the following words.. Instead of the | 
reading here, which is the literal translation of the | 
Hebrew, we read in three places of the New Testa-_ 
ment, (see the margin,) J send my messenger before 
thy face lo prepare thy way before thee, namely, 
before the Messiah, to prepare his way before him ;) 
the Messiah acting in the name of his Father, the i 
Father being inhim and he in the Father, John xiv. | 
10, 11. John prepared the way of Christ by calling || 
mento the practicé of those duties which would || 
qualify them for the reception of the blessings of the 
Messial’s kingdom; and by taking them off from 
all confidence in their relation to Abraham as their 
father, which they thought would ensure the favour 
of God to them without a Saviour; and by giving 


them notice that the Messiah was now at hand, and ,, hold, he shall come— 


1080 


and his forerunner. 


CHAPTER III. , 


chapter we have, (1,) A promise of the coming of the Messiah, and of his forerunner, with the cond thereof, 
saints and sinners, 1-6. (2,) A reproof of the Jews for corrupting God’s ordinances, and robbing him of his"dues, 


a promise, if they did, God would return in mercy to them, 


(3,) A description of the wickedness of such as spake against God, and of the righteousness and blessedness of 


4, 


way before me: and the Lorp, whom - 7 


ye seek, shall suddenly come to his 


b Isaiah xl. 3. 


so raising their expectation of him that they might 
readily enter into his measures for the setting up of 
his kingdom in the world. 

And the Lord, whom ye seek—That promised Lord 
or Shiloh, of whom you have such great expecta- 
tions, and whose coming you so much desire; and 
who, if you obey him, will bring the greatest good 
to your state, and will also make foreign nations par- 
takers of your blessings; shall suddenly come—That 
is, soon after the messenger, or unawares, as Christ’s 
first coming was, and second will be; to his temple 
—The second temple at Jerusalem, lately built by 
Zerubbabel and Joshua. All the Jews, before the © 
birth of Christ, firmly believed that the Messiah was 
to come into that very temple, according to what the 
Prophet Haggai had expressly declared, chap. ii. 8. 
The word here rendered Lord, }\78, is the same that 
is used by David, Psa. cx. 1, where he calls the Mes- 
siah his Lord, and properly means a basis, or found- 
ation, and also a proprietor, and governor. It isa 
term peculiarly proper to Christ, who is at once the 
foundation and governor of his church, and was the _ 
Lord of that temple in which he was to make his 
appearance. Even the messenger [or angel] of the 
covenant—A phrase, says Secker, found nowhere 
else in Scripture. “It may mean the person by 
whose intervention the covenant is made, or by - 
whom a covenant proposed by one party is sent to 
the other.” The same person is meant who is termed 
the angel of God’s presence, Isa. Ixiii. 9; who deliv- 
ered the law upon mount Sinai, as St. Stephen 
speaks, Acts vii. 38, and as the apostle’s words im- 
ply, Heb. xii. 25, 26. He is both the revealer and 
mediator of the new covenant, which the prophets 


foretold would take place under the Messiah, Jer. 


xxxi. 31; Isa. xlii. 6, and lv. 3; even that blessed one 
that was sent from heaven to negotiate a peace and 
settle a correspondence between God and man; 


commissioned from his Father to bring man home 
/to God by a covenant of grace, who had revolted 


from him by the violation of the covenant of inno- 
cence. By his mediation this covenant is procured 
and established; and though he is the prince of the 
covenant, as some read the clause here, yet he conde- 
scended to be the messenger of it, that we might, upon ~ 
his word, have the fullest assurance of God’s good- 
will te man. Whom ye delight in—Whose coming 
ye so much desire, the time of it being the subject 
of your earnest inquiry and diligent seareh, and the 


expectation of it your comfort and delight. Be- 


The promise is repeated, and — 
af Sa 


a 


.©Isa, xiii. 9.4 Hag, ii. 7, 


A promise of the 


CHAPTER III. 


ae 


B.C. temple, * even the messenger of the 


covenant, whom ye delight in: be- 

hold, the shall come, saith the hoan of hosts. 

2 But who may abide °the day of his 

coming? and ‘who shall stand when he 

appeareth? for ®he is like a refiner’s fire, and 
like fuller’s soap. 

3 And "he shall sit as a refiner and purifier 


© Chap. iv. 1 —— Rev. vi. 17. 
&Isa. iv. 4; Matt. iii. 10, 11, 12. 

that in the name of the Lord of hosts, to give the 
fullest assurance of its accomplishment. There 
were few among the Jews who did not please them- 
selves to think of the Messiah’s coming, though from 
various motives; the pious among them doubtless 
expecting spiritual blessings, such as a further reve- 
lation of God’s will, and larger communications of 
his grace and Spirit; but the great bulk of the nation 
looking for mere worldly advantages under a tempo- 
ral kingdom, which they expected he would set up. 

Verse 2. But who may abide the day of his com- 
ing—The LXX. read, tig vaopever nuepav evcods ave, 
who shall be able to bear the day of his coming? So 
also the Chaldee. “Quare hoe?” “Why this?” 
says Grotius: “ Because he himself shall bear the 
cross, that he may come to the kingdom, and shall 
show the same way to his followers.” The day of 
his coming, with respect to the Jews, includes all the 
time from the beginning of his preaching, to the to- 
tal destruction of their temple and city by the Ro- 
mans: and his coming, here and in several other 
places, comprehends all the effects and consequences 


of his coming, as well the judgments which arose | 


from it to the disobedient, as the mercy that flowed 
from it to the obedient. So that the meaning of the 
question is, Who shall be able to stand under the 
weight of those trials and tribulations which at that 
time will fall on all sorts of men? great crosses being 
to be borne by the believing and pious, and great 
calamities to be endured by the unbelieving and re- 


fractory. In the same light John the Baptist repre- 
sents the effects of Christ’s coming, Matt. iii. 7-12, 


Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to 
come? meaning, primarily, the wrath about to come 
on that rebellious people: whose fan, he adds, is in 
his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, 
and burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. For 
he is like a refiner’s fire—As if he had said, Some 
men are like metals, mixed with much dross, which 
nothing but.a fierce fire can purge away. Such a 
fire shall the troubles of these days be. The divine 
judgments are often called a fiery trial, such as sepa- 
rates the pure metal from the dross, purifying the 
former and consuming the latter. See Isa. i. 25; iv. 
4; Zech. xiii. 9. @ur Lord is to be understood in 
the same sense Luke xii. 49, where he says, J 
am come to send fire upon the earth, namely, a fire 
of trial and purgation, to try and purify the hearts |, 
and reins of men, and find out and separate the good 
from the bad ; like as the refiner’s fire makes the 
2 uy 


}and even well pleasing to him. 


of silver: and he shall purify the sons A. M. 
of Levi, and purge them as gold and 5 
silver, that they may ‘offer unto the Lorp an © 
offering in righteousness. . 

4 Then * shall the offering of Judah and 
Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lorp, as in the 
days of old, and as in ? former years. 

5 And I will. come near to you to judgment ; 


hTsaiah i. 25; Zech. xiii. 9——i1 Peter ii. 5 ——* Chap. i. 11. 
1 Or, ancient. - " 


dross of the metal to appear and fly off. And like 
fuller’s soap—The word n2, here rendered soap, 
and Jer. ii. 22, according to St. Jerome, was an herb 
growing in Palestine, which the fullers used to take 
spots out of clothes. 

Verses 3,4. And he shall sit as a refiner—He 
shall be diligently employed in his office, in perform- 
ing which he shall resemble a refiner and purifier 
of silver. And he shall purify the sons of Levi— 
And whereas the wan, of the sons of Levi 
has been very great, (particularly of those who have 
been taken notice of and reproved in the foregoing 
chapters,) the Messiah when he comes will reform 
these abuses, and purify the worship of God from 
such corruptions. And purge them as gold and 
silver—The effect of this fiery trial, and purifying 
furnace, shall be the thorough cleansing of the per- 
sons that are to pass through it. Not all the sons 


| of Levi, says Houbigant, “ for the similitude is taken 
» Say gant, 


from gold and silver, which being purified there 
remains some dross behind. So it happened after 
the ministration of Jesus Christ: a great company 
of the priests were obedient to the faith, Acts. vi. '7. 
Of the other sons of Levi, who did not believe in 
Christ, it is just before said, Who may abide the 
day of his coming, when, the metal being purified, 
he will cast the dross into the fire.” But those who 
should minister in holy things in the Christian 
Church, instead of the Levitical priests, are chiefly 
intended: or rather, all real Christians, who are 
made a holy priesthood, and who, with hearts and 
minds purified by faith, offer up spiritual sacrifices 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Peter ii. 53 
yea, who even offer themselves, their souls and bo- 
dies, their faculties and members, their time and 
talents, all they are and have, unto the Lord an. of- 
fering in righteousness. Then shall the offering 
of Judah and Jerusalem—The services and duties 
of the Christian. ministry, and of the whole Chris- 
tian Church ; be pleasant unto the Lord—Acceptable 
The prophet de- 
scribes the Christian worship, and the various ser- 
| vices of the Christian Church, and of its true mem- 
bers, by expressions taken from the Jewish service, 
being that with which they were acquainted; as in 
the days of old—As in the purest ages of the patri- 
archal or Mosaic dispensation, or, as in the times of 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, David. 

Verse b. And T will come near lo you to judg- 
ment—In answer to theirdemand, Where vs the God 

1081 : 


A reproof of the Jews 
, an 


MALACHI. 


Sor their infidelity. ' 


A.M. 3604. and I will be a swift witness against 
=a > the sorcerers, and against the adulte- 
‘rers, ‘and against false swearers, and against 
those that * oppress the hireling in his wages, 
the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn 
aside the stranger from his right, and fear not 
me, saith the Lorp of hosts. 
6 For Iam the Lorn, ™ I change not; ™ there- 
fore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. 

7 4 Even from the days of ° your fathers ye 


' Zech. v. 4; James v. 4, 12. 2 Or, defrawd.——™ Num. xxiii. 
19; Rom. xi. 29; James i. 17. 


of judgment? chap. ii. 17, God here tells them that 
he will hasten the time of judgment, and it shall come 
speedily upon them, on account of those sins that 
Were general among them: and that if they did not 
repent, and reform their conduct upon the preaching 
of the gospel by the forerunner of the Messiah, the 
Messiah himself, and his apostles and other servants, | 
he would proceed to the utter excision of their na- 
tion. And I will be a swift witness, &e.—It be- 
longs to God alone to be both witness and judge; 


for he alone seeth all the actions of men, and need- 
eth not that any should testify against them, because 
he can himself convict them of their guilt, as hav- | 
ing been present and looking on when their most 

secret sins were committed. Against the sorcerers, | 
and against the adulterers, &c.—The sins enume- 
rated in this verse were very prevalent in Malachi’s 
time. Diviners, dreamers, and such as consulted 
oracles at the idols’ temples, are reproved, Zech. x. 
2; as are the false pretenders to prophecy, Nehemi- 
ah vi. 12-14, False swearing and oppression are 
complained of, Zech. v. 4; Nehemiah v. 3, &e. 
Their marrying strange women, and putting away 
their former wives to make room: for them, was no 
better than adultery, and a breach of that solemn 
oath with which they had bound themselves, Nehe- 
miah x. 29, 30. And the same sins seem to have | 
been commonly practised before and at the time of | 
Christ’s appearance, till the destruction of Jerusalem. 
No nation was more given to charms, divinations, | 
and fortune-telling, than the Jews were about that 

time, as Dr. Lightfoot has shown out of their own 

authors. Adulterers were then so common, that the 

Sanhedrim ordained that the trial of an adulteress, 

prescribed Num. v., should no longer be put in prac- | 
tice, as the’ same author observes out of the Talmud. 
Josephus informs us that magicians swarmed in 
Judea, under the government of Felix, and after- 
ward. The denunciation here, that God would 
come near to judgment with all these, and be a 
swift witness against them, was fulfilled by that ter- 
rible destruction which was made of them by the | 
Romans when Jerusalem was taken, and such havoe 

was made of the nation as never happened to any 

people before. 

Verse 6. I am the Lord—Hebrew, Jehovah; I 
change not—In my nature or perfections there is no 


‘ 1082 


| me—Namely, by repentance, and amend 


are gone away from mine ordinances, 
and have not kept them. ” Return 
unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the 
Lorp of hosts. 4% But ye said, Wherein shall 
we return ? 

8 ¥ Willa man rob God? Yet ye have rob- 
bed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed 
thee? *In tithes and offerings. 

9 Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have 
robbed me, even this whole nation. 


i 


2 Lam. iii. 22.——®° Acts vii. 51.—? Zech. i. 3——% Chap. i. 6. 


t Neh. xiii. 10, 12. 


and always must have an unchangeable hatred to all 


sin: and my long-suffering also changes not, and 
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not: consumed—Are 
not destroyed and sent into eternal misery in your 
sins. God’s wisdom also changes not, but remains 
the same to dispense rewards to the good, and pun- 
ishments to the wicked, in the fittest season, and 
therefore neither the one nor the other are con- 
sumed, but preserved to the time appointed of God. 
Or, the sense may be, Because I am the same yes- 
terday, to-day, and for ever, as my name Jehovah 
imports, and I am‘true to my former promises, (see 
Ex. vi. 3-6,) therefore you still continue a people, 
and are not consumed, as your iniquities deserve. 
And I will still preserve a remnant of you to fulfil 
to them the promises I made to your fathers: see 
Rom. xi. 29. 


&c.—Here the discourse is again addressed to the 
wicked, aud from hence to the end of verse 12 the 
people are reprehended for slighting the institutions 
_of divine worship, and for withholding the legal 
tithes and oblations; are assured that they are under 


a curse for these violations of the law, and that an 


‘opposite conduct would bring on them the divine 
blessing. Ye are gone away from mine ordinances 
—Those which directed you respecting my worship, 
or your dealings one with another. Return unto 
nt of 
life; and I will return to you—I will pardon and 
/accept you, and bestow my blessings upon you. 
| But ye said—Or, ye say, Wherein shall we return? 
/—You persist to justify yourselves, and inquire 
| what it is you are to repent of ? as if your crimes 
were not most notorious and shameful. And your 


| words, or at least your actions, show that you have 
no sense of, nor remorse for, your former sins, nor 


any purpose of forsaking them. 7 
Verses 8,9. Will a man rob God—Grotius reads, 


| “Would any one dare to rob his judges as ye have 


robbed me?” the word rendered God sometimes 
meaning judges or magistrates. Some otlrers ren- 
der the clause, Js it right that God should be robbed 
(or defrauded) by man? Here God gives them an 
answer to their question in the foregoing verse, 


unjust and presumptuous to defrau 


od, Uk 


- 


3604, — 


Verse 7. Even from the days of your fila’, 


Wherein shall we return; or, repent and 
| But ye have robbed me—Notwithstanding it 
change, or shadow of turning, and therefore I have |, 


> 


Seer 


ea 


The wickedness of those ; 


CHAPTER III. 


who spake against God. 


A. M. 3604. 
B. C. 400. 
storehouse, that there may be meat 


in my house, and prove me now herewith, 
saith the Lorn of hosts, if I will not open you 
the * windows of heaven, and * pour * you out 
a blessing, that there shall not be reom enough 
to receive it. 

11 And I will rebuke the devourer for Your, 
sakes, and he shall not ‘destroy the fruits of 
your ground; neither shall your vine cast her 


s Prov. iii. 9, 10.—t1 Chron. xxvi. 20; 2 Chron. xxxi. 11; 
Nehemiah x. 38; xiii. ae 4 Genesis vil. 11; 2 Kings vii. 2. 
$ Heb. empty out-——* 2 Chron. xxxi. 10. 

EN 


10 * Bring ye all the tithes into t the || fruit before the time in the field, saith x 3 3604. 


C, 400. 


the Lorn of hosts. 

12 And all nations shall call you blessed ; for 
ye shall be # a delightsome land, saith the Lop 
of hosts. 

13 7 * Your words have been stout against 
me, saith the Lorp. Yet ye say, What have 
we spoken so much against thee ? 

14 » Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: 
and what profit is it that we have kept ° his 


y Amos iv. 9.——4 Heb. corrupt——* Dan. viii. 9.4 Chap. 
ii, 1'7.——> Job xxi. 14, 15; xxii. 17; Psa. lxxiii. 13; Zeph. i. 
12.= Heb: his observation. 


in general are afraid to do it; yet ye have done it. 
Do you.ask, wherein you have robbed me? I an 
swer, In tithes and offerings—By thisseems to be | 
meant the first-fruits of their ground and cattle, and 
other offerings which were allotted to the priests, | 
Deut. xviii. 4, out of which revenue they were to 
provide the daily sacrifices, and also maintain the | 
Levites, who attended upon the service in the tem- 
ple. Ye are cursed with a curse—Are greatly 
cursed, or, you lie under aheavy curse, and are like- 
ly still to do so, for the curse shall continue upon 
you while you continue in this your sinful course. 
For ye have robbed me, even this whole nation— 
This has not been the crime of a few only, but ye 
have in general defrauded me, and evil shall come 
upon you for it. In a note on Rom. ii. 22, where 
the apostle ranks sacrilege with idolatry, Grotius 
observes, “Non multum distat falsos deos colere et 
verum spoliare.” There is very little difference 
between adoring false gods and robbing the true 
God. 

Verses 10-12. Bring ye all the tithes—Make a 
punctual and full payment of all tithes: and in this 
instance make good your solemn engagement with 
Nehemiah, mentioned chap, x. 29. Into the store- 
house—This was one or more large rooms built on 
purpose for this use; that there may be meat—That | 
there may be provision for the daily sacrifices, and 
for iasittessnes of my ministers, the priests and 
Levites, who attend upon the service of my temple. 
And prove me now herewith—Make the experiment 
inthis particular. Jf J will not open you the win- 
dows of heaven, &c.—There is now a scarcity of the 
fruits of the ihe nd a dearth, but take the advice 
which I give you, Af try whéther your plenty will 
not be in proportion to the free-will wherewith you 
bring in your tithes and offerings; and whether I 


will not immediately send you plentiful showers of | 


rain, whereby the earth shall bring forth its fruit in 
great abundance. The de th here spoken of is men- 
tioned.Neh: v. 3: compare 2 Chron. xxxi. 10. To 


open the windows of heaven is a proverbial speech, 
‘expressing God’s showering down plenty, or giving | 
great abundance of the fruits of the earth; (see 2 | 
Kings vii. 2;) as shutting wp heaven danhia scarci- 
ty, Deut. xi. 17; Hag.i..10, 11. And pour out a 
blessing—First of rain to water the earth, next a 


- 3 wy 
<< 
) 


& 


| shall your vines, 


blessing of corn, wine, and oil, and all other products 
of the earth. hat there shall not be room, &¢.— 
Or, till there be enough; or, till you shall say, There 
is enough. And I will rebuke the devourer for your 
sakes—All kinds of devourers, the locusts, the can- 
ker-worms, the caterpillars, and all other destructive 
insects, Which, though may be in incredible 


y 
| multitudes, yet, by a ae from God, they will be 


checked all at once, as if they were but one insect. 
Neither shall your vine cast her fruit—Neither 
or other fruit-trees, be blasted by 
blighting winds, so as to make their fruit fall off be- 
fore it comes to maturity, but they shall carry it till 
it be fully ripe. And all nations—All that are near 
you; shall call you blessed—Shall style youa happy 
people. For ye shall be atlelightsome land—Y our 
country shall be again known by the name of the 
pleasant land, as it was formerly called. The revi- 
val of religion in a land will make it delightsome 
both to God and all good men. 

Verses 13-15. Your words, &c.—“ From this verse 
tothe end of chap. iv. 3, the prophet expostulates with 
the wicked for their hard speeches; and declares 
that God will make a fearful distinction between 
them and the righteous.’”—Newcome. Have been 
slout against me—Your words have been blas- 
phemous, and void of all reverence and duty. Ye 
have spoken injuriously of me, and have uttered 
such things as dishonour me. Ye have even arraign- 
ed my proceedings, and spoken against them. Yet 
ye say, What have we spoken, &e.—This is to the 
same purport as their words in verse 8, and some 
other foregoing verses. ‘They impudently deny the 
charge, therefore the prophet renews it against them 
in the following words; Ye have said—If not with 
your lips, yet at least in your hearts; Jt is vain to 
serve God—We receive no advantage from it, it is 
of no use tous. That they should talk thus impious- 
ly in the times of Zerubbabel, when Malachi uttered 
these reproofs and exhortations, is not probable; but 
God, who sees into the hearts of men, saw, lurking 
in their hearts, the seeds of that impiety which 
broke out in the following age. And what profit isit 
—What benefit is it of to us; that we have kept his 
ordinance—That we have attended upon the institu- 
tions of his worship, and have governed our lives ac- 
cording to his laws? And that we have walked 

1083 


The promise of blessings 


— 


AM es ordinance, and that we have walk- 
———— ed ®mournfully before the. Lorp of 
hosts ? 

15 And now ° we call the. proud happy ; yea, 
they that work wickedness * are set up; yea, 
they that ‘tempt God are even delivered. 

16 4% Then they ¢that feared the Lorp 
fspake often one to another: and the Lorp 
hearkened, and heard i¢: and &a book of re- 


membrance was written before him for them 
— 


MALACHI. 


to those that fear God. 


that feared the Lor», and that thought 
upon his name. 

17 And * they shall be mine, saith the Lorp 
of hosts, in that day when I make up my 

8 jewels; and ¥I will spare them, as a man 
spareth his own son thatserveth 

18 !'Then shall ye return an el vg 
tween the righteous and the wicked, between 
him that serveth God and him thatserveth him 
not. 


6 Heb. in black. 
are builti——' Psalm xev. 9. 
f Heb. iii. 13. & Psa. lvi. 8; 


¢ Psa. Ixxiii, 12; Chap. ii. 17.——’ Heb. 
e Psalm Ixvi. 16; Chap. iv. 2. 
Isa. lxv. 6; Rev. xx..12. @ 


h Exodus xix. 5; Deut. vii. 6; Psalm exxxv. 4; Titus ii. 14; 
1 Pet. ii. 9.——® Or, special treasure: i Isa. xii. 3.—— Psa, 
exii. 13.——! Psa. lyiil. 11. 


mournfully before the Lord—Have humbled our- 
selves before him with fasting and prayer, sackcloth 
and ashes. Their beholding the prosperity of the 
wicked made them conclude, that it was to no pur- 
pose to walk according to the laws of God, or to 
confess their offences and express their sorrow for 
them. And, or rather, but, or therefore, now we call 
the proud happy—Those who behave themselves 
arrogantly against God, the proud contemners of his 
Jaw. We can now do no less than think them hap- 
piest who do not concern themselves about the ob- 
servance of God’s laws, but live according to their 
pleasure, and do every thing that their inclination or 
profit prompts them to do, without any fear of God’s 
calling them to an account forit. Yea, they that 
work wickedness are set up—Are the ‘flourishing 
ones; are raised to prosperity, as buildings are to 
their height. Yea, they that tempt God are even 
delivered—Y ea, 
posed, should have wearied out God’s patience with 


their provocations, who have seemed to act as if | 


they tried to provoke him, even these men escape 


those dangers and calamities which other men are | 


involved in. Those who spake thus seem to have 
expected an exact distribution of temporal rewards 
and punishments to be made to good and bad men in 
this life. 

Ver, 16,17. Then—When contempt of God was 
grown to such a height; they that feared the Lord 
—Those that were truly religious, that knew God’s 
judgments to be a great deep, and that his ways are 
as high above our ways as heaven is above the earth ; 


spake often. one to another—Conversed together | 


about spiritual things the more frequently: for 
though it is not said what was the subject of their 
conyersation with each other, yet we have reason to 
believe it was as good concerning God and his provi- 
dence as the discourse of the wicked was evil. They 
spake what was right concerning God’s justice and 
mercy, his holiness, forbearance, and long-suffering, 
his wisdom and equity in his government of the 
world in general, and of his church and the members 
of it in particular. And by their pious discourse 
they endeavoured to arm each other against the im- 
pressions which such wicked suggestions as those 
above mentioned might otherwise have madé upon 


their minds; and to confirm one another in piety. 


they who, one would have sup-| 


and virtue. And the Lord hearkened and heard— 
Took a special notice of what these pious persons 
did and said. And a book of remembrance was 
written—It was as safely laid up in his memory as 
if it had been entered into a register, in order to be 
produced at the day of judgment to their praise and 
honour: see the margin. The words are a beautiful 
allusion to the records kept by kings, Esth, vi. 1. 
And they shall be mine—It shall appear how dear 
they are to me, when the time comes in which I 
shall separate the precious from the vile, the vessels 


of honour from those of dishonour, 2 Tim. ii. 20. In 


the day of the execution of my judgments they shall 
be distinguished and preserved safe, as choice jewels 
are wont to be. And I will spare them as a man 
spareth his own son, &e.—They shall be spared, 
pitied, and loved, and I will preserve them from 
those calamities which shall fall upon the wieked 
and unbelieving, with the same tenderness which a 
father shows to a dutiful son. The period especially 
referred to may be the Roman war under Titus. 
When God should utterly cut off the Jewish Church 
and nation for their infidelity, the remnant among 
them, that should be found to believe his word, and 
having waited for the Messiah, the consolation of 
Israel, should welcome him when he came; these, 
being admitted into the Christian Church, should be- 
come a peculiar people to God, and God would take 
eare of them, that they should not perish with the 
unbelievers, but that they should be hid in the day 
of the Lord’s anger against that nation. These pious 
ones should have all the glorious privileges of God’s 
Israel appropriated to them, and centring in them. 
They should be a peculiar treasure unto him, when 
the rest were rejected; should Be vessels of rey 
and, honour when the rest shouldbe made vessels of 
wrath and dishonour. This, however, is very ap- 
plicable to all the faithful people of God , and the dis- 


al 


tinction he will put between them and others, in the 


great day of final accounts: .* 


Verse 18. Then shall ye—Ye contemners God 


and religion; return and discergtes clearly, and 
he righteous - 
ortion 


distinguish perfectly; between 
the wicked—Between the characters and the 
of the truly righteous, and of those who a 
How different the lot is, and to all eternit: 
between the former and the latter ; ’ 2en 


Destruction of the 


CHAPTER IV. 


Jewish nation predicted. 


serveth God—And makes conscience of his duty to 
him, and him that serveth him not—But puts con- 
tempt upon his service. You that now speak against 
God, as making no difference between the good and 
bad, and therefore say, It is vain to serve him, verse 
14, you shall be made to see your error: and you 


F that speak for God, but know not what to say to this, 


‘that there seéms to be one event to the righteous 
and the wicked, and that all things come alike to all, 
will then have the matter set in a true light, and 


" 


— SSS 
will see to your everlasting satisfaction the differ- 
ence between the holy and the profane, the godly 
and the ungodly. Zhen shall ye retuyn—That is, 
change your minds, and come to a right understand- 
ing of this most important matter. For then every 
man’s character will be both perfected and perfectly 
discovered; and every man appear in his true co- 
lours; and every man’s condition, likewise, will be 
both perfectly happy or miserable, without mixture 
or alloy, and everlastingly determined. 


CHAPTER TV. 


In this chapter, which is a continuation of the discourse in the preceding, 
destruction of the Jewish nation, as a type and emblem of t. 
ing at the time of the general judgment and final conflagration of the heaven and the earth, 1. 


we have, (1,) A prediction of the general 
final destruction of all the impenitent and unbeliev- 
(2,) The benefit 


which such as believed on the Messiah, at his coming, and became his subjects and servants among the Jews, should 
enjoy, while their unbelieving countrymen were given up to destruction: a figure of the final salvation of the right. 


eous at the time of Christ’s second coming, 2, 3. 


to observe the law of Moses till the Messiah should appear, 4. 


») A solemn charge given to the Jews, in the mean time, strictly 


(4,) A promise of a further discovery of God's will 


by Elijah the prophet, that is, John the Baptist, the harbinger of the Messiah, whose ministry, it is foretold, should 
produce a happy effect in the reformation of many, both young and old, 5, 6. 


A. M. 3604. 


OR behold, * the day cometh that 
.C. 400. 


shall burn as an oven; and all 
>the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall 
be ° stubble: and the day that cometh shall 


burn them up, saith the Lorp of A.M. 3604, 
hosts, that it shall ‘leave them nei- are 
ther root nor branch. 

2 4 But unto you that ° fear my name, shall 


2 Joel ii. 31; Chap. iii. 2’; 2 Pet. iii. 7.——» Chap. iii. 18. 


NOTES ON CHAPTER IV. 

Verse 1. For behold the day cometh—Though it 
may Spear to be at a distance from you, yet it is 
coming, and will soon overtake and overwhelm you: 
even that great and terrible day of the Lord, as it is 
called Joel ii. 31. That shall burn as an oven— 
God is described as’ a consuming fire, when he 
comes to execute his judgments, Deut. iv. 24, and 
the prediction here was remarkably verified when, 
upon the taking of the city and temple of J erusalem, 
by the Roman army under Titus, they were both 
destroyed by such flames as no human power could 
quench. The refiner’s fire, mentioned chap. iii. 2, 
now became unspeakably more dreadful, raging 
everywhere through the city and temple, and most 
fiercely where the’arched roofs made it double itself 
and infold flames within fla : by which terrible 
destruction, and the Hee accompanying it, an 
end was put to the whole state of the Jews: an awful 
image this of the (ie eee of the heavens and 


» the earth, and the final judgment of the last day on 


the vie human race. all the proud—Such 
especi ts spoke hap. iii. 15. And all 
that haya impenitent sinners, of what- 
ever kind, Wile eathen, Jews, or Christians, so 


‘not ‘obey the truth, whether 
works or his word, "but obey 
be as stubble—Shall perish 
. And the day that cometh 


called, even all that | 
manifested by 


¢ Obad. 18.—#4 Amos ii. 9.——® Chap. iii. 16. 


sume them. J¢ shall leave them neither root nor 
branch—A proverbial expression for utter destruc- 
tion, and signifying, as applied to the unbelieving 
Jews, that both they and their families should be 
utterly destroyed. 

Verse 2. But unto you that fear my name—So 
they are described, chap. iii. 16, whose names were 
written in the book of remembrance; who loved the 
law of their God, and kept it; who believed its pro- 
mises, and rejoiced in expectation of the blessings 
promised ; who believed his threatenings and trem- 
bled at them, and who walked humbly with their 
God ; shall the Sun of righteousness-arise—Christ, 
who is fitly compared to the sun, being the fountain 
of light and vital heat to his ‘church: elsewhere 
called the day-spring from on high, Luke i. 78, and 
the east, or sun-rising, for so the word rendered 
branch, Zech. iii. 8, is translated by the Chaldee and 
LXX.: see the note there, and on Isa. lx. 1, 2. Thus 
the church is described, Rev. xii. 1, as clothed with 
the sun, that is, adorned with graces communi- 
cated to her from Christ. He is termed the Sun or 
RIGHTEOUSNESS, not only because he is the end of the 
law for righteousness, that is, for justification, 
sanctification, and practical obedience, to believers, 
and is made of God unto them righteousness, but. 
because he is the medium and source of the divine 
rehieen benignily to them, as the word rendered 

usness also signifies. ‘He i is said to arise with 


totally and speedily con- | healing i in his wings, because his doctrine and media- 
1085 


, * 
ee 


- before it was invested by the Romans, 


. 


Blessings promised at the 


A. M. 3604. the f Sun of righteousness arise with 
B. C. 400. MG A ar 

———— healing in his wings; and ye shall 
go forth, arid grow up as calves of the stall. 

3 £ And ye shall tread down the wicked ; for 
they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet 
in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lorp 
of hosts. ’ 


f Luke i. 78; Ephesians v. 14; 2 Pet. i.19; Revelation ii. 28. 
&2 Sam. xxii. 43; Mic. vii. 10; Zech. x. 5, 


tion, with the spirit of truth and grace, which he has 
procured for, and confers upon, his true followers, re- 
moves men’s ignorance and errors, sins and miseries, 
and heals all the diseases of their fallen souls, commu- 
nicating to them spiritual health and strength, with 
delight and joy, safety and security, and restoume 
and regulating all their faculties and powers. And 
ye shall go forth—That is, as the words are thought 
primarily to signify, out of the city of Jerusalem 
before the fatal siege begin, being warned by Christ 


so to do, (see Matt. xxiv. 15-18; Luke xxi. 20, 21,) | 


and thereby escaping those dreadful calamities, in 
which those who stayed in the city were involved. 
Indeed, those who had faith in Christ’s predictions, 
apprehending, from the circumstances of things, the 
destruction of the city to be near at hand, quitted it 
And grow 
wp—In strength, vigour, and spiritual stature; as 
calves of the stall—Where they are safely guarded, 
and well ordered and provided for. This shall be 
your state when the rest of your nation shall be con- 
sumed with divers kinds of death. Ye shall be ina 
good condition through your faith in the Redeemer, 
which shall be to you the evidence of things not seen ; 
through the peace which you shall have with God, 
and in your own minds; through the love of God 
shed abroad in your hearts, and communion with 
him; and through the well-grounded and lively hopes 
with which you shall be inspired of the like deliver- 
ance in the judgment of the last day. * 


~~ Verse 3. And ye shall tread down the wicked— 


“Ye shall know that they are wholly subdued.”,— 
Newcome. Houbigant thinks this “refers to the 
miracles of the rising church, by which the wicked 
were compelled to yield, and submit themselves; 
for there is no other dominion under which they 
could be held by Christians.” There was a time 
when the wicked trode them down, and said to their 
souls, Bow down that we may go over; but the day 
will come that will make them victorious over all 
their enemies, and they, as it were, shall tread down 
tlie wicked; for, being made Christ’s footstool, Psa. 
ex. 1, they are also made theirs, and shall come and 
worship before the feet of the church, Rev. iii. 9. 
“ When believers, by faith, overcome: the world; 
when they suppress their corrupt appetites and pas- 
sions; and when the God of peace bruises Satan 
under their feet, then they indeed tread down the 
wicked..—Henry. For they shall be ashe der 
the soles of your feet—The meaning of this is 
thought by some to be, that when these believing 


7 1086 
ty 
. 


MALACHI. 


_ 


~ coming of the Messiah. 


4 Remember ye the "law o 3604. 
Moses my servant, which I com- “77 

manded unto him in ‘ Horeb for all Israel, with 
kthe statutes and judgments. re wey 
5 4] Behold, T will send you ' Elijah the pro- . 
phet ™before the coming of the great and_ 


dreadful day of the Lorn: 


h Exod. xx. 3.—— Deut. iv. 10. Psa. ex] 9.——! Matt. 
xi. 14; xvii. 11; Mark ix. 11; Luke i. 17. Joel ii. 31. 


ones, who through their faith should escape the de- 
struction in which the unbelievers were involved, 
should return to the place where the city stood, _ 
they would there tread upon the ashes e wicked, 
who were destroyed in the destruction of the city, 
and many of them burned to ashes in the flames by 
which it was consumed. According to Eusebius, a 
Christian Church was erected in a town called Ailia, 
built upon the ruins of Jerusalem, of which no Jess 
than thirteen persons of Jewish parentage were 
bishops. So that the faithful among the Jewish 
nation did literally tread the ashes of the wicked 
under the soles of their feet. But the general sense 
of the expression no doubt is, that the great, the un- 
speakable superiority of the righteous oyer the 
wicked, should be evident to themselves and all 
men, in the distinction which should be made in 
their favour, first, in the calamities which would 
come on the Jewish nation, and secondly, and espe- 
cially, in that day when the righteous shall rise zo 
everlasting life, and the wicked to shame and ever- 
lasting contempt. . 
Verse 4. Remember ye the law of Moses—Ye are 
not now to expect any succession of prophets for 
‘the time to come, nor any prophet whatever, till the 
forerunner of the Messiah appears: your chief care, 
therefore, till that time, must be to attend upon the 
institutions, and to obey the preeepts, which Moses 
has given to all Israel in his law; particularly in 
that part of it which was delivered to him by God 
with an audible voice from mount Horeb: see Exod. 
xix. 9; Deut. iv. 10. This your lawgiver spake 
plainly of the Messiah, instructed you to’ expect 
his coming, and solemnly charged you to believe his 
doctrines and obey his commands, When*he should 
come, threatening all those who did not With inevi- 
table destruction. ._The words law, ‘statutes, and 
judgments, are promiscuously, used to signi C) 
same thing, as appears from the greater part of the 
hundred and nineteenth Psalm. | > 
Verse 5. Behold, I will send yow Elijah the prophet” § 
—The first prophet that I shall sefid to Pha) afterhim , 


who now speaks to you, will be E the messen- 
ger, that shall go bine the Messi 


~* 


to. prepare his 


way. In him the spirit of proph oy 
and he shall be another Elijah ? 
austerity of life, and labour fe aa 

was the universal opinion in ‘, 


by the learned and unlearne 
common people, that Elijah sh 


Blessings promised at the 


i 3604. 


sot. 6 And he shall turn the heart of the 
me 


fathers to the children, and the heart 
a” ee » 

° © ° Zech. xiv, 12. 
EEE Ee, a 


should first come and restore all things ; and long 

before that time the son of Sirach grounded his ex- 

pectation of him on the passage now before us: see 

Ecclus. xlviii. 10. The Jews have not since varied 

from this ion: in all their later writings the 

coming of Hlijah and of the Messiah are usually 
mentioned together; and this is the reason why they 
pray so heartily for the ae of Elijah, even with- 
out mention of the Messiah, because. the coming of 
the one, according to Malachi, infers the coming of 
he other.” But it is neither said nor implied in the 
text that Elijah the Tishbite should come in person, 
but only that one should come in the spirit and power 
of Elijah, and when such a one did come, Malachi’s 
words were fulfilled; who meant no more that Elijah 
should rise again, than Hosea and Jeremiah did that 

David should be restored to life, in order to reign Over 

Israel and Judah, when they prophesied that the 

tribes should heréafter serve David their king. 

* Whoever this Elijah was, he must, according to the 
next clause of this vert, precede the coming of the 
great and dreadful day of the Lord, that is, the 
time of the final destruction of the Jewish city, tem- 
ple, and commonwealth, which events actually took 
place near one thousand seven hundred years ago, 
and no other Elijah than John the Baptist, followed 
by the Messiah, came to warn them of it, as is con- 
fessed by them. 

It is allowed by the Jews as a fact, that prophecy 
was sealed up with Malachi, and that when he died 
the Holy Spirit was taken away from Israel. They 
expected, ver, that it would be restored in the 
days of theMessiah, and they ought, therefore, to 
have.concluded that John the Baptist, in whom this 
gift did revive, must be the Elijah of Malachi: for all 
the people held John as a prophet, Matt. xiv.5; xxi. 
26. Even the members of the Sanhedrim, astonished 
at his preaching and actions, (see John i. 19-25,) 
thought he mst be Elijah, or that prophet, namely, 
the Messiah, mentioned by Moses: and the scribes 

_ and Pharisees, as well as the rest of the country, 
© “went to las of him, confessing their sins, 


Matt. iti. 5-7. Add to this, that his preaching 
exactly answered the® description given of it by 
Malachi. As Elijah was to givemotice of the coming 
of the day that should burn as an oven, verse 1, 
. that great and dreadful, da wherein the Lord, 
Messiah, should smite the land of Judea with a 
curse, verse 6; so did’ John the Baptist exhort to 
repentance, from this motive, that the kingdom of 
God was at hand. phot iia was coming, from 


by t to flee, be at the person coming 
-: o h eae nie than he, with his fan 
ed pe hand, wo horoughly purge his floor, and 


burn the chaff nquenchable fire: see Matt. iii. 
2, 44.10, 1; a Chandler’s Defence. The 
reade ‘he ‘to see the sacred historians’ 
ed by a wise, learfied, and 


7 


CHAPTER IV. 


‘ coming of the Messiah, 


of the children to their fathers, lest [come A. M. 3604. 
.C, 400. 
and ° smite the earth with ? a curse. 


p Zech. v. 3. 


well-disposed Jew, who was not a Christian, namely, 
the well-known historian Josephus: “It was the 
opinion of the Jews,” says he, “that Herod’s army 
was cut off by the Arabs through God’s just judg- 
ment, for the sake of John, who was surnamed the 
Baptist. For he killed that excellent man, who 
excited the people to the exercise of all virtues, 
especially piety and justice, and to receive his 
baptism, which, he assured them, would be pleasing 
to God, if to purity of body they added purity of 
life, and first cleansed their souls, not from one or 
two, but every sin. But when the people resorted 
in numbers to him, eager to hear his doctrine, and 
ready to do any thing by his counsel, fearing what 
might be effected through so great authority of the 
man, he first imprisoned and then slew him.”— 
Antiq., lib. xviii, cap. 7. 

Verse 6. And he shall turn the heart of the fa- 
thers to the children, Lae the times of the 
Maccabees, to the times of Christ, the Jewish peo- 
ple were miserably divided among themselves, by 
discords, which broke out into civil wars, of which 
Josephus gives an account. And moreover, the dif- | 
ferent religious sects among them, especially those 
of the Sadducees and Pharisees, greatly distracted 
the people, and alienated and separated the nearest 
relations from each other: Now John the Baptist 
began to apply a remedy to these evils, by instilling 
the precepts of love and charity, and directing all to 
one and the same master, Christ: see Luke ili. 11; 
Matt. iii. 11; Mark i. 7; John i. 15. yep Sa to 
be the most prable interpretation of the words, 
taking them in the sense of our translation, and as 
they are understood by the LXX., and by St. Luke, 
chap. i. 17, But amore easy sense may be given of 
them by translating the Hebrew preposition 4y, not 
to, but with, in which sense it is often used, and as 
Kimchi, Noldius, and others render it, namely, He 
shall turn the hearts of the fathers with the chil- 
dren, and of the children with the Sathers ; 3 that is, 
he shall do his utmost to produce a national reforma- 
tion, to turn both fathers and children from their evil 
practices, and to make them all unanimously join in 
the great duties of repentance and amendment of 
life; to restore a true sense of religion, which was 
then dwindled into a mere form, and thereby to pre- 
pare the people for the reception of Christ, in order 
to prevent the utter excision denounced upon the 
land, as it follows, Lest I come and sinite the earth 
with a curse.—By the earth here, as frequently 
elsewhere, is meant the land of Judea, and the 
clause would be better rendered, Lest I come and 
smite the land, namely, of Judea, with utter de- 
struction: for so the word ™7n, here rendered 
curse, is often translated, as the learned reader may 
see by, referringsto Num. xxi. 2; Deut. vii. 2, 13, 15, 
16; Jo vie213 Zech. xiv. 11. So that the mean- © 
ing is, Lest, when J come ie judgment upon 

e 108 


Conclusion of the as 
Judea, all the inhabitants of it should be utterly de- 
stroyed. By the preaching of John, and his direct- 
ing the people to Christ, many were brought to 
repentance and reformation of life, and thereby 
escaped the common destruction of the nation. All, 
therefore, did not perish, but a remnant was saved, 
as St. Paul takes notice, Rom. ix. 27, 29, and xi. 5. 
Judea, however, remains a desolation, and Jerusalem 
a heap of ruins, both of them sad ang perpetual 
monuments of God’s displeasure against such as 
reject Christ and his salvation. Thet remarkable 
predictions, therefore, contained’ in this last chapter 
of the ancient records of the divine will, like a mul- 
titude of others, which have come under our consid- 
eration in the course of these notes, have all been 
punctually fulfilled. The harbinger of the Messiah 
appeared at the time foretold, in the spirit and 
power of Elias; the Messiah himself was manifested 
as the Sun of righteousness, as soon as that messen- 
ger sent before his face had prepared his way; and 
the most signal vengeance was executed, as foretold, 
on all such as rejected him and his salvation, These 
remarkable predictions, therefore, added to all that 
went before, being evidently verified, are so many 
fresh proofs of the divine authority of the Holy 
Scriptures, of the truth of the Christian religion, of 
the certain accomplishment of all the promises and 
threatenings of the gospel of Christ, and of the abso- 
lute necessity of possessing the religion there delin- 
eated, and practising the duties there enjoined. This, 
indeed, is the design of all the prophecies, and even 
of all the books contained in the Old and New Tes- 
tamehts, and the principal use which ought to be made 
of them. ° 

Thus, through the assistance of God, we are come 
to the conclusion of the writings of the prophets: 


¢ 


s 


MALACHI. 


-_ 


for, from the time of Malachi to the time of th 
siah, for the space of near four hundred years, ther 
was, as some of the prophets had foretold there 
should be, a famine of the words of the Tord} (ee 
Amos, chap. viii. 11, 123) and during this long course 
of time no prophet appeared in Israel, where there 
had been before a succession of them for a very long 
period of years. The divine providence, it is pro- 
bable, as was intimated in the argument to this book, ; 
caused this long cessation-of prophecy, this long 
famine of the word of the Lord inmpthe land, in» 
order to excite the gréater expectation and a more 
fervent desire of the coming of the great prophet, 
the Christ of God; and hee men’s minds for 
a new and different dispensation, in which, after the 
first establishment of it, there was no longer to be a 
succession of prophets; but the work of God in and 
among men, in order to their salvation, was to be 
carried on through and by the grace of the Lord 
Jesus, that great one, who had been foretold by the 
mouth of all the prophets; and by the fellowship of 
the Holy Ghost, or a Divine Spirit, enlightening and 
renewing men’s minds, inspiring them with true 
wisdom, and communicating to them the divine 
nature, and forming them after the image of him 
that had created them. It has been observed by 
some, and not improperly, that whereas the last 
word of the Old Testament is a curse which threatens 
the earth, of our danger of which we must be made 
sensible, that we may welcome the gospel of Christ, 
which comes with a blessing ; it is with a blessing, 
with the choicest of blessings, that the New Testa: 
ment ends: and with it let us arm ourselves, or 
rather, let God arm us, against thiscurse. The grace 
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all! Amten. 
To God only wise be ascribed wl the glory, 


* ire 


7 
THE END OF ALL THE CANONICAL BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 


1088 


* 


alt 


- Fs coe a. Ch : 
~ al) < * _ 7 
= : es a let, Sia ee 


eiacareroee Sot 
penny = 


