\ COLUMBIAN HD] ZION. 


BEST .THOUGHTS 


AND 


DISCOURSES 


CF 


D. L. Moopy. 


The Work Of Moody and Sankey as Lvangetists, witna 
Sketches of their Lives and Portraits on Stevé. 


A no 


BY 


ABBIE CLEMENS MORROW. 


age a ee ee a 


Intropuction BY Rev. Emory J. Haynts, 


4 


TORONTO: 
J. B. MAGURN, PUBLISHER, 


86 KING Streer Easr. 


—, 


1876. 


Duniry & Burs, Printers, 
No, 11 CoLBoRNE SiREET, TORONTO. 


ISOUG 


Introduction. 


By Rev. Emory J. Haynes. 


In the brief space since D. L. Moody and Ira. D. Sankey 
began to attract more than local attention, their lives have 
been sketched and scraps of their personal history written to 
an extent at which the most avid craving for notoriety could 
not murmur. 

But, in point of fact, even the general public seems to have 
been convinced of what the personal friends of these two men 
early felt assured, that notoriety constituted no part of their 
aim. This form of personal aggrandizement was es foreign 
to their purpose as money, or ease, the sight-seeing of travel, 
or pampering hospitality. In the community where these 
words are being written the two comrades have recently 
passed a number of weeks, seen by the multitude, seen by the 
few; watched as they stood before vast audiences, and as they 
sat at the firesides and boards of our homes; and from every 
point of view they seem as void of personal seeking as human 
nature under Divine help can be expected to present itself. 
One of them informed us that when they stepped upon the 
platform of their earliest English meeting, the working-man 
drew near to see what might be the trick; for it seemed in- 


lv INTRODUCTION. 


credible that two Yankees should have come so far upon nc 
selfish errand. ‘‘One has an organ and performs on that. 
The other tells stories. Let us see where ‘the make’ comes 
in.” But they, waiting long in yain for baser revelations, 


soon became convicted and converted. If there have been 
any, in the two large American cities of their visiting, watch- 
ing with such prying and invidious eyes, they also must have 
long ago been persuaded of a holier and only pure errand; 
for the universal voice in our streets to-day is one of respect, 
widening to an affection which glows very warm and change- 
less in even thousands of hearts. 

It may not be generally known that a sedulous conceal- 
ment of such data as is indispensable to any thing like a fair 
biography—of facts and experiences, of opinions and their 
development; which letters and other written record must 
furnish for a memoir, a history of the deceased, but which a 
man’s own lips can alone supply to the annalist of a yet living 
subject—has been the invariable habit of these two Workers. 
They have persistently said: ‘‘Let us alone. Listen rather 
to our message, and lend a hand to help us speak, sing, work 
for Jesus.” 

It is impossible not to admire such self-abnegation. It is 
the coming in of quite a new fashion among modern religion- 
ists; or rather, like all fashion, the reproduction of the old; 
that old garb which wrapped about and sandalled and girt 
the dusty Apostles of earlier ages. It would seem we ought 
to respect this reticence and seclusion; and we would, were 
it not that, so is human nature, concealment heightens curi- 
osity; or better, modest worth is sure to win attention, since it 
is even written; whoso seeketh the lowest seat shall be bid go 


| 
. 
| 
| | 


INTRODUCTION. Vv 


higher; the last first, the first last. Probably no shrewder 
course could have been chosen to awaken a wide desire to 
know ull about them and to secure far and fair fame, than the 
one taken by these Evangelists, without any such design. 
Their experience and example might be salutary if pondered 
by many public characters, not only at the altar, but at the 
tribunes of politics, literature, art, and social life. Alas! 
Poor Coriolanus ! 

The main reason, however, why the reader should be chary 
of detailed and lengthy lives of the revivalists is the un- 
doubted fact that there is little to relate. True, every life is 
wonderful. The smallest, humblest career is filled with inci- 
dent all too vast for even a Boswell’s faithful chronicling. 
There, are tragedies; there, plottings or honorable delibera- 
tions graver than in star chambers and senates; there, wasted 
moor or filled gardens; all in the microcosm of the obscurest 
Mansoul. But no pen ever attempts such history. And 
beyond this secret realm, common to us all, the characters of 
the two simple men joining hands to cry up and down the 
land, ‘‘ Repent,” present small material for story. Their glory 
is that God chose them, two smooth, round stones from the 
brook, and lying side by side with multitudes, to execute 
wonders. It is as if He had said: Behold what I can do with 
any and every plain, pure heart, all given up to me. 

Turn therefore to the perusal of the word which has been 
spoken; what it was; how it was. It has not been a strange, 
nor a wonderful word. In this country it has not always pro- 
duced strange nor wonderful effect. ‘Ihe British public was 
ripe for the harvest. God chose the hour: and in the study 
of the Genesis of ‘‘revivals” wo must more and more recog- 


Pass 


& 
k 
k 
bf 
| 


* 7 


vi INTRODUCTION. 

nize His inscrutable pleasure as the first great cause. Heaven 
had become impatient over ritualistic and materialistic ten- 
dencies over the sea; and heaven picked up two plain lives 
with which itself turned the kingdom upside down. Per. 
haps it would not do to perpetuate persona] pre-eminence ; it 
would dishearten the faithful ministry, stumble believers, 
Perhaps another weapon will be singled out of infinite ro- 
source, and perhaps the same shall yet be wondrously power- 
ful. In any conclusion the study of those simple means is 
more than curious. May God make them blessings to many 
souls. And to the prayer that the people come, and, so they 
come—it matters not by whose lead—to the waiting Christ, wo 
are sure none more heartily than this noble-souled preacher 
and his sweet singer will say--Amen. 


CONTENTS, 


Crapter I. 
EARLY ASSOCIATIONS . . : 


Carter IJ. 
FIRST MISSIONARY EFFORTS. P 


Cuapter III. 
MR. MOODY'S WAIFS . . ; 


Carter IV. 
CHARACTERISTIC INCIDENTS . 


Cuapter VY. 
ALLIANCE OF MOODY AND SANKEY 


Cuapter VI, 


OVER THE SEA . ; : , 
Cuaprer VII. 
HUME AGAIN , : ? , 


Discourse I. 
CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS . 


Discourse II. 
SINNERS SEEKING CHRIST . , 


MOODY'S THOUGHTS . : 


THE CROWNING WATCH-NIGHT OF THE 


e e 
CENTURY 


11 


17 


25 


29 


38 


45 


68 


4] 
44 


Moody's Life and Work 


SS eee 


CHAPTER I. 
EAP LY ASSOCIATIONS. 


Dwicut Lyman Moopy—the sixth child of Edwin 
and Betsy Moody—was born on the 5th of Febru- 
ary, 1837, in Northfield, Mass., in the same distvict 
which, a little more than a century before, was the 
svene of the great revival under Jonathan Edwards. 

When he was only four years old his father sud- 
denly died. Mr. Moody, Lavine gencrously helped 
a friend and lost much money by him, was obliged 
to mortgage the homestead, and all that was left 
for the support of his widow, and her nine children 
—the eldest but thirteen—was a little home on the 
mountain slope, and an acre or two of land. But 
Mrs. Moody was brave and persevering, and, with 
a little assistance from her brother in Boston tow- 
ards paying the interest on the mortgage, kept her 
little family together and above positive want. 

Little Dwight, though very generous, and fond 
of his mother, was not naturally a religious child. 
Prayer was his dernier ressort. 

Once when he was crawling under a fence the 


= Laer peg Set ne Cah ee OMe ermine an 
sa nn aE 
i 


9 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


rails fell down and caught him and he could nov 
extricate himself. He struggled until nearly ex- 
haustcd, then called loudly for help ; but, it being 
some distance from any house, no one heard him. 
When he did finally reach home he gave the fol- 
lowing account of his accident: 

“T tried and tried, but I couldn’t lift them aw- 
ful heavy rails; then I hollered for heip, but no- 
body came; and then I began to think I should 
have to die, away up there on the mountain, all 
alone. But I happened to think that, maybe, God 
would help me; and so I asked Him. And after 
that I could lift the rails, just as easy.” 

As the children grew old enough they were sent 
to the Unitarian Sabbath-school, in the village, 
about a mile distant. On Sabbath evenings Mrs. 
Moody would gather her little flock around her 
and read to them out of the books which they 
brought from the Sunday-school. If the girls had 
been more than ordinarily troublesome, or the boys 
unusually disobedient, it was marvellous how these 
same Sunday-school books knew all about it, and 
would counsel, or reprove, or condemn, each spe- 
cial case. To be sure, it was hard for the children 
afterward to “find the place,” when they chanced 
to take up the book, but they had enjoyed the 
reading none the less; and, very likely, Mrs, 
Moody's improvised stories were quite as effica: 
cious in teaching her children to be good, as would 
have been the originul ones, in these same books 


d nov 
ly ex- 
being 
| him. 
1e fol- 


m aw- 
ut no- 
should 
in, all 
e, God 
1 after 


re sent 
village, 
s Mrs. 
d her 
h they 
ris had 
he boys 
these 
it, and 
h spe- 
hildren 
hanced 
ed the 
r, Mrs. 
effica: 

: would 
> books 


EARLY ASSOCIATIONS. 3 


published by the Sunday-school Union. Some- 
times, when her patience was sorely tried by the 
rebelliousness of her children, she would go away 
and in secret pray for grace and strength to lead 
her little ones aright; and said she, “When I 
would come back they would all be good children 
again.” 

She used to repeat a verse of a hymn, or a text 
of Scripture, at the table, and teach her children to 
say 1t in concert after her. 

Dwight worked on the farm during the sum- 
mer, and went to school in the winter, until his 
eighteenth year. About this time he went to Bos- 
ton. His mother’s brother offered him a position 
in his boot and shoe establishment on three con- 
ditions: His uncle was to choose his boarding- 
place; he was not to go at night to any place of 
which his uncle did not approve; and he was to 
attend regularly the Mount Vernon Church and 
Sabbath-school. 

In this church he listened to a sermon which had 
the effect of making him exceedingly uneasy; he 
thought some one had been informing the minis- 
ter about him and resolved not to go again. But 
respect for his promise to his uncle influenced him 
to return and the serious impression was con- 
tinued; though for some time he felt no particular 
imterest in either church or school. His Sabbath- 
school teacher, Mr. Kimball, considered him a very 
unp”omising pupil. But upon young Moody’s ven- 


4 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


turing, one Sunday, the question, “That Moses was 
what you would call a pretty smart sort of a man, 
wasn’t he?” he answered the young man in a way 
which gained his interest and confidence. Soon 
after, Mr. Kimball called at his pupil’s store; and, 
after conversing with him, asked him if he would 
not like to become a Christian. He answered him 
frankly and freely, commenced seeking the Saviour, 
and soon after was converted. 

Years after, when Mr. Moody was holding some 
meetings in Boston, a son of this same teacher in- 
troduced himself to tim. Mr. Moody inquired if 
he were a Christian. On his replying in the nega- 
tive, Mr. Moody asked him, ‘“ How old are you?” 

“ Seventeen.” 

“Just my age when your father led me to Christ; 
and that was just seventeen years ago this very 
day. Now I want to pay him by leading his son to 
the Saviour.” 

The youth was much moved. Mr. Moody prayed 
with him and obtained a promise from him that he 
would become a Christian. Soon after Mr. Moody 
received a letter from his old teacher informing 
him that his son had found the Saviour. 

Wishing to make a public profession of his faith 
Dwight applied for admission to the Mount Ver- 
non church. The committee who considered his 
application for adinission, recommended him to de- 
lay a public profession until he could more thor- 
oughly acquaint himself with the fundamental doc- 


3 was 
man, 
, Way 
Soon 

and, 
ould 

him 
iour, 


EARLY ASSOCIATIONS. 5 


trines of Christianity, as he was lamentably unac- 
quainted with them. After six months he again 
presented himself, and was received into the church 
at the May Communion, in 1855. 

Being very zealous to enter the Master’s service 
he rose, in a prayer-meeting which he attended 
soon after, and offered some remarks. When the 
meeting was over the pastor took him aside and 
advised him not to speak in the meetings again, but 
serve God in some other way. 

Believing himself in the right, undaunted, he con- 
tinued to attend the prayer-meetings, making brief 
remarks as at first. On different occasions he met 
with a similar frank rebuke from many of the good 
people of the church, who, feeling themselves no 
great anxiety for sinners, could not appreciate the 
young convert’s zealous desire to help his neighbors 
to the kingdom of heaven. 

Probably this want of sympathy first led young 
Moody to turn his thoughts toward the great West, 
where success awaited those who had bravery and 
strength to win it. 


CHAPTER II. 


FIRST MISSIONARY EFFORTS. 


Axsour a year after his conversion, Mr. Moody 
removed to Chicago and obtained a situation in a 
shoe store. 

A gentleman, then a clerk in this same establish- 
ment, says of him, “Moody was a first-rate sales- 
man. It was his particular pride to make his col- 
umn foot up the largest on the book, not only in 
the way of sales, but also of profits. He took par- 
ticular delight in trading with notional or unrea- 
sonable people; especially when they made great 
show of smartness and cunning, and thought them- 
selves extraordinarily wise. Nothing was ever mis- 
represented in the smallest particular; but when it 
came to be a sharpness of wit between buyer and 
seller, Moody generally had the best of it.” 

Several of the clerks lodged in the store; and 
one of the favorite pastimes of the young men, 
after the hour for closing the establishment, was 
to turn their place of business into a hall of debate; 
among the chief subjects of which were theology 
and amusements. Moody disliked theatres, cards. 
billiards, and all such amusements. It is related, 
by one of his fellow-clerks that comine into the 


oody 
ina 


lish- 
ales- 
; col- 
ly in 
par- 
area- 
reat 
hem- 
mis- 
en it 

and 


and 
nen, 


was 
date; 
logy 
ards. 


ted, 


FIRST MISSIONARY EFFORTS. ( 


store one night after prayer-meeting, he found 
two of the boys playing checkers. He instantly 
grasped the board, scattering the checkers, and 
dashed it to pieces; then—before a word of re- 
monstrance could be spoken—dropped upon his 
knees and commenced to pray. 

He was, however, partial to athletic sports, inno- 
cent practical jokes, or a friendly trial of strength, 
and would always laugh as heartily when conquered 
as when victorious. 

Arriving at Chicago, he joined a congregational 
church where he rented four pews, and kept them 
filled each Sabbath with young men. He attended 
the prayer-meetings, exhorted and prayed. Here 
he was presented with the same advice he had 
received in Boston; to leave the exhorting and 
praying to those who understood it. 

He soon found a little Methodist church where 
the people were more congenial, and joined a band 
of young men who used to go, on Sabbath morn- 
ings, to hotels and saloons and distribute tracts, 
and invite the people to divine worship. 

On one of his tract-distributing tours he found a 
little Mission School and asked for a class in it. 
In answer to his application the superintendent 
informed him that there were already twelve teach- 
ers and only sixteen pupils; but that he would be al- 
lowed to teach a class if he could gather it himself. 

He went out into the streets and by personal ap- 
plication succeeded in bringing in nearly a score of 


8 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


rough, filthy, half-naked urchins, and a place was 
assigned him. 

But, enjoying the position of recruiting officer 
better than that of teacher, he handed his class 
over to another gentleman, and continued his work; 
bringing in fresh supplies until the school was filled. 

Then was suggested the idea of organizing a 
separate school of his own, for the benefit of the 
lower classes. He rented a hali—used on Saturday 
nights for dancing—near the North Side Market, 
where were many Catholics and Germans, and com- 
menced his school among the half-starved, drunk- 
en, blasphemous, degr:ded mortals in this Five 
Points of Chicago. This school—which in one year 
reached to over six hundred and soon increased to 
a thousand—was held in this hall for six years, and 
has become one of the mest noted in the West. 

In his benevolent visitations from house to house, 
Mr. Moody was frequently interfered with by the 
rougher people, and occasionally was obliged to 
flee for his life. 

It is said that upon one occasion he was cornered 
by three ruffians who threatened to kill him. 

“Look here,” said he, “give a fellow a chance to 
say his prayers, won’t you?” 

They acquiesced, and falling upon his knees he 
prayed so earnestly for his persecutors that they, 
quietly left the room, and he took with him to Sun- 
day-school the children he came for. 

Mr. Moody felt that to make a school profitable, 


1 Was 


officer 
; class 
work; 
filled. 
ing a 
of the 
urday 
arket, 
| com- 
runk- 
Five 
> year 
ed to 
, and 


house, 
ly the 
bd to 
hered 
e to 
s he 
they, 


Sin- 


ble, 


FIRST MISSIONARY EFFORTS. 9 


to such a crowd of disorderly little urchins, it must 
be lively and attractive. He had none of the ideal 
appliances necessary to a modern Sunday-school. 
But he loved children dearly—and the more de- 
graded they were the more interest he seemed to 
take in them, and such trifles as the young urchins 
whistling, pulling each other’s hair, turning somer- 
saults, or crying, ‘‘ Want a shine, Mister,” “ Black 
yer boots,” etc., had no power to ruffle his temper. 

He succeeded in persuading two gentlemen, Mr. 
Trudeau and Mr. Stillson, who were good singers, 
to come and help him. He also pressed Mr. J. V. 
Farwell, a prominent business man of executive 
ability, into the service as superintendent of the 
school. 

For the first few Sabbaths they made no effort at 
regular instruction, but endeavored to gain the at- 
tention and confidence of the children by telling 
them stories, and singing; afterward the school 
was organized and conducted much in the usual 
way. As the mission became notorious and popu- 
lar, there was no lack of teachers. 

Mr. Moody began to be conscious of the defects 
in his education, and his lack of Scripture knowl- 
edge. He had been accustomed to read the Bible 
because he loved it; now, he commenced studying 
it, chapter by chapter, spelling out the hard words, 
and skipping the ones he could not master. Those 
who did not know him during his first efforts at 
evangelization can never appreciate through what 


: 
3 
E 
FS 
i 
‘ 


10 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


difficulties he has struggled up to his present re- 
markable power. 

At a Canada convention, an old friend said of 
him, ‘The first time I ever saw him was at a meet- 
ing in a little old shanty that had been abandoned 
by a saloon-keeper. Mr. Moody had got the place 
to hold a meeting in at night. I went there a little 
late; and the first thing I saw was a man standing 
with a few tallow candles around him, holding a 
negro boy, and trying to read to him the story of 
the Prodigal Son; and a great many of the words 
he could not make out, and had to skip. I thought, 
If the Lord can ever use such an instrument as that 
for His honor and glory, it will astonish me. After 
that meeting was over Mr. Moody said to me, ‘ Rey- 
nolds, I have got only one talent: I have no educa- 
tion, but I love the Lord Jesus Chris+ and I want 
to do something for Him and 1 want you to pray 
for me.’ I have never ceased from that day to this, 
morning and night, to pray for that devoted Chris- 
tian soldier. I have watched him, have had counsel 
with him, and know him thoroughly; and, for con- 
sistent walk and conversation, I have never met a 
man to equal him. It astounds me when I look 
back and see what Mr. Moody was thirteen years 
ago, and then what he is under God to-day—shak- 
ing Scotland to its very centre, and reaching now 
over to Ireland. The last time I heard from him, 
his injunction was, ‘Pray for me every day; pray 
now that God will keep me humble.’” 


nt re- 


aid of 
, meet- 
idoned 
» place 
a little 
anding 
ding a 
tory of 
words 
ought, 
as that 

After 
, ‘Rey- 
educa- 
I want 
oO pray 
o this, 
Chris- 
ounsel 
br con- 
met a 
T look 

years 

shak- 


gy now 
h him, 
> pray 


CHAPTER III. 
MR. MOODY'S WAIFS. 


Mr. Moopy’s pupils grew very much attached to 
him and some of them very zealous for the honor 
of the school. One day an urchin who had been 
caught with the young evangelist’s sweets—he used 
to carry a quantity of maple sugar around with 
him to entice the children—came into the school 
and sat down with his cap on. A lad, who had 
been some time a member of the mission, walking 
in, saw the new recruit with his cap on. He de- 
liberately stepped up to him, snatched off the offend- 
ing article and, striking him a blow in the face with 
it which felled him to the floor, said, “Tl learn you 
better than to wear your cap in this school,” and 
marched away, to his place, with the air of one who 
had performed a meritorious act. 

One Sabbath afternoon one of Mr. Moody’s eldest 
pupils came to him for advice. His father, a Roman 
Catholic, was bitterly opposed to the mission, and, 
every Sunday afternoon, in a drunken frenzy, would 
give him an unmerciful beating. He had endured 
this for several successive weeks. 

Mr. Moody advised him to pray. This he did. 
Upon reaching home his father came toward him 


12 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


with birch uplifted ready to give him the accustomed 
flogging. 

Quietly taking off his coat, the boy said, “you 
have always been kind to me, father, when not in 
liquor: it is not my father which beats me every 
Sunday, but whiskey, so now I am going to fight the 
whiskey.” 

This was but adding fuel to the fire. A sharp 
contest ensued but whiskey was so badly conquered 
that ever after the father allowed his boy to attend 
the school unmolested. 

Mr. Moody did not attempt the degree of order 
in his mission which would be necessary in an ordi- 
nary Sunday-school, but there was a big, bold fellow 
who tried his patience sorely. He could neither be 
entreated, nor frightened, nor shamed into obedi- 
ence, bnt grew constantly worse. The teachers held 
a consultation, and thought he ought to be dis- 
missed; but this was contrary to Mr. Moody’s ideal 
of the Gospel, and they separated without arriving 
at any definite plan of action. 

The next Sunday came and with it this same burly 

boy more noisy than ever. There was fear that he 
would actually break up the school. 
_ Mr. Moody came suddenly upon the culprit in the 
vestibule, seized him by both arms, lifted him from 
his feet, took him to a class-room, locked the door 
and—thrashed him. 

This was not in the least an easy matter, for the of- 
fender was agile, and vigorous, and fierce, as an un- 


stomed 


|, “you 
not in 
3 every 
ght the 


. sharp 
iquered 
attend 


f order 
in ordi- 
1 fellow 
ither be 

obedi- 
brs held 
be dis- 
’s ideal 
rriving 


e burly 
hat he 


in the 
m from 
e door 


the of: 
an un: 


at. MOODY'S WALES 13 


tamed animal. But Mr. Moody proved the stronger, 
and when they came into the school-room the pupil 
was completely conquered and reduced to subjection. 

Mr. Moody said, afterward, to a teacher, “It was 
hard work but I think we have saved him.” 

A gisat event in the history of this school was a 
visit frera President Lincoln. That great man left 
a half-finished dinner, and a distinguished company, 
to be present at a session of Mr. Moody’s school. 
While in the carriage, on the way, Mr. Lincoln 
asked not to be invited to speak to the school. 
But upon his introduction as the président of the 
United States, the excitement of those rough scions 
of American citizenship was uncontrollable, and 
yielding to their enthusiastic clamoring he made 
a Sunday-school speech for the first and last time 
in his life. 

There was, however, nothing of religion in his 
address. It was not until afterward, when the 
weight of a nation’s civil war was crushing him, 
that he himself learned the truth and value of re- 
ligion. And his great, honest nature would never 
allow him to stoop to speak upon a subject beyond 
his experience or understanding. 

Afterward, when the war broke out, and Lincoln 
called for volunteers, sixty of these same boys en- 
rolled themselves in the Army of the Republic. 

In his visitations from house to house Mr. Moody 
inet very many wretched families. One Sunday 
morning going into a miserable attic he found the 


1-4 MOODY S LIFE AND WORK, 


wife half crazy from rum, the husband on the verge 
of delirium tremens, and the children half famished 
for want of food. He went out and procured them 
some nourishment. Then he talked to them on 
temperance, and persuaded the man to sign the 
pledge, a copy of which he had with him. 

The following Sabbath all the family attended 
the mission. Passing that way, a day or two after- 
ward, the man called to him from the window, threw 
a silver coin to him and said, “TI like that Sunday- 
school and I want to take a little stock in it.” 

That reformed inebriate is now a Christian gen- 
tleman with a thriving business and a delightful 
home of his own. 

One Saturday night Mr. Moody, with his friend 
Mr. Stillson, entered a drinking saloon and—while 
the men were carousing and swearing—asked to 
leave some religious papers with those who were 
drinking. Permission being granted they entered 
into conversation with the bar-keeper, and gradu- 
ally learned that his father and mother were Chris- 
tian people. Simultaneously they asked the ques- 
tion, “Do your parents know that you are selling 
liquor ?” 

The man was evidently touched and softened 
They spoke with him kindly and bade him “ gooa 
night.” 

They had not yet reached home when they felt 
that they had failed in their duty in not praying 
with the bar-tender. So they turned back, re-en 


| verge 
nished 
1 them 
2m on 
mm. the 


tended 

after- 
threw 
unday- 


n gen- 
ightful 


friend 
—while 
ked to 
oO were 
pntered 
gradu- 
Chris- 
P ques- 
selling 


ftened 
** g00G 


ey felt 
praying 
re-en 


- 


MR. MOODY'S WAIFS, 15 


tered the saloon, and asked the keeper’s forgiveness 
for not praying with him. 

Then Mr. Moody knelt down and offered a prayer 
of which Mr. Stillson says— 

“T never heard Moody pray like that before, it 
seemed as if he was baptized and inspired by the 
Holy Ghost.” 

Two weeks afterward they met him in the street, 
when he told them he had given up drinking, 
closed his liquor saloon, and would rather die in 
the alms-house than have any thing more to do 
with liquor. 

One trouble, a cause of serious annoyance to Mr. 
Moody, was the Catholic boys breaking the windows 
of his building and disturbing his meetings. 

Av length, when his patience was exhausted, he 
called upon Bishop Duggan, the Romish prelate of 
the city, and stated his cause of complaint. Sur- 
prised at his fearlessness and zeal the bishop prom- 
ised that thereafter the boys in his church should be 
properly restrained. 

Emboldened by the bishop’s kindly answer Mr. 
Moody then preferred a strange request. 

He aaid, “I often come across sick people who 
are Roman Catholics. I should be glad to pray 
with them and relieve them, but they are so suspi- 
cious of me they will not allow me to come near 
them. Now, bishop, won’t you give me a good 
word to those people; it will help me amazingly in 
my work.” 


Da ae RT cae 
hl EA EIR aE 


te 


16 MOODY'S Litw AND WORK. 


Zoe bishop replied, “TI will be most happy to give 
the recommendation if you will join the Catholic 
Church, you seem to be too good and valuable a 
man to be a heretic.” 

“Tam afraid that would hinder me in my work 
among the Protestants,” answered Mr. Moody. 

“Not at all,” returned the prelate. 

“ What,” said the evangelist, “do you mean to tell 
me that I could go to the noon-prayer-meeting, and 
pray with all kinds of Christian people—Baptists, 
Methodists, Congregationalists, every denomination, 
just as I do now?” 

“Oh yes, if it were necessary, you might do 
that.” 

“So, then, Catholics and Protestants can pray to- 
gether, can they?” 

“Yes.” 

“Well, bishop, this is a very important matter. 
No one wants to belong to the true church more 
than Ido. I wish you would pray for me right here 
that God would show me His true church and help 
me to be a worthy member of it.” 

The bishop could not very well refuse, so they 
kreeled down together and he prayed very kindly 
for the heretic, and, afterward, the heretic prayed 
earnestly for him. 

The bishop prohibited his wild parishioners from 
breaking any more of Moody’s prayer-meeting win- 
dows, and from that time until his decease Bishor 
Duggan was a good friend to Mr, Moody 


Lo give 
atholic 
iwble a 


y work 
ly. 


. to tell 
ng, and 
aptists, 
ination, 


ght do 


oray to- 


matter. 
h more 
rht here 
md help 


so they 
y kindly 
prayed 


rs from 
ng win- 
Bishor 


CHAPTER IV. 
CHARACTERISTIC INCIDENTS. 


Grapvuatty, Mr. Moody’s heart, and thought, and 
time, were so given to his missionary labors that he 
took very little interest in his business and decided 
to give up his cherished plan of making a fortune 
and devote his whole time to his work. 

“How do you expect to live?” inquired a friend. 

“God will provide if he wishes me to keep on; 
and I will keep on until I am obliged to stop,” was 
his answer. 

He had saved about a thousand dollars but, with 
his numerous charities, this soon disappeared. He 
was at last obliged to sleep upon the benches in the 
Young Men’s Christian Association hall because he 
had no money with which to pay for lodgings else- 
where. He slept there with money in his purse 
which friends, not knowing his circumstances, had 
given him to use in his work, but which he was too 
conscientious to take for his own personal expenses. 

Since that time he has never received a salary 
from any individual, nor entered into any business 
or speculation. Yet he has never known actual want. 
God has cared for him and his family. Friends con- 
stantly insist upon supplying him with all the neces- 
sary comforts of life. 

2 


meriverngg: at i 


oo 


Cre ter IR or TTT a BOR 


oe eee 


EEN, TR Ss atc 
i ORES hs ARSE nein la wt ae A At PARE AR I aE 


os 
Bs 
on 
ay 
3, 
Si 
a 


v9 


18 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


At the breaking out of the rebellion a new direc- 
tion was given to Mr. Moody’s labors. In the neigh- 
borhood of Chicago was a large camp where he would 
go, night after night, seeking to bring the soldiers 
under the influence of divine grace. Subsequently 
he was in the service of the Christian Commission, 
as president of the executive branch for Chicago. 

During the four years of carnage and death he 
labored and travelled indefatigably, supplying the 
soldiers with comforts, and pointing the dying to 
the Saviour. 

A Christian Commissioner gives the following re- 
sult of his teaching the soldiers faith in prayer for 
temporal supplies: 

“One night, a party of our men found themselves 
on a battle-field, in charge of a great many wounded 
soldiers, who, by the sudden retreat of the army, 
were left wholly without shelter or supplies. Havy- 
ing done their best for the poor fellows—bringing 
them water from a distant brook, and searching the 
haversacks of the dead for rations—they began to 
say to themselves, and one another, ‘These weak 
and wounded men must have food, or they will die. 
The army is out of reach, and there is no village for 
many miles: what are we to do?’ 

«Pray to God to send us bread,’ said one. 

“That night, in the midst of the dead and dying, 
they held a little prayer-meeting, telling the Lord 
all about the case, anc begging Him to send them 
bread immediately ; though from whence it could 


direc- 
neigh- 
would 
oldiers 
uently 
ission, 
120. 

ath he 
ng the 
ing to 


ing re- 
yer for 


nselves 
runded 
army, 

Hay- 
inging 
ng the 
ran to 

weak 
ll die. 
ge for 


dying, 
Lord 
them 
could 


ET ee git ay eat ae eae palette Sohal ir Ou ia alt aoa 


CHARACTERISTIC INCIDENTS. 19 


come they had not the most remote idea. All night 
long they plied their work of mercy. With the first 
ray of dawn the sound of an approaching wagon 
caught their ears; and presently, through the mists 
of the morning, appeared a great Dutch farm wag- 
on, piled to the very top with loaves of bread. 

“On their asking the driver where he came from, 
and who sent him, he replied: 

«“¢When I went to bed last night I knew that the 
army was gone, and I could not sleep for thinking 
of the poor fellows who always have to stay behind. 
Something seemed to say to me, “ What will those 
poor fellows do for something to eat?” It came to 
me so strong that I waked up my old wife, and told 
her what was the matter. We had only a little bread 
in the house; and while my wife was making some 
more I took my team and went around to all my 
neighbors, making them get up and give me all the 
bread in their houses, telling them it was for the 
wounded soldiers. When I got home my wagon 
was full, my old wife piled her baking on the top, 
and I started off to bring the bread to the boys, feel- 
ing just as if the Lord, Himself, was sending me.’” 

Mr. Moody was on the battle-fields of Shiloh, 
Pittsburg Landing, Murfreesboro; with the army in 
many different places, and was among the first to 
enter Richmond, where with undiminished zeal he 
ministered alike to loyalists and rebels. 

The war being ended he again gave his undivided 
attention to missionary work in Chicago. He had 


2() MOODY'S LIFE AXD WORK. 


now a commodious chapel in Illinois street erected 
at a cost of $20,000—which money he had himself 
collected. He was President of the Chicago Y. M. 
C. A., and calls for him to attend religious conven- 
tions and revival meetings were very frequent. But 
his chief work was in his own church, one peculiar- 
ity of which was every member having some specified 
work to do. It is said that the bell in the tower— 
a gift from a New-York friend—used to ring every 
night in the week for a men’s meeting, or mother’s 
meeting, or Bible meeting, or temperance meeting, 
or stranger’s meeting, or a meeting of some kind. 

One morning Mr. Moody observed a stranger 
standing on the corner near his church, apparently 
with nothing to do and nowhere to go, and going 
up to him and handing him a number of papers 
said very pleasantly, ‘“‘ Here, take this pile of papers 
and standing at that corner give one to every body 
that passes by.” 

The stranger, pleased to hear a friendly voice and 
have something to do, took them and gave them 
out as directed, joined Moody’s church, and has 
Deen since a most effective worker. 

Though bodily weariness occasionally overcame 
him he would recover his strength and spirits after 
a very brief season of rest. 

Col. Hammond, a friend of his, gives the follow- 
ing incident: 

“Mr. Moody cane to me one Sunday, after morn- 
ing service, seemingly quite tired out. He threw 


‘ 
38 
Ff 
‘a 
a 
s 
a 
“is 
Be! 
Ba 
Ss 
“ody 


rected 
uimself 
-Y. M.z 
onven- 
But 
culiar- 
ecified 
ywer— 
' every 
other’s 
eeting, 
rind, 
ranger 
arently 
going 
papers 
papers 
y body 


ce and 
them 
hd has 


brcame 
s after 


ollow- 


morn- 
threw 


CHARACTERISTIC INCIDENTS. 21 


himself into a chair and burst out—‘I am used up 
—can’t think, or speak, or do any thing else. There 
is my meeting at the church to-night—you must 
take it. I have absolutely nothing left in me.’ 

“Knowing that he never asked help unless he 
needed it, I promised to take the service off his 
hands. When the time came I went down to the 
church, and found the house quite full. I was 
about commencing the service, when the door 
opened, and in rushed Mr. Moody, followed '~ a 
long procession of young men whom he had picked 
up and brought with him on an errand which, to 
them, was evidently a new one. 

“Mounting the platform with a bound, he seized 
the hymn-book and commenced, and from beginning 
to end of that service I had nothing to do but keep 
out of the way. 

“He had taken a rest of an hour or two, and then, 
having no care about the evening service on his 
mind, took up his old work of bringing in recruits, 
at which he was this time unusually successiul. As 
he led them to the church some happy thought 
struck him, and between the street corner and the 
pulpit he arranged a sermon which was one of the 
most effective I ever heard him preach.” 

Mr. Hitchcock, now superintendent of Mr. Moody’s 
school, gives the following characteristic sketch of the 
Evangelist making two hundred calls one New Year's 
Day: 

“At an early hour the carriage which was to take 


39 MOODY S LIFE AND WORK. 


him and several of his leading men was at the door, 
and, with a carefully prepared list of residences, they 
began the day’s labor. The list included a very large 
proportion of families living in garrets, and the upper 
stories of tenement houses. On reaching a family be- 
longing to his congregation he would spring out of 
the carriage, leap up the stairways, rush into the 
room, and pay his respects as follows: 

“*You know me: I am Moody; this is Deacon 
De Golyer, this is Deacon Thane, this is Brother 
Hitchcock. Are you all well? Do you all come to 
church and Sunday-school? Have you all the coal 
you need for the winter? Let us pray.’ And down 
we would all go upon our knees, while Mr. Moody 
offered from fifteen to twenty words of earnest, ten- 
der, sympathetic supplication, that God would bless 
the man, his wife, and each one of the children. 

“Then, springing to his feet, he would dash on 
his hat, dart through the doorway and down the 
stairs, throwing a hearty ‘good-by’ behind him, 
leap into the carriage, and off to the next place on 
his list; the entire exercise occupying about one 
minute and a half. 

“ Before long the horses were tired out, for Moody 
insisted on their going at a run, from one house to 
another; so the carriage was abandoned, and the 
party proceeded on foot. One after another his 
companions became exhausted with running up- 
stairs and down-stairs, and across the streets, and 
kneeling on bare floors, and getting up in a hurry’ 


door, 
3, they 
‘large 
upper 
ily be- 
out of 
to the 


eacon 
rother 
me to 
e coal 
down 
Toody 
t, ten- 
bless 
de. 
sh on 
n the 
him, 
ce on 
t one 


Loody 
se to 

the 
r his 
, Uup- 
s, and 
urry' 


CHARACTERISTIC INCIDENTS. 23 


until, reluctantly, but of necessity, they were obliged 
to relinquish the attempt, and the tireless pastor was 
left to make the last of the two hundred calls alone; 
after which feat he returned home in the highest 
spirits, and with no sense of fatigue, to laugh at his 
exhausted companions for deserting him.” 

One afternoon Mr. Moody was being driven by a 
Christian gentleman through a farming community, 
to a town where he was to speak at a convention 
and attend revival meetings. As they journeyed 
they came to a school-house closed for the day. At 
the farm-house beyond Mr. Moody stopped and in- 
quired of the woman if they ever had any religious 
meetings in that school-house. Upon her replying 
that they never had any meetings around there he 
said, “ Tell every body you see there will be a prayer- 
meeting in that school-house every night next week.” 

At the second house they found the teacher of 
the school and Mr. Moody gave the same notice to 
her telling her to send word throughout the com- 
munity, by her pupils. His acquaintance, knowing 
that he had an engagement for every night the fol- 
lowing week, inquired of him who was to superin- 
tend the meetings. 

“You are,” was the blunt reply. 

“J!” cried the astonished brother, “I never did 
such a thing in my life.” 

“Tt is high time you commenced then! I have 
made the appointment and you must keep it.” 

The timid brother was forced to acquiesce, and 


peer ae 


SR 6S ee . 
eae ern nS ed SA rE t= in rn 
janie - z " 


Sang 


Man seen ae ae 


ah 
Ee 
si 
= 


24 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


led the meetings, which was the result of a great 
revival throughout all that portion of the country. 

At a certain State Sunday-school Convention Mr. 
Moody’s determination that every thing connect- 
ed with Sunday-school work, however extended, 
should be conducted upon a basis of strict piety, 
and with earnest religious exercises, in contradis- 
tinction to the views and more worldly purposes of 
some of his eminent co-laborers—gained him the 
severe displeasure of several prominent men at the 
convention. Mr. Moody’s views were adopted, by 
a vote of the majority, and he and his friends ap- 
pointed upon a number of important committees. 
One of the opposition, in the presence of five thou- 
sand people, gave him a pointedly insulting question 
to speak upon. 

He accepted the challenge and spoke with ex- 
traordinary meekness and fervent religious feeling. 
He touchingly recapitulated his own and his friends’ 
labors for Christ, and at the end tendered the res- 
ignation of all honorable offices he and his friends 
had received. But his address had moved the mul- 
titude to tears, and the hearts of his enemies to 
deepest repentance. 

Unanimously, and by acclaim, they voted that the 
resignation should not be accepted, expressed their 
appreciation of him and his work, and a desire for his 
pardon. Never was a more melting scene witnessed 
in a vast audience, than when the great man offered 
a short, audible prayer for reconciliation and peace. 


great 
untry. 
n Mr. 
nnect- 
ended, 
piety, 
tradis- 
ses of 
m the 
at the 
ed, by 
ds ap- 
ittees. 
thou- 
estion 


h ex- 
eling. 
iends’ 
e res- 
riends 
b mul- 
les to 


at the 
their 
or his 
essed 
fered 
eace, 


CHAPTER V. 
ALLIANCE OF MOODY AND SANKEY. 


Ir was early in the year 1871 that Mr. Moody 
first met—at a National Convention of Young Men’s 
Christian Associations, Indianapolis, Indiana—Mr. 
Ira David Sankey. 

This gentleman was born in Edinburg, Pennsy]l- 
vania, U. S., in the year 1840. He was the child of 
pious parents, but it was not until his sixteenth year 
that he experienced a change of heart. 

He early displayed a taste for music and, after his 
conversion, took an active part in promoting the 
efficient training of Sunday-school children in the 
singing of hymns. At the age of twenty he was 
a leader in the M. E. Church of an evening class 
numbering seventy or eighty, and superintendent 
of a large Sunday-school. 

Mr. Moody hearing him sing and being intro- 
duced to him, at the close of the meeting, after a 
few preliminary questions, abruptly told him he 
wanted him to come and work with him in Chi- 
cago; that he was the man for whom he had been 
seeking during the last eight years. 

A proposition to leave his pleasant home and 
prosperous business, and go into a strange city to 
do missionary labor—from a man with whom he 


sea 5 ane a se een = a ee 


ai 
one ora LI i — 


26 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


was personally unacquainted, but of whom he had 
heard that he was living entirely dependent upon 
faith in God for his daily sustenance—was rather 
startling, but M.. Moody succeeded in obtaining 
from him a promise that he would think about it 
and pray over it. A few evenings after they held 
a meeting together in the streets of Indianapolis, 
and with such signal success that Sankey resolved 
he, too, would trust the Lord and go with his new 
friend to labor in Chicago. 

Mr. Sankey’s singing has no pretension to the 
artistic, his music is made subservient to the words, 
and in accent and tone is constantly varied to suit 
the words; but the hallowed sweetness and winning 
tenderness of many of his songs has been effectual 
in awakening many thousands of people. 

For two or three years prior to their going abroad 
these two men labored amicably and efficaciously, 
in Chicago, Pittsfield, Springfield, Philadelphia, and 
many other towns and cities. 

In October the terrible fire swept over the city. 
It covered a space of one mile by four. Within 
the doomed precinct were Mr. Moody’s school and 
church and the building of the Young Men’s Chris- 
tian Association. 

Mr. Moody had been married in 1862, to Miss 
Emma C. Revell. At the time of the fire he was liv 
ing with his wife and children—a boy and girl—in 
an elegant house, completely and handsomely fur- 
nished—a New Yeav’s gift from generous friends, 


had 
upon 
uther 
ining 
ut it 
held 
rolis, 
olved 

new 


» the 
ords, 
- suit 
ning 
ctual 


road 
usly, 
,and 


city. 
ithin 
l and 
hris- 


Miss 

S liv 

l—-in 
fur- 
8, 


ALLIANCE OF MOODY AND SANKEY. 27 


Mr. Moody and his family were roused at mid- 
night to find the fire approaching their dwelling and, 
leaving their home with all their precious property 
to the merciless flames, hurriedly sought shelter at 
the house of a friend. The only article he saved 
was his Bagster Bible. Placing his family beyond 
reach of the raging fire, he immediately commenced 
providing the hungry and the houseless with food 
and shelter. 

So indefatigable was his energy, so unconquerable 
his faith, and so successful his solicitations for dona- 
tions, that in thirty days after the destruction of his 
school building, a great, rough, comfortable struc- 
ture, over a hundred feet in length and seventy-five 
in width—was erected, in the centre of the ruins, for 
the accommodation of his pupils. 

Being such a distance from the habitations which 
escaped the fire, it was feared there would be but a 
meagre attendance the first Sabbath. But at the 
dedicatory service were over one thousand children, 
with some of their parents and friends, who had 
come over the charred ruins to the new chapel. 

The building was kept open day and night and 
food and shelter were provided for any housceless 
wanderer who chanced to enter. 

Mr. Moody, when supplying them with neces- 
saries, would exact from them a promise that, before 
they ate the food or put on the clothes, they would 
thank the Lord upon their knees for sending them. 

In June, 1878, Mr. Moody decided to accept the 


ee Ee RE ee 
BRE ginny emigninilenctme ttn tice + 


Se IE en BE 


' 
‘ 
H 


——— 


28 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


invitation of two gentlemen—Mr. Pennefather, of 
London, and Mr. Bainbridge, of Newcastle—to com- 
mence an evangelistic work in Great Britain. 

The time selected for this missionary tour was 
characteristic of the man. His new church was in 
process of building, and his school and congregation 
were soon to be transferred to the basement story. 
Mr. Moody felt that there were many who could 
execute as well as he the numberless little matters 
incident to the erection of a new building. He left, 
the spiritual superintendence to the members of his 
flock—-whom he taught to be Independent in spirit 
as they were in name. They had occasional help 
from the pastors of other churches. 

He has had no reason to regret his faith in the 
ability of those in whose charge he left his work. 

Mr. Moody made all his arrangements to leave, 
secured a passage for himself and family, bade his 
congregation and school farewell, but to within an 
hour of his departure by the train had not a dollar 
with which to defray his expenses. 

A few hours before the time he was to start it oc- 
curred to a friend of his, Hon. J. V. Farwell, who 
kuew nothing of his straitened circumstances, that 
Mocd, would need some money after he reached 
England. Going down to bid him farewell he placed 
in his hand a check for $500. 

On the 7th of June, 1873, Mr. Moody, with his 
family and Mr. Sankey, sailed for Liverpool, reach- 
ing there after a prosperous voyage of ten days. 


ler, of 
0 com- 


iY was 
vas in 
cation 
story. 
could 
iatters 
Te left 
of his 
spirit 
1 help 


in the 
rk. 

leave, 
e his 
in an 
lollar 


it oc- 

who 
| that 
nched 
laced 


his 
bach- 


CHAPTER VI. 
OVER THE SEA. 


Mr. Moopy with his Bible, and Mr. Sankey with 
his music-book and organ, arriving in Liverpool on 
the 17th of June, 1873, learned that the friends who 
had invited them to Great Britain were both dead. 
Lamenting their loss but not disheartened, they im- 
mediately commenced their work. 

They held meetings in Liverpool, York, Sunder- 
land, Newcastle, Stockton-on-tees, Carlisle, Darling- 
ton, and Shields. At several of these places hundreds 
were influenced to come to Christ. 

After they reached Edinburgh three or four of the 
largest halls were constantly in requisition, yet dis- 
appointed thousands turned away from these over- 
crowded buildings unable to gain admittance. 

Dr. Blakie says, of the work in Edinburgh: “ There 
have been some very remarkable conversions of scep- 
tics. Dr. Andrew Thompson told of one who, having 
been awakened on the previous week, had gone for 
the first time to church on the previous Sunday. He 
had hardly been in a place of worship for years, and 
a week before would have scouted the idea. He was 
so happy in the morning that he returned in the af- 
ternoon. The blessing seemed to come down upon 


a Et 
eS 


ee ee 


= 


Se 


ee 


I= 


RRR a Nac ei oe 


pavers —— 


30 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


him. Another sceptic who carried his unbelief tc 
the verge of blasphemy has now come to the foot of 
the cross. 

“Among the most direct and touching fruits of 
saving impressions of any one, affectionate interest 
in the welfare of other members of the family is one 
of the surest and most uniform. A working man 
of fifty years of age, for example, is impressed and 
brought to peace in believing, and immediately he 
comes to the minister and cries out, with streaming 
eyes, ‘Oh! pray for my two sons!’ A father and 
his son are seen at another meeting with arms round 
each other’s necks. In many cases the work of con- 
version seems to go through whole families. That 
peculiar joyfulness and expectation which marks 
young converts, is often the means of leading oth- 
ers to the fourtain, and two, three, four, and even 
more membeis of the same family share the blessing.” 

And Dr. Bonar says, ‘‘ There was scarcely a Chris- 
tian household in all Edinburgh, in which there 
were not one or more persons converted during 
the revival.” 

Through the two months of the Fvangelists’ stay 
in Edinburgh a noon prayer-meeting was held daily, 
at Free Association Hall, and each noon attended 
by over one thousand persons. 

Among the inquirers were youths in their teens, 
students from the University, soldiers from the Cas- 
tle, old men with their threescore years and ten, 
the rich, the poor, the educated, the uneducated, 


<ciianeeleinneecemreeraeet ama 


OVER THE SEA. 31 


the backslider, the blasphemer, and the sceptic; 
and in many instances the wounded were healed 
and the burdened went home rejoicing. 

During the holidays masses of young people from 
the school crowded the meetings. So great was the 
attraction of Mr. Sankey’s singing and Mr. Moody’s 
eloquence, that hundreds of young persons, espe- 
cially of the higher classes, who were formerly ac- 
customed to go to the theatre, opera, and panto- 
mime, gave them up deliberately and, from choice 
and the force of conviction, attended the Gospel and 
prayer-meetings. 

The last meeting was held on the slope of Arthur’s 
Seat, no edifice being in the least capable of contain- 
ing the vast multitude. 

The following is a graphic sketch of a day at 
Elgin: 

“Surely something unusual was going on, strects 
abandoned, the house-doors fast, the shops closed. 
Through half a mile of the empty streets ours were 
the only footsteps that echoed on the pavement, and 
every thing was silent and desolate asa plague-strick- 
en city! At last, just on the verge of the town, the 
stillness was broken by the distant sound of a voice, 
and the turn of a lane revealed a sight which time 
can never efface from the memory. There stood the 
inhabitants, motionless, breathless, plague-stricken 
indeed, plague-stricken with the plague of sin. The 
sermon was evidently half over, and the preacher, 
with folded arms, leaned over the wooden rail of the 


32 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


rude platform. Oh, the sin upon those faces round 
him! I cannot tell you who were there, or how 
many, or what a good choir there was, or what Mr. 
Sankey sang, or which dignitary prayed. I cannot 
tell you how beautifully the sun was setting, or how 
fresh the background of woods looked, or how azure 
the sky was. But these old men penitent, these 
drunkards petrified, these strong men’s tears, these 
drooping heads of women, these groups of gutter 
children, with their wondering eyes! Oh, that mul- 
titude of thirsty ones—what 1 sight it was! What 
could the preacher do but ach his best? And 
long after the time for stop} 4, was it a marvel to 
hear the persuasive voice still pleading with these 
Christless thousands ? 

“One often hears doubts as to the possibility of 
producing an impression in the open air, but there 
is no mistake this time. No, there is no mistaking 
these long, concentric arcs of wistful faces curving 
around the speaker, and these reluctant tears, which 
conscious guilt has wrung from eyes unused to weep. 
Oh, the power of the living Spirit of God! Oh, the 
fascination of the Gospel of Christ! Oh, the glad- 
ness of the old, old story of these men and women 
hurrying graveward! These thousands just hung 
spellbound on the speaker’s lips. It seemed as if 
he daren’t stop, so many hungry ones were there to 
feed. At last he seemed about to close, and the au- 
dience strained to catch the last solemn words; when 
the preacher, casting his eye on a little boy, seemed 


ad 
)W 
Lr. 
ot 
OW 
ire 
ese 
ese 
ter 
ul- 
hat 
Lnd 
l to 
1ese 


y of 
ere 
king 
ying 
ich 
eep. 
the 
lad- 
men 
ung 
AS if 
e to 

aul- 
rhen 
m ed 


OVER THE SKA. 33 


moved with an overpowering desire to tell the little 
ones of a children’s Christ. Then followed for fif- 
teen minutes more the most beautiful and pathetic 
children’s sermon we have ever heard; and then, 
turning to the weeping mothers and fathers, con- 
cluded with a last tender appeal, which must have 
sunk far into many a parent’s heart. 

When these tireless Evangelists had compassed 
Scotland they crossed the water. Mr. Sankey was 
a decided favorite with the Irish people. 

The majority of people in Dublin are Roman 
Catholics. Strangely enough the first convert given 
them in this capital was a young man of the Rom- 
ish faith, So many of that. persuasion flocked to 
hear them that Cardinal Cullen felt obliged to pub- 
lish an edict prohibiting their attendance upon the 
meetings. 

The following is an extract from an article-—enti- 
tled “Fair Play,” in a Catholic paper—on the re- 
vival; “With much regret we notice indications of 
an attempt to excite the hostility of our Catholic 
population against the religious services conducted 
by some Protestant missionaries from America. We 
trust we shall not appeal in vain to the spirit of tol- 
erance, of honorable fair play, of respect of con- 
science in the breasts of Irish Catholics, when we 

call upon them to crush the slightest attempt at 
offensive demonstration against the religious exer- 
cises which some sections of the Protestant commu- 
nity are holding, under the auspices of the gentlemen 
3 


34 MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


we refer to. We Catholics should ever discriminate 
between the Protestantism o7 sincere men devoted 
to their own convictions, but seeking no unjust in- 
terference with ours, and the wretched kind of Prot- 
estantism which consists in wanton insult and ag- 
gression upon the Catholic poor. For this latter 
warfare on our homes and altars, we shall always 
have scorn and reprobation; for the former, we 
should always have respectful sentiments. Let 
Messrs. Moody and Sankey do all they can to make 
Protestants earnest in religion. Let us Catholics 
daily devote ourselves more and more energetically 
to the practical duties of our holy faith; and let us 
all, Protestant and Catholic, work and pray to keep 
the teachings and theories of the Huxleys and the 
Tyndalls far from the shores of Ireland.” 

Leaving Dublin the brethren returned to England. 

At Birmingham, in one week, they held twenty- 
two services, reaching in the aggregate 156,000 men, 
women, and children. 

At one of the meetings a roughly clad man, to all 
appearance a common laborer, who had come to 
town after the meeting was over, seemed much dis- 
appointed. He had walked, in the rain, nearly six 
miles in order to hear the Evangelists, and arrived 
too late to gain an entrance. He said he had to 
walk back and preach the same evening. He was 
somewhat relieved when he obtained a ticket for the 
worker’s meeting the following Sunday morning. 
May, June, July, and August, of 1874, were given 


OVER THE SEA. 35 


by the Evangelists to London. Agricultural Hall, 
in North London, was the first building chosen for 
their labors, and it was variously computed that the 
arrangements afforded accommodation for from fif- 
teen to eighteen thousand people. 

At the first meeting inside, the great multitude 
were singing Old Hundred. Outside there were in- 
fidels distributing handbills, containing malignant 
misstatements ; multitudes of young men full of 
frolic and fun; gaily-dressed evil women laughing 
and jesting; carmen, boardmen, and loafers, swear- 
ing and mocking; among all not one serious face, 
not one with thought or care for their immortal 
souls, proving that the brethren were wise in devot- 
ing four months to the city which evidently needed 
them so much. 

Afterward, many of these wretched characters were 
induced to come to the services and to Christ. 

The noon prayer-meeting, held at Her Majesty’s 
Opera House, was a marked feature of the work in 
that metropolis. 

The number of requests for prayer constantly flow- 
ing in could not be read separately, but were classi- 
fied, as follows: sixty requests for prayer for uncon- 
verted children, forty requests by Christian wives 
for husbands out of Christ, ten requests by sisters 
for brothers addicted to the use of liquor. Hun- 
dreds of Sunday-school teachers request prayer for 
their pupils. Twenty requests for profligate sons 
by heart-broken parents. 


Scans 


Some ee 


aaa 


SEER eR RM eh Sa 


Sethe Nah ea gr 


36 MOODYS LIFE AND WORK. 


And one day came to Her Majesty’s Opera House 
the strangest petition of all. A poor woman in 
Newgate prison condemned to die sent a request 
for prayer. The heart of the great audience, mostly 
of the nobility, was touched with compassion, and 
with bowed heads they prayed the kind Father to 
bless the miserable, condemned criminal. 

A tract distributor passing over Waterloo Bridge 
offered a man a tract. He declined it with the re- 
mark, “TI shall be in hell before night.” 

“No, you will not, for Iam going to heaven, and 
will stick to you all day.” 

They left the bridge together, the hungry man 
was fed and taken to one of the meetings. While 
there he fell asleep. ‘Let him sleep, perhaps h2 
has been walking all night,” said his friend. 

After the services were ended he was taken home 
to supper, inquiring concerning all this kindness, 
“what’s up?” He was fed, cared for, reasoned with, 
instructed and taught the way to heaven, instead of 
going to hell as he had said. 

After five weeks at Agricultural Hall and some 
time spent at Row Road Hall the Evangelists re- 
moved to the Royal Opera House in the Haymarket. 

Here the wealthy, the titled, the cultivated, and 
the leaders of fashionable society gathered—partic- 
ularly at the Bible readings. 

A New York journal, on the revival in London, 
contained the following: ‘“ We presume that the aris- 
tocracy and the literati will scarce hear of the move: 


eA -/> 


OVER THE SEA. 37 


ment that is about them. It is an after generation 
that builds the monuments of the prophets. Bun- 
yan got no words of honor from the Duke of Bed- 
ford, whose descendant has lately set up his statue.” 
But long before these words were written Mr. Moody 
had been welcomed as a guest within the walls of 
Dunrobin Castle, and dined with the Lord Chancel- 
lor of England. 

At his first meeting in London he was assisted 
by a peer of the realm and, at the Haymarket, the 
Princess of Wales, the Duchess of Sutherland, the 
Prince Teck, and many more of the nobility, listened 
to his stirring appeals, wept over his pathetic sto- 
ries, and joined heartily in the sweet songs led by 
Mr. Sankey. 

They must also have added to their presence and 
influence the weight of their purses, for the amount 
expended in London alone, in arrangements for the 
revival, was $625,000. 

One young man’s testimony may be given as an 
illustration of hundreds: “I went into the inquiry 
room, and Mr. Sankey walked up and down with 
me, and talked to me as though he had been my 
own father; and I found Christ.” 

The four months’ labor of the Evangelists in Lon- 
don was ended, and they left Great Britain followed 
by the grateful love, the thankful tenderness, tho 
heart-stirring benedictions of millions of people to 
whom under God they had been the instrument of 
blessing. 


| 
| 


| 


if 
a 

dl 

i af 

Ri! 

| ie 
\ 


| 
| 
i 
| 
| 


CHAPTER VII. 
HOME AGAIN. 


NotwirusranpinG the wonderful career of the revi- 
valists in Europe, there were many who prophesied 
—-and with some plausibility—that the same success 
could not attend them in America, where the songs 
were well known and the style of their address 
familiar. But, instead, the anticipations of their 
most sanguine friends are more than realized. 

A pleasant feature of the Brooklyn services was 
the united and harmonious action of laymen and 
ministers of all denominations of Christians. 

Every morning at the Tabernacle, and every even- 
ing at the Rink, were thirty or forty city pastors 
gathered near the platform all ready to do their ut- 
termost to increase the interest and success of the 
meetings. 

Dr. Duryea gives the following incident in connec- 
tion with the work in Brooklyn: “A young man of 
my acquaintance, of fine culture and wide reading, 
came to me, took me by the hand and said, ‘ Doc- 
tor, I am going.’ 

“He was the first to rise in the auditorium when 
Mr. Moody gave the invitation. He was verging 
on Universalism, but Mr, Moody’s sermon went 


PN LO oe ne nee ne 


a 
wet epee 


POH NS ANE 


HOME AGAIN. 39 


home, and broke sunlight through the vapor and 
mystification in his mind.” 

Many who would not have been influenced to 
attend the revival services by Mr. Moody’s preach- 
ing are drawn thither by Mr. Sankey’s singing. 
Of the hymns sung by Mr. Sankey in Brooklyn 
“The Ninety and Nine” was the general favorite. 
The following is the correct account of its origin: 
The first time Mr. Sankey visited London he bought 
a copy of The Christian Age, a religious paper, 
which published Dr. Talmage’s sermons, and found 
this hymn. It seemed adapted to religious work. 
He cut it from the paper and, three days afterward, 
sang it at a meeting in Edinburgh, having himself 
composed the music. Not long after he received a 
letter from a lady thanking him for having sung the 
hymn, and informing him the author was her sister, 
Miss Eliza C. Claphane, of Melrose, Scotland. She 
wrote the hymn in 1868 and died shortly afterward. 

It is difficult to explain the secret of Mr. Moody’s 
success or the elements of his power. That he has 
power no one, who has ever sat by his side and 
watched the sea of upturned, earnest faces eager 
to catch every syllable which falls from his lips, 
can doubt. 

He is thoroughly in earnest. He preaches with 
his whole soul, evidently believing all he says, and 
expecting his hearers to believe it. 

He is remarkably natural. Without apparent ef- 
fort he gets wonderfully near to his audience, what- 


40) MOODY'S LIFE AND WORK. 


ever their size may be. He speaks with the same 
unaffected fervor to fifteen and to fifteen thousand. 

He is thoroughly conscientious. The committee 
having charge of the revival meetings, in London, 
tendered him a large royalty accruing from the sale 
of music-books in London. It was his by every 
1egal and moral right, but he utterly refused to ac- 
cept a penny of it. Since his return it has been 
sent, by the committee in London, to Mr. Moody’s 
Tabernacle building committee in Chicago. 

That such a man should have no enemies or slan- 
derers would be a miracle. But his calumniators 
are usually those who do not know him, and many 
of these since seeing him and hearing him, have be- 
come his warmest friends. 

In a religious movement of such vast proportions 
as that which is here so briefly and imperfectly 
sketched, there can be no exactness with reference 
to results. 

Just how many thousands of believers have been 
refreshed and helped to a truer knowledge of their 
privilege and duty, and how many tens of thousands 
of wanderers brought into the fold of Christ, will 
never be known until the day when He shall num- 
ber His jewels. 


Lew 
, 


— 


BES eainennecrsccsineem os 


Addresses and Best Thoughts. 


1. How to Reap tur Brstz.—If the Holy Ghost is 
our Teacher, we will understand the Word of God. 
The best thing to interpret the Bible is the Bible it- 
self. There are three books every Christian ought to 
have; the Bible, Cruden’s Concordance, and the “ Bi- 
ble Text-Book.” Study the Bible topically. Take 
up one subject at a time. Take up “Love” and 
spend a month upon it. Take a concordance and go 
through the Bible with it upon this subject, and then 
you will be full of love, and there will be no room 
for malice and hatred in your heart. After that take 
up “Faith”; it is better to go to the Word of God 
and get faith than to pray for it. Then take up 
“Blood”; it shows the way to heaven. Now take 
up “Heaven,” and spend months upon it. Then 
“Prayer.”. We do not know how to pray as we 
ought to. The only way for us to study the Bible 
is to take up one subjeci «ud try to master that sub- 
ject. A man said to me, “Can you recommend the 
best Life of Christ?” I said I could recommend 
four—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. A man had 
better spend a year over those four Gospels than to 
run over the whole Bible. If a man studies Genesis 


{? ADDRESSES 


he has a key to the whole Bible. It is the beginning 
of every thing, and then the other parts of the Bible 
will unfold themselves to us. Let « take the Bible 
up with some object in view—to g —s some truth. 
In California the best gold is found at the greatest 
depth ; and so with the Word of God; the best part 
is deepest. Here is some law document ; it is unin- 
teresting. Now, suppose it is the will of some man 
giving you a great inheritance ; you will become in- 
terested. This Book tells me of this inheritance. 
What can the geologist tell you about the Rock 
of Ages? He can tell you about the rocks of this 
world. What does the astronomer know about the 
bright and morning star? He can ¢+ell you about 
other stars. God did not tell Jo: how to use 
the sword, and fight in the promiseu sand, but He 
told him to meditate upon the law day and night, 
and no one could stand before him. These words 
apply to every one here. This sword cuts right and 
left, and with it a man can cut his enemies right up 
to the throne of God. 


2. Gov’s Brptr anp Sprrit.—A man filled with 
the Spirit dwells much with the Scripture. Peter 
quoted Scripture at the Day of Pentecost, when he 
was full of the Holy Ghost. What is a man good for 
if he has no weapon? We don’t know how to use 
this sword; we should get into the habit of using 
it. David says, “Thy Word have I hid in my heart.” 
A good thing in a good place for a good purpose. 


| 


AND BEST ‘THOUGHTS, a) 


If you lose your health you lie upon your bed ana 
feed upon the Word of God. When you meet to- 
gether to dine it is better to bring out the Bible 
than to bring on wine. I was glad in England at 
seeing that done in a great many houses of the up- 
per classes. 


3. Key to tHe Brsizt.—An Englishman said to me, 
“Moody, did you ever study the life of Job?” Isaid, 
“No, I never did.” He said, “If you get a key to 
Job you get a key to the whole Bible.” ‘ What has 
Job to do with the Bible?” He said, “I wili tell 
you. I will divide the subject into seven heads. 
First, Job, before he was tried, was a perfect man 
untried. He was like Adam in Eden until Satan 
came in. Second, he was tried by adversity. Third, 
the wisdom of the world is represented by Job’s 
friends trying to restore him. See what language 
they used. They were wonderful wise men, but 
they could not help Job out of his difficulties. Men 
are miserable comforters when they do not under- 
stand the grace of God. Job could stand his scold- 
ing wife and his boils better than these men’s argu- 
ments; they made him worse instead of better. 
Fifth, God speaks, and Job humbles himself in the 
dust. God, before He saves a man, brings him 
down into the dust. He does not talk about how 
he has fed the hungry and clothed the naked; but 
he says, I am vile. Seventh, God restores him, and 
the last end of Job was better than the first. So the 


4-4 ADDRESSES 


last state of man is better than the first. It is bet- 
ter than the state of Adam, because Adam might 
have lived ten thous.ad years and then fallen; there- 
fcre it is better for us to be outside of Eden with 
Christ than that we should be in Eden without Him. 
God gave Job double as much wealth as he had _ be- 
fore, but He only gave him ten children. He had 
ten before his calamity came upon him. That is 
worthy of notice. God would not admit that Job 
had lost any children. He gave him ten here and 
ten in heaven.” 


4, Tur Crownina WATCH-NIGHT OF THE CENTURY.— 
The most wonderful watch-night ever held was by 
Moody and Sankey, closing at the dawn of the 
second century of our independence, in the same 
city where that wonderful document the Declara- 
tion of Independence was signed. 

The building was crowded with at least eleven 
thousand persons, and as many more were outside 
trying to get in. The meeting commenced at nine 
o’clock, continuing till ten. Then the doors were 
opened and many retired, thus allowing as many 
others to come in and take their places. So again 
at eleven. The first hour of this service was occu- 
pied by Mr. Moody in an address on ‘“ How long 
halt ye between two opinions.” A delightful feat- 
ure of the second hour was a talk with the Rev. Dr. 
Plumer, of South Carolina, on conviction and con- 
version. The eleven o’clock service was opened by 


ce 


5 
H 
3 
3 
i 
$ 
i 
j 


26 arc careening a (ERC SANE MBE REIN 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 45 


singing “The Lord of Earth and Sky.” Mr. Sankey 
sang ‘One more day’s work for Jesus.” Mr. Moody 
preached from the text, “ What then shall I do 
with Jesus which is called Christ.” He followed 
out the same line of thought that he took in the 
nine o’clock service. He showed the want of de- 
cision in Pilate’s character. More souls are lost for 
the want of decision, than for any one thing. God 
holds the world responsible for what they have done 
with his Son. A large number rose for prayers. 
The congregation, led by Dr. Newton, repeated the 
Lord’s prayer. The benediction was pronounced 
by Dr. Plumer, who then joined Mr. Moody in 
wishing the assembly a happy new year. 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 


5. “THe Son or Man ts come To SEEK AND TO SAVE 
THAT WHICH was Lost.”—To me this is one of the 
sweetest verses in the whole Bible. In this one little 
short sentence we are told what Christ came into 
this world for. He came for a purpose; He came 
to do a work, and in this little verse the whole story 
is told. He came not to condemn the world, but 
that the world through Him, might be saved. 

A few years ago, the Prince of Wales went to 
America, and there was great excitement about your 
Crows Prince. The papers took it up, and began 
to discuss it, and a great many were wondering what 
he came for. Was it to look into the republican 
government? Was it for his health? Was it to see 


ict Sie echt) Sa IO NC Rca, IP Rp dit ge = ese 


46 ADDRESSES 


our institutions? he never told us what he came for. 
But when the Prince of Heaven came down into 
this world, He told us what he came for. God sent 
Him, and He came to do the will of His Father. 
“To seek and to save that which was lost.” 


6. Never Famep.—And you cannot find any place t; 
in Scripture where a man was ever sent by God to 
do a work in which he failed. God sent Moses to 
Kgypt to bring three millions of bondmen up out 
of the house of bondage into the promised land. 
Did he fail? It looked, at first, as if he were going 
to. If we had been in the Court when Pharaoh 
said to Moses, “ Who is God, that I should obey 
Him?” and ordered him out of his presence, we 
might have thought it meant failure. But did it? 
God sent Elijah to stand before Ahab, and it was a 
bold thing when he told bim there should be neither 

dew nor rain; but didn’t he lock up the heavens for 
three years and six months? Now here is God 
sending his own beloved Son from his bosom, from 
the throne, down into this world. Do you think t 
He is going to fail? Thanks be to God, He can 1 4 
save to the uttermost, and there is not a man in 
this city who may not find it so, if he is willing to 
be saved. 


cE EAE BEd A) PN I ASE TNA a 


7. Bartmevs.—I find a great blessing to myself in 
taking up a passage like this, and looking all round 
it, to see what brought it out. If you look back to 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 47 


the close of the eighteenth chapter, you will find 
Christ coming near the city of Jericho. And, sit- 
ting by the wayside, was a poor blind beggar. Per- 
haps he has been there for -years, led out, it may be, 
by one of his children, or perhaps, as we sometimes 
see, he had got a dog to lead him out. There he 
had sat for years, and his cry had been, “Please 
give a poor blind man a farthing.” One day, as he 
was sitting there, a man came down from Jerusa- 
lem, and seeing the poor blind man, took his seat 
by his side, and said, ‘ Bartimeus, I have good news 
for you.” “What is it?” said the blind beggar. 
‘‘There is a man’ iu Israel who is able to give you 
sight.” “Oh no,” said the blind beggar, “there is 
no chance of my ever receiving sight. I was born 
blind, and nobody born blind ever got- sight. I 
shall never see in this world; I may in the world to 
come, but I must go through this world blind.” 
‘‘But,” said the man, “let me tell you, I was at 
Jerusalem the other day, and the great Galilean 
prophet was there, and I saw a man who was born 
blind that had received his sight; and I never saw 
a man with better sight.” Then for the first time 
hope rises in the poor man’s heart, and he asks 
“How was it done?” “Why, Jesus spat on the 
ground and made some clay, and anointed his 
eyes” (why, that is enough to put a man’s sight 
out, even if he can see!) “and sent him to wash in 
the pool of Siloam, and while he was doing so, he 
got two good eyes. Yes, it is so. I talked with 


45 ADDRESSES 


him, and I didn’t see a man in all Jerusalem who 
had better sight.” “What did He charge?” says 
Bartimeus. “Nothing. There was no fee or doc- 
tor’s bill; he got his sight for nothing. You just 
tell Him what you want; you don’t need to have an 
influential committee to call on Him, or any impor- 
tant deputation. The poor have as much influence 
with Him as the rich; all are alike.” ‘What is 
his name?” asks Bartimeus. ‘Jesus of Nazareth. 
And if He ever comes this way, don’t you let Him 
by, without getting your case laid before Him.” 
And the blind man says “That you may be sure of; 
He shall never pass this way without my seeking 
Him.” 

A day or two after, he is led out, and takes his 
seat at the usual place, still crying out for money. 
All at once, he hears the footsteps of a coming mul- 
titude, and begins to cry, ‘Who is it?” ‘Tell me, 
who is it?” Some one said it was Jesus of Naza- 
reth that was passing by. The moment he hears 
that, he says to himself, ““ Why, that is the man 
who gives sight to the blind,” and he lifted up his 
ery, “Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy upon 
me!” I don’t know who it was—perhaps it was 
Peter—who said to the man, “Hush! keep still.” 
He thought the Lord was going up to Jerusalem to 
be crowned King, and He would not like to be dis- 
turbed by a poor blind beggar. Oh they did not 
know the Son of God when He was here! He 
would hush every harp in heaven to hear a sinner 


» BO a a me, 


PN I 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 49 


pray ; no music delights Him so much. But Bar- 
timeus lifted up his voice louder, “'Thou Son of Da- 
vid, have mercy on me.” His prayer reached the 
ear of the Son of God, as prayer always will, and 
His footsteps were arrested. He told them to bring 
the man. ‘“Bar.imeus,” they said, “be of good 
cheer, arise, He calleth thee ;” and He never called 
any one, but He had something good in store for 


him. Oh, sinner! remember that to-night. They ~ 


led the blind man to Jesus. The Lord says, “What 
shall I do for you?” “ Lord, that I may receive my 
sight.” ‘You shall have it,” the Lord said; and 
straightway his eyes were opened. 

I should have liked to have been there, to see 
that wonderful scene. The first object that met his 
gaze was the Son of God Himself, and now among 
the shouting multitude, no one shouts louder than 
the poor blind man that has got his sight. He 
glorifies God, and I fancy I can hear him shouting 
“Hosanna to the Son of David,” more sweetly than 
Mr. Sankey can sing. 


8. Zaccuevs.—Pardon me, if I now draw a little 
on my imagination. Bartimeus gets into Jericho, 
and he says, “I will go and see my wife, and tell her 
about it.” A young convert always wants to talk 
to his friends about salvation. Away he goes down 
the street, and he meets a man who passes him, 
goes on a few yards, and then turns round and 
says, “Bartimeus, is that you?” “Yes.” Well, I 


4 


50 ADDRESSES 


thought it was, but I could not believe my eyes. 
How have you got your sight?” “Oh, I just met 
Jesus of Nazareth outside the city, and asked Him 
to have mercy on me.” “Jesus of Nazareth! What, 
is He in this part of the country?” ‘Yes. He is 
right here in Jericho. He is now going down to 
the western gate.” ‘I should like to see Him,” 
says the man, and away he runs down the street; 
but he cannot catch a glimpse of Him, even though 
he stands on tiptoe, being little of stature, and on 
account of the great throng around Him. “ Well,” 
he says, “I am not going to be disappointed ;” so 
he runs on, and climbs up into a sycamore tree. 
“If I can get on to that branch, hanging right over 
the highway, He cannot pass without my getting a 
good look at Him.” That must have been a very 
strange sight to see the rich man climbing up a 
tree like a boy, and hiding among the leaves, where 
he thought nobody would see him, to get a glimpse 
of the passing stranger! There is the crowd burst- 
ing out, and he looks for Jesus. He looks at Peter; 
“That’s not Him.” He looks at John; ‘“ That’s 
not Him.” At last his eye rested on One fairer 
than the sons of men; “That’s Him!” And Zac- 
cheus, just peeping out from among the branches, 
looks down upon the wonderful God-man in amaze- 
ment. At last the crowd comes to the tree; it looks 
as if Christ were going by ; but He stops right undex 
the tree, looks up, and says, ‘“‘ Zaccheus, make haste 
and come down.” I can imagine the first thought 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 51 


in his mind was, “ Who told Him my name? I was 
never introduced to Him.” Ah! He knew him. 
Sinner, Christ knows all about you. He knows 
your name and your house. You need not try to 


hide from Him. He knows where you are, and all 
about you. 


9. SuppEN Conversions.—Some people do not be- 
lieve in sudden conversion. I should like them to 
answer me when was Zaccheus converted? He was 
certainly in his sins when he went up into that tree ; 
he certainly was converted when he came down. He 
must have been converted somewhere between the 
branch and the ground. It didn’t take a long while 
to convert that publican! “Make haste and come 
down. I shall never pass this way again ; this is 
my last visit.” Zaccheus made haste, and came 
down and received Him joyfully. Did you ever 
hear of any one receiving Christ in any other way? 
He received Him joyfully. Christ brings joy with 
Him. Sin, gloom, and darkness flee away ; light, 
peace, and joy burst into the soul. May there be 
many that shall come down from their high places, 
and receive Christ to-night ! 


10. Evipence or Zaccuevs’s Converston.—Some 
one may ask, “How do you know that he was 
converted?” I think he gave very good evidence. 
I would like to see as fruitful evidence of conversion 
here to-night. Let some of you rich men be con- 


52 ADDRESSES 


verted, and give half your goods to feed the poor, 
and people will believe pretty quickly that it is gen- 
uine work! But there is better evidence even than 
that. “If I have taken any thing from any man 
falsely, I restore him fourfold.” Very good evidence 
that. You say if people are converted suddenly, they 
won't hold out. Zaccheus held out long enough to 
restore fourfold. We should like to have a work 
that reaches men’s pockets. I can imagine one of 
his servants going to a neighbor next morning, with 
a check for £100, and handing it over. ‘“ What is 
this for?” “Oh, my master defrauded you of £25 
a few years ago, and this is restitution money.” 
That would give confidence in Zaccheus’s conver- 
sion! I wish a few cases like that would happen 
here, and then people would stop talking against 
sudden conversions. 


11. Puarisrrs’ Compraint.—The Lord goes to be 
the publican’s guest, and while He is there the Phar- 
isees began to murmur and complain. It would 
have been a good thing if Pharisees had died off 
with that generation; but, unfortunately, they have 
left a good many grandchildren, living down here in 
the afternoon of this nineteenth century, who are 
ever complaining, “This man receiveth sinners.” 
But while the Pharisees were complaining, the 
Lord uttered the text I have to-night, “I did not 
come to Zaccheus to make him wretched, to condemn 
him, to terment him ; I came to bless and save him. 


AND BEST TEOUGHTS. 53 


The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that 
which was lost.” 


12. Goon News.—If there is a man or woman in 
this audience to-night who believes that he or she 
is lost, I have good news to tell you—Christ is come 
after you. I was at the Fulton Street prayer-meet- 
ing, a good many years ago, one Saturday night, and 
when the meeting was over, a man came to me, and 
said, “I would like to have you go down to the city 
prison to-morrow, and preach to the prisoners. I 
said I would be very glad to go. There was no 
chapel in connection with that prison, and I was to 
preach to them in their cells. I had to stand ata 
little iron railing and talk down a great, long narrow 
passage way, to some three or four hundred of them, 
I suppose, all out of sight. It was pretty difficult 
work; I never preached to the bare walls before. 
When it was over I thought I would like to see to 
whom I had been preaching, and how they had re- 
ceived the Gospel. I went to the first door, where 
the inmates could have heard me best, and looked 
in at a little window, and there were some men play- 
ing cards. I suppose they had been playing all the 
while. “How is it with you here?” I said. “ Well, 
stranger, we don’t want you to get a bad idea of us. 
False witnesses swore a lie, and that is how we are 
here.” “Oh,” I said, “Christ cannot save any body 
here; there is nobody lost.” I went to the next cell. 
“Well, friend, how is it with you?” “Oh,” said the 


54 A” DRESSES 


prisoner, “the man that did the deed looked very 
much like me, so they caught me and I am here.” 
He was innocent too! I passed along to the next 
cell. “Howis it with you?” “Well, we got into 
bad company, and the man that did it got clear, and 
we got taken up, but we never did anything.” I 
went along to the next cell. “ How is it with you?” 
“Our trial comes on next week, but they have noth- 
ing against us, and we'll get free.” I went round 
nearly every cell, but the answer was always the 
same—they had never done any thing. Why, I 
never saw sO many innocent men together in my 
life! There was nobody to blame but the magis- 
trates, according to their. way of it. These men 
were wrapping their filthy rags of self-righteous- 
ness about them. And that has been the story for 
six thousand years. I got discouraged as I went 
through the prison, on, and on, and on, cell after 
cell, and every man had an excuse. If he hadn't 
one, the devil helped him to make one. I had got 
almost through the prison, when I came to a cell 
and found a man with his elbows on his knees, and 
his head in his hands. Two little streams of tears 
were running down his cheeks; they did not come 
by drops that time. 

“ What’s the trouble?” I said. He looked up 
the picture of remorse and despair. “Oh, my sing 
are more than I can bear.” “Thank God for that,” 
I replied. ‘ What,” said he, “you are the man that 
has been preaching to us, ain’t you?” “Yes.” “I 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 55 


think you said you were a friend?” “Tam.” “And 
yet you are glad that my sins are more than I can 
bear!” “TI will explain,” I said; “if your sins are 
more than you can bear, won’t you cast them 
on One who will bear them for you?” ‘ Who's 
that?” “The Lord Jesus.” “He won't bear my 
sins.” “Why not?” “T have sinned against Him 
all my life.” “I don’t care if you have; the blood 
of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanses from all sin.” 
Then I told him how Christ had come to seek and 
save that which was lost ; to open the prison doors 
and set the captives free. It was like a cup of re- 
freshment to find a man who believed he was lost, 
so I stood there, and held up a crucified Saviour to 
him. ‘Christ was delivered for our offences, died 
for our sins, rose again for our justification.” For 
a long time the man could not believe that such a 
miserable wretch could be saved. He went on to 
enumerate his sins, and I told him that the blood 
of Christ could cover them all. After I had talked 
with him I said, “ Now let us pray.” He got down 
on his knees inside the cell, and I got down outside, 
and I said, ‘You pray.” “Why,” he said, “it would 
be blasphemy for me to call on God.” ‘You call on 
God,” I said. He knelt down, and, like the poor 
publican, he lifted up his voice and said, “God be 
merciful to me, a vile wretch!” I put my hand 
through the window, and as I shook hands with 
him a tear fell on my hand that burned down into 
my soul. It was a tear of repentance. He believed 


siege —= 
Tene 


ea 


es 


ES er TEP ° 


De er Se 


i 


a= pee 
— 


<_< =e. 
a 


—= 


aise a 
pe hp nen 


56 ADDRESSES 


he was lost. ThenI tried to get him to believe that 
Christ had come to save him. I left him still in 
darkness. ‘I will be at the hotel,” I said, “ be- 
tween nine and ten o'clock, and I will pray for 
you.” 


13. Harry Convert.—Next morning, I felt so much 
interested in him, that I thought I must see him be- 
fore I went back to Chicago. No sooner had my 
eye lighted on his face, than I saw that remorse 
and despair had fled away, and his countenance was 
beaming with celestial light; the tears of joy had 
come into his eyes, and the tears of despair were 
gone. The Sun of Righteousness had broken out 
across his path; his soul was leaping within him 
for joy; he had received Chnist, as Zaccheus did, 
joyfully. “Tell me about it,” I said. “Well, I do 
not know what time it was; I think it was about 
midnight. I had been in distress a long time, when 
all at once my great burden fell off, and now, I be- 
lieve [am the happiest man in New York.” I think 
he was the happiest man I saw from the time I left 
Chicago till I got back again. His face was lighted 
up with the light that comes from the celestial hills. 
I bade him good-by, and | expect to meet him in 
another world. 

Can you tell me, , the Son o. God came down 
to that prison that night, and, passing cell after cell, 
went to that one, and set tue captive free? It was 
because the man believed he was lost, 


57 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 


at 14, Sinner Betreve You are Lost.—-But you say, 
in “7 do not feel that.” Well, never mind your feel- 
e- ings; believe it. Just ask yourself, “Am I saved, or 
or am I lost?” It must be one or the other. There 
is no neutrality about the matter. A man cannot 
| } be saved and lost at the same time; it is impossi- Be 
ch ble. Every man and woman in this audience must ant 
e- either be saved or lost, if the Bible be true; and if I | 
ay thought it was not true, I should not be here preach- 
Se ing, and I would not advise you people to come; er 
ag but if the Bible is true, every man and every woman VI 
ad in this room must either be in the ark or out of it, bi 
re either saved or lost. it 
ut I do not believe there would be a dry eye in this ‘ 
im city to-night, if we would but wake up to the thought ! 
id, of what it is to be lost. The world has been rocked 
do to sleep by Satan, who is going up and down and 
ut telling people that it doesn’t mean any thing. I 
en believe in the old-fashioned heaven and hell. Christ 
be- came down to save us from a terrible hell, and any 
nk man who is cast down to hell from England must go 
oft in the full blaze of the Gospel, and over the mangled 
ed body of the Son of God. 
Is. 
in 15. A Lost Sovut.—We hear of a man who has lost 
his health, and we sympathize with him, and we say 
wn it is very sad. Our hearts are drawn out in sympa- 
Pll, thy. Here is another man who has lost his wealth, 
as and we say, “That is very sad.” Here is another 


man who has lost his reputation, his standing among 


58 ADDRESSES 


men. “That is sadder still,” you say. We know 
what it is to lose health, and weaivh, and reputation, 
but what is the loss of all these things compared 
with the loss of the soul? 


16. Losr Eyrsicut.—I was in an eye infirmary in 
Chicago some time ago, before the great fire. A 
mother brought a beautiful little babe to the doctor 
—a babe only a few months old—and wanted the 
doctor to look at the child’s eyes. He did so, and 
pronounced it blind—blind for life—it will never see 
again. ‘The moment he said that, the mother seized 
it, pressed it to her bosom, and gave a terrible 
scream. It pierced my heart, and I could not but 
weep. What a fearful thought to that mother! 
“Oh, my darling,” she cried, “are you never to see 
the mother that gave you birth? Oh, doctor, I can- 
not stand it. My child, my child!” It wasa sight 
to move any heart. But what is the loss of eyesight 
to the loss of a soul? I hada thousand times rather 
have these eyes taken out of my head and go to the 
grave blind, than lose my soul. I have a son, and 
no oxe but God knows ho v I love him; but I would 
see those eyes dug out of his head to-night rather 
than see him grow up to manhood and go down to 
the grave without Christ and without hope. The 
loss of a soul! Christ knew what ‘t meant. That 
is what brought Him from the b« som of the Father; 
that is what brougut Him from the throne; that is 
whci brought Him to Calvary. The Son of God 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 59 


was in earnest. When He died on Calvary it was tc 
save a lost world; it was to save your soul and mine. 
O the loss of the soul—how terrible it is! If you 
are lost to-night, I beseech you do not rest until you 
have found peace in Christ. Fathers and mothers, 
if you have children out of the Ark, do not rest until 
they are brought into it. Do not discourage your 
children from coming to Christ. I am glad to see 
those little boys and girls here. Dear children, re- 
member the sermon is for you. The Son of Man 
came for you as much as for that old gray-haired 
man, yonder. He came for all, rich and poor, young 
and old. Young man, if you are lost may God show 
it to you, and may you press into the kingdom. The 
Son of Man is come to seek and to save you. 


17. Story oF Rowranp Hriiti.—There is a story 
told of Rowland Hill. He was once preaching in 
the open air to a vast audience. Lady Anne Erskine 
was riding by, and she asked who it was that was 
addressing the vast assembly. She was told it was 
the celebrated Rowland Hill. Says she, “I have 
heard of him; drive me near the platform, that I may 
listen to him.” The eye of Rowland Hill rested on 
her; he saw that she belonged to royalty, and turn- 
ing to some one, he inquired who she was. He went 
on preaching, and all at once he stopped. “My 
friends,” he said, “I have got something here for 
sale.” Every body was startled to think that a min- 
ister was going to sell something in hissermon. “J 


60 ADDRESSES 


am going to sell it by auction, and it is worth more 
than the crown of all Europe: it is the soul of Lady 
Anne Erskine. Will any one bid for her soul? 
Hark! methinks I hear a bid. Who bids? Satan 
bids. What will you give? I will give riches, 
honor, and pleasure; yea, I will give the whole 
world for her soul. Hark! I hear another bid for 
this soul. Whobids? The Lord Jesus Christ. Je- 
sus, what will you give for this soul? I will give 
peace, and joy, and comfort that the world knows 
not of; yea, I will give eternal life for her soul.” 
Turning to Lady Anne Erskine, he said, “ You have 
heard the two bidders for your soul—which shall 
have it?” She ordered the footman to open the 
door, and pushing her way through the crowd, she 
says, “The Lord Jesus shall have my soul, if He will 


accept it.” 


18. Two Brppers ror tHE Sovut.—There are two 
bidders for your soui to-night. It is for you to de- 
cide which shall have it. Satan offers you what he 
cannot give; he is a liar, and has been from the 
foundation of the world. I pity the man who is 
living on the devil’s promises. He lied to Adam, 
and deceived him, stripped him of all he had, and 
then left him in his lost, ruined condition. And all 
the men since Adam living on the devil’s lies, the 
devil’s promises, have been disappointed, and will 
be, down to the end of the chapter. But the Lord 
Jesus Christ is able to give all He offers, and He 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 61 


offers eternal life to every lost soul here. ‘The 
gift of God is eternal life.” Who will have it? Will 
any one flash it over the wires, and let it go up to 
the throne of God, that you want to be saved? As 
Mr. Sankey sang of that shout around the throne, 
my heart went up to God, that there might be a 
great shout for lost ones brought home to-night. 


19. Curtst nas Soveur You.—Last night a man 
yonder told me he was anxious to be saved, but 
Christ had never sought for him. I said, ‘ What 
are you waiting for?” “Why,” he said, “I am 
waiting for Christ to call me; as soon as He calls 
me, I am coming.” There may be others here who 
have got the same notion. Now, I do not believe 
there is a man in this city that the Spirit of God 
has not striven with at some period of his life. I 
do not believe there is a person in this audience but 
Christ has sought after him. Bear in mind, He 
takes the place of the seeker. Every man who has 
ever been saved through these six thousand years 
was first sought after by God. No sooner did Adam 
fall than God sought him. He had gone away fright- 
ened, and hid himself away among the bushes in the 
garden, but God took the place of the Seeker; and 
from that day to this God has always had the place 
of the Seeker. No man or woman in this audience 
has been saved but that He sought them first. 


20. Tur SHEPHERD.—What do we read in the fif- 
teenth chapter of St. Luke? There is a shepherd 


wt 


62 ADDRESSES 


bringing home his sheep into the fold. As they 
pass in, he stands and numbers them. I can see 
him counting one, two, three, up to ninety-nine. 
“But,” says he, “I ought to have a hundred: I 
must have made a mistake;” and he counts them 
over again. “There are only ninety-nine here; I 
must have lost one.” He does not say, “I will let 
him find his own way back.” No! He takes the 
place of the Seeker; he goes out into the mountain, 
and hunts until he finds the lost one, and then he 
lays it on his shoulder and brings it home. Is it 
the sheep that finds the shepherd? No, it is the 
shepherd that finds and brings back the sheep. He 
rejoiced to find it. Undoubtedly the sheep was very 
glad to get back to the fold, but it was the shepherd 
who rejoiced, and who called his friends and said, 
“ Rejoice with me.” 


21. Toe Woman’s Monry.—Then there is that 
woman who lost the piece of money. Some one 
perhaps had paid her a bill that day, giving her ten 
pieces of silver. As she retires at night, she takes 
the money out of her pocket and counts it. ‘ Why,” 
she says, “I have only got nine pieces; I ought to 
have ten.” She counts it over again. “Only nine 
pieces! Where have I been,” she says, ‘since I got 
that money? Iam sure I have not been out of the 
house.” She turns her pocket wrong side out, aud 
there she finds a hole in it. Does she wait until the 
money gets back into her pocket? No. She takes 


©" A eo ee oe, | 


a_i a © OD ect WD 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 63 


a broom, and lights a candle, and sweeps diligently. 
She moves the sofa and the table and the chairs, 
and all the rest of the furniture, and sweeps in 
every corner until she finds it. And when she has 
found it, who rejoices? The piece of money? No; 
the woman who finds it. In these parables Christ 
brings out the great truth that God takes the place 
of Seeker. People talk of finding Christ, but it is 
Christ who first finds them. 


22. Trouste Devetors Lovr.—It was Adam’s fall, 
his loss, that brought cut God’s love. God never 
told Adam when He put him into Eden, that He 
loved him. It was his fall, his sin, that brought it 
out. <A friend of mine from Manchester was in 
Chicago a few years ago, and he was very much in- 
terested in the city—a great city, with its 300,000 or 
400,000 inhabitants, with its great railway centres, 
its lumber market, its pork market, and its grain 
market. He said he went back to Manchester and 
told his friends about Chicago. But he could not 
get any body very much interested in it. It wasa 
great many hundreds of miles away; and the peo- 
ple did not seem to care for hearing about it. But 
one day there came flashing along the wire the sad 
tidings that it was on fire ; and, my friend said, the 
Manchester people became suddenly interested in 
Chicago! Every despatch that came they read ; 
they bought up the papers, and devoured every 
particle of news. And at last, when the despatch 


64 ADDRESSES 


came that Chicago was burning up, that 100,000 
people were turned out of house and home, then 
every one became so interested that they began to 
weep for us. They came forward and laid down 
their money—some gave hundreds of pounds—for 
the relief of the poor sufferers. It was the calamity 
of Chicago that brought out the love of Manchester, 
and of London, and of Liverpool. I was in that ter- 
rible fire, and I saw men that were wealthy stripped 
of all they had. That Sunday night, when they re- 
tired, they were the richest men in Chicago. Next 
morning they were paupers. But I did not see a 
man weep. But when the news came flashing along 
the wire, “ Liverpool is giving a thousand pounds ; 
Manchester is giving a thousand pounds ; London 
is giving money to aid the city ;” and as the news 
kept flashing that help was coming, that city was 
broken-hearted. I saw men weep then. The love 
that was showed us, that love broke our hearts. So 
the love of God ought to break every heart in this 
city. It was love that brought Christ down here to 
die for us. It was love that made Him leave His 
place by the Father’s throne and come down here 
to seek and to save that which was lost. 


23. Great Sryner Greater Saviour. — Another 
young man told me last night that he was too great 
a sinner to be saved. Why, they are the very men 
Christ came after. “This Man receiveth sinners 
and eateth with them.” The only charge they could 


0,000 
then 
un to 
down 
—for 
anvity 
ester, 
 ter- 
ipped 
ey re- 
Next 
see a 
along 
unds ; 
ondon 
» news 
y was 
e love 
Be So 
0 this 
ere to 
e His 
here 


bother 
ereat 
men 
nners 
could 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 65 


bring against Christ down here was, that He was 
receiving bad men. They are the very kind of men 
He is willing to receive. All you have got to do 
is, to prove that you are a sinner, and I will prove 
that you have got a Saviour. And the greater the 
sinner, the greater need you have of a Saviour. 
You say your heart is hard; well, then, of course, 
you want Christ to soften it. You cannot do it 
yourself. The harder your heart, the more need 
you have of Christ: the blacker you are, the more 
need you have of a Saviour. If your sins rise up 
before you like a dark mountain, bear in mind that 
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin. 
There is no sia so big, or so black, or so corrupt 
and vile, but the blood of Christ can cover it. So 
I preach the old Gospel again, “The Son of Man is 
come to seek and to save that which was lost.” 


24. How Curist Soveut Turem.—-bat now for the 
sake of these men who believe Christ never sought 
them, perhaps it would be well to say how He seeks. 
There are a great many ways in which He does so. 
Last night I found a man in the inquiry-room, and 
the Lord had been speaking to him by the prayers 
of a godly sister who died a little while ago. Her 
prayers were answered. He came into the inquiry- 
room trembling from head to foot. I talked to him 
about the plan of salvation, and the tears trickled 
down his cheeks, and at last he took Christ as his 
Saviour. The Son of Man sought out that young 


5 


66 ADDRESSES 


man through the prayers of his sister, and then 
through her death. 

Some of you have godly, praying mothers, who 
have prayed whole nights for your soul, and who 
have now gone to heaven. Did not you take their 
hand and promise that you would meet them there? 
That was the Son of God seeking you by your 
mother’s prayers and your mother’s death. Some 
of you have got faithful, godly ministers who weep 
for you in the pulpit, and plead with you to come to 
Christ. You have heard heart-searching sermons, 
and the truth has gone down deep into your heart, 
and tears have come down your cheeks. That was 
the Son of God seeking you. Some of you have had 
godly, praying Sabbath-school teachers and super- 
intendents, urging you to come to Christ. Some of 
you, perhaps, have got young men converted round 
you, and they have talked with you and pleaded 
with you to come to Christ. That was the Son of 
God seeking after your soul. Some of you have 
had a tract put in your hand with a startling title, 
“Biternity ; Where will You Spend It?” and the 
arrow has gone home. That was the Son of God 
seeking after you. Many of you have been laid on 
a bed of sickness, when you had time to think and 
meditate. And in the silent watches of the night, 
when every body was asleep, the Spirit of God has 
come into your chamber, has come to your bedside, 
and the thought came stealing through your mind 
that you ought to be a child of God and an heir of 


hen 


who 
who 
heir 
ere? 
your 
some 
weep 
ne to 
nons, 
1eart, 
tL was 
e had 
uper- 
ne of 
“ound 
aded 
on of 
have 
title, 
| the 
God 
id on 
and 
ight, 
has 
side, 
mind 
eir of 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 67 


heaven. That was the Son of God seeking after 
your lost soul. Some of you have had little chil- 
dren, and you have laid them yonder in the ceme- 
tery. When that little child was dying you prom- 
ised to love and serve God (ah, Have you kept your 
promise?) That was the Son of God seeking you. 
He took that little child yonder to draw your affec- 
tions heayenwards. 


25. Many Ways.--It would take me all night te 
tell the different ways in which the Lord seeks. Can 
you rise in this hall to-night and say that the Son of 
God never sought for you? Ido not believe there 
is @ man or woman in this audience or in the whole 
city who could do it. My friend, He has been call- 
ing for you from your earliest childhood, and He has 
put it into the hearts of God’s own people just to 
call you together in this hall. Prayer is going up 
all over the Christian world for you. Perhaps there 
never has been a time in the history of your life 
when so many were praying for you as at the pres- 
ent time. That is the Son of God seeking for your 
soul through the prayers of the Church, through the 
prayers of ministers, through the prayers of the saints 
not only in London but throughout the world. I 
have received news to-day in a despatch sent across 
from America, that all the churches nearly, in Amer- 
ica, are praying for London. What does it mean? 
God has laid it upon the heart of the Church 
throughout the world to pray for London. It must 


68 ADDRESSES 


be that God has something good in store for Lon- 
don; the Son of Man is coming to London to seek 
and to save that which was lost; and I pray that 
the Good Shepherd may enter this hall to-night and 
may come to many a heart, and that you may hear 
the still small voice: “ Behold, I stand at the door 
and knock ; if any man hear My voice, and open the 
door, I will come in to him and will sup with him, 
and he with Me.” O friends, open the door to-night, 
and let the heavenly Visitor in. Do not turn Him 
away any longer. Do not say with Felix, “Go thy 
way this time, and when I have a convenient season 
I will call for thee.’ Make this a convenient sea- 
son; make this the night of your salvation. Receive 
the gift of God to-night, and open the door of your 
heart, and say, ‘“‘ Welcome, thrice welcome into this 
heart of mine.” 


SINNERS SEEKING CHRIST. 


26. “Srex tHE Lorp wH1LE Hr MAY BE FOUND 5 CALL 
yE UPON Hiw waite He 1s near.”—I have been speak- 
ing about the Son of Man seeking the lost ; to-night 
I want to take up the other side of the case—man’s 
side. I have learned this, that when any one be- 
comes in earnest about his soul’s salvation he begins 
to seek God, and it does not take a great while for 
them to meet; it does not take long for an anxious 
sinner to meet an anxious Saviour. What do we 
read in the 29th chapter of Jeremiah, 13th verse? 
“Ye shali seek Me and find Me when ye shall search 


yn- 
sek 
hat 
ind 
ear 
oor 
the 
im, 
cht, 
tim 
thy 
1sO0 
sea- 
elve 
your 
this 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 6Y 


for Me with all your heart.” These are the men who 
find Christ—those who seek for Him with all their 
heart. 


27. Hatr-HEarTepNess.—I am tired and sick of 
half-heartedness. You don’t like a half-hearted 
man; you don’t care for any one to love you with 
a half heart, and the Lord won’t have it. If we are 
going to seek for Him and find Him, we must do it 
with all our heart. I believe the reason why so few 
people find Christ is because they do not search for 
Him with all their heart; they are not ¢éerribly in 
earnest about their soul’s salvation. God is in ear- 
nest ; every thing God has done proves that He is 
in earnest about the salvation of men’s souls. He 
has proved it by giving his only Son to die for us. 
The Son of God was in earnest when He died. 
What is Calvary but a proof of that? And the 
Lord wants us to be in earnest when it comes to 
this great question of the soul’s salvation. I never 
saw men seeking Him with all their hearts but they 
soon found Him. 


28. Nor WorrtH Savina.—It was quite refreshing, 
last night, to find in the inquiry-room a young man 
who thought he was not worth saving, he was so 
vile and wicked. There was hope for him because 
he was so desperately in earnest about his soul. He 
thought he was worthless. He had got a sight of 
himself in God’s looking-glass, and when a man does 


70 ADDRESSES 


that he has a very poor opinion of himself. You 

can alyays tell when a man is a great way from God 

—he is always talking about himself, and how good q 
he is. But the moment he secs God by the eye of 
faith he is down on his knees, and, like Job, he cries, 
“Behold, I am vile.” All his goodness flees away. 
What men want is to be in earnest about their sal- 
vation, and they will soon find Christ. You do not 
need to go up to the heights to bring Him down, 
or down to the depths to bring Him up, or to go off 
to some distant city to find Him. This day He is 
near to every one of us. 


29. Bap Apvicr.—I heard some one in the in- 
quiry-room telling a young person to go home and 
seek Christ in his closet. I would not dare to tell 
any one to do that. You might be dead before you 
got home. If I read my Bible correctly, the man 
who preaches the Gospel is not the man who tells q 
me to seek Christ to-morrow or.an hour hence, but y 
now. He is near to every one of us this minute to 
save. Ifthe world would just come to God for sal- 
vation, and be in earnest about it, they would find 
the Son of God right at the door of their heart. 


30. Wortpty Wispom.—Suppose I should say I 
lost a very valuable diamond here last night—I , 
have not, but suppose it—worth £20,000. I had it 
in my pocket when I came into the hall, and when 
IT had done preaching I found it was not in my 


AND LEST THOUGHTS. 7) 


pocket, but was in the hall somewhere. And sup- 
pose I was to say that any one who found it could 
have it. How earnest you would all become! You 
would not get very much of my sermon ; you would 
all be thinking of the diamond. I do not believe 
the police could get you out of this hall. The idea 
of finding a diamond worth £20,000! If you could 
only find it, it would lift you out of poverty at once, 
and you would be independent for the rest of your 
days. Oh, how soon every body would become ter- 
ribly in earnest then! I would to God I could get 
men to seek for Christ in the same way. I have 
got something worth more than a diamond to offer 
you. Is not salvation—eternal life—worth more 
than all the diamonds in the world? Suppose Ga- 
briel should wing his way from the throne of God 
and come down here, and say be had been commis- 
sioned by Jehovah to come and offer to this as- 
sembly any one gift you might choose. You could 
have just what you chose, but only one thing. What 
woulditbe? The wealth of England or of the world? 
Would that be your choice? Ten thousand times, 
no! Your one ery would pe, “Life! eternal life!” 


31. Vatur or Lirr.—There is nothing men value 
as they do life. Let a man Le out on a wreck that 
is fast going down. He is worth a million sterling, 
and his only chance is to give up that million ster- 
ling, just to save the life of the body. He would 
give it up in a moment. “Skin for skin; all that 


72 ADDRESSES 


a man hath will he give for his life.” I understand 
some people nave been afraid to come to this hall 
because there might be a cry of “ Fire! fire!” and 
a panic, aad they might lose their lives. Yet there 
are twenty doors to the building; I do not know 
that I ever saw a building that you could get easier 
out of. Yet people seem to sleep, and to forget 
thal; there is no door out of hell. If they enter 
there they must remain, age after age. Millions on 
millions of years will roll on, but there will be no 
door, no escape out of hell. May God wake up 
this slumbering congregation and make you anxious 
about your souls. People talk about our being ear- 
nest and fanatical—about our being on fire. Would 
to God the Church was on fire; this world would 
soon shake to its foundation. 


32. “Coxp or Hor.”—What we want to see is men 
really wishing to become Christians, men who are 
in dead earnest about it. The idew of hearing a man 
say in answer to the question, “ Do you want to be- 
come a Christian?” ‘“ Well, I would not mind.” My 
friend, I do not think yow will ever get into the 
kingdom of God until you change your language. 
We want men crying from the depths of their heart, 
“T want to be saved.” On the day of Pentecost the 
cry was, “Men and brethren, what shall we do?” 
These men were in earnest, and they found Christ 
right there ; three thousand found Him, when they 
sought with all their hearts. When men seek Christ 


and 
hall 
and 
ere 
10W 
sier 
reet 
ater 
son 
/ no 
up 
lous 
ear- 
yuld 
yuld 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 73 


as they do wealth, they will soon find Him. To be 
sure the world will raise a cry that they ave excited. 
Let cotton go up ten or fifteen per cent, before to- 
morrow morning, and you will see how quickly the 
merchants will get excited! And the papers don’t 
ery it down either. They say it is healthy excite- 
ment; commerce’ getting on. But when you be- 
gin to get excited about your soul’s salvation, and 
are in earnest, then they raise the cry, ‘‘Oh, they are 
getting excited ; most unhealthy state of things.” 
Yet they C ™ talk about men hastening down to 
death by thousands. There is the poor drunkard, 
look at him! Hear the piercing cry going up to 
heaven! Yet the Church of Goud slumbers and 
sleeps. Here and there there is an inquirer, and 
yet they go into the inquiry-room as if they were 
half asleep. When will men seek for Christ as they 
seek for wealth, or as they seek for honor ? 


33. Wake Up.—May God wake up a slumbering 
Church! What we want men to do is not to shout 
“Amen,” and clasp their hands. The deepest and 
quietest waters very often run swiftest. We want 
men to go right to work : there will be a chance for 
you to shout by and by. Go and speak to your 
neighbor, and tell him of Christ and heaven. You 
need not go a few yards down these streets before 
you find some one who is passing down to the 
darkness of eternal death. Let us haste to the 
rescue ! 


a ee a area 


seas ar 


A =-k ace 
7 2 ws E 
4 at a Sa 
— “=f a= 
‘a a ed 
wgremrrregeng rane semieeings 9 


ee ee 
= 


* ai 


oP Sr 70 hoe RATE NED 2 OID sa 


AS Sian 2 aaiaiate Bas 


= 


a 


a 


* 
Ps 


a a 


23-3 


ied Se 


o 
be! 


(| 
4 

4 

ca 
4 

> | 
| 

| 

| 


74 ADDRESSES 


34, Face Danerr.—I am told that when the war 
broke out on the Gold Coast, though it was known 
that the climate was a very unhealthy one, and a 
great many who went there would never return, 
yet hundreds and thousands of men wanted to go. 
Why? They wanted to get wealth, and from wealth 
honor. And if there is a chance of going to India, 
no end of men are willing to go To get a little 
honor they will sacrifice comivrt, pleasure, health, 
and every thing. What we want, is to have men 
seeking the kingdom of God as they s or honor 
and wealth. 


35. Lire in Dancrer.—As I said, 1: !ife is in dan- 
ger, how terribly in earnest men become. That is 
right; there is no doubt about that. But why should 
not men be as much in earnest about tueir soul’s 
salvation? Why should not every man and woman 
herve wake up and seek the Lord with all their heart? 
Then, the Lord says, you shal find Hin. 


36. Powsr or Harn’ cness.—There is a story told 
of a vessel that was wrecked, and was going down 
at sea. There were not enough life-boar. to take all 
on board. When the vessel went dcwn, some ot 
the life-boats were near the vessel. A man swam 
from the wreck just as it was going down, to one of 
the boats; but they had no room to take him, and 
they refused. When they refused, he seized hold 
of the boat with his right hand, but they took a 


var 
wh 
da 
mn, 

20. 
lth 
dia, 
ttle 
Ith, 
nen 
nor 


lan- 
ut is 
ould 
ul’s 
man 
art ? 


told 
own 
all 

a ot 
yam 

e of 

and 
nold 


bk a 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 75 


sword and cut off his fingers. When he had lost 
the fingers of his right hand, the man was so ear- 
nest to save his lite that he seized the boat with his 
left hand ; they cut off the fingers of that hand too. 
Then the man swam up and seized the boat with 
his teeth, and they had compassion on him and 
relented. They could not cut off his head, so they 
took him in, and the man saved his life. Why? 
Because he was in earnest. Why not seek your soul’s 
salvation as that man sought to save his life? 


37. Forry-ruree THousanp Sours a Day.— Will 
there ever be a better time? Will there ever be a 
better time for that old man whose locks are grow- 
ing gray, whose eyes are growing dim, and who is 
hastening to the grave? Is not this the very best 
time for him? “Seek the Lord while He may be 
found.” There is aman in the middle of life. Is 
this not the best time for him to seek the kingdom 
of God! Will you ever have a better opportunity ? 
Will Christ ever be more willing to save than now? 
He says, “Come, for all things are now ready.” 
Not, going to be, but are now ready. There is a 
young man. My friend, is it not the best time for 
you to seek the kingdom of God? Seek the Lord, 
you can find Him here to-night. Can you say that 
you will find Him here to-morrow? Will any one 
rise up in this hali and say that? Young man, you 
know not what to-morrow may bring forth. Do 
you know that since we met here last night 43,090 


a 
seomng ds “ns re NESSES “SSC se 


seeing mec ie NI $3 Ta arse a — pre ater e 


acon e ae 
be 


Peers ae, tres Ss ee 


1] 
3 
| 
i! 
i 
/ 


76 ADDRESSES 


sou!s have passed frem time to eternity? Do you 
know that every time the clock ticks a soul passes 
away? Is not this the best time for you to seek 
the kingdom of God? 


38. Great Revivat.—-My boy, the Lord wants you. 
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and seek Him 
while He may be found. About eighteen years ago, 
a great revival swept over America. A great many 
men stood and shook their heads; they could 
not believe it was a healthy state of things. The 
Church was not in its normal state! Vhe Church 
from Maine to Minnesota, and on to California, was 
astir. And as you passed over the great republic, 
over its western prairies and mountains, and through 
its valleys, as you went on by train, and as you 
passed through its cities and villages, you could see 
the churches lit up; and men were flocking into the 
kingdom of God by hundreds. And in a year and 
» half or two years there were more than half a mil- 
lion souls brought in. Men said it was false excite- 
ment, wildfire, and it would pass away. But, my 
friends, it was grace preceding judgment. Little 
did we know that our nation was soon to be bap- 
tized in blood, and that we would soon hear the 
tramp of a million men, that hundreds and thou- 
sands of our young men, the flower of our nation, 
would soon be lying in a soldier’s grave. But oh, 
my friends, it was God ealling his people in. He 
was preparing our nation tor a terrible struggle, 


you 
LSSes 
seek 


you. 
Him 
ago, 
nany 
could 
The 
urch 
, Was 
ablic, 
ough 
, you 
d see 
the 
and 
mil- 
<cite- 
» my 
‘ittle 
bap- 
> the 
hou- 
tion, 
ut oh, 
He 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 77 


39. Waar 1s Doina Now.—And now, it seems to 
me that there is another wave of blessing passing 
over this earth. Tidings are coming from all parts 
of the world, telling us of the great work God is 
doing. The last tidings from India, told us of a 
blessed work going on there. The last tidings from 
Japan and from other places—we have the same good 
news of God pouring out his Spirit. It was only the 
other day that two men came up here from a town of 
50,000 inhabitants, and wanted us to go there; but 
we could not, and we told them to go home and get 
to work themselves. To-day one of them told us 
that they had sixteen last might in the inquiry-room. 
God is pouring out his Spirit everywhere. Every- 
where men are putting in the sickle and bringing 
their sheaves and laying them at the feet of the 
Master. I believe we are living in the days that 
our fathers prayed for. The heavens are opened, 
and the Spirit of God is descending upon the sons 
of men. 


40. A Goop Time to Seex Him.—Now, this time 
of revival is a good time to seek the Lord. ‘Will you 
ever have a better time? The tidings from every 
city is this—the people are praying. It is a ques- 
tion in my mind if there was ever so much prayer 
going up to God as at the present. Not only here, 
but all round the world, we have God’s people mak- 
ing their hearts burdened for the salvation of souls. 
And is it not God working? Will there ever be a 


SEE Ee yee 


j 
i} 


ae ge ena emma ae atin me me 


18 ADDRESSES 


better time for you to seek the kingdom of God than 
the present, when there is such a great awakening, 
when there is such a spirit of expectation; when the 
Church of God is coming up as one man, and the 
spirit of unity prevails? Think of the praying ones 
here. Do you believe there were ever so many men 
and women praying for your soul as there are here 
to-night? Look over this audience—what are these 
Christians doing now! They are silently praying to 
God. Icansee they are praying. There is a young 
man with his mother sitting by his side. That 
mother is pleading, “God save my boy to-night!” 
May it go down deep into his soul! ‘Seek ye the 
Lord while He may be found; call ye upon Him 
while He is near.” 


41. Is rar Lorp Hrrr.—Now, let me ask you a 
question. Do you believe that the Lord can be 
found hee to-night? I appeal to these ministers 
present at my side; do you believe He can? They 
answer “ Yes.” My friends, do you believe it? An- 
other Yrs comes from the audience. Well, if He 
can, is it not the height of madness for any man or 
woman to go out of this hall without seeking Him ? 
If He can be found, why not seek Him? Young 
lady, why not seek Him with all your heart? Young 
man, why not seek Christ to-night with all your 
heart? Why not say, “I must be saved”? There 
is nothing’ so important as this great question of 
salvation. 


1an 
ng, 
the 
the 
nes 
nen 
ere 
ese 
x to 
ung 
‘hat 
a os 
the 
Lim 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 79 


42. Tury Atways Fixp Him.—Supposing you could 
win the world, what would you do with it? Would 
it be worth as much as Christ? Let every thing else 
be laid aside, and make up your minds that you will 
not rest until you have sought and found the Lord 
Jesus. J never knew any one make up his mind to 
seek Him but he soon found Him. At Dublin a 
young man found Christ. He went home and lived 
so godly and so Christ-like, that two of his brothers 
could not understand what had wrought the change 
in him. They left Dublin and followed us to Shef- 
field, and found Christ there. They were in earnest. 
But, thanks be to God, you have not got to go out 
of this hall. Christ can be found here to-night. I 
firmly believe every one here can find Christ to- 
night if you will seek for Him with all your heart. 
He says, “Call upon Me.” Did you ever hear of 
any one calling on Christ with the whole heart, that 
Christ didn’t answer? Look at that thief on the 
cross! It may have been that he had a praying 
mother, and that his mother taught him the fifty- 
third chapter of Isaiah. He had heard Christ pray 
that wonderful prayer, “ Father, forgive them.” And 
as he was hanging on the cross that text of Scripture 
came to his mind, ‘‘ Seek the Lord while He may be 
found; call ye upon Him while He is near.” The 
truth came flashing into his soul, and he says, “ He 
is near me now; I will call on Him. Lord, remem- 
ber me when Thou comest into thy kingdom.” No 
sooner had he called than the Lord said, “This day 


alte ice Sh BER Sante 


et stm 


= ss 
Fie 
F 


a ce oa an ce ec a le See eee eee 


80 ADDRESSES 


shalt thou be with Me in paradise.” That was his 
seeking opportunity, his day. My friends, this is 
your day now. I believe that every man has his 
day. You have it just now; why not call upon Him 
just now? Say, as the poor thief did, “Lord, re- 
member me.” That was his golden opportunity, 
and the Lord heard and answered and saved him. 
Did not Bartimeus call on Him while He was near? 
Christ was passing by Jericho for the last time, and 
he cried out, “Thou Son of David, have mercy on 
me.” And did not the Lord hear his prayer, and 
give him his sight? It was a good thing Zaccheus 
called—or rather the Lord called him, but when the 
Lord called he came. May the Lord call many here, 
and may you respond, “Lord, here am I; you have 
called and I come.” Do you believe the Lord will 
call a poor sinner, and then cast him out? No! 
His word stands forever, “Him that cometh to Me 
I will in no wise cast out.” 


43. Witsout a Cuaracter.—I was glad when that 
man I told you of, said he felt as if he was too bad. 
Men are pretty near the kingdom of God when they 
do not see any thing good in themselves. At the 
Fulton Street Prayer-meeting a man came in, and 
this was his story. He said he had a mother who 
prayed for him; he was a wild, reckless prodigal. 
Some time after his mother’s death he began to be 
troubled. He thought he ought to get into new 
company, and leave his old companions. So he 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. §1 


snid he would go and join a secret society; he 
thought he would join the Odd Fellows. They 
went and made inquiry about him, and they found 
he was a drunken sailor, so they blackballed him. 
They would not have him. He went to the Free- 
masons; he had nobody to recommend him, so they 
inquired and found there was no good in his char- 
acter, and they too blaclballed him. They didn’t 
want him. One day, some one handed him a little 
notice in the street about the prayer-meeting, and 
he went in. He heard that Christ had come to 
save sinners. He believed Him; he took Him at 
at His word; and, in reporting the matter, he said 
he “came to Christ without a character, and Christ 
hadn’t blackballed him.” 

My friends, that is Christ’s way. Is there a man 
here without a character, with nobody to say a 
good word for him? I bring you good news. Call 
on the Son of God, and He will hear you. Call on 
him to-night. 


44, A Sourrary Woman.—I was at a meeting for 
ministers the other day. Up in the gallery there 
was one solitary woman; she sat there alone. When 
the meeting was over and I was passing out, she 
came and said, “ Mr. Moody, do you remember me?” 
“Oh yes,” I said, “I remember you.” Where had 
T met her? Mr. Sankey and myself were leaving 
Dundee for the north of Scotland. There was a 
lady who had come from London and brought her 


6 


a a rn a A Rk anions 


89 ADDRESSES 


two boys all the way to get blessed; they must 
have been about eighteen or nineteen—twins. That 
mother’s heart was burdened for their salvation. 
The last night we had a meeting there, one of the 
sons yielded himself up to Christ, and the mother 
went back next morning with her two boys, rejoic- 
ing that they had asked and found peace in believ- 
ing. Some people may say that she was a great fa- 
natic for going all the way from London to Dundee 
with her boys to get a blessing. But last Friday 
she says, “My boy, who found the Lord in Dun- 
dee, died three weeks ago.” And as she pressed my 
hand as I left thy meeting, I said to myself, ‘‘ Was 
it not a good thing that mother took her boy to 
Dundee?” My friends, let us be in earnest about 
the salvation of our children, and of our friends. 
Warn that young lady. Yes, mother, speak to that 
daughter of yours. Father, speak to that child of 
yours. Wife, speak to your unconverted husband; 
husband, speak to your unconverted wife. Do not 
let a man go out of this house saying, “ Nobody 
cared for my soul.” I never saw a mother bur- 
dened for her children but they soon became anx- 
ious. Oh may there be many a sinner seeking the 
kingdom of God with all their heart! 


45. Wuat arr You cornea to Do?—Before I close, 
I want to ask you once more, “ What are you going 
to do? If the Lord is near, won’t you call upon 
Him? Don’t let that scoffing man next you keep 


Saad ee 


iS B OO 


Sit tae 


a0U BEST THOTANTS. 83 


you out of the kingdom of God. There is a scorn- 
ful look upon that man’s face; perhaps he is mak- 
ing light of what I am saying. Don’t mind him; 
don’t look to him; but just look right up to God, 
and ask Him to save you. Now, every true friend 
—and you all have friends—every true friend, if 
you could got his advice to-night, would tell you to 
be saved now. Ask that minister sitting next you, 
‘Had I better seek the kingdom of God to-night?” 
What does he tell you? “ By all means, don’t put 
it off another minute.” Ask that godly praying 
mother by your side, ‘Is it best to seek the king- 
dom of God to-night?” Does she say, Put it off 
one week, or put it off one month? Do you think 
that mother would say that? There is not a Chris- 
tian mother in this hall who would say it. I doubt 
if there is an unconverted mother even here whose 
advice would be to put off becoming a Christian. 
Ask that praying sister of yours, ask that praying 
brother, ask any friend you have here—if you are 
sitting near one—whether it is not the very best 
thing you can do. And then cry up to heaven and 
ask Him who is sitting at the right hand of God, 
and who loves you more than your father or your 
mother, or any one on earth—who loves you so 
much that He gave Himself for you; ask im what 
He will have you do, and hear His voice from the 
throne, “Seek ye first the kingdom of God.” And 
then shout down to the infernal regions, and ask 
those down there, and what will they say? ‘Send 


‘Y Mo 


My NS es 4. 
Oe % VF K & Ko 5 
lp . ee W x kg Ke 
Vv EVALUATION 
v a 
is 28 42s 
lao 2 yz 
Wu Wg 
les gs 
WMAZS HLA. es 
* 
Ny A 
7 Sy wr XK \ 
a ae ey 4S « “e ¢ “9 
aya 7 | % sn on“ 


av 
& 
POI gTE MC wn 
Y sciences " (716) 872-4503 
Corporation 


tad Se 


oy 


84 ADDRESSES 


some one to my father’s house, for I have five breth- 
ren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also 
come into this place.” Heaven, earth, and hell 
unite in this one thing, “Seek first the kingdom of 
God.” Don’t put it off. Call upon Him while He 
is near. Andif you call upon Him in real earnest 
He will hear that call. 


46. Last Cari! !—You may call too late. I have 
no doubt that those who would not pray when the 
ark was building prayed when the flood came, but 
their prayer was not answered. I have no doubt 
that when Lot went out of Sodom, Sodom cried to 
God, but it was too late, and God’s judgment swept 
them from the earth. My friends, it is nc too late 
now, but it may be at twelve o’clock to-night. I 
cannot find any place in this Bible where I can say 
you may call to-morrow. Iam not justified in say- 
ing that. ‘Behold, now is the accepted time, now 
is the day of salvation.” Those men of Jerusalem, 
what « golden opportunity they had, with Christ in 
their midst. We see the Son of God weeping over 
Jerusalem, His heart bursting with grief for the city, 
as He cried, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that 
stonest the prophets, how often would I have gath- 
ered thee as a hen gathereth her brood, but ye would 
not.” He could look down forty years, and see Ti- 
tus coming with his army, and besieging that city. 
They called upon God then, but it was too late, and 
eleven hundred thousand people perished. To-night 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 85 


is a time of mercy. It may beI am talking to some 
one to-night whose days of grace may be few, to 
some one who may be snatched away very soon. 
There may be some one here to-night who may 
never hear unother Gospel sermon; some one who 
may be hearing the last call. My friend, be wise to- 
night. Make up your mind that you will seek the 
kingdom of God now. “Behold, now is the accepted 
time; behold, now is the day of salvation.” Christ 
is inviting you to come—‘“ Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest.” Oh, may we all find rest in Christ to-night! 
Do not let any thing divert your minds, but this 
night, this hour, make up your mind that you will 
not leave this hall until the great question of eter- 
nity has been settled. 


47, SeLF-RIGHTEOUSNESS.—An artist wanted a man 
that would represent the prodigal. One day, he 
met a poor beggar, and he thought—‘“ That man 
would represent the prodigal.” He found the beg- 
gar ready to sit for his painting if he would pay 
him. The man appeared on the day appointed, but 
the artist did not recognize him. He said, “You 
made an appointment with me.” “No,” says the 
artist, “I never saw you before.” ‘You are mis- 
taken; you did see me, and made an appointment 
with me.” ‘No, it must be some other artist. I 
have an appointment to mcet a beggar here at this 


86 ADDRESSES 


hour.” “Well,” says the beggar, “Iam the man.” 
“You the man?” “Yes.” “What have you been 
doing?” “Well, I thought I would get a new suit 
of clothes before I got painted.” “Well,” says the 
artist, “I don’t want you;” he would not have him 
then. And so if you are coming to God, come just 
as you are. Do not go and put on some garments 
of yours, and think the Lord will accept you because 
you have some good thoughts and desires. 


48. Conversion oF Cutupren.—I was urging the 
early conversion of children in a meeting, and an 
old man got up at the close and said, “I want to 
endorse every word. Sixteen years ago I was in a 
heathen country, a missionary, and my wife died and 
left three little children. On the Sabbath after her 
death my eldest girl came to me and said, ‘Papa, 
shall I take the children into the bedroom and pray 
with them as mother used to?’” The mother was 
dead, and little Nellie, ten years old, wanted to fol- 
low in her footsteps. The father said yes, and she 
led them off to the chamber to pray. When they 
came out he noticed that they had been weeping, 
and asked what about. ‘‘ Well, father,” said the lit. 
tle girl, “I prayed just as mother taught me, and 
then ”’—naming her little brother—‘“he prayed the 
prayer that mother taught him; but little Susie, she 
was too young, mother had not taught her a prayer, 
so she made a prayer of her own, and I could not 
help but weep to hear her pray.” ‘“ Why,” said the 


AND BEST TIOUGHTS. 87 


father, “what did she say?” “Why she put up 
her little hands, and closed her eyes, and said, ‘O 
God, you have come and taken away my dear mam- 
ma, and I have no mamma to pray for me now— 
won't you please make me good just as my dear 
mamma was, for Jesus’ sake, Amen;’” and God 
heard that prayer. That little child before she was 
four years old gave evidence of being a child of God, 
and for sixteen years she was in that heathen coun- 
try leading little children to the Lamb of God that 
taketh away the sin of the world. 


49. Tue Dyna Soxpier’s Rorti-Cart.—A soldier 
lay on his dying couch during our last war, and 
they heard him say “Here!” They asked him 
what he wanted, and he put up his hand and said, 
“Hush! they are calling the roll of heaven, and I 
am answering to my name,” and presently he whis- 
pered, “ Here!”’ and he was gone. 


50. Farru rHen Worxs.—You cannot do any thing 
to please God until you believe. Suppose I should 
say to my little girl, “Emma, go and get me a glass 
of water,” and she was to say, “I don’t want to do 
it, papa.” She goes into another room and some 
one gives her a cluster of grapes, which she decides 
to give to her papa. Do you think these grape : 
would be acceptable if she did not want to get the 
water? I should say, “I do not want the grapes 
until you have brought the water,” She goes out of 


= 


~ 


88 ADDRESSES 


the room again, and some one gives her an orange 
If she brought the orange to me, do you think ] 
should want it? no, and that child cannot do any 
thing to please me until I get the water. You can- 
not please God until you believe on His Son. 


51. A Moruer’s Love.—In the time of the Cali- 
fornian gold fever a man went to the diggings, and 
left his wife to follow him some time afterwards. 
While on her voyage with her little boy the vessel 
caught fire, and as there was a powder magazine on 
board the captain knew when the flames reached it 
the ship would be blown up. The fire could not be 
got under, so they took to the life-boats, but there 
was not room forall. As the last boat pushed off 
the mother and bov stood on the deck. One of the 
sailors said there was room for another. What did 
the mother do?—she gave up her boy. She kissed 
him, and told him if he lived to see his father to 
tell him she died to save her boy. Do you think 
when that boy grew up he could fail to love that 
mother who died to save him? My friends, this is a 
faint type of what Christ has done for you and me. 


52. “Jesus Pays Ir Atu.”—When Rev. Mr. Arnot 
was pastor of a church in Glasgow he heard of a 
woman in trouble. She could not pay her debts 
and she could not pay her rent; so he went round 
to her house thinking he would help her. He 
knocked at the door twice but no one came, He 


aie 
; ii 
eH 


, 
| 
| it 
i ; 
Hi ' 
Li 
at ie 
‘ 
i ' 
i 
cf 
im 
§ t 
ih 3 i 
H i 
fi 7 | 
hh : } 
" ee 
{ i it 
‘D ub ; 
n 
i] { 
! e 
A 
iP | 
] i 
a i 
i 
a 
/ Bt f 
i mo 
BY q 
| 
i ‘ 
ul 
¢ : 
a | } 
‘ in 
| 3 
} | 
/ a8 
1 ait 
i on 
ia ig, 
| a 
} j 
HW in| 
Hi hi 
iy 3 
| of 
| 
gti 
ih 
Wh i 
{ | 
i} 
i 
| } 
| | 
} aa} 
| j 
| fa} 
i | 
if iat 
i! i 
i} . 
| : 
| Fe 
i | 4} 
i . 
an ae 
} " 
1 
{ tal 
| } 
| >) 
i} ; 
1} hig! 
mn, i 
| } 
iB i} 
if i if 
ij 3 
| 5 
j {i 
+} fa 
i! | 
| i 
i 
i 
{ i t 
it 
i it 
i] 
i) 
i 
ie { 
1 ; 
: 
| 
; if 
' i j 
| 
WV 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 8S 


knocked the third time very loud but all was still. 
After waiting he made a great noise and at last left 
the house. Some days after he met the woman in 
the street, and said, “‘: was at your house the other 
day. I heard you were in trouble and went to help 
you.” “Was that you? I was in the house but J 
thought it was the landlord come for the rent and 
as [ had not got the money I kept the door locked.” 
That woman represents the sinner. A sinner thinks 
God is coming to demand something. God comes 
to give and bless. Jesus comes to pay the debt. 


53. Unrry Torovas Curist.—The blood of Christ 
wakes us one. During the days of slavery in Amer- 
ica, when there was much political strife and strong 
prejudice against the black men, especially by Irish- 
men, I heard a preacher say when he came to the 
cross for salvation he found a poor negro on the 
right hand, and an Irishman on the left hand, and 
the blood came trickling down upon them and made 
them one. There may be strife in the world, but 
every one Christ has redeemed He has made one. 
We are blood relatives. 


54. Tue Precious Buioop.—During the American 
war a doctor heard a man saying, ‘‘ Blood, blood, 
blood!” The doctor thought this was because he 
had seen so much blood, and sought to divert his 
mind. The man smiled, and said, “I wasn’t think- 
ing of the blood upon the battle-field, but I wag 


90 ADDRESSES 


thinking how precious the blood of Christ is to me 
as I am dying.” As he died, his lips quivered, 
“ Blood, blood, blood!” and he was gone. It will 
be precious when we come to our dying bed—it will 
be worth more than all the world then. 


56. JULIAN ConquereD.—It is said of Julian, the 
apostate in Rome, that when he was trying to stamp 
out Christianity, he was pierced in the side by an 
arrow. He pulled the arrow out, and taking a hand- 
ful of blood as it flowed from the wound, threw it 
into the air, shouting, ‘‘Thou Galilean, Thou hast 
conquered !” 


56. Cooxman’s Triumpx.—You may have read of 
that good man in America, Alfred Cookman. While 
his friends were gathered round his dying couch his 
face lit up, and with a shout of triumph, he said, “I 
am sweeping through the gates, washed in the blood 
of the Lamb!” And this echoes and re-echoes 
through America to-day, “I am sweeping through 
the gates, washed in the blood of the Lamb! ” 


57. Curist anp Hypocrires.-Some people say, 
“T have no doubt about the Word of God, but there 
are some men in the church that ought not to be 
there ; therefore, I do not purpose to go into the 
church.” I am not asking you to come into the 
church—not but what I believe in churches; but I 
am asking you to the marriage supper of the Lamb, 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 9] 


But you say, here are some hypocrites. “Here is a 
man up here in one of the churches that cheated me 
out of £5 a few years ago, and you are not going to 
catch me in the company of hypocrites.” Well, my 
friend, if you want to get out of the company of hypo- 
crites, you had better get out of the world as quick 
as you can. One of the twelve apostles turned out 
to be a hypocrite, and there is no doubt there will 
be hypocrites in the church to the end of time. 
But ‘“ what is that to thee?” says Christ to Peter ; 
“follow thou Me.” We do not ask you to follow 
hypocrites, we ask you to follow Christ; we do not 
ask you to believe in hypocrites, we ask you to be- 
lieve in Christ. Another thing, if you want to get 
out of the company of hypocrites you had better 
make haste and come to Christ. There will be no 
hypocrites at the marriage supper of the Lamb ; 
they will all be in hell, and you will be there with 
them if you do not make haste and come to Christ. 


58. I Don’t Fret Riaut.—There is a class who 
say, “I would like to come to Christ, but I do not 
feel.” That is the very worst and the most common 
excuse we have. I wish sometimes the word could 
be abolished—feel, feel. Supposing my friend Mr. 
Stone should invite me to his house to dinner, and 
I say, “I would like to go very much, but I don’t 
know as I feel right.” “Well,” he says, “what do 
you mean? Don’t you want to go to my house?” 
“Oh, yes, I want to go.” Men say— Oh, yes, we 


92 ADDRESSES 


want to be saved.” “What do you mean, Mr. 
Moody? Do you mean that you do not know as 
you will be well to-morrow? Do you think you 
will be sick?” ‘Oh, no, I expect to be well to-mor- 
row if I live.” ‘Well, what do you mean by feel- 
ng?” “Well, I do not know just how Ill feel. I 
would like to go to your house to dinner to-mor- 
row, but I don’t know as I will feel just right.” “I 
don’t understand you, Mr. Moody ; I am not talk- 
ing about feeling ; I invite you to come to my house 
to dinner.” ‘ Well, I would like to come very much, 
but the fact is I do not know how I will feel to-mor- 
row.” I can imagine my friend Mr. Stone saying, 
“What has come over Moody? I asked him to my 
house to dinner, and he says he would like to come, 
but he does not know as he will feel right, and he 


talked about feeling all the time.” That is the way 
people talk now. You talk to them about coming 
to the kingdom of God, and they say, “I do not 
know as I feel just right.” 


59. Heaven a Rearity.—I believe heaven is a city 
quite as real as London is. What we want is to 
make heaven real, and hell real, and God real, and 
Christ real, and then live as if we believed these 
things to be real. 


60. Waat Gop Wants.—I heard of an English- 
man that when the Lord converted him, had a 
great desire to see every man converted, So he 


he 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 93 


went into one town, and gave notice that he would 
preach. It got noised round that the man was rich, 
so he had a great audience the first night, but, the 
next night hardly any one was there. Then he got 
out placards, and stated that if any man in that 
town owed any debt, if they would come round 
to his office between nine and twelve o’clock on 
a certain day, he would pay the debt. That went 
through the town like wild-fire. One said to the 
other, “John, do you believe that?” ‘No, I am 
not going to believe that any stranger is going to 
pay our debts.” The day came, and at nine o’clock 
the man was there. At ten o’clock none had come. 
At eleven o’clock a man was seen walking up and 
down, and finally he stuck his head in the door and 
said, “Is it true that you will pay any man’s debt?” 
“Yes; do you owe any debt?” “Yes.” “Have you 
brought the necessary papers?” “Yes.” So the 
man drew a check and paid the other’s debt, and 
he kept him and talked with him till twelve o’clock; 
and before twelve o’clock two other men came and 
got their debts paid. At twelve o’clock that man 
let them out, and the people outside said to them, 
“He paid your debts, did not he?” ‘“ Yes, he did,” 
they answered. The people laughed and made fun 
of them, and would not believe it till they pulled 
out the check, and said, “There it is. He has paid 
all the debt.” Then the people said, “ What fools 
we were, we did not go in and get our debts paid!” 
But they could not; it was too late; the door was 


a 5 ‘ , $= #« 


26s ec 
= 
ST FR 


ne 


Se Tat 


as ang ae 


a rm 
SoG: 


oe fae 


oon 


a 


Rites 
ee SR. oa 
Bo — ae 


Poe 


MESES Sater tone 


94 ADDRESSES 


closed. Then the man preached the Gospel, and 
great crowds went to hear him; and he said, ‘‘ Now, 
my friends, that is what God wants to do, but you 
will not let Him do it. Christ came to pay our 
debts, and that is the Gospel.” 


61. Gop’s Omnrperesence.—God is here, the same 
as we say the sun has been shining to-day, but it is 
95,000,000 of miles away, and so God may be here, 
but at the same time God is a Person. God has a 
dwelling-place, God has a home, God has a throne. 


62. Sezeina Jesus.—One Christian asked another 
what he expected to do when he got to heaven, and 
he said he expected to take one good long look of 
about 500 years at Christ, and then he would want 
to see Paul and Peter and John and the rest of the 
disciples. Well, it seems to me one glimpse of Christ 
will pay us for all that we are called upon to endure 
here—to see the King in His beauty, to be in the 
presence of the King. 


63. Tue Beauty or Heaven.—I read of a little child 
whose mother was sick, and the child was not old 
enough to understand about the sickness of the 
mother. It was taken away, and when the mother 
died, they thought they would rather have the child 
remember its mother as she was when she was well, 
and so they did not take her back till after the 
mother was buried. They brought the child home 


—1d 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 95 


and she ran into the drawing-room to meet her 
mother, and her mother was not there. The little 
thing was disappointed, and ran into all the rooms, 
but could not find her -iother. She began to ery 
and asked them to send her back; she did not want 
to stay; home had lost its attraction because mother 
was not there. What is going to make heaven sa 
delightful? It won’t be the pearly gates; it won’t 
be the jasper walls; but it will be that we shall see 
the King in His beauty, and shall behold Him, and 
not only Him, but those that have gone before us. 


64. Tarxina Azsovur Heavix.—I was going to a 
mecting some time age, aud a friend said to me on 
my way, “What is your subject?” I told him I 
should talk about heaven. I noticed u scowl on his 
forehead, and said, ‘“ What makes you look in that 
way?” He said he was in hopes I was going to give 
them something practical, that there would be time 
enough to talk about heaven when we got there. 
But there is a passage in Timothy which says that 
“all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is 
profitable for doctrine,” and if God did not want us 
to talk about and think about heaven He would not 
have so much written about it. And I think if peo- 
ple talked more about heaven they would have more 
of a desire to go there. 


65. Our Name in Heaven.——Two years ago a friend 
of mine that was in London was going back to Amer 


36 ADDRESSES 


ica. She went to Liverpool with a party of Amer- 
ican friends, and they were talking about what hotel 
they would stop at, and decided to go to the North- 
Western. The hotel was full, and as they were start- 
ing to find another, they said to my friend, “Are 
not you going with us?” My friend said, “No, I 
am going to stay here.” ‘Oh, no,” they said, “you 
cannot stay here.” But my friend said, “I am go- 
ing to stay.” “Howisit?” “I have got a room.” 
“Where did you get it?” “Why, I sent my name 
on ahead.” She had telegraphed a few days before 
and secured aroom. And that is just what the chil- 
dren of God are doing now; they are sending their 
names on ahead and getting them down in the Book 
of Life. They are not waiting for the dying minute. 


66. Reconcrtiation.—There was an Englishman 
who had an only son who was very headstrong. 
Father and son quarrelled. The father said he 
wished the son would leave home and never come 
back. The boy said he would go and not come to 
the father’s house again till he sent for him. The 
father said he never would send for him. Away 
went the boy. But when a father gives up a boy a 
mother does not. The mother of the boy wrote 
and plead with him to write to his father first and 
his father would forgive him; but the boy said, “I 
will never go home till father asks me.” She plead 
to the father but the father said, ‘“‘ No, I will never 
ask him.” At last the mother, broken-hearted, was 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 97 


sick and given up by the physicians to die. Her 
husband, anxious to gratify her last wish, wanted 
to know if he could do any thing for her. She said, 
“Yes, you can send for my boy.” “ Well,” said the 
father. ‘I will send word to him that you want to 
see him.” “No,” she says, “If ever I see him you 
must send for him.” So the father wrote and the 
boy came home to his dying mother. When he 
opened the door he found his mother dying and his 
father by the bedside. The father looked up and 
saw his son but refused to speak with him. The 
mother kissed her boy and said, ‘‘Now, my son, 
just speak to your father.” But the boy said, “No, 
mother, I will not speak to him until he spcaks to 
me.” She took her husband’s hand and her boy’s 
and spent her dying moments striving to reconcile 
them. As she was expiring she could not speak, so 
she put the hand of the wayward boy into the hand 
of the father and passed away. The boy looked at 
the mother, and the father at the wife, and at last 
the father’s heart broke, and he took that boy to 
his bosom, and by that body they were reconciled. 
Sinner, that is only a faint type, a poor illustration, 
because God is not angry with you. God gives you 
Christ, and I bring you to-night to the dead body 
of Christ. I ask you to look at the wounds in His 
hands and feet, and the wound in His side. And I 
ask you, “ Will you not be reconciled?” ~ 


67. Tus Br--z Anp Sceptics.—Supposing I should 
7 


98 


ADDRESSES 


send my little boy to school to-morrow morning, 
and when he came home I should say, “Can you 
read, write, spell? Do you understand all about 
arithmetic, geometry, algebra?” The little fellow 
would look at me, and say, “ Why, what do you talk 
in that way for? I have been trying all day to learn 
the A B C.” Supposing I replied, “If you have 
not finished your education you need not go to the 
school any more.” Well, there is about as much 
sense in that as in the way that infidels talk about 
the Bible. They take it up, read a chapter, and 
say, ‘Oh, it is so dark and mysterious we cannot 
understand it.” 


68. Tur Bioop Covers Srx.—In Ireland, some 
time ago, a teacher asked a little boy if there was 
any thing that God could not do; and the little fel- 
low said, “ Yes; He cannot see my sins through the 
blood of Christ.” That is just what He cannot do. 
The blood covers them. 


69. “Our or Purearory.”—I am told that at 
Rome, if you go up a few steps on your hands and 
knees, that is nine years out of purgatory. If you 
take one step now you are out of purgatory for time 
and eternity. 


70. Sarety By THE Cross.—In our western coun- 
try in the autumn, when there has not been for 
months any rain, sometimes the prairie catches fire, 


cr em cer YF Ww 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 99 


and the flames just roll along twenty feet high over 
that western desert, at the rate of thirty or forty 
miles an hour, consuming man and beast. When 
the frontiersmen see it coming, what do they do? 
They know they cannot run as fast as the fire can 
run. Not the fleetest horse can escape from that 
fire. They take a match and light the grass around 
them and let the flames sweep, and then they get 
into the burnt. district and stand safe. They hear 
the flames roar, they see death coming towards 
them; but they do not fear, they do not tremble, 
because the fire has passed over the place where 
they are, and there is no danger. There is one 
mountain peak that the wrath of God has swept 
over; that is Mount Calvary, and that fire spent its 
fury upon the bosom of the Son of God. Take 
your stand by the cross, and you will be safe for 
time and eternity. 


71. Farrn nor Reason.—I heard of some com- 
mercial travellers who went to hear a man preach. 
They came back to the hotel, and were sitting in 
the smoking-room, and they said the minister did 
not appes’ to their reason, and they would not be- 
lieve any thing they could not reason out. An old 
man sitting there listening, said to them, “ You say 
you won’t believe any thing you can’t reason out?” 
“No, we won't.” The old man said, “As I was 
coming on the train I noticed some sheep and 
cattle and swine and geese, eating grass. Now, 


100 ADDRESSES 


can you tell me by what process that same grass 
was turned into feathers, hair, bristles, and wool?” 
“Well, no, we can’t just tell you that.” “Do you 
believe it is a fact?” ‘Oh, yes, itis a fact.” “I 
thought you said you would not believe any thing 
you could not reason out?” ‘Well, we can’t help 
believing that; we see it with our eyes.” ‘ Well,’ 
said the old man, “I can’t help but believe in re- 
generation, and a man being converted, although 
I cannot explain how God converted him.” 


72. THe Bioop CiEansetu.—There is no condem- 
nation to him that is in Christ Jesus. You may 
just pile up your sins till they rise up like a dark 
mountain, and then multiply them by ten thousand 
for those you cannot think of; and after you have 
tried to enumerate all the sins you have ever com- 
mitted, just let me bring one verse in, and then 
that mountain will melt away: “The blood of Jesus 
Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.” 


73. A Grrr Rervsep.—Suppose I was going over 
London Bridge and saw a poor, miserable beggar 
with no rags hardly to cover his nakedness, and 
right behind him was the Prince of Wales with a 
bag of gold, and the poor beggar was running away 
from him, and the Prince was hallooing, “ Oh, beg- 
gar here is a bag of gold!” Sinner that is your 
condition. The Prince of Heaven wants to give you 
eternal life and you are running away from Him, 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 101 


74. Morauity witt not Save.—Nicodemus stood 
very high; he was one of the church dignitaries; he 
stood as high as any man in Jerusalem, except the 
high-priegt himself. He belonged to the seventy 
rulers of the Jews; he was a doctor of divinity, and 
taught the law. There is not one word of Scrip- 
ture against him; he was a man that stood out be- 
fore the whole nation as of pure and spotless char- 
acter. What does Christ say to him? “Except a 
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of 
God.” 


75. Saran in Cuurcu.—Many say, “Oh, yes, I am 
a Christian, I go to church every Sabbath.” There 
is no one who goes to church so regularly as Satan. 
He is always there before the minister and the last 
one out of church. There is not a church, or a 
chapel, but he is a regular attendant of it. The 
idea that he is only in slums, and lanes, and public 
houses, is a false one. 


76. Dratn wirnout Curist.—A stage-driver away 
on the Pacific coast--as I was told when I was 
there about three years ago—while lying on his 
dying bed, kept moving one of his feet up and 
down, saying, “I am on the down grade, and can- 
not reach the brake.” As they told me of it I 
thought how many were on the down grade and 
could not reach the brake, and were dying without 
God and without hope. 


= 


vk, 


+ 
 —_— 


oan ee 


oe 
102 ADDRESSES 


77. Curistians Asterp.—A father took his little 
child out into the field one Sabbath, and lay down 
under a beautiful shady tree. The little child ran 
about gathering wild flowers and little. blades of 
grass, and coming to its father and saying, “ Pretty! 
pretty!” At last the father fell asleep, and while 
he was sleeping, the little child wandered away. 
When he awoke, his first thought was, “Where is 
my child?” He looked all around, but he could 
not see him. Running to a little hill, he looked 
around and shouted, but all he heard was the echo 
of his own voice. Then going to a precipice at 
some distance, he looked down, and here upon the 
rocks and briers, he saw the mangled form of his 
loved child. He rushed to the spot, took up the 
lifeless corpse and hugged it to his bosom, and ac- 
cused himself of being the murderer of his own 
child. While he was sleeping his child had wan- 
dered over the precipice. I thought as I heard 
that, what a picture of the Church of God! How 
many fathers and mothers, how many Christian 
men, are sleeping now while their children wander 
over the terrible precipice, right into the bottom- 
less pit of hell. 


78. “I’m Guan Sur’s rn Heaven.”—I was attending 
a Sabbath-school convention in a little town, where 
a stranger took me into his house. I said, “Have 
you no children?” He said no; he had one, but 
she was in heaven, and he said he was glad of it. I 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 103 


said, “ Glad that your only child is dead?” =‘ Yes,” 
he said. “How is that? Was she deformed, or 
was any thing wrong with her?” “No, she was as 
perfect as could be ;” and he brought me a portrait 
of a beautiful girl, with golden curls falling down 
her neck, more like an angel than a child. I asked 
how old she was. “Seven.” “What do you mean 
by saying you are glad she is in heaven?” ‘ Well,” 
said he, “I worshipped that child, I was making 
money for my child, and every Sunday I spent 
hours with her; she was the idol of my heart, but 
I did not know it. One day I found my child sick. 
Tn a few days she died, and I accused God of being 
unjust, and refused to be reconciled. I would have 
torn God from His throne if I could. For three 
days and nights I neither ate, nor drank, nor slept. 
I was almost mad. On the third day I buried her, 
and when I came home, as I walked up and down 
the room, I thought I heard the voice of my little 
one; but then I thought, ‘No, that voice is hushed 
forever. Then I thought I heard her little feet 
coming towards me, but then I said, ‘No, I shall 
never hear those little feet again.’ At last I threw 
myself on my bed, and began to weep. Nature gave 
way, and I fell asleep. Ihadadream. I thought 
I was crossing a waste, barren field, and I came to 
ariver that looked so cold and dark and dreary that 
I drew back from it ; but, looking across, I saw the 
most beautiful land my eyes had ever rested upon. 
Then I saw a company on the other side, and among 


3 
Fe tee 


$ => * 
ene Taha PE Re ie eS ees 


fe 


i 


pEMIaRT 


a ee a 


-* wa Fg 
ee 


3 
Sow 


ert 
HRMS 
zit teaievremeaN 


104 ADDRESSES 


them my darling child. She came to the bank oa 
the river, and waving her little angel hand, said, 
‘Father, come right this way; it is so beautiful 
here.’ I then went to the water’s edge, and thought 
I would plunge in, but it was too deep for me—I 
could not swim. I thought I would give any thing 
to cross. I tried to find a boat, but there was no 
ferryman. I looked for a bridge, but there was 
none; and while I was wandering up and down 
the little angel voice came across the stream, ‘Come 
right this way, father ; it is beautiful here!’ All at 
once I heard a voice as if it came from heaven, say- 
ing, ‘I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. No 
man cometh unto the Father but by Me.’ The 
voice awoke me from sleep. I thought it was God 
calling me, and that if I would ever see my child 
again I must come to God through Jesus Christ. 
That night I knelt beside my bed and gave myself 
to God. Now I no longer look upon my child as 
sleeping in her grave, but I see her with the eye of 
faith in that beautiful land, and every night when I 
lie down I hear her sweet voice saying, ‘Come right 
this way, father,’ and every morning I hear her 
repeating the same words. Now my wife is con- 
verted. Iam superintendent of the Sabbath-school, 
and eight children have been converted, and I am 
trying to get as many converted as I can to go with 
me to that beautiful land.” 


79. Curist First.—Before I left the farm, I was 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 105 


talking one day to a man who was working there, 
and who was weeping. I said to him, “ What is 
the trouble?” And he told me a very strange story. 
When he started in life, he left his native village, 
and went to another town to find something to do, 
and was unsuccessful. The first Sabbath he went 
to a little church, and the minister preached from 
this text : “Seek ye first the kingdom of God;” and 
he thought the text and the sermon were for him- 
self. He wanted to get rich, and when he was 
settled in life he would seek the kingdom of God. 
He went on, and the next Sabbath he was in an- 
other village. It was not long before he heard an- 
other minister preach from the same text, “Seek ye 
first the kingdom of God.” He thought surely some 
one must have been speaking to the minister about 
him. For the minister just pictured him out. But 
he said when he got settled in life, and had control 
of his time, and was his own master, he would then 
seek the kingdom of God. Some time after he was 
at another village, and he went to church again, and 
he had not been going a great while when he heard 
the third minister preach from the same text : “Seek 
ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, 
and all things else shall be added.” He said it went 
right down into his soul ; but he calmly and delib- 
erately made up his mind that he would not be- 
come a Christian until he had got settled in life, 
and owned his farm. This man said, “Now I am 
what the world calls rich. I go to church every 


106 ADDRESSES 


Sunday, but I have never heard a sermon from that 
day to this which has ever made any impression 
upon my heart. My heart is as hard as a stone.” 
As he said that tears trickled down his cheek. I 
was a young man and did not know what it meant. 

When I was converted I thought when I should 
go back home I would see this man, and preach 
Christ to him. When I went back home I said to 
my widowed mother, naming this man, “ Is he still 
living in the same place?”? My mother said, “He 
is gone mad and has been taken away to the insane 
asylum, and every one that goes to see him he points 
his finger at and says, ‘Seek ye first the kingdom 
of God.’” I thought I should like to see him but 
he was so far gone it would do no good. The next 
time I went home he was at his home idiotic. I 
went to see him. When I went in I said, ‘Do you 
know me?” He pointed his finger at me and said, 
“Young man, seek ye first the kingdom of God.” 
God had driven the text into his mind but his rea- 
son was gone. Three years ago, when I visited my 
father’s grave I noticed a new stone had been put 
up. Istopped and found it was my friend’s. The 
autumn wind seemed whispering the text, “Seek ye 
first the kingdom of God.” 


80. Tue Fatat Ism—When every child that be- 
longs to the Lord is willing to speak for Him, is 
willing to work for Him, and, if need be, willing to 
die for Him, then Christianity will advance, and we 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 107 


shall see the work of the Lord prosper. I fear more 
than any thing else, the dead, cold formalism of the 
Church of God. 

Talk about the false isms! There is none so dan- 
gerous as this dead, cold formalism which has come 
right into the heart of the Church. So many of us 
just sleep whiie souls all around are perishing. 


81. THe Mountains or Unpetier.—A few years ago 
there was a little story going through the American 
religious press that touched my heart as a father. 
It was about the death of a little boy. The mother 
thought her little boy was safe in the arms of Jesus; 
but one day she came into his room, and he said, 
as he was looking out of the window, “Mother, 
what are those mountains that I see yonder?” The 
mother said, “Eddie, there is no mountain in sight 
of the house.” ‘Don’t you see them, mothcr?” 
said he; “they’re so high and so dark. Eddie has 
got to cross those mountains. Won’t you take him 
in your arms and carry him over?” The mother 
said, “Eddie, I would if I could, but I cannot.” 
Now, there is a time coming when your friends can- 
not help you. When you come to the mountain, if 
you have not Christ, you must take that journey 
alone, for there will be no one to help you then. 
The mother prayed with that little boy. Then she 
said, “Eddie, you must take your eyes off your 
mother. You must have your eyes upon Jesus. 
He will help you.” The mother again prayed with 


108 ADDRESSES ~ 


him, and tried to get his little mind oft trom the 
dark mountain. All at once he said, ‘ Mother, hark! 
don’t you hear them call?” ‘ Hear who, Eddie?” 
“Don’t you see the angels just on the other side of 
the mountain? They are calling forme. Take me, 
mother, and carry me over the mountain.” The 
mother said again, ‘Why, my boy, I cannot go with 
you; but Christ will be with you. He will take you 
safe over the mountains if you trust Him.” Again 
the mother prayed for her little boy. At length he 
closed his eyes and he prayed, “ Lord Jesus, be with 
me, and take me over the mountains.” Then he 
opened his little eyes, and said, “Good-by, mam- 
ma; Jesus is coming to carry me over the moun- 
tains ;” and the little sufferer was gone. Sinner, 
Christ will carry you over the mountains of unbelief, 
if you will only let Him. 


82. THanxsaivinc.—One reason why we don’t have 
more answers to our prayers is because we are not 
thankful enough. The Divine injunction is, “Be 
careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer 
and supplication, with thanksgiving, let vour requests 
be made known unto God.” Some one has well 
yaid there-are three things in this verse: careful for 
nothing—prayerful for every thing—thankful for 
any thing. 


83. Jupas’ Kiss.—Judas got near enough to Christ 
to kiss Him, and yet went down to damnation. 


t 


AND BEST TIOUGHTS, 1°9 


84. Taree Sreps tro Hett.—There are three steps 
to the lost world. The first is Neglect. AJ] a man 
has to do is to neglect salvation and that will take 
Lim to the lost world. I am on a swift river, and 
lying in the bottom of my little boat ; all I have to 
do is to fold my arms and the current will carry me 
out to sea. Alla man has to do in the current of 
life is to fold his arms and he will drift on and be 
lost. The second step is Refusal. The last step is 
to Despise the love of Christ. 


85. Pray! Don’t Araur!—Spend no time in ar- 
guments. I believe that is a work uf the devil to 
cause delay. If a man comes to argue we should 
go on our knees, pray with him, and then let him 
go. Job never fell until he got into an argument 
with his friends; he could stand his boils, and all 
his other afflictions, better than an argument. 


86. Guarp Aaarnst SeLF-conripencr.—Many of the 
Bible characters fell just in the things in which they 
were thought to be strongest. Moses failed in his 
humility, Abraham in his faith, Elijah in his cour- 
age—for one woman scared him away to that juni- 
per tree; and Peter, whose strong point was bold- 
ness, was so frightened by a maid as to deny his 
Lord. 


87. Conrmnvous Errort.—There are some who say, 
“We don’t have any sympathy with theso special 


> 


110 ADDRESSES 


efforts” ; and I sympathize with that objection. I 
believe it is the privilege of the child of God to 
make continuous efforts for the salvation of others, 
every day throughout the year. 


88. “Ler Your Licur Surne.”—A friend of mine 
was walking along the streets one dark night, when 
he saw a man coming along with a lantern. As he 
came up close to him, he noticed by the bright light 
that the man had no eyes. He went past him; but 
the thought struck him, “Surely that man is buna!” 
He turned round and said, “ My friend, are you not 
blind?” “Yes,” was the answer. “Then what have 
you got the lantern for?” “I carry the lantern,” 
said the blind man, “that people may not stumble 
over me.” Let us hold up our light, burning with 
the clear radiance of heaven, that men may not 
stumble over us. 


89. Unper tHe Juniper Tree.—There is a large 
class of people who are always looking upon the 
dark side. Some time ago I myself got under the 
juniper tree. In those days I used to fish all night, 
and catch nothing. One of the workers in our Mis- 
sion came in to see me one Monday morning, full of 
joy, saying what a good Sunday he had. “ Well,” 
said I, “Iam glad you have had a good day; but 
I have had a very bad one.” He knew I had been 
in trouble of ind and so he said, “Did you ever 
study Noah?” “No,” said I; “I have read about 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 111 


him, but I don’t know that I have ever studied him.” 
“Well,” said he, “study him. It will do you good.” 
So I began to study Noah, and I found out that he 
preached for a hundred and twenty years without 
making a single convert. “That is a good deal worse 
than my case,” thought I; and that made me feel 
better at once. That day I went down to the noon 
prayer-meeting, and one poor sinner rose and asked 
us to pray for him. ‘ What would old Noah have 
given for that?” thought I. I tell you, what we 
want is perseverance. 


90. Sexp Any Bopy sur Mr.—There are but few 
now that say, “Here am , Lord; send me”: the 
cry now is, “Send some one else. Send the minis- 
ter, send the church officers, the church-wardens, 
the elders; but not me. I have not got the ability, 
the gifts, or the talents.” Ah! honestly say you 
have not got the heart; for if the heart is loyal, 
God can use you. It is really all a matter of heart. 
It does not take God a great while to qualify a man 
for his work, if he only has the heart for it. 


91. Distance Disrncnantina.—When me. going 
up in a balloon have ascended a little height, things 
down here begin to look very small indeed. What 
had seemed very grand and imposing, now scem as 
mere nothings; and the higher they rise the smaller 
every thing on earth appears—it gets fainter and 
fainter as they rise, till the railway train, dash- 


ee 


PS te cis he 


f 
: 
a 
Pia) 
et 
EOE | 
by fa) 
oa 
oe 
pti 
a + 
oe 
k ce i 
at 


ME 
- 


Sig er Re pS ES EE SOT 


Sth At 


on 


poy 


See 


112 ADDRESSES 


ing along at fifty miles an hour, seems like a thread, 
and scarcely appears to be moving at all, and the 
grand piles of buildings seem now like mere dots. 
So it is when we get near heaven: earth’s treasures, 
earth’s cares, look very small. 


92. To-morrow.—Look at poor old Pharaoh down 
there in Egypt, when the plague of frogs was on him. 
What an awful time he must have had! Frogs in 
the fields, and frogs in the houses; frogs in the bed- 
rooms, and frogs in the kneading-troughs. When 
the king went to bed, a frog would jump on to his 
face; when he cut into a loaf of bread, there was a 
frog in the middle of it. Nothing but frogs every- 
where! Frogs, frogs, frogs! He stood it as long 
as he could; and then he sent for Moses, and begged 
him to take them away. ‘“ When would you like to 
have me do it?” says Moses. Now just listen to 
what he says. You would think he would say, Now! 
this minute! I have had them long enough! But 
he says, “‘ To-morrow.” Kept the frogs another day, 
when he might have got rid of them at once! That 
is just like you, sinner. You say you want to be 
saved; but you are willing to keep your hateful, 
hideous sins till to-morrow, instead of being rid of 
them now. 


98. A Boox or WonpErs.—A man once wanted to 
sell me a “ Book of Wonders.” I took it and looked 
it over, and could not find any thing in it about Cal- 


AND BEST TIOUGHTS. 113 


vary. Whata mistake! A book of wonders—and 
the greatest wonder of all left out! 


94, Repenrance.— What is repentance? Some one 
says it is a “godly sorrow for sin.” But I tell you 
a man can’t have a godly sorrow, or a godly any 
thing else, till after he repents. Repentance means 
right-about-face! Some one says, “Man is born 
with his back towards God, and repentance is turn- 
ing square round.” 


95. A Lim Srx Tuovsanp Years OLp.—One of the 
greatest lies that has come out of the pit of hell is 
that Christ is a hard Master. It is a lie, and has 
been so from the foundation of the world. Oh, 
young man, I beg of you, do not believe the devil 
when he says that God is a hard Master. It is 
false, my friends; and to-night let me brand that 
excuse as one of the devil’s own lies, that he has 
been retailing up and down the earth for six thou- 
sand years. 


96. Trev to tur Worip.—I once heard of two 
men, who, under the influence of liquor, came down 
one night to where their boat was tied; they wanted 
to return home, so they got in and began to row. 
They pulled away hard all night, wondering why 
they never got to the other side of the bay. When 
the gray dawn of morning broke, behold, they had 
never loosed the mooring line or raised the anchor! 


114 ADDRESSES 


And that’s just the way with many who are striving 
to enter the kingdom of heaven. They cannot be- 
lieve, because they are tied to this world. 


97. Lazrness Not Lranness—A good many peo- 
ple are complaining all the time about themselves, 
and crying out— “My leanness! my leanness!” 
when they ought rather to say, “My laziness! my 
laziness!” 


98. “Comer tro Curist Cain anp Atu.”’—In the 
North there was a minister talking to a man in the 
inquiry room. He said, “My heart is so hard, it 
seems as if it was chained; and I cannot come.” 
“Ah!” said the minister, “come to Christ, chain 
and all”; and he just came to Christ, and Christ 
snapped the fetters, and set him free right there. 


99. Tue Trerorater.—There was a soldier down 
in Tennessee when I was there—a great, strong, 
hearty fellow, who was a teetotaler. One day, when 
the army was going on a long march, a man offered 
him a drink of whiskey. 

“T am a teetotaler,” was his reply. 

“Never mind that. You’re in the army now; be- 
sides, you need some stimulant to help you on this 
long march.” 

Taking out a pocket Bible, he held it up before 
the face of his tempter, and said— 

“That is all the stimulant I want.” 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 115 


100. Crowntess Sarnts.—I have an idea there are 
thousands of crownless saints in heaven. They just « 
barely get in at the doors. They have, indeed, been wf 
redeemed by the blood of the Lamb; but there is no 
reward for them. They have sought their own ease ie 
in this world; they have not sought to work for 
Christ here below; therefore, though admitted to 


+ VM 


Fes 


y 


1) 


y heaven, they enjoy no distinguished reward. “They ; ' 
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the fir- bi 
mament; and they that turn many to righteousness " 

e as the stars forever and ever.” But none of those ai 

° uuat have lost heart, and have given up working for ba 

uf the Master here, will shine as the stars, or receive q 


the great reward hereafter. For those careless ones 
a there is no bright glory, no place neax the throne; 
they have just got in at the gates—that’s all! 


101. Curisr Tot Arx.—When I was in Manches- ae 
ter, I went into the gallery one Sunday night, to pede 
ha:e a talk with a few inquirers; and while I was | 
taiking, a business man came in, and took his seat ne 
on the outskirts of the audience. I think, at first, oa | 


he had come merely to criticise, and that he was a qi 
little sceptical. At last I saw he was in tears. I | 
turned to him, and said, “ My friend, what is your 4 


difficulty?” ‘ Well,” he said, “Mr. Moody, the fact 
is, I cannot tell.” I said, “Do you believe you are 
asinner?” He said, ‘Yes; I know that.” I said, 
“Christ is able to save you”; and I used one illuse 
tration after another, but he did not see it. At last 


116 ADDRESSES 


I thought of the ark, and I said: ‘ Was it Noah’s 
feelings that saved him? Was it Noah’s righteous- 
ness that saved him, or was it the ark?” “TI see it, 
now,” said he; “I see it.” He got up and shook 
hands with me, and said: “ Good-night: I must go. 
I was determined to be saved before I went. I see 
it now.” 

A few days after, he came and touched me on the 
shoulder, and said, “Do you know me?” I said, 
“T know your face, but do not remember where I 
have seen you.” He said, “Do you not remember 
the illustration of the ark?” I said, “Yes.” “It 
has been all light ever since,” said he. “I under- 
stand it now. Christ is the Ark; He saves me.” 


102. Conversion Instanranrous.—I can imagine 
some of you saying; “I do not see how a man is 
really going to be converted all at once.” Let me 
give you an illustration. There are two soldiers. 
Now, if you bring those soldiers up to this platform, 
and ask them how they became soldiers, they will 
tell you this—that one moment they were citizens, 
and the next minute soldiers. What was it that 
made them soldiers? It was when they took the 
Queen’s shilling. The moment they received that 
shilling they ceased to be citizens, and they became 
soldiers. Before they received that shilling they 
could go where they pleased; the next minute they 
came under the government and under the regula- 
tions of the army, and they must go where Queen 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 117 


Victoria sends them. They did not have to wait 
for the uniform. The minute they received the shil- 
ling they became soldiers. What made them sol- 
diers? Receiving the shilling. What makes a man 
a Christian? Receiving Christ. “He came unto 
His own, and His own received Him not: but as 
many as received Him, to them gave He power to 
become the sons of God.” 


103. Curisr Our Sussrrrure.—There is a story 
told of Napoleon, that, when he sent out a draft for 
recruits, a man was drafted who didn’t want to g0 
into the army ; but he had a friend who thought a 
good deal of him, and this friend offered to go in 
‘his place. He was taken. A battle was fought, and 
the man was killed and buried on the field, Some 
time afterwards another draft was made, and by a 
mistake this man, whose substitute the other had 
been, was drafted the second time. When they 
went to take him, he said : 

“You cannot take me.” 

“Why not?” 

“T am dead.” 

“You are not.” 

“Yes, Iam. I died at such a battle, and you will 
find me buried on such a battle-field.” 

The man declared that he was dead, and they 
declared that he was alive. 

“See if I was not drafted at such and such a 
time.” They looked, and found that he had been 


#ss 


Si eS REAL ES Cee arnt oe oncnemcacamaten 


fGeeGia yu 


a. 


Laan i oe ear 


118 ADDRESSES 


drafted; and found another name against his: and 
then they said that he had got a substitute. 

*T know that,” said he; “and he died for me, and 
you cannot take me.” | 

They said they would take him, and they did. 
Upon this he appealed to the emperor, who decided 
they could not take him, for another man had died 
in his place. 

There were hundreds of such cases during our 
war, where men bought substitutes; and others 
served through love—the father for the son, and 
the son for the father, and brothers for brothers. 
One wealthy man hired another to go to the war for 
him, and he was killed. The wealthy man went 
down South, and built a monument over his substi- 
tute’s grave; and on it he put this inscription: “ He 
DIED FoR ME.” Ah! my friends, go to the tomb of 
Jesus, and say over it, “ He died for me.” Yea, you 
can go further, and say, “He rose for me, and He 
is at the right hand of God for me; and I have life 
in Him, and the hope of eternal glory. Death can- 
not touch my spiritual nature; I am safe for time 
and eternity.” 


104. Tur Last Nicut.—A little while ago, in one 
of the mining districts of England a young man at- 
tended one of our meetings, and refused to go from 
the place till he had found the Saviour. The next 
day he went down into the pit and the coal fell in 
upon him; and when they took him out he wag 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 119 


brursed and mangled and had but a few moments 
to live. His last words were. “It was a good 
thing I settled it last night.” 


105. An Eayprran Lecenp.—There is a legend told 
in reference to that night on which the Lord slew 
the first-born of the Egyptians; and it runs thus: 
There was a little child, the first-born in the house 
of an Israelite; and you know God said that, in 
every house where the blood was not upon the 
door-post, the first-born should be smitten by death. 
This little girl was sick, but she was afraid that the 
blood was not upon the door-post; so she asked her 
father if he was sure he had put the blood upon the 
door-post; and the father said, ‘Yes, he was quite 
sure: he had ordered it to be done.” But the little 
girl said the second time, “Father, are you quite 
sure that the blood is there?” “Yes, my child,” 
answered the father; “be quiet, and sleep.” But 
the child could not sleep. She was very sick and 
very restless; and ag night came on, and it grew 
darker and darker, and nearer and nearer to the 
time when the angel should pass over Goshen, she 
got still more nervous and restless and uneasy; and 
at last she said, “ Father, take me in your arms and 
let me see the blood upon the door-post”; and the 
father, to satisfy the child, took her to the door to 
show her the blood; and lo and behold! it was not 
there: the man to whom he had given instructions 
had forgotten to do it, And then the father, in the 


Js ib GA 


12U ADDRESSES 


sight of the child, had the blood put upon the door- 
post, and the child lay down and went to sleep. 


106. Tae Deep Prr.—Did any of you ever go down 
into a coal-pit, fifteen hundred or two thousand feet, 
right down into the bowels of the earth? If you 
have, don’t you know that it would be sheer mad- 
ness to try to climb up the steep sides of that shaft 
and so get out of the pit? Of course, you couldn’t 
leap out of it; in fact, you couldn’t get out of it at 
all by yourself. But I'll tell you this—you could get 
out of a coal-pit fifteen hundred feet deep a good deal 
quicker than you can get out of the pit that Adam 
took you into. When Adam went down into it, he 
took the whole human family with him. But the 
Lord can take us out. 


107. A Vast Forzunr.—A vast fortune was left 
in the hands of a minister for one of his poor parish- 
ioners. Fearing that it might be squandered if sud- 
denly bestowed upon him, the wise minister sent 
him a little at a time, with a note, saying: “This is 
thine; use it wisely; there is more to follow!” Breth- 
ren, that’s just the way God deals with us. 


108. “Immepiatety.” — Not long ago, in Edin- 
burgh, an earnest Christian lady found a woman 
whose feet had taken hold of hell, and who was 
pressing onwards to a harlot’s grave. The lady 
begged her to go home, but she said, “no, her par- 


OYr- 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 12, 


ents would not receive her.” This Christian woman 
knew what a mother’s heart was. So she wrote a 
letter to the mother, telling her how she had met 
her daughter, who was sorry and wanted to return. 
The next post brought an answer back, and on the en- 
velope was written, “Immediately—immediately !” 
They opened the letter: yes, she was forgiven. They 
wanted her back, and they sent money for her to 
come immediately. That is what the great and 
loving God is saying to every wandering sinner— 
immediately. 


109. Bacxstirrrs.—The devil has told you that 
God won’t have any thing to do with you, because 
you have wandered away. If that is true, there 
would be very few men in heaven. David backslid; 
Abraham and Jacob turned away from God; I do 
not believe there is a saint in heaven but at some 
time of his life, with his heart has backslidden from 
God. Perhaps not in his life, but in his heart. The 
prodigal’s heart got into the far country before his 
body got there. 


110. O O.—When I was in England in 1867, there 
was a merchant who came over from Dublin, and 
was talking with a business man in London; and as 
I happened to look in, he introduced me to the man 
from Dublin. Alluding to me, the latter said to the 
former, “Is this young man all O 0?” Said the 
London man, “What do you mean byO 0?” Re- 


<4 


Se a eee ee 8 


* 


« 2 mat 


_ 


aa io ie 


* 


<tiaile 


& % 
~ 


122 ADDRESSES 


plied the Dublin man, “Js he Out and Out for 
Christ?” I tell you it burned down into my soul 
It means a good deal to be O O for Christ. 


111. A Losr Lirz.—A young man lay dying, and 
his mother thought he was a Christian. One day, 
passing his room door, she heard him say, ‘ Lost! 
lost! lost!” The mother ran into the room and 
cried, ‘‘My boy, .3 it possible you have lost your 
hope in Christ, now you are dying?” ‘No, mother, 
it is not that; [ have a hope beyond the grave, but 
I have lost my life. I have lived twenty-four years, 
and done nothing for the Son of God, and nowI am 
dying. My life has been spent for myself; I have 
lived for this world, and now, while I am dying, I 
have given myself to Christ; but my life is lost.” 


112. Prorrsstna Curistrans.—There are wu creat 
many in the Church who make one profession, and 
that is about all you hear of them ; and when they 
come to die you have to go and hunt up some musty 
old church records, to know whether they were 
Christians or not. God won't do that. 


113. WHat % ne Propicat Lost!—Did you ever 
notice whut the prodigal lost? He lost his food. 
That is what every poor backslider loses. They 
get no manna from heaven. They see no beauty in 
the Word of God. 

Then the prodigal lost his work. They made him 
take care of swine; that was all loss fora Jow. So 


putea soo 


MA wee 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 123 


every backslider loses his work. He cannot do any 
thing for God; he cannot work for eternity. 

The prodigal also lost his testimony. Who be- 
lieved him? There he stands among the swine, 
and some one says to another, “ Look at that poor 
wretch.” “What,” he says, “do you call me a poor 
wretch? My father is a wealthy man; he has got 
moe clothes in his wardrobe than you ever saw 
in your life. My father is 1 man of great wealth 
and position.” Do you suppose these men would be- 
lieve him? “ ‘That poor wretch the son of a wealthy 
man!” “Tf be had got such a wealthy father he 
would go to hin.” So with the backsliders: the 
world does not believe that they are the sons of a 
King. 

Then, the prodigsi lost his home. As long as his 
money lasted, he was quite popular in the public- 
house and among his acquaintances; he had pro- 
fessed friends, but as soon as his money was gone, 
where were his friends? That is the condition of 
every poor backslider. 


114. An Onty Daveutrr Lost.—Not long ago the 
snly daughter of a wealthy friend of mine sickened 
and died. The father and mother stood by her dy- 
ing bed. He had spent all his time in accumulat- 
ing wealth for her; she had been introduced into 
gay and fashionable society; but she had been 
taught nothing of Christ. As she came to the 
brink of the river of death, she said, ‘““Won’t you 


2S see 5 SE RT SN EE ee ay 


Se Wied SE tests kB rs 


= 
~- 


124 ADDRESSES 


help me; it is very dark, and the stream is bitter 
cold.” They wrung their hands in grief, but could 
do nothing for her; and the poor girl died in dark- 
ness and despair. What was their wealth to them 
then ? 


115. Arrarp or Bacxsiipinc Acarn.—Some say, 
“There would be little use of me attempting to 
come back. In a few days I should just be where 
I was again. I should like very much to go to my 
Father’s home again, but I’m afraid I wouldn’t 
stay there.” Well, just picture this scene. The 
poor prodigal has got home, and the father has 
killed the fatted calf; and they are sitting at the 
table eating. His father sits opposite; he is full 
of joy, and his heart is leaping within him. All at 
once he sees his boy w eping. ‘ My son, what are 
you weeping for? Are you not glad to have got 
home?” ‘Qh, yes, father; I never was so glad as 
I am to-day: but I am so afraid I will go back into 
that foreign country!” Why, you cannot imagine 
such a thing! When you have got one meal in 
your Father’s house, you will never be inclined to 
wander away again. 


116. Every Man’s Brocrarsy!—Some men like to 
have their lives written before they die; if any of 
you would like to read your biography turn to the 
third chapter of Romans and you will find it al- 
ready written, 


itter 
ould 
lark- 
them 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 12é 


117. Tur Onz-pont Orrenper.—If I have an or- 
chard, and two apple-trees in it, which both bear 
some bitter apples, perfectly worthless, does it make 
any difference to me that the one tree has got per- 
haps five hundred apples, all bad, and the other only 
two, both bad? “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, 
and yet offend in one point, he is -uilty of all.” Sup- 
pose you were to hang up a man to the roof with a 
chain of ten links; if one were to break, does it mat- 
ter that the other nine are all sound and whole? 
Not the least. One link breaks, and down comes 
the man. But is it not rather hard that he should 
fall when the other nine are perfect, when only one 
is broken? Why, of course not; if one is broken, it 
is just the same to the man as if all had been bro- 
ken: he falls. So the man who breaks one com- 
mandment is guilty of all. He is a criminal in 
God’s sight. 


118. Tue Law Ovr Looxime-crass.—I said to my 
family, one morning, a few weeks before the Chicago 
fire, “I am coming home this afternoon to give you 
a ride.” My little boy clapped his hands. ‘Oh, 
papa, will you take me to see the bears in Lincoln 
Park?” “Yes.” I had not been gone long when 
my little boy said, “Mamma, I wish you would get 
me ready.” At last he was ready to have the ride, 
face washed, and clothes all nice and clean. “Now, 
you must take good care and not get yourself dirty 
again,’ said mamma. It was a long time yet until 


satan niais ot Iai 


ee 
ee 


ne SO 
tie 
SESS 


— 
epee 


fae he 


Ser ee ere 


oo 
a 
Bess Aiceyepue aaa hasae salt eet aia ees stasis we tak aaa 


oe 


= 


A 


Ss 


ce oS 


i 


’ e 
ert nce i ene 


126 ADDRESSES 


the afternoon, and after a little he began to play 
When I got home, I found him outside, with his 
face all covered with dirt. ‘I can’t take you to the 
Park that way, Willie.” “ Why, papa? you said you 
would take me.” “Ah, but I can’t; you’re all over 
mud. I couldn’t be seen with such a dirty little 
boy.” “Why, I’se clean, papa; mamma washed 
me. ‘ Well, you’ve got dirty since.” But he be- 
gan to cry, and I could not convince him that he 
was dirty. ‘“I’se clean; mamma washed me!” he 
cried. Do you think I argued with him? No. I 
just took him up in my arms, and_-_ rried him into 
the house, and showed him his fac the looking- 
glass. He could not take my word ior it; but one 
look at the glass was enough. He didn’t say he 
wasn’t dirty after that! The looking-glass showed 
him that his face was dirty—but I did not take the 
looking-glass to wash it; of course not. Yet that is 
just what thousands of people do. The law is the 
looking-glass to see ourselves in, to show us how 
vile and worthless we are in the sight of God; but 
they take the law, and try to wash themselves with 
it! Man has been trying that for six thousand 
years, and has miserably failed. ‘By the deeds of 
the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight.” 
Only one Man ever lived on the earth who could 
say He had kept the law, and that was the Lord 
Jesus Christ. But men have tried to do what Me 
did, and have failed. Instead of sheltering under 
his righteousness, they have offered God their own. 


‘ 
: 
$ 
i 
3 
| 
i 


eA RE AN ap a ae AIL OTTO 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 127 


119. Waar are We Dorna.—There are more men 
worshipping the golden calf than the God of heaven. 
They bring before it health and happiness and peace. 
“Give me thirty pieces of silver, and I will sell you 
Christ,” is the world’s cry to-day. “Give me fash- 
ion, and I will sell you Christ!” ‘TI will sacrifice 
my wife, my children, my life, my all, for a little 
drink. I will sell my soul for drink!” It is easy 
to blame these men for worshipping the golden calf. 
But what are we doing ourselves? 


120. Nrever.—The law has never saved a single 
man since the world began. 


121. Sryvers on A Levert Toen.—It was my sad lot 
to be in the Chicago fire. As the flames rolled down 
our streets, destroying every thing in their onward 
march, I saw the great and the honorable, the learned 
and the wise, fleeing before the fire with the beggar, 
and the thief, and the harlot. All were alike. As 
the flames swept through the city it was like the 
judgment day. The mayor, nor the mighty men, 
nor wise men could stop these flames. They were 
all on a level then, and many who were worth hun- 
dreds of thousands were left paupers that night. 
When the day of judgment comes, there will be no 
difference; all sinners will suffer. 


122. Wuar tHe Gospet HAs Unpone.—No man can 
ever tell what the Gospel has done for him, but I 


SoS ee ile ang teem etree SF coi ace peonkimer nore 


oes wot eh 


128 ADDRESSES 


think I can tell what it has undone. It has taken 
out of my path four of the bitterest enemies I ever 
had. Death, the Grave, Sin and the Judgment, 
have all lost their terror for me. 


123. Curist’s Enemies His Wirnessres.—First, call 
the Pharisees. We know how they hated Him. 
Come, Pharisees, tell us what you have against the 
Son of God. ‘“ This man receiveth sinners.” What 
an argument to bring against Him! Why, it is the 
very thing that makes us love Him. He receives 
sinners. If He had not, what would have become 
of us? Have you nothing more to bring against 
Him than this? “He saved others, Himself He 
cannot save.” And so He did save others, but He 
could not save Himself and save us too. So He 
laid down his own life for yours and mine. Yes, 
Pharisees, you have told the truth for once in your 
lives !—*‘* He saved others, Himself He cannot save.” 

Now, let us call upon Caiaphas. Let him stand up 
here in his flowing robes. ‘Caiaphas, you were chief 
priest when Christ was tried; you were president of 
the Sanhedrim; you were in the council-chamber 
when they found Him guilty; you yourself con- 
demned Him. Tell us; what did the witnesses 
say? On what grounds did you judge Him?” 

“He hath spoken blasphemy,” says Caiaphas. 
“He said, ‘Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man 
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in 
the clouds of heaven.’ When I heard that, I found 


St FORE LENIIE TOSE 


SSS 
Sel Fait PC Nee 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 129 


Him guilty of blasphemy; I rent my mantle, and 
condemned Him to death.” Yes, all that they had 
against Him was that He was the Son of God; and 
they slew Him for the promise of His coming: for 
His bride. 

Now, let us summon Pilate. Let him enter the 
witness-box. Pilate, this man was brought before 
you; you examined Him; you talked with Him face 
to face, what think ye of Christ? Says Pilate. “He 
said He was the King of the Jews, but I find no 
fault in Him.” Such is the testimony of the man 
who examined Him! And, as he stands there, the 
centre of a Jewish mob, there comes along a man, 
elbowing his way, in haste. He rushes up to Pilate 
and gives him a message. He tears it open; his 
face turns pale as he reads—“ Have thou nothing 
to do with this just man, for I have suffered many 
things this day in a dream because of Him.” It is 
from Pilate’s wife—her testimony to Christ. 

And now, look—in comes Judas. He ought to 
make a good witness. ‘Come, tell us, Judas, what 
think ye of Christ. You knew the Master well: you 
sold Him for thirty pieces of silver; you betrayed 
Him with a kiss; you saw Him perform those mira- 
cles; you were with Him in Jerusalem. What think 
ye of Him?” I can see him as he comes into:the 
presence of the chief priests; I can hear the money 
ring as he dashes it upon the table—“ J have betrayed 
innocent blood !” 


Let us take the centurion, who was present at 
9 


nk Se 


es opine sect mere ~e ‘ 


ett eho tee 8 


é —" 


St ig iti ea a 
. ‘ gee erecaeetniieese Aisa guesses Reneenttatiie ee 


Ns Mac annadTagi ass 


130 ADDRESY SS 


the execution. ‘Centurion, you had charge of the 
executioners; you saw that the order for his death 
was carried out; you saw Him die; you heard Him 
speak upon the cross. Tell us, what think ye of 
Christ?” Hark! Look at him; he is smiting his 
breast as he cries, “ Truly, this was the Son of God!” 

I might go to the thief upon the cross, and ask 
what he thought of Him. At first he railed upon 
Him and reviled Him. But then he thought better 
of it. “This man hath done nothing amiss,” he 
says. I might go further. I might summon the 
very devils themselves and ask them for their testi- 
mony. Have they any thing to say of Him? Why, 
the very devils called Him the Son of God! In 
Mark we have the unclean spirit crying, “Jesus, 
Thou Son of the most High God.” 


124. Drevirs Betieve.—Men say, “Oh, I believe 
Christ to be the Son of God, and because I believe 
it intellectually, I shall be saved.” I tell you the 
devils did that. And they did more than that, they 
trembled. 


125. Ir?—Did you ever stop to think what would 
take place ifGod should take, at his word, every one 
who makes excuse ?—if He were to say, “ Yes, if you 
want to be excused from this feast, I will excuse 


you,” and with the next stroke should sweep them. 


all from the face of the earth? Supposing every 
one should be taken at their word, and laid in the 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 131 


arms of death, how many of your shops would be 
closed to-morrow; how many homes would be filled 
with mourning and tears? Not a publican would 
be left to carry on his traffic; every rum-seller 
wants to be excused. He knows that if he accepts 
of this invitation, he would have to give up his 
hellish trade. He could not go on making all those 
fatherless children, and taking the bread out of the 
mouth of the orphan and the widow, and be on his 
way to the marriage supper of the Lamb at the same 
time. If God did excuse them and take them away 
with a stroke, you would have no drunkards reeling 
through your streets. There would be no harlots 
then, for every harlot wants to be excused; she 
knows she has to give up her sins if she wants to 
be present at the supper of the Lamb. And your 
princely merchants, many of them, would be gone. 
They do not want to accept the invitation, because 
they think if they do they cannot make money so 
fast. But oh, my friends, it would be a solemn 
time if God should take men at their word. The 
grass would soon be growing in the streets, and the 
living would be occupied in burying the dead. 


126. Tae Oran or Excuses.—Do you know the 
origin of excuses? You will find it away back in 
Eden. When Adam had sinned, he tried to excuse 
himself. ‘The woman whom Thou gavest to be with 
me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.” He 
tried to lay the blame on God, Eve tried to lay it 


£3 2 
—ae SS 


ms 22 @ 
es 


Se penser dle ia SODA a SO ha 


132 ADDRESSES 


on the serpent; and down to the present time, men 
and women, with one consent, begin to make excuse. 


127. Tax Cuier.—To-day Christ may be a root 
out of a dry ground, without form or comeliness; 
but He will become to you the chiefest among ten 
thousand, the altogether lovely, the bright, and the 
morning star, if you take Him as your Saviour. 


128. Unrrarianism Setrirep.—John takes up his 
pen, and, with one stroke, forever settles the ques- 
tion of Unitarianism. He goes right back before 
the time of Adam. “In the beginning was the 
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word 
was God.” 


129. Tue Gospet ror Eacu.—I can imagine Peter 
saying, “Lord, do you really mean that we shall 
preach the Gospel to every creature?” “Yes, Pe- 
ter.” “Shall we go back to Jerusalem and preach 
the Gospel to those Jerusalem sinners who murdered 
you?” “Yes, Peter, and tarry there until you are 
endued with power from on high. Go search out 
that man who spat in my face; tell him I forgive 
him; there is nothing in my heart but love for him. 
Go, search out the man who put that cruel crown 
of thorns on my brow; tell him I will have a crown 
ready for him in my kingdom, if he will accept sal- 
vation; there shall not be a thorn in it, and he shall 
wear it forever and ever in the kingdom of his Re- 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 133 

men deemer. Find out that man who took the reed from || 
use. my hand, and smote my head, driving the thorns Hh 

deeper into my brow. If he will accept salvation 

root | as a gift, I will give him a sceptre, and he shall 44] 
183; sway it over the nations of the earth. Yes, I will Ha | 
ten give him to sit with Me upon my throne. Go, seek “ay 
the that man who struck Me with the palm of his hand; 4 | 
tell him that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth 4 d 
from all sin, and my blood was shed for him freely.” wht 

» his “Go, seek out that poor soldier who drove the spear “4. 

yues- into my side; tell him that there is a nearer way to x 
efore my heart than that. Tell him that I forgive him a 
, the freely; and tell him I will make him a soldier of | 
Vord the cross, and my banner over him shall be love.” | 
| 130. “No Greater Lre.”—There is another class a 
eter who say, “I love the world very much and if I be- " 
shall ! come a Christian I shall have to give up all pleasure ae 
, Pe- ; and go through the world with a long face.” I want bit | 
each [ to say here, that no greater lie was éver forged than y! 
ered | that. The devil started it away back in Eden; but | | 
are there is not one word of truth in it; it is a libel ie 
out upon Christianity. It does not make a man gloomy 4} 
give to become a child of God. See! there is a man y 
him. going to execution. In a few moments he will be ay 
own launched into eternity. But, flashing over the wires, ae i 
own comes a message, a reprieve. I run in haste to the oF 
sal- man. I shout, “Good news! good news! You are 
shall not to die!” Does that make him gloomy? No! 


Re- no! no! It is the want of Christ that makes men 


134 ADDRESSES 


gloomy? Take a man who is really thirsty, dying 
for want of water, and you go and give him water. 
Is that going to make him gloomy? That is what 
Christ is—water to the thirsty soul. If a man is 
dying for want of bread, and you give him bread, is 
that to make him gloomy? That is what Christ is 
to the soul—the bread of life. You will never have 
true pleasure or peace or joy or comfort until you 
have found Christ. 


131. Tue Turre Excuses.—Let us take up these 
three men who, “with one consent, began to make 
excuse.” 

What did the first one say? “I have bought a 
piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it.” 
Some one has said, Why did he not look at the 
ground before he bought it? If he had been a 
good business man, he would have seen his ground 
Jirst, he couldn’t make the bargain any better by 
going to look at it now. And now that he has got 
it, he can go and look at it at any time; the land 
could not run away! It was not that he had made 
a partial bargain and might withdraw, or that some 
one might step in ahead of him and get the ground 
from him. He did not even have that excuse. He 
had bought the land, there was no fear that he 
should lose his title to it. Yet he must needs go 
and see it. Strange time to go and see ground just 
at supper-time! On the face of it, it was a down- 
right lie. He did not want to go to the feast, and 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 135 


ring so he manufactured this excuse to ease his con- | 
ter. science. That is what people make excuses for, 1 
shat The devil gets men into that cradle and rocks them alee 
n is to sleep in it. , 
1, is What did the second man say? “I have bought ‘ 
it is five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them. I pray wll 
ave thee have me excused.” Why not prove them before a} 
you he bought them? Jt was no time to prove oxen 1 | 
after they were bought. And now that the bargain 4 | 
was closed he could prove them any time. Why not a | 
hese let them stand in the stall till he had accepted this L | 
1ake invitation? Don’t you see that was another lie? b 
The third man’s excuse was the most ridiculous Hh 
ht a | of them all. “I have married a wife and therefore q 
it.” I cannot come.” Why did he not take his wife 
the along with him? Who likes to go to a feast better i 
— than a young bride? He might have asked her to 4 
sind go too; and if she were not willing, then let her vied 
by stay at home. The fact was, he did not want to go. aM 
got | ai 
land 132. A Jupitre Mertina.—-Some people, when the a 
hade 3 Gospel is preached, put on a long face, as if they Bye 
ome ; had to attend a funeral or witness an execution, or 3 
Lund hear some dry, stupid lecture or sermon. It was aa 
He my privilege to go into Richmond with General ua 
he Grant’s army. I had not bic» long there before it . 
5 go was announced that the negroes were going to have “a | 
just a jubilee meeting. These colored people were just ’ : 
whe awakening to the fact that they were free. And I 


went down to the African Church, one of the largest 


136 ADDRESSES 


in the South, and found it crowded. One of the 
colored chaplains of a northern regiment had of- 
fered to speak. I have heard many eloquent wen 
in Europe and in America, but I do think 1 
ever heard eloquence such as I heard that day. He 
said, ‘Mothers! you rejoice to-day; you are forever 
free! That little child has been torn from your em- 
brace, and sold off to some distant state for the last 
time. Your hearts are never to be broken again in 
that way; you are free.” The women clapped their 
hands and shouted at the top of their voices, “Glory, 
glory to God!” It was good news to them, and 
they believed it. It filled them full of joy. Then he 
turned to the young men, and said, “ Young men? 
you rejoice to-day; you have heard the ck of the 
slave-driver’s whip for the last time; yc. posterity 
shall be free; young men rejoice to-day, you are 
forever free!” And they clapped their hands, and 
shouted, “Glory to God!” They believed the good 
tidings. ‘‘ Young maidens!” he said, “ you rejoice 
to-day. You have been put on the auction-block 
and sold for the last time; you are free—forever 
free!” They believed it, and lifting up their voices, 
shouted, “Glory be to God!” I never was in such 
a meeting. They believed that it was good news to 
them. 


133. Ons Stn Exctupes.—When we got our charter 
for the city of Chicago, there was one clause in the 
constitution that allowed the mayor to appoint all 


SSS ee 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 137 


the police. It worked well when it was a small city; 
but when it had three or four hundred thousand in- 
habitants, it put too much power in the hands of 
oneman. So our citizens got a new bill passed that 
put the power into the hands of commissioners ap- 
pointed by government. There was one clause in 
the new law that no man shouid be a policeman who 
was not a certain height—five feet six inches, let 
us say. When the commissioners got into power, 
they advertised for men as candidates, and stated 
that no man need apply who could not bring good 
credentials to recommend him. I remember going 
past the office one day, and there was a crowd of 
them waiting to get in. They were comparing notes 
as to their chances of success. One says, “I have 
got a good letter of recommendation from the 
mayor, and one from the supreme judge.” An- 
other says, “And I have got a good letter from 
Senator So-and-so. I’m sure to get in.” The two 
men come on together, and lay their letters down 
on the commissioners’ desk. ‘ Well,” say the offi- 
cials, “you have certainly a good many letters, but 
we won't read them till we measure you.” Ah! 
they forgot all about that. So the first man is 
measured, and he is only five feet. ‘No chance for 
you, sir; the law says the men must be five feet six 
inches, and you don’t come up to the standard.” 
The other says, ‘My chance is better than his, I am 
a good bit taller.” That is what people are always 
doing, measuring themsclves by others. Measure 


Ss ee S| ee 


138 ADDRESSES 


yourself by the law of God, or by the Sou of God 
Himself; and if you do that, you will find you 
have come short. He zoes up to the officers, and 
they measure him; he is five feet, five inches, and 
i nine tenths of an inch. “No good,” they tell him, 
“you're not up to the standard.” “But I’m only 
\ one tenth of an inch short,” he remonstrates. ‘It’s 
\ no matter,” they say, “there is no difference.” He 
goes with the man who was five feet. One comes 
i, short six inches, and the other only one tenth of an 
it} inch; but the law cannot be changed. And the law 
i of God is, that no man shall go into the kingdom of 
heaven with one sin on him. 


> « ~ 
a Pee NRO NS er ie ent eee ae 5 
I 4 ee ests " 
> see 


i 
— 


134. A Presupice Answerep.—You say, “I would 
like to become a Christian, but I have a prejudice 
against these special meetings. If it was a regular 
ministry, and it was our regular minister, I would 
accept the invitation.” If that is your difficulty, I 
can help you out of it. You can just get right up, 
and go out of the hall, and walk straight over to 
your minister, and have a talk with him. And if 
you say you do not want to be converted in a 
speciat meeting, there are regular meetings in all 
the churches throughout the town, and your min- 
ister would be heartily glad to talk with you about 
your soul. 


i 
i 
i 
Na 
Nat 
H i! 
a 


135. Exrection.—Supposing a man, wishing to go 
to London, should say, “I don’t know if God hay 


f God 
id you 
‘gs, and 
s, and 
1 him, 
1 only 
*Tt’s 
> He 
comes 
of an 
le law 
om of 


vould 
udice 
cular 
rould 
ty, I 
t up, 
ar to 
id if 
in a 
n all 
min- 


bout 


) 20 
hay 


; 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 139 


decreed it. If I am to be there, I will be there. 
What is the use of paying fare and taking trouble 
about it? If I am elected to get there, I will get 
there somehow.” Who would use such language as 
that? Or suppose a farmer were to say, “I am not 
going to plant; if God has decreed that I am to 
have a crop, I shall have it. I am not going to 
trouble myself tilling the ground or working hard; 
if God has decreed that I will have a good harvest, 
why, I shall have it without any tilling.” Or sup- 
pose you are sick, and do not send for the doctor. 
Suppose you say, “If God has decreed it, I shall get 
well,” so you refuse to take the medicines. You say, 
“There is no use in it; if God has decreed that I 
am to get well, I will get well without it.” Who- 
ever talks in that way? Yet a good many people 
carry out that very doctrine with regard to spiritual 
things. 


136. Goop Enover to Travet 1n.—I was going to 
New Orleans from Chicago a few years ago, and 
there were two ladies in the carriage with me. 
They got well acquainted with one another by the 
time they reached Cairo, where one lived; the other 
was going on to New Orleans) The one who had 
to get out at Cairo said to the other, “I wish you 
would stay here with me for a few days, I like your 
company so much.” “T should like to stay,” replied 
the other, “but my things are all packed and have 
gone on before; I have no clothes but those I am 


ee ee 


pr 
eoene 
ia 


SIRS: estemer en opr nce ee eer amore te 


a8 


SSS 


140 ADDRESSES 


wearing. They are good enough to travel in, but I 
would not like to be seen in company with them.” 
Now that is the way with the Christian. He is 
away from home here, his treasure has gone on be- 
fore, and any thing is good enough to travel in. If 
things don’t go on smoothly down here we need not 
be too particular, they’re good enough to travel in. 
If our treasures are in heaven our hearts will be 
there, and we shall be living as pilgrims and stran- 
gers on the earth. 


137. No 'Timu!—So thousands and thousands say 
they have no time to be religious. What have you 
done with all the time that God has given you? 
What have you been doing all these months and 
years that have rolled away since He gave you 
birth? Is it true you have no time? What did 
you do with the 365 days of last year? Had you 
no time during all these twelve months to seek the 
kingdom of God? You spend twenty years getting 
an education to enable you to earn a living for this 
poor frail body, so soon .to be eaten up of worms. 
You spend seven or eight years in learning a trade, 
that you may earn your daily bread; and yet you 
have not five minutes to accept of this invitation of 
Christ’s! My friend, bear in mind you have yet 
to find time to die; to stand in the presence of the 
Judge. And when he calls you to stand before that 
bar, will you dare to tell Him that you had no time 
to prepare for the marriage supper of His Son? 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 141 


You have no time? Take time? Let every thing 
else be laid aside until you have accepted of this 
invitation. Do you not know that it is a lie? If 
you have not time, take it. ‘Seek first the king- 
dom of God.” Let the children sit up a little late 
to-night. Let your business be suspended to-mor- 
row. Suppose you do not get so much money to- 
morrow. What matter it if you get Christ? Better 
for a man to be sure of salvation than to “gain the 
whole world and lose his own soul.” 


138. Tue Lorp’s Worx Neeps Monry.—When men 
go.up in balloons they take with them bags of sand 
for ballast, and when they want to rise higher they 
throw out some of the sand. Now there are some 
Christians who, before they rise higher will have to 
throw out some ballast. It may be money, or any 
other worldly consideration, but if they wish to rise, 
they must get rid of it. If you have got overloaded, 
just throw out a little money, and you will mount 
up as on eagle’s wings. Any minister will tell you 
what to do with it. I never saw any department of 
the Lord’s work that did not want some money. 


139. Berrer Hicuer Up.-—Not long ago there lived 
an old bed-ridden saint, and a Christian lady who 
visited her found her always very cheerful. This 
visitor had a lady friend of wealth who constantly 
looked on the dark side of things, and was always 
cast down although she was a professed Christian. 


a ah Me 


a 
-_ 


= Sie 


MS eal ts ts aM 


er a 


| 
| 


142 ADDRESSES 


She thought it would do this lady good to see the 
bed-ridden saint, so she took her down to the house. 
She lived up in the garret, five stories up, and when 
they had got to the first story the lady drew up her 
dress and said, “ How dark and filthy it is?” “It’s 
better higher up!” said her friend. They got to 
the next story, and it was no better; the lady com- 
plained again, but her friend replied, “It’s better 
higher up.” At the third floor it seemed still worse, 
and the lady kept complaining, but her friend kept 
saying, “It’s better higher up.” At last they got 
to the fifth story, and when they went into the sick 
room, there was a nice carpet on the floor, there 
were flowering plants in the window, and little 
birds singing. And there they found this bed-rid- 
den saint—one of those saints whom God is polish- 
ing for his own temple—just beaming with joy. The 
lady said to her ‘it must be very hard for you to lie 
here.” She smiled, and said, “ Jt’s better higher up.” 
Yes! And if things go against us, my friends, let 
us remember that “it’s better higher up.” 


140. Taayk Gop ror Apversity.—John Bunyan 
thanked God more for Bedford jail than for any 
thing that ever happened to him. 


141. Missive rot Marg.—In olden times in Eng- 
land, they used to have a game of firing arrows 
through a ring on the top of a pole. The man 
that failed to get all his arrows through the ring 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 143 


was called a “sinner.” Now I should like to take 
up that illustration. Suppose our pole to be up in 
the gallery, and on the top of it the ring. I have 
ten arrows, and Mr. Sankey has ten. I take up the 
first arrow, and take aim. Alas! I miss the mark. 
Therefore I am a “sinner.” “But,” I say, “I will 
do the best I can with the other nine; I have only 
missed with one.” Like some men who try to keep 
all the commandments but one! I fire again, and 
miss the mark a second time. “Ah, but,” I say, “I 
have got eight arrows still,” and away goes another 
arrow—miss! I fire all the ten arrows and do not 
get one through the rmg. Well, I was a “sinner ” 
after the first miss, and I can only be a sinner after 
the tenth. Well, Mr. Sankey takes his ten arrows. 
He fires and gets his first arrow through. ‘Do 
you see that?” he says. ‘“ Well,” I reply, “go on; 
don’t boast until you get them all through.” He 
takes the second arrow and gets that through. 
“Ha! do you see that?” “Don’t boast,” I repeat, 
“until all ten are through;” if a man has not broken 
the law at all then he has got something to boast 
of! Away goes the third, and it goes through. 
Then another and another all right, and another 
until nine are through. “Now,” he says, “one 
more arrow, and Iam nota sinner.” He takes up 
the last arrow, and his hand trembles a little; he 
just misses the mark. And he is a “sinner” as 
much as I am. My friend, have you never missed 
the mark. Have you not come short? I should - 


144 ADDRESSES 


like to see the man who never missed the mark. 
He never lived. 


142. Our or THE Poor-Hovusr.—A few years ago, 
I was going away to preach one Sunday morning, 
when a young man drove up in front of us. He 
had an aged woman with him. “Who is that 
young man?” I asked. ‘ Do you see that beautiful 
meadow?” said my friend, “and that land there 
with the house upon it?” “Yes.” “His father 
drank that all up,” he said. Haus father was a great 
drunkard, squandered his property, died, and left 
his wife in the poor-house. And that young man 
has toiled hard and earned money, and bought back 
the land; he has taken his mother out of the poor- 
house, and now he is taking her to church.” The 
first Adam sold us in Eden, sold us for nought, but, 
the Messiah, the second Adam, came and bought us 
back again. The first Adam brought us fo the poor- 
house; the second Adam makes us kings and priests 
unto God. 


143. In Erernity a Pavrrr.—A friend of mine 
called on a wealthy Illinois farmer, to get him in- 
terested in a soldiers’ mission. He took him up 
on the cupola of his house, and said, “Look yon- 
der, over that beautiful rolling prairie, that is all 
mine, as far as the eye can reach. He took him to 
another view, and pointing over the rich farms of 
the Mississippi Valley, showed him pasture land for 


mark. 


3 ago, 
rning, 
. He 
; that 
wutiful 
there 
father 
, great 
1d. left 
o man 
it back 
, poor- 
> The 
it, but, 
eht us 
e poor- 
priests 


f mine 
im in- 
im up 
k yon- 
t is all 
him to 
prms of 
and for 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 145 


thirty miles round, with large herds of cattle, and 
horses, and sheep feeding. ‘They are all mine,” 
he said; “I have made it all myself.” Then he 
pointed proudly towards the town, and showed him 
streets, and piles of buildings, and a great hall 
named after himself, and said once more, “They 
are all mine; I came here a poor man, but my own — 
industry has done it all.” 

My friend said, when he had seen all, raising his 
finger, and pointing solemnly to the sky, ‘ What, 
have you got up there?” ‘The rich man’s counte- 
nance fell. “Where?” he asked. “In heaven.” 
“T have got nothing there.” Alas! he had lived 
his threescore years and ten, and must soon enter 
eternity, yet he had no treasure there. “Is it not 
strange,” said my friend, “a man of your judgment 
and forethought, making such a wreck of life, living 
for the moment, on borrowed time, to die a beggar, 
and enter eternity a pauper?” But a few months 
after that he died as he had lived, and his property 
went to others. 


144. Curist’s Surrerine not Rearizep.—I re- 
member when our war was going on I took up the 
morning paper and read of a terrible battle—ten 
thousand men killed, and I laid the paper down 
and forgot it. At last I went into the battle-field 
and helped to bear away the sick and wounded; 
after I had been over one or two battle-fields I be- 
gan to realize what it meant. I could hear the dy- 


10 


146 


ADDRESSES 


ing groans of the men and their cry for water, 
and when I heard of a battle the whole thing was 
stainped upon my mind. I can tell you how a little 
child suffered and it will bring tears to your eyes, 
but I tell you how the Son of God suffered and 
some of you will go out laughing. 


145. Heaventy Treasures.—When I was on the 
Pacific Coast I spent my first Sunday in San Fran- 
cisco. I went to the Sunday-school, but it was a 
very stormy day, and so few made their appearance, 
the superintendent was in doubt whether he should 
not send them home again. However, it was de- 
cided to go on with the lesson, and I was asked to 
undertake the task. The subject, “Our Treasures 
in Heaven.” The blackboard was ready, and being 
a poor writer myself, I handed the chalk to one of 
the teachers, and said to the children, ‘“‘ Now, I want 
you to tell me some earthly treasures ; what do you 
suppose men think most of?” Some one cried, 
“Money.” “ Put that down,” I said. ‘ Any thing 
else?” “Lands.” “Put thatdown.” Many strange 
things were said; one little boy said “ Rum,” and 
perhaps he was nearer the truth than any of them, 
for many aman will sell soul and body, and business 
and family, and home and every thing else for drink; 
and when the catalogue was finished, I asked them 
next to give me a list of heavenly treasures. The 
first answer was “Jesus”; and as we went on from 
one to another, we found that the treasures of heaven 


water, 
1g was 
a little 
r eyes, 
d and 


on the 
Fran- 
was a 
wrance, 
should 
ras. dle- 
ked to 
2asures 
| being 
one of 
I want 
do you 
cried, 

y thing 
strange 
and 
them, 

isiness 
drink; 
Hh them 
The 

n from 
heaven 


33 
bd 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 147 


were far more numerous and very much more pre- 
cious than all the treasures which the earth could 
give. The young man who was writing down the 
answers was an unconverted teacher. As he scanned 
the lists and compared the earthly with the heavenly, 
he stood transfixed with shame. ‘What a fool have 
I been!” he says to himself; “I have come to this 
Pacific Coast, and spent my substance for such 
things of earth!” And there at that blackboard 
he vowed to God that for the rest of his life his 
heart should be set alone upon the things which are 
above. 


146. No Room.—The world has no room for the 
Master, and should the servant be above his Lord ? 
The cry of the world to-day is, as it was eighteen 
hundred years ago, no room. He might have been 
born in a palace, but He went to the manger in 
order that He might get His arm under the lowest 
and bear him up towards heaven. He became poor 
for our sakes. He occupied a boxrowed cradle and 
a borrowed grave. He hadno home. The temple 


was made for Him, and yet it was closed against 
Him. 


147. Have You ruz Toxen?—“ Yes,” you say, “I 
go to church every Sunday.” That is not the token. 
“Tread my Bible.” Thatis not the token. ‘“Isay 
my prayers every night. I have been baptized.” 
Not one of these is the token. What have they to 


= 7 


aT — 


ae ae 


eo a 


ee 


5. awartibamanastamtiaea ee sc" 


| 


eenmmatiimee ami ne 


He 
Ih 
t 
{ 
fl 
} 
oy 

i} 


148 ADDRESSES 


do with the blood? Death will smite you when he 
comes if you are not sheltered behind the blood. 
You must die or find a substitute to dic in your 
place. Some say prayer is the key to heaven, but 
is there any promise to that effect? It is the blood 
—if you trample that under your feet there is no 
hope for you in the world to come. 


148. Luruer anp tHe Devit.—Martin Luther had 
a conflict with the devil, but when he said the blood 
of Christ cleanseth from all sin, Satan left him. 


149. Horse ror rae Drunxarp.—I have been talk- 
ing with a prominent Christian man, who said he 
did not think there was any hope for a woman who 
had become addicted to strong drink, and another 
said he did not think there was any hope for a con- 
firmed drunkard. When I look upon a drunkard 
and think of all the pledges he has made, I might 
say they were right ; but when I come to this chap- 
ter and read, “ All power is given to Me,” I rejoice 
to say there is hope for every drunkard on earth. 
Our God has power to save. I would say to these 
persons I would not give a farthing for all your good 
resolutions, you must be born again. It is not a 
reformation but a new creation. You will then hate 
strong drink as much as you love it now. All works 
of the flesh come to naught. Thanks be to God, 
the Lord Jesus is stronger than your appetite for 
strong drink. He is mighty to save. We want to 


en he 
blood. 

your 
n, but 
blood 
is no 


ry had 
blood 


. talk- 
nid he 
n who 
nother 
a con- 
nkard 
might 
chap- 
ejoice 
earth. 
these 
r good 
not a 
n hate 
works 

God, 
ite for 
ant to 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 149 


come boldly to God and ask Him to save the poor 
drunkard. 


150. A Cuatrencr.—I challenge you to find any 
reason for not loving Christ. If you go to the lost 
world and ask the damned spirits in hell there is 
not one of them can give youareason. There is no 
reason can be given on earth, and if you go to the 
world above they don’t want to give a reason, they 
all love Him. 


151. Tae Lecacy or Curist.—All that Christ left 
here of His person was His blood. His blood flowed 
out on Calvary. The soldier hurled his spear, which 
was the crowning act of earth and hell, and blood 
came out of the Saviour’s side and covered the 
spear, teaching us that the blood of Jesus Christ 
covers sin, and the blood touching the earth re- 
deemed it. It touched the Roman spear and it 
took the Roman government. It was not long be- 
fore Rome bowed to the sceptre of Christ. Oh, 
that the blood may touch you to-night and you 
may be saved. 


‘152. Parpon.—I was in Ohio a few years ago, and 
invited to preach in the State prison. Eleven hun- 
dred convicts were in the chapel, in front of me. 
After I had got through the preaching, the chap- 
lain said to me: “Moody, a few years ago, our 
commissioners went to the governor of the State, 


~ 


Pe ee eS 


eS ED CCI AE tc ee gt eae NN swrrearrerenssy~ 6 


150 ADDRESSES 


and got him to promise that he would pardon five 
men for good behavior. The governor consented, 
with this understanding—that the record was to be 
kept in secret, and that at the end of six months the 
five men highest on the roll should receive a par- 
don, regardless of who or what they were. At the 
end of six months the prisoners were all brought 
into the chapel and the commissioners came up, 
and the president of the commissioners stood upon 
the platform, and put his hand in his pocket, and 
brought out some papers, and said, ‘I hold in my 
hand pardons for five men.’” Every man was as 
still as death; many were deadly pale, and the 
suspense was something awful. The commissioner 
went on to tell them how they had got the pardon; 
but the chaplain said to the commissioner, ‘“ Before 
you make your speech, read out the names. This 
suspense is awful.” So he read out the first name, 
“Reuben Johnson will come and get his pardon;” 
and he held it out, but no one came forward. He 
said to the governor, “ Are all the prisoners here?” 
The governor told him they were all there. Then 
he said again, ‘Reuben Johnson will come and get 
his pardon. It is signed and sealed by the gov- 


ernor. He is a free man.” Th chaplun told me 
he looked right down wh« uben wae, and he 
was looking all round to se... fortunate man who 


had got his pardon. Finally the chaplain caught 
his eye, and he said, “ Reuben, you are the man.” 
Reuben turned round and looked behind him to see 


ee 


n five 
ented, 
3 to be 
hs the 
& par- 
At the 
‘ought 
1e up, 
| upon 
t, and 
in my 
vas as 
d the 
sioner 
wdon; 
Before 

This 
name, 
don;” 
|. He 
ere ?” 
Then 
nd get 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 151 i 


where Reuben was. The chaplain said the second 
time, “ Reuben, you are the man,” and the second 


time he looked round thinking it must be some Ati) 
other Reuben. Now, men do not believe the Gos- bE 


pel is for them. They think it is too good, and old 
pass it over their shoulders to the next man. Well, } 


the chaplain could see where Reuben was, and he j 
had to say three times, “Reuben, come and get Ti 
your pardon.” At last the old man got up and 1 
came along down the hall, trembling from head to ihe 
foot, and when he got the pardon he looked at it 4 
and went back to his seat and buried his face in his 4) : 


hands, and the prisoners heard him weep to think 
he was a free man. When the prisoners got into 
the ranks to go back to the cells Reuben got into 
the ranks too, and the chaplain had to call to him, 


“Reuben, get out of the ranks; you are a free man, ; | 
you are no longer a prisoner.” And Reuben stepped hee 
out of the ranks. That is the way men make out ke | 
pardons. They make out pardons for good charac- | | 
ter or good behavior. But God makes out pardons Hit 


for men that have not got any character, and who 
Lave been very, very bad. 


153. ‘Tue Boy anp tue Gamsters.—A good many 
years ago, Chicago was a grain market. There were 
no railways running there then, and the grain used 
to be shipped on the lake. There was a man living 
out in the Western prairies, a farmer and a minister, 
and he sent his only son into Chicago with a load 


152 ADDRESSES 


of grain. He waited and waited for his boy to re- 
turn, but he did not come home. At last the father 
saddled his horse and went into Chicago. He went 
where he had sent his boy to sell grain, and found 
that he had sold it. Then he feared that some 
one had murdered him, and he got detectives on 
his track. They tracked him into a gambling den, 
where he had gambled away the whole of his money. 
After he had done that the men said, “Sell your 
horses and machine and then you can get all the 
money back again and go home to your father, and 
no one will know any thing at all about it.” That 
is the way the devil leads men on. He sold his 
horses and machine, and gambled that money away 
too. What could he do? He was ashamed to go 
home to meet his father, and he fled. That is just 
exactly like the sinner. He thinks because he has 
sinned God will have nothing to do with him. 
What did that father do? Did he say, ‘Let the 
boy :70?” No; he went after him. And I want to 
say to you that fom the time when Adam fell to the 
present time God has been seeking after His chil- 
dren. That man went from town to town. When 
he got into the pulpit to preach when he had fin- 
ished his sermon he told the story of how he had 
lost his boy, and described him, and he usked any 
of the audience who m’ght ever meet with him to 
write and let him know. At last he found that 
he had gone to California. Did that father say, 
“Let him go”? No, He went to San Francisco, 


to re- 
father 
e went 
found 
; some 
ves on 
g den, 
money. 
il your 
all the 
er, and 

That 
1d his 
y away 
1 to go 
is just 
he has 

him. 
et the 
rant to 
to the 
s chil- 
When 
ad fin- 
ne had 
d any 
im to 
1 that 
r say, 
hcisco, 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 153 


and he advertised in the paper that he would preach 
at such a church on such a day. When he had 
preached he told his story, in hopes that the boy 
might have seen the advertisement and come to the 
church. When he had done, away under the ygal- 
lery there was a young man who waited until the 
audience had gone out; then he came towards the 
pulpit. The father looked, und saw it was that boy, 
and he ran to him, and pressed him to his bosom. 
The boy wanted to confess what he had done, but 
not a word would the father hear. He forgave him 
freely, and took him to his home. My friends, you 
have been enticed away by the devil; now, God is 
inviting you to come home to-night. 


154. Untversarism ANsweRED.— Suppose Queen 
Victoria did not like any man to be deprived of 
his liberty, and threw all her prisons open, and was 
so merciful that she could not bear any one to suf- 
fer for guilt, how long would she hold the sceptre ? 
How long would she rule? Not twenty-four hours. 
Those very men who cry out about God being mer- 
ciful would say, ‘We don’t want such a queen.” 
Well, God is merciful, but He is not going to take 
an unpardoned sinner into heaven. 


155. THat 1s Not THE Qurestion.—The question is 
on the other side. God has something against you. 
Suppose a man stole $1,000 from me and then said, 
“T have nothing against you.” That is not what I 


RS mnt an ne la ac Ce aa 


{ 
3 
mf 
} 
bi 
4 


154 ADDRESSES 


want. I want him to make restitution. All sin is 
sin against God, and there will be no peace for the 
sinner until God is reconciled. If a man will seek 
forgiveness in Christ his sins suall be covered and 
then there will be peace. 


156. Siyners Banxrupr.—Christ suffered in our 
stead, for our sins were laid upon Him, and because 
He was punished so we go free. Instead of God 
coming down and punishing us, He justifies us. It 
is the same as if I had been running up an account 
in one of your stores and ancther man paid it. 
When I go to pay the account I am told: “It is all 
settled; you are justified, Mr. Moody; there is noth- 
ing against you in my ledger.” 


157. Our Worst Enemy.—The worst enemy man 
has to-day is unbelief: we do not believe that Christ 
came to bless. We are under the power of the devil. 
Many of us believe the les of the devil instead of 
believing the words of the Lord Jesus Christ. 


158. Curist’s Love More roan Att.—My wife went 
out one day, and my little boy, two years old, got 
hold of a pair of scissors. My little girl knew he 
ought not to have them, and she went to him and 
tried to get them away; but the little fellow held on 
to the scissors, and would not give them up. She 
was afraid of sticking them into his eyes, so she ran 
and got an orange, and held it up, and said, “ Wil- 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 155 


“If they ask me who sent me, what shall I tell 
is all : them?” God said, “Say I Am sent me;” and as 


sin is lie, do not you want the orange?” and the little fel- 

or the low dropped the scissors, and went for the orange. 

seek If you will allow me the illustration, God comes 

| and here, and says, “ Here is my Son, take Him.” He : 
saves the sinner; and the moment we get Him, bl 
these things we love so much are gone; they float 

sl deus: away into the dim past. Christ is worth more than 1 

cau all the world; and God comes and says, “ Here is 

| — my Son, take Him, and believe on Him.” 

s. : 

oe 159. Gov’s Branx Curcx.—And when Moses said, . | 

id it. 


noth- some one has said, that was a blank check, and 
God told him to fill it out; and when they were in 
the desert and wanted water He filled out the check 
Beatie and drew water from the rock. When he wanted ' 
hrist bread He filled out the check and God gave him ) 
devil, bread from heaven. ‘ 
rad of : 
169%, Tur Conrrast.—Two fathers come before me. 1 
One was a man of great wealth. Yet he would have 4 
went freely given it all could he have brought back his ' et 
d, got eldest boy from his early grave. One day that boy A 
ew he j had been borne home unconscious. ‘ He must die,” 
m and said the doctor. “But, doctor,” said the agonized { 
id on father, “can you do nothing to bring him to con- : 
She sciousness, even for a moment?” ‘That may bo, 
wil but he can never live.” Time passed, and after a 


terrible ‘suspense the father’s wish was gratified, 


Die <olecareeel Seine ciened tna aes teeta atialien aiererteeeiae lane eee were 


Boa feasts ee “ a 
ae 


156 ADDRESSES 


“My son,” he whispered, “the doctor tells me you 
are dying.” “Well,” said the boy, “you never 
prayed for me, father; won’t you pray for my lost 
soul now?” ‘The father wept. It was true he had 
never prayed. And in a little while that soul, un- 
prayed for, passed into its dark eternity. Oh, fa- 
ther! if your boy was dying, and called on you to 
pray, could you lift your burdened heart to heaven ? 
What a contrast is the other father! He, too, had 
a lovely boy, and one day he came home to find him 
at the gates of death. “A great change has come 
over our boy,” said the weeping mother; “he has 
only been a little ill before, but it seems now as if 
he were dying fast.” The father went into the room, 
and placed his hand on the forehead of the little boy. 
He could see the boy was dying. He could feel the 
cold damp of death. “My son, do you know you 
are dying?” “No; amI?” “Yes; you are dying.” 
* And shall I die to-day?” ‘Yes, my boy, you can- 
not live till night.” ‘Well, then, I shall be with 
Jesus to-night, won’t I, father?” ‘Yes, my son, 
you will spend to-night with the Saviour.” As he 
turned away, the little fellow saw the tears trickling 
over his father’s cheeks. ‘Don’t weep for me, fa- 
ther,” he said; “when I get to heaven I will go right 
straight to Jesus, and tell Him that ever since I can 
remember you have tried to lead me to Him.” 


161. Home-stoxness Curep.—I heard of a Chris- 
tian who did not succeed in his work as well as he 


Ne 


> you 
never 
r lost 
e had 
l, un- 
h, fa- 
ou to 
ven ? 
, had 
| him 
come 
2 has 
as if 
‘oom, 
boy. 
1 the 

you 
ing.” 
can- 
with 
son, 
s he 
cling 
b, fa- 
ight 
can 


ris- 
s he 


OS ATEN SM THT Se 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 157 


used to, and he got Home-sick and wished himself 
dead. One night he dreamed that he had died, and 
was carried by the angels to the eternal city. As 
he went along the crystal pavement, he met a man 
he used to know, and they went down the golden 
streets together. All at once he noticed every one 
looking in the same direction, and saw One coming 
up who was fairer than the sons of men. It was 
his blessed Redeemer. As the chariot came oppo- 
site, He came forth, and beckoning the one friend, 
placed him in His own chariot-seat, but himself 
He led aside, and pointing over the battlements of 
heaven, ‘Look over yonder,” He said, “what do 
you see?” “It seems as if I see the dark earth I 
have come from.” ‘What else?” “I see men as 
if they were blindfolded, going over a terrible pre- 
cipice into a bottomless pit.” ‘ Well,” said He, “ will 
you remain up here, and enjoy those mansions that 
I have prepared, or go back to yon dark earth, and 
warn these men, and tell them about Me and my 
kingdom, and the rest that remaineth for the peo- 
ple of God?” That man never wished himself dead 
again. He yearned to live as long as ever he could, 
to tell men of heaven and of Christ. 


162. A Foor 1n His Day.—There is not a man in 
the word of God whose name shines out upon the 
page of divine history who was eminent in God’s 
service, but’ who was considered the greatest fool in 
his day. 


* 


o-—_ -_ @ =i 


458 ADDRESSES 


163. Repempricn.—A friend in Ireland once met 
a little Irish boy who had caught a sparrow. The 
poor little bird was trembling in his hand, and 
seemed very anxious to escape. The gentleman 
begged the boy to let it go, as the bird could 
not do him any good; but the boy said he would 
not, for he had chased it three hours before he 
could catch it. At last he offered to buy the bird; 
the boy agreed to the price, and it was paid. Then 
the gentleman took the poor little thing and held it 
out on his hand. The boy had been holding it very 
fast, for the boy was stronger than the bird, just as 
Satan is stronger than we, and there it sat for a 
time scarcely able to realize the fact that it had got 
liberty; but, in a little, it flew away chirping, as if 
to say to the gentleman, “Thank you! thank you! 
you have redeemed me.” That is what redemption 
is—buying back and setting free. So Christ came 
to break the fetters of sin, to open the prison doors 
and set the sinner free. This is the good news, the 
Gospel of Christ—‘Ye are not redeemed by cor- 
ruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the 
precious blood of Christ.” 


164. Curist’s CructFIx1on THE Founpation.— When 
I was in one of your cities, a gentleman came to me 
and said, “If you are right, I am wrong; and if I 
am right, you are wrong.” I saw he was a minister, 
and I said, “ Well, I never heard you preach; if you 
have heard me you can tell what the difference ir 


PLUS SRPMS TN FAME TS mL YT ee ee Fe 


ice met 
7 The 
id, and 
itleman 
| could 
. would 
fore he 
ie bird; 

Then 
held it 
it very 
just as 
t for a 
had got 
ig, as if 
ik you! 
mption 
‘t came 

doors 
ws, the 
Dy cor- 
th the 


When 
b to me 
nd if I 
nister, 
if you 
nce ig 


PISS Tt Als tS ey RTM PSY CRT TP SERED ATE RIE HIT 


SP Ty eR a ac sei mat Te 


VEO SA CTR RANE TIEN 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 153 


Where do we differ?” ‘Well, you preach that it is 
the death of Christ; I preach His life. I tell people 
His death has nothing to do with it; you tell them 
His life has nothing to do with their salvation, and 
that His death only will save them. I do not believe 
a word of it.” ‘‘ Well,” I said, “what do you do 
with this passage, ‘Who His own self bare our sins 
in His own body on the tree?’” “Well, I never 
preached on that text.” “ What do you do with 
this, then, ‘Ye are not redeemed with corrupti- 
ble things as silver and gold, but with the pre- 
cious blood of Christ?’” ‘I never preached on 
that text either,” was the reply. ‘ Well, what do 
you do with this, ‘Without shedding of blood there 
is no remission?’” “I never spoke on that,” he 
said. ‘ What do you do with this, ‘He was wound- 
ed for our transgressions, He was bruised for our 
iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was 
upon Him?’” “I never preached on that either.” 
“What do you preach, then?” I asked. He hesi- 
tated for a little, and then said, “I preach moral 
essays.” ‘You leave out the atonement?” ‘“ Yes.” 
“Well,” I said, “it would all be a sham to me if I 
did that; I could not understand it. I would be 
away home to-morrow. I would not know what to 
preach. Moral essays on Christ without his death!” 
The young man said, “ Well, it does seem a sham 
sometimes.” He was honest enough to confess that. 
Why, the whole thing is a myth without the atone- 
ment, The crucifixion of Christ is the foundation of 


160 ADDRESSES 


HH the whole matter. Ifa man is unsound on the blood, 
i he is unsound in every thing. ‘“ Without shedding 
of blood is no remission.” 


165. Grace Brrorrt Jupement.—It was of mercy 
and grace that Adam was turned out of Eden, so 
that he could not eat of the tree of life. He put into 
the hand of man a lamp of promise to light him 
through the world. 


166. Livine 1x Dovustine Castin.—-Why, it is sal- 
vation by doubts nowadays instead of by faith; thére 
are so few that dare to say, “I know that my Re- 
deemer liveth, I know in whom I have believed.” 

Make sure of this one thing if you are not sure of 
any thing else. It is better that you fail in health 
or in business, it is better that you go to some asy- 
lum, it is better for you to go to heaven from some 
poor-house or from some mad-house than to go to 
hell in a gilded chariot. Make sure that your name 

! is written in heaven; then you have something worth 
rejoicing over. 


167. Tur Berrayat.—Let us imagine we are living 
when the Son of God was upon earth—that we were 
citizens of Jerusalem; that we were at that memo- 
rable feast; that late one Thursday afternoon we are 
walking down the street, and we see thirteen men 
coming down the street. We make inquiries who 
they are, and we are told: It is Jesus and His disci- 


blood, 
edding 


' mercy 
iden, sO 
out into 
ht him 


tis sal- 
1; thére 
my Re- 
ved.” 

; sure of 
1 health 
me asy- 
m some 
o go to 
ur name 
he worth 


re living 
we were 

memo- 
n we are 
ben men 
ries who 

is disci- 


AND BEST THOUGUTS. 161 


ples. They are going to the guest chamber. They 
come to a common-looking house; they go up stairs 
to that guest chamber and sit around the table. He 
began to be exceedingly sorrowful; he knew that 
one of His disciples was that night to swear he 
never knew Him; that the Shepherd was to be smit- 
ten, and the sheep were to leave Him. He was sor- 
rowful unto death. John was wondering what was 
making Him so sad. At last he told them that one 
of them that night should betray him. They all 
looked startled. At last one says: Lord, is it I? 
And another says: is it 1? They all began to mis- 
trust themselves, and at last Judas, that awful traitor 
who was already plotting with the chief priests to 
deliver Him up, said: Lord, is it I? Jesus gave 
him to understand that it was, and presently He 
turned and said: “What thou doest do quickly,” 
and he got up and left. I don’t believe you could 
find a sadder party than they were. Judas had seen 
Him perform His mighty miracles; he had been with 
Him when He fed the multitude in the wilderness; 
when He had wept over Jerusalem; been associated 
with Him for three long years, and now he gets up 
and goes out. It was night, and I hear him as he 
goes down those stairs. He gocs off to the Sanhe- 
drim, to the rulers of the Jews. He says: What 
will you give me? He sold Jesus for thirty pieces 
of silver. How cheap he sold his birthright. You 
condemn him, but how many of you are selling Him 
for less. A lady, last night, wanted to become a 


ll 


=m 2-_—_=_ &@ = 2 


162 ADDRESSES 


Christian, but she could not give up the ball that 
was soon to come off; she would sell her soul for a 
night in the ball-room. How many would sell Him 
for a night in some drinking saloon. 


168. Tun Devin’s Work.—If you will read your 
Bible in the light of Calvary, you will find there is 
no other way of coming to heaven but by the blood. 
The devil don’t fear 10,000 preachers who preach a 
bloodless religion. A man who preaches a bloodless 
religion is doing the devil’s work, and I don’t care 
who he is. ; 

169. Drata Loszs rvs Stina Tuen.—I was brought 
up in a little village in New England. It was the 
custom there when a person was buried to toll out 
the age of the man at his funeral. Death never en- 
tered the village and tore away one of the inhabi- 
tants, but I always used to count the tolling of the 
bell. Sometimes it would be away up to seventy, 
or between seventy and eighty—beyond the life al- 
lotted to man. Sometimes it would be clear down 
in the teens, and childhood, and death would take 
away one of my own age. It used to make a sol- 
emn impression on me. When it comes to death 
some men say, “I do not fear it.” I feared it, and 
felt terribly afraid, when I thought of the cold hand 
of death feeling for the cords of life; and being 
launched out to eternity, to go to an unknown 
world. I used to have terrible thoughts of God; 


Priiuinnnaal aneibe as cence inci nee ee 


that 
for @ 


Him 


your 
re is 
ood. 
ach a 
dless 
, care 


pught 
is the 
ll out 
sy en- 
habi- 
of the 
renty, 
fe al- 
down 
take 
bn sol- 
death 
, and 
hand 

elng 
hown 


AND BEST THOUGHTS, 163 


but they are all gone now. Death has lost its sting. 
And as I go on through the world I can shout now, 
when the bell is tolling, “Oh, death, where is thy 
sting?” And I hear a voice come rolling down 
from Calvary, ‘Buried in the bosom of the Son of 
God.” 


170. Suppen Converstons.—-There are some peo- 
ple in this nineteenth century who do not believe 
in sudden conversions. I should like them to tell 
me where Zaccheus was converted. He certainly 
was not converted when he went up into the sye- 
amore tree; he certainly was converted when he 
came down. He must have been converted some- 
where between the branches and the ground. I 
wish we had a few men converted like Zaccheus in 
London; it wou'd make no small stir. When a 
man begins to make restitution it is a pretty good 
sign of conversion. Zaccheus gave half his goods 
all at once; and he says, “If I have taken any thing 
from any manI restore him fourfold.” I imagine 
the next morning one of the servants of Zaccheus 
going with a check for £100, and saying, “ My 
master, a few years ago, took from you wrongfully 
about £25, and this is restitution money. That 
would give confidence in Zaccheus’s conversion. 


171. Tae Penitrent Tater.—The first we know of 
the thief on the cross he was a reviler of Christ. 
The next we hear of him he appears to be under 


164 ADDRESSES 


conviction, One of the malefactors which were 
hanged railed on Him; saying, “If Thou be tho 
Christ save Thyself and us.” But the other, an- 
swering, rebuked him, saying, “ Dost thou not fear 
God seeing thou art in the same condemnation ? 
And we indeed justly; for we receive the due re- 
ward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing 
amiss.” What do you suppose changed this man’s 
feelings in these few hours? I think it was the 
Saviour’s prayer—‘‘ Father, forgive them for they 
know not what they do.” 

I seem to hear this thief talking to himself in this 
way. “What a strange man this must be! He 
says he is the Son of God. Why does not God 
send his angels and destroy all this crowd of people 
who are torturing His Son? If he has power now, 
as He used to have when he worked those miracles 
they talk about, why does he not sweep all these 
wretches to destruction? I would do it in a min- 
ute if I had the power. But this man prays God 
to forgive them. Strange! Strange! I am sorry 
I said a word against him when they hung him up 
here. What a difference there is between him and 
me. 

“Here we are on two crosses, side by side; but all 
the rest of our lives we have been far enough apart. 
I have been robbing and murdering, and He has 
been visiting the hungry, healing the sick, and rais- 
ing the dead. I will not rail at Him any more. In- 
deed, I begin to believe He must be the Son of God; 


were 
e tho 
‘, an- 
| fear 
tion ? 
le re- 
thing 
man’s 
is the 
they 


n this 
! He 
, God 
reople 
now, 
racles 
these 

min- 
+ God 
sorry 
m up 
m and 


ut all 
part. 
e has 
rais- 

In- 


SSSR APH eA ENED STEYR Hl Cae 


IMI SP TE 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 165 


for surely no son of man could forgive his enemies 
this way.” 

This poor man had been scourged, beaten, nailed 
to the cross, and hung up there for the world tc 
gaze upon; and he was not sorry for his sins one 
single bit—but when he heard the Saviour praying 
for His murderers, that broke his heart. 

And what did Jesus say in answer to his prayer. 
He looks kindly upon him and says, “To-day shalt 
thou be with Me in Paradise.” He got more than 
he asked for. He only asked to be remembered, 
but Christ says to him, ‘I will take you right ap 
into my kingdom to-day.” No doubt Satan said to 
himself, “I will have the soul of that thief, pretty 
soon, down here in the caverns of the lost. He be- 
longs tome.” But Christ snapped the fetters of his 
soul and set him at liberty. Satan lost his prey. 
What a contrast! In the morning led out a con- 
demned criminal; in the evening saved from his 
sins. In the morning cursing; in the evening sing- 
ing hallelujahs with a choir of angels. In the morn- 
ing condemned by men as not fit to live on earth; 
in the evening reckoned good enough for heaven. 
Jesus had died before his very eyes, and hastened 
before him to get a place ready tor this first soul 
brought from the world after He had died. 

You have heard of the child who did not like to 
die and go to heaven, because he did not know any 
body there. But the thicf had one acquaintance: 
even the Master of the place Himself. He calls to 


166 ADDRESSES 


Gabriel, and says, “Prepare a chariot; there is a 
friend of mine upon that cross. They are breaking 
his legs. He soon will be ready to come. Make 
haste and bring him to me.” And the angel in the 
chariot sweeps down the sky, takes up the soul of 
the poor penitent thief, and hastens back again to 
glory; while the gates of the city swing wide open, 
and the angels shout their welcome to this poor sin- 
ner ‘washed in the blood of the Lamb.” 


172. Husuep Harps.—They never knew the Son 
of God when He was here. He would hush every 
harp in heaven to hear a sinner pray; no music 
would delight Him so much. 


173. Tue Faruer’s Writ.—I remember a story of 
a bad boy who ran away from home. He had re- 
fused all the invitations which his father had sent 
him to come home and be forgiven, and help to 
comfort his old heart. He had even gone so far as 
to scoff at his father and mother. But one day a 
letter came telling hin his father was dead, and 
they wanted him to come home and attend the 
funeral. At first he would not go, but then he 
thought it would be a shame not to pay some little 
respect to the memory of so good a man after he 
was dead; and so, just as a matter of form, he tuok 
the train, and went to the old home, sat through all 
the funeral services, saw his father buried, and came 
back with the rest of the friends to the house, with 


» is & 
vking 
Make 
n the 
yul of 
nin to 
open, 
r sin- 


> Son 
every 
music 


ory of 
ud re- 
l sent 
Ip to 
far as 
day a 
, and 
the 
bn he 
little 
er he 
took 
eh all 
came 
with 


PIRES AR ASPET IS MERLE REISE 


AA PROT RIES RS ERS 


fs 


AND BEST THOUGHTS, 167 


his heart as cold and stony as ever. But when the 
old man’s will was brought out, the ungrateful son 
found that his father had remembered him in the 
will, and had left him an ‘rheritance with the 
others, who had not gone astsay. This broke his 
heart. That is just the way our Father in Heaven 
does with sinners. He loves them in spite of their 
sins, and it is the love which, more than any thing 
else, brings hard-hearted sinners to their knees. 


174. Conression .u0RE Converston.—I never knew 
any man to be converted till he confessed. Cain felt 
bad enough cver his sins, but he did not confess. 
Saul was greatly tormented in his ‘nind, but he 
went to the witch of Endor rather than to the Lord. 
Judas felt so bad over the betrayal of his Master, 
that he went out and hanged himself; but he did 
not confess—that is, he did not confess to God. He 
came back and confessed to the priests, saying, “I 
have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent 
blood.” It was of no use to confess to them. They 
could not forgive him. What he should have done 
was to confess to God; but instead of that, he went 
right away and hanged himself. 


175. Toe Srory or Mepurposueru.—There is a 
story of a man by the name of Mephibosheth which 
will help you to understand the Gospel. You re- 
member what a hard time David had when Saul 
was hunting him to kill him. One day David and 


168 ADDRESSES 


his friend Jonathan were taking a walk in the 
fields. Saul was angry, and bent on killing David; 
but his son Jonathan was looking out for a chance 
to save him. 

After they had agreed upon a sign by which Da- 
vid was to know whether it was safe for him to stay 
around the court of the kine, or whether he must 
leave, Jonathan says to him— 

“David, you are to be king after my father. I 
want you to promise me one thing: when you come 
to the throne, if any of the house of Saul are alive, 
I want you to be good to them, for my sake.” 

“Tl do that, of course,” said David. About four 
years after David set up his kingdom at H 

It must have been near fourteen years after that 
before David remembered his promise to his old 
friend Jonathan. But one day the king was walk- 
ing in his palace at Jerusalem, where he had re- 
moved his capital; a.d all at once he happened to 
think of that promise. 

“That's too bad!” said David. “TI forgot all 
about that promise. I have been so busy fighting 
these Philistines, and fixing things up, that I have 
not had time to tiivk of any thing else.” So he 
called his servants in great haste, and said, “Do 
any of you know whether there is any of Saul's 
family living?” One of them said there was an 
old servant of Saul by the name of Ziba ond maybe 
he could tell. “Go and tell him I want him, right 
away.” 


Re na LNs REE MRI BE Vises 


i ABORT NOL i aT 


in the 
David; 


chance 


th Da- 
to stay 
» must 


ier, 
1 come 
, lve, 


ut four 


r that 
is old 
walk- 
ud re- 
hed to 


of all 
rhting 
have 


So he 
*Do 
Saul's 
is an 
ay be 
right 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 


Ziba came; and David said, “Do you know wheth- 
er there is any body of the house of Saul in my kine- 
dom?” Ziba said there was one he knew of—a son 
of Jonathan, by the name of Mephibosheth. “Go, 
fetch him!” says David; “go quick. Tell him I 
want to show him the kindness of God.” 

Where do you suppose Mephibosheth was all the 
time? Down at Lo-debar. That is where all the 
human race are until they come to Christ; away 
down at Lo-debar—which means, a place of no pas- 
ture. When they reached the little out of the way 
place I fancy there was a great commotion. 

“Where’s Mephibosheth? The king wants him.” 
Poor fellow! when he heard that he hung his head. 
He was afraid the king wanted to kill him because 
he was of the house of his old enemy. I never 
knew a sinner to take the Gospel right. They al- 

rays think, at first, that it is too good to be true. 

“Don’t be afraid,” said the servants. “The king 
says he wants to show you the kindness of God. 
So get ready. Don’t you see the king has sent his 
own chariot to fetch you?” 

But poor Mepbibosheth had another difficulty. 
He was lame in both feet. He was a little fellow 
when David came to the throne; and an old ser- 
vant, who was afraid that all the house of Saul 
were going to be killed, took him up and ran away 
to hide him. Somehow he managed to drop the 
lad, and lamed him in both feet. 

And now I can see poor Mephibosheth looking 


170 ADDRESSES 


down at Lis feet. And he says to himsclf, “TI am 
not fit to go to the king. I am a poor cripple.” 

That’s just the way with a convicted sinner. He 
is all the time thinking of his own unworthiness, 
and saying to himsclf that he isn’t fit to be saved. 

“Never mind your lame feet, Mephibosheth; so 
long as the king sends for you, it’s all right.” So 
they take him up, and put him inte the chariot, and 
start for Jerusalem. 

When the king sees him, he takes him in his 
arms, and cries out— 

“Oh Mephibosheth, the son of my dear old friend 
Jonathan! you shall have all that belonged to the 
house of Saul; and you shall live with me here in 
my palace!” 

What a happy man he must have been to hear 
that! Sinner, that is just what God says to the 
soul that comes to him in Jesus Christ. He takes 
us in His arms; He gives us a great fortune of love 
and grace; and He promises that we shall live with 
Him in His heavenly palace forever. 

Some people think that Mephibosheth, like cer- 
tain low-spirited Christians, after he went to live 
with the king, must have been all the time worry- 
ing over his lame feet. But I don’t think so. He 
eculdn’t help it; and if David didn’t mind it, it was 
all right. So I think that when he dined with him 
in state, with the great lords and ladies all around 
him, he just stuck his club-feet under the table, and 
looked the king right in the face. 


4 
3 


Fens neehecent eked tarseh se iab daria, Sena REP AO 


ose BPS 


thiness, 
. saved. 
eth; so 
t.” So 
ot, and 


in his 


l friend 
to the 
here in 


(0 hear 
to the 
p takes 
of love 
re with 


ke cer- 
to live 
worry- 

He 
it was 
h him 
round 
e, and 


ee 


Te alg ate er aU ea! eee 


= 


PIAS OEY ORAS ap 


ponst om 


ts 


athesoadtai ache ay did. Seen es POU 


ae 


EE Mer Gas wie aet ai pindak 


~ 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. ye! 


176. Art Tur Heap!—We have heard a great deal 
about the faith of Abraham, and the faith of Moses; 
but the thicf on the cross seems to me to have had 
more faith than any of them. He stands at the 
head of the class. God was twenty-five years ton- 
ing up the faith of Abraham; Moses was forty years 
getting ready for his work; but this thief, right 
here in the midst of men who rejected Him—nailed 
to the cross, and racked with pain in every nerve, 
overwhelmed with horror, and his soul in a perfect 
tempest—still manages to lay hold upon Christ, 
and trust in Him for a swift salvation. 


177. Free.—In the British nies, before the 
time of Wilberforce, there used to be a great many 
slaves; but that good man began to agitate the ques- 
tion of setting them free ; and all the slaves in the 
colonies were anxious to know how he was getting 
along. But in those days there were no telegraphs 
and no steamships. The mails went by the slow 
sailing vessels. They would be from six to eight 
months in making a voyage to some of the colonies. 
The slaves used tc watch for the British ships, hop- 
ing to hear good news, but fearing they might hear 
bad ones. There was a ship which had sailed im- 
mediately after the Emancipation Act had becn 
passed and signed by the king; and when she came 
within hailing distance of the boats which had put 
off from the shore at the port where she was bound, 
the captain could not wait to deliver the message 


ea... Ef 


— ee 


112 ADDRESSES 


officially, and have it duly promulgated by the gov- 
ernment; but, seeing the poor anxious men standing 
up in their boats, eager for the news, he placed his 
trumpet to his mouth, and shouted with all his 
might, “Free! free!” Just so the angels shout 
when a poor bondman is taken in hand by the 
Saviour Himself; delivered from the bondage of 
darkness, into the liberty of His dear Son ; free— 
free from sin—free from the curse of the law. 


178. Tur First yor tae Exveventa Hovr.—Some- 
body has said “the thief on the cross was saved at 
the eleventh hour.” I don’t know about that. Per- 
haps it was the first hour. It might have been the 
first hour with him, I think. Perhaps he never 
knew Christ until he was led out to die beside Him. 
This may have been the very first time he had ever 
learned the way of faith in the Son of God. 


179. THe Story or Barassas.—Whai a night Ba- 
rabbas spent just before the day Christ was cruci- 
fied! As the sun goes down he ays to himself: “To- 
morrow !—only to-morrow! They will hang me and 
in that awful torture I must die!” 

Maybe they let his mother, or his wife and chil- 
dren, come and see him for the last time. He 
couldn’t sleep that night. He heard them ham- 
mering in the prison yard and knew they were 
makine the cross. At last the light of morning 
breaks through the prison bars, ‘ To-day — this 


caripweasnpes pest eRssie eset kite) aie Traces 


Dears 


ala 


le gOv- 
anding 
ced his 
all his 
- shout 
by the 
lage of 
free— 


-Some- 
aved at 
6 Per- 
een the 
> never 
le Him. 
ad ever 


rht Ba- 

eruci- 
ft: Bo. 
me and 


d chil- 
e. He 
h ham- 
> were 
orning 


— this 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 173 


very day-—they will open that door and lead me 
away to be crucified!” 

Pretty soon the door swings open ; there are the 
soldiers. Good-by to life and hope! Death, hor- 
rible death now!—and after death, what then? The 
officer of the guard speaks to him: “Barabbas you 
are free.” 

He hears the strange words but they make little 
impression on him. He is so near dead with fear 
and horror, that the good news doesn’t reach him. 
He stands euzing a moment at the soldiers, and 
then he comes to himself. 

“Don’t laugh at me! don’t make sport of me! 
Take me away and crucify me; but don’t tear my 
soul to pieces!” 

Again the officer speaks: “You are free! Here— 
the door is open: go out; go home.” 

It is so wonderful to get out of the clutches of the 
Roman law, that he is afraid to believe the good 
news. And so he begins to ask how it can be. 

They tel! him that Pilate has promised the Jews 
the release of one prisoner that day ; and that the 
Jews have chosen him instead of one Jesus of Naz- 
areth, who was condemned to be crucified. 

Now the poor man begins to weep. This breaks 
his heart. He knows this Jesus. He has seen Him 
do some of His miracles. He was in the crowd pick- 
ing pockets when Jesus fed the five thousand hun- 
gry people. 

“What! that just man to die—and I, a thief, a 


174 ADDRESSES 


highwayman, a murderer, to go free!” And in the 
midst of his joy at his own release, his heart breaks 
at the thought that his life is saved at sich a cost. 
Sinner, that is the Gospel. Come cut of your 
prison; throw off the chains of sin. You were justly 
condemned, but Jesus died for you. Let your heart 
break in penitence; weep tears of love and joy. 


180. Exigau anp THE Priests or Baat.—Let us go 
to Carmel. 

King Ahab had forsaken the God of Israel, and 
all the court had followed his example. 

But there was an old prophet out in the moun- 
tains, to whom God said: “Go to Ahab, and tell 
him the heavens shall be shut up and there shall be 
no rain.” 

Away he goes to the wicked king. He bursts in 
upon him lke a clap of thunder, gives his message, 
and hurries away. I suppose Ahab laughed at the 
veld prophet. ‘“ What! no more rain? The fellow 
must be crazy!” 

Pretty soon the weather gets very dry. The earth 
is parched, the trees die, the grass perishes, and the 
‘cattle die. Famine; starvation; death! 

One day the king was talking with the prophet 
Obadiah. You see he did have one good man with 
him along with all the prophets of the false God. 

“See here, Obadiah,” says Ahab; “you go one 
way and I'll go another and see if we cannot find 
water.” 


ah FR RST I MT ata 


ERGO Da? Het owe nbag ee: 


Ski 2; aD a 


lin the 
breaks 
cost. 
of your 
e justly 
iv heart 
ry. 


t us go 
el, and 


moun- 
nd tell 
hall be 


irsts in 
essage, 
at the 

fellow 


2 earth 
nd the 


rophet 
n with 
rod. 

xO one 


»t find 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 175 


Obadiah met Elijah. “O, Elijah! is that you? 
Ahab has been hunting for you every where.” 

“Yes, [I'm here,” says Elijah. “You go and tell 
Ahab I want to see him.” 

So Obadiah hurries off and tells Ahab he has seen 
the prophet. 

“What! Elijah?” 

Yes.” 

“Why didn’t you bring him along?” 

“He wouldn’t come. He says he wants you to 
come to him.” 

Ahab wasn’t used to having people talk to him 
in that way, but he was anxious to see the prophet, 
so he went. And when he sees him he is very angry, 
and cries, “Art thou he that troubleth Israel?” 

“Not at all,” says Elijah. “You are the man 
that is troubling Isracl—going off after Baal, and 
leading ever so many of the people with you. Now, 
we have had enough of this sort of thing. Some 
people are praying to God, and some are praying 
to Baal, and we must have this question settled. 
You just bring all your prophets and all the priests 
of Baal up to Mount Carmel, and I also will come. 
We will make us each an altar, and offer sacrifice 
on it; and the God that answereth by fire, let Him 
be God.” 

“ Agreed,” says Ahab. 

All the places of business were closed, and every- 
body was going up to Mount Carmel. 

There were eight hundred and fifty of the proph- 


eee 


176 ADDRESSES 


ets and priests of Baal. I fancy I can see them 
going up in a grand procession, with the king im 
his chariot at their head. 

But Elijah marched, all alone: a rough man, clad 
in the skins of beasts, with a staffin his hand. No 
banners, no procession, no grcat men in his train! 
But the man who could hold the keys of heaven for 
three years and six months was not afraid to be 
alone. 

Now says Elijah to the people, “ How long halt 
ye between two opinions? Let the priests of Baal 
build them an altar and offer sacrifice, but put no 
fire under; and I w'll do the same: and the God 
that answereth by five, let Him be God.” 

So the priests of Baal build their altar. 

T am sure if God hadn’t held him back, Satan 
would have brought up a little spark out of hell to 
set that sacrifice on fire. But God wouldn’t let him. 

Then they begin to pray: “ Oh Baal, hear us! Oh 
Baal, hear us!” 

“You must pray louder than that, if you expect 
Baal to hear you,” says the old prophet. ‘ Maybe 
he is asleep: pray louder, so as to wake him up.” 

Poor fellows! they haven’t any voice left; so they 
begin to pray in blood. They cut themselves with 
knives, and lift their streaming hands and arms to 
Baal. But no fire comes down. 

It is gctting towards sundown. _ 

The prophet of the Lord builds an altar. Mind; 
he doesn't have any thing to do with the altar of 


> them 
cing m 


n, clad 
d. No 
train ! 
veu for 
l to be 


ng halt 
of Baal 
put no 
he God 


, Satan 

hell to 
let him. 
is! Oh 


expect 
‘Maybe 
up.” 

so they 
yes with 
arms to 


Mind; 
altar of 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. ay 


Baal, but builds an entirely different one, on the 
ruins of the altar of the Lord which had been bro- 
ken down. 

“We won’t have any body saying there is any 
trick about this thing,” says the prophet. So they 
bring twelve barrels of water and pour over the 
altar. I don’t know how they managed to get so 
much water; but they did it. 

Then Elijah prays: “Oh God of Abraham and of 
Isaac and of Jacob, let it be known this day that 
Thou art God in Israel.” 

God heard him at once, and—down came the fire! ! 
It burnt up the sacrifice, the wood, the water, and 
the very stones of the altar. Jehovah is God: no- 
body can halt any longer. 

Ah! but some of you say, “I too would have de- 
cided for God if I had been on Mount Carmel that 
day.” My friends, Calvary is a great deal more won- 
derful than Carmel. The sacrifice of Christ on the 
cross is more wonderful than the sacrifice which was 
burned on that altar. 


181. Tae Wivow’s Son.—Think of that poor widow 
at Nain! She is old, now; and her only son, who is 
the staff of her life, is sick. How she watches him; 
sits up all night to see that he has his medicine at 
the right time; by his bedside all day, fanning him 
and moistening his parched lips with water. The 
best doctor in Nain is sent for. He comes and feels 
the young man’s pulse, and shakes his head, and the 

i. 12 


% deo 


Vv, W, Ni as 

% ‘. A KX Z, Ss Ke & 

By a \Y WN Sew &s 

* A vy Jo é & &: 
\ \F NMI, = 
A iy ke we 
ay, NN Va NS 
\F IMAGE EVALUATION “ 


TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


| LO ‘Mas 2s 
—— 22 
| An sc [20 
a [28 
WW2S LA tes. 
Y 40 
NEZEN G 
be °: bj. . 
> S q ys a.’ a 
MW & “ee, 


7s. . yr > 
O; Photographic i> 4 | 
/ ° Dp 23 WEST MAIN STREET rN | 
4 SCIENCES = wasn ny eso ” | 
Corporation | 


we 


« 


a 


7 


178 ADDRESSES 


widow knows there is no hope for her boy. In a lit- 
tle while the fever comes to its crisis and the poor 
boy dies with his head upon his mother’s bosom. 
The people come and try to comfort the poor wom- 
an, but itis no use. Her heart is broken. 

Well: they make him ready for the burial; they 
celebrate his funeral service, and put him on the 
bier to carry him to his grave. What a sad proces- 
sion! as they come out of the city gates they see 
thirteen dusty-looking travellers, coming up the 
road. There is One among them, tall and far fairer 
than the sons of men. Who can He be? He is 
moved with compassion when He sees this little 
funeral procession; and it does not take Him long 
to find out that that woman who walks iiext the bier 
is a poor widow, whose only son she is following to 
his-grave. He tells the bearers to put down the bier; 
and while the mother wonders what is to be done, 
He bends tenderly over the dead man, and speaks 
to him in a low, sweet voice, “Arise!” And the 
dead man hears Him. His body begins to move: 
the man who was dead is struggling with his grave- 
clothes; they unbind them, and now he sits up. He 
leaps off the bier, catches a sight of his mother, re- 
members that he was dead and is now alive again; 
takes her in his arms, kisses her again and again, 
and then turns to look at the Stranger who has 
wrought this miracle upon him. He is ready to do 
any thing for that Man—ready to follow Him to the 
death. But Jesus does not ask that of him. He 

. * 


a, lit- 
» poor 
osom. 
wom- 


; they 
yn the 
yroces- 
ey see 
ip the 
- fairer 
He is 
3 little 
n long 
he bier 
ing to 
he bier; 


her, re- 
again ; 
again, 
ho has 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 179 


knows his mother needs him; and so He does not 
take him away to be one of His disciples, but gives 
him back to his old mother. 

I would have liked to see that young man re-en- 
tering the city of Nain, arm-in-arm with his mother. 
What do you suppose he said to the people, who 
looked at him with wonder? Would he not confess 
that Jesus of Nazareth had raised him from the 
dead? Would he not go everywhere, declaring 
what the Lord had done for his dead body? Oh 
how I love to preach Christ, who can stand over all 
the graves, and say to all the dead bodies, “ Arise!” 


182. Tur Srory or Naaman.—I have been reading 
to you about a man whom the king delighted to hon- 
or. He was captain of the hosts of Syria; but he was 
a leper; and that threw a blight over his whole life. 
There was no physician to help him in all Syria. 
None of the eminent doctors in Damascus could do 
him any good. Neither could any in Jerusalem. 
But I will tell you what they had in Syria: they 
had one of God’s children there—and she was a lit- 
tle girlh Naaman knew nothing about her, though 
she was one of his household. At last some one 
told the king of Syria that the little Israelitish maid 
had said that there was a prophet in her country 
who could cure the leprosy. Now Naaman stood 
high in the king’s favor, for he had just won a great 
victory. So the king said, “ you had better go down 
to Samaria, and see if there is any thing in it, and I 


180 ADDRESSES 


will give you letters of introduction to the king. 
Away goes Naaman down to Samaria with his letter 
of introduction, and he takes with him a bag of gold 
and silver. And he took about £100,000 sterling, 
to pay this doctor’s bill. There are a good many 
men who would willingly pay that sum, if with it 
they could buy the favor of God, and get rid of the 
curse of sin. Naaman had a letter of introduction 
from the king himself, and of course he would be 
received with high honors. But instead of the king 
rushing out to meet him, when he heard of Naa- 
man’s arrival and his object, he rent his mantle in a 
rage, and said: “Am I a God, that I can kill and 
make alive?” But at last the king bethinks himself 
of Elisha the prophet; and he says, “There is a man 
in my kingdom who may be able to help you and 
cure you.” So Naaman drives up in grand style to 
the prophet’s house and sends in his message, “ Tell 
the prophet Major General Naaman, of Syria, has 
arrived and wishes to see him.” Elisha takes it 
coolly. He does not come out to see him; but as 
soon as he learns his errand, sends his servant to 
say! ‘Dip seven times in Jordan, and you shall be 
clean.” What a blow to his pride! 

I can imagine him saying to his servant, “What! 
Dip seven times in Jordan! We cali the Jordan a 
ditch in our country!” 

I can fancy his indignation as he asks—“ Are not 
Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better 
than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in 


# 


king. 
letter 
f gold 
arling, 
many 
vith it 
of the 
uction 
ild be 
e king 
_ Naa- 
leina 
ll and 
imself 
a man 
u and 
yle to 
“Tell 
a, has 
kes it 
ut as 
ant to 
hall be 


Whas ! 
rdan a ; 
re not # 
better 
Ash in 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 181 


them and be clean?” So he turned and went away 
in a rage. Jordan never had any reputation as a 
river. Its banks were not half so beautiful as those 
of the rivers of Damascus. Yes, it was a dreadful 
blow to his pride! Damascus was one of the most 
beautiful cities in the world; and it is said that when 
Mahomet first saw it, he turned his head away, for 
fear it should lead his thoughts away from heaven. 

Naaman went off in a rage. But I don't think 
much of that; for when a man turns away in anger 
oe generally cools down and comes back again. 

Whilst Naaman was thinking what was best to be 
done, one of his servants came and said—“ My lord, 
if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, 
wouldst thou not have done it? how much rather, 
then, when he saith to thee, Wash and be clean!” 
Why, if Elisha had said to him, “Go back to Syria 
on your hands and knees,” he would most likely 
have done it. If he had said, ‘Go back all the way 
on one foot,” he would have tried to doit. Orif he 
had said, “ Give me a hundred thousand pounds for 
the medicine I prescribe, and thou shalt be cleansed,” 
no doubt he would have done it. But to tell him 
merely to dip in the river Jordan seven times. 
“Well,” says the servant, “you have come a hun- 
dred and fifty miles; and now don’t you think you 
had better do what he tells you?” 

His anger is cooling down; and he says, ‘“ Well, I 
think I might as well try it.” That’s the starting 
point of his faith. 


182 ADDRESSES 


Naaman’s will was conquered at last. So he goes 
down to the river and takes the first dip; and as he 
comes up, I can imagine him looking at himself, 
and saying to his servant, “There! I am no better 
than I was when I went in.” Down he goes a sec- 
ond time, and he comes up as much a leper as ever; 
and so he goes down again and again, the third and 
fourth and fifth time, with the same result—as much 
a leper as ever. When he comes up the sixth time, 
he looks at himself, and says, “Ah! no better. 
What a fool I have made of myself! I wouldn’t 
have the generals and aristocracy of Damascus know 
that I have been dipping in this way in Jordan for 
all the world. However, as I have gone so far, I'll 
make the seventh plunge.” He has not altogether 
lost faith; and down he goes the seventh time, and 


up he comes agam. He looks at himself, and shouts 
aloud for joy. “Lo, Iam well! My leprosy is all 
gone—all gone! My flesh has come again as that 
of alittle child. I never knewsuchathing. Thank 


bP) 


God! praise God! I am the happiest man alive. 
So he comes up out of Jordan and puts on his 
elothes, and goes back to the prophet, and wants to 
pay him. 

That’s just the old story: Naaman wants to give 
money for his cure. How many people want to do 
the same nowadays! Why, it would have spoiled 
the story of grace, if the prophet had taken any 
thing! You may give a thank-offering to God’s 
cause, not because you can be saved, but because 


he goes 
d as he 
himself, 
» better 
S a sec- 
us ever; 
ird and 
SS much 
h time, 
better. 
ouldn’t 
s know 
lan for 
far, I'll 
gether 
ne, and 
shouts 
y is all 
us. that 
Thank 
alive.” 
on his 
bnts to 


0 givo 
to do 
poiled 
n any 
God’s 


eCcause 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 183 


you are saved. But the prophet refused to take 
any thing; and I can imagine no one felt more re- 
joiced than Elisha did. So Naaman starts back to 
Damascus, a very different man than he was when 
he left it. He lost the leprosy in Jordan when he 
did what the man of God told him; and if you obey 
the voice of God, the burden of your sins will fall 
from off you, and you shall be cleansed. It is all 
done by the power of faith. 


183. Tue Merssacze not THE Messencer.—A good 
many people say, “Oh, I don’t like such and such a 
minister; I should like to know where he comes 
from, and what he has done, and whether any bish- 
cp has ever laid his hands on his head.” My dear 
friends, never mind the minister; it’s the message 
you want. Why, if some one were to send me a 
message, and the news were important, I shouldn’t 
stop to ask about the messenger who brought it; I 
should want to read the news; I should look at the 
letter and its contents, and not at the boy who 
brought it. And so it is with God’s message. The 
good news is every thing, the minister nothing. 
Why, if I got lost in London, I should he willing to 
ask any body which way to go—even if it were only 
a poor shoeblack. It is the way I want, not the 
person who directs me. 


184. Tory SHALL sHINeE as THE Srars.—We all 
want to shine; the mother wishes it ior her boy, 


184 ADDRESSES 


when she sends him to school; the father for his 
lad, when he goes off to college. God tells us who 
are to shine—-not statesmen, nor warriors, nor such 
like, that shine but for a season—but such as will 
shine forever and ever; those, namely, who win souls 
to Christ; the little boy even who persuades one to 
come to Christ. 


185. Curist1ans WatcueD.—The unbelieving world, 
and sceptics holding out their false lights, are watch- 
ing youand me. When Jacob put away his idols, 
he could go up to Bethel and get strength and the 
blessing—so will it be with the Church of God. A 
viper fixes upon the hand of the shipwrecked Paul; 
immediately he is judged by the barbarians some 
criminal unfit to live; but he shakes it off into the 
fire, and suffers no harm, and now they are ready to 
worship him, and ready too to hear and receive his 
message: the Church of God must shake off the 
vipers that have fastened on hand and heart too, 
ere men will hear. Where one ungodly man reads 
the Bible, a hundred read you and me: and if they 
find nothing in us, they set the whole thing aside as 
a myth. 


186. UNconcERN UNDER ReEsponsipiLity.—I remem- 
ber, one afternoon I was preaching, observing a 
young lady from the house I was staying at, in the 
audience. I had heard she taught in the Sabbath- 
school, which I knew was at the same hour; and sc 


or his 
s who 
r such 
us will 
. souls 
one to 


world, 
vatch- 
idols, 
id the 
dA 
Paul; 
some 
to the 
dy to 


ve his 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 185 


I asked her, after service, how she came to be there? 
“Oh,” said she, ‘my class is but five little boys, and 
I thought it did not matter for them.” And yet 
among these there might have been, who knows, a 
Luther or a Knox, the beginning of a stream ot 
blessing, that would have gone on widening and 
ever widening; and besides, one soul is worth all 
the kingdoms of the earth. 


187. Tue Atontna Bioop.—If you cut the crimson 
thread that binds the Bible, it falls to pieces. 


188. Hummity 1s Curistian Errorr.—A young 
lady was sent to a boarding-school, and was there 
led to Christ; not only so, but taught that she ought 
to work for Him. By and by she goes home, and 
now she secks, in one way and another, to work 
for Him, but without finding how. She asks fora 
class in her church Sunday-school, but the superin- 
tendent has already more than enough of teachers. 
One day, going along the street, she sees a little 
boy struck by his companion, and crying bitterly. 
She asks him what the trouble is? The boy thinks 
she is mocking him, and replies sullenly. She speaks 
kindly, tries to persuade him to school. He does 
not want to learn. She coaxes him to come and 
hear her and the rest singing there; and so next 
Sunday he comes with her. She gets a corner in 
the school of well-dressed scholars for herself and 
her charge. He sits and listens, full of wonder. On 


186 ADDRESSES 


going home, he tells his mother he has been among 
the angels. At first, at a loss, she becomes angry, 
when a question or two brings out that he has been 
to a Protestant Sunday-school; and the father, on 
coming home, forbids his going back, on pain of 
flogging. Next Sunday, however, he goes, and is 
flogged, and so again, and yet again, till, one Sun- 
day, he begs to be flogged before going, that he 
may not be kept thinking of it all the time. The 
father relents a little and promises him a holiday 
every Saturday afternoon, if he will not go to Sun- 
day-school. The lad agrees, sees his teacher, who 
offers to teach him then. How many wealthy young 
folks would give up their Saturdays to train one poor 
ragged urchin in the way of salvation? Some time 
after, at his work, the lad is on one of the railway 
cars. The train starts suddenly; he slips through, 
and the wheels pass over his legs; he asks the doc- 
tor if he will live to get home; it is impossible. 
“Then,” says he, “tell father and mother that I 
am going to heaven and want to meet them there.” 
Will the work she did seem little, now, to the young 
lady? Or is it nothing that even one thus grateful 
waits her yonder ? 


189. CurrerFutness aN Arrraction or Piety.—A 
London minister, lately pointed out a family of 
seven, all of whom he was just receiving into the 
Church. Their story was this; going to church, he 
had to pass by a window. looking up at which one 


AMong 
angry, 
s been 
1er, On 
vain of 
and is 
e Sun- 
hat he 
e The 
10oliday 
o Sun- 
sr, who 
young 
ne poor 
ne time 
railway 
rough, 
ne doc- 
ossible. 
that I 
there.” 
> young 
rrateful 


ty.—A 
0 ily of 
to the 
rch, he 
ch one 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 187 


day, he saw a baby looking out; he smiled—the 
baby smiled. Next time he passes he looks up 
again, smiles, and the baby smiles back. A third 
time going by, he looks up, and seeing the baby, 
throws it a kiss—which the baby returns to him. 
Time after time he has to pass the window, and now 
cannot refrain from looking up each time: and each 
time there are more faces to receive his smiling 
greeting; till by and by he sces the whole family 
grouped at the window—father, mother, and all. 
The father conjectures the happy, smiling stranger 
must be a minister, and so, next Sunday morning, 
after they have received at the window the usual 
greeting, two of the children, ready dressed, are 
sent out to follow him; they enter his church, hear 
him preach, and carry back to their parents the re- 
port that they never heard such preaching. Soon 
the rest come to the church, too, and are brought 
in—all by a smile. Let us not go about hanging 
our heads like a bulrush; if Christ gives us joy, let 
us live it! 


190. Exsruustasm.— We need more enthusiasm. 
The more we have the better. I have a great ad- 
miration for Garibaldi, though I cannot, of course, 
approve of all his acts. When put in prison he 
said, “It were better that fifty Garibaldis should 
perish, than that Rome should not be free.” This 
was the cause getting above the man: that is what 
we want, We want to forget ourselves. There 


~ > —-- = a —* 
— wee: =~ samemaena aii = -—— . 
1 a tl tt iAP ERAT Pel FATED AA. aie ei 2 = : a : ’ 
a a ~ 


188 ADDRESSES 


are one hundred thousand men waiting now to be 
brought to Christ, to be invited to come to Him, 
and shall we hang back ? 


191. Looxina Unto Jesus.—When I was a boy, 
T used to try to describe a straight path through 
the snow in the fields by looking down at my feet. 
The way to make a straight path would be to look 
at an object beyond; so in this passage we are di- 
rected to have our eyes on the mark at the right 
hand of the Master. 


192. Osepience.—I remember reading in some 
history of the ninth century of a young general 
who with only five hundred men came up against 
a king with twenty thousand. And the king sent 
to him to say that it was the height of folly to re- 
sist with his handful of men. The general called 
in one of his men, and said, “Take that sword and 
drive it to your heart.” And the man took the 
weapon, and drove it to his heart, and fell dead. 
He said to another, “Leap into yonder chasm,” 
and the man instantly obeyed. Then, turning to 
the messenger, he said, “Go back and tell your 
king that we have five hundred such men. We will 
die but we will never surrender.” The messenger 
returned, and his tale struck terror into the hearts 
of the king’s soldiers, so that they fled like chaff 
before the wind. God says, ‘One shall chase a 
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight,” 


r to be 
. Him, 


u boy, 
rough 
y feet. 
0 look 
re di- 
e right 


some 
yeneral 
igainst 
@ sent 
to re- 
called 
d and 
bk the 
dead. 
asm,” 
ng to 
your 
e will 
senger 
hearts 
chaff 


ase a 


’ 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 189 


198. Roorep 1n Curist.—In the country there 
are sometimes seen great trees blown over and 
torn up by the roots, and the occasion of it was 
the shallow soil. So it is with many professors— 
they Icr a while believe, but in time of temptation 
they fall away, because they had not been rooted 
in Christ. This points to the inward and outward 
growth of the Christian. The only way to keep 
from falling is to grow. 


194. PerRsEVERANCE Wii.L SURELY Conquer.—Thero 
was a terribly wicked man who kept a liquor sa- 
loon, whose children I was very anxious to draw 
to my Sabbath-school. So one day I called on this 
man and said, “Mr. Bell, I want you to let your 
children come to the Sabbath-school.” He was 
terribly angry, said he did not believe in the Bible, 
school, or any thing else, and ordered me to leave 
the house. 

Soon after I went down again, and asked him to 
go to church, and again he was very angry. He 
said that he had not been at church for nineteen 
years, and would never go again, and he would 
rather see his boy a drunkard and his daughter a 
harlot than that they should attend the Sabbath- 
school. A second time I was forced to leave the 
house. 

Two or three days after I called again, and he 
said, “ Well, I guess you are a pretty good-natured 
sort of man and different from the rest of Chris 


190 ADDRESSES 


tians, or yeu would not come back.” I asked him 
what he had to say against Christ and if he haa 
read His life; and he asked me what I had to say 
against Payne’s “ Age of Reason,” and if I had read 
it. I said I had not read it; whereupon he said 
he would read the New Testament if I would read 
the Age of Reason. I agreed, though he had the 
best of the bargain. I asked Mr. Bell to come to 
church but he said they were all hypocrites that 
went to church. This he would do, however; I 
might come to his house, i I liked, and preach. 
“Here in this saloon?” “Yes! but look here, you 
are not to do all the talking; he said that he and 
his friends would have their say as well as I. I 
agreed that they might have the first forty-five 
minutes, and I the last fifteen of the hour, which 
he thought fair, and that was settled. The day 
came and I went to keep my appointment, but I 
never met such a crowd as were in that saloon, 
such a collection of infidels, deists, and reprobates 
of all kinds I never saw before. Their oaths and 
language were horrible. Some of them secmed as 
if they had come on leave of absence from the pit. 
I never was so near hell before. They began to 
talk in the most blasphemous way; some thought 
one thing, some another; some believed there was 
a God—others not; some didn’t believe any thing. 
They couldn’t agree, contradicted each other, and 
very nearly caine to fighting with one another before 
their time had expired. 


ked him 
he haa 
| to say 
ad read 
he said 
ild read 
had the 
some to 
tes that 
ever; I 
preach. 
ere, you 
he and 
as I. I 
orty-five 
r, Which 
he day 
, but I 
saloon, 
brobates 
ths and 
med as 
the pit. 
egan to 
thought 
ere was 
r thing. 
her, and 
r before 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 1.1 


I had brought down a little boy, an orphan with 
me, and when I saw and heard such blasphemy I 
thought I had done wrong to bring him there. 
When their time was up, I said that we Christians 
always began service with prayer to God. ‘ Hold,” 
said they; “two must be agreed first.” ‘“ Well, 
here are two of us.” And so I prayed, and then 
the little boy did so, and I never heard a prayer 
like that in all my life. It seemed as if God was 
speaking through that little boy. With tears run- 
ning down his cheeks he besought God, for Christ’s 
sake, to take pity on all these poor men; and that 
went to their very hearts. I heard sobs through- 
out the hall, and one infidel went out at this door 
and another at that; and Mr. Bell came to me and 
said, “you can have my children, Mr. Moody.” And 
the best friend that I have in Chicago to-day is that 
same Joshua Bell, and his son has come out for 
Christ and as a worker for Him. 


195. Satvation 1s Every Tuinc.—The first one 
thing is to know that you are saved yourself. If 
a man lack salvation he lacketh every thing. A 
wife said to me, “My husband is every thing to me 
except one thing: he gets drunk.” It seemed that 
this alone would make a hell on earth. A water: 
pipe might be perfectly laid, the reservoir in good 
condition, and the water in sufficient quantity, but 
if one joint of the pipe were lacking, the whole was 
useless. 


192 ADDRESSES 


196. Hearr-yearnincs ProvipenTIALLy ANSWERED, 
—-During our war, there was a Southern man who 
came over to a Wisconsin regiment, saying he could 
not fight to uphold slavery. Some time after, the 
mail from the north came in, and all the men got 
letters from their relations, aud universal joy pre- 
vailed. This Southern man said he wished he were 
dead ; he was most unhappy, for there were no let- 
ters for him. His mother was dead, and his father 
and brothers would have shot him if they could, for 
going against them. This man’s tent-mate was very 
sorry for his friend, and when he wrote to his moth- 
er in Wisconsin, he just told her all aboutit. His 
mother sat down and wrote to her son’s friend. She 
called him her son, and spoke to him like a mother. 
She told him, when the war was over that he must 
come to her, and that her home would be his. When 
the letter reached the regiment, the chaplain took it 
down to where this man was standing, and told him 
it was for him; but he said it was a mistake, that no- 
body would write to him; he had no friends, it must 
be for some one else. He was persuaded to open it, 
and when he read it, he felt such joy. He went 
down the lines, saying, “J’ve got a mother!” When 
afterwards the regiment was disbanded, and the men 
were returning to their homes, there was none who 
showed so much anxiety as this man to get to his 
mother in Wisconsin. There are hundreds of young 
men who want mothers, and any kindness dene to 
them will not lose its reward. 


WERED, 
mn who 
» could 
er, the 
en got 
xy pre- 
le were 
no let- 
father 
uld, for 
‘as very 
; moth- 
t. His 
d. She 
mother. 
he must 
When 
took it 
ld him 
hat no- 
it must 
open it, 
e went 
When 
he men 
ne who 
t to his 
young 
cne to 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 193 


197. Our Lire rx Curist.—When God converted 
us He gave us a new nature—life in Christ—and 
the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit 
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to 
the other. 


198. THe Wortp not THE Curistian’s Home.—You 
must learn to be like a rock in the stream, past which 
the current flows rapidly, but it is unmoved. You 
are still in the world, but you are not of the world. 
You are citizens of another world, and only strangers 
and pilgrims here. 


199. Crina to tHE Rocxr.—There is a tunnel over 
the Rocky Mountains, and the bore is so contracted 
that there is no room for a man to escape if two 
trains were coming alongside of each other; but they 
have cut niches in the solid rock, into whicu a per- 
son may go and be safe. Two little children were 
caught thus one day—a sister and her little brother; 
and after she got her brother into one of these niches 
she went to the one opposite, and just as the trains 
were about to whisk past them she cried to her lit- 
tle brother, “Cling close to the rock.” The trains 
passed and they were safe in the clefts of the rock. 
This is all you want, dear young Christians, cling 
close to the rock of your salvation. 


200. Wxom Satan Leaves Atont.—There is a story 
told of a gentleman in our country who had a ser- 


194 ADDRESSES 


vant—a negro—we call such Sambo—and he was a 
converted man, and his master used to banter him 
about his religion, and to say, ‘Sambo, you are 
always talking of the conflict; I don’t have any of 
your groaning and the conflict you talk of.” One 
day they were out hunting. His master blazed away 
at some ducks, and did not mind the dead ones, but 
sent Sambo after the wounded ones. ‘ Massa,” said 
he, when he next spoke to him of his warfare, ‘‘as 
you did not care for the dead ducks—you knew you 
had them; so Satan leaves you all quiet. You are 
dead, and he lets you alone; but he is after me, 
because I am wounded, but alive.” 


201. Tue Banner or THE Cross.—The Spanish au- 
thorities in Cuba had arrested a man who, though 
born in England, was a naturalized United States 
citizen. He was charged with conspiracy against 
the government, and ordered to be shot. But the 
consuls of both England and America believed the 
man to be innocent, and used all the persuasion and 
entreaty in their power for his release, but the proud 
Spaniards haughtily disregarded their petition. 

The hour of execution had now arrived, and a 
company of soldiers were drawn up‘in line. The 
condemned English-American marched out before 
them, calmly awaiting his fate. He stood at the 
foot of the grave, already dug, his coat off, and his 
hands pinioned behind him. The officer ordered 
his men to load, and at the word “present,” they 


was & 
ry him 
tL are 
any of 
’ One 
d away 
es, but 
»,” said 
re, “ag 
ew you 
Tou are 
fer me, 


nish au- 
though 
States 
against 
But the 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 195 


brought their rifles to their shoulders, awaiting the 
word of command to fire. 

In the awful suspense, suddenly there sprang 
forward from the bystanders the two consuls; the 
one drawing from his breast the Stars and Stripes, 
wrapped it right round the prisoner, whilst the 
other threw over him the Union Jack. The consuls 
now stood on either side, defying the Spaniards, who 
dared not fire on the flags of two of the mightiest 
nations under heaven, and the man was released, 
and proved his innocence to the satisfaction of the 
authorities. Oh! to be wrapped in the blood- 
stained banner of the Cross. 


202. Prayer Answerep.—I think it would do us 
good to take the word “ prayrr,” and run through 
the Bible tracing it out. Read about nothing else. 
I think you would be perfectly amazed if you took 
up the word “prayer,” and counted the cases in the 
Bible where people are recorded as praying, and 
God answering their prayers. 


203. AckNowLEDGING Gop’s Mercres.—A young pas- 
tor, newly placed over a church, finding his prayer- 
meetings ill-attended and lifeless, surprised his peo- 
ple one Sabbath, by announcing that there would 
be no prayer-meeting that week, but a meeting for 
praise. Curiosity brought out a large gathering of 
his church; he told them that as they were so reluc- 
tant to pray, he wished every one now to look back 


196 ADDRESSES 


on his past life, and see if he did not remember 
something to thank God for, and just to rise up 
and thank God for it. The result was, that one 
after another rose up, thanking God for this and 
that mercy, till the hour was over before they were 
aware, and they went away declaring it to be the 
best meeting they had ever had; and not only so, 
but this proved to be the beginning of a revival 
among them. 


204, Evin Tuovcuts.—Some young converts are 
much distressed about evil thoughts. Now the sin 
lies not in their coming into you~ mind, but in your 
harboring them. As one has saiu, ‘‘ We cannot help 
the birds from flying over our heads, but we can 
prevent their building their nests in our hair.” 


205. Our Burpen-Bearer.—A little boy wished to 
help his father to carry books to the library. The 
little fellow took hold of a big book, and the father 
seeing him on the stairs exhausted, and unable to 
go farther, took the boy and the book in his arms. 
So Christ will carry us and our burdens too. 


206. Aspunpant Grace In Storsé.—Christians are 
all the time praying God to take the thorn out of 
the flesh instead of praying for more grace to bear 
it. God can give you grace enough to bear any 
affliction. God is anxious to give, but we do not 
ask Hin: for all we want. He not only saves us 


ember 
ise up 
it one 
is and 
y were 
be the 
nly so, 
revival 


rts are 
the sin 
in your 
ot help 
we can 


0 
@ 


shed to 

The 
p father 
able to 
8 arms. 


ANS are 
h out of 
o bear 
bar any 
do not 
Aves us 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 197 


but He keeps us. There is always more grace to 
follow. This Mr. Moody illustrated by an anecdote 
told by Rowland Hill, of a rich man giving his pas- 
tur a large sum of money to give to the most de- 
serving poor man in his parish. The pastor thought 
it best to give it in small sums, so he gave him $25 
at a time, and wrote on the envelope: “There is 
more to follow.” Which did the man most good, 
the $25 or the more to follow? That is grace. We 
have a great feast of many things, but there is more 
to follow. It is humiliation now, but by and by we 
will see the King in His beauty. It is peace for the 
past, grace for the present, and glory for the future, 


207. Unton 1n Prayer.—One night in the inquiry 
room there were four persons together, and I found 
that three of them were Christians; they had come 
to seek a blessing upon the fourth, a fine-looking 
business man. After talking a little with him, I 
said, “ Now, my friend, what is the difficulty? what 
is it that keeps you from Christ?” Huis young wife, 
who was one of the party said, “Mr. Moody, I can 
tell you what is the trouble; it is his business; he is 
in the liquor business.” I said, “ Well, can’t you 
give itup?” The man ihought he would not give 
it up just at once; in three or four years he would 
make his way out of the business. But I said, “ You 
can’t afford to wait that time, you may be dead in 
less than three or four years.” And then I turned 
to his wife and said, “Haye you faith to pray that 


198 ADDRESSES 


your husband may give up his business now and 
find the Saviour?” She said she had. I asked his 
two other friends, “Have you faith for him?” They 
said, “ Yes,” and we knelt down around the man— 
surrounded him with prayer. The talk we had had 
with him seemed to have little effect, but when we 
talked to God about it, he broke down; there and 
then he resolved to give up the liquor business, and 
found peace and salvation. 


208. A Prisoner ConverteD.—I made a visit, one 
Sunday, to the Tombs prison in New York, by invi- 
tation of the chaplain. After preaching to the pris- 
oners, I conversed personally with them in their 
cells and listened to their stories. They were all 
“innocent” men, except one who, with streaming 
eyes, said to me, “My sins are more than I can 
bear.” “Thank God for that, for you are invited to 
cast them upon Jesus who has borne them for you.” 
We prayed together, and the following morning I 
visited him, and the prisoner, whose face was lit up 
with a heavenly smile, told how at midnight, while 
he was praying, the Lord Jesus came into his soul 
and made him free. 


209. Conrrssine Curist.—The blessing of heaven 
will fall upon you, and you shall have peace and joy if 
you confess Christ before a scoffing, mocking world. 
I remember the first time I confessed Christ my 
knees smote together. I had a little speech all 


ow and 
ked his 
” They 
man— 
ad had 
hen we 
ere and 
Ss, and 


sit, one 
oy invi- 
1€ pris- 
n their 
rere all 
eaming 

I can 
ited to 
r you.” 
ning I 
3 lit up 
» While 
is soul 


heaven 
1 joy if 
world. 
ist my 


ch all 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 199 


made up, but when I got on my feet it all went 
from me. I just stood up for Christ. Satan after- 
wards said, “ What a fool you made of yourself! ” 
I have been making a “fool” of myself for twenty 
years. 


210. A Cutny’s Farra.—A little girl, who, going 
among strangers, went down on her knees and 
prayed to God thus: “Lord, please make these 
people as kind to me as my father and mother 
were,” and then, with a short pause, the little child 
burst out with this joyous, confident conclusion: 
“Of course, good, dear Lord, of course you'll do it.” 


211. No Bart on Tuearre ror Pavt.—Paul never 
would have been invited to a charity ball, and he 
was so peculiar that he never would have attended 
a theatre except to preach the Gospel. 


212. Frartess Apvocacy.—I have a good deal of 
respect for the old woman who, in the time of war, 
started out with a poker when the enemy was ap- 
proaching. She was asked what she could do with 
that, and replied: “I can show them which side I 
am on.” 


213. Tre anp Zeat.—Look how men search for 
wealth. Men say they cannot come to these meet- 
ings and wait half an hour; they cannot leave their 
families ; but let them think they can accumulate a 


/ 

} 

1 

+ 

4 

i 

‘5 

+ 
+h 

bay) 
ie | 

Le 

ea 
Lae Sy 

Z 

} 

+3 

ay | 
a3 
Dyke By 
vil aT 
ety 


ae 
ee 


200 ADDRESSES 


little wealth and they can leave their families six 
months, and six years if need be. Men sacrifice 
honor and home in pursuit of wealth, and yet men 
never accuse them of being mad. Look how the 
politicians have been in earnest for the past two 
weeks. Men have got hold of me on the street and 
tried to drag me to the polls to vote their ticket 
—democratic and republican both. They did not 
know me, but it made no difference. They were in 
earnest; but let them try to save souls and we are 
fanatics. 


214. Sure Enrrance tro Heaven.—A man told me 
that he had a dream that he was taken by the angels 
to the gates of heaven and they would not let him 
in. He represented himself as having been a Sab- 
bath-school superintendent; they did not know him. 
Another man came and said he had been an elder of 
the church; they did not know him. Another told 
of the good he had done; they did not know him. 
At last one came crying, “Blood, blood, blood,” 
and the gates flew wide open. The man awoke 
and thought if he entered those gates he must be 
washed in the blood. The blood must be a token. 


215. Lost sy Nreauect.—If any one is lost in this 
audience it won’t be on account of Adam’s sin, and 
yet—it will be. If I inherited consumption from 
my parents I would not be tv blame for it; but if I 
should have overwhelming proof that a sure remedy 


§ six 
rifice 
men 
y the 
twu 
; and 
icket 
l not 
re in 
e are 


d me 
ngels 

him 
Sab- 
him. 
ler of 
told 
him. 
bod,” 
woke 
st be 
ken. 


this 
and 
rom 
if I 
hedy 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 201 


had been found for the disease, and I refuse to avail 
myself of it, then I must expect the consequences of 
my neglect. We are all sinners, but, thanks be to 
God, he has provided a sure cure, and it is offered 
to the whole world for nothing. 


216. Prrsrvertnc Prayrr.—A lady in England 
whose husband was an infidel determined to pray 
for him every day for a year. She did so, but there 
was no change. Then she made up her mind to pray 
for six months longer for his conversion ; still no 
change. At the end of that time she said, “T’'ll pray 
for him to the end of my life; [ll never give him 
up.” That was just the condition of mind which 
God wanted to bring her to. That very day her 
husband came home, went to his chamber, fell on 
his knees and cried, ‘‘O Lord, save me!” 


217. Prayer Dunne tHe Crvtz War.—During the 
American war, when husbands, fathers, and broth- 
ers were away on the battle-fields, their wives, daugh- 
ters, and mothers learnt to pray, and many an hour 
was spent by them in their closets alone with God. 
The results were marvellous, and that, too, in the case 
of the wickedest and most depraved men in the army. 

One day at Nashville a great, strong, wicked-look- 
ing soldier came to me trembling. He said he had 
got this letter from his sister, six hundred miles 
away, and she said that she prayed to God, night 
after night, that he should be saved, and he said he 


202 ADDRESSES 


could not stand to hear that, and he had come to 
give himself to Christ; and there and then we knelt 
down together in prayer to God, he crushed and 
broken in heart. 


218. Hert or THE Grave.—What is the use of 
keeping poor people’s bodies a little longer out of 
the grave, and not trying to keep their souls out of 
hell? 


219. A Lovz-reast Story.—One Thanksgiving in 
our mission-school I had appointed a kind of love- 
feast, at which every one was to tell what he was 
most thankful for. 

One little fellow, who had no other relative in the 
world but a decrepit old grandfather, with whom he 


lived in the greatest poverty, had become a Chris- 
tian some time before, and, like others of the chil- 
dren, was trying to do a tittle home-missionary work 
on his own account. When his turn came to tell 
what he was most thankful for, he said— 

“There was that big fellow, ‘Butcher Kilroy,’ who 
acted so bad that nobody would have him, and he 
had to be turned out of one class after another, till 
T was afraid he would be turned out of the school. 
It took me a long time to get him to come, and I 
begged for him to stay. I used to pray to Jesus 
every day to give him a new heart, and I felt pretty 
sure He would if we didn’t turn him out. By and 
by Butcher Kilroy began to want to be a Christian, 


e to 
nelt 
and 


e of 
it of 
ut of 


17 in 
love- 
was 


n the 
m he 
hris- 
chil- 
work 
’ tell 


r who 
d he 
r, till 
hool. 
And I 
J esus 
retty 

and 
ptian, 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 203 


and now he is converted; and that is what makes 
this Thanksgiving the happiest one in all my life.” 


220. Perer.—Peter is found in bad company. I 
never saw a backslider but commenced in that way. 
First the devil gets him asleep, and then he can go 
to the theatre and it does not trouble him. He 
will not go to a church where the minister is too 
strict; he will go to a church where the minister 
goes to the theatre himself once in a while. Peter 
is in bad company, and one young woman says to 
him: “You are His disciple.” Peter said: “I am 
not,” changing his speech so that he would not talk 
like a man who had been with Christ. Another 
said: “Thou art one of His disciples.” “I am 
not,” said Peter, and the cock crew, but his con- 
science was not aroused. If there was any time 
that Christ needed Peter it was in that hour when 
Peter was sitting in the seat of the scornful. An- 
other one says: “You are His disciple, for your 
speech betrayeth you.” No one can be with Christ 
but his speech shows it. Now Peter gets angry, 
and begins to curse and swear: “I never knew 
Him.” Oh, how Christ won him back! Christ 
might have said: “Have you forgotten that you 
said a few hours ago that you would go to death 
forme?” But He just turned and gave Peter one 
look, a look of compassion and pity. Peter canght 
that eye, it was enough. He awoke from that sleep 
and began to realize what he had done. He went 


204 ADDRESSES 


out and wept bitterly. No one on this earth knows 
what Peter suffered that night. How his heart 
must have sunk uext day when he heard Christ 
had expired. I can imagine all those long hours 
Christ was in the grave, Peter neither slept nor ate. 
How tenderly the Saviour dealt with him. The 
first thing after He had risen He sent a message 
to Peter. He had an interview with Peter and I 
can imagine Peter cried to Him to forgive him. 
How Christ forgave him and made him the cham- 
pion of the cross; made him the great Apostie to 
preach on the day of Pentecost. His self-confi- 
dence is now all gone. Oh, may God take from 
us this self-confidence, that we may not be lifted 
up, but be humble and walk humbly with God. If 
there is a poor backslider here who will come back 
to Jesus, God will make him more useful in the 
future. If there is a poor wanderer here Jesus 
wants you. He will forgive you and restore His 
love in your heart. 


221. Gov’s Mercy Frez.—Do you think that God 
offers the cup of salvation to all men, and then, just 
as you are going to drink, He snatches it.away, and 
says, “Oh, but you are not one of the elect.” God 
doesn’t do any thing of the kind. 


222. Tue Crry or Rervar.—The law was, if a 
man killed another accidentally, the next relative 
should revenge his kinsman, and the only hope for 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 205 


the man was to get into that city. They were on 
each side of Jordan, so there could be no obstacles 
in the way. Suppose I am chopping in the woods, 
and the axe slipped out of my hands and killed the 
man I am working with. I know his brother will 
be on my track, and I run as fast as 7 can for the 
city of refuge. I soon hear his footsteps after me. 
I leap over bridges. I don’t stop to loiter by the 
way. No time for discussing which is the best 
denomination. I want to save my life. The aven- 
ger is on me. He has a double-edged sword bear- 
ing down upon me. I say, “If I can only get 
through that gate, I will save my life.” Away I go. 
A watchman standing on the walls of the city sees 
me coming, and the news spreads through the city 
that there is a poor fugitive coming. The inhabi- 
tants stand on the walls, and they see the avenger 
bearing down upon me. They cry: “Run! flee for 
thy life! run!” At last I go leaping through the 
gates of the city. One moment outside; the next 
in. The avenger cannot touch me. Did you ever 
stop to think that death is on your track? Did 
you ever stop to think how near he may be to you? 
A young man from one of the hotels heard my lec- 
ture on the Prophet Daniel. On the next Wednes- 
day night he was talking about the lecture. On 
Thursday night he wes found dead in his bed. I 
hope he was in the city of refuge. If he was, he is 
safe for time and eternity. Death is on our track; 
if we are in the city of refuge we are safe. God 


206 ADDRESSES 


has provided a city of refuge for every one, that is, 
Christ. 


223. Satan AsteEp.—The devil can do most any 
thing with a man when he gets asleep. A man 
dreamt he was travelling, and came to a little 
church, and on the cupola of that church there was 
a devil fast asleep. He went along further, and 
came to a log cabin, and it was surrounded by 
devils all wide awake. He asked one of them what 
it meant; said the devil: “I will tell you. The fact 
is, that whole church is asleep and one devil can 
take care of all the people, but here are a man and 
woman who pray, and they have more power than 
the whole church.” When God tells us to watch 
we must watch. 


224. Moopy anp tHE InFipet.—One day I was 
holding a meeting in the north of England, when 
one of the managers of the affair came to me com- 
plaining of a man down in the lower part of the hall. 
“That man,” said he, “ought to be put right out of 
here. He’s a rank infidel. He is president of the 
infidel club in this town.” 

I said, “No! we will not put the man out. I will 
go down and speak to him,” and forthwith went to 
the infidel and sat down alongside of him. “My 
friend,” I said, “can I do any thing to interest you 
in your soul’s welfare?” 

“Well, I don’t know as you can,” replied the in- 


vhat 
fact 
can 
and 
than 
atch 


was 
yhen 
om- 
hall. 
t of 
the 


will 
ht to 
My 
you 


AND BEST THOSGHTS. 207 


fidel, in sarcastic tones. “I don’t know as I have 
got a soul in the first place, and I am not going to 
be interested until Ido. Now, if you can prove to 
me that I have got a soul then it will be time 
enough to talk about being interested, and not 
before.” 

I said, “ Well, my friend, we won’t spend any 
time now arguing that question, but will you do 
this for me? Will you kneel down alongside of me 
and pray?” “No!” said the man bluntly, “Tl do 
nothing of the sort. I don’t see the use of it. I 
don’t know who I am going to pray to. If you tell 
me that you are going to pray to God, I tell you 
that I don’t believe there is a God, and, therefore, I 
don’t see any sort of use in praying to something 
that don’t exist. But,” added the infidel, “if you 
think there is any use in it, go ahead and pray. I 
don’t care, go ahead and try it on me. It won’t do 
any harm, anyhow.” 

I knelt down beside the infidel and prayed, while 
he, with sneers depicted in his face, held his head up 
high to show that such a proceeding could have nu 
effect on him. JI heard no more from the man until 
some weeks later, when, while preaching at Wick, 
in Scotland, the infidel met me at the close of the 
service, and said, “ Well, now, Mr. Moody, do you 
see how that prayer of yours worked? It didn’t do 
a bit of good. I am just the same man as I was be- 
fore, and maybe a little worse. It has had no effect 
whatever.” Some months after I returned to Liv- 


208 ADDRESSES 


erpool one morning I received a letter from a law- 
yer living in the same town as the infidel, which 
stated that the infidel had actually been converted, 
and the last accounts I had from that quarter show 
that our friend has not only held fast to the new 
faith, but he has now over seventeen other infidels 
who were members of the same atheistical club. 


225. A. Western Jupce.—When I was quite a 
young man a lady came to me and requested me to 
talk to her husband. I felt it was no use, for he was 
a prominent western judge of sceptical sentiments, 
and more than a match for me in argument. But 
yielding to her persistent entreaties I proceeded to 
the judge’s office. The old man laughed at me. I 
succeeded in obtaining from him a promise that 
when he was converted he would write and let me 
know. Special prayer was offered for him at the Ful- 
ton street prayer-meeting and other places. Some 
time afterward, when I returned to town, * met the 
judge, who told me of his conversion. One night 
his wife went to prayer-meeting and during her 
absence he began to think, “Suppose my wife is 
right; that there is a hell and a heaven, and that 
my children are going to heaven and I am not.” 
Conviction seized him and he commenced to pray. 
He retired before his wife returned and pretended 
to be asleep while she prayed for him. Rising early 
in the morning he told her he did not feel very well, 
and without waiting for breakfast, proceeded to his 


AND BEST THOUGHTS. 209 


office. He told his clerks they might have a holiday, 
and shutting himself up in the office prayed that 
God for Christ’s sake would take away the great 
load of guilt, and soon the burden rolled off. He 
told his wife that he was a new man, and they both 
kneeled in prayer, thanking God for his great good- 
ness. Upon returning to America I inquired if the 
judge stood firm. I was informed that he had passed 
gloriously from earth and was now standing at the 
right hand of God. 


226. Prayer a SusstiruTs For Favrit-rmpine.—“ If 
things do not always please you, don’t complain— 
just pray!” 


227. Evertastina Remorse THE SINNER’s Portion.— 
Do you think that Judas, after nearly 1,900 years, 
has forgotten that he betrayed his Saviour for thirty 
pieces ci silver? Do you think that Cain, after 
5,000 years, has forgotten the pleading look of his 
brother Abel when he slew him ? 


228. Toran Asstinencr.—I would rather have 
my right hand cut off than touch the stuff before 
my children. The friends that have been lost are 
so many as should rouse us to be as one man in 
sweeping the drink from our tables. If you want 
me to sign the pledge, I will take any pledge you 
may bring; I never touch drink, and never intend 
to do so. Now for the other side! Some temper: 


13 


pr Ro mae a 


at eee eT tise) 


210 ADDRESSES AND BEST THOUGHTS. 


ance men make a grand mistake, and that is—they 
lug in the question every time they get the chance. 
Every thing in its own place! If I go to a prayer- 
meeting I do not want to hear temperance or the 
higher Christian life. There is a man who comes 
to our noon-day meetings; no matter what the sub- 
ject is, he gets up and talks every day on the higher 
life. A friend, in going out of the meeting one day, 
said to me, “I like a fiddle with a thousand strings, 
not with this one of higher life played on every day.” 
And so it is with temperance. 


, Is—they 
e chance. 
a prayer- 
e or the 
10 comes 
the sub- 
1e higher 
one day, 
| strings, 
ery day.” 


TOPICAL INDEX, 


Abstinence, Total, 228. 

Adversity, 140, 

Advice, 29. 

Advocacy, 212, 

Affliction, 22. 

Backsliding, 109, 113, 115. 

Ball, 211. 

Banner, 201. 

Barabbas, The ‘Story of, 179, 

Betrayal, The, 167. 

Bible, 1, 3, 67. 

Biography, 116. 

Blindness, 7. 

Blood, 54, 55, 68, 72, 105, 147. 
187. 


Burden-bearer, 205. 

Calvary, 93, 108, 144, 151, 164, 

Character, 43. 

Cheerfulness, 189. 

Christ, 5, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 79. 
101, 127, 142, 146, 172, 158, 
191, 197, 209. 

Christian, 88, 110, 185, 112, 
119, 107, 136, 208. 

Complaining, 11, 

Confession, 174, 198. 

Conversion, 9, 10, 12, 13, 48, 
98, 102, 170, 209, 

Cross, 70, 201. 

Death, 37, 49, 56, 76, 111, 169, 

Devils, 124, 

Discouragement, 89, 

Doubt, 166, 


Earnestness, 35, 36, 42, 44, 45, 
34. 


Effort, 87. 

Election, 135, 

Eleventh Hour, 178. 

Elijah, and the Priests of Baal, 
180. 


| Enemies, 123, 157. 
Enthusiasm, 190, 
Eternity, 143, 

Excuses, 125, 126, 131. 
Faith, 50, 71, 176, 210. 
Fall, The, 106. 
Fault-finding, 226. 
Feeling, 58, 14, 

Formalism, 80. 

Good News, 12, 132, 183, 

Gospel, 60, 122, 129, 
Grace, 165, 206. 

Grave, 218, 
Half-heartedness, 27. 
Heart-yearnings, 196. 
Heaven, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65, 78, 

100, 139, 145, 214. 

Hell, 14, 83, 84, 218, 
Home, 198, 
Home-sickness, 161. 

Humility, 188. 

Hypocrites, 57. 

Indifference, 32, 77. 

Infidelity, 224. 

Invitation, 153. 

Judgment, 121, 


212 TOPICAL INDEX. 


Last Call, 46, 104. 
Laziness, 97. 

Law, 117, 118, 120, 133. 
Lies, 95, 130. 

Life, 31, 197. 

Looking unto Jesus, 191. 
Lost, 15, 16, 114. 

Love, 22, 51, 158, 173. 
Love-feast, 219. 

Loyalty, 90. 


Mephibosheth, The Story of, 


175. 
Mercies, God’s, 203, 221. 
Morality, 74. 
Naaman, The Story of, 182. 
Nearness to Christ, 91. 
Neglect, 215. 
Obedience, 192. 
Omnipotence, 6. 
Omnipresence, 61. 
Omniscience, 8. 
Parental Instruction, 160. 
Pardon, 152. 
Paul, 211. 
Perseverance, 194. 
Portion, 227. 


Prayer, 85, 202, 207, 217, 225, 


226. 
Prejudice, 134. 
Procrastination, 92. 157. 
Reason, 150. 
Reconciliation, 66. 
Redemption, 163. 177. 
Refuge, City of, 222. 
Remorse, 227, 
Repentance, 94. 


Revivals, 38, 39, 40, 41, 

Reward, 184. 

Rock, 198. 

Salvation, 159, 195. 

Satan, 75, 148, 168, 153, 200, 
223. 

Sceptics, 67. 

Seeking Christ, 34, 69, 21. 

Self-contidence, 86. 

Self-knowledge, 28. 

Self-righteousness, 47. 

Shepherd, 20. 

Sin, 155. 

Sinners, 26, 52, 73, 108, 141 
156, 173, 227. 

Sleep, 77. 

Soul, 17, 18. 

Spirit, 2. 

Temperance, 99, 149. 

Thanksgiving, 82. 

Theatre, 211. 

Thief. The, 171. 

Thoughts, Evil, 204. 

Time, 213. 

Unbelief, 81. 

Unconcern, 186. 

Union, 53, 207. 

Unitarianism, 128. 

Universalism, 154, 

Watch-night, 4. 

Widow’s Son, The, 181. 

Wisdom, 30. 

Work, 33, 138. 

World, 9, 16% 

Zeal, 2.3, 


3, 200, 


21, 


8, 141 


ZELL'S POPULAR ENCYCLOPEDIA 


AND 


UNIVERSAL DICTIONARY 


New and Revised Edition, with 18 Coloured Maps. 


HIS work furnishes a complete description of every subject connected 
- with History, Biography, Geography, Science, Art, Language, Natural 
History, Botany, nro hens Medicine, Law, Mechanics, Architecture, 
Manufacturing, Agriculture, Bible History, Church History, Religions, &c. 


It is, in fact, equal to a complete library of works on all subjects. 


Printed in ordinary type and page, it would make Twenty Volumes, 
worth not less than $5 cach, or $100 for the entire work. 


It contains nearly 150,000 articles, all prepared with great care, by the 
most able authors, each specially qualified for his particular part. 


An article in the National Quarterly, edited by Ed. I. Sears, LL.D., gives 
the views of that able and scholarly reviewer and critic upon this work. 


He begins with remarking that he had received not less than fifty letters 
within the year, asking his opinion of Zell’s Popular Encyclopedia, 


From a prejudice against the word ‘‘ popular,” as too often used in this 
country, the Doctor confesses that, before examining it, his faith in 
the new Encylopedia was very slight. After a careful examination, he 
speaks of it, with unqualified commendation, as follows : 


*** Blessed,’ he says, quoting Swift, ‘are they that expect nothing, for 
they shall not be disappointed.’ If we are not blessed, we are at least agree- 
ably surprised. The prefix popular, as generally used in this country, is 
not appropriate in this present instance, but in the sense of instructive 
and useful to all classes of the people who have any taste for the 
acquisition of knowlgdge, or any desire for extending the sphere of their 
intelligence ; and, in this sense, we know no similar work to which it may 
be more justly applied. In other words, the new Encyclopedia is not the 
crude, shallow, slip-shod, self-contradictory sort of performance which so 
many of our authors and compilers seem to regard as only suitable for the 
people, and the only kind that ought to be called popular. It is a work 
which, while it must prove attractive, as well as useful, to those who have 
received only the most elementary education, cannot fail to recommend 


et a sachs " . 
ee ne 


Raila lit elaine ilar aciatileliin 
sean eet 


ZELL’S POPULAR ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


itself, also, to the most highly educated, even to possessors of good 
libraries, for the large amount of information, in general, well digested 
and accurate, which it embraces on multiform subjects, including the 
whole circle of the Arts and Sciences. Many articles are quite long and 
elaborate. The majority owe their val: 2 to the circumstance that in 
their condensed form they rarely omit any important particular, and 
scarcely ever any vewly-discovered fact. ‘Thus the literary and scientific 
labourer is often enabled to obtain at a glance 'nformation requiring 
extensive research elsewhere, and which 1s not to be found at all in 
other Encyclopedias, It affords us pleasure to bear testimony to the 
peculiar merits of this work. The departments which please us most 
are the Historical, Geographical, Archwlogical, and Scientific. In the 
department of Scierce, we have sufficient of what is not found in any 
similar work, being the result of recent research and discoveries, to 
recommend the work. The Lexicographical department alone is of 
great value ; itis indeed such that none having it will have any need 
to pay the high price demanded at the present day foc a copy of Web- 
ster’s Dictionary. The numerous and generally accurate illustrations of 
Zell’s Popular Encyclopedia considerably enchance the interest and 
attractiveness.”  , = 


The following notices are from the Globe and Muil: 


‘*This work, which will be exceedingly useful as a book of reference, 
is published in numbers, sixty four of which are to complete the whole. 
It is edited by L. Colange, L.L.D., is handsomely printed, and contains 
18 beautiful maps, besides numerous illustrative Engravings. Whilst 
aiming at scientific accuracy, it is at the same time intended to be 
popular, the articles being written in plain language. * * * * In 
order to show the value of the work to every one, we will mention that 
it is a complete dictionary of language; it contains every word, with 
its etymology and definition, that is to be found in other large dic- 
tiouaries. It is also a complete gazeteer.” 

**The plan of this work is wonderfully comprehensive, embracing as 
it does a dictionary of language, a biographical and a medical dictionary, 
a history of the world, a complete natural history, a complete work on 
botany, also on Mechanics, and a Church history. In short, there is 
no subject to which reference is not made, All who want a book to 
which they can turn in @ moment for anything in the world they waut 
to know about, will find ZeLi’s ENcycLopeptia just what they require.” 

This work is published in 2, 3, 4 and 5 volume editions, varying in 
price from $37 50 to $75 per set ; and in G4 parts at fifty cents each. 

Full particulars, (specimen part with a map, post-paid for twenty -five 
cents) will be sent on application. Sold only by subscription, 


J. B. MAGURN, 


PUBLISHERS’ GENERAL AGENT, 


83 King Street East, Toronto. 
a. O. Box 743. 


. 


one nen eee gainer 


good 
rested 
ng the 
iy and 
bat in 
r, and 
entific 
uiring 
all in 
to the 
; most 
In the 
1 any 
les, to 
> is of 

need 
Web- 
ions of 
st and 


erence, 
whole. 
mtains 
V hilst 
to be 
* In 
m that 
, with 
ye dic- 


ing as 
onary, 
ork on 


T, 
onto. 


| 
| 
| 


sa tl eS 


SABIE Sat 


PRAYER 


REMARKABLE ANSWERS. 


A Statement of Facts in the Light of Reason and Revelation. 


BY REY: WM. W, PATTON, D.D. 


This work covers ground occupied by no other book. Its theme is one of 
absorbing interest to the Christian, and it is believed that a perusal 
of its pages will not fail to deeply interest all classes of people. It 
will confound, if not convince, the sveptic, strengthen the faith of Believers, 
and awaken to earnest thought the Impenitent. 

The author has given, in popular form, both the facts and the philo- 
sophy of the subject. It is written for the people, yet it assumes that 
they are neither children nor fools, but desire an intelligent discussion of a 
fundamental question. The heads of the chapters, herewith, will serve to 
show how thoroughly the subject has been handled by the author. 

It will be observed that about one-third of the book is devoted to 
the nature, characteristics, methods and conditions of 
Prayer, and the remaining two-thirds to Striking Cases of 
Answers to Frayer, for all variety of objects. The cases quoted are 
largely original, and have been furnished the author from trustworthy 
sources, and in most instances the sources are given. These have been 
culled from a much larger number that were supplied to the author ex- 
pressly for this work, but which had to be omitted for want of space. They 
are arranged carefully in distinct Chapters, to illustrate the snccese of 
orayer for different oljects, and are accompanied by explanatory and critical 
remarks. It isa book which every Pastor will welcome, as helpfl to the 
progress of piety in his church, and which will encourage the Uhristian to 
ask and expect greater blessings for himse!f and for others, 


—— i OO i tO OO le le lt oe ltt te 


PRAYER AND ITS REMARKABLE ANSWERS. 


CONTENTS. 

Chapter I, Prayer characteristic of Piety.—II, What true Prayer is.— 
III, Why Prayer prevails.—IV. ‘The method of the answer.—V. Conditions 
of success in Prayer.---VI, The Prayer of Faith.—VII. Sceptical assaults 
on Prayer.—VIII, Bible-answers to Prayer— Old Testament.—IX. Bible- 
answers to Prayer—New Testament.—X. Prayer for the supply of temporal 
wants (commenced).—X”. Prayer for the supply of temporal wants (con- 
cluded).—XII, Prayer for physical healing (commenced).—XIII. Prayer 
for physical healing (concluded),—XIV. Prayer for sanctifying grace.— 
XV. Prayer to overcome physical habit.--XNVI. Prayer for individual 
conversions.—X VII, Parental "Prayers.—X VIII. Prayer for ministers, 
churches and revivals,--XIX. Prayer for charitable institutions,—XX. 
Review of facts in conclusion, 403 pages, 


The Rev. JOHN POTTS gives the following opinion of 
this book. 


**T have somewhat carefully examined Dr. Patton’s book entitled ‘ Prayer 
and its Remarkable Answers.’ The subject is one of undying interest to 
finite beings, and its treatment by the author is intelligent, interesting and 
practical. The perusal of these pages must give greatly enlarged views of 
the nature, obligatio. and privilege of Prayer. 

‘‘ Those whe habitua..ly ‘bow before the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ’ will fee! «specially encouraged to expect large blessings, as they 
learn of the remarkable answers recorded on the pages of this book. 


“JOHN POTTS. 
‘*“METROPOLITAN CHURCH PaRsonacr, 


“Toronto, Dcbruary, 1870." 


English cloth, black and gold, $1.50; gilt edges, $2.00. 


‘J. B. MAGURN, 


PUBLISHER, 
36 King Street East, Toronto, 


ERS. 


true Prayer is,— 
.—V. Conditions 
sceptical assaults 
ent.—IX. Bible- 
pply of temporal 
oral wants (con- 
.—XIIL. Prayer 
ctifying grace.— 
x for individual 
er for ministers, 
stitutions, —XX, 


opinion of 


entitled ‘ Prayer 
dying interest to 
', interesting and 
nlarged views of 


of our Lord Jesus 
lessings, as they 
is book, 


[IN POTTS. 


dges, $2.00. 8 


>] 
HER, 
it, Toronto, 


Be. — 


