im 


•ru 
iir 

:O 


m 


V. 


CMMANUB. 


T.  and  T.  ClarJt  s  Publications. 


LANGE'S    COMMENTARY. 

In  2-i  Volumes  Imperial  8vo  (Subscription  price,  nett~),  15s.  each. 

THEOLOGICAL  AND  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 

ON   THE   OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

Specially  designed  and  adapted  for  the  use  of  Ministers  and  Students.  By 
Prof.  JOHN  PETER  LANGE,  D.D.,  in  connection  with  a  number  of  Eminent 
European  Divines.  Translated,  enlarged,  and  revised  under  the  general 
editorship  of  Rev.  Dr.  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  assisted  by  leading  Divines  of  the  various 
Evangelical  Denominations. 

OLD    TESTAMENT    VOLUMES. 


I.  GENESIS.    With  a  General  Introduc 

tion  to  the  Old  Testament.  By  Prof.  J.  P. 
LANGB,  D.D.  Translated  from  the  German, 
with  Additions,  by  Prof.  TAYLEB  LEWIS, 
LL.D.,  and  A.  GOSMAN,  D.D. 

II.  EXODUS.      By    J.    P.    LANGE,    D.D. 
LEVITICUS.     By  J.  P.  LANGK.D.D.    With 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  by  Rev.  Dr. 

OSGOOD. 

III.  NUMBERS     AND     DEUTERONOMY. 
NUMBERS.     By  Prof.  J.   P.   LANGK,   D.D. 
DEUTERONOMY.      By    WILBELJI    JULIUS 

SCHROEDER. 

IV.  JOSHUA.  By  Rev.  F.  E.  FAY.   JUDGES 
and  RUTH.     By  Prof.  PAULUS  CASSRLL,  D.D. 

V.  SAMUEL,    I.   and  II.      By   Professor 
ERDMANN,  D.D. 

VI.  KINGS. 
D.D. 

VII.  CHRONICLES,  I.  and  II.     By  OTTO 
ZOCKI.ER.      EZRA.      By   FK.   W.   SCHULTZ. 
NEHEMIAH.     Hy   Rev.   HOWARD   CROSBY, 
DD.,LL.D.    ESTHER.    By  FR.  W.  SCHULTZ. 

VIII.  JOB.    A  Rhythmical  Version,  with 

an  Introduction  and  Annotations  by  Prof. 
TAYLER  LEWIS,  LL.D.  A  Commentary  by 
Dr.  OTTO  ZOCKLER.  together  with  an  Intro 
ductory  Essay  on  Hebrew  Poetry  by  Prof. 
PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D. 


By  KARL  CHR.  W.  F.  BAHR, 


IX.  PROVERBS.    By  Prof.  OTTO  ZOCKLER, 
D.D.    ECCLESIASTES.     By  Prof.  0.  Ziicx- 
LER,   D.D.      With    Additions,   and    a    New 
Metrical  Version,  by  Prof.  TAYLKR  LEWIS, 
D.D.      THE    SONG    OF    SOLOMON.      By 
Prof.  0.  ZOCKLER,  D.D. 

X.  THE  PSALMS.     By  CART.  BERNITARDT 
MOM,,  D.D.     With  a  New  Metrical  Version 
of  the  Psalms,  and  Philological  Notes,  by  T. 

J.  CONANT,  D.U. 

XI.  JEREMIAH.     Bv  C,  W.  E.  NAEGETS- 
BACH,  D.D.    LAMENTATIONS.     By  C.  W. 
E.  NAEGELSBACH,  D.D. 

XII.  ISAIAH.    By  C.  W.  E.  NAEGELSBACII. 

XIII.  EZEKIEL.      By  F.    W.   SCHRODER, 
D  D.      DANIEL.     13y    Professor    ZOCKLEK. 
D.D. 

XIV.  THE  MINOR  PROPHETS.     HOSE  A, 

JOEL,  and  AMOS.  By  OTTO  SCHMOLLHK 
Ph.D.  OBADIAH  and'  MICAH.  By  Rev 
PAUL  KLEINEET.  JONAH,  NAHUM, 
HABAKKUK,  and  ZEPHANIAH.  By  Rev. 
PAUL  KLEINERT.  HAGGAI.  By  Rev.  JAMFS 
E.  M'CuRDY.  ZECHARIAH.  By  T.  W 
CHAMBERS,  D.D.  MALACHI.  By  JOSEPH 
PACKARD,  D.D. 


NEW    TESTAMENT    VOLUMES. 


I.  MATTHEW.     With  a  General  Intro 

duction  to  the  New  Testament.  By  J.  P. 
LANGE,  D.D.  Translated,  with  Additions,  by 
PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D. 

II.  MARK.    By  J.  P.  LAXGE,  D.D.    LUKE. 
By  J.  J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE. 

III.  JOHN.    By  J.  P.  LANGE,  D.D. 

IV.  ACTS.     By  G.  V.  LECIILER,  D.D.,  and 
Rev.  CHARLES  GEROK. 

V.  ROMANS.    By  J.  P.  LAXGE,  D.D.,  and 

Rev.  F.  R.  FAY. 

VI.  CORINTHIANS.      By    CHRISTIAN   F. 
KLING. 


VII.  GALATIANS.     By  OTTO  SCHMOIJ.ER 
Ph.D.     EPHESIANS    and    COLOSSIANS. 
By   KARL  BRACNE.   D.D.     PHILIPPIANS. 
By  KARL  BRACNE,  D.D. 

VIII.  THESSALONIANS.    By  Drs.  AUBER- 
I.IN  and  RIGGENBACH.     TIMOTHY.     Bv  J. 
J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE,  D.D.     TITOS.    By  J.  J. 

•  VAN  OOSTERZEE,  I >.!>.  PHILEMON.  "By  J. 
J.  VAN  OOSTERZBK,  D.D.  HEBREWS.  By 
KARL  B.  NOLL,  D.D. 

IX.  JAMES.     By  J.  P.  LANGE,  D.D..  and 

J.  J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE,  D.D.  PETER  and 
JUDE.  By  P.  F.  C.  FRONMULLER,  Ph.D. 
JOHN.  By  KARL  BRAUNE,  D.D. 

X.  THE    REVELATION    OF     JOHN.      By 

Dr.  J.  P.  LANGE.  Together  with  Double 
Alphabetical  Index  to  all  the  Ten  Volumes 
on  the  New  Testament,  by  JOHN  II.  WOODS. 

Completing  the  New  Testament  portion. 


and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  Four  Volumes,  imperial  Svo,  handsomely  bound,  price  18s.  each, 

A  POPULAR 
COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT, 

WITH    ILLUSTRATIONS   AND    MAPS. 

EDITED   BY  PHILIP   SCHAFF,   D.D.,   LL.D. 

THE   CONTRIBUTORS  ARE— 


JOSEPH  ANGUS,  D.D. 

Principal  DAVID  BROWN,  D.D. 

MARCUS  DODS,  D.D. 

J.  OSWALD  DYKES,  D.D. 

PATON  J.  GLOAG,  D.D. 

The  Very  Rev.  Dean  HOWSON,  D.D. 

J.  RAWSON  LUMBY,  D.D. 


WILLIAM  MILLIGAN,  D.D. 
W.  F.  MOULTON,  D.D. 
EDWARD  H.  PLUMPTRE,  D.D. 
WILLIAM  B.  POPE,  D.D. 
MATTHEW  B.  RIDDLE,  D.D. 
S.  W.  F.  SALMOXD,  D.D. 
Rev.  Canon  SPENCE. 


Maps  and  Plans — Professor  ARNOLD  GUYOT. 
Illustrations -W.  M.  THOMSON,  D.D.,  Author  of  '  The  Land  and  the  Book.' 


Volume  I.— THE  SYNOPTICAL  GOSPELS.    Now  Ready. 

Volume  II.— ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL.      By  W.  MILLIGAN,  D.D.,  \ 
and  W.  F.  MOULTON,  D.D. 

>  shortly. 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.     By  the  \  ery 
Rev.  Dean  HOWSON  and  Rev.  Canon  SPENCE.          / 


From  the  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol. 

'  A  useful,  valuable,  and  instructive  Commentary.  It  contains  a  large  amount  of  in 
formation,  is  judiciously  illustrated,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  is  likely  to  be  of  great  use. 
I  have  not  tested  it  in  difficult  doctrinal  passages,  but  I  see  in  it  nothing  to  lead  me  to 
doubt  that  it  would  stand  the  test.  Its  design  seems  to  be  tLat  of  a  popular  Commentary, 
and  this  design,  it  seems  to  me,  it  has  fully  carried  out.' 

From  the  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Winchester. 

'I  have  looked  into  this  volume,  and  read  several  of  the  notes  on  crucial  passages. 
They  seem  to  me  very  well  done,  with  great  fairness,  and  with  evident  knowledge  of  the 
controversies  concerning  them.  The  illustrations  are  very  good.  I  cannot  doubt  that 
the  book  will  prove  very  valuable.' 

From  the  Very  Rev.  Edward  Bickersteth,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Lichfield  and 

Prolocutor  of  Canterbury. 

'I  have  been  looking  into  this  volume,  and  I  am  much  struck  with  the  fulness  and 
accuracy  of  the   annotations,   wherever  I  Lave   examined  them,  as  well  as  with  the 
general  excellence  of  the  work.' 
From  Rev.  W.  G.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.  (Presbyterian),  Professor  in  Union  Theological 

Seminary,  New  York. 

'Having  examined  the  volume  with  some  care,  it  impresses  me  as  admirably  adapted 
to  the  class  for  whom  it  is  prepared,  and  calculated  to  promote  a  popular  understanding 
of  the  Word  of  God.  It  selects  the  important  words  and  clauses,  and  explains  them 
concisely  yet  thoroughly.  It  grapples  with  the  difficult  questions,  and  answers  them 
generally  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  The  illustrations  are  well  chosen,  and  the  style  in 
which  the  book  is  made  is  very  attractive.' 

From  Rev.  Professor  Lindsay  Alexander,  D.D. 

'I  feel  satisfied  that,  if  the  whole  were  completed  after  the  name  manner,  it  would  be 
the  Commentary  par  excellence  in  the  English  language.  Indeed,  as  a  Commentary  for 
popular  use  1  know  nothing  equal  to  it  in  any  lauguage.' 


CLARK'S 


THEOLOGICAL   LIBRARY 


FOUBTH   SERIES. 
VOL.  XLIII. 


on  tlje  $vo&eii)£  of  Solomon. 

"VOL.    I. 


E  D  I  N  B  U  E  G  II  : 
T.  &  T.  CLARK,  38,  GEORGE  STREET. 

MDCCCLXXX. 


iMUNTED  KY   MORRISON  AND  GUM?, 

FOR 
T.    &    T.    CLARK,     EDINBURGH. 

LONDON, HAMILTON,   ADAMS,   AND  CO. 

DUBLIN,    .       .       •      •      •       ROBERTSON  AND  CO. 
NKW  YORK SCRIBNER  AND  WELFORD. 


BIBLICAL    COMMENTARY 


ON  TUB 


PROVERBS   OF   SOLOMON 


BY 
FRANZ    DELITZSCH,    D.D., 

PEOFESSOB.   OF   THEOLOGY. 


TRANSLATED  FEOM  THE  GERMAN  BY 

M.   G.   EASTON,   D.D. 


VOL.    I. 


EDINBURGH: 
T.    &  T.   CLARK,   38,  GEORGE   STREET. 

1880. 


bS 
1H5 


\flfco 
v.i 

EMMANUEL 


", 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 


HE  volume  which  is  here  presented  to  English  readers 
is  the  first  of  three  which  will  contain  the  Solomonic 
writings.  They  form  the  last  section  of  the  "  Keil  and 
Delitzsch"  series  of  Commentaries  on  the  Books  of  the 
Old  Testament  Scriptures.  The  remaining  volume  on  the  Pro 
verbs,  as  well  as  that  on  Ecclesiastes  and  the  Canticles,  which 
has  also  been  prepared  by  Delitzsch,  and  is  now  in  course  of 
publication  in  Germany,  will  be  issued  with  as  little  delay  as 
possible. 

In  this  translation  I  have  endeavoured  accurately  to  reproduce 
the  original,  so  as  to  bring  the  student  as  much  as  possible  into 
direct  contact  with  the  learned  commentator  himself.  Any  ex 
planatory  notes  or  words  I  have  thought  it  right  to  add  are  enclosed 
in  square  brackets  [  ],  so  as  to  be  easily  distinguishable.  The 
Arabic  and  Syriac  words  occurring  in  the  original  have  been,  with 
very  few  exceptions,  printed  in  English  characters.  In  their 
vocalization  I  have  followed  the  system  of  Forbes  in  his  Arabic 
Grammar,  so  that  the  student  will  be  readily  able  to  restore  the 
original.  When  nothing  depends  on  the  inflection  of  these  words, 
the  consonants  only  are  printed. 

It  might  appear  superfluous  in  me  to  speak  in  commendation  of 
the  great  work  which  is  now  drawing  to  a  close ;  but  a  translator, 
since  he  has  necessarily  been  in  close  fellowship  with  the  author, 
may  be  expected  to  be  in  a  position  to  offer  an  opinion  on  the 
character  of  the  work  on  which  he  has  been  eno-ao-ed:  and  I  am 

O     O  ' 

sure  that  all  my  collalorateurs  will  concur  with  me  in  speaking  of 
the  volumes  which  form  this  commentary  as  monuments  of  deep 


viii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

and  careful  research  into  the  meaning  of  the  sacred  Scriptures. 
Whether  or  not  we  can  in  all  cases  accept  the  conclusions  reached 
by  the  respected  authors,  no  one  can  fail  to  see  how  elaborate  and 
minute  the  investigation  has  been.  These  volumes  are  the  ripest 
fruits  of  life-long  study  of  the  Old  Testament.  Their  authors  are 
exegetes  who  have  won  for  themselves  an  honoured  place  in  the 
foremost  rank  for  their  profound  acquaintance  with  the  Hebrew 
and  its  cognate  languages.  With  a  scholarship  of  rare  compass 
and  accuracy,  they  combine  a  reverent  sympathy  with  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  and  a  believing  appreciation  of  its  saving  truths. 

The  satisfaction  I  have  had  in  the  study  of  this  work,  and  in 
spending  so  many  of  my  leisure  hours  in  rendering  it  into  English, 
is  greatly  heightened  by  the  reflection,  that  I  have  been  enabled  in 
this  way  to  contribute  to  the  number  of  exegetical  works  within 
reach  of  the  English  student.  The  exegetical  study  of  God's  word, 
which  appears  to  be  increasingly  drawing  the  attention  of  theo- 
loo-ians,  and  which  has  been  so  greatly  stimulated  by  the  Transla- 

O  /  <_>  * 

tions  issued  by  the  publishers  of  this  work,  cannot  fail  to  have  the 
most  beneficial  results.  The  minister  of  the  gospel  will  find  such 
study  his  best  and  truest  preparation  for  his  weighty  duties  as  an 
expounder  of  Scripture,  if  prosecuted  in  the  spirit  of  a  devout 
recoo-nition  of  the  truth,  that  "  bene  orasse  est  bene  studuisse." 

O  ' 

Thus  is  he  k'd  step  by  step  into  a  thorough  and  full  understanding 
of  the  words  and  varying  forms  of  expression  used  by  those  "  holy 
men  of  old,  who  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost/' 

DARVEL,  October  187  i. 


AUTHOR'S    PEEFACE. 


TIE  preparation  of  this  Commentary  on  the  Mislde, 
which  was  begun  in  18  G9  (not  without  previous  pre 
paration),  and  twice  interrupted  by  providential  events, 
extended  into  the  winter  of  1872.  There  is  now  want 
ing  to  the  completion  of  the  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament, 
undertaken  by  Dr.  Keil  and  myself,  only  the  Commentary  on  the 
Canticles  and  Ecclesiastes,  which  will  form  the  concluding  volume. 
In  the  preparation  of  this  Commentary  on  the  Proverbs,  I  am 
indebted  in  varied  ways  to  my  friends  Fleischer  and  Wetzstein. 
In  the  year  1836,  Fleischer  entered  on  his  duties  as  Professor  at 
Leipzig  by  delivering  a  course  of  lectures  on  the  Book  of  the 
Proverbs  of  Solomon.  I  was  one  of  his  hearers,  and  am  now  so 
fortunate  as  to  be  able  from  his  own  MS.  (begun  13th  May,  com 
pleted  9th  September  1836)  to  introduce  this  beloved  teacher  into 
the  number  of  interpreters  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  The  assist 
ance  contributed  by  Wetzstein  begins  at  chapter  xxx.,  and  consists 
in  remarks  on  Muhlau's  work  on  the  Proverbs  of  A<mr  and  Lemuel 

O 

(1869),  which  my  Dorpat  friend  placed  at  my  disposal. 

The  exegetical  apparatus  has  in  the  course  of  this  work  extended 
far  beyond  the  list  given  at  pp.  50,  51.  I  obtained  the  Commentary 
of  the  Caraite  Ahron  b.  Joseph  (1294),  which  was  printed  at 
Koslow  (Eupatoria)  in  1835,  and  had  lent  to  me  from  the  library 
of  Dr.  Hermann  Lotze  the  Commentary  by  the  Roman  poet 
Immanuel  [born  at  Rome  about  1265],  who  was  intimately  asso 
ciated  with  Dante,  printed  at  Naples  in  1487,  and  equal  in  value 
to  a  MS.  Among  the  interpreters  comprehended  in  the  Biblia 
Rulbinica,  I  made  use  also  of  the  Commentary  of  the  Spanish 


X  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE. 

Menachem  b.  Salomo  Meiri  (1447),  which  first  appeared  in  the 
Amsterdam  Bibelwerk,  and  came  under  my  notice  in  a  more  handy 
edition  (Fiirth,  1844)  from  the  library  of  my  dear  friend  and 
companion  in  study,  Baer.  To  him  I  owe,  among  many  other 
things,  the  comparison  of  several  MSS.,  particularly  of  one  brought 
from  Arabia  by  Jacob  Sappir,  which  has  come  into  his  possession. 

In  making  use  of  the  Grcecus  Venetus,  I  was  not  confined 
to  Villoison's  edition  (1784).  The  only  existing  MS.  (found  in 
Venice)  of  this  translation  one  of  my  young  friends,  von  Gebhardt, 
has  compared  with  the  greatest  care  with  Villoison's  printed  edition, 
in  which  he  has  found  many  false  readings  and  many  omissions. 
We  have  to  expect  from  him  a  critical,  complete  edition  of  this 
singular  translation,  which,  both  as  regards  the  knowledge  its 
author  displays  of  the  Hebrew  language  and  his  skill  in  the  Greek 
language,  remains  as  yet  an  unsolved  mystery. 

The  Index  1  (to  the  words  etymologically  explained  in  this  Com 
mentary)  has  been  prepared  by  Dr.  Hermann  Strack,  who,  by  his 
recently-published  Prolegomena  ad  Vetus  Testamentum  Helraicum, 
has  shown  himself  to  be  a  Hebraist  of  rare  attainments. 

Bacon,  in  his  work  De  Augmentis  Scientiarum  (viii.  2),  rightly 
speaks2  of  Solomon's  proverbs  as  an  unparalleled  collection.  May 
it  be  granted  me,  by  the  help  of  God,  to  promote  in  some  decree 
the  understanding  of  this  incomparable  Book,  as  to  its  history,  its 
language,  and  its  practical  lessons  ! 

LEIPZIG,  30th  October  187i. 

1  Will  be  given  with  vol.  ii. 

2  [In  hoc  genere  autem  nihil  invenitur,  quod  ullo  modo  comparandum  sit 
cum  aphorismis  illis,  quos  edidit  rex  Salomon  ;  de  quo  testatar  Scriptura  cor 
illifuisse  imtar  arenas  maris :  sicut  enim  arenae  maris  universas  orbis  oras  cir- 
cumdant,  ita  et  sapientia  ejus  omnia  humana,  non  minus  quam  divina,  complexa 
est.      In  aphorismis  vero  illis,  praeter  alia  majis  theologica,  reperies  liquido 
haud  pauca  praecepta  et  mouita  civilia  prsestantissima,  ex  profundis  quidem 
sapientise  penetralibus  scaturientia,  atque  in  amplissiiiium  varietatis  campuin 
excurrentia.] 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

PAGE 

1.  PLAN  or  THE  BOOK,  AND  ITS  ORIGIN,  .....  2 

2.  THE  SEVERAL  PARTS  OF  THE  BOOK,  AND  MANIFOLD  FORMS  OF  THE 

PROVERBS,          .......  6 

Distichs,     ........  7 

Tetrastichs,  Hexatichs,  Octosticbs,  ....  10 

Pentastichs,  Hoptastichs,   .  .  .  .  .  .11 

The  Fifteen  Masbal-strains  of  the  First  Part  of  the  Book,  .  12 

The  Midda,  Priamel,          .....  13 

The  Second  Part  of  the  Collection,  .  15 

The  "  Words  of  the  Wise,"  ...  .16 

The  "  Hezekiah-Collection,"          .....  17 

Appendices  to  the  Second  Collection,       .  .  .  .18 

Ewald's  View  regarding  the  Parts  of  the  Book,    ...  20 

3.  THE  REPETITIONS  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS,  .  .  .2-1 

The  Time  at  which  the  First  Collection  was  made,  .  .  27 

4.  THE  MANIFOLDNESS  OF  THE  STYLE  AND  FORM  OF  INSTRUCTION  IN  THE 

BOOK,     ........  si 

Relation  of  the  Introduction  to  the  First  Collection,          .             .  33 

Style  of  the  Supplements,  xxii.  17-xxiv.  22  and  xxiv.  23  ff.,         .  35 

The  Supplements  to  the  Hezekiah-Collection,        ...  36 
Names  given  to  the  whole  Book,  ...                          .36 

Jewish  Literature  in  the  Age  of  Solomon,             .  38 

The  Chokma,          .......  41 

5.  THE  ALEXANDRIAN  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  BOOK,          ...  46 

Literature  of  the  Interpretation  of  the  Book,     ....  50 

11 


XU  CONTENTS. 

THE  OLDER  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS,  I.— XXIV. 

'  PAnpi 

The  External  Title  of  the  Book,  i.  1-6,  .....          52 

Motto  of  the  Book,  i.  7,  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  58 

FIRST  INTRODUCTORY  MASIIAL  DISCOURSE,  i.  8-10,          ...         50 
SECOND  ,,  ,,  i.  20;ff.,          .  .          67 

THIRD  ,,  ,,  ii.,  ...          75 

FOURTH  „  ,,  iii.  1-18,        .  .  .          85 

FIFTH  ,,  „  iii.  19-26,      .  .91 

SIXTH  .,  ,,  iii.  27-35,      ...          98 

SEVENTH  ,,  ,,  iv.-v.  6,         ...        105 

EIGHTH  „  ,,  v.  7-23,         .  .  .122 

NINTH  „  ,,  vi.  1-5,          .  .  .        134 

TENTH  ,,  ,,  vi.  6-11,        .  .  .139 

ELEVENTH  ,,  ,,  vi.  12-10,'      .  .  142 

TWELFTH  ,,  „  vi.  20  ff.,        .  .  .149 

THIRTEENTH        ,,  ,,  vii.,  .  .  .        156 

FOURTEENTH       „  ,,  viii.,  .  .  .        172 

FIFTEENTH  ,,  ,,  ix.,  .  .  .        195 

FIRST  COLLECTION  OF  SOLOMONIC  PROVERBS,  x.-xxii.  16,  .  .        207 

CHAPTER  xi.,        .  .  .  .  .  .  .        229 

CHAPTER  xii.,       .......        250 

CHAPTER  xiii.,      .......        270 

CHAPTER  xiv.,      .  .  .  .  .  .  .        288 

CHAPTER  xv.,       .......        315 

CHAPTER  xvi.,       .......        334 

CHAPTER  xvii.,  .  .  .  .  .  .        352 


INTRODUCTION. 

HE  Book  of  Proverbs  bears  the  external  title 

which  it  derives  from  the  words  with  which  it  com 
mences.  It  is  one  of  the  three  books  which  are  dis 
tinguished  from  the  other  twenty-one  by  a  peculiar 
system  of  accentuation,  the  best  exposition  of  which  that  has  yet 
been  given  is  that  by  S.  Baer,1  as  set  forth  in  my  larger  Psalmen- 
commentar?  The  memorial  word  for  these  three  books,  viz.  Job, 

Mishle   (Proverbs),    and  Tehillim  (Psalms),  is  J1DX,  formed  from 
the  first  letter  of  the  first  word  of  each  book,  or,  following  the 

Talmudic  and  Masoretic  arrangement  of  the  books,  BWl. 

Having  in  view  the  superscription  nb^fc?  *i?B>D,  with  which  the 
book  commences,  the  ancients  regarded  it  as  wholly  the  composi 
tion  of  Solomon.  The  circumstance  that  it  contains  only  800 
verses,  while  according  to  1  Kings  v.  12  (iv.  32)  Solomon  spake 
3000  proverbs,  R.  Samuel  bar-Nachmani  explains  by  remarking 
that  each  separate  verse  may  be  divided  into  two  or  three  allegories 
or  apothegms  (e.g.  xxv.  12),  not  to  mention  other  more  arbi 
trary  modes  of  reconciling  the  discrepancy.3  The  opinion  also  of 
K.  .Jonathan,  that  Solomon  first  composed  the  Canticles,  then  the 
Proverbs,  and  last  of  all  Ecclesiastes,  inasmuch  as  the  first  cor 
responds4  with  the  spring-time  of  youth,  the  second  with  the  \vis- 

1  Cf.  Outlines  of  Hebrew  Accentuation,  Prose  and  Poetical,  by  Eev.  A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.I).,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Free  Church  College,  Edinburgh,  18G1, 
based  on  Baer's  Torath  Emcth,  Rodelheim  1872. 

2  Vol.  ii.,  ed.  of  1860,  pp.  477-511. 

3  Pesikla,  ed.  Buber  (18G8),  346,  35a.     Instead  of  800,  the  Masora  reckons 
915  verses  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs. 

4  Schir-ha-Schirim  liabba,  c.  i.  f.  4o. 

VOL.   I.  A 


2  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERDS. 

dom  of  manhood,  and  the  third  with  the  disappointment  of  old 
age,  is  founded  on  the  supposition  of  the  unity  of  the  book  and 
of  its  Solomonic  authorship. 

At  the  present  day  also  there  are  some,  such  as  Stier,  who 
regard  the  Book  of  Proverbs  from  first  to  last  as  the  work  of 

& 

Solomon,  just  as  Klauss  (1832)  and  Randegger  (1841)  have  ven 
tured  to  affirm  that  all  the  Psalms  without  exception  were  com 
posed  by  David.  But  since  historical  criticism  has  been  applied 
to  Biblical  subjects,  that  blind  submission  to  mistaken  tradition 
appears  as  scarcely  worthy  of  being  mentioned.  The  Book  of 
Proverbs  presents  itself  as  composed  of  various  parts,  different 
from  each  other  in  character  and  in  the  period  to  which  they 
belong.  Under  the  hands  of  the  critical  analysis  it  resolves  itself 
into  a  mixed  market  of  the  most  manifold  intellectual  productions 
of  proverbial  poetry,  belonging  to  at  least  three  different  epochs. 

1.  The  external  plan  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  and  its  own  testi 
mony. as  to  its  origin. — The  internal  superscription  of  the  book,  which 
recommends  it,  after  the  manner  of  later  Oriental  books,  on  account 
of  its  importance  and  the  general  utility  of  its  contents,  extends 
from  ver.  1  to  ver.  6.  Among  the  moderns  this  has  been  acknow 
ledged  by  Lb'wenstein  and  Maurer ;  for  ver.  7,  which  Ewald, 
Bertheau,  and  Keil  have  added  to  it,  forms  a  new  commencement 
to  the  beginning  of  the  book  itself.  The  book  is  described  as 

t1*  O 

"  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  and  then  there  is  annexed  the  state 
ment  of  its  object.  That  object,  as  summarily  set  forth  in  ver.  2, 
is  practical,  and  that  in  a  twofold  way  :  partly  moral,  and  partly 
intellectual.  The  former  is  described  in  vers.  3-5.  It  presents 
moral  edification,  moral  sentiments  for  acceptance,  not  merely  to 
help  the  unwise  to  attain  to  wisdom,  but  also  to  assist  the  wise. 
The  latter  object  is  set  forth  in  ver.  6.  It  seeks  by  its  contents 
to  strengthen  and  discipline  the  mind  to  the  understanding  of 
thoughtful  discourses  generally.  In  other  words,  it  seeks  to  gain 
the  moral  ends  which  proverbial  poetry  aims  at,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  make  familiar  with  it,  so  that  the  reader,  in  these 
proverbs  of  Solomon,  or  by  means  of  them  as  of  a  key,  learns  to 
understand  such  like  apothegms  in  general.  Thus  interpreted,  the 
title  of  the  book  does  not  say  that  the  book  contains  proverbs  of 
other  wise  men  besides  those  of  Solomon  ;  if  it  did  so,  it  would 
contradict  itself.  It  is  possible  that  the  book  contains  proverbs 


INTRODUCTION. 


other  than  those  of  Solomon,  possible  that  the  author  of  the  title 
of   the   book  added  such  to  it  himself,    but  the  title  presents  to 
view  only  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon.     If  i.  7  begins  the  book,  then 
after  reading  the  title  we  cannot  think  otherwise  than  that  here 
begin  the  Solomonic  proverbs.     If  we  read  farther,  the  contents 
and  the  form  of  the  discourses  which  follow  do  not  contradict  this 
opinion  ;    for  both  are  worthy  of  Solomon.      So  much  the  more 
astonished    are  we,  therefore,  when  at  x.  1  we  meet  with  a  new 
superscription,  *&>&  ^p,  from  which  point  on  to  xxii.  16  there  is 
a  long  succession  of  proverbs  of  quite  a  different  tone  and  form- 
short  maxims,  Mashals  proper -while  in  the  preceding  section  of 
the  book  we  find  fewer  proverbs  than  monitory  discourses.     What 
now  must  be  our  opinion  when  we   look   back  from  this   second 
superscription  to  the  part  i.  7-ix.,  which  immediately  follows  the 
title  of  the  book?     Are  i.  7-ix,  in  the  sense  of  the  book,  not  the 
Proverbs  of  Solomon "  ?      From   the  title  of  the   book,   which 
declares  them  to  be  so,  we  must  judge  that  they  are.     Or  are  they 
Proverbs  of  Solomon"  ?    In  this  case  the  new  superscription  (x.  1) 
The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  appears  altogether  incomprehensible! 
And  yet  only  one  of  these  two  things  is  possible:  on  the  one  side, 
therefore,  there  must  be  a  false  appearance  of  contradiction,  which 
on  a  closer  investigation  disappears.     But  on  which  side  is  it?     If 
it  is  supposed  that  the  tenor  of  the  title,  i.  1-6,  does  not  accord 
with  that  of  the  section  x.  1-xxii.  6,  but  that  it  accords  well  with 
that  of  i.  7-ix.  (with  the  breadth  of  expression  in  i.  7-ix.,  it  has  also 
several   favourite  words  not  elsewhere  occurring  in  the  Book  of 
Proverbs ;  among  these,  noiy,  subtilty,  and  nsTD,  discretion,  i.  4) 
then  Ewald's  view  is  probable,  that  i.-ix.  is  an  original  whole  written 
at  once,  and  that  the  author  had  no  other  intention  than  to  n-ive  it 
as  an  introduction  to  the  larger  Solomonic  Book  of  Proverbs  be 
ginning  at  x.  1.     But  it  is  also  possible  that  the  author  of  the  title 
has  adopted  the  style  of  the  section  i.  7-ix.     Bertheau,  who  has 
propounded  this  view,  and  at  the  same  time  has  rejected,  in  oppo 
sition  to  Ewald,  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  the  section,  adopts  this 
conclusion,  that  in  i.  8-ix.  there  lies  before  us  a  collection  of  the 
admonitions  of  different  authors  of  proverbial  poetry,  partly  original 
introductions  to  larger  collections  of  proverbs,  which  the  author 
of  the  title  gathers  together  in  order  that  he  may  give  a  compre 
hensive  introduction  to  the  larger  collection  contained  in  x.  1-xxii. 
16.    But  such  an  origin  of  the  section  as  Bertheau  thus  ima-i 


rines 


4  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

is  by  no  means  natural ;  it  is  more  probable  that  the  author,  whose 
object  is,  according  to  the  title  of  the  book,  to  give  the  proverbs  of 
Solomon,  introduces  these  by  a  long  introduction  of  his  own,  than 
that,  instead  of  beginning  with  Solomon's  proverbs,  he  first  pre 
sents  long  extracts  of  a  different  kind  from  collections  of  proverbs. 
If  the  author,  as  Bertheau  thinks,  expresses  indeed,  in  the  words 
of  the  title,  the  intention  of  presenting,  along  with  the  "  Proverbs 
of  Solomon,"  also  the  "  words  of  the  wise,"  then  he  could  not  have 
set  about  his  work  more  incorrectly  and  self- contradictorily  than  if 
he  had  begun  the  whole,  which  bears  the  superscription  "  Proverbs 
of  Solomon"  (which  must  be  regarded  as  presenting  the  proverbs 
of  Solomon  as  a  key  to  the  words  of   the  wise  generally),  with 
the  "  words  of  the  wise."    But  besides  the  opinion  of  Ewald,  which 
in  itself,  apart  from  internal  grounds,  is  more  natural  and  probable 
than  that  of  Bertheau,  there  is  yet  the  possibility  of  another.    Keil, 
following  H.  A.  Hahn,  is  of  opinion,  that  in  the  sense  of  the  author 
of  the  title,  the  section  i.-ix.  is  Solomonic  as  well  as  x.-xxii.,  but  that 
he  has  repeated  the  superscription  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon"  before 
the  latter  section,  because  from  that  point  onward  proverbs  follow 
which  bear  in  a  special   measure   the  characters  of  the  Mashal 
(Havernick's  End.  iii.  428).     The  same  phenomenon  appears  in 
the  book  of  Isaiah,  where,  after  the  general  title,  there  follows  an 
introductory  address,  and  then  in  ii.  1  the  general  title  is  repeated 
in  a  shorter  form.     That  this  analogy,  however,  is  here  inappli 
cable,  the  further  discussion  of  the  subject  will  show. 

The  introductory  section  i.  7-ix.,  and  the  larger  section  x.-xxii. 
16,  which  contains  uniform  brief  Solomonic  apothegms,  are  fol 
lowed  by  a  third  section,  xxii.  17-xxiv.  22.  Hitzig,  indeed,  reckons 
x.-xxiv.  22  as  the  second  section,  but  with  xxii.  17  there  com 
mences  an  altogether  different  style,  and  a  much  freer  manner  in 
the  form  of  the  proverb  ;  and  the  introduction  to  this  new  collec 
tion  of  proverbs,  which  reminds  us  of  the  general  title,  places  it 
beyond  a  doubt  that  the  collector  does  not  at  all  intend  to  set  forth 
these  proverbs  as  Solomonic.  It  may  indeed  be  possible  that,  as 
Keil  (iii.  410)  maintains,  the  collector,  inasmuch  as  he  begins  with 
the  words,  "  Incline  thine  ear  and  hear  words  of  the  wise,"  names 
his  own  proverbs  generally  as  "  words  of  the  wise,"  especially  since 
he  adds,  "  and  apply  thine  heart  to  my  knowledge  ;"  but  this  sup 
position  is  contradicted  by  the  superscription  of  a  fourth  section, 
xxiv.  23  ff.,  which  follows.  This  short  section,  an  appendix  to  the 


INTRODUCTION. 

tliircl,  bears  the  superscription,  "  These  things  also  are 
If  Keil  thinks  here  also  to  set  aside  the  idea  that  the  following 
proverbs,  in  the  sense  of  this  superscription,  have  as  their  authors 
"  the  wise,"  he  does  unnecessary  violence  to  himself.  The  *?  is 
here  that  of  authorship  ;  and  if  the  following  proverbs  are  corn- 
posed  by  the  D^3n,  "  the  wise,"  then  they  are  not  the  production 
of  the  one  D3H,  "  wise  man,"  Solomon,  but  they  are  "  the  words 
of  the  wise"  in  contradistinction  to  "  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon." 

The  Proverbs  of  Solomon  begin  again  at  xxv.  1  ;  and  this 
second  large  section  (corresponding  to  the  first,  x.  1-xxii.  16) 
extends  to  xxix.  This  fifth  portion  of  the  book  has  a  superscrip 
tion,  which,  like  that  of  the  preceding  appendix,  commences 
thus  :  "Also  (D3)  these  are-proverbs  of  Solomon  which  the  men  of 
Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  collected."  The  meaning  of  the  word 
^npn  is  not  doubtful.  It  signifies,  like  the  Arameo-Arabic  HD3, 
to  remove  from  their  place,  and  denotes  that  the  men  of  Hezekiah 
removed  from  the  place  where  they  found  them  the  following 
proverbs,  and  placed  them  together  in  a  separate  collection.  The 
words  have  thus  been  understood  by  the  Greek  translator.  From 
the  supplementary  words  at  dhdicpiToi,  (such  as  exclude  all  Sidtcpicrts) 
it  is  seen  that  the  translator  had  a  feeling  of  the  important  literary 
historical  significance  of  that  superscription,  which  reminds  us  of  the 
labours  of  the  poetical  grammarians  appointed  by  Pisistratus  to  edit 
older  works,  such  as  those  of  Hesiod.  The  Jewish  interpreters,  simplv 
following  the  Talmud,  suppose  that  the  "  also"  (D3)  belongs  to  the 
whole  superscription,  inclusive  of  the  relative  sentence,  and  that  it 
thus  bears  witness  to  the  editing  of  the  foregoing  proverbs  also  by 
Hezekiah  and  his  companions;1  which  is  altogether  improbable,  for 
then,  if  such  were  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "  which  the  men  of 
Hezekiah,"  etc.,  they  ought  to  have  stood  after  i.  1.  The  super 
scription  xxv.  1  thus  much  rather  distinguishes  the  following  collec 
tion  from  that  going  before,  as  having  been  made  under  Hezekiah. 
As  two  appendices  followed  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  x.  1-xxii. 
16,  so  also  two  appendices  the  Hezekiah-gleanings  of  Solomonic 
proverbs.  The  former  two  appendices,  however,  originate  in  gene 
ral  from  the  "  wise,"  the  latter  more  definitely  name  the  authors  : 
the  first,  xxx.,  is  by  "  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh  ;"  the  second,  xxxi. 

1  Vid.  B.  Bathra,  15a.  From  the  fact  that  Isaiah  outlived  Hezekiah  it  is  there 
concluded  that  the  Hezekiah-co/%z«m  also  continued  after  Hezekiah's  death. 
Cf.  Fiirst  on  the  Canon  of  the  0.  T.  18G8,  p.  78  f. 


THE  BOOK   OF  PROVERBS. 

1-9,  by  a  "  King  Lemuel."  In  so  far  the  superscriptions  are  clear. 
The  names  of  the  authors,  elsewhere  unknown,  point  to  a  foreign 
country ;  and  to  this  corresponds  the  peculiar  complexion  of  these 
two  series  of  proverbs.  As  a  third  appendix  to  the  Hezekiah-col- 
lection,  xxxi.  10  ff.  follows,  a  complete  alphabetical  proverbial  poem 
which  describes  the  praiseworthy  qualities  of  a  virtuous  woman. 

We  are  thus  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Book  of  Proverbs 
divides  itself  into  the  following  parts  :— (1)  The  title  of  the  book, 
i.  1-6,  by  which  the  question  is  raised,  how  far  the  book  extends 
to  which  it  originally  belongs ;  (2)  the  hortatory  discourses,  i.  7-ix., 
in  which  it  is  a  question  whether  the  Solomonic  proverbs  must  be 
regarded  as  beginning  with  these,  or  whether  they  are  only  the 
introduction  thereto,  composed  by  a  different  author,  perhaps  the 
author  of  the  title  of  the  book  ;  (3)  the  first  great  collection  of 
Solomonic  proverbs,  x.-xxii.  16;  (4)  the  first  appendix  to  this 
first  collection,  "  The  words  of  the  wise,"  xxii.  17-xxiv.  22  ;  (5) 
the  second  appendix,  supplement  of  the  words  of  some  wise  men, 
xxiv.  23  ff. ;  (6)  the  second  great  collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs, 
which  the  "  men  of  Hezekiah"  collected,  xxv.-xxix. ;  (7)  the  first 
appendix  to  this  second  collection,  the  words  of  Agur  the  son 
of  Jakeh,  xxx. ;  (8)  the  second  appendix,  the  words  of  King 
Lemuel,  xxxi.  1-9  ;  (9)  third  appendix,  the  acrostic  ode,  xxxi. 
10  ff.  These  nine  parts  are  comprehended  under  three  groups: 
the  introductory  hortatory  discourses  with  the  general  title  at  their 
head,  and  the  two  great  collections  of  Solomonic  proverbs  with 
their  two  appendices.  In  prosecuting  our  further  investigations, 
we  shall  consider  the  several  parts  of  the  book  first  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  manifold  forms  of  their  proverbs,  then  of  their 
style,  and  thirdly  of  their  type  of  doctrine.  From  each  of  these 
three  subjects  of  investigation  we  may  expect  elucidations  regarding 
the  origin  of  these  proverbs  and  of  their  collections. 

2.  The  several  parts  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  with  reject  to  the 
manifold  forms  of  the  proverbs. — If  the  Book  of  Proverbs  were  a 
collection  of  popular  sayings,  we  should  find  in  it  a  multitude  of 
proverbs  of  one  line  each,  as  e.g.,  "  Wickedness  proceedeth  from 
the  wicked"  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  13)  ;  but  we  seek  for  such  in  vain.  At 
the  first  glance,  xxiv.  236  appears  to  be  a  proverb  of  one  line ;  but 
the  line  "  To  have  respect  of  persons  in  judgment  is  not  good," 
is  only  the  introductory  line  of  a  proverb  which  consists  of  several 


INTRODUCTION. 


lines,  ver.  24  f.  Ewald  is  right  in  regarding  as  inadmissible  u 
comparison  of  the  collections  of  Arabic  proverbs  by  Abu-Obeida, 
Meidani,  and  others,  who  gathered  together  and  expounded  the 
current  popular  proverbs,  with  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  Ali's  Hun 
dred  Proverbs  are,  however,  more  worthy  of  being  compared  with 
it.  Like  these,  Solomon's  proverbs  are,  as  a  whole,  the  production 
of  his  own  spirit,  and  only  mediately  of  the  popular  spirit.  To 
make  the  largeness  of  the  number  of  these  proverbs  a  matter  of 
doubt  were  inconsiderate.  Eichhorn  maintained  that  even  a  god 
like  genius  scarcely  attains  to  so  great  a  number  of  pointed 
proverbs  and  ingenious  thoughts.  But  if  we  distribute  Solomon's 
proverbs  over  his  forty  years'  reign,  then  we  have  scarcely  twenty 
for  each  year ;  and  one  must  agree  with  the  conclusion,  that  the 
composition  of  so  many  proverbs  even  of  the  highest  ingenuity  is 
no  impossible  problem  for  a  "  godlike  genius."  When,  accordingly, 
it  is  related  that  Solomon  wrote  3000  proverbs,  Ewald,  in  his 
History  of  Israel,  does  not  find  the  number  too  great,  and  Bertheau 
does  not  regard  it  as  impossible  that  the  collection  of  the  u  Proverbs 
of  Solomon"  has  the  one  man  Solomon  as  their  author.  The 
number  of  the  proverbs  thus  cannot  determine  us  to  regard  them 
as  having  for  the  most  part  originated  among  the  'people,  and  the 
form  in  which  they  appear  leads  to  an  opposite  conclusion.  It  is, 
indeed,  probable  that  popular  proverbs  are  partly  wrought  into 
these  proverbs,1  and  many  of  their  forms  of  expression  are  moulded 
after  the  popular  proverbs;  but  as  they  thus  lie  before  us,  they  are, 
as  a  whole,  the  production  of  the  technical  Mashal  poetry. 

The  simplest  form  is,  according  to  the  fundamental  peculiarity 
of  the  Hebrew  verse,  the  distich.     The  relation  of  the  two  lines  to 
each   other  is  very  manifold.      The   second  line  may  repeat  the 
thought  of  the  first,  only  in  a  somewhat  altered  form,  in  order  to 
express  this  thought  as  clearly  and  exhaustively  as  possible.     We 
call  such  proverbs  synonymous  distichs  ;  as  e.g.  xi.  25  : 
A  soul  of  blessing  is  made  fat, 
And  he  that  watereth  others  is  himself  watered. 

Or  the  second  line  contains  the  other  side  of  the  contrast  to  the 
statement  of  the  first ;  the  truth  spoken  in  the  first  is  explained  in 
the  second  by  means  of  the  presentation  of  its  contrary.  We  call 
such  proverbs  antithetic  distichs  ;  as  e.g.  x.  1  : 

1  Isaac  Euchel  (t  1804),  in  his  Commentary  on  tlie  Proverbs,  regards  xiv.  4a 
and  xvii.  196  as  such  popular  proverbs. 


O  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

A  wise  son  inaketh  his  father  glad, 
And  a  foolish  son  is  his  mother's  grief. 

Similar  forms,  x.  16,  xii.  5.  Elsewhere,  as  xviii.  14,  xx.  24,  the 
antithesis  clothes  itself  in  the  form  of  a  question.  Sometimes  it  is 
two  different  truths  that  are  expressed  in  the  two  lines  ;  arid  the 
authorization  of  their  union  lies  only  in  a  certain  relationship,  and 
the  ground  of  this  union  in  the  circumstance  that  two  lines  are  the 
minimum  of  the  technical  proverb — synthetic  distichs ;  e.g.  x.  18  : 

A  cloak  of  hatred  are  lying  lips, 

And  he  that  spreadeth  slander  is  a  fool. 

Not  at  all  infrequently  one  line  does  not  suffice  to  bring  out  the 
thought  intended,  the  begun  expression  of  which  is  only  com 
pleted  in  the  second.  These  we  call  integral  (eiugedankige}  distichs  ; 
as  e.g.  xi.  31  (cf.  1  Pet.  iv.  18)  : 

The  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  on  the  earth — 
How  much  more  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  ! 

To  these   distichs   also  belong  all  those  in  which   the  thought 

"  rt 

stated  in  the  first  receives  in  the  second,  by  a  sentence  presenting  a 
reason,  or  proof,  or  purpose,  or  consequence,  a  definition  completing 
or  perfecting  its  e.g.  xiii.  14,  xvi.  10,  xix.  20,  xxii.  28.1  But  there  is 
also  a  fifth  form,  which  corresponds  most  to  the  original  character 
of  the  Mashal :  the  proverb  explaining  its  ethical  object  by  a  re 
semblance  from  the  region  of  the  natural  and  every-day  life,  the 
TrapaftoKri  proper.  The  form  of  this  parabolic  proverb  is  very 
manifold,  according  as  the  poet  himself  expressly  compares  the 
two  subjects,  or  only  places  them  near  each  other  in  order  that  the 
hearer  or  reader  may  complete  the  comparison.  The  proverb  is 

1  Such  integral  distichs  are  also  xv.  3,  xvi.  7,  10,  xvii.  13,  15,  xviii.  9,  13, 
xix.  26,  27,  xx.  7,  8,  10,  11,  20,  21,  xxi.  4,  13,  16,  21,  23,  24,  30,  xxii.  4,  11, 
xxiv.  8,  26,  xxvi.  16,  xxvii.  14,  xxviii.  8,  9,  17,  24,  xxix.  1,  5,  12,  14.  In  xiv. 
27,  xv.  24,  xvii.  23,  xix.  27,  the  second  line  consists  of  one  sentence  with  ^J  and 
the  infin.  ;  in  xvi.  12,  26,  xxi.  25,  xxii.  9,  xxvii.  1,  xxix.  19,  of  one  sentence 
with  vg;  with  as  ^3,  xviii.  2,  xxiii.  17.  The  two  lines,  as  xi.  31,  xv.  11,  xvii. 
7,  xix.  7a&,  10,  xx.  27,  form  a  conclusion  a  minori  ad  majiis,  or  the  reverse. 
The  former  or  the  latter  clauses  stand  in  grammatical  relation  in  xxiii.  1,  2, 
15  f.,  xxvii.  22,  xxix.  21  (cf.  xxii.  29,  xxiv.  10,  xxvi.  12,  xxix.  20,  with  hypoth. 
perf.,  and  xxvi.  26  with  hypoth.  fut.)  ;  in  the  logical  relation  of  reason  and 
consequence,  xvii.  14,  xx.  2,  4  ;  in  comparative  relation,  xii.  9,  etc.  Thtse 
examples  show  that  the  two  lines,  not  merely  in  the  more  recent,  but  also 
iu  the  old  Solomonic  Mashal,  do  not  always  consist  of  two  parallel  members. 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

least  poetic  when  the  likeness  between  the  two  subjects  Is  expressed 
by  a  verb;  as  xxvii.  15  (to  which,  however,  ver.  16  belongs)  : 
A  continual  dropping  in  a  rainy  day 
And  a  contentious  woman  are  alike. 

The  usual  form  of  expression,  neither  unpoetic  nor  properly  poetic, 
is  the  Introduction  of  the  comparison  by  3  [as],  and  of  the  simili 
tude  in  the  second  clause  by  |3  [so]  ;  as  x.  26  : 

As  vinegar  to  tbe  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to  the  eyes, 
So  is  the  sluggard  to  them  who  give  him  a  commission. 
This  complete  verbal  statement  of   the  relation  of  likeness  may 
also  be  abbreviated  by  the  omission  of  the  J3  ;  as  xxv.  13,  xxvi.  11  : 
As  a  dog  returning  to  his  vomit — 
A  fool  returning  to  his  folly. 

We  call  the  parabolic  proverbs  of  these  three  forms  comparisons. 
The  last,  the  abbreviated  form  of  the  comparative  proverb,  forms 
the  transition  to  another  kind  of  parabolic  proverb,  which  we  will 
call  in  contradistinction  to  the  comparative,  the  emblematic,  in 
which  the  contrast  and  its  emblem  are  loosely  placed  together 
without  any  nearer  expression  of  the  similitude  ;  as  e.g.  xxvi.  20, 
xxvii.  17,  18,  20.  This  takes  place  either  by  means  of  the  copu 
lative  Vav,  ],  as  xxv.  25 — 

Cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul, 

And  good  news  from  a  far  country.1 

Or  without  the  Vav  ;  in  which  case  the  second  line  Is  as  the  sub 
scription  under  the  figure  or  double  figure  painted  in  the  first ;  e.g. 
xxv.  llf.,  xi.  22: 

A  gold  ring  in  a  swine's  snout — 
A  fair  woman  and  without  understanding. 

These  ground-forms  of  two  lines  can,  however,  expand  into  forms 
of  several  lines.  Since  the  distich  is  the  peculiar  and  most  appro 
priate  form  of  the  technical  proverb,  so,  when  two  lines  are  not 
sufficient  for  expressing  the  thought  intended,  the  multiplication  to 

1  This  so-called  Vav  adxquationis,  which  appears  here  for  the  first  time  in  the 
Proverbs  as  the  connection  between  the  figure  and  the  thing  itself  without  a 
verbal  predicate  (cf.,  on  tbe  other  hand,  Job  v.  7,  xii.  11,  xiv.  11  f.),  is,  like  the 
Vav,  1,  of  comparison,  only  a  species  of  that  Vav  of  association  which  is  called 
in  Arab.  Waw  aZq/am'a,  or  Waw  alariayat,  or  Waw  aTasatsahab  (vid.  at  Isa. 
xlii.  5)  ;  and  since  usage  attributes  to  it  the  verbal  power  of  secum  Jiabere,  it  is 
construed  with  the  accus.  Vid.  examples  in  Freytag's  Arabum  Proverlia, 
among  the  recent  proverbs  beginning  with  the  letter  CJ  (£). 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

four,  six,  or  eight  lines  is  most  natural.  In  the  tetrastich  the 
relation  of  the  last  two  to  the  first  two  is  as  manifold  as  is  the 
relation  of  the  second  line  to  the  first  in  the  distich.  There  is, 
however,  no  suitable  example  of  four-lined  stanzas  in  antithetic 
relation.  But  we  meet  with  synonymous  tetrastichs,  e.g.  xxiii.  15  f., 
xxiv.  3  f.,  28  f. ;  synthetic,  xxx.  5  f. ;  integral,  xxx.  17  f.,  especially 
of  the  form  in  which  the  last  two  lines  constitute  a  proof  passage 
beginning  with  ^,  xxii.  22  f.,  or  13,  xxii.  24  f.,  or  without  exponents, 
xxii.  26  f. ;  comparative  without  expressing  the  comparison,  xxv. 
1 6  f .  (cf.,  on  the  other  hand,  xxvi.  18  f.,  where  the  number  of  lines 
is  questionable),  and  also  the  emblematical,  xxv.  4  f. : 

Take  away  the  dross  from  the  silver, 

And  there  shall  come  forth  a  vessel  for  the  goldsmith  ; 

Take  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  king, 

And  his  throne  shall  be  established  in  righteousness. 

Proportionally  the  most  frequently  occurring  are  tetrastichs,  the 
second  half  of  which  forms  a  proof  clause  commencing  with  ^ 
or  ]3.  Among  the  less  frequent  are  the  six-lined,  presenting  (xxiii. 
1-3,  xxiv.  llf.)  one  and  the  same  thought  in  manifold  aspects, 
with  proofs  interspersed.  Among  all  the  rest  which  are  found  in 
the  collection,  xxiii.  12-14,  19-21,  26-28,  xxx.  15  f.,  xxx.  29-31, 
the  first  two  lines  form  a  prologue  introductory  to  the  substance 
of  the  proverb  ;  as  e.g.  xxiii.  12-14  : 

0  let  instruction  enter  into  thine  heart, 

And  apply  thine  ears  to  the  words  of  knowledge. 

Withhold  not  correction  from  the  child  ; 

For  if  thou  beatest  him  with  the  rod — he  dies  not. 

Thou  shalt  beat  him  with  the  rod, 

And  deliver  his  soul  from  hell. 

Similarly  formed,  yet  more  expanded,  is  the  eight-lined  stanza, 
xxiii.  22-28  : 

Hearken  unto  thy  father  that  begat  thee, 

And  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old. 

Buy  the  truth  and  sell  it  not : 

Wisdom,  and  virtue,  and  understanding. 

The  father  of  a  righteous  man  greatly  rejoices, 

And  he  that  begetteth  a  wise  child  hath  joy  of  him. 

Thy  father  and  thy  mother  shall  be  glad, 

And  she  that  bare  thee  shall  rejoice. 

The  Mashal  proverb  here  inclines  to  the  Mashal  ode  ;  for  this 
octastich  may  be  regarded  as  a  short  Mashal  song, — like  the  alpha- 


INTRODUCTION.  11 

betical  Mashal  psalm  xxxvii.,  which  consists  of  almost  pure  tetra- 
stichs. 

We  have  now  seen  how  the  distich  form  multiplies  itself  into 
forms  consisting  of  four,  six,  and  eight  lines  ;  but  it  also  unfolds 
itself,  as  if  in  one-sided  multiplication,  into  forms  of  three,  five, 
and  seven  lines.  Tristichs  arise  when  the  thought  of  the  first  line 
is  repeated  (xxvii.  22)  in  the  second  according  to  the  synonymous 
scheme,  or  when  the  thought  of  the  second  line  is  expressed  by 
contrast  in  the  third  (xxii.  29,  xxviii.  10)  according  to  the  anti 
thetic  scheme,  or  when  to  the  thought  expressed  in  one  or  two 
lines  (xxv.  8,  xxvii.  10)  there  is  added  its  proof.  The  parabolic 
scheme  is  here  represented  when  the  object  described  is  unfolded 
in  two  lines,  as  in  the  comparison  xxv.  13,  or  when  its  nature  is 
portrayed  by  two  figures  in  two  lines,  as  in  the  emblematic  pro 
verb  xxv.  20 : 

To  take  off  clothing  in  cold  weather, 

Vinegar  upon  nitre, 

And  he  that  singeth  songs  to  a  heavy  heart. 

In  the  few  instances  of  pentastichs  which  are  found,  the  last 
three  lines  usually  unfold  the  reason  of  the  thought  of  the  first 
two :  xxiii.  4  f.,  xxv.  6  f.,  xxx.  32  f. ;  to  this  xxiv.  13  forms  an 
exception,  where  the  }3  before  the  last  three  lines  introduces  the 
expansion  of  the  figure  in  the  first  two.  As  an  instance  we  quote 
xxv.  6  f . : 

Seek  not  to  display  thyself  in  the  presence  of  the  king, 
And  stand  not  in  the  place  of  the  great. 
For  better  that  it  be  said  unto  thee,  "  Come  up  hither," 
Than  that  they  humble  thee  in  the  presence  of  the  prince, 
While  thine  eyes  have  raised  themselves. 

Of  lieptastlchs  I  know  of  only  one  example  in  the  collection, 
viz.  xxiii.  6-8  : 

Eat  not  the  bread  of  the  jealous, 

And  lust  not  after  his  dainties  ; 

For  he  is  like  one  who  calculates  with  himself  :— 

"  Eat  and  drink,"  saith  he  to  thee, 

And  his  heart  is  not  with  thee. 

Thy  morsel  which  thou  hast  eaten  must  thou  vomit  up, 

And  thou  hast  wasted  thy  pleasant  words. 

From  this  heptastich,  which  one  will  scarcely  take  for  a  brief 
Mashal  ode  according  to  the  compound  strophe-scheme,  we  see 
that  the  proverb  of  two  lines  can  expand  itself  to  the  dimensions 


12  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

of  seven  anrl  eight  lines.  Beyond  these  limits  the  whole  proverb 
ceases  to  be  ?^'O  in  the  proper  sense  ;  and  after  the  manner  of  Ps. 
xxv.,  xxxiv.,  and  especially  xxxvii.,  it  becomes  a  Mashal  ode.  Of 
this  class  of  Mashal  odes  are,  besides  the  prologue,  xxii.  17-21, 
that  of  the  drunkard,  xxiii.  29-35  ;  that  of  the  slothful  man,  xxiv. 
30-34 ;  the  exhortation  to  industry,  xxvii.  23-27  ;  the  prayer  for 
a  moderate  portion  between  poverty  and  riches,  xxx.  7-9  ;  the 
mirror  for  princes,  xxxi.  2-9  ;  and  the  praise  of  the  excellent 
wife,  xxxi.  10  ff.  It  is  singular  that  this  ode  furnishes  the  only 
example  of  the  alphabetical  acrostic  in  the  whole  collection.  Even 
a  single  trace  of  original  alphabetical  sequence  afterwards  broken 
up  cannot  be  found.  There  cannot  also  be  discovered,  in  the 
Mashal  songs  referred  to,  anything  like  a  completed  strophe- 
scheme  ;  even  in  xxxi.  10  ff.  the  distichs  are  broken  by  tristichs 
intermingled  with  them. 

In  the  whole  of  the  first  part,  i.  7-ix.,  the  prevailing  form  is  that 
of  the  extended  flow  of  the  Mashal  song ;  but  one  in  vain  seeks 
for  strophes.  There  is  not  here  so  firm  a  grouping  of  the  lines  ; 
on  the  supposition  of  its  belonging  to  the  Solomonic  era,  this  is 
indeed  to  be  expected.  The  rhetorical  form  here  outweighs  the 
purely  poetical.  This  first  part  of  the  Proverbs  consists  of  the 
following  fifteen  Mashal  strains  :  (1)  i.  7-19,  (2)  20  ff.,  (3)  ii., 
(4)  iii.  1-18,  (5)  19-26,  (6)  27  ff.,  (7)  iv.  1-v.  6,  (8)  7  ff.,  (9)  vi. 
1-5,  (10)  6-11,  (11)  12-19,  (12)  20  ff.,  (13)  vii.,  (14)  viii.,  (15) 
ix.  In  iii.  and  ix.  there  are  found  a  few  Mashal  odes  of  two  lines 
and  of  four  lines  which  may  be  regarded  as  independent  Mashals, 
and  may  adapt  themselves  to  the  schemes  employed  ;  other  brief 
complete  parts  are  only  waves  in  the  flow  of  the  larger  discourses, 
or  are  altogether  formless,  or  more  than  octastichs.  The  octastich  vi. 

O  7 

16-19  makes  the  proportionally  greatest  impression  of  an  indepen 
dent  inwoven  Mashal.  It  is  the  only  proverb  in  which  symbolical 
numbers  are  used  which  occurs  in  the  collection  from  i.  to  xxix.  : 

There  are  six  things  which  Jahve  hateth, 

And  seven  are  an  abhorrence  to  His  soul : 

Haughty  eyes,  a  lying  tongue, 

And  hands  that  shed  innocent  blood  ; 

An  heart  that  deviseth  the  thoughts  of  evil, 

Feet  that  hastily  run  to  wickedness, 

One  that  uttereth  lies  as  a  false  witness, 

And  he  who  soweth  strife  between  brethren. 

Such  numerical  proverbs  to  which  the  name  rno  has  been  given 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

by  later  Jewish  writers  (see  my  Gesch.  der  jiiJ.  Poes'ie^  pp. 
199,  202)  are  found  in  xxx.  With  the  exception  of  xxx.  7-9, 
24-28  (cf.  Sir.  xxv.  1,  2),  the  numerical  proverb  has  this  pecu 
liarity,  found  also  in  most  of  the  numerical  proverbs  of  Sirach 
(Sir.  xxiii.  16,  xxv.  7,  xxvi.  5,  28),  that  the  number  named  in  the 
first  parallel  line  is  in  the  second  (cf.  Job  v.  9)  increased  by  one. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  form  of  the  Priamel1  is  used  neither  in  the 
Book  of  Proverbs  nor  in  that  of  Sirach.  Proverbs  such  as  xx.  10 
("  Diverse  weights,  diverse  measures — an  abomination  to  Jahve  are 
they  both")  and  xx.  12  ("  The  hearing  ear,  the  seeing  eye — Jahve 
hath  created  them  both"),  to  be  distinguished  from  xvii.  3,  xxvii. 
21,  and  the  like,  where  the  necessary  unity,  and  from  xxvii.  3, 
where  the  necessary  resemblance,  of  the  predicate  is  wanting,  are 
only  a  weak  approach  to  the  Priamel, — a  stronger,  xxv.  3,  where  the 
three  subjects  form  the  preamble  ("  The  heaven  for  height,  and  the 
earth  for  depth,  and  the  heart  of  kings — are  unsearchable").  Per 
haps  xxx.  11—14  is  a  greater  mutilated  Priamel.  Here  four  subjects 
form  the  preamble,  but  there  is  wanting  the  conclusion  containing 
the  common  predicate.  This,  we  believe,  exhausts  the  forms  of  the 
Mashal  in  the  collection.  It  now  only  remains  to  make  mention 
of  the  Mashal  chain,  i.e.  the  ranging  together  in  a  series  of 
proverbs  of  a  similar  character,  such  as  the  chain  of  proverbs 
regarding  the  fool,  xxvi.  1-12,  the  sluggard,  xxvi.  13-16,  the  tale 
bearer,  xxvi.  20-22,  the  malicious,  xxvi.  23-28 — but  this  form 
belongs  more  to  the  technics  of  the  Mashal  collection  than  to  that 
of  the  Mashal  poetry. 

We  now  turn  to  the  separate  parts  of  the  book,  to  examine  more 
closely  the  forms  of  their  proverbs,  and  gather  materials  for  a  critical 
judgment  regarding  the  origin  of  the  proverbs  which  they  contain. 
Not  to  anticipate,  we  take  up  in  order  the  separate  parts  of  the 
arrangement  of  the  collection.  Since,  then,  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
in  the  introductory  pcedagogic  part,  i.  7-ix.,  notwithstanding  its  rich 
and  deep  contents,  there  is  exceedingly  little  of  the  technical  form 
of  the  Mashal,  as  well  as  generally  of  technical  form  at  all.  This 
part,  as  already  shown,  consists  not  of  proper  Mashals,  but  of  fifteen 
Mushal  odes,  or  rather,  perhaps,  Mashal  discourses,  didactic  poems  of 
the  Mushal  kind.  In  the  flow  of  these  discourses  separate  Mashals 
intermingle,  which  may  either  be  regarded  as  independent,  or,  us 

1  [From  prseambulum,  designating  a  peculiar  kind  of  epigram  found  iu  the 
German  poetry  of  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries.] 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

i.  32,  iv.  18  f.,  can  easily  be  so  understood.  In  the  Mashal  chains 
of  chap.  iv.  and  ix.  we  meet  with  proverbs  that  are  synonymous 
(ix.  7,  10),  antithetic  (iii.  35,  ix.  8),  integral,  or  of  one  thought 
(iii.  29,  30),  and  synthetic  (i.  7,  iii.  5,  7),  of  two  lines  and  of  four 
lines  variously  disposed  (iii.  9  f.,  11  f.,  31  f.,  33  f.) ;  but  the  para 
bolic  scheme  is  not  at  all  met  with,  separate  proverbs  such  as  iii. 
27  f.  are  altogether  without  form,  and  keeping  out  of  view  the 
octastich  numerical  proverb,  vi.  16—19,  the  thoughts  which  form 
the  unity  of  separate  groups  are  so  widely  expanded  that  the 
measure  of  the  Mashal  proper  is  far  exceeded.  The  character  of 
this  whole  part  is  not  concentrating,  but  unfolding.  Even  the  inter 
mingling  proverbs  of  two  lines  possess  the  same  character.  They 
are  for  the  most  part  more  like  dissolved  drops  than  gold  coins  with 
sharp  outline  and  firm  impress ;  as  e.g.  ix.  7  : 

He  that  correcteth  the  mocker  getteth  to  himself  shame  ; 
And  he  that  rebuketh  the  sinner  his  dishonour. 

The  few  that  consist  of  four  lines  are  closer,  more  compact,  more 
finished,  because  they  allow  greater  space  for  the  expression  ;  e.g. 
iii.  9  f.  : 

Honour  Jahve  with  thy  wealth, 
And  with  the  first-fruits  of  all  thine  income  : 
And  thy  barns  shall  be  filled  with  plenty, 
And  thy  vats  shall  overflow  with  must. 

But  beyond  the  four  lines  the  author  knows  no  limits  of  artistic 
harmony;  the  discourse  flows  on  till  it  has  wholly  or  provisionally 
exhausted  the  subject ;  it  pauses  not  till  it  reaches  the  end  of  its 
course,  and  then,  taking  breath,  it  starts  anew.  We  cannot,  more 
over,  deny  that  there  is  beauty  in  this  new  springing  forth  of  the 
stream  of  the  discourse  with  its  fresh  transparent  waves  ;  but  it  is 
a  peculiar  beauty  of  the  rhetorically  decomposed,  dissolved  Mashal, 
going  forth,  as  it  were,  from  its  confinement,  and  breathing  its 
faorance  far  and  wide. 

O 

The  fifteen  discourses,  in  which  the  Teacher  appears  twelve  times 
and  Wisdom  three  times,  are  neither  of  a  symmetrically  chiselled 
form  nor  of  internally  fashioned  coherence,  but  yet  are  a  garland 
of  songs  having  internal  unity,  with  a  well-arranged  manifoldness 
of  contents.  It  is  true  that  Bertheau  recognises  here  neither  unity 
of  the  contents  nor  unity  of  the  formal  character  ;  but  there  is  no 
Old  Testament  portion  of  like  extent,  and  at  the  same  time  of  more 
systematic  internal  unity,  and  which  bears  throughout  a  like  formal 


INTRODUCTION.  1  5 

impress,  than  this.  Bertheau  thinks  that  he  has  discovered  in 
certain  passages  a  greater  art  in  the  form;  and  certainly  there  are 
several  sections  which  consist  of  just  ten  verses.  But  this  is  a  mere 
accident;  for  the  first  Mashal  ode  consists  of  groups  of  1,  2,  and 
10  verses,  the  second  of  8  and  6  verses,  the  third  of  10  and  12,  the 
fourth  of  10  and  8,  the  fifth  of  2  and  6,  etc.  —  each  group  forming 
a  complete  sense.  The  10  verses  are  met  with  six  times,  and  if  iv. 
1-9  from  the  Peshito,  and  iv.  20-27  from  the  LXX.,  are  included, 
eight  times,  without  our  regarding  these  decades  as  strophes,  and 
without  our  being  able  to  draw  any  conclusion  regarding  a  parti 
cular  author  of  these  decade  portions.  In  i.  20-33,  Bertheau  finds 
indeed,  along  with  the  regular  structure  of  verses,  an  exact  artistic 
formation  of  strophes  (3  times  4  verses  with  an  echo  of  2).  But 
he  counts  instead  of  the  stichs  the  Masoretic  verses,  and  these  are 
not  the  true  formal  parts  of  the  strophe. 

We  now  come  to  the  second  part  of  the  collection,  whose  super 
scription  nb!>B>  VK'D  can  in  no  respect  be  strange  to  us,  since  the 
collection  of  proverbs  here  commencing,  compared  with  i.  7-ix., 
may  with  special  right  bear  the  name  Mishle.  The  375  proverbs 
which  are  classed  together  in  this  part,  x.-xxii.  16,  without  any 
comprehensive  plan,  but  only  according  to  their  more  or  fewer 
conspicuous  common  characteristics  (Bertheau,  p.  xii),  consist  all 
and  every  one  of  distichs  ;  for  each  Masoretic  verse  falls  naturally 
into  two  stichs,  and  nowhere  (not  even  xix.  19)  does  such  a  distich 
proverb  stand  in  necessary  connection  with  one  that  precedes  or 
that  follows  ;  each  is  in  itself  a  small  perfected  and  finished  whole. 
The  tristich  xix.  7  is  only  an  apparent  exception.  In  reality  it  is  a 
distich  with  the  disfigured  remains  of  a  distich  that  has  been  lost. 
The  LXX.  has  here  two  distichs  which  are  wanting  in  our  text. 
The  second  is  that  which  is  found  in  our  text,  but  only  in  a  muti 
lated  form  : 


necxovoi&iv  r&saiovp'yt'i  xetxtctf, 
[He  that  does  much  harm  perfects  mischief.] 
og  Se  tptdlt^st  hoyovs  ov  ocud^aiTeti. 
[And  he  that  uses  provoking  words  shall  not  escape.] 

Perhaps  the  false  rendering  of 

jno 


The  friend  of  every  one  is  rewarded  with  evil, 
He  who  pursues  after  rumours  does  not  escape. 


16  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

But  not  only  are  all  these  proverbs  distichs,  they  have  also,  not 
indeed  without  exception,  but  in  by  far  the  greatest  number,  a 
common  character  in  that  they  are  antithetic.  Distichs  of  predo 
minating  antithetic  character  stand  here  together.  Along  with 
these  all  other  schemes  are,  it  is  true,  represented  :  the  synonymous, 
xi.  7,  25,  30,  xii.  14,  28,  xiv.  19,  etc. ;  the  integral,  or  of  one  thought, 
xiv.  7,  xv.  3,  etc.,  particularly  in  proverbs  with  the  comparative  f?, 
xii.  9,  xv.  16,  17,  xvi.  8,  19,  xvii.  10,  xxi.  19,  xxii.  1,  and  with  the 
ascending  ""3  ^N  [much  more],  xi.  31,  xv.  11,  xvii.  7,  xix.  7,  10, 
xxi.  27 ;  the  synthetic,  x.  18,  xi.  29,  xiv.  17,  xix.  13 ;  the  parabolic, 
the  most  feebly  represented,  for  the  only  specimens  of  it  are  x.  26, 
xi.  22  ;  besides  which  I  know  not  what  other  Bertheau  could  quote. 
We  shall  further  see  that  in  another  portion  of  the  book  the  para 
bolic  proverbs  are  just  as  closely  placed  together  as  are  the  anti 
thetic.  Here  almost  universally  the  two  members  of  the  proverbs 
stand  together  in  technical  parallelism  as  thesis  and  antithesis  ; 
also  in  the  synonymous  proverbs  the  two  members  are  the  parallel 
rays  of  one  thought ;  in  the  synthetic  two  monostichs  occur  in 
loose  external  connection  to  suffice  for  the  parallelism  as  a  funda 
mental  law  of  the  technical  proverb.  But  also  in  these  proverbs  in 
which  a  proper  parallelism  is  not  found,  both  members  being  needed 
to  form  a  complete  sentence,  verse  and  members  are  so  built  up, 
according  to  Bertheau' s  self-confirmatory  opinion,  that  in  regard 
to  extent  and  the  number  of  words  they  are  like  verses  with 
parallel  members. 

To  this  long  course  of  distichs  which  profess  to  be  the  Mislde  of 
Solomon,  there  follows  a  course,  xxii.  17-xxiv.  22,  of  "  words  of 
the  wise,"  prefaced  by  the  introduction  xxii.  17-21,  which  un 
deniably  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  greater  introduction,  i.  7-ix., 
and  of  which  we  are  reminded  by  the  form  of  address  preserved 
throughout  in  these  "  words  of  the  wise."  These  "  words  of  the 
wise  "  comprehend  all  the  forms  of  the  Mashal,  from  those  of  two 
lines  in  xxii.  28,  xxiii.  9,  xxiv.  7,  8,  9,  10,  to  the  Mashal  song  xxiii. 
29-35.  Between  these  limits  are  the  tetrastichs,  which  are  the 
most  popular  form,  xxii.  22  f.,  24  f.,  26  f.,  xxiii.  10  f.,  15  f.,  17  f., 
xxiv.  If.,  3f.,  5f.,  15  f.,  17  f.,  19  f.,  21  f.,— pentastichs,  xxiii.  4f., 
xxiv.  13  f.,  and  hexastichs,  xxiii.  1-3,  12-14,  19-21,  2G-28,  xxiv. 
11  f. ; — of  tristichs,  heptastichs,  and  octastichs  are  at  least  found 
one  specimen  of  each,  xxii.  29,  xxiii.  6-8,  xxiii.  22-25.  Bertheau 
maintains  that  there  is  a  difference  between  the  structure  of  these 


INTRODUCTION.  17 

proverbs  and  that  of  the  preceding,  for  he  counts  the  number  of 
the  words  which  constitute  a  verse  in  the  case  of  the  latter  and  of 
the  former ;  but  such  a  proceeding  is  unwarrantable,  for  the  re 
markably  long  Masoretic  verse  xxiv.  12  contains  eighteen  words  ; 
and  the  poet  is  not  to  be  made  accountable  for  such  an  arrangement, 
for  in  his  mind  xxiv.  11  f.  forms  a  hexastich,  and  indeed  a  very 
elegant  one.  Not  the  words  of  the  Masoretic  verse,  but  the  sticks 
are  to  be  counted.  Reckoning  according  to  the  sticks,  I  can  dis 
cover  no  difference  between  these  proverbs  and  the  preceding.  In 
the  preceding  ones  also  the  number  of  the  words  in  the  stichs 
extends  from  two  to  five,  the  number  two  being  here,  however, 
proportionally  more  frequently  found  (e.g.  xxiv.  46,  xxiv.  8a,  106)  ; 
a  circumstance  which  has  its  reason  in  this,  that  the  symmetry  of 
the  members  is  often  very  much  disturbed,  there  being  frequently 
no  trace  whatever  of  parallelism.  To  the  first  appendix  to  the 
"  Proverbs  of  Solomon  "  there  follows  a  second,  xxiv.  23  ff.,  with 
the  superscription,  "These  things  also  to  the  wise,"  which  contains 
a  hexastich,  xxiv.  236-25,  a  distich,  ver.  26,  a  tristich,  ver.  27,  a 
tetrastich,  ver.  28  f.,  and  a  Mashal  ode,  ver.  30  ff.,  on  the  slugo-ard 

'  /  /  OO 

— the  last  in  the  form  of  an  experience  of  the  poet  like  Ps.  xxxvii. 
35  f.  The  moral  which  he  has  drawn  from  this  recorded  observa 
tion  is  expressed  in  two  verses  such  as  we  have  already  found  at 
vi.  10  f.  These  two  appendices  are,  as  is  evident  from  their  com 
mencement  as  well  as  from  their  conclusion,  in  closest  relation  to 
the  introduction,  i.  7-ix. 

There  now  follows  in  xxv.-xxix.  the  second  great  collection  of 
"  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  "  copied  out,"  as  the  superscription  men 
tions,  by  the  direction  of  King  Hezekiah.  It  falls,  apparently,  into 
two  parts  ;  for  as  xxiv.  30  ff.,  a  Mashal  hymn,  stands  at  the  end 
of  the  two  appendices,  so  the  Mashal  hymn  xxvii.  23  ff.  must  be 
regarded  as  forming  the  division  between  the  two  halves  of  this 
collection.  It  is  very  sharply  distinguished  from  the  collection 
beginning  with  chap.  x.  The  extent  of  the  stichs  and  the  greater 
or  less  observance  of  the  parallelism  furnish  no  distinguishing 
mark,  but  there  are  others  worthy  of  notice.  In  the  first  collection 
the  proverbs  are  exclusively  in  the  form  of  distichs  ;  here  we  have 
also  some  tristichs,  xxv.  8,  13,  20,  xxvii.  10,  22,  xxviii.  10,  tetra- 
stichs,  xxv.  4  f.,  y  f.,  21  f.,  xxvi.  18  f.,  24  f.,  xxvii.  15  f.,  and 
pentastichs,  xxv.  6  f.,  besides  the  Mashal  hymn  already  referred  to. 
The  kind  of  arrangement  is  not  essentially  different  from  that  in 

B 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

the  first  collection ;  it  is  equally  devoid  of  plan,  yet  there  are  here 
some  chains  or  strings  of  related  proverbs,  xxvi.  1-12,  13-16, 
20-22.  A  second  essential  distinction  between  the  two  collections 
is  this,  that  while  in  the  first  the  antithetic  proverb  forms  the 
prevailing  element,  here  it  is  the  parabolic,  and  especially  the 
emblematic ;  in  xxv.-xxvii.  are  sentences  almost  wholly  of  this 
character.  We  say  almost,  for  to  place  together  proverbs  of  this 
kind  exclusively  is  not  the  plan  of  the  collector.  There  are  also 
proverbs  of  the  other  schemes,  fewer  synonymous,  etc.,  than  anti 
thetic,  and  the  collection  begins  in  very  varied  quodlibet :  xxv.  2, 
an  antithetic  proverb;  xxv.  3,  a  priamel  with  three  subjects;  xxv.  4f., 
an  emblematic  tetrastich  ;  xxv.  6  f.,  a  pentastich  ;  xxv.  8,  a  tristich  ; 
xxv.  9  f.,  a  tetrastich,  with  the  negative  JS  ;  xxv.  11,  an  emblematic 
distich  ("  Golden  apples  in  silver  caskets — a  word  spoken  in  a  fitting 
way").  The  antithetic  proverbs  are  found  especially  in  xxviii.  and 
xxix.:  the  first  and  the  last  proverb  of  the  whole  collection,  xxv.  2, 
xxix.  27,  are  antithetic ;  but  between  these  two  the  comparative 
and  the  figurative  proverbs  are  so  prevalent,  that  this  collection 
appears  like  a  variegated  picture-book  with  explanatory  notes  written 
underneath.  In  extent  it  is  much  smaller  than  the  foregoing.  I 
reckon  126  proverbs  in  137  Masoretic  verses. 

The  second  collection  of  Solomon's  proverbs  has  also  several 
appendices,  the  first  of  which,  xxx.,  according  to  the  inscription,  is 
by  an  otherwise  unknown  author,  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh.  The  first 
poem  of  this  appendix  presents  in  a  thoughtful  way  the  unsearch- 
ableness  of  God.  This  is  followed  by  certain  peculiar  pieces,  such 
as  a  tetrastich  regarding  the  purity  of  God's  word,  xxx.  5  f.;  a  prayer 
for  a  moderate  position  between  riches  and  poverty,  vers.  7-9 ;  a 
distich  against  slander,  ver.  10 ;  a  priamel  without  the  conclusion, 
vers.  11-14;  the  insatiable  four  (a  Midda),  ver.  15  f . ;  a  tetrastich 
regarding  the  disobedient  son,  ver.  17  ;  the  incomprehensible  four, 
vers.  18-20;  the  intolerable  four,  vers.  21-23;  the  diminutive  but 
prudent  four,  vers.  24-28  ;  the  excellent  four,  vers.  29-31 ;  a  penta 
stich  recommending  prudent  silence,  ver.  32  f.  Two  other  supple 
ments  form  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  book  :  the  counsel  of 
Lemuel's  mother  to  her  royal  son,  xxxi.  2-9,  and  the  praise  of  the 
virtuous  woman  in  the  form  of  an  alphabetical  acrostic,  xxxi.  10  ff. 

After  we  have  acquainted  ourselves  with  the  manifold  forms  of 
the  technical  proverbs  and  their  distribution  in  the  several  parts  of 
the  collection,  the  question  arises,  \Yhat  conclusions  regarding  the 


INTRODUCTION.  19 

origin  of  these  several  parts  may  be  drawn  from  these  forms  found 
in  them "?  We  connect  with  this  the  conception  of  Ewald,  who  sees 
represented  in  the  several  parts  of  the  collection  the  chief  points  of 
the  history  of  proverbial  poetry.  The  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon," 
x.  1-xxii.  16,  appear  to  him  to  be  the  oldest  collection,  which 
represents  the  simplest  and  the  most  ancient  kind  of  proverbial 
poetry.  Their  distinguishing  characteristics  are  the  symmetrical 
two-membered  verse,  complete  in  itself,  containing  in  itself  a  fully 
intelligible  meaning,  and  the  quick  contrast  of  thesis  and  antithesis. 
The  oldest  form  of  the  technical  proverb,  according  to  Ewald,  is, 
according  to  our  terminology,  the  antithetic  distich,  such  as  pre 
dominates  in  x.  1— xxii.  16.  Along  with  these  antithetic  distichs 
we  find  here  also  others  of  a  different  kind.  Ewald  so  considers 
the  contrast  of  the  two  members  to  be  the  original  fundamental 
law  of  the  technical  proverb,  that  to  him  these  other  kinds  of 
distichs  represent  the  diminution  of  the  inner  force  of  the  two- 
membered  verse,  the  already  begun  decay  of  the  art  in  its  oldest 
limits  and  laws,  and  the  transition  to  a  new  method.  In  the 
"  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  xxv.-xxix.,  of  the  later  collection,  that 
rigorous  formation  of  the  verse  appears  already  in  full  relaxation 
and  dissolution  :  the  contrast  of  the  sense  of  the  members  appears 
here  only  exceptionally  ;  the  art  turns  from  the  crowded  fulness  and 
strength  of  the  representation  more  to  the  adorning  of  the  thought 
by  means  of  strong  and  striking  figures  and  forms  of  expression,  to 
elegant  painting  of  certain  moral  conditions  and  forms  of  life ;  and 
the  more  the  technical  proverb  is  deprived  of  the  breath  of  a  vigor 
ous  poetic  spirit,  so  much  the  nearer  does  it  approach  to  the  vulgar 
proverb  ;  the  full  and  complete  symmetry  of  the  two  members 
disappears,  less  by  the  abridgment  of  one  of  them,  than  by  the  too 
great  extension  and  amplification  of  the  two-membered  proverb 
into  longer  admonitions  to  a  moral  life,  and  descriptions  relating 
thereto.  So  the  proverbial  poetry  passes  essentially  into  a  different 
form  and  manner.  "  While  it  loses  in  regard  to  internal  vigorous 

o  O 

brevity  and  strength,  it  seeks  to  gain  again  by  means  of  connected 
instructive  exposition,  by  copious  description  and  detailed  repre 
sentation  ;  breaking  up  its  boldly  delineated,  strong,  and  yet  simply 
beautiful  form,  it  rises  to  oratorical  display,  to  attractive  eloquence, 
in  which,  indeed,  though  the  properly  poetical  and  the  artistic 
gradually  disappears,  yet  the  warmth  and  easy  comprehension  are 
increased."  In  chap,  i.-ix.,  the  introduction  of  the  older  collection, 


20  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

and  xxii.  17-xxiv.,  of  the  first  half  of  the  supplement  to  the  older  col 
lection  (xxv.-xxix.  is  the  second  half),  supplied  by  a  later  writer,  the 
great  change  is  completed,  the  growth  of  which  the  later  collection 
of  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  particularly  in  xxv.-xxix.,  reveals. 
The  symmetry  of  the  two  members  of  the  verse  is  here  completely 
destroyed  ;  the  separate  proverb  appears  almost  only  as  an  exception  ; 
the  proverbial  poetry  has  passed  into  admonition  and  discourse,  and 
has  become  in  many  respects  lighter,  and  more  flexible,  and  flowing, 
and  comprehensible.  "  It  is  true  that  on  the  side  of  this  later  form 
of  proverbial  poetry  there  is  not  mere  loss.  While  it  always  loses 
the  excellent  pointed  brevity,  the  inner  fulness  and  strength  of  the 
old  proverbs,  it  gains  in  warmth,  impressiveness,  intelligibility ;  the 
wisdom  which  at  first  strives  only  to  make  its  existence  and  its 
contents  in  endless  manifoldness  known,  reaches  this  point  at  last, 
that  having  become  clear  and  certain,  it  now  also  turns  itself 
earnestly  and  urgently  to  men."  In  the  later  additions,  chap. 
xxx.  xxxi.,  appended  altogether  externally,  the  proverbial  poetrv 
has  already  disappeared,  and  given  place  to  elegant  descriptions  of 
separate  moral  truths.  While  the  creative  passes  into  the  back 
ground,  the  whole  aim  is  now  toward  surprising  expansion  and  new 
artistic  representation. 

This  view  of  the  progressive  development  of  the  course  of  pro 
verbial  poetry  is  one  of  the  chief  grounds  for  the  determination  of 
Ewald's  judgment  regarding  the  parts  that  are  Solomonic  and  those 
that  are  not  Solomonic  in  the  collection.  In  x.  1-xxii.  16  he  does 
not  regard  the  whole  as  Solomon's,  as  immediately  and  in  their 
present  form  composed  by  Solomon  ;  but  the  breath  of  the  Solo 
monic  spirit  enlivens  and  pervades  all  that  has  been  added  by  other 
and  later  poets.  But  most  of  the  proverbs  of  the  later  collection 
(xxv.-xxix.)  are  not  much  older  than  the  time  of  Hezekiah  ;  yet 
there  are  in  it  some  that  are  Solomonic,  and  of  the  period  next  to 
Solomon.  The  collection  stretches  backward  with  its  arms,  in  part 
indeed,  as  the  superscription,  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  shows, 
to  the  time  of  Solomon.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  introduction, 
i.-ix.,  and  in  the  first  half  of  the  appendix  (xxii.  17-xxiv.),  there 
is  not  found  a  single  proverb  of  the  time  of  Solomon  ;  both 
portions  belong  to  two  poets  of  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  a  new 
era,  in  which  the  didactic  poets  added  to  the  older  Solomonic  col 
lection  longer  pieces  of  their  own  composition.  The  four  small 
pieces,  xxx.  1-14,  15-33,  xxxi.  1-9,  10 ff.,  are  of  a  still  later  date; 


INTRODUCTION.  21 

they  cannot  belong  to  an  earlier  period  than  the  end  of  the  seventh 
or  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  B.C. 

We  recognise  the  penetration,  the  sensibility,  the  depth  of 
thought  indicated  by  this  opinion  of  Ewald's  regarding  the  orio-in 
of  the  book  ;  yet  for  the  most  part  it  is  not  supported  by  satisfac 
tory  proof.  If  we  grant  that  he  has  on  the  whole  rightly  con 
strued  the  history  of  proverbial  poetry,  nevertheless  the  conclusion 
that  proverbs  which  bear  in  themselves  the  marks  of  the  oldest 
proverbial  poetry  belong  to  the  Solomonic  era,  and  that  the  others 
belong  to  a  period  more  nearly  or  more  remotely  subsequent  to  it, 
is  very  fallacious.  In  this  case  much  that  is  found  in  Sirach's 
Book  of  Proverbs  must  be  Solomonic;  and  the  *|DX  ^b  of  Isaac 
Satanow,1  the  contemporary  of  Moses  Mendelssohn,  as  well  as 
many  other  proverbs  in  the  collection  pan  pta,  and  in  the  poetical 
\vorks  of  other  Jewish  poets  belonging  to  the  middle  ages  or  to 
later  times,  might  be  dated  back  perhaps  a  thousand  years".  Along 
with  the  general  course  of  development  the  individuality  of  the 
poet  is  also  to  be  taken  into  account ;  an  ancient  poet  can,  along 
with  the  formally  completed,  produce  the  imperfect,  which  appears 
to  belong  to  a  period  of  art  that  has  degenerated,  and  a  modern 
poet  can  emulate  antiquity  with  the  greatest  accuracy.  But  Ewald's 
construction  of  the  progress  of  the  development  of  proverbial 
poetry  is  also  in  part  arbitrary.  That  the  two-membered  verse  is  the 
oldest  form  of  the  technical  proverb  we  shall  not  dispute,  but  that 
it  is  the  two-membered  antithetic  verse  is  a  supposition  that  cannot 
be  proved  ;  and  that  Solomon  wrote  only  antithetic  distichs  is  an 
absurd  assertion,  to  which  Keil  justly  replies,  that  the  adhering  to 
only  one  form  and  structure  is  a  sign  of  poverty,  of  mental  narrow 
ness  and  one-sidedness.  There  are  also  other  kinds  of  parallelism, 
which  are  not  less  beautiful  and  vigorous  than  the  antithetic,  and 
also  other  forms  of  proverbs  besides  the  distich  in  which  the  thought, 
which  can  in  no  way  be  restrained  within  two  lines,  must  neces 
sarily  divide  itself  into  the  branches  of  a  greater  number  of  lines. 
Thus  I  must  agree  with  Keil  in  the  opinion,  that  Ewald's  assertion 
that  in  the  Hezekiah-collection  the  strong  form  of  the  technical 
proverb  is  in  full  dissolution,  contains  an  exaggeration.  If  the 

[Isaac  Ha-Levi  was  born  at  Satanow  (whence  his  name),  in  Russian  Poland, 
1732,  died  at  Berlin  1802.  Besides  other  works,  he  was  the  author  of  several 
collections  of  gnomes  and  apothegms  in  imitation  of  the  Proverbs.  Vid. 
Delitzsch  Zur  Gesch.  der  Jud.  Pocsit,  p.  115.] 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  PKOVERDS. 

first  collection,  x.  1-xxii.  16,  contains  only  two  (x.  26,  xi.  22) 
figurative  proverbs,  while  it  would  be  altogether  foolish  to  deny 
that  these  two,  because  they  were  figurative  proverbs,  were  Solo 
monic,  or  to  affirm  that  he  was  the  author  of  only  these  two,  so  it 
is  self-evident  that  the  Hezekiah-collection,  which  is  principally  a 
collection  of  figurative  proverbs,  must  contain  many  proverbs  in 
which  a  different  kind  of  parallelism  prevails,  which  has  the  ap 
pearance  of  a  looser  connection.  Is  it  not  probable  that  Solomon, 
who  had  an  open  penetrating  eye  for  the  greatest  and  the  smallest 
objects  of  nature,  composed  many  such  proverbs  1  And  is  e.g. 
the  proverb  xxvi.  23, 

Dross  of  silver  spread  over  a  potsherd — 

Burning  lips  and  a  wicked  heart, 

less  beautiful,  and  vigorous,  and  worthy  of  Solomon  than  any  anti 
thetic  distich  ?  If  Ewald  imagines  that  the  3000  proverbs  which 
Solomon  wrote  were  all  constructed  according  to  this  one  model,  we 
are  much  rather  convinced  that  Solomon's  proverbial  poetry,  which 
found  the  distich  and  the  tetrastich  as  forms  of  proverbs  already  in 
use,  would  not  only  unfold  within  the  limits  of  the  distich  the  most 
varied  manifoldness  of  thought  and  form,  but  would  also  within  the 
limits  of  the  Mashal  generally,  run  through  the  whole  scale  from 
the  distich  up  to  octastichs  and  more  extensive  forms.  But  while 
we  cannot  accept  Ewald's  criteria  which  he  applies  to  the  two 
collections,  x.  1-xxii.  16  and  xxv.-xxix.,  yet  his  delineation  of  the 
form  and  kind  of  proverbial  poetry  occurring  in  i.-ix.,  xxii.  17  ff., 
is  excellent,  as  is  also  his  conclusion,  that  these  portions  belong  to 
a  new  and  more  recent  period  of  proverbial  poetry.  Since  in  xxii. 
17-21  manifestly  a  new  course  of  "  Words  of  the  Wise"  by  a  poet 
later  than  Solomon  is  introduced,  it  is  possible,  yea,  not  improbable, 
that  he,  or,  as  Ewald  thinks,  another  somewhat  older  poet,  intro 
duces  in  i.  7-ix.  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon"  following,  from  x.  1 
onward. 

But  if  Solomon  composed  not  only  distichs,  but  also  tristichs, 
etc.,  it  is  strange  that  in  the  first  collection,  x.-xxii.  16,  there  are 
exclusively  distichs  ;  and  if  he  constructed  not  only  contrasted 
proverbs,  but  equally  figurative  proverbs,  it  is  as  strange  that  in 
the  first  collection  the  figurative  proverbs  are  almost  entirely 
wanting,  while  in  the  second  collection,  xxv.-xxix.,  on  the  contrary, 
they  prevail.  This  remarkable  phenomenon  mav  be  partly  ex- 
plairu'd  if  we  could  suppose  that  not  merely  the  second  collection, 


INTRODUCTION.  23 

but  both  of  them,  were  arranged  by  the  "  men  of  Hezekiah,"  and 
that  the  whole  collection  of  the  Solomonic  proverbs  was  divided 
by  them  into  two  collections  according  to  their  form.  But  leaving 
out  of  view  other  objections,  one  would  in  that  case  have  expected  in 
the  first  collection  the  proportionally  great  number  of  the  antithetic 
distichs  which  stand  in  the  second.  If  we  regard  both  collections 
as  originally  one  whole,  then  there  can  be  no  rational  ground  for  its 
being  divided  in  this  particular  way  either  by  the  original  collector 
or  by  a  later  enlarger  of  the  collection.  We  have  therefore  to 
regard  the  two  portions  as  the  work  of  two  different  authors.  The 
second  is  by  the  "  men  of  Hezekiah  ;"  the  first  cannot  be  by 
Solomon  himself,  since  the  number  of  proverbs  composed,  and 
probably  also  written  out  by  Solomon,  amounted  to  3000 ;  besides, 
if  Solomon  was  the  author  of  the  collection,  there  would  be  visible 
on  it  the  stamp  of  his  wisdom  in  its  plan  and  order :  it  is  thus  the 
work  of  another  author,  who  is  certainly  different  from  the  author 
of  the  introductory  Mashal  poems,  i.  7-ix.  For  if  the  author  of 
the  title  of  the  book  were  not  at  the  same  time  the  author  of  the 
introduction,  he  must  have  taken  it  from  some  other  place  ;  thus  it 
is  inconceivable  how  he  could  give  the  title  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon," 
etc.,  i.  1-6,  to  poems  which  were  not  composed  by  Solomon.  If 
i.  7— ix.  is  not  by  Solomon,  then  these  Mashal  poems  are  explicable 
only  as  the  work  of  the  author  of  the  title  of  the  book,  and  as  an 
introduction  to  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  beginning  x.  1.  It 
must  be  one  and  the  same  author  who  edited  the  "  Proverbs  of 
Solomon"  x.  1-xxii.  16,  prefixed  i.  7— ix.  as  an  introduction  to 
them,  and  appended  to  them  the  "  Words  of  the  Wise,"  xxii.  17- 
xxiv.  22  ;  the  second  collector  then  appended  to  this  book  a  sup 
plement  of  the  "  Words  of  the  Wise,"  xxiv.  23  ff.,  and  then  the 
Hezekiah-collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs,  xxv.— xxix. ;  perhaps 
also,  in  order  that  the  book  might  be  brought  to  a  close  in  the  same 
form  in  which  it  was  commenced,  he  added1  the  non-Solomonic 
proverbial  poem  xxx.  f.  We  do  not,  however,  maintain  that  the 
book  has  this  origin,  but  only  this,  that  on  the  supposition  of  the 
non-Solomonic  origin  of  i.  7-ix.  it  cannot  well  have  any  other 
origin.  But  the  question  arises  again,  and  more  emphatically, 
How  was  it  possible  that  the  first  collector  left  as  gleanings  to 

1  Zockler  takes  xxiv.  23  ff.  as  a  second  appendix  to  the  first  principal  collec 
tion.  This  is  justifiable,  but  the  second  superscription  rather  suggests  two 
collectors. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

the  second  so  great  a  number  of  distichs,  almost  all  parabolical, 
and  besides,  all  more  than  two-lined  proverbs  of  Solomon  ?  One 
can  scarcely  find  the  reason  of  this  singular  phenomenon  in  any 
thing  else  than  in  the  judgment  of  the  author  of  the  first  collection 
as  the  determining  motive  of  his  selection.  For  when  we  think  also 
on  the  sources  and  origin  of  the  two  collections,  the  second  always 
presupposes  the  first,  and  that  which  is  singular  in  the  author's 
thus  restricting  himself  can  only  have  its  ground  in  the  freedom 
which  he  allowed  to  his  subjectivity. 

Before  we  more  closely  examine  the  style  and  the  teaching  of 
the  book,  and  the  conclusions  thence  arising,  another  phenomenon 
claims  our  attention,  which  perhaps  throws  light  on  the  way  in 
which  the  several  collections  originated  ;  but,  at  all  events,  it  may 
not  now  any  longer  remain  out  of  view,  when  we  are  in  the  act  of 
forming  a  judgment  on  this  point. 

3.   The  repetitions  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs. — We  find  not  only 
in  the  different  parts  of  the  collection,  but  also  within  the  limits 
of  one  and  the  same  part,  proverbs  which  wholly  or  in  part  are 
repeated  in  the  same  or  in  similar  words.     Before  we  can  come  to 
a  judgment,  we  must  take  cognizance  as  closely  as  possible  of  this 
fact.     We  begin  with  «  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  x.-xxii.  16  ; 
for  this  collection  is  in  relation  to  xxv.-xxix.  certainly  the  earlier 
and  it  is  especially  with  respect  to  the  Solomonic  proverbs  that 
this  fact  demands  an  explanation.     In   this  earlier  collection  we 
find,    (1)  whole    proverbs   repeated    in    exactly   the  same  words: 
xiv.  12  =  xvi.  25  ;— (2)  proverbs  slightly  changed  in  their  form 
of  expression:   x.  1  =  xv.  20,   xiv.  20  =  xix.  4,   xvi.   2  =  xxi.  2, 
xix.  5  =  xix.  9,  xx.  10  =  xx.  23,  xxi.  9  =  xxi.  19  ;— (3)  proverbs 
almost  identical  in  form,  but  somewhat  different  in  sense  :  x.  2  = 
xi.  4,  xiii.  14  =  xiv.  27  ;— (4)  proverbs  the  first  lines  of  which  are 
the  same  :  x.  15  =  xviii.  11 ;— (5)  proverbs  with  their  second  lines 
the  same:   x.  6  =  x.  11,  x.  8  =  x.  10,  xv.  33  =  xviii.  12  ;— (6) 
proverbs  with  one  line  almost  the  same:  xi.  13  =  xx.  19,  xi.  21=xvi. 
5,  xii.  14  =  xiii.  2,  xiv.  31  =xvii.  5,  xvi   18  =  xviii.  12,  xix.  12  = 
xx.  2  ;  comp.  also  xvi.  28  with  xvii.  9,  xix.  25  with  xxi.  11.    In  com 
paring  these  proverbs,  one  will  perceive  that  for  the  most  part  the 
external  or  internal  resemblance  of  the  surrounding  has  prompted 
the  collector  to  place  the  one  proverb  in  this  place  and  the  other  in 
that  place  (not  always  indeed ;  for  what  reason  e.g.  could  determine 


INTRODUCTION.  25 

the  position  of  xvi.  25  and  xix.  5,  9, 1  cannot  say)  ;  then  that  the  pro 
verb  standing  earlier  is  generally,  to  all  appearance,  also  the  earlier 
formed,  for  the  second  of  the  pair  is  mostly  a  synonymous  distich, 
which  generally  further  extends  antithetically  one  line  of  the  first : 
cf.  xviii.  11  with  x.  15,  xx.  10,  23  with  xi.  1,  xx.  19  with  xi.  13, 
xvi.  5  with  xi.  21,  xx.  2  with  xix.  12,  also  xvii.  5  with  xiv.  31, 
where  from  an  antithetic  proverb  a  synthetic  one  is  formed  ;  but 
here  also  there  are  exceptions,  as  xiii.  2  compared  with  xii.  14,  and 
xv.  33  with  xviii.  12,  where  the  same  line  is  in  the  first  case  con 
nected  with  a  synonymous,  and  in  the  second  with  an  antithetic 
proverb  ;  but  here  also  the  contrast  is  so  loose,  that  the  earlier- 
occurring  proverb  has  the  appearance  of  priority. 

We  now  direct  our  attention  to  the  second  collection,  xxv.-xxix. 
When  we  compare  the  proverbs  found  here  with  one  another,  we 
see  among  them  a  disproportionately  smaller  number  of  repetitions 
than  in  the  other  collection  ;  only  a  single  entire  proverb  is  repeated 
in  almost  similar  terms,  but  in  an  altered  sense,  xxix.  20  =  xxvi.  12  ; 
but  proverbs  such  as  xxviii.12,  28,  xxix. 2,  notwithstanding  the  partial 
resemblance,  are  equally  original.  On  the  other  hand,  in  this  second 
collection  we  find  numerous  repetitions  of  proverbs  and  portions  of 
proverbs  from  the  first : — (1)  Whole  proverbs  perfectly  identical 
(leaving  out  of  view  insignificant  variations)  :  xxv.  24  =  xxi.  9, 
xxvi.  22=  xviii.  8,  xxvii.  12  =  xxii.  3,  xxvii.  13  =  xx.  16; — (2) 
proverbs  identical  in  meaning,  with  somewhat  changed  expression  : 
xxvi.  13  =  xxii.  13,  xxvi.  15  — xix.  24,  xxviii.  6  =  xix.  1,  xxviii.  19  = 
xii.  11,  xxix.  13  =  xxii.  2; — (3)  proverbs  with  one  line  the  same 
and  one  line  different :  xxvii.  21  =xvii.  3,  xxix.  22  =  xv.  18  ;  cf. 
also  xxvii.  15  with  xix.  13.  When  we  compare  these  proverbs  with 
one  another,  we  are  uncertain  as  to  many  of  them  which  has  the 
priority,  as  e.g.  xxvii.  21  =  xvii.  3,  xxix.  22  =xv.  18  ;  but  in  the  case 
of  others  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Hezekiah-collection  contains  the 
original  form  of  the  proverb  which  is  found  in  the  other  collec 
tion,  as  xxvi.  13,  xxviii.  6,  19,  xxix.  13,  xxvii.  15,  in  relation  to 
their  parallels.  In  the  other  portions  of  this  book  also  we  find  such 
repetitions  as  are  met  with  in  these  two  collections  of  Solomonic 
proverbs.  In  i.  7-ix.  we  have  ii.  16,  a  little  changed,  repeated  in 
vii.  5,  and  iii.  15  in  viii.  11  ;  ix.  10a  =  i.  7a  is  a  case  not  worthy 
of  being  mentioned,  and  it  were  inappropriate  here  to  refer  to  ix. 
4,  16.  In  the  first  appendix  of  "  the  Words  of  the  Wise,"  xxii. 
17-xxiv.  22,  single  lines  often  repeat  themselves  in  another  con- 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


nection  ;  cf.  xxiii.  3  and  6,  xxiii.  10  and  xxii.  28,  xxiii.  17  f.  and 
xxiv.  13  f.,  xxii.  23  and  xxiii.  11,  xxiii.  17  and  xxiv.  1.  That  in 
such  cases  the  one  proverb  is  often  the  pattern  of  the  other,  is  placed 
beyond  a  doubt  by  the  relation  of  xxiv.  19  to  Ps.  xxxvii.  1  ;  cf. 
also  xxiv.  20  with  Ps.  xxxvii.  38.  If  here  there  are  proverbs  like 
those  of  Solomon  in  their  expression,  the  presumption  is  that  the 
priority  belongs  to  the  latter,  as  xxiii.  27  cf.  xxii.  14,  xxiv.  5  f, 
cf  xi.  14,  xxiv.  19  f.  cf.  xiii.  9,  in  which  latter  case  the  justice 
of  the  presumption  is  palpable.  Within  the  second  appendix  of 
"  the  Words  of  the  Wise,"  xxiv.  23  ff.,  no  repetitions  are  to  be 
expected  on  account  of  its  shortness ;  yet  is  xxiv.  23  repeated 
from  the  Solomonic  Mashal  xxviii.  21,  and  as  xxiv.  33  f.  are 
literally  the  same  as  vi.  10  f.,  the  priority  is  presumably  on  the 
side  of  the  author  of  i.  7-ix.,  at  least  of  the  Mashal  in  the  form 
in  which  he  communicates  it.  The  supplements  xxx.  and  xxxi. 
afford  nothing  that  is  worth  mention  as  bearing  on  our  present 
inquiry,1  and  we  may  therefore  now  turn  to  the  question,  What 
insight  into  the  origin  of  these  proverbs  and  their  collection  do  the 
observations  made  afford  ? 

From  the  numerous  repetitions  of  proverbs  and  portions  of 
proverbs  of  the  first  collection  of  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon"  in 
the  Hezekiah-collection,  as  well  as  from  another  reason  stated  at 
the  end  of  the  foregoing  section  of  our  inquiry,  we  conclude  that 
the  two  collections  were  by  different  authors  ;  in  other  words,  that 
they  had  not  both  «  the  men  of  Hezekiah"  for  their  authors.  It 
is  true  that  the  repetitions  in  themselves  do  not  prove  anything 
against  the  oneness  of  their  authorship  ;  for  there  are  within  the 
several  collections,  and  even  within  i.-ix.  (cf.  vi.  20  with  i.  8,  viii. 

1  Quite  the  same  phenomenon,  Fleischer  remarks,  presents  itsejf  in  the  dif 
ferent  collections  of  proverbs  ascribed  to  the  Caliph  Ali,  where  frequently  one 
and  the  same  thought  in  one  collection  is  repeated  in  manifold  forms  in  a  second 
here  in  a  shorter,  there  in  a  longer  form.  As  a  general  principle  this  is  to  be 
borne  in  mind,  that  the  East  transmits  unchanged,  with  scrupulous  exactness 
only  religious  writings  regarded  as  holy  and  divine,  and  therefore  the^e 
Proverbs  have  been  transmitted  unchanged  only  since  they  became  a  distinct 
part  of  the  canon  ;  before  that  time  it  happened  to  them,  as  to  all  in  the  East 
that  is  exposed  to  the  arbitrariness  of  the  changing  spirit  and  the  intercourse  of 
life,  that  one  and  the  same  original  text  has  been  modified  by  one  speaker 
and  writer  after  another.  Thus  of  the  famous  poetical  works  of  the  East  such 
eg.  as  F.rdusi's  Schah-Nameh  [Booh  of  the  Kings]  and  Sadi's  Garden  of 
looses,  not  one  MS.  copy  agrees  with  another. 


INTRODUCTION.  27 

10  f.  with  iii.  l^f.),  repetitions,  notwithstanding  the  oneness  of 
their  authorship.  But  if  two  collections  of  proverbs  are  in  so 
many  various  ways  different  in  their  character,  as  x.  1-xxii.  16  and 
xxv.— xxix.,  then  the  previous  probability  rises  almost  to  a  certainty 
by  such  repetitions.  From  the  form,  for  the  most  part  anomalous,  in 
which  the  Hezekiah-collection  presents  the  proverbs  and  portions  of 
proverbs  which  are  found  also  in  the  first  collection,  and  from  their 
being  otherwise  independent,  we  further  conclude  that  "the  men  of 
Hezekiah"  did  not  borrow  from  the  first  collection,  but  formed  it 
from  other  sources.  But  since  one  does  not  understand  why  "  the 
men  of  Hezekiah"  should  have  omitted  so  great  a  number  of 
genuine  Solomonic  proverbs  which  remain,  after  deducting  the 
proportionally  few  that  have  been  repeated  (for  this  omission  is 
not  to  be  explained  by  saying  that  they  selected  those  that  were 
appropriate  and  wholesome  for  their  time),  we  are  further  justified 
in  the  conclusion  that  the  other  collection  was  known  to  them  as  one 
current  in  their  time.  Their  object  was,  indeed,  not  to  supplement 
this  older  collection  ;  they  rather  regarded  their  undertaking  as 
a  similar  people's  book,  which  they  wished  to  place  side  by  side 
with  that  collection  without  making  it  superfluous.  The  difference 
of  the  selection  in  the  two  collections  has  its  whole  directing  occa 
sion  in  the  difference  of  the  intention.  The  first  collection  begins 
(x.  1)  with  the  proverb — 

A  wise  son  maketh  glad  his  father, 
And  a  foolish  son  is  the  grief  of  his  mother ; 
the  second  (xxv.  2)  with  the  proverb- 
It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing, 
And  the  glory  of  kings  to  search  out  a  matter. 

The  one  collection  is  a  book  for  youth,  to  whom  it  is  dedicated  in 
the  extended  introduction,  i.  7-ix. ;  the  second  is  a  people's  book 
suited  to  the  time  of  Hezekiah  ("  Solomon's  Wisdom  in  Hezekiah's 
days,"  as  Stier  has  named  it),  and  therefore  it  takes  its  start 
not,  like  the  first,  from  the  duties  of  the  child,  but  from  those  of 
the  king.  If  in  the  two  collections  everything  does  not  stand  in 

*  O 

conscious  relation  to  these  different  objects,  yet  the  collectors  at 
least  have,  from  the  commencement  to  the  close  (cf.  xxii.  15  with 
xxix.  26),  these  objects  before  their  eyes. 

As  to  the  time  at  which  the  first  collection  was  made,  the  above 
considerations  also  afford  us  some  materials  for  forming  a  judg 
ment.  Several  pairs  of  proverbs  which  it  contains  present  to  us 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVECDS. 

essentially  the  same  sayings  in  older  and  more  recent  forms.  Keil 
regards  the  proverbs  also  that  appear  less  original  as  old-Solomonic, 
and  remarks  that  one  and  the  same  poet  does  not  always  give 
expression  to  the  same  thoughts  with  the  same  pregnant  brevity 
and  excellence,  and  affirms  that  changes  and  reproductions  of 
separate  proverbs  may  proceed  even  from  Solomon  himself.  This 
is  possible  ;  but  if  we  consider  that  even  Davidic  psalms  have  been 
imitated,  and  that  in  the  "  Words  of  the  Wise"  Solomonic  proverbs 
are  imitated, — moreover,  that  proverbs  especially  are  subject  to 
changes,  and  invite  to  imitation  and  transformation, — we  shall  find 
it  to  be  improbable,  Rather  we  would  suppose,  that  between  the 
publication  of  the  3000  proverbs  of  Solomon  and  the  preparation 
of  the  collection  x.-xxii.  16  a  considerable  time  elapsed,  during 
which  the  old-Solomonic  Mashal  had  in  the  mouths  of  the  people 
and  of  poets  acquired  a  multitude  of  accretions,  and  that  the  col 
lector  had  without  hesitation  gathered  together  such  indirect 
Solomonic  proverbs  with  those  that  were  directly  Solomonic.  But 
did  not  then  the  3000  Solomonic  proverbs  afford  to  him  scope 
enough  ?  We  must  answer  this  question  in  the  negative  ;  for  if 
that  vast  number  of  Solomonic  proverbs  was  equal  in  moral-reli 
gious  worth  to  those  that  have  been  preserved  to  us,  then  neither 
the  many  repetitions  within  the  first  collection  nor  the  proportional 
poverty  of  the  second  can  be  explained.  The  "  men  of  Hezekiah" 
made  their  collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs  nearly  300  years  after 
Solomon's  time  ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  old  book 
of  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  had  disappeared  at  that  time.  Much 
rather  we  may  with  probability  conclude,  from  the  subjects  to 
which  several  proverbs  of  these  collections  extend  (husbandly,  war, 
court  life,  etc.),  and  from  Solomon's  love  for  the  manifold  forms 
of  natural  and  of  social  life,  that  his  3000  proverbs  would  not  have 
afforded  much  greater  treasures  than  these  before  us.  But  if  the 
first  collection  was  made  at  a  time  in  which  the  old-Solomonic 
proverbs  had  been  already  considerably  multiplied  by  new  combi 
nations,  accretions,  and  imitations,  then  probably  a  more  suitable 
time  for  their  origination  could  not  be  than  that  of  Jehoshaphat, 
which  was  more  related  to  the  time  of  Solomon  than  to  that 
of  David.  The  personality  of  Jehoshaphat,  inclined  toward  the 
promotion  of  the  public  worship  of  God,  the  edification  of  the 
people,  the  administration  of  justice ;  the  dominion  of  the  house  of 
David  recognised  and  venerated  far  and  wide  amon^  neighbouring 


INTRODUCTION.  29 

peoples  ;  the  tendencies  of  that  time  towards  intercourse  with  dis 
tant  regions ;  the  deep  peace  which  followed  the  subjugation  of 
the  confederated  nations, — all  these  are  features  which  stamped 
the  time  of  Jehoshaphat  as  a  copy  of  that  of  Solomon.  Hence  we 
are  to  expect  in  it  the  fostering  care  of  the  Chokma.  If  the  author 
of  the  introduction  and  editor  of  the  older  book  of  Proverbs  lived 
after  Solomon  and  before  Hezekiah,  then  the  circumstances  of 
the  case  most  suitably  determine  his  time  as  at  the  beginning  of 
the  reign  of  Jehoshaphat,  some  seventy  years  after  Solomon's  death. 
If  in  i.-ix.  it  is  frequently  said  that  wisdom  was  seen  openly  in  the 
streets  and  ways,  this  agrees  with  2  Chron.xvii.  7—9,  where  it  is  said 
that  princes,  priests,  and  Levites,  sent  out  by  Jehoshaphat  (compare 
the  Carolingian  missi],  went  forth  into  the  towns  of  Judah  with  the 
book  of  the  law  in  their  hands  as  teachers  of  the  people,  and  with 
2  Chron.  xix.  4,  where  it  is  stated  that  Jehoshaphat  himself  u  went 
out  through  the  people  from  Beer-sheba  to  Mount  Ephraim,  and 
brought  them  back  unto  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers."  We 
have  an  evidence  of  the  fondness  for  allegorical  forms  of  address 
at  that  time  in  2  Kings  xiv.  8-11  (2  Chron.  xxv.  17—21),  which  is 
so  far  favourable  to  the  idea  that  the  allegorizing  author  of  i.-ix. 
belonged  to  that  epoch  of  history. 

This  also  agrees  with  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat,  that  in  the  first  col 
lection  the  kingdom  appears  in  its  bright  side,  adorned  with  righteous 
ness  (xiv.  35,  xvi.  10, 12, 13,  xx.  8),  wisdom  (xx.  26),  grace  and  truth 
(xx.  28),  love  to  the  good  (xxii.  11),  divine  guidance  (xxi.  1),  and  in 
the  height  of  power  (xvi.  14, 15,  xix.  12) ;  while  in  the  second  collec 
tion,  which  immediately  begins  with  a  series  of  the  king's  sayings, 
the  kingdom  is  seen  almost  only  (with  exception  of  xxix.  14)  on 
its  dark  side,  and  is  represented  under  the  destructive  dominion  of 
tyranny  (xxviii.  15,  16,  xxix.  2),  of  oppressive  taxation  (xxix.  4), 
of  the  Camarilla  (xxv.  5,  xxix.  12),  and  of  multiplied  authorities 
(xxviii.  2).  Elster  is  right  when  he  remarks,  that  in  x.-xxii.  16  the 
kingdom  in  its  actual  state  corresponds  to  its  ideal,  and  the  warning 
against  the  abuse  of  royal  power  lies  remote.  If  these  proverbs 
more  distinguishably  than  those  in  xxv.-xxix.  bear  the  physiog 
nomy  of  the  time  of  David  and  Solomon,  so,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  time  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  son  and  successor  of  Asa,  is  favour 
able  to  their  collection  ;  while  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  the  son 
and  successor  of  Ahaz,  and  father  and  predecessor  of  Manasseh, 
in  which,  through  the  sin  of  Ahaz,  negotiations  with  the  world- 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

kingdom  began,  that  cloudy  aspect  of  the  kingdom  which  is  borne 
by  the  second  supplement,  xxiv.  23-25,  was  brought  near. 

Thus  between  Solomon  and  Hezekiah,  and  probably  under 
Jehoshaphat,  the  older  Book  of  Proverbs  contained  in  i.-xxiv.  22 
first  appeared.  The  "Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  x.  1-xxii.  16,  which 
formed  the  principal  part,  the  very  kernel  of  it,  were  enclosed  on  the 
one  side,  at  their  commencement,  by  the  lengthened  introduction 
i.  7-ix.,  in  which  the  collector  announces  himself  as  a  highly  gifted 
teacher  and  as  the  instrument  of  the  Spirit  of  revelation,  and  on  the 
other  side  are  shut  in  at  their  close  by  "  the  Words  of  the  Wise," 
xxii.  17— xxiv.  34.  The  author,  indeed,  does  not  announce  i.  6  such 
a  supplement  of  "  the  Words  of  the  Wise  ;"  but  after  these  words 
in  the  title  of  the  book,  he  leads  us  to  expect  it.  The  introduc 
tion  to  the  supplement  xxii.  17-2J.  sounds  like  an  echo  of  the 
larger  introduction,  and  corresponds  to  the  smaller  compass  of  the 
supplement.  The  work  bears  on  the  whole  the  stamp  of  a  unity ; 
for  even  in  the  last  proverb  with  which  it  closes  (xxiv.  21  f., 
"  My  son,  fear  thou  Jahve  and  the  king,"  etc.),  there  still  sounds 
the  same  key-note  which  the  author  had  struck  at  the  commence 
ment.  A  later  collector,  belonging  to  the  time  subsequent  to 
Hezekiah,  enlarged  the  work  by  the  addition  of  the  Hezekiah- 
portion,  and  by  a  short  supplement  of  "  the  Words  of  the  Wise," 
which  he  introduces,  according  to  the  law  of  analogy,  after  xxii. 
17-xxiv.  22.  The  harmony  of  the  superscriptions  xxiv.  23,  xxv. 
1,  favours  at  least  the  supposition  that  these  supplements  are  the 
work  of  one  hand.  The  circumstance  that  "  the  Words  of  the 
Wise,"  xxii.  17-xxiv.  22,  in  two  of  their  maxims  refer  to  the  older 
collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  "  the 
Words  of  the  Wise,"  xxiv.  23  ff.,  refer  in  xxiv.  23  to  the  Heze- 
kiah-collection,  and  in  xxiv.  33  f.  to  the  introduction  i.  7-ix., 
strengthens  the  supposition  that  with  xxiv.  23  a  second  half  of  the 
book,  added  by  another  hand,  begins.  There  is  no  reason  for  not 
attributing  the  appendix  xxx.-xxxi.  to  this  second  collector;  perhaps 
he  seeks,  as  already  remarked  above,  to  render  by  means  of  it  the 
conclusion  of  the  extended  Book  of  Proverbs  uniform  with  that  of 
the  older  book.  Like  the  older  collection  of  "  Proverbs  of  Solo 
mon,"  so  also  now  the  Hezekiah-collection  has  "  Proverbs  of  the 
Wise "  on  the  right  and  on  the  left,  and  the  king  Of  proverbial 
poetry  stands  in  the  midst  of  a  worthy  retinue.  The  second  col 
lector  distinguishes  himself  from  the  first  by  this,  that  he  never 


INTRODUCTION.  ol 

professes  himself  to  be  a  proverbial  poet.  It  is  possible  that  the 
proverbial  poem  of  the  "  virtuous  woman,"  xxxi.  10  ff.,  may  be 
his  work,  but  there  is  nothing  to  substantiate  this  opinion. 

After  this  digression,  into  which  we  have  been  led  by  the  repe 
titions  found  in  the  book,  we  now  return,  conformably  to  our  plan, 
to  examine  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  forms  of  its  language 
and  of  its  doctrinal  contents,  and  to  inquire  whether  the  results 
hitherto  attained  are  confirmed,  and  perhaps  more  fully  determined, 
by  this  further  investigation. 

4.  The  Book  of  the  Proverbs  on  the  side  of  its  manifoldness  of 
style  and  form  of  instruction. — We  commence  our  inquiry  with  the 
relation  in  which  x.-xxii.  16  and  xxv.-xxix.  stand  to  each  other  with 
reference  to  their  forms  of  language.  If  the  primary  stock  of  both 
of  these  sections  belongs  indeed  to  the  old  time  of  Solomon,  then  they 
must  bear  essentially  the  same  verbal  stamp  upon  them.  Here 
we  of  course  keep  out  of  view  the  proverbs  that  are  wholly  or 
partially  identical.  If  the  expression  fEIT'H'in  (the  chambers  of  the 
body)  is  in  the  first  collection  a  favourite  figure  (xviii.  8,  xx.  27,  30), 
coined  perhaps  by  Solomon  himself,  the  fact  that  this  figure  is  also 
found  in  xxvi.  22  is  not  to  be  taken  into  account,  since  in  xxvi.  22 
the  proverb  xviii.  8  is  repeated.  Now  it  cannot  at  all  be  denied, 
that  in  the  first  collection  certain  expressions  are  met  with  which 
one  might  expect  to  meet  again  in  the  Hezekiah-collection,  and 
which,  notwithstanding,  are  not  to  be  found  in  it.  Ewald  gives 
a  list  of  such  expressions,  in  order  to  show  that  the  old-Solo 
monic  dialect  occurs,  with  few  exceptions,  only  in  the  first  collec 
tion.  But  his  catalogue,  when  closely  inspected,  is  unsatisfactory. 
That  many  of  these  expressions  occur  also  in  the  introduction 
i.  1-ix.  proves,  it  is  true,  nothing  against  him.  But  N|p.E 
(health),  xii.  18,  xiii.  17,  xiv.  30,  xv.  4,  xvi.  24,  occurs  also  in 
xxix.  1;  nT!  (he  pursueth),  xi.  19,  xii.  11,  xv.  9,  xix.  7,  also  in 
xxviii.  19  ;  fro  (a  tattler),  xvi.  28,  xviii.  8,  also  in  xxvi.  20,  22  ; 
np3l  N7  (not  go  unpunished),  xi.  21,  xvi.  5,  xvii.  5,  also  in  xxviii. 
20.  These  expressions  thus  supply  an  argument  for,  not  against, 
the  linguistic  oneness  of  the  two  collections.  The  list  of  ex 
pressions  common  to  the  two  collections  might  be  considerably 
increased,  e.g. :  XH33  (are  unruly),  xxix.  18,  Kal  xiii.  18,  xv.  32  ; 
r?  (he  that  hastens),  xix.  2,  xxi.  5,  xxviii.  20,  xxix.  19  ;  D^no 
(of  contentions),  xxi.  9  (xxv.  24),  xxi.  19,  xxiii.  29,  xxvi.  21,  xxvii. 


32  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

25.  If  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  striking  fact  that  the  figures 
of  speech  D>sn  lipo  (a  fountain  of  life),  x.  11,  xiii.  14,  xiv.  27, 
xvi.  22,  and  D^n  YV  (a  tree  of  life),  xi.  30,  xiii.  12,  xv.  4,  as 
also  the  expressions  nnno  (destruction),  x.  14,  15,  xiii.  3,  xiv.  28, 
xviii.  7,  x.  29,  xxi.  15,  n'Bj  (he  uttereth),  xii.  17,  xiv.  5,  25,  xix. 
5,  9  ;  ^p  (perverteth),  xiii.  6,  xix.  3,  xxi.  12,  xxii.  12,  and  *]?D 
(perverseness),  xi.  3,  xv.  4,  are  only  to  be  found  in  the  first  col 
lection,  and  not  in  that  by  the  "  men  of  Hezekiah,"  it  is  not  a 
decisive  evidence  against  the  oneness  of  the  origin  of  the  proverbs 
in  both  collections.  The  fact  also,  properly  brought  forward  by 
Ewald,  that  proverbs  which  begin  with  t?1  (there  is), — e.g.  xi.  24, 
"  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  increaseth  still," — are  exclusively 
found  in  the  first  collection,  need  not  perplex  us  ;  it  is  one  peculiar 
kind  of  proverbs  which  the  author  of  this  collection  has  by  pre 
ference  gathered  together,  as  he  has  also  omitted  all  parabolic 
proverbs  except  these  two,  x.  26,  xi.  22.  If  proverbs  beginning 
with  a*  are  found  only  in  the  first,  so  on  the  other  hand  the  para 
bolic  Vav  and  the  proverbial  perfect,  reporting  as  it  were  an  ex 
perience  (cf.  in  the  second  collection,  besides  xxvi.  13,  xxvii.  12, 
xxix.  13,  also  xxviii.  1,  xxix.  9),  for  which  Db'derlein1  has  invented 
the  expression  aoristus  gnomicus,2  are  common  to  both  sentences. 
Another  remark  of  Evvald's  (Ja/irb.  xi.  28),  that  extended  proverbs 
with  fc^K  are  exclusively  found  in  the  Hezekiah-collection  (xxix. 
9,  3,  xxv.  18,  28),  is  not  fully  established  ;  in  xvi.  27-29  three 
proverbs  with  B^K  are  found  together,  and  in  xx.  6  as  well  as  in 
xxix.  9  E'^N  occurs  twice  in  one  proverb.  Rather  it  strikes  us  that 
the  article,  not  merely  the  punctatorially  syncopated,  but  that  ex 
pressed  by  n,  occurs  only  twice  in  the  first  collection,  in  xx.  1,  xxi. 
31  ;  oftener  in  the  second,  xxvi.  14,  18,  xxvii.  19,  20,  22.  Since, 
however,  the  first  does  not  wholly  omit  the  article,  this  also  cannot 
determine  us  to  reject  the  linguistic  unity  of  the  second  collec 
tion  with  the  first,  at  least  according  to  their  primary  stock. 

But  also  what  of  the  linguistic  unity  of  i.  1-ix.  with  both  of  these, 
maintained  by  Keil  ?  It  is  true,  and  merits  all  consideration,  that 
a  unity  of  language  and  of  conception  between  i.  1-ix.  and  x.- 
xxii.  16  which  far  exceeds  the  degree  of  unity  between  x.-xxii.  16 
and  xxv. -xxix.  may  be  proved.  The  introduction  is  bound  with  the 

1  EC  Jen  u.  Anf,(itze,  ii.  316. 

2  A  similar  thing  is  found  among  German  proverbs,  eg. :  Wer  niclit  mitsass, 
auch  niclit  mitass  (Whoso  sat  not,  ate  not). 


INTRODUCTION.  33 

first  collection  in  the  closest  manner  by  the  same  use  of  such  ex 
pressions  as  "UK  (gathereth),  vi.  8,  x.  5 ;  P'^K  (the  middle,  i.e.  of 
the  night,  deep  darkness),  vii.  9,  xx.  20  ;  JTnnx  (the  end),  v.  4, 
xxiii.  18,  xxiv.  14;  »•)£«  (fierce),  v.  9,  xvii.'ll;  n:<3  (under 
standing),  i.  2,  xvi.  16;  ruwn  (understanding),  ii.  6,  iii.  19,  xxi. 
30;  rnt  (an  adulteress),  v.  3,  xxii.  14,  xxiii.  33;  3^  ton  (lacking 
understanding),  vi.  32,  vii.  7,  xii.  11  ;  np^>  t\QV  (will  increase 
learning),  i.  5,  ix.  9,  xvi.  21,  23;  (TO  (uttereth),  vi.  19,  xiv.  5, 
xix.  5,  9  ;  fta  (perverted),  iii.  32,  xiv.  2  ;  D'anp  (contention),  vi. 
14,  19,  x.  12  ;  NS-iD  (health),  iv.  22,  xii.  18,  xiii.  17,  xvi.  24 
(deliverance,  xxix.  1)  ;  n0:  (are  plucked  up),  ii.  22,  xv.  25 ; 
nj^  &6  (shall  not  be  unpunished),  vi.  29,  xi.  21,  xvi.  5;  Wn 
(strengthened,  i.e.  the  face),  vii.  13,  xxi.  29  ;  D^n  ^  (tree  of  life), 
iii.  18,  xi.  30,  xiii.  12,  xv.  4;  snj?  (becometh  surety)  and  Vpn 
(striketh  hands)  occurring  together,  vi.  1,  xvii.  18,  xxii.  26 ;  DT13 
and  &'Kna  (simplicity,  folly),  i.  22,  32,  viii.  5,  ix.  6,  xxiii.  3 ;  pi? 
(to  wink  with  the  eyes),  vi.  13,  x.  10  ;  Tvy>  (a  city),  viii.  3,  ix.  3, 
14,  xi.  11  ;  rppjq  (the  beginning),  i.  7,  xvii.  14 ;  3to  bb>  (good 
understanding),  iii.  4,  xiii.  15 ;  pN-«3K»  (shall  dwell  in  the  land), 
ii.  21,  x.  30;  jVlo  rfep  (sendeth  forth  strife),  vi.  14,  xvi.  28  ;  rfaann 
(evil  words),  ii.  12,  vi.  14,  x.  31,  xvi.  28  ;  rnin  (instruction),  i.  8, 
iii.  1,  iv.  2,  vii.  2,  xiii.  14;  n»Bhn  (counsel),  iii.  21,  viii.  14,  xviii. 
1  ;  niTiann  (prudent  measures),  i.  5,  xx.  18,  xxiv.  6 ; — and  these 
are  not  the  only  points  of  contact  between  the  two  portions  which 
an  attentive  reader  will  meet  with.  This  relation  of  i.  1-ix.  18  to 
x.-xxii.  16  is  a  strong  proof  of  the  internal  unity  of  that  portion, 
which  Bertheau  has  called  in  question.  But  are  we  therefore  to 
conclude,  with  Keil,  that  the  introduction  is  not  less  of  the  old 
time  of  Solomon  than  x.-xxii.  16  ?  Such  a  conclusion  lies  near, 
but  we  do  not  yet  reach  it.  For  with  these  points  of  contact  there 
are  not  a  few  expressions  exclusively  peculiar  to  the  introduction  ; — 
the  expressions  naTO  sing,  (counsel),  i.  4,  iii.  21;  nony  (prudence), 
i.  4,  viii.  5,  12  ;  nx^D  (an  enigma,  obscure  maxim),  i.  6 ;  $W  (a 
path  of  life),  ii.  9,  iv.  11,  26  ;  rfayo,  ii.  15,  18,  v.  6,  21 ;  jW  (the 
apple  of  the  eye),  vii.  2,  9  ;  nhna  (the  throat),  i.  9,  iii.  3,  22  ; 
the  verbs  nn«  (cometh),  i.  27,  D£S  (make  level  or  plain),  iv.  26, 
v.  6,  21,  and  nab  (deviate),  iv.  15,  vii.  25.  Peculiar  to  this  section 
is  the  heaping  together  of  synonyms  in  close  connection,  as  "  con 
gregation"  and  "  assembly,"  v.  14,  "  lovely  hind"  and  «  pleasant 
roe,"  v.  19;  cf.  v.  11,  vi.  7,  vii.  9,  viii.  13,  31.  This  usage  is, 

VOL.  I.  f« 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

however,  only  a  feature  in  the  characteristic  style  of  this  section 
altogether  different  from  that  of  x.  1-xxii.  16,  as  well  as  from 
that  of  xxv.-xxix.,  of  its  disjointed  diffuse  form,  delightino-  in 
repetitions,  abounding  in  synonymous  parallelism,  even  to  a  repeti 
tion  of  the  same  words  (cf.  e.g.  vi.  2),  which,  since  the  linguistic 
and  the  poetic  forms  are  here  inseparable,  we  have  already  spoken 
of  in  the  second  part  of  our  introductory  dissertation.  This  fun 
damental  diversity  in  the  whole  condition  of  the  section,  notwith 
standing  those  numerous  points  of  resemblance,  demands  for 
i.  1-ix.  an  altogether  different  author  from  Solomon,  and  one  who 
is  more  recent.  If  we  hold  by  this  view,  then  these  points  of 
resemblance  between  the  sections  find  the  most  satisfactory  expla 
nation.  The  gifted  author  of  the  introduction  (i.  1-ix.)  has  formed 
his  style,  without  being  an  altogether  slavish  imitator,  on  the  Solo 
monic  proverbs.  And  why,  then,  are  his  parallels  confined  almost 
exclusively  to  the  section  x.  1-xxii.  16,  and  do  not  extend  to  xxv.- 
xxix.?  Because  he  edited  the  former  and  not  the  latter,  and  took 
pleasure  particularly  in  the  proverbs  which  he  placed  together, 
x.  1-xxii.  16.  Not  only  are  expressions  of  this  section,  formed  by 
himself,  echoed  in  his  poetry,  but  the  latter  are  for  the  most  part 
formed  out  of  germs  supplied  by  the  former.  One  may  regard  xix. 
27,  cf.  xxvii.  11,  as  the  germ  of  the  admonitory  addresses  to  the  son, 
and  xiv.  1  as  the  occasion  of  the  allegory  of  the  wise  and  the 
foolish  woman,  ix.  Generally,  the  poetry  of  this  writer  has  its 
hidden  roots  in  the  older  writings.  Who  does  not  hear,  to  mention 
only  one  thing,  in  i.  7-ix.  an  echo  of  the  old  yov  (hear),  Deut. 
vi.  4-9,  cf.  xi.  18-21?  The  whole  poetry  of  this  writer  savours 
of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  The  admonitory  addresses  i.  7-ix. 
are  to  the  Book  of  Proverbs  what  Deuteronomy  is  to  the  Pentateuch. 
As  Deuteronomy  seeks  to  bring  home  and  seal  upon  the  heart  of 
the  people  the  rnta  of  the  Mosaic  law,  so  do  they  the  rnta  of  the 
Solomonic  proverbs. 

We  now  further  inquire  whether,  in  the  style  of  the  two  supple 
ments,  xxii.  17-xxiv.  22  and  xxiv.  23  ff.,  it  is  proved  that  the  former 
concludes  the  Book  of  Proverbs  edited  by  the  author  of  the  general 
introduction,  and  that  the  latter  was  added  by  a  different  author  at 
the  same  time  with  the  Hezekiah-collection.  Bertheau  places  both 
supplements  together,  and  attributes  the  introduction  to  them,  xxii. 
17-21,  to  the  author  of  the  general  introduction,  i.  7-ix.  From 
the  fact  that  in  ver.  19  of  this  lesser  introduction  ("  I  have  taught 

>  O 


INTRODUCTION.  35 

thee,  WlN-fjX,  even  thee")  the  pronoun  is  as  emphatically  repeated 
as  in  xxiii.  15  (^"W  ^  cf.  xxiii.  14,  19),  and  that  D'W  (sweet), 
xxii.  18,  also  occurs  in  the  following  proverbs,  xxiii.  8,  xxiv.  4, 1  see 
no  ground  for  denying  it  to  the  author  of  the  larger  general  intro 
duction,  since,  according  to  Bertheau's  own  just  observation,  the 
linguistic  form  of  the  whole  collection  of  proverbs  has  an  influence 
on  the  introduction  of  the  collector;  with  more  justice  from  DH?6#, 
xxii.  20  [only  in  Keri\,  as  the  title  of  honour  given  to  the  col 
lection  of  proverbs,  compared  with  DH^,  viii.  6,  may  we  argue 
for  the  identity  of  the  authorship  of  both  introductions.     As  little 
can  the  contemporaneousness  of  the  two  supplements  be  shown 
from  the  use  of  the  pronoun,  xxiv.  32,  the  ?b  TPW  (animum  ad- 
vertere,  xxiv.  32),  and  DJW  (shall  be  delight)  xxiv.  25,  for  these 
verbal  points  of   contact,  if  they  proved  anything,  would  prove 
too  much  :    not  only  the    contemporaneousness  of    the   two   sup 
plements,  but  also  the  identity  of  their  authorship  ;    but   in  this 
case  one  does  not  see  what  the  superscription  D*B3n£  ^ks-na  (these 
also  of  the  wise  men),  separating  them,  means.      Moreover,  xxiv. 
33  f.  are  from  vi.  10  f.,  and  nearer  than  the  comparison  of  the 
first   supplement  lies  the  comparison  of  cyy  with  ii.  10,  ix.  17, 
a5?  nPn  D1^  (a  man    lacking  understanding)  with  xvii.  18,  irroyp 
with  xxii.  14, —  points  of  contact  which,  if  an  explanatory  reason 
is  needed,  may  be  accounted  for  from  the  circumstance  that  to 
the  author  or  authors  of   the  proverbs  xxiv.  23  ff.  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  i.  1-xxiv.  22  may  have  been  perfectly  familiar.      From 
imitation    also  the    points   of    contact  of   xxii.    17-xxiv.  22  may 
easily  be  explained;    for  not  merely  the  lesser  introduction,  the 
proverbs  themselves  also  in  part  strikingly  agree  with  the  prevailing 
language  of  i.  1-ix. :  cf.  ^a  "iBte  (go  straight  forward  in  the  way), 
xxiii.  19,  with  iv.  14;  niKnn  (wisdom),  xxiv.  7,  with  i.  20,  ix.  1;  and 
several  others.     But  if,  according  to  i.  7,  we  conceive  of  the  older 
Book  of  Proverbs  as  accompanied  with,   rather  than  as  without 
fi'P?t]  ^  (words  of  wise  men),  then  from  the  similarity  of  the 
two  superscriptions  xxiv.  23,  xxv.  1,  it  is  probable  that  the  more 
recent  half  of  the  canonical  book  begins  with  xxiv.  23,  and  we 
cannot  therefore  determine  to  regard  xxiv.  23  ff.  also  as  a  com 
ponent    part  of  the  older  Book  of   Proverbs;    particularly  since 
xxiv.  236  is  like  xxviii.  21a,  and  the  author  of  the  introduction  can 
scarcely  have  twice  taken  into  his  book  the  two  verses  xxiv.  33  f., 
which  moreover  seem  to  stand  in  their  original  connection  at  vi.  lOf. 


36  THE  DOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

The  supplements  to  the  Hezekiali-collection,  xxx.  f.,  are  of  so 
peculiar  a  form,  that  it  will  occur  to  no  one  (leaving  out  of  view 
such  expressions  as  D'^i?  njn,  knowledge  of  the  Holy,  xxx.  3,  cf. 
ix.  10)  to  ascribe  them  to  one  of  the  authors  of  the  preceding 
proverbs.  We  content  ourselves  here  with  a  reference  to  Miihlau's 
work,  De  Proverbiorum  quce  dicuntur  Aguri  et  Lemuelis  origine 
atque  indole,  1869,  where  the  Aramaic-Arabic  colouring  of  this 
in  all  probability  foreign  section  is  closely  investigated. 

Having  thus  abundantly  proved  that  the  two  groups  of  pro 
verbs  bearing  the  inscription  nb;>^  WD  are,  as  to  their  primary 
stock,  truly  old-Solomonic,  though  not  without  an  admixture  of 
imitations ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  introduction,  i.  7-ix.,  as  well 
as  the  D^oan  "nm,  xxii.  17-xxiv.  and  xxx.  f.,  are  not  at  all  old- 
Solomonic,  but  belong  to  the  editor  of  the  older  Book  of  Proverbs, 
which  reaches  down  to  xxiv.  22,  so  that  thus  the  present  book  of 
the  poetry  of  Solomon  contains  united  with  it  the  poems  of  the 
older  editor,  and  besides  of  other  poets,  partly  unknown  Israelites, 
and  partly  two  foreigners  particularly  named,  Agur  and  Lemuel ;  we 
now  turn  our  attention  to  the  DOCTRINAL  CONTENTS  of  the  work, 
and  ask  whether  a  manifoldness  in  the  type  of  instruction  is  notice 
able  in  it,  and  whether  there  is  perceptible  in  this  manifoldness 
a  progressive  development.  It  may  be  possible  that  the  Proverbs 
of  Solomon,  the  Words  of  the  Wise,  and  the  Proverbial  poetry 
of  the  editor,  as  they  represent  three  eras,  so  also  represent  three 
different  stages  in  the  development  of  proverbial  poetry.  However, 
the  Words  of  the  Wise  xxii.  17-xxiv.  are  so  internally  related  to 
the  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  that  even  the  sharpest  eye  will  discover 
in  them  not  more  than  the  evening  twilight  of  the  vanishing  Solo 
monic  Mashal.  There  thus  remain  on  the  one  side  only  the  Pro 
verbs  of  Solomon  with  their  echo  in  the  Words  of  the  Wise,  on 
the  other  the  Proverbial  Poems  of  the  editor ;  and  these  present 
themselves  as  monuments  of  two  sharply  defined  epochs  in  the 
progressive  development  of  the  Mashal. 

The  common  fundamental  character  of  the  book  in  all  its  parts 
is  rightly  defined  when  we  call  it  a  Book  of  Wisdom.  Indeed,  with 
the  Church  Fathers  not  only  the  Book  of  Sirach  and  the  Solomonic 
Apocrypha,  but  also  this  Book  of  Proverbs  bears  this  title,  which 
seems  also  to  have  been  in  use  among  the  Jews,  since  Melito  of 
Saixk-s  adds  to  the  title  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  77  /cat  Zofyia ; 
j>ince,  moreover,  Eusebius  (H.  E.  iv.  22)  affirms,  that  not  only  liege- 


INTRODUCTION.  37 

sippus  and  Irenseus,  but  the  whole  of  the  ancients,  called  the 
Proverbs  of  Solomon  Uavdperos  ^o^ia.1  It  is  also  worthy  of 
observation  that  it  is  called  by  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  77  aoffi 
/3//3Xo9,  and  by  Gregory  of  Nazianzum  f)  Trai&aywyiKr)  o-otyia. 
These  names  not  only  express  praise  of  the  book,  but  they  also 
denote  at  the  same  time  the  circle  of  human  intellectual  activity 
from  which  it  emanated.  As  the  books  of  prophecy  are  a  product 
of  the  n^33,  so  the  Book  of  the  Proverbs  is  a  product  of  the  n^Dn, 
(rotyia,  the  human  effort  to  apprehend  the  objective  a-otyia,  and 
thus  of  <£iXoo-o$/a,  or  the  studium  sapientice.  It  has  emanated 
from  the  love  of  wisdom,  to  incite  to  the  love  of  wisdom,  and  to 
put  into  the  possession  of  that  which  is  the  object  of  love — for  this 
end  it  was  written.  We  need  not  hesitate,  in  view  of  Col.  ii.  8, 
to  call  the  Book  of  Proverbs  a  "  philosophical"  treatise,  since  the 
origin  of  the  name  (f>i\oao<f)ia  is  altogether  noble :  it  expresses  the 
relativity  of  human  knowledge  as  over  against  the  absoluteness  of 
the  divine  knowledge,  and  the  possibility  of  an  endlessly  progressive 
advancement  of  the  human  toward  the  divine.  The  characteristic 
ideas  of  a  dialectic  development  of  thought  and  of  the  formation  of 
a  scientific  system  did  not  primarily  appertain  to  it — the  occasion 
for  this  was  not  present  to  the  Israelitish  people  :  it  required 
fructification  through  the  Japhetic  spirit  to  produce  philosophers 
such  as  Philo,  Maimcnides,  and  Spinoza.  But  philosophy  is  every 
where  present  when  the  natural,  moral,  positive,  is  made  the  object 
of  a  meditation  which  seeks  to  apprehend  its  last  ground,  its  legi 
timate  coherence,  its  true  essence  and  aim.  In  this  view  C.  B. 
Michaelis,  in  his  Adnotationes  uleriores  in  ffagiographa,  passes 
from  the  exposition  of  the  Psalms  to  that  of  the  Proverbs  with  the 
words,  "  From  David's  closet,  consecrated  to  prayer,  we  now  pass 
into  Solomon's  school  of  wisdom,  to  admire  the  greatest  of  philo 
sophers  in  the  son  of  the  greatest  of  theologians."  2 

1  This  name  [meaning  "wisdom,   including  all  virtue"],  there  are  many 
things  to  show,  was  common  in  Palestine.    The  Jerusalem  Talmud,  in  a  passage 
quoted  by  Krochmal,  Kerem  Chemed,  v.  79,  divides  the  canon  into  min,  HX133, 
and  HEOn.     Kashi,  in  Eaba  liatlira,  14&,  calls  Mishle  (Proverbs)  and  Koheleth 
(Ecclesinstes)  ncDn  1|~i£D.     The  Book  of  Koheleth  is  called  (b.  Mec/ilta,  7o), 
according  to  its  contents,  riK&B>  ^  inDSn.     The  Song  bears  in  the  Syriac 
version  (the  Peshito)  the  inscription  chekmetho  dechekmotho. 

2  "  In  hoc  genere,"   says  Lord  Bacon,  De  Avymentis  Scientiarum,  viii.  2> 
"nihil  invenitur,  quod  ullo  modo  comparandum  sit  cum  aphovismis  illis,  quos 
edidit  rex  Salomon,  de  quo  testatur  Scriptura,  cor  illi  fuisse  instar  areiise  maris. 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


When  we  give  the  name  QiXoaotyia  to  the  tendency  of  mind  to 
which  the  Book  of  Proverbs  belongs,  we  do  not  merely  use  a  current 
scientific  word,  but  there  is  an  actual  internal  relation  of  the  Book 
of  Proverbs  to  that  which  is  the  essence  of  philosophy,  which 
Scripture  recognises  (Acts  xvii.  27,  cf.  Koin.  i.  19  f.)  as  existing 
within  the  domain  of  heathendom,  and  which  stamps  it  as  a  natural 
product  of  the  human  spirit,  which  never  can  be  wanting  where  a 
human  being  or  a  people  rises  to  higher  self-consciousness,  and 
begins  to  reflect  on  the  immediate  self-consciousness  and  its  opera 
tions  in  their  changing  relation  to  the  phenomena  of  the  external 
world.  The  mysteries  of  the  world  without  him  and  of  the  world 
within  him  give  man  no  rest,  he  must  seek  to  solve  them;  and 
whenever  he  does  that,  he  philosophizes,  i.e.  he  strives  after  a  know 
ledge  of  the  nature  of  things,  and  of  the  laws  which  govern  them 
in  the  world  of  phenomena  and  of  events  ;  on  which  account  also 
Josephus,  referring  to  Solomon's  knowledge  of  nature,  says  (Ant. 
viil.  2.  5),  ovSefAiav  TOVTWV  <f)v<Tiv  rjyvorjaev  ov&e  Ijraprj\6ev  avege- 
Taarov  aXV  iv  Trdcrais  i.$i\oav$T]crev.  Cf.  Irenseus,  Cont.  Her.  iv. 
27.  1  :  earn  qua?  est  in  condilione  (/crlcrei)  sapientiam  Dei  evponelat 
physiologice. 

The  historical  books  show  us  how  much  the  age  of  Solomon 
favoured  philosophical  inquiries  by  its  prosperity  and  peace,  its 
active  and  manifold  commercial  intercourse  with  foreign  nations. 
its  circle  of  vision  extending  to  Tarshish  and  Ophir,  and  also  how 
Solomon  himself  attained  to  an  unequalled  elevation  in  the  extent 
of  his  human  and  secular  knowledge.  We  also  read  of  some  of  the 
wise  men  in  1  Kings  v.  11,  cf.  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  Ixxxix.,  who  adorned 
the  court  of  the  wisest  of  kings;  and  the  to,  which  became, 
through  his  influence,  a  special  branch  of  Jewish  literature,  is 
the  peculiar  poetic  form  of  the  ncari.  Therefore  in  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  we  find  the  name  DV;an  n:n  (words  of  the  wise)  used 
for  DVE'O  (proverbs)  ;  and  by  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the 
proverbs  in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  D'Mn,  one  will  convince 


Sicut  enim  arense  maris  univer?as  orbis  eras  circumdant,  ita  et  sapientia  ejus 
oiniiia  huniana  non  minus  quani  divina  coniplexa  est.  In  aphorismis  vero  illis 
prseter  alia  magis  theologica  reperies  liquido  haud  pauca  prajcepta  et  monita 
civilia  pisestantissirna,  ex  profundis  quidem  sapientise  peuetralibus  scaturientia 
atque  hi  amplissimum  varietatis  campum  excurrentia."  Accordingly,  in  the 
same  work  Bacon  calls  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  "  insignes  parabolas  s.  apho- 
risnios  do  diviua  atque  morali  philusophia." 


INTRODUCTION.  39 

himself  that  this  name  has  not  merely  a  common  ethical  sense,  but 
begins  to  be  the  name  of  those  who  made  wisdom,  i.e.  the  know 
ledge  of  things  in  the  depths  of  their  essence,  their  special  lifework, 
and  who  connected  themselves  together  in  oneness  of  sentiment  and 
fellowship  into  a  particular  circle  within  the  community.     To  this 
conclusion  we  are  conducted  by  such  proverbs  as  xiii.  20 — 
He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  becomes  wise, 
And  whoever  has  intercourse  with  fools  is  destroyed  ; 
xv.  12— 

The  scorner  loveth  not  that  one  reprove  him  : 
To  wise  men  he  goeth  not ; — 

and  by  the  contrast,  which  prevails  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 
between  f?.  (mocker)  and  D?n  (wise),  in  which  we  see  that,  at 
the  same  time  with  the  striving  after  wisdom,  scepticism  also, 
which  we  call  free  thought,  obtained  a  great  ascendency  in  Israel. 
Mockery  of  religion,  rejection  of  God  in  principle  and  practice, 
a  casting  away  of  all  fear  of  Jahve,  and  in  general  of  all  SetcriSat- 
yti(wa,  were  in  Israel  phenomena  which  had  already  marked  the 
times  of  David.  One  may  see  from  the  Psalms  that  the  com 
munity  of  theDavidic  era  is  to  be  by  no  means  regarded  as  furnish 
ing  a  pattern  of  religious  life  :  that  there  were  in  it  D?i3  (Gentile 
nations)  which  were  in  no  way  externally  inferior  to  them,  and  that 
it  did  not  want  for  rejecters  of  God.  But  it  is  natural  to  expect 
that  in  the  Solomonic  era,  which  was  more  than  any  other  exposed 
to  the  dangers  of  sensuality  and  worldliness,  and  of  religious  indif 
ference  and  free-thinking  latitudinarianism,  the  number  of  the 
Dv^  increased,  and  that  scepticism  and  mockery  became  more  in 
tensified.  The  Solomonic  era  appears  to  have  first  coined  the 
name  of  Y?.  for  those  men  who  despised  that  which  was  holy, 
and  in  doing  so  laid  claim  to  wisdom  (xiv.  6),  who  caused  conten 
tion  and  bitterness  when  they  spake,  and  carefully  avoided  the 
society  of  the  D^n,  because  they  thought  themselves  above  their 
admonitions  (xv.  12).  For  in  the  psalms  of  the  Davidic  time  the 
word  733  is  commonly  used  for  them  (it  occurs  in  the  Proverbs 
only  in  xvii.  21,  with  the  general  meaning  of  low  fellow,  Germ. 
Bnbe),  and  the  name  f?  is  never  met  with  except  once,  in  Ps.  i.  1, 
which  belongs  to  the  post-Davidic  era.  One  of  the  Solomonic  pro 
verbs  (xxi.  24)  furnishes  a  definite  idea  of  this  newly  formed  word  : 

An  inflated  arrogant  man  they  call  a  scorner  (}'?), 

One  who  acts  in  the  superfluity  of  haughtiness. 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Bv  the  self-sufficiency  of  his  ungodly  thoughts  and  actions  he 
is  distinguished  from  the  'J]5i  (simple),  who  is  only  misled,  and 
may  therefore  be  reclaimed,  xix.  25,  xxi.  11;  by  his  non-recog 
nition  of  the  Holy  in  opposition  to  a  better  knowledge  and  better 
means  and  opportunities,  he  is  distinguished  from  the  ^D3  (fool 
ish,  stupid),  xvii.  16,  the  ^X  (foolish,  wicked),  i.  7,  vii.  22,  and 
the  2?  "ion  (the  void  of  understanding),  vi.  32,  who  despise  truth 
and  instruction  from  want  of  understanding,  narrowness,  and 
forgetful  ness  of  God,  but  not  from  perverse  principle.  This 
name  specially  coined,  the  definition  of  it  given  (cf.  also  the 
similarly  defining  proverb  xxiv.  8),  and  in  general  the  rich  and 
fine  technical  proverbs  in  relation  to  the  manifold  kinds  of  wisdom 
(nra,  xvi.  16 ;  IDIO,  i.  8;  ntoan,  xxi.  30;  nisra,  v.  2;  ntaann,  i.  5, 
xii.  5  ;  the  rwin  first  coined  by  the  Chokma,  etc.),  of  instruction 
in  wisdom  (H^,  i.  5 ;  rnta,  iv.  2,  vi.  23  ;  njn,  to  tend  a  flock,  to 
instruct,  x.  21;  "spn,  xxii.  6;  nain,  xv.  12;  fii^'iM  nj57,  to  win  souls, 
vi.  25,  xi.  30),  of  the  wise  men  themselves  (E3H,  xii.  15;  P^:,  x.  13; 
rviriOj  a  reprover,  preacher  of  repentance,  xxv.  12,  etc.),  and  of  the 
different  classes  of  men  (among  whom  also  ^HS  D1X;  one  who  steps 
backwards  [retrograder],  xxviii.  23) — all  this  shows  that  n^??  was 
at  that  time  not  merely  the  designation  of  an  ethical  quality,  but 
also  the  designation  of  a  science  rooted  in  the  fear  of  God  to  which 
many  noble  men  in  Israel  then  addicted  themselves.  Jeremiah 
places  (xviii.  18)  the  Dan  along  with  the  jna  (priest)  and  N'aa 
(prophet);  and  if  Ezek.  (vii.  26)  uses  |gT  (old  man)  instead  of 
&9n5  yet  by  reference  to  Job  xii.  12  this  may  be  understood.  In 
his  "  Dissertation  on  the  popular  and  intellectual  freedom  of  Israel 
from  the  time  of  the  great  prophets  to  the  first  destruction  of 
Jerusalem"  (Jahrbucher,  i.  96  f.),  Ewald  says,  "  One  can  scarcely 
sufficiently  conceive  how  high  the  attainment  was  which  was  reached 
in  the  pursuit  after  wisdom  (philosophy)  in  the  first  centuries  after 
David,  and  one  too  much  overlooks  the  mighty  influence  it  exerted 
on  the  entire  development  of  the  national  life  of  Israel.  The  more 
closely  those  centuries  are  inquired  into,  the  more  are  we  astonished 
at  the  vast  power  which  wisdom  so  early  exerted  on  all  sides  as  the 
common  object  of  pursuit  of  many  men  among  the  people.  It  first 
openly  manifested  itself  in  special  circles  of  the  people,  while  in  the 
age  after  Solomon,  which  was'  peculiarly  favourable  to  it,  eagerly 
inquisitive  scholars  gathered  around  individual  masters,  until  ever 
increasing  schools  were  formed.  But  its  influence  gradually  pene- 


INTRODUCTION.  4 1 

trnted  all  the  other  pursuits  of  the  people,  and  operated  on  the  most 
diverse  departments  of  authorship."  We  are  in  entire  sympathy 
with  this  historical  view  first  advanced  by  Ewald,  although  we  must 
frequently  oppose  the  carrying  of  it  out  in  details.  The  literature 
and  the  national  history  of  Israel  are  certainly  not  understood  if  one 
does  not  take  into  consideration,  along  with  the  nxi23  (prophecy),  the 
influential  development  of  the  """?•?'?  as  a  special  aim  and  subject  of 
intellectual  activity  in  Israel. 

And  how  was  this  Chokma  conditioned — to  what  was  it  directed  ? 
To  denote  its  condition  and  aim  in  one  word,  it  was  universalistic, 
or  humanistic.  Emanating  from  the  fear  or  the  religion  of  J alive 
('n  "^Dl!)  the  way  of  the  Lord,  x.  29),  but  seeking  to  comprehend 
the  spirit  in  the  letter,  the  essence  in  the  forms  of  the  national  life, 
its  effort  was  directed  towards  the  general  truth  affecting  mankind 
as  such.  While  prophecy,  which  is  recognised  by  the  Chokma  as  a 
spiritual  power  indispensable  to  a  healthful  development  of  a  people 
(DJ7  y]3*  jitn  psa,  xxix.  18),  is  of  service  to  the  historical  process  into 
which  divine  truth  enters  to  work  out  its  results  in  Israel,  and  from 
thence  outward  among  mankind,  the  Chokma  seeks  to  look  into  the 
very  essence  of  this  truth  through  the  robe  of  its  historical  and 
national  manifestation,  and  then  to  comprehend  those  general  ideas 
in  which  could  already  be  discovered  the  fitness  of  the  religion  of 
Jahve  for  becoming  the  world-religion.  From  this  aim  towards  the 
ideal  in  the  historical,  towards  the  everlasting  same  amid  changes, 

7  O  C"1         / 

the  human  (I  intentionally  use  this  word)  in  the  Israelitish,  the 
universal  religion  in  the  J  alive-religion.  (Jahvetum),  and  the  uni 
versal  morality  in  the  Law,  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  are  explained,  as  well  as  of  the  long,  broad  stream  of  the 
literature  of  the  Chokma  j  beginning  with  Solomon,  which,  when  the 
Palestinian  Judaism  assumed  the  rugged,  exclusive,  proud  national 
character  of  Pharisaism,  developed  itself  in  Alexandrinism.  Ber- 
theau  is  amazed  that  in  the  Proverbs  there  are  no  warnings  given 
against  the  worship  of  idols,  which  from  the  time  of  the  kings 
gained  more  and  more  prevalence  among  the  Israelitish  people. 
"  How  is  it  to  be  explained,"  he  asks  (Spr.  p.  xlii.),  "  if  the 
proverbs,  in  part  at  least,  originated  during  the  centuries  of  conflict 
between  idolatry  and  the  religion  of  Jahve,  and  if  they  were  col 
lected  at  a  time  in  which  this  conflict  reached  its  climax  and  stirred 
all  ranks  of  the  people — this  conflict  against  the  immorality  of  the 
Phoenician-Babylonian  religion  of  nature,  which  must  often  have 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

led  into  tlie  same  region  of  the  moral  contemplation  of  the  world 
over  which  this  book  moves?  !"  The  explanation  lies  in  this,  that 
the  Chokma  took  its  stand-point  in  a  height  and  depth  in  which  it 
had  the  mingling  waves  of  international  life  and  culture  under  it 

O  O 

and  above  it,  without  being  internally  moved  thereby.  It  naturally 
did  not  approve  of  heathenism,  it  rather  looked  upon  the  fear  of 
Jahve  as  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  and  the  seeking  after  Jahve  as 
implying  the  possession  of  all  knowledge  (xxviii.  5,  cf.  1  John  ii.  20) ; 
but  it  passed  over  the  struggle  of  prophecy  against  heathendom,  it 
confined  itself  to  its  own  function,  viz.  to  raise  the  treasures  of  gene 
ral  religious-moral  truth  in  the  Jahve-religion,  and  to  use  them  for 
the  ennobling  of  the  Israelites  as  men.  In  vain  do  we  look  for  the 
name  ?H^B>)  in  the  Proverbs,  even  the  name  rnin  has  a  much  more 
flexible  idea  attached  to  it  than  that  of  the  law  written  at  Sinai 
(cf.  xxviii.  4.  xxix.  18  with  xxviii.  7,  xiii.  14,  and  similar  passages) ; 
prayer  and  good  works  are  placed  above  sacrifice,  xv.  8,  xxi.  3.  27, 
— practical  obedience  to  the  teaching  of  wisdom  above  all,  xxviii.  i). 
The  Proverbs  refer  with  special  interest  to  Gen.  i.  and  ii.,  the 
beginnings  of  the  world  and  of  the  human  race  before  nations  took 
their  origin.  On  this  primitive  record  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  to 
speak  only  of  the  nbStp  WDj  the  figure  of  the  tree  of  life  (perhaps 
also  of  the  fountain  of  life),  found  nowhere  else  in  the  Old  Testa 
ment,  leans;  on  it  leans  also  the  contrast,  deeply  pervading  the 
Proverbs,  between  life  (immortality,  xii.  28)  and  death,  or  between 
that  which  is  above  and  that  which  is  beneath  (xv.  21)  ;  on  it  also 
many  other  expressions,  such,  e.g.,  as  what  is  said  in  xx.  27  of  the 
"spirit  of  man."  This  also,  as  Stier  (Der  Wcise  ein  Kijnig,  ISl'J, 
p.  240)  has  observed,  accounts  for  the  fact  that  D*JS  occurs  by  far 
most  frequently  in  the  Book  of  Job  and  in  the  Solomonic  writings. 
All  these  phenomena  are  explained  from  the  general  human 
universal  aim  of  the  C/iokma. 

When  James  (iii.  17)  says  that  the  "  wisdom  that  is  from  above 
is  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of 
mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrisy," 
his  words  most  excellently  designate  the  nature  and  the  contents  of 
the  discourse  of  wisdom  in  the  Solomonic  proverbs,  and  one  is 
almost  inclined  to  think  that  the  apostolic  brother  of  the  Lord, 
when  he  delineates  wisdom,  has  before  his  eyes  the  Book  of  the 
Proverbs,  which  raises  to  purity  by  the  most  impressive  admoni 
tions.  Next  to  its  admonitions  to  purity  are  those  especially  to 


INTRODUCTION.  43 

peaceful  ness,  to  gentle  resignation  (xiv.  30),  quietness  of  mind 
(xiv.  33)  and  humility  (xi.  2,  xv.  33,  xvi.  5,  18),  to  mercy  (even 
toward  beasts,  xii.  10),  to  firmness  and  sincerity  of  conviction,  to 
the  furtherance  of  one's  neighbour  by  means  of  wise  discourse  and 
kind  help.  What  is  done  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  with  refer 
ence  to  the  law  is  continued  here.  As  in  Deuteronomy,  so  here, 
love  is  at  the  bottom  of  its  admonitions,  the  love  of  God  to  men, 
and  the  love  of  men  to  one  another  in  their  diverse  relations  (xii.  2, 
xv.  9);  the  conception  of  n^v  gives  way  to  that  of  charity,  of  alms 
giving  (Sircaioavwr)  =  e\€r)p.o<rvvr]}.  Forgiving,  suffering  love  (x.  12), 
love  which  does  good  even  to  enemies  (xxv.  21  f.),  rejoices  not  over 
the  misfortune  that  befalls  an  enemy  (xxiv.  17  f.),  retaliates  not 
(xxiv.  28  f.),  but  commits  all  to  God  (xx.  22), — love  in  its  manifold 
forms,  as  that  of  husband  and  wife,  of  children,  of  friends, — is  here 
recommended  with  New  Testament  distinctness  and  with  deepest 
feeling.  Living  in  the  fear  of  God  (xxviii.  14),  the  Omniscient 
(xv.  3,  11,  xvi.  2,  xxi.  2,  xxiv.  11  f.),  to  whom  as  the  final  Cause 
all  is  referred  (xx.  12,  24,  xiv.  31,  xxii.  2),  and  whose  universal 
plan  all  must  subserve  (xvi.  4,  xix.  21,  xxi.  30),  and  on  the  other 
side  active  pure  love  to  man — these  are  the  hinges  on  which  all  the 
teachings  of  wisdom  in  the  Proverbs  turn.  Frederick  Schlegel,  in 
the  fourteenth  of  his  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Literature,  distin 
guishes,  not  without  deep  truth,  between  the  historico-prophetic 
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  or  books  of  the  history  of  redemption, 
and  the  Book  of  Job,  the  Psalms,  and  the  Solomonic  writings,  as 
books  of  aspiration,  corresponding  to  the  triple  chord  of  faith,  hope, 
charity  as  the  three  stages  of  the  inner  spiritual  life.  The  Book 
of  Job  is  designed  to  support  faith  amid  trials ;  the  Psalms  breathe 
forth  and  exhibit  hope  amid  the  conflicts  of  earth's  longings;  the 
Solomonic  writings  reveal  to  us  the  mystery  of  the  divine  love,  and 
the  Proverbs  that  wisdom  which  grows  out  of  and  is  itself  eternal 
love.  When  Schlegel  in  the  same  lecture  says  that  the  books  of  the 
Old  Covenant,  for  the  most  part,  stand  under  the  signature  of  the 
lion  as  the  element  of  the  power  of  will  and  spirited  conflict  glow 
ing  in  divine  fire,  but  that  in  the  inmost  hidden  kernel  and  heart 
of  the  sacred  book  the  Christian  figure  of  the  lamb  rises  up  out 
of  the  veil  of  this  lion  strength,  this  may  specially  be  said  of  the 
Book  of  Proverbs,  for  here  that  same  heavenly  wisdom  preaches, 
which,  when  manifested  in  person,  spake  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount,  New  Testament  love  in  the  midst  of  the  Old  Testament. 


4  t  THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

It  is  said  that  in  the  times  before  Christ  there  was  a  tendency  to 
apocryphize  not  only  the  Song  of  Solomon  and  Ecclesiastes,  but 
also  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  and  that  for  the  first  time  the  men  of 
the  Great  Synagogue  established  their  canonicity  on  the  ground  of 
their  spiritual  import;  they  became  perplexed  about  the  Proverbs, 
according  to  b.  Sabbath,  30&,  on  account  of  such  self-contradictory 
proverbs  as  xxvi.  4,  5,  and  according  to  Aboth  de- Rabbi  Nathan, 
c.  1,  on  account  of  such  secular  portions  as  that  of  the  wanton 
woman,  vii.  But  there  is  no  need  to  allegorize  this  woman,  and 
that  self-contradiction  is  easily  explained.  The  theopneustic  cha 
racter  of  the  book  and  its  claim  to  canonicity  show  themselves 
from  its  integral  relation  to  the  Old  Testament  preparation  for 
redemption  ;  but  keeping  out  of  view  the  book  as  a  whole,  it  is 
self-evident  that  the  conception  of  a  practical  proverb  such  as 
xiv.  4  and  of  a  prophecy  such  as  Isa.  vii.  14  are  very  different 
phenomena  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  that  in  general  the  operation  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  in  a  proverb  is  different  from  that  in  a  prophecy. 

We  have  hitherto  noted  the  character  of  the  instruction  set 
forth  in  the  Proverbs  according  to  the  marks  common  to  them  in 
all  their  parts,  but  in  such  a  way  that  we  have  taken  our  proofs 
only  from  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon "  and  the  "  Words  of  the 
Wise,"  with  the  exclusion  of  the  introductory  proverbial  poems  of 
the  older  editor.  If  we  compare  the  two  together,  it  cannot  be 
denied  that  in  the  type  of  the  instruction  contained  in  the  latter, 
the  Chokma,  of  which  the  book  is  an  emanation  and  which  it  has  as 
its  aim  (noan  Djrp,  i.  2),  stands  before  us  in  proportionally  much 
more  distinctly  defined  comprehension  and  form;  we  have  the 
same  relation  before  us  whose  adumbration  is  the  relation  of  the 
instruction  of  wisdom  in  the  Avesta  and  in  the  later  Minochired 
(Spiegel,  Parsi-Grammatik,  p.  182  ff.).  The  C/iohna  appears  also 
in  the  "  Proverbs  of  Solomon  "  as  a  being  existing  in  and  for  itself, 
which  is  opposed  to  ambiguous  subjective  thought  (xxviii.  26)  ; 
but  here  there  is  attributed  to  it  an  objectivity  even  to  an  apparent 
personality:  it  goes  forth  preaching,  and  places  before  all  men  life 
and  death  for  an  eternally  decisive  choice,  it  distributes  the  spirit 
to  those  who  do  not  resist  (i.  23),  it  receives  and  answers  prayer 
(i.  28).  The  speculation  regarding  the  Chokma  is  here  with 
reference  to  Job  xxviii.  (cf.  Prov.  ii.  4,  iii.  14  f.,  viii.  11,  19),  and 
particularly  to  xxviii.  27,  where  a  demiurgic  function  is  assigned 
to  wisdom,  carried  back  to  its  source  in  eternity:  it  is"  the 


INTRODUCTION.  45 

medium  by  which  the  world  was  created,  iii.  19  :  it  \vas  before 
the  creation  of  the  world  with  God  as  from  everlasting,  His  son  of 
royal  dignity,  viii.  22-26 ;  it  was  with  Him  in  His  work  of  creation, 
viii.  27-30;  after  the  creation  it  remained  as  PL's  delight,  rejoicing 
always  before  Him,  and  particularly  on  the  earth  among  the  sons 
of  men,  viii.  30  f.  Staudenmaier  (Lehre  von  der  Idee,  p.  37)  is 
certainly  riot  on  the  wrong  course,  when  under  this  rejoicing  of 
wisdom  before  God  he  understands  the  development  of  the  ideas 
or  life-thoughts  intimately  bound  up  in  it — the  world-idea.  This 
development  is  the  delight  of  God,  because  it  represents  to  the 
divine  contemplation  the  contents  of  wisdom,  or  of  the  world-idea 
founded  in  the  divine  understanding,  in  all  its  activities  and  inner 
harmonies;  it  is  a  calm  delight,  because  the  divine  idea  unites 
with  the  fresh  and  ever  young  impulse  of  life,  the  purity,  good 
ness,  innocence,  and  holiness  of  life,  because  its  spirit  is  light, 
clear,  simple,  childlike,  in  itself  peaceful,  harmonious,  and  happy; 
and  this  delight  is  experienced  especially  on  the  earth  among  the 
sons  of  men,  among  whom  wisdom  has  its  delight;  for,  as  the 
divine  idea,  it  is  in  all  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  inmost  life-thought,  the 
soul  of  each  being,  but  it  is  on  the  earth  of  men  in  whom  it  comes 
to  its  self-conception,  and  self-conscious  comes  forth  into  the  light 
of  the  clear  day.  Staudenmaier  has  done  the  great  service  of 
having  worthily  estimated  the  rich  and  deep  fulness  of  this  biblical 
theologumenon  of  wisdom,  and  of  having  pointed  out  in  it  the 
foundation-stone  of  a  sacred  metaphysics  and  a  means  of  protection 
against  pantheism  in  all  its  forms.  We  see  that  in  the  time  of  the 
editor  of  the  older  Book  of  Proverbs  the  wisdom  of  the  schools  in  its 
devotion  to  the  chosen  object  of  its  pursuit,  the  divine  wisdom  living 
and  moving  in  all  nature,  and  forming  the  background  of  all  things, 
rises  to  a  height  of  speculation  on  which  it  has  planted  a  banner 
showing  the  right  way  to  latest  times.  Ewald  rightly  points  to  the 
statements  in  the  introduction  to  the  Proverbs  regarding  wisdom 
as  a  distinct  mark  of  the  once  great  power  of  wisdom  in  Israel ; 
for  they  show  us  how  this  power  learned  to  apprehend  itself  in 
its  own  purest  height,  after  it  had  become  as  perfect,  and  at  the 
same  time  also  as  self-conscious,  as  it  could  at  all  become  in  ancient 
Israel. 

Many  other  appearances  also  mark  the  advanced  type  of  in 
struction  contained  in  the  introduction.  Hitzig's  view  (Spruche, 
p.  xvii.  f.),  that  i.  6-ix.  18  are  the  part  of  the  whole  collection 


46  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERDS. 

which  was  earliest  written,  confutes  itself  on  all  sides  ;  on  the  con 
trary,  the  views  of  Blei'k  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament, 
thrown  out  in  a  sketchy  manner  and  as  if  by  a  diviner,  surprisingly 
agree  with  our  own  results,  which  have  been  laboriously  reached 
:ind  are  here  amply  established.  The  advanced  type  of  instruc 
tion  in  the  introduction,  i.-ix.,  appears  among  other  things  in  this, 
that  we  there  find  the  allegory,  which  up  to  this  place  occurs  in 
Old  Testament  literature  only  in  scattered  little  pictures  built  up 
into  independent  poetic  forms,  particularly  in  ix.,  where  without 
any  contradiction  no^DS  ntrs  [a  simple  woman,  v.  13]  is  an  alle 
gorical  person.  The  technical  language  of  the  Chokma  has  ex 
tended  itself  on  many  sides  and  been  refined  (\ve  mention  these 
synonyms :  nc3H,  njn,  ru'3,  no-iy,  nsttp,  1D1D,  pppn) ;  and  the  seven 
pillars  in  the  house  of  wisdom,  even  though  it  be  inadmissible  to 
think  of  them  as  the  seven  liberal  arts,  yet  point  to  a  division  into 
seven  parts  of  which  the  poet  was  conscious  to  himself.  The 
common  address,  "0?  [my  son],  which  is  not  the  address  of  the 
father  to  the  son,  but  of  the  teacher  to  the  scholar,  countenances 
the  supposition  that  there  were  at  that  time  D'psn  ^Zi,  i.e.  scholars  of 
the  wise  men,  just  as  there  were  "sons  of  the  prophets"  (B^rf), 
and  probably  also  schools  of  wisdom.  "And  when  it  is  described 
how  wisdom  spake  aloud  to  the  people  in  all  the  streets  of  Jeru 
salem,  in  the  high  places  of  the  city  and  in  every  favourable  place, 
does  not  one  feel  that  such  sublime  descriptions  could  not  be 
possible  unless  at  that  time  wisdom  were  regarded  by  the  people  as 
one  of  the  first  powers,  and  the  wise  men  truly  displayed  a  great 
public  activity  ? "  We  must  answer  this  question  of'  Evvald's  in 
the  affirmative. 

Bruch,  in  his  Weisheitslehre  tier  Ilebraer,  1851,  was  the  first  to 
call  special  attention  to  the  Chokma  or  huimmism  as  a  peculiar 
intellectual  tendency  in  Israel ;  but  he  is  mistaken  in  placing 
it  in  an  indifferent  and  even  hostile  relation  to  the  national  law 
and  the  national  cultus,  which  he  compares  to  the  relation  of 
Christian  philosophy  to  orthodox  theology.  Oehler,  in  his  Grund- 
zilge  der  ahtestamentl.  Weisheit,  which  treats  more  especially  of 
the  doctrinal  teachings  of  the  Book  of  Job,  judges  more  correctly; 
cf.  also  his  comprehensive  article,  Pdilagogik  des  A.  T.  in  Schmid's 
Pddagogischer  Encyclopddie,  pp.  653-6'Jo  (partic.  677-683). 

5.   The  Alexandrian   Translation  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs.— Of 


INTRODUCTION.  47 

highest  interest  for  the  history  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  is  the 
relation  of  the  LXX.  to  the  Hebrew  text.  One  half  of  the 
proverbs  of  Agur  (xxx.  of  the  Hebrew  text)  are  placed  in  it 
after  xxiv.  22,  and  the  other  half  after  xxiv.  34;  and  the  proverbs 
of  King  Lemuel  (xxxi.  1-9  of  the  Hebrew  text)  are  placed  after 
the  proverbs  of  Agur,  while  the  acrostic  proverbial  poem  of  the 
virtuous  woman  is  in  its  place  at  the  end  of  the  book.  That 
transposition  reminds  us  of  the  transpositions  in  Jeremiah,  and 
rests  in  the  one  place  as  well  as  in  the  other  on  a  misunderstand 
ing  of  the  true  contents.  The  translator  has  set  aside  the  new 
superscription,  x.  1,  as  unsuitable,  and  has  not  marked  the  new 
beginning,  xxii.  17 ;  he  has  expunged  the  new  superscription, 
xxiv.  23,  and  has  done  the  same  to  the  superscription,  "  The  words 
of  Agur "  (xxx.  1),  in  two  awkward  explanations  (\6yov  $v\ao-- 
a-6fj.evo<i  and  rou9  e/iou?  \oyovs  <f>oj3q6i)ri),  and  the  superscription, 
"The  words  of  Lemuel"  (xxxi.  1),  in  one  similar  (ol  epol  \6yi 
eifyqvrcu  VTTO  ©eov),  so  that  the  proverbs  of  Agur  and  of  Lemuel 
are  without  hesitation  joined  with  those  of  Solomon,  whereby  it 
yet  remains  a  mystery  why  the  proverbs  beginning  with  "The 
words  of  Agur"  have  been  divided  into  two  parts.  Hitzig  ex 
plains  it  from  a  confounding  of  the  columns  in  which,  two  beinc 
on  each  page,  the  Hebrew  MS.  which  lay  before  the  translator 
was  written,  and  in  which  the  proverbs  of  Agur  and  of  Lemuel 
(names  which  tradition  understood  symbolical  I  v  of  Solomon)  were 
already  ranked  in  order  before  ch.  xxv.  But  besides  these,  there 
are  also  many  other  singular  things  connected  with  this  Greek 
translation  interesting  in  themselves  and  of  great  critical  worth. 
That  it  omits  i.  16  may  arise  from  this,  that  this  verse  was  not 
found  in  the  original  MS.,  and  was  introduced  from  Isa.  lix.  7 ;  but 
there  are  wanting  also  proverbs  such  as  xxi.  5,  for  which  no  reason 
can  be  assigned.  But  the  additions  are  disproportionately  more 
numerous.  Frequently  we  find  a  line  added  to  the  distich,  such 
as  in  i.  18,  or  an  entire  distich  added,  as  iii.  15 ;  or  of  two  lines  of  the 
Hebrew  verse,  each  is  formed  into  a  separate  distich,  as  i.  7,  xi.  16  : 
or  we  meet  with  longer  interpolations,  extending  far  beyond 
this  measure,  as  that  added  to  iv.  27.  Many  of  These  proverbs 
are  easily  re-translated  into  the  Hebrew,  as  that  added  to  iv.27, 
consistin  of  four  lines : 


48  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


Bat  many  of  them  also  sound  as  if  they  had  been  originally 
Greek  ;  e.g.  the  lines  appended  to  ix.  10,  xiii.  15  ;  the  distich,  vi. 
11;  the  imperfect  tristich,  xxii.  14;  and  the  formless  trian,  xxv. 
10.  The  value  of  these  enlargements  is  very  diverse;  not  a  few 
of  these  proverbs  are  truly  thoughtful,  such  as  the  addition  to 
xii.  13— 

He  who  is  of  mild  countenance  findeth  mercy  ; 

He  who  is  litigious  crushes  souls  — 
and  singularly  bold  in  imagery,  as  the  addition  to  ix.  12  — 

He  who  supports  himself  by  lies  hunts  after  (njn)  the  wind, 

He  catches  at  fluttering  birds  ; 

For  he  forsakes  the  ways  of  his  own  vineyard, 

And  wanders  away  from  the  paths  of  his  own  field, 

And  roams  through  arid  steppes  and  a  thirsty  land, 

And  gathers  with  his  hand  withered  heath. 

The  Hebrew  text  lying  before  the  Alexandrian  translators  had 
certainly  not  all  these  additions,  yet  in  many  passages,  such  as 
xi.  16,  it  is  indeed  a  question  whether  it  is  not  to  be  improved  from 
the  LXX.  ;  and  in  other  passages,  where,  if  one  reads  the  Greek, 
the  Hebrew  words  naturally  take  their  place,  whether  these  are  not 
at  least  old  Hebrew  marginal  notes  and  interpolations  which  the 
translation  preserves.  But  this  version  itself  has  had  its  gradual 
historical  development.  The  text,  the  KOLVTJ  (communis),  proceeds 
from  the  Hexaplar  text  edited  by  Origen,  which  received  from  him 
many  and  diverse  revisions;  and  in  the  times  before  Christ,  perhaps 
(as  Hitz.  supposes),  down  to  the  second  century  after  Christ,  the 
translation  itself,  not  being  regarded  as  complete,  was  in  the  pro 
gress  of  growth,  for  not  unfrequently  two  different  translations  of 
one  and  the  same  proverb  stand  together,  as  xiv.  22,  xxix.  25 
(where  also  the  Peshito  follows  the  LXX.  after  which  it  translates), 
or  also  interpenetrate  one  another,  as  xxii.  8,  9.  These  doubled 
translations  are  of  historical  importance  both  in  relation  to  the 
text  and  to  the  interpretation  of  it.  Along  with  the  Books  of 
Samuel  and  Jeremiah,  there  is  no  book  in  regard  to  which  the 
LXX.  can  be  of  higher  significance  than  the  Book  of  Proverbs  ; 
we  shall  seek  in  the  course  of  our  exposition  duly  to  estimate  the 
text1  as  adopted  by  Bertheau  (1847)  and  Hitzig  (1858)  in  their 

1  Cf.  also  J.  Gottlob  Jager's  Observations  in  Provcrbiorum  Salomonis  Ver- 
sionem  Akxandrinam,  1788;  Ae'Lugwdo'sAnmerkwigenzurgriech.  Uebersetzung 


INTRODUCTION.  49 

commentaries,  and  by  Ewald  in  his  Jahrb.  xi.  (1861)  and  his 
commentary  (2d  ed.  1867).  The  historical  importance  of  the 
Egyptian  text-recension  is  heightened  by  this  circumstance,  that 
the  old  Syrian  translator  of  the  Solomonic  writings  had  before 
him  not  only  the  original  text,  but  also  the  LXX. ;  for  the  current 
opinion,  that  the  Peshito,  as  distinguished  from  the  Syro-Hexaplar 
version,  sprang  solely  from  the  original  text  with  the  assistance  of 
the  Targum,  is  more  and  more  shown  to  be  erroneous.  In  the  Book 
of  Proverbs  the  relation  of  the  Peshito  and  Targum  is  even  the 
reverse;  the  Targum  of  the  Proverbs,  making  use  of  the  Pesliito, 
restores  the  Masoretic  text, — the  points  of  contact  with  the  LXX. 
showing  themselves  here  and  there,  are  brought  about *  by  the 
Peshito.  But  that  Jerome,  in  his  translation  of  the  Vulgate  accord 
ing  to  the  Hebrcea  veritas,  sometimes  follows  the  LXX.  in  opposi 
tion  to  the  original  text,  is  to  be  explained  with  Hitzig  from  the  fact 
that  he  based  his  work  on  an  existing  Latin  translation  made  from 
the  LXX.  Hence  it  comes  that  the  two  distichs  added  in  the 
LXX.  to  iv.  27  remain  in  his  work,  and  that  instead  of  the  one 
distich,  xv.  6,  we  have  two  : — hi  abundanti  (after  the  phrase  3~\2 
instead  of  JV3  of  the  Masoretic  text)  justitia  virtus  maxima  est, 
cogitationes  autem  impiorum  eradicabuntur.  Dornus  (n^)  justi 
plurima  fortitude,  et  in  fructibus  impii  conturbatio;  for  Jerome  has 
adopted  the  two  translations  of  the  LXX.,  correcting  the  second 
according  to  the  original  text.2 

der  Proverbien,  1863  ;  M.  Heidenheim's  Zar  Textkritik  der  Proverlien,  in  his 
Quarterly  Journal  for  German  and  English  Theological  Criticism  and  Investi 
gation,  No.  vin.  (1865),  and  ix.,  xi.  (1866).  The  text  of  the  LXX.  (cf. 
Angelo  Mai's  Classici  Anctores,  t.  ix.)  used  by  Procopius  in  his  '  Epftwefei  tig  rocs 
votpoiftfxs  is  peculiar,  and  here  and  there  comes  near  to  the  Hebrew  original. 
The  scholion  of  Evagrius  in  the  2^dA/a  si;  rx;  Kupuifttets  of  Origen,  edited  by 
Tischendorf  in  his  Notitia,  1860,  from  a  MS.  of  Patinos,  shows  how  soon  eveu 
the  Hexaplar  text  became  ambiguous. 

1  Cf.  Dathe,  De  ratione  consensus  Versionis  Syriac&el  Chaldaicss  Proverbiorum 
Salomonis  (1764),   edited  by  Rosenmuller  in  his  Opuscula.    Maybaum,  in  the 
Treatise  on  the  Language  of  the  Targum  to  the  Proverbs  and  its  relation  to  the 
Syriac,  in  Merx's  Archiv,  ii.  66-93,  labours  in  vain  to  give  the  priority  to  that  of 
the  Targum :  the  Targum  is  written  from  the  Peshito,  and  here  and  there  ap 
proaches  the  Hebrew  text ;  the  language  is,  with  few  differences,  the  Syriac  of 
the  original. 

2  The  Ethiopia  translation,  also,  is  in  particular  points,  as  well  as  on  the 
whole,  dependent  on  the  LXX.,  for  it  divides  the  Book  of  Proverbs  into  pro 
verbs  (vretpoifttetg),  i.  -xxiv.,    and  instructions  (vatiliioti)  of  Solomon,  xxv.- 
xxxi.     Vid.  Dillmunn  in  Ewald's  Jahrb.  v.  147,  150. 

VOL.  I. 


50  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

The  fragments  of  the  translations  of  Aquila,  Symmachus,  Theo- 
dotion,  etc.,  contained  in  Greek  and  Syrian  sources,  have  been 
recently  collected,  more  perfectly  than  could  have  been  done  by 
Montfaucon,  by  Fried.  Field,  in  his  work  Origenis  He.raplorum  qua 
supersunt,  etc.  (Oxonii,  1867,  4).  Of  special  interest  is  the  more 
recent  translation  of  the  original  text,  existing  only  in  a  MS.  laid  up 
in  the  Library  of  St.  Mark  [at  Venice],  executed  in  bold  language, 
rich  in  rare  and  newly  invented  words,  by  an  unknown  author,  and 
belonging  to  an  age  which  has  not  yet  been  determined  (Grcecus 
Venetus}  :  cf.  d'Ansse  de  Villoison's  nova  versio  Grceca  Proverbio- 
rum,  Ecdesiastis,  Cantici  Canticorum,  etc.,  Argentorati,  1784  ;  and 
also  the  Animadversiones  thereto  of  Jo.  Ge.  Dahler,  1786. 


The  literature  of  the  interpretation  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  is 
found  in  Keil's  Einleituiig  in  das  A.  T.  (1859),  p.  346  f.  [Manual 
oj  Historico- Critical  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  translated 
by   Professor   Douglas,    D.D.,    Free   Church    College,    Glasgow. 
Edinburgh  :  T.  &  T.  Clark.  Vol.  i.  p.  468  f.].    The  most  important 
of  the  older  linguistic  works  on   this  book  is  the  commentary  of 
Albert  Schultens  (Lugduni  Batavorum,  1748,  4),  whose  service  to 
the  cause  of  Semitic    philology  and  O.  T.  exegesis  Miihlau  has 
brought  to  remembrance  in  the  Lutheran  Zeitschrift,  1870,   1  ; 
Vogel's  abstract  (Halce,  1769),  prefaced  by  Semler,  does  not  alto 
gether  compensate    for  the  original  work.      From  the  school  of 
Schultens,  and  also  from  that  of  Schroder,  originate  the  Anmer- 
kungen  by  Alb.  Jac.  Arnold!,  maternal  grandson   of  Schultens,  a 
Latin  edition  of    which  was  published   (Lugduni  Bat.   1783)    by 
Her.r.  Alb.   Schultens,   the  grandson   of    Schultens    by   his    son. 
Among  the  commentaries  of  English  interpreters,  that  in  Latin 
by  Thomas  Cartwright  (Amstelredami,  1663,  4),  along  with  the 
Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  by  Charles  Bridges  (4th  ed., 
London,  1859),  hold  an  honourable  place.     The  Critical  Remarks 
on  the  Books  of  Job,  Proverbs,  etc.,  by  D.  Durell  (Oxford,  1772,  4), 
also  merit  attention.    Of  more  recent  commentaries,  since  Keil  gave 
his  list  of  the  literature  of  the  subject,  have  been  published  those  of 
Elster  (1858)  and  of  Zockler  (1867),  forming  a  part  of  the  theo- 
logico-hoiniletical  Bibelwerk  edited  by  J.  P.  Lange.     Chaps,  xxv.- 
xxix.  Rtul.  Stier  has  specially  interpreted  in  two  works  entitled  Der 


INTRODUCTION.  51 

Weise  ein  Konig  ["The  Wise  Man  a  King"],  and  Salomonis  Weislieit 
in  Hiskiastagen  [•'  Solomon's  Wisdom  in  tlie  Days  of  Hezekiah  "], 
1849  ;  and  chapters  xxx.  xxxi.  in  a  work  entitled  Die  Politik  der 
Weisheit  ["The  Politics  of  Wisdom''],  1850.  Part  in.  (1865) 
of  the  new  exegetico-critical  Aehrenlese  [u  Gleanings"]  of  Fried. 
Bottcher,  edited  by  Muhlau,  furnishes  39  pages  of  remarks  on 
the  Proverbs.  Leop.  Dukes,  author  of  the  Kabbinical  Blumenlese 
["Anthology  "],  1844,  and  the  Schrift  zur  rabbinischen  Spruch/cunde, 
1851,  has  published  (1841)  a  commentary  to  the  Proverbs  in 
Cahen's  French  Bibelwerk.  There  also  is  furnished  a  list  of  Jewish 
interpreters  down  to  the  appearance  of  L.  H.  Loewenstein's  Com 
mentary  (1838),  which  contains  valuable  contributions  to  the 
critical  confirmation  of  the  Masoretic  text,  in  which  Heidenheim's 
MS.  remains,  and  also  the  Codex  of  1294  mentioned  in  my  preface 
to  Baer's  edition  of  the  Psalter,  and  in  the  Specimen  Lectionum 
of  Baer's  edition  of  Genesis,  are  made  use  of.  Among  Malbim's 
best  works  are,  after  his  Commentary  on  Isaiah,  that  on  the 
Mishle  (Warsaw,  1867).  [Vide  Preface.] 


I. 

THE  OLDER  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

I.-XXIV. 

SUPERSCRIPTION  AND  MOTTO,  I.  1-7. 

j|HE  external  title,  i.e.  the  Synagogue  name,  of  the  whole 
collection  of  Proverbs  is  **?&£>  (Mislile),  the  word  with 
which  it  commences.     Origen   (Euseb.  H.  E.  vi.  25) 
uses  the  name  MtcrXwfl,  i.e.  rfb&D,  which  occurs  in  the 
Talmud  and  Midrash  as  the  designation  of  the  book,  from  its  con 
tents.     In  a  similar  way,  the  names  given  to  the  Psalter,  D^nn  and 
ni?nn,  are  interchanged. 

This  external  title  is  followed  by  one  which  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 
viewed  as  to  its  gradual  formation,  and  first  the  older  portion,  gives 
to  itself.  It  reaches  from  i.  1  to  ver.  6,  and  names  not  only  the  con 
tents  and  the  author  of  the  book,  but  also  commends  it  in  regard  to  the 
service  which  it  is  capable  of  rendering.  It  contains  "  Proverbs  of 
Solomon,  the  son  of  David,  king  of  Israel."  The  books  of  the  nxuj 
and  roan,  including  the  Canticles,  thus  give  their  own  titles;  among 
the  historical  books,  that  of  the  memoirs  of  Nehemiah  is  the  only 
one  that  does  so.  ^fb  has  the  accent  Dechi,  to  separate1  it  from 
the  following  complex  genitive  which  it  governs,  and  HjHt^  "fin  is 
made  the  second  hemistich,  because  it  belongs  to  Hfcfe",  not  to 
iyi.a  As  to  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  word  b^b,  we  refer  to  the 
derivation  given  in  the  Gesch.  der  jud.  Poesiejp.  196,  from  ^b, 
Aram,  bno,  root  ^n,  Sanskr.  tul  (whence  tula,  balance,  similarity), 
Lat.  tollere ;  the  comparison  of  the  Arab,  mathal  leads  to  the  same 

1  Norzi  has  erroneously  accented  ^'D  with  the  accent  Munach.     The  D  is 
besides  the  Masoretic  majusculum,  like  the  3,  tf,  and  N  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Law,  the  Canticles,  and  Chronicles. 

2  If  it  had  belonged  to  m,  then  the  sentence  would  have  been  accented 

thus:  ^>jnB»  ita  i-ii-p  nzbv  ^b- 

i  j  'a. 


52 


CHAP.  I.  2.  £3 

conclusion.  lttxte  signifies,  not,  as  Schultens  and  others  after  him 
affirm,  effigies  ad  similitudinem  alius  rei  expressa,  from  ^'D  in  the 
primary  signification  premere,  premente  manu  tractare  ;  for  the  cor 
responding  Arab,  verb  matlial  does  not  at  all  bear  that  meaning, 
but  signifies  to  stand,  to  present  oneself,  hence  to  be  like,  properly 
to  put  oneself  forth  as  something,  to  represent  it;  and  in  the  Hebr. 
also  to  rule,  properly  with  /y  to  stand  on  or  over  something,  with 
2  to  hold  it  erect,  like  Arab,  kam  with  i,  rem  administravit  \yid. 
Jesaia,  p.  691].  Thus  e.g.,  Gen.  xxiv.  2,  it  is  said  of  Eliezer: 
h^~>B^r»a  7Bten,  who  ruled  over  all  that  he  (Abraham)  had  (Luther: 
was  a  prince  over  all  his  goods).  Thus  />K>B,  figurative  discourse 
which  represents  that  which  is  real,  similitude;  hence  then  parable 
or  shorter  apothegm,  proverb,  in  so  far  as  they  express  primarily 
something  special,  but  which  as  a  general  symbol  is  then  applied  to 
everything  else  of  a  like  kind,  and  in  so  far  stands  figuratively.  An 
example  is  found  in  1  Sam.  x.  11  f.  It  is  incorrect  to  conclude 
from  this  meaning  of  the  word  that  such  memorial  sayings  or  pro 
verbs  usually  contained  comparisons,  or  were  clothed  in  figurative 
language ;  for  that  is  the  case  in  by  far  the  fewest  number  of  in 
stances  :  the  oldest  have  by  far  the  simplest  and  most  special 
interpretations  "  (Fleischer).  Hence  Mashal,  according  to  its 
fundamental  idea,  is  that  which  stands  with  something  =  makes 
something  stand  forth  =  representing.  This  something  that  repre 
sents  may  be  a  thing  or  a  person  ;  as  e.g.  one  may  say  Job  is  a 
Mashal,  i.e.  a  representant,  similitude,  type  of  Israel  (vide  the  work 
entitled  D«nn  fy,  by  Ahron  b.  Elia,  c.  90,  p.  143) ;  and.  like  Arab. 
mathal  (more  commonly  mithl  =  ?VV,  cf.  ?^p,  Job  xli.  25),  is  used 
quite  as  generally  as  is  its  etymological  cogn.  instar  (instare).  But 
in  Hebr.  Mashal  always  denotes  representing  discourse  with  the 
additional  marks  of  the  figurative  and  concise,  e.g.  the  section  which 
presents  (Hab.  ii.  6)  him  to  whom  it  refers  as  a  warning  example, 
but  particularly,  as  there  defined,  the  gnome,  the  apothegm  or  maxim, 
in  so  far  as  this  represents  general  truths  in  sharply  outlined  little 
pictures. 

Ver.  2.  Now  follows  the  statement  of   the  object  which  these 
proverbs  subserve ;  and  first,  in  general, 

To  become  acquainted  with  wisdom  and  instruction, 

To  understand  intelligent  discourses. 

They  seek  on  the  one  side  to  initiate  the  reader  in  wisdom  and 
instruction,  and  on  the  other  to  guide  him  to  the  understanding 


54  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

of  intelligent  discourses,  for  they  themselves  contain  such  discourses 
in  which  there  is  a  deep  penetrating  judgment,  and  they  sharpen 
the  understanding  of  him  who  engages  his  attention  with  them.1 
As    Schultens  has   already  rightly   determined    the    fundamental 
meaning  of  JH»,  frequently  compared  with  the  Sanskr.  vid,  to  know 
(whence  by  gunating,2  veda,  knowledge),  after  the  Arab,  wad' a,  as 
deponere,  penes  se  condere,   so  he  also  rightly  explains   'T?3n   by 
soliditas ;  it  means  properly  (from  D3H,  Arab,  hakm,  K.  lik,  vide 
under  Ps.  x.  8,  to  be  firm,  closed)   compactness,  and   then,  like 
TrvKvorrjs,   ability,   worldly  wisdom,  prudence,    and  in  the   higher 
general  sense,   the   knowledge  of   things    in   the  essence  of  their 
being  and  in  the  reality  of  their  existence.     Along  with  wisdom 
stands  the  moral  npio,  properly  discipline,  i.e.  moral  instruction,  and 
in  conformity  with  this,  self-government,  self-guidance,  from  ip^  = 
ID),  cogn.  ipKj  properly  adstrictio  or  constrictio ;  for  the  »  of  the 
noun  signifies  both  id  quod  or  aliquid  quod  (o,rt)  and  quod  in  the 
conjunctional  sense  (on),   and  thus  forms  both  a  concrete  (like 
npto  =z  ipNb,  fetter,  chain)  and  an  abstract  idea.     The  first  general 
object  of  the  Proverbs  is  JW,  the  reception  into  oneself  of  wisdom 
and  moral  edification  by  means  of  education  and  training;   the 
second  is  to  comprehend  utterances  of   intelligence,  i.e.   such  as 
proceed  from  intelligence  and  give  expression  to  it  (cf.  nipx  "nox, 
xxii.  21).    pa,  Kal,  to  be  distinguished  (whence  pa,  between,  constr. 
of  H3.,  space  between,  interval),  signifies  in  Hiph.  to  distinguish, 
to  understand;    nra   is,   according  to   the    sense,    the  n.  actionis 
of  this  Hiph.,  and   signifies  the  understanding  as  the  capability 
effective  in  the  possession  of  the  right  criteria  of  distinguishing 
between  the  true  and  the  false,  the  good  and  the  bad  (1  Kings 
iii.  9),  the  wholesome  and  the  pernicious. 

Vers.  3-5.  In  the  following,  2a  is  expanded  in  vers.  3-5,  then 
26  in  ver.  6.     First  the  immediate  object : 

3  To  attain  intelligent  instruction, 
Righteousness,  and  justice,  and  integrity ; 

4  To  impart  to  the  inexperienced  prudence,' 

_  To  the  young  man  knowledge  and  discretion 

5  Let  the  wise  man  hear  and  gain  learning, 

And  the  man  of  understanding  take  to  himself  rules  of  conduct. 

1  T\rh  is  rightly  pointed  by  Lowenstein  with  Dechi  after  Cod.  1294;  vide  the 
rule  by  which  the  verse  is  divided,  Torath  Emeth,  p.  51,  §  12. 
1  [Guna  =  a  rule  in  Sanskrit  grammar  regulating  the  modification  of  vowels.] 


CHAP.  I.  3-5. 


55 


With  njn,  denoting  the  reception  into  oneself,  acquiring,  is  inter 
changed  (cf.  ii.  1)  J"in£,  its  synonym,  used  of  intellectual  reception 
and  appropriation,  which,  contemplated  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  relation  between  the  teacher  and  the  learner,  is  the  correla 
tive  of  nn,   -rrapaZtiovai,   tradere   (ix.   9).     But  ^3fn  TOD  is  that 
which  proceeds  from  chokma  and  wusar  when  they  are  blended 
together  :  discipline  of  wisdom,  discipline  training  to  wisdom  ;  i.e. 
such  morality  and  good  conduct  as  rest  not  on  external  inheritance, 
training,  imitation,  and  custom,  but  is  bound  up  with  the  intelli 
gent  knowledge  of  the  Why  and  the  Wherefore.     5>3sf  n,  as  xxi.  16, 
is  inf.  absol.  used  substantively  (cf.  Bi?.f  ?,  keeping  quiet,  Isa.  xxxii. 
17)  of  hw  (whence  fafc>,  intellectus),  to  entwine,  involve;  for  the 
thinking  'through   a   subject    is  represented   as   an    interweaving, 
complicating,  configuring  of  the  thoughts  (the  syllogism  is  in  like 
manner  represented  as  ^'f  «,  Aram,  top,  a  bunch  of  grapes),  (with 
which  also  S>3D,  a  fool,  and  ^SDH,  to  act  foolishly,  are  connected,  from 
the  confusion"  of  the  thoughts,  the  entangling  of  the  conceptions; 
cf.  Arab,  'akl,  to  understand,  and  b^»).     The  series  of  synonyms 
(cf.  xxiii.  23)  following  in  36,  which  are  not  well  fitted  to  be  the 
immediate  object  to  nPlj£,  present  themselves  as  the  unfolding  of 
the  contents  of  the  b?B>n  TOO,  as  meaning  that  namely  which  is 
dutiful   and   right   and  '  honest.     With   the   frequently    occurring 
two  conceptions  BBB>p*  P}*  (ii.  9),  (or  with  the  order  reversed  as 
in  Ps.  cxix.  121)  is  interchanged  njTTCi  OBBfo  (or  with  the  order 
also  reversed,  xxi.  3).     The  remark  of  Heidenheim,  that  in  P^V  the 
conception  of  the  justum,  and  in  n\rrs  that  of  the  cequum  prevails, 
is  suggested    by   the   circumstance  that  not  pHX  but  riiTO  signifies 
SiKatOffVW}  (cf.  x.  2)  in  the  sense  of  liberality,  and  then  of  alms 
giving   (€her)fJ,offvvrj)\  but   plX   also  frequently  signifies  a  way  of 
thought  and  action  which  is  regulated  not  by  the  letter  of  the  law 
and  by  talio,  but  by  love  (cf.  Isa.  xli.  2,  xlii.  6).    Tsedek  and  tsdakah 
have  almost  the  relation  to  one  another  of  integrity  and  justice 
which  practically  brings  the   former   into  exercise.     BBtPO  (from 
BBB>,  to  make  straight,  to  adjust,  cf.  B3B>,  Arab,  sabita,  to  be  smooth) 
is  the  right  and  the  righteousness  in  which  it  realizes  itself,  here 
subjectively  considered,  the  right  mind.1     D'TO  (defect,  for  D 
from  it?*,  to  be  straight,  even)  is  plur.  tantum  ;  for  its  sing. 


1  According  to  Malbim,  t2£^'?D  is  the  fixed  objective  right,  pis  the  righteous 
ness  which  does  not  at  once  decide  according  to  the  letter  of  the  law,  but  always 
according  to  the  matter  and  the  person. 


56  THE  COOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

(after  the  form  2^0)  the  form  "riB^D  (in  tlie  same  ethical  sense,  e.g. 
Mai.  ii.  6)  is  used :  it  means  thus  a  way  of  thought  and  of  con 
duct  that  is  straight,  i.e.  according  to  what  is  right,  true,  i.e. 
without  concealment,  honest,  i.e.  true  to  duty  and  faithful  to  one's 
word. 

Ver.  4.  This  verse  presents  another  aspect  of  the  object  to  be 
served  by  this  book  :  it  seeks  to  impart  prudence  to  the  simple. 
The  form  D^na1  (in  which,  as  in  trfa,  the  »  plur.  remains  unwritten) 
is,  in  this  mongrel  form  in  which  it  is  written  (cf.  vii.  7,  viii.  5, 
ix.  6,  xiv.  18,  xxvii.  12).  made  up  of  Djna  (i.  22,  32,  once  written 
plene,  D^riB,  xxii.  3)  and  D'sna  (vii.  7).    "These  two  forms  with   * 
and  the  transition  of   »  into  N  are   interchanged   in   the  plur.  of 
such  nouns  as  Via,  segolate  form,  "  from  nna  (cogn.  nna),  to  be 
open,  properly  the  open-hearted,  i.e.  one  whose  heart  stands  open 
to  every  influence  from  another,  the  harmless,  good-natured,— a 
vox  media  among  the  Hebrews  commonly  (though  not  always,  cf. 
e.g.   Ps.   cxvi.  6)   in  malam  partem :    the  foolish,   silly,    one  who 
allows  himself  to  be  easily  persuaded  or  led  astray,   like  similar 
words  in  other  languages  —  Lat.  simplex,  Gr.  eirfOr)?,  Fr.  naw ; 
Arab,  fatyn,  always,  however,  in  a  good  sense:  a  high  and  noble- 
minded  man,  not  made  as  yet  mistrustful  and  depressed  by  sad 
experiences,  therefore  juvenis  ingenuus,  vir  animi  generosi"  (Fl.). 
The  D'Nna,  not  of  firm  and  constant  mind,  have  need  of  nany ; 
therefore  the  saying  xiv.  15,  cf.  viii.  5,  xix.  25.     The  noun  HD^ 
(a  fern,  segolate  form  like  neon)  means  here  calliditas  in  a  good 
sense,  while  the  corresponding  Arab,  'aram  (to  be  distinguished 
from  the  verb  'aram,  tny,  to  peel,  to  make  bare,  nudare)  is  used  only 
in  a  bad  sense,  of  malevolent,  deceptive  conduct.     In  the  parallel 
member  the  word  1^  is  used,  generally  (collectively)  understood, 
of  the  immaturity  which  must  first  obtain  intellectual  and  moral 
clearness  and  firmness ;  such  an  one  is  in  need  of  peritia  et  sollei-tia, 
jischer  well  renders  it ;  for  njn  Js  experimental  knowledge, 
and  nsro  (from  D»T,  according  to  its  primary  signification,  to  press 
together,  comptWre;  then,  referred  to  mental  concentration  :   to 
think)  signifies  in  the  sing.,  sensu  bono,  the  capability  of  compre 
hending  the  right  purposes,  of  seizing  the  right  measures,  of  pro 
jecting  the  right  plans. 

Ver.  5.  In  this  verse  the  infinitives  of  the  object  pass  into  inde- 
1  Like  D'sag,  Ps.  civ.  12,  D^nm  1  Ciiron.  xii.  8,  cf.  Micldol,  196a.     la 
vcrs.  22,  32,  the  mute  N  is  wanting. 


CHAP.  I.  C.  57 

pendent  sentences  for  the  sake  of  variety.  That  PS?y^  cannot 
mean  andiet,  but  audiat)  is  shown  by  ix.  9  ;  but  *\&\  is  jussive 
(with  the  tone  thrown  back  before  np? ;  cf .  x.  9,  and  xvi.  21,  23 
Avhere  the  tone  is  not  thrown  back,  as  also  2  Sam.  xxiv.  3)  with 

the  consecutive  Fay  (1)  (=  Arab.  ^J,  /)  :    let  him  hear,  thus  will 

he  ...  or,  in  order  that  he.  Whoever  is  wise  is  invited  to 
hear  these  proverbs  in  order  to  add  learning  (doctrinam)  to  that 
which  he  already  possesses,  according  to  the  principle  derived  from 
experience,  ix.  9,  Matt.  xiii.  12.  The  segolate  np7,  which  in  pausa 
retains  its  —  (as  also  naa,  JJB»,  TOV,  *£»,  pnx,  Dip,  and  others), 
means  reception,  and  concretely  what  one  takes  into  himself  with 
his  ear  and  mind  ;  therefore  learning  (StSa^r)  with  the  object  of 
the  ttTroSo^?/),  as  Deut.  xxxii.  2  (parallel  ""HEX,  as  iv.  2  i"1^'"71),  and 
then  learning  that  has  passed  into  the  possession  of  the  receiver, 
knowledge,  science  (Isa.  xxix.  24,  parall.  ^3).  Schultens  com 
pares  the  Arab,  lakah,  used  of  the  fructification  of  the  female 
palm  by  the  flower-dust  of  the  male.  The  part.  Ji33  (the  Jin.  of 
which  is  found  only  once,  Isa.  x.  13)  is  the  passive  or  the  re- 
fL'xive  of  the  ffiph.  \^,  to  explain,  to  make  to  understand  :  one 
who  is  caused  to  understand  or  who  lets  himself  be  informed,  and 
thus  an  intelligent  person — that  is  one  who  may  gain  rivsnri  by 
means  of  these  proverbs.  This  word,  found  only  in  the  plur. 
(probably  connected  with  sin,  shipmaster,  properly  one  who  has 
to  do  with  the  BvSn,  ship's  ropes,  particularly  handles  the  sails, 
LXX.  Kvf$ipvi)<nv)}  signifies  guidance,  management,  skill  to  direct 
anything  (Job  xxxii.  7,  of  God's  skill  which  directs  the  clouds), 
and  in  the  plur.  conception,  the  taking  measures,  designs,  in  a  good 
sense,  or  also  (as  in  xii.  5)  in  a  bad  sense ;  here  it  means  guiding 
thoughts,  regulating  principles,  judicious  rules  and  maxims,  as  xi. 
14,  prudent  rules  of  government,  xx.  18,  xxiv.  6  of  stratagems.  Fl. 
compares  the  Arab,  tedlir  (guidance,  from  "Q^,  to  lead  cattle),  with 
its  plur.  teddlii',  and  the  Syr.  duboro,  direction,  management,  etc. 

"Ver.  6.  The  mediate  object  of  these  proverbs,  as  stated  in  ver.  2b, 
is  now  expanded,  for  again  it  is  introduced  in  the  infinitive  con 
struction  : — The  reader  shall  learn  in  these  proverbs,  or  by  means 
of  them  as  of  a  key,  to  understand  such  like  apothegms  generally 
(as  xxii.  17  ff.)  : 

To  understand  proverb  and  symbol, 

The  words  of  wise  men  and  their  eniimuis. 


53  TIIE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

In  the  Gesch.  der  jud.  Poesie,  p.  200  f.,  the  derivation  of  the  noun 
nV^p  is  traced  from  f6,  primarily  to  shine,  Sanskr.  las,  frequently 
with  the  meanings  ludere  and  lucere  ;  but  the  Arab,  brings  near 
another  primary  meaning.  "  ntf^D,  from  Arab,  root  Za.<?,  fl.<>xit,  torsit, 
thus  properly  oratio  detorta,  obliqna,  non  aperta ;  hence  j^,  mocker, 
properly  qui  verbis  obliqnis  utitur :  as  Iliph.  P?n,  to  scoff,  but  also 
vei'ba  detorta  retorqnere,  i.e.  to  interpret,  to  explain"  (Fl.).  Of  the 
root  ideas  found  in  HTH^  to  be  sharp,  pointed  (TH,  perhaps  related 
to  the  Sanskr.  Icatu,  sharp  of  taste,  but  not  to  acutu*),  and  to 
be  twisted  (cf.  "tHX,  "US,  T^  harmonizing  with  the  at  present 
mysterious  catena),  the  preference  is  given  to  the  latter  already, 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  2.  "  The  Arab.  Md,  to  revolve,  to  turn  (whence  hid, 
bend,  turn  aside !),  thence  HTn,  arpofyii,  cunning,  intrigue,  as  also 
enigma,  dark  saying,  perplexe  dictum"  (Fl.)  The  comparison  made 
by  Schultens  with  the  Arab,  hidt  as  the  name  of  the  knot  on  the 
horn  of  the  wild-goat  shows  the  sensible  fundamental  conception. 
In  post-biblical  literature  nTH  is  the  enigma  proper,  and  TOT?O 
poetry  (with  nvbn  of  poetical  prose).  The  Grcec.  Veuet.  translates 
it  prjTopeiav. 

Ver.  7.  The  title  of  the  book  is  followed  by  its  motto,  symbol, 
device  : 

The  fear  of  Jahve  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge  ; 

Wisdom  and  discipline  is  despised  by  fools. 

The  first  hemistich  expresses  the  highest  principle  of  the  Israelitish 
Chokma,  as  it  is  found  also  in  ix.  10  (cf.  xv.  33),  Job  xxviii.  28,  and 
in  Ps.  cxi.  10  (whence  the  LXX.  has  interpolated  here  two  lines). 
JV£W  combines  in  itself,  as  «p%>;,  the  ideas  of  initium  (accordingly 
J.  H.  Michaelis  :  iniliitm  cognitionis,  a  quo  quisquis  recte  philoso- 
phari  cupit  auspicium  facere  debet)  and  principium,  i.e.  the  basis, 
thus  the  root  (cf.  Mic.  i.  13  with  Job  xix.  28).1  Wisdom  comes 
from  God,  and  whoever  fears  Him  receives  it  (cf.  Jas.  i.  5  f.). 
n]n^  n^>T.  is  reverential  subordination  to  the  All-directing,  and 
since  designedly  mrp  is  used,  and  not  DNT7K(n),  to  the  One  God, 
the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  world,  who  gave  His  law  unto 
Israel,  and  also  beyond  Israel  left  not  His  holy  will  unattested  ; 
the  reverse  side  of  the  fear  of  Jahve  as  the  Most  Holy  One  is 
jn  n&or,  viii.  13  (post-biblical  Ntpn  nsT).  The  inverted  placing 

1  In  Sirach  i.  14,  16,  the  Syr.  has  both  times  NnO3H  ^"l  ;  but  in   the 
second  instance,  where  the  Greek  translation  has  Vhwpw^  aoQi'a 
(after  Ps.  xvi.  11)  may  have  existed  in  the  original  text. 


CIIAP.  I.  8,  9.  £9 

of  the  words  11  imports  that  the  wisdom  and  discipline  which 
one  obtains  in  the  way  of  the  fear  of  God  is  only  despised  by  the 
^•N,  i>e-  the  hard,  thick,  stupid  ;  see  regarding  the  root-word 
^!X,  coalescere,  cohcerere,  incrassari,  der  Prophet  Jesaia,  p.  424,  and 
at  Ps.  Ixxiii.  4.  Schultens  rightly  compares  Tra^efc,  crassi  pro 
stupidis.1  ITS  has  the  tone  on  the  penult.,  and  thus  comes  from 
M3  ;  the  3d  p'r.  of  nta  would  be  tta  or  VT3.  The  perf.  (cf.  ver.  29) 
is  to  be  interpreted  after  the  Lat.  oderunt  (Ges.  §  126). 


FIRST  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  I.  8-19. 

WARNING  AGAINST  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  THOSE  WHO  SIN  AGAINST 
THEIR  NEIGHBOUR'S  LIFE  AND  PROPERTY. 

Vers.  8,  9.  After  the  author  has  indicated  the  object  which  his 
Book  of  Proverbs  is  designed  to  subserve,  and  the  fundamental 
principle  on  which  it  is  based,  he  shows  for  whom  he  has  intended 
it ;  he  has  particularly  the  rising  generation  in  his  eye  : 

8  Hear,  my  son,  tliy  father's  instruction, 
And  refuse  not  the  teaching  of  thy  mother  ; 

9  For  these  are  a  fair  crown  to  thy  head, 
And  jewels  to  thy  neck. 

"My  son,"  says  the  teacher  of  wisdom  to  the  scholar  whom  he  has, 
or  imagines  that  he  has,  before  him,  addressing  him  as  a  fatherly 
friend.  The  N.  T.  representation  of  birth  into  a  new  spiritual  life, 
1  Cor.  iv.  15,  Philem.  10,  Gal.  iv.  19,  lies  outside  the  circle  of 
the  O.  T.  representation  ;  the  teacher  feels  himself  as  a  father 
by  virtue  of  his  benevolent,  guardian,  tender  love.  Father  and 
mother  are  the  beloved  parents  of  those  who  are  addressed.  When 
the  Talmud  understands  T3«  of  God,  i?3K  of  the  people  (HEN), 
that  is  not  the  grammatico-historic  meaning,  but  the  practical 
interpretation  and  exposition,  after  the  manner  of  the  Midrash. 
The  same  admonition  (with  "to,  keep,  instead  of  JJ»B>,  hear,  and 
JTiyp,  command,  instead  of  "ICW,  instruction)  is  repeated  in  vi. 
20,  and  what  is  said  of  the  parents  in  one  passage  is  in  x.  1 
divided  into  two  synonymous  parallel  passages.  The  stricter 
1  Malbim's  explanation  is  singular  :  the  sceptics,  from  *7)Jti  perhaps  !  This 
also  is  Heideiiheiin's  view. 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  PKOVERD3. 

musar,  which  expresses  the  idea  of  sensible  means  of  instruction 
(discipline),  (xiii.  24,  xxii.  15,  xxiii.  13  f.),  is  suitably  attributed  to 
the  father,  and  the  torah  to  the  mother,  only  administered  by  the 
word  ;  Wisdom  also  always  says  TTtin  (my  torah),  and  only  once, 
viii.  10,  "HDIO  (my  miisar). 

Ver.  9.  EHj  which  is  also  used  in  the  neut.  ilia,  e.g.  Job  xxii. 
24,  refers  here  to  the  paternal  discipline  and  the  maternal  teaching. 
These,  obediently  received  and  followed,  are  the  fairest  ornament 
of  the  child.  FVp,  from  nip,  to  wind,  to  roll,  Arab,  lawy  (from  "£, 
whence  also  b£>  =  V)?,  as  in,  to  boil  up,  =  ^V^),  means  winding, 
twisted  ornament,  and  especially  wreath ;  a  crown  of  gracefulness 
is  equivalent  to  a  graceful  crown,  a  corolla  gratiosa,  as  Schultens 
translates  it;  cf.  iv.  9,  according  to  which,  Wisdom  bestows  such  a 
crown.1  D'ip:j?  (or  nipjl?,  Judg.  viii.  26)  are  necklaces,  jewels  for 
the  neck ;  denom.  of  the  Arab,  'unek,  and  Aram.  pJW,  the  neck 
(perhaps  from  p?V  =  pw,  to  oppress,  of  heavy  burdens  ;  cf.  av^v, 
the  neck).  flhjna  is,  like  fauces,  the  throat  by  which  one  swallows 
(Arab,  g'arg'ara,  tag'ary'ara),  a  plur.  extensive  (Bottcher,  §  695), 
and  is  better  fitted  than  jna  to  indicate  the  external  throat ; 
Ezekiel,  however,  uses  (xvi.  11)  garon,  as  our  poet  (iii.  3,  22, 
vi.  21)  uses  garg'roth,  to  represent  the  front  neck.2 

Ver.  10.  The  general  counsel  of  ver.  9  is  here  followed  by  a 
more  special  warning : 

My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee 
Consent  thou  not. 

The  V?3  (my  son)  is  emphatically  repeated.  The  intensive  form 
D'XiSPl  signifies  men  to  whom  sin  has  become  a  habit,  thus  vicious, 
wicked,  nrs  (Pi.  of  nns^  to  open)  is  not  denom.,  to  make  or  wish 
to  make  a  ^f ;  the  meaning,  to  entice  (harmonizing  with  Treideiv), 
~fi3  obtains  from  the  root-meaning  of  the  Kal,  for  it  is  related  to 
it  as  pandere  (januam)  to  pater e :  to  open,  to  make  accessible, 
susceptible,  namely  to  persuasion.  The  warning  105  is  as  brief 
as  possible  a  call  of  alarm  back  from  the  abyss.  In  the  form  N2ft 
(from  fUN,  to  agree  to,  to  be  willing,  see  Wetstein  on  Job,  p.  349) 

1  *n  10  fi^  *^e  In  ^as  ^e  conjunctive  accent  slMlshcktli,  on  account  of 
which  the  Pesiq  accent  (  '  )  is  omitted.  This  small  shalsJieleth  occurs  only  eight 
times.  See  Torath  EmetJi,  p.  36. 

-  The  writing  varies  greatly.  Here  and  at  vi.  21  we  have  ^n'ln^;  at  iii.  3, 
^Tr^  '  "*•  22'  T^l^  Tlms  ^cording  to  the  Masora  and  correct  texts. 

3  The  accent  Pazer  over  the  ^3  has  the  force  of  Athnach. 


CHAP.  I.  11-14.  ol 

the  preformative  K  is  wanting,  as  in  ViDn,  2  Sam.  xix.  14,  cf.  Ps. 
cxxxix.  20,  Ges.  §  68,  2,  and  instead  of  nafo  (=  rnxn,  1  Kings  xx.  8)  is 
vocalized  not  N?h  (cf.  xi.25),  but  after  the  Aram,  toft  (cf.  *<£*)  ;  see 
Gen.  xxvi.  29,  and  Comment,  on  Isaiah,  p.  648;  Gesen.  §  75,  17. 

Vers.  11-14.  Of  the  n  imber  of  wicked  men  who  gain  associ 
ates  to  their  palliation  and  strengthening,  they  are  adduced  as  an 
example  whom  covetousness  leads  to  murder. 

11  If  they  say,  "  Go  with  us,  we  will  lurk  for  blood, 
Lie  in  wait  for  the  innocent  without  cause  ; 

12  Like  the  pit  we  will  swallow  them  alive 

And  in  perfect  soundness  like  them  that  go  down  to  the  grave. 

13  We  find  all  manner  of  precious  treasure, 
Fill  our  houses  with  spoil. 

14  Thou  shalt  cast  thy  lot  amongst  us, 
We  all  have  only  one  purse." 


Ver.  11.  The  verb  2"iN  signifies  nectere,  to  bind  fast  (from 
y},  close,  compact),  (see  under  Isa.  xxv.  11),  and  particularly  (but 
so  that  it  bears  in  itself  its  object  without  ellipse)  insidias  nectere  = 
insidiari.  Regarding  DT3  Fleischer  remarks  :  "  Either  elliptically 
for  D^fSE?  (Jewish  interp.),  or,  as  the  parallelism  and  the  usage  of 
the  language  of  this  book  rather  recommend,  per  sy  need,  for:  for  a 
man,  with  particular  reference  to  his  blood  to  be  poured  out  (cf.  our 
saying  *  ein  junges  Blut,'  a  young  blood  =  a  youth,  with  the  under 
lying  conception  of  the  blood  giving  colour  to  the  body  as  shining 
through  it,  or  giving  to  it  life  and  strength),  as  Ps.  xciv.  21."  As 
in  post-biblical  Heb.  CHJ  "it?3  (or  inverted,  aifjua  KOL  <rdp%,  Heb.  ii. 
14),  used  of  men  as  such,  is  not  so  used  in  the  O.  T.,  yet  Cn,  like 
B'Bp,  is  sometimes  used  synecdochically  for  the  person,  but  never 
with  reference  to  the  blood  as  an  essentially  constituent  part  of 
corporealness,  but  always  with  reference  to  violent  putting  to  death, 
which  separates  the  blood  from  the  body  (cf.  my  System  der  bib. 
Psychologie^  p.  242).  Here  E^p  is  explained  by  ^CH-  ,  with  which  it 
is  interchanged,  Mic.  vii.  2  :  let  us  lurk  for  blood  (to  be  poured  out). 
The  verb  JBV  is  never,  like  J&B  (to  conceal),  connected  with  BV^-J 
D^ptoj  na,  niih  —  thus  none  of  these  words  is  here  to  be  supplied;  the 
idea  of  gaining  over  one  expressed  in  the  organic  root  tjv  (whence 
HBV,  diducendo  obducere)  has  passed  over  into  that  of  restraining 
oneself,  watching,  lurking,  hence  }B¥  (cog.  Aram.  JD3)  in  the  sense 
of  speculari,  insidiari,  interchanges  with  nB¥  (to  spy),  (cf.  Ps. 
x.  8,  Ivi.  7  with  xxxvii.  32).  The  adv.  C3H  (an  old  acc-us.  from 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

JH)  properly  means  in  a  gracious  manner,  as  a  free  gift  (Swpedv, 
yratis  =  gratus*),  and  accordingly,  without  reward,  also  without 
cause,  which  frequently  —  without  guilt ;  but  it  never  signifies  sine 
effectu  qui  noceat,  i.e.  with  impunity  (Lowenst.).  We  have  thus 
either  to  connect  together  D3n  "jpj,  "  innocent  in  vain  "  (as  D3H  ^k, 
my  enemies  without  a  cause,  Lam.  iii.  52)  :  his  innocence  helps 
him  nothing  whom  God  protects  not  against  us  notwithstanding 
his  innocence  (Schultens,  Bertheau,  Elster,  and  others)  ;  or  connect 
D:n  with  the  verb  (lie  in  wait  for),  for  which  Hitzig,  after  the 
LXX.,  Syr.,  Rashi,1  Ralbag,  Immanuel,  rightly  decides  in  view 
of  1  Sam.  xix.  5,  xxv.  31 ;  cf.  also  Job  ix.  17,  where  the  succession 
of  the  accents  is  the  same  (Tarcha  transmuted  from  M/igrash}, 
Frequently  there  are  combined  together  in  this  D3D  (cf.  Isa.  xxviii. 
14  f.),  that  which  the  author  thinks,  and  that  which  those  whom 
he  introduces  as  speaking  think. 

Ver.  12.  The  first  clause  of  this  verse  Hitzig  translates:  "as 
the  pit  (swallows)  that  which  lives."  This  is  untenable,  because 
3  with  the  force  of  a  substantive  (as  instar,  likeness)  is  regarded 
as  a  preposition,  but  not  a  conjunction  (see  at  Ps.  xxxviii.  14  f.). 
E^n  (the  living)  is  connected  with  D#«3j  and  is  the  accus.  of  the 

state  (JU»-,  according  to  the  terminology  of  the  Arab,  gram 
marians)  in  which  they  will,  with  impunity,  swallow  them  up  like 
the  pit  (the  insatiable,  xxvii.  20,  xxx.  16),  namely,  while  these 
their  sacrifices  are  in  the  state  of  life's  freshness,2  "  the  living," 
— without  doubt,  like  Ps.  Iv.  16,  Ixiii.  10,  cxxiv.  3,  in  fact  and  in 
expression  an  allusion  to  the  fate  of  the  company  of  Korah,  Num. 
xvi.  30,  33.  If  this  is  the  meaning  of  D"n,  then  D'O'en  as  the 
parallel  word  means  integros  not  in  an  ethical  sense,  in  which  it 
would  be  a  synonym  of  '•pa  of  ver.  116  (cf.  xxix.  10  with  Ps.  xix.  14), 
but  in  a  physical  sense  (Grcec.  Venet.  teal  TeXeiou?;  Parchon  as  Rashi, 
CTC^n  D\snn,  vid.  Bottcher,  De  Jaferis,  §  293).  This  physical 
sense  is  claimed  for  Dn,  Job  xxi.  23,  for  Dn  probably,  Ps.  Ixxiii.  4, 
and  why  should  not  D'DD,  used  in  the  law  regarding  sacrifices  (e.g. 
Ex.  xii.  5,  "  without  blemish")  of  the  faultlessness  of  the  victim, 

1  [Raslii,  i.e.  Rabbi  Salomo  Isaaki,  of  Troyes,  died  A.D.  1105.     Ralbag,  i.e. 
Rabbi  Levi  ben  Gershon,  usually  referred  to  by  Christian  writers  as  Master  Leo 
de  Bannolis,  or  Gersonides,  a  native  of  Banolas  near  Gerona,  died  about  1342.] 

2  Only  in  this  sense  is  the  existing  accentuation  of  this  verse  (cf.  the  Targ.) 
to  be  justified. 


CHAP.  I.  11-14.  63 

also  signify  such  an  one  Oho  te'px  T£;x  (Isa.  i.  6)?  In  the  midst 
of  complete  external  health  they  will  devour  them  like  those  that 
go  down  to  the  grave  (cf.  Ps.  xxviii.  1,  Ixxxviii.  5,  with  Isa. 
xiv.  19),  i.e.  like  those  under  whose  feet  the  earth  is  suddenly 
opened,  so  that,  without  leaving  any  trace  behind,  they  sink  into 
the  grave  and  into  Hades.  The  connection  of  the  finite  with  the 
accus.  of  place,  Ps.  Iv.  16,  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  genitive 
connection  "in  'T)i^  (with  the  tone  thrown  back)  :  those  that  go 
down  to  the  grave. 

Vers.  13,  14.1  To  their  invitation,  bearing  in  itself  its  own  con 
demnation,  they  add  as  a  lure  the  splendid  self-enriching  treasures 
which  in  equal  and  just  fellowship  with  them  they  may  have  the 
prospect  of  sharing,  jin  (from  fin,  levem}  then  facilem  esse,  etre 
<uW,  a  son  aise)  means  aisance,  convenience,  opulence,  and  con 
cretely  that  by  which  life  is  made  agreeable,  thus  money  and 
possessions  (Fleischer  in  Levy's  Cliald.  Worterbuch,  i.  423  f.).  With 
this  pn  with  remarkable  frequency  in  the  Mis/tie  ">j^  (from  "^, 
Arab,  wakar,  grave  esse)  is  connected  in  direct  contrast,  according 
to  its  primary  signification  ;  cf.  xii.  27,  xxiv.  4 :  heavy  treasures 
which  make  life  light.  Yet  it  must  not  be  maintained  that,  as 
Schultens  has  remarked,  this  oxymoron  is  intended,  nor  also  that 
it  is  only  consciously  present  in  the  language.  N^D  has  here  its 
primitive  appropriate  signification  of  attaining,  as  Isa.  x.  14  of 
reaching.  7?W  (from  ??&?,  to  draw  from,  draw  out,  from  *?&, 
cf.  r6tP,  sjpK',  Arab,  salab,  Comm.  on  Isa.  p.  447)  is  that  which  is 
drawn  away  from  the  enemy,  e.ruvice,  and  then  the  booty  and 
spoil  taken  in  war  generally.  N?P?,  to  fill  with  anything,  make 
full,  governs  a  double  accusative,  as  the  Kal  (to  become  full  of 
anything)  governs  only  one.  In  ver.  14,  the  invitation  shows 
how  the  prospect  is  to  be  realized.  Interpreters  have  difficulty 
in  conceiving  what  is  here  meant.  Do  not  a  share  by  lot  and  a 
common  purse  exclude  one  another  ?  Will  they  truly,  in  the  dis 
tribution  of  the  booty  by  lot,  have  equal  portions  at  length,  equally 
much  in  their  money-bags?  Or  is  it  meant  that,  apart  from  the 
portion  of  the  booty  which  falls  to  every  one  by  lot,  they  have  a 
common  purse  which,  when  their  business  is  ebbing,  must  supply 
the  wants  of  the  company,  and  on  which  the  new  companion  can 
maintain  himself  beforehand  ?  Or  does  it  mean  only  that  they  will 

1  Here,  in  ver.  14,  "py\$  is  to  be  written  with  MtmacJi  (not  Metliey)  in  the 
second  syllable;  vid.  Turutlt  Emctli,  p.  20.  Accentttationsaystem,  vii.  §  2. 


64.  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

be  as  mutually  helpful  to  one  another,  according  to  the  principle 
ra  TWV  <f)i\c»}v  rcoivd  (amicorum  omnia  communia),  as  if  they  had 
only  one  purse?  The  meaning  is  perfectly  simple.  The  one 
ness  of  the  purse  consists  in  this,  that  the  booty  which  each  of 
them  gets,  belongs  not  wholly  or  chiefly  to  him,  but  to  the  whole 
together,  and  is  disposed  of  by  lot ;  so  that,  as  far  as  possible,  he 
who  participated  not  at  all  in  the  affair  in  obtaining  it,  may  yet 
draw  the  greatest  prize.  This  view  harmonizes  the  relation  between 
146  and  14a.  The  common  Semitic  D^p  is  even  used  at  the  present 
day  in  Syria  and  elsewhere  as  the  name  of  the  Exchange  ("  Borse  ") 
(plur.  akjds)-,  here  it  is  the  purse  ("  Kasse")  (xprj^drwv  Bo^eiov, 
Procop.),  which  is  made  up  of  the  profits  of  the  business.  This 
profit  consists  not  merely  in  gold,  but  is  here  thought  of  in  regard 
to  its  worth  in  gold.  The  apparent  contradiction  between  distri 
buting  by  lot  and  having  a  common  purse  disappears  when  the 
distribution  by  lot  of  the  common  property  is  so  made,  that  the 
retaining  of  a  stock-capital,  or  reserve  fund,  is  not  excluded. 

Ver.  15.  After  the  men  are  described  against  whose  enticements 
a  warning  is  given  forth,  the  warning  is  emphatically  repeated,  and 
is  confirmed  by  a  threefold  reason  : 

My  son  !  go  not  in  the  way  with  them. 

Keep  back  thy  foot  from  their  path. 

If  ^3  (in  the  way),  taken  alone,  cannot  be  equivalent  to  "ins  711:1 
(in  one  way),  so  is  onx  (with  them)  to  be  regarded  as  its  determi 
nation.1  Foot  (not  feet),  as  eye,  hand,  etc.,  is  used  where  the 
members  come  less  under  consideration  than  what  they  unitedlv 
bring  about  (iv.  26  f.).  rn'na,  from  ana,  signifies  properly  that 
which  is  raised,  especially  the  (raised)  footstep. 

Ver.  16.  The  first  argument  to  enforce  the  warninf: 
For  their  feet  run  to  the  evil, 
And  hasten  to  shed  blood. 

That  this  is  their  object  they  make  no  secret  (ver.  llff.);  but 
why  is  it  that  such  an  object  as  this  should  furnish  no  ground  of 
warning  against  them,  especially  as  on  this  beginning  the  stamp 
of  that  which  is  morally  blamable  is  here  impressed  with  jn!>  ? 
1  The  Arab,  grammarians  regard  this  as  half  determination,  and  call  it 
takJisys;  that  DriX  has  with  them  the  force  of  a  virtually  co-ordinated  attri 
butive  ;  while,  according  to  the  Arab,  gram.,  it  is  also  possible  that  ipia,  "  in 
one  way,"  is  equivalent  to  on  the  common  way,  for  in  the  indeterminatiou 
sometimes  there  lies  the  conception  not  merely  of  dhad,  but  of  weuhud. 


CHAP.  I.  17.  65 

Besides,  this  circular  movement  of  the  thoughts  is  quite  after  the 
manner  of  this  poet  ;  and  that  ver.  16  is  in  his  style,  vi.  18  shows. 
The  want  of  this  distich  (166  =  Rom.  iii.  15)  in  LXX.  B.  K. 
weighs  heavier  certainly  than  the  presence  of  it  in  LXX.  A. 
(Procop.,  Syro-Hexap.),  since  the  translation  is  not  independent, 
but  is  transferred  from  Isa.  lix.  7  ;  but  if  for  the  first  time,  at  a 
later  period,  it  is  supplied  in  the  LXX.,  yet  it  has  the  appearance 
of  an  addition  made  to  the  Hebr.  text  from  Isa.  lix.  7  (Hitzig, 
Lagarde)  ;  cf.  Comm.  on  Isaiah,  xl.-lxvi.  SJSIp?  is  always  pointed 
thus  ;  for,  as  a  regular  rule,  after  h  as  well  as  O  the  aspiration 
disappears  ;  but  in  Ezek.  xvii.  17  "i\BV3,  is  also  found,  and  in  this 
case  (cf.  at  Ps.  xl.  15)  the  punctuation  is  thus  inconsequent. 
Ver.  17.  The  second  argument  in  support  of  the  warning. 

For  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  out 

In  the  eyes  of  all  (the  winged)  birds. 

The  interpretation  conspersum  cst  rete,  namely,  with  corn  as  a 
bait,  which  was  put  into  circulation  by  Rashi,  is  inadmissible  ;  for 
as  little  as  njn  (Hiph.  of  nn)  can  mean  to  strew,  can  rnr  mean  to 
spread.  The  object  is  always  that  which  is  scattered  (gestreut),  not 
that  which  is  spread  (bestreut).  Thus,  expansum  est  rete,  but  not 
from  "IT»,  extendere,  from  which  nnilO1  in  this  form  cannot  be  de 
rived  (it  would  in  that  case  be  i"niT»),  but  from  rnf,  pass,  of  rnr,  to 
scatter,  spread  out.  The  alluring  net,  when  it  is  shaken  out  and 
spread,  is,  as  it  were,  scattered,  ventilatur.  But  if  this  is  done 
incautiously  before  the  eyes  of  the  birds  to  be  caught,  they  forth 
with  fly  away.  The  principal  stress  lies  on  the  ^;j|3  (before  the 
eyes)  as  the  reason  of  the  E2H  (in  vain),  according  to  the  saying  of 
Ovid,  Qua  nimis  apparent  retia,  vitat  avis.  The  applicatio  simili- 
tudinis  lying  near,  according  to  J.  H.  Michaelis,  is  missed  even  bv 
himself  and  by  most  others.  If  the  poet  wished  to  say  that  they 
carried  on  their  work  of  blood  with  such  open  boldness,  that  he 
must  be  more  than  a  simpleton  who  would  allow  himself  to  be 
caught  by  them,  that  would  be  an  unsuitable  ground  of  warning  ; 
for  would  there  not  be  equally  great  need  for  warning  against 
fellowship  with  them,  if  they  had  begun  their  enticement  with 
more  cunning,  and  reckoned  on  greater  success  ?  Hitzig,  Ewald, 
Zockler,  and  others,  therefore  interpret  D2H,  not  in  the  sense  of 


1  The  MS.  Masora  remarks  IDHI  JV$>,  and  hence  mfft  is  written  defectively 
in  the  Erfurt,  1,  2,  3,  Frank/.  1294,  in  the  edition  of  Norzi  and  elsewhere. 
VOL.  I. 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

in  vain,  inasmuch  as  they  do  riot  let  themselves  be  caught ;  but :  in 
vain,  for  they  see  not  the  net,  but  only  the  scattered  corn.  But 
according  to  the  preceding,  ntJnn  (the  net)  leads  us  to  think  only 
either  of  the  net  of  the  malicious  designs,  or  the  net  of  the  alluring 
deceptions.  Thus,  as  Ziegler  has  noticed,  the  warned  ought  to 
make  application  of  the  similitude  to  himself :  Go  not  with  them, 
for  their  intention  is  bad ;  go  not  with  them,  for  if  the  bird  flees 
away  from  the  net  which  is  spread  out  before  it,  thou  wilt  not 
surely  be  so  blind  as  suffer  thyself  to  be  ensnared  by  their  gross 
enticement''.  ^3  ^3  :  the  furnished  with  the  wing  (wings  in 
Eccles.x.  20)  ;  fe  forms  the  idea  of  property  (lord). 

Ver.  18.  The  causal  conj.  '3  (for)  in  vers.  16  and  17  are 
co-ordinated  ;  and  there  now  follows,  introduced  by  the  conj.  i 
("  and"),  a  third  reason  for  the  warning  : 

And  they  lie  in  wait  for  their  own  blood, 

They  lay  snares  for  their  own  lives. 

The  warning  of  ver.  16  is  founded  on  the  immorality  of  the  con 
duct  of  the  enticer ;  that  of  17  on  the  audaciousness  of  the  seduc 
tion  as  such,  and  now  on  the  self-destruction  which  the  robber  and 
murderer  bring  upon  themselves  :  they  wish  to  murder  others,  but, 
as  the  result  shows,  they  only  murder  themselves.  The  expression 
is  shaped  after  ver.  11,  as  if  it  were  :  They  lay  snares,  as  they 
themselves  say,  for  the  blood  of  others ;  but  it  is  in  reality  for 
their  own  blood  :  they  certainly  lie  in  wait,  as  they  say  ;  but  not,  as 
they  add,  for  the  innocent,  but  for  their  own  lives  (FJ.).  Instead 
of  Dffib,  there  might  be  used  ww£,  after  Mic.  vii.  2  ;  but  DfB^ 
would  signify  ipsis  (post-biblical,  DB^JP),  while  DHB'EHp  leaves  un- 
obliterated  the  idea  of  the  life :  aninds  ipsorum ;  for  if  the  O.  T. 
language  seeks  to  express  ipse  in  any  other  way  than  by  the  per 
sonal  pronoun  spoken  emphatically,  this  is  done  by  the  addition  of 
£;2:  (Isa.  liii.  11).  oni  was  on  this  account  necessary,  because  ver. 
1 7  has  another  subject  (cf.  Ps.  Ixiii.  10). 
Ver.  19.  An  epiphonema  : 

Such  is  the  lot  of  all  who  indulge  in  covetousncss  ; 

It  takes  away  the  life  of  its  owner. 

This  language  is  formed  after  Job  viii.  13.  Here,  as  there,  in 
the  word  riinix,  the  ideas  of  action  and  issue,  manner  of  life  and 
its  result,  are  all  combined.  J?V|  signifies  properly  that  which  is 
cut  off,  a  piece,  fragment  broken  off,  then  that  which  one  breaks 
off  and  takes  to  himself  —  booty,  gain,  particularly  unjust  gain 


CHAP.  I.  20.  67 

(xxviii.  16).  J-'V?  ?:'-»'3  is  he  who  is  greedy  or  covetous.  The  subject 
to  n<^  is  i'i'3,  covetousness,  Tr\eove%ia  (see  Isa.  Ivii.  17).  As  Hosea, 
iv.  11,  says  of  three  other  things  that  they  take  away  3?,  the 
understanding  (i/ou?),  so  here  we  are  taught  regarding  unjust  gain 
or  covetousness,  that  it  takes  away  £'SJ,  the  life  (^v^)  (K^  npb, 
to  take  away  the  life,  1  Kings  xix.  10,  Ps.  xxxi.  14).  V^JD  denotes 
not  the  possessor  of  unjust  gain,  but  as  an  inward  conception,  like 
fJN  ?JJ3,  xxii.  24,  cf.  xxiii.  2,  xxiv.  8,  Eccles.  x.  11,  him  of  whom 
covetousness  is  the  property.  The  sing.  S?S3  does  not  show  that 
Vyi?3  is  thought  of  as  sing.  ;  cf.  xxii.  23,  Ps.  xxxiv.  23  ;  but 
according  to  iii.  27,  xvi.  22,  Eccles.  viii.  8,  this  is  nevertheless 
probable,  although  the  usage  without  the  suffix  is  always 
and  not  v£2  (of  plur.  inteus. 


SECOND  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  I.  20-33. 
DISCOURSE  OF  WISDOM  TO  HER  DESPISERS. 

After  the  teacher  of  wisdom  has  warned  his  disciples  against  the 
allurements  of  self-destroying  sin,  whose  beastly  demoniacal  nature 
culminates  in  murder  and  robbery,  he  introduces  Wisdom  herself 
saying  how  by  enticing  promises  and  deterring  threatenings  she 
calls  the  simple  and  the  perverse  to  repentance.  Wisdom  is  here 
personified,  i.e.  represented  as  a  person.  But  this  personification 
presupposes,  that  to  the  poet  wisdom  is  more  than  a  property  and 
quality  of  human  subjectivity  :  she  is  to  him  as  a  divine  power, 
existing  independently,  to  submit  to  which  is  the  happiness  of  men, 
and  to  reject  which  is  their  destruction.  And  also  to  the  public 
appearance  of  wisdom,  as  it  is  here  represented,  there  must  be 
present  objective  reality,  without  which  the  power  of  conviction 
departs  from  the  figure.  The  author  must  think  on  historical  and 
biographical  facts,  on  human  organs  (as  2  Chron.  xvii.  7-9,  cf. 
Wisd.  vii.  27),  through  which,  without  words  and  in  words,  Wisdom 
delivers  such  addresses.  But  the  figure  cannot  be  so  historical  that 
it  sustains  only  the  relation  to  a  definite  time,  and  not  to  all  time  ; 
it  is  a  call  to  repentance,  going  forth  to  all  time  and  to  all  places, 
which,  divested  of  all  the  accidents  of  its  externality,  he  here  refers 
to  its  invisible  divine  background,  when  he  begins  in  these  words  : 


G3  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

20  Wisdom  cries,  sounding  loudly  in  the  streets, 

She  causes  her  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  chief  streets. 

21  Over  the  places  of  greatest  tumult  she  calleth  ; 

In  the  porches  of  the  gates,  in  the  city,  she  speaketh  forth  h  :r  worcla. 

Yer.  20.  Looking  to  its  form  and  vocalization,  J"iiB3n  may  be  an 
Aramaizing  abstract  formation  (Gesen. ;  E\v.  165,  c ;  Olsh.  219,  b)  ; 
for  although  the  forms  rriDN  and  HV3  are  of  a  different  origin,  yet 
in  Dial  and  ni??in  such  abstract  formations  lie  before  us.  The  ter 
mination  uth  is  here,  by  the  passing  over  of  the  u  into  the  less 
obscure  but  more  intensive  o  (cf.  in1;  in  the  beginning  and  middle 
of  the  word,  and  W  W  at  the  end  of  the  word),  raised  to  6th,  and 
thereby  is  brought  near  to  the  fem.  plur.  (cf.  niMn?  xiv.  1,  sapientia, 
as  our  plur.  of  the  neut.  sapiens,  n???D.)>  approaching  to  the  abstract. 
On  the  other  hand,  that  riiDsn  is  sing,  of  abstract  signification,  is  not 
decisively  denoted  by  its  being  joined  to  the  plur.  of  the  predicate 
(for  nihfi  here,  as  at  viii.  3,  is  scarcely  plur. ;  and  if  ni£5O?  xxiv. 
7,  is  plur.,  rri£3n  as  the  numerical  plur.  may  refer  to  the  different 
sciences  or  departments  of  knowledge)  ;  but  perhaps  by  this,  that  it 
interchanges  with  nuttn,  ps.  xlix.  4,  cf.  Prov.  xi.  12,  xxviii.  16, 
and  that  an  abstract  formation  from  n£2n  (fem.  of  D^h,  DbH), 
which  besides  is  not  concrete,  was  unnecessary.  Still  less  is  nift^n 
=  niD3n  a  singular,  which  has  it  in  view  to  change  HMH  into  a 
proper  name,  for  proof  of  which  Hitzig  refers  to  rrioinn,  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
15 ;  the  singular  ending  6th  without  an  abstract  signification  does 
not  exist.  After  that  Dietrich,  in  his  Abhandl.  1846,  has  shown 
that  the  origin  of  the  plur.  proceeds  not  from  separate  calculation, 
but  from  comprehension,1  and  that  particularly  also  names  denotino- 
intellectual  strength  are  frequently  plur.,  which  multiply  the  con 
ception  not  externally  but  internally,  there  is  no  longer  any 
justifiable  doubt  that  rrttMH  signifies  the  all-comprehending,  abso 
lute,  or,  as  Bottcher,  §  689,  expresses  it,  the  full  personal  wisdom. 
Since  such  intensive  plurals  are  sometimes  united  with  the  plur.  of 
the  predicate,  as  e.g.  the  monotheistic-ally  interpreted  Elohim,  Gen. 
xxxv.  7  (see  I.e.),  so  nain  may  be  plur.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
idea  that  it  is  a  forma  inixta  of  fin  (from  JJn)  and  runn  (Job 
xxxix.  23)  or  ninn,  the  final  sound  in  ah  opposes.  It  may,  how 
ever,  be  the  emphatic  form  of  the  3d  fem.  sing,  of  fri ;  for  that  the 

1  In  the  Indo-Germanic  languages  the  s  of  the  plur.  also  probably  proceeds 
from  the  prep,  sa  (sam)  =  aw.  See  Schleicher,  Comnend.  der  verql.  Gram 
§247. 


CHAP.  I.  21,  22.  69 

Hebr.  has  such  an  emphatic  form,  corresponding  to  the  Arab,  taktu- 
lanna,  is  shown  by  these  three  examples  (keeping  out  of  view  the 
suspicion  of  a  corruption  of  the  text,  Olsh.  p.  452),  Judg.  v.  26, 
Job  xvii.  16,  Isa.  xxviii.  3  ;  cf.  Hinplp'n,  Obad.  13  (see  Caspari,  I.e.), 
an  example  of  the  2d  masc.  sing,  of  this  formation.  |J"J  (with  nri) 
is  a  word  imitative  of  sound  (Schallwort),  used  to  denote  "  a  clear- 
sounding,  shrill  voice  (thence  the  Arab,  rannan,  of  a  speaker  who 
has  a  clear,  piercing  voice)  ;  then  the  clear  shrill  sound  of  a  string 
or  chord  of  a  bow,  or  the  clear  tinkle  of  the  arrow  in  the  quiver, 
and  of  the  metal  that  has  been  struck"  (Fl.).  The  meaning 
of  niirn  is  covered  by  platece  (Luke  xiv.  21),  wide  places;  and 
pin,  which  elsewhere  may  mean  that  which  is  without,  before  the 
gates  of  the  city  and  courts,  here  means  the  "  open  air,"  in  contra 
distinction  to  the  inside  of  the  houses. 

Ver.  21.  ni»o'n  (plur.  of  'Oin,  the  ground-form  of  ncin,  from  'on 
=  n?3n),  "  they  who  are  making  noise  ;"  for  the  epithet  is  poetically 
used  (Isa.  xxii.  2)  as  a  substantive,  crowded  noisy  streets  or  places. 
C;N~i  is  the  place  from  which  on  several  sides  streets  go  forth  :  cf. 
ras  el-ain,  the  place  where  the  well  breaks  forth ;  ras  en-nahr,  the 
place  from  which  the  stream  divides  itself  ;  the  sing,  is  meant  dis- 
tributively  as  little  as  at  viii.  2.  nos,  if  distinguished  from  ">J^ 
(which  also  signifies  cleft,  breach),  is  the  opening  of  the  gate,  the 
entrance  by  the  gate.  Four  times  the  poet  says  that  Wisdom  goes 
forth  preaching,  and  four  times  that  she  preaches  publicly ;  the  "VJO 
used  in  five  places  implies  that  Wisdom  preaches  not  in  the  field, 
before  the  few  who  there  are  met  with,  but  in  the  city,  which  is  full 
of  people. 

Ver.  22.  The  poet  has  now  reached  that  part  of  his  introduction 
where  he  makes  use  of  the  very  words  uttered  by  Wisdom  : 

How  long,  ye  simple,  will  ye  love  simplicity, 
And  scorners  delight  in  scorning, 
And  fools  hate  knowledge  ? 

Three  classes  of  men  are  here  addressed :  the  &?n3,  the  simple,  who, 
being  accessible  to  seduction,  are  only  too  susceptible  of  evil ;  the  D^V?, 
mockers,  i.e.  free-thinkers  (from  p7,  Arab.  lus^Jlectere,  torquere,  pro 
perly  qui  verbis  obliquis  utitur)  ;  and  the  DylD3,  fools,  i.e.  the  men 
tally  imbecile  and  stupid  (from  ?D3,  Arab,  kasal,  to  be  thick,  coarse, 
indolent).  The  address  to  these  passes  immediately  over  into  a  de 
claration  regarding  them  ;  cf.  the  same  enallage,  i.  27  f.  "T!?"'1^  has 
the  accent  Malipach,  on  account  of  the  Pa*ek  following;  vid.  Torath 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Emeth,  p.  26.  Intentionally,  Wisdom  addresses  only  the  D713,  to 
whom  she  expects  to  find  soonest  access.  Between  the  futt.,  which 
express  the  continuing  love  and  hatred,  stands  the  perf.  ^""pn,  which 
expresses  that  in  which  the  mockers  found  pleasure,  that  which  was 
the  object  of  their  love.  Dni?  is  the  so-called  dat.  ethicus,  which  re- 
flexively  refers  to  that  which  is  said  to  be  the  will  and  pleasure  of 
the  subject ;  as  we  say,  "  I  am  fond  of  this  and  that."  The  form 
^L!^,  Abulwalid,  Parchon,  and  Kimchi  regard  as  Plel ;  but 
^qxn  instead  of  ^3nxn  would  be  a  recompensation  of  the  virtual 
doubling,  defacing  the  character  of  the  Piel.  Schultens  regards  it 
as  a  defectively  written  Paiel  (in  Syr.),  but  it  is  not  proved  that 
this  conjugation  exists  in  Hebr. ;  much  rather  ^nsri  js  the  only 
possible  Kal  form  with  I^HNn  without  the  pause,  regularly  formed 
from  ttnsn  (vid.  Ewald,  §  193,  a).  The  division  by  the  accent 
Mercha-Malipach  of  the  two  words  713  innxn  is  equal  in  value  to  the 
connecting  of  them  by  Makkeph ;  vid.  Baer's  Psalteri"rn.  p.  x.  In 
codd.,  and  also  in  correct  texts,  lansn  is  written  with  the  accent 
Galgal  on  the  first  syllable,  as  the  servant  of  the  Mercha-Malipach. 
The  Gaja  is  incorrectly  here  and  there  placed  under  the  f\. 

Ver.  23.  To  the  call  to  thonghtfulness  which  lies  in  the  complaint 
"  How  long?"  there  follows  the  entreaty  : 

Turn  ye  at  my  reproof  ! 

Behold  !  I  would  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  you, 

I  would  make  you  to  know  my  words. 

23a  is  not  a  clause  expressive  of  a  wish,  which  with  the  particle 
expressive  of  a  wish,  which  is  wanting,  would  be  KjnniKTi,  or 
according  to  xxiii.  1  and  xxvii.  23  would  be  !QVJTI  ni£>.  The*  nan 
introducing  the  principal  clause,  stamps  23a  as  the  conditional 
clause  ;  the  relation  of  the  expressions  is  as  Isa.  xxvi.  10,  Job  xx. 
24.  iSV^n1  is  not  equivalent  to  si  convertamini,  which  would  require 
«£n}  but  to  si  revertamini ;  but  ^n^in^ 2  does  not  therefore  mean 
at  my  reproof,  i.e.  in  consequence  of  it  (Hitzig,  after  Num.  xvi. 
34),  but  it  is  a  construct™  pra>gnans  :  turning  and  placing  yourselves 
under  my  reproof.  With  nnain  there  is  supposed  "an  e\ey%o<; 
(LXX.,  Svmni.)  :  bringing  proof,  conviction,  punishment.  If 

1  In  the  Hacjiograplia  everywhere  written   pkne,   with   exception   of    Job 
xvii.  10. 

2  The  Mctheg  belongs  to  the  n,  under  which  it  should  be  placed  (and  not  to 
the  $j),   as   the  commencing  sound  of  the  second   syllable  before  the  tone- 
syllable  ;  cf.  ver.  25. 


CHAP.  I.  2-1-27. 


71 


they,  leaving  their  hitherto  accustomed  way,  permit  themselves  to 
be  warned  against  their  wickedness,  then  would  Wisdom  cause  her 
words  to  flow  forth  to  them,  i.e.  would  without  reserve  disclose  and 
communicate  to  them  her  spirit,  cause  them  to  know  (namely  by 
experience)  her  words.  T??  (from  JO3,  K.  13 ;  vid.  Genesis,  p.  635) 
is  a  common  figurative  word,  expressive  of  the  free  pouring  forth 
of  thoughts  and  words,  for  the  mouth  is  conceived  of  as  a  fountain 
(of.  xviii.  4  with  Matt.  xii.  34),  and  the  pija-ts  (vid.  LXX.)  as 
peOo-*9  ;  only  here  it  has  the  Spirit  as  object,  but  parallel  with  nyi, 
thus  the  Spirit  as  the  active  power  of  the  words,  which,  if  the 
Spirit  expresses  Himself  in  them,  are  "rrvev^a  Kal  £0)77,  John  vi.  63. 
The  addresses  of  Wisdom  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  touch  closely 
upon  the  discourses  of  the  Lord  in  the  Logos-Gospel.  Wisdom 
appears  here  as  the  fountain  of  the  words  of  salvation  for  men  ; 
and  these  words  of  salvation  are  related  to  her,  just  as  the  \6yoi. 
to  the  divine  Xcyyo?  expressing  Himself  therein. 

Vers.  24-27.  The  address  of  Wisdom  now  takes  another  course. 
Between  vers.  23  and  24  there  is  a  pause,  as  between  Isa.  i.  20  and 
21.  In  vain  Wisdom  expects  that  her  complaints  and  enticements 
will  be  heard.  Therefore  she  turns  her  call  to  repentance  into  a 
discourse  announcing  judgment. 

24  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused ; 
Stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded ; 

25  And  ye  have  rejected  all  my  counsel, 
And  to  my  reproof  have  not  yielded  : 

26  Therefore  will  I  also  laugh  at  your  calamity, 
Will  mock  when  your  terror  cometh  ; 

27  When  like  a  storm  your  terror  cometh, 

And  your  destruction  sweeps  on  like  a  whirlwinl; 
When  distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon  you. 

Commencing  with  JJP  (which,  like  fe'O,  from  njy,  to  oppose,  denotes 
the  intention,  but  more  the  fundamental  reason  or  the  cause  than,  as 
15»j>,  the  motive  or  object),  the  clause,  connected  with  '3N'D3,  ego  vicis- 
sim,  turns  to  the  conclusion.  As  here  "nwfc  J^  (as  the  word  of  Jahve) 
are  connected  by  ^X'Cj)  to  the  expression  of  the  talio  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  4, 
so  also  ISO,  with  its  contrast  H3X,  Isa.  i.  19  f.  The  construction 
qv.oniam  vocavi  et  renuistis  for  quoniam  quum  vocarem  rennistis 
(cf.  Isa.  xii.  1)  is  the  common  diffuse  (zerstreute)  Semitic,  the  para- 
tactic  instead  of  the  periodizing  style.  The  stretching  out  of  the 
hand  is,  like  the  "spreading  out"  in  Isa.  Ixv.  2,  significant  of  striving 
to  beckon  to  the  wandering,  and  to  bring  them  near.  Regarding 


72 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


3vJ'pn,  viz.  foTN,  to  make  the  ear  stiff  (R.  pp),  arrigere,  incorrectly 
explained  by  Sclmltens,  after  the  Arab,  kashabj  polire,  by  aurem 
purgare,  vid.  Isaiah,  p.  257,  note. 

Ver.  25.  ina  is  synonymous  with  BfBJ,  i.  8 ;  cf.  iv.  15  injna,  turn 
from  it.  Gesenius  has  inaccurately  interpreted  the  phrase  &sn  jna 
of  the  shaving  off  of  the  hair,  instead  of  the  letting  it  fly  loose,  jne 
means  to  loosen  (—to  lift  up,  syn.  fyin),  to  release,  to  set  free;  it 
combines  the  meanings  of  loosening  and  making  empty,  or  at  liberty 
which  is  conveyed  in  Arab,  by  ^j  and  ^j.  The  latter  means, 
intrans.,  to  be  set  free,  therefore  to  be  or  to  become  free  from 
occupation  or  business  ;  with  ^  of  an  object,  to  be  free  from  it, 
i.e.  to  have  accomplished  it,  to  have  done  with  it  (Fl.).  Thus : 
since  ye  have  dismissed  (missum  fecistis)  all  my  counsel  (nxy  as  rnjjr 
from  J-T,  lie.),  i.e.  what  I  always  would  advise  to  set  you  right. 
H3X  combines  in  itself  the  meanings  of  consent,  i.  10,  and  compli 
ance,  i.  30  (with  b),  and,  as  here,  of  acceptance.  The  principal 
clause  begins  like  an  echo  of  Ps.  ii.  4  (cf.  Jer.  xx.  7). 

Vers.  26,  27.  pnt?',  as  xxxi.  25  shows,  is  not  to  be  understood 
with  3  ;  3  is  that  of  the  state  or  time,  not  of  the  object.    Regarding 
TN,   calamitas  opprimenSj  obruens  (from  *l!N'  =  jT,  to  burden,  to 
oppress),  see  at  Ps.  xxxi.  12.     *O  is  related  to  nnso   as  arriving  to 
approaching;  D^na  is  not  that  for  which  they  are" in  terror,— for 
those  who  are  addressed  are  in  the  condition  of  carnal  security,— but 
that  which,  in  the  midst  of  this,  will  frighten  and  alarm  them.    The 
Chethib  mst?  is  pointed  thus,  mstr  (from  WV  =  riN^  as  man,  mjfl  after 
the  form  ronx,  rn^n) ;  the  Keri  substitutes  forVliis  infinitive' name 
the  usual  particip.  nsb?  (where  then  the  Vav  is  1W,  "  superfluous"), 
crashing  (fern,  of    nsb?),  then  a  crash  and   an   overthrow   with  a 
crash ;  regarding  its  root-meaning  (to  be  waste,  and  then  to  sound 
hollow),  see  under  Ps.  xxxv.  8.     naiD  (from  ^D  =  naD),  sweeping 
forth  as  a  (see  x.  25)  whirlwind.     The  infinitive  construction  of 
27a  is  continued  in  2lb  in  the  finite.    "  This  syntactical  and  logical 
attraction,  by  virtue  of  which  a  modus  or  tempus  passes  by  1  or  by 
the  mere  parallel   arrangement   (as   ii.   2)    from   one   to   another, 
attracted  into  the  signification  and  nature  of  the  latter,  is  peculiar 
to  the  Hebr.     If  there  follows  a  new  clause  or  section  of  a  clause 
where  the  discourse  takes,  as  it  were,  a  new  departure,  that  attrac 
tion  ceases,  and  the  original  form  of  expression  is  resumed  ;  cf.  i. 
22,  where  after  the  accent  At/much  the  future  is  returned  to,  as  here 


CHAP.  I.  28-31.  73 

in  27c,the  infinitive  construction  is  restored"  (Fl.).  The  allite 
rating  words  HjTijfi  rni'j  cf.  Isa.  xxx.  6,  Zeph.  i.  15,  are  related  to 
each  other  as  narrowness  and  distress  (Hitzig);  the  Mashal  is  fond 
of  the  stave-rhyme.1 

Vers.  28-31.  Then — this  sublime  preacher  in  the  streets  con 
tinues — distress  shall  teach  them  to  pray : 

28  Then  shall  they  call  on  me,  and  I  will  not  answer; 
They  shall  early  seek  after  me,  and  not  find  me ; 

29  Because  that  they  hated  knowledge, 
And  did  not  choose  the  fear  of  Jahve. 

30  They  have  not  yielded  to  my  counsel, 
Despised  all  my  reproof : 

31  Therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  way, 
And  satiate  themselves  with  their  own  counsels. 

In  the  full  emphatic  forms,  ^Sip"1    they  shall  call  on  me,  WHir'11, 

*  ;  \  T  ;  •  J  t/  '•;*-.  ~ ;  ~    :/ 

they  shall  seek  me,  and  "^SSD'.,  they  shall  find  me,  the  suffix  ^  may 
be  joined  to  the  old  plur.  ending  un  (Gesenius,  Olshausen,  Bottcher); 
but  open  forms  like  l'"^!^,  He  will  bless  him,  'P?^,  He  will 
honour  me  (from  Tlr?1!),  and  the  like,  rather  favour  the  conclusion 
that  3  is  epenthetic  (Ew.  §  250,  6).2  The  address  here  takes  the 
form  of  declaration:  Stultos  mine  indignos  censet  ulteriori  alloquio 
(Mich.).  It  is  that  laughter  and  scorn,  ver.  26,  which  here  sounds 
forth  from  the  address  of  the  Judcje  regardino-  the  incorrigible.  "Tl^ 

o          o  o  ••  • 

is  denom.  of  inc^,  to  go  out  and  to  seek  with  the  morning  twilight, 
as  also  "ii?3,  Ps.  xxvii.  5,  perhaps  to  appear  early,  and  usually  (Arab.) 
lakar  (I.  II.  IV.),  to  rise  early,  to  be  zealous  (Lane  :  "  He  hastened 
to  do  or  accomplish,  or  attain  the  thing  needed").  Zockler,  with 
Hitzig,  erroneously  regards  vers.  29,  30  as  the  antecedent  to  ver.  31. 
With  v2Nv),  "and  they  shall  eat,"  the  futt.  announcing  judgment 
are  continued  from  ver.  28;  cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  46-48.  The  conclusion 
after  ^3  nnn,  "  therefore  because,"  or  as  usually  expressed  (except 

1  Jul.  Ley,  in  his  work  on  the  Metrical  Forms  of  Hebrew  Poetry,  1866,  has 
taken  too  little  notice  of  these  frequently  occurring  alliteration  staves ;  Lagarde 
communicated  to  me  (8th  Sept.  1846)  his  view  of  the  stave-rhyme  in  the  Book 
of  Proverbs,  with  the  remark,  "  Only  the  Hebr.  technical  poetry  is  preserved  to 
us  in  the  0.  T.  records;  but  in  such  traces  as  are  found  of  the  stave-rhyme,  there 
are  seen  the  echoes  of  the  poetry  of  the  people,  or  notes  passing  over  from  it." 

2  In  the  Codd.  •OiiOp'1  is  written  ;  in  this  case  the  Metlieg  indicates  the  tone 
syllable:  vid.  Toraih  Emeth,  p.  7  note,  p.  21  note;  and  Accentssystem,  ii.  §  1,  note. 
In  ""Jinnt^  the  Relict  is  to  be  placed  over  the  ").    In  the  Silluk-vford  MJNVE)'1  it 
appears  undoubtedly  that  the  form  is  to  be  spoken  as  Milel,  i.e.  with  tone  on 
the  penult. 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

here  and  Deut.  iv.  37,  of.  Gen.  iv.  25),  it?x  nnn  (avff  wz/),  is  other 
wise  characterized,  Deut.  xxii.  29,  2  Chron.  xxi.  12;  and  besides, 
lU'X  nnn  stands  after  (e.g.  1  Sam.  xxvi.  21 ;  2  Kings  xxii.  17 ;  Jer. 
xxix.  19)  oftener  than  before  the  principal  clause.  1H3  combines 
in  itself  the  meanings  of  eligere  and  diligere  (Fl.).  The  construc 
tion  of  p  nitx  (to  be  inclining  towards)  follows  that  of  the  analogous 
?  J^'  (to  hear).  Each  one  eats  of  the  fruit  of  his  way — good  fruit 
of  good  ways  (Tsa.  iii.  10),  and  evil  fruit  of  evil  ways.  "  The  |E, 
31&,  introduces  the  object  from  which,  as  a  whole,  that  which  one 
eats,  and  with  which  he  is  satisfied,  is  taken  as  a  part,  or  the  object 
from  which,  as  from  a  fountain,  satisfaction  flows  forth"  (Fl.).  In 
correct  texts,  ^r^\\  has  the  accent  Dechi,  and  at  the  same  time 
Munach  as  its  servant.  Regarding  the  laws  of  punctuation,  accord 
ing  to  which  DrprtfJjteDI  (with  Munach  on  the  tone-syllable,  Tarcha 
on  the  antepenult,  and  Metlieg  before  the  Cliatcpli-Pathacli]  is  to  be 
written,  see  Baer's  Toratli  Emeth,  p.  11,  Accentssystem,  iv.  §  4. 
Norzi  accents  the  word  incorrectly  with  Relia  Mugrash.  With 
the  exception  of  Prov.  xxii.  22,  the  pluralet1  niVJJiO  has  always  the 
meaning  of  ungodly  counsels. 

Vers.  32,  33.    The  discourse  is  now  summarily  brought  to  a 
close : 

82  For  the  perverseness  of  the  simple  slays  them, 

And  the  security  of  fools  destroys  them. 
S3  But  whoever  hearkeneth  to  me  dwells  secure, 

And  is  at  rest  from  fear  of  evil. 

Of  the  two  interpretations  of  31E>,  a  turning  towards  (with  ?S  and 
the  like,  conversion)  or  a  turning  away  (with  ^]nxe  or  TJJD,  deser 
tion),  in  ruirp  the  latter  (as  in  the  post-Bib,  niFiKTi,  repentance,  the 
former)  is  expressed  ;  apostasy  from  wisdom  and  from  God  are  con 
joined.  iTvt?  is  here  carnalis  securitas;  but  the  word  may  also  denote 
the  external  and  the  internal  peace  of  the  righteous,  as  JJNK',  whence 
|3K7B>,  Job  xxi.  23,  as  a  superlative  is  formed  by  the  insertion  of  the  *? 
of  1?^,  is  taken  in  bonam  et  malarn  partem.  !J^  is.  according  to 
the  Masora  (also  in  Jer.  xxx.  10,  xlvi.  27,  xlviii.  11),  3d  perf.  Pilel 
(Ewald,  §  120,  a),  from  the  unused  JXE',  to  be  quiet:  he  has  attained 
to  full  quietness,  and  enjoys  such.  The  construction  with  }O  follows 
the  analogy  of  j»  n^n  (to  give  rest  from),  |O  V\w  (to  rest  from),  and 
the  like.  The  negative  interpretation  of  IP,  sine  ullo  pacore  mall, 

1  [A  plur.  denoting  unity  in  the  circumstances,  and  a  similarity  in  the  rela 
tions  of  time  and  space.] 


CHAP.  II.  75 


(Schultens,  Ewald),  is  unnecessary;  also  Job  xxi.  9  may  be  ex 
plained  by  "  peace  from  terror,"  especially  since  Dftip  is  derived 
from  the  root  ^,  extrahere.  njn  "ins,  «  fear  of  evil,"  one  may  per 
haps  distinguish  from  jn  TP1D  as  the  genitive  of  combination. 


THIRD  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  II. 

EARNEST  STRIVING  AFTER  WISDOM  AS  THE  WAY  TO  THE  FEAR  OF 
GOD  AND  TO  VIRTUE. 

The  admonition  so  far  has  almost  wholly  consisted  of  warning 
and  threatening.  The  teacher,  directing  back  to  the  discipline  of 
the  paternal  home,  warns  against  fellowship  in  the  bloody  deeds 
of  the  covetous,  which  issue  in  self-murder;  and  Wisdom  holds  up 
before  her  despisers  the  mirror  of  the  punishment  which  awaits 
them.  Now  the  admonition  becomes  positive.  The  teacher  de 
scribes  separately  the  blessings  of  the  endeavour  after  wisdom  ; 
the  endeavour  after  wisdom,  which  God  rewards  with  the  gift  of 
wisdom,  leads  to  religious  and  moral  knowledge,  and  this  guards 
men  on  the  wav  of  life  from  all  evil.  The  teacher  accordingly 

"  £3  J 

interweaves  conditions  and  promises  : 

1  My  son,  if  thou  receivest  my  words, 
And  keepest  my  commandments  by  thce  ; 

2  So  that  thou  inclinest  thine  ear  unto  wisdom, 
Turnest  thine  heart  to  understanding  • — 

O     7 

3  Yea,  if  thou  callest  after  knowledge, 
To  understanding  directest  thy  voice ; 

4  If  thou  seekest  her  as  silver, 

And  searches t  for  her  as  for  treasures : 

5  Then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  Jahve, 
And  find  the  knowledge  of  God. 

G  -For  Jahve  giveth  wisdom  : 

From  His  mouth  cometh  knowledge  and  understanding. 

7  He  preserves  for  the  upright  promotion  ; 
A  shield  for  such  as  walk  in  innocence. 

8  For  He  protects  the  paths  of  justice, 
And  guards  the  way  of  His  saints. 

The  first  B«,  with  that  which  it  introduces,  vers.  1,  2,  is  to  be  in 
terpreted  as  an  exclamation,  "O  that!"  (0  si),  and  then  as  an 
optative,  as  Ps.  Ixxxi.  9,  cxxxix.  19.  TN  .  .  .  »3,  vers.  3-5,  with 


76  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

the  inserted  connecting  clauses,  would  then  be  confirmatory,  "for 
then."  But  since  this  poet  loves  to  unfold  one  and  the  same 
thought  in  ever  new  forms,  one  has  perhaps  to  begin  the  conditional 
premisses  with  ver.  1,  and  to  regard  DN  '3  as  a  new  commence 
ment.  Hitzig  takes  this  DX  ^  in  the  sense  of  imo :  "much  more 
if  thou  goest  to  meet  her,  e.g.  by  curious  inquiry,  not  merely  per- 
mittest  her  quietly  to  come  to  thee."  ON  would  then  preserve  its 
conditional  meaning;  and  ''S,  as  in  Job  xxxi.  18,  Ps.  cxxx.  4,  since 
it  implies  an  intentional  negative,  would  receive  the  meaning  of 
imo.  But  the  sentences  ranged  together  with  DX  are  too  closely 
related  in  meaning  to  admit  such  a  negative  between  them.  ^3 
will  thus  be  confirmatory,  not  mediately,  but  immediately;  it  is  the 
"  for  =  yes"  of  confirmation  of  the  preceding  conditions,  and  takes 
them  up  again  (Ewald,  §  356  b,  cf.  330  b)  after  the  form  of  the 
conditional  clause  was  given  up.  The  )Q?,  which  in  i.  11,  18  is 
the  synonym  of  nss,  speculari,  presents  itself  here,  11,  7 a,  as  the 
synonym  of  JCtp,  whence  C^btpD,  synon.  of  D^IBS,  recondita ;  the 
group  of  sounds,  f)V,  DV,  DB  (cf.  also  ejl,  in  Arab,  dafan,  whence 
dafynat,  treasure),  express  shades  of  the  root  representation  of 
pressing  together.  The  inf.  of  the  conclusion  3H?j?r6,  to  incline 
(Gr.  Venet.  &>9  atcpo&To),  is  followed  by  the  accus.  of  the  object 
^TX,  thine  ear,  for  n'trpn  properly  means  to  stiffen  (not  to  puro;e, 
as  Schultens,  nor  to  sharpen,  as  Gesenius  thinks);  cf.  under  Ps. 
x.  17.  AVith  nnrin  are  interchanged  n^a,  which  properly  means 
that  which  is  distinguished  or  separated,  and  fUton,  which  means 
the  distinguishing,  separating,  appellations  of  the  capacity  of  dis 
tinguishing  in  definite  cases  and  in  general ;  but  it  does  not  repre 
sent  this  as  a  faculty  of  the  soul,  but  as  a  divine  power  which 
communicates  itself  as  the  gift  of  God  (charisma). 

Vers.  3-8.  Instead  of  DX  '3  there  is  an  old  npn  fo1  (read  not  so, 
but  thus),  DK  '3  (if  thou  callest  understanding  mother),  which  sup 
poses  the  phrase  DS  "3  (LXX.)  as  traditional.  If  DX  were  intended 
(according  to  which  the  Targ.  in  the  Bill  rabbinica,  but  not  in 
Norzi's  text,  translates),  then  36  would  correspond ;  vid.  vii.  4,  cf. 
Job  xvii.  14.  Thus:  Yea,  if  thou  callest  for  understanding,  i.e. 
callest  her  to  thee  (xviii.  6),  invitest  her  to  thee  (ix.  15).  Tiie  P  of 
K'i33  is,  Avith  the  exception  of  the  imper.  (e.g.  V^jpa),  always  with 
out  the  Dagesh.  Ver.  46  belongs  to  the  ideas  in  the  Book  of  Job 
found  in  these  introductory  discourses,  cf.  Job  iii.  21,  as  at  ver. 
1  Regarding  this  formula,  see  Strack's  Prolegomena,  pp.  6G-70, 


CHAP.  II.  3-8.  77 


14,  Job  iii.  22  (Ewald,  SprGcJie,  p.  49).  fc'Sn  (t"2n),  scrutari, 
proceeds,  as  D2n  shows,  from  the  primary  meaning  of  a  ditch,  and 
is  thus  in  its  root-idea  related  to  "ISH  (to  dig,  search  out).  In  the 
principal  clause  of  ver.  5  the  'n  n^rv,  as  Ps.  xix.  10,  is  the  fear  of 
Jahve  as  it  ought  to  be,  thus  the  reverence  which  is  due  to  Him, 
the  worshipping  of  Him  as  revealed,  'n  and  D'wtjj  are  inter 
changed  as  D^lp  and  'n  at  ix.  10.  rijn  is  knowledge  proceeding 
from  practice  and  experience,  and  thus  not  merely  cognition 
(Kenntnis),  but  knowledge  (Erkenntnis).  The  thoughts  revolve  in 
a  circle  only  apparently.  He  who  strives  after  wisdom  earnestly 
and  really,  reaches  in  this  way  fellowship  with  God  ;  for  just  as  He 
gives  wisdom,  it  is  nowhere  else  than  with  Him,  and  it  never  comes 
from  any  other  source  than  from  Him.  It  comes  (ver.  6)  V2D 
(LXX.  erroneously  V02S),  i.e.  it  is  communicated  through  the 
medium  of  His  word,  Job  xxii.  22,  or  also  (for  Xo709  and  irvevp-a 
lie  here  undistinguished  from  one  another)  it  is  His  breath  (Book 
of  Wisdom  vii.  25  :  ar/zi9  rfjs  rov  Qeov  &vvd/jiea><;  fcal  aTroppoia  T/)? 
rov  TravroKpdropos  So^s  et\.ucpivij<i)  ;  the  inspiration  (riD£'J)  of  the 
Almighty  (according  to  Job  xxxii.  8)  gives  men  understanding. 
In  ver.  7a,  whether  |SV1.  (Chethib)  or  iS>'l  (Keri)  is  read,  the  mean 
ing  is  the  same.  The  former  is  the  expression  of  the  completed 
fact,  as  rjTOLftacrev,  1  Cor.  ii.  9,  and  is  rightly  preferred  by  LXX. 
and  Syr.,  for  one  reluctantly  misses  the  copula  (since  the  thought 
is  new  in  comparison  with  ver.  6).  DHB'v  should  be  written  with 
the  accent  Dechi.  The  Chokma-word  (besides  in  Proverbs  and 
Job,  found  only  in  Mic.  vi.  9  and  Isa.  xxviii.  29)  njtjfciPI  is  a  fl/'phil 
formation  (with  the  passing  over  of  6  into  u,  as  in  nsin)  from  HEnn 
(whence  the  pr.  names  nK>V  and  HM^*)  —  (Arab.)  wasy  and  dsy,  to 
re-establish,  to  advance,  Iliph.  of  n^  =  nw\}  to  stand,  and  thus  means 
furtherance,  i.e.  the  power  or  the  gift  to  further,  and  concretely 
that  which  furthers  and  profits,  particularly  true  wisdom  and  true 
fortune.1  The  derivation  from  W  (viii.  21)  is  to  be  rejected,  because 
"  the  formation  would  be  wholly  without  analogy,  so  much  the  more 
because  the  *  of  this  word  does  not  represent  the  place  of  the  1,  as 

1  I  was  formerly  in  error  in  regarding  the  word  as  a  Hoplial  formation,  and 
in  assigning  to  it  the  primary  signification  of  being  in  a  state  of  realized 
existence,  of  reality,  in  contradistinction  to  appearance  only.  The  objection  of 
J.  D.  Michaelis,  Supplem.  p.  1167,  Non  placent  in  linguis  ejusmodi  cti/ma  meta- 
pliysica,  etc.,  does  not  apply  here,  since  the  word  is  a  new  one  coined  by  the 
Chukma,  but  all  the  shades  of  meaning  are  naturally  derived  from  the  funda- 


78  THE  BOOK  OF  PttOVERBS. 


is  seen  from  the  Arab.  (JM.^  and  the  Syr.  A  ^  V  "  (Fl.);1  and 
the  derivation  of  ntj>l  =  r\yyf  to  be  smooth  (Hitzig),  passes  over 
without  any  difficulty  into  another  system  of  roots.2  In  the 
passage  under  consideration  (ver.  7),  n*W)  signifies  advancement 
in  the  sense  of  true  prosperity.  The  parallel  passage  7a  clothes 
itself  in  the  form  of  an  apposition  :  (He)  a  shield  (|3O,  n.  instr.  of 
i;3,  to  cover)  for  DH  *3?'n,  pilgrims  of  innocence  (FL),  i.e.  such  as 
\valk  in  the  way  (the  object-accus.,  as  vi.  12,  for  which  in  x.  9  3) 
of  innocence.  DF1  is  whole,  full  submission,  moral  faultlessness, 
which  chooses  God  with  the  whole  heart,  seeks  good  without  ex 
ception:  a  similar  thought  is  found  in  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  12.  "V*??,  8a,  is 
such  an  inf.  of  consequence  as  S^'pO?  (ver.  2),  and  here,  as  there, 
is  continued  in  the  finite.  The  "paths  of  justice"  are  understood 
with  reference  to  those  who  enter  them  and  keep  in  them  ;  parallel, 
"the  way  of  His  saints"  p"1??,  he  who  cherishes  ipn,  earnest 
inward  love  to  God),  for  that  is  just  njTiyrnx  (xii.  28)  :  they  are 
nipny  '3?n  (Isa.  xxxiii.  15).  Instead  of  the  Mttgi-ash,  the  conjunc 
tive  Tarcha  is  to  be  given  to  T!^1.- 

Vers.   9-11.  With   the  IX  repeated,  the  promises   encouraging 
to  the  endeavour  after  wisdom  take  a  new  departure  : 

9  Then  si  i  alt  thou  understand  righteousness,  and  justice, 
And  uprightness  ;  every  way  of  good. 

10  For  wisdom  will  enter  into  thine  heart, 
And  knowledge  will  do  good  to  thy  soul  ; 

11  Discretion  will  keep  watch  over  thee, 
Understanding  will  keep  thee. 

mental  signification  "  furtherance  "  (cf.  Seneca,  Deus  stator  stabilitorque  e.s£). 
"  iTtnn,  from  Arab,  any  and  wasy,  to  further  by  word  and  deed,  to  assist  by 
counsel  and  act,  to  render  help,  whence  the  meanings  auxilium,  salus,  and 

tirudens  consilium,  sapientia,  easily  follow  ;  cf.  Ali's  Arab,  proverb,  M^  cJL;  j 
U^^  —  '  He  furthers  thee,  who  does  not  trouble  himself  about  thee.'  " 

"^  "" 

1  The   Arab.  j^*J.'   (almost   only   in   the   negative  (j*>^  —  ^  ^),   of  tho 
same  signification  as  £"?  with  which  the  Aram.  rTS  (lin''K)  is  associated,  pre 

supposes  an  (_>«\  (  —  (jj*  )i  to  be  founded,  to  found,  and  is  rightly  regarded 
by  the  Arabs  as  an  old  segolate  noun  in  which  the  verbal  force  was  compre 
hended. 


2  The  Arab,  ^j^*  and  u5j-*  are  confounded  in  common  usage  (IVetstein, 
Deutsch.  Morgenl  Zeitxclir.  xxii.  19),  but  the  roots  w  and  1^  are  diilerent; 
C'l  and  t^'s,  on  the  contrary,  are  modifications  of  one  root. 


CHAP.  II.  9-11.  79 

Regarding  the  ethical  triad  D'Tv"*?  [righteousness,  Tightness], 
I23c'»  [judgment],  and  pW  [rectitude],  vul.  5.  3.  Seb.  Schmid  is 
wrong  in  his  rendering,  et  omnis  via  qua  bonum  adittir  erit  till 
plana,  which  in  comparison  with  Isa.  xxvi.  7  would  be  feebly 
expressed.  J.  H.  Michaelis  rightly  interprets  all  these  four  con 
ceptions  as  object- accusatives;  the  fourth  is  the  summarizing 
asyndeton  (cf.  Ps.  viii.  7)  breaking  off  the  enumeration  :  omnem 
denigne  orlitam  boni ;  Jerome,  bonam:  in  this  case,  however,  2iH 
would  be  genitive  (vid.  xvii.  2).  P2>'O  is  the  way  in  which  the 
chariot  rolls  along;  in  bw  there  are  united  the  root-conceptions 
of  that  which  is  round  fo)  and  rolling  (^).  Whether  ^3,  ver.  10, 
is  the  argumentative  "because"  (according  to  the  versions  and 

O  V  ~ 

most  interpreters)  or  "  for  "  ("  denn"  J.  H.  Michaelis,  Ewald,  and 
others),  is  a  question.     That  with  '3  =  "  for  "  the  subject  would 
precede  the  verb,  as  at  vers.  6,  21,  and  i.  32  (Hitzig),  determines 
nothing,  as  ver.  18  shows.     On  the  one  hand,  the  opinion  that  ^3  = 
"  because  "  is  opposed   by  the  analogy  of  the  ""3,  ver.  6,  following 
TK,  ver.   5 ;  the  inequality  between  vers.  5-8  and  ver.  9  ff.  if  the 
new  commencement,  ver.  9,  at  once  gives  place  to  another,  ver.  10; 
the  relationship  of  the  subject  ideas  in  vers.  10,  11,  which  makes 
ver.  11  unsuitable  to  be  a  conclusion  from  ver.  10.     On  the  contrary, 
the  promise  not  only  of  intellectual,  but  at  the  same  time  also  of 
practical,  insight  into  the  right  and  the  good,  according  to  their 
whole   compass  and  in  their  manifoldness,  can  be  established    or 
explained  quite  well  as  we  thus  read  vers.  10, 11  :  For  wisdom  will 
enter  (namely,  to  make  it  a  dwelling-place,  xiv.  33  ;  cf.  John  xiv. 
23)    into  thine   heart,   and   knowledge   will   do  good  to   thy   soul 
(namely,  by  the  enjoyment  which   arises  from  the  possession  of 
knowledge,  and  the   rest  which  its  certainty  yields),     njn,  7^00-49, 
is  elsewhere  fern.  (Ps.  cxxxix.  6),  but  here,  as  at  viii.  10,  xiv.  6,  in 
the  sense  of  TO  yvwvat,,  is  masc.     In  ver.  11  the  contents  of  the 
pn  TX  (ver.  9)  are  further  explained,    by  ~i2uj,  of  watching  (for  Job 
xvi.  16  is  to  be  interpreted  differently),  is  used  only  by  our  poet 
(here   and  at  vi.   22).     Discretion,  i.e.  the  capacity  of  well-con 
sidered  action,  will   hold  watch  over  thee,  take  thee  under  pro 
tection  ;   understanding,  i.e.  the  capacity  in  the  case  of  opposing 
rules  to  make  the  right  choice,   and  in  the    matter  of    extremes 
to  choose  the   right  medium,   will    be   bestowed  upon  thee.      In 
nsny??,  as  in   Ps.  Ixi.  8,  cxl.  2,  5,  Deut.  xxxiii.  9,  etc.,  the  first 
stem  letter  is  not  assimilated,  in   order  that  the  word  may  have  a 


80 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


fuller   sound;    the   writing  na—   for   ?|—  is  meant  to   affect  the 
eye.1 

Vers.  12-15.  As  in  vers.  10,  11,  the  pan  TN  ("then  shalt  tliou 
understand,"  ver.  5)  is  expanded,  so  now  the  watching,  preserving, 
is  separately  placed  in  view  : 

12  To  deliver  thee  from  an  evil  way, 
From  the  man  who  speaks  falsehood  ; 

13  (From  those)  who  forsake  the  ways  of  honesty 
To  walk  in  ways  of  darkness, 

14  Who  rejoice  to  accomplish  evil, 
Delight  in  malignant  falsehood— 

15  They  are  crooked  in  their  paths, 
And  perverse  in  their  ways. 

That  in  !r^  is  not  genitival,  via  wall,  but  adjectival,  via  mala,  is 
evident  from  yivrvb  TIT,  xvi.  29.  From  the  evil  way,  i.e.  conduct, 
stands  opposed  to  the  false  words  represented  in  the"  person  of  the 
deceiver;  from  both  kinds  of  contagium  wisdom  delivers,  nbsnn 
(like  the  similarly  formed  nfann,  occurring  only  as  plur.)  means 
misrepresentations,  viz.  of  the  good  and  the  true,  and  that  for  the 
purpose  of  deceiving  (xvii.  20),  fallacies,  i.e.  intrigues  iu  conduct, 
and  lies  and  deceit  in  words.  Fl.  compares  Arab,  ifk,  a  lie,  and 
affak,  a  liar.  *J*J?r&  has  Manach,  the  constant  servant  of  Dechi, 
instead  of  Metheg,  according  to  rule  (A ccentssystem,  vii.  §  2).  D»3J&n 
(ver.  13)  is  connected  with  the  collective  t^K  (cf.  Jud<r.  ix.  55)  "; 
we  have  in  the  translation  separated  it  into  a  relative  clause  with 
the  abstract  present.  The  vocalization  of  the  article  fluctuates 
yet  the  expression  D'aryn,  like  ver.  17  mTjn,  is  the  better  estab- 
.shed  (Michlol  53£) ;  D'arjn  is  one  of  the  three  words  which  retain 

.eir  Met/ieg,  and  yet  add  to  it  a  Munach  in  the  tone-syllable 
(md.  the  two  others,  Job  xxii.  4,  xxxix.  26).  To  the  "ways  of 
honesty  (Geradheit}  (cf.  the  adj.  expression,  Jer.  xxxi.  9),  which 

oes  not  shun  to  come  to  the  light,  stand  opposed  the  "ways  of 
darkness,  the  tpya  rov  a^rov,,  Rom.  xiii.  12,  which  designedly 
conceal  themselves  from  God  (Isa.  xxix.  15)  and  men  (Job  xxiv. 
15,  xxxvui.  13,  15). 

Ver.  14.  In  this   verse   the  regimen   of  the  |»,    I2b,   is    to  be 

1  as  lost ;    the    description    now    goes   on    independently. 

AA  hoever  does  not  shrink  back  from  evil,  but  gives  himself  up  to 

3it,  who  finally  is  at  home  in  it  as  in  his  o.vn  proper  life-element, 

1  For  the  right  succession  of  the  accents  here,  see  Torath  Emeth,  p.  49  §  5  • 
Accentuationssystem,  xviii.  §  3. 


CHAP.  II.  16-19.  81 

and  rejoices,  yea,  delights  in  that  which  he  ought  to  shun  as  some 
thing  destructive  and  to  be  rejected.  The  neut.  JH  is  frequently 
an  attributive  genit.,  vi.  24,  xv.  26,  xxviii.  5  ;  cf.  liB,  xxiv.  25, 
which  here,  since  ntoann  are  those  who  in  themselves  are  bad,  does 
not  separate,  but  heightens  :  perversitates  non  simplices  aut  vulgares, 
sed  pessimce  et  ex  omni  parte  vitiosce  (J.  H.  Michaelis).  With 
IPX  (otTM/e?),  ver.  15,  this  part  is  brought  to  a  conclusion. 
Fleischer,  Bertheau,  and  others  interpret  DriTirnK,  as  the  accus. 
of  the  nearer  definition,  as  CTKO\IOS  rov  vovv,  ra?  Trpdj;ei<; ;  but 
should  it  be  an  accus.,  then  would  we  expect,  in  this  position  of 
the  words,  W$y  (Isa.  lix.  8  ;  Prov.  x.  9,  cf.  ix.  15).  D'B>j3tf  is  the 
pred. ;  for  rnfc,  like  SfVl,  admits  of  both  genders.  Dnibtt  carries  in 
it  its  subject  an  ;  ^  like  the  Arab.  Td,  I'dh,  is  a  weaker  form  of 
J*W,  flectere,  inclinare,  in  trans,  recedere :  they  are  turned  aside, 
inclined  out  of  the  way  to  the  right  and  left  in  their  walk  (3  as 
xvii.  20). 

Vers.  16-19.  With  the  resumption  of  ^JfnS,  the  watchful  pro 
tection  which  wisdom  affords  to  its  possessors  is  further  specified 
in  these  verses : 

16  To  save  tliee  from  the  strange  woman, 
From  the  stranger  who  useth  smooth  words ; 

17  Who  forsakes  the  companion  of  her  youth, 
And  forgets  the  covenant  of  her  God  ; 

18  For  she  sinks  down  to  death  together  with  her  house, 
And  to  the  shadow  of  Hades  her  paths — 

19  All  they  who  go  to  her  return  not  again, 
And  reach  not  the  paths  of  life 

The  subject  here  continued  is  the  fourfold  wisdom  named  in  vers. 
10,  11.  IT  signifies  alienm,  which  may  also  be  equivalent  to  alms 
populi,  but  of  a  much  wider  compass — him  who  does  not  belom*  to 
a  certain  class  (e.g.  the  non-priestly  or  the  laity),  the  person  or 
thing  not  belonging  to  me,  or  also  some  other  than  I  designate  ;  on 
the  other  hand,  ^33,  peregrinus,  scarcely  anywhere  divests  itself  of 
the  essential  mark  of  a  strange  foreign  origin.  While  thus  mr  n$s 
is  the  non-married  wife,  nnpa  designates  her  as  non-Israelitish. 
Prostitution  was  partly  sanctioned  in  the  cultus  of  the  Midianites, 
Syrians,  and  other  nations  neighbouring  to  Israel,  and  thus  was 
regarded  as  nothing  less  than  customary.  In  Israel,  on  the  contrary, 
the  law  (Deut.  xxiii.  18  f.)  forbade  it  under  a  penalty,  and  therefore 
it  was  chiefly  practised  by  foreign  women  (xxiii.  27,  and  cf.  the 
VOL.  I. 


g2  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

exception,  Ruth  ii.  10),1— an  inveterate  vice,  which  spread  itself 
particularly  from  the  latter  days  of  Solomon,  along  with  general 
ungodliness,  and  excusing  itself  under  the  polygamy  sanctioned 
by°the  law,  brought  ruin  on  the  state.  The  Chokma  contends 
against  this,  and  throughout  presents  monogamy  as  alone  corre 
sponding  to  the  institution  and  the  idea  of  the  relation.  Desig- 
natino1  marriage  as  the  "covenant  of  God,"  it  condemns  not  only 
adulterous  but  generally  promiscuous  intercourse  of  the  sexes, 
because  unhallowed  and  thus  unjustifiable,  and  likewise  arbitrary 
divorce.  Regarding  the  ancient  ceremonies  connected  with  the 
celebration  of  marriage  we  are  not  specially  informed ;  but  from 
ver.  17,  Mai.  ii.  14  (Ewald,  Bertheau,  Hitzig,  but  not  Kohler),  it 
appears  that  the  celebration  of  marriage  was  a  religious  act,  and 
that  they  who  were  joined  together  in  marriage  called  God  to 
witness  and  ratify  the  vows  they  took  upon  themselves.  The  perf. 
in  the  attributive  clause  njT'bnn  O^?^  proceeds  on  the  routine 
acquired  in  cajoling  and  dissembling :  who  has  smoothed  her 
words,  i.e.  learned  to  entice  by  flattering  words  (Fl.). 

Vers.  17-19.  P!^  as  here  used,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
phylarch-name,  similar  in  sound,  which  is  a  denom.  of  *\£ ;  but  it 
comes  immediately  from  *£«,  to  accustom  oneself  to  a  person  or 
cause,  to  be  familiar  therewith  (while  the  Aram.  *!?«,  *)?*.,  to  learn, 
Pa.  to  teach),  and  thus  means,  as  the  synon.  of  JH,  the  companion 
or  familiar  associate  (vid.  Schultens).  Parallels  such  as  Jer.  iii.  4 
suggested  to  the  old  interpreters  the  allegorical  explanation  of  the 
adulteress  as  the  personification  of  the  apostasy  or  of  heresy. 
Ver.  18a  the  LXX.  translate  :  edero  <yap  Trapa  ru>  davdry  TOV 
OLKOV  aim}?  :  she  (the  dissolute  wife)  has  placed  her  house  beside 
death  (the  abyss  of  death).  This  nne>  [edero]  is  perhaps  the 
original,  for  the  text  as  it  lies  before  us  is  doubtful,  though,  rightly 
understood,  admissible.  The  accentuation  marks  n;V3  as  the  sub 
ject,  but  n??  is  elsewhere  always  masc.,  and  does  not,  like  the  rarer 
rnx,  ver.  15,  admit  in  usage  a  double  gender;  also,  if  the  fern, 
usage  were  here  introduced  (Bertheau,  Hitzig),  then  the  predicate, 
even  though  nJV3  were  regarded  as  fern.,  might  be,  in  conformity 
with  rule,  rra>,  as  e.g.  Isa.  ii.  17.  nnp  is,  as  in  Ps.  xliv.  26,  3d  pr. 
of  rw^  Arab,  sa/i/t,  to  go  down,  to  sink;  the  emendation  nns? 

1  In  Talmudic  Heb.  JVEnN  (Aramean)  has  this  meaning  for  the  Biblical 


CHAP.  II.  20-22.  83 

(Joseph  Kimchi)  does  not  recommend  itself  on  this  account,  that 
nriB>  and  nnti>  mean,  according  to  usage,  to  stoop  or  to  bend  down  ; 
and  to  interpret  (Kalbag,  n^S^'n)  nnB>  transitively  is  inadmissible. 
For  that  reason  Aben  Ezra  interprets  n;V3  as  in  apposition  :  to 
death,  to  its  house;  but  then  the  poet  in  that  case  should  say  ^iN^x;, 
for  death  is  not  a  house.  On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  perceive 
in  nJV3  an  accus.  of  the  nearer  definition  (J.  H.  Michaelis,  Fl.) ; 
the  expression  would  here,  as  15a,  be  refined  without  purpose. 
Bottcher  has  recognised  nrP3  as  permutative,  the  personal  subject  : 
for  she  sinks  down  to  death,  her  house,  i.e.  she  herself,  together 
with  all  that  belongs  to  her ;  cf.  the  permutative  of  the  subject, 
Job  xxix.  3,  Isa.  xxix.  23  (vid.  comm.  I.e.),  and  the  more  particular 
statement  of  the  object,  Ex.  ii.  6,  etc.  Regarding  D'KB"!,  shadows 
of  the  under-world  (from  nsn^  synon.  !"6n;  weakened,  or  to  become 
powerless),  a  word  common  to  the  Solomonic  writings,  vid.  Com 
ment,  on  Isaiah,  p.  206.  What  ver.  186  says  of  the  person  of  the 
adulteress,  ver.  19  says  of  those  who  live  with  her  riJTa,  her  house- 
companions.  I^N-jJ,  "  those  entering  in  to  her,"  is  equivalent  to 
0^  D^?;  tne  participle  of  verbs  eundi  et  veniendi  takes  the 
accusative  object  of  the  finite  as  gen.  in  st.  constr.,  as  e.g.  i.  12, 
ii.  7,  Gen.  xxiii.  18,  ix.  10  (cf.  Jer.  x.  20).  The  pa^,  with  the 
tone  on  the  ult.,  is  a  protestation :  there  is  no  return  for  those  who 
practise  fornication,1  and  they  do  not  reach  the  paths  of  life  from 
which  they  have  so  widely  strayed.2 

Vers.  20-22.  With  $»?  there  commences  a  new  section,  co-ordi 
nating  itself  with  the  *£»«£  ("to  deliver  thee")  of  vers.  12,  36, 
unfolding  that  which  wisdom  accomplishes  as  a  preserver  and  guide : 

20  So  that  thou  walkest  in  the  good  way, 
And  keepest  the  right  paths. 

21  For  the  upright  shall  inhabit  the  land, 
And  the  innocent  shall  remain  in  it. 

22  But  the  godless  are  cut  off  out  of  the  land, 
And  the  faithless  are  rooted  out  of  it. 


1  One  is  here  reminded  of  the  expression  in  the  JEneid,  vi.  127-129  : 

Revocare  gradum  superasque  evadere  ad  auras, 
Hoc  opes,  hoc  labor  est. 

See  also  an  impure  but  dreadful  Talinudic  story  about  a  dissolute  Rabbi, 
1.  Aboda  zara,  17a. 

2  In  correct  texts  Wt^-tfh  has  the  Makkepli.     Vid.  Torath  Emeih,  p.  41 ; 
Accentuationssystem,  xx.  §  2. 


84  THE  BOOK  OF  PBOVEEDS. 

Wisdom — thus  the  connection — will  keep  thee,  so  that  thou  shalt 
not  fall  under  the  seductions  of  man  or  of  woman  ;  keep,  in  order 
that  thou  .  .  .  ly?^  (from  |Jtt?  =  "1^,  tendency,  purpose)  refers  to 
the  intention  and  object  of  the  protecting  wisdom.  To  the  two 
negative  designations  of  design  there  follows,  as  the  third  and  last, 
a  positive  one.  D'liB  (contrast  to  B^yi,  xiv.  19)  is  here  used  in  a 
general  ethical  sense  :  the  good  (6rwten,  not  Gtttigen,  the  kind). 
ID^J  with  the  object  of  the  way,  rnay  in  another  connection  also 
mean  to  keep  oneself  from,  eavere  ab  (Ps.  xvii.  4)  ;  here  it  means  : 
carefully  to  keep  in  it.  The  promise  of  ver.  21  is  the  same  as  in 
the  Mashal  Ps.  xxxvii.  9,  11,  22  ;  cf.  Prov,  x.  30.  p«  is  Canaan, 
or  the  land  which  God  promised  to  the  patriarchs,  and  in  which  He 
planted  Israel,  whom  He  had  brought  out  of  Egypt;  not  the  earth, 
as  Matt.  v.  5,  according  to  the  extended,  unlimited  N.  T.  circle  of 

7  O  ' 

vision,  IIW  (Milel)  is  erroneously  explained  by  Schultens  :  fnni- 
culis  bene  firmis  iiroborabunt  in  terra.  The  verb  irP,  Arab,  watar, 
signifies  to  yoke  (whence  1JV,  a  cord,  rope),  then  intrans.  to  be 
stretched  out  in  length,  to  be  hanging  over  (vid.  Fleischer  on  Job 
xxx.  11);  whence  1TV,  residue,  Zeph.  ii.  9,  and  after  which  the 
LXX.  here  renders  vTro\ei(j)dr]<rovTai,  and  Jerome  permanebunt. 
In  226  the  old  translators  render  1HGP  as  the  fut.  of  the  pass.  nD3, 
Deut.  xxviii.  63  ;  but  in  this  case  it  would  be  1np3\  The  form 
WD^  pointed  inE1;,  might  be  the  Nipli.  of  nno,  but  nno  can  neither  be 
taken  as  one  with  np3?  of  the  same  meaning,  nor  with  Hitzig  is  it  to 
be  vocalized  ^ns^  (Hopli.  of  HD3) ;  nor,  with  Bottcher  (§  1100,  p. 
453),  is  ^riD";  to  be  regarded  as  a  veritable  fut.  Niph.  W&\  is,  as  at 
xv.  25,  Ps.  Hi.  7,  active:  evellant ;  and  this,  with  the  subj.  remain 
ing  indefinite  (for  which  J.  H.  Michaelis  refers  to  Hos.  xii.  9),  is 
equivalent  to  evellentur.  This  indefinite  "  they  "  or  "  one"  ("man"), 
Fleischer  remarks,  can  even  be  used  of  God,  as  here  and  Job  vii. 
3, — a  thing  which  is  common  in  Persian,  where  e.g.  the  expression 
rendered  hominem  ex  pulvere  feeerunt  is  used  instead  of  the  fuller 
form,  which  would  be  rendered  homo  a  Deo  ex  pulcere  factus  est. 
QHJiS  bears  (as  133  proves)  the  primary  meaning  of  concealed,  i.e. 
malicious  (treacherous  and  rapacious,  Isa.  xxxiii.  1),  and  then 
faithless  men.1 

1  Similar  is  the  relation  in  Arab,  of  labbaxa  to  lilds  (8J«Q$))  ;  it  means  to  make 
a  thing  unknown  by  covering  it;  whence  telbis,  deceit,  miilebbis,  a  falsifier. 


CHAP.  III.  1-4.  85 


FOUETH  INTRODUCTORY  MASIIAL  DISCOURSE,  III.  1-18. 

EXHORTATION  TO  LOVE  AND  FAITHFULNESS,  AND  SELF-SACRI 
FICING  DEVOTION  TO  GOD,  AS  THE  TRUE  WISDOM. 

The  foregoing  Mashal  discourse  seeks  to  guard  youth  against 
ruinous  companionship  ;  this  points  out  to  them  more  particularly 
the  relation  toward  God  and  man,  which  alone  can  make  them 
truly  happy,  vers.  1-4. 

1  My  son,  forget  not  my  doctrine, 

And  let  thine  heart  keep  my  commandments  ; 

2  For  length  of  days,  and  years  of  life, 
And  peace,  will  they  add  to  thee. 

8  Let  not  kindness  and  truth  forsake  thec  : 

Bind  them  about  thy  neck, 

Write  them  on  the  tablet  of  thy  heart, 
4  And  obtain  favour  and  true  prudence 

In  the  eyes  of  God  and  of  men. 

The  admonition  takes  a  new  departure.  VTiin  and  "•n'lifO  refer 
to  the  following  new  discourse  and  laws  of  conduct.  Here,  in  the 
midst  of  the  discourse,  we  have  ISP  and  not  ">l>*r  ;  the  non-assimi 
lated  form  is  found  only  in  the  conclusion,  e.g.  ii.  11,  v.  2.  The 
plur.  la'pi1  (ver.  2)  for  n:spin  (they  will  bring,  add)  refers  to  the 
doctrine  and  the  precepts;  thesynallage  has  its  ground  in  this,  that 
the  fem.  construction  in  Hebrew  is  not  applicable  in  such  a  case ; 
the  vulgar  Arab,  also  has  set  aside  the  forms  ja/cfubna,  taktubna. 
11  Extension  of  days"  is  continuance  of  duration,  stretching  itself 
out  according  to  the  promise,  Ex.  xx.  12  ;  and  "  years  of  life"  (ix. 
11)  are  years — namely,  many  of  them — of  a  life  which  is  life  in 
the  full  sense  of  the  word.  D^n  has  here  the  pregnant  significa 
tion  vita  vitalis,  /3/o?  /Stcoro?  (Fl.).  cfe  (R.  hw)  is  pure  well-being, 
free  from  all  that  disturbs  peace  or  satisfaction,  internal  and  exter 
nal  contentment. 

Ver.  3.  With  this  verse  the  doctrine  begins  ;  bx  (not  J^)  shows 
that  3a  does  not  continue  the  promise  of  ver.  2.  Ipn  (R.  on, 
stringere,  afficere)  is,  according  to  the  prevailing  usage  of  the  lan 
guage,  well-affectedness,  it  may  be  of  God  toward  men,  or  of  men 
toward  God,  or  of  men  toward  one  another — a  loving  disposition,  of 
the  same  meaning  as  the  N.  T.  a^dirr)  (vid.  e.g.  Hos.  vi.  6).  J"l»K 
(from  riiOS),  continuance,  a  standing  to  one's  promises,  and  not 


86  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


falsifying  just  expectations  ;  thus  fidelity,  irlans,  in  the  inter 
related  sense  of  fides  and  fidelitat.  These  two  states  of  mind  and 
of  conduct  are  here  contemplated  as  moral  powers  (Ps.  Ixi.  8,  xliii. 
3),  which  are  of  excellent  service,  and  bring  precious  gain  ;  and  46 
shows  that  their  ramification  on  the  side  of  God  and  of  men,  the 
religious  and  the  moral,  remains  radically  inseparable.  The  suffix 
D—  does  not  refer  to  the  doctrine  and  the  precepts,  but  to  these 
two  cardinal  virtues.  If  the  disciple  is  admonished  to  bind  them 
about  his  neck  (vid.  i.  9,  cf.  iii.  22),  so  here  reference  is  made,  not 
to  ornament,  nor  yet  to  protection  against  evil  influences  by  means 
of  them,  as  by  an  amulet1  (for  which  proofs  are  wanting),  but  to 
the  signet  which  was  wont  to  be  constantly  carried  (Gen.  xxxviii.  18, 
cf.  Cant.  viii.  6)  on  a  string  around  the  neck.  The  parallel  member 
3c  confirms  this  ;  3&  and  3c  together  put  us  in  mind  of  the  Tephil- 
lim  (phylacteries),  Ex.  xiii.  16,  Deut.  vi.  8,  xi.  18,  in  which  what  is 
here  a  figure  is  presented  in  external  form,  but  as  the  real  figure 
of  that  which  is  required  in  the  inward  parts.  1$  (from  n^,  Arab. 
Z'a/t,  to  begin  to  shine,  e.g.  of  a  shooting  star,  gleaming  sword  ;  vid. 
Wetzstein,  Deutsch.  morgenl.  Zeitzschr.  xxii.  151  f.)  signifies  the 
tablet  prepared  for  writing  by  means  of  polish  ;  to  write  love  and 
fidelity  on  the  tablet  of  the  heart,  is  to  impress  deeply  on  the  heart 
the  duty  of  both  virtues,  so  that  one  will  be  impelled  to  them  from 
within  outward  (Jer.  xxxi.  33). 

Ver.  4.  To  the  admonitory  imper.  there  follows  here  a  second, 
as  iv.  4,  xx.  13,  Amos  v.  4,  2  Chron.  xx.  20,  instead  of  which  also 
the  perf.  consec.  might  stand  ;  the  counsellor  wishes,  with  the  good 
to  which  he  advises,  at  the  same  time  to  present  its  good  results. 
•^  is  (1  Sam.  xxv.  3)  the  appearance,  for  the  Arab,  shakl  means 
forma,  as  uniting  or  binding  the  lineaments  or  contours  into  one 
figure,  a-xn/^a,  according  to  which  3iD  bt?  may  be  interpreted  of 
the  pleasing  and  advantageous  impression  which  the  well-built 
external  appearance  of  a  man  makes,  as  an  image  of  that  which 
his  internal  excellence  produces  ;  thus,  favourable  view,  friendly 
judgment,  good  reputation  (Ewald,  Hitzig,  Zockler).  But  every 
where  else  (xiii.  15  ;  Ps.  cxi.  10  ;  2  Chron.  xxx.  22)  this  phrase 
means  good,  i.e.  fine,  well-becoming  insight,  or  prudence  ;  and  *?$? 

1  Fleischer  is  here  reminded  of  the  giraffe  in  the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  the  head 
of  which  was  adorned  by  its  Arabic  keeper  with  strings  and  jewels,  the  object 
of  which  was  to  turn  aside  the  'ain  (the  bad,  mischievous  look)  from  the  precious 
beast. 


CHAP.  III.  5-8.  87 

has  in  the  language  of  the  Mislde  no  other  meaning  than  intel- 
lectus,  which  proceeds  from  the  inwardly  forming  activity  of  the 
mind.  He  obtains  favour  in  the  eyes  of  God  and  man,  to  whom 
favour  on  both  sides  is  shown  ;  he  obtains  refined  prudence,  to 
whom  it  is  on  both  sides  adjudicated  It  is  unnecessary,  with 
Ewald  and  Hitzig,  to  assign  the  two  objects  to  God  and  men.  In 
the  eyes  of  both  at  the  same  time,  he  who  carries  love  and  faith 
fulness  in  his  heart  appears  as  one  to  whom  JH  and  Sin  ?3&  must 
be  adjudicated. 

Vers.  5-8.  Were  "  kindness  and  truth"  (ver.  3)  understood  only 
in  relation  to  men,  then  the  following  admonition  would  not  be 
interposed,  since  it  proceeds  from  that  going  before,  if  there  the 
quality  of  kindness  and  truth,  not  only  towards  man,  but  also 
towards  God,  is  commended  : 

5  Trust  in  Jahve  with  thy  whole  heart, 
And  lean  not  on  thine  own  understanding. 

6  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him, 
And  He  will  make  plain  thy  paths. 

7  Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes  ; 
Fear  Jahve,  and  depart  from  evil. 

8  Health  will  then  come  to  thy  navel, 
And  refreshing  to  thy  bones. 

From  God  alone  comes  true  prosperity,  true  help.  He  knows  the 
right  way  to  the  right  ends.  He  knows  what  benefits  us.  He  is 
able  to  free  us  from  that  which  does  us  harm  :  therefore  it  is  our 
duty  and  our  safety  to  place  our  confidence  wholly  in  Him,  and  to 
trust  not  to  our  own  judgment.  The  verb  HC2,  Arab,  bath,  has 
the  root-meaning  expand  ere,  whence  perhaps,  by  a  more  direct  way 
than  that  noted  under  Ps.  iv.  6,  it  acquires  the  meaning  confidere, 
to  lean  with  the  whole  body  on  something,  in  order  to  rest  upon  it, 
strengthened  by  7JJ,  if  one  lean  wholly — Fr.  se  reposer  stir  quelquun; 
Ital.  riposarsi  sopra  alcuno^ — like  IV^'H  with  ?N,  to  lean  on  anything, 
so  as  to  be  supported  by  it;  with  ?V,  to  support  oneself  on  anything 
(Fl.).  injn  (the  same  in  form  as  ^nsiP,  Num.  xi.  12)  is  not  fully 
represented  by  "  acknowledge  Him  ;"  as  in  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9  it  is 
not  a  mere  theoretic  acknowledgment  that  is  meant,  but  earnest 
penetrating  cognizance,  engaging  the  whole  man.  The  practice- 
mystical  ^JH,  in  and  of  itself  full  of  significance,  according  to  O. 
and  N.  T.  usage,  is  yet  strengthened  by  toto  corde.  The  heart  is 
the  central  seat  of  all  spiritual  soul-strength ;  to  love  God  with  the 
whole  heart  is  to  concentrate  the  whole  inner  life  on  the  active 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


contemplation  of  God,  and  the  ready  observance  of  His  will.  God 
requites  such  as  show  regard  to  Him,  by  making  plain  their  path 
before  them,  i.e.  by  leading  them  directly  to  the  right  end,  remov 
ing  all  hindrances  out  of  their  way.  T{?<"nx  has  Cholem  in  the  first 
syllable  (vid.  Kimchi's  Lex.).1  li  Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes" 
is  equivalent  to  ne  tibi  sapiens  videare  ;  for,  as  J.  H.  Michaelis 
remarks,  coitfidere  Deo  est  sapere,  sibi  vero  ac  suce  sapientice,  desipere. 
u  Fear  God  and  depart  from  evil"  is  the  twofold  representation  of 
the  eva-efieia,  or  practical  piety,  in  the  Chokma  writings  :  Prov.  xvi. 
6,  the  Mashal  psalm  xxxiv.  10,  15,  arid  Job  xxviii.  28  cf.  i.  2. 
For  JT)E>  ID,  the  post-biblical  expression  is  Nt2H  &o\ 

Ver.  8.  The  subject  to  *nn  (it  shall  be)  is  just  this  religious- 
moral  conduct.  The  conjectural  reading  1"]^p  (Clericus),  T!^ 
—  TjNtp  ?  (Ewald,  Hitzig),  to  thy  flesh  or  body,  is  unnecessary  ;  the 
LXX.  and  Syr.  so  translating,  generalize  the  expression,  which  is 
not  according  to  their  taste.  nb>,  from  "W,  Arab,  sarr,  to  be  fast, 
to  bind  fast,  properly,  the  umbilical  cord  (which  the  Arabs  call  surr, 
whence  the  denom.  sarra,  to  cut  off  the  umbilical  cord  of  the  new 
born)  ;  thus  the  navel,  the  origin  of  which  coincides  with  the 
independent  individual  existence  of  the  new-born,  and  is  as  the 
firm  centre  (cf.  Arab,  saryr,  foundation,  basis,  Job,  p.  487)  of  the 
existence  of  the  body.  The  system  of  punctuation  does  not,  as  a 
rule,  permit  the  doubling  of  i,  probably  on  account  of  the  pre 
vailing  half  guttural,  i.e.  the  uvular  utterance  of  this  sound  by  the 
men  of  Tiberias.2  ^B&  here,  and  yw  at  Ezek.  xvi.  4,  belong  to  the 
exceptions  ;  cf.  the  expanded  duplication  in  TLI?',  Cant.  yii.  3,  to 
which  a  chief  form  "n't?  is  as  little  to  be  assumed  as  is  a  Tin  to 
'T]?.  The  air.  ryeyp.  nwari,  healing,  has  here,  as  Kan»,  iv.  22,  xvi. 
24,  and  nsnfi,  Ezek.  xlvii.  12,  not  the  meaning  of  restoration  from 
sickness,  but  the  raising  up  of  enfeebled  strength,  or  the  confirm 
ing  of  that  which  exists;  the  navel  comes  into  view  as  the  middle 
point  of  the  vis  vitalis.  **p&  is  a  Piel  formation,  corresponding  to 

the  abstract  Kal  formation  rnN'Sn;  the  Arab.  iL.-,  used  transit. 
(to  give  to  drink),  also  ^  (cf.  Pa.  Job  xxi.  24)  and  ill,  like 


1  In  the  st.  constr.  ii.  19,  and  with  the  grave  suff.  ii.  15,  o  instead  of  o  is  in 
order;  but  Ben-Asher  s  \nrnx,  Job  xiii.  27,  cf.  xxxiii.  11,  is  an  inconsistency. 

2  See  ray  work,  Physiologic  u.  Musik  in  ihrer  Bedeutung  fur  Grammatik  beson- 
ders  die  hclraisclie,  pp.  11-13. 


CHAP.  III.  9,  10.  89 

c.  -• 

the  Hebr.  nj^ipn  (Hiph.  of  njr^  to  drink)  :  the  infin.     JLs  means,  to 

the  obliterating  of  the  proper  signification,  distribution,  benefac 
tion,  showing  friendship,  but  in  the  passage  before  us  is  to  be 
explained  after  Job  xxi.  24  (the  marrow  of  his  bones  is  well 
watered ;  Arnheim — -f ull  of  sap)  and  xv.  30.  Bertheau  and  Hitzig 
erroneously  regard  ver.  8  as  the  conclusion  to  ver.  7,  for  they 
interpret  HINDI  as  the  subject ;  but  had  the  poet  wished  to  be  so 
understood,  he  should  have  written  '•nni.  Much  rather  the  subject 
is  devotion  withdrawn  from  the  evil  one  and  turned  to  God,  which 
externally  proves  itself  by  the  dedication  to  Him  of  earthly  pos 
sessions. 

Ver.  9  Honour  Jahve  with  thy  wealth, 

And  with  the  first-fruits  of  all  thine  increase  : 
10  Then  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  plenty, 
And  thy  vats  overflow  with  must. 

It  may  surprise  us  that  the  Chokma,  being  separated  from  the 
ceremonial  law,  here  commends  the  giving  of  tithes.  But  in  the 
first  place,  the  consciousness  of  the  duty  of  giving  tithes  is  older 
than  the  Mosaic  law,  Gen.  xxviii.  22  ;  in  this  case,  the  givino1  of 
tithes  is  here  a  general  ethical  expression.  ">&'JJ  and  "i^KP  do  not 
occur  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs ;  in  the  post-biblical  phraseology 
the  tithes  are  called  nbsn  pPH,  the  portion  of  the  Most  High. 
"123,  as  the  Arab,  wakkra,  to  make  heavy,  then  to  regard  and  deal 
with  as  weighty  and  solemn  (opp.  ^i?,  to  regard  and  treat  as  light, 
from  ??P  —  Arab,  hdn,  to  be  light).  |in,  properly  lightness  in  the 
sense  of  aisance,  opulency,  forms  with  133  an  oxymoron  (fac  Jovam 
gravem  de  levitate  tua),  but  one  aimed  at  by  the  author  neither  at 
i.  13  nor  here.  J8  (iu  ^.ino  and  '?.D,  ver.  9)  is  in  both  cases  par 
titive,  as  in  the  law  of  the  Levitical  tenths,  Lev.  xxvii.  30,  and  of 
the  Challa  (heave-offering  of  dough),  Num.  xv.  21,  where  also 
JVK'SO  (in  Heb.  vii.  4,  aiepodivia)  occurs  in  a  similar  sense,  cf. 
Num.  xviii.  12  (in  the  law  of  the  Tkeruma  or  wave-offering  of 
the  priests),  as  also  nston  in  the  law  of  the  second  tenths,  Dent, 
xiv.  22,  cf.  Num.  xviii.  30  (in  the  law  of  the  tenths  of  the  priests). 
Ver.  10.  With  1  apodosis  imperative  the  conclusion  begins.  J?3b>, 
satisfaction,  is  equivalent  to  fulness,  making  satisfied,  and  that,  too, 
richly  satisfied  ;  tfhtfi  also  is  such  an  accusative,  as  verbs  of  filling 
govern  it,  for  HT>>  to  break  through,  especially  to  overflow,  signifies 
to  be  or  become  overflowingly  full  (Job  i.  10).  EDX  (from 


90  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

ClialcJ.  ipN,  Syr.  dsan,  to  lay  up  in  granaries)  is  tlie  granary,  of  tho 
same  meaning  as  the  Arab,  dkhzan  (from  khazan  =  ]&n,  Isa.  xxiii. 
18,  recondere\  whence  the  Spanish  magazeii,  the  French  and 
German  magazin.  2  p.  (from  2p_),  Arab,  icakab^  to  be  hollow)  is 
the  vat  or  tub  into  which  the  must  flows  from  the  wine-press  (03 
or  fl^13)}  Xa««o9  or  inroktfviov.  Cf.  the  same  admonition  and  promise 
in  the  prophetic  statement  of  Mai.  iii.  10-12. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  contrast  here  follows.  As  God  should  not 
be  forgotten  in  days  of  prosperity,  so  one  should  not  suffer  himself 
to  be  estranged  from  Him  by  days  of  adversity. 

11  The  school  of  Jahve,  my  son,  despise  thou  not, 
Nor  loathe  thou  His  correction ; 

12  For  Jahve  correcteth  him  whom  He  loveth, 
And  that  as  a  father  his  son  whom  he  loveth 

Vid.  the  original  passage  Job  v.  17  f.  There  is  not  for  the  Book 
of  Job  a  more  suitable  motto  than  this  tetrastich,  which  expresses 
its  fundamental  thought,  that  there  is  a  being  chastened  and  tried 
by  suffering  which  has  as  its  motive  the  love  of  God,  and  which 

*•  O  1 

does  not  exclude  sonship.1  One  may  say  that  ver.  11  expresses 
the  problem  of  the  Book  of  Job,  and  ver.  12  its  solution.  "ICW, 
muSe/a,  we  have  translated  "  school,"  for  "ID*,  ira&eveLv,  means  in 
reality  to  take  one  into  school.  Almdung  [punishment]  or  Huge 
[reproof]  is  the  German  word  which  most  corresponds  to  the  Hebr. 
nnsifi  or  nnain.  a  pip  (whence  here  the  prohibitive  Kpfl  with  7N) 
means  to  experience  loathing  (disgust)  at  anything,  or  aversion 
(vexation)  toward  anything.  The  LXX.  (cited  Heb.  xii.  5  f.), 
fjiy&e  IK\VOV,  nor  be  faint-hearted,  which  joins  in  to  the  general 
thought,  that  we  should  not  be  frightened  away  from  God,  or  let 
ourselves  be  estranged  from  Him  by  the  attitude  of  anger  in  which 

O  «/  O 

He  appears  in  His  determination  to  inflict  suffering.  In  12a  the 
accentuation  leaves  it  undefined  whether  nirp  as  subject  belongs  to 
the  relative  or  to  the  principal  clause ;  the  traditional  succession  of 
accents,  certified  also  by  Ben  Bileam,  is  niiT  nns11  TV?'N  nx  '3,  for  this 

'  *  J  J  J  >:•       < 

passage  belongs  to  the  few  in  which  more  than  three  servants 
(viz.  Mahpach,  Mercha,  and  three  Munachs)  go  before  tl>e  Ath- 
nach?  The  further  peculiarity  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  J"lK, 

1  Here  Procop.  rightly  distinguishes  between  vcttis'iet  and  iitu,upiet. 

2  Vid.   Torath  Emeth,  p.  19  ;   Accentualionssystem,  vi.  §  6 ;   the  differences 
between  Ben-Asher  and  Ben-Naphtali  in  the  Appendixes  to  Biltlia  Rabbinica; 
Dachselt's  Biblia  Accentuata,  and  Pinner's  Prospectus,  p.  91  (Odessa,  1815). 


CHAP.  III.  13-15.  91 

although  \vithout  the  MakkepJi,  retains  its  Segol,  besides  here  only 
in  Ps.  xlvii.  5,  Ix.  2.  126  is  to  be  interpreted  thus  (cf.  ix.  56)  : 
"  and  (that)  as  a  father  the  son,  whom  he  loves."  The  1  is  ex 
planatory,  as  1  Sam.  xxviii.  3  (Gesenius,  §  155,  la),  and  nyv 
(which  one  may  supplement  by  ink  or  13)  is  a  defining  clause 
having  the  force  of  a  clause  with  "1K;N.  The  translation,  et  ut  pater 
qui  filio  bene  cupit,  is  syntactically  (cf.  Isa.  xl.  11)  and  accentually 
(vid.  136)  not  less  admissible,  but  translating  "  and  as  a  father  he 
holds  his  son  dear,"  or  with  Hitzig  (after  Jer.  xxxi.  10,  a  passage 
not  quite  syntactically  the  same),  "and  holds  him  dear,  as  a  father 
his  son  "  (which  Zockler  without  syntactical  authority  prefers  on 
account  of  the  2d  modus,  cf.  e.g.  Ps.  li.  18),  does  not  seem  a 
right  parallel  clause,  since  the  giving  of  correction  is  the  chief 
point,  and  the  love  only  the  accompanying  consideration  (xiii.  24). 
According  to  our  interpretation,  H"1^  is  to  be  carried  forward  in 
the  mind  from  12a.  The  LXX.  find  the  parallel  word  in  3N2% 
for  they  translate  /jiaarrtjol  Se  Trdvra  vlov,  ov  Trapa^e^erai,  and 
thus  have  read  2N31;  or  2N3^. 

Vers.  13-15.  Such  submission  to  God,  the  All-wise,  the  All- 
directing,  who  loves  us  with  fatherly  affection,  is  wisdom,  and 
such  wisdom  is  above  all  treasures. 

13  Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  found  wisdom, 
And  the  man  who  has  gained  understanding ; 

14  For  better  is  her  acquisition  than  the  acquisition  of  silver, 
And  her  gain  than  fine  gold. 

15  More  precious  is  she  than  corals  ; 

And  all  thy  jewels  do  not  equal  her  value. 

The  imperfect  P'SJ,  which  as  the  Iliph.  of  pis,  cadre,  has  the  general 
meaning  educere,  interchanges  with  the  perfect  NVO.  This  bring 
ing  forth  is  either  a  delivering  up,  i.e.  giving  out  or  presenting, 
Isa.  Iviii.  10,  Ps.  cxl.  9,  cxliv.  13  (cf.  pw,  Arab,  nafak,  to  give 
out,  to  pay  out),  or  a  fetching  out,  getting  out,  receiving,  viii.  35, 
xii.  2,  xviii.  22.  Thus  13a  reminds  one  of  the  parable  of  the 
treasure  in  the  field,  and  136  of  that  of  the  goodly  pearl  for  which 
the  e/i7ropo9  who  sought  the  pearl  parted  with  all  that  he  had. 
Here  also  is  declared  the  promise  of  him  who  trades  with  a 
merchant  for  the  possession  of  wisdom ;  for  Hinp  and  "inp  (both, 
as  Isa.  xxiii.  3,  18,  xlv.  15,  from  "inp,  the  latter  after  the  forms 
JH|,  J>9?,  without  our  needing  to  assume  a  second  primary  form, 
1HD)  go  back  to  the  root-word  ino,  to  trade,  go  about  as  a  trader, 


92  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

with  the  fundamental  meaning  einropeveeOat,  (LXX.)  ;  and  also 
the  mention  of  the  pearls  is  not  wanting  here,  for  at  all  events  the 
meaning  "pearls"  has  blended  itself  with  B^JE),  which  is  a  favourite 
word  in  the  Mashal  poetry,  though  it  be  not  the  original  meaning 
of  the  word.  In  146  ^03  is  surpassed  by  fnn  (besides  in  the 
Proverbs,  found  only  in  this  meaning  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  14),  which 
properly  means  ore  found  in  a  mine,  from  pn,  to  cut  in,  to  dig 
up,  and  hence  the  poetic  name  of  gold,  perhaps  of  gold  dug  out 
as  distinguished  from  molten  gold.  Hitzig  regards  ^pvcros  as 
identical  with  it  ;  but  this  word  (Sanskr.  without  the  ending  hir, 
Zend,  zar}  is  derived  from  gliar,  to  glitter  (vid.  Curtius).  nriNisn 
we  have  translated  "gain,"  for  it  does  not  mean  the  profit  which 
wisdom  brings,  the  tribute  which  it  yields,  but  the  gain,  the  pos 
session  of  wisdom  herself. 

Ver.  15.  As  regards  D^JS,  for  which  the  Kethib  has  Q"J3,  the 
following  things  are  in  favour  of  the  fundamental  meaning 
"corals,"  viz.:  (1.)  The  name  itself,  which  corresponds  with  the 

Arab,  ^j  ;  this  word,  proceeding  from   the  root-idea  of  shooting 

forth,  particularly  after  the  manner  of  plants,  means  the  branch 
and  all  that  raises  or  multiplies  itself  branch-like  or  twig-like 
(Fleischer).  (2.)  The  redness  attributed  to  the  D'O'OD,  Lam.  iv.  7, 
in  contradistinction  to  the  pure  whiteness  attributed  to  snow  and 
milk  (vid.  at  Job  xxviii.  IS).  The  meaning  of  the  word  may,  how 
ever,  have  become  generalized  in  practice  (LXX.  in  loc.  \i6wv 
7ro\vreXa)v,  Grcec.  Venet.  \i6iBic0v};  the  meaning  "pearls,"  given 
to  it  in  the  Job-Targum  by  Rashi,  and  particularly  by  Bochart, 
lay  so  much  the  nearer  as  one  may  have  wrought  also  corals 
and  precious  stones,  such  as  the  carbuncle,  sardius,  and  sapphire, 
into  the  form  of  pearls.  n^'?<!»  m  consequence  of  the  retrogression 
of  the  tone,  has  Munach  on  the  penult.,  and  that  as  an  exception,  as 
has  been  remarked  by  the  Masora,  since  in  substantives  and  proper 
names  terminating  in  n—  the  Tins  JIDJ,  i.e.  the  receding  of  the  tone, 
does  not  elsewhere  appear,  e.g.  N^n  ns*}  Gen.  xii.  14,  N^n  rna, 
Cant.  vi.  9,  N'n  iTU?  Jer.  xxx.  7.  "  Y^  is  first  abstr.,  a  being  in 
clined  to  something,  lust,  will,  pleasure  in  anything,  then  also 
concr.,  anything  in  which  one  has  pleasure,  what  is  beautiful, 


precious  ;    cf.  ^£»  (j»^'>    hence    dLu-xiJ    *,<^>    precious    stones  " 
(Fleischer),     nit?  with  3  means  to  be  an  equivalent  (purchase-price, 


CHAP.  III.  16-18.  U3 

exchange)  for  anything  ;  the  most  natural  construction  in  Arab,  ns 

L 

well  as  in  Hebr.  is  that  with  ?,  to  be  the  equivalent  of  a  thing  (vid. 
at  Job  xxxiii.  27) ;  the  3  is  the  Beth  pretii,  as  if  one  said  in  Arab. : 
liabi  anta  thou  art  in  the  estimate  of  my  father,  I  give  it  for  thee. 
One  distinctly  perceives  in  vers.  14,  15,  the  echo  of  Job  xxviii. 
This  tetrastich  occurs  again  with  a  slight  variation  at  viii.  10,  11. 
The  Talmud  and  the  Midrash  accent  it  so,  that  in  the  former  the 
expression  is  D^Sir^Dl,  and  in  the  latter  fsarrby  and  they  explain 
the  latter  of  precious  stones  and  pearls  (JW^nDI  JTQ1D  D^DS). 

Vers.  16-18.  That  wisdom  is  of  such  incomparable  value  is 
here  confirmed : 

16  Length  of  days  is  in  her  right  hand  ; 
In  her  left,  riches  and  honour. 

17  Her  ways  are  pleasant  ways, 
And  all  her  paths  are  peace. 

18  A  tree  of  life  is  she  to  those  that  lay  hold  upon  her, 
And  he  who  always  holdeth  her  fast  is  blessed. 

As  in  the  right  hand  of  Jahve,  according  to  Ps.  xvi.  11,  are  plea 
sures  for  evermore,  so  Wisdom  holds  in  her  rio-ht  hand  "  length  of 

7  O  O 

days,"  viz.  of  the  days  of  life,  thus  life,  the  blessing  of  blessings ; 
in  her  left,  riches  and  honour  (viii.  18),  the  two  good  things  which, 
it  is  true,  do  not  condition  life,  but,  received  from  Wisdom,  and 
thus  wisely,  elevate  the  happiness  of  life — in  the  right  hand  is  the 
chief  good,  in  the  left  the  TrpovOijtcr),  Matt.  vi.  33.  Didymus  :  Per 
sopientice  dextram  divinarum  rerum  cognitio,  ex  qua  immortalitatis 
vita  oritur,  siginficatur ;  per  sinistram  autem  rerum  hiimanarnm 
notitia,  ex  qua  gloria  opumque  abundantia  nascitur.  The  LXX., 
as  between  15a  and  156,  so  also  here  after  ver.  16,  interpolate  twro 
lines:  "From  her  mouth  proceedeth  righteousness;  justice  and 
mercy  she  bears  upon  her  tongue," — perhaps  translated  from  the 
Hebr.,  but  certainly  added  by  a  reader. 

Ver.  17.  Djfr-'a'Yn  are  ways  on  which  one  obtains  what  is  agree 
able  to  the  inner  and  the  outer  man,  and  which  it  does  good  to 
enjoy.  The  parallel  DW  is  not  a  genitive  to  Di:rrti  to  be  supplied  ; 
the  paths  of  Wisdom  are  themselves  DW,  for  she  brings  well-beino- 

*  T    7  O  O 

on  all  sides  and  deep  inward  satisfaction  (peace).  In  regard  to  HTriJ, 
via  eminens,  elata,  Schultens  is  right  (vid.  under  i.  15)  j1  n'Tin'Ttf 
has  Munach,  and  instead  of  the  Metheg,  Tarcha,  vid.  under  i.  316. 

1  The  root  is  not  2fl,  to  grope,  but  rD;  whence  Arab,  natt,  to  bubble  up, 
nata,  to  raise  oneself,  to  swell  up,  etc. 


94  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

The  figure  of  the  tree  of  life  the  fruit  of  which  brings  immortality, 
is,  as  xi.  30,  xv.  4  (cf.  xiii.  12),  Rev.  ii.  7,  taken  from  the  history 
of  paradise  in  the  Book  of  Genesis.  The  old  ecclesiastical  saying, 
Lignum  vitce  crux  Christi,  accommodates  itself  in  a  certain  measure, 
through  Matt.  xi.  19,  Luke  xi.  49,  with  this  passage  of  the  Book  of 
Proverbs.  3  P^nn  means  to  fasten  upon  anything,  more  fully 
expressed  in  Gen.  xxi.  18,  to  bind  the  hand  firm  with  anything, 
to  seize  it  firmly.-  They  who  give  themselves  to  Wisdom,  come  to 
experience  that  she  is  a  tree  of  life  whose  fruit  contains  and  com 
municates  strength  of  life,  and  whoever  always  keeps  fast  hold  of 
Wisdom  is  blessed,  i.e.  to  be  pronounced  happy  (Ps.  xli.  3,  vid.  under 
Ps.  cxxxvii.  8).  The  predicate  "^^J?,  blessed,  refers  to  each  one  of 
the  fl^Bhj  those  who  hold  her,  cf.  xxvii.  16,  Num.  xxiv.  9.  It  is  the 
so-called  distributive  singular  of  the  predicate,  which  is  freely  used 
particularly  in  those  cases  where  the  plur.  of  the  subject  is  a  parti 
ciple  (vid.  under  ver.  35). 


FIFTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  III.  19-26. 

THE  WORLD- CREATIVE  WISDOM  AS  MEDIATRIX  OF  DIVINE 
PROTECTION. 

O  son,  guard  against  seducers  (i.  8  ff.) ;  listen  to  the  warning 
voice  of  Wisdom  (i.  20  ff.) ;  seek  after  Wisdom :  she  is  the  way  to 
God,  comes  from  God,  and  teaches  thee  to  shun  the  wicked  way 
and  to  walk  in  the  way  that  is  good  (ii.)  ;  thou  shalt  obtain  her  if, 
renouncing  self-confidence,  thou  givest  thyself  unreservedly  to  God 
(iii.  1-18) — these  are  the  four  steps,  so  far,  of  this  introductory 
Trapaivea-ts.  Each  discourse  contributes  its  own  to  present  vividly 
and  impressively  what  Wisdom  is  and  what  she  procures,  her  nature 
and  her  blessings.  From  her  hand  come  all  good  gifts  of  God  to 
men.  She  is  the  tree  of  life.  Her  place  between  God  and  men  is 
thus  that  of  a  mediatrix. 

Vers.  19,  20.  This  place  of  a  mediatrix — the  speaker  here  now 
continues — she  had  from  the  beginning.  God's  world-creating 
work  was  mediated  by  her : 

19  Jahve  hath  by  wisdom  founded  the  earth, 
Established  the  heavens  by  understanding. 


CHAP.  in.  19,  20.  95 

20  By  His  knowledge  the  water-floods  broke  forth, 
And  the  sky  dropped  down  dew. 

That  wisdom  is  meant  by  which  God  planned  the  world-idea,  and 
now  also  wrought  it  out ;  the  wisdom  in  which  God  conceived  the 
world  ere  it  was  framed,  and  by  which  also  He  gave  external 
realization  to  His  thoughts  ;  the  wisdom  which  is  indeed  an  attri 
bute  of  God  and  a  characteristic  of  His  actions,  since  she  is  a 
property  of  His  nature,  and  His  nature  attests  itself  in  her,  but 
not  less,  as  appears,  not  from  this  group  of  tetrastichs,  but  from 
all  that  has  hitherto  been  said,  and  from  the  personal  testimony, 
viii.  22  ff.,  of  which  it  is  the  prceludium^  she  goes  forth  as  a  divine 
power  to  which  God  has  given  to  have  life  in  herself.  Considered 
apart  from  the  connection  of  these  discourses,  this  group  of  verses, 
as  little  as  Jer.  x.  2,  Ps.  civ.  24,  determines  regarding  the  attribu 
tive  interpretation  ;  the  Jerusalem  Targum,  I.,  when  it  translates, 
Gen.  i.  1,  rpB>6O3  by  KDrnna  (Kno^na),  combines  viii.  22  with  such 
passages  as  this  before  us.  ID*  (here  with  the  tone  thrown  back) 
properly  signifies,  like  the  Arab,  tuasad,  to  lay  fast,  to  found,  for  one 
gives  to  a  fact  the  firm  basis  of  its  existence.  The  parallel  Pit.  of  p3 
(Arab,  kdn,  cogn.  jro,  see  on  Isaiah,  p.  691)  signifies  to  set  up,  to 
restore ;  here  equivalent  to,  to  give  existence. 

Ver.  20.  It  is  incorrect  to  understand  20a,  with  the  Targ.,  of 
division,  i.e.  separating  the  water  under  the  firmament  from  the 
water  above  the  firmament;  Vi?33  is  spoken  of  water,  especially  of  its 
breaking  forth,  Gen.  vii.  11,  Ex.  xiv.  21,  cf.  Ps.  Ixxiv.  15,  properly 
dividing  itself  out,  i.e.  welling  forth  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth  ; 
it  means,  without  distinguishing  the  primordial  waters  and  the  later 
water-floods  confined  within  their  banks  (cf.  Job  xxxviii.  8  f.,  Ps. 
civ.  6-8),  the  overflowing  of  the  earth  for  the  purpose  of  its  pro 
cesses  of  cultivation  and  the  irrigation  of  the  land,  nicinn  (from 
Din  =  nnn,  to  groan,  to  roar)  are  chiefly  the  internal  water  stores 
of  the  earth,  Gen.  xlix.  25,  Ps.  xxxiii.  7.  But  while  20a  is  to  be 
understood  of  the  waters  under  the  firmament,  206  is  to  be  inter 
preted  of  those  above.  D"1!?^  (from  PHE^  Arab,  shak,  comutinuere, 
attenuare)  properly  designates  the  uppermost  stratum,  of  air  thinly 
and  finely  stretching  itself  far  and  wide,  and  then  poetically  the 
clouds  of  heaven  (vid.  under  Ps.  Ixxvii.  18).  Another  name,  E^")^, 
comes  from  fpy,  which  is  transposed  from  ^JH  (here  used  in  206), 
Arab,  raf,  to  drop,  to  run.  The  ?B  added  on  the  object  accusative 
represents  synecdochically  all  the  waters  coming  down  from  heaven 


9G  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

and  fructifying  the  earth.  This  watering  proceeds  from  above 
(IDjni) ;  on  the  contrary,  the  endowing  of  the  surface  of  the  earth 
with  great  and  small  rivers  is  a  fundamental  fact  in  creation 

(W3). 

Vers.  21-22.  From  this  eminence,  in  which  the  work  of  creation 
presents  wisdom,  exhortations  are  now  deduced,  since  the  writer 
always  expresses  himself  only  with  an  ethical  intention  regarding 
the  nature  of  wisdom  : 

21  My  son,  may  they  not  depart  from  thine  eyes — 
Preserve  thoughtfulness  aud  consideration, 

22  And  they  will  be  life  to  thy  soul 
And  grace  to  thy  neck. 

If  we  make  the  synonyms  of  wisdom  which  are  in  216  the  subject 
per  prolepsin  to  W^"fo  (Hitzig  and  Zockler),  then  19-20  and  21-22 
clash.  The  subjects  are  wisdom,  understanding,  knowledge,  which 
belong  to  God,  and  shall  from  Him  become  the  possession  of  those 
who  make  them  their  aim.  Regarding  TV,  obliquari,  deflectere,  see 
under  ii.  15,  cf.  iv.  21;  regarding  n>K>n  (here  defective  after  the 
Masora,  as  rightly  in  Vened.  1515,  1521,  and  Nissel,  1662),  see  at 
ii.  7;  ^  for^ftn,  see  at  iii.  2b.  Tiie  LXX.  (cf.  Heb.  ii.  1) 
translate  without  distinctness  of  reference :  vie  fj,rj  irapappv^ 
(Trapapvfjs),  let  it  not  flow  past,  i.e.  let  it  not  be  unobserved,  hold 
it  always  before  thee ;  the  Targ.  with  the  Syr.  render  ??3  fcO,  ne 
vilescat,  as  if  the  words  were  TOP~?N.  In  22«  the  synallage  generis 
is  continued :  ViTl  for  n^Tim.  Resardino;  rhna,  see  at  i.  9.  By 

TV:*;  o  o  ;  ;  ~ '  v 

wisdom  the  soul  gains  life,  divinely  true  and  blessed,  and  the 
external  appearance  of  the  man  grace,  which  makes  him  pleasing 
and  gains  for  him  affection. 

Vers.  23-26.  But  more  than  this,  wisdom  makes  its  possessor  in 
all  situations  of  life  confident  in  God  : 

23  Then  shalt  thou  go  thy  way  with  confidence, 
And  thy  foot  shall  not  stumble. 

24  When  thou  liest  down,  thou  art  not  afraid, 

But  thou  layest  thyself  down  and  hast  sweet  sleep. 

25  Thou  needest  not  be  afraid  of  sudden  alarm, 

Nor  for  the  storm  of  the  wicked  when  it  breaketh  forth. 

26  For  Jahve  will  be  thy  confidence 
And  keep  thy  foot  from  the  snare. 

The  H027  (cf.  our  "  lei  guter  Laune  "  =  in  good  cheer),  with  f>  of 
the  condition,  is  of  the  same  meaning  as  the  conditional  adverbial 
accusative  rm,  x.  9,  i.  33.  Ver.  236  the  LXX.  translate  6  Be 


CHAP.  III.  23-26.  97 

TTOU?  cov  ov  fjirj  TrpoGKo^rji  while,  on  the  contrary,  at  Ps.  xci.  12 
they  make  the  person  the  subject  (/^Trore  Trpoaxo\}rr)s  rbv  /c.r.X.)  ; 
here  also  we  retain  more  surely  the  subject  from  23a,  especially 
since  for  the  intrans.  of  *]33  (to  smite,  to  push)  a  Hithpa.  ^nn  is 
used  Jer.  xiii.  16.  In  ver.  24  there  is  the  echo  of  Job  xi.  18,  and 
in  ver.  25  of  Job  v.  21.  246  is  altogether  the  same  as  Job  v.  246: 
et  decumbes  et  suavis  erit  somnus  tuus  =  si  decubueris,  suavis  erit. 
The  hypothetic  perf.,  according  to  the  sense,  is  both  there  and  at 
Job  xi.  18  (cf.  Jer.  xx.  9)  oxy toned  as  perf.  conscc.  Similar  examples 
are  vi.  22,  Gen.  xxxiii.  13,  1  Sam.  xxv.  31,  cf.  Ewald,  §  357a.  nzny 
(of  sleep  as  Jer.  xxxi.  26)  is  from  Tiy,  which  in  Hebr.  is  used  of 
pleasing  impressions,  as  the  Arab,  'ariba  of  a  lively,  free  disposition. 
HJtr,  somnus  (nom.  actionis  from  1^,  with  the  ground-form  sina 
preserved  in  the  Arab,  lidat,  vid.  Job,  p.  284,  note),  agrees  in 
inflexion  with  me*,  annus.  ta,  ver.  25a,  denies,  like  Ps.  cxxi.  3, 
with  emphasis:  be  afraid  only  not  =  thou  hast  altogether  nothing  to 
fear.  Schultens  rightly  says  :  Subest  species  prohibitions  et  tanquam 
abominationis,  ne  tale  quicquam  vel  in  suspicionem  veniat  in  mentemve 
cogitando  admittatur.  ins  here  means  terror,  as  i.  26  f.,  the  terrific 
object ;  Dxns  (with  the  accus.  om)  is  the  virtual  genitive,  as  xxvi.  2 
Dan  (with  accus.  am).  Eegarding  nxb^  see  under  i.  27.  The 
genitive  DTSJBn  may  be,  after  Ps.  xxxvii.  17,  the  genii,  subjecti,  but 
still  it  lies  nearer  to  say  that  he  who  chooses  the  wisdom  of  God  as 
his  guiding  star  has  no  ground  to  fear  punishment  as  transgressors 
have  reason  to  fear  it ;  the  nsb>  is  meant  which  wisdom  threatens 
against  transgressors,  i.  27.  He  needs  have  no  fear  of  it,  for 
wisdom  is  a  gift  of  God,  and  binds  him  who  receives  it  to  the 
giver :  Jahve  becomes  and  is  henceforth  his  confidence.  Regard 
ing  1  essentice,  which  expresses  the  closest  connection  of  the  subject 
with  the  predicate  which  it  introduces,  see  under  Ps.  xxxv.  2.  As 
here,  so  also  at  Ex.  xviii.  4,  Ps.  cxviii.  7,  cxlvi.  5,  the  predicate  is  a 
noun  with  a  pronominal  suffix.  ^p3  is,  as  at  Ps.  Ixxviii.  7,  Job 
xxxi.  24,  cognate  to  nD2O  and  nipo,1  the  object  and  ground  of  con 
fidence.  That  the  word  in  other  connections  may  mean  also  fool- 
hardiness,  Ps.  xlix.  14,  and  folly,  Eccles.  vii.  25  (cf.  regarding 
7'D3,  which  in  Arab,  as  belid  denotes  the  dull,  in  Hebr.  fools,  see 
under  i.  22),  it  follows  that  it  proceeds  from  the  fundamental  con- 

1  According  to  Malbim,  nii?fl  is  the  expectation  of  good,  and  ^p3,  confidence 
in  the  presence  of  evil. 

VOL.   I.  n 


S3  TKE  BOOK  OF  PROVERDS. 

ception  of  fulness  of  flesh  and  of  fat,  whence  arise  the  conceptions 
of  dulness  and  slothfulness,  as  well  as  of  confidence,  whether  con 
fidence  in  self  or  in  God  (see  Schultens  I.e.,  and  Wiinsche's  Hosea, 
p.  207  f.).  1$>.  1S  taking,  catching,  as  in  a  net  or  trap  or  pit,  from 
*\&j  to  catch  (cf.  Arab,  lakida,  to  fasten,  III.  IV.  to  hold  fast)  ; 
another  root-meaning,  in  which  Arab,  lak  connects  itself  with  nak, 
13,  to  strike,  to  assail  (whence  al-laMat,  the  assault  against  the 
enemy,  Deutsch.  Morgenl.  Zeitscli.  xxii.  140),  is  foreign  to  the  Hebr. 
Reo-ardino-  the  |D  of  lata,  Fleischer  remarks  :  "The  JO  after  verbs 

O  O  ' 

of  guarding,  preserving,  like  1£^  and  1S3,  properly  expresses  that 
one  by  those  means  holds  or  seeks  to  hold  a  person  or  thing  back 
from  something,  like  the  Lat.  defendere,  tueri  aliquem  ab  hoatibus,  a 
periculo."" l 


SIXTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  III.  27-35. 
EXHORTATION  TO  BENEVOLENCE  AND  RECTITUDE. 

The  promise  in  which  it  terminates,  designates  the  close  of  the  fifth 
discourse.  The  sixth  differs  from  it  in  this,  that,  like  none  of  the 
preceding,  it  adds  proverb  to  proverb.  The  first  series  recommends 
love  to  one's  neighbour,  and  the  second  warns  against  fellowship 
with  the  uncharitable. 

Vers.  27,  28.  The  first  illustration  of  neighbourly  love  which 
is  recommended,  is  readiness  to  serve  : 

1  Hitzig  rejects  iii.  22-26  as  a  later  interpolation.  And  why  ?  Because  iii., 
which  he  regards  as  a  complete  discourse,  consists  of  twice  ten  verses  beginning 
with  \J2.  In  addition  to  this  symmetry  other  reasons  easily  reveal  themselves  to 
his  penetration.  But  the  discourses  contained  in  chap,  i.-ix.  do  not  all  begin 
with  >32  (vid.  i.  20) ;  and  when  it  stands  in  the  beginning  of  the  discourse,  it  is 
not  always  the  first  word  (vid.  i.  8) ;  and  when  it  occurs  as  the  first  word  or  in 
the  first  line,  it  does  not  always  commence  a  new  discourse  (vid.  i.  15  in  the 
middle  of  the  first,  iii.  11  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth) ;  and,  moreover,  the  Hebr. 
poetry  and  oratory  does  not  reckon  according  to  verses  terminated  by  Soph 
Pasuk,  which  are  always  accented  distichs,  but  they  in  reality  frequently  consist 
of  three  or  more  lines.  The  rejected  verses  are  in  nothing  unlike  those  that 
remain,  and  which  are  undisputed  ;  they  show  the  same  structure  of  stichs,  con 
sisting  for  the  most  part  of  three,  but  sometimes  also  only  of  two  words  (cf. 
iii.  22&  with  i.  96,  106),  the  same  breadth  in  the  course  of  the  thoughts,  and  ilia 
eame  accord  with  Job  and  Deuteronomy. 


CHAP.  III.  27,  £3.  09 

27  Eefusc  no  manner  of  good  to  him  to  whom  5t  is  duo 

When  it  is  in  thy  power  to  do  it. 
'28  Say  not  to  thy  neighbour,  "  Go,  and  come  again, 

To-morrow  I  will  give  it,"  whilst  yet  thou  hast  it. 

Regarding  the  intensive  plur.  v6y3  with  a  sing,  meaning,  see 
under  i.  19.  The  form  of  expression  without  the  suffix  is  not  ^3 
but  2i£3  7V3 ;  and  this  denotes  here,  not  him  who  does  good  (i>jn  as 
Arab,  dhw  or  sahab),  but  him  to  whom  the  good  deed  is  done  (of. 
xvii.  8),  i.e.  as  here,  him  who  is  worthy  of  it  (bjO  as  Arab.  did}, 
him  who  is  the  man  for  it  (Jewish  interp. :  lf>  ^ixi  KinB*  n3).  We 
must  refuse  nothing  good  (nothing  either  legally  or  morally  good) 
to  him  who  has  a  right  to  it  (|D  J>3»  as  Job  xxii.  7,  xxxi/16),1  if 
we  are  in  a  condition  to  do  him  this  good.  The  phrase  *V  ^TTS^, 
Gen.  xxxi.  29,  and  frequently,  signifies :  it  is  belonging  to  (prac 
ticable)  the  power  of  my  hand,  i.e.  I  have  the  power  and  the  means 
of  doing  it.  As  IT  signifies  the  haughty,  insolent,  but  may  be  also 
used  in  the  neuter  of  insolent  conduct  (vid.  Ps.  xix.  14),  so  ^ 
signifies  the  strong,  but  also  (although  only  in  this  phrase)  strength. 
The  Keri  rejects  the  plur.  TT,  because  elsewhere  the  hand  always 
follows  7K7  in  the  singular.  But  it  rejects  the  plur.  TJni>  (ver.  28) 
because  the  address  following  is  directed  to  one  person.  Neither  of 
these  emendations  was  necessary.  The  usage  of  the  language  per 
mits  exceptions,  notwithstanding  the  usus  tyrannus,  and  the  plur. 
T»jr6  may  be  interpreted  distributively  :  to  thy  fellows,  it  may  be 
this  one  or  that  one.  Hitzig  also  regards  "pjr6  as  a  singular ;  but 
the  mas.  of  rrjn,  the  ground-form  of  which  is  certainly  raj,  is  njri, 
or  shorter,  jn.  3l2n  IjJ  does  not  mean  :  forth  !  go  home  again  !  but : 
go,  and  come  again.  31B>,  to  come  again,  to  return  to  something,  to 
seek  it  once  more.2  The  1  of  TJPIS  Eh  is,  as  296,  the  conditional : 
fjnum  sit  penes  te,  sc.  quod  ei  des.  "  To-morrow  shall  I  give  "  is 
less  a  promise  than  a  delay  and  putting  off,  because  it  is  difficult 
for  him  to  alienate  himself  from  him  who  makes  the  request.  This 

1  Accentuate  niJp  J&DTrfeft  not  3-iB-JttBrrta.      The  doubling  of  the  Mak- 
keph  is  purposeless,  and,  on  the  contrary,  the  separating  of  niL3  from  V^JDO 
by  the  Dechi  (the  separating  accent  subordinate  to  AthnacK)  is  proper.     It  is 
thus  in  the  best  MSS. 

2  Thus  also  (Arab.)  raf  is  used  in  Thaalebi's  Confidential  Companion,  p.  24, 
line  8,  of  Fliigel's  ed.     Admission  was  prevented  to  one  Haschmid,  then  angry 
he  sought  it  once  more ;  he  was  again  rejected,  then  he  sought  it  not  again. 
(Arab,  flm  yro/'),  but   says,    etc.      Fliigel   has  misunderstood   the  passage. 
Fleischer  explains  raj\  \\itk  reference  to  Prov.  iii.  28,  by  revenir  a  la  charge. 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

holding  fast  by  one's  own  is  unamiable  selfishness;  this  putting  off 
in  the  fulfilment  of  one's  duty  is  a  sin  of  omission  —  ov  yap  olSas, 
as  the  LXX.  adds,  rl  re^erai  r)  eTTtovaa. 

Ver.  2(J.  A  second  illustration  of  neighbourly  love  is  harmless- 
ness  : 

Devise  not  evil  against  thy  neighbour, 
While  he  dwelleth  securely  by  thee. 

The  verb  Bnn,  ^apda-a-eiv,  signifies  to  cut  into,  and  is  used  of  the 
faber  ferrarim  as  well  as  of  the  tignarius  (fsaiah,  p.  463),  who 
with  a  cutting  instrument  (Enn,  Gen.  iv.  22)  works  with  metal  or 
wood,  and  from  his  profession  is  called  Bnn.  But  the  word  means 
as  commonly  to  plough,  i.e.  to  cut  with  the  plough,  and  Enh  is 
used  also  of  a  ploughman,  and,  without  any  addition  to  it,  it  always 
has  this  meaning.  It  is  then  a  question  whether  the  metaphorical 
phrase  njn  Sinn  signifies  to  fabricate  evil,  cf.  dolorum  faber,  men- 
dacia  procudere,  -^revSwv  KOI  aTrarwv  TEKTCDV,  and  the  Homeric  naica 
(frpeal  fivaao&o/jieveiv  (Fleischer  and  most  others),  or  to  plough  evil 
(Kashi,  Ewald,  etc.).  The  Targ.,  Syriac,  and  Jerome  translate 
215TI,  without  deciding  the  point,  by  moliri  ;  but  the  LXX.  and 
Grcecus  Venet.  by  refcraiveiv.  The  correctness  of  these  render 
ings  is  not  supported  by  Ezek.  xxi.  36,  where  JVrr^o  ''Knn  are  not 
such  as  fabricate  destruction,  but  smiths  who  cause  destruction  ; 
also  t^ino,  1  Sam.  xxiii.  9,  proves  nothing,  and  probably  does  not  at 
all  appertain  to  ehn  incidere  (Keil),  but  to  Enn  silere,  in  the  sense 
of  dolose  moliri.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  to  be  observed  from  Job 
iv.  8,  Hos.  x.  13,  cf.  Ps.  cxxix.  3,  that  the  meaning  arare  malum 
might  connect  itself  with  njn  Bnn  ;  and  the  proverb  of  Sirach  vii. 
12,  pr)  dporpia  -^reOSo?  eV  aSeAx^w  crou,  places  this  beyond  a  doubt. 
Therefore  in  this  phrase,  if  one  keeps  before  him  a  clear  perception 
of  the  figure,  at  one  time  the  idea  of  fabricating,  at  another  that 
of  ploughing,  is  presented  before  us.  The  usage  of  the  language 
in  the  case  before  us  is  more  in  favour  of  the  latter  than  of  the 
former.  Whether  HX  3^  means  to  dwell  together  with,  or  as 
Bottcher,  to  sit  together  with,  after  Ps.  i.  1,  xxvi.  4  f.,  need  not 
be  a  matter  of  dispute.  It  means  in  general  a  continued  being 
together,  whether  as  sitting,  Job  ii.  13,  or  as  dwelling,  Judg.  xvii. 
II.1  To  take  advantage  of  the  regardlessness  of  him  who  imparts 


1  Accentuate   nDnJ5  ntrp-Nim.      It  is  thus  in  correct  texts.       The   Eelna 
Mugrash  is  transformed,  according  to  the  Accentuationssystem,  xviii.  §  2. 


CHAP.  III.  30-32.  101 

to  us  his  confidence  is  unamiable.  Love  is  doubly  owing  to  him 
who  resigns  himself  to  it  because  he  believes  in  it. 

Ver.  30.  A  third  illustration  of  the  same  principle  is  peaceable- 
ness  : 

Contend  not  with  a  man  without  a  cause, 
When  he  has  inflicted  no  evil  upon  thee. 

Instead  of  SVin,  or  as  the  Ken  has  amended  it  H'nn,  the  abbreviated 
form  Sin  or  I"?.3?  would  be  more  correct  after  ?K ;  mi  or  I11"!  (from 
21,  to  be  compact)  means  to  fall  upon  one  another,  to  come  to 
hand-blows,  to  contend.  Contending  and  quarrelling  with  a 
man,  whoever  he  may  be,  without  sufficient  reason,  ought  to  be 
abandoned ;  but  there  exists  no  such  reason  if  he  has  done  me  no 
harm  which  I  have  to  reproach  him  with.  njn  ^3  with  the  accus. 
or  dat.  of  the  person  signifies  to  bring  evil  upon  any  one,  malum 
inferre,  or  also  referre  (Schultens),  for  ?B3  (cogn.  1103)  signifies  to 
execute,  to  complete,  accomplish, — both  of  the  initiative  and  of  the 
requital,  both  of  the  anticipative  and  of  the  recompensing  action  ; 
here  in  the  former  of  these  senses. 

Vers.  31,  32.  These  exhortations  to  neighbourly  love  in  the 
form  of  warning  against  whatever  is  opposed  to  it,  are  followed  by 
the  warning  against  fellowship  with  the  loveless : 

31  Be  not  envious  toward  the  man  of  violence, 
And  have  no  pleasure  in  all  his  ways. 

32  For  an  abhorrence  to  Jahve  is  the  perverse, 
But  with  the  upright  is  His  secret. 

The  conceptions  of  jealousy  and  envy  lie  in  N3p/  (derived  by  Schul 
tens  from  N3p,  Arab,  kand,  intensius  rubere)  inseparable  from  each 
other.  The  LXX.,  which  for  iWpn  reads  rupn  (/CT^OT?),  brings  the 
envy  into  316,  as  if  the  words  here  were  "irHVrTWj  as  in  Ps.  xxxvii. 
1,  7  (there  the  LXX.  has  firj  irapatyXov,  here  ^Be  ^XWCTT;?). 
There  is  no  reason  for  correcting  our  text  in  accordance  with  this 
(substituting  inrHji  for  iron  as  Hitzig  does),  because  vrm^a  would 
be  too  vague  an  expression  for  the  object  of  the  envy,  while 
irorrta  altogether  agrees  with  it ;  and  the  contrary  remark,  that 
733  inn  is  fundamentally  no  irn,  fails,  since  (1)  ira  frequently  ex 
presses  pleasure  in  anything  without  the  idea  of  choice,  and  (2) 
"  have  not  pleasure  in  all  his  ways  "  is  in  the  Hebrew  style  equiva 
lent  to  "in  any  one  of  his  ways;"  Ewald,  §  323&.  He  who  does 
"  violence  to  the  law"  (Zeph.  iii.  4)  becomes  thereby,  according  to 
the  common  course  of  the  world,  a  person  who  is  feared,  whose  autho- 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

rity,  power,  nnd  resources  are  increased,  but  one  must  not  therefore 
envy  him,  nor  on  any  side  take  pleasure  in  his  conduct,  which  in 
all  respects  is  to  be  reprobated  ;  for  the  tfo,  inflexus,  tortuosus  (vid. 
ii.  15),  who  swerves  from  the  right  way  and  goes  in  a  crooked 
false  way,  is  an  object  of  Jahve's  abhorrence,  while,  on  the  contrary, 
the  just,  who  with  a  right  mind  walks  in  the  right  way,  is  Jahve's 
niD—  an  echo  of  Ps.  xxv.  14.  Tin  (II.  no,  to  be  firm,  compressed) 
means  properly  the  being  pressed  together,  or  sitting  together  (cf. 
the  Arab,  ivisdd,  wisddt,  a  cushion,  divan,  corresponding  in  form 
to  the  Hebr.  liD1!)  for  the  purpose  of  private  communication  and 
conversation  (ipjn),  and  then  partly  the  confidential  intercourse, 
as  here  (cf.  Job  xxix.  4),  partly  the  private  communication,  the 
secret  (Amos  iii.  7).  LXX.,  h  Be  StKaloi*  [ou]  trvveSpia£ei.  Those 
who  are  out  of  the  way,  who  prefer  to  the  simplicity  of  right-doing 
all  manner  of  crooked  ways,  are  contrary  to  God,  and  He  may  have 
nothing  to  do  with  them;  but  the  right-minded  He  makes  partakers 
of  His  most  intimate  intercourse,  He  deals  with  them  as  His  friends. 
Ver.  33.  The  prosperity  of  the  godless,  far  from  being  worthy 
of  envy,  has  as  its  reverse  side  the  curse  : 

The  ctirse  of  Jahve  is  in  the  house  of  the  godless, 
And  the  dwelling  of  the  just  He  blesseth. 


(a  curse),  like  n^pn  (a  highway,  from  &p),  is  formed  from 
T]K  (cf.  Arab,  harr,  detestari,  abhorrere,  a  word-imitation  of  an  in 
terjection  used  in  disagreeable  experiences).  The  curse  is  not 
merely  a  deprivation  of  external  goods  which  render  life  happy, 
and  the  blessing  is  not  merely  the  fulness  of  external  possessions  ; 
the  central-point  of  the  curse  lies  in  continuous  disquiet  of  con 
science,  and  that  of  the  blessing  in  the  happy  consciousness  that 
God  is  with  us,  in  soul-rest  and  peace  which  is  certain  of  the  grace 
and  goodness  of  God.  The  poetic  ma  (from  nu  =  Arab,  nwy,  \eten- 
dit  aliquo)  signifies  the  place  of  settlement,  and  may  be  a  word 
borrowed  from  a  nomad  life,  since  it  denotes  specially  the  pasture- 
ground;  cf.  xxiv.  15  (Fleischer).  While  the  curse  of  God  rests  in 
the  house  of  the  wicked  (vid.  Kohler  on  Zech.  v.  4),  He  blesses^ 
on  the  contrary,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  righteous.  The  LXX. 
and  Jerome  read  TJ^'T,  but  ^  is  more  agreeable,  since  God  con 
tinues  to  be  the  subject. 

Ver.  34.  His  relation  to  men  is  determined  by  their  relation  to 
Him. 


CHAP.  in.  oi.  103 

As  for  the  scorn ers,  He  scorneth  them, 
But  to  the  lowly  He  giveth  grace. 

Most  interpreters  render  the  verse   thus:    "If   the   scorner    Tie 
(even  He,  in  return)  scorneth,  so  He  (on  the  other  hand)  giveth 
grace  to  the  lowly."     For  the  sequence  of  the  words  in  the  conse 
quence,  in  which  the  precedence  of  the  verb  is  usual,  e.g.  Lev. 
xii.  5,  we  are  referred  to  xxiii.  18,  cf.  xxiv.  14  ;  but  why  had  the 
poet  placed  the  two  facts  in  the  relation  of  condition  and  conse 
quence  ?     The  one  fact  is  not  the  consequence  but  the  reverse  of 
the  other,  and  accordingly  they  are  opposed  to  each  other  in  co 
ordinated  passages,  Ps.  xviii.  26  f.     The  Vav  in  such  antitheses  has 
generally  the  meaning  of  "  and  on  the  other  hand,"  e.g.  Job  viii. 
20,  while  the  LXX.,  Targ.,  Syriac,  and  Jerome  altogether  pass 
over  the  EX  as  if  it  did  not  exist.     Ziegler  translates  :  "  Truly  !  the 
scorner  He  scorneth ; "   but  an  affirmative  CX  does  not  exist,  the 
asseveration  after  the  manner  of  an  oath  is  negative.     Bertheau's 
expedient  would  be  more  acceptable,  by  which  he  makes  the  whole 
of  ver.  34  the  protasis  to  ver.  35  ;  but  if  this  were  intended,  another 
subject  would  not  enter  into  ver.  35.     Thus  34a  and  346  are  two 
independent  parallel  passages ;   D^p'DN  is  the  protasis :    if  as  re 
gards  the  scorners,  i.e.  if  His  conduct  is  directed  to  the  scorners,  so 
He  scorneth.     The  7  denotes  relation,  and  in  this  elliptical  usage  is 
like  the  7  of  superscription,  e.g.  Jer.  xxiii.  9.     N'ln  is  the  emphatic 
avros  :  He  on  the  contrary,  and  in  a  decisive  way  (Evvald,  §  314a£). 
Instead  of  F?l  there  might  have  been  used  DV'p1;  (for  r?i?»  where 
it  occurs  as  a  governing  word,  has  the  accusative,  xix.  28,  Ps. 
cxix.  51),  but  we  do  not  miss  the  object :  if  it  relates  to  scorners 
(thus   also    Lowenstein    translates),   so    it  is    He  in   return    who 
scorneth.    The  LXX.  renders  it:  tcvpio?  virepyfjidvois  dvTirda-creTat,, 
TdTreivois  Se  Si'Scocri  yapiv ;  cf.  Jas.  iv.  6,  1  Pet.  v.  5.     Kin  is  used 
as  a  name  of  God  (Deutsch.  Morgenl.  Zeitschr.  xvi.  400),  on  which 
account  it  is  rendered  like  mrp  by  /cvpios.    A  vTreprjfyavos  (appearing 
above  others,  i  e.  overbearing)  is  the  fv?  according  to  the  definition 
xxi.  24.     The  expression  of  the  talio   is  generalized  in  avrirdcr- 
c-e-rai  (resists  them).     For  D"jy  the  Keri  has  D'lay :  lay  (from  nay, 

'  *T-;Tr\  T  T  / 

the  ground-form  lay,  Arab,  'anaiv)  is  the  lowly  (raTreii/o?),  or  he 
who  bends  himself,  i.e.  the  gentle  and  humble,  the  patient,  and 
the  passive  'ay,  he  who  is  bowed  down,  the  suffering;  but  the  limits 
of  the  conception  are  moveable,  since  in  'ay  is  presupposed  the 
possession  of  fruit-virtues  gained  in  the  school  of  affliction, 


104  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Ver.  35.  This  group  of  the  proverbs  of  wisdom  now  suitably 
closes  with  the  fundamental  contrast  between  the  wise  and  fools  : 
The  wise  shall  inherit  honour, 
But  fools  carry  away  shame. 

If  we  take  By1??*  as  the  object,  then  we  can  scarcely  interpret  the 
clause  :  shame  sweeps  fools  away  (Umbreit,  Zockler,  Bertheau), 
for  D-nn  [Hiph.  of  on]  signifies  (Isa.  Ivii.  14,  Ezek.  xxi.  31)  "  to 
raise  up  anything  high  and  far,"  not  "  to  sweep  away."  Prefer 
able  is  the  rendering  :  roi»9  8'  afaovas  vtyot  a-ripia  (Grcec.  Venet., 
and  similarly  Jerome),  i.e.  only  to  it  do  they  owe  their  celebrity  as 
warning  examples  (Ewald),  to  which  Oetinger  compares  "  whose 
glory  is  in  their  shame,"  Phil.  iii.  19  ;:  but  pS?  is  the  contrary  of 
1123  (glory,  Hab.  ii.  16),  and  therefore  is  as  much  an  object  con 
ception  as  is  the  latter,  35a.  If  it  is  the  object,  then  if  we  take  Dno 
from  ID  after  the  form  of  fa,  Neh.  xiii.  21  =  D^pup  (Hos.  iv.  7), 
it  might  be  rendered  :  Yet  fools  exchange  shame  (Lowenstein). 
But  TiD,  like  the  Arab,  mrr,  transire,  means  properly  to  pass  over 
or  to  wander  over ;  it  is  intransitive,  and  only  in  Hiph.  signifies 
actively  to  exchange.  D*iB  thus  will  be  the  participle  of  D^n  ;  the 
plur.  taken  distributively  (fools  =  whoever  is  only  always  a  fool)  is 
connected  with  the  singular  of  the  predicate.  This  change  in  the 
number  is  here,  however,  more  difficult  than  at  iii.  18,  and  in  other 
places,  where  the  plur.  of  the  part,  permits  the  resolution  into  a 
relative  clause  with  quicungue,  and  more  difficult  than  at  xxviii.  1, 
where  the  sing,  of  the  predicate  is  introduced  by  attraction; 
wherefore  ono  may  be  an  error  in  transcribing  for  D'ono  or 
WO  (Bottcher).  J.  H.  Michaelis  (after  the  Targ.  and  Syr.)  has 
properly  rendered  the  clause :  «  stulti  tollunt  ignominiam  tanquam 
portionem  suam"  adding  "qua  derivato  nomine  norm  dicitur" 
Dnn  signifies,  in  the  language  of  the  sacrificial  worship  and  of 
worship  generally,  to  lift  off  from  anything  the  best  portion,  the 
legitimate  portion  due  to  God  and  the  priesthood  (vid.  at  iii.  9)  ; 
for  which  reason  Rashi  glosses  Dno  by  b  tfnso,  and  Ralbag  by 
•6  rvnjo.  See  xiv.  29.  Honour  is  that  which  the  wise  inherit,  it 
falls  to  them  unsought  as  a  possession,  but  fools  receive  shame  as 
the  offal  (viz.  of  their  foolish  conduct).  The  fut.  and  part,  are  sig 
nificantly  interchanged.  The  life  of  the  wise  ends  in  glory,  but 

1  Jona  Gerundi  renders  it  otherwise  :  "  But  shame  raises  the  fools  high  ;"  i.e. 
only  the  infamous,  he  who  has  no  sense  of  honour,  makes  much  advancement 
out  of  fools. 


CHAP.  iv.  1-4.  105 

fools  inherit  shame;  the  fruit  of  their  conduct  is  shame  and  ever 
more  shame. 


SEVENTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  IV.-V.  6. 
RECOLLECTIONS  OF  HIS  FATHER'S  HOUSE. 

The  means  are  not  yet  exhausted  by  which  the  teacher  of  wisdom 
seeks  to  procure  acceptance  for  his  admonitions  and  warnings,  and 
to  give  them  emphasis.  He  has  introduced  the  importance  of  his 
person  in  order  that  he  might  gain  the  heart  of  the  disciple,  and 
has  presented  as  speaker,  instead  of  himself,  the  revered  person  of 
Wisdom  herself,  who  seeks  to  win,  by  means  of  warnings  and 
promises,  the  souls  of  men. 

Chap.  iv.  1-4.  He  now  confirms  and  explains  the  command  to 
duty  which  he  has  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  whole  (i.  8). 
This  he  does  by  his  own  example,  for  he  relates  from  the  history 
of  his  own  youth,  to  the  circle  of  disciples  by  whom  he  sees  himself 
surrounded,  what  good  doctrine  his  parents  had  taught  him  re 
garding  the  way  of  life  : 

1  Hear,  ye  sons,  the  instruction  of  a  father, 
And  attend  that  ye  may  gain  understanding  ; 

2  For  I  give  to  you  good  doctrine, 
Forsake  not  my  direction  ! 

8  For  I  was  a  son  to  my  father, 

A  tender  and  only  (son)  in  the  sight  of  my  mother. 
4  And  he  instructed  me,  and  said  to  me  : 

"  Let  thine  heart  hold  fast  my  words  : 

Observe  my  commandments  and  live !  " 

That  0*321  in  the  address  comes  here  into  the  place  of  ^2,  hitherto 
used,  externally  denotes  that  ^S  in  the  progress  of  these  discourses 
finds  another  application  :  the  poet  himself  is  so  addressed  by  his 
father.  Intentionally  he  does  not  say  OiriiX  (cf.  i.  8)  :  he  does  not 
mean  the  father  of  each  individual  among  those  addressed,  but 
himself,  who  is  a  father  in  his  relation  to  them  as  his  disciples ; 
and  as  he  manifeots  towards  them  fatherly  love,  so  also  he  can  lay 
claim  to  paternal  authority  over  them.  njn;>  is  rightly  vocalized, 
not  njnp.  The  words  do  not  give  the  object  of  attention,  but  the 
design,  the  aim.  The  combination  of  ideas  in  nra  run  (cf.  i.  2), 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

which  appears  to  us  singular,  loses  its  strangeness  when  we  remem 
ber  tbat  njn  means,  according  to  its  etymon,  deposition  or  reception 
into  the  conscience  and  life.  Regarding  n|X>.  apprehension,  recep 
tion,  lesson  =  doctrine,  vid.  i.  5.  ^iru  is  tbe  perf.,  wbicli  denotes 
as  fixed  and  finished  what  is  just  now  being  done,  Gesenius, 
§  126,  4.  2_TJ?  is  here  synonym  of  B<:i?3,  i.  8,  and  tlie  contrary  of 
"U?tJ>,  xxviii.  4.  The  relative  factum  in  the  perfect,  designating 
the  circumstances  under  which  the  event  happened,  regularly  pre 
cedes  the  chief  factum  ^} ;  see  under  Gen.  i.  2  f.  Superficially 
understood,  the  expression  3a  would  be  a  platitude  ;  the  author 
means  that  the  natural  legal  relation  was  also  confirming  itself  as  a 
moral  one.  It  was  a  relation  of  many-sided  love,  according  to  3a : 
he  was  esteemed  of  his  mother — *jjB7,  used  of  the  reflex  in  the 
judgment,  Gen.  x.  9,  and  of  loving  care,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  means 
ihis — as  a  tender  child,  and  therefore  tenderly  to  be  protected  (^11 
us  Gen.  xxxiii.  13),  and  as  an  only  child,  whether  he  were  so  in 
reality,  or  was  only  loved  as  if  he  were  so.  TIT  (Aq.,  Sym., 
Theod,,  fjiovoyevijs)  may  with  reference  to  number  also  mean  unice 
dilectus  (LXX.  dyaTrco/jievos] ;  cf.  Gen.  xxii.  2,  TVT.  (where  the 
LXX.  translate  rbv  dyaTrrjTov,  without  therefore  having  TVT. 
before  them).  ""JS?  is  maintained  by  all  the  versions;  V.^r  is  not  a 
variant.1  The  instruction  of  the  father  begins  with  the  jussive, 
which  is  pointed8  "=19^1  to  distinguish  it  from  ~^orp  on  account  of 
the  tf.  The  LXX.  has  incorrectly  epetSera),  as  if  the  word  were  IDD"1; 
Symmachus  has  correctly  /care^ero).  The  imper.  !T,rn  is,  as  vii.  2, 
Gen.  xx.  7,  more  than  rrnni ;  the  teacher  seeks,  along  with  the 
means,  at  the  same  time  their  object :  Observe  my  commandments, 
and  so  become  a  partaker  of  life !  The  Syriac,  however,  adds 
Try  jit^N3  Tnirn  [and  my  instruction  as  the  apple  of  thine  eye],  a 
clause  borrowed  from  vii.  2. 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  exhortation  of  the  father  now  specializes  itself: 
5  Get  wisdom,  get  understanding; 

Forget  not  and  turn  not  from  the  words  of  my  mouth. 

1  In  some  editions  )}y?  is  noted  as  Keri  to  13 fi^,  but  erroneously  and  contrary 
to  the  express  evidence  of  the  Masora,  which  affirms  that  there  are  two  passages 
in  which  we  ought  to  read  not  ^a^>,  but  ^3$J,  viz.  Ps.  Ixxx.  3  and  Prov.  iv.  3. 

2  The  writing  of  "Fjorv  with  the  grave  Metheg  (Gaja)  and  Kamets-Chatuph 
(o)  is  that  of  Ben  Asher  ;  on  the  other  hand,  'TjbD*  with  Cholem  (o)  and  the 
permanent  Metheg  is  that  of  Ben  Naphtali ;  vid.  Michlol  2la  (under  the  verbal 
form  25).  §  30. 


CHAP.  iv.  7-9.  107 

6  Forsake  her  not,  so  shall  she  preserve  thee ; 
Love  her,  so  shall  she  keep  thee. 

Wisdom  and  understanding  are  (5a)  thought  of  as  objects  of 
merchandise  (cf.  xxiii.  23,  iii.  14),  like  the  one  pearl  of  great 
price,  Matt.  xiii.  46,  and  the  words  of  fatherly  instruction  (5&), 
accordingly,  as  offering  this  precious  possession,  or  helping  to  the 
acquisition  of  it.  One  cannot  indeed  say  correctly  "^""nEKO  rDB>JT"7K, 
but  'B-nox  nbBto  rotwrfo  (Ps.  cii.  5) ;  and  in  "this  sense  rGBJrrfo 
goes  before,  or  also  the  accus.  object,  which  in  PISW^S  the  author 
has  in  his  mind,  may,  since  he  continues  with  BrrPX,  now  not 
any  longer  find  expression  as  such.  That  the  ''Sr'niDX  are  the 
means  of  acquiring  wisdom  is  shown  in  ver.  6,  where  this  continues 
to  be  the  primary  idea.  The  verse,  consisting  of  only  four  words, 
ought  to  be  divided  by  Mugrasli  ;l  the  Vav  (i)  in  both  halves  of 
the  verse  introduces  the  apodosis  imperativi  (cf.  e.g.  iii.  9  f.,  and 
the  apodosis  prohibitivi,  iii.  21  f.).  The  actual  representation  of 
wisdom,  ver.  5,  becomes  in  ver.  6  personal. 

Vers.  7-9.  Referring  to  ver.  5,  the  father  further  explains  that 
wisdom  begins  with  the  striving  after  it,  and  that  this  striving  is 
itself  its  fundamental  beginning: 

7  The  beginning  of  wisdom  is  "  Get  wisdom," 

And  with  [urn,  at  the  price  of]  all  thou  hast  gotten  get  understanding. 

8  Esteem  her,  so  shall  she  lift  thee  up ; 

She  will  bring  thee  honour  if  thou  dost  embrace  her. 

9  She  will  put  on  thine  head  a  graceful  garland, 
She  will  bestow  upon  thee  a  glorious  diadem. 

In  the  motto  of  the  book,  i.  7,  the  author  would  say  that  the  fear 
of  Jahve  is  that  from  which  all  wisdom  takes  its  origin,  niiT  nx"P 

O  T    :        -  :  • 

(i.  7)  is  the  subject,  and  as  such  it  stands  foremost.  Here  he 
means  to  say  what  the  beginning  of  wisdom  consists  in.  ™2?n  JVPiO 
is  the  subject,  and  stands  forth  as  such.  The  predicate  may  also 
be  read  noarrnij?  (  =  rrijp),  after  xvi.  16.  The  beginning  of  wis 
dom  is  (consists  in)  the  getting  of  wisdom;  but  the  imperative 
nap,  which  also  Aq.,  Sym.,  Theod.  (/rr^crat),  Jerome,  Syr.,  Targ. 
express  (the  LXX.  leaves  ver.  7  untranslated),  is  supported  by  11. 
Hitzig,  after  Mercier,  De  Dieu,  and  Doderlein,  translates  the  verse 

1  According  to  correct  readings  in  codd.  and  older  editions,  spDBTll  has 
also  indeed  Rebia  Mugrash,  and  POnS,  Mercha  (with  ZinnoritJi) ;  vid.  Torath 
Emcth,  p.  47,  §  6  ;  Accentuationssystcm,  xviii.  §1,2;  and  regarding  the  Zin- 
norUh,  see  Liber  Fsalmorum  Hebraicus  by  S.  Baer,  p.  xii. 


108  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVECCS. 

thus:  "the  highest  thing  is  wisdom  ;  get  wisdom,"  which  Zockler 
approves  of;  but  the  reasons  which  determine  him  to  this  render 
ing  are  subtleties:  if  the  author  had  wished  himself  to  be  so 
understood,  he  ought  at  least  to  have  written  the  words  HEOnn  JVK'iO. 
But  ncan  rPK'SO  is  a  genitive  of  relation,  as  is  to  be  expected  from 
the  relativity  of  the  idea  rppsn,  and  his  intention  is  to  say  that  the 
beginning  of  wisdom  consists  in  the  proposition  '"icsn  rrjjp  (cf.  the 
similar  formula,  Eccles.  xii.  13)  ;  this  proposition  is  truly  the  lapis 
philosophorum,  it  contains  all  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  becom 
ing  wise.  Therefore  the  Greek  <ro(pta  called  itself  modestly  <pt\o- 
a-o(f>la',  for  upffl  aim}?  the  Book  of  Wisdom  has,  vi.  18,  f)  a\rjdecrTdrr) 
iraiSetas  e-jridvpla.  In  76  the  proposition  is  expressed  which  con 
tains  the  specificum  helping  to  wisdom.  The  2  denotes  price  : 
give  all  for  wisdom  (Matt.  xiii.  46,  44)  ;  no  price  is  too  high,  no 
sacrifice  too  great  for  it. 

Ver.  8.  The  meaning  of  the  avr.  yeyp.  i^p  is  determined  by 
CEi")  in  the  parallel  clause  ;  <?D  signifies  to  raise,  exalt,  as  a  way  or 
darn  by  heaping  up  ;  the  Pilpel,  here  tropical  :  to  value  or  estimate 
highly.  Bottcher  interprets  well  :  hold  it  high  in  price,  raise  it 
(as  a  purchaser)  always  higher,  make  offer  for  it  upon  offer.  The 
LXX.  (approved  by  Bertheau),  irepi^apaKwaov  avrijv,  circura- 
vallate  it,  i.e.  surround  it  with  a  wall  (n&D)  —  a  strange  and  here 
unsuitable  figure.  Hold  it  high,  says  the  author,  and  so  it  will 
reward1  thee  with  a  high  place,  and  (with  chiastic  transposition  of 
the  performance  and  the  consequence)  she  will  honour2  thee  if 
(lav)  thou  lovingly  embracest  her.  p3H  is  used  of  embracing  in 
the  pressure  of  tender  love,  as  in  the  Canticles  ii.  6,  viii.  3  ;  the 
Piel  is  related  to  the  Kal  as  arnplexari  to  amplecti.  Wisdom 
exalts  her  admirers,  honours  her  lovers,  and  makes  a  man's  appear 
ance  pleasant,  causing  him  to  be  reverenced  when  he  approaches. 
Regarding  jrrrn),  md.  i.  9.  ?SO,  to  deliver  up  (Gen.  xiv.  20),  to 
give  up  (Hos.  xi.  8),  is  connected  in  the  free  poetic  manner  'with 
two  accusatives,  instead  of  with  an  accus.  and  dat.  LXX.  has 
vTrepacrTTia-r),  but  one  does  not  defend  himself  (as  with  a  shield)  by 
a  wreath  or  crown. 


1  Lowenstein  has  rightly  -pttrini,  vid.  my  preface  to  Baer's  Genesis,  p.  vii. 

2  TVe  read  713311,  not  ^naan  (Hahn)  or  <?nzi3n  (Lowenstein);  the  tone 
lies  on  the  penult.,  and  the  toue-syllable  has  the  point  Tsere,  as  in  ^p3''l,  Deut. 

ii.  7  ;  vid.  Michlol  G66. 


CHAP.  iv.  ic-i7.  ICO 

Vers.  10-12.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  supposition  that  the 
warning  which  his  father  gave  to  the  poet  now  passes  over  into 
warnings  given  by  the  poet  himself  (Hitzig)  ;  the  admonition  of 
the  father  thus  far  refers  only  in  general  to  the  endeavour  after 
wisdom,  and  we  are  led  to  expect  that  the  good  doctrines  which 
the  father  communicates  to  the  son  as  a  viaticum  will  be  further 
expanded,  and  become  more  and  more  specific  when  they  take  a 
new  departure. 

10  Hearken,  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings, 
So  shall  the  years  of  life  be  increased  to  thee. 

11  In  the  way  of  wisdom  have  I  taught  thee, 
Guided  thee  in  the  paths  of  rectitude. 

12  When  thou  goest,  thy  step  shall  not  be  straitened  ; 
And  if  thou  runnest,  thou  shalt  not  stumble. 

Regarding  n£  (of  Hj37)  of  appropriating  reception  and  taking  up 
in  succum  et  sanguinem,  vid.  i.  3  ;  regarding  D"fn  ni3E>,  years  not 
merely  of  the  duration  of  life,  but  of  the  enjoyment  of  life,  iii.  2  ; 
regarding  ty[B  (njjjns),  path  (track),  ii.  9 ;  regarding  the  3  of 
rriin,  of  the  department  and  subject  of  instruction,  Ps.  xxv.  8. 
The  perfects,  ver.  11,  are  different  from  W13,  2a;  they  refer  to 
rules  of  life  given  at  an  earlier  period,  which  are  summarily  re 
peated  in  this  address.  The  way  of  wisdom  is  that  which  leads  to 
wisdom  (Job  xxviii.  23) ;  the  paths  of  rectitude,  such  as  trace  out 
the  way  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  the  good  and  the 
right.  If  the  youth  holds  to  this  direction,  he  will  not  go  on  in 
darkness  or  uncertainty  with  anxious  footsteps  ;  and  if  in  youthful 
fervour  he  flies  along  his  course,  he  will  not  stumble  on  any  un 
foreseen  obstacle  and  fall,  i^.l  is  as  a  metaplastic  fut.  to  "HV  or 
"ilV,  to  be  narrow,  to  straiten,  formed  as  if  from  1VJ.  The  Targ. 
after  Aruch,1  "jinK  p2BTi  &6,  thou  shalt  not  need  to  bind  together 
(constringere)  or  to  hedge  up  thy  way. 

Vers.  13-17.  The  exhortations  attracting  by  means  of  promises, 
now  become  warnings  fitted  to  alarm  : 

13  Hold  fast  to  instruction,  let  her  not  go ; 
Keep  her,  for  she  is  thy  life. 

14  Into  the  path  of  the  wicked  enter  not, 
And  walk  not  in  the  way  of  the  evil. 

1  [R.  Nathan  ben  Jechiel,  A.D.  1106,  who  is  usually  styled  by  the  Jewish 
\v liters  "-niy  bj?3»  Auctor  Aruch,  author  of  a  Talmudical  Lexicon.] 


110  THE  DOOK  OF  PRCVIIRDS. 

15  Avoid  it,  enter  not  into  it; 
Turn  from  it  and  pass  away. 

1 6  For  they  cannot  sleep  unless  they  do  evil, 

And  they  are  deprived  of  sleep  unless  they  bring  others  to  ruin. 

17  For  they  eat  the  bread  of  wickedness, 
And  they  drink  the  wine  of  violence. 

Elsewhere  "i2*O  means  also  self-discipline,  or  moral  religious  edu 
cation,  i.  3  ;  here  discipline,  i.e.  parental  educative  counsel,  ^n  is 
the  segolated  fut.  apoc.  Iliph.  (indie.  na~in)  from  tarp,  cf.  the 
imper.  Hi  ph.  ^P?  from  harp.  n}3M  is  the  imper.  Kal  (not  Piel,  as 
Aben  Ezra  thinks)  with  Dagesh  dirimens;  cf.  the  verbal  substan 
tive  nnSJj  Ps.  cxli.  3,  with  similar  Dagesh,  after  the  form  nnj5^  Gen. 
xlix.  10.  IDIE  (elsewhere  always  masc.)  is  here  used  in  the  fern, 
as  the  synonym  of  the  name  of  wisdom  :  keep  her  (instruction), 
for  she  is  thy  life,1  i.e.  the  life  of  thy  life.  In  ver.  14  the  godless 
(vid.  on  the  root-idea  of  J?'^"J  under  Ps.  i.  1)  and  the  habitually 
wicked,  i.e.  the  vicious,  stnnd  in  parallelism ;  N12  and  "i$K  are  re 
lated  as  entering  and  going  on,  ingressus  and  progressus.  The 
verb  "it?:N  signifies,  like  ">^,  to  be  straight,  even,  fortunate,  whence 
"KPN  =  Arab,  yusdr,  happiness,  and  to  step  straight  out,  ix.  6,  of 
which  meanings  lu'N  is  partly  the  intensive,  as  here,  partly  the 
causative,  xxiii.  19  (elsewhere  causative  of  the  meaning,  to  be 
happy,  Gen.  xxx.  13).  The  meaning  progredi  is  not  mediated  by 
a  supplementary,  VlJJV;  the  derivative  "Wtf  ("tt$K),  a  step,  shows 
that  it  is  derived  immediately  from  the  root-idea  of  a  movement  in  a 
straight  line.  Still  less  justifiable  is  the  rendering  by  Schultens,  ne 
vestigia  imprimas  in  via  malorum ;  for  the  Arab,  dththr  is  denom.  of 
ithr,  "ins,  the  primitive  verb  roots  of  which,  athr,  "ins="i^'K,  are  lost. 

Ver.  15.  On  *njnB,  avoid  it  (the  way),  (opp.  Tn«,  Job  xvii.  9; 
SJOPl,  Ps.  xvii.  5),  see  under  i.  25.  n9r'>  elsewhere  (as  the  Arab. 
shaft,  to  be  without  measure,  insolent)  used  in  malani  partem,  has 
here  its  fundamental  meaning,  to  go  aside,  l;5^  (expressed  in 
French  by  de  dessns,  in  Ital.  by  di  sopra)  denotes :  so  that  thou 
comest  not  to  stand  on  it.  "Qy  means  in  both  cases  transire,  but 
the  second  instance,  "  to  go  beyond  (farther)  "  (cf.  2  Sam.  xv.  -^, 
and  under  Hab.  i.  11),  coincides  with  "  to  escape,  evadem" 

Ver.  16.  In  the  reason  here  given  the  perf.  may  stand  in  the  con- 

1  Punctuate  xsn  "Q  ;  the  Zinnorith  represents  the  placo  of  the  MakkepJi,  rid. 
Torath  Emeth,  p. '9. 


CHAP.  IV.  17- ID.  1  1  1 

ditional  clauses  as  well  as  in  Virgil's  Et  si  non  aliqua  nocuisses, 
mortuus  esses  ;  but  the  fut.,  as  in  Eccles.  v.  11,  denotes  that  they 
(the  0s JH  and  the  CJ^Kh)  cannot  sleep,  and  are  deprived  of  their 
sleep,  unless  they  are  continually  doing  evil  and  bringing  others 
into  misery ;  the  interruption  of  this  course  of  conduct,  which  has 
become  to  them  like  a  second  nature,  would  be  as  the  interruption 
of  their  dietj  which  makes  them  ill.  For  the  Kal  WB?*,  which 
here  must  have  the  meaning  of  the  person  sinning  (cf.  ver.  19), 
and  would  be  feeble  if  used  of  the  confirmed  transgressors,  the 

L 

Keri  rightly  substitutes  the  Hiphil  ^T?!,  which  occurs  also  2  Chron. 
xxv.  8,  there  without  an  object,  in  the  meaning  to  cause  to  fall,  as 
the  contrast  of  ">Ty  (to  help). 

Ver.  17.  The  second  *3  introduces  the  reason  of  their  bodily 
welfare  being  conditioned  by  evil-doing.  If  the  poet  meant:  they 
live  on  bread  which  consists  in  wickedness,  i.e.  on  wickedness  as 
their  bread,  then  in  the  parallel  sentence  he  should  have  used  the 
word  DDH;  the  genitives  are  meant  of  the  means  of  acquisition: 
they  live  on  unrighteous  gain,  on  bread  and  wine  which  they 
procure  by  wickedness  and  by  all  manner  of  violence  or  injustice. 
On  the  etymon  of  DDH  (Arab,  hamas,  durum,  asperum,  vehernentem 
esse),  vid.  Schultens;  the  plur.  B'pon  belongs  to  a  more  recent 
epoch  (vid.  under  2  Sam.  xxii.  49  and  Ps.  xviii.  49).  The  change 
in  the  tense  represents  the  idea  that  they  having  eaten  such  bread, 
set  forth  such  wine,  and  therewith  wash  it  down. 

Vers.  18,  19.  The  two  ways  that  lie  for  his  choice  before  the 
youth,  are  distinguished  from  one  another  as  light  is  from  dark 
ness  : 

18  And  the  path  of  the  just  is  like  the  brightness  of  the  morning  light, 
Which  shines  more  and  more  till  the  perfect  day. 

19  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  deep  darkness, 
They  know  not  at  what  they  stumble. 

The  Hebr.  style  is  wont  to  conceal  in  its  Vav  (1)  diverse  kinds  of 
logical  relations,  but  the  Vav  of  18^  may  suitably  stand  before 
19a,  where  the  discontinuance  of  this  contrast  of  the  two  ways 
is  unsuitable.  The  displacing  of  a  Vav  from  its  right  position  is 
not  indeed  without  example  (see  under  Ps.  xvi.  3) ;  but  since 
ver.  19  joins  itself  more  easily  than  ver.  18  to  ver.  17  without 
missing  a  particle,  thus  it  is  more  probable  that  the  two  verses  are 
to  be  transposed,  than  that  the  1  of  rnjtt  (ver.  17)  is  to  be  prefixed  to 
!j"rn  (ver.  18).  Sinning,  says  ver.  16,  lias  become  to  the  godless  as 


112  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEHDS. 

a  second  nature,  so  that  they  cannot  sleep  without  it ;  they  must 
continually  be  sinning,  adds  ver.  17,  for  thus  and  not  otherwise  do 
they  gain  for  themselves  their  daily  bread.  With  reference  to  this 
fearful  self-perversion  to  which  wickedness  has  become  a  necessity 
and  a  condition  of  life,  the  poet  further  says  that  the  way  of  the 
godless  is  npDXS,1  as  deep  darkness,  as  the  entire  absence  of  light : 
it  cannot  be  otherwise  than  that  they  fall,  but  they  do  not  at  all 
know  whereat  they  fall,  for  they  do  not  at  all  know  wickedness 
as  such,  and  have  no  apprehension  of  the  punishment  which  from 
an  inward  necessity  it  brings  along  with  it ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
path  of  the  just  is  in  constantly  increasing  light — the  light  of 
knowledge,  and  the  light  of  true  happiness  which  is  given2  in  and 
with  knowledge.  On  HQ2  vid.  under  Isa.  ii.  22  ;  it  is  ^3£>,  <TKU.V- 
SaA.oi>,  that  is  meant,  stumbling  against  which  (cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  37) 
they  stumble  to  their  fall.  HJi,3  used  elsewhere  than  in  the  Bible, 
means  the  morning  star  (Venus),  (Sirach  1.  4,  Syr.)  ;  when  used 
in  the  Bible  it  means  the  early  dawn,  the  light  of  the  rising  sun, 
the  morning  light,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  4,  Isa.  Ixii.  1,  which  announces 
itself  in  the  morning  twilight,  Dan.  vi.  20.  The  light  of  this 
morning  sunshine  is  ")iKJ  ^in,  going  and  shining,  i.e.  becoming 
ever  brighter.  In  the  connection  of  "liXJ  ^in  it  might  be  a  question 

1  In  good  MSS.  and  printed  copies  the  3  has  the  Pathach,  as  Kimchi  states  the 
rule  in  Michlolloa:  nna  n^2N3  ^3,  fins  D'OnXS  ^3. 

2  Hitzig  inverts  the  order  of  vers.  18  and  19,  and  connects  the  13  of  IGa 
immediately  with  ver.  19  (for  the  way  of  the  wicked  .  .  .).      He  moreover 
regards  vers.  16,  17  as  an  interpolation,  and  explains  ver.  16  as  a  gloss  trans 
forming  the  text  of  ver.   19.     "  That  the  wicked  commit  wickedness,"  says 
Hitzig,  "  is  indeed  certain  (1  Sam.    xxiv.  14),  and  the  warning  of  ver.  15 
ought  not  to  derive  its  motive  from  their  energy  in  sinning."     But  the  warning 
against  the  way  of  the  wicked  is  founded  not  on  their  energy  in  sinning,  but  on 
their  bondage  to  sin  :  their  sleep,  their  food  and  drink — their  life  both  when 
they  sleep  and  when  they  wake — is  conditioned  by  sin  and  is  penetrated  by 
sin.      This  foundation  of  the  warning  furnishes  what  is  needed,  and  is  in 
nothing  open  to  objection.     And  that  in  vers.  16  and  19  }JJT  &6  and  qjn"  N^>, 
\fitfy  and  17tf'3>,  nfyjJ  and  n^ESS  seem  to  be  alike,  does  not  prove  that  ver. 
16  originated  as  a  parallel  text  from  ver.  19 — in  the  one  verse  as  in  the  other 
the  thoughts  are  original. 

3  Bottcher,  under  2  Sam.  xxiii.  4,  explains  PUD  of  the  brightness  striking 
against,  conquering  (cf.  niJ,  fp3)  the  clouds ;  but  ferlre  or  percutere  lies  nearer 
(cf.  yjj,  Ezek.  xvii.  10,  raj,  Ps.  cxxi.  6,  and  the  Arab,  darb,  used  of  strong 
sensible  impressions),  as  Silius,  iv.  329,  says  of  the  light:  percussit  lumine 
campos. 


CHAP.  IV.  20-22.  113 

whether  lis  is  regarded  as  gerundive  (Gen.  viii.  3,  5),  or  as 
participle  (2  Sam.  xvi.  5,  Jer.  xli.  6),  or  as  a  participial  adjective 
(Gen.  xxvi.  13,  Judg.  iv.  24)  ;  in  the  connection  of  "liNI  !p?n,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  unquestionably  the  gerundive:  the  partic.  denoting 
the  progress  joins  itself  either  with  the  partic.,  Jon.  i.  11,  or  with 
the  participial  adjective,  2  Sam.  iii.  1,  2  Chron.  xvii.  12,  or  with 
another  adjective  formation,  2  Sam.  xv.  12,  Esth.  ix.  4  (where 
sty]  after  «nJl  of  other  places  appears  to  be  intended  as  an  adjective, 
not  after  2  Sam.  v.  10  as  gerundive).  Thus  "rifcO,  as  also  3it3J,  1 
Sam.  ii.  26,  will  be  participial  after  the  form  B>'}3,  being  ashamed 
(Ges.  §  72,  1)  ;  cf.  D13,  Zech.  x.  5,  Dip,  2  Kings  xvi.  7.  "  Disn  )i23 
quite  corresponds  to  the  Greek  TO  ffraffrjpbv  TJ)V  ^/-tepaq,  -f)  araO^pa 
(as  one  also  says  TO  (rradrjpov  T??9  VVKTOS),  and  to  tiie 


Arabic  jl^jJi  Lv(i  and  ^J^laSl  LV\J.      The  figure  is  probably  de 

rived  from  the  balance  (cf.  Lucan's  Pharsalia,  lib.  9  :  qnum  car- 
dine  summo  Stat  librata  dies)  :  before  and  after  midday  the 
tongue  on  the  balance  of  the  day  bends  to  the  left  and  to  the 
right,  but  at  the  point  of  midday  it  stands  directly  in  the  midst" 
(Fleischer).  It  is  the  midday  time  that  is  meant,  when  the  clear 
ness  of  day  has  reached  its  fullest  intensity,  —  the  point  between 
increasing  and  decreasing,  when,  as  we  are  wont  to  say,  the 
sun  stands  in  the  zenith  (  =  Arab.  samt,  the  point  of  support, 
i.e.  the  vertex).  Besides  Mark  iv.  28,  there  is  no  biblical  pas 
sage  which  presents  like  these  two  a  figure  of  gradual  develop 
ment.  The  progress  of  blissful  knowledge  is  compared  to  that 
of  the  clearness  of  the  day  till  it  reaches  its  midday  height,  having 
reached  to  which  it  becomes  a  knowing  of  all  in  God,  xxviii.  5, 
1  John  ii.  20. 

Vers.  20-22.   The  paternal   admonition  now  takes  a  new  de 
parture  : 

20  My  son,  attend  unto  my  words, 
Incline  thine  ear  to  my  sayings. 

21  Let  them  not  depart  from  thine  eyes  ; 
Keep  them  in  the  midst  of  thine  heart. 

22  For  they  are  life  to  all  who  get  possession  of  them, 
And  health  to  their  whole  body. 

Regarding  the  Hiph.  r?>n  (for  t^n),  ver.  21,  formed  after  the 
Chaldee  manner  like  rk»,  D^n,  JMsn,  vid.  Gesenius,  §  72,  9;—  Evvald, 
§  114,  c,  gives  to  it  the  meaning  of  "  to  mock,"  for  he  interchanges 

VOL.  I.  II 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

it  with  pvHj  instead  of  the  meaning  to  take  away,  efficere  tit  recedat 
(cf.  under  ii.  15).  This  supposed  causative  meaning  it  has  also 
here:  may  they  =  may  one  (vid.  under  ii.  22)  not  remove  them 
from  thine  eyes  ;  the  object  is  (ver.  20)  the  words  of  the  paternal 
admonition.  Hitzig,  indeed,  observes  that  "the  accusative  is  not 
supplied  ;  "  but  with  greater  right  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  V7! 
(fut.  Hipli.  of  pb)  and  W1  (fut.  Kal  of  id.}  are  not  one  and  the 
same,  and  the  less  so  as  rpn  is  not,  like  Ppn,  intrinsically  transi 
tive.  Here  and  there  ttvj  occurs,  but  the  masoretical  and  gram 
matical  authorities  (e.g.  Ivimchi)  demand  ir?\  The  plur.  DrVNVb!? 
is  continued,  22&,  in  the  sing.,  for  that  which  is  said  refers  to 
each  one  of  the  many  (iii.  18,  28,  35).  NVO  is  fundamentally  an 
active  conception,  like  our  "finden"  to  find  ;  it  means  to  attain,  to 
produce,  to  procure,  etc.  N3"l?  means,  according  as  the  D  is 
Tinderstood  of  the  "that  =  Mi"  of  the  action  or  of  the  "what"  of 
its  performance,  either  health  or  the  means  of  health  ;  here,  like 
HlKS"!,  iii.  8,  not  with  the  underlying  conception  of  sickness,  but 
of  the  fluctuations  connected  with  the  bodily  life  of  man,  which 
make  needful  not  only  a  continual  strengthening  of  it,  but  also  its 
being  again  and  again  restored.  Nothing  preserves  soul  and  body 
in  a  healthier  state  than  when  we  always  keep  before  our  eyes  and 
carry  in  our  hearts  the  good  doctrines  ;  they  give  to  us  true  guidance 
on  the  way  of  life  :  "  Godliness  has  the  promise  of  this  life,  and 
of  that  which  is  to  come."  1  Tim.  iv.  8. 

Vers.  23-27.    After  this  general  preface  the  exhortation  now 
becomes  special  : 

23  Above  all  other  things  that  are  to  be  guarded,  keep  thy  heart, 
For  out  from  it  life  has  its  issues. 

24  Put  away  from  thee  perverseness  of  mouth, 
And  waywardness  of  lips  put  far  from  thee. 

25  Thine  eyes  should  look  straight  forward, 

And  thine  eyelids  look  straight  to  the  end  before  thee. 

26  Make  even  the  path  of  thy  feet, 
And  let  all  thy  ways  be  correct. 

27  Turn  not  aside  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  ; 
Remove  thy  foot  from  evil. 


Although  i»lpp  in  itself  and  in  this  connection  may  mean  the 
object  to  be  watchfully  avoided  (cavendi)  (vid.  under  ii.  20ft)  : 
thus  the  usage  of  the  language  lying  before  us  applies  it,  yet 
only  as  denoting  the  place  of  watching  or  the  object  obtervandi  ; 
so  that  it  is  not  to  be  thus  explained,  with  Ruschi  and  others:  before 


CHAP.  IV.  23-27.  115 

all  from  which  one  has  to  protect  himself  (ab  omni  re  cavenda), 
guard  thine  heart ;  but :  before  all  that  one  has  to  guard  (prce  omni 
re  custodienda),  guard  it  as  the  most  precious  of  possessions  com 
mitted  to  thy  trust.  The  heart,  which  according  to  its  etymon 
denotes  that  which  is  substantial  (Kernhafte)  in  man  (cf.  Arab. 
lubb,  the  kernel  of  the  nut  or  almond),  comes  here  into  view  not 
as  the  physical,  but  as  the  intellectual,  and  specially  the  ethical 
centrum. 

Ver.  24.  The  nis^'in  are  the  point  of  a  thing,  e.g.  of  a  boundary, 
from  which  it  goes  forth,  and  the  linear  course  proceeding  from 
thence.  If  thus  the  author  says  that  the  D^n  nixyin  g0  out  from 
the  heart,1  he  therewith  implies  that  the  life  has  not  only  its 
fountain  in  the  heart,  but  also  that  the  direction  which  it  takes  is 
determined  by  the  heart.  Physically  considered,  the  heart  is  the 
receptacle  for  the  blood,  in  which  the  soul  lives  and  rules;  the 
pitcher  at  the  blood-fountain  which  draws  it  and  pours  it  forth ; 
the  chief  vessel  of  the  physically  self-subsisting  blood-life  from 
which  it  goes  forth,  and  into  which  it  disembogues  (Syst.  der  bib. 
Ptychol.  p.  232).  What  is  said  of  the  heart  in  the  lower  sense 
of  corporeal  vitality,  is  true  in  the  higher  sense  of  the  intellectual 
soul-life.  The  Scripture  names  the  heart  also  as  the  intellectual 
soul-centre  of  man,  in  its  concrete,  central  unity,  its  dynamic 
activity,  and  its  ethical  determination  on  all  sides.  All  the 
radiations  of  corporeal  and  of  soul  life  concentrate  there,  and 
again  unfold  themselves  from  thence;  all  that  is  implied  in  the 
Hellenic  and  Hellenistic  words  i/oD?,  \6yos,  trw/eu^o-i?,  0u/zo<?,  lies 
in  the  word  KapSia ;  and  all  whereby  nfe>3  (the  body)  and  B>a3  (the 
spirit,  anima)  are  affected  comes  in  &  into  the  light  of  conscious 
ness  (Id.  p.  251).  The  heart  is  the  instrument  of  the  thinking, 
willing,  perceiving  life  of  the  spirit;  it  is  the  seat  of  the  knowledge 
of  self,  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  of  the  knowledge  of  our  relation 
to  God,  and  also  of  the  law  of  God  impressed  on  our  moral  nature; 
it  is  the  workshop  of  our  individual  spiritual  and  ethical  form  of 
life  brought  about  by  self-activity,— the  life  in  its  higher  and  in 
its  lower  sense  goes  out  from  it,  and  receives  from  it  the  impulse 
of  the  direction  which  it  takes ;  and  how  earnestly,  therefore,  must 
we  feel  ourselves  admonished,  how  sacredly  bound  to  preserve  the 
heart  in  purity  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  1),  so  that  from  this  spring  of  life  may 

1  The  correct  form  here  is  WDD"1:),  with  the  Makkeph  to  '3. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


go  fortli  not  mere  seeming  life  and  a  caricature  of  life,  but  a  true 
life  well-pleasing  to  God  !  How  we  have  to  cany  into  execution 
this  careful  guarding  of  the  heart,  is  shown  in  ver.  24  and  the 
golden  rules  which  follow.  Mouth  and  lips  are  meant  (ver.  24) 
as  instruments  of  speech,  and  not  of  its  utterance,  but  of  the  speech 
going  forth  from  them.  niB>j3jr,  distorsio,  refers  to  the  mouth 
(vi.  12),  when  what  it  speaks  is  disfiguring  and  deforming,  thus 
falsehood  as  the  contrast  of  truth  and  love  (ii.  12);  and  to  the  lips 
T\vh,  when  that  which  they  speak  turns  aside  from  the  true  and 
the  right  to  side-ways  and  by-ways.  Since  the  Kametz  of  such 
abstracta,  as  well  of  verbs  l"y  like  m»-J,  Ezek.  xxxii.  5,  as  of 
verbs  n"^  like  n£a,  Isa.  xlv.  13,  nitn,  Isa.  xxviii.  18,  is  elsewhere 
treated  as  unalterable,  there  lies  in  this  rfiTj"  either  an  inconsistency 
of  punctuation,  or  it  is  presupposed  that  the  form  tW?  was  vocal 
ized  like  rvQB>  =  IV:3B>,  Num.  xxi.  29. 

Ver.  25.  Another  rule  commends  gathering  together  (concen 

tration)  in   opposition   to   dissipation.     It  is   also   even   externally 

regarded  worthy  of  consideration,  as  Ben-Sira,  ix.  5,  expresses  it  : 

M  Tre/H/SXeVov  iv  /ou/nat?  TroXew?  —  purposeless,  curious    staring 

about  operates  upon  the   soul,  always    decentralizing    and    easily 

defiling  it.     But  the  rule  does  not  exhaust  itself  in  this  meaning 

with  reference  to  external  self-discipline;  it  counsels  also  straight 

forward,  unswerving  directness  toward  a  fixed  goal  (and  what  else 

can  this  be  in  such  a  connection  than  that  which  wisdom  places 

before  man1?),  without  the  turning  aside  of  the  eye  toward  that 

which  is  profitless  and  forbidden,  and  in  this  inward  sense  it  falls 

in  with  the  demand  for  a  single,  not  squinting  eye,  Matt.  vi.  22, 

where  Bengel   explains  aTrXoO?  by  simplex  et  bonus,   intentus   in 

ccelum,  in  Deum,  unice.      rai    (R.  -p)   means  properly  fixing,  or 

holding  fast  with  the  look,  and  1M  (as  the  Arab,  najad,  to  be  clear, 

to  be  in  sight,  shows)  the  rising  up  which  makes  the  object  stand 

conspicuous  before  the   eyes;    both   denote    here  that  which   lies 

straight  before  us,  and  presents  itself  to  the  eye  looking  straight 

out.     The  naming  of  the  D'BVBj;  (from  *]V3J>,  to  flutter,  to  move 

tremblingly),    which  belongs  not   to   the  seeing  apparatus  of  the 

eye  but  to  its  protection,  is  introduced  by  the  poetical  parallelism  ; 

for  the  eyelids,  including  in  this  word  the  twinkling,  in  their  move 

ment  follow  the  direction  of  the  seeing  eye.     On  the  form.  V1B>^ 

(fut.  Hiph.  of  IB*,  to  be  straight),  defective  according  to  the  Masora, 

with  the  Jod  audible,  cf.  Hos.  vii.  12,  1  Chron.  xii.  2,  and  under 


CHAP.  IV.  23-27.  117 


Gen.  viii.  17  ;   the  softened  form  "W^n  does  not  occur,  we  find 
only  wn  or  TB>in. 

Ver.  26.  The  understanding  of  this  rule  is  dependent  on  the  right 
interpretation  of  D?3,  which  means  neither  "  weigh  off  "  (Evrald) 
nor  "measure  off"  (Hitzig,  Zockler).  D^3  has  once,  Ps.  Iviii.  3, 
the  meaning  to  weigh  out,  as  the  denom.  of  DPS),  a  level,  a  steel 
yard;1  everywhere  else  it  means  to  make  even,  to  make  level,  to 
open  a  road:  vid.  under  Isa.  xxvi.  7,  xl.  12.  The  admonition 
thus  refers  not  to  the  careful  consideration  which  measures  the 
way  leading  to  the  goal  which  one  wishes  to  reach,  but  to  the 
preparation  of  the  way  by  the  removal  of  that  which  prevents 
unhindered  progress  and  makes  the  way  insecure.  The  same 
meaning  appears  if  D?3,  of  cognate  meaning  with  |3n,  denoted 
first  to  level,  and  then  to  make  straight  with  the  level  (Fleischer). 
We  must  remove  all  that  can  become  a  moral  hindrance  or  a  dan 
gerous  obstacle  in  our  life-course,  in  order  that  we  may  make 
right  steps  with  our  feet,  as  the  LXX.  (Heb.  xii.  13)  translate. 
266  is  only  another  expression  for  this  thought.  i3"H  i"?1?  (2  Chron. 
xxvii.  6)  means  to  give  a  direction  to  his  way  ;  a  right  way,  which 
keeps  in  and  facilitates  the  keeping  in  the  straight  direction,  is 
accordingly  called  ii33  '•p'l  i;  and  "let  all  thy  ways  be  right"  (cf. 
Ps.  cxix.  5,  LXX.  tcarevdw0efo]<Tav)  will  thus  mean  :  see  to  it 
that  all  the  ways  which  thou  goest  lead  straight  to  the  end. 

Ver.  27.  In  closest  connection  with  the  preceding,  27a  cautions 
against  by-ways  and  indirect  courses,  and  276  continues  it  in  the 
briefest  moral  expression,  which  is  here  JT)1?  VH  "'P?  instead  of  "no 
JHOj  iii.  7,  for  the  figure  is  derived  from  the  way.  The  LXX.  has 
other  four  lines  after  this  verse  (27),  which  we  have  endeavoured 
to  retranslate  into  the  Hebrew  (Introd.  p.  47).  They  are  by  no 
means  genuine  ;  for  while  in  27a  right  and  left  are  equivalent  to 
by-ways,  here  the  right  and  left  side  are  distinguished  as  that  of 
truth  and  its  contrary;  and  while  there  [in  LXX.]  the  opOas 
Tpo%ia<;  •jrotelv  is  required  of  man,  here  it  is  promised  as  the 
operation  of  God,  which  is  no  contradiction,  but  in  this  similarity 
of  expression  betrays  poverty  of  style.  Hitzig  disputes  also  the 
genuineness  of  the  Hebrew  ver.  27.  But  it  continues  explanatorily 
ver.  26,  and  is  related  to  it,  yet  not  as  a  gloss,  and  in  the  general 

1  The  Arabic  word  teflis,  said  to  be  of  the  same  signification  (a  balance),  and 
which  is  given  in  the  most  recent  editions  of  Gesenius'  Lexicon,  has  been 
already  shown  under  Job  xxxvii.  16  to  be  a  word  devoid  of  all  evidence. 


118  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

relation  of  26  and  27a  there  comes  a  word,  certainly  not  unwel 
come,  such  as  276,  which  impresses  the  moral  stamp  on  these 
thoughts. 

That  with  ver.  27  the  admonition  of  his  father,  which  the  poet, 
placing  himself  back  into  the  period  of  his  youth,  reproduces,  is 
not  yet  concluded,  the  resumption  of  the  address  ^3,  v.  1,  makes 
evident ;  while  on  the  other  hand  the  address  0^3  in  v.  7  shows 
that  at  that  point  there  is  advance  made  from  the  recollections  of 
his  father's  house  to  conclusions  therefrom,  for  the  circle  of  young 
men  by  whom  the  poet  conceives  himself  to  be  surrounded.  That 
in  v.  7  ff.  a  subject  of  the  warning  with  which  the  seventh  address 
closes  is  retained  and  further  prosecuted,  does  not  in  the  connection 
of  all  these  addresses  contradict  the  opinion  that  with  v.  7  a  new 
address  begins.  But  the  opinion  that  the  warning  against  adultery 
does  not  agree  (Zockler)  with  the  designation  tj"i,  iv.  3,  given  to 
him  to  whom  it  is  addressed,  is  refuted  by  1  Cliron.  xxii.  5,  2 
Chron.  xiii.  7. 

Chap.  v.  1-6.  Here  a  fourth  rule  of  life  follows  the  three  already 
given,  iv.  24,  25,  26-27  : 

1  My  son,  attend  unto  my  wisdom, 
And  incline  thine  ear  to  my  prudence, 

2  To  observe  discretion, 

And  that  thy  lips  preserve  knowledge. 

3  For  the  lips  of  the  adulteress  distil  honey, 
And  smoother  than  oil  is  her  mouth  ; 

4  But  her  end  is  bitter  like  wormwood, 
Sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword. 

5  Her  feet  go  down  to  death, 
Her  steps  cleave  to  Hades. 

6  She  is  far  removed  from  entering  the  way  of  life, 
Her  steps  wander  without  her  observing  it. 

Wisdom  and  understanding  increase  with  the  age  of  those  who 
earnestly  seek  after  them.  It  is  the  father  of  the  youth  who  here 
requests  a  willing  ear  to  his  wisdom  of  life,  gained  in  the  way  of 
many  years'  experience  and  observation.  In  ver.  2  the  inf.  of  the 
object  is  continued  in  the  finitum,  as  in  ii.  2,  8.  JliBTO  (yid.  on  its 
etymon  under  i.  4)  are  plans,  projects,  designs,  for  the  most  part 
in  a  bad  sense,  intrigues  and  artifices  (vid.  xxiv.  8),  but  also  used 
of  well-considered  resolutions  toward  what  is  good,  and  hence  of 
the  purposes  of  God,  Jer.  xxiii.  20.  This  noble  sense  of  the  word 
*ts  plur->  is  peculiar  to  the  introductory  portion  (i.-ix.) 


CHAP.  V.  1-6.  119 

of  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  The  plur.  means  here  and  at  viii.  12 
(placing  itself  with  niODH  and  fifo^n,  vid.  p.  68)  the  reflection  and 
deliberation  which  is  the  presupposition  of  well-considered  action, 
and  "ibK>  is  thus  not  otherwise  than  at  xix.  8,  and  everywhere  so 
meant,  where  it  has  that  which  is  obligatory  as  its  object :  the 
youth  is  summoned  to  careful  observation  and  persevering  ex 
emplification  of  the  quidquid  agas,  prudenter  agas  et  respice  finem. 
In  2b  the  Rebia  Mugrash  forbids  the  genitive  connection  of  the 
two  words  Tna't?  njni. ;  we  translate :  et  ut  scientiam  labia  tua  tuean- 
tur.  Lips  which  preserve  knowledge  are  such  as  permit  nothing 
to  escape  from  them  (Ps.  xvii.  3i)  which  proceeds  not  from  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  in  Him  of  that  which  is  good  and  right, 
and  aims  at  the  working  out  of  this  knowledge ;  vid.  Kohler  on 
Mai.  ii.  7.  TO?^  (from  ns^,  Arab,  shafat,  edge,  lip,  properly  that 
against  which  one  rubs,  and  that  which  rubs  itself)  is  fern.,  but 
the  usage  of  the  language  presents  the  word  in  two  genders  (cf.  3a 
with  xxvi.  23).  Regarding  the  pausal  W^l  for  VisP,  vid.  under  iii. 
1,  ii.  11.  The  lips  which  distil  the  honey  of  enticement  stand 
opposite  to  the  lips  which  distil  knowledge ;  the  object  of  the  ad- 
munition  is  to  furnish  a  protection  against  the  honey-lips. 

Ver.  3.    HIT  denotes  the  wife  who  belongs  to  another,  or  who 

TT  O 

does  not  belong  to  him  to  whom  she  gives  herself  or  who  goes 
after  her  (vid.  ii.  16).  She  appears  here  as  the  betrayer  of  youth. 
The  poet  paints  the  love  and  amiableness  which  she  feigns  with 
colours  from  the  Canticles,  iv.  11,  cf.  v.  16.  J"ID3  denotes  the  honey 
flowing  of  itself  from  the  combs  (D^SItf),  thus  the  purest  and 
sweetest ;  its  root- word  is  not  ^3,  which  means  to  shake,  vibrate, 
and  only  mediately  (when  the  object  is  a  fluid)  to  scatter,  sprinkle, 
but,  as  Schultens  has  observed,  a  verb  flQ3  =  Arab,  nafat,  to  bubble, 
to  spring  up,  nafath,  to  blow,  to  spit  out,  to  pour  out.  Parchon 
places  the  word  rightly  under  riS3  (while  Kimchi  places  it  under  P|W 
after  the  form  fi'^3),  and  explains  it  by  mmn  »»  D"S^n  EO1  m!>n 
PID'H  DTip  (the  words  N^'lTl  £;ai  should  have  been  used):  the  honey 
which  flows  from  the  cells  before  they  are  broken  (the  so-called 
virgin  honey).  The  mouth,  'HH  — Arab,  kink  (from  ^n,  Arab. 
hanakj  imbuere,  e.g.,  after  the  manner  of  Beduins,  the  mouth  of  the 
newly-born  infant  with  date-honey),  comes  into  view  here,  as  at 
viii.  7,  etc.,  as  the  instrument  of  speech  :  smoother  than  oil  (cf. 
Ps.  Iv.  22),  it  shows  itself  when  it  gives  forth  amiable,  gentle, 
impressive  words  (ii.  16,  vi.  24);  also  our  "schmeicheln"  (  =  to 


120  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

flatter,  caress)  is  equivalent  to  to  make  smooth  and  fair ;  in  the 
laniiuaire  of  weavers  it  means  to  smooth  the  warp. 

Vers.  4,  5.  In  verse  4  the  reverse  of  the  sweet  and  smooth 
external  is  placed  opposite  to  the  attraction  of  the  seducer,  by 
whose  influence  the  inconsiderate  permits  himself  to  be  carried 
away  :  her  end,  i.e.  the  last  that  is  experienced  of  her,  the  final 
consequence  of  intercourse  with  her  (cf.  xxiii.  32),  is  bitter  as 
wormwood,  sharp  as  a  two-edged  sword.  The  O.  T.  language 
regards  bitterness  and  poison  as  related  both  in  meaning  and  in 
reality;  the  word  H3.vp  (Aq.  d^ivSiov  =  wormwood)  means  in 
Arab,  the  curse.  ni'3  Tin  is  translated  by  Jerome  after  the 
LXX.,  gladius  biceps;  but  ni'Q''3  means  double-edged,  and  W  Tin 
HVS  (.luclg.  iii.  16)  means  a  double-edged  sword.  Here  the  plur. 
will  thus  poetically  strengthen  the  meaning,  like  ft<£o?  7ro\vaTOfiov^ 
that  which  devours,  as  if  it  had  three  or  four  edges  (Fl.).  The 
end  in  which  the  disguised  seduction  terminates  is  bitter  as  the 
bitterest,  and  cutting  as  that  which  cuts  the  most :  self-condemna 
tion  and  a  feeling  of  divine  anger,  anguish  of  heart,  and  destructive 
judgment.  The  feet  of  the  adulteress  go  downward  to  death.  In 
Hebr.  this  descendentes  ad  mortem  is  expressed  by  the  genitive  of 
connection  ;  HID  is  the  genitive,  as  in  112  H")!"1,  i.  12  ;  elsewhere  the 
author  uses  ?K  niTii"1,  vii.  27,  ii.  18.  Death,  rvjD  (so  named  from 
the  stretching  of  the  corpse  after  the  stiffness  of  death),  denotes 
the  condition  of  departure  from  this  side  as  a  punishment,  with 
which  is  associated  the  idea  of  divine  wrath.  In  biNtp  (sinking, 
abyss,  from  ?N^,  R.  $>{?,  %a\av,  vid.  under  Isa.  v.  14),  lie  the  ideas 
of  the  grave  as  a  place  of  corruption,  and  of  the  under-world  as 
the  place  of  incorporeal  shadow-life.  Her  steps  hold  fast  to  Hades 
is  equivalent  to,  they  strive  after  Hades  and  go  straight  to  it ; 
similar  to  this  is  the  Arab,  expression,  hdhd  dldrb  ydkhdh  dly  dlbld: 
this  way  leads  straight  forward  to  the  town  (Fl.). 

Ver.  6.  If  we  try  to  connect  the  clause  beginning  with  \Q  with 
5b  as  its  principal  sentence :  she  goes  straight  to  the  abyss,  so  that 
by  no  means  does  she  ever  tread  the  way  of  life  (thus  e.g.  Schultens), 
or  better,  with  66 :  never  more  to  walk  in  the  way  of  life,  her 
paths  fluctuate  hither  and  thither  (as  Gr.  Venet.  and  Kamphausen 
in  Bunsen's  Bibehverk,  after  Bertheau  and  Ewald,  translate)  ;  then 
in  the  former  case  more  than  in  the  latter  the  difference  of  the 
subject  opposes  itself,  and  in  the  latter,  in  addition,  the  jnn  &O,  only 
disturbing  in  this  negative  clause.  Also  by  the  arrangement  of 


CHAP.  V.  1-G.  121 

the  words,  Ga  appears  as  an  independent  thought.  But  with  Jewish 
expositors  (Rashi,  Aben-Ezra,  Ralbag,  Malbim,  etc.)  to  interpret 
C&DJjl,  after  the  Talmud  (b.  Moed  katan  9a)  and  Midrash,  as  an 
address  is  impracticable  ;  the  warning :  do  not  weigh  the  path 
of  life,  affords  no  meaning  suitable  to  this  connection — for  we 
must,  with  Cartwright  and  J.  H.  Michaelis,  regard  6a  as  the 
antecedent  to  Qb  :  ne  forte  semitam  vitce  ad  seqnendum  eligas,  te  per 
varios  deceptionum  rnceandros  abripit  ut  non  noveris,  nbi  locorum  sis  ; 
but  then  the  continuation  of  the  address  is  to  be  expected  in  Qb. 
No,  the  subject  to  DT'Dn  is  the  adulteress,  and  J3  is  an  intensified 
8*6.  Thus  the  LXX.,  Jerome,  Syr.,  Targ.,  Luther,  Geier,  Nolde, 
and  among  Jewish  interpreters  Ileidenheim,  who  first  broke  with 
the  tradition  sanctioned  by  the  Talmud  and  the  Midrash,  for  he 
interpreted  6a  as  a  negative  clause  spoken  in  the  tone  of  a  question. 
But  |3  is  not  suitable  for  a  question,  but  for  a  call.  Accordingly, 
Bottcher  explains:  viam  vitce  ne  ilia  complanare  studeat!  (C?3  in 
the  meaning  complanando  operam  dare}.  But  the  adulteress  as  such, 
and  the  striving  to  come  to  the  way  of  life,  stand  in  contradiction : 
an  effort  to  return  must  be  meant,  which,  because  the  power  of 
sin  over  her  is  too  great,  fails;  but  the  words  do  not  denote  that, 
they  affirm  the  direct  contrary,  viz.  that  it  does  not  happen  to  the 
adulteress  ever  to  walk  in  the  way  of  life.  As  in  the  warning  the 
independent  J3  may  be  equivalent  to  cave  ne  (Job  xxxii.  13),  so  also 
in  the  declaration  it  may  be  equivalent  to  absit  ut,  for  J3  (from 
^33,  after  the  forms  \2=  Arab,  banj,  ^V  =  Arab,  'asj)  means  turning 
away,  removal.  Thus :  Far  from  taking  the  course  of  the  way  of 
life  (which  has  life  as  its  goal  and  reward) — for  D?3,  to  open,  to 
open  a  road  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  50),  has  here  the  meaning  of  the  open 
road  itself — much  rather  do  her  steps  wilfully  stagger  (Jer.  xiv. 
10)  hither  and  thither,  they  go  without  order  and  without  aim,  at 
one  time  hither,  at  another  time  thither,  without  her  observing  it ; 
i.e.  without  her  being  concerned  at  this,  that  she  thereby  runs  into 
the  danger  of  falling  headlong  into  the  yawning  abyss.  The  un 
consciousness  which  the  clause  jnn  JO  expresses,  has  as  its  object 
not  the  falling  (Ps.  xxxv.  8),  of  which  there  is  here  nothing  directly 
said,  but  just  this  staggering,  vacillation,  the  danger  of  which  she 

does  not  watch  against.     iW  has  Mercha  under  the  J?  with  Zinnorith 

preceding;  it  is  Mi  Ira  [an  oxytone]  (Michlol  111&);  the  punctuation 
varies   in  the  accentuation  of  the   form   without  evident  reason: 


122  THE  BOOK  OF  PEOVERBS. 

Olsli.  §  233,  p.  285.  The  old  Jewish  interpreters  (and  recently 
also  Malbim)  here,  as  also  at  ii.  16,  by  the  nnt  [strange  woman] 
understand  heresy  (rWD),  or  the  philosophy  that  is  hostile  to 
revelation  ;  the  ancient  Christian  interpreters  understood  by  it 
folly  (Origen),  or  sensuality  (Procopius),  or  heresy  (Olympiodorus), 
or  false  doctrine  (Poly chronics).  The  LXX.,  which  translates, 
ver.  5,  n^n  by  T?}<?  a$pocrvvr)s  ol  TroSe?,  looks  toward  this  allegorical 
interpretation.  But  this  is  unnecessary,  and  it  is  proved  to  be 
false  from  v.  15-20,  where  the  rnf  is  contrasted  with  the  married 
wife. 


EIGHTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  V.  7-23. 

WARNING  AGAINST  ADULTERY  AND  COMMENDATION  OP 
MARRIAGE. 

With  v.  1-6,  which  like  iv.  20  commences  it  once  more,  the 
seventh  discourse  is  brought  to  a  conclusion.  The  address  V?  is 
three  times  repeated  in  similar  connections,  iv.  10,  20,  v.  1.  There 
is  no  reason  for  breaking  off  the  fatherly  admonition  (introduced 
with  the  words,  "  And  he  said  to  me,"  iv.  4),  which  was  addressed 
to  the  author  in  the  period  of  his  youth,  earlier  than  here,  where 
the  author  again  resumes  the  D^3  WDB'  with  which  he  had  begun 
(iv.  1)  this  seventh  narrative  address.  That  after  the  father  has 
ceased  speaking  he  does  not  express  himself  in  a  rounded  manner, 
may  be  taken  as  a  sign  that  toward  the  end  he  had  become  more 
and  more  unmindful  of  the  role  of  the  reporter,  if  this  D^2  nnj?1 
following,  with  which  he  realizes  for  his  circle  of  hearers  the 
admonition  which  had  been  in  part  addressed  to  himself,  does  not 
prove  the  contrary. 

Vers.  7-11.  The  eighth  discourse  springs  out  of  the  conclusion 
of  the  seventh,  and  connects  itself  by  its  reflective  ^v^B  so  closely 
with  it  that  it  appears  as  its  continuation  ;  but  the  new  beginning 
and  its  contents  included  in  it,  referring  only  to  social  life,  secures 
its  relative  independence.  The  poet  derives  the  warning  against 
intercourse  with  the  adulteress  from  the  preceding  discourse,  and 
grounds  it  on  the  destructive  consequences. 

7  And  now,  ye  sons,  hearken  unto  me, 
And  depart  not  from  the  words  of  my  mouth. 


CHAP.  V.  7-11.  123 

8  Hold  thy  path  far  from  her  neighbourhood, 
And  come  not  to  the  door  of  her  house  ! 

9  That  thou  mayest  not  give  the  freshness  of  thy  youth  to  another, 
Nor  thy  years  to  the  cruel  one  ; 

10  That  strangers  may  not  sate  themselves  with  thy  possessions, 
And  the  fruit  of  thy  toils  come  into  the  house  of  a  stranger, 

11  And  thou  groanest  at  the  end, 

When  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  consumed. 

Neither  here  nor  in  the  further  stages  of  this  discourse  is  there  any 
reference  to  the  criminal  punishment  inflicted  on  the  adulterer, 
which,  according  to  Lev.  xx.  10,  consisted  in  death,  according  to 
Ezek.  xvi.  40,  cf.  John  viii.  5,  in  stoning,  and  according  to  a  later 
traditional  law,  in  strangulation  (p^n).  Ewald  finds  in  ver.  14  a 
play  on  this  punishment  of  adultery  prescribed  by  law,  and  reads 
from  ver.  9  f.  that  the  adulterer  who  is  caught  by  the  injured 
husband  was  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  slave,  and  was  usually 
deprived  of  his  manhood.  But  that  any  one  should  find  pleasure 
in  making  the  destroyer  of  his  wife  his  slave  is  a  far-fetched  idea, 
and  neither  the  law  nor  the  history  of  Israel  contains  any  evidence 
for  this  punishment  by  slavery  or  the  mutilation  of  the  adulterer,  for 
which  Ewald  refers  to  Grimm's  Deutsche  Reclitsaltertumer.  The 
figure  which  is  here  sketched  by  the  poet  is  very  different.  He 
who  goes  into  the  net  of  the  wanton  woman  loses  his  health  and 
his  goods.  She  stands  not  alone,  but  has  her  party  with  her,  who 
wholly  plunder  the  simpleton  who  goes  into  her  trap.  Nowhere  is 
there  any  reference  to  the  husband  of  the  adulteress.  The  poet 
does  not  at  all  think  on  a  married  woman.  And  the  word  chosen 
directs  our  attention  rather  to  a  foreigner  than  to  an  Israelitish 
woman,  although  the  author  may  look  upon  harlotry  as  such  as 
heathenish  rather  than  Israelitish,  and  designate  it  accordingly. 
The  party  of  those  who  make  prostitutes  of  themselves  consists  of 
their  relations  and  their  older  favourites,  the  companions  of  their 
gain,  who  being  in  league  with  her  exhaust  the  life-strength  and 
the  resources  of  the  befooled  youth  (Fl.).  This  discourse  begins 
with  nriJT!,  for  it  is  connected  by  this  concluding  application  (cf.  vii. 
24)  with  the  preceding. 

Vers.  8,  9.  In  verse  8,  one  must  think  on  such  as  make  a  gain 
of  their  impurity.  7i?O,  Schultens  remarks,  with  reference  to 
Ezek.  xxiii.  18,  crebrum  in  rescisso  omni  commercio:  IP  denotes  the 
departure,  and  ?y  the  nearness,  from  which  one  must  remove  himself 
to  a  distance.  Regarding  "rin  (ver.  9),  which  primarily,  like  our 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

PracJit  (braclit  from  brechen  =  to  brenk)  [pomp,  magnificence], 
appears  to  mean  fulness  of  sound,  and  then  fulness  of  splendour, 
see  under  Job  xxxix.  20 ;  here  there  is  a  reference  to  the  freshness 
or  the  bloom  of  youth,  as  well  as  the  years,  against  the  sacrifice  of 
which  the  warning  is  addressed — in  a  pregnant  sense  they  are  the 
fairest  years,  the  years  of  youthful  fulness  of  strength.  Along 
with  E'nnx  the  singnlare-tantnm  """IpX  (vid.  Jer.  1.  42)  has  a  collective 
sense;  regarding  the  root-meaning,  vid.  under  Isa.  xiii.  9.  It  is 
the  adj.  relat.  of  "IT3S  after  the  form  2T~N,  which  is  formed  not 
from  "IT  "ijS,  but  from  an  unknown  verb  "1T3.  The  ancients  referred 
it  to  death  and  the  devil  ;  but  the  tnf2K  belongs  to  the  covetous 
society,  which  impels  ever  anew  to  sin,  which  is  their  profit,  him 
who  has  once  fallen  into  it,  and  thus  brings  bodily  ruin  upon  him  : 
they  are  the  people  who  stand  far  aloof  from  this  their  sacrifice, 
and  among  them  are  barbarous,  rude,  inexorably  cruel  monsters 
(Unmenschen)  (Grcecus  Venetus,  rep  aTrai'^pcoTreo),  who  rest  not  till 
their  victim  is  laid  prostrate  on  the  ground  and  ruined  both  bodily 
and  financially. 

Ver.  10.  This  other  side  of  the  ruin  ver.  10  presents  as  an  image 
of  terror.  For  lin  refers  to  the  person  in  his  stately  appearance, 
but  n'3  to  his  possessions  in  money  and  goods;  for  this  word,  as  well 
as  in  the  strikingly  similar  passage  Hos.  vii.  9,  is  used  as  the 
synonym  of  ?'.n  (Gen.  xxxiv.  29,  etc.),  in  the  sense  of  ability, 
estate.  This  meaning  is  probably  mediated  by  means  of  a  meto 
nymy,  as  Gen.  iv.  12,  Job  xxxi.  3i»,  where  the  idea  of  the  capability 
of  producing  is  passed  over  into  that  of  the  produce  conformable 
to  it ;  so  here  the  idea  of  work-power  passes  over  into  that  of  the 
gain  resulting  therefrom.  T^yjfl  (and  thy  toils)  is  not,  like  in'3, 
the  accusative  governed  by  W2&  •  the  carrying  over  of  this  verb 
disturbs  the  parallelism,  and  the  statement  in  the  passage  besides 
does  not  accord  therewith,  which,  interpreted  as  a  virtual  predi 
cate,  presents  Wb  as  an  independent  prohibitive  clause  :  neve  sint 
labores  tui  in  domo  percgrini,  not  peregrina;  at  least  ^33  according 
to  the  usage  of  the  language  is  always  personal,  so  that  ^133  rV3 
(cf.  Lam.  v.  2),  like  'H33  Btata,  Zeph.  i.  8,  is  to  be  explained  after 
n33  TJJ,  Judg.  xix.  12.  ysy  (from  asy,  Arab.  'a*ab,  to  bind  fast, 
to  tie  together,  then  to  make  effort,  Troielv,  laborare)  is  difficult 
work  (x.  22),  and  that  which  is  obtained  by  it;  Fleischer  compares 
the  Ital.  i  miei  sndori,  and  the  French  mes  sueurs. 

Ver.  11.  The  fut.  W3b»  and  the  VrP  needed  to  complete  106  are 


CHAP.  V.  12-M.  125 

continued  in  ver.  11  in  the  consec.  perf.  Dn3?  elsewhere  of  the 
hollow  roaring  of  the  sea,  Isa.  v.  30,  the  growling  of  the  lion, 
xxviii.  15,  here,  as  also  Ezek.  xxiv.  23,  of  the  hollow  groaning  of 
men  ;  a  word  which  echoes  the  natural  sound,  like  Din,  riEn.  The 
LXX.,  with  the  versions  derived  from  it,  has  teal  /jLeTa/j,e\7)0i]crr), 
i.e.  fi'pru!  (the  Niph.  En?,  to  experience  the  sorrow  of  repentance, 
also  an  echo-word  which  imitates  the  sound  of  deep  breathing) — u 
happy  quid  pro  quo,  as  if  one  interchanged  the  Arab,  naharn, 
fremere,  anhelare,  and  nadam,  poenitere.  That  wherein  the  etid 
consists  to  which  the  deluded  youth  is  brought,  and  the  sorrowful 
sound  of  despair  extorted  from  him,  is  stated  in  115  :  his  flesh  is 
consumed  away,  for  sensuality  and  vexation  have  worked  together 
to  undermine  his  health.  The  author  here  connects  together  two 
synonyms  to  strengthen  the  conception,  as  if  one  said  :  All  thy  tears 
and  thy  weeping  help  thee  nothing  (Fl.);  he  loves  this  heaping 
together  of  synonyms,  as  we  have  shown  at  p.  33.  When  the 
blood-relation  of  any  one  is  called  i">|>2  "IN2>,  Lev.  xviii.  6,  xxv.  49, 
these  two  synonyms  show  themselves  in  subordination,  as  here  in 
close  relation,  "1SB>  appears  to  be  closely  connected  with  D'n'HK', 
muscles  and  sinews,  and  with  "ib>,  the  umbilical  cord,  and  thus  to 
denote  the  flesh  with  respect  to  its  muscular  nature  adhering  to 
the  bones  (Mic.  iii.  2),  as  lb-'2  denotes  it  with  respect  to  its  tangible 
outside  clothed  with  skin  (vid.  under  Isaiah,  p.  418). 

Vers.  12—14.  The  poet  now  tells  those  whom  he  warns  to  hear 
how  the  voluptuary,  looking  back  on  his  life-course,  passes  sentence 
against  himself. 

o 

12  And  thou  sayest,  "  Why  have  I  then  hated  correction, 
And  my  heart  despised  instruction  ! 

13  And  I  have  not  listened  to  the  voice  of  my  teachers, 
Nor  lent  mine  ear  to  my  instructors  ? 

14  I  had  almost  fallen  into  every  vice 

In  the  midst  of  the  assembly  and  the  congregation  ! " 

The  question  12a  (here  more  an  exclamation  than  a  question)  is 
the  combination  of  two  :  How  has  it  become  possible  for  me  ? 
How  could  it  ever  come  to  it  that  .  .  .  Thus  also  one  says  in  Arab.: 
Kyf  falat  hadhd  (Fl.).  The  regimen  of  TpN  in  126  is  becoming 
faint,  and  in  136  has  disappeared.  The  Kal  "N3  (as  i.  30,  xv.  5) 
signifies  to  despise ;  the  Piel  intensively,  to  contemn  and  reject 
(K.  p,  pungere). 

Ver.  13.  ?  yw#  signifies  to  cleave  to   anything  in  hearing,  as 


126  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


3  nso  is  to  do  so  in  seeing  ;  h  yvy  yet  more  closely  corresponds 
with  the  classic  eTra/coveiv,  obedire,  e.g.  Ps.  Ixxxi.  9  ;  ^p|  VV'J  is  the 
usual  phrase  for  "  hearken  !  " 

Ver.  14.  t3y»3  with  the  perf.  following  is  equivalent  to  :  it 
wanted  but  a  little  that  this  or  that  should  happen,  e.g.  Gen. 
xxvi.  10.  It  is  now  for  the  most  part  thus  explained  :  it  wanted  but 
a  little,  and  led  astray  by  that  wicked  companionship  I  would  have 
been  drawn  away  into  crime,  for  which  I  would  then  have  been 
subjected  to  open  punishment  (Fl.).  Ewald  understands  in  directly 
of  punishment  in  its  extreme  form,  stoning  ;  and  Hitzig  explains 
JH"«  by  "  the  totality  of  evil,"  in  so  far  as  the  disgraceful  death  of 
the  criminal  comprehends  in  it  all  other  evils  that  are  less.  But 
y?"v33  means,  either,  into  every  evil,  misfortune,  or  into  every 
wickedness  ;  and  since  in,  in  contradistinction  to  &  (Hitzig  com 
pares  Ezek.  xxxvi.  5),  is  a  conception  of  a  species,  then  the  meaning 
is  equivalent  to  in  omni  genere  mail.  The  reference  to  the  death- 
punishment  of  the  adulteress  is  excluded  thereby,  though  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  it  might  be  thought  of  at  the  same  time,  if  he  who 
too  late  comes  to  consider  his  ways  were  distinctly  designated  in 
the  preceding  statements  as  an  adulterer.  But  it  is  on  the  whole 
a  question  whether  yr^M  is  meant  of  the  evil  which  follows  sin  as 
its  consequence.  The  usage  of  the  language  permits  this,  cf. 
2  Sam.  xvi.  8,  Ex.  v.  19,  1  Chrou.  vii.  23,  Ps.  x.  6,  but  not  less 
the  reference  to  that  which  is  morally  bad,  cf.  Ex.  xxxii.  22  (where 
Keil  rightly  compares  with  1  John  v.  19)  ;  and  ^ri  (for  which  in 
the  first  case  one  expected  VIJJM,  I  fell  into,  vid.  xiii.  17,  xvii.  20, 
xxviii.  14)  is  even  more  favourable  to  the  latter  reference.  Also 
n"W  %I5  7Pri?  (cf-  on  tne  heaping  together  of  synonyms  under  lib), 
this  paraphrase  of  the  palam  ac  publice,  with  its  Sflna  (cf.  Ps.  cxi.  1, 
2  Chron.  xx.  14),  looks  rather  to  a  heightening  of  the  moral  self- 
accusation.  He  found  himself  in  all  wickedness,  living  and  movin^ 
therein  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation,  and  thereby  giving  offence 
to  it,  for  he  took  part  in  the  external  worship  and  in  the  practices 
of  the  congregation,  branding  himself  thereby  as  a  hypocrite. 
That  by  the  one  name  the  congregation  is  meant  in  its  civil  aspect, 
and  by  the  other  in  its  ecclesiastical  aspect,  is  not  to  be  supposed  : 
in  the  congregation  of  the  people  of  the  revealed  law,  the  political 
and  the  religious  sides  are  not  so  distinguished.  It  is  called  without 
distinction  ^  and  rnj;  (from  TIP).  Rather  we  would  say  that  5>np 
is  the  whole  ecclesia,  and  my  the  whole  of  its  representatives  ;  but 


CHAP.  V.  15-17.  127 

also  the  great  general  council  bears  sometimes  the  one  name 
(Ex.  xii.  3,  cf.  21)  and  sometimes  the  other  (Deut.  xxxi.  30,  cf.  28) 
— the  placing  of  them  together  serves  thus  only  to  strengthen  the 
conception. 

Vers.  15-17.  The  commendation  of  true  conjugal  love  in  the 
form  of  an  invitation  to  a  participation  in  it,  is  now  presented 
along  with  the  warning  against  non-conjugal  intercourse,  heio-ht- 
ened  by  a  reference  to  its  evil  consequences. 

15  Drink  water  from  thine  own  cistern, 

And  flowing  streams  from  thine  own  fountain. 

16  Shall  thy  streams  flow  abroad, 
The  water-brooks  in  the  streets ! 

17  Let  them  belong  to  thyself  alone, 
And  not  to  strangers  with  thee. 

One  drinks  water  to  quench  his  thirst ;  here  drinking  is  a  figure 
of  the  satisfaction  of  conjugal  love,  of  which  Paul  says,  1  Cor.  vii. 
9,  Kpelaaov  ecm  <ya/j,f)(Tai,  rj  Trvpovedai,  and  this  comes  into  view 
here,  in  conformity  with  the  prevailing  character  of  the  O.  T.,  only 
as  a  created  inborn  natural  impulse,  without  reference  to  the 
poisoning  of  it  by  sin,  which  also  within  the  sphere  of  married  life 
makes  government,  moderation,  and  restraint  a  duty.  Warning 
against  this  degeneracy  of  the  natural  impulse  to  the  irdOos 
eiriBvfiias  authorized  within  divinely  prescribed  limits,  the  apostle 
calls  the  wife  of  any  one  TO  eavrov  cr/ceuo?  (cf.  1  Pet.  iii.  7).  So 
here  the  wife,  who  is  his  by  covenant  (ii.  17),  is  called  "cistern" 
(lia)1  and  "  fountain"  (1K3)  of  the  husband  to  whom  she  is  married. 
The  figure  corresponds  to  the  sexual  nature  of  the  wife,  the  expres 
sion  for  which  is  H2p3 ;  but  Isa.  li.  1  holds  to  the  natural  side  of  the 
figure,  for  according  to  it  the  wife  is  a  pit,  and  the  children  are 
brought  out  of  it  into  the  light  of  day.  Aben-Ezra  on  Lev.  xi.  36 
rightly  distinguishes  between  in  and  1N3 :  the  former  catches  the 
rain,  the  latter  wells  out  from  within.  In  the  former,  as  Rashi  in 
Erubin  ii.  4  remarks,  there  are  D'D3WD  D'O,  in  the  latter  D«n  D'O. 
The  post-biblical  Hebrew  observes  this  distinction  less  closely  (vid. 
Kimchi's  Book  of  Roots),  but  the  biblical  throughout;  so  far  the 
Kerij  Jer.  vi.  7,  rightly  changes  in  into  the  form  "V3,  corresponding 
to  the  Arab.  byar.  Therefore  in  is  the  cistern,  for  the  making  of 
which  3Sn,  Jer.  ii.  13,  and  isa  the  well,  for  the  formation  of  which 

1  The  LXX.  translate  diro  truv  dyyi/uv,  i.e.  TTI3Q  (yid.  Lagarde). 


128  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

13H,  Gen.  xxi.  30,  and  ma,  xxvi.  25,  are  the  respective  words  usually 
employed  (vid.  Malbim,  Sifra  1176).  The  poet  shows  that  he 
also  is  aware  of  this  distinction,  for  he  calls  the  water  which  one 
drinks  from  the  113  by  the  name  D»Q,  but  on  the  other  hand  that 
out  of  the  1N3  by  the  name  Dyjfo,  running  waters,  fluenta ;  by  this 
we  are  at  once  reminded  of  Cant.  iv.  15,  cf.  12.  The  "112  offers 
only  stagnant  water  (according  to  the  Sohar,  the  113,  has  no  water 
of  its  own,  but  only  that  which  is  received  into  it),  although  coming 
down  into  it  from  above;  but  the  1X3  has  living  water,  which 
wells  up  out  of  its  interior  (^no,  156,  intentionally  for  the  mere 
p),  and  is  fresh  as  the  streams  from  Lebanon  (7H,  properly  labi, 
to  run  down,  cf.  ^TN,  placideire,  and  generally  ire;  J|j,  loco  cedere, 
desinere;  J ;,  IV.,  to  cause  to  glide  back,  deglutire,  of  the  gourmand). 
What  a  valuable  possession  a  well  of  water  is  for  nomads  the 
history  of  the  patriarchs  makes  evident,  and  a  cistern  is  one  of  the 
most  valuable  possessions  belonging  to  every  well-furnished  house. 
The  figure  of  the  cistern  is  here  surpassed  by  that  of  the  fountain, 
but  both  refer  to  the  seeking  and  finding  satisfaction  (cf.  the 
opposite  passage,  xxiii.  27)  with  the  wife,  and  that,  as  the  expressive 
possessive  suffixes  denote,  with  his  legitimate  wife. 

Ver.  16.  Here  we  meet  with  two  other  synonyms  standing  in 
a  similar  relation  of  progression.  As  TV  denotes  the  fountain  as  to 
its  point  of  outflow,  so  ])V»  (n.  loci)  means  water  flowing  above  on 
the  surface,  which  in  its  course  increases  and  divides  itself  into 
several  courses  ;  such  a  brook  is  called,  with  reference  to  the  water 
dividing  itself  from  the  point  of  outflow,  or  to  the  way  in  which  it 
divides,  J?2  (from  J?B,  Job  xxxviii.  25),  Arab,  falfj  (as  also  the 
Ethiop.)  or  falj,  which  is  explained  by  nahar  saghayr  (Fl.).1  We 
cannot  in  this  double  figure  think  of  any  reference  to  the  genera 
tive  power  in  the  sperma ;  similar  figures  are  the  waters  of  Judah, 
Isa.  xlviii.  1,  and  the  waters  of  Israel  flowing  forth  as  if  from  a 
bucket,  Num.  xxiv.  7,  where  1JJ1T  is  the  parallel  word  to  D'»,  cf.  also 
the  proper  name  3N1S  (from  IDz^io  from  H10,  diffluere),  aqua  h.e. 
semen  patris,  and  73^,  Deut.  xxviii.  30,  =Arab.  sajal  (whence  sajl 
=  *71,  situla),  which  is  set  aside  by  the  Ken.  Many  interpreters 

1  The  latter  idea  (vid.  under  Ps.  i.  3)  lies  nearer,  after  Job  xxxviii.  25 :  the 
brook  as  dividing  channels  for  itself,  or  as  divided  into  such ;  fall  (falaj) 
signifies,  according  to  the  representation  Isa.  Iviii.  8,  also  \\kefajr,  the  morning- 
light  (as  breaking  forth  from  a  cleft). 


CHAP.  V.  15-17.  129 

have  by  nyin  and  Hfarna  been  here  led  into  the  error  of  pressing 
into  the  text  the  exhortation  not  to  waste  the  creative  power  in 
sinful  lust.  The  LXX.  translates  1V3^  by  vTrepeK^eiaOa) ;  but 
Origen,  and  also  Clemens  Alexandria  us,  used  the  phrase  firj  virep- 
eK^eladco,  which  is  found  in  the  Complut,  Aid.,  and  several  codd., 
and  is  regarded  by  Lagarde,  as  also  Cappellus,  as  original :  the 
three  Gottingen  theologians  (Ewald,  Bertheau,  and  Elster)  accord 
ingly  make  the  emendation  WB^K.  But  that  ^77  of  the  LXX. 
was  not  added  till  a  later  period  ;  the  original  expression,  which 
the  Syro-Hexapl.  authorizes,  was  vTrepeK-^eiadoy  without  /*?;,  as 
also  in  the  version  of  Aquila,  Biaa-KopTri^eaOwaav  without  //,??  (yid. 
Field).  The  Plebrew  text  also  does  not  need  btf.  Clericns,  and 
recently  Hitzig,  Zockler,  Kamphausen,  avoid  this  remedy,  for  they 
understand  this  verse  interrogatively — an  expedient  which  is  for 
the  most  part  and  also  here  unavailing ;  for  why  should  not  the 
author  have  written  wa11  DK?  Schultens  rightly  remarks:  nee 
negationi  nee  interrogation  ullus  hie  locus,  for  (with  Fleischer  and 
von  Hofmann,  Schriftbeweis,  ii.  2,  402)  he  regards  ver.  16  as  a 
conclusion:  tune  exundabunt ;  so  that  he  strengthens  the  summons 
of  ver.  15  by  the  promise  of  numerous  descendants  from  unvio- 
lated  marriage.  But  to  be  so  understood,  the  author  ought  to  have 
written  rea"1].  So,  according  to  the  text,  IVS"1  as  jussive  continues 
the  irnper.  nriB>  (15a),  and  the  full  meaning  according  to  the 
connection  is  this :  that  within  the  marriage  relation  the  generative 
power  shall  act  freely  and  unrestrained,  pn  and  riiarn  denote 
(i.  20)  the  space  free  from  houses,  and  the  ways  and  places  which 
lead  towards  and  stretch  between  them  ;  pn  (from  pn,  Arab,  khass, 
to  split,  seorsim  ponere)  is  a  very  relative  conception,  according  as 
one  thinks  of  that  which  is  without  as  the  contrast  of  the  house, 
the  city,  or  the  country.  Here  pn  is  the  contrast  of  the  person, 
and  thus  that  which  is  anywhere  without  it,  whereto  the  exercise  of 
its  manly  power  shall  extend.  The  two  figurative  expressions  are 
the  description  of  the  libero  famine,  and  the  contrast,  that  restriction 
of  self  which  the  marriage  relation,  according  to  1  Cor.  vii.  3-5, 
condemns. 

Ver.  17.  That  such  matters  as  these  are  thought  of,  is  manifest 
from  this  verse.  As  JHT  comprehends  with  the  cause  (sperma)  the 
effect  (posterity),  so,  in  ver.  16,  with  the  e/usio  roboris  virilis  is 
connected  the  idea  of  the  beginnings  of  life.  For  the  subjects  of 
ver.  17  are  the  e/asiones  seminis  named  in  ver.  16.  These  in  their 

VOL.  I.  I 


IT.O  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVIDES. 

effects  (ver.  17)  may  belong  to  thee  alone,  viz.  to  tliee  alone 
(*P!?K  properly  in  thy  separateness)  within  thy  married  relation, 
not,  as  thou  hast  fellowship  with  other  women,  to  different  family 
circles,  Aben-Ezra  rightly  regards  as  the  subject,  for  he  glosses 
thus  :  D'HEbn  D^2n  arur  D^sn,  and  Immanuel  well  explains  ^"^ 
by  l^  iDrPJY1.  The  child  born  out  of  wedlock  belongs  not  to  the 
father  alone,  he  knows  not  to  whom  it  belongs ;  its  father  must  for 
the  sake  of  his  honour  deny  it  before  the  world.  Thus,  as  Grotius 
remarks :  ibi  sere  ubi  prolem  metas.  In  fNI  the  Vrp  is  continued. 
It  is  not  thus  used  adverbially  for  tib,  as  in  the  old  classic  Arabic 
lyas  for  P  (Fl.),  but  it  carries  in  it  the  force  of  a  verb,  so  that  ViT, 

according  to  rule,  in  the  sense  of  vn  &6l  =  vrv  vfy\.  continues  it. 

• 
Vers.  18-20.  With  ver   18  is  introduced   anew  the  praise  of 

conjugal  love.  These  three  verses,  18-21,  have  the  same  course 
of  thought  as  15-17. 

18  Let  thy  fountain  be  blessed, 

And  rejoice  in  the  wife  of  thy  youth. 

19  The  lovely  hind  and  the  graceful  gazelle — 
May  her  bosom  always  charm  thee ; 

In  her  love  mayest  thou  delight  thyself  evermore. 

20  But  why  wilt  thou  be  fascinated  with  a  stranger, 
And  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  foreign  woman  ? 

Like  TO  and  1S2,  ">ipo  is  also  a  figure  of  the  wife;  the  root-word  is 
"tip,  from  "i p,  ")3,  the  meanings  of  \\hich,  to  dig  and  make  round, 
come  together  in  the  primary  conception  of  the  round  digging  out 
or  boring  out,  not  "np=:"npT,  the  Hipli.  of  which  means  (Jer.  vi.  7) 
to  well  out  cold  (water).  It  is  the  fountain  of  the  birth  that  is 
meant  (cf.  ">ipE>  of  the  female  nJ1V,  e.g.,  Lev.  xx.  18),  not  the  pro 
creation  (LXX.,  rj  ar)  <£Xev|r,  viz.  <£Xe^  yovifjuf)  ;  the  blessing 
wished  for  by  him  is  the  blessing  of  children,  which  ^"13  so  much 
the  more  distinctly  denotes  if  ?p3,  Arab,  barak,  means  to  spread 
out,  and  ^3  thus  to  cause  a  spreading  out.  The  JO,  186,  explains 
itself  from  the  idea  of  drawing  (water),  given  with  the  figure  of  a 
fountain ;  the  word  J"l£'N3  found  in  certain  codices  is,  on  the  contrary, 
prosaic  (Fl.).  Whilst  ip  HDI?  is  found  elsewhere  (Eccles.  ii.  20, 
2  Chron.  xx.  27)  as  meaning  almost  the  same  as  3  nob';  the  former 
means  rejoicing  from  some  place,  the  latter  in  something.  In  the 
genitive  connection,  "  wife  of  thy  youth"  (cf.  ii.  17),  both  of  these 
significations  lie  :  thy  youthful  wife,  and  she  who  was  chosen  by 
thee  in  thy  youth,  according  as  we  refer  the  suffix  to  the  whole 
idea  or  only  to  the  second  member  of  the  chain  of  words. 


CHAP.  V.  18-20.  131 

Ver.  19.  The  subject,  19a,  set  forth  as  a  theme  courts  love  for 
her  who  is  to  be  loved,  for  she  presents  herself  as  lovely.  n!?sx  is 
the  female  of  the  stag,  which  may  derive  its  name  W  from  the 
weapon-power  of  its  horns,  and  n£j£  (from  V,  Arab.  w'alt  to  climb), 
that  of  the  wild-goat  (?£);  and  thus  properly,  not  the  gazelle,  which 
is  called  '3X  on  account  of  its  elegance,  but  the  chamois.  These 
animals  are  commonly  used  in  Semitic  poetry  as  figures  of  female 
beauty  on  account  of  the  delicate  beauty  of  their  limbs  and  their 
sprightly  black  eyes.  D^riK  signifies  always  sensual  love,  and  is 
interchanged  in  this  erotic  meaning  (vii.  18)  with  DHH.  In  19& 
the  predicate  follows  the  subject.  The  Grose.  Venet.  translates  as 
if  the  word  were  nnn,  and  the  Syr.  as  if  it  were  rwi,  but  Aquila 
rightly  translates  rirOoi  avTrjs.  As  TtVtfo?  is  derived  (vid.  Curtius, 
Griech.  Etymologic,  Nr.  307)  from  dhd,  to  suck  (causative,  with  anu, 
to  put  to  sucking),  so  *n,  ^  in,  Arab,  thady  (commonly  in  dual 
thadjeiri),  from  rnp,  Arab,  thdy,  rigare,  after  which  also  the  verb 
TUT.  is  chosen :  she  may  plentifully  give  thee  to  drink  ;  figuratively 
equivalent  to,  refresh  or  (what  the  Aram,  'n  precisely  means) 
fascinate1  thee,  satisfy  thee  with  love.  D*^  also  is  an  erotic  word, 
which  besides  in  this  place  is  found  only  in  Ezekiel  (xxiii.  3,  8,  21). 
The  LXX.  obliterates  the  strong  sensual  colouring  of  this  line. 
In  19c  it  changes  n3B>n  into  rUB>n,  TroXXoo-ro?  ear},  perhaps  also 
because  the  former  appeared  to  be  too  sensual.  Moses  ha-Darshan 

(in  Rashi)  proposes  to  explain  it  after  the  Arab,  ^s^tj  to  cover,  to 

cast  over,  to  come  over  anything  (III.  =  pDJ7,  to  employ  oneself 
with  something):  engage  thyself  with  her  love,  i.e.  be  always 
devoted  to  her  in  love.  And  Immanuel  himself,  the  author  of  a 
Hebrew  Divan  expatiating  with  unparalleled  freedom  in  erotic 
representations,  remarks,  while  he  rightly  understands  rutr'n  of  the 
fascination  of  love :  nnw  VIB>K3  ib'BX  Ipwn  misnn  N-np,  he  calls  the 
husband's  continual  caressing  of  the  wife  an  error.  But  this  moral 
side-glance  lies  here  at  a  distance  from  the  poet.  He  speaks  here 
of  a  morally  permissible  love-ecstasy,  or  rather,  since  Yon  excludes 
that  which  is  extraordinary,  of  an  intensity  of  love  connected  with 
the  feeling  of  superabundant  happiness.  !W  properly  signifies  to 
err  from  the  way,  therefore  figuratively,  with  l  of  a  matter,  like 

1  Many  editions  liave  here  -^33  ;  but  this  Dagesh,.  which  is  contrary  to  rule, 
is  to  be  effaced. 


132  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

delirare  ea,  to  be  wholly  captivated  by  her,  so  that  one  is  no  longer 
in  his  own  power,  can  no  longer  restrain  himself — the  usual  word 
for  the  intoxication  of  love  and  of  wine,  xx.  1  (Fl.). 

Ver.  20.  The  answer  to  the  Why?  in  this  verse  is:  no  reason 
able  cause, — only  beastly  sensuality,  only  flagitious  blindness  can 
mislead  thee.  The  2  of  rnn  is,  as  196  and  Isa.  xxviii.  7,  that  of 
the  object  through  which  one  is  betrayed  into  intoxication,  pn 
(thus,  according  to  the  Masora,  four  times  in  the  O.  T.  for  P^H) 

properly  means  an  incision  or  deepening,  as  ^Sr  (from  .5",  cohibere), 

the  front  of  the  body,  the  part  between  the  arms  or  the  female 
breasts,  thus  the  bosom,  Isa.  xl.  11  (with  the  swelling  part  of  the 
clothing,  sinus  vestis,  which  the  Arabs  ca\\jayb\  and  the  lap;  P2H  (as 
iv.  8),  to  embrace,  corresponds  here  more  closely  with  the  former  of 
these  meanings  ;  also  elsewhere  the  wife  of  any  one  is  called  IpTl  nt^X 
or  IpTQ  ro3K;n,  as  she  who  rests  on  his  breast.  The  ancients,  also 
J.  11.  Michaelis,  interpret  vers.  15-20  allegorically,  but  without 
thereby  removing  sensual  traces  from  the  elevated  N.  T.  conscious 
ness  of  pollution,  striving  against  all  that  is  fleshly;  for  the  castum 
cum  Sapientia  conjugium  wrould  still  be  always  represented  under 
the  figure  of  husband  and  wife  dwelling  together.  Besides,  though 
mT  might  be,  as  the  contrast  of  ncan,  the  personified  lust  of  the 
world  and  of  the  flesh,  yet  19a  is  certainly  not  the  neon,  but  a 
woman  composed  of  flesh  and  blood.  Thus  the  poet  means  the 
married  life,  not  in  a  figurative  sense,  but  in  its  reality — he  de 
signedly  describes  it  thus  attractively  and  purely,  because  it  bears 
in  itself  the  preservative  against  promiscuous  fleshly  lust. 

Vers.  21-23.  That  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  out  of  the  married 
relationship  is  the  commencement  of  the  ruin  of  a  fool  is  now 
proved. 

21  For  the  ways  of  every  one  are  before  the  eyes  of  Jahve, 
And  all  his  paths  He  marketh  out. 

22  His  own  sins  lay  hold  of  him,  the  evil-doer, 
And  in  the  bands  of  his  sins  is  he  held  fast. 

23  He  dies  for  the  want  of  correction, 

And  in  the  fulness  of  his  folly  he  staggers  to  ruin. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  interpret  H3J  as  an  adverbial  accusative : 
straight  before  Jahve's  eyes;  it  may  be  the  nominative  of  the 
predicate:  the  ways  of  man  (for  B*S  is  here  an  individual,  whe 
ther  man  or  woman)  are  an  object  (properly,  fixing)  of  the  eyes 


CHAP.  V.  21-23.  133 

of  Jalive.  With  tins  the  thought  would  suitably  connect  itself: 
et  omnes  orbitas  ejus  ad  amussim  examinat;  but  D?Sj  as  the  denoin. 
of  DPS,  Ps.  Iviii.  3,  is  not  connected  with  all  the  places  where  the 
verb  is  united  with  the  obj.  of  the  way,  and  Ps.  Ixxviii.  50  shows 
that  it  has  there  the  meaning  to  break  through,  to  open  a  way 
(from  ba,  to  split,  cf.  Talmudic  &^E>»,  opened,  accessible,  from  B^S, 

.  «.  \<TV,  perfodere,  fodiendo  viam,  aditum  sibi  aperire).     The  opening 

of  the  way  is  here  not,  as  at  Isa.  xxvi.  7,  conceived  of  as  the  setting 
aside  of  the  hindrances  in  the  way  of  him  who  walks,  but  generally 
as  making  walking  in  the  way  possible :  man  can  take  no  step  in 
any  direction  without  God ;  and  that  not  only  does  not  exempt  him 
from  moral  responsibility,  but  the  consciousness  of  this  is  rather 
for  the  first  time  rightly  quickened  by  the  consciousness  of  being 
encompassed  on  every  side  by  the  knowledge  and  the  power  of 
God.  The  dissuasion  of  ver.  20  is  thus  in  ver.  21  grounded  in  the 
fact,  that  man  at  every  stage  and  step  of  his  journey  is  observed  and 
encompassed  by  God  :  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  escape  from  the 
knowledge  of  God  or  from  dependence  on  Him.  Thus  opening  all 
the  paths  of  man,  He  has  also  appointed  to  the  way  of  sin  the 
punishment  with  which  it  corrects  itself :  "  his  sins  lay  hold  of  him, 
the  evil-doer."  The  suffix  V—  does  not  refer  to  K*K  of  ver.  21, 
where  every  one  without  exception  and  without  distinction  is 
meant,  but  it  relates  to  the  obj.  following,  the  evil-doer,  namely, 
as  the  explanatory  permutative  annexed  to  the  "him"  according 
to  the  scheme,  Ex.  ii.  6 ;  the  permutative  is  distinguished  from 
the  apposition  by  this,  that  the  latter  is  a  forethought  explanation 
which  heightens  the  understanding  of  the  subject,  while  the  former 
is  an  explanation  afterwards  brought  in  which  guards  against  a 
misunderstanding.  The  same  construction,  xiv.  I3b,  belomnno-  to 

t->  '  '  o       O 

the  syntaxis  ornata  in  the  old  Hebrew,  has  become  common  in  the 
Aramaic  and  in  the  modern  Hebrew.  Instead  of  inns^  (ver.  22), 
the  poet  uses  poetically  fo'W ;  the  interposed  3  may  belong  to  the 
emphatic  ground-form  1^3?*,  but  is  epenthetic  if  one  compares 
forms  such  as  inp  (R.  up),  Num.  xxiii.  13  (cf.  p.  73).  The  insan 
governed  by  *73n,  laquei  (*?3n,  tormina),  is  either  gen.  exeg. :  bands 
which  consist  in  his  sin,  or  gen.  subj. :  bands  which  his  sin  unites, 
or  better,  gen.  possess. :  bands  which  his  sin  brings  with  it.  By 
these  bands  he  will  be  held  fast,  and  so  will  die:  he  (ttin  referring 
to  the  person  described)  will  die  in  insubordination  (Symm.  Sf 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

),  or  better,  since  I"S  and  3*"i  are  placed  in  contrast :  in 
want  of  correction.  With  the  na^  (ver.  236),  repeated  purposely 
from  ver.  20,  there  is  connected  the  idea  of  the  overthrow  which 
is  certain  to  overtake  the  infatuated  man.  In  ver.  20  the  sense 
of  moral  error  be<ian  already  to  connect  itself  with  this  verb. 

L 

n?;iK  is  the  right  name  of  unrestrained  lust  of  the  flesh.  riTiK  is 
connected  with  ^X,  the  belly ;  blN,  Arab,  a/,  to  draw  together,  to 
condense,  to  thicken  (IsaiaJi,  p.  424).  Dummheit  (stupidity)  and 
the  Old-Norse  dumba,  darkness,  are  in  their  roots  related  to  each 
other.  Also  in  the  Semitic  the  words  for  blackness  and  darkness 
are  derived  from  roots  meaning  condensation.  ^IK  is  the  miiid 
made  thick,  darkened,  and  become  like  crude  matter. 


NINTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  VI.  1-5. 
WARNING  AGAINST  INCONSIDERATE  SURETYSHIP. 

The  author  does  not  return  to  the  subject  of  chastity  till  the 
twelfth  discourse,  vi.  20  ff.  Between  the  eighth  and  the  twelfth 
three  other  groups  of  moral  proverbs  are  introduced,  which  are 
neither  connected  with  one  another  nor  with  the  eight  discourses 
which  precede  them.  Must  we  therefore,  with  Hitzig  and  Kamp- 
liausen,  hold  vi.  1-5,  6-11,  12-19,  to  be  an  interpolation  here 
introduced  from  some  other  place1?  We  find  here  the  fondness 
for  synonyms  arid  words  similar  in  sound  peculiar  to  the  author  of 
the  introduction,  vi.  2,  3,  5,  and  meet  with  the  same  interchange  of 
words,  vi.  4,  cf.  iv.  25,  and  figurative  expressions,  vi.  18,  cf.  iii.  29 
(tjnn),  word-formations,  vi.  10  (pan),  cf.  iii.  8  pi3E>),  ideas,  vi.  12, 
cf.  iv.  28  (na  rmrpy),  vi.  14,  cf.  ii.  12,  14  (niasnn),  and  constructions, 
vi.  12  (na  niC'pi?  l^in),  cf.  ii.  7  (on  ^n);  like  delineations  of  charac 
ter,  vi.  186,  cf.  i.  16,  and  threatenings,  vi.  15,  cf.  i.  26  f.,  iii.  25 — as 
many  marks  of  identity  of  the  authorship  as  could  be  expected. 
And  what  had  moved  the  interpolators  to  introduce  the  three 
groups  of  proverbs,  vi.  1-5,  6-11,  12-19,  just  here?  In  vain 
does  Hitzig  seek  to  extract  from  chap.  v.  certain  words  and  ideas 
common  to  it  with  chap.  vi.  which  shall  make  it  clear  that  the 
groups  of  proverbs  in  question  are  here  an  interpolation  ;  the  points 
of  contrast  are  not  prominent.  If  now  the  poet  has  already  in  iii. 


CIIA1'.  VI.  1-5.  135 

1-18,  but  still  more  in  iii.  27  ff.,  connected  together  all  manner 
of  rules  of  life  without  any  close  or  visible  connection,  it  is  not 
strange  if  at  vi.  1,  where  besides  the  ^2  denotes  the  new  section, 
lie  breaks  off  to  a  new  subject  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  matter ; 
and  the  connection  wanting  between  vi.  1  and  v.  23,  as  well  as 
between  iii.  27  and  iii.  26,  does  not  therefore  warrant  critical 
suspicion. 

Vers.  1-5.  The  author  warns  against  suretyship;  or  rather,  he 
advises  that  if  one  has  made  himself  surety,  he  should  as  quickly 
as  possible  withdraw  from  the  snare. 

1  My  son,  if  thou  hast  become  surety  for  thy  neighbour, 
Hast  given  thy  hand  for  another : 

2  Thou  art  entangled  in  the  words  of  thy  mouth, 
Ensnared  in  the  words  of  thy  mouth. 

8  Do  this  then,  my  son,  and  free  thyself — 

For  thou  hast  come  under  the  power  of  thy  neighbour — 
Go,  instantly  entreat  and  importune  thy  neighbour. 

4  Give  no  sleep  to  thine  eyes, 
And  no  slumber  to  thine  eyelids ; 

5  Tear  thyself  free  like  a  gazelle  from  his  hand, 
And  as  a  bird  from  the  hand  of  the  fowler. 

The  chief  question  here  is,  whether  ?  after  1~W  introduces  him  for 
whom  or  with  whom  one  becomes  surety.  Elsewhere  2~\y  (R.  21, 
whence  also  2"]^,  nectere,  to  twist  close  and  compact)  with  the 
accusative  of  the  person  means  to  become  surety  for  any  one,  to 
represent  him  as  a  surety,  xi.  15,  xx.  16  (xxvii.  13),  Gen.  xliii.  9, 
xliv.  33  (as  with  the  accusative  of  the  matter,  to  pledge  anything,  to 
deposit  it  as  a  pledge,  Jer.  xxx.  21,  Neh.  v.  3,  =  &'&,  Arab,  wad'a, 
Job  xvii.  3) ;  and  to  become  surety  with  any  one  is  expressed, 
xvii.  18,  by  ^s?  my.  The  phrase  p  3">J7  is  not  elsewhere  met  with, 
and  is  thus  questionable.  If  we  look  to  ver.  3,  the  JTj  ('"ijn)  men 
tioned  there  cannot  possibly  be  the  creditor  with  whom  one  has 
become  surety,  for  so  impetuous  and  urgent  an  application  to  him 
would  be  both  purposeless  and  unbecoming.  But  if  he  is  meant 
for  whom  one  has  become  surety,  then  certainly  1JT)p  is  also  to  be 
understood  of  the  same  person,  and  p  is  thus  dat.  commodi;  similar 
to  this  is  the  Targumic  *?y  NTW"]y,  suretyship  for  any  one,  xvii.  18, 
xxii.  26.  But  is  the  IT,  lb,  distinguished  from  "|jn,  the  stranger 
with  whom  one  has  become  surety  ?  The  parallels  xi.  15.  xx.  16, 
where  "U  denotes  the  person  whom  one  represents,  show  that  in  both 
lines  one  and  the  same  person  is  meant ;  "it  is  in  the  Proverbs 


136  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

equivalent  to  in«,  each  different  from  the  person  in  the  discourse, 
v.  1.7,  xxvii.  2,— thus,  like  -|jn,  denotes  not  the  friend,  but  generally 
him  to  whom  one  stands  in  any  kind  of  relation,  even  a  very  ex 
ternal  one,  in  a  word,  the  fellow-creatures  or  neighbours,  xxiv.  28 
(of.  the  Arab,  sahlk  and  karynk,  which  are  used  as  vaguely  and 
superficially).  It  is  further  a  question,  whether  we  have  to  explain 
Ib  :  if  thou  hast  given  thine  hand  to  another,  or  for  another.  Here 
also  we  are  without  evidence  from  the  usage  of  the  language;  for 
the  phrase  *|3  y$R,  or  merely  JJjOT,  appears  to  be  used  of  striking  the 
hand  in  suretyship  where  it  elsewhere  occurs  without  any  further 
addition,  xvii.  18,  xxii.  26,  xi.  15  ;  however,  Job  xvii.  3,  T$>  JJpru 
appears  the  same  :  to  strike  into  the  hand  of  any  one,  i.e.  to  give 
to  him  the  hand-stroke.  From  this  passage  Hitz^'g  concludes  that 
the  surety  gave  the  hand-stroke,  without  "doubt  in  the  presence  of 
witnesses,  first  of  all  of  the  creditor,  to  the  debtor,  as  a  sign  that 
he  stood  for  him.  But  this  idea  is  unnatural,  and  the  "  without 
doubt"  melts  into  air.  He  on  whose  hand  the  stroke  falls  is  always 
the  person  to  whom  one  gives  suretyship,  and  confirms  it  by  the 
hand-stroke.  Job  also,  I.e.,  means  to  say  :  who  else  but  Thou,  O 
Lord,  could  give  to  me  a  pledge,  viz.  of  my  innocence?  If  now 
the  IT,  ver.  16,  is,  as  we  have  shown,  not  the  creditor,1  but  the 
debtor,  then  is  the  *?  the  dat.  commodi,  as  la,  and  the  two  lines  per 
fectly  correspond.  JJJW  properly  means  to  drive,  to  strike  with  a  re 
sounding  noise,  cogn.  with  the  Arab.  ivaVa,  which  may  be  regarded 
as  its  intrans.  (Fl.);  then  particularly  to  strike  the  hand  or  with  the 
hand.  He  to  whom  this  hand-pledge  is  given  for  another  remains 
here  undesignated.  A  new  question  arises,  whether  in  ver.  6,  where 
e'?  (il}a(lrieari)  and  13^  (comprehendi)  follow  each  other  as  Isa. 
vm.  15,  cf.  Jer.  1.  24,  the  hypothetical  antecedent  is  continued  or 
not.  We  agree  with  Schultens,  Ziegler,  and  Fleischer  against  the 
continuance  of  the  QK.  The  repetition  of  the  TB  ^»N3  (cf.  ii.  14) 
serves  rightly  to  strengthen  the  representation  of  the  thought:  thou, 
thou  thyself  and  no  other,  hast  then  ensnared  thyself  in  the  net ; 
but  this  strengthening  of  the  expression  would  greatly  lose  in  force 

1  A  translation  by  R.  Joseph  Joel  of  Fulda,  1787,  whose  autograph  MS  Bner 
ses,  renders  the  passage  not  badly  thus:—"  My  son,  if  thou  hast  become 
surety  for  thy  friend,  and  hast  given  the  hand  to  another,  then  thou  art  bound 
by  thy  word,  held  by  thy  promise.  Yet  do  what  I  say  to  thee,  my  son  •  Be  at 
iains  as  soon  as  thou  canst  to  get  free,  otherwise  thou  art  in  the  power  of  thy 
friend;  shun  no  trouble,  be  urgent  with  thy  friend." 


CHAP.  VI.  1-5.  137 

by  placing  ver.  2  in  the  antecedent,  while  if  ver.  2  is  regarded  as 
the  conclusion,  and  thus  as  the  principal  proposition,  it  appears  in 
its  full  strength. 

Ver.  3.  The  new  commencement  needs  no  particle  denoting  a 
conclusion  ;  the  NiSX,  making  the  summons  emphatic  (cf.  2  Kings 
x.  10,  frequently  in  interrogative  clauses),  connects  it  closely 
enough.  DXT,  neut.,  refers  to  what  follows.  The  1  before  ^»'3n  is 
explanatory,  as  we  say  in  familiar  language :  Be  so  good  as  tell  me, 
or  do  me  the  favour  to  come  with  me;  while  no  Frenchman  would 
say,  Faites-moi  le  (ce)  plaisir  et  venez  avec  moi  (Fl.).1  The  clause 
nsn  rp2  is  not  to  be  translated:  in  case  thou  art  fallen  into  the 
hand  of  thy  neighbour ;  for  this  is  represented  (vers.  1,  2)  as  having 
already  in  fact  happened.  On  two  sides  the  surety  is  no  longer 
sui  juris:  the  creditor  has  him  in  his  hand;  for  if  the  debtor  does 
not  pay,  he  holds  the  surety,  and  in  this  way  many  an  honourable 
man  has  lost  house  and  goods,  Sirach  xxix.  18,  cf.  viii.  13 ; — and  the 
debtor  has  him,  the  surety,  in  his  hand  ;  for  the  performance  which 
is  due,  for  which  the  suretyship  avails,  depends  on  his  conscientious 
ness.  The  latter  is  here  meant :  thou  hast  made  thy  freedom  and 
thy  possessions  dependent  on  the  will  of  thy  neighbour  for  whom 
thou  art  the  surety.  The  clause  introduced  with  ^  gives  the  reason 
for  the  call  to  set  himself  free  (^>'3n  from  ta,  E.  f>¥,  *?&,  to  draw 
out  or  off)  ;  it  is  a  parenthetical  sentence.  The  meaning  of  DSnnn 
is  certain.  The  verb  DSTJ  (b>£H,  DEn)  signifies  to  stamp  on,  calcare, 
conculcare ;  the  KamusB  explains  rafas  by  rakad  balarjal.  The 
Hitlipa.  might,  it  is  true,  mean  to  conduct  oneself  in  a  trampling 
manner,  to  tread  roughly,  as  N?3nn,  and  the  medial  Nipli.  K33,  to 
conduct  oneself  speaking  (in  an  impassioned  manner);  but  Ps.  Ixviii. 
31  and  the  analogy  of  DDiann  favour  the  meaning  to  throw  one 
self  in  a  stamping  manner,  Le.  violently,  to  the  ground,  to  trample 
upon  oneself, — i.e.  let  oneself  be  trampled  upon,  to  place  oneself  in 
the  attitude  of  most  earnest  humble  prayer.  Thus  the  Groec.  Venet. 

1  For  the  right  succession  of  the  accents  here  (three  serviles  before  the  Pazer), 
rid.   Torath  Emeth,  p.  30 ;  Acceiituationssystem,  xii.  §  4.     According  to  Beu- 
Naphtali,  Mercha  is  to  be  given  to  the  riKT. 

2  The  Zinnoriih  before  the  Mahpach  in  these  words  represents  at  the  same 
time  the  Makkeph.     But  Ben-Naphtali  differs  here  from  Ben-Asher,  for  he 
adopts  the  Makkeph  and  rejects  the  Zinnorith ;  vid.  Torath  Emeth,  p.  16,  and 
my  Pgalmencomm.  Bd.  ii.  (1860),  p.  460,  note  2. 

3  [El-Feyrooztibtidee's  Kamus,  a  native  Arabic  Lexicon  ;  vid.  Lane's  Arab. 
Lex.  Bk.  i.  pt.  1,  p.  xvii.] 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERD3. 

7raTr')6r)Ti,  llashi  ("  humble  thyself  like  to  the  threshold  which  is 
trampled  and  trode  upon"),  Aben-Ezra,  Immanuel  ("humble  thy 
self  under  the  soles  of  his  feet ") ;  so  Cocceius,  J.  H.  Michaelis,  and 
others:  concnlcandum  te  prcebe.  ami  is  more  controverted.  The 
Talmudic-Midrash  explanation  (b.  Joma,  87a;  Bathra,  1735,  and 
elsewhere)  :  take  with  thee  in  great  numbers  thy  friends  (am 
r^nann),  is  discredited  by  this,  that  it  has  along  with  it  the  expla 
nation  of  DSTinn  by  (T)  D3  "inn}  solve  palmam  (rnanus),  i.e.  pay 
what  thou  canst.  Also  with  the  meaning  to  rule  (Parchon,  Imma 
nuel),  which  am  besides  has  not,  nothing  is  to  be  done.  The 
right  meaning  of  2  am  is  to  rush  upon  one  boisterously,  Isa.  iii.  5. 
am  means  in  general  to  be  violently  excited  (Arab,  rahiba,  to  be 
afraid),  and  thus  to  meet  one,  here  with  the  accusative  :  assail 
impetuously  thy  neighbour  (viz.  that  he  fulfil  his  engagement). 
Accordingly,  with  a  choice  of  words  more  or  less  suitable,  the  LXX. 
translates  by  irapo^vve,  Symm.,  Theodotion  by  Trapop/^Tja-ov,  the 
Grcec.  Venet.  by  evurxy<rov,  the  Syr.  (which  the  Targumist  copies) 
by  J1J  (solicita),  and  Kimchi  glosses  by  :  lay  an  arrest  upon  him  with 
pacifying  words.  The  Talmud  explains  TH  as  plur.;1  but  the  plur., 
which  was  permissible  in  iii.  28,  is  here  wholly  inadmissible  :  it  is 
thus  the  plena  scriptio  for  ^JT|  with  the  retaining  of  the  third  radical 
of  the  ground-form  of  the  root-word  (TJ  =  njn),  or  with  i  as  mater 
lectionis,  to  distinguish  the  pausal-form  from  that  which  is  without 
the  pause;  cf.  xxiv.  34.  LXX.,  Syr.,  Jerome,  etc.,  rightly  translate 
it  in  the  sing.  The  immediateness  lying  in  ^  (cf.  inraje.  Matt, 
v.  24)  is  now  expressed  as  a  duty,  ver.  4  f.  One  must  not  sleep  and 
slumber  (an  expression  quite  like  Ps.  cxxxii.  4),  not  give  himself 
quietness  and  rest,  till  the  other  has  released  him  from  his  bail  by 
the  performance  of  that  for  which  he  is  surety.  One  must  set 
himself  free  as  a  gazelle  or  as  a  bird,  being  caught,  seeks  to  dis 
entangle  itself  by  calling  forth  all  its  strength  and  art. 

Ver.  5.  The  naked  "TO  is  not  to  be  translated  "  immediately  ;" 
for  in  this  sense  the  word  is  rabbinical,  not  biblical.  The  versions 
(with  exception  of  Jerome  and  the  Grcec.  Venet.)  translate  as  if  the 
word  were  HBO  [out  of  the  snare].  Bertheau  prefers  this  reading, 
and  Bb'ttcher  holds  TV  [a  hunter]  to  have  fallen  out  after  TD.  It 
is  not  a  parallelism  with  reservation ;  for  a  bird-catcher  is  not  at 

1  There  is  here  no  distinction  between  the  Kethib  and  the  Ken.  The  Masora 
remarks,  "  This  is  the  only  passage  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  where  the  word  is 
\\ritten  with  Yud  (^)  ;"  it  thus  rccuguises  only  the  undisputed  -pin. 


CHAP.  VI.  C-S.  139 

the  same  time  a  gazelle-hunter.  The  author,  if  he  has  so  written, 
has  conceived  of  TO,  as  at  1  Kings  xx.  42,  as  absolute,  and  connected 
it  with  ?y3n  :  tear  thyself  free  like  the  gazelle  from  the  hand  into 
which  thou  hast  fallen  (Hitzig);  according  to  which,  the  section 
should  be  accentuated  thus :  TO  *axa  iwn.  '3X,  Aram.  '3B,  Arab. 
zaby,  is  the  gazelle  (Arab.  ghazdl),  so  called  from  its  elegance  ; 
IIS?,  the  bird,  from  its  whistling  (12V,  Arab,  safar,  R.  f|¥,  cf.  Arab. 
taffdrat)  the  whistling  of  a  bird),  Arab,  safar,  whistler  (with 
prosthesis,  'asafwar,  warbler,  Psalm,  p.  794).  The  bird-catcher  is 
called  Bnp*  (from  B>p),  after  the  form  ifcj,  cog.  trip,  Isa.  xxix.  21, 
«%  R.  B>p),  after  the  form  niaa  (fern,  rnfoa),  or  e>ip; ;  one  would 
think  that  the  Kametz,  after  the  form  kdtwl  (vid.  under  Isa.  i.  17), 
must  here  be  fixed,  but  in  Jer.  v.  26  the  word  is  vocalized 


TENTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  VI.  6-11. 
CALL  TO  THE  SLUGGARD  TO  AWAKE. 

A  Itera  parcenesis  (remarks  J.  H.  Michaelis)  ad  debitorem  potius 
directa,  sicut,  prima  ad  fidejussorem.  But  this  connection  is  a 
subtle  invention.  These  brief  proverbial  discourses,  each  of  which 
forms  a  completed  whole,  have  scarcely  been  a  priori  destined  for 
this  introduction  to  the  Salomonic  Book  of  Proverbs  edited  by  the 
author  ;  but  he  places  them  in  it ;  and  that  he  so  arranges  them 
that  this  section  regarding  sluggards  follows  that  regarding  sureties, 
may  have  been  occasioned  by  accidental  points  of  contact  of  the 
one  with  the  other  (cf  l£,6a,  with  36;  fifot!*  .  .  .  nto«n,  ver.  10,  with 
ver.  4),  which  may  also  further  determine  the  course  in  which  the 
proverbs  follow  each  other. 

Vers.  6-8.  As  Elihu  (Job  xxxv.  11)  says  that  God  has  set  the 
beasts  as  our  teachers,  so  he  sends  the  sluggard  to  the  school  of  the 
ant  (Ameise),  so  named  (in  Germ.)  from  its  industry  (Emsigkeit]  : 

G  Go  to  the  ant,  sluggard  ; 

Consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise  ! 

7  She  that  hath  no  judge, 
Director,  and  ruler : 

8  She  prepareth  in  summer  her  food, 
Has  gathered  in  harvest  her  store. 


HO  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

The  Declii  written  mostly  under  the  'H?  separates  the  inseparable. 
The  thought,  Go  to  the  ant,  sluggard !  permits  no  other  distinction 
than  in  the  vocative;  but  the  Dechi  of  n?lM"vSj!  7]1?  is  changed  into 
Miinach1  on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  Athnach-VfOTd,  which 
consists  of  only  two  syllables  without  the  counter-tone.  The  ant  lias 
for  its  Hebrew-Arabic  name  (TOM,  from  the  R.  DJ  (Isaiah,  p.  687), 
which  is  first  used  of  the  sound,  which  expresses  the  idea  of  the 
low,  dull,  secret, — thus  of  its  active  and  yet  unperceived  motion ; 
its  Aramaic  name  in  the  Peshito,  )jLLo_»o_»,  and  in  the  Targ. 
K3»E>D}tJ>  (also  Arab,  sumsum,  simsim,  of  little  red  ants),  designates 
it  after  its  quick  activity,  its  busy  running  hither  and  thither  (vid. 
Fleischer  in  Levy's  Cliald.  Worterb.  ii.  578).  She  is  a  model  of 
unwearied  and  well-planned  labour.  From  the  plur.  ^~^]  it  is  to 
be  concluded  that  the  author  observed  their  art  in  gathering  in  and 
laying  up  in  store,  carrying  burdens,  building  their  houses,  and  the 
like  (vid.  the  passages  in  the  Talmud  and  Midrash  in  the  Hamburg 
Real-Encydopadie  fur  Bibel  und  Talmud,  18G8,  p.  83  f.).  To  the 
ant  the  sluggard  (TVJf,  Aram,  and  Arab,  tay,  with  the  fundamental 
idea  of  weight  and  dulness)  is  sent,  to  learn  from  her  to  be 
ashamed,  and  to  be  taught  wisdom. 

Ver.  7.  This  relative  clause  describes  the  subject  of  ver.  8  more 
fully:  it  is  like  a  clause  with  H3  03,  quamquam?  The  community  of 
ants  exhibits  a  peculiar  class  of  workers;  but  it  is  not,  like  that  of 
bees,  composed  of  grades  terminating  in  the  queen-bee  as  the  head. 
The  three  offices  here  named  represent  the  highest  judiciary,  police, 
and  executive  powers;  for  Pyf?  (from  nvj^  to  distinguish,  with 
the  ending  in,  vid.  Jesurun,  p.  215s.)  is  the  jud<je  ;  "iBb>  (from 
"it3E>,  Arab,  satr,  to  draw  lines,  to  write)  is  the  overseer  (in  war  the 
director,  controller),  or,  as  Saalschiitz  indicates  the  province  of  the 
schotrim  both  in  cities  and  in  the  camp,  the  office  of  police ;  tab 
(vid.  Isaiah,  p.  691),  the  governors  of  the  whole  state  organism 
subordinated  to  the  schoftim  and  the  schotrim.  The  Syr.,  and  the 
Targ.  slavishly  following  it,  translate  pvp  by  &nyn  (harvest),  for 
they  interchange  this  word  with  TXp. 

Ver.  8.  In  this  verse  the  change  of  the  time  cannot  be  occasioned 
by  this,  that  r.%  and  Tyj3  are  distinguished  as  the  earlier  and  the 

1  Cod.  1294  accentuates  ntarta  "]!>_;  and  that,  according  to  Ben-Asher's 
rule,  is  correct. 

2  Ver.  7  is  commonly  halved  by  Relict;  but  for  the  correct  accentuation,  vid. 
Torath  Emetli,  p.  48,  §  3. 


CHAP.  VI.  9-11. 

later  period  of  the  year ;  for  Hi?  (=  Arab.  Tcayt,  from  Mt,  to  be 
glowing  hot,  cf.  Arab.  Itghyyt  of  the  glow  of  the  mid-day  heat) 
is  the  late  summer,  when  the  heat  rises  to  the  highest  degree ;  but 
the  son  of  the  Shunammite  succumbed  to  the  sun-stroke  in  the  time 
of  harvest  (2  Kings  iv.  18  f.).  Lowenstein  judiciously  remarks 
that  pan  refers  to  immediate  want,  rnjtf  to  that  which  is  future ; 
or,  better,  the  former  shows  them  engaged  in  persevering  industry 
during  the  summer  glow,  the  latter  as  at  the  end  of  the  harvest, 
and  engaged  in  the  bringing  home  of  the  winter  stores.  The  words 
of  the  procuring  of  food  in  summer  are  again  used  by  Agur,  Prov. 
xxx.  25  ;  and  the  Aramaic  fable  of  the  ant  and  the  grasshopper? 
which  is  also  found  among  those  of  -ZEsop  and  of  Syntipas,  serves 
as  an  illustration  of  this  whole  verse.  The  LXX.  has,  after  the 
"  Go  to  the  ant,"  a  proverb  of  five  lines,  rj  TropevdrjTi  Trpbs  rqv 
fie\La-crav.  Hitzig  regards  it  as  of  Greek  origin  ;  and  certainly,  as 
Lagarde  has  shown,  it  contains  idiomatic  Greek  expressions  which 
would  not  occur  to  a  translator  from  the  Hebrew.  In  any  case, 
however,  it  is  an  interpolation  which  disfigures  the  Hebrew  text 
by  overlading  it. 

Vers.  9-11.  After  the  poet  has  admonished  the  sluggard  to 
take  the  ant  as  an  example,  he  seeks  also  to  rouse  him  out  of 
his  sleepiness  and  indolence  : 

9  How  long,  0  sluggard,  wilt  thou  lie  ? 
When  wilt  thou  rise  up  from  thy  sleep  ? 

10  "  A  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber, 

A  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  rest ! " 

11  So  comes  like  a  strong  robber  thy  poverty, 
And  thy  want  as  an  armed  man. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  awakening  cry,  ver.  9,  is  not  of  the  kind  that 
Paul  could  have  it  in  his  mind,  Eph.  v.  14.  PXS?  has,  as  the  voca 
tive,  Pasek  after  it,  and  is,  on  account  of  the  Pasek,  in  correct 
editions  accentuated  not  with  Munach,  but  Mercha.  The  words, 
ver.  10,  are  not  an  ironical  call  (sleep  only  yet  a  little  while,  but 
in  truth  a  long  while),  but  per  mimesin  the  reply  of  the  sluggard 
with  which  he  turns  away  the  unwelcome  disturber.  The  plurals 
with  EVE  sound  like  self-delusion:  yet  a  little,  but  a  sufficient !  To 
fold  the  hands,  i.e.  to  cross  them  over  the  breast,  or  put  them  into 
the  bosom,  denotes  also,  Eccles.  iv.  5,  the  idler,  p'isn,  complicatio 

1  Vid.  Goldberg's  Chofes  Matmonim,  Berlin  1845  ;  and  Landsberger's  Berlin 
Graduation  Thesis,  Falulte  aliquot  Aramxse,  1846,  p.  28. 


142  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

(cf.  in  Livy,  compressis  gnodaiunt  manibus  sidere;  and  Lucan,  ii.  292, 
comprr.ssas  tenuisse  mamis\  is  formed  like  ^ptP,  iii.  8,  and  the  inf. 
332>  like  ipn,  x.  21,  and  7?2>,  xvi.  19.  The  perf.  cousec.  connects 
itself  with  the  words  heard  from  the  mouth  of  the  slu^^ard,  which 

OO  ' 

are  as  a  hypothetical  antecedent  thereto  :  if  thou  so  sayest,  and 
always  again  sayest,  then  this  is  the  consequence,  that  suddenly 
and  inevitably  poverty  and  want  come  upon  thee.  That  ^l?i]p 
denotes  the  grassator,  i.e.  vagabond  (Arab,  dawwar,  one  who 
wanders  much  about),  or  the  robber  or  foe  (like  the  Arab,  'aduww, 
properly  transgressor  finium))  is  not  justified  by  the  usa^e  of  the 
language  ;  %*n  signifies,  2  Sam.  xii.  4,  the  traveller,  and  ^HO  is 
one  who  rides  quickly  forward,  not  directly  a  «a/co?  oSoiTropo? 
(LXX.). 

Ver.  11.  The  point  of  comparison,  lla,  is  the  unforeseen,  as  in 
quick  inarch  or  assault  (Bottcher),  and  116  the  hostile  and  irre 
trievable  surprise  ;  for  a  man  in  armour,  as  Hitzig  remarks,  brings 
no  good  in  his  armour:  he  assails  the  opponent,  and  he  who  is  with 
out  defence  yields  to  him  without  the  possibility  of  withstanding 
him.  The  LXX.  translate  }JO  B*X3  by  oxnrep  dyaObs  Spoked?  (cf. 
Syoo^eu?  —  n&T'UD,  Job  vii.  6,  LXX.,  Aq.),  for  what  reason  we  know 
not.  After  ver.  11  they  interpose  two  other  lines  :  "  but  if  thou 
art  assiduous,  thy  harvest  will  come  to  thee  as  a  fountain,  but  want 
will  go  away  wairep  rcatcbs  Spoytieu?."  Also  this  "  bad  runner" 
we  must  let  go ;  for  Lagarde's  retranslation,  JbJ  t^Nn  t^'na  "ponci, 
no  one  can  understand.  The  four  lines,  vers.  10,  11,  are  re 
peated  in  the  appendix  of  Words  of  the  Wise,  xxiv.  33  f. ;  and  if 
this  appendix  originated  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  they  may  have 
been  taken  therefrom  by  the  poet,  the  editor  of  the  older  Book  of 
Proverbs.  Instead  of  ^n»3?  Tj^nnp  is  there  used  (so  comes  for 
ward  thy  poverty,  i.e.  again  and  again,  but  certainly  moving  for 
ward);  and  instead  of  "portD,  "pDn»  is  written,  as  also  here,  ver.  6, 
for  inaBfc  is  found  the  variant  TfUBto  with  Jod  as  mater  lectionis  of 
the  pausal  Segol. 


ELEVENTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  VI.  12-19. 

WARDING  AGAINST  DECEIT  AND  MALICE. 

There  follows  now  a  third  brief  series  of  instructions,  which  run 


CHAP   VI.  12-15.  143 


to  .a  conclusion  vu'th  a  deterring  prospect  similar  to  the  fore 
going. 

12  A  worthless  man,  a  wicked  man, 

Is  he  who  practiseth  falsehood  with  his  mouth  ; 

13  Who  winketh  with  his  eyes,  scrapeth  with  his  foot, 
Pointeth  with  his  fingers. 

14  Malice  is  in  his  heart, 

He  deviseth  evil  at  all  tiroes, 
He  spreadeth  strife. 

15  Therefore  suddenly  his  destruction  shall  come, 
Suddenly  shall  he  be  destroyed,  and  there  is  no  remedy. 

It  is  a  question,  what  is  the  subject  and  what  the  predicate  in 
ver.  12.  Thus  much  is  clear,  that  upon  him  who  is  here  described 
according  to  his  deceitful  conduct  the  sentence  of  condemnation 
shall  fall.  He  who  is  so  described  is  thus  subject,  and  ?JJv3  Dltf 

J          >  --•   :          r  T 

is  without  doubt  predicate.  But  does  the  complex  subject  begin 
with  }1X  E^X  1  Thus  e.g.  Hitzig :  "  A  worthless  man  is  the  wicked 
man  who  ..."  But  the  interchange  of  D1X  and  t^X  is  a  sign  of 
parallel  relation;  and  if  126  belonged  attributively  to  fix  E^X,  then 
since  ftxn  ti^X  is  not  used,  it  ought  at  least  to  have  been  continued 
by  ^ii"1'"].  The  general  moral  categories,  12a,  are  thus  predicates, 
as  was  indeed  besides  probable  ;  the  copious  division  of  the  subject 
demands  also  in  point  of  style  a  more  developed  predicate,  xvi. 
27  is  simpler  in  plan,  and  also  logically  different.  There  the 
expression  is,  as  is  usual,  ?JJv3  t^X.  Since  {IX  DHX  is  not  possible, 
the  author  uses  instead  ^jrta.  This  word,  composed  of  ^2.  and  ^ 

L         L  '  '' 

(from  ?JP,  >Jfl,  to  be  useful,  to  be  good  for),  so  fully  serves  as  one 
word,  that  it  even  takes  the  article,  1  Sam.  xxv.  25.  It  denotes 
worthlessness,  generally  in  a  chain  of  words  in  the  genitive,  but 
also  the  worthless,  Job  xxxiv.  18 ;  and  it  is  to  be  so  taken  here, 

for   CHX  does  not;  form  a  constructivus.  and  never  governs  a  eeni- 

''L    L 
tive.     ?JP?3  is  thus  a  virtual  adjective  (as  nequam  in  homo  nequarri); 

the  connection  is  like  that  of  JJB>")  tHX,  xi.  7,  and  elsewhere,  although 
more  apposition al  than  this  pure  attributive.  Synonymous  with 
^jrta  is  fix  (from  an,  to  breathe),  wickedness,  i.e.  want  of  all  moral 
character.  Thus  worthless  and  wicked  is  he  who  practises  deceit 
with  his  mouth  (cf.  iv.  24),  i.e.  who  makes  language  the  means  of 
untruthf ulness  and  uncharitableness.  na  m^'jpy  is  meant  in  amoral 
sense,  but  without  excluding  that  distortion  of  the  mouth  which 
belongs  to  the  mimicry  of  the  malicious.  It  is  the  accus.  of  the 
object;  for  ^pn  is  also  bound  iu  a  moral  sense  with  the  accusative 


144  TOE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

of  that  which  one  practises,  i.e.  dealing  with,  exercises  himself  in, 
ii.  7,  xxviii.  18,  Isa.  xxxiii.  15. 

Ver.  13.  V^y?  pip  is  translated  according  to  the  sense  :  who 
winks  (nictat)  with  his  eyes;  but  that  is  not  the  proper  meaning  of 
the  word,  for  pp  is  used  not  only  of  the  eyes,  x.  10  (cf.  xvi.  30, 
qui  oculos  morsicat  or  connivet),  Ps.  xxxv.  19,  but  also  of  the  lips, 
xvi.  30.  Thus  Lowensteiu's  explanation  :  who  opens  up  the  eyes, 

is  incorrect.  The  verb  pp  unites  in  it  the  meanings  of  ,  ^JJ,  to 
pinch  off  with  a  sharp  implement,  and  ^J!,  with  a  blunt  instru 

ment  (Arab,  mikrad,  pincers).  It  means  to  pince,  to  nip,  as  Arab. 
heirs,  pincer,  —  e.g.  kars  balski/n  alarsasat,  he  cuts  off  with  the  knife 
the  leaden  seal,  —  hence  frequently,  to  nip  together  the  eyes,  pro- 
vincially:  to  wink  ("  zwickern"  frequent,  of  "  zwicken"  to  nip)  with 
the  eyes  —  the  action  of  the  deceiver,  who  thereby  gives  the  sign  to 
others  that  they  help  or  at  least  do  not  hinder  him  from  banter 
ing  and  mocking,  belying  and  deceiving  a  third  person  (Fl.)  ;  cf. 
All's  proverb,  "  O  God,  pardon  to  us  the  culpable  winking  with  the 
eye  (ramzat)"  and  Fleischer's  notes  thereon,  the  Proverbs  of  All, 
p.  100  f. 

That  the  words  which  follow,  1vJ"]3  p^D,  are  meant  of  discourse, 
i.e.  the  giving  of  signs,  with  the  feet,  and,  so  to  say,  significant  oratio 
pedestris  (LXX.,  Aben-Ezra,  Bertheau,  Hitzig,  and  others),  is  very 
improbable,  since  the  usage  of  language  has  set  apart  the  Piel  ??O 
for  the  meaning  loqui,  and  b?10  admits  another  suitable  signification, 
for  /vio  means  in  Talmudic/rzcare,  confricargj  —  e.g.  Tvb'TQ  ?hon,  he 
who  grinds  the  parched  ears  of  corn  (b.  Beza  12i  ;  Maseroth,  iv.  5), 
—  after  which  Syr.,  Targ.,  D3n  (stamping),  Aq.  rplftow,  Symm. 
TTpoaTplfiwv,  Jerome,  (gui)  terit  pede,  and  Raslii  f|B>2t?D  (grinding, 
scratching)  ;  it  means  one  who  scrapes  with  his  feet,  draws  them 
backwards  and  forwards  on  the  ground  in  order  thereby  to  give  a 

sign  to  others  ;  also  the  Arab.  J^,  levem  et  agilem  esse,  which  as  the 
synonym  of  c,  -^1  is  connected  with  ^i  of  the  way,  signifies  pro 
perly  to  move  the  feet  quickly  hither  and  thither  (Fl.).1 


1  The  root-idea  of  the  Arab,  mall  is  unquietness  of  motion  ;  the  Arab,  noun 
mallt  signifies  the  glow  with  its  flickering  light  and  burning  :  glowing  ashes, 
inner  agitation,  external  haste;  Arab,  malil  (?7D)  is  the  feverish  patient,  but 
also  one  quickly  hastening  away,  and  generally  an  impatient  or  hasty  person 
(*>«/.  Wetstein  in  Bauuissin  in  his  Job.  Titschendorfianus,  vii.  6).  The  grinding 


CHAP.  VI.  12-15.  145 

appears  here,  in  accordance  with  its  primary  signification  (projicere, 
sc.  brachium  or  digilum  =  monstrare),  connected  with  VnjDXKS  ; 
another  expression  for  this  scornful,  malicious  SaKTv\oSeiKveiv  is 
JJ3VX  nte,  Jsa.  Iviii.  9. 

Ver.  14.  In  this  verse  is  continued  the  description  of  the  subject, 

J 

only  once  returning  to  the  particip.  The  clauses  are  arranged 
independently,  but  logically  according  to  the  complex  conception 
of  the  subject,  nbann  are  just  the  knaveries,  i.e.  the  malicious 
wickedness  which  comes  to  light  in  word  and  deportment  as  JTiK'py 
na.  Regarding  the  double  figure  of  the  smithy  and  of  agriculture 
underlying  Bhn,  machinari,  vid.  at  iii.  29,  and  regarding  the  omis 
sion  of  the  KVI  to  Bhh,  at  Ps.  vii.  10  The  phrase  DTiD  rfep  (as 
ver.  19,  xvi.  28),  to  let  loose  disputes,  so  that  they  break  forth, 
reminds  us  rather  of  the  unfettering  of  the  winds  by  JEolus  than 
of  the  casting  in  of  the  apple  of  discord.  Instead  of  DT1B  the 
Ken  has  E^HD ;  on  the  other  hand,  D^p  remains  unconnected 
vi.  19,  x.  12.  The  form  D^np  occurs  once,  xviii.  18,  and  its 
constr.  V.H*?  once,  xix.  13.  Everywhere  else  the  text  has  DWB, 
for  which  the  Keri  has  DH?np,  xviii.  19,  xxi.  9,  19,  xxiii.  29,  xxv. 
24,  xxvi.  21,  xxvii.  15.  The  forms  £]p  and  )"ip  are  also  recognised : 
the  former  stands  alone  without  any  analogous  example ;  the  latter 
is  compared  at  least  with  1TO,  Arab,  masdd  (Psalmen,  p.  163,  3). 
Probably  these  two  forms  are  warranted  by  Gen.  xxv.  2,  cf.  xxxvii. 
28,  36,  where  £]»  and  fi»  occur  as  the  names  of  two  sons  of 
Abraham  by  Ketnrah.  But  the  national  name  D^IP  is  no  reason 
for  the  seven  times  laying  aside  of  the  regular  form  DW»,  i.e.  tTOftp, 
which  is  the  plur.  of  Jiio  after  the  forms  D^Kp,  D^top,  although 
BW»,  after  the  forms  D^'ttp,  D^sp,  is  also  found. 

Ver.  15.  With  the  14th  verse  the  description  terminates.  A 
worthless  and  a  wicked  person  is  he  who  does  such  things.  The 
point  lies  in  the  characteristic  out  of  which  the  conclusion  is  drawn: 
therefore  his  ruin  will  suddenly  come  upon  him,  etc.  Regarding 
TK,  the  root-meaning  of  which  is  illustrated  by  Amos  ii.  13,  vid.  at 
i.  26.  Dxna  is  an  old  accus.  of  an  absol.  &W13,  of  the  same  meaning 
as  J.TIB,  used  as  an  adverbial  accus.,  both  originating  in  the  root-ided, 
of  splitting,  opening,  breaking  out  and  breaking  forth.  "  Shall  be 

is  made  by  means  of  a  quick  movement  hither  and  thither ;  and  so  also  is  speak 
ing,  for  the  instrument  of  speech,  particularly  the  tongue,  is  set  in  motion. 
Only  the  meaning  pnecidcre,  circumcidcre,  does  not  connect  itself  with  that  root- 
idea:  ta  in  this  signification  appears  to  be  a  nuance  of  no,  stringere. 
VOL.  I.  K 


]  46  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

broken  to  pieces"  (as  a  brittle  potter's  vessel,  Ps.  ii.  9,  Isa.  xxx.  14, 
Jer.  xxix.  11)  is  a  frequent  figure  for  the  destruction  (I?*?)  of  an 
army  (cf.  Arab,  dnksar  dljysh),  of  a  city  or  a  state,  a  man.  p&O 
continues  the  "I2$1  as  xxix.  1 :  there  shall  be  as  it  were  no  means 
of  recovery  for  his  shattered  members  (Fl.).  Without  the  Vav  this 
KSHD  PN  would  be  a  clause  conceived  of  accusatively,  and  thus 
adverbially :  without  any  healing. 

Vers.  16-19.  What  now  follows  is  not  a  separate  section  (Hitzig), 
but  the  corroborative  continuation  of  that  which  precedes.  The 
last  word  (DTJD,  strife)  before  the  threatening  of  punishment,  146, 
is  also  here  the  last.  The  thought  that  no  vice  is  a  greater 
abomination  to  God  than  the  (in  fact  satanical)  striving  to  set  men 
at  variance  who  love  one  another,  clothes  itself  in  the  form  of  the 
numerical  proverb  which  we  have  already  considered,  pp.  12,  13. 
From  that  place  we  transfer  the  translation  of  this  example  of  a 
Midda : — 

16  There  are  six  things  which  Jahve  hateth, 
And  seven  are  an  abhorrence  to  His  soul : 

17  Haughty  eyes,  a  lying  tongue, 

And  hands  that  shed  innocent  blood ; 

18  An  heart  that  deviseth  the  thoughts  of  evil, 
Feet  that  hastily  run  to  wickedness, 

19  One  that  uttereth  lies  as  a  false  witness, 
And  he  who  soweth  strife  between  brethren. 

The  sense  is  not,  that  the  six  things  are  hateful  to  God,  and  the 
seventh  an  abomination  to  Him  besides  (Lowenstein) ;  the  Midda- 
form  in  Amos  i.  3-ii.  6,  and  in  the  proverb  in  Job  v.  19,  shows 
that  the  seven  are  to  be  numbered  separately,  and  the  seventh  is 
the  non  plus  ultra  of  all  that  is  hated  by  God.  We  are  not  to 
translate  :  sex  hcecce  odit,  for  nan^  nan  (D?^  jn)  points  backwards  and 
hitherwards,  but  not,  as  n?S?  forwards  to  that  immediately  following; 
in  that  case  the  words  would  be  nta  w,  or  more  correctly  niwi  W. 
But  also  Hitzig's  explanation,  "  These  six  things  (viz.  vers.  12-15) 
Jahve  hateth,"  is  impossible ;  for  (which  is  also  against  that  hcecce) 
the  substantive  pronoun  non,  njn  (l"l^nn,  Hinn)  is  never,  like  the 
Chald.  Jten  (isn),  employed  as  an  accus.  in  the  sense  of  QnnSj  jnnx, 
it  is  always  (except  where  it  is  the  virtual  gen.  connected  with  a 
preposition)  only  the  nom.,  whether  of  the  subject  or  of  the  predi 
cate;  and  where  it  is  the  nom.  of  the  predicate,  as  Deut.  xx.  15, 
Isa.  li.  19,  substantival  clauses  precede  in  which  run  (non)  repre- 


CHAP.  VI.  16   19.  147 

sents  the  substantive  verb,  or,  more  correctly,  in  which  the  logical 
copula  resulting  from  the  connection  of  the  clause  itself  remains 
unexpressed.  Accordingly,  'n  &»t?  is  a  relative  clause,  and  is 
therefore  so  accentuated  here,  as  at  xxx.  15  and  elsewhere  :  sex 
(wtnt)  ea  quce  Deus  odit,  et  septem  (sunf)  abominatio  animce  ejus. 
Regarding  the  statement  that  the  soul  of  God  hates  anything,  vid. 
at  Isa.  i.  14.  JTQyin,  an  error  in  the  writing  occasioned  by  the 
numeral  (vid.  xxvi.  25),  is  properly  corrected  by  the  Ken ;  the 
poet  had  certainly  the  singular  in  view,  as  iii.  32,  xi.  1,  when  he 
wrote  royin.  The  first  three  characteristics  are  related  to  each 
other  as  mental,  verbal,  actual,  denoted  by  the  members  of  the 
body  by  means  of  which  these  characteristics  come  to  light.  The 
virtues  are  taken  all  together  as  a  body  (organism),  and  meekness 
is  its  head.  Therefore  there  stands  above  all,  as  the  sin  of  sins,  the 
mentis  elates  tumor,  which  expresses  itself  in  elatum  (grande)  super- 
cilium :  nton  D^y,  the  feature  of  the  CH,  haughty  (cf.  Ps.  xviii.  28 
with  2  Sam.  xxii.  28),  is  the  opposite  of  the  feature  of  the  D^y  rr^, 
Job  xxii.  29 ;  py  is  in  the  O.  T.  almost  always  (vid.  Cant.  iv.  9) 
fern.,  and  adjectives  of  course  form  no  dual.  The  second  of  these 
characteristics  is  the  lying  tongue,  and  the  third  the  murderous 
hands.  t|i?3"D'n  is  innocent  blood  as  distinguished  from  \?3H  &]}  the 
blood  of  the  innocent,  Deut.  xix.  13.1 

Ver.  18.  The  fourth  characteristic  is  a  deceitful  heart.  On  Knn, 
vid.  ver.  14,  iii.  29.  and  on  pK,  ver.  12.  The  fifth :  feet  running 

'  I  •  T  '*  C5 

with  haste  to  evil ;  njn?  as  yT>  in  Isa.  lix.  7,  echoing  the  distisch 
i.  16,  as  here,  lib  and  18b.  The  connection  p"6  "inp,  propere 
cucurrit  (contrast  ?  1HN),  is  equivalent  to  "IHD  fi. 

Ver.  19.  The  sixth :  "A  speaker  of  lies,  a  tongue  of  falsehood," 
is  hateful  to  God.  It  is  one  subject  which  is  thus  doubly  charac 
terized.  D^D  are  fictions,  and  "ij?B>  is  the  disfiguring  (deformatio) 
of  the  actual  facts.  They  are  purposely  placed  together  in  this 
connection.  The  derivations  of  these  synonyms  are  obscure ; 
Fiirst  gives  to  the  former  the  root-idea  of  spinning  (properly  knot 
ting  together),  and  to  the  latter  that  of  painting.  D'M  is  introduced 

1  The  writing  &]  follows  the  Masoretic  rule,  vid.  Kimchi,  Michlol  2056,  and 
Heidenheim  under  Deut.  xix.  10,  where  in  printed  editions  of  the  text  (also  in 
Norzi's)  the  irregular  form  ->p3  &\  is  found.  Besides,  the  Metheg  is  to  be  given 
to  -Q-n,  so  that  one  may  not  read  it  dom,  as  e.g.  niNO'B'B?,  Gen.  vii.  11,  that 
one  may  not  read  it  "ty'B>. 


148  THE  BOOK  OF  PRO  VERBS. 


to  support  IpK-'.1  It  would  also  be  verbally  permissible  to  interpret 
"^  I?,  in  the  sense  of  "W  JTfiy,  like  xxv.  18,  as  in  apposition  to 
Ds3Ta;  but  in  the  nearest  parallel,  xiv.  15,  the  idea  is  personal,  for  it 
is  said  of  the  lptJ>  1JJ  that  he  breathes  out  lies.  In  that  place  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  clause  is  a  verbal  one,  and  H"1^  finitum,  viz. 
Hiph.  of  nia.  This  Hiph.  signifies  elsewhere  also  suflare^  xx.  8, 
afflare,  Ps.  x.  5,  Ezek.  xxi.  36,  perflare,  Cant.  iv.  16,  anhelare 
(desiderare),  Ps.  xii.  6,  Hab.  ii.  3,  but  with  D'OD,  efflare,  a  synonym 
to  "i^n,  as  J^an  and  T'tpn,  which  has  (cf.  xii.  17)  no  secondary  mean 
ing  in  use,  but  is  mostly  connected  with  D'QD,  not  without  reference 
to  the  fact  that  that  which  is  false  is  without  reality  and  is  nothing 
more  than  mil  ^>an.  But  what  kind  of  a  form  is  ITS'1,  where  it 
is  not,  as  xiv.  5,  the  predicate  of  a  verbal  clause,  but  in  connection 
with  D"3Ta,  as  here  and  at  xiv.  25,  xix.  5,  9  (once  with  rmnx,  xii.  17), 
is  the  subject  of  a  substantival  clause  ?  That  which  lies  nearest  is 
to  regard  it  as  a  noun  formed  from  the  fut.  fJiph.  Such  formations 
we  indeed  meet  only  among  proper  names,  such  as  TW,  pa},  D11^  5 
however,  at  least  the  one  n.  appell.  3'n^  (an  adversary)  is  found, 
which  may  be  formed  from  the  Hiph.  as  well  as  from  the  Kal. 
But  should  not  the  constr.  of  rVE^  after  the  form  an*  be  n"2?  ?  One 
does  not  escape  from  this  consideration  by  deriving  ITS'1,  after  the 
forms  JW,  TW,  TT?  tW,  and  the  like,  from  a  secondary  verb  nsj,  the 
existence  of  which  is  confirmed  by  Jer.  iv.  31,  and  from  which  also 
n?',  Ps.  xxvii.  12,  appears  to  be  derived,  although  it  may  be  reduced 
also,  after  the  form  a;v  (with  a^T),  to  n'an.  But  in  this  case  also  one 
expects  as  a  connecting  form  PPS^  like  TT,  as  in  reality  HS"1  from  HB* 
(cf.  bx,  ViEf,  from  b«,  ITO).  "Shall  it  now  be  assumed  that  the' 
Kametz  is  treated  as  fixed  ?  This  were  contrary  to  rule,  since  it  is 
not  naturally  long.  Thus  the  connection  is  not  that  of  the  genitive. 
But  if  ITS'1  were  a  substantive  formed  with  the  preformative  of  the 
second  modus  like  Blpp*  [1  Sam.  xvii.  40],  or  were  it  a  participial 
intensive  form  of  active  signification  such  as  ^aj,  then  the  verbal 
force  remaining  in  it  is  opposed  to  the  usage  of  the  language. 
There  remains  nothing  further,  therefore,  than  to  regard  rva^  as  an 
attributive  put  in  the  place  of  a  noun  :  one  who  breathes  out  ;  and 
there  is  a  homogeneous  example  of  this,  for  in  any  other  way  we 
cannot  explain  Tpi1",  Eccles.  i.  18.  In  196  the  numeral  proverb 
reaches  its  point.  The  chief  of  all  that  God  hates  is  he  who  takes 
1  Isaak  Albo  thus  distinguishes  these  synonyms  in  his  dogmatic,  bearing  the 

title  anpy  ISD,  ii.  27. 


CHAP.  VI.  20-22.  149 

a  fiendish  delight  in  setting  at  variance  men  who  stand  nearly 
related.  Thus  this  brief  proverbial  discourse  rounds  itself  off, 
coming  back  again  to  146  as  a  refrain. 


TWELFTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  VI.  20  ff. 

WARNING  AGAINST  ADULTERY,  BY  REFERENCE  TO  ITS  FEARFUL 

CONSEQUENCES. 

After  these  three  smaller  sections,  the  teacher  of  wisdom  returns 
here  to  the  theme  of  the  eighth:  Warning  against  sins  of  the  flesh, 
whose  power  and  prevalence  among  men  is  so  immeasurably  great, 
that  their  terrible  consequences  cannot  sufficiently  be  held  up  before 
them,  particularly  before  youth. 

20  Keep,  my  son,  the  commandiwnt  of  thy  father, 
And  reject  not  the  instruction  of  thy  mother. 

21  Bind  them  to  thy  heart  evermore, 
Fasten  them  about  thy  neck. 

The  suff.  -3m  refers  to  the  good  doctrine  (cf.  vii.  3)  pointed  out  by 
niyp  and  rnin ;  the  masc.  stands,  as  is  usual  (e.g.  i.  16,  v.  2),  instead 
of  the  fern.  Kegarding  the  figure,  reminding  us  of  the  Tefillin 
and  of  Amuletes  for  perpetual  representation,  vid.  under  iii.  3. 
Similarly  of  persons,  Cant.  viii.  6.  The  verb  ^y  (only  here  and 
Job  xxxi.  36)  signifies  to  bend,  particularly  to  bend  aside  (Arab. 
'ind,  bending  off,  going  aside;  accus.  as  adv.,  aside,  apud),  and  to 
bend  up,  to  wind  about,  circumplicare. 

Ver.  22.  The  representation  of  the  good  doctrine  is  now  personi 
fied,  and  becomes  identified  with  it. 

When  thou  walkest,  it  will  guide  thee  ; 

When  thou  liest  down,  it  will  keep  watch  over  thee  ; 

And  when  thou  wakest,  it  will  talk  with  thee. 

The  subject  is  the  doctrine  of  wisdom,  with  which  the  representa 
tion  of  wisdom  herself  is  identified.  The  futures  are  not  expressive 
of  a  wish  or  of  an  admonition,  but  of  a  promise;  the  form  of  the 
third  clause  shows  this.  Thus,  and  in  the  same  succession  as  in 
the  schema  Deut.  vi.  7,  cf.  xi.  19,  are  the  three  circumstances  of 
the  outward  life  distinguished  :  going,  lying  down,  and  rising  up. 
The  punctuation  "pSinna,  found  here  and  there,  is  Ben-Nap h tali's 


150  TH3  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

variant ;  Ben-Asher  and  also  the  Textus  rec.  reject  the  Metlieg  in 
tliis  case,  vid.  Baer's  Metheg-Setzung,  §  28.  The  verb  nra  with  its 
Hiph.  in  a  strengthened  /faZ-signification,  is  more  frequentlv  found 

in  the  Psalms  than  in  the  Proverbs ;  the  Arab.  UJ  shows  that  it 

properly  signifies  to  direct  (dirigere),  to  give  direction,  to  move  in 
a  definite  direction.  1OB>'  with  fw,  to  take  into  protection,  we  had 
already  ii.  11 ;  this  author  has  favourite  forms  of  expression,  in  the 
repetition  of  which  he  takes  delight.  With  lying  down,  sleeping 
is  associated,  rri^prn  is,  as  Ps.  cxxxix.  18,  the  Jiypoth.  per/.,  accord" 
ing  to  Ewald,  §  357a:  et  ut  expergefactus  es,  ilia  te  compellalit. 
Bertheau  incorrectly :  she  will  make  thee  thoughtful.  But  apart 
from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  this  Hiph. 
in  the  language  of  the  Bible,  the  personification  demands  a  clearer 
figure.  n*&  (mfe>)  signifies  mental  speech  and  audible  speech  (Gen. 
xxiv.  63,  poet.,  in  the  Talmudic1  a  common  word);  with  3,  speakino- 
concerning  something  (falulari  de\  Ps.  Ixix.  13 ;  with  the  accus^ 
that  which  is  said  of  a  thing,  Ps.  cxlv.  5,  or  the  address,  briefly 
for  p  rvtr,  Job  xii.  8  (as  J3O  with  accus.  iv.  9  =  ^  p»):  when  thou 
art  awake,  wisdom  will  forthwith  enter  into  conversation  with  thee, 
and  fill  thy  thoughts  with  right  matter,  and  give  to  thy  hands  the 
right  direction  and  consecration. 

Ver.  23.  Since  in  srn   the  idea  of  wisdom  and  of  wholesome 
doctrine  lie  in  one  another,  the  author  can  proceed  with  proof : 

For  a  lamp  is  the  commandment,  and  instruction  a  light  (Jerome,  et 

kx  lux) ; 
. —       And  a  way  of  life,  disciplinary  reproofs. 

That  n-nn  has  here  not  the  positive,  specifically  Israelitish  sense, 
but  the  generalized  sense  of  instruction  in  conformity  with  truth 
regarding  the  will  of  God  and  the  duty  of  man,  vid.  p.  42.  This 
instruction  mediated  by  man,  but  of  divine  origin,  is  nix,  light,  which 
enlightens  the  man  who  submits  to  it;  and  the  commandment, 
nrco,  which  directs  men  in  every  case  to  do  what  is  right,  and 
forbids  that  which  is  wrong  (including  the  prohibition  Lev.  iv.  2), 
is  13,  a  lamp  which,  kindled  at  that  light,  enlightens  all  the  darkness 
of  ignorance  with  reference  to  human  conduct  and  its  consequences. 

1  The  conjecture  thrown  out  by  Wetstein,  that  (Arab.)  shykh  is  equivalent  to 
rre>»  (rPDQ),  speaker,  is  untenable,  since  the  verb  shakh,  to  be  old,  a  so-called 
munsarif,  i.e.  conjugated  throughout,  is  used  in  all  forms,  and  thus  is  certainly 
the  root  of  shykh. 


CHAP.  VI.  24-23.  151 

TIN  and  13  are  related  to  each  other  as  general  and  particular, 
primary  and  derivative.  Lowenstein  accentuates  incorrectly  *T^^\ 
-rfK  instead  of  nte  rriirn  (as  the  Cod.  1294  and  the  3  Erfurt  Codd.j; 
vid.  on  the  retrogression  of  the  tone,  not  existing  here,  under  iii.  15. 
The  gen.  "iCflD  denotes  the  object  or  character  of  the  admonition  : 
not  disciplinary  in  the  external  sense  of  the  word,  but  rather  moral, 
having  in  view  discipline  in  the  sense  of  education,  i.e.  moral 
edification  and  elevation.  Such  corrections  are  D^n  Tp"},  the  way 
to  true  life,  direction  how  to  obtain  it. 
Ver.  24.  The  section  thus  closes  : 

To  keep  thee  from  the  vile  woman, 
From  the  flattery  of  the  strange  tongue. 

Regarding  the  genitive  connection  JH  fil^tf,  a  woman  of  a  wicked 
character,  vid.  under  ii.  14  ;  and  regarding  the  adjectival  connec 
tion  !T"OJ  p$7,  under  ver.  17  ;  the  strange  tongue  is  the  tongue 
(tfE?)  of  the  strange  (foreign)  woman  (vid.  p.  81),  alluring  with 
smooth  words  (ii.  16).  Evvald,  Bertheau :  from,  her  of  a  smooth 
tongue,  the  stranger,  as  Symm.,  Theocl.,  diro  \eioj\coa-o-ou  ^evqs ; 
but  fii^D  is  a  substantive  (Gen.  xxvii.  IB),  and  as  a  fern,  adject, 
form  is  without  an  example.  Rather  J^?  nppn  is  to  be  regarded  as 
the  first  member  and  rp-OJ  as  the  second  of  the  st.  constr.,  for  the 
former  constitutes  one  idea,  and  J1&6  on  this  account  remains  un 
abbreviated  ;  cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  22,  Isa.  xxviii.  1;  but  (1)  this  syntactical 
phenomenon  is  yet  problematical,  vid.  Friedr.  Philippi,  Wesen  und 
Ursprung  des  St.  Constr.  p.  17 ;  and  (2)  the  supposition  of  such  an 
anomaly  is  here  unnecessary. 

The  proosrnium  of  these  twelve  proverbial  discourses  is  now  at  an 
end.     Wisdom  herself  begins  striking  the  note  of  the  Decalogue  : 

25  Long  not  for  her  beauty  in  thy  heart, 

And  let  her  not  catch  thee  with  her  eyelids  ; 

26  Because  for  a  harlot  one  coineth  down  to  a  piece  of  bread, 
And  a  man's  wife  lieth  in  wait  for  a  precious  soul. 

The  warning  25a  is  in  the  spirit  of  the  "  thou  shalt  not  covet," 
Ex.  xx.  17,  and  the  ev  rfj  fcap&la  avrov,  Matt.  v.  28,  of  the  Preacher 
on  the  Mount.  The  Taltnudic  proverb  rrvoyiD  ltJ>p  rrvny  mmn 
(Joma  29a)  means  only  that  the  imagination  of  the  sinful  act 
exhausts  the  body  even  more  than  the  act  itself.  The  warning, 
"  let  her  not  catch  thee  with  her  eyelids,"  refers  to  her  (the  adul 
teress's)  coquettish  ogling  and  amorous  winking.  In  the  reason 


1  52  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


added,  beginning  with  "Jjn  *3  (thus  it  is  to  be  punctuated),  there  is 

the  appositional  connection  HJir  nefc,  Gesen.  §  113  ;  the  idea  of  ruir 
goes  over  into  26i.  "D$  133  [=TO3,  R.  ID,  to  round,  vid.  at 
Gen.  xlix.  5],  properly  a  circle  of  bread,  is  a  small  round  piece  of 
bread,  such  as  is  still  baked  in  Italy  (pagnotta)  and  in  the  East 
(Arab,  kurs),  here  an  expression  for  the  smallest  piece"  (Fl.). 
"W3  (constr.  of  1JJ3),  as  Job  ii.  4,  Isa.  xxxii.  14,  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  inrepj  pro,  and  with  TJ?  there  is  connected  the  ick-a  of  the 
coming  down  to  this  low  point.  Ewald,  Bertheau  explain  after 
the  LXX.,  rip))  jap  7ropvi)<$  ocry  teal  evbs  aprov,  yvvrj  Se  dvSp&v 
TifiM?  ^rw^o?  aypevei.  But  nothing  is  said  here  of  price  (re 
ward);  the  parallelism  is  synonymous,  not  antithetic:  he  is  doubly 
threatened  with  loss  who  enters  upon  such  a  course.  The  adul 
terer  ^  squanders  his  means  (xxix.  3)  to  impoverishment  (vid.  the 
mention  of  a  loaf  of  bread  in  the  description  of  poverty  1  Sam. 
ii.  36),  and  a  man's  wife  (but  at  the  same  time  seeking  converse 
with  another)  makes  a  prey  of  a  precious  soul  ;  for  whoever  con 
sents  to  adulterous  converse  with  her,  loses  not  perhaps  his  means, 
but  certainly  freedom,  purity,  dignity  of  soul,  yea,  his  own  person. 
T«  comprehends—  as  JVTV,  fisher's  town  [Zidon],  Arab,  sydd,  hunter 
and  fisher,  show—  all  kinds  of  hunting,  but  in  Hebr.  is  used  only 
of  the  hunting  of  wild  beasts.  The  root-meaning  (cf.  nny)  is  to 
spy,  to  seize. 

Vers.  27-29.  The  moral  necessity  of  ruinous  consequences 
which  the  sin  of  adultery  draws  after  it,  is  illustrated  by  examples 
of  natural  cause  and  effect  necessarily  connected  : 

27  Can  one  take  fire  in  his  bosom 
And  his  clothes  not  be  burned  ? 

28  Or  can  any  one  walk  over  burning  coals 
And  his  feet  not  be  burned? 

29  So  he  that  goeth  to  his  neighbour's  wife, 

No  one  remains  unpunished  that  toucheth  her. 

We  would  say  :  Can  any  one,  without  being,  etc.  ;  the  former  is  the 
Semitic  "  extended  (paratactic)  l  construction."  The  first  B*N  has 
the  conjunctive  S/ialaheleth.  nnn  signifies  to  seize  and  draw  forth 
a  brand  or  coal  with  the  fire-tongs  or  shovel  (nrino,  t}ie  instrument 
for  this);  cf.  Arab,  klidt,  according  to  Lane,  "  he  seized  or  snatched 


1  [The  ifetpenetKn^;  xpovof  denotes  the  imperfect  tense,  because  it  is  still 
extended  to  the  future.] 


CHAP.  VI.  30,  31.  153 


away  a  thing  ;  "  the  form  nrin^  is  Kal,  as  narv  (vid.  Kohler,  De 
Tetragrammate,  1867,  p.  10).  p'H  (properly  indentation)  is  here 
not  the  lap,  but,  as  Isa.  xl.  11,  the  bosom. 

Ver.  28.  A  second  example  of  destructive  consequences  naturally 
following  a  certain  course  is  introduced  with  DN  of  the  double 
question.  2vna  (from  ?n3,  after  the  form  Dnsi,  but  for  which  J"pn3 
is  used)  is  the  regular  modification  of  gahhalim  (Gesen.  §  27,  2). 
The  fern,  ly^ni  is  followed  here  (cf.  on  the  other  hand  i.  16)  by  the 
rhythmically  full-sounding  form  ny.ian  (retaining  the  distinction 
of  gender),  from  nj3,  Arab,  kwy,  to  burn  so  that  a  brand-mark 
('3,  Isa.  iii.  24,  cauterium)  remains. 

Ver.  29.  The  instruction  contained  in  these  examples  here 
follows  :  TO  et?  Trvp  Kal  et?  jvval/ca  efjLireffe.lv  taov  inrdpjfet  (Pytha 
goras  in  Maximi  Eclog.  c.  39).  ?X  N13  is  here,  as  the  second  in 
Ps.  li.  1,  a  euphemism,  and  3  W3,  to  come  in  contact  with, 
means,  as  ?K  W^  to  touch,  Gen.  xx.  6.  He  who  goes  in  to  his 
neighbour's  wife  shall  not  do  so  with  impunity  (^i?-!).  Since  both 
expressions  denote  fleshly  nearness  and  contact,  so  it  is  evident  he 
is  not  guiltless. 

Vers.  30,  31.  The  thief  and  the  adulterer  are  now  placed  in 
comparison  with  one  another,  in  such  a  way  that  adultery  is  sup 
posed  to  be  a  yet  greater  crime. 

30  One  does  not  treat  the  thief  scornfully  if  he  steals 
To  satisfy  his  craving  when  he  is  hungry  ; 

31  Being  seized,  he  may  restore  sevenfold, 
Give  up  the  whole  wealth  of  his  house. 

For  the  most  part  30a  is  explained  :  even  when  this  is  the  case,  one 
does  not  pass  it  over  in  the  thief  as  a  bagatelle.  Ewald  remarks  : 
^  M3  stands  here  in  its  nearest  signification  of  overlooking,  whence 
first  follows  that  of  contemning.  But  this  "  nearest"  signification 
is  devised  wholly  in  favour  of  this  passage  ;  —  the  interpretation, 
tl  they  do  not  thus  let  the  thief  pass,"  is  set  aside  by  Cant.  viii. 
1,  7  ;  for  by  316,  cf.  Cant.  viii.  76,  and  34a,  cf.  Cant.  viii.  6a,  it  is 
proved  that  from  ver.  30  on,  reminiscences  from  the  Canticles, 
which  belong  to  the  literature  of  the  Chokma,  find  their  way  into 
the  Mashal  language  of  the  author.  Hitzig's  correct  supposition, 
that  ?  T13  always  signifies  positive  contemning,  does  not  necessitate 
the  interrogative  interpretation  :  "Does  not  one  despise  the  thief 
if  .  .  .  ?  "  Thus  to  be  understood,  the  author  ought  to  have  written 
"•a  fjS  or  '•a  DJ.  Michaelis  rightly  :  fartuiti  licet  merito  pro  infami 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

in  republica  habetur,  tamen  si  cum  adalterio  comparatur,  minus  pro- 
brosum  est.  Regarding  K'SS  in  the  sense  of  appetite,  and  even 
throat  and  stomach,  vid.  Psychologic,  p.  204.  A  second  is,  that  the 
thief,  if  he  is  seized  (but  we  regard  NVCOI  not  as  the  hypotli.  per/., 
but  as  the  part,  deprehensus),  may  make  compensation  for  his 
crime.  The  fut.  D9B*  thus  to  be  understood  as  the  potential  lies 
near  from  this,  that  a  sevenfold  compensation  of  the  thing  stolen 
is  unheard  of  in  the  Israelitish  law ;  it  knows  only  of  a  twofold, 
fourfold,  fivefold  restoration,  Ex.  xxi.  37,  xxii.  1-3,  8  (cf.  Saal- 
schiitz,  Mos.  Reclit,  p.  554  ff.).  This  excess  over  that  which  the 
law  rendered  necessary  leads  into  the  region  of  free-will :  he  (the 
thief,  by  which  we  are  now  only  to  think  of  him  whom  bitter 
necessity  has  made  such)  may  make  compensation  sevenfold,  i.e. 
superabundantly ;  he  may  give  up  the  whole  possessions  (vid.  on 
jin  at  i.  13)  of  his  house,  so  as  not  merely  to  satisfy  the  law,  but  to 
appease  him  against  whom  he  has  done  wrong,  and  again  to  gain  for 
himself  an  honoured  name.  What  is  said  in  vers.  30  and  31  is  per 
fectly  just.  One  does  not  contemn  a  man  who  is  a  thief  through 
poverty, he  is  pitied;  while  the  adulterer  goes  to  ruin  under  all  circum 
stances  of  contempt  and  scorn.  And  :  theft  may  be  made  good,  and 
that  abundantly;  but  adultery  and  its  consequences  are  irreparable. 
Vers.  32,  33.  Here  there  is  .a  contrast  stated  to  ver.  30 : 

32  He  who  commits  adultery  (adulterans  mulierem)  is  beside  himself, 
A  self-destroyer — who  does  this. 

33  He  gains  stripes  and  disgrace, 

And  his  reproach  is  never  quenched. 

f]^,  which  primarily  seems  to  mean  excedere,  to  indulge  in  excess, 
is,  as  also  in  the  Decalogue,  cf.  Lev.  xx.  10,  transitive :  o  fioL^euwv 
yvvai/ca.  Regarding  being  mad  (herzlos  =  heartless)  =  amens 
(excorsj  vecors),  vid.  Psychologie,  p.  254.  te'33  JVnK'O  is  he  who 
goes  to  ruin  with  wilful  perversity.  A  self-murderer — i.e.  he  intends 
to  ruin  his  position  and  his  prosperity  in  life — who  does  it,  viz.  this, 
that  he  touches  the  wife  of  another.  It  is  the  worst  and  most 
inextinguishable  dishonouring  of  oneself.  Singularly  Behaji:  who 
annihilates  it  (his  soul),  with  reference  to  Deut.  xxi.  12,  Eccles.  iv. 
17,  where  r\&y  would  be  equivalent  to  ?t33J  Karapiyelv,  which  is 
untrue  and  impossible.1  i'Jj)  refers  to  the  corporal  punishment  in- 

1  Behaji  ought  rather  to  have  referred  to  Zeph.  iii.  19,  Ezek.  vii.  27,  xxii. 
14  ;  but  there  riS  r\&y  means  agere  cum  aliqtto,  as  we  say  :  mil  jemundcm 
alrechnen  (to  settle  accounts  with  any  one). 


CHAP.  VI.  34,  35.  155 

flictecl  on  the  adulterer  by  the  husband  (Deut.  xvii.  8,  ^xi.  5);  Hitzig, 
who  rejects  ver.  32,  refers  it  to  the  stripes  which  were  given  to  the 
thief  according  to  the  law,  but  these  would  be  called  nro  (rriSD). 

•L  -L  T  " 

The  punctuation  pi^rj?J3  is  to  be  exchanged  for  Iwl  W3.  (Lowen- 
stein  and  other  good  editors).  NVO  has  a  more  active  signification 
than  our  u  finden"  (to  find):  consequitnr,  rvy^dvet. 

Vers.  34,  35.  One  who  has  been  stolen  from  is  to  be  appeased, 
but  not  the  injured  husband. 

34  For  jealousy  is  the  fury  of  a  husband, 

And  he  spareth  not  in  the  day  of  vengeance. 

35  He  regardeth  not  any  ransom, 

And  is  not  contented  though  thou  offerest  to  him  gifts  ever  so  great. 


The  connection  marks  ntWj?  as  the  subject  ;  for  it  respects  carnal 
intercourse  with  another's  wife.  Jealousy  is  not  usually  n»n?  the 
glow  of  anger  (from  EH",  as  n3K>  from  |^),  but  ~Q?~n^"  (constr.  as 
J")3^);  the  glow  of  a  man's  anger,  who  with  the  putting  forth  of  all 
his  manly  strength  will  seek  satisfaction  to  his  wounded  honour. 
123,  here  significant  for  C^N,  with  the  fundamental  idea  of  strength, 
firmness;  cf.  Arab,  jabr,  to  make  fast,  to  put  right  again  some 
thing  broken  in  pieces,  particularly  a  broken  vessel,  hence  Algebra, 
properly  the  operation  by  which  an  incomplete  magnitude  is  com 
pleted  (Fl.).  The  following  ?E>rv;'N7i  (with  the  orthophonic  Dagesfi, 
as  ver.  25  "fon^  and  with  Makkeph)  is  connected  with  "OJ,  with 
definite  reference  to  the  man  whom  the  faithless  guest  has  made  a 
cuckold.  When  the  day  comes  in  which  the  adultery  brought  to 
light  demands  and  admits  of  vengeance,  then,  wounded  in  his  right 
and  in  his  honour,  he  knows  no  mercy  ;  he  pays  no  regard  to  any 
atonement  or  recompense  by  which  the  adulterer  seeks  to  appease 
him  and  induce  him  not  to  inflict  the  punishment  that  is  due  :  he 
does  not  consent,  even  though  thou  makest  ever  so  great  the  gift 
whereby  thou  thinkest  to  gain  him.  The  phrase  D^S  KB'J,  irpoo-wrrov 
\ajjLJ3uveiV)  signifies  elsewhere  to  receive  the  countenance,  i.e.  the 
appearance  and  the  impression  of  a  man,  i.e.  to  let  it  impress  one 
favourably  ;  here  it  is  used  of  the  123,  i.e.  the  means  by  which 
covering,  i.e.  non-punishment,  pardon  of  the  crime,  impunity  of 
the  guilty,  is  obtained.  Regarding  H3X,  to  consent  to,  vid.  at  i.  10. 
"in°E>,  Aram.  iniB^  is  a  gift,  particularly  bribery.  That  the  language 
may  again  finally  assume  the  form  of  an  address,  it  beautifully 
rounds  itself  off. 


156  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


THIRTEENTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURE,  TIL 

WARNING  AGAINST  ADULTERY  BY  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  ITS 
ABHORRENT  AND  DETESTABLE  NATURE  AS  SEEN  IN  AN 
EXAMPLE. 

The  fearful  desolation  which  adultery,  and  in  general  the  sin  of 
uncleanness,  occasions  in  the  life  of  the  individual  who  is  guilty  of 
it,  as  well  as  in  society,  does  not  suffer  the  author  of  this  discourse, 
directed  to  youth,  to  abandon  his  theme,  which  he  has  already 
treated  of  under  different  aspects.  He  takes  up  his  warning  once 
more,  strengthens  it  by  an  example  he  himself  had  witnessed  of 
one  who  fell  a  sacrifice  to  this  sin,  and  gives  it  a  very  impressive 
conclusion,  ver.  24  ff. 

The  introduction  first  counsels  in  general  to  a  true  appreciation 
of  these  well-considered  life-rules  of  wisdom. 

1  My  son,  keep  my  words, 

And  treasure  up  my  commandments  with  thce. 

2  Keep  my  commandments,  and  thou  shalt  live ; 
And  my  instruction  as  the  apple  of  thine  eye. 

3  Wind  them  about  thy  fingers, 

Write  them  on  the  tablet  of  thy  heart. 

The  LXX.  has  after  ver.  1  another  distich  ;  but  it  here  disturbs 
the  connection.  Regarding  }&¥,  rid.  at  ii.  1 ;  ^X  refers,  as  there, 
to  the  sphere  of  one's  own  character,  and  that  subjectively.  Regard 
ing  the  imper.  n^ni,  which  must  here  be  translated  according  to  its 
sense  as  a  conclusion,  because  it  comes  in  between  the  objects 
governed  by  "ib^,  vid.  at  iv.  4.  There  rvrn  is  punctuated  with  Silluk; 
here,  according  to  Kimchi  (Michlol  125a),  with  Segol-Athnach, 
rpni  as  in  the  Cod.  Erfurt.  2  and  3,  and  in  the  editions  of  Athias 

AV  :iv'  J 

and  Clodius,  so  that  the  word  belongs  to  the  class  runX3  pnns  (with 
short  instead  of  long  vowel  by  the  pausal  accent)  :  no  reason  for 
this  is  to  be  perceived,  especially  as  (iv.  4)  the  Tsere  (e  from  aj) 
which  is  characteristic  of  the  imper.  remains  unchanged.  Regard 
ing  my  |te^Wf  Arab,  itisdn  el-ain,  the  little  man  of  the  eye,  i.e.  the 
apple  of  the  eye,  named  from  the  miniature  portrait  of  him  who 
looks  into  it  being  reflected  from  it,  vid.  at  Ps.  xvii.  8  ;  the  ending 
on  is  here  diminutive,  like  Syr.  achuno,  little  brother,  berui>o,  little 
son,  and  the  like.  On  ver.  3,  rid.  at  vi.  21,  iii.  3.  Tiie  T  *?W  p^sn 
1  Qv'En,  prayer-Jilkls,  phylacteries.] 


CHAP.  VII.  4,  5.  157 

were  wound  seven  times  round  the  left  arm  and  seven  times  round 
the  middle  finger.  The  writing  on  the  table  of  the  heart  may  be 
regarded  as  referring  to  Deut.  vi.  9  (the  Mezuzoth}.1 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  subject-matter  of  this  earnest  warning  are  the 
admonitions  of  the  teacher  of  wisdom,  and  through  him  of  Wisdom 
herself,  who  in  contrast  to  the  world  and  its  lust  is  the  worthiest 
object  of  love,  and  deserves  to  be  loved  with  the  purest,  sincerest 
love: 

4  Say  to  wisdom :  ' '  Thou  art  my  sister ! " 
And  call  understanding  "  Friend;" 

5  That  they  may  keep  thee  from  the  strange  woman, 
From  the  stranger  who  useth  smooth  words. 

The  childlike,  sisterly,  and  friendly  relationship  serves  also  to  pic 
ture  forth  and  designate  the  intimate  confidential  relationship  to 
natures  and  things  which  are  not  flesh  and  blood.  If  in  Arabic 
the  poor  is  called  the  brother  of  poverty,  the  trustworthy  the 
brother  of  trustworthiness,  and  abu,  um  (D^),  acliu,  ucht,  are  used 
in  manifold  ways  as  the  expression  for  the  interchangeable  relation 
between  two  ideas ;  so  (as  also,  notwithstanding  Ewald,  §  2736,  in 
many  Hebr.  proper  names)  that  has  there  become  national,  which 
here,  as  at  Job  xvii.  14,  xxx.  29,  mediated  by  the  connection  of  the 
thoughts,  only  first  appears  as  a  poetic  venture.  The  figurative 
words  of  ver.  4  not  merely  lead  us  to  think  of  wisdom  as  a  personal 
existence  of  a  higher  order,  but  by  this  representation  it  is  itself 
brought  so  near,  that  BK  easily  substitutes  itself,  ii.  3,  in  the  place 
of  DS.  Tintf  of  Solomon's  address  to  the  bride  brought  home  is 
in  its  connection  compared  with  Book  of  Wisdom  viii.  2.  While 
the  6th  of  ninx  by  no  means  arises  from  abstr.  uth,  but  achoth  is 
derived  from  achajath,  JHi»  (as  Ruth  ii.  1,  cf.  njnio,  iii-  2),  here  by 
Mugrash  J^£,  properly  means  acquaintance,  and  then  the  person 
known,  but  not  in  the  superficial  sense  in  which  this  word  and  the 
Arab,  maarfat  are  used  (e.g.  in  the  Arabic  phrase  quoted  by 
Fleischer,  kanna  ashaab  sarna  rrfaaraf — nous  dtions  amis,  nous 
en  sommes  plus  que  de  simples  connaissances),  but  in  the  sense  of 
familiar,  confidential  alliance.  The  in/in.  T!9?Y  does  not  need  for 
its  explanation  some  intermediate  thought  to  be  introduced:  quod 
eo  conducet  tibi  ut  (Mich.),  but  connects  itself  immediately  as  the 
purpose :  bind  wisdom  to  thyself  and  thyself  to  wisdom  thus 

1  [=the  door-posts,  afterwards  used  by  the  Jews  to  denote  the  passages  of 
Scripture  written  on  the  door-posts.] 


158  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

closely  that  them  mayest  therewith  guard  thyself.  As  for  the  rest, 
vid.  ii.  16;  this  verse  repeats  itself  here  with  the  variation  of  one 
word. 

How  necessary  it  is  for  the  youth  to  guard  himself  by  the  help 
of  wisdom  against  the  enticements  of  the  wanton  woman,  the 
author  now  shows  by  a  reference  to  his  own  observation. 

6  For  through  the  window  of  my  house, 
From  behind  the  lattice  I  looked  out ; 

7  Then  saw  I  among  the  simple  ones, 

Discerned  among  the  young  people,  a  youth  devoid  of 
understanding. 

'3  refers  indeed  to  the  immediately  following  clause,  yet  it  actually 
opens  up  the  whole  following  exemplification.  The  connection 
with  ver.  5  would  be  closer  if  instead  of  the  extended  Semitic 
construction  it  were  said  :  nam  quum  .  .  .  prospicerem  vidi,  etc. 
p?n  (from  ??n,  to  bore  through)  is  properly  a  place  where  the 
wall  is  bored  through.  3JK>K  (from  3JK>  =  Arab,  shaniba,  to  be 
agreeable,  cool,  fresh)  is  the  window-lattice  or  lattice-window,  i.e. 
lattice  for  drawing  down  and  raising  up,  which  keeps  off  the  rays 
of  the  sun.  *\\>W)  signifies  primarily  to  make  oneself  long  in  order 
to  see,  to  stretch  up  or  out  the  neck  and  the  head,  /capa&oKetv, 
Ai'ab.  atall,  ataVa,  and  tatalVa  of  things,  imminere,  to  overtop,  to 
project,  to  jut  in;  cf.  Arab,  askafof  the  ostrich,  long  and  bent,  with 
respect  to  the  neck  stretching  it  up,  sakaf,  abstr.  crooked  length. 
And  "lya  is  thus  used,  as  in  Arab,  duna,  but  not  Vad,  is  used :  so 
placed,  that  one  in  relation  to  the  other  obstructs  the  avenue  to 
another  person  or  thing :  "  I  looked  forth  from  behind  the  lattice- 
window,  i.e.  with  respect  to  the  persons  or  things  in  the  room, 
standing 'before  the  lattice-window,  and  thus  looking  out  into  the 
open  air"  (Fleischer).  That  it  was  far  in  the  night,  as  we 
learn  at  ver.  9,  does  not  contradict  this  looking  out ;  for  apart 
from  the  moon,  and  especially  the  lighting  of  the  streets,  there 
were  star-lit  nights,  and  to  see  what  the  narrator  saw  there  was 
no  night  of  Egyptian  darkness.  But  because  it  was  night  6a  is 
not  to  be  translated  :  I  looked  about  among  those  devoid  of  ex 
perience  (thus  e.g.  Lowenstein)  ;  but  he  saw  among  these,  observed 
among  the  youths,  who  thus  late  amused  themselves  without,  a 
young  man  whose  want  of  understanding  was  manifest  from 
what  further  happened.  Bertheau:  that  I  might  see,  is  syntacti 
cally  impossible.  The  meaning  of  iOXJ  is  not  determined  by  the 


CHAP.  VII.  8,  9.  159 


following,  but  conversely  nJH?^  stands  under  the  operation 
of  J  (=  "^SXlj  Neb.  xiii.  7),  characterizing  the  historic  aorist, 
Regarding  ^13,  vid.  at  i.  4.  D^n  is  the  rnasc.  of  J"li32}  Arab,  bendt 
in  the  meaning  maiden.  B^ID  has  in  correct  texts,  according  to 
the  rules  of  the  accents,  the  2  raphatum.1 

Now  follows,  whither  he  saw  the  young  fop  \_Laffen\  then  go 
in  the  darkness. 

8  Going  up  and  down  the  street  near  her  corner, 
And  he  walked  along  the  way  to  her  house, 

9  In  the  twilight,  when  the  day  declined, 

In  the  midst  of  the  night  and  deep  darkness. 

"We  may  interpret  "OJJ  as  appos.:  juvenem  amentern,  ambulantem,  or 
as  the  predicate  accus.:  vidi  juvenem  .  .  .  ambulantem  •  for  that  one 
may  so  express  himself  in  Hebrew  (cf.  e.g.  Isa.  vi.  1,  Dan.  viii.  7), 
Hitzig  unwarrantably  denies.  The  passing  over  of  the  part,  into 
t\\e  finite,  8&,  is  like  ii.  14,  17,  and  that  of  the  inf.  i.  27,  ii.  8.  pV<J>, 
Arab,  suk  (dimin.  suweika,  to  separate,  from  sikkat,  street,  alley), 
still  means,  as  in  former  times,  a  broad  street,  a  principal  street,  as 
well  as  an  open  place,  a  market-place  where  business  is  transacted, 
or  according  to  its  etymon  :  where  cattle  are  driven  for  sale.  On 
the  street  he  went  backwards  and  forwards,  yet  so  that  he  kept 
near  to  her  corner  (i.e.  of  the  woman  whom  he  waited  for),  i.e.  he 
never  withdrew  himself  far  from  the  corner  of  her  house,  and 
always  again  returned  to  it.  The  corner  is  named,  because  from 
that  place  he  could  always  cast  a  look  over  the  front  of  the  house 
to  see  whether  she  whom  he  waited  for  showed  herself.  Re^ardino1 

O  '       O 

PJ33  for  nn33,  vid.  at  Ps.  xxvii.  5  :  a  primary  form  }3  has  never  been 
in  use;  D'SB,  Zech.  xiv.  10,  is  plur.  of  Has.  $>¥K  (from  f>XK,  Arab. 
wasl,  to  bind)  is,  as  a  substantive,  the  side  (as  the  place  where  one 
thing  connects  itself  with  another),  and  thus  as  a  preposition  it 
means  (like  juxta  from  jungere)  beside,  Ital.  allato.  t\~rv\  is  the 
object,  accus.,  for  thus  are  construed  verbs  eundi  (e.g.  Hab.  iii.  12, 
Num.  xxx.  17,  cf.  xxi.  22). 

Ver.  9.  The  designations  of  time  give  the  impression  of  progress 
to  a  climax  ;  for  Hitzig  unwarrantably  denies  that  ^J  means  the 
twilight  ;  the  Talmud,  Beraclwth  3b,  correctly  distinguishes  "nn 
'SBO  two  twilights,  the  evening  and  the  morning  twilight.  But 
the  idea  is  not  limited  to  this  narrow  sense,  and  does  not  need  this, 

1  Regarding  the  Targ.  of  vii.  6,  7,  vid.  Perles,  Etymologische  Studien,  1871, 
p.  9. 


1GO  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

since  the  root- word  *!?'•!  (vid.  at  Isa.  xl.  24)  permits  the  extension 
of  the  idea  to  the  whole  of  the  cool  half  (evening  and  night)  of 
the  entire  day;  cf.  the  parallel  of  the  adulterer  who  veils  himself 
by  the  darkness  of  the  night  and  by  a  mask  on  his  countenance, 
Job  xxiv.  15  with  Jer.  xiii.  16.  However,  the  first  group  of 
synonyms,  DV  anya  v\w:2  (with  the  Cod.  Frank/.  1294,  to  be  thus 
punctuated),  as  against  the  second,  appears  to  denote  an  earlier 
period  of  the  second  half  of  the  day  ;  for  if  one  reads,  with  Hitzig, 
Di11  a'tya  (after  Judg.  xix.  9),  the  meaning  remains  the  same  as 
with  Di^  a^ya,  viz.  advesperascente  die  (Jerome),  for  3"]y  =  Arab. 
yharab,  means  to  go  away,  and  particularly  to  go  under,  of  the  sun, 
and  thus  to  become  evening.  He  saw  the  youth  in  the  twilight, 
as  the  day  had  declined  («e/e\i/eei>,  Luke  xxiv.  29),  going  back 
wards  and  forwards ;  and  when  the  darkness  of  night  had  reached 
its  middle,  or  its  highest  point,  he  was  still  in  his  lurking-place. 
r6£  ii^;i|N,  apple  of  the  eye  of  the  night,  is,  like  the  Pers.  dili  scheb, 
heart  of  the  night,  the  poetic  designation  of  the  middle  of  the 
night.  Gusset  incorrectly  :  crepusculuin  in  quo  sicut  in  oculi  pnpilla 
est  nigredo  sublustris  et  quasi  mistura  lucis  ac  tenebrarum.  pK^K  is, 
as  elsewhere  3^,  particularly  the  middle ;  the  application  to  the 
night  was  specially  suitable,  since  the  apple  of  the  eye  is  the  black 
part  in  the  white  of  the  eye  (Hitzig).  It  is  to  be  translated 
according  to  the  accus.,  in  pupilla  noclis  et  caligine  (not  caliginis) ; 
and  this  was  probably  the  meaning  of  the  poet,  for  a  3  is  obviously 
to  be  supplied  to  !"7?S1. 

Finally,  the  young  man  devoid  of  understanding  sees  his  waiting 
rewarded  :  like  meets  like. 

10  And,  lo,  a  woman  coining  to  meet  him, 

In  the  attire  of  an  harlot  and  of  subtle  heart. 

11  Boisterous  is  she,  and  ungovernable; 
Her  feet  have  no  rest  in  her  own  house. 

12  At  one  time  before  her  door,  at  another  in  the  street, 
And  again  at  every  corner  she  places  herself  on  the  watch. 

"  Ver.  12  (Hitzig)  expresses  what  is  wont  to  be,  instead  of  a  single 
event,  ver.  11,  viz.  the  custom  of  a  street  harlot.  But  she  who  is 
spoken  of  is  not  such  an  one;  lurking  is  not  applicable  to  her  (cf. 
Job  xxxi.  9),  and,  ver.  11,  it  is  not  meant  that  she  is  thus  inclined." 
But  Hitzig's  rendering  of  ver.  11,  "  she  was  boisterous  ...  in  her 
house  her  feet  had  no  rest,"  is  inaccurate,  since  neither  N^l  nor 
is  used.  Thus  in  vers.  11  and  12  the  poet  gives  a  charac- 


CHAP.  VII.  10-12.  1G1 

tcristic  of  the  woman,  introduced  by  n3.ni.  into  the  frame  of  his  picture, 
which  goes  beyond  that  which  then  presented  itself  to  his  eyes.  We 
must  with  ver.  12  reject  also  ver.  11 ;  and  even  that  would  not  be 
a  radical  improvement,  since  that  characteristic  lying  behind  the 
evident,  that  which  was  then  evident  begins  with  2?  rntfJ}  (and 

~  *•.  :        V 

subtle  in  heart).  We  must  thus  suppose  that  the  woman  was  not 
unknown  to  the  observer  here  describing  her.  He  describes  her 
first  as  she  then  appeared.  JVti'  Hitzig  regards  as  equivalent  to  rWti', 
similitude  (from  nit?),  and  why?  Because  JTE'  does  not  mean  "  to 
lay  against,"  but  "  to  place."  But  Ex.  xxxiii.  4  shows  the  contrary, 
and  justifies  the  meaning  attire,  which  the  word  also  has  in  Ps. 
Ixxiii.  6.  Meiri  less  suitably  compares  2  Kings  ix.  30,  but  rightly 
explains  ppn  (dressing,  ornament),  and  remarks  that  rw  elliptical  is 
equivalent  to  JVC'3.  It  is  not  the  nominative  (Bertheau),  but  the 
accusative,  as  JVJ3D,  Ps.  cxliv.  12,  Ewald,  §  279d  How  Hitzig 
reaches  the  translation  of  3^>  mV31  by  "  and  an  arrow  in  her  heart " 
(et  saucia  corde1),  one  can  only  understand  by  reading  his  com 
mentary.  The  usage  of  the  language,  iv.  23,  he  remarks,  among 
other  things,  would  stamp  her  as  a  virtuous  person.  As  if  a 
phrase  like  3?  ">VJ  could  be  used  both  sensu  bono  and  sensu  malol 
One  can  guard  his  heart  when  he  protects  it  carefully  against 
moral  danger,  or  also  when  he  purposely  conceals  that  which  is  in 
it.  The  part.  "W3  signifies,  Isa.  i.  8,  besieged  (blockaded),  Ezek. 
xvi.  12,  protected,  guarded,  and  Isa.  xlviii.  6,  Ixv.  4,  concealed, 
hidden.  Ewald,  §  1876,  refers  these  three  significations  in  the 
two  passages  in  Isaiah  and  in  the  passage  before  us  to  VW,  Niph, 
"to  (as  ?iJ);  but  (1)  one  would  then  more  surely  take  IIS  (cf. 
7iB3;  D'MJ)  as  the  verbal  stem ;  (2)  one  reaches  the  idea  of  the 
concealed  (the  hidden)  easier  from  that  of  the  preserved  than 
from  that  of  the  confined.  As  one  says  in  Lat.  homo  occultus, 
tectus,  abstruse,  in  the  sense  of  Kpv^rlvovs,  so  it  is  said  of  that 
woman  3?  mp,  not  so  much  in  the  sense  of  retenta  cor,  h.e.  quce 
quod  in  corde  haberet  non  pandebat,  Fr.  retenue  (Cocc.),  as  in  the 
sense  of  custodita  cor,  qua?  intentlonem  cordis  mentemque  suam  callide 
novit  premere  (Mich.) :  she  is  of  a  hidden  mind,  of  a  concealed 
nature;  for  she  feigns  fidelity  to  her  husband  and  flatters  her 
paramours  as  her  only  beloved,  while  in  truth  she  loves  none,  and 
each  of  them  is  to  her  only  a  means  to  an  end,  viz.  to  the  indul 
gence  of  her  worldly  sensual  desire.  For,  as  the  author  further 

1  Virgil's  jEiicid,  iv.  1. 
VOL.  I.  L 


1G2  THE  ROOK  OF  PRO  VERES. 

describes  her,  she  is  n»o'n  (fern,  of  nc'n  =  "'D'n,  as  i.  21,  Isa.  xxii.  2), 
tumultuosa,  externally  as  internally  impetuous,  because  full  of 
intermingling  lust  aiul  deceit  (opp.  ^o-i/^o?,  1  Pet.  iii.  4,  1  Tim. 
ii.  11),  and  rnnb,  self-willed,  not  minding  the  law  of  duty,  of 
discretion,  or  of  modesty  (from  "np,  Arab,  s/iarr,  pervicacem,  malum 
esse).  She  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  noiseless  activity  and  the 
gentle  modesty  of  a  true  house-wife,  rude,  stubborn,  and  also 
vagrant  like  a  beast  in  its  season  (Flos.  iv.  14)  :  in  domo  ipsius 
residere  nequeunt  pedes  ejus ;  thus  not  olicovpos  or  olfcovpyo?  (Tit. 
ii.  5),  far  removed  from  the  genuine  woman-like  ef<7&>  r)o-v%ov  peveiv 
Bo/jLwv1 — a  radt,  as  they  call  such  a  one  in  Arab.  (Wunsche  on  Hos. 
xii.  1),  or  as  she  is  called  in  Aram.  N^3  flpS3. 

Ver.  12.  This  verse  shows  how  she  conducts  herself  when  she 
wanders  abroad.  It  is  no  common  street-walker  who  is  designated 
(no  " Husterin"  Arab,  kahbt,  after  which  also  the  female  demon- 
name  (Arab.)  seald  is  explained),  but  that  licentious  married  wife, 
who,  no  better  than  such  a  strumpet  when  she  wanders  abroad, 
hunts  after  lovers.  The  alternating  DJ?3  (properly  a  stroke) 
Fleischer  compares  with  the  Arab,  synonyms,  marrt,  a  going  over, 
karrt,  a  going  back,  una  volta,  una  fiata,  une  fois  (Orelli,  Synon. 
der  Zeit  und  Ewigkeit,  p.  51).  Regarding  pn,  vid.  at  v.  16: 
it  is  the  free  space  without,  before  the  house-door,  or  also  before 
the  gate  of  the  city ;  the  parallelism  speaks  here  and  at  i.  20  more 
in  favour  of  the  former  signification. 

Ver.  13.  After  this  digression  the  poet  returns  to  the  subject, 
and  further  describes  the  event  as  observed  by  himself. 

And  she  laid  hold  on  him  and  kissed  him ; 
Put  on  a  bold  brow  and  said  to  him. 

The  verb  PB>3  is  here,  after  its  primary  signification,  connected  with 
the  dat. :  osculum  fixit  ei.  Tims  also  Gen.  xxvii.  26  is  construed, 
and  the  Dagesh  in  ft  is,  as  there,  Dag.  forte  conj.,  after  the  law  for 
which  the  national  grammarians  have  coined  the  technical  name 
PTPD  TlX  (veniens  e  lonyinquo,  "  coming  out  of  the  distance,"  i.e. 
the  attraction  of  a  word  following  by  one  accented  on  the  penult.). 
The  penult.-accenting  of  nj?B»3  is  the  consequence  of  the  retrogres 
sion  of  the  accent  (lint?  DID:),  which  here,  where  the  word  from  the 
first  had  the  penult,  only  with  Metheg,  and  thus  with  half  a  tone, 
brings  with  it  the  dageshing  of  the  b  following,  as  the  original 

1  Eurip.  Ilerac. 


CHAP.  VII.  14,  15.  1C3 


permltima-accenting  of  njrrnrri  does  Of  tne  n  ^j^  f0nows  jtj  for 
the  reading  ia  by  Lowenstein  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  punctuation 

of  the  Textus  receptus  under  consideration  here.1  As  in  and  ^ 
liave  received  the  doubling  Dagesh,  so  on  the  other  hand,  according 
to  Evvald,  §  1936,  it  has  disappeared  from  nryn  (written  with 
Rapke  according  to  Kimchi,  Michlol  145o).  "And  as  npeb  has 
the  tone  thrown  back,  so  the  proper  pausal  lOtfrn  is  accented  on 
the  ult.,  but  without  attracting  the  b  following  by  dageshing,  which 
is  the  case  only  when  the  first  of  the  two  words  terminates  in  the 
sound  of  a  (ah).  Via  tyn  is  said  of  one  who  shows  firmness  or 
hardness  of  countenance  (Arab,  slabt  alwajh),  i.e.  one  who  shows 
shamelessness,  or,  as  we  say,  an  iron  forehead  (Fl.). 

She  laid  hold  on  him  and  kissed  him,  both  of  which  actions  were 
shameless,  and  then,  assuming  the  passivity  and  modesty  befitting 
the  woman,  and  disregarding  morality  and  the  law,  she  said  to  the 
youth  : 

14  "  To  bring  peace-offerings  was  binding  upon  me, 
To-day  have  I  redeemed  my  vows. 

15  Therefore  am  I  come  out  to  meet  thee, 
To  seek  thy  face,  and  have  found  thee." 


We  have  translated  D'O^  'TO  «  peace-offerings,"  proceeding  on  the 
principle  that  UW  (sing,  only  Amos  v.  22,  and  on  the  Phoenician 
altar  at  Marseilles)  denotes  contracting  friendship  with  one  (from 
C?t^to  hold  friendly  relationship),  and  then  the  gifts  having  this 
in  view  ;  for  the  idea  of  this  kind  of  offering  is  the  attestation  and 
confirmation  of  communion  with  God.  But  in  view  of  the  deriva 
tives  D'ibte  and  DlW,  it  is  perhaps  more  appropriate  to  combine 
D7B>  with  D?B>,  to  discharge  perfectly,  and  to  translate  it  thank- 
payment-offering,  or  with  v.  Ilofmann,  a  due-offering,  where  not 
directly  thank-offering  ;  for  the  proper  eucharistic  offering,  which 
is  the  expression  of  thanks  on  a  particular  occasion,  is  removed 
from  the  species  of  the  Shelamim  by  the  addition  of  the  words 
rntorty  (Lev.  vii.  12-25).  The  characteristic  of  the  Shelamim  is 
the  division  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice,  between  Jahve  and  His 
priests  on  the  one  side,  and  the  person  (or  persons)  bringing  it  on 
the  other  side:  only  one  part  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  was 
Jahve's,  consumed  by  fire  (Lev.  iii.  16);  the  priests  received  one 
part  :  those  who  brought  the  offering  received  back  another  part 
1  I  id.  User's  Toratli  Lmclli,  p.  29  sq.,  and  Psalmen-Cammentar  under  Ps.  Iii.  5. 


1C!  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

as  it  were  from  the  altar  of  God,  that  they  might  eat  it  with  holy 
joy  along  with  their  household.  So  here  the  adulteress  says  that 
there  was  binding  upon  her,  in  consequence  of  a  vow  she  had 
taken,  the  dutv  of  presenting  peace-offerings,  or  offerings  that 
were  due  ;  to-day  (she  reckons  the  day  in  the  sense  of  the  dies 
civilis  from  night  to  night)  she  has  performed  her  duties,  and  the 
vn  'D^>G5>  have  yielded  much  to  her  that  she  mi  "lit  therewith  regale 

'."'       '  '  ;  ~  v  » 

him,  her  true  lover  ;  for  with  }?"vJ?  she  means  to  say  that  even  the 
prospect  of  the  gay  festival  which  she  can  prepare  for  him  moved  her 
thus  to  meet  him.  This  address  of  the  woman  affords  us  a  glimpse 
into  the  history  of  the  customs  of  those  times.  The  Shelamim  meals 
degenerated  in  the  same  manner  as  our  Kirmsen.1  Secularization 
lies  doubly  near  to  merrymaking  when  the  law  sanctions  this,  and 
it  can  conceal  itself  behind  the  mask  of  piety.  Regarding  in^,  a 
more  exact  word  for  &Jip3,  vid.  at  i.  28.  To  seek  the  countenance  of 
one  is  equivalent  to  to  seek  his  person,  himself,  but  yet  not  without 
reference  to  the  wished-for  look  [aspectus]  of  the  person. 

Thus  she  found  him,  and  described  to  him  the  enjoyment  which 
awaited  him  in  eating  and  drinking,  then  in  the  pleasures  of 
love. 

16  "  My  bed  have  I  spread  with  cushions, 

Variegated  coverlets,  Egyptian  linen  ; 
171  have  sprinkled  my  couch 

With  myrrh,  aloes,  and  cinnamon. 
18  Come  then,  we  will  intoxicate  ourselves  with  love  till  the  morning, 

And  will  satisfy  ourselves  in  love." 


The  noun  tJ^y,  from  t??y,  —  Arab.  'arash,  cedijicare,  fabricari,  signi 
fies  generally  the  wooden  frame  ;  thus  not  so  much  the  bed  within 
as  the  erected  bed-place  (cf.  Arab,  'arsh,  throne,  and  'arysh, 
arbour).  This  bedstead  she  had  richly  and  beautifully  cushioned, 
that  it  might  be  soft  and  agreeable.  I?"],  from  m,  signifies  to  lay 
on  or  apply  closely,  thus  either  vincire  (whence  the  name  of  the 
necklace,  Gen.  xli.  42)  or  sternere  (different  from  IS"),  Job  xvii. 
13,  which  acquires  the  meaning  sternere  from  the  root-meaning  to 
raise  up  from  under,  sublevare),  whence  D^3")D,  cushions,  pillows, 
stragulce.  Bottcher  punctuates  B""1]?"]*?  incorrectly  ;  the  1  remains 
aspirated,  and  the  connection  of  the  syllables  is  looser  than  in  n^?, 
Ewald,  §  88c/.  The  ntaBn  beginning  the  second  half-  verse  is 
in  no  case  an  adjective  to  Q'HS'iE,  in  every  case  only  appos.,  pro- 
1  [Kirmse  =  anniversary  of  the  dedication  of  a  church,  village  fete.'] 


CHAP.  VII.  16-18.  1G5 

bably  an  independent  conception  ;  not  derived  from  3tpn  (cogn. 
2vn),  to  hew  wood  (whence  Arab,  hatab,  fire-wood),  according  to 
which  Kiinchi,  and  with  him  the  Grcec.  Venet.  (irepigiHrTots),  under 
stands  it  of  the  carefully  polished  bed-poles  or  bed-boards,  but 
from  2tpn=  Arab,  khateba,  to  be  streaked,  of  diverse  colours  (vid. 
under  Ps.  cxliv.  12),  whence  the  Syriac  macldabto,  a  figured 
(striped,  checkered)  garment.  Hitzig  finds  the  idea  of  coloured 
or  variegated  here  unsuitable,  but  without  justice  ;  for  the  pleasant 
ness  of  a  bed  is  augmented  not  only  by  its  softness,  but  also  by  the 
impression  which  its  costliness  makes  on  the  eye.  The  following 
Dnyp  HEX  stands  in  an  appositional  relation  to  JTODn,  as  when  one 
says  in  Arabic  taub-un  dibdg'-un,  a  garment  brocade  =  of  brocade. 
fiBX  (after  the  Syr.  for  pBN,  as  |1DS)  signifies  in  the  Targum  the 
cord  (e.g.  Jer.  xxxviii.  6),  like  the  Arab,  tunub,  Syr.  (e.g.  Isa.  liv.  2) 
tunob  ;  the  root  is  }t3,  not  in  the  sense  of  to  bind,  to  wind  (Dietr.), 
but  in  the  sense  of  to  stretch  ;  the  thread  or  cord  is  named  from 
the  extension  in  regard  to  length,  and  JIDX  is  thus  thread-work, 
whether  in  weaving  or  spinning.1  The  fame  of  Egyptian  manu 
factures  is  still  expressed  in  the  Spanish  aclabtea,  fine  linen  cloth, 
which  is  equivalent  to  the  modern  Arabic  el-kobtije  (kibfije);  they 
had  there  particularly  also  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  dye 
stuffs  found  in  the  plants  and  fossils  of  the  country  (Klemm's 
Culturgesc/iichte,  v.  308-310). 

Vers.  17,  18.  These  verses  remind  us  of  expressions  in  the 
Canticles.  There,  at  iv.  14,  are  found  the  three  names  for  spicery 
as  here,  and  one  sees  that  D^nH  ID  are  not  to  be  connected  geni- 
tively  :  there  are  three  things,  accented  as  in  the  title-verse  i.  3. 
The  myrrh,  1b  (Balsamodendron  myrrha),  belongs,  like  the  frank 
incense,  to  the  species  of  the  Amyris^  which  is  an  exotic  in 
Palestine  not  less  than  with  us;  the  aromatic  quality  in  them  docs 
not  arise  from  the  flowers  or  leaves,  so  that  Cant.  i.  13  leads  us 
to  think  of  a  bunch  of  myrrh,  but  from  the  resin  oozing  through 
the  bark  (Gummi  myrrhcv  or  merely  my  who),  consisting  of  bright 
glossy  red  or  golden-yellow  grains  more  or  less  transparent. 
tfbn*  (used  by  Balaam,  Num.  xxiv.  6)  is  the  Semitic  Old-Indian 
name  of  the  aloe,  agaru  or  aguru  ;  the  aromatic  quality  is  in  the 
wood  of  the  Aquilaria  agallocha,  especially  its  root  (agallochum  or 


1  Hence  perhaps  the  Greek  G^'JOJ,  which  Fick  in  his  Veryl.  Worterluch  con 
nects  with  the  Arab,  verb-root  radh,  to  bind,  wind,  clothe,  but  not  without 
leaking  thereto  interrogation  marks. 


16G  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

lignum  aloes]  dried  in  the  earth, — in  more  modern  use  and  com 
merce  the  inspissated  juice  of  its  leaves.  Ji»3p  is  Kivva^w^ov  (like 
"ib,  a  Semitic  word1  that  had  come  to  the  Greeks  through  the 
Phoenicians),  the  cinnamon,  i.e.  the  inner  rind  of  the  Laurus  cin- 
namomum.  The  myrrh  is  native  to  Arabia  ;  the  aloe,  as  its  name 
denotes,  is  Indian  ;  the  cinnamon  in  like  manner  came  through 
Indian  travellers  from  the  east  coast  of  Africa  and  Ceylon  (Tapro- 
bane).  All  these  three  spices  are  drugs,  i.e.  are  dry  apothecaries' 
wares  ;  but  we  are  not  on  that  account  to  conclude  that  she  per 
fumed  (Hitzig)  her  bed  with  spices,  viz.  burnt  in  a  censer,  an 
operation  which,  according  to  Cant.  iii.  6,  would  rather  be  desig 
nated  "'JjHttip.  The  verb  P|W  (only  here  as  Kal)  signifies  to  lift 
oneself  up  (vid.  under  Ps.  xlviii.  13),  and  transitively  to  raise  and 
swing  hither  and  thither  (=*pjn)  ;  here  with  a  double  accusative, 
to  besprinkle  anything  out  of  a  vessel  moved  hither  and  thither. 
According  to  this  sense,  we  must  think  of  the  three  aromas  as 
essences  in  the  state  of  solution  ;  cf.  Ex.  xxx.  22-33,  Esth.  ii.  12. 
Ilitzig's  question,  "  Who  would  sprinkle  bed-sheets  with  perfumed 
and  thus  impure  water  ?  "  betrays  little  knowledge  of  the  means  by 
which  even  at  the  present  day  clean  linen  is  made  fragrant.  The 
expression  DHln  nn  sounds  like  DHH  "nt?,  Cant.  v.  1,  although 
there  DHH  is  probably  the  voc.,  and  not,  as  here,  the  accus. ;  nn  is 
the  Kal  of  nn,  v.  19,  and  signifies  to  drink  something  copiously  in 
full  draughts.  The  verbal  form  D^J?  for  fy  is  found  besides  only 
in  Job  xx.  18,  xxxix.  13 ;  the  Hithpa.  signifies  to  enjoy  oneself 
greatly,  perhaps  (since  the  Hithpa.  is  sometimes  used  recipro 
cally,  vid.  under  Gen.  ii.  25)  with  the  idea  of  reciprocity  (Targ. 
inp  nn).  \ye  read  lo°habim  with  Chateph-Kametz  after  Ben- 
Asher  (vid.  Kimchi's  Lex.)  ;  the  punctuation  C^ariKS  is  that  of 
Ben-Naphtali. 

The  adulteress  now  deprives  the  youth  of  all  fear ;  the  circum 
stances  under  which  her  invitation  is  given  are  as  favourable  as 
possible. 

19  "  For  the  man  is  not  at  home, 
He  has  gone  on  a  long  journey. 

1  Myrrh  has  its  name  ifo  from  the  bitterness  of  its  taste,  and  tjjp  appears  to 
be  a  secondary  formation  from  H3J5,  whence  njp,  reed  ;  cf.  the  names  of  the 
cinnamon,  camiella,  FT.  canneUe.  Cinnamum  (x.ivv*pov)  is  only  a  shorter  form 
for  cinnamomum.  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  xii.  19  (42),  uses  both  forms  indiscrimi 
nately. 


CHAP.  VII    19,  20.  167 

20  He  has  taken  the  purse  with  him  ; 

He  will  not  return  home  till  the  day  of  the  full  moon." 

It  is  true  that  the  article  stands  in  t^Nn,  Arab,  almar-fat,  i.e.  serves 
to  define  the  word  :  the  man,  to  whom  here  /car  '^o^tjv  and  alone 
reference  can  be  made,  viz.  the  husband  of  the  adulteress  (Fl.)  ; 
but  on  the  other  side  it  is  characteristic  that  she  does  not  say  "^N 
(a»  e.g.  Gen.  xxix.  32),  but  ignores  the  relation  of  love  and  duty 
in  which  she  is  placed  to  him,  and  speaks  of  him  as  one  standing 
at  a  distance  from  her  (Aben-Ezra).  Erroneously  Vogel  reads  rP33 
after  the  Targ.  instead  of  irV33.  We  say  in  Hebr.  1JV33  l^K,  il  nest 
pas  chez  soi,  as  we  say  i"P:i  n^  U  a  pris  avec  soi  (cf.  Jer.  xxxviii. 
10).  pinno  Hitzig  seeks  to  connect  with  the  verb,  which,  after 
Isa.  xvii.  13,  xxii.  3,  is  possible ;  for  the  Hebr.  pirniD  (prni3?p)?  far 
off,  has  frequently  the  meaning  from  afar,  for  the  measure  of 
length  is  determined  not  from  the  point  of  departure  outward,  but 
from  the  end,  as  e.g.  Homer,  IL  ii.  456  :  exaOev  £e  re  fyaiverai 
avytf,  from  afar  the  gleam  is  seen,  i.e.  shines  hither  from  the  dis 
tance.  Similarly  we  say  in  French,  U  vient  du  cote  du  nord,  he 
comes  from  the  north,  as  well  as  il  va  du  cote  du  nord,  he  goes 
northwards.  But  as  we  do  not  say :  he  has  gone  on  a  journey  far 
off,  but :  on  a  distant  journey,  so  here  pim»  is  virtually  an  adj. 
(vid.  under  Isa.  v.  26)  equivalent  to  njrtrri  (Num.  ix.  10)  :  a 
journey  which  is  distant  =  such  as  from  it  he  has  a  long  way  back. 
Michaelis  has  well  remarked  here:  ut  timorem  ei penitus  adimat, 
veluti  per  gradus  incedit.  He  has  undertaken  a  journey  to  a 
remote  point,  but  yet  more  :  he  has  taken  money  with  him,  has 
thus  business  to  detain  him ;  and  still  further :  he  has  even  deter 
mined  the  distant  time  of  his  return.  f)p3rnm  (thus  to  be  written 
after  Ben-Asher,  vid.  Baer's  Torath  Emeth,  p.  41)  is  the  purse 
(from  •)•)*,  to  bind  together),  not  one  of  many,  but  that  which  is  his 
own.  The  terminus  precedes  206  to  emphasize  the  lateness ;  vid. 
on  ND3  under  Ps.  Ixxxi.  4.  Grcec.  Venet.  rfj  rjpepy  rov  Kaipov,  after 
Kimchi  and  others,  who  derive  ND3  (HDD)  from  the  root  D3,  to 
reckon,  and  regard  it  as  denoting  only  a  definite  time.  But  the  two 
passages  require  a  special  idea;  and  the  Syr.  keso,  which  in  1  Kings 
xii.  32,  2  Chron.  vii.  10,  designates  the  time  from  the  15th  day 
of  the  month,  shows  that  the  word  denotes  not,  according  to  the 
Talmud,  the  new  moon  (or  the  new  year's  day),  when  the  moon's 
disk  begins  to  cover  itself,  i.e.  to  fill  (nDDJV),  but  the  full  moon, 
when  it  is  covered,  i.e.  filled ;  so  that  thus  the  time  of  the  rii^ht- 

o 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

scene  here  described  is  not  that  of  the  last  quarter  of  the  moon 
(Ewald),  in  which  it  rises  at  midnight,  but  that  of  the  new 
moon  (Hitzig),  when  the  night  is  without  moonlight.  Since 
the  derivation  of  the  word  from  ND3  (HD3),  to  cover,  gives  the 
satisfactory  idea  of  the  covering  or  filling  of  the  moon's  disk,  we 
do  not  seek  after  any  other  ;  Dietrich  fixes  on  the  root-idea  of 
roundness,  and  Hitzig  of  vision  (KD3  =  mD,  rut?;  vid.,  on  the  con 
trary,  under  Ps.  cxliii.  9).  The  f»  is  that  of  time  at  which,  in 
which,  about  which,  anything  is  done;  it  is  more  indefinite  than  3 
would  be.  He  will  not  return  for  some  fourteen  days. 
The  result : — 

21  She  beguiled  him  by  the  fulness  of  her  talking, 
By  the  smoothness  of  her  lips  she  drew  him  away. 

Here  is  a  climax.  First  she  brought  him  to  yield,  overcoming 
the  resistance  of  his  mind  to  the  last  point  (cf.  1  Kings  xi.  3)  ; 
then  drove  him,  or,  as  we  say,  hurried  him  wholly  away,  viz.  from 
the  right  path  or  conduct  (cf.  Deut.  xiii.  6,  11).  "with  wan 
(=VinBPi)  as  the  chief  factum,  the  past  imperf.  is  interchanged, 
216.  Regarding  n^,  see  above,  p.  56.  Here  is  the  rhetoric  of 
sin  (Zockler) ;  and  perhaps  the  np^  of  20a  has  suggested  this  anti- 
phrastic  np_?  to  the  author  (Hitzig),  as  P^n  (the  inverted  ng£,  formed 
like  »tf,  which  is  the  abstr.  of  ^  as  that  is  of  P^H)  and  ttrVTO  are 
reciprocally  conditioned,  for  the  idea  of  the  slippery  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  18) 
connects  itself  with  p^n. 
What  followed  : — 

22  So  he  goes  after  her  at  once 

As  an  ox  which  goeth  to  the  slaughter-house, 

And  as  one  bereft  of  reason  to  the  restraint  of  fetters, 

23  As  a  bird  hastens  to  the  net, 

Without  knowing  that  his  life  is  at  stake- 
Till  the  arrow  pierces  his  liver. 

The  part,  ^in  (thus  to  be  accentuated  according  to  the  rule  in 
Baer's  Torath  Emet/i,  p.  25,  with  Mercha  to  the  tone-syllable  and 
Mahpach  to  the  preceding  open  syllable)  preserves  the  idea  of  the 
fool's  going  after  her.  Dfcna  (suddenly)  fixes  the  point,  when  he 
all  at  once  resolves  to  betake  himself  to  the  rendezvous  in  the 
house  of  the  adulteress,  now  a  Ke7r<£a>0et'<?,  as  the  LXX.  translates, 
i.e.,  as  we  say,  a  simpleton  who  has  gone  on  the  lime-twig.  He 
follows  her  us  an  ox  goes  to  the  slaughter-house,  unconscious  that 


CHAP.  VII.  22,  23.  169 

he  is  going  tliither  to  be  slaughtered  ;  the  LXX.  ungrammatically 
destroying  the  attributive  clause :  wairep  Be  ftovs  eirl  a<^>a^rjv 
aye-ai.  The  difficulties  in  D3JD1  (thus  punctuated,  after  Kimchi, 
with  a  double  Segol,  and  not  D3JJ31,  as  is  frequently  the  case)  multi 
ply,  and  it  is  not  to  be  reconciled  with  the  traditional  text.  The  ox 
appears  to  require  another  beast  as  a  side-piece  ;  and  accordingly 
the  LXX.,  Syr.,  and  Targ.  find  in  D3y  a  dog  (to  which  from 
SM  they  also  pick  out  ?JK,  a  stag),  Jerome  a  lamb  (et  quasi  agnus 
^33)5  Rashi  a  venomous  serpent  (perhaps  after  e^t??),  Lowen- 
stein  and  Malbim  a  rattlesnake  (7?fett?  ^n3  after  D3JJ);  but  all  this 
is  mere  conjecture.  Symmachus'  a/ctpratv  (eVt  &eo-p,wv  atypccv)  is 
without  support,  and,  like  the  favourite  rendering  of  Schelling,  et, 
sicut  saliens  in  vinculum  cervus  (7*8),  is  unsuitable  on  account  of 
the  unsemitic  position  of  the  words.  The  noun  D3y?  plur.  ^psy, 
signifies,  Isa.  iii.  18,  an  anklet  as  a  female  ornament  (whence  ver.  10 
the  denorn.  D3V,  to  make  a  tinkling  of  the  anklets).  In  itself  the 
word  only  means  the  fetter,  compes,  from  D3y,  Arab,  'akas,  'akash, 
contrahere,  constringere  (vid.  Fleischer  under  Isa.  lix.  5)  ;  and  that 
it  can  also  be  used  of  any  kind  of  means  of  checking  free  move 
ment,  the  Arab,  'ikds,  as  the  name  of  a  cord  with  which  the  camel 
is  made  fast  by  the  head  and  forefeet,  shows.  With  this  significa 
tion  the  interpretation  is  :  et  velut  pedicd  (  =  D3JJ331!)  implicatus  ad 
castigationem  stulti,  he  follows  her  as  if  (bound)  with  a  fetter  to  the 
punishment  of  the  fool,  i.e.  of  himself  (Michaelis,  Fleischer,  and 
others).  Otherwise  Luther,  who  first  translated  "  in  a  fetter," 
but  afterwards  (supplying  ^  not  3)  :  "  and  as  if  to  fetters,  where 
one  corrects  fools."  But  the  ellipsis  is  harsh,  and  the  parallelism 
leads  us  to  expect  a  living  being  in  the  place  of  D3y.  Now  since, 
according  to  Gesenius,  D3JJ,  fetter,  can  be  equivalent  to  a  fettered 
one  neither  at  Isa.  xvii.  5,  xxi.  17,  nor  Prov.  xxiii.  28  (according  to 
which  D3y  must  at  least  have  an  active  personal  signification),  we 
transpose  the  nouns  of  the  clause  and  write  D3y_  "icwta  Sfcjpl,  he 
follows  her  as  a  fool  (Psychol.  p.  292)  to  correction  (restraint) 
with  fetters;  or  if  ^1N  is  to  be  understood  not  so  much  physically 
as  morally,  and  refers  to  self-destroying  conduct  (Ps.  cvii.  7)  :  as  a 
madman,  i.e.  a  criminal,  to  chains.  The  one  figure  denotes  the 
fate  into  which  he  rushes,  like  a  beast  devoid  of  reason,  as  the  loss 
of  life  ;  and  the  other  denotes  the  fate  to  which  he  permits  him 
self  to  be  led  by  that  woman,  like  a  criminal  by  the  officer,  as 
the  loss  of  freedom  and  of  honour. 


170  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Ver.  23.  The  confusion  into  which  the  text  lias  fallen  is  con 
tinued  in  this  verse.  For  the  figure  of  the  deadly  arrow  connects 
itself  neither  with  that  of  the  ox  which  goes  to  the  slaughter-house, 
nor  with  that  of  the  madman  who  is  put  in  chains  :  the  former  is 
not  killed  by  being  shot ;  and  with  the  latter,  the  object  is  to  render 
him  harmless,  not  to  put  him  to  death.  The  LXX.  therefore 
converts  ^IK  into  ^«,  a  stag,  and  connects  the  shooting  with  an 
arrow  with  this  :  rj  o>?  eXa^o?  rogev/Aan  TreTrX^co?  et?  TO  rjirap. 
But  we  need  no  encroachment  on  the  text  itself,  only  a  correct 
placing  of  its  members.  The  three  thoughts,  ver.  23,  reach  a 
right  conclusion  and  issue,  if  with  nsrta  liay  inpp  (here  Mercha- 
mahpacli)  a  new  departure  is  begun  with  a  comparison  :  he  follows 
her  with  eager  desires,  like  as  a  bird  hastens  to  the  snare  (vid. 
regarding  PIS,  a  snare,  and  P'giD,  a  noose,  under  Isa.  viii.  15). 
AY  hat  then  follows  is  a  continuation  of  22a.  The  subject  is  again 
the  youth,  whose  way  is  compared  to  that  of  an  ox  going  to'  the 
slaughter,  of  a  culprit  in  chains,  and  of  a  fool ;  and  he  knows  not 
(non  novit,  as  iv.  19,  ix.  18,  and  according  to  the  sense,  non  curat, 
iii.  6,  v.  6)  that  it  is  done  at  the  risk  of  his  life  (te;S33  as  1  Kino;s 
ii.  23,  Num.  xvii.  3),  that  his  life  is  the  price  with  which  tliis 
kind  of  love  is  bought  (Nlil,  neut.,  as  not  merely  Eccles.  ii.  1  and 
the  like,  but  also  e.g.  Lev.  x.  3,  Esth.  ix  1) — that  does  not  concern 
him  till  (ny  =  nBfc  ty  or  ^  ny)  the  arrow  breaks  or  pierces  through 
(H?a  as  Job.  xvi.  13)  his  liver,  i.e.  till  he  receives  the  death- wound, 
from  which,  if  not  immediately,  yet  at  length  he  certainly  dies. 
Elsewhere  the  part  of  the  body  struck  with  a  deadly  wound  is 
called  the  reins  or  loins  (Job,  etc.),  or  the  gall-bladder  (Job  xx. 
25);  here  the  liver,  which  is  called  123,  Arab,  kebid,  perhaps  as  the 
organ  in  which  sorrowful  and  painful  affections  make  themselves 
felt  (cf.  JEschylus,  Agam.  801 :  S^a  XUTT?;?  e</>'  vjrrap  TrpoaiK- 
velrai,),  especially  the  latter,  because  the  passion  of  sensual  love, 
according  to  the  idea  of  the  ancients,  reflected  itself  in  the  liver. 
He  who  is  love-sick  has  jecur  ulcerosum  (Horace,  Od.  i.  25.  15)  ; 
he  is  diseased  in  his  liver  (Psydwl.  p.  2ti8).  But  the  arrow  is  not 
here  the  arrow  of  love  which  makes  love-sick,  but  the  arrow  of 
death,  which  slays  him  who  is  ensnared  in  sinful  love.  The  be 
fooled  youth  continues  the  disreputable  relation  into  which  he 
has  entered  till  it  terminates  in  adultery  and  in  lingering  disease 
upon  his  body,  remorse  in  his  soul,  and  dishonour  to  his  name, 
speedily  ending  in  inevitable  ruin  both  spiritually  and  temporally. 


CHAP.  VII.  24-27.  171 


Yers.  24,  25.  With  nnjn,  as  at  v.  7,  the  author  now  brings  his 
narrative  to  a  close,  adding  the  exhortation  deduced  from  it  : 

24  And  now,  ye  children,  give  ear  unto  me, 
And  observe  the  words  of  my  mouth  ! 

25  Let  not  thine  heart  incline  to  her  ways, 
And  stray  not  in  her  paths. 

The  verb  not?  (whence  jest,  like  jet,  iv.  15,  with  long  5  from  i)  the 
author  uses  also  of  departure  from  a  wicked  way  (iv.  15)  ;  but  here, 
where  the  portraiture  of  a  faithless  wife  (a  nniD)  is  presented,  the 
word  used  in  the  law  of  jealousy,  Num.  v.,  for  the  trespass  of  an 
t^S  nti'X  is  specially  appropriate.  nt3b>  is  interchanged  with  rUT) 
(cf.  Gen.  xxi.  14)  :  wander  not  on  her  paths,  which  would  be  the 
consequence  of  straying  on  them.  Theodotion  :  /ecu  ^  v\avrj6fj<s 
tv  aTpaTTols  avTY)<s,  with  /cat,  as  also  Syr.,  Targ.,  and  Jerome. 
The  Masora  reckons  this  verse  to  the  25  which  have  ta  at  the 
beginning  and  tal  at  the  middle  of  each  clause  (vid.  Baer  in  the 
Luth.  Zeitschrift,  1865,  p.  587)  ;  the  text  of  Norzi  has  therefore 
correctly  ?&O,  which  is  found  also  in  good  MSS.  (e.g.  the  Erfurt, 
2  and  3). 

Yers.  26,  27.  The  admonition,  having  its  motive  in  that  which 
goes  before,  is  now  founded  on  the  emphatic  finale  : 

26  For  many  are  the  slain  whom  she  hath  caused  to  fall, 
And  many  are  her  slain. 

27  A  multiplicity  of  ways  to  hell  is  her  house, 
Going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death. 

The  translation  "  for  many  slain  has  she  laid  low  "  (Syr.,  Targ., 
Jerome,  Luther)  is  also  syntactically  possible  ;  for  D^l  can  be 
placed  before  its  substantive  after  the  manner  of  the  demonstra 
tives  and  numerals  (e.g.  Neh.  ix.  28,  cf.  inx,  Cant.  iv.  9),  and  the 
accentuation  which  requires  two  servants  (the  usual  two  Munachs) 
to  the  Athnach  appears  indeed  thus  to  construe  it.  It  is  otherwise 
if  D^ai  here  meant  magni  (thus  e.g.  Ralbag.  and  recently  Bertheau), 
and  not  multi  ;  but  D'm  and  D'oyjJ  stand  elsewhere  in  connection 
with  each  other  in  the  signification  many  and  numerous,  Ps. 
xxxv.  18,  Joel  ii.  2,  Mic.  iv.  3.  "Her  slain"  are  those  slain  by 
her  ;  the  part.  pass,  is  connected  with  the  genitive  of  the  actor,  e.g. 
ix.  18  ;  cf.  (Arab.)  katyl  dlmhalit,  of  one  whom  love  kills  (Fl.). 
With  ver.  27  cf.  ii.  18,  ix.  18.  In  27a,  FIJV3  is  not  equivalent  to 
nn'22  after  viii.  2,  also  not  elliptical  and  equivalent  to  nrP2  ^"it  ; 
the  former  is  unnecessary,  the  latter  is  in  no  case  established  by  Ps. 


1~2  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEIICS. 

xlv.  7,  Ezra  x.  13,  nor  by  Deut.  viii.  15,  2  Kings  xxiii.  17  (see,  on 
the  other  hand,  Philippi's  Status  Construct  us,  pp.  87-93).  Rightly 
Hitzig  has  :  her  house  forms  a  multiplicity  of  ways  to  hell,  in  so 
far  as  adultery  leads  by  a  diversity  of  ways  to  hell.  Similarly  the 
subject  and  the  predicate  vary  in  number,  xvi.  25,  Ps.  ex.  3,  Job 
xxvi.  13,  Dan.  ix.  23,  and  frequently.  If  one  is  once  in  her  house, 
he  may  go  in  this  or  in  that  way,  but  surely  bis  path  is  to  destruc 
tion  :  it  consists  of  many  steps  to  hell,  such  as  lead  down  (-pi,  fern. 
Isa.  xxxvii.  34,  masc.  Isa.  xxx.  21)  to  the  extreme  depths  of  death 
(cf.  Job  ix.  9,  "  chambers  of  the  south  "  =  its  remotest  regions 
veiling  themselves  in  the  invisible)  ;  for  Tin  (Arab,  kldddr)  is  the 
part  of  the  tent  or  the  house  removed  farthest  back,  and  the  most 
private  (Fl.).  These  niD-'Vm,  cf.  faw  'j?»i',  ix.  18,  approach  to 
the  conception  of  DiliTa  which  is  afterwards  distinguished  from 

I  O 


FOURTEENTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  VIII. 

A  DISCOURSE  OF  WISDOM  CONCERNING  HER  EXCELLENCE  AND 

HER  GIFTS. 

The  author  has  now  almost  exhausted  the  ethical  material ;  for 
in  this  introduction  to  the  Solomonic  Book  of  Proverbs  he  works  it 
into  a  memorial  for  youth,  so  that  it  is  time  to  think  of  concluding 
the  circle  by  bending  back  the  end  to  the  beginning.  For  as  in 
the  beginning,  i.  20  ff.,  so  also  here  in  the  end,  he  introduces 
Wisdom  herself  as  speaking.  There,  her  own  testimony  is  delivered 
in  contrast  to  the  alluring  voice  of  the  deceiver  ;  here,  the  daughter 
of  Heaven  in  the  highways  inviting  to  come  to  her,  is  the  contrast 
to  the  adulteress  lurking  in  the  streets,  who  is  indeed  not  a  per 
sonification,  but  a  woman  of  flesh  and  blood,  but  yet  at  the  same 
time  as  the  incarnate  airdrij  of  worldly  lust.  He  places  opposite 
to  her  Wisdom,  whose  person  is  indeed  not  so  sensibly  perceptible, 
but  who  is  nevertheless  as  real,  coming  near  to  men  in  a  human 
way,  and  seeking  to  win  them  by  her  gifts. 

1  Doth  not  Wisdom  discourse, 

And  Understanding  cause  her  voice  to  be  heard? 

2  On  the  top  of  the  high  places  in  the  way, 

In  the  midst  of  the  way,  she  has  placed  herself. 


CHAP.  VIII.  1-3.  173 

3  By  the  side  of  the  gates,  at  the  exit  of  the  city, 
At  the  entrance  to  the  doors,  she  calleth  aloud. 

As  nan  points  to  that  which  is  matter  of  fact,  so  N?n  calls  to  a  con 
sideration  of  it  (cf.  xiv.  22)  ;  the  question  before  the  reader  is 
doubly  justified  with  reference  to  i.  20  ff.  AVith  neon,  mnn  is 
interchanged,  as  e.g.  ii.  1-6  ;  such  names  of  wisdom  are  related  to 
its  principal  name  almost  as  DTita,  jr6j?,  and  the  like,  to  nin\  In 
describing  the  scene,  the  author,  as  usual,  heaps  up  synonyms  which 
touch  one  another  without  com  in"1  together. 

r~»        r*- 

Ver.  2.  By  D'Eh?  Hitzig  understands  the  summit  of  a  mountain, 
and  therefore  regards  this  verse  as  an  interpolation  ;  but  the  "high 
places"  are  to  be  understood  of  the  high-lying  parts  of  the  city. 
There,  on  the  way  which  leads  up  and  down,  she  takes  her  stand. 

%>J|  =  ^Lc,  old  and  poetic  for  ?P,  signifies  here  "  hard  by,  close  to," 

properly,  so  that  something  stands  forward  over  the  edge  of  a  thing, 
or,  as  it  were,  passes  over  its  borders  (Fl.).  The  JV3,  Hitzig,  as 
Bertheau,  with  LXX.,  Targ.,  Jerome,  interpret  prepositionally  as 
a  strengthening  of  P3  (in  the  midst)  ;  but  where  it  once,  Ezek.  i.  27, 
occurs  in  this  sense,  it  is  fully  written  ?  JV3.  Here  it  is  the  accus. 
loci  of  the  substantive ;  "  house  of  the  ascent "  (Syr.  16th  urchotho) 
is  the  place  where  several  ways  meet,  the  uniting  point,  as  "pin  DK 
(Ezek.  xxi.  26),  the  point  of  departure,  exit ;  the  former  the  cross- 
way,  as  the  latter  the  separating  way.  Thus  Immanuel :  the  place 
of  the  frequented  streets  ;  Meiri :  the  place  of  the  ramification 
(more  correctly,  the  concentration)  of  the  ways.  n2¥3  signifies 
more  than  nn;?  (she  raises  herself)  and  rnny  (she  goes  thither)  ;  it 
means  that  she  plants  herself  there. 

Ver,  3.  In  this  verse  Bertheau  finds,  not  inappropriately,  the 
designations  of  place:  on  this  side,  on  that  side,  and  within  the 
gate.  Tf,  at  the  hand,  is  equivalent  to  at  the  side,  as  Ps.  cxl.  6. 
*B7,  of  the  town,  is  the  same  as  nna^  ix.  14,  of  the  house:  at  the 
mouth,  i.e.  at  the  entrance  of  the  city,  thus  where  they  go  out  and 
in.  There  are  several  of  these  ways  for  leaving  and  entering  a  citv, 

*•  O  O  v    i 

and  on  this  account  D^nna  NilD  are  connected  :  generally  where  one 
goes  out  and  in  through  one  of  the  gates  (doors).  NUO,  fully 
represented  by  the  French  avenue,  the  space  or  way  which  leads  to 
anything  (FL).  There  she  raises  her  voice,  which  sounds  out  far 
and  wide;  vid.  concerning  npn  (Grcec.  Venet.  incorrectly,  after 
Rashi,  aXaXa^ofcrt),  at  i.  20. 


174  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVIDES. 

Now  beins  the  discourse.      The  exordium   summons     eneral 


attention  to  it  with  the  emphasis  of  its  absolute  truth  : 

4  "  To  you,  ye  men,  is  my  discourse  addressed, 
And  my  call  is  to  the  children  of  men  ! 

5  Apprehend,  0  ye  simple  ones,  what  wisdom  is; 
And,  ye  fools,  what  understanding  is. 

G  Hear,  for  I  will  speak  princely  things, 
And  the  opening  of  my  lips  is  upright. 

7  For  my  mouth  uttereth  truth, 

And  a  wicked  thing  is  an  abomination  to  my  lips. 

8  The  utterances  of  my  mouth  are  in  rectitude, 
There  is  nothing  crooked  or  perverse  in  them. 

9  To  the  men  of  understanding  they  are  all  to  the  point, 
And  plain  to  those  who  have  attained  knowledge." 

Hitzig  rejects  this  section,  4-12,  as  he  does  several  others  in  viii. 
and  ix.,  as  spurious.  But  if  this  preamble,  which  reminds  us  of 
Elihu,  is  not  according  to  every  one's  taste,  yet  in  respect  of  the 
circle  of  conception  and  thought,  as  well  as  of  the  varying  develop 
ment  of  certain  fundamental  thoughts,  it  is  altogether  after  the 
manner  of  the  poet.  The  terminology  is  one  that  is  strange  to  us  ; 
the  translation  of  it  is  therefore  difficult  ;  that  which  is  given  above 
strives  at  least  not  to  be  so  bad  as  to  bring  discredit  on  the  poet. 
The  tautology  and  flatness  of  ver.  4  disappears  when  one  under 
stands  D'B*«  and  D"1K  '33  like  the  Attic  av&pes  and  avOpmrot  ;  vid. 
under  Isa.  ii.  9,  liii.  3  (where  B^K,  as  here  and  Ps.  cxli.  4,  is 
equivalent  to  B^K  ^s,  Ps.  xlix.  3,  iv.  3).  Wisdom  turns  herself 
with  her  discourses  to  high  and  low,  to  persons  of  standing  and  to 
the  proletariat.  The  verbal  clause  4a  interchanges  with  a  noun 
clause  46,  as  frequently  a  preposition  with  its  noun  (e.g.  ver.  8a) 
completes  the  whole  predicate  of  a  semistich  (Fh). 

Ver.  5.  Regarding  n^"}^,  callidifas,  in  a  good  sense,  md.  at  i.  4  ; 
regarding  B^na,  those  who  are  easily  susceptible  of  good  or  bad, 
according  to  the  influence  that  is  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  vid. 
also  i.  4  ;  and  regarding  By1!?!,  the  intellectually  heavy,  dull  persons 
in  whom  the  flesh  burdens  the  mind,  vid.  at  i.  22.  &  is  parallel 
with  HDiy,  for  the  heart  (according  to  its  Semitic  etymon,  that  which 
remains  fast,  like  a  kernel,  the  central-point)  is  used  for  the  under 
standing  of  which  it  is  the  scat  (Psychol.  p.  249),  or  heartedness 
^intelligence  (cf.  ^"lOn,  vi.  32  =  avovs  or  ciXoyos*).  We  take  n»"iy 
and  i?  as  objective,  as  we  have  translated  :  that  which  is  in  both, 
and  in  which  they  consist.  Thus 


CHAP.  VIII.  4-9.  175 

with  this  author,  has  both  times  the  simple  transitive  meaning 
of  the  gain  of  understanding  into  the  nature  and  worth  of  both  ; 
and  we  neither  need  to  interpret  the  second  W3n  in  the  double 
transitive  meaning,  "  to  bring  to  understanding,"  nor,  with  Hitzig, 
to  change  it  into  Won1  [direct,  i.e.  applicate]. 

Ver.  6.  That  to  which  Wisdom  invites,  her  discourse  makes 
practicable,  for  she  speaks  of  D<1T^.  Ilitzig  interprets  this  word 
by  conspicua,  manifest  truths,  which  the  Grcec.  Venet.  understands 
to  be  ivavria,  after  Kimchi's  interpretation:  truths  which  one  makes 
an  aim  and  object  p33)  on  account  of  their  worth.  Fiirst,  however, 
says  that  T33,  from  133,  Arab,  najad,  means  to  be  elevated,  exalted, 
and  thereby  visible  (whence  also  T3H,  to  bring  to  light,  to  bring 
forward);  and  that  by  DHS33,  as  the  plur.  of  this  T33,  is  to  be  under 
stood  princeps  in  the  sense  of  principalia,  or  pra>stantia  (LXX. 
crefj,vd ;  Theodot.  rjye/AOVLtcd ;  Jerome,  de  rebus  rnagnis)  (cf .  vo/j,o<; 
/Sao-tXt/co?  of  the  law  of  love,  which  surpasses  the  other  laws,  as  kings 
do  their  subjects),  which  is  supported  by  the  similar  expression, 
xxii.  20.  But  that  we  do  not  need  to  interpret  DI|TI33  as  abstr.,  like 
D<l"]^"l'?j  and  as  the  ace.  adverb. :  in  noble  ways,  because  in  that  case 
it  ought  to  be  niT33  (Berth.),  is  shown  by  xxii.  20,  and  also  xvi.  13  ; 
cf.  on  this  neuter  use  of  the  masc.,  E  \vald,  §  172a.  "  The  opening 
of  my  lips  (i.e.  this,  that  they  open  themselves,  not :  that  which 
they  disclose,  lay  open)  is  upright "  is  to  be  regarded  as  metonymia 
antecedentis pro  conseq.:  that  which  I  announce  is  .  .  .;  or  also  as 
a  poetic  attribution,  which  attributes  to  a  subject  that  which  is 
produced  by  it  (cf.  iii.  176):  my  discourse  bearing  itself  right, 
brings  to  light  (Fl.).  xxiii.  16,  cf.  31,  is  parallel  both  in  the 
words  and  the  subject ;  D11"]^^,  that  which  is  in  accordance  with 
fact  and  with  rectitude,  uprightness  (vid.  at  i.  3),  is  a  word  com 
mon  to  the  introduction  (i.-ix.),  and  to  the  first  appendix  to  the 
first  series  of  Solomonic  Proverbs  (xxii.  17-xxiv.  22),  with  the 
Canticles.  In  Cant.  v.  16  also,  as  here  (cf.  v.  3,  Job  vi.  30),  the 
word  palate  \_Gaumeii\  is  used  as  the  organ  of  speech. 

Ver.  7.  ^  continues  the  reason  (begun  in  ver.  6)  for  the 
Hearken!  (cf.  i.  15-17,  iv.  16  f.);  so  that  this  second  reason  is 
co-ordinated  with  the  first  (Fl.).  Eegarding  J1OK,  vid.  at  iii.  3 ; 
run,  here  of  the  palate  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  30),  as  in  xv.  28  of  the 
heart,  has  not  hitherto  occurred.  It  signifies  quiet  inward  medita 
tion,  as  well  as  also  (but  only  poetically)  discourses  going  forth  from 
1  Vid.  the  Heir.  Zeitschrift,  p^nn,  1856,  p.  112. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PEOVEEDS. 


it  (vid.  at  Ps.  i.  2).  The  contrary  of  truth,  i.e.  moral  trutli,  is  I1?''1?., 
wickedness  in  words  and  principles,  —  a  segolate,  which  retains  its 
Secjol  also  in  pausa,  with  the  single  exception  of  Eccles.  iii.  16. 

Vers.  8,  9.  The  3  of  pTO3  is  that  of  the  close  connection  of  a 
quality  with  an  action  or  matter,  which  forms  with  a  substantive 
adverbia  as  well  as  virtual  adjectiva,  as  here  :  cum  rectitudine  (con- 
juncta  i.  e.  vera)  sunt  omnia  dicta  oris  mei  (Fl.)  ;  it  is  the  3  of  the 
distinctive  attribute  (Hitzig),  certainly  related  to  the  1  essentice 
(iii.  26,  according  to  which  Schultens  and  Bertheau  explain), 
which  is  connected  with  the  abstract  conception  (e.g.  Ps.  xxxiii.  4), 
but  also  admits  the  article  designating  the  gender  (vid.  at  Ps. 
xxix.  4).  The  opposite  of  plX  (here  in  the  sense  of  veracitas, 
which  it  means  in  Arab.)  is  V$)}  bl£M,  dolosum  ac  perversum. 
V$V  (cf.  Gesen.  §  84,  9)  is  that  which  is  violently  bent  and 
twisted,  i.e.  estranged  from  the  truth,  which  is,  so  to  speak, 
parodied  or  caricatured.  Related  to  it  in  meaning,  but  proceed 
ing  from  a  somewhat  different  idea,  is  bflSJ.  ^3,  used  primarily 
of  threads,  cords,  ropes,  and  the  like,  means  to  twist  them,  to  twine 
them  over  and  into  one  another,  whence  7T1B,  a  line  or  string  made 
of  several  intertwisted  threads  (cf.  aLuu,  a  wick  of  a  candle  or 
lamp)  ;  Niph.,  to  be  twisted,  specifically  luctari,  of  the  twisting  of 
the  limbs,  and  figuratively  to  bend  and  twist  oneself,  like  the 
crafty  (versutus)  liars  and  deceivers,  of  words  and  thoughts  which 
do  not  directly  go  forth,  but  by  the  crafty  twistings  of  truth  and 
rectitude,  opp.  -\&,  paa  (Fl.).  There  is  nothing  of  deception  or 
error  in  the  utterances  of  wisdom  ;  much  rather  they  are  all  D'nbJ, 
straight  out  from  her  (cf.  Isa.  Ivii.  2),  going  directly  out,  and 
without  circumlocution  directed  to  the  right  end  for  the  intelligent, 
the  knowing  (cf.  Neh.  x.  29)  ;  and  &"}&,  straight  or  even,  giving 
no  occasion  to  stumble,  removing  the  danger  of  erring  for  those 
who  have  obtained  knowledge,  i.e.  of  good  arid  evil,  and  thus  the 
ability  of  distinguishing  between  them  (Gesen.  §  134,  1),  —  briefly, 
for  those  who  know  how  to  estimate  them. 

Her  self-commendation  is  continued  in  the  resumed  address  : 

10  "  Receive  my  instruction,  and  not  silver, 
And  knowledge  rather  than  choice  gold  ! 

11  For  wisdom  is  better  than  corals, 

And  all  precious  jewels  do  not  equal  her. 

12  I,  Wisdom,  inhabit  prudence, 

And  the  knowledge  of  right  counsels  is  attainable  by  me." 


CHAP.  VIII.  10-12.  177 


Instead  of  ^pa'NTi  influenced  by  inp^  is  S|03'?N1  with  inpfl  to  be 
supplied  ;  besides,  with  most  Codd.  and  older  editions,  we  are  to 
accentuate  ^D^  ^i?  with  the  erasure  of  the  Makkeph.  "  Such 
negations  and  prohibitions,"  Fleischer  remarks,  "  are  to  be  under 
stood  comparatively  :  instead  of  acquiring  silver,  rather  acquire 

wisdom.     Similar  is  the  old  Arabic  jUi!  ^  jUll,  the  fire,  and  not 

the  disgrace  !  Also  among  the  modern  Arabic  proverbs  collected 
by  Burckhardt,  many  have  this  form,  e.g.  No.  34,  alhajamat  lalafas 
wala  alhajat  alanas,  Better  to  let  oneself  be  cut  with  the  axe  than 
to  beg  for  the  favour  of  another  "  105  is  to  be  translated,  with 
Jerome,  Kimchi,  and  others:  and  knowledge  is  more  precious  than 
fine  gold  C1!???,  neut.:  auro  pretiosius);  and  in  view  of  xvi.  16,  this 
construction  appears  to  be  intended.  But  Fleischer  has  quite 
correctly  affirmed  that  this  assertatory  clause  is  unsuitably  placed  as 
a  parallel  clause  over  against  the  preceding  imperative  clause,  and, 
what  is  yet  more  important,  that  then  ver.  11  would  repeat  idem  per 
idem  in  a  tautological  manner.  We  therefore,  after  the  Aramaic  and 
Greek  translators,  take  ini3  fjD3  together  here  as  well  as  at  ver.  19, 
inasmuch  as  we  carry  forward  the  inp:  et  scientiam  prce  auro  lectis- 
simO)  which  is  also  according  to  the  accentuation.  Equally  pregnant 
is  the  p  in  H"1?1?  °f  tne  passage  iii.  14,  15,  which  is  here  varied. 

Ver.  12  follows  ver.  11  =  iii.  15  as  a  justification  of  this 
estimating  of  wisdom  above  all  else  in  worth.  Regarding  ^X.  with 
Gaja,  vid.  the  rule  which  the  accentuation  of  this  word  in  the  three 
so-called  metrical  books  follows  in  Merx'  Archiv,  1868,  p.  203  (cf. 
Baer's  Torath  Emeth,  p.  40).  We  translate  :  ego  sapientia  incolo 
sollertiam,  for  the  verb  \3V  is  construed  with  the  accuastive  of  the 
object,  ii.  21,  x.  30,  Ps.  xxxvii.  3  (cf.  ny,  Ps.  v.  5),  as  well  as  with 
U,  Gen.  xxvi.  2,  Ps.  Ixix.  37.  Wisdom  inhabits  prudence,  has 
settled  dowrn,  as  it  were,  and  taken  up  her  residence  in  it,  is  at 
home  in  its  whole  sphere,  and  rules  it.  Bertheau  not  unsuitably 
compares  olicwv  with  fj,6vo<;  e^wi/,  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  Regarding  fiiBTD, 
vid.  i.  4,  v.  2.  It  denotes  well-considered,  carefully  thought  out 
designs,  plans,  conclusions,  and  Jljn  is  here  the  knowledge  that  is 
so  potent.  This  intellectual  power  is  nothing  beyond  wisdom,  it  is 
in  her  possession  on  every  occasion  ;  she  strives  after  it  not  in  vain, 
her  knowledge  is  defined  according  to  her  wish.  Wisdom  describes 
herself  here  personally  with  regard  to  that  which  she  bestows  on 
men  who  receive  her. 

VOL.  i.  M 


173 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


Far  remote  is  the  idea  that  13a  is  dependent  on  NVOX  (I  acquire) 
(Lowenstein,  Bertheau).  With  this  verse  begins  a  new  series  of 
thoughts  raising  themselves  on  the  basis  of  the  fundamental  clause 
13a.  Wisdom  says  what  she  hates,  and  why  she  hates  it  : 

13  "  The  fear  of  Jahve  is  to  hate  evil ; 
Pride  and  arrogancy,  and  an  evil  way 
And  a  deceitful  mouth,  do  I  hate." 

If  the  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  (ix.  10,  i.  7),  then 
wisdom,  personally  considered,  stands  before  all  else  that  is  to  be  said 
of  her  in  a  relation  of  homage  or  reverence  toward  God  corresponding 
to  the  fear  of  God  on  the  part  of  man ;  and  if,  as  the  premiss  13a 
shows,  the  fear  of  God  has  as  its  reverse  side  the  hatred  of  evil, 
then  there  arises  what  Wisdom  says  in  TOb>  (I  hate)  of  herself! 
Instead  of  the  n.  actionis  nwfc  (hatred),  formed  in  the  same  way 
with  ns-v,  which,  admitting  the  article,  becomes  a  substantive,  the 
author  uses,  in  order  that  he  might  designate  the  predicate  as  such 
(Hitzig),  rather  the  n.  actionis  n&i?,  which  is  indeed  also  a  noun, 
but  is  not  used  substantively ;  T\&&  as  ns^o,  Jer.  xxix.  10.  JlN-ip' 
Judg.  viii.  1,  is  equivalent  to  TlKis?  like  neb,  the  becoming  dry] 
rw,  the  being  able  ;  cf.  (Arab.)  sfianat,  hating,  maldt,  welLbeing, 
karat,  reading  (FL).  The  evil  which  Wisdom  hates  is  now  part!- 
cularized  as,  vi.  16-19,  the  evil  which  Jahve  hates.  The  virtue  of 
all  virtues  is  humility;  therefore  Wisdom  hates,  above  all,  self- 
exaltation  in  all  its  forms.  The  paronomasia  JiKJl  nw  (pride  and 
haughtiness)  expresses  the  idea  in  the  whole  of  Its  contents  and 
compass  (cf.  Isa.  xv.  6,  iii.  1,  and  above  at  i.  27).  fisa  (from  nxa, 
the  nominal  form),  that  which  is  lofty  =  pride,  stands  with  jtaa,  as 
Job  iv.  10,  nhJ,  that  which  is  high  =  arrogance.  There  follows  the 
mam  mali,  representing  the  sins  of  walk,  i.e.  of  conduct,  and  os 
fallax  (vid.  at  ii.  12),  the  sins  of  the  mouth.  Hitzig  rightly  rejects 
the  interpunctuation  in,  and  prefers  jn.  Jn  consequence  of  this 
Dechi  (Tiphdia  init.),  nbsnn  ^  have  in  Codd.  and  good  editions 

the  servants  Asia  and  Illuj  (vid.  Baer's  Torath  Emeth,  p.  11)  ; 
Aben-Ezra  and  Moses  Kimchi  consider  the  Asia  erroneously  as 
disjunctive,  and  explain  'En  by  et  os^axioma  meurn,  but  Asia  is 
conjunctive,  and  has  after  it  the  n -raphatum. 

After  Wisdom  has  said  what  she  hates,  and  thus  what  she  is  nor, 
she  now  says  what  she  is;  has,  and  promises: 


CHAP.  VIII.  1-1-16.  179 

14  "  Mine  is  counsel  and  promotion  ; 

I  am  understanding,  mine  is  strength. 

15  By  me  kings  reign, 

And  rulers  govern  justly. 

16  By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles — • 
All  judges  of  the  earth." 

Whoever  gives  anything  must  himself  possess  it;  in  this  sense 
Wisdom  claims  for  herself  counsel,  promotion  (in  the  sense  of 
offering  and  containing  that  which  is  essentially  and  truly  good ; 
vid.  concerning  nnnn,  ii.  7),  and  energy  (vid.  Eccles.  vii.  19). &  But 
she  does  not  merely  possess  nra ;  this  is  much  rather  her  peculiar 
nature,  and  is  one  with  her.  That  ver.  14  is  formed  after  Job  xii. 
13,  16  (Hitzig)  is  possible,  without  there  following  thence  any 
argument  against  its  genuineness.  And  if  ver.  15  f.,  and  Isa. 
xxxii.  1,  x.  1,  stand  in  intentional' reciprocal  relation,  then  the 
priority  is  on  the  side  of  the  author  of  the  Proverbs.  The  connec 
tion  gives  to  the  laconic  expression  its  intended  comprehensiveness. 
It  is  not  meant  that  Wisdom  has  the  highest  places  in  the  state  to 
give,  but  that  she  makes  men  capable  of  holding  and  discharging 
the  duties  of  these. 

Ver.  I5b.  Here  we  are  led  to  think  of  legislation,  but  the  usage 
of  the  language  determines  for  the  Po.  PP.h  only  the  significations 
of  commanding,  decreeing,  or  judging;  pTO  is  the  object,  accus. 
the  opposite  of  JJ&rni?.pn  (decrees  of  unrighteousness),  Isa.  x.  1.     jn 
is  a  poetic  word,  from  JP  =  Arab,  razuiia,  to  be  heavy,  weighty 
then  to  be  firm,  incapable  of  being  shaken,  figuratively  of  majestic 

repose,  dignity  (cf.  ^  and  Ttaa)  in  the  whole  external  habitus,  in 

speech  and  action  such  as  befits  one  invested  with  power  (Fl.). 

Ver.  1G«.  We  may  not  explain  the  second  clause  of  this  verse: 
et  ad  ingen.ua  impelluntur  quicunque  terrce  imperant,  for  3H3  is  adj. 
without  such  a  verbal  sense.  But  besides,  D'anj  is  not  pred.,  for 
which  it  is  not  adapted,  because,  with  the  obscuring  of  its  ethical 
signification  (from  ru,  to  impel  inwardly,  viz.  to  noble  conduct, 
particularly  to  liberality),  it  also  denotes  those  who  are  noble  only 
with  reference  to  birth,  and  not  to  disposition  (Isa.  xxxii.  8).  Thus 
DTi:  is  a  fourth  synonym  for  the  highly  exalted,  and  pK  'tastr^  is 
the  summary  placing  together  of  all  kinds  of  dignity;  for  B2^  unites 
in  itself  references  to  government,  administration  of  justice,  and 
rule,  b  is  used,  and  not  bl— a  so-called  asyndeton  summativum. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Instead  of  p«  (LXX.)  there  is  found  also  tlie  word  pn*  (Syr., 
Targ..  Jerome,  Grcec.  Venet.,  adopted  by  Norzi  after  Cocld.  and 
Neapol.  1487).  But  this  word,  if  not  derived  from  the  conclusion 
of  the  preceding  verse,  is  not  needed  by  the  text,  and  gives  a 
summary  which  does  not  accord  with  that  which  is  summed  up 
(D'afo,  D^n,  Dnb>,  D'a"^)  ;  besides,  the  Scripture  elsewhere  calls 
God  Himself  pi*  BSIB>  (?s.  ix.  5  ;  Jer.  xi.  20).  The  Masoretic 
reading1  of  most  of  the  editions,  which  is  also  found  in  the  Cod. 
Hillel  (Wi  12D2),  merits  the  preference. 

The  discourse  of  Wisdom  makes  a  fresh  departure,  as  at  vcr.  13  : 
she  tells  how,  to  those  who  love  her,  she  repays  this  love  : 

17  "  I  love  them  that  love  me, 

And  they  that  seek  me  early  find  me. 

18  Riches  and  honour  are  with  me, 
Durable  riches  and  righteousness. 

19  Better  is  my  fruit  than  pure  and  fine  gold, 
And  my  revenue  (better)  than  choice  silver. 

20  In  the  way  of  righteousness  do  I  walk, 
In  the  midst  of  the  paths  of  justice. 

21  To  give  an  inheritance  to  them  that  love  me 
And  I  fill  their  treasuries." 


The  Chethib  n^nx  (ego  has  qui  earn  amant  redamo),  Gesenius, 
Lfhrgeb,  §  196,  5,  regards  as  a  possible  synallage  (earn  =  me),  but 
one  would  rather  think  that  it  ought  to  be  read  (mrr  =)  'n  »anfc. 
The  ancients  all  have  the  reading  ^n«.  anN  (=2nNX,  with  the 
change  of  the  eg  into  e,  and  the  compression  of  the  radical  N  ;  cf. 
ION',  fcqn,  i.  10)  is  the  form  of  the  fut.  Kal,  which  is  inflected  «nsn, 
i.  22.  Regarding  nntf  (the  Grcec.  Venet.  well  :  ol  opOplgovres  /iot), 
vid.  i.  28,  where  the  same  epenthet.  fut.  form  is  found. 

Ver.  18.  In  this  verse  part  of  iii.  16  is  repeated,  after  which  ^ 
is  meant  of  possession  (mecum  and  penes  me).  Regarding  pn,  vid. 
i.  13  ;  instead  of  the  adjective  lj£  there,  we  have  here  pny.  The 
verb  pny  signifies  promoveri,  to  move  forwards,  whence  are  derived 
the  meanings  old  (cf.  cetas  provecta,  advanced  age),  venerable  for 
age,  and  noble,  free  (cf.  p*ij?,  Isa.  xxviii.  9,  and  Arab,  'atyk,  manu- 


1  If  the  Masoretes  had  read  p-^  "BBt?,  then  would  they  have  added  the 
remark  n^  ("it  does  not  further  occur"),  and  inserted  the  expression  in  their 
Eegister  of  Expressions,  which  occurs  but  once,  Masora  fnalis,  p.  62. 

2  [One  of  the  most  ancient  and  celebrated  Codd.  of  the  Heb.  Scriptures, 
called  Hillel  from  the  name  of  the  man  who  wrote  it.    Vid.  Strack's  Prolegomena, 
p.  112     It  was  written  about  A.D.  600.] 


CHAP.  VIII.  17-21.  181 


missus),  unbound,  the  bold.  Used  of  clothing,  pVlJJ  (Isa.  xxiii.  18) 
expresses  the  idea  of  venerable  for  age.  pny  used  of  possessions 
and  goods,  like  the  Arab,  'dtak,  denotes  such  goods  as  increase 
during  long  possession  as  an  inheritance  from  father  to  son,  and 
remain  firm,  and  are  not  for  the  first  time  gained,  but  only  need 
to  be  inherited,  opes  perennes  et  firmce  (Schultens,  Gesenius' 
Thesaur.)  Fleischer),  although  it  may  be  also  explained  (which  is, 
however,  less  probable  with  the  form  pny)  of  the  idea  of  the  vener 
able  from  opes  superbce  (Jerome),  splendid  opulence.  niJ7V  is 
here  also  a  good  which  is  distributed,  but  properly  the  distributing 
goodness  itself,  as  the  Arab,  sadakat,  influenced  by  the  later  use  of 
the  Hebrew  nplX  (8i,Kaio<TVvri  =  €\.e/r]f&o<TVVT]),  denotes  all  that  which 
God  of  His  goodness  causes  to  flow  to  men,  or  which  men  bestow 
upon  men  (Fl.).  Righteousness  is  partly  a  recompensative  good 
ness,  which  rewards,  according  to  the  law  of  requital,  like  with 
like;  partly  communicative,  which,  according  to  the  law  of  love 
without  merit,  and  even  in  opposition  to  it,  bestows  all  that  is  good, 
and  above  all,  itself;  but  giving  itself  to  man,  it  assimilates  him  to 
itself  (yid.  Ps.  xxiv.  7),  so  that  he  becomes  p^^,  and  is  regarded  as 
such  before  God  and  men,  ver.  19. 

The  fruit  and  product  of  wisdom  (the  former  a  figure  taken 
from  the  trees,  iii.  18  ;  the  latter  from  the  sowing  of  seed,  iii.  9) 
is  the  gain  and  profit  which  it  yields.  With  P"1?,  vn>'-  10,  "'•  1^, 
T£)  is  here  named  as  the  place  of  fine  gold,  briefly  for  TSlft  2HT,  solid 
gold,  gold  separated  from  the  place  of  ore  which  contains  it,  or  gene 
rally  separated  gold,  from  TTB,  violently  to  separate  metals  from  base 
mixtures;  Targ.  rjnniK  Knq-n,  gold  which  has  stood  the  fire-test, 
obrussa,  of  the  crucible,  Greek  o/3pv£ov,  Pers.  ebriz,  Arab,  ibriz. 
In  the  last  clause  of  this  verse,  as  also  in  106,  ">£??  is  to  be  inter 
preted  as  pred.  to  <I0?!'3J?)  but  the  balance  of  the  meaning  demands 
as  a  side-piece  to  the  T3E1  piTO  (19a)  something  more  than  the 
mere  *]D3.  In  20  f.  the  reciprocal  love  is  placed  as  the  answer  of 
love  under  the  point  of  view  of  the  requiting  righteousness.  But 
recompensative  and  communicative  righteousness  are  here  com 
bined,  where  therefore  the  subject  is  the  requital  of  worthy  pure 
love  and  loving  conduct,  like  with  like.  Such  love  requires  re 
ciprocal  love,  not  merely  cordial  love,  but  that  which  expresses 
itself  outwardly. 

Vers.  20,  21.  In  this  sense,  Wisdom  says  that  she  acts  strictly 
according  to  justice  and  rectitude,  and  adds  (21)  wherein  this  her 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

conduct  manifests  itself.  The  Piel  ^n  expresses  firm,  constant 
action  ;  and  spna  means  that  she  turns  from  this  line  of  conduct 
on  no  side.  TTWnb  is  distinguished  from  ^mna,  as  ut  possidendam 
tribuam  from  possidendam  tribuendo ;  the  former  denotes  the 
direction  of  the  activity,  the  latter  its  nature  and  manner;  both 
combine  if  we  translate  ita  ut  .  .  ,l  Regarding  the  origin  of  B?, 
vid.  at  ii.  7  ;  it  denotes  the  being  founded,  thus  substantia,  and 
appears  here,  like  the  word  in  mediaeval  Latin  and  Romanic  (Ital. 
sustanza,  Span,  substantia),  and  like  ova-fa  and  inrapgis  (ra  vTrdp- 
Xoma)  in  classic  Greek,  to  denote  possessions  and  goods.  But  since 
this  use  of  the  word  does  not  elsewhere  occur  (therefore  Hitzig 
explains  &  =<b  &,  I  have  it  [=  presto  est])j  and  here,  where 
Wisdom  speaks,  W  connects  itself  in  thought  with  njato,  it  will  at 
least  denote  real  possession  (as  we  also  are  wont  to  call  not  every 
kind  of  property,  but  only  landed  property,  real  possession),  such 
possession  as  has  real  worth,  and  that  not  according  to  commercial 
exchange  and  price,  but  according  to  sound  judgment,  which  ap 
plies  a  higher  than  the  common  worldly  standard  of  worth.  The 
Pasek  between  'ariK  and  W  is  designed  to  separate  the  two  Jods 
from  each  other,  and  has,  as  a  consequence,  for  'OHX  ^rur6  the 
accentuation  with  Tarclia  and  Hercha  (vid.  Accentss'ystem,  vi.  §  4; 
cf.  Torath  Emeth,  p.  17,  §  3).  The  carrying  forward  of  the  inf. 
with  the  finite,  216,  is  as  i.  27,  ii.  2,  and  quite  usual. 

Ver.  22.  Wisdom  takes  now  a  new  departure,  in  establishing 
her  right  to  be  heard,  and  to  be  obeyed  and  loved  by  men.  As 
the  Divine  King  in  Ps.  ii.  opposes  to  His  adversaries  the  self- 
testimony:  "I  will  speak  concerning  a  decree!  Jahve  said  unto 
me:  Thou  art  my  Son;  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee;"  so 
Wisdom  here  unfolds  her  divine  patent  of  nobility  :  she  originates 
with  God  before  all  creatures,  and  is  the -object  of  God's  loVe  and 
joy,  as  she  also  has  the  object  of  her  love  and  joy  on  God's  earth, 
and  especially  among  the  sons  of  men  : 

"  Jahve  brought  me  forth  as  the  beginning  of  His  way, 

As  the  foremost  of  His  works  from  of  old." 

The  old  translators  render  ^P  (with  Kametz  by  DecM ;  vid.  under 
Ps.  cxviii.  5)  partly  by  verbs  of  creating  (LXX.  emcre,  Syr. 
1  Biesenthal  combines  the  etymologically  obscure  ^mn  with  ^m  :  to  make 
to  flow  into,  so  that  ^nj  denotes  inheritance  in  contradistinction  to  acquisition; 
while  r6m,  in  contradistinction  to  n$T,  denotes  the  inheritance  rather  of 
many  than  of  the  individual. 


CHAP.  VIII.  22.  183 

Targ.  ^^3),  partly  by  verbs  of  acquiring  (Aquila,  Symmachus, 
Theodotion,  Venet.  etcrrjaaTO ;  Jerome,  possedit)  ;  Wisdom  appears 
also  as  created,  certainly  not  without  reference  to  this  passage, 
Sir.  i.  4,  Trporepa  Travrwv  e/crtcrrat  <ro<pla ;  i.  9,  ai}ro9  e/cricrev 
ai>Tr)v  ;  xxiv.  8,  6  /criVa?  //e.  In  the  christological  controversy  this 
word  gained  a  dogmatic  signification,  for  they  proceeded  generally 
on  the  identity  of  cro(j)la  vTrocrrariKij  (sapientia  substantiahs)  with 
the  hypostasis  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  Arians  used  the  etcrta-e  /j,e 
as  a  proof  of  their  doctrine  of  the  filins  non  genitus,  sed  Jactus,  i.e. 
of  His  existence  before  the  world  began  indeed,  but  yet  not  from 
eternity,  but  originating  in  time  ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  ortho 
dox  preferred  the  translation  e/mjcraTo,  and  understood  it  of  the 
co-eternal  existence  of  the  Son  with  the  Father,  and  agreed  with 

/  O 

the  efcricre  of  the  LXX.  by  referring  it  not  to  the  actual  existence, 
but  to  the  position,  place  of  the  Son  (Athanasius  :  Dem  me  creavit 
regem  or  caput  operum  siiorum ;  Cyrill. :  non  condidit  secundum 
substantiani)  sed  constituit  me  totius  unieersi  principium  et  funda- 
mentum).  But  (1)  Wisdom  is  not  God,  but  is  God's  ;  she  has 
personal  existence  in  the  Logos  of  the  N.  T.,  but  is  not  herself  the 
Logos ;  she  is  the  world-idea,  which,  once  projected,  is  objective  to 
God,  not  as  a  dead  form,  but  as  a  living  spiritual  image ;  she  is 
the  archetype  of  the  world,  which,  originating  from  God,  stands 
before  God,  the  world  of  the  idea  which  forms  the  medium  between 
the  Godhead  and  the  world  of  actual  existence,  the  communicated 
spiritual  power  in  the  origination  and  the  completion  of  the  world 
as  God  designed  it  to  be.  This  wisdom  the  poet  here  personifies ; 
he  does  not  speak  of  the  personal  Logos,  but  the  further  progress  of 
the  revelation  points  to  her  actual  personification  in  the  Logos. 
And  (2)  since  to  her  the  poet  attributes  an  existence  preceding  the 
creation  of  the  world,  he  thereby  declares  her  to  be  eternal,  for  to 
be  before  the  world  is  to  be  before  time.  For  if  he  places  her  at 
the  head  of  the  creatures,  as  the  first  of  them,  so  therewith  he  does 
not  seek  to  make  her  a  creature  of  this  world  having  its  commence- 

O 

ment  in  time  ;  he  connects  her  origination  with  the  origination  of 
the  creature  only  on  this  account,  because  that  a  priori  refers  and 
tends  to  the  latter ;  the  power  which  was  before  heaven  and  earth 
were,  and  which  operated  at  the  creation  of  the  earth  and  of  the 
heavens,  cannot  certainly  fall  under  the  category  of  the  creatures 
around  and  above  us.  Therefore  (3)  the  translation  with  e/cncrev 
has  nothing  against  it,  but  it  is  different  from  the  /mVt9  of  the 


184 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


heavens  and  the  earth,  and  the  poet  has  intentionally  written  not 
^Nna,  but  '^p.     Certainly  nap,  Arab.  &nd,  like  all  the  words  used 
of  creating,  refers  to  one  root-idea  :  'that  of  forging  (vid.  under 
Gen.  iv.  22),  as  fcOl  does  to  that  of  cutting  (vid.  under  Gen.  i.  1)  ; 
but  the  mark  of  a  commencement  in  time  does  not  affix  itself  to  nap 
in  the  same  way  as  it  does   to  jro,  which  always  expresses  the 
divine  production  of  that  which  has  not  hitherto  existed,     njp  com 
prehends  in  it  the  meanings  to  create,  and  to  create  something  for 
oneself,  to  prepare,  parare  (e.g.  Ps.  cxxxix.   13),  and  to  prepare 
something  for   oneself,  comparare,  as   KTI&IV  and   KTaaQat,,   both 
from  kshi,  to  build,  the  former  expressed,  by  struere,  and  the  latter 
by  sibi  sincere.     In  the  VT3^,  then,   there  are  the  ideas,  both  that 
God  produced  wisdom,  and  that  Pie  made  Himself  to  possess  it; 
not  certainly,  however,  as  a  man  makes  himself  to  possess  wisdom 
from  without,  iv.  7.     But  the  idea  of  the  bringing  forth  is  here 
the  nearest  demanded  by  the  connection.     For  ism  rPKW  is  not 
equivalent  to  mi  IVBfcna  (Syr.,   Targ.,  Luther),  as  Jerome  also 
reads  :  Ita  enim  scriptum  est :  ADONAI  CANANI  BRESITH  DERCHO 
(Ep.  cxl.  ad  Cyprian.}  ;  but  it  is.  as  Job  xl.  19  shows,  the  second 
accusative  of  the  object  (LXX.,  Aquila,  Symmachus,  Theodotion). 
But  if  God  made  wisdom  as  the  beginning  of  His  way,  i.e.  of  His 
creative  efficiency  (cf.  Rev.  Hi.  14  and  Col.  i.  15),  the  making  is 
not  to  be  thought  of  as  acquiring,  but  as  a  bringing  forth,  rev'eal- 
ing  this  creative  efficiency  of  God,  having  it  in  view  ;   and  this  is 
also  confirmed  by  the   Vi&n  (genita  sum;    cf.  Gen.  iv.  1,  <rp:p 
genui)  following.     Accordingly,  l%»  nnj?  (foremost  of  His  works) 
lias  to  be  regarded  as  a  parallel  second  object,  accusative.     All  the 
old    translators   interpret   Dip  as  a   preposition  [before],  but   the 
usage  of  the  language  before  us  does  not  recognise  it  as  such  ;  this 
would   be  an  Aramaism,  for  D^.,  Dan.  vii/7,  frequently  D^-p 
(Syr.,  Targ.),  is  so  used.     But  as' Dip  signifies  previous  existence 
in  space,  and  then  in  time  (vid.  Orelli,  Zeit  und  Ewigkeit,  p.  76), 
so  if  may  be  used  of  the  object  in  which  the  previous  existence 
appears,  thus  (after  Sir.  i.  4):  Trporepav  TUV  fyya>v  ai-rov  (Hitzig). 
Ver.  23.  A  designation  of  the  When  I  expressed   first   by   TND 
(Isa.  xlviii.  8,  cf.  xl.  21),  is  further  unfolded  : 
"  From  everlasting  was  I  set  up, 

From  the  beginning,  from  the  foundations  of  the  earth." 
That  VOW    cannot   be  translated:  I  was  anointed  =  consecrated, 
vid.  at  Ps.  li.  6.      But  the  translation  also  ;  I  was  woven  =  wrought 


CHAP.  VIII    21-26. 

(Hitzig,  E-vvald,  and  previously  one  of  the  Greeks,  e'Stacr^y),  does 
not  commend  itself,  for  B|T)  (Ps.  cxxxix.  15),  used  of  the  embryo,  lies 
far  from  the  metaphorical  sense  in  which  TJD3  =  Arab,  nasaj,  texere, 
would  here  be  translated  of  the  origin  of  a  person,  and  even  of  such  a 
spiritual  being  as  Wisdom  ;  WIDJ,  as  the  LXX.  reads  (Mepekuocre 
/ie),  is  not  once  used  of  such.  Rightly  Aquila,  KareardOriv  ;  Sym- 
machus,  TrpoKexeipia/jLCu;  Jerome,  ordinata  sum.  Literally,  but 
unintelligibly,  the  Gr.  Venet.  Ktyypai,  according  to  which  (cf.  Sir. 
i.  10)  Bottcher  :  I  was  poured  forth  =  formed,  but  himself  acknow 
ledging  that  this  figure  is  not  suitable  to  personification  ;  nor  is  it 
at  all  likely  that  the  author  applied  the  word,  used  in  this  sense  of 
idols,  to  the  origin  of  Wisdom.  The  fact  is,  that  7JD3,  used  as  seldom 
of  the  anointing  or  consecration  of  kings  as  7]iD,  passes  over,  like 
P*  (PT?),  p«  (jaxo,  a  pillar),  and  W  (rsn),  from  the  meaning  of 
pouring  out  to  that  of  placing  and  appointing  ;  the  mediating  idea 
appears  to  be  that  of  the  pouring  forth  of  the  metal,  since  1>D3,  Dan. 
xi.  8,  like  ^D3,  signifies  a  molten  image.  The  Jewish  interpreters 
quite  correctly  remark,  in  comparing  it  with  the  princely  name  T?JT 
[cf.  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  12]  (although  without  etymological  insight),  that  a 
placing  in  princely  dignity  is  meant.  Of  the  three  synonyms  of 
ceternitas  a  parte  ante,  E^iJft?  points  backwards  into  the  infinite 
distance,  B'iOO  into  the  beginning  of  the  world,  pS-W^O  not  into 
the  times  which  precede  the  origin  of  the  earth,  but  into  the  oldest 
times  of  its  gradual  arising ;  this  ''Dip  it  is  impossible  to  render,  in 
conformity  with  the  Hebr.  use  of  language  :  it  is  an  extensive 
plur.  of  time,  Bottcher,  §  697.  The  IP  repeated  does  not  mean 
that  the  origin  and  greatness  of  Wisdom  are  contemporaneous  with 
the  foundation  of  the  world;  but  that  when  the  world  was  founded, 
she  was  already  an  actual  existence. 

This  her  existence  before  the  world  began  is  now  set  forth  in 

O 

yet  more  explicit  statements  : 

24  "  When  there  were  as  yet  no  floods  was  I  brought  forth, 

When  as  yet  there  were  no  fountains  which  abounded  with  water  ; 

25  For  before  the  mountains  were  settled, 
Before  the  hills  was  I  brought  forth, 

26  While  as  yet  He  had  not  made  land  and  plains, 
And  the  sum  of  the  dust  of  the  earth." 

The  description  is  poetical,  and  affords  some  room  for  imagination. 
By  nittinn  are  not  intended  the  unrestrained  primeval  waters,  but, 
as  also  iii.  20,  the  inner  waters,  treasures  of  the  earth ;  and  conse- 


18G  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVliRDS. 

quently  by  Hin'D,  not  the  fountains  of  the  sea  on  this  earth  (Ewald, 
after  Job  xxxviii.  16),  but  the  springs  or  places  of  springs  (for  i^1?  is 
n.  loci  to  TV,  a  well  as  an  eye  of  the  earth;  vid.  Gen.  xvi.  7),  by  means 
of  which  the  internal  waters  of  the  earth  communicate  themselves 
to  the  enrth  above  (cf.  Gen.  vii.  11  with  xlix.  25).  D'O-«J333 

/  •  T       ••  T  ;  • 

(abounding  with  water)  is  a  descriptive  epitheton  to  rriri'D,  which, 
notwithstanding  its  fern,  plur.,  is  construed  as  masc.  (cf.  v.  16). 
The  Masora  does  not  distinguish  the  thrice-occurring  H3.33  ac 
cording  to  its  form  as  written  (Isa.  xxiii.  8,  9).  The  form  "HM? 
(which,  like  D'fis,  would  demand  Metheg)  is  to  be  rejected;  it  is 
everywhere  to  be  written  ^333  (Evvald,  §  2146)  with  Pathach,  with 
Dagesh  following;  vid.  Kimchi,  Michlol  61  £.  Kimchi  adds  the 
gloss  D'ai  D^S  •"j'-jflD,  which  the  Gr.  Venet.,  in  accordance  with  the 
meaning  of  1333  elsewhere,  renders  by  777770^?  SeSogaapevoov  vBdruv 
(as  also  Bottcher:  the  most  honoured  =  the  most  lordly);  but 
Meiri,  Immanuel,  and  others  rightly  judge  that  the  adjective  is 
here  to  be  understood  after  Gen.  xiii.  2,  Job  xiv.  21  (but  in  this 
latter  passage  133  does  not  mean  "  to  be  numerous")  :  loaded  = 
endowed  in  rich  measure. 

Ver.  25.  Instead  of  T^,  in  (yet)  non-existence  (24),  we  have 
here  DIB,  a  subst.  which  signifies  cutting  off  from  that  which 
already  exists  (vid.  at  Gen.  ii.  5),  and  then  as  a  particle  nondum 
or  antequam,  with  3  always  antequam,  and  in  ver.  26  *&""W,  so  long 
not  yet  (this  also  originally  a  substantive  from  nij?,  in  the  sense  of 
progress).  With  ytelpn  (were  settled)  (as  Job  xxxviii.  6,  from  jntp, 
to  impress  into  or  upon  anything,  imprimere,  injigere)  the  question 
is  asked  :  wherein  ?  Not  indeed  :  in  the  depths  of  the  earth,  but 
as  the  Caraite  Ahron  b.  Joseph  answers,  DM  ypip  ^N,  in  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  ;  for  out  of  the  waters  they  rise  up,  Ps.  civ.  8  (cf.  at 
Gen.  i.  9). 

Ver.  26.  ni^im  pX  is  either,  connecting  the  whole  with  its  part: 
terra  cum  campis,  or  pK  gains  by  this  connection  the  meaning 
of  land  covered  with  buildings,  while  DlVin  the  expanse  of  un 
occupied  land,  or  the  free  field  outside  the  towns  and  villages  (cf. 
13,  Arab,  barrytt)  (Fl.),  vid.  Job  v.  10,  xviii.  17  (where  we  have 
translated  "  in  the  steppe  far  and  wide ") ;  and  regarding  the 
fundamental  idea,  vid.  above  at  v.  16.  Synonymous  with  px,  as 
contrast  to  min,  is  ?3n,  which  like  ^  (produce,  wealth)  comes 
from  ?3J,  and  thus  denotes  the  earth  as  fruit-bearing  (as  i""?"™ 
properly  denotes  the  humus  as  the  covering  of  earth).  Accordingly, 


CHAP    VIII.  '27.  1&7 


with  Ewald,  we  may  understand  by  rnisy  C;N"i,  (l  tlie  lieaps  of  the 
many  clods  of  the  fertile  arable  land  lying  as  if  scattered  on  the 
plains."  Hitzig  also  translates  :  "  the  first  clods  of  the  earth."  We 
do  not  deny  that  nnay  may  mean  clods  of  earth,  i.e.  pieces  of  earth 
gathered  together,  as  Job  xxviii.  6,  2HT  rnay,  gold  ore,  i.e.  pieces 
of  earth  or  ore  containing  gold.  But  for  clods  of  earth  the  Heb. 
language  has  the  nouns  2J"i  and  nSHJO  ;  and  if  we  read  together 
™~'?y,  plur.  of  the  collective  isy  (dust  as  a  mass),  which  comes  as 
from  a  n.  unitatis  n^V,  and  tJ>JO,  which,  among  its  meanings  in 
poetry  as  well  as  in  prose,  has  also  that  of  the  sum,  i.e.  the  chief 
amount  or  the  total  amount  (cf.  the  Arab,  rds  dirndl,  the  capital,  TO 
Ke(f)d\cuov),  then  the  two  words  in  their  mutual  relation  yield  the 
sense  of  the  sum  of  the  several  parts  of  the  dust,  as  of  the  atoms 
of  dust  (Cocceius  ;  Schultens,  summam  pulverum  orbis  Iiabitabilis)  ; 
and  Fleischer  rightly  remarks  that  other  interpretations,  as  ab  initio 
pulveris  orbis,  prcecipua  quceque  orbis  terrarum,  caput  orbis  terrarum 
(i.e.  according  to  Rashi,  the  first  man  ;  according  to  Umbreit,  man 
generally),  leave  the  choice  of  the  plur.  rmsjJ  unintelligible.  Be 
fore  these  creatures  originated,  Wisdom  was,  as  she  herself  says, 
and  emphatically  repeats,  already  born  ;  W^n  is  the  passive  of 
the  Pilel  Wrij  which  means  to  whirl,  to  twist  oneself,  to  bring 
forth  with  sorrow  (Aquila,  Theodotion,  <a$tvrj9r]v  ;  Grcec.  Venet. 
24«,  7re7r\a<T/j,ai,  25&,  eoSo^/iai),  then  but  poet,  generally  to  beget, 
to  bring  forth  (xxv.  23,  xxvi.  10). 

Ver.  27.  But  not  only  did  her  existence  precede  the  laying  of 
the  foundation  of  the  world  ;  she  was  also  actively  taking  part  in 
the  creative  work  : 

"  "When  He  prepared  the  heavens,  I  was  there, 
When  He  measured  out  a  circle  for  the  mirror  of  the  multitude  of  waters." 

Again  a  sentence  clothed  with  two  designations  of  time.  The 
adv.  of  place  SV  is  used,  chiefly  poetically,  for  TK,  eo  tempore  (Arab. 
thumm,  in  contradistinction  to  thamm,  eo  loco)  ;  but  here  it  has  the 
signification  of  place,  which  includes  that  of  time  :  Wisdom  was 
there  when  God  created  the  world,  and  had  then  already  long 
before  that  come  into  existence,  like  as  the  servant  of  Jahve,  Isa. 
xlviii.  16,  with  just  such  a  S3X  D^,  says  that  He  is  there  from  the 
time  that  the  history  of  nations  received  a  new  direction,  beginning 
with  Cyrus,  f^n  signifies  to  give  a  firm  position  or  a  definite 
direction.  Thus  Job  xxviii.  27  of  Wisdom,  whom  the  Creator 
places  before  Himself  as  a  pattern  (ideal)  ;  here,  as  Jer.  x.  12,  Ps. 


1SS 


THE  BOOK  OF  PKOVERBS. 


Ixv.  7,  of  the  setting  Up,  restoring  throughout  the  whole  world.  In 
the  parallel  member,  «n,  corresponding  to  D?BB>,  appears  necessarily 
to  designate  the  circle  or  the  vault  of  the  heavens  (Job  xxii.  14), 
which,  according  to  the  idea  of  the  Hebrews,  as  in  Homer,  rests  as 
a  half-globe  on  the  outermost  ends  of  the  disc  of  the  earth  sur 
rounded  with  water,  and  thus  lies  on  the  waters.  Vid.  Hupfeld 
under  Ps.  xxiv.  2.  This  idea  of  the  ocean  girdling  the  earth  is 
introduced  into  the  O.  T.  without  its  being  sanctioned  by  it.  The 
LXX.  (teal  ore  a^copi^e  TOV  eavrov  Opovov  eV  dvepcov)  appears  to 
understand  Dinn  of  the  waters  above;  but  Dinn  never  has  this 
meaning,  D<  (Job  ix.  8,  xxxvi.  30)  might  rather  be  interpreted  of  the 
ocean  of  the  heavens.  The  passage  in  accordance  with  which  this 
before  us  is  to  be  expounded  is  Job  xxvi.  10  :  He  has  set  a  limit  for 
the  surface  of  the  waters,  i.e.  describing  over  them  a  circle  setting 
bounds  to  their  region.  So  here,  with  the  exchange  of  the  func 
tions  of  the  two  words  :  when  He  marked  out  a  circle  over  the 
surface  of  the  multitude  of  waters,  viz.  to  appoint  a  fixed  region 
('I}!?1?)  Gen.  i.  10)  for  them,  i.e.  the  seas,  fountains,  rivers,  in  which 
the  waters  under  the  heavens  spread  over  the  earth.  pi?n  signifies 
incidere,  figere,  to  prescribe,  to  measure  off,  to  consign,  and  directly 
to  mark  out,  which  is  done  by  means  of  firm  impressions  of  the 
graver's  tools.  But  here  this  verb  is  without  the  Dagesh,  to  dis 
tinguish  between  the  infinitive  and  the  substantive  ipn  (his  statute 
or  limit)  ;  for  correct  texts  have  ipna  (Michlol  147a);  and  although 
a  monosyllable  follows,  yet  there  is  no  throwing  back  of  the  tone, 
after  the  rule  that  words  terminating  in  o  in  this  case  maintain  their 
ultima  accentuation  (e.g.  ^  tetPD,  Num.  xxiv.  23).  Fleischer  also 
finally  decides  for  the  explanation  :  quum  delinearet  circulum  super 
abysso,  when  He  marked  out  the  region  of  the  sea  as  with  the  circle. 
In  28,  29,  these  two  features  of  the  figure  of  the  creation  of  the 
world  return  (the  beginning  of  the  firmament,  and  the  embank 
ment  of  the  under  waters) ;  hence  we  see  that  the  discourse  here 
makes  a  fresh  start  with  a  new  theme  : 

28  "  When  He  made  firm  the  ether  above, 

When  He  restrained  the  fountains  of  the  waters; 

29  When  He  set  to  the  sea  its  bounds, 

That  the  waters  should  not  pass  their  limits  ; 
When  He  settled  the  pillars  of  the  earth  ; 

30  Then  was  I  with  Him  as  director  of  the  work, 
And  was  delighted  day  by  day, 

Rejoic  ng  always  before  Him, 


CHAP.  VIII.  28-31.  183 

81  Rejoicing  in  His  earth, 

And  having  my  delight  in  the  children  of  men.'' 


"NVe  have,  with  Symmachus,  translated  B'i?'"^  (from  PT^,  Arab. 
s/iak,  to  grind,  to  make  thin)  by  aWepa,  for  so  the  fine  transparent 
strata  of  air  above  the  hanging  clouds  are  called  —  a  poetic  name  of 
the  firmament  Vipi.  The  making  firm  p2X  is  not  to  be  understood 
locally,  but  internally  of  the  spreading  out  of  the  firmament  over 
the  earth  settled  for  continuance  (an  expression  such  as  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  23).  In  286  the  Masora  notices  the  plur.  niJ'y  instead  of 
niry  with  rvb  as  wdcum  (cf.  Micldol  191a);  the  transition  of  the 
sound  is  as  in  flV3  from  galajta.  The  inf.  TilJ|  appears  on  the  first 
look  to  require  a  transitive  signification,  as  the  LXX.  and  the 
Targ.,  the  Grcec.  Venet.  and  Luther  (da  er  festiyet  die  Brunnen 
der  tieffen  =  when  He  makes  firm  the  fountains  of  the  deep)  have 
rendered  it.  Elster  accordingly  believes  that  this  signification  must 
be  maintained,  because  3  here  introduces  creative  activity,  and  in 
itself  is  probably  the  transitive  use  of  try,  as  the  Arab,  'azz  shows  : 
when  He  set  His  Ty  against  the  DW  D"O  (Isa.  xliii.  16).  But  the 
absence  of  the  subject  is  in  favour  of  the  opinion  that  here,  as  every 
where  else,  it  is  intransitive;  only  we  may  not,  with  Hitzig,  trans 
late  :  when  the  fountains  of  the  flood  raged  wildly  ;  but,  since  286, 
if  not  a  creative  efficiency,  must  yet  express  a  creative  work,  either 
as  Ewald,  with  reference  to  tty»,  fortress  :  when  they  became  firm, 
or  better  as  Fleischer,  with  reference  to  D^y  D^O  :  when  they  broke 
forth  with  power,  with  strong  fulness.  Whether  the  suff.  of  ipn; 
29a,  refers  back  to  the  sea  or  to  Jahve,  is  decided  after  the  parallel 
VS.  If  this  word  is  equivalent  to  its  coast  (cf.  Ps.  civ.  9),  then 
both  suffixes  refer  to  the  sea  ;  but  the  coast  of  the  sea,  or  of  a  river, 
is  called  nsb?  not  KQ,  which  only  means  ostium  (mouth),  not  ora. 
Also  Isa.  xix.  7  will  require  to  be  translated  :  by  the  mouth  of 
the  Kile  ;  and  that  ''S,  Ps.  cxxxiii.  2,  may  denote  the  under  edge, 
arises  from  this,  that  a  coat  has  a  mouth  above  as  well  as 
below,  i.e.  is  open.  Thus  both  suff.  are  to  be  referred  to  God, 
and  va  is  to  be  determined  after  Job  xxiii.  12.  The  clause 
beginning  with  D^EI  corresponds  in  periodizing  discourse  to  a 
clause  with  ut,  Ewald,  §  338.  ipina  is  the  same  form,  only  written 
plene,  as  ver.  27,  ipn?  =  ipna  =  ipipnzi.1 


1  One  might  regard  it  as  modified  from  1ppn2  ;  but  that  niD;,  Ps.  xcii.  12,  is 
modified  from  nib',  or  nin,  Gen.  xlix.  26,  from  nin,  is  by  no  means  certain. 


100  THE  BOOK  01'  PROVERCS. 

Ver.  30.  In  tliis  sentence,  subordinating  to  itself  these  c!esiLfnn- 
tions  of  time,  the  principal  question  is  as  to  the  meaning  of  |i'-X. 
Hofmann's  interpretation  (Schriftbew.  i.  97)  "continually"  (inf. 
absol.  in  an  adverbial  sense)  is  a  judicious  idea,  arid  P?X,  to  endure, 
remains  indeed  in  npN  (stability)  ;  but  in  this  sense,  which  i»X3 
represents,  it  is  not  otherwise  used.  Also  fcttiip^np  (believing,  trust- 
inn)  of  the  Targ.  (Grcec.  Venet.  TT&ms,  as  if  the  word  used  were  piCX) 
is  linguistically  inadmissible;  the  Hebr.  TP?!5'!?  corresponds  to  the 
Aram,  haimen.  One  of  these  two  only  is  possible  :  JiON  means 
either  opifex  or  alumnus.  The  meaning  alumnus  (Aqnila,  Tidrjvov- 
fj,evr) ;  Meiri  and  Malbim,  7XH  pTQ  J1DX,  ev  ra>  KO\TTW  TOV  Qeov) 
would  derive  the  word  from  }EX,  to  support,  make  firm,  take  care  of; 
the  form  ought  to  have  a  passive  sense  (Symm.  Theod.  ea-Trjpty- 
pevr)),  as  ?n3,  twined,  pressed,  strong,  great,  and  be  pointed  Tp3 
(with  a  moveable  a,  different  from  the  form  1132,  Pton5  Isa.  i.  17); 
and  pEN,  in  the  meaning  nursling,  foster-child,  favourite  (Schultens, 
Euchel,  Elster,  and  others,  also  Rashi  and  Kimchi,  who  all  find  in 
JION  the  meaning  of  education,  7ITJ),  would  place  itself  with  J1CS, 
fostered,  Lam.  iv.  5,  i^X,  fosterer,  n3_OS,  foster-mother.  This  is 
the  meaning  of  the  word  according  to  the  connection,  for  Wisdom 
appears  further  on  as  the  child  of  God ;  as  such  she  had  her  joy 
before  Him;  and  particularly  God's  earth,  where  she  rejoiced  with 
the  sons  of  men,  was  the  scene  of  her  mirth.  But  on  this  very 
account,  because  this  is  further  said,  we  also  lose  nothing  if  pex 
should  be  interpreted  otherwise.  And  it  is  otherwise  to  be  inter 
preted,  for  Wisdom  is,  in  consequence  of  ^p  (viii.  22),  and  Twin, 
which  is  twice  used  (viii.  24,  25),  God's  own  child  ;  but  the  designa 
tion  jllDN  would  make  Him  to  be  the  JCX  of  Wisdom  ;  and  the  child 
which  an  |»X  bears,  Num.  xi.  12,  and  fosters,  Esth.  ii.  7,  is  not 
his  own.  Hence  it  follows  that  PCX  in  this  signification  would  be 
an  aira%  \eyo/j,evov ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  really  occurs  elsewhere, 
Jer.  lii.  15  (vid.  Hitzig  I.e.),  in  the  sense  of  opifex.  This  sense, 
which  recommends  itself  to  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Bertheau,  and  Zockler, 
lies  also  at  the  foundation  of  the  ap/no^ovaa  of  the  LXX.,  fcOpnD 
of  the  Syr.,  the  cuncta  componens  of  Jerome,  and  the  designation 
of  Wisdom  as  77  rwv  iramwv  re^t/m?  of  the  Book  of  Wisdom  vii. 
21.  The  workmaster  is  called  Jiss,  for  which,  Cant.  vii.  2,  JOS,  or 
rather  J^X  (omindii),  Aram,  and  Mishn.  i'^^ ;  not,  perhaps,  as  he 
whom  one  entrusts  with  something  in  whom  one  confides  or  may 
confide  in  a  work  (vid.  Fleischer,  loc."),  but  from  iSK,  to  be  firm,  as 


CHAP.  VIII.  28-C1.  101 

one  who  is  strong  in  his  art,  as  perhaps  also  the  right  hand,  which 
has  the  name  PP'  as  being  the  artijex  among  the  members.  The 
word  occurs  also  as  an  adjective  in  the  sense  of  "  experienced, 
skilful,"  and  does  not  form  a  fern,  according  to  the  use  of  the  word 
in  this  case  before  us,  only  because  handicraft  (rvonis)  belongs  to 
men,  and  not  to  women  ;  also  in  the  Greek,  S^toiyyyos,  in  the 
sense  of  ra  Sij^ocria  (et9  TO  Sr/^oaiov}  epya%6fjL€vo<},  has  no  fern. ; 
and  in  Lat.,  art  if  ex  is  used  as  a  substantive  (e.g.  in  Pliny  :  artifex 
omnium  natura),  like  an  adj.  of  double  gender.  It  is  thus  alto 
gether  according  to  rule  that  we  read  |i»S  and  not  n;io«  (after 
the  form  'T^S) ;  also  we  would  make  a  mistake  if  we  translated 
the  word  by  the  German  "Werkmefoterin"  [work- mistress,  direc 
tress]  (Hitzig),  for  it  is  intended  to  be  said  that  she  took  up  the 
place  of  a  workmaster  with  Him,  whereby  chiefly  the  artistic  per 
formances  of  a  Bnn  [artificer]  are  thought  of.  This  self-designation 
of  Wisdom  is  here  very  suitable  ;  for  after  she  has  said  that  she 
was  brought  forth  by  God  before  the  world  was,  and  that  she  was 
present  when  it  was  created,  this  }10K  now  answers  the  question  as 
to  what  God  had  in  view  when  He  gave  to  Wisdom  her  separate 
existence,  and  in  what  capacity  she  assisted  in  the  creation  of  the 
world  :  it  was  she  who  transferred  the  creative  thoughts  originally 
existing  in  the  creative  will  of  God,  and  set  in  motion  by  His 
creative  order,  from  their  ideal  into  their  real  effectiveness,  and, 
as  it  were,  artistically  carried  out  the  delineations  of  the  several 
creatures  ;  she  was  the  mediating  cause,  the  demiurgic  power 
which  the  divine  creative  activity  made  use  of,  as  is  said,  iii.  19, 
"  Jahve  has  by  Wrisdom  founded  the  earth,"  and  as  the  Jerusalem 
Targ.  Gen.  i.  1,  in  connection  with  Prov.  viii.  22,  translates: 
sjns  rn  N>OE>  jv  «  &on  No^na. 

But — this  is  now  the  question— does  the  further  unfolding  of  the 
thoughts  here  agree  with  this  interpretation  of  J1DN  ?  That  we  may 
not  misunderstand  what  follows,  we  must  first  of  all  represent  to 
ourselves,  that  if  post  meant  the  foster-child,  Wisdom  could  not  yet, 
in  what  follows,  be  thought  of  as  a  little  child  (Num.  xi.  12),  for 
that  would  be  an  idea  without  any  meaning;  to  rejoice  [sj>ielen  = 
play]  is  certainly  quite  in  accordance  with  youth,  as  2  Sain.  ii.  14 
shows  (where  ^sh  pnb>  is  said  of  the  sportive  combat  of  youthful 
warriors  before  the  captain),  not  exclusively  little  children.  So, 
then,  we  must  guard  against  interpreting  DWi>K!,  with  the  LXX. 
and  Syr.,  in  the  sense  of  ^e>Jjtf,_-an  interpretation  which  the 


192 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEIJDS. 


Targ.,  Jerome,  the  Grac.  VeneL,  and  Luther  have  happily  avoided  ; 
for  mention  is  not  made  here  of  what  Wisdom  is  for  Jahve,  but  of 
what  she  is  in  herself.     The  expression  is  to  be  judged  after  Ps. 
cix.  4  (cf.  Gen.  xii.  2),  where  Hitzig  rightly  translates,  "I  am 
wholly  prayer;"  but  Bottcher,  in  a  way  characteristic  of  his  mode 
of  interpretation,  prefers,  « I  am  ointment"  (vid.  Neue  Aehrenlese, 
No.  1222).  ^  The  delight  is  meant  which  this  mediating  participa 
tion  in  God's  creating  work  imparted  to  her— joy  in  the  work  in 
which  she  was  engaged.     The  pluralet.  DTW  is  to  be  understood 
here,  not  after  Jer.  xxxi.  20,  but  after  Isa.  xi.  8,  Ps.  cxix.  70, 
where  its  root-word,  the  Pilpel  VWV  (proceeding  from  the  primary 
meaning  of  caressing,  demulcere),  signifies  intransitively:  to  have  his 
delight  somewhere  or  in  anything,  to  delight  oneself, — a  synonym 
to  the  idea  of  play  (cf.  Aram.  Njf ,  Ethpe.  to  play,  Ethpa.  to  chatter); 
for  play  is  in  contrast  to  work,  an  occupation  which  has  enjoy 
ment  in  view.     But  the  work,  i.e.  the  occupation,  which  aims  to  do 
something  useful,  can  also  become  a  play  if  it  costs  no  strenuous 
effort,  or  if  the  effort  which  it  costs  passes  wholly  into  the  back 
ground  in  presence  of  the  pleasure  which  it  yields.    Thus  Wisdom 
daily,  i.e.  during  the  whole  course  of  creation,  went  forth  in  pure 
delight;  and  the  activity  with  which  she  translated  into  fact  the 
creative  thoughts  was  a  joyful  noise  in  the  sight  of  God,  whose 
commands  she  obeyed  with  childlike  devotion;  cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  21 
where  David  calls  his  dancing  and  leaping  before  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  a  'n  »»>  pHB>.     But  by  preference,  her  delight  was  in  the 
world,  which  13  illustrated  from   the  Persian  Minokhired,  which 
personifies  Wisdom,  and,  among  other  things,  says  of  her:   "  The 
creation  of  the  earth,  and  its  mingling  with  water,  the  springing  up 
and  the  growth  of  the  trees,  all  the  different  colours,  the  odour,  the 
taste,  and  that  which  is  pleasing  in  everything— all  that  is  chiefly 
the  endowment  and  the  performance  of  Wisdom."  x     She  also  there 
says  that  she  was  before  all  celestial  and  earthly  beino-s,  the  first 
with  Ormuzd,  and  that  all  that  is  celestial  and  earthly  arose  and 
also  remains  in  existence  by  her.     But  the  earth  was  the  dearest 
object  of  her  delight  in  the  whole  world ;  to  help  in  establishing  it 
(hi.  19)  was  her  joyful  occupation ;  to  fashion  it,  and  to  provide  it 
with  the  multiplicity  of  existences  designed  for  it,  was  the  most 
pleasant  part  of  her  creative  activity.     For  the  earth  is  the  abode 
of  man,  and  the  heart-pleasure  of  Wisdom  was  with  (VIK,  prep.) 
1  Vid.  Spiegel's  Grammatik  der  Pdrsiyrache,  p.  162,  cf.  182. 


CHAP.  VIII.  31,  32.  193 

the  children  of  men;  with  them  she  found  her  high  enjoyment, 
these  were  her  peculiar  and  dearest  sphere  of  activity. 

Ver.  31.  Since  the  statements  of  Wisdom,  as  to  her  participation 
in  the  creation  of  the  world,  are  at  this  point  brought  to  a  close,  in 
this  verse  there  is  set  forth  the  intimate  relation  into  which  she 
thus  entered  to  the  earth  and  to  mankind,  and  which  she  has  con 
tinued  to  sustain  to  the  present  day.  She  turned  her  love  to  the 
earth  for  the  sake  of  man,  and  to  man  not  merely  as  a  corporeal,  but 
especially  as  a  spiritual  being,  to  whom  she  can  disclose  her  heart, 
and  whom,  if  he  receives  her,  she  can  bring  back  to  God  (Book  of 
Wisdom  vii.  27).  There  are  not  here  express  references  to  Gen. 
i.  or  ii.  In  ^  Di»  (day  for  day,  as  Gen.  xxxix.  10,  cf.  Esth.  ii.  4, 
DisJ  DV)  we  have  not  to  think  of  the  six  days  of  creation.  But 
inasmuch  as  the  whole  description  goes  down  to  DIN  ^  as  its 
central-point,  it  denotes  that  creation  came  to  its  close  and  its  goal 
in  man.  The  connection  of  f?$  '?{?  is  as  Job  xxxvii.  12,  where 
WiK  for  pK  is  wholly,  as  M,  np-in,  and  the  like,  an  original 
accusative. 

Ver.  32.  After  that  Wisdom  has  shown  in  vers.  22-31  how 
worthy  her  fellowship  is  of  being  an  object  of  desire  from  her 
mediating  place  between  God  and  the  world,  she  begins  with  this 
verse  (as  vii.  24,  v.  7)  the  hortatory  (paranetische)  concluding  part 
of  her  discourse: 

"And  now,  ye  sons,  hearken  unto  me, 
And  salvation  to  those  who  keep  my  ways  !  " 

The  LXX.  omits  ver.  33,  and  obviates  the  disturbing  element 
<>f  ^f  *?!.,  326,  arising  from  its  1.,  by  a  transposition  of  the  stichs. 
But  this  nBW  is  the  same  as  the  KOI  pafcdpios,  Matt.  xi.  6  ;  the 
organic  connection  lies  hid,  as  Schleiermacher  (Ilermeneutik,  p.  73) 
well  expresses  it,  in  the  mere  sequence  ;  the  clause  containing  the 
proof  is  connected  by  ]  with  that  for  which  proof  is  to  be  assumed, 
instead  of  subordinating  itself  to  it  with  ^.  Such  an  exclamatory 
clause  has  already  been  met  with  in  iii.  13  ;  there  D^K  follows  as 
the  governed  genitive,  here  a  complete  sentence  (instead  of  the 
usual  participial  construction,  'am  •nci?)  forms  this  wenitive,  Gesen 
§  123,  3,  Anm.  1. 

The  summons  32«,  and  its  reason  326,  are  repeated  in  these 
verses  which  f  ollowr  : 


33  "  Hear  instruction,  and  be  wise, 
And  withdraw  not. 


VOL.  I. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

34  Blessed  is  the  man  -who  hears  me, 
Watching  daily  at  my  gates, 
Waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  doors ! 

35  For  whosoever  findeth  me  has  found  life, 
And  has  obtained  favour  from  J  alive ; 

36  And  whosoever  misseth  me  doeth  wrong  to  himself ; 
All  they  who  hate  me  love  death." 

The  imper.  wsrrij  33a  (et  sapite),  is  to  be  judged  after  iv.  4, 
nTT),  cf.  the  Chethib,  xiii.  20  ;  one  sees  this  from  the  words 
which  follow,  to  which,  after  xv.  32,  as  at  iv.  13,  to 
is  to  be  placed  as  object:  and  throw  not  to  the  winds 
(ne  missam  faciatis ;  vid.  regarding  jna  at  i.  25),  viz.  instruction 
(disciplinam). 

Ver.  34.  The  ^C;N  here  following  1U»E>  is  related  to  it  as  assign 
ing  a  motive,  like  the  ^EW  (ver.  326)  following  W03>;  according  to 
the  Masora,  \ve  have  to  write  pPK  with  Mercha,  and  on  the  first 
syllable  Goja  (vid.  Baer's  TorathEmeth,  pp.  26,  29;  cf.  under  Ps. 
i.  1).  *$Y?  signifies  to  watch,  not  in  the  sense  of  ad  vigilandum, 
but  vigilando,  as  Isa.  v.  22,  xxx.  1 ;  Ewakl,  §  3SOd.  In  contradis 
tinction  to  "Pin  and  Plpn,  which  denote  watching  as  the  consequence 
of  wakefulness  or  an  interruption  of  sleep,  "J£t?  signifies  watching 
as  a  condition,  and  that  as  one  which  a  person  willingly  maintains 
(Psyclwl.  p.  275),  the  intentional  watching  (cf.  Arab,  shakidha,  to 
fix  penetrating  eyes  upon  anything),  with  ^  of  the  place  and  object 
and  aim  (Jer.  v.  6;  cf.  *?y  Tjjn,  Job  viii.  6).  The  plurals  nirta 
(fores,  as  rrioh,  Jer.  i.  18,  mcenia)  and  B^nns  are  amplifying  plurs. 
of  extension,  suggesting  the  idea  of  a  palace  or  temple;  nflTO  (posies 
portce,  in  quibus  cardines  ejus  moventur,  from  TIT,  to  move  hither  and 
thither)  is  intended  to  indicate  that  he  to  whom  the  discourse  refers 
holds  himself  in  closest  nearness  to  the  entrance,  that  he  might  not 

'  O 

miss  the  moment  when  it  is  opened,  or  when  she  who  dwells  there 
presents  herself  to  view.  "  The  figure  is  derived  from  the  service 
of  a  court  :  Wisdom  is  honoured  by  her  disciples,  as  a  queen 
or  high  patroness ;  cf.  Samachschari's  Golden  Necklaces,  Pr.  35  : 
Blessed  is  the  man  who  knocks  only  at  God's  door,  and  who 
departs  not  a  nail's  breadth  from  God's  threshold  "  (Fl.). 

Ver.  35.  This  verse  gives  the  reason  for  pronouncing  those 
happy  who  honour  Wisdom.  The  Chethib  is  D^n  'KXb  ^yb  '3,  but 
the  passing  over  into  the  sing.  356  is  harsh  and  objectionable ;  the 
Keri  rightly  regards  the  second  ^VD  as  a  mistaken  repetition  of  the 
first,  and  substitutes  D"n  N^o  <trcb  '3,  with  which  the  »«tprn  (ver. 


CHAP.  IX.  195 


3Ga)  of  the  antithesis  agrees.     Re^ardinff  %6?vb.  for  which,  less 

/  ™  O       •  :  i\  / 

accurately,  *KSb  (only  with  the  Dechi  without  Metheg)  is  generally 
written,  vid.  Accentuationssystem,  vii.  §  2.  P^Dj  to  get  out  =  reach, 
exchanged  with  N¥D,  iii.  13  (vid.  there);  according  to  its  etymon,  it 
is  connected  with  J»,  of  him  from  or  by  whom  one  has  reached 
anything;  here,  as  xii.  2,  xviii.  22,  God's  favour,  favorem  a  Jova 
impetravit. 

Ver.  36.  'N'Bh  may,  it  is  true,  mean  "my  sinning  one=he  who  sins 
against  me  (?  Kt?n),"  as  *Q\>  is  frequently  equivalent  to  ty  DVp|3;  but 
the  contrast  of  ^yb  places  it  beyond  a  doubt  that  NL3H  stands  here 
in  its  oldest  signification  :  to  miss  something  after  which  one  runs 
(xix.  2),  seeks  (Job  v.  24),  at  which  one  shoots  (Hiph.  Judg.  xx.  16), 
etc.,  id  non  aUingere  quod  petitur,  Arab,  dkhta,  to  miss,  opposite  to 
dsab,  to  hit  (Fl.).  Just  because  it  is  the  idea  of  missing,  which, 
ethically  applied,  passes  over  into  that  of  sin  and  guilt  (of  fault, 
mistake,  false  step,  a  Fehls,  Fehlers,  Fehltritts"),  NEn  can  stand 
not  only  with  the  accusative  of  the  subject  in  regard  to  which  one 
errs,  Lev.  v.  16,  but  also  with  the  accusative  of  the  subject  which 
one  forfeits,  i.e.  misses  and  loses,  xx.  2,  cf.  Hab.  ii.  10  ;  so  that 
not  only  te'33  DSb,  xv.  32  (animam  suam  nihili  facit),  but  also 
te'Q3  XEin,  xx.  2  (animam  suam  pessumdat),  is  synonymous  with 
it^S3  Don  (animce  suce  h.  e.  sibi  ipsi  injuriam  facit).  Whoever 
misses  Wisdom  by  taking  some  other  way  than  that  which  leads  to 
her,  acts  suicidally:  all  they  who  wilfully  hate  (Piel)  wisdom  love 
death,  for  wisdom  is  the  tree  of  life,  iii.  18  ;  wisdom  and  life  are 
one,  35a,  as  the  Incarnate  Wisdom  saith,  John  viii.  51,  "If  a  man 
keep  my  sayings,  he  shall  never  see  death."  In  the  Logos, 
Wisdom  has  her  self-existence;  in  Him  she  has  her  personification, 
her  justification,  and  her  truth. 


FIFTEENTH  INTRODUCTORY  MASHAL  DISCOURSE,  IX. 

A  DOUBLE  INVITATION  :    THAT  OF  WISDOM,  AND  THAT  OF  HER 
RIVAL,  FOLLY. 

The  preceding  discourse  pronounces  those  happy  who,  having 
taken  their  stand  at  the  portal  of  Wisdom,  M^ait  for  her  appearance 
and  her  invitation.  There  is  thus  a  house  of  Wisdom  as  there  is  a 


196  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

house  of  God,  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11  ;  and  if  now  the  discourse  is  of  a  house 
of  Wisdom,  and  of  an  invitation  to  a  banquet  therein  (like  that  in 
the  parable,  Matt,  xxii.,  of  the  invitation  to  the  marriage  feast  of 
the  king's  son),  it  is  not  given  without  preparation  : 

1  "Wisdom  hath  buildcd  for  herself  an  house, 
Hewn  out  her  seven  pillars  ; 

2  Hath  slaughtered  her  beasts,  mingled  her  wine  ; 
Hath  also  spread  her  table  ; 

3  Hath  sent  out  her  maidens  ;  she  waiteth 
On  the  highest  points  of  the  city. 


Regarding  nioan,  vid.  at  i.  20.     It  is  a  plur.  excellentice,  which  is  a 

variety  of  the  plur.  extensivus.     Because  it  is  the  expression  of  a 

plural  unity,  it  stands  connected  (as  for  the  most  part  also  DTPS, 

Deus]  with  the  sing,  of  the  predicate.     The  perfects  enumerate  all 

that  Wisdom  has  done  to  prepare  for  her  invitation.     If  we  had  a 

parable  before  us,  the  perf.  would  have  run  into  the  historical  npaTfl; 

but  it  is,  as  the  fcHpn  shows,  an  allegorical  picture  of  the  arrange 

ment  and  carrying  out  of  a  present  reality.    Instead  of  JV3  n?  nni3 

there  is   rHV?  nn:3,  for    the  house  is  already  in  its  origin  repre 

sented  as  hers,  and  \b  is  to  be  translated  :  she  has  hewn  out  her 

seven  pillars  (Hitzig);  more  correctly:  her  pillars,  viz.  seven  (after 

the  scheme  njn  arm,  Gen.  xxxvii.  2);  but  the  construction  is  closer. 

nynty  is,  altogether  like  Ex.  xxv.  37,  the  accusative  of  the  second 

object,  or  of  the  predicate  after  the  species  of  verba,  with  the  idea  : 

to  make  something,  turn  into  something,  which  take  to  themselves 

a  double  accusative,  Gesen.  §  139,  2  :  excidit  columnas  suas  ita  ut 

xepiem  essent.     Since  the  figure  is  allegorical,  we  may  not  dispense 

with  the  interpretation  of  the  number  seven  by  the  remark,  u  No 

emphasis  lies  in  the  number  "  (Bertheau).     First,  we  must  con 

template  architecturally  the  house  with  seven  pillars:  "They  are," 

as  Hitzig  rightly  remarks,  "  the  pillars  of  the  fi~np»  (porch)  [yitl. 

Bachmann  under  Judg.  iii.  23,  and  Wetstein  under  Ps.  cxliv.  12, 

where   2tpn  is  used  of  the  cutting  out  and  hewing  of  wood,  as 

3VH  of  the  cutting  out  and  hewing  of  stone]  in  the  inner  court, 

which  bore  up  the  gallery  of  the  first  (and  second)  floors  :  four  of 

these  in  the  corners  and  three  in  the  middle  of  three  sides  ;  through 

the  midst  of  these  the  way  led  into  the  court  of  the  house-floor  [the 

area]."     But  we  cannot  agree  with  Hitzig  in  maintaining  that,  with 

the  seven  pillars  of  viii.  and  ix.,  the  author  looks  back  to  the  first 

seven  chapters  (Arab,  dbwab,  gates)  of  this  book  ;  we  think  other- 


CHAP.  IX.  1-3.  197 

wise  of  the  component  members  of  this  Introduction  to  the  Book  of 
Proverbs ;  and  to  call  the  sections  of  a  book  "gates,  D^-W,"  is  a  late 
Arabico-Jewish  custom,  of  which  there  is  found  no  trace  whatever 
in  the  O.  T.  To  regard  them  also,  with  Heidenheim  (cf.  Dante's 
Prose  Writings,  translated  by  Streckfuss,  p.  77),  as  representing  the 
seven  liberal  arts  (ntEDn  jntr)  is  impracticable  ;  for  this  division  of 
the  artes  liberates  into  seven,  consisting  of  the  Trivium  (Grammar, 
Rhetoric,  and  Dialectics)  and  Quadrivium  (Music,  Arithmetic, 
Geometry,  and  Astronomy),  is  not  to  be  looked  for  within  the  old 
Israelitish  territory,  and  besides,  these  were  the  sciences  of  this 
world  which  were  so  divided ;  but  wisdom,  to  which  the  discourse 
here  refers,  is  wholly  a  religious-moral  subject.  The  Midrash 
thinks  of  the  seven  heavens  (DTP")  njn^),  or  the  seven  climates  or 
parts  of  the  earth  (rmnK  njn^),  as  represented  by  them ;  but  both 
references  require  artificial  combinations,  and  have,  as  also  the  refer 
ence  to  the  seven  church-eras  (Vitringa  and  Chr.  Ben.  Michaelis), 
this  against  them,  that  they  are  rendered  probable  neither  from 
these  introductory  proverbial  discourses,  nor  generally  from  the 
O.  T.  writings.  The  patristic  and  middle-age  reference  to  the  seven 
sacraments  of  the  church  passes  sentence  against  itself  ;  but  the 
old  interpretation  is  on  the  right  path,  when  it  suggests  that  the 
seven  pillars  are  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  seven- 
foldness  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  already  brought  near 
by  the  seven  lamps  of  the  sacred  candelabra  (the  "TlfaD),  is  estab 
lished  by  Isa.  xi.  2  (vid.  I.e.);  and  that  Wisdom  is  the  possessor  and 
dispenser  of  the  Spirit  she  herself  testifies,  i.  23.  Her  Spirit  is  the 
"  Spirit  of  wisdom;"  but  at  the  same  time,  since,  born  of  God,  she 
is  mediatrix  between  God  and  the  world,  also  the  "Spirit  of  Jahve." 
He  is  the  "  spirit  of  understanding,"  the  "  spirit  of  counsel," 
and  the  "spirit  of  might"  (Isa.  xi.  2);  for  she  says,  viii.  14, 
"  Counsel  is  mine,  and  reflection ;  I  am  understanding,  I  have 
strength."  He  is  also  the  "  spirit  of  knowledge,"  and  the  li  spirit 
of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  (Isa.  xi.  2)  ;  for  fear  and  the  knowledge 
of  Jahve  are,  according  to  ix.  14,  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  and 
essentially  wisdom  itself. 

Ver.  2.  If  thus  the  house  of  Wisdom  is  the  place  of  her  fellow 
ship  with  those  who  honour  her,  the  system  of  arrangements  made 
by  her,  so  as  to  disclose  and  communicate  to  her  disciples  the 
fulness  of  her  strength  and  her  gifts,  then  it  is  appropriate  to 
understand  by  the  seven  pillars  the  seven  virtues  of  her  nature 


198  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

communicating  themselves  (apocalyptically  expressed,  the  e-ma 
Trvev/AaTa),  which  bear  up  and  adorn  the  dwelling  which  she 
establishes  among  men.  Flesh  and  wine  are  figures  of  the 

0  O 

nourishment  for  the  mind  and  the  heart  which  is  found  with 
wisdom,  and,  without  asking  what  the  flesh  and  the  wine  specially 
mean,  are  figures  of  the  manifold  enjoyment  which  makes  at 
once  strong  and  happy.  The  segolate  n.  verbale  nnD,  which  vii. 
22  denoted  the  slaughtering  or  the  being  slaughtered,  signifies 
here,  in  the  concrete  sense,  the  slaughtered  ox;  Michaelis  rightly 
remarks  that  ran,  in  contradistinction  to  mt,  is  the  usual  word  for 
mactatio  extrasacrificialis.  Regarding  )^  "iJDDj  vid.  under  Isa. 
v.  22  ;  it  is  not  meant  of  the  mingling  of  wine  with  sweet  scents 
and  spices,  but  with  water  (warm  or  cold),  and  signifies  simply  to 
make  the  wine  palatable  (as  icepavvvvai,  temperare)  ;  the  LXX. 
e/cepaaev  ei?  tcparrjpa,  Kparrjp  is  the  name  of  the  vessel  in  which 
the  mixing  takes  place  ;  they  drank  not  arcparov,  but  KeKepaa- 
jjievov  a/cparov,  Rev.  xiv.  10.  The  frequently  occurring  phrase 
iC1??'  ^Py  signifies  to  prepare  the  table  (from  np&??  properly  the 
unrolled  and  outspread  leather  cover),  viz.  by  the  placing  out  of 
the  dishes  (vid.  regarding  "=1"]^,  under  Gen.  xxii.  9). 

Ver.  3.  The  verb  fcO£,  when  a  feast  is  spoken  of,  means  to 
invite  ;  D"1^!?,  ver.  18  (cf.  1  Sam.  ix.  13,  etc.),  are  the  guests. 
C1^"1^.?  the  LXX.  translates  rovs  eaim}?  SouXovs,  but  certainly 
here  the  disciples  are  meant  who  already  are  in  the  service  of 
Wisdom  ;  but  that  those  who  are  invited  to  Wisdom  are  thought 
of  as  feminine,  arises  from  the  tasteful  execution  of  the  picture. 
The  invitation  goes  forth  to  be  known  to  all  far  and  wide,  so  that 
in  her  servants  Wisdom,  takes  her  stand  in  the  high  places  of  the 
city.  Instead  of  ti'Nia,  viii.  2,  i.  21,  there  is  used  here  the  expres 
sion  ''Srpy.  We  must  distinguish  the  Semitic  ^3  (  =  ganf),  wings, 
from  sp:i  =  fp3,  to  cover,  and  *\*  (=  gaff  or  ganf),  the  bark,  which  is 

derived   either  from  *]?)  or  *\tt    <  _  ^>--  convexus,  incurvus  et  ex- 


tnnsecus  gibber  fait,  hence  originally  any  surface  bent  outwards  or 
become  crooked  (cf.  the  roots  cap:  caf,  23  P)J  ep  2p,  etc.),  here  the 
summit  of  a  height  (Fl.);  thus  not  super  alls  (sifter  the  analogy  of 
TrrepviyLov,  after  Suidas  =  dicpcoTijpiov},  but  super  dorsis  (as  in  Lut. 
we  say  dorsum  mentis,  and  also  vice). 

Now    follows   the    street-sermon    of    Wisdom    inviting    to    her 
banquet: 


CHAP.  ix.  4-6.  199 

4  "  Who  is  simple  ?  let  him  come  hither ! " 
Whoso  wanteth  understanding,  to  him  she  saith: 

5  "  Come,  eat  of  my  bread, 

And  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled  ! 
G  Cease,  ye  simple,  and  live, 

And  walk  straight  on  in  the  way  of  understanding." 

The  question  '•na  ^  (thus  with  Munach,  not  with  MaMepJt,  it  is  to 
be  written  here  and  at  ver.  16  ;  vid.  Baer's  Toraih  Emeth,  p.  40), 
gnis  est  imperitus,  is,  as  Ps.  xxv.  12,  only  a  more  animated  expres 
sion  for  quisquis  est.     The  retiring  into  the  background   of  the 
nnjtf  (servants),  and  the  immediate  appearance  of  Wisdom  herself, 
together  with  the  interruption,  as  was  to  be  expected,  of  her  con 
nected  discourses  by  the  i?  n7^^j  are  signs  that  the  pure  execution 
of  the  allegorical  representation  is  here  at  an  end.      Hitzig  seeks, 
by  the  rejection  of  vers.  4,  5,  7-10,  to  bring  in  a  logical  sequence  ; 
but  these  interpolations  which  he  cuts  out  are  yet  far  more  incon 
ceivable  than  the  proverbial  discourses  in  the  mouth  of  Wisdom, 
abandoning   the   figure  of   a  banquet,  which  besides   are   wholly 
in  the  spirit  of  the  author  of  this  book.     That  Folly  invites  to  her, 
ver.  16,  in  the  same  words  as  are  used  by  Wisdom,  ver  4,  is  not 
strange  ;  both  address  themselves  to  the  simple  (vid.  on  "'HB  at  i.  4) 
and  those  devoid  of  understanding  (as  the  youth,  vii.  7),  and  seek 
to  bring  to  their  side  those  who  are  accessible  to  evil  as  to  good, 
and  do  not  fully  distinguish  between  them,  which  the  emulating 
devertat  hue  of  both  imports.     The  fourth  verse  points  partly  back 
wards,  and  partly  forwards ;  4a  has  its  introduction  in  the  K~ipn  of 
ver.  3  ;  on  the  contrary,  46  is  itself  the   introduction  of  what 
follows.     The  setting  forth  of  the  nom.  absolutus  2?™ipn  is  con 
ditioned  by  the  form  of  4a ;  the  *£>  (cf.  4a)  is  continued  (in  46) 
without  its  needing  to  be  supplied  :  excors  (=  si  quis  est  excors) 
dicit  ei  (not  dixit^  because  syntactically  subordinating  itself  to  the 
Nipn).     It  is  a  nominal  clause,  whose  virtual  predicate  (the  devoid 
of  understanding  is  thus  and  thus  addressed  by  her)  is  in  ver.  16. 
Ver.  5.  The  plur.  of   the  address  shows  that  the  simple  (in 
experienced)  and  the  devoid  of   understanding  are  regarded    as 
essentially  one  and  the  same  class  of  men.     The  3  after  EH?  and 
nriB>  proceeds  neither  from  the  idea  of  eating  into  (hewing  into) 
anything,  nor  from  the  eating  with  anything,  i.e.  inasmuch  as  one 
makes  use  of  it,  nor  of  pampering  oneself  with  anything  (as  2  '"^"i); 
Michaelis  at  last  makes  a  right  decision  (cf.  Lev.  xxii.  11,  Judg. 


200 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


xiii.  16,  Job  xxi.  25,  and  particularly  2  Drr?,  Ps.  cxli.  4)  :  com- 
municationem  et  participation  em  in  re  fruenda  denotat ;  the  LXX. 
(frdyere  TWV  kpwv  aprwv.  The  attributive  ^DD  stands  with  back 
ward  reference  briefly  for  VPODO.  That  Wisdom,  ver.  2,  offers 
flesh  and  wine,  but  here  presents  bread  and  wine,  is  no  contradic 
tion,  which  would  lead  us,  with  Hitzig,  critically  to  reject  vers.  4 
and  5  as  spurious  ;  Drp  Js  the  most  common,  all-comprehensive 
name  for  nourishment.  Bertheau  suitably  compares  Jahve's  in 
vitation,  Isa  Iv.  1,  and  that  of  Jesus,  John  vi.  35. 

Ver.  6.  That  D'^na  is  a  plur.  with  abstract  signification  (accord 
ing  to  which  the  four  Greek  and  the  two  Aramaean  translations 
render  it ;  the  Gra>c.Venet.,  however,  renders  row  vrjTrlovs)  is  impro 
bable;  the  author  forms  the  abstr.  ver.  13  otherwise,  and  the  expres 
sion  here  would  be  doubtful.  For  D^na  is  here  to  be  rendered 
as  the  object-accus. :  leave  the  simple,  i.e.  forsake  this  class  of 
men  (Ahron  b.  Joseph;  Umbreit,  Zockler) ;  or  also,  which  we  prefer 
(since  it  is  always  a  singular  thought  that  the  "simple"  should 
leave  the  "  simple  "),  as  the  vocative,  and  so  that  wry  means  not 
absolutely  "leave  off"  (Hitzig),  but  so  that  the  object  to  be 
thought  of  is  to  be  taken  from  D^NDa :  give  up,  leave  off,  viz.  the 
simple  (Immanuel  and  others  ;  on  the  contrary,  Rashi,  Meiri,  and 
others,  as  Ewald,  Bertheau,  decide  in  favour  of  D^xna  as  n.  alstr.). 
Regarding  vrn,  for  et  vivetis,  vid.  iv.  4.  The  LXX.,  paraphrasing  : 
i'va  et?  rov  alwva  /SacrtXeuo-^re.  "1L';X  is  related  to  1VJ'\S  (-|!$X)  as 
'Hll  to  ^vl '  tne  Pwli  not  in  its  intrans.  (vid.  iv.  14)  but  in  its 
trans,  sense  (Isa.  i.  17,  iii.  12,  etc.),  shows  that  the  idea  of  goino- 
straight  out  and  forwards  connects  itself  therewith.  The  peculi 
arity  of  the  Tia  is  just  the  absence  of  character. 

In  what  now  follows  the  discourse  of  Wisdom  is  continued;  where 
fore  she  directs  her  invitation  to  the  simple,  i.e.  those  who  have  not 
yet  decided,  and  are  perhaps  susceptible  of  that  which  is  better : 

7  "  He  who  correcteth  a  scorner  draweth  upou  himself  insult ; 

And  he  who  communicateth  instruction  to  a  scorner,  it  is  a  dishonour 
to  him. 

8  Instruct  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  hate  thee  ; 

Give  instruction  to  the  wise,  so  he  will  love  thee. 

9  Give  to  the  wise,  and  he  becomes  yet  wiser  ; 

Give  knowledge  to  the  upright,  and  he  gains  in  knowledge." 

Zockler  thinks  that  herewith  the  reason  for  the  summons  to  the 
"  simple "  to  forsake  the  fellowship  of  men  of  their  own  sort,  is 


CHAP.  IX.  7-9.  201 

assigned  (lie  explains  Cm  as  Aliron  b.  Joseph  :  DsxnBn  p  Vnsn);  but 
his  remark  tliat,  under  the  term  ll  simple,"  mockers  and  wicked  per 
sons  are  comprehended  as  belonging  to  the  same  category,  confounds 
two  sharply  distinguished  classes  of  men.  fv  is  the  freethinker 
who  mocks  at  religion  and  virtue  (vid.  i.  22),  and  1^"J  the  godless 
who  shuns  restraint  by  God  and  gives  himself  up  to  the  unbridled 
impulse  to  evil.  The  course  of  thought  in  ver.  7  and  onwards 
shows  why  Wisdom,  turning  from  the  wise,  who  already  are  hers, 
directs  herself  only  to  the  simple,  and  those  who  are  devoid  of 
understanding  :  she  must  pass  over  the  K?  and  V^n,  because  she 
can  there  hope  for  no  receptivity  for  her  invitation  ;  she  would, 
contrary  to  Matt.  vii.  6,  "  give  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs,  and 
cast  her  pearls  before  swine."  "ID*,  iraiSeveiv  (with  the  prevailing 
idea  of  the  bitter  lesson  of  reproof  and  punishment),  and  n^Din, 
eXey^ew,  are  interchangeable  conceptions,  Ps.  xciv.  10  ;  the  ?  is 
here  exponent  of  the  object  (to  bring  an  accusation  against  any 
one),  as  ver.  8,  xv.  12  (otherwise  as  Isa.  ii.  4,  xi.  4,  where  it  is  the 
dat.  commodi :  to  bring  unrighteousness  to  light,  in  favour  of  the 

injured).     Y?.  "lj?'  is  pointed  with  Mahpach  of  the  penultima,  and 

thus  with  the  tone  thrown  back.  The  Pasek,  placed  in  some 
editions  between  the  two  words,  is  masoretically  inaccurate.  Pie 
who  reads  the  moral  to  the  mocker  brings  disgrace  to  himself;  the 
incorrigible  replies  to  the  goodwill  with  insult.  Similar  to  the  ft  n^ 
here,  is  DTi»  tollit  =  reportat,  iii.  35,  iv.  27.  In  Ib  toft  is  by  no 
means  the  object  governed  by  rviriDi :  and  he  who  shows  to  the 
godless  his  fault  (Meiri,  Arama,  Lowenstein  :  1O1O  =  IDID'^y,  and 
thus  also  the  Grose.  Venet.  fiw/nov  eaurw,  soil.  \a/jL/3dvei)  ;  plainly 
1B1O  is  parallel  with  r&p.  But  1O1D  does  not  also  subordinate  itself 
to  rip?  as  to  the  object,  parallel  jl^p  :  maculam  sibimet  scil.  acgttirit ; 
for,  to  be  so  understood,  the  author  ought  at  least  to  have  written 
b  Dl».  Much  rather  VOID  is  here,  as  at  Deut.  xxxii.  5,  appos.,  thus 
pred.  (Hitzig),  without  needing  anything  to  be  supplied  :  his  blot 
it  is,  viz.  this  proceeding,  which  is  equivalent  to  Hv  WH  NEW 
(Targ.),  opprobrio  ipsi  est.  Zockler  not  incorrectly  compares  Ps. 
cxv.  7  and  Eccles.  v.  16,  but  the  expression  (macula  ejus  =  ipsi) 
lies  here  less  remote  from  our  form  of  expression.  In  other  words  : 
Whoever  correcteth  the  mockers  has  only  to  expect  hatred  (rD1JT7N 
with  the  tone  thrown  back,  according  to  rule ;  cf .,  on  the  contrarv, 
Judg.  xviii.  25),  but  on  the  other  hand,  love  from  the  wise. 


02  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


Ver.  8.  The  1  in  "pHX1"!  is  that  of  consequence  (apoJosis  im- 
perativi):  so  he  will  love  thee  (as  also  Ewald  now  translates),  not  : 
that  he  may  love  thee  (Syr.,  Targ.),  for  the  author  speaks  here 
only  of  the  consequence,  not  of  something  else,  as  an  object  kept 
in  view.  The  exhortation  influences  the  mocker  less  than  nothing 

c">7 

so  much  the  more  it  bears  fruit  with  the  wise.  Thus  the  proverb 
is  confirmed  lialenti  dabitur,  Matt.  xiii.  12,  xxv.  29. 

Ver.  9.  If  anything  is  to  be  supplied  to  JFI,  it  is  n\>h  (iv.  2)  ;  but 
]H  ,  tradere,  TrapaSiSovai,  is  of  itself  correlat.  of  np^,  accipere  (post- 
bibl.  ^i?),  7rapa\a/j,(3dveiv:  e.g.  Gal.  i.  9.  p  JJnin  —  to  communi 
cate  knowledge,  njn,  follows  the  analogy  of  ?  iTDin^  to  impart 
instruction,  nnmn.  Regarding  the  jussive  form  ^DVI.  in  the  apod. 
imper.,  vid.  Gesen.  §  128,  2.  Observe  in  this  verse  the  inter 
change  of  D3n  and  pH^!  Wisdom  is  not  merely  an  intellectual 
power,  it  is  a  moral  quality  ;  in  this  is  founded  her  receptivity  of 
instruction,  her  embracing  of  every  opportunity  for  self-improve 
ment.  She  is  humble;  for,  without  self-will  and  self-sufficiency, 
she  makes  God's  will  her  highest  and  absolutely  binding  rule 
(iii.  7). 

These  words  naturally  follow  : 

10  "  The  beginning  of  wisdom  is  the  fear  of  Jalive, 

And  the  knowledge  of  the  Holy  One  is  understanding." 

This  is  the  highest  principle  of  the  Chokrna,  which  stands  (i.  7) 
as  a  motto  at  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  The  LXX. 
translate  JWiO  there  (i.  7),  and  Dpnn  here,  by  ap-^rj.  Gusset  dis 
tinguishes  the  two  synonyms  as  pars  optima  and  primus  actus  ; 
but  the  former  denotes  the  fear  of  God  as  that  which  stands  in  the 
uppermost  place,  to  which  all  that  Wisdom  accomplishes  subordi 
nates  itself;  the  latter  as  that  which  begins  wisdom,  that  which  it 
proposes  to  itself  in  its  course.  With  mrv  is  interchanged,  ii.  5, 
DT6x,  as  here  D^n^  as  the  internally  multiplicative  plur.  (Dietrich, 
Abliandlungen,  pp.  12,  45),  as  xxx.  3,  Josh.  xxiv.  9,  Hos.  xii.  1,  of 
God,  the  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  "  (Isa.  vi.  3),  i.e.  Him  who  is  abso 
lutely  Holy.  Michaelis  inaccurately,  following  the  ancients,  who 
understood  not  this  non-numerical  plur.  :  cognitio  quce  sanctos  facit 
et  sanctis  propria  est.  The  njn,  parallel  with  riX"}1,  is  meant  of 
lively  practical  operative  knowledge,  which  subordinates  itself  to 
this  All-holy  God  as  the  normative  but  unapproachable  pattern. 

Ver.  11.  The  singular  reason  for  this  proverb  of  Wisdom  is  now 
given  : 


CHAP.  IX.  12.  203 

u  For  by  me  will  thy  days  become  many, 
Arid  the  years  of  thy  life  will  be  increased." 

Incorrectly  Hitzig  :  "  and  years  of  life  will  increase  to  tliee  ; ' 
*P?in  is  always  and  everywhere  (e.g.  also  Job  xxxviii.  11)  transitive. 
In  the  similar  passage,  iii.  2,  IJTDV  had  as  its  subject  the  doctrine 
of  Wisdom  ;  here  fiDan  and  nj-a  it  is  not  practicable  to  interpret  as 
subj.,  since  lla  Wisdom  is  the  subject  discoursing — the  expression 
follows  the  scheme,  dicunt  eos  =  dicuntur,  as  e.g.  Job  vii.  3  ;  Gesen. 
§  137 — a  concealing  of  the  operative  cause,  which  lies  near,  where, 
as  ii.  22,  the  discourse  is  of  severe  judgment,  thus :  they  (viz.  the 
heavenly  Powers)  will  grant  to  thee  years  of  life  (D^n  in  a  preg 
nant  sense,  as  iii.  2)  in  rich  measure,  so  that  constantly  one  span 
comes  after  another.  But  in  what  connection  of  consequence  does 
this  stand  with  the  contents  of  the  proverb,  ver.  10  1  The  ancients 
say  that  the  clause  with  'a  refers  back  to  ver.  5  f.  The  vers.  7-10 
(according  also  to  Fl.)  are,  as  it  were,  parenthetic.  Hitzig  rejects 
these  verses  as  an  interpolation,  but  the  connection  of  ver.  11  with 
5  f.  retains  also  something  that  is  unsuitable  :  "  steps  forward  on  the 
way  of  knowledge,  for  by  me  shall  thy  clays  become  many  ;"  and  if, 
as  Hitzig  supposes,  ver.  12  is  undoubtedly  genuine,  whose  connec 
tion  with  ver.  11  is  in  no  way  obvious,  then  also  will  the  difficulty  of 
the  connection  of  vers.  7-10  with  the  preceding  and  the  succeed 
ing  be  no  decisive  mark  of  the  want  of  genuineness  of  this  course 
of  thought.  We  have  seen  how  the  progress  of  ver.  6  to  7  is 
mediated  :  the  invitation  of  Wisdom  goes  forth  to  the  receptive, 
with  the  exclusion  of  the  irrecoverable.  And  ver.  11  is  related  to 
ver.  10,  as  the  proof  of  the  cause  from  the  effect.  It  is  the  fear  of 
God  with  which  Wisdom  begins,  the  knowledge  of  God  in  which 
above  all  it  consists,  for  by  it  is  fulfilled  the  promise  of  life  which 
is  given  to  the  fear  of  God,  x.  27,  xiv.  27,  xix.  23,  cf.  Dent.  iv. 
40,  and  to  humility,  which  is  bound  up  with  it,  x.  17. 

Ver.  12.  This  wisdom,  resting   on  the   fear  of  God,  is  itself  a 
blessing  to  the  wise  : 

"  If  thou  art  wise,  thou  art  wise  for  thyself  ; 
And  if  thou  mockest,  thou  alone  shalt  bear  it." 

The  LXX.,  with  the  Syr.,  mangle  the  thought  of  12a,  for  they 
translate:  if  thou  art  wise  for  thyself,  so  also  thou  wilt  be  wise  for 
thy  neighbour.  The  dat.  commodi  ^  means  that  it  is  for  the  per 
sonal  advantage  of  the  wise  to  be  wise.  The  contrast  expressed 


204  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

by  Job  xxii.  2  f . :  not  profitable  to  God,  but  to  thyself  (Hitzig),  is 
scarcely  intended,  although,  so  far  as  the  accentuation  is  antithetic, 
it  is  the  nearest.  The  perf.  1W1  is  the  hypothetical;  Gesen. 
§  126,  1.  To  bear  anything,  viz.  anything  sinful  (Ntpn  or  I'lV),  is 
equivalent  to,  to  atone  for  it,  Job  xxxiv.  2,  cf.  Num.  ix.  13,  Ezek. 
xxiii.  35.  Also  12&  is  a  contrast  scarcely  aimed  at.  Wisdom  is  its 
own  profit  to  man  ;  libertinism  is  its  own  disgrace.  Man  decides, 
whenever  he  prefers  to  be  wise,  or  to  be  a  mocker  of  religion  and 
of  virtue,  regarding  his  own  weal  and  woe.  With  this  nota  bene 
the  discourse  of  Wisdom  closes. 

The  poet  now  brings  before  us  another  figure,  for  he  personifies 
Folly  working  in  opposition  to  Wisdom,  and  gives  her  a  feminine 
name,  as  the  contrast  to  Wisdom  required,  and  thereby  to  indicate 
that  the  seduction,  as  the  13th  proverbial  discourse  (chap,  vii.)  has 
shown,  appears  especially  in  the  form  of  degraded  womanhood  : 

13  The  woman  Fully  [Frau  Tliorlint]  conducts  herself  boisterously, 
Wantonness,  and  not  knowing  anything  at  all ; 

14  And  hath  seated  herself  at  the  door  of  her  house, 
Oa  a  seat  high  up  in  the  city, 

15  To  call  to  those  who  walk  in  the  way, 
Who  go  straight  on  their  path. 

The  connection  of  IW'DS  flK'K  is  genitival,  and  the  genitive  is  not, 
as  in  JH  ntTX,  vi.  24,  specifying,  but  appositional,  as  in  p^TD  (vid. 
under  Isa.  i.  8).  n'jpin  [boisterous]  is  pred.,  as  vii.  11:  her  object 
is  sensual,  and  therefore  her  appearance  excites  passionately,  over 
coming  the  resistance  of  the  mind  by  boisterousness.  In  13&  it  is 
further  said  who  and  how  she  is.  DVriS)  she  is  called  as  wanton 
ness  personified.  This  abstract  Jn'Tis,  derived  from  *riS,  must  be 
vocalized  as  rivnDN  ;  Hitzig  thinks  it  is-  written  with  a  on  account 
of  the  following  u  sound,  but  this  formation  always  ends  in  ijjuth, 
not  ojjutli.  But  as  from  nrn  as  well  }V-|n  — Jinn  as  Jitn  is  formed, 

so  from  nna  as  well  rnri3  like  niTn,  or  nina  like  n^,   rnjn_,  as 

DVriQ  (instead  of  which  JTITIQ  is  preferred)  can  be  formed ;  Kimchi 
rightly  (Michlol  ISla)  presents  the  word  under  the  form  n^JJB. 

i  v'.       \  /I  f  T    ; 

With  731  (xiv.  7)  poetic,  and  stronger  than  N7i,  the  designation  of 
the  subject  is  continued;  the  words  HE)  ru/T'721  (thus  with  Mercha 
and  without  Mdkkeph  following,  n^T1  is  to  be  written,  after 
Codd.  and  old  editions)  have  the  value  of  an  adjective  :  and  not 
knowing  anything  at  all  (!"!£>  =  rt,  as  Num.  xxiii.  3,  Job  xiii.  13, 
and  here  in  the  negative  clause,  as  in  prose  noiN?:>)5  i.e.  devoid  of 


CHAP.  IX.  1C,  17.  205 

all  knowledge.  The  Targ.  translates  explanatorily :  not  recog 
nising  NrOD,  the  good  ;  and  the  LXX.  substitutes  :  she  knows  not 
shame,  which,  according  to  Hitzig,  supposes  the  word  HS73,  ap 
proved  of  by  him  ;  but  !"ID?3  means  always  pudefactio:  not  pudor. 
To  know  no  ncta  would  be  equivalent  to,  to  let  no  shaming  from 
without  influence  one;  for  shamelessness  the  poet  would  have  made 
use  of  the  expression  JV^3  njTP"v:n.  In  rQt£l  the  declaration  re 
garding  the  subject  beginning  with  rvoin  is  continued :  Folly  also 
lias  a  house  in  which  works  of  folly  are  carried  on,  and  has  set  her 
self  down  by  the  door  (nnsp  as  "w,  viii.  3)  of  this  house  ;  she  sits 
there  ND3~?i'.  Most  interpreters  here  think  on  a  throne  (LXX. 
eVt  Stypov,  used  especially  of  the  sella  cum  Us)  ;  and  Zockler,  as 
Umbreit,  Hitzig,  and  others,  connecting  genitiv.  therewith  H£iD 
rn.i?,  changes  in  146  the  scene,  for  he  removes  the  "  high  throne  of 
the  city "  from  the  door  of  the  house  to  some  place  elsewhere. 
But  the  sitting  is  in  contrast  to  the  standing  and  going  on  the  part 
of  Wisdom  on  the  streets  preaching  (Evagrius  well  renders :  in 
molli  ignavaqne  sella)  ;  and  if  NDD  and  house-door  are  named  along 
with  each  other,  the  former  is  a  seat  before  the  latter,  and  the 
accentuation  rightly  separates  by  Mugrash  ND3  from  mp  ''DID. 
"  According  to  the  accents  and  the  meaning,  nip  ''DID  is  the  ace. 
loci:  on  the  high  places  of  the  city,  as  viii.  2  f."  (Fl.)  They  are 
the  high  points  of  the  city,  to  which,  as  Wisdom,  ver.  3,  viii.  2,  so 
also  Folly,  her  rival  (wherefore  Eccles.  x.  6  does  not  appertain 
to  this  place),  invites  followers  to  herself.  She  sits  before  her 
door  to  call  T]il  nny^  (with  Munach,  as  in  Cod.  1294  and  old 
editions,  without  the  Makkeph),  those  who  go  along  the  way 
(genitive  connection  with  the  supposition  of  the  accusative  con 
struction,  transire  viam,  as  ii.  7),  to  call  (invite)  D'H^pn  (to  be 
pointed  with  D  raphatum  and  Guja  going  before,  according  to 
Ben-Asher's  rule;  vid.  Metliegsetz.  §  20),  those  who  make  straight 
their  path,  i.e.  who  go  straight  on,  directly  before  them  (cf  Isa. 
Ivii.  2).  The  participial  construction  (the  schemes  amans  Dei  and 
amans  Deum\  as  well  as  that  of  the  verb  Nip  (first  with  the  dat. 
and  then  with  the  accus.),  interchange. 

The  woman,  who  in  her  own  person  serves  as  a  sign  to  her 
house,  addresses  those  who  pass  by  in  their  innocence  (BEJnp,  2 
Sam.  xv.  11): 

1G  "  Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  hither  !  " 

And  if  any  one  is  devoid  of  understanding,  she  saith  to  him : 


206  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

17  "  Stolen  waters  taste  sweet. 

And  the  bread  of  secrecy  is  pleasant." 

*n3  (folly,  simplicity)  has  a  side  accessible  to  good  and  its  contrary : 
Wisdom  is  connected  with  the  one  side,  and  Folly  with  the  other. 
And  as  the  a?~lDn  offers  a  vacuum  to  Wisdom  which  may  perhaps 
be  filled  with  the  right  contents,  so  is  this  vacuum  welcome  to  Folly, 
because  it  meets  there  no  resistance.  In  this  sense,  ver.  16  is  like 
ver.  4  (excepting  the  addition  of  a  connecting  and  of  a  concluding  •) : 
et  si  quis  excors,  turn  dicit  ei)  ;  the  word  is  the  same  in  both,  but 
the  meaning,  according  to  the  two  speakers,  is  different.  That  to 
which  they  both  invite  is  the  pleasure  of  her  fellowship,  under  the 
symbol  of  eating  and  drinking ;  in  the  one  case  it  is  intellectual 
and  spiritual  enjoyment,  in  the  other  sensual.  That  Wisdom  offers 
(ix.  5)  bread  and  wine,  and  Folly  water  and  bread,  has  its  reason 
in  this,  that  the  particular  pleasure  to  which  the  latter  invites  is  of 
a  sensual  kind;  for  to  drink  water  out  of  his  own  or  out  of  another 
fountain  is  (iii.  15-20)  the  symbol  of  intercourse  in  married  life, 
or  of  intercourse  between  the  unmarried,  particularly  of  adulterous 
intercourse.  D'M?  tfB  (correct  texts  have  it  thus,  without  the 
MaMeph)  is  sexual  intercourse  which  is  stolen  from  him  who  has  a 
right  thereto,  thus  carnal  intercouse  with  t^N  ntr'tf  ;  and  Dnnp  Dr6 
fleshly  Just,  which,  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  law,  must  seek  (cf. 
fin-turn,  secret  love  intrigue)  concealment  (nnriD,  extensive  plur., 
as  D'jpojrc?;  Bottcher,  §  694).  Just  such  pleasure,  after  which  one 
wipes  his  mouth  as  if  he  had  done  nothing  (xxx.  20),  is  for  men 
who  are  without  wisdom  sweet  (pno,  Job  xx.  12)  and  pleasant;  the 
prohibition  of  it  gives  to  such  pleasure  attraction,  and  the  secrecy 
adds  seasoning;  and  just  such  enjoyments  the  m^DD,  personified 
carnality,  offers.  But  woe  to  him  who,  befooled,  enters  her  house  ! 
lie  goes  within  : 

18  And  he  knows  not  that  the  dead  are  there; 
In  the  depths  of  Hades,  her  guests. 

How  near  to  one  another  the  house  of  the  adulteress  and  Hades 
are,  so  that  a  man  passes  through  the  one  into  the  other,  is  already 
stated  in  ii.  18,  vii.  28.  Here,  in  the  concluding  words  of  the 
introduction  to  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  addressed  to  youth,  and  for 
the  most  part  containing  warnings  against  sinful  pleasures,  these 
two  further  declarations  are  advanced :  the  company  assembled  in 
the  house  of  lewdness  consists  of  t^ND"!,  i.e.  (cf.  p.  83)  the  old, 
worn-out,  who  are  only  in  appearance  living,  who  have  gone  down 


CHAP.  X.-XXII.  16.  207 

to  the  seeming  life  of  the  shadowy  existence  of  the  kingdom  of 

t 

the  dead;  her  (niT'Da)  invited  ones  (cf.  vii.  26,  her  slaughtered 
ones)  are  in  the  depths  of  Hades  (not  in  the  valleys,  as  Urnbreit, 
Lowenstein,  and  Ewald  translate,  but  in  the  depths,  Aquila, 
Symmachus,  Theodotion,  eVl  rot?  /BaOecri,;  for  "•pBJJ  is  not  only  ])lnr. 
to  p!?JJ,  but  also  per  metaplasmuin  to  pSD'y,  xxv.  3,  as  "HOX  to  "^N), 
thus  in  JVnnn  7iNtp  (Deut.  xxxii.  22);  they  have  forsaken  the  fellow 
ship  of  the  life  and  of  the  love  of  God,  and  have  sunk  into  the 
deepest  destruction.  The  house  of  infamy  into  which  Folly  allures 
does  not  only  lead  to  hell,  it  is  hell  itself ;  and  they  who  permit 
themselves  to  be  thus  befooled  are  like  wandering  corpses,  and 
already  oil  this  side  of  death  are  in  the  realm  of  wrath  and  of  the 


FIRST  COLLECTION  OF  SOLOMONIC  PEOVERBS,  X.-XXII.  16. 

The  superscription,  nb;>tJ>  "tab,  here  shows  that  now  we  have 
reached  that  which  the  title  of  the  book,  i.  1-6,  presented  to  view. 
Here  we  have  the  commencement  of  that  collection  of  Solomonic 
Proverbs  which  under  this  title  forms,  together  with  the  introduc 
tion,  i.  7-ix.,  the  Older  Book  of  Proverbs.  The  introduction  is 
disproportionately  long.  It  is  the  manner  of  the  editor  to  extend 
himself  in  length  and  breadth ;  and  besides,  an  educational  zeal  in 
behalf  of  youth,  and  his  aim,  which  was  without  doubt  to  put  them 
on  their  guard  against  certain  prevailing  moral  evils  of  his  time, 
make  him  thus  persuasive ;  and  if  he  detains  his  readers  so  long 
from  the  proper  Solomonic  Proverbs,  yet  this  might  be  excused 
from  the  circumstance,  that  though  his  introduction  does  not 
strictly  consist  of  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  yet  it  consists  of  proverbs 
after  the  manner  of  Solomon,  i.e.  of  proverbs  which,  as  to  their 
contents  and  form,  take  their  structure  from  the  pattern  of  those 
of  Solomonic  authorship. 

In  this  introduction,  i.-ix.,  there  are  larger  sections  of  intercon 
nected  thoughts  having  one  common  aim.  Even  in  vi.  1-19  there 
are  manifestly  three  proverbial  discourses  distinguished  from  one 
another,  shorter  indeed,  yet  containing  one  fundamental  thought. 

1  The  LXX.  has  considerable  additions  introduced  after  ver.  18,  as  also  after 
var.  12,  of  which  we  shall  elsewhere  speak. 


208  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERCS. 

Such  proverbs  as  are  primarily  designed  to  form  one  completed 
little  whole  of  themselves,  are  not  here  to  be  met  with.  On  the 
contrary,  the  Solomonic  collection  which  now  follows  consists  of 
pure  distichs,  for  the  most  part  antithetical,  but  at  the  same  time 
going  over  all  the  forms  of  the  technical  proverb,  as  we  have 
already  shown;  vid.  p.  16.  Accordingly  the  exposition  must  from 
this  point  onward  renounce  reproduced  combinations  of  thought. 
The  succession  of  proverbs  here  is  nevertheless  not  one  that  is 
purely  accidental  or  without  thought ;  it  is  more  tlmn  a  happy 
accident  when  three  of  the  same  character  stand  together ;  the 
collector  has  connected  together  proverb  with  proverb  according 
to  certain  common  characteristics  (Bertheau).  And  yet  more  than 
that:  the  mass  separates  itself  into  groups,  not  merely  succeeding 
one  another,  but  because  a  certain  connection  of  ideas  connects 
together  a  number  of  proverbs,  in  such  a  way  that  the  succession 
is  broken,  and  a  new  point  of  departure  is  arrived  at  (Hitzig). 
There  is  no  comprehensive  plan,  such  as  Oetinger  in  his  summary 
view  of  its  contents  supposes  ;  the  progressive  unfolding  follows 
no  systematic  scheme,  but  continuously  wells  forth.  But  that  the 
editor,  whom  we  take  also  to  be  the  arranger  of  the  contents  of  the 
book,  did  not  throw  them  together  by  good  chance,  but  in  placing 
them  together  was  guided  by  certain  reasons,  the  very  first  pro 
verb  here  shows,  for  it  is  chosen  in  conformity  with  the  design  of 
this  book,  which  is  specially  dedicated  to  youth  : 
1  A  wise  son  maketh  glad  his  father  ; 
A  foolish  son  is  his  mother's  grief. 

One  sees  here  quite  distinctly  (cf.  Hos.  xiii.  13)  that  D2n  (from 
D3H,  properly  to  be  thick,  stout,  solid,  as  TTVKV 09  =  0-0^09)  is  pri 
marily  a  practical  and  ethical  conception.  Similar  proverbs  are 
found  further  on,  but  consisting  of  synonymous  parallel  members, 
in  which  either  the  father  botli  times  represents  the  parents,  as 
xvii.  21,  xxiii.  24,  or  father  and  mother  are  separated,  each  being 
named  in  different  members,  as  xvii.  25,  xxiii.  25,  and  particularly 
xv.  20,  where  20a  =  la  of  the  above  proverb.  It  is  incorrect  to 
say,  with  Hitzig,  that  this  contrast  draws  the  division  after  it :  the 
division  lies  nearer  in  the  synonymous  distichs,  and  is  there  less 
liable  to  be  misunderstood  then  in  the  antithetic.  Thus,  from  this 
proverb  before  us,  it  might  be  concluded  that  grief  on  account  of 
n  befooled  son  going  astray  in  bypaths,  and  not  coming  to  the  right 
way,  falls  principally  on  the  mother,  as  (Sir.  iii.  9)  is  often  tiie 


CHAP.  X.  2,  3.  209 

< 

case  in  unfortunate  marriages.  The  idea  of  the  parents  is  in  this 
way  only  separated,  and  the  two  members  stand  in  suppletive  in 
terchangeable  relationship,  nab'*  is  the  middle  of  the  clause,  and 
is  the  usual  form  in  connection  ;  nsb^  is  the  pausal  form.  r\ftF\} 
from  njin  (nr),  has  pass,  u,  as  nnin,  act.  6.  "  The  expression  of  the 
pred.  Ib  is  like  iii.  17,  viii.  6,  x.  14  f.;  cf.  e.g.  Arab,  dlastaksa  furkat, 
oversharpening  is  dividing,  i.e.  effects  it  [inquiries  become  or  lead 
to  separation]  (cf.  our  proverb,  Allzuscliarf  macht  schartig  =  too 
much  sharpening  makes  full  of  notches)  ;  Burckhardt,  Spruchw. 
Nr.  337"  (Fl.). 

Ver.  2.  There  follows  now  a  series  of  proverbs  which  place  pos 
sessions  and  goods  under  a  moral-religious  point  of  view  : 

Treasures  of  wickedness  bring  no  profit ; 

But  righteousness  delivers  from  death. 

The  LXX.  and  Aquila  translate  avopovs  (do-e/3ti?).  ^Jfln  (to  profit) 
with  the  accus.  is  possible,  Isa.  Ivii.  12,  but  nhyis  one  does  not  use 
by  itself;  it  requires  a  genitive  designating  it  more  closely.  But 
also  Ny'tTn  of  the  Targ.,  irapavofjiwv  of  Symmachus,  fails ;  for  the 
question  still  remains,  to  whom?  Rightly  Syr.,  Jerome,  Theodo- 
tion,  and  the  Quinta:  acre/Seta?,  cf.  iv.  17,  Mic.  iv.  10;  Luke  xvi. 
9,  fjiap-wvas  rrj^  ciSt/a'a?.  Treasures  to  which  wickedness  cleaves 
profit  not,  viz.  him  who  has  collected  them  through  wickedness. 
On  the  contrary,  righteousness  saves  from  death  (2£>  =  xi.  4l>, 
where  the  parallelism  makes  it  clear  that  death  as  a  judgment  is 
meant).  In  Deut.  xxiv.  13  it  had  been  already  said  that  compas 
sionate  love  is  "righteousness  before  the  Lord,"  the  cardinal  virtue 
of  the  righteousness  of  life.  Faith  (Hab.  ii.  4)  is  its  soul,  and  love 
its  life.  Therefore  BiKaioo-vvr]  and  €\,er)fj,ocnjvr)  are  interchangeable 
ideas;  and  it  ought  not  to  be  an  objection  against  the  Apocrypha 
that  it  repeats  the  above  proverb,  eXe^/ioo-w?;  e'/c  Oavdrov  pverai, 
Tob.  iv.  10,  xii.  9,  Sir.  iii.  30,  xxix.  12,  for  Dan.  iv.  24  also  says 
the  very  same  thing,  and  the  thought  is  biblical,  in  so  far  as  the 
giving  of  alms  is  understood  to  be  not  a  dead  work,  but  (Ps. 
cxii.  9)  the  life-activity  of  one  who  fears  God,  and  of  a  mind 
believing  in  Him  and  resting  in  His  word. 

Ver.  3.    Another   proverb,    the    members    of    which    stand    in 
chiastic  relation  to  those  of  the  preceding : 

Jahve  does  not  suffer  the  soul  of  the  righteous  to  hunger; 

But  the  craving  of  the  godless  He  disappointeth. 

The  thought  is  the  same  as  xiii.  25.     There,  as  also  at  vi.  30,  the 

VOL.  I.  O 


210  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

soul  is  spoken  of  as  the  faculty  of  desire,  and  that  after  nourish 
ment,  for  the  lowest  form  of  the  life  of  the  soul  is  the  impulse  to 
self-preservation.      The    parallel   njn,   in   which    LXX.   and   Ar. 
erroneously  find    the   meaning  of    n»n,   life,  the   Syr.    Targ.    the 
meaning  of   jin,    possession,   means  the  desire,    without    however 
being  related  to   HJX  (Berth.);  it  is  the  Arab,  haw  an,  from  nin, 
Arab,  hatcay,  which,  from  the  fundamental  meaning  %alvei,v,  hiare, 
to  gape,  yawn,  signifies  not  only  unrestrained  driving  along,  and 
crashing  overthrow  (cf.  xi.  6,  xix.  13),  but  also  the  breaking  forth, 
ferri  in  aliquid,  whence  n^  Arab,  haivan,  violent  desire,  in  Hebr. 
generally  (here  and  Ps.  lii.  9,  Mic.  vii.  3)  of  desire  without  limits 
and    without   restraint    (cf.    the    plur.    d/taicd,    arbitrary    actions, 
caprices)  ;  the  meanings  deduced  from  this  important  verbal  stern 
(of  which  also  njn  iTl^  accidere,  and  then  esse,  at  least  after  the 
Arabic  conception  of  speech,  is  an  offshoot)  are  given  by  Fleischer 
under  Job  xxxvii.  6,  and  after  Fleischer  by  Ethe,  Schlafgemach  der 
Phantasie,  ii.  p.  6f.    The  verb  ^n  signifies  to  push  in  the  most  mani 
fold  shades,  here  to  push  forth,  repellere,  as  2  Kings  iv.  27  (cf.  Arab. 
hadhafj  to  push  off  —  to  discharge) ;  the  fut.  is  invariably  ^fify  like 
n.3^..     God  gives  satisfaction  to  the  soul  of  the  righteous,  viz.  in 
granting  blessings.    The  desire  of  the  wicked  He  does  not  suffer  to 
be  accomplished  ;  it  may  appear  for  a  long  time  as  if  that  which 
was  aimed  at  was  realized,  but  in  the  end  God  pushes  it  back,  so 
that  it  remains  at  a  distance,  because  contrary  to  Him.     Instead  of 
D"1!'^")  ninij  some  editions  (Plantin  1566,  Bragadin  1615)  have  mm 
D<I1^,  but,  in  opposition  to  all  decided  testimony,  only  through  a, 
mistaken  reference  to  xi.  6. 

VtT.  4.  There  follow  two  proverbs  which  say  how  one  man  fails 
and  another  succeeds : 

He  becomes  poor  -who  bears  a  sluggish  hand; 

But  the  hand  of  the  diligent  nuaketh  rich. 

These  three  proverbs,  xix.  15,  xii.  24,  27,  are  similar.  From  the  last 
two  it  is  seen  that  n*ipi  is  a  subst.,  as  also  from  Ps.  cxx.  2  f. 
(n-cn  jit??,  from  a  crafty  tongue)  that  it  is  an  adject.,  and  from 
Lev.  xiv.  15  f.  (where  *]?  is  fern.)  that  it  may  be  at  the  same  time 
an  adject,  here  also.  The  masc.  is  W,  like  ^  to  nntp,  but  neither 
of  these  occur  ;  "  the  fundamental  idea  is  that  of  throwing  oneself 
down  lazily,  when  one  with  unbent  muscles  holds  himself  no  longer 
erect  and  stretched,  Arab,  faramy"  (Fl.).  The  translation:  deceit 
ful  balances  (Lowenstein  after  Kashi);  is  contrary  to  biblical  usage, 


CHAP.  X.  5.  211 

which   knows  nothing  of  ep  in  this   Mishnic  meaning.     But  if 

fp  is  here  regarded  as  fern.,  then  it  cannot  be  the  subject  (Jerome, 

egestatem  operata  est  manus  remissa),  since  we  read  ntJfy    not  nbfy. 

But  Pan  also  is  not  suitable  as  the  subject  (LXX.,  Syr.,  Targ.), 

for  poverty  is  called  0n,  B>n,  two  ;  On  the  contrary,  en*  plur.  D'Bh 

or  D^JO,  is  used  adjectively.     Since  now  the  adject/Bh,  1  Sam! 

xii.  14,  is  also  written  BW,  it  may  be  translated:  Poor  is  he  who 

.  .  .  (Bertheau)  ;  but  we  much  rather  expect  the  statement  of  that 

which  happens  to  such  an  one,  thus  :    Poor  will  he  be  ...     BW, 

3  prat.  =  Vht   Ps.   xxxiv.   11,   with   the  same  (grammatically  in 

correct)  full  writing  as  DSJ5,  Hos.  x.  14.     In  the  conception  of  the 

subject,  !T»vsp,  after  Jer.  xlviii.  10,  is  interpreted  as  the  accus.  of 

the  manner  (Berth.:  whoever  works  with  sluggish  hand);  but  since 

rr»n  r\\yy  (in  another  sense  indeed  :  to  practise  cunning)  is  a  com 

mon  phrase,  Ps.  Hi.  4,  ci.  7,  so  also  will  n'BVSp  be  regarded  as  the 

object  :  qui  agit  manum  remissam,  whoever  carries  or  moves  such 

a  hand  (Hitzig).     In  46  working  is  placed  opposite  to  bearing:  the 

diligent  hand  makes  rich,  ditat  or  divitias  parit;  but  not  for  itself 

(Gesen.  and  others:  becomes  rich),  but  for  him  who  bears  it.     The 

diligent  man  is  called  jnn,  from  p?,  to  sharpen,  for,  as  in  o^?,  acer, 

sharpness  is  transferred  to  energy  ;  the  form  is  the  same  as  p&n, 

smooth  (for   the  a   is  unchangeable,   because    recompensative),  a 

kindred   form   to  ^  like  fton,  and   Arab.  f£ul   as  fashawsh,  a 

boaster,  wind-bag,  either  of  active  (as  pan)  or  (as  p£n,  pnn,  W, 

7i3C>)  of  passive  signification. 

Ver.  5.   There  is  now  added  a  proverb  which,  thus  standing  at 
the  beginning  of  the  collection,  and  connecting  itself  with  ver.  1, 
stamps  on  it  the  character  of  a  book  for  youth  : 
He  that  gathereth  in  summer  is  a  wise  son  ; 
But  he  that  is  suuk  in  sleep  in  the  time  of  harvest  is  a  son  that 
causeth  shame. 


Von  Hofmann  (Schriftb.  ii.  2.  403)  rightly  interprets  ^3B>»  J3  and 
&*??M3,  with  Cocceius  and  others,  as  the  subject,  and  'not  with 
Hitzig  as  predicate,  for  in  nominal  clauses  the  rule  is  to  place 
the  predicate  before  the  subject  ;  and  since  an  accurate  expression 
of  the  inverted  relation  would  both  times  require  Kin  referring  to 
the  subject,  so  we  here  abide  by  the  usual  syntax  :  he  that  gathers 
in  summer  time  is  ...  Also  the  relation  of  the  members  of  the 
sentence,  xix.  26,  is  a  parallel  from  which  it  is  evident  that  the 
misguided  son  is  calijd  p'-ao  as  causing  shame,  although  in 


212  THE  COOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

the  idea  to  put  to  shame  (=to  act  so  that  others  are  ashamed) 
and  to  act  shamefully  (disgracefully),  as  in  ^afefl  the  ideas  to 
have  insight  and  to  act  intelligently,  lie  into  one  another  (cf.  xiv. 
35)  ;  the  root-meaning  of  Vwn  is  determined  after  W,  which 
from  *?&&)  cornplicare,  designates  the  intellect  as  the  faculty  of 
intellectual  configuration.  E;i3,  properly  disturbari,  proceeds  from 
a  similar  conception  as  the  Lat.  confundi  (pudore).  P.5  and  "V*\> 
fall  together,  for  pp  (from  pp  =  tlJs,  to  be  glowing  hot)  is  just  the 
time  of  the  "i^p ;  vid.  under  Gen.  viii.  22.  To  the  activity  of  a 
thoughtful  ingathering,  13«,  for  a  future  store  (vid.  vi.  7).  stands 
opposed  deep  sleep,  i.e.  the  state  of  one  sunk  in  idleness.  DTU 
means,  as  Schultens  has  already  shown,  somno  penitus  obrui,  omni 
sensu  obstructo  et  oppilato  guasi,  from  Din,  to  fill,  to  shut  up,  to 
conclude  ;  the  derivation  (which  has  been  adopted  since  Gesenius) 
from  the  Arab,  word  having  the  same  sound,  *£j,  stridere,  to  shrill, 
to  rattle  (but  not  stertere,  to  snore),  lies  remote  in  the  Niph.,  and 
also  contradicts  the  usage  of  the  word,  according  to  which  it  desig 
nates  a  state  in  which  all  free  activity  is  bound,  and  all  reference 
to  the  external  world  is  interrupted;  cf.  ncTiri,  xix.  15,  of  dulness, 
apathy,  somnolency  in  the  train  of  slothfulness.  The  LXX.  lias 
here  one  distich  more  than  the  Hebr.  text. 

Ver.  6.  There  now  follow  two  proverbs  regarding  the  blessings 
and  the  curses  which  come  to  men,  and  which  flow  forth  from  them. 
Here,  however,  as  throughout,  we  take  each  proverb  by  itself,  that 
it  might  not  appear  as  if  we  had  a  tetrastich  before  us.  The  first 
of  these  two  antithetic  distichs  is : 

Blessings  (come)  on  the  head  of  the  just ; 

But  violence  covereth  the  mouth  of  the  godless. 

Blessings  are,  without  being  distinguished,  bestowed  as  well  ns 
praved  for  from  above.  Regarding  the  undistinguished  uses  of  &#~0 
(of  a  recompense  of  reward),  tJ>K"i3  (of  penal  recompense),  and 
PKV^y  (especially  of  punishment),  vid.  under  Gen.  xlix.  26.  If 
we  understand,  with  Ewald,  Bertheau,  Elster,  Zockler,  and  others, 
the  two  lines  after  ver.  11,  xix.  28,  cf.  x.  18  :  the  mouth  of  the 
wicked  covers  (hides  under  a  mask)  violence,  inasmuch  as  he 
speaks  words  of  blessing  while  thoughts  of  malediction  lurk 
behind  them  (Ps.  Ixii.  5),  then  we  renounce  the  sharpness  of  the 
contrast.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  preserved  if  we  interpret  ^  as 
object :  the  violence  that  has  gone  out  from  it  covereth  the  mouth 


CHAP.  x.  7.  213 

of  the  wicked,  i.e.  it  falls  back  upon  his  foul  mouth;  or  as  Fleischer 
(and  Oetinger  almost  the  same)  paraphrases  it :  the  deeds  of  vio 
lence  that  have  gone  forth  from  them  are  given  back  to  them  in 
curses  and  maledictions,  so  that  going  back  they  stop,  as  it  were, 
their  mouth,  they  bring  them  to  silence ;  for  it  is  unnecessary  to 
take  *•£>  synecdochically  for  "OS  (cf.  e.g.  Ps.  Ixix.  8),  since  in  niDna  6a 
are  perhaps  chiefly  meant  blessings  of  thankful  acknowledgment 
on  the  part  of  men,  and  the  giving  prominence  to  the  mouth  of  the 
wicked  from  which  nothing  good  proceeds  is  well  accounted  for. 
The  parallels  do  not  hinder  us  thus  to  explain,  since  parts  of  pro 
verbs  repeating  themselves  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  often  show  a 
change  of  the  meaning  (yid.  p.  24  f.).  Hitzig's  conjecture,  npa"1 
(better  fED'.),  is  unnecessary ;  for  elsewhere  we  read,  as  here,  that 
DEfl  (violence),  jure  talionis,  covers,  fiB?"1,  the  wicked,  Hab.  ii.  17,  or 
that  he,  using  "violence,"  therewith  covers  the  whole  of  his  external 
appearance,  i.e.  gives  to  it  the  branded  impress  of  the  unrighteous 
ness  he  has  done  (vid.  Kohler  under  Mai.  ii.  16). 

Ver.  7.  Thus,  as  ver.  6  says  how  it  goes  with  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked  in  this  life,  so  this  verse  tells  how  it  fares  with  them 
after  death : 

The  memory  of  the  righteous  remains  in  blessings, 
And  the  name  of  the  godless  rots. 

The  tradition  regarding  the  writing  of  "13T  with  five  ("^l)  or  six 
points  (13T)  is  doubtful  (vid.  Heidenheim  in  his  ed.  of  the  Penta 
teuch,  Meor  Enajim,  under  Ex.  xvii.  14) ;  the  Cod.  1294  and  old 

printed  copies  have  here  ">3T.  Instead  of  n3"Q/>  TU1'  might  be  used  : 
r  r  vj-  tit  ATT  =  -'  AT  =  o 

the  phrase  nm?  rvn  (opp.  npppp  rvn,  often  used  by  Jeremiah), 
subordinate  to  the  substantival  clause,  paraphrases  the  passive,  for 
it  expresses  a  growing  to  something,  and  thus  the  entrance  into  a 
state  of  endurance.  The  remembrance  of  the  righteous  endures 
after  his  death,  for  he  is  thought  of  with  thankfulness  (^"r  = 
n:ro?  p^Tf  iDt,  the  usual  appendix  to  the  name  of  an  honoured, 
beloved  man  who  has  died),  because  his  works,  rich  in  blessing, 
continue ;  the  name  of  the  godless,  on  the  contrary,  far  from  con 
tinuing  fresh  and  green  (Ps.  Ixii.  17)  after  his  departure,  becomes 
corrupt  (3pn,  from  pi,  to  be  or  to  become  thin,  to  dissolve  in  fine 
parts,  talescere),  like  a  worm-eaten  decayed  tree  (Isa.  xl.  20).  The 
Talmud  explains  it  thus,  Joma  386 :  foulness  comes  over  their 
name,  so  that  we  call  no  one  after  their  name.  Also  the  idea  sug 
gests  itself,  that  his  name  becomes  corrupt,  as  it  were,  with  his 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

bones;  the  Mislma,  at  least  Ohdloth  ii.  1,  uses  2pn  of  the  dust  of 
corruption. 

Ver.  8.  There  follows  now  a  series  of  proverbs  in  which  reference 
to  sins  of  the  mouth  and  their  contrary  prevails: 

He  that  is  wise  in  heart  receives  precepts  ; 

But  he  that  is  of  a  foolish  mouth  comes  to  ruin. 

A  SP'Daq,  wise-hearted,  is  one  whose  heart  is  D3n,  xxiii.  15;  in  a 
word,  a  P2J,  a  person  of  understanding  or  judgment,  xvi.  21.  Such 
an  one  does  not  make  his  own  knowledge  the  ne  phis  ultra,  nor  does 
he  make  his  own  will  the  noli  me  tangere  ;  but  he  takes  commands, 
i.e.  instructions  directing  or  prohibiting,  to  which  he  willingly  subor 
dinates  himself  as  the  outflow  of  a  higher  knowledge  and  will,  and 
by  which  he  sets  bounds  and  limits  to  himself.  But  a  fool  of  the 
lips,  i.e.  a  braggart  blunderer,  one  pleasing  himself  with  vain  talk 
(xiv.  23),  falls  prostrate,  for  he  thinks  that  he  knows  all  things 
better,  and  will  take  no  pattern ;  but  while  he  boasts  himself  from 
§  on  high,  suddenly  all  at  once — for  he  offends  against  the  funda 
mental  principle  of  common  life  and  of  morality — he  comes  to  lie 
low  down  on  the  ground.  The  Syr.  and  Targ.  translate  B2^  by, 
he  is  caught  (Bertheau,  ensnared) ;  Aquila,  Vulgate,  Luther,  Saprj- 
o-erai,  he  is  slain;  Symmachus,  fiaaaviaOija-eTai ;  but  all  without 
any  support  in  the  usage  of  the  language  known  to  us.  Theodotion, 
^fpr/crerat,  he  is  confounded,  is  not  tenable  ;  Joseph  Kimchi,  who 
after  David  Kimchi,  under  Hos.  iv.  14,  appeals  in  support  of  this 
meaning  (tjant?\  similarly  Parchon :  W>arv)  to  the  Arabic,  seems 
to  think  on  iltibds,  confusion.  The  demonstrable  meanings  of  the 
verb  Baf)  are  the  following :  1.  To  occasion  trouble.  Thus  Mechilta, 
under  Ex.  xvii.  14,  imtD^,  one  has  imposed  upon  him  trouble  ; 
Sifii,  under  Num.  xi.  1,  UBabfU,  we  are  tired,  according  to  which 
Eashi :  he  fatigues  himself,  but  which  fits  neither  to  the  subj.  nor 
to  the  contrast,  which  is  to  be  supposed.  The  same  may  be  said 
of  the  meaning  of  the  Syr.  .  fr^V  to  drive  on,  to  press,  which 
without  doubt  accords  with  the  former  meaning  of  the  word  in  the 
language  of  the  Midrash.  2.  In  Arab,  labat  (E.  lab,  vid.  Wiinsche's 
Hos.  p.  172),  to  throw  any  one  down  to  the  earth,  so  that  he  falls 
with  his  whole  body  his  whole  length ;  the  passive  Blta,  to  be  thus 
thrown  down  by  another,  or  to  throw  oneself  thus  down,  figura 
tively  of  one  who  falls  hoplessly  into  evil  and  destruction  (Fl.). 
The  Arabic  verb  is  also  used  of  the  springing  run  of  the  animal 
ridden  on  (to  gallop),  and  of  the  being  lame  (to  hop),  according  to 


CHAP.  X.  9.  215 

which  in  the  Lex.  the  explanations,  he  hurries,  or  he  wavers  hither 
and  thither,  are  offered  by  Kimclii  (Grcec.  Venet.  irXai/qdiyo-erat). 
But  the  former  of  these  explanations,  corruit  (=in  calamitatem  ruit\ 
placed  much  nearer  by  the  Arabic,  is  confirmed  by  the  LXX. 
v7roaK6\ta-0ijaeTai,  and  by  the  Bercshith  rabba,  c.  52,  where  Eir?  is 
used  in  the  sense  to  be  ruined  (=^;DJ).  Hitzig  changes  the  pas 
sive  into  the  active  :  "  he  throws  the  offered  n^  scornfully  to  the 
ground,"  but  the  contrast  does  not  require  this.  The  wanton,  arro 
gant  boasting  lies  already  in  the  designation  of  the  subj.  DTlSt?  ins  ; 
and  the  sequel  involves,  as  a  consequence,  the  contrasted  con 
sequence  of  ready  reception  of  the  limitations  and  guidance  of  his 
own  will  by  a  higher. 

Ver.  9.  The  form  of  this  verse  is  like  the  eighth,  word  for  word  : 

He  that  walketh  in  innocence  walketh  securely  ; 
But  he  that  goeth  in  secret  ways  is  known. 


The  full  form  of  Dina  does  not,  as  Hitzig  supposes,  stand  in  causal 
connection  with  the  JDechi,  for  the  consonant  text  lying  before  us 
is  at  least  500  years  older  than  the  accentuation.  For  DH  Tj^'n  at 
ii.  7,  there  is  here  Qinn  7^'n  —  Din  7pn3  ^n  ;  so  vann  K^yp  denotes 

after  ii.  15,  such  an  one  D^jpy  "^"H  ">^N.  Expressed  in  the 
language  of  the  N.  T.,  Din  is  the  property  of  the  a-TrXou?  or 
d/cepaios,  for  the  fundamental  idea  of  fulness  is  here  referred  to 
full  submission,  full  integrity.  Such  an  one  goes  rm  (Aquila, 
dyttep^M/o)?),  for  there  is  nothing  designedly  concealed  by  him,  of 
which  he  has  reason  to  fear  that  it  will  come  to  the  licrht;  who 
ever,  on  the  contrary,  makes  his  ways  crooked,  i.e.  turns  into 
crooked  ways,  is  perceived,  or,  as  we  might  also  explain  it  (vid. 
under  Gen.  iv.  15)  :  if  one  (qui  =  si  quis)  makes  his  ways  crooked, 
then  it  is  known  —  nothing,  however,  stands  opposed  to  the  reference 
of  JHV  to  the  person  :  he  is  finally  known,  i.e.  unmasked  (LXX. 
Jerome,  jvcoadijcrera^  manifestus  fiet).  Usually  it  is  explained  : 
he  is  knowing,  clever,  with  the  remark  that  jnu  is  here  the  passive 
of  J?Hin  (Gesen.,  Ewald,  Hitzig)  ;  Hiph.  to  give  to  feel  ;  Nipli.  to 
become  to  feel,  properly  to  be  made  to  know  (Luth.  :  made  wise)  ; 
but  the  passive  of  the  Hiph.  is  the  Hoph.  Such  a  Niph.  in  which 
the  causative  (not  simply  transitive)  signification  of  the  Hiph. 
would  be  applied  passively  is  without  example  (vid.  Ewald,  §  133a); 
the  meaning  of  Jer.  xxxi.  19  also  is  :  after  I  have  become  known, 
i.e.  been  made  manifest,  uncovered,  drawn  into  the  light. 


216  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Ver.  10.  This  verse  contains  another  proverb,  similarly  formed, 
parallel  with  the  half  of  ver.  8  : 

He  that  winketh  with  the  eye  causeth  trouble  ; 
And  a  foolish  mouth  comes  to  ruin. 

Regarding  the  winking  or  nipping,  i.e.  the  repeated  nipping  of 
the  eyes  (cf.  nictare,  frequent,  of  nicfre),  as  the  conduct  of  the 
malicious  or  malignant,  which  aims  at  the  derision  or  injury  of 
him  to  whom  it  refers,  vid.  under  vi.  13 ;  there  pp  was  connected 
with  2  of  the  means  of  the  action  ;  here,  as  Ps.  xxxv.  19,  cf.  Prov. 
xvi.  30,  it  is  connected  with  the  object  accus.  He  who  so  does 
produces  trouble  (heart-sorrow,  xv.  13),  whether  it  be  that  he  who 
is  the  butt  of  this  mockery  marks  it,  or  that  he  is  the  victim  of 
secretly  concerted  injury  ;  ftp  is  not  here  used  impersonally,  as  xiii. 
10,  but  as  xxix.  15,  cf.  Lev.  xix.  28,  xxiv.  20,  in  the  sense  of  the 
cause.  106  forms  a  striking  contrast  to  10a,  according  to  the  text 
of  the  LXX.  :  o  Be  eXey^wv  /^era  irapprjcrias  eiprjvoTroiei.  The 
Targ.,  however,  abides,  contrary  to  the  Syr.,  by  the  Hebrew  text, 
which  certainly  is  older  than  this  its  correction,  which  Evvald 
and  Lagarde  unsuccessfully  attempt  to  translate  into  Hebrew. 
The  foolish  mouth,  here  understood  in  conformity  with  10a,  is  one 
who  talks  at  random,  without  examination  and  deliberation,  and 
thus  suddenly  stumbles  and  falls  over,  so  that  he  comes  to  lie  on 
the  ground,  to  his  own  disgrace  and  injury. 

Ver.  11.  Another  proverb,  similar  to  the  half  of  ver.  6: 

A  fountain  of  life  is  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  ; 

But  the  mouth  of  the  godless  hideth  violence. 

If  we  understand  116  wholly  as  66  :  os  improborum  oltcget  violentia, 
then  the  meaning  of  lla  would  be,  that  that  which  the  righteous 
speaks  tends  to  his  own  welfare  (Fl.).  But  since  the  words  spoken 
are  the  means  of  communication  and  of  intercourse,  one  has  to  think 
of  the  water  as  welling  up  in  one,  and  flowing  forth  to  another  ; 
and  the  meaning  of  lib  has  to  accommodate  itself  to  the  preceding 
half  proverb,  whereby  it  cannot  be  mistaken  that  DOH  (violence), 
which  was  66  subj.,  bears  here,  by  the  contrast,  the  stamp  of  the 
obj.;  for  the  possibility  of  manifold  windings  and  turnings  is  a 
characteristic  of  the  Mashal.  In  the  Psalms  and  Prophets  it  is 
God  who  is  called  D*n  lipD,  ps.  xxxvi.  10,  Jer.  ii.  13,  xvii.  13  ; 
the  proverbial  poetry  plants  the  figure  on  ethical  ground,  and 
understands  by  it  a  living  power,  from  which  wholesome  effects 
accrue  to  its  possessor,  xiv.  27,  and  go  forth  from  him  to  otlieiv, 


C:IAP.  x.  12,  is.  217 

xiii.  14.  Thus  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  is  here  called  a  foun 
tain  of  life,  because  that  which  he  speaks,  and  as  he  speaks  it, 
is  morally  strengthening,  intellectually  elevating,  and  inwardly 
quickening  in  its  effect  on  the  hearers  ;  while,  on  the  contrary, 
the  mouth  of  the  godless  covereth  wrong  (violentiam),  i.e.  conceals 
with  deceitful  words  the  intention,  directed  not  to  that  which  is 
best,  but  to  the  disadvantage  and  ruin  of  his  neighbours;  so  that 
words  which  in  the  one  case  bring  to  light  a  ground  of  life  and  of 
love,  and  make  it  effectual,  in  the  other  case  serve  for  a  covering 
to  an  immoral,  malevolent  background. 

Ver.  12.  Another  proverb  of  the  different  effects  of  hatred  and 
of  love : 

Hate  stirreth  up  strife, 

And  love  covereth  all  transgressions. 

Regarding  B'O'lO,  ^or  which  the  Ken  elsewhere  substitutes  E^"]*?, 
vid.  under  vi.  14.  Hatred  of  one's  neighbour,  which  is  of  itself 
an  evil,  has  further  this  bad  effect,  that  it  calls  forth  hatred,  and 
thus  stirreth  up  strife,  feuds,  factions,  for  it  incites  man  against 
man  (cf.  "n'y,  Job  iii.  8) ;  on  the  contrary,  love  covers  not  merely 
little  errors,  but  also  greater  sins  of  every  kind  (D^'3'73),  viz. 
by  pardoning  them,  concealing  them,  excusing  them,  if  possible, 
with  mitigating  circumstances,  or  restraining  them  before  they  are 
executed.  All  this  lies  in  the  covering.  James,  however,  gives  it, 
v.  20,  another  rendering :  love  covers  them.,  viz.  from  the  eyes  of 
a  holy  God;  for  it  forgives  them  to  the  erring  brother,  and  turns 
him  from  the  error  of  his  way.  The  LXX.  improperly  translate 
TrazmK  Be  rot*?  /j,rj  (frikoveiKovvras  /eeXoTrm  <$>t\ia;  but  Peter 
(1  Pet.  iv.  8)  as  well  as  James,  but  none  of  the  Greek  versions :  77 
a<ya7rr)  KaXvifret,  7r\fj0o<;  a^apnwv.  The  Romish  Church  makes 
use  of  this  passage  as  a  proof  for  the  introduction  of  the  fides 
formata,  viz.  caritate,  in  justification,  which  is  condemned  in  the 
Apology  of  the  Augsburg  Confession  ;  and,  indeed,  the  multitude 
peccatorum  is  not  meant  of  the  sins  of  him  who  cherishes  love,  but 
of  the  sins  of  the  neighbour.  Sin  stirs  up  hatred  in  men  in  their 
relation  to  one  another;  but  love  covers  the  already  existing  sins, 
and  smooths  the  disturbances  occasioned  by  them. 

Ver.  13.  There  follow  now  two  other  proverbs  on  the  use  and 
abuse  of  speech  : 

On  the  lips  of  the  man  of  understanding  wisdom  is  found  ; 
And  the  rod  for  the  back  of  the  fool. 


218  THE  BOOK  OF  PROYEEDS. 

"With  Lowenstein.  Hitzicj.  and  others,  it  is  inadmissible  to  regard  E3":l 

/  O  v  ••  ; 

as  second  subject  to  NVDPi.  The  mouth  itself,  or  the  word  of  the 
mouth,  may  be  called  a  rod,  viz.  a  rod  of  correction  (Isa.  xi.  4);  but 
that  wisdom  and  such  a  rod  are  found  on  the  lips  of  the  wise  would 
be  a  combination  and  a  figure  in  bad  taste.  Thus  I3b  is  a  clause  bv 
itself,  as  Luther  renders  it :  "  but  a  rod  belongs  to  the  fool's  back;" 
and  this  will  express  a  contrast  to  13a,  that  while  wisdom  is  to  be 
sought  for  on  the  lips  of  the  man  of  understanding  (cf.  Mai.  ii.  7), 
a  man  devoid  of  understanding,  on  the  contrary,  gives  himself  to 
such  hollow  and  corrupt  talk,  that  in  order  to  educate  him  to  some 
thing  better,  if  possible,  the  rod  must  be  applied  to  his  back  ;  for, 
according  to  the  Talmudic  proverb  :  that  which  a  wise  man  gains 
by  a  hint,  a  fool  only  obtains  by  a  club.  The  rod  is  called  ET^ 
from  BTJ>,  to  be  smooth,  to  go  straight  down  (as  the  hair  of  the 
head) ;  and  the  back  13,  from  nis,  to  be  rounded,  i.e.  concave  or 
convex. 

Yer.  14  Wise  men  store  up  knowledge  ; 

But  the  mouth  of  the  fool  is  threatening  destruction. 

Ewald,  Bertheau,  Hitzig,  Oetinger :  "  The  mouth  of  the  fool 
blunders  out,  and  is  as  the  sudden  falling  in  of  a  house  which  one 
cannot  escape  from."  But  since  nnnp  is  a  favourite  Mishle-\vord 
to  denote  the  effect  and  issue  of  that  which  is  dangerous  and  de 
structive,  so  the  sense  is  perhaps  further  to  be  extended:  the  mouth 
of  the  fool  is  for  himself  (xiii.  3)  and  others  a  near,  i.e.  an  always 
threatening  and  unexpectedly  occurring  calamity;  unexpectedly, 
because  suddenly  he  blunders  out  with  his  inconsiderate  shame- 
bringing  talk,  so  that  such  a  fool's  mouth  is  to  every  one  a  press  ens 
periculum.  As  to  «S^,  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  in  the  Beduin, 
^s^jfut.  ij  signifies  to  be  still,  to  be  thoughtful,  to  be  absorbed  in 
oneself  (vid.  Wetstein  on  Job,  p.  281).  According  to  Codd.  and 
editions,  in  this  correct,  ~'Sb  is  to  be  written  instead  of  ^K  ^;  vid. 
the  law  concerning  the  Mukkeph  in  the  three  poetical'  books, 
Baer's  Torat/i  Emeth,  p.  40. 

A  pair  of  proverbs  regarding  possession  and  gain. 

"\  er.  15.  Regarding  possession: 

The  rich  man's  wealth  is  his  strong  city  ; 
The  destruction  of  the  poor  is  their  poverty. 

The  first  line— xviii.  11.  One  may  render  the  idea  according  to  that 
which  is  internal,  and  according  to  that  which  is  external;  and  the 
proverb  remains  in  both  cases  true.  As  ty  may  mean,  of  itself  alone, 


CHAP.  X.  16.  219 

power,  as  means  of  protection,  or  a  bulwark  (Ps.  viii.  3),  or  the  con 
sciousness  of  power,  high  feeling,  pride  (Judg.  v.  21)  ;  so  W  rnp 
may  be  rendered  as  an  object  of  self-confidence,  and  nnntt,  on  the 
contrary,  as  an  object  of  terror  (Jer.  xlviii.  39)  :  the  rich  man,  to 
whom  his  estate  (vid.  on  Jin,  p.  Go)  affords  a  sure  reserve  and  an 
abundant  source  of  help,  can  appear  confident  and  go  forth  ener 
getically ;  on  the  contrary,  the  poor  man  is  timid  and  bashful,  and 
is  easily  dejected  and  discouraged.  Thus  e.g.  Oetingerand  Hitzig. 
But  the  objective  interpretation  is  allowable,  and  lies  also  much 
nearer :  the  rich  man  stands  thus  independent,  changes  and  ad 
versities  cannot  so  easily  overthrow  him,  he  is  also  raised  above 
many  hazards  and  temptations;  on  the  contrary,  the  poor  man 
is  overthrown  by  little  misfortunes,  and  his  despairing  endeavours 
to  save  himself,  when  they  fail,  ruin  him  completely,  and  per 
haps  make  him  at  the  same  time  a  moral  outlaw.  It  is  quite  an 
experienced  fact  which  this  proverb  expresses,  but  one  from  which 
the  double  doctrine  is  easily  derived  :  (1)  That  it  is  not  only 
advised,  but  also  commanded,  that  man  make  the  firm  establishing 
of  his  external  life-position  the  aim  of  his  endeavour ;  (2)  That 
one  ought  to  treat  with  forbearance  the  humble  man;  and  if  he 
always  sinks  deeper  and  deeper,  one  ought  not  to  judge  him  with 
unmerciful  harshness  and  in  proud  self-exaltation. 
Ver.  16.  Regarding  gain: 

o  o  o 

The  gain  of  the  righteous  tendeth  to  life  ; 
The  income  of  the  godless  to  sin. 

Intentionally,  that  which  the  righteous  receives  is  called  i"w3  (as 
Lev.  xix.  13),  as  a  reward  of  his  labour;  that  which  the  godless 
receives  is  called  n^DF),  as  income  which  does  not  need  to  be  the 
reward  of  labour,  and  especially  of  his  own  immediate  labour. 
And  with  D^np,  nKBnp  runs  parallel,  from  the  supposition  that  sin 
carries  the  germ  of  death  in  itself.  The  reward  of  his  labour  serves 
to  the  righteous  to  establish  his  life,  i.e.  to  make  sure  his  life- 

O  ' 

position,  and  to  elevate  his  life-happiness.  On  the  contrary,  the 
income  of  the  godless  serves  only  to  ruin  his  life;  for,  made  thereby 
full  and  confident,  he  adds  sin  to  sin,  whose  wages  is  death. 
Hitzig  translates  :  for  expiation,  i.e.  to  lose  it  again  as  atonement 
for  past  sins  ;  but  if  D^n  and  DNDn  are  contrasted  with  each  other, 
then  nNDn  is  death-bringing  sin  (viii.  35  f.). 

The  group  of  proverbs  now  following  bring  again  to  view  the 


2-0  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEHCS. 

good  and  bad  effects  of  human  speech.  The  seventeenth  verse 
introduces  the  transition  : 

Ver.  17  There  is  a  way  to  life  -when  one  gives  heed  to  correction  ; 
And  whoever  disregards  instruction  runs  into  error. 

Instead  of  D*n  mfo  (v.  6),  there  is  here  a«nb  m«  ;  and  then  this 
proverb  falls  into  rank  with  ver.  16,  which  contains  the  same  word 
D'TI?.  The  accentuation  denotes  rni<  as  subst. ;  for  rnx  [way, 
road]  =  rnfc  [a  wayfarer,  part,  of  rnN]  would,  as  l'pb?,  Lev.  xi.  7, 
J?9'J,  Ps.  xciv.  9,  have  the  tone  on  the  ultima.  It  is  necessary 
neither  to  change  the  tone,  nor,  with  Ewald,  to  interpret  rns  as 
abstr.  pro  concrete,  like  tfyft,  for  the  expression  "  wanderer  to  life  " 
has  no  support  in  the  Mishle.  Michaelis  has  given  the  right  inter 
pretation  :  via  ad  vitam  est  si  quis  custodiat  disciplinam.  The 
syntactical  contents,  however,  are  different,  as  e.g.  1  Sam.  ii.  13, 
where  the  participle  has  the  force  of  a  hypothetical  clause  ;  for 
the  expression  :  "  a  way  to  life  is  he  who  observes  correction,"  is 
equivalent  to  :  he  is  on  the  way  to  life  who  .  .  ;  a  variety  of  the 
manner  of  expression  :  "  the  porch  was  twenty  cubits,"  2  Chron. 
iii.  4,  particularly  adapted  to  the  figurative  language  of  proverbial 
poetry,  as  if  the  poet  said :  See  there  one  observant  of  correction — • 
that  (viz.  the  iblp  [-IBB>}  to  watch]  representing  itself  in  this  iOB>) 
is  the  way  to  life.  "IDIO  and  nroin  are  related  to  each  other  as 
TraiBeia  and  eXe^os ;  3Tjf  [Sty,  to  leave,  forsake]  is  equivalent  to 
•)Db>  "Wa.  nyno  would  be  unsuitable  as  a  contrast  in  the  causative 
sense  :  who  guides  wrong,  according  to  which  Bertheau  under 
stands  17a,  that  only  he  who  observes  correction  can  guide  others 
to  life.  We  expect  to  hear  what  injuries  he  who  thinks  to  raise 
himself  above  all  reproach  brings  on  himself.  Hitzig,  in  his  Com 
mentary  (1858),  for  this  reason  places  the  Hithpa.  nynp  (rather 
write  njjfip)  in  the  place  of  the  Hiph. ;  but  in  the  Comm.  on  Jere 
miah  (1866),  xlii.  20,  he  rightly  remarks:  "To  err,  not  as  an 
involuntary  condition,  but  as  an  arbitrary  proceeding,  is  suitably 
expressed  by  the  Hiph"  In  like  manner  ^Din,  JW  (to  touch), 
P'rnn  (to  go  to  a  distance),  denote  the  active  conduct  of  a  being 
endowed  with  reason  ;  Ewald,  §  122,  c.  Jewish  interpreters  gloss 
nyno  by  supplying  it'EU  ;  but  it  signifies  only  as  inwardly  transitive, 
to  accomplish  the  action  of  the  Hiyn. 

Ver.  18  He  that  hideth  hatred  is  a  mouth  of  falsehood ; 
And  he  that  spreadeth  slander  is  a  fool. 

The  LXX.,  Ka\VTTTOvo-iv  fyjdpav  %«A.a  Sitcaia,  which  Ewald  pro- 


CHAP.  X.  19.  £21 

fers,  and  which  has  given  occasion  to  Hitzig  to  make  a  remarkable 
conjecture  ("  He  who  conceals  hatred,  close  lips,"  which  no  one 
understands  without  Hitzig's  comment,  to  this  his  conjecture). 
But  (1)  to  hide  hatred  (cf.  ver.  11,  xxvi.  24)  is  something  altogether 
different  from  to  cover  sin  (ver.  12,  xvii.  9),  or  generally  to  keep 
anything  secret  with  discretion  (x.  13)  ;  and  (2)  that  Sircaia  is  a 
corrupt  reading  for  aSitca  (as  Grabe  supposes,  and  Symmachus 
translates)  or  &6\ta  (as  Lagarde  supposes,  and  indeed  is  found  in 
Codd.).  Michaelis  well  remarks :  odium  tectum  est  dolosi,  mani 
festo,  sycophantia  stultorum.  Whoever  conceals  hateful  feelings 
behind  his  words  is  ~ip^"TiS:^  a  mouth  of  falsehood  (cf.  the  mouth 
of  the  fool,  ver.  14) ;  one  does  not  need  to  supply  B»K,  but  mucli 
rather  has  hence  to  conclude  that  a  false  man  is  simply  so  named, 
as  is  proved  by  Ps.  cxx.  3.  There  is  a  second  moral  judgment, 
186  :  he  who  spreadeth  slander  (K>'iB%  according  to  the  Masoretic 
writing:  he  who  divulges  it,  the  correlate  to  snn,  to  bring  to,  Gen. 
xxxvii.  2)  is  a  Thor  [fool,  stupid,  dull],  ^03  (not  a  Narr  [fool, 
godless  person],  SK)  ;  for  such  slandering  can  generally  bring  no 
advantage;  it  injures  the  reputation  of  him  to  whom  the  nsn,  i.e. 
the  secret  report,  the  slander,  refers ;  it  sows  discord,  has  incal 
culable  consequences,  and  finally  brings  guilt  on  the  tale-bearer 
himself. 

Vrer.  19  Tn  a  multitude  of  words  transgression  is  not  wanting  ; 
But  he  who  restrains  his  lips  shows  wisdom. 

"We  do  not,  with  Bertheau,  understand  19a:  by  many  words  a 
transgression  does  not  cease  to  be  what  it  is ;  the  contrast  196  re 
quires  a  more  general  condemnation  of  the  multitude  of  words,  and 
?^n  not  only  means  to  cease  from  doing  (to  leave  off),  and  to  cease 
from  being  (to  take  away),  but  also  not  at  all  to  do  (to  intermit, 
Ezek.  iii.  11 ;  Zech.  xi.  12),  and  not  at  all  to  be  (to  fail,  to  be 
absent),  thus  :  ubi  verborum  est  abnndantia  non  deest  peccatum 
(Fl.).  Michaelis  suitably  compares  7ro\v\oyla  vroXXa  av^aX/iara 
€%ei  by  Stobiius,  and  SDH  N'QD  Dnm  raion  ^3  in  the  tractate  A  both 
i.  17,  wherewith  Kashi  explains  the  proverb.  J^'3  is  not  here,  as 
elsewhere,  e.g.  Prf.  xix.  14,  with  special  reference  to  the  sin  of 
falling  away  from  favour,  apostasy,  but,  like  the  post-biblical  '"nay, 

generally  with  reference  to  every  kind  of  violation  (y^;3  =  <j^J 
dirumpere)  of  moral  restraint;  here,  as  Jansen  remarks,  peccatum 
sice  mendacii)  sive  detractions*  sive  allerius  indiscrete  Icesionia,  sive 


222  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

vanitatis,  sive  denique  verbi  otiosi.  In  19Z>  it  is  more  appropriate  to 
regard  ^2HW?  as  the  present  of  the  internal  transitive  (inteWuj  enter 
agit)  than  to  interpret  it  in  the  attributive  sense  (intelligens), 

Ver.  20  Choice  silver  is  the  tongue  of  the  righteous  ; 
But  the  heart  of  the  godless  is  little  worth. 

Choice  silver  is,  as  viii.  19,  cf.  10,  pure,  freed  from  all  base  mix 
tures.  Like  it,  pure  and  noble,  is  whatever  the  righteous  speaks ; 
the  heart,  i.e.  the  manner  of  thought  and  feeling,  of  the  godless  is, 
on  the  contrary,  like  little  instar  nihilij  i.e.  of  little  or  no  worth, 
Arab,  yasway  kdlyla  (Fl.).  LXX. :  the  heart  of  the  godless 
e/tXenJret,  i.e.  E>yft\  at  first  arrogant  and  full  of  lofty  plans,  it 
becomes  always  the  more  dejected,  discouraged,  empty.  But  20a 
leads  us  to  expect  some  designation  of  its  worth.  The  Targ. 
(according  to  which  the  Peshito  is  to  be  corrected;  vid.  Levy's 
Wdrterbuchj  ii.  26) :  the  heart  of  the  godless  is  Nnn?D  (from  ^D-1), 
refuse,  dross.  The  other  Greek  versions  accord  with  the  text 
before  us. 

Ver.  21  The  lips  of  the  righteous  edify  mnny ; 

But  fools  die  through  want  of  understanding. 

The  LXX.  translate  21a:  the  lips  of  the  righteous  eTriararat 
v-^niXd,  which  would  at  least  require  JTQl  1JTP.  njn  is,  like  the  post- 
bibl.  D3")3  (vid.  the  Hebr.  Romerbrief,  p.  97),  another  figure  for  the 
N.  T.  OLKoBofMeiv  :  to  afford  spiritual  nourishment  and  strengthen 
ing,  to  which  Fleischer  compares  the  ecclesiastical  expressions  : 
pastor,  ovile  ecclesice,  les  ouailles ;  njn  means  leader,  Jer.  x.  21,  as 
well  as  teacher,  Eccles.  xii.  11,  for  it  contains  partly  the  prevailing 
idea  of  leading,  partly  of  feeding.  W  stands  for  nrjnn  as  ver. 

O '      1  •/  O  I  *  TV!** 

32,  v.  2.  In  21Z>,  Bertheau  incorrectly  explains,  as  Euchel  and 
Michaelis  :  stulti  complures  per  demenlem  unum  moriuntur  ;  the  fool 
has  truly  enough  in  his  own  folly,  and  needs  not  to  be  first  drawn 
by  others  into  destruction,  "ipn  is  not  here  the  connective  form  of 
ipn  (Jewish  interpreters  :  for  that  reason,  that  he  is  such  an  one), 
nor  of  "ipn  (Hit/ig,  Zockler),  which  denotes,  as  a  concluded  idea, 
penuria,  but  like  2rn,  xxi.  4,  3?y',  vi.  10,  and  ^'}  xvi.  19,  ijifiit. : 
they  die  by  want  of  understanding  (cf.  v.  23) ;  this  amentia  is  the 
cause  of  their  death,  for  it  leads  fools  to  meet  destruction  without 
their  observing  it  (Hos.  iv.  6). 

Three  proverbs  which  say  that  good  comes  from  above,  and  is  as 
a  second  nature  to  the  man  of  understanding : 


CHAP.  X.  22,  23.  223 

Vcr.  22  Jahve's  blessing — it  malvCth  rich  ; 
And  labour  addeth  nothing  thereto 

Like  24«,  son  limits  the  predicate  to  this  and  no  other  subject:  "nil 
depends  on  God's  blessing."  Here  is  the  first  half  of  the  ora  et 
labora.  The  proverb  is  a  compendium  of  Ps.  cxxvii.  1,  2.  22b  is 
to  be  understood,  according  to  ver.  2  of  this  Solomonic  psalm,  not 
that  God  adds  to  His  blessing  no  sorrow,  much  rather  with  the 
possession  grants  at  the  same  time  a  joyful,  peaceful  mind  (LXX., 
Targ.,  Syriac,  Jerome,  A  ben-Ezra,  Michael  is,  and  others),  which 
would  require  the  word  nvjf ;  but  that  trouble,  labour,  i.e.  strenuous 
self-endeavours,  add  not  (anything)  to  it,  i.e.  that  it  does  not 
associate  itself  with  the  blessing  (which,  as  the  Jewish  interpreters 
rightly  remark,  is,  according  to  its  nature,  nSDID,  as  the  curse  is 
pion)  as  the  causa  efficiens,  or  if  we  supply  quiJqnam,  as  the  com 
plement  to  nray  [along  with  it]  :  nothing  is  added  thereto,  which 
goes  along  with  that  which  the  blessing  of  God  grants,  and  com 
pletes  it.  Thus  correctly  Kashi,  Luther,  Ziegler,  Ewald,  Hitzig, 

•  '     t 

Zockler.  The  now  current  accentuation,  nay  3yy  s|pv  N7i,  is  incor 
rect.  Older  editions,  as  Venice  1525,  1615,  Basel  1618,  have 
n»y  3VJ?  P|DV-K$>1}  the  transformation  of  3XJJ  S)DV-fc6\  Besides,  3*y 
has  double  Segol  (vid.  Kimchi's  Lex.\  and  f]DV  is  written,  according 
to  the  Masora,  in  the  first  syllable  plene,  in  the  last  defective. 

Ver.  23  Like  sport  to  a  fool  is  the  commission  of  a  crime ; 
And  wisdom  to  a  man  of  understanding. 

Otherwise  Lowenstein  :  to  a  fool  the  carrying  out  of  a  plan  is  as 
sport ;  to  the  man  of  understanding,  on  the  contrary,  as  wisdom.  J1ET, 
from  COT,  to  press  together,  mentally  to  think,  as  Job  xvii.  11,  and 
according  to  Gesenius,  also  Prov.  xxi.  27,  xxiv.  9.  But  nrar  has 
the  prevailing  signification  of  an  outrage  against  morality,  a  sin  of 
unchastity  ;  and  especially  the  phrase  net  nb>y  is  in  Judg.  xx.  6  and 
in  Ezekiel  not  otherwise  used,  so  that  all  the  old  interpreters 
render  it  here  by  pair  are  scelus;  only  theTargum  has  the  equivocal 
KnT3jp3y;  the  Syriac,  however,  ]A«  i  n  ^^.  Sinful  conduct 
appears  to  the  fool,  who  places  himself  above  the  solemnity  of  the 
moral  law,  as  sport ;  and  wisdom,  on  the  contrary,  (appears  as  sport) 
to  a  man  of  understanding.  We  would  not  venture  on  this  accep 
tation  of  Pinb>3  if  pnb>  were  not  attributed,  viii.  30  f.,  to  wisdom 
itself.  This  alternate  relationship  recommends  itself  by  the  inde- 
termination  of  nzpsm,  which  is  not  favourable  to  the  interpretation  : 


2-4  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERCS. 

sed  sapientiam  colit  vir  intelligent,  or  as  Jerome  has  it :  sapientia 
autem  est  viro  prudentia.     Tlie  subjects  of  the  antithesis  chiastically 
combine  within  the  verse :  neon,  in  contrast  to  wicked  conduct,  is 
acting  in  accordance  with  moral  principles.     This  to  the  man  of 
understanding  is  as  easy  as  sporting,  just  as  to  the  fool  is  shame 
less  sinning;  for  he  follows  in  this  an  inner  impulse,  it  brings  to 
him  joy,  it  is  the  element  in  which  he  feels  himself  satisfied. 
Ver.  24  That  of  which  the  godless  is  afraid  cometh  upon  him, 
And  what  the  righteous  desires  is  granted  to  him. 

The  formation  of  the  clause  24a  is  like  the  similar  proverb,  xi.  276  ; 
the  subject-idea  has  there  its  expression  in  the  genitival  annexum, 
of  which  Gen.  ix.  6b  furnishes  the  first  example;  in  this  passage 
before  us  it  stands  at  the  beginning,  and  is,  as  in  ver.  22,  emphati 
cally  repeated  with  N'n.  rniao,  properly  the  turning  oneself  away, 
hence  shrinking  back  in  terror;  here,  as  Isa.  Ixvi.  4,  of  the  object  of 
fear,  parallel  to  rnsn,  wishing,  of  the  object  of  the  wish.  In  246 
Ewald  renders  \F\\  as  adj.  from  pV  (whence  jrPK),  after  the  form 
njp.3,  and  translates :  yet  to  the  righteous  desire  is  always  green. 
But  whether  \W  is  probably  formed  from  jrv,  and  not  from  jru,  is  a 
question  in  xii.  12,  but  not  here,  where  wishing  and  giving  (fulfil 
ling)  are  naturally  correlata.  Hitzig  corrects  JFP,  and  certainly  the 
supplying  of  'n  is  as  little  appropriate  here  as  at  xiii.  21.  Also  a 
"  one  gives "  is  scarcely  intended  (according  to  which  the  Targ., 
Syr.,  and  Jerome  translate  passively),  in  which  case  the  Jewish 
interpreters  are  wont  to  explain  frp,  scil.  frmn  ;  for  if  the  poet 
thought  of  }1V  with  a  personal  subject,  why  did  he  not  rescue  it 
from  the  dimness  of  such  vague  generality?  Thus,  then,  JIV  is,  with 
Bottcher,  to  be  interpreted  as  impersonal,  like  xiii.  10,  Job  xxxvii. 
10,  and  perhaps  also  Gen.  xxxviii.  28  (Ewald,  §  295a)  :  what  the 
righteous  wish,  that  there  is,  i.e.  it  becomes  actual,  is  fulfilled.  In 
this  we  have  not  directly  and  exclusively  to  think  of  the  destiny 
at  which  the  godless  are  afraid  (Heb.  x.  27),  and  toward  which  the 
desire  of  the  righteous  goes  forth  ;  but  the  clause  has  also  truth 
which  is  realized  in  this  world  :  just  that  which  they  greatly  fear, 
e.g.  sickness,  bankruptcy,  the  loss  of  reputation,  comes  upon  the 
godless;  on  the  contrary,  that  which  the  righteous  wish  realizes 
itself,  because  their  wish,  in  its  intention,  and  kind,  and  content, 
stands  in  harmony  with  the  order  of  the  moral  world. 

There  now  follows  a  series  of  proverbs,  broken  by  only  one  dis 
similar  proverb,  on  the  immoveable  continuance  of  the  righteous : 


CHAP.  X.  25,  26.  225 

Ver.  25  When  the  storm  sweeps  past,  it  is  no  more  with  the  wicked  ; 
But  the  righteous  is  a  building  firm  for  ever. 

How  ver.  25  is  connected  with  ver.  24  is  shown  in  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  v.  15  (the  hope  of  the  wicked  like  chaff  which  the  wind 
pursues).  The  Aram.,  Jerome,  and  Grcec.  Venet.  interpret  a  of 
comparison,  so  that  the  destruction  of  the  godless  is  compared  in 
suddenness  and  rapidity  to  the  rushing  past  of  a  storm  ;  but  then  Pin 
ought  to  have  been  used  instead  of  naw ;  and  instead  of  JJBn  p«1 
with  the  1  apodosis,  a  disturbing  element  in  such  a  comparison, 
would  have  been  used  yvh  ej*>rp,  Or  at  least  £K  yah.  The  thought 
is  no  other  than  that  of  Job  xxi.  18:  the  storm,"  which  is  called  HMD, 
from  f)iD,  to  rush  forth,  is  meant,  as  sweeping  forth,  and  3  the 
temporal,  as  Ex.  xi.  4  (LXX.  irapairopevofievTi^  /caTaiyiSos),  with 
1  apod,  following,  like  e.g.,  after  a  similar  member  of  a  temporal 
sentence,  Isa.  x.  25.  naiD  is  a  figure  of  God-decreed  calamities, 
as  war  and  pestilence,  under  which  the  godless  sink,  while  the 
righteous  endure  them;  cf.  with  25a,  i.  27,  Isa.  xxviii.  18;  and 
with  25Z>,  iii.  25,  Hab.  ii.  4,  Ps.  xci.  "  An  everlasting  foundation," 
since  D^ij?  is  understood  as  looking  forwards,  not  as  at  Isa.  Iviii.  12, 
backwards,  is  a  foundation  capable  of  being  shaken  by  nothing, 
and  synecdoch.  generally  a  building.  The  proverb  reminds  us  of 
the  close  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  finds  the  final  confirma 
tion  of  its  truth  in  this,  that  the  death  of  the  godless  is  a  penal 
thrusting  of  them  away,  but  the  death  of  the  righteous  a  lifting 
them  up  to  their  home.  The  righteous  also  often  enough  perish  in 
times  of  war  and  of  pestilence;  but  the  proverb,  as  it  is  interpreted, 
verifies  itself,  even  although  riot  so  as  the  poet,  viewing  it  from  his 
narrow  O.  T.  standpoint,  understood  it ;  for  the  righteous,  let  him 
die  when  and  how  he  may,  is  preserved,  while  the  godless  perishes. 

Ver.  26.  This  proverb  stands  out  of  connection  with  the  series  : 
As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to  the  eyes, 
So  is  the  sluggard  to  them  who  give  him  a  commission. 
A  parabolic  proverb  (vid.  p.  9),  priamel-\\ke  in  its  formation 
(p.  13).  Here  and  there  &Z$  is  found  with  Mugrask,  but  in 
correct  texts  it  has  Eebia-magnum ;  the  verse  is  divided  into  two  by 
Athnach,  whose  subordinate  distributive  is  (Accentssystem,  xi.  §  1) 
Relia-magnum.  Smoke  makes  itself  disagreeably  perceptible  to 
the  sense  of  smell,  and  particularly  to  the  eyes,  which  it  causes  to 
smart  so  that  they  overflow  with  tears  ;  wherefore  Virgil  speaks  of 
it  as  amarusj  and  Horace  lacrimosus.  pon  (from  pon,  to  be  sour, 

VOL.  I.  p 


220  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

harsh)  signifies  properly  that  which  is  sour,  as  acetum,  o£o?;  here, 
after  the  LXX.  #/t<^a£,  the  unripe  grapes,  but  which  are  called  ">D3 
OP?)  (vid.  under  Job  xv.  33),  by  which  the  Syr.,  here  following 
the  LXX.,  translates,  and  which  also  in  the  Talmud,  Dernal  i.  1, 
is  named  f*Oh,  after  a  doubtful  meaning  (vid,  Aruch,  and  on  the 
other  side  Rashi),  thus:  vinegar,  which  the  word  commonly  means, 
and  which  also  accords  with  the  object  of  the  comparison,  especially 
if  one  thinks  of  the  sharp  vinegar-wine  of  the  south,  which  has  an 
effect  on  the  teeth  denoted  by  the  Hebr.  verb  nm,  as  the  effect  of 
smoke  is  by  nna  (FL).  The  plur.  Vr6b&  Js  that  of  the  category,  like 
xxii.  21,  xxv.  13  ;  the  parallel  VHK  of  the  latter  passage  does  not 
at  least  make  it  necessary  to  regard  it,  like  this,  as  a  plur.  excellentice 
(Bertheau,  Hitzig,  Ewald).  They  who  send  a  sluggard,  i.e.  who 
make  him  their  agent,  do  it  to  their  own  sorrow  ;  his  slothf  ulness 
is  for  them,  and  for  that  which  they  have  in  view,  of  dull,  i.e.  slow 
and  restrained,  of  biting,  i.e.  sensibly  injurious  operation. 

From  this  point  the  proverbs  fall  into  the  series  connecting 
themselves  with  ver.  25: 

Ver.  27  The  fear  of  Jahve  multiplies  the  days  of  life; 

But  the  years  of  the  godless  are  shortened. 

This  parable,  like  ver.  25,  also  corresponds  with  the  O.  T.  stand 
point,  having  in  view  the  present  life.  The  present-life  history 
confirms  it,  for  vice  destroys  body  and  soul ;  arid  the  fear  of  God, 
which  makes  men  contented  and  satisfied  in  God,  is  truly  the  right 
principle  of  longevity.  But  otherwise  also  the  pious  often  enough 
die  early,  for  God  carries  them  away  njnn  ^so  [from  the  face 
of  the  evil],  Isa.  Ivii.  1  f. ;  or  if  they  are  martyrs  for  the  truth 
(Ps.  xliv.  23,  cf.  lx.  6),  the  verification  of  the  above  proverb  in 
such  cases  moves  forward  (Wisd.  iv.  7  ff.)  into  eternity,  in  which 
the  life  of  the  pious  continues  for  ever,  while  that  of  the  godless 
loses  itself  with  his  death  in  the  state  of  everlasting  death,  ix.  11, 

*">  / 

cf.  iii.  2,  resembles  27a.  Instead  of  HjnVpri,  nj'ivpn  was  to  be  ex 
pected;  but  the  flexion  does  not  distinguish  the  transitive  "i?!?  (Arab. 
kasara)  and  intransitive  "iVj?  (Arab,  kasura)  as  it  on  "lit. 

Ver.  28  The  expectation  of  the  righteous  is  gladness, 

And  the  hope  of  the  godless  comes  to  nothing. 

rprrin  as  well  as  nipn  proceed  on  the  fundamental  idea  of  a  strained 
earnest  looking  back  upon  something,  the  same  fundamental  idea 
which  in  another  view  gives  the  meaning  of  strength  (^n,  Arab. 
liayl;  hiwwat,  kawiyy,  cf.  7]3,  Arab,  jdl,  plectere,  and  i>na,  strong  and 


CHAP.  X.  29.  227 

strength").  The  substantival  clause  28a  denotes  nothing  more  than  : 
it  is  gladness  (cf.  iii.  17,  all  their  steps  are  gladness),  but  which  is 
equivalent  to,  it  is  that  in  its  issue,  in  gaudium  desinit.  Hitzig's 
remark  that  rpnin  is  the  chief  idea  for  hope  and  fear,  is  not  con 
firmed  by  the  usage  of  the  language ;  it  always  signifies  joyful, 
not  anxious,  expectation  ;  cf.  the  interchange  of  the  same  two 
synonyms  xiii.  7,  and  nwn,  ps.  cxii.  10,  instead  of  rnpn  (here 
and  Job  viii.  13).  While  the  expectation  of  the  one  terminates 
in  the  joy  of  the  fulfilment,  the  hope  of  the  other  ("nx,  R.  13,  to 
separate)  perishes,  i.e.  comes  to  nothing. 

Ver.  29  Jahve's  way  is  a  bulwark  to  the  righteous ; 

But  ruin  to  those  that  do  evil. 
Of  the  two  meanings  which  Tjf»  (Ttyo)  has  :  a  stronghold  from  TTV, 

O  T\T/  O  -T? 

and  asylum  (=  Arab.  m*adz)  from  TW,  the  contrast  here  demands  the 
former,  'n  !j~n  and  'n  JiN'V,  understood  objectively,  are  the  two 
O.  T.  names  of  true  religion.  It  means,  then,  the  way  which  the 
God  of  revelation  directs  men  to  walk  in  (Ps.  cxliii.  8),  the  way  of 
His  precepts,  Ps.  cxix.  27,  His  way  of  salvation,  Ps.  Ixvii.  3  (4) ; 
in  the  N.  T.  77  080?  rov  ©eoO,  Matt.  xxii.  16,  Acts  xviii.  25  f.;  cf.  r> 
0809  simply,  Acts  ix.  2,  xxiv.  14.  This  way  of  Jahve  is  a  fortress, 
bulwark,  defence  for  innocence,  or  more  precisely,  a  disposition 
wholly,  i.e.  unreservedly  and  without  concealment,  directed  toward 
(j04and  that  which  is  good.  All  the  old  interpreters,  also  Luther, 
but  not  the  Grcec.  Venet.,  translate  as  if  the  expression  were  Dr6 ; 
but  the  punctuation  has  preferred  the  abstr.  pro  concreto,  perhaps 
because  the  personal  on  nowhere  else  occurs  with  any  such  prefix  ; 
on  the  contrary,  Dh  is  frequently  connected  with  3,  3,  h.  T»1  Df6, 
integro  vice  (vitce),  are  by  no  means  to  be  connected  in  one  con 
ception  (Ziegler,  Umbr.,  Elster),  for  then  the  poet  ought  to  have 
written  TTTDnb  mrv  TJ70.  296  cannot  be  intrepreted  as  a  thought  by 
itself :  and  ruin  (vid.  regarding  nrino,  ruina,  and  subjectively  con- 
sternatio,  ver.  16)  comes  to  those  who  do  evil;  but  the  thought, 
much  more  comprehensive,  that  religion,  which  is  for  the  righteous 
a  strong  protection  and  safe  retreat,  will  be  an  overthrow  to  those 
who  delight  only  in  wickedness  (vid.  on  J)K,  p.  143),  is  confirmed  by 
the  similarly  formed  distich,  xxi.  15.  Also  almost  all  the  Jewish 
interpreters,  from  Rashi  to  Malbim,  find  here  expressed  the  opera 
tion  of  the  divine  revelation  set  over  against  the  conduct  of  men, — 
essentially  the  same  as  when  the  Tora  or  the  Cliukma  present  to 
men  for  their  choice  life  and  death;  or  the  gospel  of  salvation, 


228  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

according  to  2  Cor.  ii.  15,  is  to  one  the  savour  of  life  unto  life,  to 
another  the  savour  of  death  unto  death. 

Ver.  30  The  righteous  is  never  moved  ; 

But  the  godless  abide  not  in  the  land. 

Love  of  home  is  an  impulse  and  emotion  natural  to  man ;  but  to  no 
people  was  fatherland  so  greatly  delighted  in,  to  none  was  exile 
and  banishment  from  fatherland  so  dreadful  a  thought,  as  it  was 
to  the  people  of  Israel.  Expatriation  is  the  worst  of  all  evils 
with  which  the  prophets  threatened  individuals  and  the  people, 
Amos  vii.  17,  cf.  Isa.  xxii.  17  f. ;  and  the  history  of  Israel  in  their 
exile,  which  was  a  punishment  of  their  national  apostasy,  confirms 
this  proverb  and  explains  its  form;  cf.  ii.  21  f.,  Ps.  xxxvii.  29. 
73  is,  like  ix.  13,  the  emphatic  No  of  the  more  elevated  style  ; 
BiE>3,  the  opposite  of  Ji33,  xii.  3 ;  and  |?E>  signifies  to  dwell,  both 
inchoative :  to  come  to  dwell,  and  consecutive  :  to  continue  to 
dwell  (e.g.  Isa.  Ivii.  15,  of  God  who  inhabiteth  eternity).  In 
general,  the  proverb  means  that  the  righteous  fearlessly  maintains 
the  position  he  takes ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  all  they  who  have 
no  hold  on  God  lose  also  their  outward  position.  But  often 
enough  this  saying  is  fulfilled  in  this,  that  they,  in  order  that  they 
may  escape  disgrace,  became  wanderers  and  fugitives,  and  are 
compelled  to  conceal  themselves  among  strangers. 

Ver.  31.  For  the  third  time  the  favourite  theme  already  handled 
in  three  appendixes  is  taken  up  : 

The  mouth  of  the  righteous  bringeth  forth  wisdom, 
And  the  tongue  of  falsehood  shall  be  rooted  up. 

Regarding  the  biblical  comparison  of  thoughts  with  branches,  and 
of  words  with  flowers  and  fruits,  vid.  my  Psychol.  p.  181 ;  and 
regarding  the  root  23  (with  its  weaker  2K),  to  swell  up  and  to 
spring  up  (to  well,  grow,  etc.),  vid.  what  is  said  in  the  Comm.  on 
Genesis  on  N'QJ,  and  in  Isaiah  on  21X.  We  use  the  word  213  of 
that  which  sprouts  or  grows,  and  223  of  that  which  causes  that 
something  sprout ;  but  also  213  may,  after  the  manner  of  verbs 
of  being  full  (iii.  10),  of  flowing  (Gesen.  §  138,  1,  Anm.  2),  take 
the  object  accus.  of  that  from  which  anything  sprouts  (xxiv.  31), 
or  which  sprouting,  it  raises  up  and  brings  forth  (cf.  Isa.  Ivii.  19). 
The  mouth  of  the  righteous  sprouts,  brings  forth  (in  Ps.  xxxvii.  30, 
without  a  figure,  narv,  i.e.  utters)  wisdom,  which  in  all  relations 
knows  how  to  find  out  that  which  is  truly  good,  and  suitable  for 
the  end  intended,  and  happily  to  unriddle  difficult  complications. 


CHAP.  X.  32,  XI.  1.  229 

The  conception  of  wisdom,  in  itself  practical  (from  D3H,  to  be 
thick  =  solid,  firm),  here  gains  such  contents  by  the  contrast:  the 
tongue — whose  character  and  fruit  is  falsehood,  which  has  its 
delight  in  intentional  perversions  of  fact,  and  thus  increaseth 
complications  (vid.  regarding  ntoann,  ii.  12) — is  rooted  up,  whence 
it  follows  as  regards  the  mouth  of  the  righteous,  that  it  continues 
for  ever  with  that  its  wholesome  fruit. 

Ver.  32  The  lips  of  the  righteous  know  what  is  acceptable  ; 

But  the  mouth  of  the  godless  is  mere  falsehood. 

Hitzig,  instead  of  fiyr,  reads  fWIP  ;  the  aTrocrra^et  [they  distil  or  send 
forth]  of  the  LXX.  does  not  favour  this,  for  it  is  probably  only  a 
corruption  of  eV/crraTat,  which  is  found  in  several  MSS.  The  Grcec. 
Venet.,  which  translates  iroi/biavovo-i,  makes  use  of  a  MS.  which  it 
sometimes  misreads.  The  text  does  not  stand  in  need  of  any  emen 
dations,  but  rather  of  a  corrected  relation  between  the  clauses,  for 
the  relation  of  31a  with  326,  and  of  32a  with  316,  strongly  commends 
itself  (Hitzig)  ;  in  that  case  the  explanation  lies  near  :  the  lips  of 
the  righteous  find  what  is  acceptable,  viz.  to  God.  But  this  thought 
in  the  Mashal  language  is  otherwise  expressed  (xii.  2  and  paral.)  ; 
and  also  32a  and  326  fit  each  other  as  contrasts,  if  by  Ji¥"i?  as  xi. 
27,  xiv.  9,  is  to  be  understood  that  which  is  acceptable  in  its 
widest  generality,  equally  then  in  relation  to  God  and  man.  It  is 
a  question  whether  fijJT  means  that  they  have  knowledge  of  it  (as 
one  e.g.  says  "I2D  J/T,  to  understand  writing,  i.e.  the  reading  of  it), 
or  that  they  think  thereupon  (cf.  xxvii.  23).  Fundamentally  the 
two  ideas,  according  to  the  Hebrew  conception  of  the  words,  lie  in 
each  other ;  for  the  central  conception,  perceiving,  is  biblically 
equivalent  to  a  delighted  searching  into  or  going  towards  the 
object.  Thus  :  the  lips  of  the  righteous  think  of  that  which  is 
acceptable  (jl^n,  cogn.  to  jn,  gracefulness;  %«pt?.  Col.  iv.  6) ;  while 
the  mouth  of  the  godless  is  mere  falsehood,  which  God  (the 
wisdom  of  God)  hates,  and  from  which  discord  on  all  sides  arises. 
We  might  transfer  fijn1  to  326;  but  this  line,  interpreted  as  a 
clause  by  itself,  is  stronger  and  more  pointed  (Fl.) 

The  next  three  proverbs  treat  of  honesty,  discretion,  and  inno 
cence  or  dove-like  simplicity : 

xi.  1  Deceitful  balances  are  an  abomination  to  Jahve; 
But  a  full  weight  is  His  delight. 

The  very  same  proverb,  with  slightly  varied  expression,  is  found 
in  xx.  23  ;  and  other  such  like  proverbs,  in  condemnation  of  false 


230  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

and  in  approbation  of  true  balances,  are  found,  xx.  10,  xvi.  11 ; 
similar  predicates,  but  connected  with  other  subjects,  are  found  at 
xii.  22,  xv.  8.  "An  abomination  to  Jahve"  is  an  expression  we 
have  already  twice  met  with  in  the  introduction,  iii.  32,  vi.  16, 
cf.  viii.  7 ;  nnjnn  is,  like  njnn,  a  participial  noun,  in  which  the 
active  conception  of  abhorring  is  transferred  to  the  action  accom 
plished.  |iin  is  in  post- biblical  Hebr.  the  designation  of  the 
arbitrium  and  the  voluntas  ;  but  here  W¥"|  signifies  not  that  which 
God  wishes,  but  that  which  He  delights  in  having.  "  HE-ID  (here 

'  O  O  T    ;  •      \ 

for  the  first  time  in  Proverbs),  from  HEn,  the  Piel  of  which  means 
(xxvi.  19)  aliquem  dolo  et  fraude  petere.  pK,  like  the  Pers.  sanak, 
saiiakh,  Arab,  sajat,  u  stone  for  weight ;  and  finally,  without  any 
reference  to  its  root  signification,  like  Zech.  v.  8,  mswn  pK,  a 
leaden  weight,  as  when  we  say :  a  horseshoe  of  gold,  a  chess-man 
of  ivory." 

Ver.  2.  Now  follows  the  Solomonic  u  Pride  goeth  before  a  fall." 
There  coineth  arrogance,  so  also  cometh  shame  ; 
But  with  the  humble  is  wisdom. 

Interpreted  according  to  the  Hebr. :  if  the  former  has  come,  so 
immediately  also  comes  the  latter.  The  general  truth  as  to  the 
causal  connection  of  the  two  is  conceived  of  historically ;  the  fact, 
confirmed  by  many  events,  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a  single 
occurrence  as  a  warning  example  ;  the  preterites  are  like  the  Greek 
aoristi  gnomici  (vid.  p.  32) ;  and  the  perf .,  with  the  fut.  consec. 
following,  is  the  expression  of  the  immediate  and  almost  simul 
taneous  consequence  (vid.  at  Hab.  iii.  10)  :  has  haughtiness  (P"IT 
after  the  form  )w,  from  TT,  to  boil,  to  run  over)  appeared,  then 
immediately  also  disgrace  appeared,  in  which  the  arrogant  behaviour 
is  overwhelmed.  The  harmony  of  the  sound  of  the  Hebr.  pit  and 
|V|5  cannot  be  reproduced  in  German  [nor  in  English]  ;  Hitzig 
and  Ewald  try  to  do  so,  but  such  a  quid  pro  quo  as  "  Kommt  Un- 
glimpf  kommt  an  ihn  Schimpf"  [there  comes  arrogance,  there  comes 
to  him  disgrace]  is  not  a  translation,  but  a  distortion  of  the  text. 
If,  now,  the  antithesis  says  that  with  the  humble  is  wisdom,  wisdom 
is  meant  which  avoids  such  disgrace  as  arrogance  draws  along  with 
it ;  for  the  VWV  thinks  not  more  highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to 
think  (R.  )¥,  subsidere,  demitti,  Deutsch.  Morgenl.  Zeitsch.  xxv.  185). 
Ver.  3  The  integrity  of  the  upright  guideth  them  ; 

But  the  perverseness  of  the  ungodly  destroyeth  them. 
To  the  upright,  Dn^,  who  keep  the  line  of  rectitude  without  turn- 


CHAP.  XI.  3.  231 

ing  aside  therefrom  into  devious  paths  (Ps.  cxxv.  4  f.),  stand  op 
posed  (as  at  ii.  21  f.)  the  ungodly  (faithless),  &*}•&,  who  conceal 
(from  *U3,  to  cover,  whence  "US  =  fROS)  malicious  thoughts  and 
plans.  And  the  contrast  of  nan,  integrity  =  unreserved  loving  sub 
mission,  is  *!??,  a  word  peculiar  to  the  Solomonic  Mashal,  with  its 
verb  *l£D  (vid.  p.  32).  Hitzig  explains  it  by  the  Arab,  saraf,  to 
step  out,  to  tread  over ;  and  Ewald  by  la/at,  to  turn,  to  turn  about 
("  treacherous,  false  step"),  both  of  which  are  improbable.  Schul- 
tens  compares  salaf  in  the  meaning  to  smear  (R.  sp,  37,  aXei- 
$eiv;  cf.  regarding  such  secondary  formations  with  W  preceding, 
Hupfeld  on  Ps.  v.  7),  and  translates  here,  lubricitas.  But  this 
rendering  is  scarcely  admissible.  It  has  against  it  lexical  tradition 
(Menahem  :  nt3lD,  wavering;  Parchon  :  f)VT,  falsifying  ;  Kirnchi : 
JYiiy,  misrepresentation,  according  to  which  the  Grose.  Venet.  OTKO- 
Ator)7<?),  as  well  as  the  methodical  comparison  of  the  words.  The 
Syriac  has  not  this  verbal  stem,  but  the  Targum  has  *]?ip  in  the 
meaning  to  distort,  to  turn  the  wrong  way  (cr/co/Uouv,  crrpefihovv), 
Prov.  x.  10,  and  Esth.  vi.  10,  where,  in  the  second  Targum,  P1B13 
f^ljlDK  means  "  his  mouth  was  crooked."  With  justice,  therefore, 
Gesenius  in  his  Thesaurus  has  decided  in  favour  of  the  funda 
mental  idea  pervertere,  from  which  also  the  Peshito  and  Saadia 
proceed  ;  for  in  Ex.  xxiii.  8  they  translate  (Syr.)  mhapek  (it,  the 
gift  of  bribery,  perverts)  and  (Arab.)  tazyf  (=  51*W,  it  falsifies). 
Fl.  also,  who  at  xv.  4  remarks,  "  ^°,  from  *|?D,  to  stir  up,  to  turn 
over,  so  that  the  lowermost  becomes  the  uppermost,"  gives  the  pre 
ference  to  this  primary  idea,  in  view  of  the  Arab,  salaf,  inverters 
terrain  conserendi  causa.  It  is  moreover  confirmed  by  salaf,  prce- 
cedere,  which  is  pervertere  modified  to  proscertere.  But  how  does 
*)7D  mean  perversio  (Theod.  t/Troovee/Uoyio?),  in  the  sense  of  the 
overthrow  prepared  for  thy  neighbour  ?  The  parallels  demand 
the  sense  of  a  condition  peculiar  to  the  word  and  conduct  of 
the  godless  (treacherous),  xxii.  12  (cf.  Ex.  xxiii.  8),  xix.  3,  thus 
perversitas,  perversity ;  but  this  as  contrary  to  truth  and  recti 
tude  (opp.  i"1^),  "  perverseness,"  as  we  have  translated  it,  for  we 
understand  by  it  want  of  rectitude  (dishonesty)  and  untruthful- 
ness.  While  the  sincerity  of  the  upright  conducts  them,  and,  so 
to  say,  forms  their  salvus  conductus,  which  guards  them  against  the 
danger  of  erring  and  of  hostile  assault,  the  perverseness  of  the 
treacherous  destroys  them  ;  for  the  disfiguring  of  truth  avenges 
itself  against  them,  and  they  experience  the  reverse  of  the  proverb, 


232 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


"daaEkrlicJt  wd/trt  am  langsten"  (honesty  endures  the  longest). 
The  Chethib  DTBH  (CHBn)  is  an  error  of  transcription ;  the  Ken  has 
the  proper  correction,  D^>  =  DTIB*,  Jer.  v.  6.  Regarding  TO 
(whence  «l&),  which,  from  its  root-signification  of  making  close  and 
fast,  denotes  violence  and  destruction,  vid.  under  Gen.  xvii. 
Three  proverbs  in  praise  of  npis : 

Ver.  4  Possessions  are  of  no  profit  in  the  day  of  wrath  ; 

But  righteousness  delivereth  from  death. 

That  which  is  new  here,  is  only  that  possessions  and  goods  (vid.  re 
garding  Jin,  p.  63)  are  destitute  of  all  value  in  the  day  of  the  ^e\\ov<ra 
oprf ;  for  rnay  Di>,  the  day  of  wrath  breaking  through  the  limits  (of 
long-suffering),  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  prophets;  and 
such  prophetic  words  as  Isa.  x.  3,  Zeph.  i.  18,  and,  almost  in  the 
same  words,  Ezek.  vii.  19,  are  altogether  similar  to  this  proverb. 
The  LXX.,  which  translates  ev  -fifiepa  eTraycoyijs,  harmonizes  in 
expression  with  Sir.  v.  8,  cf.  ii.  2.  Tiieodotion  translates  TK,  xxvii. 
10,  by  eVa7o>7?7  (providence,  fate). 

Ver.  5  The  righteousness  of  the  blameless  smootheth  his  way, 

And  by  his  own  wickedness  doth  the  wicked  fall. 

With  the  D'pn  (cf.  i.  12),  formed  after  the  passive,  more  than  with 
En,  is  connected  the  idea  of  the  perfected,  but  more  in  the  negative 
sense  of  moral  spotlessness  than  of  moral  perfection.  The  recti 
tude  of  a  man  who  seeks  to  keep  his  conscience  and  his  character 
pure,  maketh  smooth  (Y^,  as  iii.  6,  not  of  the  straightness  of  the 
line,  but  of  the  surface,  evenness)  his  life's  path,  so  that  he  can 
pursue  his  aim  without  stumbling  and  hindrance,  and  swerving 
from  the  direct  way ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  godless  comes  to 
ruin  by  his  godlessness— that  by  which  he  seeks  to  forward  his 
interests,  and  to  make  a  way  for  himself,  becomes  his  destruction. 

Ver.  6  The  rectitude  of  the  upright  saveth  them, 

And  in  their  own  covetouyness  are  the  faithless  taken. 

The  integrity  of  those  who  go  straight  forward  and  straight  through, 
without  permitting  themselves  to  turn  aside  on  crooked  ways,  de 
livers  them  from  the  snares  which  are  laid  for  them,  the  dangers 
they  encounter;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  faithless,  though  they 
mask  their  intentions  ever  so  cunningly,  are  ensnared  in  their 
passionate  covetousness :  the  mask  is  removed,  they  are  convicted, 
and  are  caught  and  lost.  Regarding  mn,  abyss,  overthrow,  also 
stumbling  against  anything  =  covetousness,  vid.  at  x.  3,  and  under 
Ps.  v.  10.  The  form  of  the  expression  6b  follows  the  scheme,  «  iu 


CHAP.  XI.  7.  233 

the  image  of  God  created  He  man,"  Gen.  ix.  6.  The  subject  is 
to  be  taken  from  the  genitive,  as  is  marked  by  the  accentuation, 
for  it  gives  Mugraah  to  the  J">!![i?i,  as  if  it  were  the  principal  form, 

for  mn». 

T  ~  : 

Three  proverbs  regarding  destruction  and  salvation  : 

Ver.  7  When  a  godless  man  dies,  his  hope  cometh  to  nought, 

And  the  expectation  of  those  who  stand  in  fulness  of  strength 
is  destroyed. 

We  have  already  remarked  in  the  Introduction  that  D1X  is  n 
favourite  word  of  the  Chokma,  and  the  terminological  distinction 
of  different  classes  and  properties  of  men  (vid.  pp.  40,  42) ;  we 
read,  vi.  12,  H'ifa  D"?x,  and  here,  as  also  Job  xx.  29,  xxvii.  13, 
ytih  DTK,  cf.  xxi.  29,  J^'"1  £""&*,  but  generally  only  JJE>~>  is  used.  A 

T      T  T     T  7  7TT  *  t  ~  V  t/TT 

godless  man,  to  whom  earthly  possessions  and  pleasure  and  honour 
are  the  highest  good,  and  to  whom  no  means  are  too  base,  in  order 
that  he  may  appease  this  his  threefold  passion,  rocks  himself  in 
unbounded  and  measureless  hopes ;  but  with  his  death,  his  hope, 
i.e.  all  that  he  hoped  for,  comes  to  nought.  The  LXX.  translate 
reXevTijcravros  dvSpos  Bucalov  OVK  6\\vrai  eA/Trt?,  which  is  the  con 
verse  of  that  which  is  here  said,  la:  the  hope  of  the  righteous 
expects  its  fulfilment  beyond  the  grave.  The  LXX.  further 
translate,  TO  Be  fcav^r)fji.a  (I"1??™)  TWP  acrefiwv  oXXurat ;  but  the 
distich  in  the  Hebr.  text  is  not  an  antithetic  one,  and  whether 
D^itf  may  signify  the  wicked  (thus  also  the  Syr.,  Targ.,  Venet., 
and  Luther),  if  we  regard  it  as  a  brachyology  for  D^ix  *tWK,  or  as 
the  plur.  of  an  adj.  jiX,  after  the  form  3iD  (Elazar  b.  Jacob  in 
Kimchi),  or  wickedness  (Zockler,  with  Hitzig,  "  the  wicked  expec 
tation  "),  is  very  questionable.  Yet  more  improbable  is  Malbim's 
(with  Rashi's)  rendering  of  this  DM1X,  after  Gen.  xlix.  3,  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
51,  and  the  Targ.  on  Job  xviii.  12,  of  the  children  of  the  deceased  ; 
children  gignuntur  ex  robore  virili^  but  are  not  themselves  the  robur 
virile.  But  while  D^IN  is  nowhere  the  plur.  of  }}X  in  its  ethical  sig 
nification,  it  certainly  means  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  51,  as  the  plur.  of  fix, 
manly  strength,  and  in  Isa.  xl.  26,  29  the  fulness  of  strength 
generally,  and  once,  in  Hos.  ix.  4,  as  plur.  of  1)X  in  its  physical 
signification,  derived  from  its  root-meaning  anhelitus  (Gen.  xxxv. 
18,  cf.  Hab.  iii.  7),  deep  sorrow  (a  heightening  of  the  J1X,  Deut. 
xxvi.  14).  This  latter  signification  has  also  been  adopted  :  Jerome, 
expectatio  solicitorum  ;  Bertheau,  :'  the  expectation  of  the  sorrow 
ing;"  Ewald,  "  continuance  of  sorrow ;"  but  the  meaning  of  this 


23-i  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEP.DS. 

in  this  connection  is  so  obscure,  that  one  must  question  the  trans 
lators  what  its  import  is.  Therefore  we  adhere  to  the  other  ren 
dering,  "  fulness  of  strength,"  and  interpret  D"31K  as  the  opposite  of 
DVJ1K  j"K,  Isa.  xl.  29,  for  it  signifies,  per  metonymiam  abstracti  pro 
CO/JOT.,  those  who  are  full  of  strength ;  and  we  gain  the  meaning 
that  there  is  a  sudden  end  to  the  expectation  of  those  who  are  in 
full  strength,  and  build  their  prospects  thereon.  The  two  synony 
mous  lines  complete  themselves,  in  so  far  as  D^TiX  gains  by  yvh  D1X 
the  associated  idea  of  self-confidence,  and  the  second  strengthens 
the  thought  of  the  first  by  the  transition  of  the  expression  from 
the  fut.  to  the  preterite  (Fl.).  rtanni  has,  for  the  most  part  in 
recent  impressions,  the  Mugrash;  the  correct  accentuation,  accord 
ing  to  codices  and  old  impressions,  is  D^IN  r^nim  (yid.  Baer's  Torath 
Eineth,  p.  10,  §  4). 

Ver.  8  The  righteous  is  delivered  from  trouble, 
And  the  godless  comes  in  his  stead. 

The  succession  of  the  tenses  gives  the  same  meaning  as  when, 
periodizing,  we  say:  while  the  one  is  delivered,  the  other,  on  the  con 
trary,  falls  before  the  same  danger.  J^m  (vid.  under  Isa.  Iviii.  11) 
followed  by  the  historical  tense,  the  expression  of  the  principal  fact, 
is  the  perfect.  The  statement  here  made  clothes  itself  after  the 
manner  of  a  parable  in  the  form  of  history.  It  is  true  there  are  not 
wanting  experiences  of  an  opposite  kind  (from  that  here  stated), 
because  divine  justice  manifests  itself  in  this  world  only  as  a  pre 
lude,  but  not  perfectly  and  finally  ;  but  the  poet  considers  this,  that 
as  a  rule  destruction  falls  upon  the  godless,  which  the  righteous 
with  the  help  of  God  escapes ;  and  this  he  realizes  as  a  moral 
motive.  In  itself  vrinn  may  also  have  only  the  meaning  of  the  ex 
change  of  places,  but  the  LXX.  translate  avr  avrov,  and  thus 
in  the  sense  of  representation  the  proverb  appears  to  be  understood 
in  connection  with  xxi.  18  (cf.  the  prophetico-historical  appli 
cation,  Isa.  xliii.  4).  The  idea  of  atonement  has,  however,  no 
application  here,  for  the  essence  of  atonement  consists  in  the 
offering  up  of  an  innocent  one  in  the  room  of  the  guilty,  and  its 
force  lies  in  the  offering  up  of  self;  the  meaning  is  only,  that  if 
the  divinely-ordained  linking  together  of  cause  and  effect  in  the 
realms  of  nature  and  of  history  brings  with  it  evil,  this  brings  to 
the  godless  destruction,  while  it  opens  the  way  of  deliverance  for 
the  righteous,  so  that  the  godless  becomes  for  the  righteous  the 


CHAP.  XI.  9,  10.  235 

"isb,  or,  as  we  might  say  in  a  figure  of  similar  import,  the  lightning 
conductor. 

Ver.  9  The  wicked  with  his  mouth  prcpareth  destruction  for  his  neighbour; 
But  by  knowledge  the  righteous  are  delivered  from  it. 

The  LXX.  translate,  ev  <7To/xom  daeftwv  Trayi?  (ntjnf)  TroXmu?, 
al<jQif]<jL^  Be  SiKalois  e#oSo9  (in?^").  There  is  no  reason  for  changing 
(with  Hitzig  and  Ewald)  the  text,  which  in  the  form  in  which  it 
is  here  translated  was  before  all  other  translators  (Aq.,  Sym- 
machus,  Theodotion,  Syr.,  Targ.,  Jerome).  The  accentuation, 
which  separates  the  two  instrumental  statements  by  greater  dis 
junctives  from  that  which  follows,  is  correct.  The  "three"  Greek 
versions  [viz.  of  Aquila,  Theodotion,  and  Symmachus]  translate 
^H  by  vTTo/cpLTrjs,  which  it  means  in  the  modern  idiom  ;  but  in  the 
ancient  Hebr.  it  signifies,  him  who  is  resolved  upon  evil,  as  in  Arab. 
hanyf,  him  who  is  resolved  upon  that  which  is  right:  he  who 
turns  aside  to  evil  enters  on  a  path  far  removed  from  that  which 
is  right.  In  IVriB^  one  is  reminded  (without  any  etymological 
reason)  of  nntf  (pit),  and  so  in  «£[£  of  Drrtn'riGto  (Ps.  cvii.  20)  or 
a  similar  word  ;  but  njn?  contains  the  reference,  in  this  connection 
not  easy  to  be  mistaken,  to  the  hostile  purposes  of  the  wicked 
masked  by  the  words  of  the  mouth,  which  are  seen  through  by 
the  righteous  by  virtue  of  knowledge  which  makes  them  acquainted 
with  men.  This  penetrating  look  is  their  means  of  deliverance. 

Three  proverbs  follow  relating  to  the  nature  of  city  and  national 
life,  and  between  them  two  against  mockery  and  backbiting: 
Ver.  10  In  the  prosperity  of  the  righteous  the  city  rejoiceth  ; 
And  if  the  wicked  come  to  ruin,  there  is  jubilation. 

The  3  of  3-i£2  denotes  the  ground  but  not  the  object,  as  elsewhere, 
but  the  cause  of  the  rejoicing,  like  the  1,  10&,  and  in  the  similar 
proverb,  xxix.  2,  cf.  xxviii.  12.  If  it  goes  well  with  the  righteous, 
the  city  has  cause  for  joy,  because  it  is  for  the  advantage  of  the 
community ;  and  if  the  wicked  (godless)  come  to  an  end,  then  there 
is  jubilation  (substantival  clause  for  }~iO),  for  although  they  are 
honoured  in  their  lifetime,  yet  men  breathe  freer  when  the  city  is 
delivered  from  the  tyranny  and  oppression  which  they  exercised, 
and  from  the  evil  example  which  they  gave.  Such  proverbs,  in 
which  the  city  (civitas)  represents  the  state,  the  vroXt?  the  TroTureta, 
may,  as  Ewald  thinks,  be  of  earlier  date  than  the  days  of  an  Asa 
or  Jehoshaphat ;  for  u  from  the  days  of  Moses  and  Joshua  to  the 
days  of  David  and  Solomon,  Israel  was  a  great  nation,  divided 


23G  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

indeed  into  many  branches  and  sections,  but  bound  together  by 
covenant,  whose  life  did  not  at  all  revolve  around  one  great  city 
alone."  We  value  such  critical  judgments  according  to  great 
historical  points  of  view,  but  confess  not  to  understand  why  rvnp 
must  just  be  the  chief  city  and  may  not  be  any  city,  and  how  on 
the  whole  a  language  which  had  not  as  yet  framed  the  conception 
of  the  state  (post-bibl.  njHO)?  when  it  would  describe  the  com 
munity  individually  and  as  a  whole,  could  speak  otherwise  than 
of  city  and  people. 

Ver.  11  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  a  city  is  exalted, 

But  by  the  mouth  of  the  godless  it  is  broken  down. 

This  verse  is  related,  in  the  way  of  confirming  it,  to  ver.  10.  The 
LXX.,  which  omits  ver.  4,  he-re  omits  Wb  and  llo,  and  combines 
10a  and  116  into  one  proverb  (vid.  Lagarde).  The  meaning  is 
clear  :  "  by  the  benedictions  and  pious  prayers  of  the  upright  a 
city  rises  always  to  a  higher  eminence  and  prosperity  ;  while,  on 
the  contrary,  the  deceitful,  arrogant,  blasphemous  talk  of  the 
godless  brings  ruin  to  it "  (Fl.).  The  nearest  contrast  to  "  by  the 
blessing  of  the  upright "  would  be  "  by  the  cursing  of  the  wicked," 
but  not  in  the  sense  of  the  poet,  who  means  to  say  that  the  city 
raises  itself  by  the  blessing  of  the  upright,  and  on  the  contrary, 
when  godless  men  are  exalted,  then  by  their  words  (whose  blessin^ 
is  no  better  than  their  curse)  it  comes  to  ruin,  rnp  (=rrij5)  occurs 
only  four  times  in  Proverbs,  and  in  Job  xxix.  7. 

Ver.  12.    There  now  follow  two  proverbs  which   refer  to  the 
intercourse  of  private  life. 

He  who  mocketh  his  neighbour  is  devoid  of  understanding; 

But  the  intelligent  man  remaineth  silent. 

xiv.  21  is  a  proverb  similarly  beginning  with  Wjr6  T3 ;  xiii.  13  is 
another  beginning  with  "i3"£  T3.  From  this  one  sees  that  *?  ft3  (cf. 
P  nts,  Isa.  xxxvii.  22)  does  not  mean  a  speaking  contemptuously  in 
one's  presence  ;  as  also  from  vi.  30,  that  contemptuous  treatment, 
which  expresses  itself  not  in  mockery  but  in  insult,  is  thus  named ; 
so  that  we  do  not  possess  a  German  [nor  an  English]  expression 
which  completely  covers  it.  Whoever  in  a  derisive  or  insulting 
manner,  whether  it  be  publicly  or  privately,  degrades  his  neigh 
bour,  is  unwise  (sipon  as  pred.,  like  vi.  31) ;  an  intelligent  man, 
on  the  contrary,  keeps  silent,  keeps  his  judgment  to  himself, 
abstains  from  arrogant  criticisms,  for  he  knows  that  he  is  not 
infallible,  that  he  is  not  acquainted  with  the  heart,  and  he  pos- 


CHAP.  XI.  13,  14.  237 

sesses  too  much  self-knowledge  to  raise  himself  above  his  neighbour 
as  a  judge,  and  thinks  that  contemptuous  rejection,  unamiable, 
reckless  condemnation,  does  no  good,  but  on  the  contrary  does 
evil  on  all  sides. 

Ver.  13  He  wlio  goeth  about  tattling  revealeth  secrets  ; 

But  lie  who  is  of  a  faithful  spirit  concealed)  a  matter. 

The  tattler  is  called  ?^n  (intensive  form  of  ?5'"0j  from  his  going 

hither  and  thither.     ?*3"l  V^K,  Ezek.  xxii.  9,  are  men  mveii  to  tat- 

r         "  Tf  .  "  * 
tling,  backbiters;  ?^  t\Af\  (cf.  Lev.  xix.  16),  one  of  the  tattlers  or 

backbiters  goes,  a  divulger  of  the  matter,  a  tell-tale.  It  is  of  such 
an  one  that  the  proverb  speaks,  that  he  reveals  the  secret  ("liD, 
properly  the  being  close  together  for  the  purpose  of  private  inter 
course,  then  that  intercourse  itself,  vid.  at  Ps.  xxv.  14)  ;  one  has 
thus  to  be  on  his  guard  against  confiding  in  him.  On  the  contrary, 
a  niTIOWj  firmus  (Jidus)  spiriti/,  properly  one  who  is  established, 
or  reflexively  one  who  proves  himself  firm  and  true  (vid.  at  Gen. 
xv.  6),  conceals  a  matter,  keeps  it  back  from  the  knowledge  and 
power  of  another.  Zb'ckler  rightly  concludes,  in  opposition  to 
Hitzig,  from  the  parallelism  that  the  7*3"!  "pin  is  subject  ;  the 
arrangement  going  before  also  shows  that  this  is  the  "ground- 
word  "  (Ewald)  ;  in  xx.  19a  the  relation  is  reversed  :  the  revealer 
of  secrets  is  rightly  named  (cf.  Sir.  xxvii.  16,  o  aiTOK,a\v7rrwv 


Ver.  14  Where  there  is  no  direction  a  people  fall  ; 

But  where  there  is  no  want  of  counsellors  there  is  safety. 
Regarding  rri?2nri,  vid.  at  i.  5.  There  it  means  rules  of  self- 
government  ;  here,  rules  for  the  government  of  the  people,  or,  since 
the  pluralet.  denotes  a  multiplicity  in  unity,  circumspect  Kvftepvrjais. 
With  146,  xxiv.  66  (where  direction  in  war,  as  here  in  peace,  is 
spoken  of,  and  the  meaning  of  the  word  specializes  itself  accord 
ingly)  agrees  ;  cf.  also  xv.  226.  Hitzig  criticises  the  proverb, 
remarking,  "  we  who  have  the  longest  resorted  to  many  counsellors, 
as  a  consequence  of  the  superabundance  have  learned  to  say, 
'Too  many  cooks  spoil  the  broth,'  and,  'He  who  asks  long,  errs.'  " 
But  the  truth  of  the  clause  146  is  in  modern  times  more  fully 
illustrated  in  the  region  of  ecclesiastical  and  political  affairs;  and 
in  general  it  is  found  to  be  true  that  it  is  better  with  a  people 
when  they  are  governed  according  to  the  laws  and  conclusions 
which  have  resulted  from  the  careful  deliberation  of  many  com 
petent  and  authorized  men,  than  when  their  fate  is  entrusted 


THE  BOOK  OF  PKOVERDS. 

unconditionally  to  one  or  to  a  few.  The  proverb,  it  must  be 
acknowledged,  refers  not  to  counsellors  such  as  in  Isa.  iii.  3,  but 
as  in  Isa.  i.  26. 

Ver.  15.   There  follow  now  two  proverbs  regarding  kindness 
which  brings  injury  and  which  brings  honour  : 

It  fares  ill,  nothing  but  ill,  with  one  who  is  surety  for  another  ; 

But  he  who  hateth  suretyship  remaineth  in  quietness. 

More  closely  to  the  original  :  It  goes  ill  with  him  ;  for  the  proverb 
is  composed  as  if  the  writer  had  before  his  eyes  a  definite  person, 
whom  one  assails  when  he  for  whom  he  became  security  has  not 
kept  within  the  limits  of  the  performance  that  was  due.  Kegard- 
ing  3^y  with  the  accus.  of  the  person  :  to  represent  one  as  a  surety 
for  him,  and  IT  as  denoting  the  other  (the  stranger),  vid.  at  vi.  1. 
The  meaning  of  Vfr  jn  is  seen  from  xx.  16«.  jni*  is,  like  xiii.  20, 
the  fut.  N'tph.  of  yjn,  or  of  J7V1  =  wn,  after  the  forms  ^,  nty 
(Olsh.  §  265e).  The  added  in  has,  like  nny,  Hab.  iii.  9,  the  same 
function  as  the  inf.  absol.  (intensivus)  ;  but  as  the  infin.  form 
JH  could  only  be  inf.  con*tr.  after  the  form  ^,  Jer.  v.  26,  the 
infinitive  alsol  must  be  yi~i  :  thus  jn  is  an  accus.,  or  what  is  the 
same,  an  adverbial  adj.:  he  is  badly  treated  (maltreated)  in  a 
bad  way,  for  one  holds  him  to  his  words  and,  when  he  cannot  or 
will  not  accomplish  that  which  is  due  in  the  room  of  him  for 
whom  he  is  bail,  arrests  him.  He,  on  the  contrary,  who  hates 
D<yj?1n  has  good  rest.  The  persons  of  such  as  become  surety  by 
striking  the  hands  cannot  be  meant,  but  perhaps  people  thus 
becoming  surety  by  a  hand-stroke,—  such  sureties,  and  thus  such 
suretyship,  he  cannot  suffer;  D^pin  approaches  an  abstract  ["strik 
ing  hands,"  instead  of  ''those  who  strike  hands"]  in  connection 
with  this  NJb>,  expressing  only  a  strong  impossibility,  as  D^on, 
Zech.  ii.  7,  14,  means  uniting  together  in  the  sense  of  com 
bination. 

Ver.  16  A  gracious  woman  retaineth  honour, 
And  strong  men  retain  riches. 


The  LXX.  had  |H  nefo  (not  ^n  nefc)  in  view  :  yvvr)  evXdpic-To<; 
eyelpet,  dvSpl  Sogav,—  this  dvSpi  is  an  interpolation  inserted  for  the 
sake  of  the  added  line,  6povo<i  Be  drtfMias  yvvrj  fjuaovva  Sltcata. 
The  proverb  thus  expanded  is  on  both  sides  true  :  an  amiable 
woman  (gratiosa)  brings  honour  to  her  husband,  gives  him  relief, 
while  one  who  hates  the  right  (that  which  is  good,  gentle)  is  a  dis 
graceful  vessel  (opp.  nl33  ND3,  Isa.  xxii.  23),  which  disfigures  the 


CHAP.  XL  17.  239 

household,  makes  the  family  unloved,  and  lowers  it.  But  the 
commencing  line,  by  which  1Gb  is  raised  to  an  independent  distich, 
is  so  much  the  more  imperfect :  TT\OVTOV  oKvrjpol  ez/Seei?  <ytvovrai  • 
for  that  the  negligent  (idle)  bring  it  not  to  riches,  is,  as  they  are 
wont  in  Swabia  to  call  such  truisms,  a  Binsenwahrheit.  But  it  is 
important  that  the  translation  of  16&,  ol  Se  dvBpelot  epelSovrai 
TrXouro)  (the  Syr.  has  "  knowledge "  for  riches),  presupposes  the 
phrase  OWm  (cf.  x.  4,  LXX.),  and  along  with  it  this,  that  "Don11 
~iC;y  is  so  rendered  as  if  the  words  were  "1B>JO  ^SD1;,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  unhistorical.  If  we  now  take  the  one  proverb  as  it  is  found  in 
the  Hebr.  text,  then  the  repetition  of  the  "JOD  in  the  two  lines  excites 
a  prejudice  in  favour  of  it.  The  meaning  of  this  otherwise  difficult 
*pn  is  missed  by  Lowenstein  and  Zockler:  a  gracious  woman  re- 
taineth  honour  (Symm.  av9e^erat  So^?)  ;  for  (1)  7TI  "pn  would 
better  agree  with  this  predicate,  and  (2)  it  is  evident  from  xxix.  23 
that  TOD  l»n  is  not  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  offirmiter  tenere,  but 
in  the  inchoative  sense  of  consegui  honorem,  whence  also  the  eyeipei 
avbpi  of  the  LXX.  It  is  true  that  xxxi.  30  states  that  "  grace  (JH) 
is  nothing,"  and  that  all  depends  on  the  fear  of  God  ;  but  here  the 
poet  thinks  on  "grace"  along  with  the  fear  of  God,  or  he  thinks 
on  them  as  not  separated  from  each  other ;  and  since  it  is  doubly 
true,  which  is  moreover  besides  this  true,  that  a  wife  of  gracious 
outward  appearance  and  demeanour  obtains  honour,  her  company 
is  sought,  she  finds  her  way  into  the  best  society,  they  praise  her 
attractive,  pleasant  appearance,  and  that  the  husband  also  of  such 
a  wife  participates  to  some  extent  in  this  honour.  Experience  also 
confirms  it,  that  the  E'Tnj?,  strong  men,  obtain  riches  (cf.  Isa. 
xlix  25)  ;  and  this  statement  regarding  the  D^iy  fits  better  as  a 
contrast  to  16a,  as  a  like  statement  regarding  the  D^fin,  diligent, 
for  the  P"iy  (from  pV,  to  place  in  terror,  Ps.  x.  18),  whose  power 
consists  in  terrorism  or  violence,  is  the  most  direct  contrast  of  a 
wife,  this  <r/ceuo<?  aa-devecrrepov,  who  by  heart-winning  attraction 
makes  yet  better  conquests  :  she  thereby  obtains  a  higher  good, 
viz.  honour,  while  the  former  gains  only  riches,  for  ll  a  name  "  (viz. 
a  good  one)  "is  better  than  great  riches,"  xxii.  1.  If  we  read 
D^Tin,  this  thoughtful  contrast  is  lost. 
Three  proverbs  regarding  benevolence  : 

Ver.  17  The  benevolent  man  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul, 

And  the  violent  man  brings  trouble  on  his  own  flesh. 

Many  interpreters   reverse  the  relation  of  subject   and   predicate 


2-10  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

(Targ.  only  in  17Z>,  after  the  phrase  T31DTI,  for  which  the  Syr.  has 
only  *niDl) :  yni  sibi  ipsi  benefacit,  is  quidem  erga  alios  quoque 
lenignus  proesumitur,  quum  caritas  ordinata  a  se  ipsa  incipiat ;  qui 
vero  carnern  suam  male  habet,  est  crudelis  erga  alios  (Michaelis). 
But  this  cannot  be  established  ;  for  certainly  it  occurs  that  who 
ever  does  good  to  himself  does  good  also  to  others,  and  that  whoever 
is  hard  against  himself  also  judges  and  treats  others  harshly  ;  but  in 
by  far  the  greatest  number  of  cases  the  fact  is  this,  that  he  who 
does  not  deny  anything  to  himself  is  in  relation  to  others  an  egoist, 
and  this  is  not  a  "  benevolent  man;"  and,  on  the  contrary,  that  he 
who  denies  to  himself  lawful  enjoyments  is  in  relation  to  others 
capable  of  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice,  and  thus  is  the  contrast  of 
a  u  violent  man."  The  word  of  Sirach,  xiv.  5,  o  Trovypos  eavrw 
riva  ayaOos  ecnat,  to  which  Bertheau  appeals,  alludes  to  the 
nifcrard,  and  it  is  true  indeed  that  this  i"iX£>  "I2'y  but  not  every  ~I3J7 

C5O  ••     /  »/ 

11X5?,  is  a  niggard.  Thus  the  "  benevolent  man"  and  the  "violent 
man  "  will  be  the  two  subject  conceptions,  and  as  it  is  said  of  the 
benevolent  ("ion  as  e.q.  Hos.  vi.  6,  of  a  more  restricted  sense,  as 

v  v  L  '  •        •  •  • 

Isa.  Ivii.  1)  that  he  does  good  (?E2,  viz.  21 13,  xxxi.  12),  so  of  the 
violent  (unmerciful)  (*}£?«  as  xii.  20,  Jer.  vi.  23,  1.  42)  that  he 
brings  evil  on  his  own  flesh  (LXX.  avrov  crwyua) ;  for  T"iNtJJ  as 
a  parallel  word  to  i£'S3  (cf.  p.  195)  signifies  not  blood-relations 
(Symm.,  Jerome,  Luther,  and  Grotius),  but  it  has  here,  as  at 
Mic.  iii.  2,  its  nearest  signification,  from  which  it  then  comes  to 
signify  those  who  are  of  our  flesh  and  blood.  But  for  that  reason 
the  meaning  of  the  poet  cannot  be  that  given  by  Elster :  "  he 
who  exercises  benevolence  toward  others  creates  within  himself  a 
determination  which  penetrates  his  whole  being  with  generous 
and  fruitful  warmth,  as  on  the  other  hand  the  feeling  of  hatred 
deprives  the  heart  of  him  who  cherishes  it  of  the  true  fountain  of 
life."  If  this  were  meant,  then  soul  and  spirit,  not  soul  and  flesh, 
would  stand  in  parallelism.  The  weal  and  woe  refers  thus  to  the 
divine  retribution  which  requites  the  conduct  of  a  man  toward  his 
neighbours,  according  to  its  character,  with  reward  or  punishment 
(Hitzig,  Zockler). 

Ver.  18.  Man  consists  of  body  and  soul.     In  regard   to  both, 
benevolence  brings  its  reward,  and  hatred  its  punishment. 

The  godless  acquires  deceptive  gain  ; 

But  he  that  soweth  righteousness,  a  true  reward. 

Jerome  makes  186  an  independent  clause,  for  he  translates  it  as  if 


CHAP.  XI.  19.  241 

the  word  were  written  jnfpl ;  the  Syr.  and  Targ.  also,  as  If  rot? 
inox  (his  fidelity  is  his  reward).  But  according  to  the  text  as  it 
stands,  Piety  extends  its  regimen  to  both  parts  of  the  verse;  to 
make  is  here  equivalent  to,  to  work  out,  to  acquire,  ireparotetffOat, 
as  Gen.  xxxi.  1,  Jer.  xvii.  11,  etc.  The  labour  of  the  godless  has 
selfishness  as  its  motive,  and  what  he  acquires  by  his  labour  is 
therefore  "delusive  gain," — it  is  no  blessing,  it  profits  him  not 
(x.  2),  and  it  brings  him  no  advantage  (x.  16).  He,  on  the  con 
trary,  acquires  truth,  i.e.  a  truly  profitable  and  enduring  reward, 
who  sows  right-doing,  or  better :  good-doing,  by  which  we  also,  as 
the  biblical  moral  in  nplJf,  think  principally  of  well-doing,  unselfish 
activity  and  self-sacrificing  love.  Hos.  x.  12  speaks  of  sowing 
which  has  only  npnv  as  the  norm;  and  how  npllf  is  understood  is 
seen  from  the  parallel  use  of  non  [piety].  The  "  true  reward  "  is 
just  the  harvest  by  which  the  sowing  of  the  good  seed  of  noble 
benevolent  actions  is  rewarded. 

Ver.  19  Genuine  righteousness  reaches  to  life, 

And  he  who  pursues  evil  does  it  to  his  death. 

The  LXX.  translate  vio?  St/catos,  and  the  Syrian  follows  this 
unwarrantable  quid  pro  quo;  the  Bible  uses  the  phrase  rfojrp 
and  the  like,  but  not  npirp.  The  Grose.  Venet.  (translating 
oimw)  deprives  the  distich  of  its  supposed  independence.  The 
Targ.  renders  J3  with  the  following  1  as  correlates,  sic  .  .  .  uti ; 
but  p  in  comparative  proverbs  stands  naturally  in  the  second,  and 
not  in  the  first  place  (vid.  p.  10).  Without  doubt  p  is  here  a 
noun.  It  appears  to  have  a  personal  sense,  according  to  the 
parallel  *lT»ltt,  on  which  account  Elster  explains  it:  he  who  is 
firm,  stedfast  in  righteousness,  and  Zockler :  he  who  holds  fast 
to  righteousness ;  but  p  cannot  mean  "  holding  fast,"  nor  does 
$3lp; — ''fast"  does  not  at  all  agree  with  the  meaning  of  the  word, 
it  means  upright,  and  in  the  ethical  sense  genuine  ;  thus  Ewald 
better  :  "he  who  is  of  genuine  righteousness,"  but  "genuine  in  (of) 
righteousness"  is  a  tautological  connection  of  ideas.  Therefore 
we  must  regard  p  as  a  substantival  neuter,  but  neither  the  rectum 
of  Cocceius  nor  the  firmum  of  Schultens  furnishes  a  naturally 
expressed  suitable  thought.  Or  is  15  a  substantive  in  the  sense  of 
2  Kings  vii.  31  T  The  word  denotes  the  pedestal,  the  pillar,  the 
standing-place ;  but  what  can  the  basis  refer  to  here  (Euchel)  I 
Rather  read  "aim"  (Oetinger)  or  "'direction"  (Lowenstein);  but  p 
does  not  take  its  meaning  from  the  Iliph.  psn.  One  might  almost 


VOL.  I. 


Q 


242  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

assume  that  the  CTio^ma-language  makes  J3,  taUter,  a  substantive, 
and  has  begun  to  use  it  in  the  sense  of  qualitas  (like  the  post-bibl. 
rWN),  so  that  it  is  to  be  explained  :  the  quality  of  righteousness 
tendeth  to  life.  But  must  we  lose  ourselves  in  conjectures  or  in 
modifications  of  the  text  (Hitzig,  C33?  as  a  banner),  in  order  to 
gain  a  meaning  from  the  word,  which  already  has  a  meaning? 
We  say  15  "Q'n,  to  speak  right  (Num.  xxvii.  7),  and  }3  nitrj^  to  do 
right  (Eccles.  viii.  10)  ;  in  both  cases  }3  means  standing  =  con 
sisting,  stedfast,  right,  recte.  The  contrast  is  |3"Nv,  2  Kings  vii.  9, 
which  is  also  once  used  as  a  substantive,  Isa.  xvi.  6  :  the  un 
righteousness  of  his  words.  So  here  p  is  used  as  a  substantive 
connected  in  the  genitive,  but  not  so  that  it  denotes  the  right 
hold  in  2,  retaining  of  righteousness,  but  its  ri^ht  quality, — nnsx 

.    l    /  O  T,  »/  7  T    •    -; 

PIpnyvB',  as  Rashi  explains  it,  i.e.,  as  we  understand  it :  genuine 
ness,  or  genuine  showing  of  righteousness,  which  is  not  mere 
appearance  without  reality.  That  D^S  denotes  such  people  as 
seek  to  appear  not  otherwise  than  what  they  truly  are,  is  in  favour 
of  this  interpretation.  Such  genuine  righteousness  as  follows  the 
impulse  of  the  heart,  and  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart  does 
good,  has  life  as  its  result  (xix.  23),  an  inwardly  happy  and 
externally  a  prosperous  life  ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  who  wilfully 
pursues  evil,  and  finds  in  it  satisfaction,  brings  death  upon  him 
self:  he  does  it  to  his  death,  or  if  we  make  (which  is  also  possible) 
^Tin  the  subject :  it  tends  to  his  death.  Thus  in  other  words : 
Love  is  life  ;  hatred  destroys  life. 

The  following  proverbs  are  especially  directed,  as  connected 
with  this  p,  against  the  contradiction  of  the  external  appearance 
and  of  the  masked  internal  nature. 

Ver.  20  An  abomination  to  Jahve  are  the  crookedly  dishonest  of  heart, 
And  they  who  are  of  honest  walk  are  His  delight. 

We  read,  ii.  15,  viii.  8,  fc/'py  (the  form  of  the  transgressions)  ;  but 
here,  where  the  "crookedness"  is  transferred  to  the  heart,  we  re 
quire  another  word,  which  renders  the  idea  of  falseness,  the  contrary 
of  directness,  lying  in  it,  without  any  mixture  of  the  fundamental 
conception  flexuosus  or  tortuosus.  ^T.  ^Efl  are  not  only  those 
whose  walk  is  externally  without  offence  and  blameless,  but,  in 
conformity  with  the  contrast,  those  whose  manner  of  conduct 
proceeds  from  a  disposition  that  is  pure,  free  from  deception 
and  concealment.  Jerome,  et  voluntas  ejus  in  Us  qui  simpliciter 
ambulant.  But  the  word  is  not  ^oria ;  they  [the  upright]  are 


CHAP.  XI.  21.  243 

themselves  His  pn  (xi.  1)  [delight]  :  He  regards  them,  and  only 
them,  with  satisfaction. 

Ver.  21  Assuredly  [the  hand  to  it]  the  wicked  remaineth  not  unpunished, 
But  the  seed  of  the  righteous  is  delivered. 

The  LXX.  render  here,  as  xvi.  5,  where  the  TJ>  T  repeats  itself, 
%eipl  %efyja?  eppa\Q)v  d£/*a>?,  which  is  not  to  be  understood,  as 
Evagrius  supposes,  of  one  that  can  be  bribed,  but  only  of  a  violent 
person  ;  the  Syr.  and  Targ.  have  the  same  reference ;  but  the 
subject  is  certainly  jn,  and  a  governing  word,  as  Nbfo  (2  Sam.  xx. 
21),  is  wanting,  to  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  the  phrase  "one 
hand  against  the  other "  would  require  the  words  to  be  in  T. 
Jerome  and  the  Grcec.  Venet.,  without  our  being  able,  however,  to 
see  their  meaning.  The  translation  of  the  other  Greek  versions  is 
not  given.  The  Jewish  interpreters  offer  nothing  that  is  worthy, 
as  e.g.  Immanuel  and  Meiri  explain  it  by  "  immediately,"  which 
in  the  modern  Hebr.  would  require  T»,  and  besides  is  not  here 
suitable.  The  Midrash  connects  with  21a  the  earnest  warning 
that  he  who  sins  with  the  one  hand  and  with  the  other  does  good, 
is  nevertheless  not  free  from  punishment.  Schultens  has  an  ex 
planation  to  give  to  the  words  which  is  worthy  of  examination  : 
hand  to  hand,  i.e.  after  the  manner  of  an  inheritance  per  posteros 
(Ex.  xx.  5),  resting  his  opinion  on  this,  that  Arab,  yad  (cf.  T, 
Isa.  Ivi.  5)  is  used  among  other  significations  in  that  of  authorizing 
an  inheritance.  Gesenius  follows  him,  but  only  urging  the  idea 
of  the  sequence  of  time  (cf.  Pers.  dest  bedest,  hand  to  hand  = 
continuing  after  one  another),  and  interprets  Y3  T  as  Fleischer 
does  :  ab  estate  in  cetatem  non  (i.e.  nullo  unquam  tempore  futnro) 
erit  impnnis  scelestus,  sed  posteri  justorum  salvi  erunt.  According 
to  Bottcher,  "hand  to  hand"  is  equivalent  to  from  one  hand 
to  another,  and  this  corresponds  to  the  thought  expressed  in 
Plutarch's  de  sera  numinis  vindicta:  if  not  immediately,  yet  at 
last.  We  may  refer  in  vindication  of  this  to  the  fact  that,  as  the 
Arab,  lexicographers  say,  yad,  used  of  the  course  of  time,  means 
the  extension  (madd)  of  time,  and  then  a  period  of  time.  But  for 
the  idea  expressed  by  mmquam.  or  neutiquam,  or  tandem  aliquando, 
the  language  supplied  to  the  poet  a  multitude  of  forms,  and  we 
do  not  see  why  he  should  have  selected  just  this  expression  with 
its  primary  meaning  alternatim  not  properly  agreeing  with  the 
connection.  Therefore  we  prefer  with  Ewald  to'regard  T^  T  as  a 
formula  of  confirmation  derived  from  the  common  speech  of  the 


244  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

people :  hand  to  hand  (p  as  in  *l£,  Job  xvii.  3),  i.e.  the  hand  for 
it  [I  pledge  it,  guarantee  it]  (Bertheau,  Hitzig,  Elster,  Zockler). 
But  if  2  la  assures  by  the  pledge  of  the  hand,  and  as  it  were  lays 
a  wager  to  it,  that  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished,  then  the 
genitive  in  D7V!!¥  J™  is  not  that  of  dependence  by  origin,  but,  as 
Isa.  Ixv.  23,  i.  4,  the  genitive  of  apposition,  for  jnr  here,  as  iri, 
Ps.  xxiv.  6,  cxii.  2,  denotes  a  oneness  of  like  origin  and  of  like 
kind,  but  with  a  preponderance  of  the  latter,  ctai  is  the  3d 
pret.,  which  by  the  preceding  fut.  retains  the  reference  to  the 
future :  the  merited  punishment  comes  on  the  wicked,  but  the 
generation  of  the  righteous  escapes  the  judgment,  jn  has  the  ~\ 
dagheshed  (Micldol  63i)  according  to  the  rule  of  the  pTTJ,  according 
to  which  the  consonant  first  sounded  after  a  word  terminatinfr  in 

C5 

an  accented  a  or  ^  is  doubled,  which  is  here,  as  at  xv.  1,  done  with 
the  1. 

Ver.  22  A  golden  ring  in  a  swine's  snout, — 
A  fair  woman  and  without  delicacy. 

This  is  the  first  instance  of  an  emblematical  proverb  in  which  the 
first  and  second  lines  are  related  to  each  other  as  figure  and  its 
import,  vid.  p. -9.  The  LXX.  translates  rhythmically,  but  by  its 
wcr7re/>  .  .  .  OI/T«<?  it  destroys  the  character  of  this  picture-book 
proverbial  form.  The  nose-ring,  DW,  generally  attached  to  the 
right  nostril  and  hanging  down  over  the  mouth  (vid.  Lane's  Manners, 
etc.)  is  a  female  ornament  that  has  been  in  use  since  the  time  of 
the  patriarchs  (Gen.  xxiv.  47).  If  one  supposes  such  a  ring  in  a 
swine's  snout,  then  in  such  a  thing  he  has  the  emblem  of  a  wife  in 
whom  beauty  and  the  want  of  culture  are  placed  together  in 
direct  contrast.  Dya  is  taste  carried  over  into  the  intellectual 
region,  the  capability  of  forming  a  judgment,  Job  xii.  20,  and 
particularly  the  capability  of  discovering  that  which  is  right  and 
adapted  to  the  end  in  view,  1  Sam.  xxv.  33  (of  Abigail),  here  in 
accordance  with  the  figure  of  a  beast  with  which  the  ideas  of 
uncleanness,  shamelessness,  and  rudeness  are  associated,  a  mind  for 
the  noble,  the  fine,  the  fitting,  that  which  in  the  higher  and  at  the 
same  time  intellectual  and  ethical  sense  we  call  tact  (fine  feeling) ; 
rnD  (alienata)  denotes  the  want  of  this  capacity,  not  without  the 
accompanying  idea  of  self-guilt. 

Ver.  23  The  desire  of  the  righteous  is  nothing  but  good, 
The  expectation  of  the  godless  is  presumption. 

This  is  usually  explained  with  Fleischer :  If  the  righteous  wish  for 


CHAP.  XI.  24.  245 

anything,  their  wish  reaches  to  no  other  than  a  fortunate  issue ; 
but  if  the  godless  hope  for  anything,  then  there  is  to  them  in  the 
end  as  their  portion,  not  the  good  they  hoped  for,  but  wrath  (x.  28, 
cf.  xi.  4).  However,  that  "T^y  is  at  once  to  be  understood  thus, 
as  in  may  DV,  and  that  the  phrase  is  to  be  rendered:  the  hope  of 
the  godless  is  God's  wrath,  is  doubtful.  But  rmy  denotes  also 
want  of  moderation,  and  particularly  in  the  form  of  presumption, 
xxi.  24,  Isa.  xvi.  6 ;  and  thus  we  gain  the  thought  that  the  desire  of 
the  righteous  is  directed  only  to  that  which  is  good,  and  thus  to 
an  object  that  is  attainable  because  well-pleasing  to  God,  while  on 
the  contrary  the  hope  of  the  godless  consists  only  in  the  suggestions 
of  their  presumption,  and  thus  is  vain  self-deceit.  The  punctua 
tion  D^pHV  msn  is  contrary  to  rule ;  correct  texts  have  JTisn 
D^pnXj  for  Decld  stands  before  Athnach  only  if  the  Athnach-word 
has  two  syllables  (Torath  Emeth,  p.  43  ;  Accentssystem,  xviii.  §  4). 

Three  proverbs  regarding  giving  which  is  not  loss  but  gain. 
Ver.  24  There  is  one  who  giveth  bounteously,  and  he  increaseth  still  more  ; 
And  (there  is)  one  who  withholdeth  what  is  due,  only  to  his  loss. 

The  first  of  the  proverbs  with  ^  (there  is),  which  are  peculiar  to 
the  first  collection  (viJ.  p.  32).  The  meaning  is,  that  the  posses 
sions  of  the  liberal  giver  do  not  decrease  but  increase,  and  that,  on 
the  contrary,  the  possessions  of  the  niggardly  do  not  increase  but 
decrease.  "IJSD  is  not  to  be  understood  after  Ps.  cxii.  9.  Instead 
of  liy  fpiJI  the  three  Erfurt  codd  have  fjDUl  (with  retrogression  of 

T       ;  \  o 

the  tone?),  which  Hitzig  approves  of;  but  the  traditional  phrase 
which  refers  (et  qui  augetur  insnper)  &]D1J1  not  to  the  possession 
of  him  who  scattereth,  but  to  himself,  is  finer  in  the  expression. 
In  the  characteristic  of  the  other,  "I^'SB  is  commonly  interpreted 
comparatively:  plus  cequo  (Cocceius)  or  justo  (Schelling).  But  JO 
after  ^n  is  to  be  regarded  as  governed  by  it,  and  "IK"  denotes  not 
competence,  riches,  as  Arab,  yusr  (Bertheau,  Zockler),  also  not 
uprightness  =  beneficence  (Midrash,  npisn  }D),.but  duty,  upright 
ness,  as  Job  xxxiii.  23,  where  it  denotes  that  which  is  advantageous 
to  man,  as  here  that  which  befits  him  :  he  who  holds  back,  namely 
himself,  from  that  which  is  due  to  himself,  and  thus  should  permit 
to  himself,  such  an  one  profits  nothing  at  all  by  this  afai&ict 
(17&,  Col.  ii.  23),  but  it  tends  only  to  loss  to  him,  only  to  the 
lessening  of  that  which  he  possesses.  We  shall  meet  with  this 
("liDnop)  "liDTOp  7|N  xiv.  23,  and  frequently  again — it  is  a  common 
Mashal  formula  (cf.  teal  TCXTM  /j,a\\ov  varepeiTai,  Sir.  xi.  11).  The 


246  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

cause  of  the  strange  phenomenon  that  the  liberal  gains  and  the 
niggardly  loses  is  not  here  expressed,  but  the  following  proverb 
gives  the  explanation  of  it : 

Ver.  25  A  liberal  soul  [soul  of  blessing]  is  made  fat, 
And  he  that  watereth  others  is  also  watered. 

A  synonymous  distich  (vid.  p.  7).  A  soul  of  blessing  is  one  from 
whom  blessings  go  out  to  others,  who  is  even  a  blessing  to  all  with 
whom  he  comes  into  fellowship ;  nana  denotes  also  particularly  the 
gifts  of  love,  1  Sam.  xxv.  27,  Sfta  denotes,  if  the  Arab,  is  right, 
which  derives  it  from  the  fundamental  idea  "to  spread  out:"  to 
cause  to  increase  and  prosper  by  means  of  word  and  deed.  The 
blessing  which  goes  out  from  such  a  soul  comes  back  again  to 
itself:  flShn  (as  xiii.  4,  xxviii.  25),  it  is  made  fat,  gains  thereby  sap 
and  strength  in  fulness ;  the  Pual  refers  to  the  ordinance  of  God ; 
xxii.  9  is  kindred  in  meaning  to  this  anima  benefica  pinguefiet. 
In  256  Nni11  is  the  Aramaic  form  of  writing,  but  without  the 
Aramaic  vocalization  (cf.  i.  10  Nlfrj  Isa.  xxi.  12  Nn»l).  Perhaps 
the  N  makes  it  noticeable  that  here  a  different  word  from  rni', 
morning  rain,  is  used ;  however,  Symm.  translates  trpwlvos,  and 
the  Grcec.  Venet.  (Kimchi  following  it)  vero?.  As  a  rule,  we  do  not 
derive  fcOi11  from  STV,  of  which  it  would  be  the  Hophal  (  =  'T!V,  as 
SHin,  Lev.  iv.  23,=jn_tfi)  (Ewald,  §  131  f.);  for  the  idea  consper- 
gitur,  which  the  Ho.  of  the  Hiph.  rni\  Hos.  vi.  3,  expresses,  is,  as 
correlate  to  rrnn,  as  a  parallel  word  to  flpnn,  one  not  of  equal  force. 
Jerome  was  guided  by  correct  feeling,  for  he  translates :  et  qui 
inebriat  ipse  quoque  inebriabitur.  The  stem-word  is  certainly  nvi, 
whether  it  is  with  Hitzig  to  be  punctuated  JOj^frn^  or  with 
Fleischer  we  are  to  regard  ini*  as  derived  per  metatfiesin  from 
nV£,  as  for  Arab,  dray  (to  cause  to  see)  is  used  1  the  vulgar  Arab. 
drway  (in  the  Syr.  Arab.)  and  dwray  (in  the  Egypt.  Arab.).  We 
prefer  the  latter,  for  the  passing  of  fnv  (from  ffnj)  into  nnv  is 
according  to  rule,  vid.  at  xxiii.  21. 

Ver.  26  Whoso  withholdeth  corn,  him  the  people  curse ; 
But  blessing  is  on  the  head  of  him  that  selleth  it. 

This  proverb  is  directed  against  the  corn-usurer,  whose  covetous- 
ness  and  deceitful  conduct  is  described  Amos  viii.  4-8.  But 
whilst  it  is  there  said  that  they  cannot  wait  till  the  burdensome 

1  Hitzig's  comparison  of  raicad,  finem  respicere,  as  transposed  from  waray  is 
incorrect;  the  former  verb,  which  signifies  to  consider,  thus  appears  to  be 
original. 


CHAP.  XI.  27.  247 

interruption  of  their  usurious  conduct  on  account  of  the  sacred 
days  come  to  an  end,  the  figure  here  is  of  a  different  aspect  of 
their  character :  they  hold  back  their  stores  of  corn  in  the  times  of 
scarcity,  for  they  speculate  on  receiving  yet  higher  prices  for  it. 
"13  (from  "H3,  to  purify,  to  be  pure)  is  thrashed  grain,  cf.  Arab. 
burr,  wheat,  and  nakky  of  the  cleaning  of  the  grain  by  the  separa 
tion  from  it  of  the  tares,  etc.  (Fl.) ;  the  word  has  Kametz,  accord 
ing  to  the  Masora,  as  always  in  pause  and  in  the  history  of  Joseph. 
J^b  has  Munach  on  the  syllable  preceding  the  last,  on  which  the 
tone  is  thrown  back,  and  Metheg  with  the  Tsere  as  the  sign  of  a 
pause,  as  i.  10  Jft>3  (vid.  p.  67).  T3Bte,  qui  annonam  vendit,  is 
denom.  of  "Oi?,  properly  that  which  is  crushed,  therefore  grain 
(Fl.).  BMSKp,  which  we  would  understand  in  the  Proph.  of  nations, 
are  here,  as  at  xxiv.  24,  the  individuals  of  the  people.  The  nrro 
which  falls  on  the  head  of  the  charitable  is  the  thanks  of  his  fellow- 
citizens,  along  with  all  good  wishes. 

That  self-sacrificing  endeavour  after  the  good  of  others  finds  its 
reward  in  the  thought  encircling  the  following  proverbs. 

Ver.  27  He  that  striveth  after  good,  seeketh  that  which  is  pleasing ; 
And  he  that  searcheth  after  evil,  it  shall  find  him. 

Here  we  have  together  three  synonyms  of  seeking  :  L"j53  (R.  pa, 
findere),  which  has  the  general  meaning  qucerere,  from  the  root- 
idea  of  penetrating  and  pressing  forwards ;  trn  (R.  TJ,  terere), 
which  from  the  root-idea  of  trying  (proving)  corresponds  to  the 
Lat.  studere  ;  and  "iriB>  (whence  here  ">n'B>  instead  of  in^D,  as  "DM 
instead  of  "i^/ip),  which  means  mane,  and  thus  sedulo  queer  ere  (vid. 
at  i.  28).  From  276,  where  by  njn  is  meant  evil  which  one  pre 
pares  for  another,  there  arises  for  21L3  the  idea  of  good  thoughts 
and  actions  with  reference  to  others.  He  who  applies  himself  to 
such,  seeks  therewith  that  which  is  pleasing,  i.e.  that  which  pleases 
or  does  good  to  others.  If  that  which  is  pleasing  to  God  were 
meant,  then  this  would  have  been  said  (cf.  xii.  2) ;  the  idea  here 
is  similar  to  x.  32,  and  the  word  K'[5l^  is  used,  and  not  W*®\  because 
reference  is  not  made  to  a  fact  in  the  moral  government  of  the 
world,  but  a  description  is  given  of  one  who  is  zealously  intent 
upon  good,  and  thus  of  a  noble  man.  Such  an  one  always  asks 
himself  (cf.  Matt.  vii.  12)  :  what  will,  in  the  given  case,  be  well- 
pleasing  to  the  neighbour,  what  will  tend  to  his  true  satisfaction  ? 
Regarding  the  punctuation  here,  ^f^,  vid.  at  ver.  26.  The  subject 
to  ^Kisrij  which,  x.  24,  stands  as  the  fundamental  idea,  here  follows 


218  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

from  the  governed  njn,  which  may  be  the  gen.  (Ps.  xxxviii.  13) 
as  well  as  the  accus. 

Ver.  28  He  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  fall, 

And  the  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  green  leaf. 

*?!&  (plene  after  the  Masora)  as  well  as  the  figure  r6jD1  (cf.  for  the 
punctuation  1^1,  x.  26)  are  singular,  but  are  understood  if  one 
observes  that  in  28a  a  withered  tree,  and  in  2Sb  a  tree  with  leaves 
ever  green,  hovers  before  the  imagination  of  the  poet  (cf.  Ps.  i.  3, 
Jer.  xvii.  8).  The  proud  rich  man,  who  on  the  ground  of  his 
riches  appears  to  himself  to  be  free  from  danger,  goes  on  to  his 
ruin  fiw  as  xi.  5,  and  frequently  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs),  while 
on  the  contrary  the  righteous  continues  to  flourish  like  the  leaf — 
they  thus  resemble  the  trees  which  perennially  continue  to  flourish 
anew.  Regarding  rpy  as  originally  collective  (Symm.  0d\\os), 
vid.  at  Isa.  i.  30,  and  regarding  rna  (R.  -is}  to  break),  here  of  the 
continual  breaking  forth  of  fresh-growing  leaf-buds,  vid.  at  Isa. 
xi.  1.  The  apostolic  word  names  this  continual  growth  the  meta 
morphosis  of  believers,  2  Cor.  ii.  18.  The  LXX.  has  read  r6y»1 

v  -;  - 

(approved  by  Hitzig)  :  and  he  who  raiseth  up  the  righteous. 
Ver.  29  He  that  troubleth  his  own  household  shall  inherit  the  wind, 
And  a  fool  becomes  servant  to  the  wise  in  heart. 

Jerome  well  translates:  qui  conturbat  domum  suam,  for  "IDJJ  closelv 
corresponds  to  the  Lat.  lurbare ;  but  with  what  reference  is  the 
troubling  or  disturbing  here  meant?  The  Syr.  translates  29a 
doubly,  and  refers  it  once  to  deceit,  and  the  second  time  to  the 
contrary  of  avarice  ;  the  LXX.,  by  o  pr)  a-v/jLTrepifapo/jievos  ra 
eavrov  OIKM,  understands  one  who  acts  towards  his  own  not  un- 
sociably,  or  without  affability,  and  thus  not  tyrannically.  But  "OV 
VlKB>  xi.  17,  is  he  who  does  not  grudge  to  his  own  body  that  which 
is  necessary;  fctnfcp?  I3i?  is  applied  to  Elijah,  1  Kings  xviii.  17,  on 
account  of  whose  prayer  there  was  a  want  of  rain ;  and  at  xv.  27 
it  is  the  covetous  who  is  spoken  of  as  lira  13'y.  The  proverb  has, 
accordingly,  in  the  man  who  "troubles  his  own  house"  (Luth.), 
a  niggard  and  sordid  person  (Hitzig)  in  view,  one  who  does  not 
give  to  his  own,  particularly  to  his  own  servants,  a  sufficiency  of 
food  and  of  necessary  recreation.  Far  from  raising  himself  by  his 
household  arrangements,  he  shall  only  inherit  wind  (^ny,  not  as 
the  Syr.  translates,  7W,  in  the  general  signification  to  inherit,  to 
obtain,  as  iii.  35,  xxviii.  10,  etc.),  i.e.  he  goes  always  farther  and 
farther  back  (for  he  deprives  his  servants  of  all  pleasure  and  love 


CHAP.  XI.  30,  31.  249 

for  their  work  in  seeking  the  prosperity  of  his  house),  till  in  the 
end  the  reality  of  his  posse'ssion  dissolves  into  nothing.  Such 
conduct  is  not  only  loveless,  but  also  foolish  :  and  a  foolish  person 

L    "  .  .  * 

(yid.  regarding  ?*1Nj  at  i.  7)  has  no  influence  as  the  master  of  a 
house,  and  generally  is  unable  to  maintain  his  independence:  "and 
the  servant  is  a  fool  to  him  who  is  wise  of  heart."  Thus  the 
LXX.  (cf.  also  the  LXX.  of  x.  5),  Syr.,  Targ.,  Jerome,  Grcec. 
Venet.,  Luth.  construe  the  sentence.  The  explanation,  et  servus 
st.ulti  cordato  (sc.  addicitur),  i.e.  even  the  domestics  of  the  covetous 
fool  are  at  last  partakers  in  the  wise  beneficence  (Fl.),  places  296 
in  an  unnecessary  connection  with  29a,  omits  the  verb,  which  is 
here  scarcely  superfluous,  and  is  not  demanded  by  the  accentuation 
(cf.  e.g.  xix.  226). 

Ver.  30  The  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of  life, 
And  the  wise  man  winneth  souls. 

The  LXX.  translate,  etc  icapTrov  bucaiocrvvris  (ftverai,  SevSpov  £&)?}<> ; 
Hitzig  takes  thence  the  word  p1]^;  but  this  translation  discredits 
itself  by  the  unnatural  reversal  of  the  relation  of  fruit  and  tree. 
The  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  here  not  the  good  which  his  conduct 
brings  to  him,  as  Isa.  iii.  10,  Jer.  xxxii.  19,  but  his  activity  itself 
proceeding  from  an  internal  impulse.  This  fruit  is  a  tree  of  life. 
We  need  to  supplement  *"}&  [fruit]  as  little  here  as  rnfc  [a  traveller] 
at  x.  17  ;  for  the  meaning  of  the  proverb  is,  that  the  fruit  of  the 
righteous,  i.e.  his  external  influence,  itself  is  a  tree  of  life  (vid. 
p.  32),  namely  for  others,  since  his  words  and  actions  exert  a 
quickening,  refreshing,  happy  influence  upon  them.  By  this  means 
the  wise  (righteousness  and  wisdom  come  together  according  to 
the  saying  of  the  Chokma,  i.  7«)  becomes  a  winner  of  souls  (npb  as 
vi.  25,  but  taken  in  bonam  partem),  or,  as  expressed  in  the  N.  T. 
(Matt.  iv.  19),  a  fisher  of  men,  for  he  gains  them  not  only  for 
himself,  but  also  for  the  service  of  wisdom  and  righteousness. 

'  O 

Ver.  31  Lo,  the  righteous  findeth  on  earth  his  reward; 
How  much  more  the  godless  and  the  sinner ! 

The  particles  *3  *)X  signify  properly,  interrogatively  :  Shall  it  yet  be 
said  that  .  .  . ;  it  corresponds  to  the  German  li geschweige  denn" 
[neduni]  (FL).  |n  is  already  in  bibl.  Hebr.  in  the  way  of  becoming 
a  conditional  particle;  it  opens,  as  here,  the  antecedent  of  a  gra- 
datio  a  minori  ad  majus  introduced  by  *3  f)X,  Job  xv.  15  f.,  xxv.  5  f., 
cf.  |n  (run)  with  ipifl  following,  Gen.  xliv.  8,  2  Sam.  xii.  18.  xiii. 
13  presents  itself  as  the  nearest  parallel  to  £W,  where  it  means;  to 


250 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


be  rewarded.  It  is  a  vocalwlum  anceps,  and  denotes  full  requital, 
i.e.,  according  to  the  reference,  either  righteous  reward  or  righteous 
punishment.  If  30a  is  understood  of  reward,  and  306  of  punish 
ment,  then  the  force  of  the  argument  in  the  conclusion  consists  in 
this,  that  the  righteous  can  put  forth  no  claim  to  a  recompense, 
because  his  well-doing  is  never  so  perfect  as  not  to  be  mingled 
with  sin  (Eccles.  vii.  20 ;  Ps.  cxliii.  2) ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the 
repression  of  the  wicked,  who,  as  yen  as  to  his  intention,  and  Ktain 
as  to  his  conduct,  actually  denies  his  dependence  on  God,  is  de 
manded  by  divine  holiness.  But  the  conclusion  is  not  stringent, 
since  in  the  relation  of  God  to  the  righteous  His  dispensation  of 
grace  and  faithfulness  to  promises  also  come  into  view,  and  thus 
in  both  cases  tb&  appears  to  require  the  same  interpretation  :  if 
the  righteous  does  not  remain  unrevenged,  so  much  more  shall  not 
the  godless  and  the  sinner  remain  .  .  .,  or  how  much  less  shall  the 
godless  and  the  sinner  remain  so.  Thus  the  Grcec.  Venet.,  @eu>  o 
St'/cotos  ev  rfj  7$  aTroTiOr^o-erat, ;  thus  also  Luther,  and  among  the 
moderns  Lowenstein  and  Elster.  Of  the  proverb  so  understood 
the  LXX.  version,  el  6  fiev  Sl/caio?  /j,6\is  (^0749)  o-co^erai,  o  acefifa 
Kal  a^apr&jXo?  TTOV  favetTai  (cf.  1  Pet.  iv.  18)  may  be  a  free 
translation,  for  in  the  D$>B*  there  certainly  lies,  according  to  the 
sense,  a  IKfr  B£O3.  Also  D^  has  the  principal  tone,  not  pK3. 
The  thought :  even  on  this  side  (on  earth),  lies  beyond  the  sphere 
of  the  O.  T.  consciousness.  The  earth  is  here  the  world  of  man. 

Three  proverbs  on  knowledge,  the  favour  of   God,  firmness  and 
the  means  thereto. 

xii.  1  He  loveth  correction  who  loveth  knowledge, 

And  he  hateth  instruction  who  is  without  reason. 

It  is  difficult  in  such  cases  to  say  which  is  the  relation  of  the  ideas 
that  is  intended.  The  sequence  of  words  which  lies  nearest  in  the 
Semitic  substantival  clause  is  that  in  which  the  predicate  is  placed 
first ;  but  the  subject  may,  if  it  is  to  be  made  prominent,  stand  at 
the  head  of  the  sentence.  Here,  U,  the  placing  of  the  subject  in 
advance  recommends  itself  :  one  who  hates  instruction  is  devoid  of 
reason.  But  since  we  have  no  reason  in  la  to  invert  the  order  of 
the  words  as  they  lie  together,  we  take  the  conceptions  placed  first 
in  both  cases  as  the  predicates.  Thus :  he  who  loves  knowledge 
shows  and  proves  that  he  does  so  by  this,  that  he  willingly  pu°ts 
himself  in  the  place  of  a  learner ;  and  devoid  of  reason  is  lie  who 
with  aversion  rejects  reproof,  which  is  designed  to  guard  him  from 


CHAP.  XII.  2,  3.  251 


future  mistakes  and  false  steps.  Regarding  the  punctuation 
J"ijn  (with  Mercha  on  the  ante-penult,  and  the  mDJfil-sign  on  the 
penult.),  vid.  at  xi.  26  f.,  i.  19.  In  16  the  Munach  in  nrrjin  is 
transformed  from  Mugrasli  (Accentssystem,  xviii.  §  2),  as  in  xv.  10Z>. 
"W3  (cf.  xxx.  2)  is  a  being  who  is  stupid  as  the  brute  cattle  p^3, 
from  "W3,  to  graze,  cattle  of  all  kinds  ;  Arab.  Vayr,  the  beast  tear* 
e£.,  i.e.  the  camel)  ;  as  a  homo  bruttts  is  compared  to  a  n9-?  (Ps< 
xlix.  21,  Ixxiii.  22),  and  is  called  Arab,  behymt,  from  baJnpn,  "shut 
up"  (spec,  dalb,  a  bear;  tliwr,  an  ox;  hamdr,  an  ass)  (FJ.). 
Ver.  2  A  good  man  obtaineth  favour  with  Jahve, 

But  the  man  of  wicked  devices  He  condemns. 

He  who  is  an  niEpp  t^K  (xiv.  17,  cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  7)  is  defined  in 
xxiv.  8  (cf.  p.  39)  :  he  is  a  man  of  devices  (vid.  regarding  the 
etymon,  p.  56),  namely,  that  are  wicked,  one  who  contrives  evil 
against  his  neighbour.  The  meaning  of  the  subject-conception 
2iD  is  defined  according  to  this,  although  in  itself  also  it  is  clear, 
for  1113,  used  of  God  (e.g.  Ps.  Ixxiii.  1,  Ixxxvi.  5)  and  of  men  (xiii. 
22,  xiv.  14),  denotes  the  good  (bonus)  in  the  sense  of  the  benevo 
lent  (benignus)  ;  the  Scripture  truths,  that  God  is  love,  that  love  is 
the  essence  of  goodness  and  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  are  so 
conformed  to  reason,  that  they  stamp  themselves  as  immediate 
component  parts  of  the  human  consciousness.  A  21B  is  thus  a 
man  who  acts  according  to  the  ruling  motive  of  self-sacrificing  love  ; 
such  an  one  obtains  (vid.  on  P"1^,  educit  =  adipiscitur,  at  iii.  13) 
the  favour  of  God,  He  is  and  shows  Himself  kind  to  him,  while  on 
the  contrary  He  condemns  the  wicked  intriguer.  Hitzig  trans 
lates  :  the  former  of  intrigues  is  punishable  (as  the  Syr.  :  is  con 
demned;  Targ.:  his  contrivance  is  shattered  to  pieces);  but  to 
become  a  1'tJH  =  reus  JT^nri  does  not  denote,  but  either  to  practise 
JH?n,  Job  xxxiv.  12,  or  to  set  forth  as  J?^  =  to  condemn,  Isa.  1.  9. 
Taken  in  the  former  signification  (Jerome,  impie  agit),  a  declara 
tion  is  made  which  is  not  needed,  since  the  moral  badness  already 
lies  in  the  reference  of  the  subject  :  thus  ytjh11  vvill  be  used  also  of 
Jahve.  In  proof  that  the  poet  did  not  need  to  say  t^NTlX1), 
Zockler  rightly  points  to  x.  6,  Job  xxii.  29. 

Ver.  3  A  man  does  not  stand  by  wickedness, 

But  the  root  of  the  righteous  remains  unmoved. 

In  JJKH  there  lies  the  idea  of  want  of  inward  stay  (vid.  at  Ps.  i.  1)  ;  in 
a  manner  of  thought  and  of  conduct  which  has  no  stay  in  God  and 
His  law,  there  can  be  expected  no  external  endurance,  no  solidity. 


252  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

The  righteous,  on  the  contrary,  have  their  root  in  God;  nothing 
can  tear  them  from  the  ground  in  which  they  are  rooted,  they  are  ns 
trees  which  no  storm  outroots.  The  very  same  thought  is  clothed 
in  other  words  in  x.  25,  and  another  statement  regarding  the  root 
of  the  righteous  is  found  at  xii.  12. 

We  now  place  together  vers.  4-12.  One  proverb  concerning 
the  house-wife  forms  the  beginning  of  this  group,  and  four  re 
garding  the  management  of  the  house  and  business  form  the 
conclusion. 

Ver.  4  A  good  [brave]  wife  is  the  crown  of  her  husband, 

But  as  rottenness  in  his  bones  is  one  that  causeth  shame. 


As  xi.  16  says  of  JH  nc'S,  the  pleasant  wife  (lD  =  ^a/)w),  that  she 
obtaineth  honour,  so  this  proverb  of  <n  JT^'N,  the  good  wife 
(Sn  =  apertf,  virtus),  that  she  raises  her  husband  to  higher 
honour  :  she  is  for  his  self-consciousness  crre^ai/o?  /eatr^crew? 
(1  Thess.  ii.  19),  and  is  also  to  him  such  a  crown  of  honour 
before  the  world  (cf.  xxxi.  23).  On  the  contrary,  a  H^ZlO,  con 
ducting  herself  shamefully  (cf.  regarding  the  double  meaning  of 
this  Mishle  word,  which  only  here  occurs  in  the  fern.,  at  x.  5),  is  to 
her  husband  instar  cariei  in  ossibus.  3J51  (2jTi,  x.  7)  denotes  both 
the  caries  and  the  worm-hole  (cf.  Job  xli.  19,  |Uj5~}  J*y,  worm-eaten 
wood).  Like  as  the  caries  slowly  but  continuously  increases,  till 
at  last  the  part  of  the  body  which  the  bone  bears  and  the  whole 
life  of  the  man  falls  to  ruin  ;  so  an  unhappy  marriage  gnaws  at 
the  marrow  of  life,  it  destroys  the  happiness  of  life,  disturbs  the 
pursuit,  undermines  the  life  of  the  husband. 

Ver.  5  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  are  justice, 
The  counsels  of  the  godless  are  deceit. 

They  are  so,  that  is,  in  their  contents  and  their  aim.  To  the 
righteous  are  ascribed  riin^np,  namely,  simple  and  clear  ;  to  the 
godless,  niPanri,  carefully  thought  out,  prudently  thought  through 
schemes  and  measures  (regarding  the  word  and  the  idea,  vid. 
p.  57),  but  on  that  very  account  not  simple,  because  with  a 
tendency;  for  the  righteous  have  an  objective  rule,  namely,  that 
which  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  men,  but  the  godless 
have  only  a  selfish  purpose,  which  they  seek  to  attain  by  deceiving, 
and  at  the  cost  of,  their  neighbour. 

Ver.  6  The  word  of  the  godless  is  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  blood  of  others, 
But  the  mouth  of  the  upright  delivereth  them. 


CHAP.  XII.  7.  253 

Our  editions  have  3*yvn  "nil,  but  the  right  sequence  of  the  accents 
(in  Cod.  1294  and  elsewhere)  is  D'JJBh  "nin ;  the  logical  relation  in 
this  transformation,  which  is  only  rhythmically  conditioned,  remains 
the  same.  The  vocalization  wavers  between  "21K,  which  would 
ba  hnper.,  and  "SIX,  which  is  in  fin.,  like~"i»X,  xxv.  7,  "^J|,  xxi.  11, 
"^38,  Gen.  iii.  11.  However  one  punctuates  it,  tin  infiu.  is  in 
tended  in  any  case,  in  which  the  expression  always  remains 
sketchy  enough  :  the  words  of  the  godless  are  lying  in  wait  for 
blood,  i.e.  they  are  calculated  to  bring  others  to  this,  into  the 
danger  of  their  lives,  e.g.  before  the  tribunal  by  false  charges 
and  false  witness.  CH  is  the  accus.  of  the  object ;  for  instead 
of  D"£  31 X  (i.  11),  to  lurk  for  blood,  a  shorter  expression,  a"1}  31K, 
is  used  (Ewald,  §  282a).  The  suffix  of  tb'V  l  might  appear,  after 
xi.  6a,  to  refer  back  to  the  D<li^'l ;  but  the  thought  that  their  mouth 
saves  the  upright,  that  they  thus  know  to  speak  themselves  out  of 
the  danger,  is  by  far  less  appropriate  (vid.,  on  the  contrary,  njTi3, 
xi.  9)  than  the  thought  that  the  mouth  of  the  upright  delivereth 
from  danger  those  whose  lives  are  threatened  by  the  godless,  as 
is  rightly  explained  by  Ewald,  Bertheau,  Elster.  The  personal 
subject  or  object  is  in  the  Mashal  style  often  to  be  evolved  from 
the  connection,  e.g.  xiv.  26,  xix.  23. 

Ver.  7  The  godless  are  overturned  and  are  no  more, 
But  the  house  of  the  righteous  stands. 

Bertheau  and  Zockler  explain  :  The  wicked  turn  about,  then  are 
they  no  more;  i.e.  as  we  say  :  it  is  over  with  them  u  in  the  turning 
of  a  hand."  The  noun  in  the  inf.  absol.  may  certainly  be  the 
subject,  like  xvii.  12,  as  well  as  the  object  (Ewald,  §  328c),  and 
"HSn  may  be  used  of  the  turning  about  of  oneself,  Ps.  Ixxviii.  9, 
2  Kings  v.  26,  2  Chron.  ix.  12.  That  explanation  also  may  claim 
for  itself  that  "[Dn  nowhere  occurs  with  a  personal  object,  if  we 
except  one  questionable  passage,  Isa.  i.  7.  But  here  the  interpre 
tation  of  the  DWi  as  the  object  lies  near  the  contrast  of  JV3,  and 
moreover  the  interpretation  of  the  "pn,  not  in  the  sense  of  crTpe- 
faaOai  (LXX.),  but  of  KaTaarptfyew  (Syr.,  Targ.,  Jerome,  Grcec. 
Venet.,  Luther),  lies  near  the  contrast  of  1OJP.  The  inf.  absol. 
thus  leaves  the  power  from  which  the  catastrophe  proceeds  in 
definite,  as  the  pass.  123iT  would  also  leave  it,  and  the  act  de- 

1  Elias  Levita,  in  his  note  to  the  root  ns  in  Kimchi's  WiirlerlitcJi,  reads  DASWt 
and  so  also  do  6  codd.  in  Kenuicot.     But  nQ  is  masculine. 


254 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


signedly  presented  in  a  vague  manner  to  connect  with  1  the  certain 
consequences  therewith,  as  xxv.  4  f.,  as  if  to  say  :  there  comes  only 
from  some  quarter  an  unparalleled  overthrow  which  overwhelms 
the  godless ;  thus  no  rising  up  again  is  to  be  thought  on,  it  is  all 
over  with  them  ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  house  of  the  righteous 
withstands  the  storm  which  sweeps  away  the  godless. 

Ver.  8  According  to  the  measure  of  his  intelligence  is  a  man  pra'sed, 
And  whoever  is  of  a  perverse  mind  is  despised. 

Everywhere  in  the  Mishle  b&  has  no  other  meaning  than  intel- 
lectus  (vid.  p.  87).  The  praise  which  is  given  to  a  man  measures 
itself  fab  ^  (punctuate  ra|f» fi^,  according  to  Torath  Emeth,  p. 
41,  Accentssystem,  xx.  §  1),  i.e.  according  to  the  measure  (so  *sb 
is  used  in  the  oldest  form  of  the  language)  of  his  intelligence,  or 
as  we  may  also  say,  of  his  culture;  for  in  these  proverbs,  which  make 
the  fear  of  God  the  highest  principle,  *>afc  means  also  understanding 
of  moral  excellence,  not  merely  the  intellectual  superiority  of 
natural  gifts.  J^PI  is  here  a  relative  conception  of  manifold  grada 
tions,  but  it  does  not  mean  renown  in  general,  but  good  renown. 
Parallel  with  i?3fe>,  £  refers  to  the  understanding  (1/01)9) ;  the 
rendering  of  Lowenstein,  "  who  is  of  false  heart,"  is  defective. 
n.]^  (synon.  of  bnaj  and  Pjjjy,  but  nowhere  else  interchanging  with 
it)  means  here  a  vero  et  recto  detortus  et  aversus  (Fl.).  Such  a  man 
who  has  not  a  good  understanding,  nor  any  certain  rule  of  judg 
ment,  falls  under  contempt  (Grcec.  Venet.  ra>  ovrarf,  els  (MJcray/iov, 
after  the  false  reading  of  nirp  instead  of  JTTP),  i.e.  he  defames  him 
self  by  his  crooked  judgment  of  men,  of  things  and  their  relations, 
and  is  on  this  account  in  no  position  rightly  to  make  use  of  them. 
Ver.  9  Better  is  he  who  is  lowly  and  has  a  servant, 

Than  he  that  makes  himself  mighty  and  is  without  bread. 
This  proverb,  like  xv.  17,  commends  the  middle  rank  of  life  with 
its  quiet  excellences.  rb%  (like  1  Sam.  xviii.  23),  from  n£j5,  cog 
nate  with  ??i?,  Svr.  '%,  to  despise,  properly  levi  pendere,  levem 
lialere  (whence  JVJ3,  scorn,  disgrace),  here  of  a  man  who  lives  in  a 
humble  position  and  does  not  seek  to  raise  himself  up.  Many  of 
the  ancients  (LXX  Symmachus,  Jerome,  Syr.,  Kashi,  Luther, 
Schultens)  explain  V  *njn  by,  and  is  a  servant  to  himself,  serves 
himself ;  but  in  that  case  the  words  would  have  been  iP'3j!>  lUjn 
(Syr.  FIK;B3  few),  or  rather  wn  tajn.  ft  12jn  would  be  'more 
appropriate,  as  thus  pointed  by  Ziegler,  Ewald,  and  liitzig.  But 
if  one  adheres  to  the  traditional  reading,  and  interprets  this,  as  it 


CHAP.  xn.  10.  255 

must  be  interpreted  :  et  cui  servn*  (Targ.,  Grose.  Venet.\  then  that 
supplies  a  better  contrast  to  DP^-lDm,  for  "  the  first  necessity  of 
an  oriental  in  only  moderate  circumstances  is  a  slave,  just  as  was 
the  case  with  the  Greeks  and  Komans  "  (FL).  A  man  of  lowly 
rank,  who  is,  however,  not  so  poor  that  he  cannot  support  a  slave, 
is  better  than  one  who  boasts  himself  and  is  yet  a  beggar  (2  Sam. 
iii.  29).  The  Hit/ipa.  often  expresses  a  striving  to  be,  or  to 
wish  to  appear  to  be,  what  the  adj.  corresponding  to  the  verb 
states,  e.g.  Win,  iBtynn ;  like  the  Greek  middles,  e^eaOat,  a^eaOai, 
cf.  D?nnn  and  o-o^l^eo-dat.  So  here,  where  with  Fleischer  we  have 
translated:  who  makes  himself  mighty,  for  -D3,  gravem  esse,  is 
etymologically  also  the  contrast  of  r6p.  The  proverb,  Sirach  x. 
26  :  Kpeicra-wv  epyatyfjievos  KOI  TrepHra-evajv  ev  Traaiv,  rj  So^a^oynei/o? 
K.al  airopwv  aprcov  (according  to  the  text  of  Fritzsche),  is  a  half 
remodelling,  half  translation  of  this  before  us. 

Ver.  10  The  righteous  knows  how  his  cattle  feel, 

And  the  compassion  of  the  godless  is  cruel. 

The  explanation :  the  righteous  taketh  care  for  the  life  of  his  beast 
(Fl.),  fails,  for  10a  is  to  be  taken  with  Ex.  xxiii.  9;  B>S3  signifies 
also  the  state  of  one's  soul,  the  frame  of  mind,  the  state  of  feelino- ; 
but  jrp  has,  as  in  the  related  proverb,  xxvii.  23,  the  meaning  of 
careful  cognizance  or  investigation,  in  conformity  with  which  one 
acts.  If  the  Tord  includes  in  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  (Ex.  xx.  10, 
xxiii.  12)  useful  beasts  and  cattle,  which  are  here  especially  meant, 
and  secures  to  them  the  reward  of  their  labour  (Deut.  xxv.  4);  if  it 
forbids  the  mutilation,  and  generally  the  giving  of  unnecessary 
pain,  to  beasts;  if  it  enjoins  those  who  take  a  bird's  nest  to  let  the 
dam  escape  (Deut.  xxii.  6  f.), — these  are  the  prefigurations  of  that 
n»m  £>s:j  njn,  and  as  the  God  of  the  Tord  thus  appears  at  the  close 
of  the  Book  of  Jonah,  this  wonderful  apology  (defensio)  of  the  all- 
embracing  compassion,  the  God  also  of  the  world-history  in  this 
sympathy  for  the  beasts  of  the  earth  as  the  type  of  the  righteous. 

In  106  most  interpreters  find  an  oxymoron  :  the  compassion  of 
the  godless  is  compassionless,  the  direct  opposite  of  compassion;  i.e. 
he  possesses  either  altogether  no  compassion,  or  he  shows  such  as  in 
its  principle,  its  expression,  and  in  its  effects  is  the  opposite  of  what 
it  ought  to  be  (Fl.).  Bertheau  believes  that  in  the  sing,  of  the  pre 
dicate  'TDK  he  is  justified  in  translating  :  the  compassion  of  the 
wicked  is  a  tyranny.  And  as  one  may  speak  of  a  loveless  love,  i.e. 
of  a  love  which  in  its  principle  is  nothing  else  than  selfishness,  so 


256  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

also  of  a  compassionless  compassion,  such  as  consists  only  in  gesture 
and  speech,  without  truth  of  feeling  and  of  active  results.  But 
how  such  a  compassionless  compassion  toward  the  cattle,  and  one 
which  is  really  cruel,  is  possible,  it  may  be  difficult  to  show. 
Hitzig's  conjecture,  ''£?"•>  sprang  from  this  thought :  the  most 
merciful  among  sinners  are  cruel — the  sinner  is  as  such  not  Dirn. 
The  LXX.  is  right  in  the  rendering,  ra  Be  o-7r\dy^va  TWV 
aaefi&v  dv€\erjfMova.  The  noun  C^D"]  means  here  not  compassion, 
but,  as  in  Gen.  xliii.  30  (LXX.  evrepa  or  ey/cara)  and  1  Kings 
iii.  26  (LXX.  fjirjTpa),  has  the  meaning  the  bowels  (properly 
tender  parts,  cf.  Arab,  rakhuma^  to  be  soft,  tender,  with  rhm\  and 
thus  the  interior  of  the  body,  in  which  deep  emotions,  and  especially 
strong  sympathy,  are  wont  to  be  reflected  (cf.  Hos.  x.  8).  The 
singular  of  the  predicate  ^"iTDK  arises  here  from  the  unity  of  the 
subject-conception  :  the  inwards,  as  Jer.  I.  12,  from  the  reference 
of  the  expression  to  each  individual  of  the  many. 
Ver.  11  He  that  tilleth  his  own  ground  is  satisfied  with  bread, 

And  he  that  followeth  after  vain  pursuits  is  devoid  of  understanding. 

Yet  more  complete  is  the  antithetic  parallelism  in  the  doublette, 
xxviii.  19  (cf.  also  Sir.  xx.  27a).  The  proverb  recommends  the 
cultivation  of  the  field  as  the  surest  means  of  supporting  oneself 
honestly  and  abundantly,  in  contrast  to  the  grasping  after  vain, 
i.e.  unrighteous  means  of  subsistence,  windy  speculations,  and  the 
like  (Fl.).  B''i?v?.  are  here  not  persons  (Bertheau),  but  things 
without  solidity  and  value  (LXX.  ^draia ;  Aquila,  Theodotion, 
/ceva),  and,  in  conformity  with  the  contrast,  not  real  business. 
Elsewhere  also  the  mas.  plnr.  discharges  the  function  of  a  neut. 
noun  of  multitude,  vid.  W}^,  principality  viii.  6,  and  D*1!?,  Ps. 
xix.  14 — one  of  the  many  examples  of  the  imperfect  use  of  the 
gender  in  Hebr.;  the  speaker  has  in  DV"i,  vana  et  inania,  not  D^K 
(Judg.  ix.  4),  but  Dnzn  (Deut.  xxxii.  47)  in  view.  The  LXX. 
erroneously  at  xxviii.  19,  and  Symmachus  and  Jerome  at  both 
places  understand  D'pn  of  slothfulness. 

Ver.  12  The  godless  lusteth  after  the  spoil  of  evil-doers ; 
But  the  root  of  the  righteous  shoots  forth. 

This  translation  is  at  the  same  time  an  explanation,  and  agrees  with 
Fleischer's  "  the  godless  strives  by  unrighteous  gain  like  the  wicked 
(iv.  14)  to  enrich  himself,  namely,  as  must  be  understood  from  the 
antithetic  members  of  the  parallelism,  in  vain,  without  thereby 
making  progress  and  gaining  anything  certain.  The  preterite,  as 


CHAP.  xn.  ID.  257 

xi.  2,  8,  etc.,  places  the  general  true  proposition  as  a  separate 
historic  principle  derived  from  experience.  In  126  jn>  stands 
elliptically  or  pregnantly  :  edet,  soil,  quod  radix  edere  solet,  sobolem 
stirpis,  ramorum,  etc.,  as  in  the  Arab,  natan  and  dnatan  are 
specially  used  without  an  obj.  of  the  spontaneousness  of  an  odour." 
•to  (from  TO,  to  spy,  to  hunt)  is  elsewhere  the  instrument  of  the 
hunt  (a  net),  here  the  object  and  end  of  it.  If  the  words  had  been 
D'jn  'TO»,  then  we  would  explain  after  D'jn  '3S&?,  Ps.  Ixxviii.  49 
(dd.  comm.  on),  and  jn  nrx,  vi.  24 ;  but  in  the  difference  of 
number,  D'jn  will  not  be  the  qualitative  but  the  subjective  personal 
genitive :  capturam  qualem  mail  caplant.  Ewald,  who  understands 
D'^n,  lib,  of  good-for-nothing- fellows,  interprets  D'jn  here,  on  the 
contrary,  as  neuter  (§  1726):  the  desire  of  the  wicked  is  an  evil 
net,i.e.  wherein  he  catches  all  manner  of  evil  for  himself.  The 
LXX.  has  here  two  proverbs,  in  which  TOO  occurs  in  the  plur. 
and  in  the  sense  of  6xvpoo/j.ara  ;  126  of  the  Ilebr.  text  is  rendered  : 
at,  6e  pl^ai  TWV  evaeficov  ev  oxpv<*>fJ<acrt,  which  Schleusner  explains 
imntotcB  enmt.  The  Hebr.  text  can  gain  nothing  from  this  variation. 
That  the  LXX.  read  fJVK  D'pnx  Bhtn  js  not  probable,  since  they 
nowhere  thus  translate  firs.  But  Reiske  and  Ziegler  have,  like 
Ewald  and  Ilitzig,  combined  }JV  of  this  proverb  with  jn*  from  }JVK 
(Arab,  wdtin^jfirmum,  perennem  esse.  Hitzig  translates  the  distich, 
after  emending  the  text  of  I2a  by  the  help  of  the  LXX.  and  the 
Arab. :  the  refuge  of  the  wicked  is  crumbling  clay,  but  the  root  of 
the  righteous  endures  (fir  from  frp).  Bottcher  also  reads  non  instead 
of  ncn,  and  translates  (vid.  p.  192, 1.  11)  :  the  refuge  of  the  wicked 
is  miry  clay,  but  the  root  of  the  righteous  holdeth  fast  (|rp  =  Arab. 
wdLin).  But  this  derivation  of  a  verb  }JT  is  not  necessary.  The 
Grcec.  Venet.  rightly,  f>%a  5e  SiKafav  MHTCI.  The  obj.  is  self- 
evident.  Raslii  reads  nan  wm  }n^  <ljo  wnti»  no.  So  also  Schul- 
tens.  The  root  giveth,  is  equivalent  to,  it  is  productive  in  bringing 
forth  that  which  lies  in  its  nature.  That  the  root  of  the  righteous 
endures  (Targ.  D$ru)  is  otherwise  expressed,  xii.  3. 

Proverbs  regarding  injurious  and  beneficial  words,  wise  hearing 
and  prudent  silence. 

Ver.  13  In  the  transgression  of  the  lips  there  lies  a  dangerous  snare  ; 
The  righteous  escapeth  from  trouble. 

The  consecutive  modus  (NW)  is  here  of  greater  weight  than  e.g. 
at  xi.  8,  where  the  connection  follows  without  it  (N2J1)  from  the 
idea  of    the  change  of   place.       The  translation:    but  the  right- 
VOL.  i.  K 


253  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


eous  .  .  .  restores  N^l  (^.11),  and  ignores  the  syllogistic  relation  of  tho 
members  of  the  proverb,  which  shows  itself  here  (cf.  the  contrary, 
xi.  9)  to  a  certain  degree  by  N¥^.     Ewald  displaces  this  relation, 
for  he  paraphrases  :  "  any  one  may  easily  come  into  great  danger 
by  means  of  inconsiderate  words  ;  yet  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the 
righteous  may  escape,  for  he  will  guard  himself  against  evil  from 
the  beginning."     He  is  right  here  in  interpreting  rm  and  JH  K'jpto 
as  the  designation  of  danger  into  which  one  is  betrayed  by  the 
transgressions  of  his  lips,  but  "inconsiderate  words"  are  less  than 
DTiSt^  y£;3.     One  must  not  be  misled  into  connecting  with  J?^3  the 
idea  of  missing,  or  a  false  step,  from  the  circumstance  that  J?^3 
means  a  step  ;  both  verbs  have,  it  is  true,  the  common  R.  t/*3  with 
the  fundamental  idea  of  placing  apart  or  separating,  but  JJ^S)  has 
nothing  to  do  with  JJb'3  (step  =  placing  apart  of  the  legs),  but 
denotes  (as  Arab,  fusuwk  fisk,  from  the  primary  meaning  dirnptioj 
diremtio)  a  sinning,  breaking  through  and  breaking  off  the  relation 
to  God  (cf.  e.g.  xxviii.  24),  or  even  the  restraints  of  morality  (x.  10). 
Such  a  sinning,  which  fastens  itself  to,  and  runs  even  among  the 
righteous,  would  not  be  called  j?B>a,  but  rather  DNtan  (xx.  9).     Ac 
cording  to  this  the  proverb  will  mean  that  sinful  words  bring  into 
extreme  danger  every  one  who  indulges  in  them  —  a  danger  which 
he  can  with  difficulty  escape;  and  that  thus  the  righteous,  who 
guards  himself  against  sinful  words,  escapes  from  the  distress  (cf. 
with   the  expression,  Eccles.  vii.  18)  into   which  one  is  thereby 
betrayed.     Jn  is  the  descriptive  and  expressive  epithet  to  CJ'plD  (cf. 
Eccles.  ix.  12)  :  a  bad  false  trap,  a  malicious  snare,  for  KJplD  is  the 
snare  which  closes  together  and  catches  the  bird  by  the  feet.     This 
proverb  is  repeated  at  xxix.  6,  peculiarly  remodelled.     The  LXX. 
has  after  ver.  13  another  distich: 

He  who  is  of  mild  countenance  findeth  mercy; 

He  who  is  litigious  oppresseth  souls. 

(niK'B3,  or  rather,  more  in  accordance  with  the  Hebrew  original  : 
oppresseth  himself,  V^'DJ.) 

Ver.  14  From  the  fruit  which  the  mouth  of  the  man  bringeth  forth  is  he 

satisfied  with  good, 
And  what  the  hands  of  the  man  accomplish  returns  back  to  him. 

The  proverb  finds  its  final  verification  in  the  last  judgment  (cf. 
Matt.  xii.  37),  but  it  is  also  illustrated  in  the  present  life.  If  the 
mouth  of  a  man  bringeth  forth  fruit,  —  namely,  the  fruit  of  whole 
some  doctrine,  of  right  guidance,  of  comforting  exhortation,  of 


CIL'.P.  XII.  13. 


peace-bringing  consolation  for  others,—  tin's  fruit  is  also  to  his  own 
advantage,  he  richly  enjoys  the  good  which  flows  out  of  his  own 
mouth,  the  blessing  he  bestows  is  also  a  blessing  for  himself.  The 
same  also  is  the  case  with  the  actions  of  a  man.  That  which  is 
done,  or  the  service  which  is  rendered  by  his  hands,  comes  back  to 
him  as  a  reward  or  as  a  punishment.  Sea  signifies  primarily  accom 
plishment,  execution,  and  is  a  twofold,  double-sided  conception:  a 
rendering  of  good  or  evil,  and  merit  on  the  side  of  men  (whether 
merited  reward  or  merited  punishment),  as  well  as  recompense,  re 
quital  on  the  side  of  God  The  first  line  is  repeated,  somewhat 
altered,  at  xiii.  2,  xviii.  20.  The  whole  proverb  is  prophetically 
echoed  in  Isa.  iii.  10  f.  The  Ken  W  has  Jahve  as  the  subject, 
or  rather  the  subject  remains  undefined,  and  "one  requites  him" 
is  equivalent  to  :  it  is  requited  to  him.  The  Chethib  seems  to  us 
more  expressive;  but  this  use  of  the  active  with  the  undefined  sub 
ject,  instead  of  the  passive,  is  certainly  as  much  in  the  Mishle  style 
(cf.  xiii.  21)  as  the  development  of  the  subject  of  the  clause  from 
a  foregoing  genitive. 

Ver.  15  The  way  of  the  fool  is  right  in  his  own  eyes, 
But  the  wise  listeueth  to  counsel. 

Other  proverbs,  like  xvi.  2,  say  that  generally  the  judgment  of  a 
man  regarding  his  character  does  not  go  beyond  a  narrow  subjec 
tivity  ;  but  there  are  objective  criteria  according  to  which  a  man 
can  prove  whether  the  way  in  which  he  walks  is  right  ;  but  the 
fool  knows  no  other  standard  than  his  own  opinion,  and  however 
clearly  and  truly  one  may  warn  him  that  the  way  which  he  has 
chosen  is  the  wrong  way  and  leads  to  a  false  end,  yet  he  obstinately 
persists;1  while  a  wise  man  is  not  so  wise  in  his  own  eyes  (iii.  7)  as 
not  to  be  willing  to  listen  to  well-meant  counsel,  because,  however 
careful  he  may  be  regarding  his  conduct,  yet  he  does  not  regard 
his  own  judgment  so  unerring  as  not  to  be  inclined  ever  anew  to 
try  it  and  let  it  stand  the  test.  Ewald  has  falsely  construed  :  yet 
whoever  hears  counsel  is  wise.  In  consequence  of  the  contrast, 
TW  and  D3n  are  the  subject  ideas,  and  with  nxj£  J?DBh  is  brought 
forward  that  which  is  in  contrast  to  the  self-complacency  of  the 
fool,  the  conduct  of  the  wise  man. 

1  Vid.  kindred  proverbs  by  Carl  Schulze,  Die  libt.  Sprichu-Srter  der  deutscTicn 
Sprache  (18GO),  p.  50,  and  M.  C.  Wahl's  Das  Sprichwort  iu  tier  hcb.-aram. 
Literatur,  u.s.ic.  (1871),  p.  31. 


200  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Yer.  16.  The  relations  of  the  subject  and  the  predicate  are  the 
same  as  in  the  preceding  verse. 

The  fool  makes  known  his  vexation  on  the  same  day  [at  once]  , 
On  the  contrary,  the  prudent  man  hideth  the  offence. 

Very  frequently  in  these  proverbs  the  first  line  is  only  defined  by 
the  adducing  of  the  second,  or  the  second  holds  itself  in  the  light 
of  the  first.  A  post-bibl.  proverb  says  that  a  man  is  known  by 
three  things  :  by  his  DID  (his  behaviour  in  drinking),  his  D'O  (his 
conduct  in  money  transactions),  and  his  DJ?3  (his  conduct  under 
deep  inward  excitement).  So  here :  he  is  a  fool  who,  if  some  in 
jury  is  done  to  him,  immediately  shows  his  vexation  in  a  passionate 
manner;  while,  on  the  contrary, the  prudent  man  maintains  silence 
as  to  the  dishonour  that  is  done  to  him,  and  represses  his  displea 
sure,  so  as  not  to  increase  his  vexation  to  his  own  injury.  Passion 
less  retaliation  may  in  certain  cases  be  a  duty  of  self-preservation, 
and  may  appear  to  be  necessary  for  the  protection  of  truth,  but 
passionate  self-defence  is  always  of  evil,  whether  the  injury  which 
is  inflicted  be  justifiable  or  unjustifiable.  Regarding  BViy,  callidus, 
vid.  p.  56;  Schultens'  comparison  of  the  Greek  ye<yv/j,vaa/j,€vo<;  is 
only  a  conceit  in  want  of  better  knowledge,  liegarding  npb  (only 
here  and  at  ver.  23)  with  nD2»,  as  inb?  (only  xi.  27)  with  ">n^D. 
vid.  Ewald,  §  170a.  Di*3  signifies  on  the  self-same  day  =  without 
delay,  immediately,  and  is  well  translated  by  the  LXX.  avGij/Aepov. 
"With  another  object,  165  is  repeated  in  23a. 

Most  of  the  remaining  parables  of  this  section  refer  to  the  right 
use  and  the  abuse  of  the  tongue. 

Ver.  17  He  that  breathes  the  love  of  truth,  utters  that  -which  is  right ; 
But  a  lying  tongue,  deceit. 

This  verse  is  similar  in  meaning  to  xiv.  5  (where  5b  =  vi.  19a)  ; 
the  second  line  of  the  distich  —  xiv.  25b.  Everywhere  else  ns£^ 
d^D  stand  together,  only  here  ITS'1  is  joined  to  n^OS  ;  vid.  regarding 
this  IT'S11  forming  an  attributive  clause,  and  then  employed  as  an 
adjective,  but  with  distinct  verbal  force,  at  vi.  19.  Viewed  super 
ficially,  the  proverb  appears  tautological  ;  it  is  not  so,  however,  but 
places  in  causal  connection  the  internal  character  of  men  and  their 
utterances  :  whoever  breathes  HJ^N,  truth  or  conscientiousness  (the 
property  of  the  pBX,  vid.  at  Ps.  xii.  2),  i.e.  lets  the  voice  of  this  be 
heard  in  his  utterances,  such  an  one  speaks  P'TC,  i.e.  uprightness, 
integrity,  that  which  is  correct,  right  (Isa.  xiv.  19,  cf.  xli.  26),  in 
relation  to  truth  in  general,  and  to  the  present  casein  particular; 


CHAP   XII.  18. 

but  he  who  B^P^'  "W,  i.e.  he  who,  against  better  knowledge  and  the 
consciousness  of  untruth,  confirms  by  his  testimony  (from  Tiy, 
revertere,  to  say  again  and  again),  therewith  gives  utterance  to  his 
impure  character,  his  wicked  intention,  proceeding  from  delight  in 
doing  evil  or  from  self-interest,  and  diverted  towards  the  injury 
of  his  neighbour.  As  ruins  and  HEriD  correspond  as  statements  of 
the  contents  of  the  utterances,  so  p"TC  and  D'npE?  as  statements  of 
their  motive  and  aim.  ""i^no  is  obj.  accus.  of  the  T1^  (from  T2n?  to 
bring  to  light,  cf.  133,  visibility)  to  be  supplied,  not  the  pred.  nom. 
dolorum  stntctor,  as  Fleischer  poetically  finds. 

Vcr.  18  There  is  that  babbleth  like  the  thrusts  of  a  sword, 
But  the  tongue  of  the  wise  is  healing. 

The  second  (cf.  xi.  24)  of  the  proverbs  beginning  with  B^J.  The 
verb  ntps  (Ntpzi),  peculiar  to  the  Hebr.,  which  in  the  modern  Hebr. 
generally  means  "to  speak  out"  (N^P  in  the  grammar:  the  pro 
nunciation)  (according  to  which  the  LXX.,  Syr.,  and  Targ.  trans 
late  it  by  "ION),  means  in  biblical  Hebr.,  especially  with  reference 
to  the  binding  of  oneself  by  an  oath  (Lev.  v.  4),  and  to  solemn 
protestations  (Num.  xxx.  7,  9,  according  to  which  Jerome,  pro- 
mittit)  :  to  utter  incautiously  in  words,  to  speak  without  thought 
and  at  random,  referred  erroneously  by  Gesenius  to  the  R.  133,  to 
be  hollow,  probably  a  word  imitative  of  the  sound,  like  the  Greek 
(3aTTapi%€iv,  to  stammer,  and  ^aTro\ojeiv^  to  babble,  which  the 
lexicographers  refer  to  a  talkative  person  of  the  name  of  BUTTO?, 
as  our  "  salbadern"  [  =  to  talk  foolishly]  owes  its  origin  to  one 
Jenaer  Bader  on  the  Saal.  Theod.  and  the  Grcec.  Venet.  give  the 
false  reading  HDia  (776^0^069).  3?.!?  rriip.'lEa  stands  loco  accusativi, 
the  3  being  regarded  as  a  noun :  (effutiens  verba)  quce  sunt  iustar 
confossionum  gladii  (Fl.).  We  also  call  such  a  man,  who  bridles 
his  loquacity  neither  by  reflection  nor  moderates  it  by  indulgent 
reference  to  his  fellow-men,  a  Schwertmaul  (sword-mouth)  or  a 
Schandmaul  (a  mouth  of  shame  =  slanderer),  and  say  that  he  has  a 
tongue  like  a  sword.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  tongue  of  the 
wise,  which  is  in  itself  pure  gentleness  and  a  comfort  to  others, 
since,  far  from  wounding,  rather,  by  means  of  comforting,  sup 
porting,  directing  exhortation,  exercises  a  soothing  and  calming 
influence.  Regarding  NDi  whence  NSfitt.  Dietrich  in  Gesenius' 

O          T  T7  ••  :  -  7 

JLex.  is  right.  The  root-meaning  of  the  verb  N£H  (cognate  nsn?  to 
be  loose,  Hiph.  to  let  go,  Hithpa.  xviii.  9,  to  show  oneself  slothful) 
is;  as  the  Arab,  kindred  word  rafd}  rofa,  raf}  raivf  (?'«/) 


2C>2  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

that  of  stilling,  softening,  soothing,  whence  arises  the  meaning  of 
healing  (for  which  the  Arab,  lias  tabb  and  'alkli)  ;  the  meaning  to 
repair,  to  mend,  which  the  Arab,  rafd  and  rafa  have,  does  not  stand 
in  a  prior  relation  to  to  heal,  as  might  appear  from  Job  xiii.  4,  but 
is  a  specializing  of  the  general  idea  of  reficere  lying  in  mitigare, 
just  as  the  patcher  is  called  aKeaTpia  =  T)7n')Tpia,1  from  a/ceo^at, 
which  means  equally  to  still  and  to  heal.  Since  thus  in  N3~i  the 
meanings  of  mitigating  and  of  healing  are  involved,  it  is  plain  that 
N21D,  as  it  means  healing  (the  remedy)  and  at  the  same  time  (cf. 
Oepairela,  Rev.  xxii.  2)  the  preservation  of  health,  iv.  22,  vi.  15, 
xvi.  24,  xxix.  1,  so  also  may  mean  mildness  (here  and  xv.  4),  tran 
quillity  (xiv.  30  ;  Eccles.  x.  4,  calm  patience  in  contrast  to  violent 
passion),  and  refreshing  (xiii.  17).  Oetinger  and  Hitzig  translate 
here  ''medicine;"  our  translation,  "healing  (the  means  of  healing)," 
is  not  essentially  different  from  it. 

Ver.  19  The  lip  of  truth  endures  for  ever, 

But  the  lying  tongue  only  while  I  wink  with  the  eye. 

None  of  the  old  translators  understood  the  phrase  ny^iN'^l ;  the 
Venet.  also,  which  follows  Kimchi's  first  explanation,  is  incorrect : 
ea>9  p^e&)?,  till  I  split  (shatter)  it  (the  tongue).  Abulwalid  is 
nearer  the  correct  rendering  when  he  takes  nynx  as  a  noun  = 
JJin  with  He  parag.  Ahron  b.  Joseph  is  better  in  rendering  the 
phrase  by  :  until  I  make  a  Jttl,  and  quite  correct  if  J?J1  (from 
yr\  =  Arab,  raf,  which  is  used  of  the  swinging  of  the  balance) 
is  taken  in  the  sense  of  a  twinkling  of  the  eye  (Schultens : 
vibramen)  ;  cf.  Orelli's  Die  hebr.  Synonyme  tier  Zeit  und  EwigTceit^ 
p.  27  f.,  where  the  synonyms  for  a  twinkling  of  the  eye,  a  moment, 
are  placed  together.  "W  (properly  progress)  has  in  this  phrase  the 
meaning,  while,  so  long  as,  and  the  cohortative  signifies,  in  contra 
distinction  to  JWS,  which  may  also  denote  an  unwilling  movement 
of  the  eyelids,  a  movement  proceeding  from  a  free  determination, 
serving  for  the  measurement  of  a  short  space  of  time,  Ewald, 
§  22Sa.  njrrix,  Jer.  xlix.  19,  1.  44,  where  Ewald  takes  njmx  ^ 
(when  I  .  .  .)  in  the  same  sense  as  nyn&riK  here,  which  is  more 
appropriate  than  the  explanation  of  Hitzig,  who  regards  H3  as 
opening  the  principal  clause,  and  attaches  to  jrnn  the  quite  too 
pregnant  signification  "  to  need  (for  an  action)  only  a  moment." 
The  lip  of  truth,  i.e.  the  lip  which  speaketh  truth,  endures  for  ever 

1  Whether  PXITTHV,  explained  neither  by  Curtius  nor  by  Flick,  stands  in  a 
relation  to  it,  we  leave  out  of  view. 


CHAP.  x:i.  20.  203 

(for  truth,  fi£N  =  ri3E!K,  is  just  the  enduring)  ;  but  the  tongue  of 

falsehood  is   only  for  a  moment,  or  a  wink  of  the  eye,  for  it  is 

soon  convicted,  and  with  disgrace  brings  to  silence;  for  a  post-bib! . 

Aram,   proverb  says  :    'KP  N^  fcOpt?  ^  Ntpt^ip,  the  truth  endures, 

the   lie  endures  not  (Sclialbatli  104a),   and  a  Hebrew    proverb  : 

&!<?$!  &  P*?  "W?,  the  lie  has  no  feet  (on  which  it  can  stand).1 

Ver.  20  Deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  him  who  deviseth  evil, 

But  those  who  devise  peace  cause  joy. 

Regarding  the  figure  of  forging,  fabricating  (LXX.,  Aquila, 
Symmachus,  and  Theodotion,  Te/cTatvetv),  or  of  ploughing,  which 
underlies  the  phrase  JH  vhn^  moliri  malum,  vid.  at  iii.  29.  That 
deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  him  who  deviseth  evil  (JTJ  l|Enrr273J  as  is 
correctly  punctuated  e.g.  by  Norzi)  appears  to  be  a  platitude,  for 
the  y~>  171  n  is  as  such  directed  against  a  neighbour.  But  in  the 
first  place,  20a  in  itself  says  that  the  evil  which  a  man  hatches 
against  another  always  issues  in  a  fraudulent,  malicious  deception 
of  the  same;  and  in  the  second  place,  it  says,  when  taken  in  con 
nection  with  20/>,  where  nn»b>  is  the  parallel  word  to  n»i_p?  that 
with  the  deception  he  always  at  the  same  time  prepares  for  him 
sorrow.  The  contrast  to  jn  HJhn  is  Dii>B>  ^yr,  and  thus  denotes 
not  those  who  give  counsel  to  contending  parties  to  conclude  peace, 
but  such  as  devise  peace,  viz.  in  reference  to  the  neighbour,  for 
f'y  means  not  merely  to  impart  counsel,  but  also  mentally  to 
devise,  to  resolve  upon,  to  decree,  2  Cliron.  xxv.  16,  Isa.  xxxii.  7  f. ; 
cf.  ^y  Yy\  Jer.  xlix.  30.  llitzig  and  Zockler  give  to  ob&  the 
general  idea  of  welfare  (that  which  is  salutary),  and  interpret  the 
nnnty  as  the  inner  joy  of  the  good  conscience.  Certainly  Dl^ 
(R.  7B>,  extraltere,  in  the  sense  of  deliverance  from  trouble)  means 
not  only  peace  as  to  the  external  relationship  of  men  with  each 
other,  but  also  both  internal  and  external  welfare.  Thus  it  is 
here  meant  of  external  welfare ;  Hitzig  rightly  compares  Jer. 
xxix.  11  with  Nahum  i.  11  to  the  contrast  between  Dlb^  and  jn. 
But  as  ntno  is  not  self-deception,  but  the  deception  of  another,  so 
also  Pinofe*  is  not  the  joy  of  those  who  devise  the  device  in  their 
hearts  for  the  deception  of  others,  but  the  joy  they  procure  for 
others.  Thoughts  of  peace  for  one's  neighbour  are  always  thoughts 
of  procuring  joy  for  him,  as  thoughts  of  evil  are  thoughts  of  deceit, 
and  thus  of  procuring  sorrow  for  him.  Thus  wh  is  an  abbre 
viated  expression  for  "W  3^31. 

1    Vid.  Duke's  RalUn.  Llumcnkse  (1844),  p.  231. 


261  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERCS. 

Ver.  21  No  evil  befalls  the  righteous, 

But  the  godless  are  full  of  evil. 

Ilitzig  translates  |}K  "sorrow,"  and  Zoekler  "injury;"  but  the 
word  signifies  evil  as  ethical  wickedness,  and  although  it  may  be 
used  of  any  misfortune  in  general  (as  in  H3i&r|3,  opp.  P*?^3)  ;  thus 
it  denotes  especially  such  sorrow  as  is  the  harvest  and  product  of 
sin,  xxii.  8,  Job  iv.  8,  Isa.  lix.  4,  or  such  as  brings  after  it  punish 
ment,  Hab.  iii.  7,  Jer.  iv.  15.  That  it  is  also  here  thus  meant  the 
contrast  makes  evident.  The  godless  are  full  of  evil,  for  the  moral 
evil  which  is  their  life-element  brings  out  of  itself  all  kinds  of 
evil ;  on  the  contrary,  no  kind  of  evil,  such  as  sin  brings  forth  and 
produces,  falls  upon  the  righteous.  God,  as  giving  form  to  human 
fortune  (Ex.  xxi.  13),  remains  in  the  background  (cf.  Ps.  xci.  10 
with  v.  1  f.)  ;  vid.  regarding  !TJX,  the  weaker  power  of  njy,  to  go 
against,  to  meet,  to  march  against,  Fleischer,  Levy's  Chald.  Wort- 
bitch,  572. 

Ver.  22  Lying  lips  are  an  abhorrence  to  Jahve, 

And  they  that  deal  truly  are  His  delight. 

The  frame  of  the  distich  is  like  xi.  1,  20.  n^ON  is  probity  as  the 
harmony  between  the  words  and  the  inward  thoughts.  The 
LXX.,  which  translates  o  Be  TTOIWV  Trio-rets,  had  in  view  D^IEK  \V&y 
(D^iOK  nbty,  cf.  Isa.  xxvi.  2);  the  text  of  all  other  translations 
agrees  with  that  commonly  received. 

Ver.  23  A  prudent  man  conceals  knowledge, 
And  a  heart-fool  proclaims  imbecility. 

In  23a  ver.  166  is  repeated,  only  a  little  changed  ;  also  16a  corre 
sponds  with  23a,  for,  as  is  there  said,  the  fool  knows  not  how  to 
keep  his  anger  to  himself,  as  here,  that  a  heart-fool  (cf.  the  lying 
mouth,  22a)  proclaims  (trumpets  forth),  or  as  xiii.  16  says,  displays 
folly  without  referring  to  himself  the  si  tacuisses.  To  this  forward 
charalatan  blustering,  which  intends  to  preach  wisdom  and  yet 
proclaims  in  the  world  mere  folly,  i.e.  nonsense  and  imbecility,  and 
thereby  makes  itself  troublesome,  and  only  to  be  laughed  at  and 
despised,  stands  in  contrast  the  relation  of  the  DViy  D1S,  homo 
callidus,  who  possesses  knowledge,  but  keeps  it  to  himself  without 
bringing  it  forth  till  an  occasion  presents  itself  for  setting  it  forth 
at  the  rio-ht  place,  at  the  right  time,  and  to  the  right  man.  The 

O  1  /  O  *  O 

right  motive  also  regulates  such  silence  as  well  as  modesty.  But 
this  proverb  places  it  under  the  point  of  view  of  prudence. 

We  take  verses  24—28  together  as  a  group.      In   these  verses 


CHAP.  XII.  -24-26.  2G5 

the  subject  is  the  means  of  rising  (in  the  world),  and  the  two  ways, 
the  one  of  which  leads  to  error,  and  the  other  to  life. 

Ver.  24  The  hand  of  the  diligent  attains  to  dominion, 
But  slothfulness  will  become  tributary. 

In  x.  4  n>C>1  was  adj.,  bnt  to  *]?  standing  beside  it ;  here  it  is  to  be 
regarded  as  adj.  to  T  (sluggish  hand)  supplied  from  24<7,  but  may 
be  equally  regarded  as  a  subst.  (slothfulness)  (viJ.  at  ver.  27). 
Regarding  H~in,  vid.  p.  211.  DB  signifies  tribute  and  service,  i.e. 
tributary  service  rendered  to  a  master.  In  xi.  296  "ny  stands  for  it. 
It  is  still  the  experience  of  to-day,  as  it  was  of  Solomon's  time, 
thnt  slothfulness  (indolence)  brings  down  to  a  state  of  servitude, 
if  not  even  deeper,  but  that  vigorous  activity  raises  to  dominion  or 
to  the  position  of  a  master,  i.e.  to  independence,  wealth,  respect, 
and  power. 

Ver.  25  Trouble  in  the  heart  of  a  man  boweth  it  down, 
And  a  friendly  word  maketh  it  glad. 

The  twofold  anomaly  that  nj&n  is  construed  as  masc.  and  21?  as 
fern,  renders  the  text  doubtful,  but  the  LXX.,  Syr.,  Targum, 
which  introduce  another  subject,  </>o/3e/Jo<?  ^070?  (J'NIO  i:n  ?)  do 
not  improve  it ;  Theodotion's  is  preferable,  who  translates  ^epi^va 
eV  KapSia  dvSpos  Karla-^et,  avrov,  and  thus  reads  ^nv\  But  the 
rhyme  is  thereby  lost.  As  1123,  Gen.  xlix.  6,  so  also  may  ab  be 
used  as  fern.,  for  one  thereby  thinks  on  K>a: ;  the  plur.  niafj  (niaai») 
according  to  which  in  Ezek.  xvi.  '60  we  find  the  sino-.  naf>  may  also 

O  T    *     '  J 

conform  to  this.  And  ronjj*  as  pred.  to  njjn  follows  the  scheme 
ii.  106,  perhaps  not  without  attraction al  co-operation  after  the 
scheme  DTin  nnaj  ntJ'p,  1  Sam.  ii.  4.  nnrr'n,  from  nntP,  occurs  only 
here;  but  !~!£'n  from  nnti>  occurs  only  twice.  2iU  ~tt  designates  in 

*/  T      T  O 

the  book  of  Joshua  and  in  Kings  (1  Kings  viii.  50)  the  divine 
promise ;  here  it  is  of  the  same  meaning  as  1  Kings  xii.  7  :  an 
appeasing  word.  Who  has  not  in  himself  had  this  experience,  how 
such  a  word  of  friendly  encouragement  from  a  sympathizing  heart 
cheers  the  sorrowful  soul,  and,  if  only  fora  time,  changes  its  sorrow 
into  the  joy  of  confidence  and  of  hope! 

Ver.  20  The  righteous  looketh  after  his  pastures, 

But  the  way  of  the  godless  leadeth  them  into  error. 

In  26a  no  acceptable  meaning  is  to  be  gained  from  the  traditional 
mode  of  vocalization.  Most  of  the  ancients  translate  in*  as  part, 
to  in',  as  it  occurs  in  post-bib.  Hebr.,  e.g.  'inn*  nan,  prevailing, 
altogether  peculiar  love.  Thus  the  Targum,  Pinan  JO  30;  Venet. 


206  THE  BOOK  OF  PHOYERBS. 

rai  (after  Kimchi);  on  the  other  hand,  Aquila,  active: 
rov  ir^aiov  (making  the  neighbour  rich),  which  the 
meaning  of  the  Kal  as  well  as  the  form  "in*  oppose ;  Luther,  "The 
righteous  man  is  better  than  his  neighbour,"  according  to  which 
Fleischer  also  explains,  "  Probably  "in*  from  ">n*?  ifkeovd^eiv,  has 
the  meaning  of  TrXeov  e^coi/,  TfXeoveicTwv,  he  gains  more  honour, 
respect,  riches,  etc.,  than  the  other,  viz.  the  unrighteous."  Yet 
more  satisfactory  Ahron  b.  Joseph  :  not  the  nobility  and  the 
name,  but  this,  that  he  is  righteous,  raises  a  man  above  others. 
In  this  sense  we  would  approve  of  the  prcestantior  altero  Justus,  if 
only  the  two  parts  of  the  proverb  were  not  by  such  a  rendering 
wholly  isolated  from  one  another.  Thus  "in*  is  to  be  treated  as  the 
fut.  of  'Vnn.  The  Syr.  understands  it  of  right  counsel ;  and  in  like 
manner  Schultens  explains  it,  with  Cocceius,  of  intelligent,  skilful 
guidance,  and  the  moderns  (e.g.  Gesenius)  for  the  most  part  of 
guidance  generally.  Ewald  rather  seeks  (because  the  proverb- 
style  avoids  the  placing  of  a  fut.  verb  at  the  commencement  of  the 
proverb  [but  cf.  xvii.  10])  to  interpret  "in*  as  a  noun  in  the  sense 
of  director,  but  his  justification  of  the  fixed  a  is  unfounded.  And 
generally  this  sense  of  the  word  is  exposed  to  many  objections. 
The  verb  Tin  signifies,  after  its  root,  to  go  about,  "  to  make  to  go 
about,"  but  is,  however,  not,  equivalent  to,  to  lead  (wherefore 
Bottcher  too  ingeniously  derives  ~in*  =  "inN*  from  inx  —  ItTX) ;  and 
wherefore  this  strange  word,  since  the  Book  of  Proverbs  is  so  rich 
in  synonyms  of  leading  and  guiding !  The  Hiph.  "Vnn  signifies  to 
send  to  spy,  Judg.  i.  23,  and  in  this  sense  the  poet  ought  to  have 
said  injH?  in* :  the  righteous  spies  out  (the  way)  for  his  neighbour, 
he  serves  him,  as  the  Targum-Talmud  would  say,  as  1*n.  Thus 
connected  with  the  obj.  accus.  the  explanation  would  certainly  be  : 
the  righteous  searches  out  his  neighbour  (Lowenstein),  he  has 
intercourse  with  men,  according  to  the  maxim,  "  Trail  schau  ivem" 
But  why  not  'injn,  but  ^JfPj  which  occurs  only  once,  xix.  7,  in  the 
Mislde,  and  then  for  an  evident  reason  ?  Therefore,  with  Doderlein, 
Dathe,  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Ziegler,  and  Ilitzig,  we  prefer  to  read  ^njnrp; 
it  is  at  least  not  necessary,  with  Hitzig,  to  change  in*  into  in*, 
since  the  Hip/til  may  have  the  force  of  the  intens.  of  the  Kal,  but 
"in*  without  the  jussive  signification  is  a  poetic  licence  for  "Vn*. 
That  lin  can  quite  well  be  used  of  the  exploring  of  the  pasture,  the 
deriv.  1W,  Job  xxxix.  18,  shows.  Thus  altered,  26a  falls  into  an 
appropriately  contrasted  relation  to  266.  The  way  of  the  godless 


CHAP.  XII    27.  ~G7 

leads  them  into  error;  the  course  of  life  to  which  they  have  given 
themselves  up  has  such  a  power  over  them  that  they  cannot  set 
themselves  free  from  it,  and  it  leads  the  enslaved  into  destruction  : 
the  righteous,  on  the  contrary,  is  free  with  respect  to  the  way  which 
he  takes  and  the  place  where  he  stays ;  his  view  (regard)  is  directed 
to  his  true  advancement,  and  he  looketh  after  his  pasture,  i.e. 
examines  and  discovers,  where  for  him  right  pasture,  i.e.  the 
advancement  of  his  outer  and  inner  life,  is  to  be  found.  With 
injnp  there  is  a  combination  of  the  thought  of  this  verse  with  the 
following,  whose  catch-word  is  i"l%  his  prey. 

Yer.  27  The  slothful  pursues  not  his  prey  ; 

But  a  precious  possession  of  a  man  is  diligence. 

The  LXX.,  Syr.,  Targ.,  and  Jerome  render  Tin*  in  the  sense  of 
obtaining  or  catching,  but  the  verbal  stem  71  n  nowhere  has  this 
meaning.  When  Fleischer  remarks,  'Jpn,  air.  Xe7.,  probably  like 
"W,  properly  to  entangle  in  a  noose,  a  net,  he  supports  his  opinion 
by  reference  to  E^L!,  which  signifies  lattice-windows,  properly, 
woven  or  knitted  like  a  net.  But  'Spn,  whence  this  D^nn,  appears 
to  be  equivalent  to  the  Arab,  khark,  jissura,  so  that  the  plur.  gives 
the  idea  of  a  manifoldly  divided  (lattice-like,  trellis-formed)  window. 
The  Jewish  lexicographers  (Men ahem,  Abulwalid,  Parchon,  also 
Juda  b.  Koreish)  all  aim  at  that  which  is  in  accord  with  the  mean 
ing  of  the  Aram.  Tpn,  to  singe,  to  roast  (=Arab.  hark):  the  slothful 
roasteth  not  his  prey,  whether  (as  Fiirst  presents  it)  because  he  is  too 
lazy  to  hunt  for  it  (Berth.),  or  because  when  he  has  it  he  prepares 
it  not  for  enjoyment  (Ewald).  But  to  roast  is  PPJf,  not  "pi,  which  is 
used  only  of  singeing,  e.g.  the  hair,  and  roasting,  e.g.  ears  of  corn, 
but  not  of  the  roasting  of  flesh,  for  which  reason  Joseph  Kimchi 
(vid.  Kimchi's  Lex.)  understands  1TS  of  wild  fowls,  and  Tin11  of  the 
singeing  of  the  tips  of  the  wings,  so  that  they  cannot  fly  away, 
according  to  which  the  Venet.  translates  ov  /u,6vei  .  .  .  r)  6-qpa  avrou. 
Thus  the  Arab,  must  often  help  to  a  right  interpretation  of  the  CLTT. 
\e<y.  Schultens  is  right:  Verbum  harak,  *pn,  apnd  Arabes  est  movere, 
ciere,  ezcitare,  KLvelv  generatirn,  et  speciatim  excitare  prcedam  e  cubiti, 
Kiveiv  TTJV  6r/pav.  The  Lat.  agitare,  used  of  the  frightening  up  and 
driving  forth  of  wild  beasts,  corresponds  with  the  idea  here,  as  e.g. 
used  by  Ovid,  Metam.  x.  538,  of  Diana : 

Aut  pronos  lepores  aut  celsum  in  cornua  cervum 

Aut  ayitat  damns. 

Thus  "p!T  together  with  ITS  gains  the  meaning  of  hunting,  and 


2G8  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

generally  of  catcl  ing  the  prey,  n»Di  is  here  incarnnte  slothful- 
ness,  and  thus  without  ellipse  equivalent  to  n'Di  B*K.  That  in  the 
contrasted  clause  pin  does  not  mean  aTroro/^w?,  decreed  (Lowen- 
stein),  nor  gold  (Targ.,  Jerome,  Venet.\  nor  that  which  is  excellent 
(Syr.),  is  manifest  from  this  contrast  as  well  as  from  x.  4,  xii.  24. 
The  clause  has  from  its  sequence  of  words  something  striking  about 
it.  The  LXX.  placed  the  words  in  a  different  order:  /CTT//XO.  Se 
rlp,Lov  dvrjp  KaOapos  (}"6n  in  the  sense  of  Arab,  khdlas).  But 
besides  this  transposition,  two  others  have  been  tried  :  pin  D1X  Jin 
Ip11,  the  possession  of  an  industrious  man  is  precious,  and  D1X  ip1  pn 
pin,  a  precious  possession  is  that  (supply  pn)  of  an  industrious  man. 
But  the  traditional  arrangement  of  the  words  gives  a  better  meaning 
than  these  modifications.  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  explained,  with 
Ewald  and  Bertheau  :  a  precious  treasure  of  a  man  is  one  who  is 
industrious,  for  why  should  the  industrious  man  be  thought  of  as 
a  worker  for  another  and  not  for  himself?  Another  explanation 
advanced  by  Kimchi :  a  valuable  possession  to  men  is  industry,  has 
the  twofold  advantage  that  it  is  according  to  the  existing  sequence 
of  the  words,  and  presents  a  more  intelligible  thought.  But  can 
pin  have  the  meaning  of  lW)n  (the  being  industrious)?  Hitzig 
reads  P~in?  to  make  haste  (to  be  industrious).  This  is  unnecessary, 
for  we  have  here  a  case  similar  to  x.  17,  where  lbB>  for  1£^  is  to 
be  expected  :  a  precious  possession  of  a  man  is  it  that,  or  when,  he 

is  industrious,  pin  briefly  for  pin  inrn.     The  accentuation  fluc- 

.  i 
tuates  between  IP"1  D1S~pni  (so  eg.  Cod.  1294),  according  to  which 

tiie  Targum  translates,  and  IP11  DIN'pnij  which,  according  to  our 
explanation,  is  to  be  preferred. 

Ver.  28  In  the  path  of  righteousness  is  life, 

And  the  way  of  its  path  is  immortality. 

All  the  old  versions  to  the  Venet.  give  ~?X  instead  of  "vK,  and  are 
therefore  under  the  necessity  of  extracting  from  n:rru  Tjill  a 
meaning  corresponding  to  this,  et<?  Odvarov,  in  which  they  are 
followed  by  Hitzig:  "a  devious  way  leadeth  to  death."  But  ^'03 
(i"9sru)  signifies  step,  and  generally  way  and  street  (vid.  at  i.  lo), 
not  "  devious  way,"  which  is  expressed,  Juclg.  v.  6,  by  JWpbpJJ  mms. 
And  that  ?N  is  anywhere  punctuated  thus  in  the  sense  of  *?$  is 
previously  improbable,  because  the  Babylonian  system  of  punctua 
tion  distinguishes  the  negative  ?S  with  a  short  Pathach,  and  the 
prepositional  ta  (Arab,  ild)  with  a  short  Chirek,  from  each  other 


CHAP.  XII.  28.  2G9 

(vid.  Pinsker.  Einl.  p.  xxii.  f.) ;  the  punctuation  2  Sam.  xiii.  16, 
Jer.  li.  3,  gives  no  support  to  the  opinion  that  here  ?X  is  vocalized 
thus  in  the  sense  of  bs,  and  it  is  not  to  be  thus  corrected.  Nothing 

v '  O 

is  more  natural  than  that  the  Chokma  in  its  constant  contrast 
between  life  and  death  makes  a  beginning  of  expressing  the  idea 
of  the  udavacria  (rid.  p.  42),  which  Aquila  erroneously  read  from 
the  JTID-ta,  Ps.  xlviii.  15.  It  has  been  objected  that  for  the  forma 
tion  of  such  negative  substantives  and  noun-adjectives  fc6  (e.a. 
bx~N7,  DJT&6)  and  not  PK  is  used  ;  but  that  ?tf  also  may  be  in  close 
connection  with  a  noun,  2  Sam.  i.  13  shows.  There  7t?"vS  is 
equivalent  to  ?B  W  7N,  according  to  which  it  may  also  be  explained 
in  the  passage  before  us,  with  Luther  and  all  the  older  interpreters, 
who  accepted  7K  in  its  negative  signification  :  and  on  (the  2  govern 
ing)  the  way  ...  is  no  death.  The  negative  ?N  frequently  stands 
as  an  intensifying  of  the  objective  K/>;  but  why  should  the  Chokma, 
which  has  already  shown  itself  bold  in  the  coining  of  new  words, 
not  apply  itself  to  the  formation  of  the  idea  of  immortality?:  the  idol 

name  ?vK  is  the  result  of  a  much  greater  linguistic  boldness.    It  is 

'  '•"•     i     .  .  i 

certain  that  ?K  is  here  not  equivalent  to  ?N;  the  Masora  is  therefore 

right  in  affirming  that  nynj  is  written  with  He  rapliatum  pro  map- 

picato  (vid.  Kimchi,  Micldol  31a,  and  in  the  Lex.\  cf.  1  Sam. 
xx.  20,  vid.  Bottcher,  §  418.  Thus :  the  way  of  their  step  is 
immortality,  or  much  rather,  since  "JJTl  is  not  a  fixed  idea,  but 
also  denotes  the  going  to  a  distance  (i.e.  the  journey),  the  be 
haviour,  the  proceeding,  the  walk,  etc. :  the  walking  (the  stepping 
over  and  passing  through)  of  their  way  is  immortality.  Rich  in 
synonyms  of  the  way,  the  Hebrew  style  delights  in  connecting 
them  with  picturesque  expressions  ;  but  ^7?.  always  means  the 
way  in  general,  which  divides  into  mmx  or  HUTU  (Job  vi.  18, 
Jer.  xviii.  5),  and  consists  of  such  (Isa.  iii.  16).  The  distich  is 
synonymous  :  on  the  path  of  righteousness  (accentuate  npix  mS2) 
is  life  meeting  him  who  walks  in  it,  and  giving  itself  to  him  as  a 
possession,  and  the  walking  in  its  path  is  immortality  (cf.  iii.  17, 
x.  28) ;  so  that  to  go  in  it  and  to  be  immortal,  i.e.  to  be  delivered 
from  death,  to  be  exalted  above  it,  is  one  and  the  same  thing.  If 
we  compare  with  this,  xiv.  326,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Chokma 
begins  (vid.  Psychol.  p.  410)  to  break  through  the  limits  of  this 
present  life, 'and  to  announce  a  life  beyond  the  reach  of  death. 
The  proverb  xii.  28  is  so  sublime,  so  weighty,  that  it  manifestly 


270  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

forms  a  period  and  conclusion.  This  is  confirmed  from  the  follow 
ing  proverb,  which  begins  like  x.  1  (cf.  5),  and  anew  stamps  the 
collection  as  intended  for  youth  : 

xiii.  1  A  wise  son  is  his  father's  correction  ; 

But  a  scorner  listens  not  to  rebuke. 

The  LXX.,  which  the  Syr.  follows,  translate  T/o?  Trm/otyr/o? 
vTrrjKoos  Trarpt,  whence  it  is  not  to  be  concluded  with  Lagarde 
that  they  read  ~>Dii  in  the  sense  of  a  Ni.  tolerativum;  they  correctly 
understood  the  text  according  to  the  Jewish  rule  of  interpretation, 
"  that  which  is  wanting  is  to  be  supplied  from  the  context."  The 
Targ.  had  already  supplied  J?»B>  from  16,  and  is  herein  followed  by 
Hitzig,  as  also  by  Glassius  in  the  Philologla  sacra.  But  such  an 
ellipse  is  in  the  Hebr.  style  without  an  example,  and  would  be  com 
prehensible  only  in  passionate,  hasty  discourse,  but  in  a  language 
in  which  the  representation  jllius  sapiens  disciplinam  patris  audit 
numbers  among  the  anomalies  is  not  in  general  possible,  and  has 
not  even  its  parallel  in  Tacitus,  Ann.  xiii.  56 :  deesse  nobis  terra, 
in  qua  vivamns — in  qua  moriemitr,  non  potest,  because  here  the  pri 
mary  idea,  which  the  one  expression  confirms,  the  other  denies,  and 
besides  no  particle,  such  as  the  1.  of  this  passage  before  us,  stands 
between  them.  Bottcher  therefore  maintains  the  falling  out  of 
the  verb,  and  writes  J'T  before  13;  but  one  says  not  ID^D  I11!,  but 
•1D10  yvv,  i.  8,  iv.  1,  xix.  27.  Should  not  the  clause,  as  it  thus 
stands,  give  a  sense  complete  in  itself?  But  "ID1O  can  hardly,  with 
Schultens  and  Ewald,  be  taken  as  part.  Hoph.  of  ID11 :  one  brought 
up  by  his  father,  for  the  usage  of  the  language  knows  "1D112  only 
as  part.  Hoph.  of  "no.  Thus,  as  Jerome  and  the  Venet.  translate : 
a  wise  son  is  the  correction  of  his  father,  i.e.  the  product  of  the 
same,  as  also  Fleischer  explains,  "  Attribution  of  the  cause,  the 
ground,  as  elsewhere  of  the  effect."  But  we  call  that  which  one 
has  trained  (vegetable  or  animal)  his  Zucht  (=Trcu&eia  in  the  sense  of 
7ratSev/j.a).  To  the  wise  son  (x.  1)  who  is  indebted  to  the  2N  ID'.D 
(iv.  1),  stands  opposed  the  Y<  (vid.  i.  22),  the  mocker  at  religion 
and  virtue,  who  has  no  ear  for  fi'W?,  strong  and  stern  words 
which  awaken  in  him  a  wholesome  fear  (cf.  xvii.  10,  Jude  2'6  :  cv 
(froftw). 

Ver.  2  From  the  fruit  of  the  mouth  of  a  man  he  himself  enjoys  good  ; 

But  the  dulight  of  the  godless  is  violence. 

2a  =  xii.  14a,  where  V3W\  for  ?3N\  A  man  with  a  fruit-bringing 
mouth,  himself  enjoys  also  the  blessing  of  his  fruit-producing 


CHAP.  XIII.  3.  271 

speech  ;  Ins  food  (cf.  /3pw/.ia,  John  iv.  34)  is  the  good  action  in 
words,  which  in  themselves  are  deeds,  and  are  followed  by  deeds ; 
this  good  action  affords  enjoyment  not  merely  to  others,  but  also 
to  himself.  Ewald  and  Bertheau  attract  73N11  to  2b ;  so  also  does 
Fleischer :  "  the  violence  which  the  &"]&  wish  to  do  to  others 
turns  back  upon  themselves ;  they  must  eat  it  also,  i.e.  bear  its  evil 
consequences."  The  thought  would  then  be  like  x.  6  :  os  impro- 
borum  obteget  violentia,  and  "to  eat  violence"  is  parallel  to  "to 
drink  (xxvi.  6)  violence  (injury)."  But  wherefore  then  the  naming 
of  the  soul,  of  which  elsewhere  it  is  said  that  it  hungers  or  satiates 
itself,  but  never  simply  (but  cf.  Luke  xii.  19)  that  it  eats  ?  On  the 
contrary,  B>B3  means  also  appetitus,  xxiii.  2,  and  particularly  wicked 
desire,  Ps.  xxvii.  12  ;  here,  as  Ps.  xxxv.  25,  the  object  of  this  desire 
(Psycho  1.  p.  202).  Regarding  DHJ2,  vid.  above,  p.  85.  There  are 
such  as  do  injury  in  a  cunning  deceitful  manner  to  their  neighbour 
to  their  own  advantage.  While  the  former  (the  righteous)  distri 
butes  to  his  neighbour  from  the  inner  impulse  without  having 
such  a  result  in  view,  yet  according  to  God's  direction  he  derives 
enjoyment  himself  therefrom  :  the  desire  of  the  latter  goes  to  Don, 
aSiKia,  and  thus  to  the  enjoyment  of  good  unrighteously  and 
violently  seized. 

Ver.  3  He  that  guard eth  liis  mouth  keepeth  his  soul ; 

He  that  openeth  wide  his  lips,  to  him  it  is  destruction. 

oa  is  extended  in  xxi.  23  to  a  distich.  Mouth  and  soul  stand  in 
closest  interchangeable  relation,  for  speech  is  the  most  immediate 
and  continuous  expression  of  the  soul  ;  thus  whoever  guards  his 
mouth  keeps  his  soul  (the  Venet.,  with  excellent  rendering  of  the 
svnonym,  6  TTjpwv  TO  OTo/ia  eavrov  ^vXacrcret,  rrjv  tyvyrjv  eauroO), 
for  he  watches  that  no  sinful  vain  thoughts  rise  up  in  his  soul  and 
come  forth  in  words,  and  because  he  thus  keeps  his  soul,  i.e.  himself, 
safe  from  the  destructive  consequences  of  the  sins  of  the  tongue. 
On  the  contrary,  he  who  opens  wide  his  lips,  i.e.  cannot  hold  his 
mouth  (LXX.  6  Se  TrpoTrerfa  ^e/Xeow),  but  expresses  unexamined 
and  unconsidered  whatever  comes  into  his  mind  and  gives  delight, 
he  is  destruction  to  himself  (supply  Nin),  or  to  him  it  is  destruction 
(supply  riNT)  ;  both  interpretations  are  possible,  the  parallelism 
brings  nearer  the  former,  and  the  parallel  xviii.  7  brings  nearer 
the  latter.  PC'S  means  to  spread  (Schultens  :  diducere  cum  ruptura 
vel  ad  ruptnram  usque\  here  the  lips,  Pi/i.  Ezek.  xvi.  25,  the  legs, 
Arab,  fashkh,  farshkh ;  vid.  regarding  the  R.  5?3,  to  extend,  to 


2"2  THE  BOOK  OF  FROVERD8. 

spread  out,  Fleischer  in  the  supplements  to  the  A.  L.  Z.  1843, 
col.  116.  Regarding  the  Mis/tie  word  nnnp,  vid.  under  x.  14. 

Yer.  4.  The  three  proverbs  (1-3)  which  refer  to  hearing  and 
speaking  are  now  followed  by  a  fourth  which,  like  vers.  2  and  3, 
speaks  of  the  K'DJ. 

The  soul  of  the  sluggard  desires,  yet  has  not; 
But  the  soul  of  the  industrious  is  richly  satisfied. 

The  view  that  the  o  in  7*9  VJ;23  is  the  cholem  compaginis,  Bottcher, 
§  835,  meets  with  the  right  answer  that  this  would  be  the  only 
example  of  a  vocal  casus  in  the  whole  of  gnomic  poetry;  but  when 
on  his  own  part  (Nem  Aehrenlese,  §  1305)  he  regards  IP'SJ  as  the 
accus.  of  the  nearer  definition  (—  l&'SJa),  he  proceeds  inadvertently 
on  the  view  that  the  first  word  of  the  proverb  is  n?.Nn»,  while  we 
read  mxno  and  1B>23  is  thus  the  nom.  of  the  subject.  ^»y  iK:S3 

T  J  ..  T  .    _ 

means  "his  (the  sluggard's)  soul"  (for  TXy  occurs  as  explanatory 
permutative  briefly  for  hsy  C;23),  as  n*-],a  n^yp  means  "its  branches 
(i.e.  of  the  fruitful  tree),"  Isa.  xvii.  6.  One  might,  it  is  true,  add 
n  to  the  following  word  here,  as  at  xiv.  13  ;  but  the  similar  expres 
sion  appertaining  to  the  syntax  ornata  occurs  also  2  Sam.  xxii.  33, 
Ps.  Ixxi.  7,  and  elsewhere,  where  this  is  impracticable.  Meiri 
appropriately  compares  the  scheme  Ex.  ii.  6,  she  saw  him,  viz.  the 
boy.  AVith  reference  to  the  JW  here  violently  (cf.  xxviii.  1)  intro 
duced,  Bottcher  rightly  remarks,  that  it  is  an  adverb  altogether  like 
necquidquam,  xiv.  6,  xx.  4,  Ps.  Ixviii.  21,  etc.,  thus :  appetit  nec- 
quidquam  anima  ejus,  scilicet  pigri.  4i  shows  the  meaning  of  the 
desire  that  has  not,  for  there  firm  occurs,  a  favourite  strong  Mi  side 
word  (xi.  25,  xxviii.  25,  etc.)  for  abundant  satisfaction  (the  LXX. 
here,  as  at  xxviii.  25,  ev  eVi^eXe/a,  sc.  eaovrai,  instead  of  which, 
Montfaucon  supposed  TTi/ieXeuz,  which  is,  however,  a  word  not 
authenticated).  The  slothful  wishes  and  dreams  of  prosperity  and 
abundance  (cf.  xxi.  25  f.,  a  parallel  which  the  Syr.  has  here  in 
view),  but  his  desire  remains  unsatisfied,  since  the  object  is  not 
gained  but  only  lost  by  doing  nothing ;  the  industrious  gain,  and 
that  richly,  what  the  slothful  wishes  for,  but  in  vain. 

Yer.  5.  Two  proverbs  of  the  character  of  the  righteous  and  of 

.  ^ 

the  effect  of  righteousness  : 

A  deceitful  thing  the  righteous  hateth  ; 

But  the  godless  disgraceth  and  putteth  to  shame. 

AVith  -HI  in  the  sphere  of  an  intelligible  generality  (as  here  of 
falsehood,  or  Ps.  xli.  9  of  worthlessness)  a  concrete  event  is  in 


CHAP.  XIII.  6.  273 

view,  as  with  *&[  in  the  following  plur.  a  general  fact  is  separated 
into  its  individual  instances  and  circumstances  (vid.  at  Ps.  Ixv.  4)  ; 
for  in  means  not  only  the  word  in  which  the  soul  reveals  itself, 
but  also  any  fact  in  which  an  inner  principle  or  a  general  fact  or 
a  whole  comes  forth  to  view.  The  righteous  hateth  all  that  bears 
in  it  the  character  of  a  falsehood  (punctuate  ipBp?1;!  with  Gaja, 
cf.  xii.  19),  but  the  godless  .  .  .  Should  we  now,'  with  Bertheau, 
Hitzig,  and  others,  translate  «  acteth  basely  and  shamefully  "  1  It 
is  true  that  both  Hiphs.  may  be  regarded  as  transitive,  but  this 
expression  gives  no  right  contrast  to  5a,  and  is  pointless.  We 
have  seen  at  x.  5  that  B*2n,  like  ^3fc>n,  has  also  a  causative  signi 
fication  :  to  put  to  shame,  i.e.  bring  shame  upon  others,  and  that 
xix.  26,  where  vanm  B*ao  are  connected,  this  causative  significa 
tion  lies  nearer  than  the  intrinsically  transitive.  Thus  "it  will 
also  here  be  meant,  that  while  the  righteous  hateth  all  that  is  false 
or  that  is  tainted  by  falsehood,  the  godless  on  the  contrary  loves 
to  disgrace  and  to  put  to  shame.  But  it  is  a  question  whether  B*N1» 
is  to  be  derived  from  K:N3  =  ^  and  thus  is  of  the  same  meaning 
as  B»T  ;  Btei,  Isa.  xxx.  5,  which  there  signifies  pudefactum  esse, 
is  pointed  t^N3h,  and  is  thus  derived  from  a  B^  =  Bfa,  vid.  2  Sam. 
xix.  6.  But  B*K3n  occurs  also  as  Hiph.  of  Btea,  and  means  tran 
sitively  to  make  of  an  evil  savour,  Gen.  xxxiv.  30,  cf.  Ex.  v.  21, 
as  well  as  intransitively  to  come  into  evil  savour,  1  Sam.  xxvii.  12. 
In  this  sense  of  putidum  faciens,  bringing  into  evil  savour,  &xy 
occurs  here  as  at  xix.  26,  suitably  along  with  TfirV;  xix.  26  is  the 
putidum  facere  by  evil  report  (slander),  into  which  the  foolish  son 
brings  his  parents,  here  by  his  own  evil  report,  thus  to  be  thought 
of  as  brought  about  by  means  of  slander.  The  old  translators  here 
fall  into  error  ;  Luther  renders  both  Hiphils  reflexively  ;  only  the 
Venet.  (after  Kimchi)  is  right  :  o£a><rei  (from  an  6£ovv  as  trans,  to 
o&lv)  xal  arifMMret,  he  makes  to  be  of  ill  odour  and  dishonours. 
Ver.  6  Righteousness  protecteth  an  upright  walk, 

And  godlessness  bringeth  sinners  to  destruction. 

The  double  thought  is  closely  like  that  of  xi.  5,  but  is  peculiarly 
and  almost  enigmatically  expressed.  As  there,  n,rty  and  n^Kn  are 
meant  of  a  twofold  inner  relation  to  God,  which  consists  of  a 
ruling  influence  over  man's  conduct  and  a  determination  of  his 
walk.  But  instead  of  naming  the  persons  of  the  ?JV|  ""^n  and 
C\xan  as  the  objects  of  this  influence,  the  proverb  uses  the  abstract 
expression,  but  with  personal  reference,  ^n'Dn  and  nssn,  and 


VOL.  I. 


8 


274  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

designates  in  two  words  the  connection  of  this  twofold  character 

o 

with  the  principles  of  their  conduct.  What  is  meant  by  "HW1  and 
e£)pri  proceeds  from  the  contrasted  relationship  of  the  two  (cf. 
xxii.  12).  -iS3  signifies  obtervare,  which  is  not  suitable  here,  but 
also  tueri  (rvipelv),  to  which  ^p  (rid.  at  xi.  3,  and  in  Gesen. 
Thesaurus'),  nut  so  much  in  the  sense  of  "  to  turn  upside  down," 
pervertere  (as  xi.  3,  Ex.  xxiii.8),  as  in  the  sense  of  "to  overthrow," 
evertere  (as  e.g.  xxi.  12),  forms  a  fitting  contrast.  He  who  walks 
forth  with  an  unfeigned  and  untroubled  pure  mind  stands  under 
the  shield  and  the  protection  of  righteousness  (cf.  with  this  proso 
popoeia  Ps.  xxv.  21),  from  which  such  a  walk  proceeds,  and  at  the 
same  time  under  the  protection  of  God,  to  whom  righteousness 
appertains,  is  well-pleasing ;  but  he  who  in  his  conduct  permits 
himself  to  be  determined  by  sin,  godlessness  (cf.  Zech.  v.  8)  from 
which  such  a  love  for  sin  springs  forth,  brings  to  destruction  ;  in 
other  words  :  God,  from  whom  the  ytjn,  those  of  a  perverse  disposi 
tion,  tear  themselves  away,  makes  the  sin  their  snare  by  virtue  of 
the  inner  connection  established  by  Him  between  the  nj?Eh  and 
the  destruction  (Isa.  ix.  17).  In  the  LXX.  this  6th  verse  was 
originally  wanting  ;  the  translation  in  the  version  of  Aquila,  in 
the  Complut.  and  elsewhere,  which  the  Syr.  follows,  falsely  makes 
nNEn  the  subj. :  rovs  Se  ao-e/3et?  <£auXou9  Trotet  apapria. 
Ver.  7.  Two  proverbs  of  riches  and  poverty  :— 

There  is  one  who  maketh  himself  rich  and  hath  nothing  ; 

There  is  another  who  representeth  himself  poor  amid  great  riches. 
A  sentence  which  includes  in  itself  the  judgment  which  xii.  9 
expresses.  To  the  Hit/ipa.  I3?nn  (to  make  oneself  of  importance) 
there  are  associated  here  two  others,  in  the  meaning  to  make  one 
self  something,  without  anything  after  it,  thus  to  place  oneself 
so  or  so,  Ewald,  §  124a.  To  the  clauses  with  \  there  is  supplied  a 
self-intelligible  17. 

Ver.  8  A  ransom  for  a  man's  life  are  his  riches ; 

But  the  poor  heareth  no  threatening. 

Bertheau  falls  into  error  when  he  understands  nnya  of  warning  ; 
the  contrast  points  to  threatening  with  the  loss  of  life.  The 
wealth  of  the  rich  before  the  judgment  is  not  here  to  be  thought 
of ;  for  apart  from  this,  that  the  Tord  only  in  a  single  case 
permits,  or  rather  ordains  (Ex.  xxi.  29  f.),  ransom  from  the  punish 
ment  of  death,  and  declares  it  in  all  other  cases  inadmissible, 
Num.  xxxv.  31  f.  (one  might  indeed  think  of  an  administration  of 


CHAP.  XIII.  9.  275 

justice  not  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  Mosaic  law,  or  altogether 
accessible  to  bribery),  8b  does  not  accord  therewith,  since  the  poor 
in  such  cases  would  fare  ill,  because  one  would  lay  hold  on  his 
person.  But  one  may  think  e.g.  on  waylayers  as  those  introduced 
as  speaking  i.  11-14.  The  poor  has  no  room  to  fear  that  such 
will  threateningly  point  their  swords  against  his  breast,  for  there  is 
nothing  to  be  got  from  him:  he  has  nothing,  one  sees  it  in  him  and 
he  is  known  as  such.  But  the  rich  is  a  valuable  prize  for  them, 
and  he  has  to  congratulate  himself  if  he  is  permitted  to  escape 
with  his  life.  Also  in  the  times  of  war  and  commotion  it  may 
be  seen  that  riches  endanger  the  life  of  their  possessor,  and  that  in 
fortunate  cases  they  are  given  as  a  ransom  for  his  life,  while  his 
poverty  places  the  poor  man  in  safety.  To  ysv  K>  Hitzig  fittingly 
compares  Job  iii.  18,  xxxix.  7 :  he  does  not  hear,  he  has  no  need 
to  hear.  Michaelis,  Umbreit,  LoVenstein  (who  calls  to  remem 
brance  the  state  of  things  under  despotic  governments,  especially 
in  the  East)  also  explain  Sb  correctly  ;  and  Fleischer  remarks  : 
pauper  minas  hostile*  non  audit,  i.e.  non  minatur  ei  Jiostis.  Ewald's 
syntactic  refinement :  "  Yet  he  became  poor  who  never  heard  an 
accusation,"  presents  a  thought  not  in  harmony  with  8a. 

The  three  following  proverbs  in  vers.  9-11  have  at  least  this  in 
common,  that  the  two  concluding  words  of  each  correspond  with 
one  another  almost  rhythmically. 

Ver.  9  The  light  of  the  righteous  burneth  joyously, 
And  the  lamp  of  the  godless  goeth  out. 

The  second  line  =  xxiv.  206,  cf.  xx.  20.  In  the  Book  of  Job 
xviii.  5  f.,  -jyT  D'jJBh  nix  and  1JTP  V^y  h3  (cf.  xxi.  17)  stand  to 
gether,  and  there  is  spoken  of  (xxix.  3)  a  divine  "V?  as  well  as  a 
divine  nix  which  enlightens  the  righteous ;  however,  one  must  say 
that  the  poet,  as  he,  vi.  3,  deliberately  calls  the  Tord  TIX,  and  the 
commandment,  as  derived  from  it  and  separated,  13,  so  also  here  de 
signedly  calls  the  righteous  nix,  viz.  DVn  nix  (iv.  18,  cf.  2  Pet.  i.  19), 
and  the  godless  13,  viz.  plin  13, — the  former  imparts  the  sunny  day 
light,  the  latter  the  light  of  tapers  set  in  darkness.  The  authentic 
punctuation  is  D^TmiX,  Ben-Naphtali's  is  '"*  ">1X  without  Makkeph. 
To  nSB*  Hitzig  compares  the  "  laughing  tongue  of  the  taper"  of 
Meiclani,  iii.  475;  Kimchi  also  the  "  laughing,  i.e.  amply  measured 
span,  prill?  nSD,"  of  the  Talmud  ;  for  the  light  laughs  when  it 
brightly  shines,  and  increases  rather  than  decreases;  in  Arab,  samulia 
has  in  it  the  idea  of  joy  directly  related  to  that  of  liberality.  The 


276  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


LXX.  translates  riDE*  incorrectly  by  SiaTravros,  and  has  a  distich 
following  ver.  9,  the  first  line  of  which  is  -^rv^al  SoXiat,  (n*^1  &' 
TrXavtavrat,  ev  afjiapriais,  and  the  second  line  is  from  Ps.  xxxvii. 

Ver.  10  Nothing  comes  by  pride  but  contention  ; 

But  wisdom  is  with  those  who  receive  counsel. 

The  restrictive  PI  (only)  does  not,  according  to  the  sense,  belong  to 
pin  (by  pride),  but  to  ns?D,  vid.  under  Ps.  xxxii.  6  and  Job  ii.  10. 
Of  ]W  =  there  is,  vid.  under  x.  24.  Bertheau's  "  one  causes  "  is  not 
exact,  for  u  one  "  [man]  is  the  most  general  personal  subject,  but 
jry  is  in  such  cases  to  be  regarded  as  impersonal  :  by  pride  is 
always  a  something  which  causes  nothing  but  quarrel  and  strife, 
for  the  root  of  pride  is  egoism.  Line  second  is  a  variant  to  xi.  26. 
Bescheidenheit  (modesty)  is  in  our  old  [German]  language  exactly 
equivalent  to  Klugheit  (prudence).  But  here  the  D^V  are  more 
exactly  designated  as  permitting  themselves  to  be  advised  ;  the 
elsewhere  reciprocal  Yffi  has  here  once  a  tolerative  signification, 
although  the  reciprocal  is  also  allowable  :  with  such  as  recipro 
cally  advise  themselves,  and  thus  without  positiveness  supplement 
each  his  own  knowledge  by  means  of  that  of  another.  Most  in 
terpreters  regard  106  as  a  substantival  clause,  but  why  should  not 
JJT1  be  carried  forward  ?  With  such  as  permit  themselves  to  be 
advised,  or  are  not  too  proud  to  sustain  with  others  the  relation 
of  giving  and  receiving,  there  is  wisdom,  since  instead  of  hatred 
comes  wisdom  —  the  peaceful  fruit  resulting  from  an  interchange 
of  views. 

Ver.  11  Wealth  by  means  of  fraud  always  becomes  less  ; 

But  he  that  increaseth  it  by  labour  gains  always  more. 

We  punctuate  baPIO'fln  (with  Makkeph,  as  in  Ven.  1521,  Antw. 
1582,  Frank.-on-the-Oder  1595,  Gen.  1618,  Leyden  1662),  not 
72HD  pn  (as  other  editions,  and  e.g.  also  Lowenstein)  ;  for  the  mean 
ing  is  not  that  the  wealth  becomes  less  by  ^nn  (Targ.,  but  not  the 
Syr.),  or  that  it  is  less  than  tal  (Umbreit),  but  bsnD'pn  is  one  idea  : 
wealth  proceeding  from  ^nn  ;  but  $>nn,  properly  a  breath  (Theod. 
diro  ar/Mov  or  ar/uoW),  then  appearance  without  reality  (Aquila, 
airo  fjLaTaioTrjros),  covers  itself  here  by  that  which  we  call  swindle, 
i.e.  by  morally  unrestrained  fraudulent  and  deceitful  speculation  in 
contrast  to  solid  and  real  gain.  The  translations:  eVtcrTrouSa^o/ieVr; 
//-era  avo^ias  (LXX.),  vTrepcrTrov^a^of^evrj  (Symmachus,  Quinta1), 

1  [A  fragment  of  an  anonymous  translation,  so  called  from  the  place  it  holds 
in  Origen's  Hexa2>la.~\ 


CHAP.  XIII.  12.  277 


festinata  (Jerome),  do  not  necessarily  suppose  the  phrase 
=  i5nhp,  xx.  21  Ken,  for  wealth  which  comes  tano  is  obtained  in  a 
windy  (unsubstantial)  manner  and  as  if  by  storm,  of  which  the 
proverb  holds  good  :  "  so  gewonnen  so  zerronnen  "  (=  quickly  come, 
quickly  go).  '2$®  needs  neither  to  be  changed  into  that  un- 
hebraic  ^3pp  (Hitzig)  nor  into  the  cognate  ?n*3O  (Ewald),  but 
yet  inferior  to  ^3PID  in  the  content  of  its  idea.  The  contrast  of  one 
who  by  fraud  and  deception  quickly  arrives  at  wealth  is  one  who 
brings  it  together  in  his  hand,  eVt  %etf»o5  (  Venet.),  i.e.  always  as 
often  as  he  can  bear  it  in  his  hand  and  bring  it  forth  (Ewald, 
Bertheau,  Elster,  and  Lagarde),  or  according  to  the  measure  of  the 
hand,  Kara  %et/?a  (which  means  "according  to  external  ability"), 
so  that  h?,  which  is  applied  to  the  formation  of  adverbs,  e.g.  Ps. 
xxxi.  24  (Hitzig),  —  by  both  explanations  T-^JJ  has  the  meaning  of 
"  gradually,"  —  is  used  as  in  the  post-bib.  Hebr.  T  ^  T  i>y  =  BJflD 
BVO,  e.g.  Schabbath  156a  (vid.  Aruch  under  *?$)  (distinguish  from 
Tl  =  with  thought,  intentionally,  Beraclwth  526).  There  is 
scarcely  a  word  having  more  significations  than  T.  Connected 
with  *?y,  it  means  at  one  time  side  or  place,  at  another  mediation 
or  direction  ;  that  which  is  characteristic  here  is  the  omission  of 
the  pronoun  (iT^P,  HT"^)-  The  LXX-  translates  V  *?y  with  the 
unrestrained  freedom  which  it  allows  to  itself  by  per  evaefteias, 
and  has  following  irK^dwOria-eraL  another  line,  SUaios  oliereipei 
Kal  KL^pa  (from  Ps.  xxxvii.  26). 

The  figures  of  paradise  in  vers.  12  and  14  require  us  to  take 
along  with  them  the  intermediate  verse  (13). 

Ver.  12  Deferred  waiting  maketh  the  heart  sick, 
And  a  tree  of  life  is  a  wish  accomplished. 

Singularly  the  LXX.  Kpei<r<rwv  evap^o/juevo1?  /3or]6a)v  fcapStfy  fol 
lowed  by  the  Syr.  (which  the  Targ.  transcribes1)  :  Better  is  he 
who  begins  to  help  than  he  who  remains  in  hesitating  expectation, 
by  which  r6nn  is  doubled,  and  is  derived  once  from  pTHPI.  to  wait, 
and  the  second  time  from  ^nn,  to  begin.  If  the  LXX.,  with  its 
imitators,  deteriorates  to  such  a  degree  proverbs  so  clear,  beautiful, 
and  inviolable,  what  may  one  expect  from  it  in  the  case  of  those  not 
easily  understood  !  ^p  signifies  also,  Isa.  xviii.  2,  to  be  widely 
extended  (cf.  Arab,  meshak),  here  in  the  sense  of  time,  ias  W??> 
to  prolong,  Isa.  xiii.  22,  and  post-bib.  i»?n  Tjfcrb,  the  course/  of  time. 

1  That  the  Targum  of  the  Proverbs  is  a  Jewish  elaboration  of  t|ie  Peshito 
text,  vid.  Noldeke  in  Merx'  Archie,  Ed.  ii.  pp.  246-49. 


278 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


Regarding  n^nin,  vid.  at  x.  28,  where  as  xi.  27  rnpn,  here  njsn,  as 
also  Ps.  Ixxviii.  29  of  the  object  of  the  wish,  and  with  NirTiri  the 
sense  of  being  fulfilled  (cf.  Josh.  xxi.  43),  as  there  with  tfan  in  the 
sense  of  accomplishing  or  performing.  Extended  waiting  makes 
the  heart  sick,  causes  heart- woe  (r6no,  part.  fern.  Hiph.  of  nbn,  to 
be  slack,  feeble,  sick ;  R.  f>n,  to  loosen,  to  make  loose) ;  on  the"  con 
trary,  a  wish  that  has  been  fulfilled  is  a  tree  of  life  (cf.  p.  32),  of  a 
quickening  and  strengthening  influence,  like  that  tree  of  paradise 
which  was  destined  to  renew  and  extend  the  life  of  man. 
Ver.  13  "Whoever  despiseth  the  word  is  in  bonds  to  it, 

And  he  that  feareth  the  commandment  is  rewarded. 

The  word  is  thought  of  as  ordering,  and  thus  in  the  sense  of  the 
commandment,  e.g.  1  Sam.  xvii.  19,  Dan.  ix.  23,  25.     That  which 
is  here  said  is  always  true  where  the  will  of  a  man  has  subordi 
nated  itself  to  the  authoritative  will  of  a  superior,  but  principally 
the  proverb  has  in  view  the  word  of   God,  the  myp  Kar  e|.  as 
the  expression  of   the  divine  will,  which  (vi.  3)  appears   as    the 
secondary,  with  the    mm,  the  general  record  of  the  divine  will. 
Regarding  h  ra  of  contemptuous,  despiteful  opposition,  vid.  at  vi. 
30,  cf.  xi.  12.     Joel  (vid.  p.  136,  note)  records  the  prevailing  tradi 
tion,   for  he   translates :    "  Whoever  despises   advice  rushes  into 
destruction  ;  whoever  holds  the  commandment  in  honour  is  per 
fect."     But  that  DJjJB*  is  to  be  understood  neither  of  perfection  nor 
of  peace  (LXX.  and  Jerome),  but  means  compensalitur  (here  not 
in  the  sense  of  punishment,  but  of  reward),  we  know  from  xi.  31. 
The  translation  also  of  b  brp    by   «  he  rushes  into  destruction  " 
(LXX.  KaTa(f)6apj]crerai,  which  the  Syr.-Hexap.  repeats ;  Luther, 
"he  destroys  himself;"  the  Venet.  ol^crerai  ol,  periet  sibi)  fails, 
for  one  does  not  see  what  should  have  determined  the  poet  to 
choose  just  this  word,  and,  instead  of  the  ambiguous  dat.  ethicus,  not 
rather  to  say  to  felTP.     So  also  this  krv  is  not  with  Gesenius  to 
be  connected  with  bn  =  Arab,  khabl,  corrumpere,  but  with  ban  = 
Arab,  habl,  ligare,  obligare.     Whoever  places  himself  contemptu 
ously  against  a  word  which  binds  him  to  obedience  will  neverthe 
less  not   be  free  from  that  word,  but  is   under  pledge  until  he 
redeem  the  pledge  by  the  performance  of  the  obedience  refused, 
or  till  that  higher  will  enforce  payment  of  the  debt  withheld  by 
visiting  with  punishment.     Jerome  came  near  the  right  interpre 
tation :  ipse  se  in  futurum  obligat ;  Abulwalicl  refers  to  Ex.  xxii. 
25 ;  and  Parchon,  Rashi,  and  others  paraphrase :  V^y  13BTDJV  jrty'o, 


CHAP.  XIII.  14,  15. 


279 


he  is  confiscated  as  by  mortgage.  Schultens  has,  with  the  correct 
reference  of  the  "6  not  to  the  contemner,  but  to  the  word,  well  estab 
lished  and  illustrated  this  explanation  :  he  is  pledged  by  the  word, 
Arab,  marhwan  (raliyii),  viz.  pigneratus  poence  (Livius,  xxix.  36). 
Ewald  translates  correctly  :  he  is  pledged  to  it  ;  and  Hitzig  gives 
the  right  explanation  :  "  A  r6hq  [a  pledge,  cf.  xx.  16]  is  handed 
over  to  the  offended  law  with  the  n^an  [the  bad  conduct]  by  the 
despiser  himself,  which  lapses  when  he  lias  exhausted  the  forbear 
ance,  so  that  the  punishment  is  inflicted."  The  LXX.  has 
another  proverb  following  ver.  13  regarding  vto?  SoX,tos  and 
ot/ceV^5  <ro(/>o5  ;  the  Syr.  has  adopted  it  ;  Jerome  has  here  the  pro 
verb  of  the  animce  dolosce  (vid.  at  ver.  9). 

Ver.  14  The  doctrine  of  the  wise  man  is  a  fountain  of  life, 

To  escape  the  snares  of  death. 

An  integral  distich,  vid.  p.  8  of  the  Introduction.  Essentially  like 
Ha,  x.  11  says,  "  a  fountain  of  life  is  the  mouth  of  the  righteous." 
The  figure  of  the  fountain  of  life  with  the  teleological  'w  TiD^>  (the 
b  of  the  end  and  consequence  of  the  action)  is  repeated  xiv.  27. 
The  common  non-biblical  figure  of  the  laquei  mortis  leads  also 
to  the  idea  of  death  as  B^  [a  fowler],  Ps.  xci.  3.  If  it  is  not 
here  a  mere  formula  for  the  dangers  of  death  (Hitzig),  then  the 
proverb  is  designed  to  state  that  the  life  which  springs  from  the 
doctrine  of  the  wise  man  as  from  a  fountain  of  health,  for  the  dis 
ciple  who  will  receive  it,  communicates  to  him  knowledge  and 
strength,  to  know  where  the  snares  of  destruction  lie,  and  to  hasten 
with  vigorous  steps  away  when  they  threaten  to  entangle  him. 

Four  proverbs  follow,  whose  connection  appears  to  have  been 
occasioned  by  the  sound  of  their  words  ($Ofe>  ...  ^3.  njni  .  .  .  JTO, 


Ver.  15  Fine  prudence  produceth  favour  ; 

But  the  way  of  the  malicious  is  uncultivated. 

Regarding  2iD  73tJ>  (thus  to  be  punctuated,  without  Makceph  with 
Mnuach,  after  Codd.  and  old  editions),  vid.  p.  84;  for  the  most 
part  it  corresponds  with  that  which  in  a  deep  ethical  sense  we  call 
line  culture.  Regarding  \F\\,  vid.  at  x.  10  :  it  is  not  usecj.  here,  as 
there,  impersonally,  but  has  a  personal  subject  :  he  brings  forth, 
causes.  Fine  culture,  which  shows  men  how  to  take  the  right  side 
and  in  all  circumstances  to  strike  the  right  key,  exercises  (a  kindly 
heart-winning  influence,  not  merely,  as  would  be  expressed  by 
jn  Ni'D1;,  to  the  benefit  of  its  possessor,  but,  as  is  expressed  by 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

ID  W.}  such  as  removes  generally  a  partition  wall  and  brings  men 
closer  to  one  another.  The  in>K  \_perennis],  touching  it  both  for 
the  eye  and  the  ear,  forms  the  contrast  to  \r\  \r\\  This  word,  an 
elative  formation  from  jrv  =  ^,  denotes  that  which  stretches  itself 
far,  and  that  with  reference  to  time :  that  which  remains  the  same 
during  the  course  of  time.  "  That  which  does  not  change  in  time, 
continuing  the  same,  according  to  its  nature,  strong,  firm,  and  thus 
fJTK  becomes  the  designation  of  the  enduring  and  the  solid,  whose 
quality  remains  always  the  same."  Thus  Orelli,  Die  heir.  Synonyme 
der  Zeit  u.  Eivigkeit,  1871.  But  that  in  the  passage  before  us  it 
denotes  the  way  of  the  DHJ1  as  "endlessly  going  forward,"  the 
explanation  of  Orelli,  after  Bottcher  (Collectanea,  p.  135),  is  with 
drawn  by  the  latter  in  the  new  Aehrenlese  (where  he  reads  IJVK  an 
"  constant  strife").  And  JJVK  *?rQ  (Deut.  xxi.  4)  does  not  mean 
"  a  brook,  the  existence  of  which  is  not  dependent  on  the  weather 
and  the  season  of  the  year,"  at  least  not  in  accordance  with  the 
traditional  meaning  which  is  given  Sota  ix.  5  (cf.  the  Gemara), 
but  a  stony  valley ;  for  the  Mishna  says :  npp  yjOBtoa  JTVK,  i.e.  JJTK  is 
here,  according  to  its  verbal  meaning,  equivalent  to  nti>p  (hard). 
We  are  of  the  opinion  that  here,  in  the  midst  of  the  discussion  of 
the  law  of  the  nsfny  rbsy  (the  ritual  for  the  atonement  of  a  murder 
perpetrated  by  an  unknown  hand),  the  same  meaning  of  the  }1VK  is 
certified  which  is  to  be  adopted  in  the  passage  before  us.  Maimuni1 
(in  Sota  and  Hilchoth  Rozeach  ix.  2)  indeed,  with  the  Mishna  and 
Gemara,  thinks  the  meaning  of  a  "  strong  rushing  wady "  to  be 
compatible ;  but  npp  is  a  word  which  more  naturally  denotes  the 
property  of  the  ground  than  of  a  river,  and  the  description,  Deut. 
xxi.  4  :  in  a  flVN  ?H3,  in  which  there  is  no  tillage  and  sowino- 
demands  for  bfU  here  the  idea  of  the  valley,  and  not  primarily  that 
of  the  valley-brook.  According  to  this  tradition,  the  Targum 
places  a  NB'jpPi  in  the  Peshito  translation  of  156,  and  the  Venet. 
translates,  after  Kimchi,  6So?  Se  avraprwv  (of  avraprfc  from 
dvTaipeuh  la^vpa.  The  fundamental  idea  of  remaining  like  itself, 
continuing,  passes  over  into  the  idea  of  the  firm,  the  hard,  so  that 
IJTK  is  a  ford  that  interchanges  with  J£D,  Num.  xxiv.  21,  and  serves 
as  a  figurative  designation  of  the  rocky  mountains,  Jer.  xlix.  19, 
and  thd  rocky  framework  of  the  earth,  Mic.  vi.  2.  Thus  the 
meaning  of  hardness  (irerpw^,  Matt.  xiii.  5)  connects  itself  with 
1  [=H  Moses  b.  Maimun  =  Ramlam,  so  called  by  the  Jews  from  the  initial 
letters  oif  his  name  =  Maimonides,  d.  1204.] 


CHAP.  XIII.  1C,  17.  281 

the  word,  and  at  the  same  time,  according  to  Deut.  xxi.  4,  of 
the  uncultivable  and  the  uncultivated.  The  way  of  the  B'H^Q,  the 
treacherous  (vid.  p.  84),  i.e.  the  manner  in  which  they  transact 
with  men,  is  stiff,  as  hard  as  stone,  and  repulsive ;  they  follow 
selfish  views,  never  placing  themselves  in  sympathy  with  the  con 
dition  of  their  neighbour ;  they  are  without  the  tenderness  which 
is  connected  with  fine  culture  ;  they  remain  destitute  of  feeling  in 
things  which,  as  we  say,  would  soften  a  stone.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  give  a  catalogue  of  the  different  meanings  of  this  )rvN,  such  as 
vorago  (Jerome),  a  standing  bog  (TJmbreit),  an  ever  trodden  way 
(Bertheau),  etc.;  Schultens  offers,  as  frequently,  the  relatively  best : 
at  via  perfidorum  pertinacissime  tension;  but  JIV  does  not  mean  to 
strain,  but  to  extend.  The  LXX.  has  between  15a  and  15& 
the  interpolation  :  TO  Be  yvuvai  VO/JLOV  Biavoias  earlv  a<yadtj<;. 

Ver.  16  Every  prudent  man  acteth  with  understanding ; 
But  a  fool  spreadeth  abroad  folly. 

Hitzig  reads,  with  the  Syr.  (but  not  the  Targ.)  and  Jerome,  73 
(pmnia  agit),  but  contrary  to  the  Hebr.  syntax.  The  ~?3  is  not  feeble 
and  useless,  but  means  that  he  always  acts  J")1H2,  mit  Bedacht  [with 
judgment]  (opp.  J"ljn  v33,  inconsulfo,  Deut.  iv.  42,  xix.  4),  while  on 
the  contrary  the  fool  displays  folly,  xii.  23  and  xv.  2  serve  to 
explain  both  members  of  the  verse.  Beddchtigkeit  [judgment]  is 
just  knowledge  directed  to  a  definite  practical  end,  a  clear  thought 
concentrated  on  a  definite  point.  X7^>  he  calls  out,  and  JT3*,  he 
sputters  out,  are  parallels  to  \th&.  Fleischer:  BHB,  expandit  (opp. 
Arab,  tawy,  intra  animum  coJdbuit\  as  a  cloth  or  paper  folded  or 
rolled  together,  cf.  Schiller's1 — 

"  He  spreads  out  brightly  and  splendidly 

The  enveloped  life." 
There  lies  in  the  word  something  derisive :  as  the  merchant  unrolls 

O 

and  spreads  out  his  wares  in  order  to  commend  them,  so  the  fool 
does  with  his  foolery,  which  he  had  enveloped,  i.e.  had  the  greatest 
interest  to  keep  concealed  within  himself — he  is  puffed  up  there 
with. 

Ver.  17  A  godless  messenger  falls  into  trouble  ; 
But  a  faithful  messenger  is  a  cordial. 

The  traditional  text,  which  the  translations  also  give  Aexcept 
Jerome,  nuntius  impii,  and  leaving  out  of  view  the  LXX.,  which 

1  ["  Er  breitet  es  heiter  und  glanzend  aus, 
Das  zusammengewickelte 


282  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

makes  of  vcr.  17  a  history  of  a  foolhardy  kino-  and  a  wise  mes- 

i  *     i  * 

senger),  lias  not  "H^pD,  but  ^N?E> ;  the  Masora  places  the  word  along 

with  IKPDn,  Gen.  xlviii.  16.  And  ^  is  likewise  testified  to  by  all 
translators;  they  all  read  it  as  Kal,  as  the  traditional  text  punctuates 
it ;  Luther  alone  departs  from  this  and  translates  the  Hi  ph. :  "  a 
godless  messenger  bringeth  misfortune."  Indeed,  this  conj.  ?3* 
presses  itself  forward ;  and  even  though  one  read  73^  the  sense 
intended  by  virtue  of  the  parallelism  could  be  no  other  than  that 
a  godless  messenger,  because  no  blessing  rests  on  his  godlessness, 
stumbles  into  disaster,  and  draws  him  who  gave  the  commission 
along  with  him.  The  connection  JJKH  INTO  is  like  JJ5>n  D1X,  xi.  7 
(cf.  the  fern,  of  this  adj.,  Ezek.  iii.  18).  Instead  of  ins  is  nyia, 
xvii.  20,  xxviii.  14,  parallels  (cf.  also  xi.  5)  which  the  punctuators 
may  have  had  in  view  in  giving  the  preference  to  Kal.  With 
"]JOD,  from  "=1^,  R.  "p,  to  make  to  go  =  to  send,  is  interchanged 
"i'V,  from  TiV,  to  turn,  whence  to  journey  (cf.  Arab,  sar,  to  become, 
to  be,  as  the  vulg.  "  to  be  to  Dresden  =  to  journey  "  is  used).  The 
connection  D'JIOK  1^  (cf.  the  more  simple  JCK3  TV,  xxv.  13)  is 
like  xiv.  15,  D^lEX  1JJ;  the  pluralet.  means  faithfulness  in  the  full 
extent  of  the  idea.  Regarding  N2"!>?,  the  means  of  healing,  here  of 
strength,  refreshment,  vid.  iv.  22,  xii.  18. 

Ver.  18  Poverty  and  shame  (to  him)  who  rc'jecteth  correction  ; 

But  he  who  regardeth  reproof  is  honoured. 

We  are  neither  to  supply  t^N  before  P^l  E""]  (or  more  correctly, 
abstr.  pro  cover.,  as  n»p1,  xii.  27),  nor  p  before  jnis,  as  Gesenius 
(Le/trgeb.  §  22 la)  does  ;  nor  has  the  part.  JTN3  the  value  of  a 
hypothetical  clause  like  xviii.  13,  Job  xii.  18,  although  it  may 
certainly  be  changed  into  such  without  destroying  the  meaning 
(Ewald,  Hitzig)  ;  but  "  poverty  and  shame  is  he  who  is  without 
correction,"  is  equivalent  to,  poverty  and  shame  is  the  conclusion 
or  lot  of  him  who  is  without  correction  ;  it  is  left  to  the  hearer  to 
find  out  the  reference  of  the  predicate  to  the  subject  in  the  sense 
of  the  quality,  the  consequence,  or  the  lot  (cf.  e.g.  x.  17,  xiii.  1, 
xiv.  35).1  Regarding  jns,  vid.  p.  73.  The  Latin  expression 
corresponding  is  :  qui  detrectat  disciplinam.  He  who  rejects  the 
admonition  and  correction  of  his  parents,  his  pastor,  or  his  friend, 
and  ijefuses  every  counsel  to  duty  as  a  burdensome  moralizing,  such 
an  o.(ie  must  at  last  gather  wisdom  by  means  of  injury  if  he  is  at 

1  Vi  I.  regarding  the  strong  demand  which  the  Helir.  style  makes  on  hearer 
and  r<  ader,  my  Gesch.  der  jiidischen  Poesie  (18G3),  p.  189. 


CHAP.  XIII.  19.  283 

all  wise  :  lie  grows  poorer  in  consequence  of  missing  the  right  rale 
of  life,  and  has  in  addition  thereto  to  be  subject  to  disgrace  through 
liis  own  fault.  On  the  contrary,  to  him  who  has  the  disgrace  to 
deserve  reproof,  but  who  willingly  receives  it,  and  gives  it  effect, 
the  disgrace  becomes  an  honour,  for  not  to  reject  reproof  shows 
self-knowledge,  humility,  and  good-will;  and  these  properties  in 
the  judgment  of  others  bring  men  to  honour,  and  have  the  effect 
of  raising  them  in  their  position  in  life  and  in  their  calling. 

Two  pairs  of  proverbs   regarding  fools  and  wise  men,  ranged 
together  by  catchwords. 

Ver.  19  Quickened  desire  is  sweet  to  the  soul, 

Arid  it  is  an  abomination  to  fools  to  avoid  evil. 

A  synthetic  distich  (vid.  p.  8),  the  first  line  of  which,  viewed  bv  itself, 
is  only  a  feebler  expression  of  that  which  is  said  in  12&,  for  i"Pnj  mxn 
is  essentially  of  the  same  meaning  as  ntO  niNH,  not  the  desire  that 
has  just  arisen  and  is  not  yet  appeased  (Umbreit,  Hitzig,  Zockler), 
which  when  expressed  by  a  part,  of  the  same  verb  would  be  njn 
(=n^n  "IE>N),  but  the  desire  that  is  appeased  (Jerome,  Luther, 
also  Venet.  &/>eo-49  ^evo^vr],  i.e.  after  Kimchi :  in  the  fulfilling  of 
past  desire ;  on  the  contrary,  the  Syr.,  Targ.  render  the  phrase  '"HfcO 
of  becoming  desire).  The  Niph.  rpru  denotes  not  the  passing  into 
a  state  of  being,  but  the  being  carried  out  into  historical  reality, 
e.y.  Ezek.  xxi.  12,  xxxix.  8,  where  it  is  connected  with  HN2;  it  is 
always  the  expression  of  the  completed  fact  to  which  there  is  a 
looking  back,  e.g.  Judg.  xx.  3  ;  and  this  sense  of  the  Niph.  stands 
so  fast,  that  it  even  means  to  be  done,  finished  (brought  to  an  end), 
to  be  out,  to  be  done  with  anything,  e.g.  Dan.  ii.  I.1  The  sentence, 
that  fulfilled  desire  does  good  to  the  soul,  appears  commonplace 
(Hitzig)  ;  but  it  is  comprehensive  enough  on  the  ground  of  Heb. 
xi.  to  cheer  even  a  dying  person,  and  conceals  the  ethically  signifi 
cant  truth  that  the  blessedness  of  vision  is  measured  by  the  degree 
of  the  longing  of  faith.  But  the  application  of  the  clause  in  its 

1  We  have  said,  p.  215,  that  a  Niph.  in  which  the  peculiar  causative  mean 
ing  of  the  Hiph.  would  be  rendered  passively  is  without  example  ;  we  must 
here  with  jTnj  add,  that  the  Niph.  of  intransitive  verbs  denotes  the  entrance 
into  the  condition  expressed  by  the  Kal,  and  may  certainly  be  regarded,  accord 
ing  to  our  way  of  thinking,  as  passive  of  the  Iliphil  (Gesen.  §  51,  2).  Hut  the 
old  language  shows  no  ninn  to  which  JVPIJ  (Arab,  dinlunmy,  in  Mutenebbi). 
stood  as  passive  ;  in  the  Arab,  also  the  seventh  form,  rightly  regarded,  is  alway|. 
formed  from  the  first,  vid.  Fleischer's  Beitraye,  u.s.w.,  in  the  mitzuiiys-Beridit. 
d.  Sachs.  Ccsellschaft  d.  Wiss.  18(53,  p.  172  f. 


' 


284  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

pairing  with  19J  acquires  another  aspect.  On  this  account,  became 
the  desire  of  the  soul  is  pleasant  in  its  fulfilment,  fools  abhor  the 
renouncing  of  evil,  for  their  desire  is  directed  to  that  which  is 
morally  worthless  and  blameworthy,  and  the  endeavour,  which  they 
closely  and  constantly  adhere  to,  is  to  reach  the  attainment  of  this 
desire.  This  subordinate  proposition  of  the  conclusion  is  unex 
pressed.  The  pairing  of  the  two  lines  of  the  proverb  may  have 
been  occasioned  by  the  resemblance  in  sound  of  rajnn  and  njxn. 
•ViD  is  n.  actionis,  like  xvi.  17,  cf.  6.  Besides,  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  the  proverb  speaks  of  fools  and  not  of  the  godless.  Folly 
is  that  which  causes  that  men  do  not  break  free  from  evil,  for  it  is 
the  deceit  of  sinful  lust  which  binds  them  fast  thereto. 
Ver.  20  Whoever  goes  with  wise  men,  becomes  wise ; 

And  whoever  has  intercourse  with  fools,  becomes  base. 

Regarding  the  significance  of  this  proverb  in  the  history  of  the 
religion  and  worship  of  Israel,  vid.  p.  39.  We  have  translated 
20a  after  the  Ken;  the  translation  according  to  the  ChetMb  is  :  "go 
with  wise  men  and  become  wise"  (cf.  viii.  33),  not  TJvH,  for  the 
connection  of  the  (meant  imperatively)  infirm,  absol  with  an  imper. 
(meant  conclusively)  is  not  tenable  ;  but  ?pn  is  an  imper.  form 
established  by  vbn,  Jer.  li.  50  (cf.  ^q  =  n^,  Num.  xxii.  14),  and 
appears  to  have  been  used  with  such  shades  of  conception  as  here 
of  intercourse  and  companionship  for  :]?.  Regarding  jri"».1,  vid.  at 
xi.  15 ;  there  it  meant  malo  afficietur,  here  it  means  mains  (pejor) 
fiet.  The  Venet.  (contrary  to  Kimchi,  who  explains  by  frangetur) 
rightly  has  Ka/cwOrja-eTai.  There  is  here  a  play  upon  words  ;  njn 
means  to  tend  (a  flock),  also  in  general  to  be  considerate  about 
anything  (xv.  14,  Isa.  xliv.  20),  to  take  care  of  anything  with  the 
accusative  of  the  person  (xxviii.  7,  xxix.  3),  to  hold  intercourse 
with  any  one  :  he  who  by  preference  seeks  the  society  of  fools, 
himself  becomes  such  (Jerome,  similis  efficietnr],  or  rather,  as  JHT 
expresses,  he  comes  always  morally  lower  down.  "  A  wicked  com 
panion  leads  his  associate  into  hell." 

Ver.  21  Evil  pursueth  sinners, 

And  the  righteous  is  repaid  with  good 

To  tftin  of  the  punishment  which  follows  after  sinners  at  their 
heels,  cf.  Nah.  i.  8.  Greek  art  gives  wings  to  Nemesis  in  this 
sense.  To  translate  216,  with  Lowenstein,  "  The  pious,  the  good 
rewards  them,"  is  untenable,  for  31D,  the  good  (e.g.  xi.  27),^never 
^  appears  personified,  only  aiB,  goodness,  Ps.  xxiii.  6,  according  to 


CHAP.  XIU.  22.  285 


which  the  LXX.  rou?  Se  Si/cat'ou?  Kcnakityerat,  (?'w}  dyadd.  Still 
less  is  21L3  meant  personally,  as  the  Venet.  ra  Be  Sifcaia  aTroBcaaei 
XpijaTcx;,  which  probably  means  :  righteous  conduct  will  a  good 
one,  viz.  God,  reward.  31D  is  an  attribute  of  God,  but  never  the 
name  of  God.  So  the  verb  0?$,  after  the  manner  of  verbs  of 
educating  and  leading  (7DJ,  nb%  lay),  is  connected  with  a  double 
accusative.  The  Syr.,  Targurn,  and  Jerome  translate  passively, 
and  so  also  do  we  ;  for  while  we  must  think  of  God  in  the  retribuet, 
yet  the  proverb  does  not  name  Him  any  more  than  at  xii.  14,  cf. 
x.  24  ;  it  is  designedly  constructed,  placing  Him  in  the  background, 
with  vague  generality  :  the  righteous  will  one,  will  they,  reward 
with  good  —  this  expression,  with  the  most  general  personal  subject, 
almost  coincides  with  one  altogether  passive. 

Ver.  22  The  good  man  leaveth  behind  him  for  his  children's  children, 

And  the  wealth  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  for  the  just. 

As  a  commencing  word,  31E  signifies  in  the  Mislile  for  the  most  part 
bonum  (prce)  ;  but  here,  as  at  xii.  2,  cf.  xxii.  9,  xiv.  4,  it  signifies 
bonus.  As  the  expression  that  God  is  31D  (Ps.  xxv.  8,  etc.)  of  the 
O.  T.  is  equivalent  to  the  N.  T.  that  He  is  dyaTrrj,  so  that  man  who 
in  his  relation  to  others  is  determined  by  unselfish  love  is  HID  for 
the  good  man  [der  Gutige],  i.e.  the  man  who  is  willing  to  communi 
cate  all  good  is  truly  good,  because  the  essence  of  np1¥,  righteous 
ness  of  life,  is  love.  Sucli  an  one  suffers  no  loss  by  his  liberality, 
but,  according  to  the  law,  xi.  25,  by  which  a  dispenser  of  blessings 
is  at  the  same  time  also  a  recipient  of  blessings,  he  has  only  gain, 
so  that  he  makes  his  children's  children  to  inherit,  i.e.  leaves  behind 
him  an  inheritance  extending  even  to  his  grandchildren  (vid.  re 
garding  'T1^  p.  182  ;  here  trans,  as  containing  its  object  in  itself, 
as  at  Deut.  xxxii.  8  :  to  make  to  inherit,  to  place  in  possession 
of  an  inheritance).  The  sinner,  on  the  contrary  (Nttfn  sing,  to 
D^tsn,  dfj,apTO)\oi),  loses  his  wealth,  it  is  already  destined  to  pass 
over  to  the  righteous  who  is  worthy  of  it,  and  makes  use  (cf.  Job 
xxvii.  17)  of  that  which  he  possesses  in  accordance  with  the  will 
and  appointment  of  God  —  a  revelation  of  justice  appertaining  to 
time,  the  exceptions  to  which  the  old  limited  doctrine  of  requital 
takes  no  notice  of.  ??n,  strength,  then  like  our  "  Vermogen"  (cf. 
opes,  facilitates),  that  by  means  of  which  one  is  placed  in  circum 
stances  to  accomplish  much  (Fl.)  ;  cf.  regarding  the  fundamental 
idea  contorquere,  compingere,  p.  226,  also  regarding  J2i»,  properly/ 
condensare,  then  condere,  p.  61. 


• 


286  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Connected  with  ver.  22  there  now  follow  two  proverbs  regarding 
sustenance,  with  one  intervening  regarding  education. 

Ver.  23  The  poor  man's  fresh  land  gives  food  in  abundance, 
And  many  are  destroyed  by  iniquity. 

The  Targ.  and  Theodotion  (/ue'ya?)  translate  m_,  but  the  Masora 
has  "TJ  with  short  Kametz,  as  xx.  6,  Eccles.  i.  8  (cf.  Kiinchi  under 
Sin).  The  rendering:  multitude  cibi  est  ager  pauperum,  makes  the 
produce  the  property  of  the  field  (=frugum  fertilis).  "fJ  is  the  new 
field  (novale  or  novatts,  viz.  ager\  from  T'i,  to  make  arable,  fruitful ; 
properly  to  raise  up,  viz.  by  grubbing  and  freeing  of  stones  ($>ipD). 
But  why,  asks  Hitzig,  just  the  new  field?  As  if  no  answer  could 
be  given  to  this  question,  he  changes  "VJ  into  3^,  and  finds  in  23a 
the  description  of  a  rentier,  "a  great  man  who  consumes  the  income 
of  his  capital."  But  how  much  more  intelligible  is  the  new  field 
of  the  poor  man  than  these  capitals  (D^'Xi)  with  their  per  cents 
(IPJ) !  A  new  field  represents  to  us  severe  labour,  and  as  belonging 
to  a  poor  man,  a  moderate  field,  of  which  it  is  here  said,  that  not 
withstanding  its  freshly  broken  up  fallow,  it  yet  yields  a  rich  pro 
duce,  viz.  by  virtue  of  the  divine  blessing,  for  the  proverb  supposes 
the  ora  et  labora.  Regarding  D^'NT  =  Q VJ,  vid.  at  x.  4.  Jerome's 
translation,  patrum  (properly,  heads),  follows  a  false  Jewish  tradi 
tion.  In  the  antithesis,  236,  one  is  tempted  to  interpret  B*  in  the 
sense  of  viii.  21  [substance,  wealth],  as  Schultens,  opulentia  ipsa 
raditur  guum  non  est  moderamen,  and  Euchel :  that  which  is  essen 
tially  good,  badly  managed,  goes  to  ruin.  But  B*  and  Bty  at  the 
beginning  of  a  proverb,  or  of  a  line  of  a  proverb,  in  every  case 
means  est  quL  That  a  wealthy  person  is  meant,  the  contrast  shows. 
nspi,  which  denotes  anything  taken  away  or  gathered  up,  has  the 
same  meaning  here  as  at  1  Sam.  xxvii.  1:  est  qui  (Fl.  quod,  but  the 
parallel  does  not  demand  this)  abripiatur,  i.e.  quasi  turbine  auferatur 
et  perdatur ;  the  word  reminds  us  of  HS1D,  whirlwind,  but  in  itself  it 
means  only  something  smooth  and  altogether  carried  off.  The  3  is 
here  as  at  Gen.  xix.  15 ;  elsewhere  BS^'p  N?2  means  with  injustice 
(properly,  not-right),  xvi.  8,  Jer.  xxii.  13,  Ezek.  xxii.  29 ;  here  it 
is  not  the  3  of  the  means,  but  of  the  mediate  cause.  While  the 
(industrious  and  God-fearing)  poor  man  is  richly  nourished  from 
the  piece  of  ground  which  he  cultivates,  many  a  one  who  has  incom 
parably  more  than  he  comes  by  his  unrighteousness  down  to  a  state 
of  beggary,  or  even  lower:  he  is  not  only  in  poverty,  but  along  with 
this  his  honour,  his  freedom,  and  the  very  life  of  his  person  perish, 


CHAP.  XIII.  24,  25.  287 

Ver.  24  He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth  his  son, 

And  he  who  loveth  him  visits  him  early  with  correction. 
The  paedagogic  rule  of  God,  iii.  12,  avails  also  for  men,  xxiii.  13  f., 
xxix.  15.  The  rod  represents  here  the  means  of  punishment,  the 
patria  potestas.  He  who  spareth  or  avoideth  this,  and  who  does  this 
even  from  love,  has  yet  no  true  right  love  for  his  son;  he  who  loveth 
him  correcteth  him  early.  With  eVijueXw?  Trai&evet,  of  the  LXX. 
(cf.  Sir.  xxx.  1,  ev$€\extfcr€i  /j,d<TTiyas)  the  thought  is  in  general 
indicated,  but  the  expression  is  not  explained.  Many  erroneously 
regard  the  suffix  of  linip  as  referring  to  the  object  immediately  fol 
lowing  (de  Dieu,  Ewald,  Bertheau,  Zockler) ;  Hitzig,  on  the  con 
trary,  rightly  remarks,  that  in  this  case  we  should  expect  the  words 
to  be,  after  v.  22  (cf.  Ex.  ii.  6),  nprarrnK.  He  himself,  without  any 
necessity,  takes  in^  in  the  sense  of  the  Arab,  skhar,  compescere. 
Hofmann  (Schriftbew.  ii.  2.402)  is  right  in  saying  that  "  IW  is 
connected  with  a  double  accusative  as  elsewhere  D^i?  occurs  ;  and 
the  meaning  is,  that  one  ought  much  more  to  anticipate  correction 
than  restrain  it  where  it  is  necessary."  IHE'  means  to  go  out  early 
to  anything  (vid.  p.  73),  according  to  which  a  Greek  rendering  is 
6p0p%et  (  Venet.  opOpiet)  avrut  vraiSeiav  :  matured  ei  castigationem  = 
mature  eum  castigat  (Fl.).  in^  does  not  denote  the  early  mornincr 
of  the  day  (as  Rashi,  Dnp^),  but  the  morning  of  life  (as  Euchel, 
W  -irrea).  "The  earlier  the  fruit,  the  better  the  training."  A 
father  who  truly  wishes  well  to  his  son  keeps  him  betimes  under 
strict  discipline,  to  give  him  while  he  is  yet  capable  of  bein<r 
influenced  the  right  direction,  and  to  allow  no  errors  to  root  them 
selves  in  him  ;  but  he  who  is  indulgent  toward  his  child  when  he 
ought  to  be  strict,  acts  as  if  he  really  wished  his  ruin. 

Ver.  25  The  righteous  has  to  eat  to  the  satisfying  of  his  soul ; 

But  the  body  of  the  godless  must  suffer  want. 

Jerome  translates  lonn  freely  by  insaturabilis  (lie  has  want  =  has 
never  enough),  but  in  that  case  we  would  have  expected  Ton  lDnn; 
also  in  25a  jniriy  would  have  been  used.  We  have  thus"  before 
us  no  commendation  of  temperance  and  moderation  in  contrast  to 
gluttony,  but  a  statement  regarding  the  diversity  of  fortune  of  the 
righteous  and  the  godless— another  way  of  clothing  the  idea  of 
x.  3.  jn'B>  is  a  segolate  form,  thus  an  infin.  formation,  formally 
different  from  the  similar  jnfe>,  iii.  10.  Regarding  ftpa,  vid.  Psychol. 
p.  265  f. ;  it  is  a  nobler  word  than  "  Bauch  "  [bellyji  for  it  denotes  j 
not  the  external  arch,  but,  like  KOI\M  (R.  D3,  concavus),  the  inner' 


288  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

body,  here  like  xviii.  20,  as  that  which  receives  the  nourishment 
and  changes  it  in  succum  et  sanguinem.  That  God  richly  nourishes 
the  righteous,  and  on  the  contrary  brings  the  godless  to  want  and 
misery,  is  indeed  a  rule  with  many  exceptions,  but  understood  in 
the  light  of  the  N.  T.,  it  has  deep  inward  everlasting  truth. 

Chap.  xiv.  The  division  of  chapters  here  corresponds  to  a  new 
commencement  made  in  ver.  1.  This  proverb  reminds  us  of  the 
allegorical  conclusion  of  the  Introduction,  and  appears,  since  it  is 
older,  to  have  suggested  it  (vid.  p.  34).  The  three  proverbs  1-3 
form  a  beautiful  trifolium:  wise  mangement,  God-fearing  conduct, 
and  wise  silence,  with  their  threefold  contraries. 

Ver.  1  The  wisdom  of  the  woman  buildeth  her  house, 
And  folly  teareth  it  down  with  its  own  hands. 

Were  it  D'KO  rtoan,  after.  Judg.  v.  29,  cf.  Isa.  xix.  11,  then  the 
meaning  would  be :  the  wise  among  women,  each  of  them  buildeth 
her  house.  But  why  then  not  just  neon  ntfs,  as  2  Sam.  xiv.  2, 
cf.  Ex.  xxxv.  25?  The  Syr.,  Targum,  and  Jerome  write  sapiens 
mulier.  And.  if  the  whole  class  must  be  spoken  of,  why  again 
immediately  the  individualizing  in  nn;a?  The  LXX.  obliterates 
that  by  its  yKoSofirjaav.  And  does  not  TON  [folly]  in  the  con 
trasted  proverb  (Ib)  lead  us  to  conclude  on  a  similar  abstract  in  la? 
The  translators  conceal  this,  for  they  translate  rfos  personally. 
Thus  also  the  Venet.  and  Luther;  rfos  is,  says  Kimchi,  an  adj. 
like  rniy,  caeca.  But  the  linguistic  usage  does  not  point  ^IS  with 
Y'lN  to  any  7$.  It  is  true  that  a  fern,  of  ^itf  does  not  occur ;  there 
is,  however,  also  no  place  in  which  r6lX  may  certainly  present 
itself  as  such.  Thus  also  niCGD  must  be  an  abstr. ;  we  have 
shown  at  i.  20  how  niD3H?  as  neut.  plur.,  might  have  an  abstr. 
meaning.  But  since  it  is  not  to  be  perceived  why  the  poet  should 
express  himself  so  singularly,  the  punctuation  JTiD3n  is  to  be  under 
stood  as  proceeding  from  a  false  supposition,  and  is  to  be  read 
m»3n,  as  at  ix.  1  (especially  since  this  passage  rests  on  the  one 
before  us).  Fleischer  says  :  "  to  build  the  house  is  figuratively 
equivalent  to,  to  regulate  well  the  affairs  of  a  house,  and  to  keep 
them  in  a  good  condition  ;  the  contrary,  to  tear  down  the  house,  is 
the  same  contrast  as  the  Arab,  'amdrat  dlbyt  and  kliarab  albyt. 
Thus  e.g.  in  Burckhardt's  Spriichw.  217,  Jiarrt  sabrt  bythd  'amdrat, 
a  good  woman  (ein  braves  Weib)  has  patience  (with  her  husband), 
and  thereby  she  builds  up  her  house  (at  the  same  time  an  example 
of  the  use  of  the  preterite  in  like  general  sentences  for  individual- 


CHAP.  XIV.  2.  289 

izing)  ;  also  No.  430  of  the  same  work :  'amdrat  dllyt  wla  khardbt, 
it  is  becoming  to  build  the  house,  not  to  destroy  it ;  cf.  in  the 
Thousand  and  One  Nights ,  where  a  woman  who  had  compelled  her 
husband  to  separate  from  her  says :  ana  ally  'amalt  hadhd  bamvhy 
wdkhrnt  byty  bnfsy.  Burckhardt  there  makes  the  remark  :  'amdrat 
dlbyt  denotes  the  family  placed  in  good  circumstances — father, 
mother,  and  children  all  living  together  happily  and  peacefully." 
This  conditional  relation  of  the  wife  to  the  house  expresses  itself 
in  her  being  named  as  house-wife  (cf.  Hausehre  [=  honour  of  a 
house]  used  by  Luther,  Ps.  Ixviii.  13),  to  which  the  Talmudic  WjM 
(=  uxor  mea)  answers ;  the  wife  is  noted  for  this,  and  hence  is  called 
JV3n  np'y,  the  root  and  foundation  of  the  house;  vid.  Buxtorf's  Lex. 
col.  301.  In  truth,  the  oneness  of  the  house  is  more  dependent  on 
the  mother  than  on  the  father.  A  wise  mother  can,  if  her  husband 
be  dead  or  neglectful  of  his  duty,  always  keep  the  house  together ; 
but  if  the  house-wife  has  neither  understanding  nor  good-will  for 
her  calling,  then  the  best  will  of  the  house-father  cannot  hinder 
the  dissolution  of  the  house,  prudence  and  patience  only  conceal 
and  mitigate  the  process  of  dissolution — folly,  viz.  of  the  house 
wife,  always  becomes  more  and  more,  according  to  the  degree  in 
which  this  is  a  caricature  of  her  calling,  the  ruin  of  the  house. 

Ver.  2  He  walketh  in  his  uprightness  who  feareth  Jahve, 
And  perverse  in  his  ways  is  he  that  despiseth  Him. 

That  which  syntactically  lies  nearest  is  also  that  which  is  intended; 
the  ideas  standing  in  the  first  place  are  the  predicates.  Wherein  it 
shows  itself,  and  whereby  it  is  recognised,  that  a  man  fears  God, 
or  stands  in  a  relation  to  Him  of  indifference  instead  of  one  of 
fear  and  reverence,  shall  be  declared  :  the  former  walketh  in  his 
uprightness,  i.e.  so  far  as  the  consciousness  of  duty  which  animates 
him  prescribes;  the  latter  in  his  conduct  follows  no  higher  rule  than 
his  own  lust,  which  drives  him  sometimes  hither  and  sometimes 
thither.  f-iB»3  $in  (cf.  I/An  -^  Mic.  ii.  7)  is  of  kindred  meaning 
with  torn  ihn,  xxviii.  6  (Qin?  i^n,  x.  9),  and  inbJ  linn,  Isa.  Ivii.  2. 
The  connection  of  VOTl  tta  follows  the  scheme  of  2  Kings  xviii. 
37,  and  not  2  Sam.  xv.  32,  Evvald,  §  288c.  If  the  second  word, 
which  particularizes  the  idea  of  the  first,  has  the  reflexive  suff.  as 
here,  then  the  accusative  connection,  or,  as  ii.  15,  the  prepositional, 
is  more  usual  than  the  genitive.  Regarding  r6,  flectere,  inclinare 
(a  word  common  to  the  author  of  i.-ix.),  vid.  at  ii.  15.  With 

VOL.  I.  T 


290  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


l^tia,  cf.  1  Sam.  ii.  30  ;    the  suffix  without  doubt  refers  to  God, 
for  inra  is  the  word  tliat  stands  in  parallel  contrast  to  'n  NT. 

Ver.  3  In  the  mouth  of  the  fool  is  a  switch  of  pride  ; 

But  the  lips  of  the  wise  preserve  them. 

The  noun  ">Bh  (Aram.  Nn^n?  Arab,  khitr),  which  besides  here 
occurs  only  at  Isa.  xi.  1,  meaning  properly  a  brandishing  (from 
"U?n  =  Arab.  khatr,  to  brandish,  to  move  up  and  down  or  hither 
and  thither,  whence  dlkhttdr,  the  brandisher,  poet,  the  spear), 
concretely,  the  young  elastic  twig,  the  switch,  i.e.  the  slender 
flexible  shoot.  Luther  translates,  "  fools  speak  tyrannically," 
which  is  the  briefer  rendering  of  his  earlier  translation,  "in  the 
mouth  of  the  fool  is  the  sceptre  of  pride  ;  "  but  although  the  Tar- 
gum  uses  NiBin  of  the  king's  sceptre  and  also  of  the  prince's  staff, 
yet  here  for  this  the  usual  Hebr,  132^  were  to  be  expected.  In 
view  of  Isa.  xi.  1,  the  nearest  idea  is,  that  pride  which  has  its  roots 
in  the  heart  of  the  fool,  grows  up  to  his  mouth.  But  yet  it  is 
not  thus  explained  why  the  representation  of  this  proceeding  from 
within  stops  with  "it?n  (cf.  xi.  30).  The  fta/crypta  vftpew?  (LXX., 
and  similarly  the  other  Greek  versions)  is  either  meant  as  the  rod 
of  correction  of  his  own  pride  (as  e.g.  Abulwalid,  and,  among  the 
moderns,  Bertheau  and  Zockler)  or  as  chastisement  for  others  (Svr., 
Targum  :  the  staff  of  reviling).  Hitzig  is  in  favour  of  the  former 
idea,  and  thinks  himself  warranted  in  translating:  a  rod  for  his 
back  ;  but  while  nia  is  found  for  ™NJ|,  we  d0  not  (cf.  under  Job 
xli.  7  :  a  pride  are  the,  etc.)  find  mNJ  for  H1J,  the  body,  or  13,  the 
back.  But  in  general  it  is  to  be  assumed,  that  if  the  poet  had 
meant  It3n  as  the  means  of  correction,  he  would  have  written  inisa. 
Rightly  Fleischer  :  "  The  tongue  is  often  compared  to  a  staff,  a 
sword,  etc.,  in  so  far  as  their  effects  are  ascribed  to  it  ;  we  have 
here  the  figure  which  in  Rev.  i.  16  passes  over  into  plastic 
reality."  Self-exaltation  (R.  N3,  to  strive  to  be  above)  to  the  de 
lusion  of  greatness  is  characteristic  of  the  fool,  the  /''IN  [godless], 
not  the  TD3  [stupid,  dull]  —  Hitzig  altogether  confounds  these  two 
conceptions.  With  such  self-exaltation,  in  which  the  mind,  morally 
if  not  pathologically  diseased,  says,  like  Nineveh  and  Babylon  in 
the  prophets,  I  am  alone,  and  there  is  no  one  with  me,  there  is 
always  united  the  scourge  of  pride  and  of  disgrace;  and  the 
meaning  of  36  may  now  be  that  the  lips  of  the  wise  protect  those 
who  are  exposed  to  this  injury  (Ewald),  or  that  they  protect  the 
wise  themselves  against  such  assaults  (thus  most  interpreters). 


CIIAi1.  XIV.  3.  291 

But  tliis  reference  of  the  eos  to  others  lies  much  more  remote  than 
at  xii.  6  ;  and  that  the  protection  of  the  wise  against  injury  inflicted 
on  them  by  words  is  due  to  their  own  lips  is  unsatisfactory,  as  in 
this  case,  instead  of  Bewahrung  [custodia],  we  would  rather  expect 
Vertheidigung  [defensio],  Dumpfung  [damping,  extinguishing],  Nie- 
derduckung   [stooping   down,   accommodating   oneself    to    circum 
stances].     But  also  it  cannot  be  meant  that  the  lips  of  the  wise 
preserve  them  from  the  pride  of  fools,  for  the  thought  that  the 
mouth  preserves  the  wise  from  the  sins  of  the  mouth  is  without 
meaning  and  truth  (cf.  the  contrary,  xiii.  3).     Therefore  Arama 
interprets  the  verb  as  jussive :  the  lips  =  words  of  the  wise  mayest 
thou  keep,  i.e.  take  to  heart.     And  the  Venet.  translates  :  ^€L\r}  Se 
&o(f)cov  (f)v\dj;ei<;  aura,  which  perhaps  means  :  the  lips  of  the  wise 
mayest  thou  consider,  and  that  not  as  a  prayer,  which  is  foreign  to 
the  gnome,  but  as  an  address  to  the  hearer,  which  e.g.xx.  19  shows 
to  be  admissible.     But  although  in  a  certain  degree  of  similar  con 
tents,  yet  3«  and  Zb  clash.     Therefore  it  appears  to  us  more  pro 
bable  that  the  subject  of  3b  is  the  HEOn  contained  in  DVoan;  in  vi. 
22   wisdom    is   also   the   subject   to  "j^y  no^n  without   its  being 
named.     Thus :  while  hurtful  pride  grows  up  to  the  throat  of  the 
fool,  that,  viz.  wisdom,  keeps  the  lips  of  the  wise,  so  that  no  word 
of  self-reflection,  especially  none  that  can  wound  a  neighbour, 
escapes  from  them.     The  form  O^&K'fl  is  much  more  peculiar  than 
1B1SK*,  Ex.  xviii.  26,  and  najjn,  Ruth  ii.  8,  for  the  latter  are  ob 
scured  forms  of  *BSt5*  and  '•"pj-T),  while  on  the  contrary  the  former 
arises  from  D'TOETI.1     If,  according  to  the  usual  interpretation,  we 
make  »nai?  the  subject,  then  the  construction  follows  the  rule, 
Gesen.  §  146,  2.     The  LXX.  transfers  it  into  Greek :  ^1X17  £e 
aofiwv  6v\d(rcrei  avrovs.     The  probable  conjecture,  that  Dillon  is 
an  error  in  transcription  for  DVi»w''n  —  Dnx  n^bK'n  (this  is  found 
also  in  Luzzatto's  Gramm.  §  776;  and  Hitzig  adduces  as  other 
examples  of  such  transpositions  of  the  l  Jer.  ii.  25,  xvii.  23,  Job 
xxvi.  12,  and  Josh  ii.  4,  uaxm  for  Jiaxrn),  we  do  not  acknowledge, 
because  it  makes  the  lips  the  subject  with  an  exclusiveness  the 
justification  of  which  is  doubtful  to  us. 

1  Vid.  regarding  these  forms  with  o  instead  of  the  simple  Sheva,  Kimchi, 
tyfichlol  20ab.  He  also  remarks  that  these  three  forms  with  u  are  all  Milra; 
this  is  the  case  also  in  a  remarkable  manner  with  ^B^,  vid.  Micldol  21&; 
Livjatli  Chen  ii.  9 ;  and  particularly  Hei'lenheim,  in  his  edition  of  the  Penta- 
teiich  entitled  Meor  Enajim,  under  Ex.  xviii.  26. 


292  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Ver.  4.  The  switch  and  the  preserving,  ver.  3,  may  have  given 
occasion  to  the  collector,  amid  the  store  of  proverbs  before  him, 
now  to  present  the  agricultural  figure : 

Without  oxen  the  crib  is  empty  • 
But  rich  increase  is  by  the  strength  of  the  plough-ox. 
This  is  a  commendation  of  the  breeding  of  cattle,  but  standing 

O  /  ~ 

here  certainly  not  merely  as  useful  knowledge,  but  as  an  admoni 
tion  to  the  treatment  in  a  careful,  gentle  manner,  and  with  thankful 
recompense  of  the  ox  (xii.  10),  which  God  has  subjected  to  man 
to  help  him  in  his  labour,  and  more  generally,  in  so  far  as  one 
seeks  to  gain  an  object,  to  the  considerate  adoption  of  the  right 
means  for  gaining  it.  C^sps  (from  *]?&<,  to  cling  to)  are  the  cattle 
giving  themselves  willingly  to  the  service  of  men  (poet,  equivalent 
to  C^S).  "lit?  ("lift,  Arab,  thwr),  Ved.  sthuras,  is  the  Aryan-Semitic 
name  of  the  plough-ox.  The  noun  D12K  (  =  D««  like  fiBX,  pBX) 
denotes  the  fodder-trough,  from  D2N?  to  feed,  and  thus  perhaps  as 
to  its  root-meaning  related  to  (fidrvr)  (Trdrvtj),  and  may  thus  also  de 
signate  the  receptacle  for  grain  where  the  corn  for  the  provender  or 
feeding  of  the  cattle  is  preserved — D13NO,  Jer.  1.  26,  at  least  has  this 
wider  signification  of  the  granary ;  but  there  exists  no  reason  to 
depart  here  from  the  nearest  signification  of  the  word :  if  a  hus 
bandman  is  not  thoughtful  about  the  care  and  support  of  the  cattle 
by  which  he  is  assisted  in  his  labour,  then  the  crib  is  empty — he 
has  nothing  to  heap  up  ;  he  needs  not  only  fodder,  but  has  also 
nothing.  ">3  (in  pause  "13),  clean  (synon.  <lj53,  cf.  at  xi.  26),  corre 
sponds  with  our  baar  [bare]  =  bloss  \_nudus].  Its  derivation  is  ob 
scure.  The  3,  46,  is  that  of  the  mediating  cause :  by  the  strength 
of  the  plough-ox  there  is  a  fulness  of  grain  gathered  into  the  barn 
(rrifcttSfl,  from  Nia,  to  gather  in,  anything  gathered  in).  ~3T  is  the 
inverted  "Q.  Striking  if  also  accidental  is  the  frequency  of  the  N 
and  2  in  ver.  4.  This  is  continued  in  ver.  5,  where  the  collector 
gives  two  proverbs,  the  first  of  which  commences  with  a  word  be 
ginning  with  N,  and  the  second  with  one  beginning  with  2 : 

Ver.  5  A  faithful  witness  does  not  speak  untruth ; 
But  a  lying  witness  breathes  out  falsehoods. 

The  right  vocalization  and  sequence  of  the  accents  is  noan  Yj.  &\}2 
(p  with  Tsere  and  the  servile  Mahpach,  n»3n  with  Munach,  because 
the  following  Aihnach-word  has  not  two  syllables  before  the  tone). 
As  in  5a  D^iDK  "W,  so  in  5b  1\>V  *W  is  the  subject.  Different  is 
the  relation  of  subject  and  predicate  in  the  second  line  of  the 


CHAP.  XIV.  6,  7. 

parallel  proverbs,  ver.  25,  xix.  5.     With  5a  cf.  D*3ttDS  TV,  xiii.  M  ; 
and  regarding  (Taj  (one  who  breathes  out),  vid.  at  vi.  19,  xii.  17. 
Ver.  6  In  vain  the  scorner  seeketh  wisdom  ; 

But  to  the  man  of  understanding  knowledge  is  easy. 

The  genera]  sentence  is  concrete,  composed  in  the  common  historical 
form.  Regarding  }W,  necquidquam,  vid.  at  xiii.  4.  The  participle 
sQ  is  here  neut.  for  n?j3i}  something  which  makes  itself  easy  or 
light.  The  frivolous  man,  to  whom  truth  is  not  a  matter  of  con 
science,  and  who  recognises  no  authority,  not  even  the  Supreme, 
never  reaches  to  truth  notwithstanding  all  his  searching,  it  remains 
veiled  to  him  and  far  remote  ;  but  to  the  man  of  understanding 
who  knows  that  the  fear  of  God  and  not  estrangement  from  God 
leads  to  truth,  knowledge  is  an  easy  matter — he  enters  on  the  right 
way  to  this  end,  he  brings  the  right  receptivity,  brings  to  bear  on 
it  the  clear  eye,  and  there  is  fulfilled  to  him  the  saying,  "  To  him 
that  hath  it  is  given." 

Three  proverbs  regarding  fools  : 

Ver.  7  Go  from  the  presence  of  a  foolish  man, 

And  surely  thou  hast  not  known  lips  of  knowledge ; 

i,e.  surely  hast  not  brought  into  experience  that  he  possesses  lips 
which  express  experimental  knowledge,  or:  surely  thou  must  confess 
on  reflection  that  no  prudent  word  has  come  forth  from  his  mouth. 
If  Ib  were  intended  to  assign  a  motive,  then  the  expression  would 
be  JTtrrb  <3  or  jnn"^  (Isa.  xliv.  9),  according  to  which  Aquila 
and  Theodotion  translate,  ical  ov  /j,r)  7^9.  "733  is  the  sphere  of 
vision,  and  133»  denotes  either  away  from  the  sphere  of  vision,  as 
e.g.  Isa.  i.  16,  or,  inasmuch  as  |»  is  used  as  in  $>#»,  nnnip,  and  the 
like :  at  a  certain  distance  from  the  sphere  of  vision,  but  so  that 
one  keeps  the  object  in  sight,  Gen.  xxi.  16.  *?  1J3  denotes,  as  the 
inverted  expression  Deut.  xxviii.  66  shows,  over  against  any  one, 
so  that  lie  has  the  object  visibly  before  him,  and  ^  133O,  Judg.  xx. 
34,  from  the  neighbourhood  of  a  place  where  one  has  it  in  view. 
So  also  here  :  go  away  from  the  vis-a-vis  (vis  =  visus)  of  the  foolish 
man,  if  thou  hast  to  do  with  such  an  one ;  whence,  Ib,  follows  what 
he  who  has  gone  away  must  on  looking  back  say  to  himself.  f>3 
(with  the  pret.  as  e.g.  Isa.  xxxiii.  23)  expresses  a  negative  with 
emphasis.  Nolde  and  others,  also  Fleischer,  interpret  Ib  relatively: 
et  in  quo  non  cognoveris  labia  sciential.  If  JTV"^  were  the  expres 
sion  used,  then  it  would  be  explained  after  ix.  13,  for  the  idea  of 
the  foolish  man  is  extended  :  and  of  such  an  one  as  absolutely 


294  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

knows  not  how  to  speak  anything  prudent.  But  in  J^T'tai  the 
relative  clause  intended  must  be  indicated  by  the  added  ia :  and  of 
sucli  an  one  in  whom  .  .  .  Besides,  in  this  case  fc&  (vid.  Ps.  xxxv.  15) 
would  have  been  nearer  than  ?3\  The  LXX.  has  modified  this 
proverb,  and  yet  has  brought  out  nothing  that  is  correct;  not  only 
the  Syr.,  but  also  Hitzig  follows  it,  when  he  translates,  "  The  foolish 
man  hath  everything  before  him,  but  lips  of  knowledge  are  a 
receptacle  of  knowledge"  (njn  ^rn).  It  racks  one's  brains  to  find 
out  the  meaning  of  the  first  part  here,  and,  as  Bottcher  rightly 
says,  who  can  be  satisfied  with  the  "lips  of  knowledge"  as  the 
"receptacle  of  knowledge"? 

Ver.  8  The  wisdom  of  the  prudent  is  to  observe  his  way. 

And  the  folly  of  fools  is  deceit. 

The  nearest  idea  is  that  of  self-deceit,  according  to  which  the 
LXX.,  Syr.,  and  Jerome  render  the  word  error  ("  Irrsal").  But 
HEnp  is  nowhere  else  used  of  self-deception,  and  moreover  is  not 
the  suitable  word  for  such  an  idea,  since  the  conception  of  the  dolus 
mains  is  constantly  associated  with  it.  Thus  the  contrast  will  be 
this:  the  wisdom  of  the  prudent  shows  itself  in  this,  that  he  considers 
his  conduct  (J^n  as  vii.  7,  cf.  Ps.  v.  2),  i.e.  regulates  it  carefully, 
examining  and  considering  (xiii.  16)  it  according  to  right  and  duty  ; 
and  that  on  the  contrary  the  folly  of  fools  shows  itself  in  this,  that 
they  aim  at  the  malevolent  deception  of  their  neighbour,  and  try 
all  kinds  of  secret  ways  for  the  gaining  of  this  end.  The  former 
is  wisdom,  because  from  the  good  only  good  comes ;  the  latter  is 
folly  or  madness,  because  deception,  however  long  it  may  sneak  in 
darkness,  yet  at  last  comes  to  light,  and  recoils  in  its  destructive 
effects  upon  him  from  whom  it  proceeds. 

Ver.  9  The  sacrificial  offering  of  fools  mocketh  ; 

But  between  upright  men  there  is  good  understanding. 
We  may  not  give  to  the  Iliph.  P?n  any  meaning  which  it  nowhere 
has,  as,  to  excuse  (Kimchi),  or  to  come  to  an  agreement  by  media 
tion  (Schultens).  So  we  may  not  make  DyW  the  subject  (Targ., 
Symmachus,  Jerome,  Luther,  "fools  make  sport  with  sin"),  for 
one  is  persuaded  that  D^IK  is  equivalent  to  D^INH  \D  *irus  $O 
(Immanuel,  Meiri,  and  others),  which  wrould  be  more  admissible  if 
we  had  pta  (vid.  iii.  35),  or  if  p^  did  not  immediately  follow  (vid. 
xxviii.  1).  Aquila  and  Theodotion  rightly  interpret  the  relation  of 
the  component  parts  of  the  sentence:  a(f>pova<;  x\evd%ei  TrA^/zyuAeta ; 
uud  this  translation  of  D£:X  also  is  correct  if  we  take  TreXeta  in 


CHAP.  xiv.  10.  295 


the  sense  of  a  Qvaia  irepl  TrX^/ieXe/a?  (Sir.  vii.  31),  in  which  the 
Judeeo-Hellenic  actually  uses  it  (vid.  Schleusner's  Lex.}.  The 
idea  of  sacrificial  offering  is  that  of  expiation  :  it  is  a  penitential 
work,  it  falls  under  the  prevailing  point  of  view  of  an  ecclesiastical 
punishment,  a  satisfactio  in  a  church-  disciplinary  sense  ;  the  for 
giveness  of  sins  is  conditioned  by  this,  (1)  that  the  sinner  either 
abundantly  makes  good  by  restitution  the  injury  inflicted  on  another, 
or  in  some  other  way  bears  temporal  punishment  for  it,  and  (2)  that 
he  willingly  presents  the  sacrifices  of  rams  or  of  sheep,  the  value  of 
which  the  priest  has  to  determine  in  its  relation  to  the  offence  (by 
a  tax-scale  from  2  shekels  upwards).  The  Tord  gives  accurately 
the  offences  which  are  thus  to  be  atoned  for.  Here,  with  reference 
to  9&,  there  particularly  comes  into  view  the  offence  against  property 
(Lev.  v.  20  ff.)  and  against  female  honour  (Lev.  xix.  20-22). 
Fools  fall  from  one  offence  into  another,  which  they  have  to  atone 
for  by  the  presentation  of  sacrificial  offerings;  the  sacrificial  offering 
mocketh  them  (p£n  with  accus.-object,  as  xix.  28,  Ps.  cxix.  51),  for 
it  equally  derides  them  on  account  of  the  self-inflicted  loss,  and  on 
account  of  the  efforts  with  which  they  must  make  good  the  effects 
of  their  frivolity  and  madness;  while  on  the  contrary,  among  men 
of  upright  character,  Jte"),  a  relation  of  mutual  favour,  prevails, 
which  does  not  permit  that  the  one  give  to  the  other  an  indemnity, 
and  apply  the  A  sham-  [C'fK  =  trespass-offering]  Tord.  Symmachus 
rightly  :  /cat  avdfJL€<rov  evOewv  evBofcta.  But  the  LXX.  confuses 
this  proverb  also.  Hitzig,  with  the  Syr.,  follows  it  and  translates  : 

The  tents  of  the  foolish  are  in  punishment  overthrown  [verfullt]  ; 

The  house  of  the  upright  is  well-pleasing  [wolyefallt]. 

Is  not  this  extravagant  [ungereimt  =  not  rhymed]  in  spite  of  the 
rhyme?  These  "6nK  [tents]  extracted  from  D^IN',  and  this  rT2 
[house]  formed  out  of  pa,  are  nothing  but  an  aimless  and  tasteless 
flourish. 

Four  proverbs  of  joy  and  sorrow7  in  the  present  and  the  future  : 
Ver.  10  The  heart  knoweth  the  trouble  of  its  soul, 

And  no  stranger  can  intermeddle  with  its  joy. 

The  accentuation  jn*P  X>  seems  to  point  out  JTIY1  as  an  adjective 
(Lowenstein  :  a  feeling  heart),  after  1  Kings  iii.  9,  or  genit.  (of 
a  feeling  heart)  ;  but  Cod.  12  1)4  and  the  Jemen  Cod.,  and  others, 
as  well  as  the  editions  of  Jablonsky  and  Michaelis,  have  3?  with 
Rebia,  so  that  this  is  by  itself  to  be  taken  as  the  subject  (cf.  the 
accentuation  xv.  5a  and  under  at  16a).  rns  has  the  n  with  Dagesh, 


296  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

and  consequently  the  short  Kametz  (Michlol  63&),  like  T1.^  iii.  8, 
cf.  ™^T3,  Judg.  vi.  28,  and  on  the  contrary  rn3,  Ezek.  xvi.  4  ;  it 
is  the  fern,  of  mor  =  morr^  from  "no,  adstringere,  amarum  esse.  Re 
garding  3?,  in  contradistinction  to  tJ>S3,  vid.  Psychol.  p.  251.  "  All 
that  is  meant  by  the  Hellenic  and  Hellenistic  ^01)9,  ^0709,  a-vvei- 
£770-49,  #uyu,o9,  is  comprehended  in  KapSla,  and  all  by  which  the  "iba 
and  B>SJ  are  affected  comes  in  2$>  into  the  light  of  consciousness." 

The  first  half  of  the  proverb  is  clear  :  the  heart,  and  only  it,  i.e. 
the  man  in  the  centre  of  his  individuality,  knows  what  brings 
bitterness  to  his  soul,  i.e.  what  troubles  him  in  the  sphere  of  his 
natural  life  and  of  the  nearest  life-circle  surrounding  him.  It  thus 
treats  of  life  experiences  which  are  of  too  complex  a  nature  to  be 
capable  of  being  fully  represented  to  others,  and,  as  we  are  wont  to 
say,  of  so  delicate  a  nature  that  we  shrink  from  uncovering  them 
and  making  them  known  to  others,  and  which  on  this  account 
must  be  kept  shut  up  in  our  own  hearts,  because  no  man  is  so  near 
to  us,  or  has  so  fully  gained  our  confidence,  that  we  have  the  de 
sire  and  the  courage  to  pour  out  our  hearts  to  him  from  their  very 
depths.  Yet  the  saying,  "  Every  one  knows  where  the  shoe  pinches 
him"  (1  Kings  viii.  38),  stands  nearer  to  this  proverb  ;  here  this 
expression  receives  a  psychological,  yet  a  sharper  and  a  deeper  ex 
pression,  for  the  knowledge  of  that  which  grieves  the  soul  is  attri 
buted  to  the  heart,  in  which,  as  the  innermost  of  the  soul-corporeal 
life,  it  reflects  itself  and  becomes  the  matter-of-fact  of  the  reflex 
consciousness  in  which  it  must  shut  itself  up,  but  also  for  the  most 
part  without  external  expression.  If  we  now  interpret  1"]I?JV~N?  as 
prohibitive,  then  this  would  stand  (with  this  exception,  that  in  this 
case  ?X  instead  of  $b  is  to  be  expected)  in  opposition,  certainly  not 
intended,  to  the  exhortation,  Rom.  xii.  15,  "  Rejoice  with  them 
that  do  rejoice,"  and  to  the  saying,  u  Distributed  joy  is  doubled  joy, 
distributed  sorrow  is  half  sorrow  ; "  and  an  admonition  to  leave  man 
alone  with  his  joy,  instead  of  urging  him  to  distribute  it,  does  not 
run  parallel  with  10a.  Therefore  we  interpret  the  fut.  as  poten- 
tialis.  As  there  is  a  soul-sorrow  of  the  man  whose  experience  is 
merely  a  matter  of  the  heart,  so  there  is  also  a  soul-joy  with  which 
no  other  (vid.  regarding  "IT,  p.  135,  and  cf.  here  particularly  Job 
xix.  27)  intermeddleth  (2  2"iJ?nn  like  Ps.  cvi.  35),  in  which  no  other 
can  intermeddle,  because  his  experience,  as  e.g.  of  blessed  spiritual 
affection  or  of  benevolent  feeling,  is  purely  of  a  personal  nature, 
and  admits  of  no  participation  (cf.  on  eicpvtye,  Matt.  xiii.  44),  and 


CHAP.  XiV.  11,  12.  207 

thus  of  no  communication  to  others.  Elster  well  observes:  "By 
this  thought,  that  the  innermost  feelings  of  a  man  are  never  fully 
imparted  to  another  man,  never  perfectly  cover  themselves  with 
the  feelings  of  another,  yea,  cannot  at  all  be  fully  understood  by 
another,  the  worth  and  the  significance  of  each  separate  human 
personality  is  made  conspicuous,  not  one  of  which  is  the  example 
of  a  species,  but  each  has  its  own  peculiarity,  which  no  one  of 
countless  individuals  possesses.  At  the  same  time  the  proverb  has 
the  significance,  that  it  shows  the  impossibility  of  a  perfect  fellow 
ship  among  men,  because  one  never  wholly  understands  another. 
Thereby  it  is  indicated  that  no  human  fellowship  can  give  true 
salvation,  but  only  the  fellowship  with  God,  whose  love  and  wisdom 
are  capable  of  shining  through  the  most  secret  sanctuary  of  human 
personality."  Thus  also  Dachsel  (but  he  interprets  106  admoni- 
torily)  :  "  Each  man  is  a  little  world  in  himself,  which  God  only 
fully  sees  through  and  understands.  His  sorrow  appertain  in  OP 
to  his  innermost  life,  and  his  joy,  another  is  never  able  fully  to 
transfer  to  himself.  Yea,  the  most  sorrowful  of  all  experiences, 
the  most  inward  of  all  joys,  we  possess  altogether  alone,  without 
any  to  participate  with  us." 

Ver.  11  The  house  of  the  wicked  is  overthrown ; 

But  the  tent  of  the  upright  flourishes. 

In  the  cogn.  proverb,  xii.  7,  line  2  begins  with  JV21,  but  here  the 
apparently  firmly-founded  house  is  assigned  to  the  godless,  and  on 

1    i  v  *  C3  O  1 

the  contrary  the  tent,  easily  destroyed,  and  not  set  up  under  the 
delusion  of  lasting  for  ever,  is  assigned  to  the  righteous.  While 
the  former  is  swept  away  without  leaving  a  trace  behind  (Isa.  xiv. 
23),  the  latter  has  blossoms  and  shoots  (H'nan  as  inwardly  transi 
tive,  like  Job  xiv.  9,  Ps.  xcii.  14)  ;  the  household  of  such  remains 
not  only  preserved  in  the  same  state,  but  in  a  prosperous,  happy 
manner  it  goes  forward  and  upward. 

Ver.  12  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  to  one, 
But  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death. 

This  is  literally  repeated  in  xvi.  25.  The  rightness  is  present  only 
as  a  phantom,  for  it  arises  wholly  from  a  terrible  self-deception  ; 
the  man  judges  falsely  and  goes  astray  when,  without  regard  to 
God  and  His  word,  he  follows  only  his  own  opinions.  It  is  the 
way  of  estrangement  from  God,  of  fleshly  security ;  the  way  of 
vice,  in  which  the  blinded  thinks  to  spend  his  life,  to  set  himself 
to  fulfil  his  purposes ;  but  the  end  thereof  (nnnns  with  neut. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

fern. :  the  end  of  this  intention,  that  in  which  it  issues)  are  the 
ways  of  death.  He  who  thus  deceives  himself  regarding  his  course 
of  life,  sees  himself  at  last  arrived  at  a  point  from  which  every  way 
which  now  further  remains  to  him  leads  only  down  to  death.  The 
self-delusion  of  one  ends  in  death  by  the  sentence  of  the  jud<re, 
that  of  another  in  self-murder ;  of  one  in  loathsome  disease,  of 
another  in  a  slow  decay  under  the  agony  of  conscience,  or  in  sorrow 
over  a  henceforth  dishonoured  and  distracted  life. 

Ver.  13  Even  in  the  midst  of  laughter  the  heart  experiences  sadness  ; 

And  to  it,  joy,  the  end  is  sorrow. 

Every  human  heart  carries  the  feeling  of  disquiet  and  of  separa 
tion  from  its  true  home,  and  of  the  nothingness,  the  transitoriness 
of  all  that  is  earthly;  and  in  addition  to  this,  there  is  many  a 
secret  sorrow  in  every  one  which  grows  out  of  his  own  corporeal 
and  spiritual  life,  and  from  his  relation  to  other  men  ;  and  this 
sorrow,  which  is  from  infancy  onward  the  lot  of  the  human  heart, 
and  which  more  and  more  deepens  and  diversifies  itself  in  the  course 
of  life,  makes  itself  perceptible  even  in  the  midst  of  laughter, 
in  spite  of  the  mirth  and  merriment,  without  being  able  to  be  sup 
pressed  or  expelled  from  the  soul,  returning  always  the  more 
intensely,  the  more  violently  we  may  have  for  a  time  kept  it  under 
and  sunk  it  in  unconsciousness.  Euchel  cites  here  the  words  of 
the  poet,  according  to  which  13a  is  literally  true : 
"  No,  man  is  not  made  for  joy  ; 
"\Vliy  weep  his  eyes  when  in  heart  he  laughs  ?  " 1 

From  the  fact  that  sorrow  is  the  fundamental  condition  of  humanity 
and  forms  the  background  of  laughter,  it  follows,  13J,  that  in 
general  it  is  not  good  for  man  to  give  himself  up  to  joy,  viz. 
sensual  (worldly),  for  to  it,  joy,  the  end  (the  issue)  is  sorrow.  That 
is  true  also  of  the  final  end,  which  according  to  that  saying,  /ia/ca- 
pcoi  oi  tckalovres  vvv  on  jeXuaere,  changes  laughter  into  weeping 
and  weeping  into  laughter.  The  correction  nnipfrn  rnns*  (Hitziir) 
presses  upon  the  Mislde  style  an  article  in  such  cases  rejected,  and 
removes  a  form  of  expression  of  the  Hebr.  syntazis  ornata,  which 
here,  as  at  Isa.  xvii.  6,  is  easily  obviated,  but  which  is  warranted 
by  a  multitude  of  other  examples,  vid.  at  xiii.  4  (also  v.  22),  and 
cf.  Philippi's  Status  Const,  p.  14  f.,  who  regards  the  second  word, 
as  here  nn»b',  after  the  Arab.,  as  accus.  But  in  cases  like  'N3t? 
1  "Nein,  der  Mensch  ist  zur  Freude  nicht  gemacht, 
Darum  weint  scin  Ang'  wena  er  herzlich  lacht." 


CHAP.  xiv.  M.  299 

"ip.fc?,  although  not  in  cases  such  as  Ezra  ii.  62,  the  accus.  rendering 
is  tenable,  and  the  Arab,  does  not  at  all  demand  it.1  In  the  old 
Hebr.  this  solutio  of  the  st.  constr.  belongs  to  the  elegances  of 
the  language;  it  is  the  precursor  of  the  vulgar  post-bibl.  Bn'nns 
nnoBrbtJ>.  That  the  Hebr.  may  also  retain  a  gen.  where  more  or 
fewer  parts  of  a  sentence  intervene  between  it  and  its  governing 
word,  is  shown  by  such  examples  as  Isa.  xlviii.  9,  xlix.  7,  Ixi.  7.2 

There  follows  a  series  of  proverbs  which  treat  of  the  wicked  and 
the  good,  and  of  the  relation  between  the  foolish  and  the  wise : 

Yer.  14  He  that  is  of  a  perverse  heart  is  satisfied  with  his  own  ways ; 
And  a  good  man  from  himself. 

We  first  determine  the  subject  conception.  S?  HID  (one  turning 
aside  TT}?  fcap$Las  or  rrjv  KapBlav)  is  one  whose  heart  is  perverted, 
JtoJ,  turned  away,  viz.  from  God,  Ps.  xliv.  19.  The  Book  of  Pro 
verbs  contains  besides  of  this  verb  only  the  name  of  dross  (rece- 
danea)  derived  from  it;  ttD,  separated,  drawn  away,  is  such  a  half 
passive  as  -no,  Isa.  xlix.  21,  3V.T,  Mic.  ii.  8,  etc.  (Olsh.  §  245a). 
Regarding  2it3  ^K,  vid.  at  xii.  2,  cf.  xiii.  22 :  a  man  is  so  called 
whose  manner  of  thought  and  of  action  has  as  its  impulse  and 
motive  self-sacrificing  love.  When  it  is  said  of  the  former  that 
lie  is  satisfied  with  his  own  ways,  viz.  those  which  with  heart 
turned  away  from  God  he  enters  upon,  the  meaning  is  not  that 
they  give  him  peace  or  bring  satisfaction  to  him  (Lowenstein), 
but  we  see  from  i.  31,  xviii.  20,  that  this  is  meant  recompensa- 
tively :  he  gets,  enjoys  the  reward  of  his  wandering  in  estrange 
ment  from  God.  It  is  now  without  doubt  seen  that  146  expresses 
that  wherein  the  benevolent  man  finds  his  reward.  We  will  there- 

1  Regarding  the  supplying  (ibdat)  of  a  foregoing  genitive  or  accus.  pronoun 
of  the  third  person  by  a  definite  or  indefinite  following,  in  the  same  case  as  the 
substantive,  Samachschari   speaks  in  the  Mufassal,  p.  94  ss.,  where,  as  ex 
amples,  are  found :  raeituhu  Zeidan,  I  have  seen  him,  the  Zeid ;  marartu  bihi 
Zeidin,  I  have  gone  over  with  him,  the  Zeid  ;  saraftu  wuguhaM  awwaliha,  in 
the  flight  I  smote  the  heads  of  the  same,  their  front  rank.      Vid.  regarding 
this  anticipation  of  the  definite  idea  by  an  indefinite,  with  explanations  of  it, 
Fleischer's  Makkari,  Additions  et  Corrections,  p.  xl.  col.  2,  and  Dieterici's  Mu- 
tanabbi,  p.  341,  1.  13. 

2  These  examples  moreover  do  not  exceed  that  which  is  possible  in  the  Arab., 
vid.  regarding  this  omission  of  the  mudcif,  where  this  is  supplied  from  the  pre 
ceding  before  a  genitive,  Samachschari's  Mufassal.  p.  34,  1.  8-13.     Perhaps 
"'-H^1   Obad.  ver.  7,  of  thy  bread  =  the  (men)  of  thy  bread,  is  au  example  of 
the  same  thing. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

fore  not  explain  (after  iv.  15,  cf.  Num.  xvi.  26,  2  Sam.  xix.  10)  : 
the  good  man   turns   himself  away  from  him,  or  the  good  man 
stands  over  him  (as  Jerome,  Venet.,  after  Eccles.  v.  7)  ;— this  ren 
dering  gives  no  contrast,  or  at  least  a  halting  one.     The  JO  of  vby» 
must  be  parallel  with  that  of  Vrno.     From  the  LXX.,  airo^Se 
rwv  Biavorifidrtav  ai/rov,  the  Syr.  rightly  :  from  the  fruit  (religious 
ness)  of  his  soul;   the  Targ. :   from  his  fruit.     Buxtorf,  against 
Cappellus,  has  already  perceived  that   here  no  other  phrase  but 
the  explanation  of  v^JJD  by  ex  eo  quod  penes  se  est  lies  at  the  foun 
dation.     We  could,  after  vii.  14,  also  explain  :  from  that  which  he 
perceives  as   his  obligation  (duty) ;  yet  that  other  explanation  lies 
proportionally  nearer,  but  yet  not  so  that  we  refer  the  suffix  to  the 
blackslider  of  Ua :  in  it  (his  fate)  the  good  man  is  satisfied,  for 
this   contrast  also   halts,  the  thought  is  not  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Book  of  Proverbs  (for  xxix.  166  does  not  justify  it)  ;  and  in  how 
totally  different  a  connection  of  thought  V^o  is  used  in  the  Book  of 
Proverbs,  is  shown  by  xxiv.  176;  but  generally  the  Scripture  does 
not  use  jnfe>  of  such  satisfaction,  it  has,  as  in  14a,  also  in  146,  the 
recompensative  sense,  according  to  the  fundamental  principle,  o  eav 
o-ireipy  avQpwTros  rovro  KOI  Qeplaei  (Gal.  vi.  7).     The  suffix  refers 
back  to  the  subject,  as  we  say  :  ty  »rm,  fy  *B>B3  (Psychol.  p.  152). 
But   considerations  of  an   opposite  kind  also  suggest  themselves. 
Everywhere  else  byo  refers  not  to  that  which  a"  man  has  within 
himself,  but  that  which  he  carries  without ;  and  also  that  V^y»  can 
be   used  in   the  sense  of  vbtyfD,  no  evidence  can  be  adduced  :  it 
must  be  admitted  to  be  possible,  since  the  writer  of  the  Chronicles 
(2   Chron.  i.  4)   ventures  to  use  pana.     Is  vi>j?o  thus  used  sub- 
stantively:  by  his  leaves  (Aben  Ezra  and  others)?     If  one  com 
pares  xi.  28  with  Ps.  i.  3,  this  explanation  is  not  absurd ;   but  why 
then  did  not  the  poet  rather  use  1*130?     We  come  finally  to  the 
result,  that  TOO,  although  it  admits  a  connected  interpretation,  is 
an  error  of  transcription.     But  the  correction  is  not  vbi'lffl  (Elster) 
nor  TOJja  (Cappellus),  for  D^y  and  My,  deeds,  are  words  which  do 
not  exist;    nor  is  it  VjyfitM  (Bertheauj  nor  vteao}  (Ewald),   but 
^fe?1  (which  Cappellus  regarded,  but  erroneously,  as  the  LXX. 
phrase) ;  for  (1)  throughout  almost  the  whole  O.  f.,  from  Judg.  ii. 
19  to  Zech.  i.  18,  D'm  and  D^yo  are  interchangeable  words,  and 
indeed  almost  an  inseparable  pair,  cf.  particularly  Jer.  xvii.  10 ;  and 
(2)  when  Isaiah  (iii.  10)  says,  &J#  b$b$Q  ^SP?  niD'O  pHV  11CN\ 
this  almost  sounds  like  a  prophetical  paraphrase  of  the  second  line 


CHAP.  XIV.  15,  13.  SOI 

of  t1;e  proverb,  which  besides  by  this  emendation  gains  a  more 
rhythmical  sound  and  a  more  suitable  compass.1 

Yer.  15  The  simple  believeth  every  word  ; 

But  the  prudent  takes  heed  to  his  step. 

We  do  not  translate,  "  every  thing,"  for  "  word "  and  faith  are 
correlates,  Ps.  cvi.  24,  and  "T13  is  the  non-self-dependent  who  lets 
himself  be  easily  persuaded  by  the  talk  of  another  (vid.  p.  56)  :  he 
believes  every  word  without  proving  it,  whether  it  is  well-meant, 
whether  it  is  true,  whether  it  is  salutary  and  useful,  so  that  he  is 
thus,  without  having  any  firm  principle,  and  without  any  judgment 
of  his  own,  driven  about  hither  and  thither;  the  prudent,  on  the 
other  hand,  considers  and  marks  his  step,  that  he  may  not  take  a  false 
step  or  go  astray,  he  proves  his  way  (8a),  he  takes  no  step  without 
thought  and  consideration  (pa  or  P?n  with  !>,  to  consider  or  reflect 
upon  anything,  Ps.  Ixxiii.  17,  cf.  xxxiii.  15) — he  makes  sure  steps 
with  his  feet  (Ileb.  xii.  13),  without  permitting  himself  to  waver 
and  sway  by  every  wind  of  doctrine  (Eph.  iv.  14). 
Yer.  16  The  wise  fcareth  and  departeth  from  evil ; 

But  the  fool  loseth  his  wits  and  is  regardless. 
Our  editions  have  K^  with  Munach,  as  if  N"V  DDH  were  a  substantive 

with  its  adjective ;  but  Cod.  1294  has  D2n  with  JRebia,  and  thus  it 
must  be  :  D3n  is  the  subject,  and  what  follows  is  its  complex  pre 
dicate.  Most  interpreters  translate  166  :  the  fool  is  over-confident 
(Zockler),  or  the  fool  rushes  on  (Hitzig),  as  also  Luther :  but  a  fool 
rushes  wildly  through,  i.e.  in  a  daring,  presumptuous  manner.  But 
I2i/rin  denotes  everywhere  nothing  else  than  to  fall  into  extreme 
anger,  to  become  heated  beyond  measure,  xxvi.  17  (cf.  xx.  2), 
Deut.  iii.  26,  etc.  Thus  16a  and  166  are  fully  contrasted.  What 
is  said  of  the  wise  will  be  judged  after  Job  i.  1,  cf.  Ps.  xxxiv.  15, 
xxxvii.  27  :  the  wise  man  has  fear,  viz.  fear  of  God,  or  rather,  since 
DTi^Nn  is  not  directly  to  be  supplied,  that  careful,  thoughtful,  self- 
mistrusting  reserve  which  flows  from  the  reverential  awe  of  God  ; 
the  fool,  on  the  contrary,  can  neither  rule  nor  bridle  his  affections, 
and  without  any  just  occasion  falls  into  passionate  excitement. 
But  on  the  other  side  he  is  self-confident,  regardless,  secure ;  while 
the  wise  man  avoids  the  evil,  i.e.  carefully  goes  out  of  its  way,  and 
in  N.  T.  phraseology  "  works  out  his  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling." 

1  As  here  an  ^  too  few  is  written,  so  at  Isa.  xxxii.  1  (D'HBOl)  and  Ps.  Ixxiv, 
14  (D^^)  one  too  many. 


302  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Yer.  17.  This  verse,  as  if  explanatory  of  "OyniD,  connects  itself 
with  this  interpretation  of  the  contrasts,  corresponding  to  the  general 
usus  loquendi)  and  particularly  to  the  Mishle  style. 

One  who  is  quick  to  anger  worketh  folly, 

And  a  man  of  intrigues  is  hated. 

Ewald  finds  here  no  right  contrast.  He  understands  nj3T?3  t^X  in  a 
good  sense,  and  accordingly  corrects  the  text,  substituting  for  WV\ 
**y?\  (**?.?".)>  for  he  translates  :  but  the  man  of  consideration  bears 
(properly  smooths,  viz.  his  soul).  On  the  other  hand  it  is  also  to  be 
remarked,  that  niOTD  £>%  when  it  occurs,  is  not  to  be  understood 
necessarily  in  a  good  sense,  since  note  is  used  just  like  JTitttD,  at  one 
time  in  a  good  and  at  another  in  a  bad  sense,  and  that  we  willingly 
miss  the  "most  complete  sense"  thus  arising,  since  the  proverb, 
as  it  stands  in  the  Masoretic  text,  is  good  Hebrew,  and  needs  only 
to  be  rightly  understood  to  let  nothing  be  missed  in  completeness. 
The  contrast,  as  Ewald  seeks  here  to  represent  it  (also  Hitzig,  who 
proposes  JN&J* :  the  man  of  consideration  remains  quiet ;  Syr.  ramys, 
circumspect),  we  have  in  ver.  29,  where  the  ^aKpoOv^o^  stands  over 
against  the  o%v9vfj.o<;  (*)X  or  2?QS  of  the  breathing  of  anger  through 
the  nose,  cf.  Theocritus,  i.  18 :  Kal  ol  del  Spifiela  rxp\a  norl  pivl 
/cdOrjrai).  Here  the  contrast  is  different :  to  the  man  who  is  quick 
to  anger,  who  suddenly  gives  expression  to  his  anger  and  displeasure, 
stands  opposed  the  man  of  intrigues,  who  contrives  secret  vengeance 
against  those  with  whom  he  is  angry.  Such  a  deceitful  man,  who 
contrives  evil  with  calculating  forethought  and  executes  it  in  cold 
blood  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  7),  is  hated ;  while  on  the  contrary  the  noisy 
lets  himself  rush  forward  to  inconsiderate,  mad  actions,  but  is  not 
hated  on  that  account ;  but  if  in  his  folly  he  injures  or  disgraces 
himself,  or  is  derided,  or  if  he  even  does  injury  to  the  body  and 
the  life  of  another,  and  afterwards  with  terror  sees  the  evil  done 
in  its  true  light,  then  he  is  an  object  of  compassion.  Theodotion 
rightly:  (avrjp  Be)  8ta/3ov\iwv pwrjOrfo'eTai,,  and  Jerome:  vir  versntus 
odiosus  est  (not  the  Venet.  dvyp  /SSeTu^/zwt',  for  this  signification  has 
only  nET,  and  that  in  the  sing.);  on  the  contrary,  the  LXX.,  Syr., 
Targum,  and  Symmachus  incorrectly  understand  JYIU12  t^X  in  bonain 
partem. 

Ver.  18  The  simple  have  obtained  folly  as  an  inheritance ; 

But  the  prudent  put  on  knowledge  as  a  crown. 

As  a  parallel  word  to  1^3,  Vina*  (after  the  Masora  defective),  also 
in  the  sense  of  Arab,  dktkar^  multiplicarej  abundare  (from  Arab. 


*  CHAP.  XIV.  13.  303 

Icathura,  to  be  much,  perhaps1  properly  comprehensive,  encompass 
ing),  would  be  appropriate,  but  it  is  a  word  properly  Arabic.  On 
the  other  hand,  inappropriate  is  the  meaning  of  the  Heb.-Aram. 
"ifl3,  to  wait  (properly  waiting  to  surround,  to  go  round  any  one,  cf. 
inaiiere  aliquem  or  aliquod),  according  to  which  Aquila,  ava/nevovaiv, 
and  Jerome,  expectabunt.  Also  "i^31?,  to  encompass  in  the  sense  of 
to  embrace  (LXX.  Kparija-ovcriv),  does  not  suffice,  since  in  the 
relation  to  17113  one  expects  an  idea  surpassing  this.  Certainly 
there  is  a  heightening  of  the  idea  in  this,  that  the  HipJi.  in  contra 
distinction  to  ^m  would  denote  an  object  of  desire  spontaneously 
sought  for.  But  far  stronger  and  more  pointed  is  the  heightening 
of  the  idea  when  we  take  nro^  as  the  denom.  of  "ins  (Gr.  /aVap?, 
KiSapi?,  Babyl.  VD,  cudur,  cf.  "n~3,  a  rounding,  sphcera).  Thus 
Theodotion,  a-recf)0/]crovrat,.  The  Venet.  better  actively,  eare^avTo 
(after  Kimchi :  DB>fiT»  by  "iroa  njnn  \&'w),  the  Targ.,  Jerome.  Luther 
(but  not  the  Syr.,  which  translates  l^rw  by  "to  inherit,"  but  linn11 
by  (AepiovvTai,,  which  the  LXX.  has  for  l^m).  The  bibl.  language 
has  also  (Ps.  cxlii.  8)  tTDn  in  the  denom.  signification  of  to  place 
a  crown,  and  that  on  oneself  ;  the  non-bibl.  has  T>mo  (like  the  bibl. 
T£?-V£)  in  the  sense  of  distributor  of  crowns,2  and  is  fond  of  the 
metaphor  njnn  tro,  crown  of  knowledge.  With  those  not  self- 
dependent  (yid.  regarding  the  plur.  form  of  Sri2,  p.  56),  who  are 
swayed  by  the  first  influence,  the  issue  is,  without  their  willing  it, 
that  they  become  habitual  fools  :  folly  is  their  possession,  i.e.  their 
property.  The  prudent,  on  the  contrary,  as  ver.  15  designates 
them,  have  thoughtfully  to  ponder  their  step  to  gain  knowledge 
as  a  crown  (cf.  "1T^.,  to  gain  riches,  rnsn,  \\^  to  gajn  flowers, 
Gesen.  §  53,  2).  Knowledge  is  to  them  not  merely  an  inheritance, 
but  a  possession  won,  and  as  such  remains  with  them  a  high  and 
as  it  were  a  kingly  ornament. 

Ver.  19  The  wicked  must  bow  before  the  good, 

And  the  godless  stand  at  the  doors  of  the  righteous. 

The  good,  viz.  that  which  is  truly  good,  which  has  love  as  its  prin 
ciple,  always  at  last  holds  the  supremacy.  The  good  men  who  mani 
fest  love  to  men  which  flows  from  love  to  God,  come  finally  forward, 
so  that  the  wicked,  who  for  a  long  time  played  the  part  of  lords, 

1  According  to  rule  the  Hebr.  &  becomes  in  Arab,  d:,  as  in  Aram.  D  ; 
but  kthar  might  be  from  ktar,  an  old  verb  rarely  found,  which  derivuta  wilb 
the  idea  of  encircling  (wall)  and  of  rounding  (bunch)  point  to. 

2  Vid,  Wissenschaft,  Kunst,  Judertthum  (1838),  p.  210. 


304 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


bow  themselves  willingly  or  unwillingly  before  them,  and  often 
enough  it  comes  about  that  godless  men  fall  down  from  their 
prosperity  and  their  places  of  honour  so  low,  that  they  post  them 
selves  at  the  entrance  of  the  stately  dwelling  of  the  righteous 
(xiii.  22),  waiting  for  his  going  out  and  in,  or  seeking  an  occa 
sion  of  presenting  to  him  a  supplication,  or  also  as  expecting*  gifts 
to  be  bestowed  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  The  poor  man  Lazarus  Trpos  rov 
TTvXwva  of  the  rich  man,  Luke  xvi.  20,  shows,  indeed,  that  this  is 
not  always  the  case  on  this  side  of  the  grave,  WV  has,  according 
to  the  Masora  (cf.  Kimchi's  Worterluch  under  nn^),  the  ultima 
accented;  the  accentuation  of  the  form  12D  wavers  between  the 
nit.  and  the  penult.  Olsh.  p.  482  f.,  cf.  Gesen.  68,  Anm.  10. 
The  substantival  clause  19&  is  easily  changed  into  a  verbal  clause  : 
they  come  (Syr.),  appear,  stand  (incorrectly  the  Targ. :  they  are 
judged  in  the  gates  of  the  righteous). 
Three  proverbs  on  the  hatred  of  men  : 

Ver.  20  The  poor  is  hated  even  by  his  neighbour  ; 

But  of  those  who  love  the  rich  there  are  many. 

This  is  the  old  history  daily  repeating  itself.  Among  all  people  is 
the  saying  and  the  complaint : 

Donee  eris  felix  multos  numeralis  amicos, 

Tempora  sifuerint  nubilia  solus  eris.1 

The  Book  of  Proverbs  also  speaks  of  this  lamentable  phenomenon. 
It  is  a  part  of  the  dark  side  of  human  nature,  and  one  should  take 
notice  of  it,  so  that  when  it  goes  well  with  him,  he  may  not  regard 
his  many  friends  as  all  genuine,  and  when  he  becomes  poor,  he 
may  not  be  surprised  by  the  dissolution  of  earlier  friendship,  but 
may  value  so  much  the  higher  exceptions  to  the  rule.  The  con 
nection  of  the  passive  with  |>  of  the  subject  (cf.  xiii.  13),  as  in  the 
Greek  with  the  dative,  is  pure  Semitic ;  sometimes  it  stands  with 
|0,  but  in  the  sense  of  d-rro,  Cant.  iii.  10,  before  the  influence  of 
the  West  led  to  its  being  used  in  the  sense  of  VTTO  (Ges.  §  143,  2)  ; 
Wjf.,  is  hated  (Cod.  1294  :  Wtf),  connects  with  the  hatred  which  is 
directed  against  the  poor  also  the  indifference  which  makes  him 
without  sympathy,  for  one  feels  himself  troubled  by  him  and 
ashamed. 

Ver.  21  Whoever  despiseth  his  neighbour  committeth  sin  ; 

But  whoever  hath  compassion  on  the  suffering — blessings  on  him ! 
One  should  regard  every  human  being,  especially  such  as  God  has 

1  Ovid,  Trist.  i.  8. 


CHAP.  XIV.  22.  305 

placed  near  to  him,  as  a  being  having  the  same  origin,  as  created 
in  the  image  of  God,  and  of  the  same  lofty  destination,  and  should 
consider  himself  as  under  obligation  to  love  him.  He  who  despiseth 
his  neighbour  (write  13  with  Metheg,  and  vid.  regarding  the 
constr.  with  dat.  object,  vi.  30,  cf.  xi.  12,  xiii.  13)  sins  in  this 
respect,  that  he  raises  himself  proudly  and  unwarrantably  above 
him ;  that  the  honour  and  love  he  shows  to  him  he  measures  not 
by  the  rule  of  duty  and  of  necessity,  but  according  to  that  which 
is  pleasing  to  himself ;  and  in  that  he  refuses  to  him  that  which 
according  to  the  ordinance  of  God  he  owes  him.  In  ver.  216  the 
ChetMb  &W:  and  the  Ken  tfUJJ  (vid.  at  Ps.  ix.  13)  interchange  in 
an  inexplicable  way ;  *W  is  the  bowed  down  (cf.  Arab,  mrfnuww, 
particularly  of  the  prisoner,  from  'ana,  fut.  ya'nw,  to  bow,  bend),  UJJ 
(Arab,  'anin,  with  the  art.  dFniy,  from  the  intrans.  'aniya,  to  be 
bowed  down)  the  patient  bearer  who  in  the  school  of  suffering  has 
learned  humility  and  meekness.  One  does  not  see  why  the  Keri 
here  exchanges  that  passive  idea  for  this  ethical  one,  especially 
since,  in  proving  himself  to  be  ?p.1n»  (compassionate)  (for  which 
elsewhere  the  part.  Kal  fp.in,  xiv.  31,  xix.  17,  xxviii.  8),  one  must 
be  determined  only  by  the  needy  condition  of  his  neighbour,  and 
not  by  his  (the  neighbour's)  moral  worthiness,  the  want  of  which 
ought  to  make  him  twofold  more  an  object  of  our  compassion. 
All  the  old  translators,  from  the  LXX.  to  the  Venet.  and  Luther, 
on  this  account  adopt  the  Chethib. 

Ver.  22.  The  proverb  terminating  (ver.  21)  with  VncJJtf  (cf.  xvi. 
20)  is  now  followed  by  one  not  less  singularly  formed,  commencing 
with  s6q  (cf.  viii.  1). 

Will  they  not  go  astray  who  devise  evil, 
And  are  not  mercy  and  truth  to  those  who  devise  good  ? 
The  part.  Bnh  signifies  both  the  plougher  and  the  artisan  ;  but  on 
this  account  to  read  with  Hitzig  both  times  't$nn,  {.e.  machinatores, 
is  nothing  less  than  advisable,  since  there  is  connected  with  this 
metaphorical  Bnn,  as  we  have  shown  at  iii.  29,  not  only  the  idea  of 
fabricating,  but  also  that  of  ploughing.  Just  so  little  is  there  any 
reason  for  changing  with  Hitzig,  against  all  old  translators,  W  into 
ijn; :  will  it  not  go  ill  with  them  .  .  .  ;  the  fut.  W  (cf.  Isa.  Ixiii. 
17)  is  not  to  be  touched  ;  the  perf.  iyn  (e.g.  Ps.  Iviii.  4)  would  de 
note  that  those  who  contrive  evil  are  in  the  way  of  error,  the  fut.  on 
the  contrary  that  they  will  fall  into  error  (cf.  xii.  26  with  Job 
xii.  24).  But  if  W  &&]  is  the  expression  of  the  result  which  shall 
VOL.  i. 


306  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

certainly  come  to  such, then  225  stands  as  a  contrast  adapted  thereto: 
and  are  not,  on  the  contrary,  mercy  and  truth  those  who  contrive 
that  which  is  good,  i.e.  (for  that  which  befalls  them,  as  xiii.  18a,  cf. 
xiv.  355,  is  made  their  attribute)  are  they  not  an  object  of  mercy 
and  truth,  viz.  on  the  part  of  God  and  of  men,  for  the  effort  which 
proceeds  from  love  and  is  directed  to  the  showing  forth  of  good 
is  rewarded  by  this,  that  God  and  men  are  merciful  to  such  and 
maintain  truth  to  them,  stand  in  truth  to  them;  for  HOSI .  "JDH  is 
to  be  understood  here,  as  at  iii.  3,  neither  of  God  nor  of  men  ex 
clusively,  but  of  both  together :  the  wicked  who  contrive  evil  lose 
themselves  on  the  way  to  destruction,  but  grace  and  truth  are  the 
lot  of  those  who  aim  at  what  is  good,  guarded  and  guided  by 
which,  they  reach  by  a  blessed  way  a  glorious  end. 

There  now  follows  a  considerable  series  of  proverbs  (vers.  23-31) 
which,  with  a  single  exception  (ver.  24),  have  all  this  in  common, 
that  one  or  two  key-words  in  them  begin  with  D. 

Ver.  23  In  all  labour  there  is  gain, 

But  idle  talk  leadeth  only  to  loss. 

Here  the  key-words  are  into  and  "liono  (parallel  xxi.  5,  cf.  with 
xi.  24),  which  begin  with  o.  3VV  is  labour,  and  that  earnest  and 
unwearied,  as  at  x.  22.  If  one  toils  on  honestly,  then  there 
always  results  from  it  something  which  stands  forth  above  the 
endeavour  as  its  result  and  product,  vid.  at  Job  xxx.  11,  where  it 
is  shown  how  "UV,  from  the  primary  meaning  to  be  stretched  out 
long,  acquires  the  meaning  of  that  which  hangs  over,  shoots  over, 
copiousness,  and  gain.  By  the  word  of  the  lips,  on  the  contrary, 
i.e.  purposeless  and  inoperative  talk  (D^2;w>  iin  as  Isa.  xxxvi.  5, 
cf.  Job  xi.  2),  nothing  is  gained,  but  on  the  contrary  there  is  only 
loss,  for  by  it  one  only  robs  both  himself  and  others  of  time,  and 
wastes  strength,  which  might  have  been  turned  to  better  purpose, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  injury  that  is  thereby  done  to  his  soul ;  per 
haps  also  he  morally  injures,  or  at  least  discomposes  and  wearies 
others. 

Ver.  24  It  is  a  crown  to  the  wise  when  they  are  rich ; 

But  the  folly  of  fools  remains  folly. 

From  xii.  4,  31,  xvii.  6,  we  see  that  D^n  rnBJ|  is  the  predicate. 
Thus  it  is  the  riches  of  the  wise  of  which  it  is  said  that  they  are  a 
crown  or  an  ornament  to  them.  More  than  this  is  said,  if  with 
Hitzig  we  read,  after  the  LXX.,  Deny,  their  prudence,  instead  of 
For  then  the  meaning  would  be,  that  the  wise  need  no 


CHAP.  XIV.  25.  307 

other  crown  tlian  that  which  they  have  in  their  prudence.     But  yet 
far  more  appropriately  "riches"  are  called  the  crown  of  a  wise  man 
when  they  come  to  his  wisdom  ;  for  it  is  truly  thus  that  riches, 
when  they  are  possessed  along  with  wisdom,  contribute  not  a  little 
to  heighten  its  influence  and  power,  and  not  merely  because  they 
adorn  in  their  appearance  like  a  crown,  or,  as  we  say,  surround 
as  with  a  golden  frame,  but  because  they  afford  a  variety  of  means 
and  occasions  for  self-manifestation  which  are  denied  to  the  poor. 
By  this  interpretation  of  24a,  246  comes  out  also  into  the  light, 
without  our  requiring  to  correct  the  first  rfm,  or  to  render  it  in  an 
unusual  sense.     The  LXX.  and  Syr.  translate  the  first  nh«  by 
Siarpipq  (by  a    circumlocution),  the  Targ.   by  gloria,  fame— we 
know  not  how  they  reach  this.      Schultens  in  his  Com.  renders : 
crassa  opulentia  elumbium  crassities,  but  in  his  Animadversiones  he 
combines  the  first  r6lX  with  the  Arab,  awwale,  precedence,  which 
Gesen.  approves  of.      But   although   the   meaning   to   be   thick 
(properly  coalescere)  appertains  to  the  verbal  stem  Sx  as  well  as 
the  meaning  to  be  before  (Arab,  dl,  dwila,  wdl),  yet  the  Hebr.  rtaw 
always  and  everywhere  means  only  folly,1  from  the  fundamental 
idea  crassities  (thickness).     Hitzig's  rfax  (which  denotes  the  conse 
quence  with  which  the  fool  invests  himself)  we  do  not  accept,  because 
this  word  is  Hitzig's  own  invention.     Rather  JV^  is  to  be  expected: 
the  crown  with  which   fools  adorn  themselves  is  folly.      But  the 
sentence :   the  folly  of  fools  is  (and  remains)  folly  (Symmachus, 
Jerome,  Venet.,  Luther),  needs  the  emendation  as  little  as  xvi.  226, 
for,  interpreted  in   connection  with   24a,   it   denotes    that    while 
wisdom  is  adorned  and  raised  up  by  riches,  folly  on  the  other  hand 
remains,  even  when  connected  with  riches,  always  the  same,  with 
out  being  either  thereby  veiled  or  removed,— on  the  contrary,  the 
fool,  when  he  is  rich,  exhibits  his  follies  always  more  and  more. 
C.  B.  Michaelis  compares  Lucian's  simia  est  simia  etiamsi  aurea 
gestet  insignia. 

Ver.  25  A  witness  of  truth  delivereth  souls ; 

But  he  who  breathes  out  lies  is  nothing  but  deception. 

When  men,  in  consequence  of  false  suspicions  or  of  false  accusations, 
fall  into  danger  of  their  lives  (rmsfej  ^n  is  the  designation  in  the 
later  language  of  the  law  of  a  criminal  process),  then  a  tongue 
1  Ewald's  derivation  of  ^ix  from  j«ix  =  piK,  null,  vain,  is  not  much  better 
than  Heidenheim's  from  >^X :  one  who  says  "perhaps"  =  a  sceptic,  vid. 
p.  59,  note. 


308  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

which,  pressed  by  conscientiousness  and  not  deterred  by  cowardice, 
will  utter  the  truth,  saves  them.  But  a  false  tongue,  which  as 
such  (vid.  5&)  is  a  D^tD  HS^  (after  the  Masora  at  this  place 
HS^I  defective),  i.e.  is  one  who  breathes  out  lies  (vid.  regarding 
rva11  at  vi.  19),  is  mere  deception  (LXX.,  without  reading  nB")B 
[as  Hitzig  does]  :  SoTuo?).  In  xii.  17  none  is  to  be  interpreted  as 
the  object,  accus.  of  W  carried  forward,  but  here  to  carry  forward 
^5fO  (Arama,  Lowenstein)  is  impracticable — for  to  deliver  deceit  = 
the  deceiver  is  not  expressed  in  the  Hebr. — ncriD  is,  as  possibly  also 
xii.  16  (LXX.  SoXios),  without  B*N  or  *W  being  supplied,  the  pred. 
of  the  substantival  clause  :  such  an  one  is  deception  (in  bad  Latin, 
dolositas),  for  he  who  utters  forth  lies  against  better  knowledge 
must  have  a  malevolent,  deceitful  purpose. 

Ver.  26  In  the  fear  of  Jahve  lies  a  strong  ground  of  confidence, 

And  the  children  of  such  an  one  have  a  refuge. 

The  so-called  2  essentice  stands  here,  as  at  Ps.  Ixviii.  5,  Iv.  19,  Isa. 
xxvi.  4,  before  the  subject  idea  ;  the  clause  :  in  the  fear  of  God 
exists,  i.e.  it  is  and  proves  itself,  as  a  strong  ground  of  confidence, 
does  not  mean  that  the  fear  of  God  is  something  in  which  one  can 
rely  (Hitzig),  but  that  it  has  (xxii.  19,  Jer.  xvii.  7,  and  here)  an 
inheritance  which  is  enduring,  unwavering,  and  not  disappointing 
in  God,  who  is  the  object  of  fear ;  for  it  is  not  faith,  nor  anything 
else  subjective,  which  is  the  rock  that  bears  us,  but  this  Rock  is  the 
object  which  faith  lays  hold  of  (cf.  Isa.  xxviii.  16).  Is  now  the 
Vazta  to  be  referred,  with  Ewald  and  Zockler,  to  'n  ?  It  is  possible, 
as  we  have  discussed  at  Gen.  vi.  1  f. ;  but  in  view  of  parallels  such 
as  xx.  7,  it  is  not  probable.  He  who  fears  God  entails  in  the 
Abrahamic  way  (Gen.  xviii.  19)  the  fear  of  God  on  his  children, 
and  in  this  precious  paternal  inheritance  they  have  a  nono  (not 
npHD,  and  therefore  to  be  written  with  Masoretic  exactness  ""if!"?), 
a  fortress  or  place  of  protection,  a  refuge  in  every  time  of  need 
(cf.  Ps.  Ixxi.  5-7).  Accordingly,  V^l  refers  back  to  the  'n  XV,  to 
be  understood  from  'n  nNTa  (LXX.,  Luther,  and  all  the  Jewish 
interpreters),  which  we  find  not  so  doubtful  as  to  regard  on  this 
account  the  explanation  after  Ps.  Ixxiii.  15,  cf.  Deut.  xiv.  1,  as 
necessary,  although  we  grant  that  such  an  introduction  of  the  N. 
T.  generalization  and  deepening  of  the  idea  of  sonship  is  to  be 
expected  from  the  Chokma. 

Ver.  27  The  fear  of  Jahve  is  a  fountain  of  life, 
To  escape  the  snares  of  death. 


CHAP.  XIV.  28,  29.  309 

There  springs  up  a  life  which  makes  him  who  carries  in  himself 
(cf.  John  iv.  14,  ev  avrw)  this  welling  life,  penetrating  and  strong 
of  will  to  escape  the  snares  (write  after  the  Masora  "^pSE  defective) 
which  death  lays,  and  which  bring  to  an  end  in  death  —  a  repetition 
of  xiii.  4  with  changed  subject. 

Ver.  28  In  the  multitude  of  the  people  lies  the  king's  honour  ; 

And  when  the  population  diminishes,  it  is  the  downfall  of  his  glory. 

The  honour  or  the  ornament  (yid.  regarding  "nn,  tumere,  ampliari, 
the  root-word  of  "nn  and  rmn  at  Isa.  Ixiii.  1)  of  a  kin^  con- 

T   T  T  T  ~;  /  O 

sists  in  this,  that  he  rules  over  a  great  people,  and  that  they  in 
crease  and  prosper  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  ruin  of  princely 
greatness  when  the  people  decline  in  number  and  in  wealth.  Re 
garding  nnnB,  vid.  at  x.  14,  DSS3  signifies  prepositionally  "  with 
out"  (properly,  by  non-existence),  e.g.  xxvi.  20,  or  adverbially 
"groundless"  (properly,  for  nothing),  Isa.  lii.  4;  here  it  is  to  be 
understood  after  its  contrast  ~2^2  :  in  the  non-existence,  but  which 
is  here  equivalent  to  in  the  ruin  (cf.  DDK,  the  form  of  which  in 
conjunction  is  DSX?  Gen.  xlvii.  15),  lies  the  misfortune,  decay,  ruin 
of  the  princedom.  The  LXX.  «/  Se  e/cXen/refc  ~\aov  <rvi>Tpi/3r) 
Bvvdcrrov.  Certainly  jin  (from  JH,  Arab,  razuna,  to  be  powerful) 
is  to  be  interpreted  personally,  whether  it  be  after  the  form  1iJ3 
with  a  fixed,  or  after  the  form  l^ip11  with  a  changeable  Kametz;  but 

i   T  O 

it  may  also  be  an  abstract  like  Qi?^  (=  Arab,  seldni),  and  this  we 
prefer,  because  in  the  personal  signification  Jp,  viii.  15,  xxxi.  4,  is 
used.  We  have  not  here  to  think  of  Jin  (from  nn),  consumption 
(the  Venet.  against  Kimchi,  Trevias)  ;  the  choice  of  the  word  also 
is  not  determined  by  an  intended  amphibology  (Hitzig),  for  this 
would  be  meaningless. 

Ver.  29  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  rich  in  understanding  ; 
But  he  that  is  easily  excited  carries  off  folly. 


D^SS  TyiX  (constr.  of  Tpx)  is  he  who  puts  off  anger  long,  viz.  the 
outbreak  of  anger,  T1££,  six.  11,  i.e.  lets  it  not  come  in,  but  shuts  it 
out  long  (/jiaKp60vjjios  =  /3paSv<;  ei<?  opyijv,  Jas.  i.  19)  ;  and  nw"iyi?, 
he  who  in  his  spirit  and  temper,  viz.  as  regards  anger  (for  nn 
denotes  also  the  breathing  out  and  snorting,  Isa.  xxv.  4,  xxxiii.  11), 
is  short,  i.e.  (since  shortness  of  time  is  meant)  is  rash  and  suddenly 
(cf.  quick  to  anger,  prceceps  in  iram,  17a)  breaks  out  with  it,  not 
oXryo-v^u^o?  (but  here  o£vdv/£0?),  as  the  LXX.  translate  17a.  The 
former,  who  knows  how  to  control  his  affections,  shows  himself 


310  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

herein  as  "great  in  understanding"  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  20),  or  as  a 
"  man  of  great  understanding"  (Lat.  multus  prudent-id) ;  the  con 
trary  is  he  who  suffers  himself  to  be  impelled  by  his  affections 
into  hasty,  inconsiderate  action,  which  is  here  expressed  more 
actively  by  TOW  nn».  Does  this  mean  that  he  bears  folly  to  the 
view  (Luther,  Umbreit,  Bertheau,  Elster,  and  others)  ?  But  for 
that  idea  the  Hits/tie  style  has  other  expressions,  xii.  23,  xiii.  16, 
xv.  2,  cf.  xiv.  17.  Or  does  it  mean  that  he  makes  folly  high,  i.e. 
shows  himself  highly  foolish  (LXX.,  Syr.,  Targum,  Fleischer,  and 
others)  ?  But  that  would  be  expressed  rather  by  ^JPl  or  ninn. 
Or  is  it  he  heightens  folly  (Lowenstein,  Hitzig)  f  But  the  remark 
that  the  angry  ebullition  is  itself  a  gradual  heightening  of  the 
foolish  nature  of  such  an  one  is  not  suitable,  for  the  choleric  man, 
who  lets  the  evenness  of  his  disposition  be  interrupted  by  a  breakino- 
forth  of  anger,  is  by  no  means  also  in  himself  a  fool.  Rashi  is 
right  when  he  says,  ip^  riB>nBO,  i.e.  (to  which  also  Fleischer 
gives  the  preference)  avfert  proportions  sua  stullitiam.  The  only 
appropriate  parallel  according  to  which  it  is  to  be  explained,  is  iii. 
35.  But  not  as  Ewald :  he  lifts  up  folly,  which  lies  as  it  were 
before  his  feet  on  his  life's  path ;  but :  he  takes  off  folly,  in  the 
sense  of  Lev.  vi.  8,  i.e.  he  carries  off  folly,  receives  a  portion  of 
folly;  for  as  to  others,  so  also  to  himself,  when  he  returns  to  calm 
blood,  that  which  he  did  in  his  rage  must  appear  as  folly  and 
madness. 

Ver.  30  A  quiet  heart  is  the  life  of  the  body, 

But  covetousness  is  rottenness  in  the  bones. 

Heart,  soul,  flesh,  is  the  O.  T.  trichotomy,  Ps.  Jxxxiv.  3,  xvi.  9  ; 
the  heart  is  the  innermost  region  of  the  life,  where  all  the  rays  of 
the  bodily  and  the  soul-life  concentrate,  and  whence  they  again 
unfold  themselves.  The  state  of  the  heart,  i.e.  of  the  central, 
spiritual,  soul-inwardness  of  the  man,  exerts  therefore  on  all  sides 
a  constraining  influence  on  the  bodily  life,  in  the  relation  to  the 
heart  the  surrounding  life.  Regarding  N31D  £,  vid.  at  xii.  18, 
p.  262.  Thus  is  styled  the  quiet  heart,  which  in  its  symmetrical 
harmony  is  like  a  calm  and  clear  water-mirror,  neither  interrupted 
by  the  affections,  nor  broken  through  or  secretly  stirred  by  passion. 
By  the  close  connection  in  which  the  corporeal  life  of  man  stands 
to  the  moral-religious  determination  of  his  intellectual  and  medi 
ately  his  soul-life — this  threefold  life  is  as  that  of  one  personality, 
essentially  one— the  body  has  in  such  quiet  of  spirit  the  best  means 


CHAT.  XIV.  31,  32.  311 

of  preserving  the  life  winch  furthers  the  well-being,  and  co-operates 
to  the  calming  of  all  its  disquietude ;  on  the  contrary,  passion, 
whether  it  rage  or  move  itself  in  stillness,  is  like  the  disease  in  the 

D  ' 

bones  (xii.  4),  which  works  onward  till  it  breaks  asunder  the  frame 
work  of  the  body,  and  with  it  the  life  of  the  body.  The  plur. 
D^'fa  occurs  only  here  ;  Bottcher,  §  695,  says  that  it  denotes  the 
whole  body ;  but  "iK'3  also  does  not  denote  the  half,  D'nBQ  is  the 
surrogate  of  an  abstr. :  the  body,  i.e.  the  bodily  life  in  the  totality  of 
its  functions,  and  in  the  entire  manifoldness  of  its  relations.  Ewald 
translates  bodies,  but  1BO  signifies  not  the  body,  but  its  material, 
the  animated  matter  ;  rather  cf.  the  Arab,  dbshdr,  "  corporeal, 
human  nature,"  but  which  (leaving  out  of  view  that  this  plur. 
belongs  to  a  later  period  of  the  language)  has  the  parallelism 
against  it.  Regarding  HiSilijp  (jealousy,  zeal,  envy,  anger)  Schul- 
tens  is  right :  affectus  inflarnmans  cestuque  indiynationis  fervidus, 
from  NJi?,  Arab,  kand,  to  be  high  red. 

Ver.  31  He  who  oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker; 

And  whosoever  is  merciful  to  the  poor,  it  is  an  honour  to  him. 

Line  first  is  repeated  in  xvii.  5 a  somewhat  varied,  and  the  relation 
of  the  idea  in  316  is  as  xix.  17a,  according  to  which  i"J2?8l  is  the 
predicate  and  Ji^X  l^n  the  subject  (Symmachus,  Targ.,  Jerome, 
Venet.,  Luther),  not  the  reverse  (Syr.) :  }iin  is  thus  not  the  3  per.  Po. 
(LXX.),  but  the  part.  Kal  (for  which  216  has  the  part.  Po.  jaino). 
The  predicates  )~&y  f\~\n  (vid.  regarding  the  perf.  Gesen.  §  126,  o) 
and  1123JD1  follow  one  another  after  the  scheme  of  the  Chiasmus. 
PK>JJ  has  Munach  on  the  first  syllable,  on  which  the  tone  is  thrown 
back,  and  on  the  second  the  niDJ/n  sign  (vid.  Torath  Emeth,  p.  21), 
as  e.q.  "ittiB,  xvii.  14,  and  2HX  xvii.  19.  The  showing  of  forbear- 

v  I"     j  I"  j  ' 

ance  and  kindness  to  the  poor  arising  from  a  common  relation  to 
one  Creator,  and  from  respect  towards  a  personality  bearing  the 
image  of  God,  is  a  conception  quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  Chokma, 
which,  as  in  the  J  alive  religion  it  becomes  the  universal  religion, 
so  in  the  national  law  it  becomes  the  human  (vid.  p.  41).  Thus 
also  Job  xxxi.  15,  cf.  iii.  9  of  the  Epistle  of  James,  which  in  many 
respects  has  its  roots  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  Matt.  xxv.  40  is  a 
New  Testament  side-piece  to  316. 

Ver.  32.  This  verse  also  contains  a  key-word  beginning  with  o, 
but  pairs  acrostically  with  the  proverb  following  : 

When  misfortune  befalls  him,  the  godless  is  overthro\vn ; 
But  the  righteous  remains  hopeful  in  his  death. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


When  the  subject  is  njn  connected  with  JJBn  (the  godless),  then  it 
may  be  understood  of  evil  thought  and  action  (Eccles.  vii.  15)  as  well 
as  of  the  experience  of  evil  (e.g.  xiii.  21).     The  LXX.  (and  also  the 
Syr.,  Targ.,  Jerome,  and  Venet.)  prefers  the  former,  but  for  the  sake 
of  producing  an  exact  parallelism  changes  Intea  [in  his  death]  into 
torn  [in  his  uprightness],  reversing  also  the  relation  of  the  subject 
and  the  predicate :  o  Se  Trevro^co?  -rfj  eavrov  oaLor^-n  (the  Syr. :  in 
this,  that  he  has  no  sin  ;   Targ. :  when  he  dies)  Shaw.     But  no 
Scripture  word  commends  in  so  contradictory  a  manner  self-rio-ht- 
eousness,  for  the  verb  non  never  denotes  self-confidence,  and  with 
the  exception  of  two  passages  (Judg.  ix.  15,  Isa.  xxx.  2),  where  it  is 
connected  with  »3,  is  everywhere  the  exclusive  (vid.  Ps.  cxviii.  8  f.) 
designation  of  confidence  resting  itself  in  God,  even  without  the 
'm,  as  here  and  at  Ps.  xvii.  7.     The  parallelism  leads  us  to  trans 
late  injm,  not  on  account  of  his  wickedness,  but  with  Luther,  in 
conformity  with  im»3,  in  his  misfortune,  i.e.  if  it  befall  him.     Thus 
Jeremiah  (xxiii.  12)  says  of  the  sins  of  his  people  :  1ITP  r6sK3,  in 
the  deep  darkness  they  are  driven  on  (Niph.  of  nm  =  niTT^and 
xxiv.  16  contains  an  exactly  parallel  thought :   the  godless  stumble 
njr>3,  into  calamity.     Ewald  incorrectly :  in  his  calamity  the  wicked 
is  overthrown— for  what  purpose  then  the  pronoun  f     The  verb  nm 
frequently  means,  without  any  addition,  "  to  stumble  over  heaps," 
e.g.  Ps.  xxxv.  5,  xxxvi.  13.     The  godless  in  his  calamity  is  over 
thrown,  or  he  fears  in  the  evils  which  befall  him  the  intimations  of 
the  final  ruin  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  righteous  in  his  death,  even  in 
the  midst  of  extremity,  is  comforted,  viz.  in  God  in  whom  he  con 
fides.     Thus  understood,   Hitzig  thinks   that  the  proverb   is   not 
suitable  for  a  time  in  which,  as  yet,  men  had  not  faith  in  immor 
tality  and  in  the  resurrection.     Yet  though   there  was  no  such 
revelation  then,  still  the   pious  in   death   put  their  confidence  in 
Jahve,  the  God  of  life  and  of  salvation— for  in  Jalive1  there  was 
for  ancient  Israel  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  the  work  of 
salvation— and  believing  that  they  were  going  home  to  Him,  com 
mitting  their  spirit  Into  His  hands  (Ps.  xxxi".  6),  they  fell  asleep, 
though  without  any  explicit  knowledge,  yet  not  without  the  hope 
of  eternal  life.     Job  also  knew  that  (xxvii.  8  ff.)  between  the  death 
of  those  estranged  from  God  and  of  those  who  feared  God  there 
was  not  only  an  external,  but  a  deep  essential  distinction  ;  and  now 

1  Vid.  my  Bibl-propUt.   Theol.  (1845),  p.  268,  cf.  Bill.  Psychologic  (1861), 
p.  410,  and  Psalmen  (1867),  p.  52  f.,  and  elsewhere. 


CHAP.  XIV.  S3,  84.  313 

the  Chokma  opens  up  a  glimpse  into  the  eternity  heavenwards, 
xv.  24,  and  has  formed,  xii.  28,  the  expressive  and  distinctive  word 
n.y?~^,  for  immortality,  which  breaks  like  a  ray  from  the  mornimr 
sun  through  the  niVht  of  the  S/ieol. 

O  O 

Ver.  33  Wisdom  rests  in  the  heart  of  the  man  of  understanding  • 

O     7 

But  in  the  heart  of  fools  it  maketh  itself  known. 

Most  interpreters  know  not  what  to  make  of  the  second  line  here. 
The  LXX.  (and  after  it  the  Syr.),  and  as  it  appears,  also  Aquila 
and  Theodotion,  insert  ov ;  the  Targ.  improves  the  Peshito,  for  it 
inserts  rfafc*  (so  that  xii.  23,  xiii.  16,  and  xv.  2  are  related).  And 
Abulwalid  explains  :  in  the  heart  of  fools  it  is  lost ;  Euchel :  it 
reels  about ;  but  these  are  imaginary  interpretations  resting  on  a 
misunderstanding  of  the  passages,  in  which  JTP  means  to  come  to 
feel,  and  jmn  to  give  to  feel  (to  punish,  correct).  Kimchi  rightly 
adheres  to  the  one  ascertained  meaning  of  the  words,  according  to 
which  the  Venet.  pea-ov  be  dtypovcov  yvcoa-dijarerai.  So  also  the  trans 
lation  of  Jerome:  et  indoctos  qnosgue  (quoque)  erudiet,  is  formed,  for 
he  understands  the  "  and  is  manifest  among  fools "  (Luther)  not 
merely,  as  C.  B.  Michaelis,  after  the  saying :  opposita  jnxta  se posita 
magis  elucescunt,  but  of  a  becoming  manifest,  which  is  salutary  to 
these.  Certainly  :np3  can  mean  among  =  in  the  circle  of,  xv.  31 ; 
but  if,  as  here  and  e.g.  Jer.  xxxi.  31,  3ipn  is  interchanged  with  ^>2, 
and  if  mpl  n»3H  is  the  subject  spoken  of,  as  1  Kings  iii.  28,  then 
31  pi  does  not  mean  among  (in  the  midst  of),  but  in  the  heart  of  the 
fool.  According  to  this,  the  Talmud  rightly,  by  comparison  with 
the  current  proverb  (Mezia  85//) :  xnp  E*p  fcrp  NH^I  JOT1DN,  a 
stater  in  a  flaggon  cries  Kish,  Kixh,  i.e.  makes  much  clatter.  In 
the  heart  of  the  understanding  wisdom  rests,  i.e.  remains  silent  and 
still,  for  the  understanding  feels  himself  personally  happy  in  its 
possession,  endeavours  always  the  more  to  deepen  it,  and  lets  it 
operate  within  ;  on  the  contrary,  wisdom  in  the  heart  of  the  fools 
makes  itself  manifest :  they  are  not  able  to  keep  to  themselves  the 
wisdom  which  they  imagine  they  possess,  or  the  portion  of  wisdom 
which  is  in  reality  theirs  ;  but  they  think,  as  it  is  said  in  Persius : 
Scire  tuum  nihil  est  nisi  scire  hoc  te  sciat  alter.  They  discredit  and 
waste  their  little  portion  of  wisdom  (instead  of  thinkino1  on  its 
increase)  by  obtrusive  ostentatious  babblincr. 

Two  proverbs  follow  regarding  the  state  and  its  ruler : 

Ver.  34  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation, 

And  sin  is  a  disgrace  to  the  people. 


314  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

The  Hebr.  language  is  richer  in  synonyms  of  "the  people"  than 
the  German.  M3  (formed  like  the  non-bibl.  MD,  water,  and  ^3, 
corporealness,  from  nia?  to  extend  itself  from  within  outward;  cf. 
ix.  3,  "'a?,  x.  13,  I?)  is,  according  to  the  usus  loq.,  like  natio  the 
people,  as  a  mass  swollen  up  from  a  common  origin,  and  DJJ,  2Sa 
(from  E£y,  to  bind),  the  people  as  a  confederation  held  together 
by  a  common  law  ;  DNp  (from  DK?,  to  unite,  bind  together)  is  the 
mass  (multitude)  of  the  people,  and  is  interchanged  sometimes 
•with  ''la,  Gen.  xxv.  23,  and  sometimes  with  DJJ,  ver.  28.  In  this 
proverb,  ^DNp  stands  indeed  intentionally  in  the  plur.,  but  not  ''li, 
with  the  plur.  of  which  2^3,  the  idea  of  the  non-Israelitish  nations, 
too  easily  connects  itself.  The  proverb  means  all  nations  without 
distinction,  even  Israel  (cf.  under  Isa.  i.  4)  not  excluded.  History 
everywhere  confirms  the  principle,  that  not  the  numerical,  nor  the 
warlike,  nor  the  political,  nor  yet  the  intellectual  and  the  so-called 
civilized  greatness,  is  the  true  greatness  of  a  nation,  and  deter 
mines  the  condition  of  its  future  as  one  of  progress ;  but  this  is  its 
true  greatness,  that  in  its  private,  public,  and  international  life, 
ni?!V,  «'•«•  conduct  directed  by  the  will  of  God,  according  to  the 
norm  of  moral  rectitude,  rules  and  prevails.  Righteousness,  good 
manners,  and  piety  are  the  things  which  secure  to  a  nation  a  place 
of  honour,  while,  on  the  contrary,  HN^n,  sin,  viz.  prevailing,  and 
more  favoured  and  fostered  than  contended  against  in  the  con 
sciousness  of  the  moral  problem  of  the  state,  is  a  disgrace  to  the 
people,  i.e.  it  lowers  them  before  God,  and  also  before  men  who 
do  not  judge  superficially  or  perversely,  and  also  actually  brings 
them  down.  EDV~i.  to  raise  up,  is  to  be  understood  after  Isa.  i.  2, 
cf.  xxiii.  4,  and  is  to  be  punctuated  E|?™,  \vith  Munack  of  the 
penult.,  and  the  mojjn-sign  with  the  Tsere  of  the  last  syllable. 
Ben-Naphtali  punctuates  thus  :  E»hn.  In  346  all  the  artifices  of 
interpretation  (from  Nachmani  to  Schultens)  are  to  be  rejected, 
which  interpret  "tpn  as  the  Venet.  (e'Xeo<?  &e  \a&v  afj-apTia)  in  its 
predominant  Hebrew  signification.  It  has  here,  as  at  Lev.  xx.  17 
(but  not  Job  vi.  14),  the  signification  of  the  Syr.chesdho,  opprobrium; 
the  Targ.  N'npn,  or  more  frequently  N^Bn,  as  among  Jewish  inter 
preters,  is  recognised  by  Chanan'el  and  Rashbam.  That  this 
is  not  foreign  to  the  Mishle  style,  is  seen  from  the  fact  that 
xxv.  10,  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  Syr.  chasedh.  The  synon.  Syr. 
chasam,  invidere,  obtrectare,  shows  that  these  verbal  stems  are 
formed  from  the  11.  DH;  stringere,  to  strike.  Already  it  is  in  some 


CHAP.  XIV.  35-XV.  1.  315 

measure  perceived  how  "!pn,  Syr.  chasadh,  Arab,  hasada,  may 
acquire  the  meaning  of  violent  love,  and  by  the  mediation  of  the 
jealousy  which  is  connected  with  violent  love,  the  signification  of 
grudging,  and  thus  of  reproach  and  of  envy;  yet  this  is  more  mani 
fest  if  one  thinks  of  the  root-signification  stringere,  in  the  meaning 
of  loving,  as  referred  to  the  subject,  in  the  meanings  of  disgrace 
and  envy,  as  from  the  subject  directed  to  others.  Ewald  (§  51c) 
compares  ?pn  and  ~ipn?  Ethiop.  chasra,  in  the  sense  of  carpere,  and 
on  the  other  side  HDP!  in  the  sense  of  "  to  join ; "  but  HDH  does  not 
mean  to  join  (vid.  Ps.  ii.  12),  and  instead  of  carpere,  the  idea  more 
closely  connected  with  the  root  is  that  of  stringere,  cf.  stringere  folia 
ex  arboribus  (Caesar),  and  stringere  (to  diminish,  to  squander,  strip) 
rem  ingluvie  (Horace,  Sat.  i.  2.  8).  The  LXX.  has  here  read  "ipn 
(xxviii.  22),  diminution,  decay,  instead  of  Ipn  (shame) ;  the  quid 
pro  quo  is  not  bad,  the  Syr.  accepts  it,  and  the  miseros  facit  of 
Jerome,  and  Luther's  verderben  (destruction)  corresponds  with 
this  phrase  better  than  with  the  common  traditional  reading  which 

*  O 

Symmachus  rightly  renders  by  oWiSo?. 

Ver.  35  The  king's  favour  is  towards  a  prudent  servant, 

And  his  wrath  visits  the  base. 

Regarding  the  contrasts  ?'I3^?  and  l^!p?  vid.  at  x.  5  ;  cf.  xii.  4. 
The  substantival  clause  35a  may  mean  :  the  king's  favour  has 
(possesses)  .  . .,  as  well  as :  it  is  imparted  to.  an  intelligent  servant ; 
the  arrangement  of  the  words  is  more  favourable  to  the  latter 
rendering.  In  356  the  gender  of  the  verb  is  determined  by  attrac 
tion  after  the  pred.,  as  is  the  case  also  at  Gen.  xxxi.  8,  Job  xv.  31, 
Ewald,  §  317c.  And  "his  wrath"  is  equivalent  to  is  the  object 
of  it,  cf.  226,  xiii.  18,  and  in  general,  p.  282.  The  syntactical  cha 
racter  of  the  clause  does  not  permit  the  supplying  of  *?  from  35a. 
Luther's  translation  proceeds  only  apparently  from  this  erroneous 
supposition. 

Chap.  xv.  1-6.  We  take  these  verses  together  as  forming  a 
group  which  begins  with  a  proverb  regarding  the  good  and  evil 
which  flows  from  the  tongue,  and  closes  with  a  proverb  regarding 

O          /  I  j-«  o 

the  treasure  in  which  blessing  is  found,  and  that  in  which  no 
blessing  is  found. 

Ver.  1  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath, 

And  a  bitter  word  stirreth  up  anger. 

In  the  second  line,  the  common  word  for  anger  (*]&?,  from  the 
breathing  with  the  nostrils,  xiv.  17)  is  purposely  placed,  but  in 


316  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

the  first,  that  which  denotes  anger  in  the  highest  degree  (non  from 
D^,  cogn.  D£n,  Arab,  liamiya,  to  glow,  like  HJB'  from  |^) :  a  mild, 
gentle  word  turns  away  the  heat  of  anger  (excandescentiam),  puts  it 
back,  cf.  xxv.  15.  The  Dagesh  in  ^  follows  the  rule  of  the 
pTH,  i.e.  of  the  close  connection  of  a  word  terminating  with  the 
accented  n— ,  n— ,  n—  with  the  following  word  (Micldol  63i). 
The  same  is  the  meaning  of  the  Latin  proverb  : 

Frangitur  ira  gravis 

Quando  est  rexponsio  suavis. 

The  3Vjr*n*]  produces  the  contrary  effect.  This  expression  does 
not  mean  an  angry  word  (Ewald),  for  2VJJ  is  not  to  be  compared 
with  the  Arab,  ghadab,  anger  (Umbreit),  but  with  Arab,  'adb, 
cutting,  wounding,  paining  (Hitzig),  so  that  ^VV»  "D"!  is  meant  in  the 
sense  of  Ps.  Ixxviii.  40  :  a  word  which  causes  pain  (LXX.  XVTT^/JO?, 
Theod.  TTOVLKOS),  not  after  the  meaning,  a  word  provoking  to  anger 
(Gesenius),  but  certainly  after  its  effect,  for  a  wounding  word 
u  makes  anger  arise."  As  one  says  of  anger  3E>,  "  it  turns  itself  " 
(e.g.  Isa.  ix.  11),  so,  on  the  other  hand,  !"!?£,  "it  rises  up,"  Eccles. 
x.  4.  The  LXX.  has  a  third  line,  0^777  airoXXvaL  Kal  <f>povifiovs, 
which  the  Syr.  forms  into  a  distich  by  the  repetition  of  xiv.  326, 
the  untenableness  of  which  is  at  once  seen. 

Ver.  2.  The  irpatrqs  <ro<fria<s  (Jas.  iii.  13)  commended  in  ver.  1 
is  here  continued  : 

The  tongue  of  the  -wise  showeth  great  knowledge, 

And  the  mouth  of  fools  poureth  forth  folly. 

-As  I?.?  3l|tp<inj  Isa.  xxiii.  16,  means  to  strike  the  harp  well,  and 
rD7  IVD'T!,  xxx.  29,  to  go  along  merrily,  so  nj^  ywr\}  to  know  in  a 
masterly  manner,  and  here,  where  the  subject  is  the  tongue,  which 
has  only  an  instrumental  reference  to  knowledge :  to  bring  to  light 
great  knowledge  (cf.  7a).  In  2b  the  LXX.  translate  o-ro/za  Be 
dtypovwv  ava'yye\\ei  tca/cd.  From  this  Hitzig  concludes  that  they 
read  nijn  as  285,  and  prefers  this  phrase ;  but  they  also  translated 
in  xiii.  16,  xiv.  28,  xxvi.  11,  H7JS  by  Katciav,  for  they  interpreted 
the  unintelligible  word  by  combination  with  nSy,  and  in  xii.  23 
by  dpai$}  for  they  thought  they  had  before  them  JT^K  (from  n^). 

Ver.  3  The  eyes  of  Jahve  are  in  every  place, 
Observing  the  evil  and  the  good. 

The  connection  of  the  dual  Q^sy  with  the  plur.  of  the  adjective, 
which  does  not  admit  of  a  dual,  is  like  vi.  17,  cf.  18.  But  the 
first  line  is  a  sentence  by  itself,  to  which  the  second  line  gives  a 


CHAP.  XV.  4.  317 

closer  determination,  as  showing  how  the  eyes  of  God  are  every 
where  (cf.  2  Chron.  xvi.  9,  after  Zech.  iv.  10)  abroad  over  the 
whole  earth,  viz.  beholding  with  penetrating  look  the  evil  and  the 
good  (n^V,  to  hold  to,  to  observe,  cf.  eVt/3Xe7roi>Te?,  Sir.  xxiii.  19), 
i.e.  examining  men  whether  they  are  good  or  evil,  and  keeping 
them  closely  before  His  eyes,  so  that  nothing  escapes  him.  This 
universal  inspection,  this  omniscience  of  God,  has  an  alarming  but 
also  a  comforting  side.  The  proverb  seeks  first  to  warn,  therefore 
it  speaks  first  of  the  evil. 

Ver.  4  Gentleness  of  the  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life  ; 

But  falseness  in  it  is  a  wounding  to  the  spirit. 

Regarding  NSnp,  vid.  at  xii.  18,  and  regarding  ^PD,  at  xi.  3;  this 
latter  word  we  derive  with  Fleischer  from  spo,  to  subvert,  over 
throw,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  "  violence,  asperitas,  in  as  far  as 
violent  speech  is  like  a  stormy  sea,"  but  of  perversity,  perversitas 
(Venet.  Xo£or?7<?),  as  the  contrast  to  truthfulness,  rectitude,  kind 
ness.  Gentleness  characterizes  the  tongue  when  all  that  it  says  to 
a  neighbour,  whether  it  be  instruction  or  correction,  or  warning 
or  consolation,  it  says  in  a  manner  without  rudeness,  violence,  or 
obtrusiveness,  by  which  it  finds  the  easiest  and  surest  acceptance, 
because  he  feels  the  goodwill,  the  hearty  sympathy,  the  humility 
of  him  who  is  conscious  of  his  own  imperfection.  Such  gentleness 
is  a  tree  of  life,  whose  fruits  preserve  life,  heal  the  sick,  and  raise 
up  the  bowed  down.  Accordingly,  HVO  13C?  is  to  be  understood 
of  the  effect  which  goes  forth  from  perversity  or  falseness  of  the 
tongue  upon  others.  Fleischer  translates :  asperitas  auteni  in  ea 
animum  vulnerat,  and  remarks,  "  nvu  "Q$,  abstr.  pro  concrete.  The 
verb  lies',  and  the  n.  verbale  "135?  derived  from  it,  may,  in  order 
to  render  the  meaning  tropical,  govern  the  prep.  3,  as  the  Arab. 
kaser  baklby,  he  has  broken  my  heart  (opp.  Arab,  jabar  baklaby}^ 
cf.  VJB3,  xxi.  29,  vid.  De  Glossis  Habichtianis,  p.  18 ;  yet  it  also 
occurs  with  the  accus.,  Ps.  Ixix.  21,  and  the  corresponding  gen. 
nn  135S/,  Isa.  Ixv.  14."  In  any  case,  the  breaking  (deep  wounding) 
is  not  meant  in  regard  to  his  own  spirit,  but  to  that  of  the  neighbour. 
Rightly  Luther:  but  a  lying  (tongue)  makes  heart-sorrow  (else 
where,  a  false  one  troubles  the  cheerful);  Euchel:  a  false  tongue  is 
soul-wounding ;  and  the  translation  of  the  year  1844  :  falsehood 
is  a  breach  into  the  heart.  Only  for  curiosity's  sake  are  two  other 
intepretations  of  4a  and  4&  mentioned:  the  means  of  safety  to  the 
tongue  is  the  tree  of  life,  i.e.  the  Tor  a  (Ei-achin  I5b)  ;  and  :  per- 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

versity  suffers  destruction  by  a  breath  of  wind,  after  the  proverb 
inW  Kj^p  nn  nn  niW  «  ^  fc,  a  breath  of  wind  breaks  a  man' 
who  is  puffed  up l  (which  Meiri  presents  for  choice,  vid.  also  Rashi 
who  understands  nn  of  the  storm  of  judgment).  The  LXX.  trans 
lates,  in  46,  a  different  text :  6  &  mrqp&i,  avr^v  TrX^crerot 
iri/eivwiTo? ;  but  the  Wi  ^  here  supposed  cannot  mean  « to  be 
full  of  spirit,"  but  rather  "  to  eat  full  of  wind."  Otherwise  the 
Syr.  and  Targ. :  and  he  who  eateth  of  his  own  fruit  is  satisfied  (Heb. 
nw  V-JBO  »N1),—an  attempt  to  give  to  the  phrase  jnb»  a  thought 
correct  in  point  of  language,  but  one  against  which  we  do  not  Jve 
up  the  Musoretic  text. 

Ver.  5  A  fool  despiseth  his  father's  correction  ; 

But  he  that  regardeth  reproof  is  prudent. 

We  may  with  equal  correctness  translate  :  he  acts  prudently  (aftei 
1  Sam.  xxiii.  22) ;  and,  he  is  prudent  (after  xix.  25).  We  prefer 
with  Jerome,  Venet.,  and  Luther,  the  latter,  against  the  LXX.,' 
Syr.,  and  Targ.,  because,  without  a  doubt,  the  D-)^  is  so  thought  of 
at  xix.  25:  the  contrast  is  more  favourable  to  the  former.  °It  is 
true  that  lie  who  regardeth  reproof  is  not  only  prudent,  but  also 
that  he  is  prudent  by  means  of  observing  it.  With  line  first  cf.  i. 
7  and  i.  30,  and  with  line  second,  xii.  1.  Luther  translates:  the 
fool  calumniates  .  .  . ;  but  of  the  meanings  of  abuse  (properly 
pungere)  and  scorn,  the  second  is  perhaps  here  to  be  preferred. 
Ver.  6  The  house  of  the  righteous  is  a  great  treasure-chamber ; 

But  through  the  gain  of  the  wicked  comes  trouble. 

The  constrast  shows  that  jph  does  not  here  mean  force  or  might 
(LXX.,  Syr.,  Targ.,  Jerome,  and  Venet.),  which  generally  this 
derivative  of  the  verb  jpn  never  means,  but  store,  fulness  of 
possession,  prosperity  (Luther:  in  the  house  of  the  righteous  are 
goods  enough),  in  this  sense  (cf.  xxvii.  24)  placing  itself,  not  with 
the  Arab,  hasuna,  to  be  firm,  fastened  (Aram.  ^m>J;  JDPI),  but 
with  Arab,  khazan,  to  deposit,  to  lay  up  in  granaries,  whence  our 
Magazin."  ton  may  indeed,  like  *n,  have  the  meaning  of  riches, 
and  jpn  does  actually  mean,  in  the  Jewish-Aram.,  to  possess,  and 
the  Aphel  tprw,  to  take  into  possession  (Kparelv)  •  but  the  constant 
use  of  the  noun  JDn  in  the  sense  of  store,  with  the  kindred  idea  of 
laying  up,  e.g.  Jer.  xx.  5,  and  of  the  Niph.  JWU,  which  means,  Isa. 
SHI.  18,  with  -WK3,  "to  be  magazined,"  gives  countenance  to  the 

1  ™LDuke's  IMMnisclu!  Blumenlese,  p.  176,  where  the  rendering  is  some 
what  different. 


CHAP.  XV.  7.  319 

idea  that  |D*n  goes  back  to  the  primary  conception,  reconderc,  and 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  }iDn?  ppn,  and  other  derivatives  after 
the  fundamental  conception.  We  may  not  interpret  H"1?,  with 
Fleischer,  Bertheau,  and  Zockler,  as  accus. :  in  the  house  (cf.  JVa. 
viii.  2),  nor  prepositionally  as  chez  =  casa;  but:  "the  house  of  the 
righteous  is  a  great  store,"  equivalent  to,  the  place  of  such.  On 
the  contrary,  destruction  comes  by  the  gain  of  the  wicked.  It  is 
impossible  that  n^V3,  can  have  the  house  as  the  subject  (Lowen- 
stein),  for  JV3  is  everywhere  mas.  Therefore  Abulwalid,  followed 
by  Kimchi  and  the  Venet.  (oXeflpos),  interprets  rroj?J  as  subst., 
after  the  form  of  the  Mishnic  fl?"!)^,  a  pool,  cf.  n-T^-!j  peremptorily 
decided,  decreed  ;  and  if  we  do  not  extinguish  the  1  of  riNiQroi 
(the  LXX.  according  to  the  second  translation  of  this  doubly- 
translated  distich,  Syr.,  and  Targ.),  there  remains  then  nothing 
further  than  to  regard  majtt  either  as  subst.  neut.  overturned  = 
overthrow  (cf.  such  part,  nouns  as  ^7?^?  '"'PJ^,  but  particularly 
^3D35  2  Chron.  x.  15),  or  as  impers.  neut.  pass:  it  is  overthrown  — 
there  is  an  overthrow,  like  n^:^,  Ps.  1.  3 :  it  is  stormed  =  a  storm 
rages.  The  gain  of  the  wicked  has  overthrow  as  its  consequence, 
for  the  greed  of  gain,  which  does  not  shrink  from  unrighteous, 
deceitful  gain,  destroys  his  house,  irp2  "njj,  ver.  27  (vid.  regarding 
13JJ,  xi.  29).  Far  from  enriching  the  house,  such  gain  is  the  cause 
of  nothing  but  ruin.  The  LXX.,  in  its  first  version  of  this  distich, 
reads,  in  6a,  ?*}¥  nu*i3  (ev  7r\eova%ov<Tr)  StKaioavvrj),  and  in  6b, 
•)3Jtt  yen  nxinnm  (and  together  with  the  fruit  the  godless  is  rooted 

T  ;  v          T    T  ,'\  O  Q 

out,  o\6ppi%oi  eK  7779  a7ro\ovvrai)  ;  for,  as  Lagarde  has  observed, 
it  confounds  lay  with  IpJ?  (to  root,  privativ :  to  root  up). 

Vers.  7-17.  A  second  series  which  begins  with  a  proverb  of  the 
power  of  human  speech,  and  closes  with  proverbs  of  the  advantages 
and  disadvantages  of  wealth. 

Ver.  7  The  lips  of  the  wise  spread  knowledge ; 

But  the  direction  is  wanting  to  the  heart  of  fools. 

It  is  impossible  that  p'N-5  can  be  a  second  object,  accus.  dependent 
on  l"^.  (dispergunt,  not  VIS?11,  xx.  28 ;  </>iAacrcrcucr4,  as  Symmachus 
translates)  :  but  the  heart  of  fools  is  unrighteous  (error  or  false 
hood)  (Hitzig  after  Isa.  xvi.  6)  ;  for  then  why  were  the  lips  of 
the  wise  and  the  heart  of  the  fools  mentioned  ?  p"N^>  also  does 
not  mean  oi>%  ovrws  (an  old  Greek  anonymous  translation,  Jerome, 
Targ.,  Venet.,  Luther)  :  the  heart  of  the  fool  is  quite  different 
from  the  heart  of  the  wise  man,  which  spreads  abroad  knowledge 


320  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

(Zockler),  for  it  is  not  heart  and  heart,  but  lip  and  heart,  that  are 
placed  opposite  to  each  other.  Better  the  LXX.  OVK  dox^aXefc, 
and  yet  better  the  Syr.  lo  kinin  (not  right,  sure).  We  have  seen, 
at  xi.  19,  that  p  as  a  participial  adj.  means  standing  =  being, 
continuing,  or  also  standing  erect  =  right,  i.e.  rightly  directed,  or 
having  the  right  direction  ;  nj?l¥~}3  means  there  conducting  one 
self  rightly,  and  thus  genuine  rectitude.  What,  after  7a,  is  more 
appropriate  than  to  say  of  the  heart  of  the  fool,  that  it  wants  the 
receptivity  for  knowledge  which  the  lips  of  the  wise  scatter  abroad? 
The  heart  of  the  fool  is  not  right,  it  has  not  the  right  direction,  is 
crooked  and  perverse,  has  no  mind  for  wisdom  ;  and  that  which 
proceeds  from  the  wise,  therefore,  h'nds  with  him  neither  estimation 
nor  acceptance. 

Ver.  8  The  sacrifice  of  the  godless  is  an  abhorrence  to  Jahve  ; 

But  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  His  delight. 

Although  the  same  is  true  of  the  prayer  of  the  godless  that  is  here 
said  of  their  sacrifice,  and  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  righteous  that  is 
here  said  of  their  prayer  (vid.  xxviii.  9,  and  cf.  Ps.  iv.  6  with  Ps. 
xxvii.  6),  yet  it  is  not  by  accident  that  here  (line  first  =  xxi.  27) 
the  sacrifice  is  ascribed  to  the  godless  and  the  prayer  to  the 
upright.  The  sacrifice,  as  a  material  and  legally-required  perform 
ance,  is  much  more  related  to  dead  works  than  prayer  freely  com 
pleting  itself  in  the  word,  the  most  direct  expression  of  the  person 
ality,  which,  although  not  commanded  by  the  law,  because  natural 
to  men,  as  such  is  yet  the  soul  of  all  sacrifices  ;  and  the  Chokma, 
like  the  Psalms  and  Prophets,  in  view  of  the  ceremonial  service 
which  had  become  formal  and  dead  in  the  opus  operatum,  is  to  such 
a  degree  penetrated  by  the  knowledge  of  the  incongruity  of  the 
offering  up  of  animals  and  of  plants,  with  the  object  in  view,  that 
a  proverb  like  "  the  sacrifice  of  the  righteous  is  pleasing  to  God  " 
never  anywhere  occurs  ;  and  if  it  did  occur  without  being  ex 
pressly  and  unavoidably  referred  to  the  legal  sacrifice,  it  would 
have  to  be  understood  rather  after  Ps.  li.  18  f.  than  Ps.  li.  20  f., 
rather  after  1  Sam.  xv.  22  than  after  Ps.  Ixvi.  13-15.  nat,  which, 
when  it  is  distinguished  from  H?ty}  means  (cf.  vii.  14)  the  sacrifice 
only  in  part  coming  to  the  altar,  for  the  most  part  applied  to  a 
sacrificial  feast,  is  here  the  common  name  for  the  bloody,  and, 
per  synecdochen,  generally  the  legally-appointed  sacrifice,  consist- 
in  or  in  external  offering.  The  MTv.  Lev.  i.  3,  used  in  the  Tora  of 

C5  O  i  '  * 

sacrifices,  is  here,  as  at  Ps.  xix.  15,  transferred  to  prayer.     The 


CHAP.  XV.  9-11.  32? 

fundamental  idea  of  the  proverb  is,  that  sacrifices  well-pleasing  to 
God,  prayers  acceptable  to  God  (that  are  heard,  xv.  29),  depend 
on  the  relations  in  which  the  heart  and  life  of  the  man  stand  to 
God. 

Ver.  9.  Another  proverb  with  the  key-word  nnyifl : 

An  abomination  to  Jahve  is  the  way  of  the  godless  ; 

But  He  loveth  him  who  searcheth  after  righteousness. 

The  manner  and  rule  of  life  is  called  the  way.  ^ip  is  the 
heightening  of  *TP,  xxi.  21,  and  can  be  used  independently  in 
bonam,  as  well  as  in  malam  partem  (xi.  19,  cf.  xiii.  21).  Regard 
ing  the  form  3rw,  vid.  Fleischer  in  Deutsch.  Morgenl  Zeitsch.  xv. 
382. 

Ver.  10  Sharp  correction  is  for  him  who  forsaketh  the  way  ; 
Whoever  hateth  instruction  shall  die. 

The  way,  thus  absolute,  is  the  God-pleasing  right  way  (ii.  13),  the 
forsaking  of  which  is  visited  with  the  punishment  of  death,  because 
it  is  that  which  leadeth  unto  life  (x.  17).  And  that  which  comes 
upon  them  who  leave  it  is  called  JH  "iDttD,  castujat'w  dura,  as  much 
as  to  say  that  whoever  does  not  welcome  instruction,  whoever  re 
jects  it,  must  at  last  receive  it  against  his  will  in  the  form  of  per 
emptory  punishment.  The  sharp  correction  (cf.  Isa.  xxviii.  28, 
19&)  is  just  the  death  under  which  he  falls  who  accepts  of  no  in 
struction  (v.  23),  temporal  death,  but  that  as  a  token  of  wrath 
which  it  is  not  for  the  righteous  (xiv.  32). 

Ver.  11  The  underworld  [Sheol]  and  the  abyss  are  before  Jahve  ; 

But  how  much  more  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  ! 

A  syllogism,  a  minori  ad  majus,  with  ^  &]N  (LXX.  TT&K  ov^i  K.CU, 
Venet.  paXkov  ow),  like  xii.  32.1  inSN  has  a  meaning  analogous 
to  that  of  Taprapos  (cf.  raprapovv,  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  to  throw  down 
into  the  rdpTapos),  which  denotes  the  lowest  region  of  Hades 
(rvrinri  ?iN^  or  n»nnn  V),  and  also  in  general,  Hades.  If  |1"QN  and 
niD  are  connected,  Job  xxxvii.  22,  and  if  {TDK  is  the  parallel  word 
to  "I3J5,  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  12,  or  also  to  hxt?,  as  in  the  passage  similar  to 
this  proverb,  Job  xxvi.  6  (cf.  xxxviii.  17)  :  "  Sheol  is  naked  before 

1  In  Rabbin,  this  concluding  form  is  called  lohl  $>J5  (light  and  heavy  over 
against  one  another),  and  p^  (judgment,  viz.  from  premisses,  thus  conclu 
sion),  KO.T  e%.  Instead  of  the  biblical  '3  f|tf,  the  latter  form  of  the  language 
has  }3B>~^3  (all  speaks  for  it  that  it  is  so),  nEpl  ni33  nnsrity  (so  much  the 
more),  p*i  irX,  or  also  "lOm  7p  (a  minori  ad  majus  =  quanto  magis);  vid.  the 
Hebr.  RiJmerbrief,  p.  14. 

VOL.  I.  X 


322  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERDS. 

Him,  and  Abaddon  has  no  covering;"  since  {TDK  is  the  general 
name  of  the  underworld,  including  the  grave,  i.e.  the  inner  place 
of  the  earth  which  receives  the  body  of  the  dead,  as  the  kingdom 
of  the  dead,  lying  deeper,  does  the  soul.  But  where,  as  here  and 
at  xxvii.  10,  ^XW  and  jmx  stand  together,  they  are  related  to  each 
other,  as  er&r??  and  raprapos  or  ajBvcraos,  Eev.  ix.  11  :  jrns  is  the 
lowest  hell,  the  place  of  deepest  descent,  of  uttermost  destruction. 
The  conclusion  which  is  drawn  in  the  proverb  proceeds  from  the 
supposition  that  in  the  region  of  creation  there  is  nothing  more 
separated,  and  by  a  wide  distance,  from  God,  than  the  depth,  and 
especially  the  undermost  depth,  of  the  realm  of  the  dead.  If  now 
God  has  this  region  in  its  whole  compass  wide  open  before  Him, 
if  it  is  visible  and  thoroughly  cognisable  by  Him  ("U3,  ace.  adv. :  in 
conspectu,  from  "U3,  eminere,  conspicuum  esse), — for  He  is  also  present 
in  the  underworld,  Ps.  cxxxix.  8, — then  much  more  will  the  hearts 
of  the  children  of  men  be  open,  the  inward  thoughts  of  men  living 
and  acting  on  the  earth  being  known  already  from  their  expres 
sions.  Man  sees  through  man,  and  also  himself,  never  perfectly ; 
but  the  Lord  can  try  the  heart  and  prove  the  reins,  Jer.  xvii.  10. 
What  that  means  this  proverb  gives  us  to  understand,  for  it  places 
over  against  the  hearts  of  men  nothing  less  than  the  depths  of  the 
underworld  in  eternity. 

Ver.  12  The  scorner  liketh  not  that  one  reprove  him, 
To  wise  men  he  will  not  go. 

The  inf.  absol.,  abruptly  denoting  the  action,  may  take  the  place  of 
the  object,  as  here  (cf.  Job  ix.  18,  Isa.  xiii.  24),  as  well  as  of  the 
subject  (xxv.  27,  Job  vi.  25).  Thus  rvain  is  (ix.  7)  construed 
with  the  dat.  obj.  Regarding  the  probable  conclusion  which  pre 
sents  itself  from  passages  such  as  xv.  12  and  xiii.  20,  as  to  the 
study  of  wisdom  in  Israel,  vid.  p.  39.  Instead  of  7X,  we  read, 
xiii.  20  (cf.  xxii.  24),  "DK ;  for  ~DX  Da!?  means  to  have  intercourse 
with  one,  to  go  a  journey  with  one  (Mai.  ii.  6,  cf.  Gen.  v.  24, 
but  not  2  Sam.  xv.  22,  where  we  are  to  translate  with  Keil), 
according  to  which  the  LXX.  has  here  /u-era  Se  aofywv  ov% 
6/uX?ycre4.  The  mocker  of  religion  and  of  virtue  shuns  the  circle 
of  the  wise,  for  he  loves  not  to  have  his  treatment  of  that  which  is 
holy  reproved,  nor  to  be  convicted  of  his  sin  against  truth ;  he 
prefers  the  society  where  his  frivolity  finds  approbation  and  a 
response. 


CHAP.  XV.  13,  14.  323 

Ver.  13  A  joyful  heart  maketh  the  countenance  cheerful ; 

But  in  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  broken. 

The  expression  of  the  countenance,  as  well  as  the  spiritual  habitus 
of  a  man,  is  conditioned  by  the  state  of  the  heart.     A   joyful 
heart  maketh  the  countenance   aio,    which    means   friendly,   but 
here  happy-looking •  =  cheerful  (for  aiB  is  the  most  general  desig 
nation  of  that    which  makes  an  impression  which  is  pleasant  to 
the    senses    or  to  the  mind)  ;    on  the    contrary,    with  sorrow  of 
heart  (nap,  constr.  of  naifl;,  x.  10,  as  nM3PI  =  JlNtsn,  from  nNBH) 
there  ^is  connected  a  stricken,  broken,  downcast  heart ;  the  spiritual 
functions  of  the  man  are  paralyzed  ;  self-confidence,  without  which 
energetic  action  is  impossible,  is  shattered  ;  he  appears  discouraged, 
whereby  rm  is  thought  of  as  the  power  of  self-consciousness  "and 
of  self-determination,  but  a!?,  as  our  «  Gemiit"  [animus],  as  the 
oneness  of  thinking  and  willing,  and  thus  as  the  seat  of  determina 
tion,  which  decides  the  intellectual -corporeal  life-expression  of  the 
man,  or  without  being  able  to  be  wholly  restrained,  communicates 
itself  to  them.     The  3.  of  napa?  is,  as  xv.  16  f.,  xvi.  8,  xvii.  1, 
meant  in   the  force  of  being  together  or  along  with,  so  that  nn 
nN'33  do  not  need  to  be  taken  separate  from  each  other  as  subject 
and  predicate  :  the  sense  of  the  noun-clause  is  in  the  3,  as  e.g.  also 
vii.  23  (it  is  about  his  life,  i.e.  it  concerns  his  life).     Elsewhere  the 
crushed  spirit,  like  the  broken  heart,  is  equivalent  to  the  heart 
despairing  in  itself  and  prepared  for  grace.      The  heart  with  a 
more  clouded  mien   may  be  well,  for   sorrow  has  in  it   a  healing 
power  (Eccles.  vii.  3),     But  here  the  matter  is  the  general  psycho^ 
logical  truth,  that  the  corporeal  and  spiritual  life  of  man  has  its 
regulator  in  the  heart,  and  that  the  condition  of  the  heart  leaves 
its  stamp  on  the  appearance  and  on  the  activity  of  the  man.     The 
translation    of    the   nxa:  nn    by   «  oppressed    breath "    (Umbreit, 
Hitzig)  is  impossible  ;  the  breath  cannot  be  spoken  of  as  broken. 

Ver.  14  The  heart  of  the  understanding  seeketh  after  knowledge, 

And  the  mouth  of  fools  practiseth  folly. 

Luther  interprets  njn  as  metaphor,  for  to  govern,  but  with  such 
ethical  conceptions  it  is  metaphor,  for  to  be  urgently  circumspect 
about  anything  (v id.  xiii.  20),  like  Arab,  ra'yand  r'ayt,  intentional, 
careful,  concern  about  anything.  No  right  translation  can  be 
made  of  the  Chethib  MB,  which  Schultens,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and 
Zockler  prefer;  the  predicate  can  go  before  the  V.f,  after  the 
Semitic  rule  in  the  fern,  of  the  sing.,  2  Sam.  x.  9,  cf.  Job  xvi.  16, 


324  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

C/tet/tib,  but  cannot  follow  in  the  masc.  of  the  sing.;  besides,  tlie 
operations  of  his  look  and  aspect  are  ascribed  to  his  face,  but  not 
spiritual  functions  as  here,  much  more  to  the  mouth,  i.e.  to  the 
spirit  speaking  through  it.  The  heart  is  within  a  man,  and  the 
mouth  without ;  and  while  the  former  gives  and  takes,  the  latter  is 
always  only  giving  out.  In  xviii.  15,  where  a  synonymous  distich 
is  formed  from  the  antithetic  distich,  the  ear,  as  hearing,  is  men 
tioned  along  with  the  heart  as  appropriating.  P33  is  not  an  adj., 
but  is  gen.,  like  pn¥,  28a  (opp.  ""Si).  D3H,  xvi.  23.  The  <f>i\oao(f)La 
of  the  understanding  is  placed  over  against  the  ftcopoXoyia  of  the 
fools.  The  LXX.  translates  KapSla  6p6rj  fqret  aia-OTjaiv  (cf.  xiv. 
10,  /capSla  dv&po?  ala-O^TtKij)  ;  it  uses  this  word  after  the  Hel 
lenistic  usus  log.  for  njn,  of  experimental  knowledge. 

Yer.  15  All  the  days  of  the  afflicted  are  evil ; 

But  he  who  is  of  a  joyful  heart  hath  a  perpetual  feast. 

Eegarding^y  (the  afflicted),  vid.  216.  They  are  so  called  on  whom 
a  misfortune,  or  several  of  them,  press  externally  or  internally. 
If  such  an  one  is  surrounded  by  ever  so  many  blessings,  yet  is  his 
life  day  by  day  a  sad  one,  because  with  each  new  day  the  feeling 
of  his  woe  which  oppresses  him  renews  itself ;  whoever,  on  the  con 
trary,  is  of  joyful  heart  (gen.  connection  as  xi.  13,  xii.  8),  such  an 
one  (his  life)  is  always  a  feast,  a  banquet  (not  npiB>D,  as  it  may  be 
also  pointed,  but  nntrp  and  Ton  thus  adv.,  for  it  is  never  adj.  ;  the 
post-bib,  usage  is  TTr^  for  Ton  nfojJ).  Hitzig  (and  also  Zockler) 
renders  156 :  And  (the  days)  of  one  who  is  of  a  joyful  heart  are 
.  .  .  Others  supply  "6  (cf.  xxvii.  76),  but  our  rendering  does  not 
need  that.  We  have  here  again  an  example  of  that  attribution 
(Arab,  isndd)  in  which  that  which  is  attributed  (musnad}  is  a  con 
dition  {Jial)  of  a  logical  subject  (the  musnad  ilehi),  and  thus  he 
who  speaks  has  this,  not  in  itself,  but  in  the  sense  of  the  condition  ; 
the  inwardly  cheerful  is  feasts  evermore,  i.e.  the  condition  of  such 
an  one  is  like  a  continual  festival.  The  true  and  real  happiness 
of  a  man  is  thus  defined,  not  by  external  things,  but  by  the  state  of 
the  heart,  in  which,  in  spite  of  the  apparently  prosperous  condition, 
a  secret  sorrow  may  gnaw,  and  which,  in  spite  of  an  externally 
sorrowful  state,  may  be  at  peace,  and  be  joyfully  confident  in 
God. 

Ver.  16  Better  is  little  with  the  fear  of  Jahve, 
Than  great  store  and  trouble  therewith. 

The  3  in  both  cases  the  LXX.  rightly  renders  by  perd.     How 


CHAP.  XV.  17,  18.  325 

(elsewhere  of  wild,  confused  disorder,  extreme  discord)  is 
meant  of  store  and  treasure,  Ps.  xxxix.  7  shows :  it  is  restless, 
covetous  care  and  trouble,  as  the  contrast  of  the  quietness  and 
contentment  proceeding  from  the  fear  of  God,  the  noisy,  wild, 
stormy   running  and   hunting  about  of    the    slave   of    mammon. 
Theodotion  translates  the  word  here,  as  Aquila  and  Symmachus 
elsewhere,   by  words  which   correspond   (tyayebaiva  =  (fidyaiva  or 
d^opTaala)  with  the  Syr.  KJYny,  greed  or  insatiability. 
Ver.  17  Better  a  dish  of  cabbage,  and  love  with  it, 
Than  a  fatted  ox  together  with  hatred. 

With  U  is  here  interchanged  DB',  which,  used  both  of  things  and  of 
persons,  means  to  be  there  along  with  something.  Both  have  the 
Dag.  forte  conj.,  cf.  to  the  contrary,  Deut.  xxx.  20,  Mic.  i.  11, 
Deut.  xi.  22  ;  the  punctuation  varies,  if  the  first  of  the  two  words 
is  a  n.  actionis  ending  in  n— .  The  dish  (portion)  is  called 
which  the  LXX.  and  other  Greek  versions  render  by 
entertainment,  and  thus  understand  it  of  that  which  is  set  before 
a  guest,  perhaps  rightly  so,  for  the  Arab,  drrakh  (to  date,  to  deter 
mine),  to  which  it  is  compared  by  Gesenius  and  Dietrich,  is 
equivalent  to  warrh,  a  denom.  of  the  name  of  the  moon.  Love 
and  hatred  are,  according  to  circumstances,  the  disposition  of  the 
host,  or  of  the  participant,  the  spirit  of  the  family : 
Cum  dat  oluscula  mensa  minuscula  pace  quieta, 
Ne  pete  grandia.  lautaque  prandia  lite  repleta. 

Two  proverbs  of  two  different  classes  of  men,  each  second  line  of 
which  terminates  with  a  catchword  having  a  similar  sound  (T"W, 

mw). 

Ver.  18  A  passionate  man  stirreth  up  strife, 

And  one  who  is  slow  to  anger  allayeth  contention. 

xxviii.  25a  and  xxix.  22a  are  variations  of  the  first  line  of  this 
proverb.  The  Pih.  rna  occurs  only  these  three  times  in  the  phrase 
jilO  rna,  R.  nj,  to  grind,  thus  to  strike,  to  irritate,  cogn.  to  (but  of  a 
different  root  from)  the  verb  "HiV,  to  excite,  x.  12,  and  ""Tin,  to  set 
on  fire,  xxvi.  21,  cf.  n^;  vi.  14.  Regarding  nnn,  vid.  xv.  1;  we 
call  such  a  man  a  "  hot-head  ;"  but  the  biblical  conception  nowhere 
(except  in  the  Book  of  Daniel)  places  the  head  in  connection  with 
spiritual-psychical  events  (Psychologie,  p.  254).  Regarding  ?f]K 
D^BN,  vid.  xiv.  29 ;  the  LXX.  (which  contains  a  translation  of  this 
proverb,  and  after  it  of  a  variation)  translates  p,aKpo6vp.os  Se  ical 
Tijv  fjieX\ovaav  Kararrpavvei,  i.e.  (as  the  Syr.  render  it)  he  suppresses 


326  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEKBS. 

the  strife  in  its  origin,  so  that  it  does  not  break  out.  But  both  are 
true  :  that  he  who  is  slow  to  anger,  who  does  not  thus  easily  permit 
himself  to  become  angry,  allayeth  the  strife  which  one  enters  into 
with  him,  or  into  which  he  is  drawn,  and  that  he  prevents  the 
strife,  for  he  places  over  against  provoking,  injurious  conduct, 
patient  gentleness  (N3~]O,  Eccles.  x.  4). 

Ver.  19  The  way  of  the  slothful  is  as  hedged  with  thorns; 
But  the  path  of  the  righteous  is  paved. 

Hitzig  misses  the  contrast  between  ?W  (slothful)  and  &~W\  (upright), 
and  instead  of  the  slothful  reads  P"}^,  the  tyrannical.  But  is  then 
the  slothful  "i£»?  The  contrast  is  indeed  not  that  of  contradiction, 
but  the  slothful  is  one  who  does  not  act  uprightly,  a  man  who  fails 
to  fulfil  the  duty  of  labour  common  to  man,  and  of  his  own  special 

calling.  The  way  of  such  an  one  is  pnn  n5^03?  like  a  fencing  with 
thorns  (from  pin,  K.  in,  to  be  pointed,  sharp,  distinguished  from 
Arab,  hadk,  to  surround,  and  in  the  meaning  to  fix  with  the  look, 
denom.  of  khadakt,  the  apple  of  the  eye),  so  that  he  goes  not  for 
wards,  and  sees  hindrances  and  difficulties  everywhere,  which 
frighten  him  back,  excusing  his  shunning  his  work,  his  remissness 
of  will,  and  his  doing  nothing  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  path  of  those 
who  wait  truly  and  honestly  on  their  calling,  and  prosecute  their 
aim,  is  raised  up  like  a  skilfully  made  street,  so  that  unhindered 
and  quickly  they  go  forward  (""W?D,  R.  fo,  aggerare,  cf.  Jer.  xviii.  15 
with  Isa.  xlix.  11,  and  iv.  8,  ??fp,  which  was  still  in  use  in  the 
common  language  of  Palestine  in  the  second  cent.,  Rosch  haschana, 
266). 

This  collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs  began,  x.  1,  with  a  pro 
verb  having  reference  to  the  observance  of  the  fourth  command 
ment,1  and  a  second  chief  section,  xiii.  1,  began  in  the  same  way. 
Here  a  proverb  of  the  same  kind  designates  the  beginning  of  a 
third  chief  section.  That  the  editor  was  aware  of  this  is  shown  by 
the  homogeneity  of  the  proverbs,  xv.  19,  xii.  28,  which  form  the 
conclusion  of  the  first  and  second  sections.  We  place  together 
first  in  this  new  section,  vers.  20-23,  in  which  (with  the  exception 
of  ver.  25)  the  no^  [maketh  glad]  of  the  first  (x.  1)  is  continued. 

Ver.  20  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father, 

And  a  fool  of  a  man  despiseth  his  mother. 

1  [The  fifth  commandment  of  the  Westminster  Shorter  Catechism  is  named 
as  the  fourth  in  Luther's  catechism.] 


CHAP.  XV.  21,  22.  327 

Line  first  =  x.  1.  The  gen.  connection  of  DIN  T'pa  (here  and  at 
xxi.  20)  is  not  superlative  [the  most  foolish  of  men],  but  like  N"iQ 
B"J?>  Gen.  xvi.  12  ;  the  latter:  a  man  of  the  wild  ass  kind  ;  the 
former :  a  man  of  the  fool  kind,  who  is  the  exemplar  of  such  a  sort 
among  men.  Piety  acting  in  willing  subordination  is  wisdom,  and 
the  contrary  exceeding  folly. 

Ver.  21  Folly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  devoid  of  understanding  ; 
But  a  man  of  understanding  goeth  straight  forward. 

Eegarding  3?"ipn,  vid.  at  vi.  32  (cf.  libib,  which  in  the  Samaritan 
means  "  dearly  beloved,"  in  Syr.  "  courageous,"  in  Arab,  and 
Aethiop.  cordatus) ;  n:«n  B*K,  x.  23,  and  1^,  with  the  accus.  of 
the  way,  here  of  the  going,  iii.  6  (but  not  xi.  5,  where  the  goino- 
itself  is  not  the  subject).  In  consequence  of  the  contrast,  the 
meaning  of  21a  is  different  from  that  of  x.  23,  according  to  which 
sin  is  to  the  fool  as  the  sport  of  a  child.  Here  1TOS  is  folly  and 
buffoonery,  drawing  aside  in  every  kind  of  way  from  the  direct 
path  of  that  which  is  good,  and  especially  from  the  path  of  one's 
duty.  This  gives  joy  to  the  fool ;  he  is  thereby  drawn  away  from 
the  earnest  and  faithful  performance  of  the  duties  of  his  calling, 
and  thus  wastes  time  and  strength ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  a  man 
of  understanding,  who  perceives  and  rejects  the  vanity  and  un- 
worthiness  of  such  trifling  and  such  nonsense,  keeps  the  straight 
direction  of  his  going,  i.e.  without  being  drawn  aside  or  kept  back, 
goes  straight  forward,  i.e.  true  to  duty,  prosecutes  the  end  of  his 
calling,  r.3?  is  accus.,  like  xxx.  29,  Mic.  vi.  8. 

Ver.  22  A  breaking  of  plans  where  no  counsel  is ; 

But  where  many  counsellors  are  they  come  to  pass. 

On  the  other  side  it  is  also  true  according  to  the  proverbs,  "  so  viel 
Kopfe  so  viel  Sinne"  \_quot  homines,  tot  sententiai],  and  "viel  Rath 
ist  Unrath"  [_ne  quid  nimis],  and  the  like.  But  it  cannot  become 
a  rule  of  morals  not  to  accept  of  counsel  that  we  may  not  go 
astray ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  and  remains  a  rule  of  morals  :  not 
stubbornly  to  follow  one's  own  heart  (head),  and  not  obstinately 
to  carry  out  one's  own  will,  and  not  in  the  darkness  of  wisdom  to 
regard  one's  own  plans  as  unimproveable,  and  not  needing  to  be 
examined ;  but  to  listen  to  the  counsel  of  intelligent  and  honest 
friends,  and,  especially  where  weighty  matters  are  in  hand,  not 
affecting  one's  own  person,  but  the  common  good,  not  to  listen 
merely  to  one  counsellor,  but  to  many.  Not  merely  the  organism 
of  the  modern  state,  but  also  of  old  the  Mosaic  arrangement  of 


328 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERDS. 


the  Israelitish  community,  with  its  representative  organization,  its 
courts  and  councils,  rested  on  the  acknowledged  justice  and  import 
ance  of  the  saying  uttered  in  xi.  14,  and  here  generalized,  nan, 
infin.  abs.  Hiph.  of  nna,  to  break,  with  the  accus.  following, 
stands  here,  like  Tjten,  xii.  7,  instead  of  the  finite :  the  thoughts 
come  to  a  fracture  (failure),  irrita  fiunt  consilia.  niD  (  =  ^,  cf. 
noiJ,  Ps.  ii.  2)  means  properly  the  being  brought  close  together 
for  the  purpose  of  secret  communication  and  counsel  (cf.  Arab. 
sdwada,  to  press  close  together  =  to  walk  with  one  privately). 
The  LXX. :  their  plans  are  unexecuted,  ol  ^  ri^&We?  crweSpia, 
literally  Symmachus,  Biaa-xeBd^ovrat,  \oyta-fju)l  pr)  6Wo9  avp/3ov- 
\lov.  Dlpn  has,  after  Jer.  iv.  14,  li.  29,  niae:n»  as  subject.  The 
LXX.  (besides  perverting  ana  [by  a  multitude]  into  aba  [eV 
Kap&tai?"]),  the  Syr.,  and  Targ.  introduce  nyy  (xix.  21)  as  subject. 
Ver.  23  A  man  has  joy  by  the  right  answer  of  his  mouth  ; 

And  a  word  in  its  season,  how  fair  is  it ! 

If  we  translate  n3j|O  only  by  "  answer,"  then  23a  sounds  as  a  praise 
of  self-complaisance;  but  it  is  used  of  true  correspondence  (xxix. 
19),  of  fit  reply  (Job  xxxii.  3,  5),  of  appropriate  answer  (cf.  28«, 
xvi.  1).  It  has  happened  to  one  in  his  reply  to  hit  the  nail  on  its 
head,  and  he  has  joy  from  that  (a  nnop  after  3  IW,  e.g.  xxiii.  24), 
and  with  right ;  for  the  reply  does  not  always  succeed.  A  reply 
like  this,  which,  according  to  circumstances,  stops  the  mouth  or 
bringeth  a  kiss  (xxiv.  26),  is  a  fortunate  throw,  is  a  gift  from 
above.  The  synonymous  parallel  line  measures  that  which  is 
appropriate,  not  to  that  which  is  to  be  answered,  but  from  a 
general  point  of  view  as  to  its  seasonableness  ;  riy  (  =  rny  from 
nr)  is  here  "  the  ethically  right,  becoming  time,  determined  by  the 
laws  of  wisdom  (moral)"  (vid.  Orelli,  Synonyma  der  Zeit  u.  Ewigkeit, 
p.  48),  cf.  Wttr^  (translated  by  Luther  "in  its  time"),  xxv.  11. 
With  alts-no,  cf.  xvi.  16  ;  both  ideas  lie  in  it:  that  such  a  word  is 
in  itself  well-conditioned  and  successful,  and  also  that  it  is  welcome, 
agreeable,  and  of  beneficial  influence. 

Four  proverbs  of  fundamentally  different  doctrines : 

Ver.  24  The  man  of  understanding  goeth  upwards  on  a  way  of  life, 

To  depart  from  hell  beneath. 

The  way  of  life  is  one,  v.  6,  Ps.  xvi.  11  (where,  notwithstanding 
the  want  of  the  article,  the  idea  is  logically  determined),  although 
in  itself  forming  a  plurality  of  mms,  ii.  19.  "  A  way  of  life," In 
the  translation,  is  equivalent  to  a  way  which  is  a  way  of  life. 


CHAP.  XV.  25.  329 

nH'^>  upwards  (as  Eccles.  iii.  21,  where,  in  the  doubtful  question 
whether  the  spirit  of  a  man  at  his  death  goes  upwards,  there  yet  lies 
the  knowledge  of  the  alternative),  belongs,  as  the  parallel  HBO  ^ixti'p 
shows,  to  D*n  mx  as  virtual  adj.:  a  way  of  life  which  leads  upwards. 
And  the  J>  of  TOtak  is  that  of  possession,  but  not  as  of  quiet  posses 
sion  (such  belongs  to  him),  but  as  personal  activity,  as  in  i^  SJTl,  he 
has  a  journey  =  he  makes  a  journey,  finds  himself  on  a  journey, 
1  Kings  xviii.  27;  for  "«D  $d?  is  not  merely,  as  IID^,  xiii.  14,  xiv.  27 
the  expression  of  the  end  and  consequence,  but  of  the  subjective 
object,  i.e.  the  intention,  and  thus  supposes  an  activity  corresponding 
to  this  intention.  The  O.  T.  reveals  heaven,  i.e.  the  state  of  the 
revelation  of  God  in  glory,  yet  not  as  the  abode  of  saved  men  ; 
the  way  of  the  dying  leads,  according  to  the  O.  T.  representation, 
downwards  into  Sheol  ;  but  the  translations  of  Enoch  and  Elijah 
are  facts  which,  establishing  the  possibility  of  an  exception,  break 
through  the  dark  monotony  of  that  representation,  and,  as  among 
the  Greeks  the  mysteries  encouraged  rjSvaTepas  eX-Tr/Sa?,  so  in  Israel 
the  Chokma  appears  pointing  the  possessor  of  wisdom  upwards, 
and  begins  to  shed  light  on  the  darkness  of  Sheol  by  the  new  great 
thoughts  of  a  life  of  immortality,  thus  of  a  far)  alavios  (xii.  28) 
(Psychologiet  p.  407  ff.),  now  for  the  first  time  becoming  prominent, 
but  only  as  a  foreboding  and  an  enigma.  The  idea  of  the  Sheol 
opens  the  way  for  a  change  :  the  gathering  place  of  all  the  living 
on  this  side  begins  to  be  the  place  of  punishment  for  the  godless 
(vii.  27,  ix.  18)  ;  the  way  leading  upwards,  efc  TTJV  £<w?)i;,  and  that 
leading  downwards,  et9  rrjv  aircoXeiav  (Matt.  vii.  13  f.),  come  into 
direct  contrast. 

Ver.  25  The  house  of  the  proud  Jahve  rooteth  out, 

And  He  established  the  landmark  of  the  widow. 


The  power  unnamed  in  *n^,  ii.  22  (cf.  xiv.  lla),  is  here  named 
njrv  I  n^  (thus  to  be  pointed  with  Mercha  and  Pasek  following). 
3£  is  the  abbreviated  fut.  form  which  the  elevated  style,  e.g.  Deut. 
xxxii.  8,  uses  also  as  indie.,  —  a  syntactical  circumstance  which 
renders  Hitzig's  correction  aim  superfluous.  It  is  the  border  of 
the  land-possession  of  the  widows,  removed  by  the  D'N3  (LXX. 
vfipia-r&v),  that  is  here  meant.  The  possession  of  land  in  Israel 
was  secured  by  severe  punishment  inflicted  on  him  who  removed 
the^"  landmark  "  (Deut.  xix.  14,  xxvii.  17),  and  the  Chokma 
(xxii.  28  ;  Job  xxiv.  2)  as  well  as  the  prophets  (e.g.  Hos.  v.  10) 


330  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVEDBS. 

inculcate  the  inviolability  of  the  borders  of  the  possession,  as  the 
guardian  of  which  Jahve  here  Himself  appears. 

Ver  26  An  abomination  to  Jahve  are  evil  thoughts  ; 

But  gracious  words  are  to  Him  pure. 

Not  personally  (Luther:  the  plans  of  the  wicked)  but  neutrally  is  JH 
here  meant  as  at  ii.  14,  and  in  jn  ncfc,  vi.  24  (cf.  Pers.  merdi  niku, 
man  of  good— good  man),  vid.  Frieclr.  Philippi's  Status  Constr. 
p.  121.  Thoughts  which  are  of  a  bad  kind  and  of  a  bad  tendency, 
particularly  (what  the  parallel  member  brings  near)  of  a  bad  dis 
position  and  design  against  others,  are  an  abomination  to  God  ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  pure,  viz.  in  His  eyes,  which  cannot  look 
upon  iniquity  (Hub.  i.  13),  are  the  Wr^OX,  words  of  compassion 
and  of  friendship  toward  men,  which  are  (after  26a)  the  expres 
sion  of  such  thoughts,  thus  sincere,  benevolent  words,  the  influence 
of  which  on  the  soul  and  body  of  him  to  whom  they  refer  is  de 
scribed,  xvi.  24.  The  Syr.,  Targ.,  Symmachus,  Theodotion,  and  the 
Venet.  recognise  in  Dnintpi  the  pred.,  while,  on  the  contrary,  the 
LXX.,  Jerome,  and  Luther  (who  finally  decided  for  the  trans 
lation,  "but  the  pure  speak  comfortably")  regard  it  as  subject. 
But  that  would  be  an  attribution  which  exceeds  the  measure  of 
possibility,  and  for  which  Dnipx  or  ^fl  must  be  used  ;  also  the 
parallelism  requires  that  D^nintJ  correspond  with  'n  rajnn.  Hence 
also  the  reference  of  Dninm  to  the  judgment  of  God,  which  is 
determined  after  the  motive  of  pure  untainted  law ;  that  which 
proceeds  from  such,  that  and  that  only,  is  pure,  pure  in  His  sight, 
and  thus  also  pure  in  itself. 

Ver.  27  Whoever  does  service  to  [servif]  avarice  troubleth  his  own  house; 

But  he  that  hateth  gifts  shall  live. 

Regarding  J?V2  jra'a,  vid.  at  i.  19,  and  regarding  Irva  ID'y,  xi.  29, 
where  it  is  subject,  but  here  object.;  xxviii.  IQb  is  a  variation  of 
21  b.  nijflS  are  here  gifts  in  the  sense  of  Eccles.  vii.  7,  which  per 
vert  judgment,  and  cause  respect  of  persons.  The  LXX.  from 
this  point  mingles  together  a  series  of  proverbs  with  those  of  the 
following  chapter. 

Two  proverbs  regarding  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  : 

Ver.  28  The  heart  of  the  righteous  considereth  how  to  answer  right, 

And  the  mouth  of  the  godless  poureth  forth  evil. 

Instead  of  rfojg,  the  LXX.  (Syr.  and  Targ.)  imagines  JitaCN, 
TriVret? ;  Jerome  translates,  but  falsely,  obedientiam  (from  njy,  to 
bend  oneself)  ;  Meiri  thinks  on  n3j6}  wormwood,  for  the  heart  of 


CHAP.  xv.  20,  cc.  331 

the  righteous  revolves  in  itself  the  misery  and  the  vanity  of  this 
present  life ;  Hitzig  corrects  this  verse  as  he  does  the  three  pre 
ceding:  the  heart  of  the  righteous  thinks  on  nil^,  a  plur.  of  verb 
fiJ-W,  which,  except  in  this  correction,  does  not  exist.  The  proverb, 
as  it  stands,  is,  in  fineness  of  expression  and  sharpness  of  the 
contrast,  raised  above  such  manglings.  Instead  of  the  righteous, 
the  wise  might  be  named,  and  instead  of  the  godless,  fools  (cf.  2b)  ; 
but  the  poet  places  the  proverb  here  under  the  point  of  view  of 
duty  to  neighbours.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  the  righteous  that 
he  does  not  give  the  reins  to  his  tongue  ;  but  as  Luther  has  trans 
lated  :  the  heart  of  the  righteous  considers  [tichtet  from  dictare, 
frequently  to  speak,  here  carefully  to  think  over]  what  is  to  be 
answered,  or  rather,  since  rt3J^T»D  is  not  used,  he  thinks  thereupon 
to  answer  rightly,  for  that  the  word  DUJ/  is  used  in  this  pregnant 
sense  is  seen  from  23a.  The  godless,  on  the  contrary,  are  just  as 
rash  with  their  mouth  as  the  righteous  are  of  a  thoughtful  heart : 
their  month  sputters  forth  (effutit)  evil,  for  they  do  not  first  lay  to 
heart  the  question  what  may  be  right  and  just  in  the  case  that  has 
arisen. 

Ver.  29  Jalivo  is  far  from  the  godless  ; 

But  the  prayer  of  the  righteous  He  heareth. 

Line  second  is  a  variation  of  8b.  God  is  far  from  the  godless,  viz. 
as  Polychronius  remarks,  non  spatii  intercapedine,  sed  sentential 
dwersitate ;  more  correctly:  as  to  His  gracious  presence — D^p  pr^ 
He  has  withdrawn  Himself  from  them,  Hos.  x.  6,  so  that  if  they 
pray,  their  prayer  reaches  not  to  Him.  The  prayer  of  the  righteous, 
on  the  contrary,  He  hears,  He  is  graciously  near  to  them,  they 
have  access  to  Him,  He  listens  to  their  petitions;  and  if  they  are 
not  always  fulfilled  according  to  their  word,  yet  they  are  not 
without  an  answer  (Ps.  cxlv.  18). 

Two  proverbs  regarding  the  eye  and  the  ear : 

Ver.  30  The  light  of  the  eye  rejoiceth  the  heart, 

And  a  good  message  maketh  the  bones  fat. 

Hitzig  corrects  also  here  :  D^JJ  1"1^1^,  that  which  is  seen  with  the 
eyes,  viz.  after  long  desire;  and  certainly  D^J?  n&OD  can  mean  not 
only  that  which  the  eyes  see  (Isa.  xi.  3),  but  also  this,  that  the 
eyes  do  see.  But  is  it  true  what  Hitzig  says  in  justification  of  his 
correction,  that  11XD  never  means  light,  or  ray,  or  brightness,  but 
lamp  (<f)d)aTrjp)  ?  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  D^JJ  "ttNO  cannot  mean 
a  cheerful  sight  (Luther)  in  an  objective  sense  (LXX. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


otf>0a\fj,o<;  /caXa),  as  a  verdant  garden  or  a  stream  flowing  through 
a  landscape  (Rashi),  for  that  would  be  D^y  TK»  njoo,  ancl  «  bright- 
ness  which  the  eyes  see  "  (Bertheau)  ;  the  genitive  connection 
certainly  does  not  mean  :  the  "ns»  is  not  the  light  from  without 
presenting  itself  to  the  eyes,  but,  like  wy  TIN  (Ps.  xxxviii.  11) 
and  similar  expressions,  the  light  of  the  eye  itself  [bright  or  joyous 
eyes].  But  TIK»  does  not  mean  alone  the  body  of  light,  but  also  the 
illumination,  Ex.  xxxv.  14  and  elsewhere,  not  only  that  which  (o,  TL) 
gives  light,  but  also  this,  that  (ort)  light  arises  and  is  present,  so 
that  we  might  translate  it  here  as  at  Ps.  xc.  8,  either  the  bright 
ness,  or  that  which  gives  light.  But  the  clear  brightness  of  one's 
own  eye  cannot  be  meant,  for  then  that  were  as  much  as  to  say 
that  it  is  the  effect,  not  that  it  is  the  cause,  of  a  happy  heart,  but 
the  brightness  of  the  eyes  of  others  that  meet  us.  That  this 
gladdens  the  heart  of  him  who  has  a  sight  of  it  is  evident,  without 
any  interchanging  relation  of  the  joy-beaming  countenance,  for  it 
is  indeed  heart-gladdening  to  a  man,  to  whom  selfishness  has  not 
made  the  ^aipeiv  pera  ^atpovTwv  impossible,  to  see  a  countenance 
right  joyful  in  truth.  But  in  connection  with  xvi.  15,  it  lies  nearer 
to  think  on  a  love-beaming  countenance,  a  countenance  on  which 
joyful  love  to  us  mirrors  itself,  and  which  reflects  itself  in  our 
heart,  communicating  this  sense  of  gladness.  The  ancient  Jewish 
interpreters  understand  D^y  TiKD  of  the  enlightening  of  the  eye  of 
the  mind,  according  to  which  Euchel  translates  :  "  clear  intelli 
gence  ;"  but  Eashi  has  remarked  that  that  is  not  the  explanation 
of  the  words,  but  the  Midrash.  That,  in  line  second  of  this 
synonymous  distich,  rute  njnoB>  does  not  mean  alloquium  humanum 
(Fl.),  nor  a  good  report  which  one  hears  of  himself,  but  a  good 
message,  is  confirmed  by  xxv.  25;  nyiDlp  as  neut.  part.  pass,  may 
mean  that  which  is  heard,  but  the  comparison  of  nyitj^  nyu^ 
stamps  it  as  an  abstract  formation  like  n^a,  n^ia  (nWtt),  according 
to  which  the  LXX.  translates  it  by  UKOTJ  (in  this  passage  by 
(f>rj}j,r)}>  Regarding  }Bh,  richly  to  satisfy,  or  to  refresh,  a  favourite 
expression  in  the  Mishle,  vid.  at  xi.  25,  xiii.  4. 

Ver.  31  An  ear  which  heareth  the  doctrine  of  life 

Keeps  itself  in  the  circle  of  the  wise. 

As,  vi.  33,  1D1O  JYinmn  means  instructions  aiming  at  discipline,  so 
here  D"?n  nrain  means  instructions  which  have  life  as  their  end, 
i.e.  as  showing  how  one  may  attain  unto  true  life  ;  Hitzig's  D3H, 
for  D^H,  is  a  fancy.  Is  now  the  meaning  this,  that  the  ear 


CHAP.  XV.  32,  33. 

which  willingly  hears  arid  receives  such  doctrine  of  life  will  come 
to  dwell  among  the  wise,  i.e.  that  such  an  one  (for  JTN  is  synecdoche 
partis  pro  persona,  as  Job  xxix.  11)  will  have  his  residence  among 
wise  men,  as  being  one  of  them,  inter  eos  sedem  firmam  habebit 
Usque  annwnerabitur  (FJ.)  ?  By  such  a  rendering,  one  is  surprised 
at  the  harshness  of  the  synecdoche,  as  well  as  at  the  circum 
stantiality  of  the  expression  (cf.  xiii.  20,  Ban.1;).  On  the  contrary, 
this  corresponds  with  the  thought  that  one  who  willingly  permits 
to  be  said  to  him  what  he  must  do  and  suffer  in  order  that  he  may 
be  a  partaker  of  life,  on  this  account  remains  most  gladly  in  the 
circle  of  the  wise,  and  there  has  his  appropriate  place.  The  "  pass 
ing  the  night"  (}v,  cogn.  7v,  Syr.  Targ.  JTIB,  Arab,  bat}  is  also 
frequently  elsewhere  the  designation  of  prolonged  stay,  e.g.  Isa.  i. 
21.  Tipa  is  here  different  in  signification  from  that  it  had  in  xiv. 
23,  where  it  meant  "  in  the  heart."  In  the  LXX.  this  proverb  is 
wanting.  The  other  Greek  translations  have  ovs  a/covov  e'Xe^of? 
£eo>}9  ev  fJ*ea-<p  aotywv  av\ia8rf(T6Tat,.  Similarly  the  Syr.,  Targ., 
•Jerome,  Venet.,  and  Luther,  admitting  both  renderings,  but,  since 
they  render  in  the  fut.,  bringing  nearer  the  idea  of  prediction 
(Midrash  :  n^n  ra^n  l&b  nair)  than  of  description  of  character. 
Two  proverbs  with  the  catchword  1D1D : 

Ver.  32  He  that  ref  useth  correction  lightly  values  his  soul ; 
But  he  that  heareth  reproof  getteth  understanding. 

Regarding  1D1&  jnis?  vid.  xiii.  18,  cf.  i.  25,  and  iPSJ  DNio?  viii.  36. 
iPa?  contains  more  than  the  later  expression  i£¥y,  self;  it  is 
equivalent  to  V»n  (Job  ix.  21),  for  the  K>23  is  the  bond  of  union 
between  the  intellectual  and  the  corporeal  life.  The  despising  of 
the  soul  is  then  the  neglecting,  endangering,  exposing  of  the  life ; 
in  a  word,  it  is  suicide  (lOb).  xix.  8a  is  a  variation  derived  from 
this  distich  :  u  He  who  gains  understanding  loves  his  soul,"  accord 
ing  to  which  the  LXX.  translate  here  dyaira  ^rvxrjv  avrov.  3? 
the  Midrash  explains  by  £1  riJVUt?  HD3H ;  but  the  correct  view  is, 
that  2?  is  not  thought  of  as  a  formal  power,  but  as  operative  and 
carried  into  effect  in  conformity  with  its  destination. 

Ver.  33  The  fear  of  Jahve  is  a  discipline  to  wisdom, 

And  before  honour  is  humility. 

We  may  regard  'n  riX'V  (the  fear  of  Jahve)  also  as  pred.  here. 
The  fear  of  Jahve  is  an  educational  maxim,  and  the  end  of  educa 
tion  of  the  Chokma ;  but  the  phrase  may  also  be  the  subject,  and 
by  such  a  rendering  Luther's  parallelism  lies  nearer:  "  The  fear 


33  1  THE  COOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

of  the  Lord  is  discipline  to  wisdom  ; "  the  fear  of  God,  viz.  con 
tinually  exercised  and  tried,  is  the  right  school  of  wisdom,  and 
humility  is  the  right  way  to  honour.  Similar  is  the  connection  1CMD 
•'I^Dj  discipline  binds  understanding  to  itself  as  its  consequence, 
i.  3.  Line  second  repeats  itself,  xviii.  12,  "  Pride  comes  before  the 
fall."  Luther's  "  And  ere  one  comes  to  honour,  he  must  previously 
suffer,"  renders  ^V  rather  than  nttj;.  But  the  Syr.  reverses  the 
idea:  the  honour  of  the  humble  goeth  before  him,  as  also  one  of 
the  anonymous  Greek  versions  :  TrpOTropevercu  Se  rcnreivols  8o'|a. 
But  the  Soga  comes,  as  the  above  proverb  expresses  it,  afterwards. 
The  way  to  the  height  lies  through  the  depth,  the  depth  of  humility 
under  the  hand  of  God,  and,  as  nuy  expresses,  of  self-humiliation. 
Four  proverbs  of  God,  the  disposer  of  all  things : 

Chap.  xvi.  1  Man's  are  the  counsels  of  the  heart ; 

But  the  answer  of  the  tongue  cometh  from  Jahve. 

Gesen.,  Ewald,  and  Bertheau  incorrectly  understand  Ib  of  hearing, 
i.e.  of  a  favourable  response  to  what  the  tongue  wishes ;  la  speaks 
not  of  wishes,  and  the  gen.  after  ruyo  (answer)  is,  as  at  xv.  23,  Mic 
iii.  7,  and  also  here,  by  virtue  of  the  parallelism,  the  yen.  subjecti 
xv.  23  leads  to  the  right  sense,  according  to  which  a  good  answer 
is  joy  to  him  to  whom  it  refers  :  it  does  not  always  happen  to  one  to 
find  the  fitting  and  effective  expression  for  that  which  he  has  in  his 
mind;  it  is,  as  this  cog.  proverb  expresses  it,  a  gift  from  above  (So#?;- 
aerat,  Matt.  x.  19).  But  now,  since  njJMD  neither  means  answering, 
nor  yet  in  general  an  expression  (Euchel)  or  report  (Lowenstein), 
and  the  meaning  of  the  word  at  4a  is  not  here  in  question,  one  has 
to  think  of  him  whom  the  proverb  has  in  view  as  one  who  has  to 
give  a  reason,  to  give  information,  or  generally — since  H3J?,  like 
dfjielfteaOai,,  is  not  confined  to  the  interchange  of  words — to  solve  a 
problem,  and  that  such  an  one  as  requires  reflection.  The  scheme 
(project,  premeditation)  which  he  in  his  heart  contrives,  is  here 
described  as  37"l|3"]j;D,  from  tiny,  to  arrange,  to  place  together,  meta 
phorically  of  the  reflection,  i.e.  the  consideration  analyzing  and 
putting  a  matter  in  order.  These  reflections,  seeking  at  one  time 
in  one  direction,  and  at  another  in  another,  the  solution  of  the 
question,  the  unfolding  of  the  problem,  are  the  business  of  men  ; 
but  the  answer  which  finally  the  tongue  gives,  and  which  here, 
in  conformity  with  the  pregnant  sense  of  ruyo  (vid.  at  xv.  23,  28), 
will  be  regarded  as  right,  appropriate,  effective,  thus  generally  the 
satisfying  reply  to  the  demand  placed  before  hirn3  is  from  God.  It 


CIIAP.  xvi.  2.  335 

is  a  matter  of  experience  which  the  preacher,  the  public  speaker,  the 
author,  and  every  man  to  whom  his  calling  or  circumstances  present 
a  weighty,  difficult  theme,  can  attest.  As  the  thoughts  pursue  one 
another  in  the  mind,  attempts  are  made,  and  again  abandoned;  the 
state  of  the  heart  is  somewhat  like  that  of  chaos  before  the  creation. 
But  when,  finally,  the  right  thought  and  the  right  utterance  for  it 
are  found,  that  which  is  found  appears  to  us,  not  as  if  self-dis 
covered,  but  as  a  gift;  we  regard  it  with  the  feeling  that  a  higher 
power  has  influenced  our  thoughts  and  imaginings;  the  confession 
by  us,  TI  iKavorr)?  f)nu>v  CK  rov  Seov  (2  Cor.  iii.  5),  in  so  far  as  we 
believe  in  a  living  God,  is  inevitable. 

Ver.  2  Every  way  of  a  man  is  pure  in  his  own  eyes ; 

But  a  weigher  of  the  spirits  is  Jahve. 

Variations  of  this  verse  are  xxi.  2,  where  "l£"  for  ^t  (according  to 
the  root-meaning:  pricking  in  the  eyes,  i.e.  shining  clear,  then: 
without  spot,  pure,  vid.  Fleischer  in  Levy's  Cludd.  Worterbuch,  i. 
424),  nto?  for  nirvn,  and  TH^?  for  WTfejj  whereupon  here  without 
synallage  (for  ^  means  the  totality),  the  singular  of  the  pred. 
follows,  as  Isa.  Ixiv.  10,  Ezek.  xxxi.  15.  For  the  rest,  cf.  with  2a, 
xiv.  12,  where,  instead  of  the  subj.  "W^,  is  used  'JE&,  and  with  26, 
xxiv.  12,  where  God  is  described  by  ntop  |3n.  The  verb  {3FI  is  a 
secondary  formation  from  pa  (vid.  Hupfeld  on  Ps.  v.  7),  like 
ii?fi  from  Arab,  tyakn  (to  be  fast,  sure),  the  former  through  the 
medium  of  the  reflex.  $3^  the  latter  of  the  reflex.  Arab,  ditkn  ; 
J3n  means  to  regulate  (from  regula,  a  rule),  to  measure  off,  to 
weigh,  here  not.  to  bring  into  a  condition  right  according  to  rule 
(Theodotion,  eSpd&v,  staliliens,  Syr.  Targ.  }ij>np,  Venet.  fcarap- 
Ti£ei;  Luther,  "but  the  Lord  maketh  the  heart  sure"),  but  to 
measure  or  weigh,  and  therefore  to  estimate  rightly,  to  know  accu 
rately  (Jerome,  spirituum  ponderator  est  Dominus).  The  judgment 
of  a  man  regarding  the  cause  of  life,  which  it  is  good  for  him  to 
enter  upon,  lies  exposed  to  great  and  subtle  self-deception  ;  but 
God  has  the  measure  and  weight,  i.e.  the  means  of  proving,  so  as 
to  value  the  spirits  according  to  their  true  moral  worth  ;  his  investi 
gation  goes  to  the  root  (cf.  KpiTtrcos,  Heb.  iv.  12),  his  judgment 
rests  on  the  knowledge  of  the  true  state  of  the  matter,  and  excludes 
all  deception,  so  that  thus  a  man  can  escape  the  danger  of  delusion 
by  no  other  means  than  by  placing  his  way,  i.e.  his  external  and 
internal  life,  in  the  light  of  the  word  of  God,  and  desiring  for 
himself  the  all-penetrating  test  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts  (Ps. 


336  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

cxxxix.  23  f.),  and  the  self-knowledge  corresponding  to  the  result 
of  this  test. 

Ver.  3  Roll  on  Jahve  thy  works, 

So  thy  thoughts  shall  prosper. 

The  proverbs  vers.  1-3  are  wanting  in  the  LXX. ;  their  absence 
is  compensated  for  by  three  others,  but  only  externally,  not  accord 
ing  to  their  worth.  Instead  of  ba,  the  Syr.,  Targ.,  and  Jerome 
read  !?3,  revela,  with  which  the  h?,  Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  cf.  Iv.  23,  inter 
changing  with  b«  (here  and  at  Ps.  xxii.  9),  does  not  agree  ;  rightly 
Theodotion,  KvXtaov  eVl  xvptov,  and  Luther.  "  commend  to  the 
Lord  thy  works."  The  works  are  here,  not  those  that  are  executed, 
Ex.  xxiii.  16,  but  those  to  be  executed,  as  Ps.  xc.  17,  where  $3, 
here  the  active  to  «i3f!7  which  at  iv.  26  as  jussive  meant  to  be 
placed  right,  here  with  1  of  the  consequence  in  the  apodosis  impera- 
tivi:  to  be  brought  about,  and  to  have  continuance,  or  briefly:  to 
stand  (cf.  xii.  3)  as  the  contrast  of  disappointment  or  ruin.  We 
should  roll  on  God  all  matters  which,  as  obligations,  burden  us,  and 
on  account  of  their  weight  and  difficulty  cause  us  great  anxiety,  for 
nothing  is  too  heavy  or  too  hard  for  Him  who  can  overcome  all 
difficulties  and  dissolve  all  perplexities;  then  will  our  thoughts,  viz. 
those  about  the  future  of  our  duty  and  our  life-course,  be  happy, 
nothing  will  remain  entangled  and  be  a  failure,  but  will  be  accom 
plished,  and  the  end  and  aim  be  realized. 

Ver.  4  Jahve  hath  made  everything  for  its  contemplated  end  ; 

And  also  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil. 

Everywhere  else  rujjO  means  answer  (  Venet.  TT/OO?  aTTOKptaiv  avrov), 
which  is  not  suitable' here,  especially  with  the  absoluteness  of  the  bb; 
the  Syr.  and  Targ.  translate,  obedientibus  ei,  which  the  words  do  not 
warrant;  but  alsopropter  semet  ipsum  (Jerome,  Theodotion,  Luther) 
give  to  46  no  right  parallelism,  and,  besides,  would  demand  faJjB?  or 
*n])P»£.  The  punctuation  inajJCT,  which  is  an  anomaly  (cf.  BrnMS, 
Isa'.'xxiv.  2,  and  ^nj?Zi,  Ezra  x.  14),  shows  (Ewald)  that  here  we 
have,  not  the  prepositional  $»)>,  but  h  with  the  subst.  rujjp,  which 
in  derivation  and  meaning  is  one  with  the  form  M?  abbreviated 
from  it  (cf.  fe>,  "IJ|»),  similar  in  meaning  to  the  Arab,  mctanyn, 
aim,  intention,  object,  and  end,  and  mind,  from  'atay,  to  place 
opposite  to  oneself  a  matter,  to  make  it  the  object  of  effort.  Hitzig 
prefers  rw$tti,  but  why  not  rather  W3^,  for  the  proverb  is  not 
intended  to  express  that  all  that  God  has  made  serve  a  purpose 
(by  which  one  is  reminded  of  the  arguments  for  the  existence  of 


CHAP.  xvi.  5.  337 

God  from  final  causes,  which  are  often  prosecuted  too  far),  but  that 
all  is  made  by  God  for  its  purpose,  i.e.  a  purpose  premeditated  by 
Him,  that  the  world  of  things  and  of  events  stands  under  the  law 
of  a  plan,  which  has  in  God  its  ground  and  its  end,  and  that  also 
the  wickedness  of  free  agents  is  comprehended  in  this  plan,  and 
made  subordinate  to  it.     God  has  not  indeed  made  the  wicked  as 
such,  but  He  has  made  the  being  which  is  capable  of  wickedness, 
and  which  has  decided  for  it,  viz.  in  view  of  the  "  day  of  adversity" 
(Eccles.  vii.  14),  which  God  will  cause  to  come  upon  him,  thus 
making  His  holiness  manifest  in  the  merited  punishment,  and  thus 
also  making  wickedness  the  means  of  manifesting  His  glory.     It  is 
the  same  thought  which  is  expressed  in  Ex.  ix.  16  with  reference 
to  Pharaoh.    A  prcedestinatio  ad  malum,  and  that  in  the  supralapsa- 
rian  sense,  cannot  be  here  taught,  for  this  horrible  dogma  (horribile 
quidem  decretum,  fateor,  says  Calvin  himself)  makes  God  the  author 
of  evil,  and  a  ruler  according  to  His  sovereign  caprice,  and  thus 
destroys  all  pure  conceptions  of  God.     What  Paul,  Kom.  ix.,  with 
reference  to  Ex.  ix.  16,  wishes  to  say  is  this,  that  it  was  not  Pharaoh's 
conduct  that  determined  the  will  of  God,  but   that  the  will  of 
God  is  always  the  antecedent:  nothing  happens  to  God  through  the 
obstinacy  and  rebellion  of  man  which  determines  Him  to  an  action 
not  already  embraced  in  the  eternal  plan,  but  also  such  an  one 
must  against  his  will  be  subservient  to  the  display  of  God's  glory. 
The  apostle  adds  ver.  22,  and  shows  that  he  recognised  the  factor 
of  human  self-determination,   but  also  as  one  comprehended   in 
God's  plan.     The  free  actions  of  men  create  no  situation  by  which 
God  would  be  surprised  and  compelled  to  something  which  was  not 
originally  intended  by  Himself.     That  is  what  the  above  proverb 
says:  the  wicked  also  has  his  place  in  Gwd's  order  of  the  world. 
Whoever  frustrates  the  designs  of  grace  must  serve  God  in  this, 
evSeigaaffat  -rr)v  op<yrjv  /cai  yvwpio-at,  TO  Swarov  avrov  (Rom.  ix.  22). 
Here  follow  three  proverbs  of  divine  punishment,  expiatio  [Ver- 
siihnung]  and  reconciliatio  [Versohnunp;]. 

Ver.  5  An  abomination  to  Jahve  is  every  one  who  is  haughty ; 
The  hand  for  it  [assuredly]  he  remains  not  unpunished. 
Proverbs  thus  commencing  we  already  had  at  xv.  9,  26.     ^  is  a 
metaplastic  connecting  form  of  Pib| ;  on  the  contrary,  PO3,  1  Sam. 
xvi.  7,   Ps.  ciii.  11,  means  being  high,  as  ^33,  height;  the  form 
underlying    323    is    not   PI33  (as  Gesen.  and  Olslmusen  write  it), 
but  Fiaa.     In  56,  xi.  21a  is  repeated.      The  translators   are  per- 
VOL.  I.  Y 


338  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

plexed  in  their  rendering  of  "lv  T.     Fleischer:  ab  estate  in  cctatem 
non  (i.e.  nullo  nnqitam  tempore  futuro)  impunis  erit. 
Ver.  6  By  love  and  truth  is  iniquity  expiated, 

And  through  the  fear  of  Jahve  one  escapes  from  evil — 

literally,  there  comes  (as  the  effect  of  it)  the  escaping  of  evil  ("no, 
n.  actionis,  as  xiii.  19),  or  rather,  since  the  evil  here  comes  into 
view  as  to  its  consequences  (xiv.  27,  xv.  24),  this,  that  one  escapes 
evil.  By  flEN}.  "1DH  are  here  meant,  not  the  %a/w  /col  aXijOeia  of 
God  (Bertheau),  but,  like  xx.  28,  Isa.  xxxix.  8,  love  and  faithful 
ness  in  the  relation  of  men  to  one  another.  The  3  is  both  times 
that  of  the  mediating  cause.  Or  is  it  said  neither  by  what  means 
one  may  attain  the  expiation  of  his  sins,  nor  how  he  may  attain 
to  the  escaping  from  evil,  but  much  rather  wherein  the  true  rever 
ence  for  Jahve,  and  wherein  the  right  expiation  of  sin,  consist? 
Thus  von  Hofmann,  Schriftbew.  i.  595.  But  the  3  of  IDfQ  is  not 
different  from  that  of  DNT3,  Isa.  xxvii.  9.  It  is  true  that  the  article 
of  justification  is  falsified  if  good  works  enter  as  causa  meritoria 
into  the  act  of  justification,  but  we  of  the  evangelical  school  teach 
that  the  fides  qua  justificat  is  indeed  inoperative,  but  not  the  fides 
quce  justificat,  and  we  cannot  expect  of  the  O.  T.  that  it  should 
everywhere  distinguish  with  Pauline  precision  what  even  James 
will  not  or  cannot  distinguish.  As  the  law  of  sacrifice  designates 
the  victim  united  with  the  blood  in  the  most  definite  manner,  but 
sometimes  also  the  whole  transaction  in  the  offering  of  sacrifice  even 
to  the  priestly  feast  as  serving  15??,  Lev.  x.  17,  so  it  also  happens 
in  the  general  region  of  ethics :  the  objective  ground  of  reconcilia 
tion  is  the  decree  of  God,  to  which  the  blood  in  the  typical  offering 
points,  and  man  is  a  partaker  of  this  reconciliation,  when  he  accepts, 
in  penitence  and  in  faith,  the  offered  mercy  of  God ;  but  this  ac 
ceptance  would  be  a  self-deception,  if  it  meant  that  the  blotting  out 
of  the  guilt  of  sin  could  be  obtained  in  the  way  of  imputation 
without  the  immediate  following  thereupon  of  a  blotting  of  it  out 
in  the  way  of  sanctification  ;  and  therefore  the  Scriptures  also 
ascribe  to  gotd  works  a  share  in  the  expiation  of  sin  in  a  wider 
sense — namely,  as  the  proofs  of  thankful  (Luke  vii.  47)  and  com 
passionate  love  (vid.  at  x.  2),  as  this  proverb  of  love  and  truth,  herein 
according  with  the  words  of  the  prophets,  as  Hos.  vi.  6,  Mic.  vi. 
6-8.  He  who  is  conscious  of  this,  that  he  is  a  sinner,  deeply 
guilty  before  God,  who  cannot  stand  before  Him  if  He  did  not 
deal  with  him  in  mercy  instead  of  justice,  according  to  the  pur- 


CHAP.  XVI.  7-9.  339 

pose  of  His  grace,  cannot  trust  to  this  mercy  if  he  is  not  zealous, 
in  his  relations  to  his  fellow-men,  to  practise  love  and  truth ;  and 
in  view  of  the  fifth  petition  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  of  the 
parable  of  the  unmerciful  steward  rightly  understood,  it  may  be 
said  that  the  love  which  covers  the  sins,  x.  12,  of  a  neighbour,  has, 
in  regard  to  our  own  sins,  a  covering  or  atoning  influence,  for 
'blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  That 
"  love  and  truth "  are  meant  of  virtues  practised  from  religious 
motives,  66  shows ;  for,  according  to  this  line,  by  the  fear  of  Jahve 
one  escapes  evil.  The  fear  of  Jahve  is  subjection  to  the  God  of 
revelation,  and  a  falling  in  with  the  revealed  plan  of  salvation. 
Ver.  7  If  Jahve  has  pleasure  in  the  ways  of  a  man, 

He  reconciles  even  his  enemies  to  him — 

properly  (for  vfytfa  is  here  the  causative  of  the  transitive,  Josh.  x. 
1)  :  He  brings  it  about  that  they  conclude  peace  with  him.  If 
God  has  pleasure  in  the  ways  of  a  man,  i.e.  in  the  designs  which 
he  prosecutes,  and  in  the  means  which  he  employs,  he  shows,  by 
the  great  consequences  which  flow  from  his  endeavours,  that,  even 
as  his  enemies  also  acknowledge,  God  is  with  him  (e.g.  Gen. 
xxvi.  27  f.),  so  that  they,  vanquished  in  heart  (e.g.  2  Sam.  xix. 
9  f.),  abandon  their  hostile  position,  and  become  his  friends.  For 
if  it  is  manifest  that  God  makes  Himself  known,  bestowing  bless 
ings  on  a  man,  there  lies  in  this  a  power  of  conviction  which  dis 
arms  his  most  bitter  opponents,  excepting  only  those  who  have  in 
selfishness  hardened  themselves. 

Five  proverbs  of  the  king,  together  with  three  of  righteousness 
in  action  and  conduct : 

Ver.  8  Better  is  a  little  with  righteousness, 

Than  rich  revenues  with  unrighteousness. 

The  cogn.  proverb  xv.  16  commences  similarly.  Of  rrifrttSfi  ah, 
multitude  or  greatness  of  income,  vid.  xiv.  4  :  "  unrighteous  wealth 
profits  not."  The  possessor  of  it  is  not  truly  happy,  for  sin 
cleaves  to  it,  which  troubles  the  heart  (conscience),  and  because 
the  enjoyment  which  it  affords  is  troubled  by  the  curses  of  those 
who  are  injured,  and  by  the  sighs  of  the  oppressed.  Above  all 
other  gains  rises  rj  evaefteia  per  avrapKetas  (1  Tim.  vi.  6). 

Ver.  9  The  heart  of  man  deviseth  his  way  ; 

But  Jahve  directeth  his  steps. 

Similar  to  this  is  the  German  proverb:  "  Der  Mensch  denkt,  Gott 
lenkt "  [=  our  "  man  proposes,  God  disposes  "],  and  the  Arabic 


340  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


el-  aid  ("n^n  —  man)  judebbir  wallah  jukaddir;  Latin,  homo  pro- 
ponit,  Dens  disponit;  for,  as  Hitzig  rightly  remarks,  96  means, 
not  that  God  maketh  his  steps  firm  (Venet.,  Luther,  Umbreit, 
Bertheau,  Elster),  but  that  He  gives  direction  to  him  (Jerome, 
dirigere).  Man  deliberates  here  and  there  (3$n;  intens.  of  2E>n;  to 
calculate,  reflect)  how  he  will  begin  and  carry  on  this  or  that  ;  but 
his  short-sightedness  leaves  much  out  of  view  which  God  sees  ; 
his  calculation  does  not  comprehend  many  contingencies  which 
God  disposes  of  and  man  cannot  foresee.  The  result  and  issue  are 
thus  of  God,  and  the  best  is,  that  in  all  his  deliberations  one  should 
give  himself  up  without  self-confidence  and  arrogance  to  the 
guidance  of  God,  that  one  should  do  his  duty  and  leave  the  rest, 
with  humility  and  confidence,  to  God. 

Ver.  10  Oracular  decision  (belongeth)  to  the  lips  of  the  king; 
In  the  judgment  his  mouth  should  not  err. 

The  first  line  is  a  noun  clause  ;  Bp£,  as  subject,  thus  needs  a  dis 
tinctive  accent,  and  that  is  here,  after  the  rule  of  the  sequence  of 
accents,  and  manuscript  authority  (yid.  Torath  Emeth,  p.  49),  not 
Mehuppach  legarme,  as  in  our  printed  copies,  but  Dechi  (Dpi?.v). 
Jerome's  translation  :  Divinatio  in  lalriis  regis,  injudicio  non  errabit 
os  ejus,  and  yet  more  Luther's  :  "  his  mouth  fails  not  in  judg 
ment,"  makes  it  appear  as  if  the  proverb  meant  that  the  king,  in 
his  official  duties,  was  infallible;  and  Hitzig  (Zockler  agreeing), 
indeed,  finds  here  expressed  the  infallibility  of  the  theocratic 
king,  and  that  as  an  actual  testimony  to  be  believed,  not  only 
as  a  mere  political  fiction,  like  the  phrase,  "  the  king  can  do  no 
wrong."  But  while  this  political  fiction  is  not  strange  even  to  the 
Israelitish  law,  according  to  which  the  king  could  not  be  brought 
before  the  judgment,  that  testimony  is  only  a  pure  imagination. 
For  as  little  as  the  N.  T.  teaches  that  the  Pope,  as  the  legitimate 
vicarius  of  Christ,  is  infallible,  cum  ex  cathedra  docet,  so  little  does 
the  O.  T.  that  the  theocratic  king,  who  indeed  was  the  legitimate 
vicarius  Dei}  was  infallible  in  judicio  ferendo.  Yet  Ewald  main 
tains  that  the  proverb  teaches  that  the  word  of  the  king,  when  on 
the  seat  of  justice,  is  an  infallible  oracle;  but  it  dates  from  the  first 
bright  period  of  the  strong  uncorrupted  kingdom  in  Israel.  One 
may  not  forget,  says  Dachsel  also,  with  von  Gerlach,  that  these 
proverbs  belong  to  the  time  of  Solomon,  before  it  had  given  to  the 
throne  sons  of  David  who  did  evil  before  the  Lord.  Then  it  would 
fare  ill  for  the  truth  of  the  proverb  —  the  course  of  history  would 


CHAP.  XVI.  11.  341 

falsify  it.  Bat  in  fact  this  was  never  maintained  in  Israel.  Of 
the  idolizing  flattering  language  in  which,  at  the  present  day, 
rulers  in  the  East  are  addressed,  not  a  trace  is  found  in  the  O.  T. 
The  kings  were  restrained  by  objective  law  and  the  recognised 
rights  of  the  people.  David  showed,  not  merely  to  those  who 
were  about  him,  but  also  to  the  people  at  large,  so  many  human 
weaknesses,  that  he  certainly  appeared  by  no  means  infallible  ;  and 
Solomon  distinguished  himself,  it  is  true,  by  rare  kingly  wisdom, 
but  when  he  surrounded  himself  with  the  glory  of  an  oriental 
potentate,  and  when  Rehoboam  began  to  assume  the  tone  of  a 
despot,  there  arose  an  unhallowed  breach  between  the  theocratic 
kingdom  and  the  greatest  portion  of  the  people.  The  proverb,  as 
Hitzig  translates  and  expounds  it :  "a  divine  utterance  rests  on 
the  lips  of  the  king;  in  giving  judgment  his  mouth  deceives  not,*' 
is  both  historically  and  dogmatically  impossible.  The  choice  of  the 
word  Dpi?,  (from  D?i?,  R.  Dp  £'p,  to  make  fast,  to  take  an  oath,  to 
confirm  by  an  oath,  incantare,  vid.  at  Isa.  iii.  2),  which  does  not  mean 
prediction  (Luther),  but  speaking  the  truth,  shows  that  Wa  ex 
presses,  not  what  falls  from  the  lips  of  the  king  in  itself,  but  accord 
ing  to  the  judgment  of  the  people :  the  people  are  wont  to  regard 
the  utterances  of  the  king  as  oracular,  as  they  shouted  in  the  circus 
at  Csesarea  of  King  Agrippa,  designating  his  words  as  Beov  <f>wvrj 
xal  OVK  dvdpdiTrow  (Acts  xii.  22).  Hence  106  supplies  an  earnest 
warnino-  to  the  king,  viz.  that  his  mouth  should  not  offend  against 

»  o"  L  -L  ^ 

righteousness,  nor  withhold  it.  7JHQ?  N?  is  meant  as  warning 
(Umbreit,  Bertheau),  like  N3fi  N7,  xxii.  24,  and  3,  in  ?J?O  is  here, 
as  always,  that  of  the  object ;  at  least  this  is  more  probable  than 
that  ^y»  stands  without  object,  which  is  possible,  and  that  1  desig 
nates  the  situation. 

Ver.  11  The  scale  and  balances  of  a  right  kind  are  Jahve's  ; 
His  work  are  the  weights  of  the  bag. 

Regarding  Dpa,  statera,  a  level  or  steelyard  (from  D?3?  to  make 
even),  vid.  iv.  26;  D^TXD  (from  JTK,  to  weigh),  libra,  is  another 
form  of  the  balance  :  the  shop-balance  furnished  with  two  scales. 
%33S  are  here  the  stones  that  serve  for  weights,  and  D"1!),  which  at 
i.  14  properly  means  the  money-bag,  money-purse  (cf.  vii.  20),  is 
here,  as  at  Mic.  vi.  11,  the  bag  in  which  the  merchant  carries  the 
weights.  The  genit.  BSK>p  belongs  also  to  0^5,  which,  in  our  edi 
tion,  is  pointed  with  the  disjunctive  Mehuppach  legarme,  is  rightly 
accented  in  Cod.  1294  (vid.  Torath  Emeth,  p.  50)  with  the  con- 


342  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

junctive  MehuppacJt.  L33K>»,  as  116  shows,  is  not  like  n9"!9,  the 
word  with  the  principal  tone;  lla  says  that  the  balance  thus,  or 
thus  constructed,  which  weighs  accurately  and  justly,  is  Jahve's,  or 
His  arrangement,  and  the  object  of  His  inspection,  and  116,  that 
all  the  weight-stones  of  the  bag,  and  generally  the  means  of 
weighing  and  measuring,  rest  upon  divine  ordinance,  that  in  the 
transaction  and  conduct  of  men  honesty  and  certainty  might  rule. 
This  is  the  declared  will  of  God,  the  lawgiver ;  for  among  the  few 
direct  determinations  of  His  law  with  reference  to  trade  this  stands 
prominent,  that  just  weights  and  just  measures  shall  be  used,  Lev. 
xix.  36,  Deut.  xxv.  13-16.  The  expression  of  the  poet  here  frames 
itself  after  this  law ;  yet  'n  is  not  exclusively  the  God  of  positive 
revelation,  but,  as  agriculture  in  Isa.  xxviii.  29,  cf.  Sirach  vii.  15, 
so  here  the  invention  of  normative  and  normal  means  of  commer 
cial  intercouse  is  referred  to  the  direction  and  institution  of  God. 

Ver.  12  It  is  an  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wickedness, 

For  by  righteousness  the  throne  is  established. 

As  106  uttered  a  warning  to  the  king,  grounded  on  the  fact  of 
10a,  so  12a  indirectly  contains  a  warning,  which  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact  126.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  throne  is  established  by 
righteousness  (P311  as  expressive  of  a  rule,  like  t?!^  Isa.  xvi.  5,  as 
expressive  of  an  event)  ;  on  this  account  it  is  an  abomination  to 
kings  immediately  or  mediately  to  commit  wickedness,  i.e.  to  place 
themselves  in  despotic  self-will  above  the  law.  Such  wicked  con 
duct  shall  be,  and  ought  to  be,  an  abhorrence  to  them,  because 
they  know  that  they  thereby  endanger  the  stability  of  their  throne. 
This  is  generally  the  case,  but  especially  was  it  so  in  Israel,  where 
the  royal  power  was  never  absolutistic  ;  where  the  king  as  well  as 
the  people  were  placed  under  God's  law:  where  the  existence  of 
the  community  was  based  on  the  understood  equality  of  right;  and 
the  word  of  the  people,  as  well  as  the  word  of  the  prophets,  was 
free.  Another  condition  of  the  stability  of  the  throne  is,  after 
xxv.  5,  the  removal  of  godless  men  from  nearness  to  the  kin<?. 
Kehoboam  lost  the  greater  part  of  his  kingdom  by  this,  that  he 
listened  to  the  counsel  of  the  young  men  who  were  hated  by  the 
people. 

Ver.  13.  History  is  full  of  such  warning  examples,  and  there 
fore  this  proverb  continues  to  hold  up  the  mirror  to  princes. 

Well-pleasing  to  kings  are  righteous  lips, 
And  whoever  speaketh  uprightly  is  loved. 


CHAP.  XVI.  14.  343 

Rightly  the  LXX.  ayaTrd,  individ.  plur.,  instead  of  the  plur.  of 
genus,  B^D  ;  on  the  contrary,  Jerome  and  Luther  give  to  the 
sing,  the  most  general  subject  (one  lives),  in  which  case  it  must  be 
distinctly  said,  that  that  preference  of  the  king  for  the  people  who 
speak  out  the  truth,  and  just  what  they  think,  is  shared  in  by 
every  one.  p^,  as  the  property  of  the  ^St^,  accords  with  the 
Arab,  sidk,  truth  as  the  property  of  the  lasdn  (the  tongue  or 
speech).  D"1")^.,  from  "it^,  means  recta,  as  D^T^j  principality  viii.  6, 
and  D'1!?'1'?.,  inania,  xii.  11.  B11"]^1!,  Dan.  xi.  10,  neut.  So  neut. 
"itJ1^!,  Ps.  cxi.  8;  but  is  rather,  with  Hitzig  and  Riehm,  to  be  read 
It^l.  What  the  proverb  says  cannot  be  meant  of  all  kings,  for 
even  the  house  of  David  had  murderers  of  prophets,  like  Manasseh 
and  Joiakim  ;  but  in  general  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  noble 
candour,  united  with  true  loyalty  and  pure  love  to  the  king  and 
the  people,  is  with  kings  more  highly  prized  than  mean  flattery, 
seeking  only  its  own  advantage,  and  that,  though  this  (flattery)  may 
for  a  time  prevail,  yet,  at  last,  fidelity  to  duty,  and  respect  for  truth, 
gain  the  victory. 

Ver.  14  The  wrath  of  the  king  is  like  messengers  of  death  ; 

But  a  wise  man  appeaseth  him. 

The  clause :  the  wrath  of  the  king  is  many  messengers  of  death, 
can  be  regarded  as  the  attribution  of  the  effect,  but  it  falls  under 
the  point  of  view  of  likeness,  instead  of  comparison  :  if  the  king 
is  angry,  it  is  as  if  a  troop  of  messengers  or  angels  of  death  went 
forth  to  visit  with  death  him  against  whom  the  anger  is  kindled ; 
the  plur.  serves  for  the  strengthening  of  the  figure  :  not  one  mes 
senger  of  death,  but  at  the  same  time  several,  the  wrinkled  brow, 
the  flaming  eye,  the  threatening  voice  of  the  king  sends  forth 
(Fleischer).  But  if  he  against  whom  the  wrath  of  the  king  has 
thus  broken  forth  is  a  wise  man,  or  one  near  the  king  who  knows 
that  opjr)  avBpos  ^iKaioavvrjv  @eov  ov  Karepja^erai,  (Jas.  i.  20),  he 
will  seek  to  discover  the  means  (and  not  without  success)  to  cover 
or  to  propitiate,  i.e.  to  mitigate  and  appease,  the  king's  anger. 
The  Scripture  never  uses  133,  so  that  God  is  the  object  (expiare 
Deum),  because,  as  is  shown  in  the  Comm.  zum  Hebrderbrief,  that 
were  to  say,  contrary  to  the  decorum  divinum,  that  God's  holiness 
or  wrath  is  covered,  or  its  energy  bound,  by  the  offering  up  of 
sacrifices  or  of  things  in  which  there  is  no  inherent  virtue  of 

O 

atonement,  and  which  are  made  the  means  of  reconciliation  only 
by  the  accommodative  arrangement  of  God.     On  the  contrary, 


344 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


133  is  used  here  and  at  Gen.  xxxii.  21  of  covering  =  reconciling 
(propitiating)  the  wrath  of  a  man. 

Ver.  15  In  the  light  on  the  king's  countenance  there  is  life, 

And  his  favour  is  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter  rains. 

Hitzig  regards  lix  as  the  inf.  (cf.  iv.  18),  but  one  says  substan- 
tively  '33  nix,  Job  xxix.  24,  etc.,  and  in  a  similar  sense  "to 
&yy,  xv.  30;  light  is  the  condition  of  life,  and  the  exhilaration  of 
life,  wherefore  D»»nn  liK,  Ps.  Ivi.  14,  Job  xxxiii.  30,  is  equivalent 
to  a  fresh,  joyous  life  ;  in  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance  is 
life,  means  that  life  goes  forth  from  the  cheerful  approbation  of 
the  king,  which  shows  itself  in  his  face,  viz.  in  the  showing  of 
favour,  which  cheers  the  heart  and  beautifies  the  life.  To  speak 
of  liberality  as  a  shower  is  so  common  to  the  Semitic,  that  it  has  in 
Arab,  the  general  name  of  nadnd,  rain.  156  conforms  itself  to  this. 
tfpro  (cf.  Job  xxix.  23)  is  the  latter  rain,  which,  falling  about  the 
spring  equinox,  brings  to  maturity  the  barley-harvest;  on  the  con 
trary,  rnio  (rni^)  js  the  early  rain,  which  comes  at  the  time  of 
ploughing  and  sowing  ;  the  former  is  thus  the  harvest  rain,  and  the 
latter  the  spring  rain.  Like  a  cloud  which  discharges  the  rain  that 
mollifies  the  earth  and  refreshes  the  growing  corn,  is  the  kind's 
favour.  The  noun  3J?,  thus  in  the  st.  constr.,  retains  its  Kametz. 
Michlol  1916.  This  proverb  is  the  contrast  to  ver.  14.  xx.  2  has 
also  the  anger  of  the  lung  as  its  theme.  In  xix.  12  the  figures  of 
the  darkness  and  the  light  stand  together  as  parts  of  one  proverb. 
The  proverbs  relating  to  the  king  are  now  at  an  end.  Ver.  10 
contains  a  direct  warning  for  the  king ;  ver.  12  an  indirect  warning, 
as  a  conclusion  arising  from  \'2b  (cf.  xx.  28,  where  VilP  is  not  to  be 
translated  tueantur ;  the  proverb  has,  however,  the  value  of  a  nota 
bene).  Ver.  13  in  like  manner  presents  an  indirect  warning,  less 
to  the  king  than  to  those  who  have  intercourse  with  him  (cf.  xxv. 
5),  and  vers.  14  and  15  show  what  power  of  good  and  evil,  of  wrath 
and  of  blessing,  is  given  to  a  king,  whence  so  much  the  greater 
responsibility  arises  to  him,  but,  at  the  same  time  also,  the  duty  of 
all  to  repress  the  lust  to  evil  that  may  be  in  him,  and  to  awaken 
and  foster  in  him  the  desire  for  good. 

Five  proverbs  regarding  wisdom,  righteousness,  humility,  and 
trust  in  God,  forming,  as  it  were,  a  succession  of  steps,  for 
humility  is  the  virtue  of  virtues,  and  trust  in  God  the  condition 
of  all  salvation.  Three  of  these  proverbs  have  the  word  niD  in 
common. 


CHAP.  XVI.  16-18.  345 

Yer.  16  To  gain  wisdom,  how  much  better  is  it  than  gold  ; 

And  to  attain  understanding  to  be  preferred  to  silver. 

Commendation  of  the  striving  after  wisdom  (understanding)  with 
which  all  wisdom  begins,  for  one  gains  an  intellectual  posses 
sion  not  by  inheritance,  but  by  acquisition,  iv.  7.  A  similar 
"parallel-comparative  clause"  (FL),  with  the  interchange  of  nio 
and  "in33?  is  xxii.  1,  but  yet  more  so  is  xxi.  3,  where  ima,  as  here, 
is  neut.  pred.  (not,  as  at  viii.  10  and  elsewhere,  adj.),  and  n^y, 
such  an  anomalous  form  of  the  inf.  constr.  as  here  rfjjp,  Gesen.  §  75, 
Anm.  2 ;  in  both  instances  it  could  also  be  regarded  as  the  inf. 
absol.  (cf.  xxv.  27)  (LehryeMude,  §  109,  Anm.  2)  ;  yet  the 
language  uses,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  the  form  r6|  only  with  the 
force  of  an  abl.  of  the  gerund,  as  i^i|  occurs  Gen.  xxxi.  38  ;  the 
inf.  of  verbs  r\"^>  as  nom.  (as  here),  genii.  (Gen.  1.  20),  and  accus. 
(Ps.  ci.  3),  is  always  either  riv3  or  '"63.  The  meaning  is  not  that  to 
gain  wisdom  is  more  valuable  than  gold,  but  that  the  gaining  of 
wisdom  exceeds  the  gaining  of  gold  and  silver,  the  common  com- 
paratio  decurtata  (cf.  Job  xxviii.  18).  Regarding  H"1?,  vid.  at 
iii.  14. 

Ver.  17  The  path  of  the  righteous  is  the  avoiding  of  evil, 

And  he  preserveth  his  soul  who  giveth  heed  to  his  way. 
The  meaning  of  npoo,  occurring  only  here  in  the  Proverbs,  is  to  be 
learned  from  xv.  19.  The  attribution  denotes  that  wherein  the  way 
they  take  consists,  or  by  which  it  is  formed ;  it  is  one,  a  straight 
and  an  open  way,  i.e.  unimpeded,  leading  them  on,  because  they 
avoid  the  evil  which  entices  them  aside  to  the  right  and  the  left. 
Whoever  then  gives  heed  to  his  way,  preserveth  his  soul  potr 
it?33,  as  xiii.  3,  on  the  contrary  xxv.  5,  subj.),  that  it  suffer  not 
injury  and  fall  under  death,  for  jn»  TiD  and  Din  ^pl&D  "I1D,  xiv.  27, 
are  essentially  the  same.  Instead  of  this  distich,  the  LXX.  has 
three  distichs  ;  the  thoughts  presented  in  the  four  superfluous 
lines  are  all  already  expressed  in  the  one  distich.  Ewald  and 
Hitzig  find  in  this  addition  of  the  LXX.  a  component  part  of  the 
original  text. 

Ver.  18  Pride  goeth  before  destruction, 

And  haughtiness  cometh  before  a  fall. 

The  contrast  is  may  1133  <:sb,  xv.  33,  according  to  which  the 
"  haughtiness  comes  before  a  fall "  in  xviii.  22  is  expanded  into  the 
antithetic  distich.  "Ot?  means  the  fracture  of  the  limbs,  destruction 
of  the  person.  A  Latin  proverb  says,  "  Magna  cadunt,  inflata 


346  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

crepant,  tumefacta  premuntnr"  l  Here  being  clashed  in  pieces  and 
overthrown  correspond,  la^  means  neither  bursting  (Hitzig)  nor 
shipwreck  (Ewald).  |fab  (like  tfni33,  Jh3T,  etc.),  from  !>B>3  or 
«9?,  to  totter,  and  hence,  as  a  consequence,  to  come  to  ruin,  is  a  ajra^. 
Xey.  Tin's  proverb,  which  stands  in  the  very  centre  of  the  Book 
of  Proverbs,  is  followed  by  another  in  praise  of  humility. 

Ver.  19  Better  in  humility  to  dwell  among  sufferers, 

Than  to  divide  spoil  among  the  proud. 

The  form  ?Slp  is  here  not  adj.  as  xxix.  23  (from  ^^,  like  "ipn?  vi. 
32,  from  icn);  but  inf.  (like  Eccles.  xii.  14,  and  ipn,  defectio, 
x.  21).  There  existed  here  also  no  proper  reason  for  changing  D^y 
(C/iet/nb)  into  D'W;  Hitzig  is  right  in  saying  that  W  may  also  be 
taken  in  the  sense  of  *ny  [the  idea  "sufferer"  is  that  which  medi 
ates],  and  that  here  the  inward  fact  of  humility  and  the  outward 
of  dividing  spoil,  stand  opposed  to  one  another.  It  is  better  to  live 
lowly,  i.e.  with  a  mind  devoid  of  earthly  pride  (Demut  [humility] 
comes  from  deo  with  the  deep  et  diu,  servant),  among  men  who 
have  experience  of  the  vanity  of  earthly  joys,  than,  intoxicated  with 
pride,  to  enjoy  oneself  amid  worldly  wealth  and  greatness  (cf.  Isa. 
ix.  2). 

Ver.  20  He  that  giveth  heed  to  the  word  will  find  prosperity  ; 

And  he  that  trusteth  in  Jahve,  blessed  is  he  ! 

The  "  word  "  here  is  the  word  tear'  e£.,  the  divine  word,  for  ^T^*? 
•n-^y  is  the  contrast  of  13^  T3,  xiii.  13a,  cf.  Neh.  viii.  13.  nia 
is  meant,  as  in  xvii.  20,  cf.  xiii.  21,  Ps.  xxiii.  6;  to  give  heed 
to  God's  word  is  the  way  to  true  prosperity.  But  at  last  all 
depends  on  this,  that  one  stand  in  personal  fellowship  with 
God  by  means  of  faith,  which  here,  as  at  xxviii.  25,  xxix.  25,  is 
designated  after  its  specific  mark  as  fidncia.  The  Mashal  con 
clusion  V^X  occurs,  besides  here,  only  at  xiv.  21,  xxix.  18. 
Four  proverbs  of  wisdom  with  eloquence: 

Ver.  21  The  wise  in  heart  is  called  prudent, 

And  grace  of  the  lips  increaseth  learning. 

Elsewhere  (i.  5,  ix.  9)  HJ57  ^Din  means  more  than  to  gain  learn 
ing,  i.e.  erudition  in  the  ethico-practical  sense,  for  sweetness  of  the 
lips  (dulcedo  orationis  of  Cicero)  is,  as  to  learning,  without  signifi 
cance,  but  of  so  much  the  greater  value  for  teaching  ;  for  grace  of 


1 


An  expression  of  similar  meaning  is  T»3D  NJVI  '""IDS  =  after  Darga  (to 
rise  up)  comes  tebir  (breaking  =  destruction)  ;  cf.  Zunz,  in  Geiger's  Zeitsclirift, 
vi.  315ff. 


CHAP.  XVI.  22,  23.  317 

expression,  and  of  exposition,  particularly  if  it  be  not  merely 
rhetorical,  but,  according  to  the  saying  pectus  disertos  facto, 
coming  out  of  the  heart,  is  full  of  mind,  it  imparts  force  to  the 
instruction,  and  makes  it  acceptable.  Whoever  is  wise  of  heart, 
i.e.  of  mind  or  spirit  (27  —  the  N.  T.  1/01)5  or  Trvev/ia),  is  called, 
and  is  truly,  jtaJ  [learned,  intelligent]  (Fleischer  compares  to  this 
the  expression  frequent  in  Isaiah,  "to  be  named  "  =  to  be  and 
appear  to  be,  the  Arab.  duay  lali);  but  there  is  a  gift  which  highly 
increases  the  worth  of  this  understanding  or  intelligence,  for  it 
makes  it  fruitful  of  good  to  others,  and  that  is  grace  of  the  lips. 
On  the  lips  (x.  13)  of  the  intelligent  wisdom  is  found  ;  but  the 
form  also,  and  the  whole  manner  and  way  in  which  he  gives 
expression  to  this  wisdom,  is  pleasing,  proceeding  from  a  deep  and 
tender  feeling  for  the  suitable  and  the  beneficial,  and  thus  he  pro 
duces  effects  so  much  the  more  surely,  and  beneficently,  and  richly. 

Ver.  22  A  fountain  of  life  is  understanding  to  its  possessor  ; 

But  the  correction  of  fools  is  folly. 

Oetinger,  Bertheau,  and  others  erroneously  understand  "I?ID  of 
the  education  which  fools  bestow  upon  others;  when  fools  is 
the  subject  spoken  of,  1D1D  is  always  the  education  which  is  be 
stowed  on  them,  vii.  22,  i.  7  ;  cf  v.  23,  xv.  5.  Also  "iD1»  does  not 
here  mean  education,  disciplina,  in  the  moral  sense  (Symmachus, 
evvota;  Jerome,  doctrina):  that  which  fools  gain  from  education, 
from  training,  is  folly,  for  "ID1D  is  the  contrast  to  D^n  lipp,  and 
has  thus  the  meaning  of  correction  or  chastisement,  xv.  10,  Jer. 
xxx.  14.  And  that  the  fruits  of  understanding  (xii.  8,  cf.  nits  73b>, 
fine  culture,  xiii.  15)  represented  by  D"n  Tipo  (vid.  x.  11)  will 
accrue  to  the  intelligent  themselves,  is  shown  not  only  by  the 
contrast,  but  also  by  the  expression  :  Scaturigo  vitce  est  intellects 
vrceditorum  eo,  of  those  (—  to  those)  who  are  endowed  therewith 
(the  LXX.  well,  rofc  /ce/er^/ieyoi?).  The  man  of  understanding 
has  in  this  intellectual  possession  a  fountain  of  strength,  a  source 
of  guidance,  and  a  counsel  which  make  his  life  secure,  deepen, 
and  adorn  it ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  folly  punishes  itself  by  folly 
(cf.  to  the  form,  xiv.  24),  for  the  fool,  when  he  does  not  come 
to  himself  (Ps.  cvii.  17-22),  recklessly  destroys  his  own  prosperity. 

Ver.  23  The  heart  of  the  wise  maketh  his  mouth  wise, 

And  learning  mouuteth  up  to  his  lips. 

Regarding  ?*3fc>n  as  causative  :  to  put  into  the  possession  of  intelli 
gence,  vid.  at  Gen.  iii.  G.  Wisdom  in  the  heart  produceth  intelli- 


348  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

gent  discourse,  and,  as  the  parallel  member  expresses  it,  learning 
mounteth  up  to  the  lips,  i.e.  the  learning  which  the  man  taketh 
into  his  lips  (xxii.  18  ;  cf.  Ps.  xvi.  4)  to  communicate  it  to  others, 
for  the  contents  of  the  learning,  and  the  ability  to  communicate  it, 
are  measured  by  the  wisdom  of  the  heart  of  him  who  possesses  it. 
One  can  also  interpret  ^Din  as  extens.  increasing :  the  heart  of  the 
wise  increaseth,  i.e.  spreads  abroad  learning,  but  then  vrist^a  (Ps. 
cxix.  13)  would  have  been  more  suitable;  VnBfc^TJJ  calls  up  the  idea 
of  learning  as  hovering  on  the  lips,  and  thus  brings  so  much  nearer, 
for  PpDin,  the  meaning  of  the  exaltation  of  its  worth  and  im 
pression. 

Ver.  24  A  honeycomb  are  pleasant  words, 

Sweet  to  the  soul,  and  healing  to  the  bones. 

Honeycomb,  i.e.  honey  flowing  from  the  fp¥,  the  comb  or  cell 
(favus))  is  otherwise  designated,  Ps.  xix.  11.  P^n9>  with  NSPO  (vid. 
p.  132),  is  neut.  DJfJPIJtDS  are,  according  to  xv.  26,  words  which  love 
suggests,  and  which  breathe  love.  Such  words  are  sweet  to  the 
soul  of  the  hearer,  and  bring  strength  and  healing  to  his  bones 
(xv.  30);  for  NQ"iE  is  not  only  that  which  restores  soundness,  but 
also  that  which  preserves  and  advances  it  (cf.  Oepcnreia,  Rev. 
xxii.  2). 

A  group  of  six  proverbs  follows,  four  of  which  begin  with  B»x, 
and  five  relate  to  the  utterances  of  the  mouth. 

Ver.  25  There  is  a  way  which  appears  as  right  to  a  man  ; 
But  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death. 

This  verse  =xiv.  12. 

Ver.  26  The  hunger  of  the  labourer  laboureth  for  him. 
For  he  is  urged  on  by  his  mouth. 

The  Syr.  translates :  the  soul  of  him  who  inflicts  woe  itself  suffers 
it,  and  from  his  mouth  destruction  comes  to  him  ;  the  Targ.  brings 
this  translation  nearer  the  original  text  (^?,  humiliation,  instead  of 
WHK,  destruction)  ;  Luther  translates  thus  also,  violently  abbrevi 
ating,  however.  But  7EV  (from  sfcy,  Arab.  'amila,  to  exert  oneself, 
laborare)  means,  like  laboriosus,  labouring  as  well  as  enduring 
difficulty,  but  not,  as  TTOVWV  nva,  causing  difficulty,  or  (Euchel) 
occupied  with  difficulty.  And  labour  and  the  mouth  stand  to 
gether,  denoting  that  man  labours  that  the  mouth  may  have  some 
what  to  eat  (cf.  2  Thess.  iii.  10;  t^Bi,  however,  gains  in  this  con 
nection  the  meaning  of  "^-v^rj  ope/cri/ci],  and  that  of  desire  after 
nourishment,  vid.  at  vi.  30,  x.  3).  *]?s  also  joins  itself  to  this  circle 


CHAP.  XVI.  27,  28.  349 

of  ideas,  for  it  means  to  urge  (Jerome,  compulit)t  properly  (related 
to  n?3.,  incurvare,  KS3  nss,  to  constrain,  necessitate),  to  bow  down 
by  means  of  a  burden.  The  Aramseo-Arab.  signification,  to  saddle 
(Schultens :  clitellas  imposmt  ei  os  suum),  is  a  secondary  denom. 
(vid.  at  Job  xxxiii.  7).  The  Venet.  well  renders  it  after  Kimchi: 
evret  KVTTTCI,  e-Tr'  avTov  TO  <TTO/j,a  aurov.  Thus:  the  need  of  nourish 
ment  on  the  part  of  the  labourer  works  for  him  (dat.  commodi  like 
Isa.  xl.  20),  i.e.  helps  him  to  labour,  for  (not :  if,  edv,  as  Rashi  and 
others)  it  presses  upon  him  ;  his  mouth,  which  will  have  something 
to  eat,  urges  him.  It  is  God  who  has  in  this  way  connected  to 
gether  working  and  eating.  The  curse  in  sudorevultus  tui  comedes 
panem  conceals  a  blessing.  The  proverb  has  in  view  this  reverse 
side  of  the  blessing  in  the  arrangement  of  God. 

Ver.  27  A  worthless  man  diggeth  evil ; 

And  on  his  lips  is,  as  it  were,  scorching  fire. 

Regarding  ?£!??  S^N,  vid.  vi.  12,  and  regarding  rrG,  to  dig  round, 
or  to  bore  out,  vid.  at  Gen.  xlix.  5,  1.  5 ;  here  the  figure,  "  to  dig 
for  others  a  pit,"  xxvi.  27,  Ps.  vii.  16,  etc. :  to  dig  evil  is  equivalent 
to,  to  seek  to  prepare  such  for  others,  n?]-?  Kimchi  rightly  ex 
plains  as  a  form  similar  to  J"O$p ;  as  a  subst.  it  means,  Lev.  xiii.  23, 
the  mark  of  fire  (the  healed  mark  of  a  carbuncle),  here  as  an  adj.  of 
a  fire,  although  not  flaming  (^irv  ^>  Isa-  IV-  5?  etc);  yet  so  much 
the  hotter,  and  scorching  everything  that  comes  near  to  it  (from  3"i¥, 
to  be  scorched,  cogn.  2iE>,  to  which  also  *\"W  is  perhaps  related  as  a 
stronger  power,  like  comburere  to  adurere).  The  meaning  is  clear : 
a  worthless  man,  i.e.  a  man  whose  disposition  and  conduct  are  the 
direct  contrast  of  usefulness  and  piety,  uses  words  which,  like  an 
iron  glowing  hot,  scorches  and  burns ;  his  tongue  is  <j)\oyi^o/j,evrj 
VTTO  rfjs  yeevwqs  (Jas.  iii.  6). 

Ver.  28  A  man  of  falsehood  scattereth  strife, 

And  a  backbiter  separateth  confidential  friends. 

Regarding  niasnn  (-QID)  B>'«,  vid.  ii.  12,  and  pi?  n^.,  vi.  14 ; 
the  thought  of  286  is  found  at  vi.  19.  J3"U  (with  }  minusculum, 
which  occurs  thrice  with  the  terminal  Nun)  is  a  Niphal  formation 
from  |i"J,  to  murmur  (cf.  T'H,  from  "H),  and  denotes  the  whisperer, 
viz.  the  backbiter,  tylQvpos,  Sir.  v.  14,  •fyiOvpiffrq?)  susurro ;  the 
Arab,  nyrj  is  abbreviated  from  it,  a  verbal  stem  of  ro  (cf.  Aram. 
nor  go )  an  axe,  Arab,  naurag,  a  threshing-sledge  =  3"]iO)  cannot  be 
proved.  Aquila  is  right  in  translating  by  Tov6pvo"r^^  and  Theo- 
dotion  by  yoyyva-os,  from  JJ"),  Niph.  }jp.3,  yoyyv^€iv.  Regarding 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

flpK,  confidential  friend,  vid.  p.  82 ;  the  sing.,  as  xviii.  9,  is  used  in 
view  of  the  mutual  relationship,  and  T^Sl?  proceeds  on  the  separa 
tion  of  the  one,  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  the  other  from  it.  Luther, 
in  translating  by  "  a  slanderer  makes  princes  disagree,"  is  in  error, 
for  *p*>K,  (f>v\apxos,  is  not  a  generic  word  for  prince. 

Ver.  29  A  man  of  violence  enticeth  his  neighbour, 

And  leadeth  him  in  a  way  which  is  not  good. 

Cf.  Gen.  iv.  8.  The  subject  is  not  moral  enticement,  but  entice 
ment  to  some  place  or  situation  which  facilitates  to  the  violent  man 
the  carrying  out  of  his  violent  purpose  (misdemeanour,  robbery, 
extortion,  murder).  Don  (here  with  e*«  at  iii.  31)  is  the  injustice 
of  club-law,  the  conduct  of  him  who  puts  his  superior  power  in 
godless  rudeness  in  the  place  of  God,  Hab.  i.  11,  cf.  Job  xii.  6. 
"  A  way  not  good  "  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvi.  5)  is  the  contradictory  contrast 
of  the  good  way  :  one  altogether  evil  and  destructive. 

Ver.  30  He  who  shutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  falsehood ; 

He  who  biteth  his  lips  bringeth  evil  to  pass. 

A  physiognomical  Caveto.  The  a-rr.  \ey.  nvj>  is  connected  with 
D*y,  Isa.  xxxiii.  15  (Arab,  transp.  fjhamd),  comprimere,  formed  from 
it.  Regarding  pp  of  lips  or  eyes,  vid.  p.  144;  the  biting  of  the  lips 
is  the  action  of  the  deceitful,  and  denotes  scorn,  malice,  knavery. 
The  perf.  denotes  that  he  who  is  seen  doing  this  has  some  evil  as 
good  as  accomplished,  for  he  is  inwardly  ready  for  it;  Hitzi^  suit 
ably  compares  1  Sam.  xx.  7,  33.  Our  editions  (also  Lowenstein) 
have  P&3}  but  the  Masora  (vid.  Mas.  finalis,  p.  1)  numbers  the  word 
among  those  which  terminate  in  N,  and  always  writes  N'b. 

We  now  take  together  a  series  of  proverbs,  xvi.  31-xvii.  5,  be 
ginning  with  rnisj;. 

Ver.  31  A  bright  diadem  is  a  hoary  head, 

In  the  way  of  righteousness  it  is  found — 

namely,  this  bright  diadem,  this  beautiful  crown  (iv.  8),  which  silver 
hair  is  to  him  who  has  it  as  the  result  of  his  advanced  age  (xx.  29) 
for  "  thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,"  Lev.  xix.  32 ;  and 
the  contrast  of  an  early  death  is  to  die  in  a  good  old  age,  Gen.  xv. 
15,  etc.,  but  a  long  life  is  on  one  side  a  self-consequence,  and  on 
another  the  promised  reward  of  a  course  of  conduct  regulated  by 
God's  will,  God's  law,  and  by  the  rule  of  love  to  God  and  love  to 
one's  neighbour.  From  the  N.  T.  standpoint  that  is  also  so  far 
true,  as  in  all  the  world  there  is  no  better  established  means  of 
prolonging  life  than  the  avoidance  of  evil ;  but  the  clause  corre- 


CHAP.  XVI.  32,  33. 

spending  to  the  O.  T.  standpoint,  that  evil  punishes  itself  by  a 
premature  death,  and  that  good  is  rewarded  by  long  life,  has  indeed 
many  exceptions  arising  from  the  facts  of  experience  against  it,  for 
we  see  even  the  godless  in  their  life  of  sin  attaining  to  In  advanced 
old  age,  and  in  view  of  the  veiled  future  it  appears  only  as  a  one 
sided^  truth,  so  that  the  words,  Wisd.  iv.  9,  "discretion  is  to  man 
the  right  grey  hairs,  and  an  unstained  life  is  the  right  old  ao-e," 
which  is  mediated  by  life  experiences,  such  as  Isa.  Ivii.  1  f.,  stand 
opposed  to  the  above  proverb  as  its  reversed  side.  That  old  Solo 
monic  proverb  is,  however,  true,  for  it  is  not  subverted  ;  and,  in 
contrast  to  self-destroying  vice  and  wickedness;  calling  forth  the 
judgment  of  God,  it  is  and  remains  true,  that  whoever  would  reach 
an  honoured  old  age,  attains  to  it  in  the  way  of  a  righteous  life 
and  conduct. 

Ver.  32  Better  one  slow  to  anger  than  a  hero  in  war ; 

And  whoever  is  master  of  his  spirit,  than  he  who  taketh  a  city 
Regarding  D?fiK  ^«,  vid.  xiv.  29,  where  Wi-Wj?  was  the  parallel  of 
the  contrast.  The  comparison  is  true  as  regards  persons,  with  re 
ference  to  the  performances  expressed,  and  (since  warlike  courage 
and  moral  self-control  may  be  united  in  one  person)  they  are  pro 
perly  those  in  which  the  ^L3  determines  the  moral  estimate.  In 
Pirke  Aloth  iv.  1,  the  question,  "Who  is  the  hero?"  is  answered 
by,  "  he  who  overcomes  his  desire,"  with  reference  to  this  proverb, 
for  that  which  is  here  said  of  the  ruling  over  the  passion  of  anger 
is  true  of  all  affections  and  passions. 

"  Yet  he  who  reigns  within  himself,  and  rules 
Passions,  desires,  and  fears,  is  more  a  king  ; 
Which  every  wise  and  virtuous  man  attains."  x 
On  the  other  side,  the  comparison  is  sugeestecl  : 
Break  your  head,  not  so  sore ; 
Break  your  will — that  is  more.2 

Ver.  33  One  casts  the  lot  into  the  lap  ; 

But  all  its  decision  cometh  from  Jahve. 

The  Tora  knows  only  in  one  instance  an  ordeal  (a  judgment  of 
God)  as  a  right  means  of  proof,  Num.  v.  12-31.  The  lot  is  no 
where  ordained  by  it,  but  its  use  is  supported  by  a  custom  running 
parallel  with  the  Mosaic  law  ;  it  was  used  not  only  in  private  life, 

1  Milton's  Paradise  Regained,  ii.  466-8. 

2  "Zcrlrich  den  Kopf  dir  nicht  so  sehr ; 

Zerbrich  den  Willen—das  ist  mehr."— MATTFI.  CLAUDIUS. 


352  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

but  also  in  manifold  ways  within  the  domain  of  public  justice,  as  well 
as  for  the  detection  of  the  guilty,  Josh.  vii.  14  f .,  1  Sam.  xiv.  40-42. 
So  that  the  proverb  xviii.  18  says  the  same  thing  of  the  lot  that  is 
said  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  vi.  16,  of  the  oath.  The  above 
proverb  also  explains  the  lot  for  an  ordeal,  for  it  is  God  who 
directs  and  orders  it  that  it  fall  out  thus  and  not  otherwise.  A 
particular  sanction  of  the  use  of  the  lot  does  not  lie  in  this,  but  it 
is  only  said,  that  where  the  lot  is  cast,  all  the  decision  that  results 
from  it  is  determined  by  God.  That  is  in  all  cases  true ;  but 
whether  the  challenging  of  the  divine  decision  in  such  a  way  be 
right  in  this  or  that  case  is  a  question,  and  in  no  case  would  one, 
on  the  contrary,  venture  to  make  the  person  of  the  transgressor 
discoverable  by  lot,  and  let  it  decide  regarding  human  life.  But 
antiquity  judged  this  matter  differently,  as  e.g.  the  Book  of  Jonah 
(chap,  i.)  shows;  it  was  a  practice,  animated  by  faith,  in  God's 
government  of  the  world,  which,  if  it  did  not  observe  the  boundary 
between  faith  and  superstition,  yet  stood  high  above  the  unbelief 
of  the  "  Enlightenment."  Like  the  Greek  /eoA/Tro?,  P^n  (from  pin, 
Arab,  hak,  khak,  to  encompass,  to  stretch  out)  means,  as  it  is 
commonly  taken,  gremium  as  well  as  sinus,  but  the  latter  meaning 
is  the  more  sure ;  and  thus  also  here  it  is  not  the  lap  as  the  middle 
of  the  body,  so  that  one  ought  to  think  on  him  who  casts  the  lot 
as  seated,  but  also  not  the  lap  of  the  garment,  but,  like  vi.  27,  cf. 
Isa.  xl.  11,  the  swelling,  loose,  external  part  of  the  clothing  cover 
ing  the  bosom  (the  breast),  where  the  lot  covered  by  it  is  thrown 
by  means  of  shaking  and  changing,  and  whence  it  is  drawn  out. 
The  construction  of  the  passive  ?^n  (from  htD  =  Arab.  tall,  to 
throw  along)  with  the  object,  accus.  follows  the  old  scheme,  Gen. 
iv.  18,  and  has  its  reason  in  this,  that  the  Semitic  passive,  formed 
by  the  change  of  vowels,  has  not  wholly  given  up  the  governing 
force  of  the  active,  BSB>p  signifies  here  decision  as  by  the  Urim 
and  Thumrnim,  Num.  xxvii.  21,  but  which  was  no  lot-apparatus, 
xvii.  1.  A  comparative  proverb  with  31D,  pairing  with  xvi.  32 : 
Better  a  dry  piece  of  bread,  and  quietness  therewith, 
Than  a  house  full  of  slain  beasts  with  unquietness. 

Similar  to  this  in  form  and  contents  are  xv.  16  f.  and  xvi.  8. 
ninn  ns>  is  a  piece  of  bread  (ns,  fern.,  as  xxiii.  8)  without  savoury 
drink  (Theodotion,  rcaO'  eavrov,  i.e.  nothing  with  it),  cf.  Lev.  vii. 
10,  a  meat-offering  without  the  pouring  out  of  oil.  Q'"0??  are  n°t 
sacrificial  gifts  (Hitzig),  but,  as  always,  slain  animals,  i.e.  either 


CHAP.  xvn.  2.  353 

offerings  or  banquets  of  slain  beasts;  it  is  the  old  name  of  the 
D'Dte  (cf.  Ex.  xviii.  12,  xxiv.  5 ;  Prov.  vii.  14),  part  of  which  only 
were  offered  on  the  altar,  and  part  presented  as  a  banquet;  and 
n?r  (in  contradist.  to  rDD,  ix.  2,  Gen.  xliii.  16)  denotes  generally 
any  kind  of  consecrated  festival  in  connection  with  the  worship  of 
God,  1  Sam.  xx.  29  ;  cf.  Gen.  xxxi.  54.  "  Festivals  of  hatred  "  are 
festivals  with  hatred.  WO  is  part,  with  object.-accus. ;  in  general 
NTO  forms  a  constructive,  NJHp  occurs  only  once  (Jer.  vi.  11),  and 
^9  not  at  all.  We  have  already,  vii.  14,  remarked  on  the  degene 
rating  of  the  shelamim  feasts ;  from  this  proverb  it  is  to  be  concluded 
that  the  merriment  and  the  excitement  bordering  on  intoxication 
(cf.  with  Hitzig,  1  Sam.  i.  13  and  3),  such  as  frequently  at  the 
Kirmsen  merry-makings  (vid,  p.  164),  brought  quarrels  and  strife, 
so  that  the  poor  who  ate  his  dry  bread  in  quiet  peace  could  look  on 
all  this  noise  and  tumult  without  envy. 

Ver.  2  A  prudent  servant  shall  rule  over  the  degenerate  son  ; 

And  he  divides  the  inheritance  among  the  brethren. 

Eegarding  the  contrasts  of  fe'D  and  tto>,  vid.  at  x.  5,  xiv.  35. 
The  printed  editions  present  B^-faa  in  genit.  connection  :  a  son 
of  the  scandalous  class,  which  is  admissible  (vid.  p.  79  and  p.  330); 
but  Cod.  1294  and  Cod.  Jaman,1  Erf.  No.  2,  3,  write  B>r3»  }ia  (with 
Tsere  and  Munach),  and  that  is  perhaps  right,  after  xf  5,  xvii.  25. 
The  futures  have  here  also  a  fut.  signification  :  they  say  to  what 
it  will  come.  Grotius  remarks,  with  reference  to  this  :  manumissus 
tutor  filiis  relinquetur;  p$>rp  tutorio  officio.  But  if  he  is  a  conscien 
tious,  unselfish  tutor,  he  will  not  enrich  himself  by  property  which 
belongs  to  another ;  and  thus,  though  not  without  provision,  he  is 
yet  without  an  inheritance.  And  yet  the  supplanting  of  the  degene 
rate  is  brought  about  by  this,  that  he  loses  his  inheritance,  and  the 
intelligent  servant  steps  into  his  place.  Has  one  then  to  suppose 
that  the  master  of  the  house  makes  his  servant  a  co-heir  with  his 
own  children,  and  at  the  same  time  names  him  as  his  executor  ? 
That  were  a  bad  anachronism.  The  idea  of  the  BiaGijicri  was,  at 
the  time  when  this  proverb  was  coined,  one  unknown— Israelitish 
antiquity  knows  only  the  intestate  right  of  inheritance,  regulated 
by  lineal  and  gradual  succession.  Then,  if  one  thinks  of  the  de 
generate  son,  that  he  is  disowned  by  the  father,  but  that  the  intelli 
gent  servant  is  not  rewarded  during  the  life  of  his  master  for  his  true 

1  The  Cod.  brought  by  Sappir  from  Jemen  (vid.  p.  295),  of  which  there  is  an 
account  in  the  preface  to  the  edition  of  lsaia.li  by  liaer  and  me. 

VOL.  I.  T. 


354  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

services,  and  that,  after  the  death  of  the  master,  to  such  a  degree 
he  possesses  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the  family,  that  he  it  is 
who  divides  the  inheritance  among  the  brethren,  i.e.  occupies  the 
place  amongst  them  of  distributor  of  the  inheritance,  not :  takes  a 
portion  of  the  inheritance,  for  P?n  has  not  the  double  meaning  of 
the  Lat.  participare ;  it  means  to  divide,  and  may,  with  3,  mean 
"to  give  a  part  of  anything"  (Job  xxxix.  17);  but,  with  the 
accus.,  nothing  else  than  to  distribute,  e.g.  Josh,  xviii.  2,  where  it 
is  to  be  translated  :  u  whose  inheritance  had  not  yet  been  distributed 
(not  yet  given  to  them)."  Jerome,  hcereditatem  dividet ;  and  thus 
all  translators,  from  the  LXX.  to  Luther. 

Ver.  3  The  fining-pot  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold  ; 
And  a  trier  of  hearts  is  Jahve. 

An  emblematical  proverb  (vid.  p.  9),  which  means  that  Jahve  is 
for  the  heart  what  the  smelting-pot  (from  *nv,  to  change,  parti 
cularly  to  melt,  to  refine)  is  for  silver,  and  what  the  smelting  fur 
nace  ("113,  from  "113,  R.  13,  to  round,  Ex.  xxii.  20)  is  for  gold,  that 
Jahve  is  for  the  heart,  viz.  a  trier  (jro,  to  grind,  to  try  by  grinding, 
here  as  at  Ps.  vii.  10)  of  their  nature  and  their  contents,  for  which, 
of  the  proof  of  metals,  is  elsewhere  (xvi.  2,  xxi.  2,  xxiv.  12)  used 
the  word  (cf.  Jiris,  the  essay-master,  Jer.  vi.  7)  J3.fr,  weigher,  or 
CHfa,  searcher  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  Wherever  the  subject  spoken 
of  is  God,  the  searcher  of  hearts,  the  plur.  ni2-",  once  n^p,  is  used  ; 
the  form  Q^lp  occurs  only  in  the  status  conjunctus  with  the  suffix. 
In  xxvii.  21  there  follow  the  two  figures,  with  which  there  is 
formed  a  priamel  (vid.  p.  13),  as  at  xxvi.  3,  another  tertiitm  com- 
parationis. 

Ver.  4  A  profligate  person  giveth  heed  to  perverse  lips  ; 

Falsehood  listeneth  to  a  destructive  tongue. 

The  meaning,  at  all  events,  is,  that  whoever  gives  ear  with  delight 
to  words  which  are  morally  reprobate,  and  aimed  at  the  destruction 
of  neighbours,  thereby  characterizes  himself  as  a  profligate.  Though 
jno  is  probably  not  pred.  but  subj.,  yet  so  that  what  follows  does 
not  describe  the  JHO  (the  profligate  hearkens  .  .  .  ),  but  stamps 
him  who  does  this  as  a  jno  (a  profligate,  or,  as  we  say  :  only  a  pro 
fligate  .  .  .  ).  JHE,  for  jno,  is  warranted  by  Isa.  ix.  16,  where 
jno  (not  JH»,  according  to  which  the  Venet.  here  translates  inro 
KCLKOV}  is  testified  to  not  only  by  correct  codd.  and  editions,  but 
also  by  the  Masora  (cf.  Micldol  116ft).  T2;?n  (from  3B!j?,  R.  l"p,  to 
stiffen,  or,  as  we  say,  to  prick,  viz.  the  ear)  is  generally  united  with  ? 


CHAP.  XVII.  5.  S55 

or  7X,  but,  as  here  and  at  xxix.  12,  Jer.  vi.  19,  also  with  ty.     flK, 
wickedness,  is  the  absolute  contrast  of  a  pious  and  philanthropic 
mind  ;  rnn,  from  n^n,  not  in  the  sense  of  eagerness,  as  x.  3,  xi.  6, 
but  of  yawning  depth,  abyss,  catastrophe  (vid.  at  Ps.  v.  10),  is 
equivalent  to  entire  destruction — the  two  genitives  denote  the  pro 
perty  of  the  lips  and  the  tongue  (labium  nequam,  lingua  perniciosa), 
on  the  side  of  that  which  it  instrumentally  aims  at  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvi. 
4,  lii.  4)  :  practising  mischief,  destructive  plans,     "igt?  beginning 
the  second  line  is  generally  regarded  as  the  subj.  parallel  with  jno, 
as  Luther,  after  Jerome,  "  A  wicked  man  gives  heed  to  wicked 
mouths,  and  a  false  man  listens  willingly  to  scandalous  tongues." 
It  is  possible  that  ipE>  denotes  incarnate  falsehood,  as  nspn,  xii.  27, 
incarnate  slothfulness,  cf.  none,  xiv.  25,  and  perhaps  also  xii.  17  ; 
PTO,  Ps.  Iviii.  2,  n»B«in,  Mic.  vi!  9;  ^DD  njr,  Isa.  xxvi.  13,  etc.,  where, 
without  supplying  W*  C^«),  the  property  stands  instead  of  the 
person  possessing  that  property.    The  clause,  that  falsehood  listeneth 
to  a  deceitful  tongue,  means  that  he  who  listens  to  it  characterizes 
himself  thereby,  according  to  the  proverb,  simile  simili  gaudet,  as  a 
har.    But  only  as  a  liar?    The  punctuation  before  us,  which  repre 
sents  jno  by  Deehi  as  subj.,  or  also  pred.,  takes  pro  "^  as  obj.  with 
pro  as  its  governing  word,  and  why  should  not  that  be  the  view 
intended  ?     The  representation  of  the  obj.  is  an  inversion  less  bold 
than  Isa.  xxii.  2,  viii.  22,  and  that  h$  here  should  not  be  so  close!  v 
connected  with  the  verb  of  hearing,  as  4a  lies  near  by  this,  that 
'V  ^'i?'"?  is  elsewhere  found,  but  not  i>J?  prxn.     Jewish  interpreters, 
taking  -ipK>  as  obj.,  try  some  other  meaning  of  pro  than  auscnl- 
tans;  but  neither  jir,  to  approach,  nor  pr,  to  arm  (Venet.  ^evSos 
owXt£«),  gives  a  meaning  suitable  to  this  place,     pro  is  equivalent 
to  pTNO.      As  prxx,  Job  xxxii.  11,  is  contracted  into  pTN,  so  must 
HNS,  if  the  character  of  the  part,  shall  be  preserved,  become  pro, 
mediated  by  pro. 

Ver.  5  He  that  mocketh  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker  ; 

He  that  rejoiceth  over  calamity  remains  not  unpunished. 
Line  first  is  a  variation  of  xiv.  31a.  God  is,  according  to  xxii.  2, 
the  creator  of  the  poor  as  well  as  of  the  rich.  The  poor,  as  a  man, 
and  as  poor,  is  the  work  of  God,  the  creator  and  governor  of  all 
things;  thus,  he  who  mocketh  the  poor,  mocketh  Him  who  called 
him  into  existence,  and  appointed  him  his  lowly  place.  But  in 
general,  compassion  and  pity,  and  not  joy  (*?  no^  commonly 


o£(5  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

with  r1,  of  the  person,  e.g.  Obad.  ver.  12,  the  usual  formula  for 
eTrixaipeKciKia),  is  appropriate  in  the  presence  of  misfortune  (TX^ 
from  "HX,  to  be  heavily  burdened),  for  such  joy,  even  if  he  on 
whom  the  misfortune  fell  were  our  enemy,  is  a  peccaturn  mortale, 
Job  xxxi.  29  f.  There  is  indeed  a  hallowed  joy  at  the  actual 
revelation  in  history  of  the  divine  righteousness ;  but  this  would 
not  be  a  hallowed  joy  if  it  were  not  united  with  deep  sorrow  over 
those  who,  accessible  to  no  warning,  have  despised  grace,  and,  by 
adding  sin  to  sin,  have  provoked  God's  anger. 

Ver.  6.   With    this  verse   this  series  of   proverbs  closes  as   it 
began  : 

A  diadem  of  the  old  are  children's  children, 
And  the  glory  of  children  are  their  parents. 

Children  are  a  blessing  from  God  (Ps.  cxxvii.,  cxxviii.)  ;  thus,  a 
family  circle  consisting  of  children  and  grandchildren  (including 
great-grandchildren)  is  as  a  crown  of  glory  surrounding  the  grey- 
haired  patriarch ;  and  again,  children  have  glory  and  honour  in 
their  parents,  for  to  have  a  man  of  an  honoured  name,  or  of  a 
blessed  memory,  as  a  father,  is  the  most  effective  commendation, 
and  has  for  the  son,  even  though  he  is  unlike  his  father,  always 
important  and  beneficial  consequences.  In  Qb  a  fact  of  experience 
is  expressed,  from  which  has  proceeded  the  rank  of  inherited  nobility 
recognised  among  men — one  may  abnegate  his  social  rights,  but  yet 
he  himself  is  and  remains  a  part  of  the  moral  order  of  the  world. 
The  LXX.  has  a  distich  after  ver.  4  [the  Vatican  text  places  it 
after  ver.  6]  :  "The  whole  world  of  wealth  belongs  to  the  faithful, 
but  to  the  unfaithful  not  even  an  obolus."  Lagarde  supposes  that 
6'Xo<r  o  Koap.o^  TWV  %/o?7 fiaTwv  is  a  translation  of  "iJV  njNptP,  instead  of 
"in11  DQb'j  la.  But  this  ingenious  conjecture  does  not  amount  to  the 
regarding  of  this  distich  as  a  variation  of  ver.  7. 

t"»  O 

The  proverbs  following,  7-10,  appear  to  be  united  acrostically 
by  the  succession  of  the  letters  t?  (b>,  K>)  and  n. 

Ver.  7   It  does  not  become  a  fool  to  speak  loftily, 

How  much  less  do  lying  lips  a  noble  ! 

As  at  Isa.  xxxii.  5  f.,  ^  and  3**])  are  placed  opposite  to  one  an 
other  ;  the  latter  is  the  nobly  magnanimous  man,  the  former  the 
man  who  thinks  foolishly  and  acts  profligately,  whom  it  does  not 
become  to  use  lofty  words,  who  thereby  makes  the  impression  of 
liis  vulgarity  so  much  the  more  repulsive  (cf.  Job  ii.  10).  ">£P  n£b» 
ri  'T)  for  the  word  belongs  to  those  which  retain  their  Palhach 


CHAP.  xvn.  s.  357 

or  Segol,  in  pmisa)  is  neither  elevated  (soaring)  (Ewald)  nor 
diffuse  (Jo.  Ernst  Jungius  in  Oetinger  :  lingua  dicax  ac  sermonem 
ultra  guam  decorum  verbis  extendere  solita),  rather  imperative 
(Bertheau),  better  presumptuous  (Hitzig)  words,  properly  words  of 
superfluity,  i.e.  of  superabundant  self-consciousness  and  high  pre 
tension  (cf.  the  transitive  bearing  of  the  Arab,  watr  with  vfipfteiv, 
from  vjrep,  Aryan  itpar,  Job,  p.  303).  Kightly  Meiri,  mw  DQb> 
m-fan.  It  produces  a  disagreeable  impression,  when  a  man  of 
vulgar  mind  and  of  rude  conduct,  instead  of  keeping  himself  in 
retirement,  makes  himself  of  importance,  and  weighty  in  a  shame 
less,  impudent  manner  (cf.  Ps.  xii.  9,  where  rn^.T,  vilitas,  in  a  moral 
sense);  but  yet  more  repulsive  is  the  contrast,  when  a  man  in  whom 
one  is  justified  in  expecting  nobility  of  mind,  in  accordance  with 
his  life-position  and  calling,  degrades  himself  by  uttering  deceitful 
words.  Regarding  the  ^  *)N,  concluding  a  minori  ad  majus,  we 
have  already  spoken  at  xi.  31,  xv.  11.  R.  Ismael,  in  Bereschith 
Rabba,  at  xliv.  8,  reckons  ten  such  conclusions  a  minori  ad  ma  jus 
in  the  Scriptures,  but  there  are  just  as  many  quanta  magis.  The 
right  accentuation  (e.g.  in  Cod.  1294)  is  here  ^ni^  C)X,  transformed 

from  H^WT^a  *|S;  according  to  Accentuations  system,  xviii.  2. 

Ver.  8  The  gift  of  bribery  appears  a  jewel  to  its  receiver  ; 

Whitherso'er  he  turneth  himself  heacteth  prudently. 

How  Sb  is  to  be  understood  is  shown  by  1  Sam.  xiv.  47,  cf.  Josh. 
i.  7  ;  the  quoque  se  vertit,  prudenter  rem  agit,  has  accordingly  in 
both  sentences  the  person  meant  by  V^ya  as  subject,  not  the 
gift  (Hitzig),  of  which  b^f!,  "  it  maketh  prosperous,"  is  not  said, 
for  5*3tJ>n  mean?,  used  only  of  persons,  prudent,  and  therefore  suc 
cessful,  fortunate  conduct.  Such  is  said  of  him  who  has  to  give 
(Luther):  he  presses  through  with  it  whithersoever  he  turns.  But 
the  making  of  ^73  the  subj.  does  not  accord  with  this :  this  means 
[gift]  to  one  who  has  to  give,  appears  to  open  doors  and  hearts, 
not  merely  as  a  golden  key,  it  is  truly  such  to  him.  Thus  V&a, 
as  at  iii.  27,  will  be  meant  of  him  to  whom  the  present  is  brought, 
or  to  whom  a  claim  thereto  is  given.  But  intj>  means  here  not  the 
gift  of  seasonable  liberality  (Zockler),  but,  as  always,  the  gift  of 
bribery,  i.e.  a  gift  by  which  one  seeks  to  purchase  for  himself 
(xvii.  23)  preference  on  the  part  of  a  judge,  or  to  mitigate  the 
displeasure  of  a  high  lord  (xxi.  14) ;  here  (for  one  does  not  let  it 
depend  merely  on  the  faithfulness  of  another  to  his  duty)  it  is 


353  THE    BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

that  by  wliicli  one  seeks  to  secure  an  advantage  to  himself.  The 
proverb  expresses  a  fact  of  experience.  The  gift  of  bribery,  to 
which,  as  to  a  well-known  approved  means,  "inb'n  refers,  appears 
to  him  who  receives  and  accepts  it  (Targ.)  as  a  stone  of  pleasant 
ness,  a  charming,  precious  stone,  a  jewel  (Juwel  from  joie  — 
gaudium)  ;  it  determines  and  impels  him  to  apply  all  his  under 
standing,  in  order  that  he  may  reach  the  goal  for  which  it  shall  be 
his  reward.  What  he  at  first  regarded  as  difficult,  yea,  impossible, 
that  he  now  prudently  carries  out,  and  brings  to  a  successful  con 
clusion,  wherever  he  turns  himself,  overcoming  the  seemingly  insur 
mountable  hindrances ;  for  the  enticement  of  the  gift  lifts  him,  as  with 
a  charm,  above  himself,  for  covetousness  is  a  characteristic  feature 
of  human  nature — pecunice  obediunt  omnia  (Eccles.  x.  19,  Vulg.). 

Ver.  9  He  covereth  transgressions  who  seeketh  after  love, 

And  he  who  always  brings  back  a  matter  separateth  friends. 

The  pred.  stands  first  in  the  simple  clause  with  the  order  of  the  words 

not  inverted.     That  j?K»a  HD3D  is  also  to  be  interpreted  here  as  pred. 

(cf.  19a)  is  shown  by  x.  12,   according  to  which  love  covereth  all 

transgressions.     We  write  J?K:a~nD3D  with  Dag.  forte  conjunctivum 

of  a  (as  of  1  in  Ezek.  xviii.  6),  and  Gaja  with  the  Sheva,  according 

to  the  Meth.-Setzung,  §  37 ;  the  punctuation  V^a  ntsao  also  occurs. 

What  the  expression  '•  to  seek  love  "  here  means,  is  to  be  judged, 

with  Hitzig,  after  Zeph.  ii.  3, 1  Cor.  xiv.  1.    It  is  in  no  case  equivalent 

to  seek  to  gain  the  love  of  another,  rather  to  seek  to  preserve  the  love 

of  men  towards  one  another,  but  it  is  to  be  understood  not  after  96, 

but  after  x.  12  :  he  seeks  to  prove  love  who  does  not  strike  on  the 

great  bell  when  his  neighbour  has  sinned  however  grievously  against 

him,  does  not  in  a  scandal-loving  manner  make  much  ado  about 

it,  and  takes  care  not  thereby  to  widen  the  breach  between  men 

who  stand  near  to  one  another,  but  endeavours  by  a  reconciling, 

soothing,  rectifying  influence,  to  mitigate  the  evil,  instead  of  making 

it  worse.     He,  on  the  contrary,  who  repeats  the  matter  (njtr  with 

3  of  the  obj.,  to  come  back  with  something,  as  xxvi.  11),  i.e.  turns 

always  back  again  to  the  unpleasant  occurrence  (Theodotion,  Bev- 

repcov  ev  \6yw ;  Symmachus,  Sevrepwv  \6yov,  as  Sir.  vii.  14,  xix.  7), 

divides  friends  (vid.  xvi.  28),  for  he  purposely  fosters  the  strife,  the 

disharmony,  ill-will,  and  estrangement  which  the  offence  produced  ; 

while  the  noble  man,  who  has  love  for  his  motive  and  his  aim,  by 

prudent  silence  contributes  to  bring  the  offence  and  the  division 

which  it  occasioned  into  forget  fulness. 


CHAP.  xvn.  10  359 

\  er.  10  One  reproof  maketh  more  impression  on  a  wise  man 
Than  if  one  reckoned  a  hundred  to  the  fool 

One  of  the  few  proverbs  which  begin  with  a  future,  vid.  xii.  26, 
p.  265.  It  expresses  what  influence  there  is  in  one  reproof  with  a 
wise  man  (1*30,  viii.  9)  ;  nnw  is  the  reproof  expressed  by  the  post- 
bibl.  nan:,  as  the  lowest  grade  of  disciplinary  punishment,  ad- 
monitio,  connected  with  warning.  The  verbal  form  nnn  is  the 
reading  of  the  LXX.  and  Syr.  (orvvrpl^ei  direi^r)  /capStav  ^>po- 
vi/JLov)  for  they  read  pnD  n!>  my)  nnn,  derived  from  nnn,  and  thus 
nnn  (from  Hiph.  nnn);  thus  Luther:  reproof  alarms  more  the  intel 
ligent,  but  nnn  with  3  of  the  obj.  is  not  Hebr. ;  on  the  contrary, 
the  reading  of  the  LXX.  is  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the 
language,  and,  besides,  is  suitable.  It  is,  however,  first  to  be  seen 
whether  the  traditional  text  stands  in  need  of  this  correction.  As 
fut.  Niph.  nnn?  apart  from  the  ult.  accent,  to  be  expected,  gives 
no  meaning.  Also  if  one  derives  it  from  nnn,  to  snatch  away,  to 
take  away,  it  gives  no  appropriate  thought;  besides,  nnn  is  con 
strued  with  the  object,  accus.,  and  the  fut.  Apoc.,  in  itself  strange 
here,  must  be  pointed  either  nnn  or  nnn  (after  ^rp)  (Bottcher, 
Lehrb.  ii.  p.  413).  Thus  nrr,  as  at  Job'xxi.  13,  Jer.  xxi.  13,  will 
be  fut..  Kal  of  nm^nm^  Ps.  xxxviii.  3  (Theodotion,  Targ.. 
Kimchi).  With  this  derivation,  also,  nnn  is  to  be  expected;  the 
reference  in  the  HandwQrterbuch  to  Gesen.  Lehrgebdude,  §  51,  1, 
Anrn.  1,  where,  in  an  extremely  inadequate  way,  the  retrogression 
of  the  tone  (ninN  ilDJ)  is  spoken  of,  is  altogether  inappropriate  to 
this  place  ;  and  Bottcher' s  explanation  of  the  ult.  tone  from  an 
intended  expressiveness  is  ungrammatical ;  but  why  should  not  nnn, 
from  nn:,  with  its  first  syllable  originating  from  contraction,  and 
thus  having  the  tone,  be  Milel  as  well  as  Milra,  especially  here, 
where  it  stands  at  the  head  of  the  sentence?  With  1  connected 
with  it,  nnj  means  :  to  descend  into  anything,  to  penetrate;  Hitzig 
appropriately  compares  altius  in  pectus  descendit  of  Sallust,  Jug.  11. 
Jerome  rightly,  according  to  the  sense  :  plus  profait,  and  the  Venet. 
avel  (read  ovei)  a.Trei\.r)  TO>  avviovrt.  In  Wb  nan  (cf.  Deut.  xxv.  3  ; 
2  Cor.  xi.  24)  is  to  be  supplied  to  nKE,  not  D''OJ?a  (an  hundred 
times,  which  may  be  denoted  correctly  by  nx»  as  well  as  ns», 
Eccles.  viii.  12).  With  the  wise  (says  a  Talmudic  proverb)  a 
sign  does  as  much  as  with  the  fool  a  stick  does.  Zehner,  in  his 
Adagia  sacra  (1601),  cites  Curtius  (vii.  4):  Nobilis  equus  umbra 
quoque  virgce  regitur,  ignavus  ne  calcari  quidem  concilari  potest. 


360  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Five  proverbs  of  dangerous  men  against  whom  one  has  to  be  on 
his  guard : 

Ver.  11  The  rebellious  seeketh  only  after  evil, 

And  a  cruel  messenger  is  sent  out  against  him. 

It  is  a  question  what  is  subj.  and  what  obj.  in  Ha.     It  lies  nearest 
to  look  on  "HO   as  subj.,  and  this  word  (from    rnip,   string  ere,   to 
make   oneself    exacting   against   any,    to    oppose,    avrtrelveiv)   is 
appropriate  thereto  ;  it  occurs  also  at  Ezek.  ii.  7  as  abstr.  pro  con 
crete.     That  it  is  truly  subj.  appears  from  this,  that  JH  K^a,  to 
seek  after  evil  (cf.  xxix.  10;  1  Kings  xx.  7,  etc.),  is  a  connection 
of  idea  much  more  natural  than  "n»  C^ijO  [to  seek  after  rebellion]. 
Thus  ^X  will  be  logically  connected  with  JH,  and  the  reading  ^.p  ^ 
will  be  preferred  to  the  reading  "H^TjN  ;  Tjx  (corresponding  to  the 
Arab,  dinnama)  belongs  to  those  particles  which  are  placed  before 
the  clause,  without  referring  to  the  immediately  following  part  of 
the  sentence,  for  they  are  much  more  regarded  as  affecting  the 
whole  sentence  (vid.  xiii.  10)  :  the  rebellious  strives  after  nothing 
but  only  evil.    Thus,  as  neut.  obj.  jn  is  rendered  by  the  Syr.,  Targ., 
Veiiet.,  and  Luther ;  on  the  contrary,  the  older  Greek  translators 
and  Jerome  regard  jn  as  the  personal  subject.    If  now,  in  reference 
to  rebellion,  the  discourse  is  of  a  ^J3S  ^STO,  we  are  not,  with  Hitzig, 
to  think  of  the  demon  of  wild  passions  unfettered  in  the  person 
of  the  rebellious,  for  that  is  a  style  of  thought  and  of  expression 
that  is  modern,  not  biblical ;  but  the  old  unpoetic  yet  simply  true 
remark    remains :    Loquendi  formula  inde  petita   quod   regis  aut 
summi  magistratus  minister    rebelli  supplicium   nunciat  infligitque. 
1&6»  is  n.  ojficii,  not  natures.       Man  as   a   messenger,   and    the 
spiritual  being  as  messenger,  are  both  called  *]X?O.     Therefore  one 
may  not   understand  nDK  "Ji&D,  with  the   LXX.,   Jerome,    and 
Luther,  directly  and  exclusively  of  an  angel  of  punishment.      If 
one  thinks  of  Jahve  as  the  Person  against  whom  the  rebellion  is 
made,  then  the  idea  of  a  heavenly  messenger  lies  near,  according 
to  Ps.  xxxv.  5  f.,  Ixxviii.  49;  but  the  proverb  is  so  meant,  that  it  is 
not  the  less  true  if  an  earthly  king  sends  out  against  a  rebellious 
multitude  a  messenger  with  an  unlimited  commission,  or  an  officer 
against  a  single  man  dangerous  to  the  state,  with  strict  directions 
to  arrest  him  at  all  hazards.      ^T3S  we  had  already  at  xii.  10  ;  the 
root  B>n  t?p  means,  to  be  dry,  hard,  without  feeling.     The  fut.  does 
not  denote  what  may  be  done  (Bertheau,  Zo'ckler),  which  is  con 
trary  to  the  parallelism,  the  order  of  the  words,  and  the  style  of 


CHAP.  xvn.  12,  13.  861 

the  proverb,  but  what  is  done.  And  the  relation  of  the  clause  is  not, 
as  Ewald  interprets  it,  "  scarcely  does  the  sedition  seek  out  evil 
when  an  inexorable  messenger  is  sent."  Although  this  explanation 
is  held  by  Ewald  as  "  unimprovable,"  yet  it  is  incorrect,  because 
=JS  in  this  sense  demands,  e.g.  Gen.  xxvii.  3,  the  perf.  (strengthened 
by  the  inftn.  intensivus).  The  relation  of  the  clause  is,  also,  not 
such  as  Bottcher  has  interpreted  it :  a  wicked  man  tries  only  scorn 
though  a  stern  messenger  is  sent  against  him,  but  not  because  such 
a  messenger  is  called  nT3N,  against  whom  this  "  trying  of  scorn" 
helps  nothing,  so  that  it  is  not  worth  being  spoken  of;  besides, 
np;^  or  IWO  would  have  been  used  if  this  relation  had  been 

intended.       We   have  in   lla  arid  116,   as  also  e.a.  at  xxvi.  24, 

•••IT  • 

xxvui.   1,  two  clauses  standing  in  internal  reciprocal  relation,  but 

syntactically  simply  co-ordinated;  the  force  lies  in  this,  that  a 
messenger  who  recognises  no  mitigating  circumstances,  and  offers 
no  pardon,  is  sent  out  against  such  an  one. 

Ver.  12  Meet  a  bear  robbed  of  one  of  her  whelps, 

Only  not  a  fool  in  his  folly. 

The  name  of  the  bear,  as  that  of  the  cow,  Job  xxi.  10,  Ps.  cxliv.  14, 
preserves  its  masculine  form,  even  when  used  in  reference  to  sexual 
relationship  (Ewald,  §  1746);  the  ursa  catnlis  orbata  is  proverbially 
a  raging  beast.  How  the  abstract  expression  of  the  action  ^iJ3  [to 
meet],  here  as  e.g.  Ps.  xvii.  5,  with  the  subj.  following,  must  pound  as 
finite  (occurrat,  may  always  meet),  follows  from  ^X1  =  ^D^iO  (n0n 

autem  occurrat).  Bfaa  has  on  the  last  syllable  Melmppach,  and  Zin- 
norith  on  the  preceding  open  syllable  (according  to  the  rule,  Accent- 
system,  vi.  §  5J).1  fcfas?,  in  the  state  of  his  folly,  i.e.  when  he  is 
in  a  paroxysm  of  his  anger,  corresponds  with  the  conditional  noun- 
adjective  7=13^,  for  folly  morbidly  heightened  is  madness  (cf.  Hos. 
xi.  7;  Psychol.  p.  291  f.). 

Ver.  13  He  that  returneth  evil  for  good, 

From  his  house  evil  shall  not  depart. 

If  ingratitude  appertains  to  the  sinful  manifestations  of  ignoble 
selfishness,  how  much  more  sinful  still  is  black  ingratitude,  which 
recompenses  evil  for  good  !  (3^0,  as  1  Sam.  xxv."  21,  syn.  foa,  to 
requite,  iii.  30,  xxxi.  12  ;  D^  to  reimburse,  xx.  22).  Instead  of 
Eton,  the  Ken  reads  non ;  but  that  this  verb,  with  a  middle  vowel, 
may  be  v'y  as  well  as  i"y,  Ps.  Iv.  2  shows. 

1  In  the  Torath  Emeth,  p.  18,  the  word  is  irregularly  represented  as  Mild — 
a  closed  syllable  with  Cholem  can  suffer  no  retrogression  of  the  tone. 


SG2  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Ter.  14  As  one  letteth  out  water  is  the  beginning  of  a  strife ; 

But  cease  thou  from  such  strife  ere  it  comes  to  showing  teeth. 

The  meaning  of  this  verb  it? a  is  certain  :  it  means  to  break  forth  ; 
and  transitively,  like  Arab,  fair,  to  bring  forth  from  a  cleft,  to 
make  to  break  forth,  to  let  go  free  (Theodotion,  aTroXvav ;  Jerome, 
dimittit;  Venet.  a^iei'?).  The  LXX.,  since  it  translates  by  £%ov<riav 
Bltiwai,  thinks  on  the  juristic  signification,  which  occurs  in  the 
Chronicles  :  to  make  free,  or  to  declare  so;  but  here  B?E>  11313  (vid. 
regarding  the  Metheg  at  xiv.  31,  p.  311)  is,  as  Luther  translates, 
one  who  tears  away  the  dam  from  the  waters.  And  |V"1E  JVC'&O  is 
not  accus.  dependent  on  1D13,  to  be  supplied  (Hitzig :  he  unfetters 
water  who  the  beginning  of  strife,  viz.  unfetters) ;  but  the  part 
is  used  as  at  x.  17  :  one  who  unfetters  the  water  is  the  beginning 
of  strife,  i.e.  he  is  thus  related  to  it  as  when  one  .  .  .  This  is  an 
addition  to  the  free  use  of  the  part,  in  the  language  of  the  Mishna, 
where  one  would  expect  the  infin,^  e.g.  J??.if3  (  =  SHI?),  if  one  sows, 
TTE3  (  =  )nT2),  of  wantonness.  It  is  thus  unnecessary,  with  Ewald, 
to  interpret  ~iti12  as  neut.,  which  lets  water  go  =  a  water-outbreak  ; 
1£31S  is  meant  personally ;  it  represents  one  who  breaks  through  a 
water-dam,  withdraws  the  restraint  of  the  water,  opens  a  sluice, 
and  then  emblematically  the  proverb  says :  thus  conditioned  is  the 
beginning  of  a  strife.  Then  follows  the  warning  to  let  go  such  strife 
(2""}!!,  with  the  article  used  in  the  more  elevated  style,  not  without 
emphasis),  to  break  from  it,  to  separate  it  from  oneself  ere  it  reach  a 
dangerous  height.  This  is  expressed  by  y?2nn  *)£>?,  a  verb  occurring 
only  here  and  at  xviii.  1,  xx.  3,  always  in  the  ffit/ipa.  The  Targum 
(misunderstood  by  Gesenius  after  Buxtorf  ;  vid.  to  the  contrary, 
Levy,  under  the  word  HV  II.)  translates  it  at  xviii.  1,  xx.  3,  as  the 
Syr.,  by  "  to  mock,"  also  Aquila,  who  has  at  xx.  3,  e!;v/3pi,<r6ija-eTai, 
and  the  LXX.  at  xviii.  1,  eTroveiSiGTos  ecrrai,  and  Jerome,  who  has 
this  in  all  the  three  passages,  render  the  Hithpa.  in  this  sense,  passively. 
In  this  passage  before  us,  the  Targ.,  as  Hitzig  gives  it,  translates, 
"  before  it  heats  itself,"  but  that  is  an  error  occasioned  by  Buxtorf ; 
vid.  on  the  contrary,  Levy,  under  the  word  &0i£  (/cv/cuo?);  this  trans 
lation,  however,  has  a  representative  in  Haja  Gaon,  who  appeals 
for  y?a,  to  glow,  to  Nidda  viii.  2.1  Elsewhere  the  LXX.,  at  xx.  3, 
crv/ut,7r\eK€Tai  (where  Jerome,  with  the  amalgamation  of  the  two 
significations,  miscentur  contumeliis)  ;  Kimchi  and  others  gloss  it 
by  mynn,  and,  according  to  this,  the  Venet.  translates,  Trpo  rod 
1  Vid.  Simon  Nascher's  Dcr  Gaon  Haja  u.  seine  geist.  Thdtig.  p.  15. 


CHAP.  xvii.  14  363 

<rvvxv0f)vai  (TYJV  epw)-,  Luther,  "before  thou  art  mingled  therein." 
But  all  these  explanations  of  the  word  :  insultare,  ezcandescere, 
and  commisceri,  are  etymologieally  inadmissible.  Bertheau's  and 
Zockler's  "roll  itself  forth"  is  connected  at  least  with  a  meanino- 

.  O 

rightly  belonging  to  the  R.  ?3.  But  the  Arab,  shows,  that  not  the 
meaning  vohere,  but  that  of  retegere  is  to  be  adopted.  Aruch1  for 
Nidda  viii.  2  refers  to  the  Arab.,  where  a  wound  is  designated 
as  CH  Wf\rh\  y?anp  rb^\  i.e.  as  breaking  up,  as  it  were,  when  the 
crust  of  that  which  is  nearly  healed  is  broken  off  (Maimuni  glosses 
the  word  by  sppnn?,  were  uncrusted),  and  blood  again  comes  forth. 
The  meaning  retegere  requires  here,  however,  another  distinction. 
The  explanation  mentioned  there  by  Aruch :  before  the  strife 
becomes  public  to  thee,  i.e.  approaches  thee,  is  not  sufficient.  The 
verbal  stem  ybj  is  the  stronger  power  of  r6j,  and  means  laying  bare; 
but  here,  not  as  there,  in  the  Mishna  of  a  wound  covered  with  a 
crust.  The  Arab,  jot  means  to  quarrel  with  another,  properly  to 
show  him  the  teeth,  the  Poel  or  the  tendency-stern  from  jalia,  to 
have  the  mouth  standing  open,  so  that  one  shows  his  teeth;  and  the 
Syr.  glas,  with  its  offshoots  and  derivatives,  has  also  this  meaning 
of  ringij  opening  the  mouth  to  show,  i.e.  to  make  bare  the  teeth. 
Schultens  has  established  this  explanation  of  the  words,  and 
Gesenius  further  establishes  it  in  the  Thesaurus,  according  to 

-  o 

which  Fleischer  also  remarks,  il  y?J,  of  showing  the  teeth,  the 
exposing  of  the  teeth  by  the  wide  opening  of  the  mouth,  as 
happens  in  bitter  quarrels."  But  2"nrj  does  not  agree  with  this. 
Hitzig's  translation,  "  before  the  strife  shows  its  teeth,"  is  as 
modern  as  in  ver.  11  is  the  passion  of  the  unfettered  demon,  and 
Fleischer's  prius  vero  quam  exacerbetur  rixa  renders  the  Hitlipa. 
in  a  sense  unnecessarily  generalized  for  xviii.  1  and  xx.  3.  The 
accentuation,  which  separates  jtanr6  from  ^"in  by  Rebia  Mugrash, 
is  correct.  One  may  translate,  as  Schultens,  antequam  denies  strin- 
gantur,  or,  since  the  Hitlipa.  has  sometimes  a  reciprocal  signification, 
e.g.  Gen.  xlii.  1,  Ps.  xli.  8  :  ere  one  reciprocally  shows  his  teeth. 
Hitzig  unjustly  takes  exception  to  the  inversion  B'iOJ  2nn.  Why 
should  not  the  object  precede,  as  at  Hos.  xii.  15,  the  nt33,  placed 
with  emphasis  at  the  end?  The  same  inversion  for  a  like  reason 
occurs  at  Eccles.  v.  6. 

1  [Vid.  p.  109,  note.] 


5C1  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

Ver.  15  He  that  acquitteth  the  guilty  and  condemneth  the  righteous — 
An  abomination  to  Jahve  are  they  both. 

The  proverb  is  against  the  partisan  judge  who  is  open  to  bribery, 
like  xxiv.  24,  cf.  Isa.  v.  23,  where,  with  reference  to  such,  the 
announcement  of  punishment  is  emphatically  made.  JKin  and 
P^V,  in  a  forensic  sense,  are  equivalent  to  sons  (reus)  and  insons. 
E3  (cf.  the  Arab,  j my' n a,  altogether,  but  particularly  the  Pers.  ham 
and  the  Tuikish  dkliy  standing  wholly  thus  in  the  numeral)  is  here, 
as  at  Gen.  xxvii.  45,  equivalent  to  T^fT,  Jer.  xlvi.  12  (in  its  unions 
=  united).  Whoever  pronounces  sentence  of  justification  on  the 
guilty,  appears  as  if  he  must  be  judged  more  mildly  than  he  who 
condemns  the  guiltless,  but  both  the  one  and  the  other  alike  are  an 
abhorrence  to  God. 

We  take  vers.  16-21  together.  This  group  begins  with  a  pro 
verb  of  the  heartless,  and  ends  with  one  of  the  perverse-hearted ; 
and  between  these  there  are  not  wanting  noticeable  points  of  con 
tact  between  the  proverbs  that  follow  one  another. 

Ver.  16  Why  the  ready  money  in  the  hand  of  the  fool ; 

To  get  wisdom  when  he  has  yet  no  heart  ? 

The  question  is  made  pointed  by  n^  thus  not :  why  the  ready 
money  when  .  .  .  ?  Is  it  to  obtain  wisdom  ? — the  whole  is  but  one 
question,  the  reason  of  which  is  founded  in  £K  371  (thus  to  be  ac 
cented  with  Mugrash  going  before).1  The  fool,  perhaps,  even  makes 
some  endeavours,  for  he  goes  to  the  school  of  the  wise,  to  follow 
out  their  admonitions,  n^0  n»P  (*v'  5,  etc.),  and  it  costs  him  some 
thing  (iv.  7),  but  all  to  no  purpose,  for  he  has  no  heart.  By  this 
it  is  not  meant  that  knowledge,  for  which  he  pays  his  honorarium, 
remains,  it  may  be,  in  his  head,  but  goes  not  to  his  heart,  and  thus 
becomes  an  unfruitful  theory ;  but  the  heart  is  equivalent  to  the 
understanding  (yid.  p.  174),  in  the  sense  in  which  the  heart  appears 
as  the  previous  condition  to  the  attainment  of  wisdom  (xviii.  15), 
and  as  something  to  be  gained  before  all  (xv.  32),  viz.  understanding, 
as  the  fitting  intellectual  and  practical  habitus  to  the  reception,  the 

1  If  we  write  "2^1  with  Makkeph,  then  we  have  to  accentuate  iiEOn  rwpb 
with  TarcJia  Munacli,  because  the  Silluk  word  in  this  writing  has  not  two 
syllables  before  the  tone.  This  sequence  of  accents  is  found  in  the  Codd.  Yen. 
1521,  1615,  Basel  1619,  while  most  editions  have  p^-^l  HEOn  JTUp^,  which  is 
false.  But  according  to  MSS.  we  have  371  without  JlJakkcph,  and  that  is  right 
according  to  the  Makkeph  rules  of  the  metrical  Accentuationssystem  ,•  vid.  Toruth 
Emcth,  p.  4.0. 


CHAP.  XVII.  17.  3G5 

appropriation,  and  realization  of  wisdom,  the  ability  rightly  to  com 
prehend  the  fulness  of  the  communicated  knowledge,  and  to  adopt 
it  as  an  independent  possession,  that  which  the  Greek  called  vovs, 
as  in  that  "golden  proverb"  of  Democrates :  TroXXol  TroXu/mtfee? 
vovv  OIK  Covert,  or  as  in  Luke  xxiv.  25,  where  it  is  said  that  the 
Lord  opened  rov  vovv  of  His  disciples  to  understand  the  Scriptures. 
In  the  LXX.  a  distich  follows  ver.  16,  which  is  made  up  of  196 
and  206,  and  contains  a  varied  translation  of  these  two  lines. 

Ver.  17  At  all  times  the  right  friend  shows  himself  loving ; 

And  as  a  brother  is  he  born  for  adversity. 

Brother  is  more  than  friend,  he  stands  to  one  nearer  than  a  friend 
does,  Ps.  xxxv.  14 ;  but  the  relation  of  a  friend  may  deepen  itself 
into  a  spiritual,  moral  brotherhood,  xviii.  24,  and  there  is  no  name 
of  friend  that  sounds  dearer  than  "ns,  2  Sam.  i.  26.  17 a  and  176 
are,  according  to  this,  related  to  each  other  climactically.  The 
friend  meant  in  11  a  is  a  true  friend.  Of  no  other  is  it  said  that 
he  loves  njr^M,  i.e.  makes  his  love  manifest ;  and  also  the  article 
in  jnn  not  only  here  gives  to  the  word  more  body,  but  stamps  it  as 
an  ideal-word :  the  friend  who  corresponds  to  the  idea  of  such  an 
one.1  The  inf.  of  the  Iliph.,  in  the  sense  "  to  associate"  (Ewald), 
cannot  therefore  be  inn,  because  jn  is  not  derived  from  Mn  but 
from  ~>n.  Thus  there  exists  no  contrast  between  11  a  and  176, 
so  that  the  love  of  a  friend  is  thought  of,  in  contradistinction  to 
that  of  a  brother,  as  without  permanency  (Fl.)  ;  but  176  means  that 
the  true  friend  shows  himself  in  the  time  of  need,  and  that  thus 
the  friendship  becomes  closer,  like  that  between  brothers.  The 
statements  do  not  refer  to  two  kinds  of  friends ;  this  is  seen  from 
the  circumstance  that  nx  has  not  the  article,  as  jnn  has.  It  is  not 
the  subj.  but  pred.,  as  mx,  Job  xi.  12  :  sooner  is  a  wild  ass  born  or 
born  again  as  a  man.  The  meaning  of  "tan  there,  as  at  Ps.  Ixxxvii. 
5  f.,  borders  on  the  notion  of  regenerari;  here  the  idea  is  not  essen 
tially  much  less,  for  by  the  saying  that  the  friend  is  born  in  the  time 
of  need,  as  a  brother,  is  meant  that  he  then  for  the  first  time  shows 
himself  as  a  friend,  he  receives  the  right  status  or  baptism  of  such 
an  one,  and  is,  as  it  were,  born  into  personal  brotherly  relationship 
to  the  sorely-tried  friend.  The  translation  comprolatur  (Jerome) 
and  erfunden  [is  found  out]  (Luther)  obliterates  the  peculiar  and 

1  The  Arab,  grammarians  say  that  the  article  in  this  case  stands,  Vastfragh 
kfcanas  dljnas,  as  an  exhaustive  expression  of  all  essential  properties  of  the 
genus,  i.e.  to  express  the  full  ideal  realization  of  the  idea  in  that  which  is  named 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


thus  intentional  expression,  for  1%  is  not  at  all  a  metaphor  used  for 
passing  into  the  light—  the  two  passages  in  Proverbs  and  in  Job 
have  not  their  parallel,  rnXj>  is  not  equivalent  to  rma  (cf.  Ps.  ix. 
10,  x.  1),  for  the  interchange  of  the  prep,  in  Via  and  176  would  then 
be  without  any  apparent  reason.  But  Hitzig's  translation  also  :  as 
a  brother  he  is  born  of  adversity,  is  impossible,  for  *?  after  "6u  and 
"IJJ  always  designates  that  for  which  the  birth  is  an  advantage,  not 
that  from  which  it  proceeds.  Thus  fe  will  be  that  of  the  purpose  : 
for  the  purpose  of  the  need,—  not  indeed  to  suffer  (Job  v.  7)  on 
account  of  it,  but  to  bear  it  in  sympathy,  and  to  help  to  bear  it. 
Rightly  Fleischer  :  frater  autem  ad  cerumnam  (sc.  levandam  et  re- 
movendam)  nascitur.  The  LXX.  gives  this  sense  to  the  h  :  aSeX$ot 
Se  ev  dvd<yKais  xprjo-i/aot,  earojcrav,  TOVTO  <ydp  %aptv  yevvtovrai. 
Ver.  18  A  man  void  of  understanding  is  he  who  striketh  hands, 
Who  becometh  surety  with  his  neighbour. 

Cf.  vi.  1-5,  where  the  warning  against  suretyship  is  given  at  lar^e, 
and  the  reasons  for  it  are  adduced.  It  is  incorrect  to  translate 
(Gesen.,  Hitzig,  and  others)  injn  '•pB^  with  the  LXX.,  Jerome, 
the  Syr.,  Targ.,  and  Luther,  "for  his  neighbour;"  to  become 
surety  for  any  one  is  *?  3"W,  vi.  1,  or,  with  the  object,  accus.,  xi. 
15,  another  suitable  prep,  is  "W?  ;  but  *)£>?  never  means  pro  (vTrep), 
for  at  1  Sam.  i.  16  it  means  "  to  the  person,"  and  2  Sam.  iii.  31, 
"before  Abner's  corpse  (bier)."  injn  is  thus  here  the  person 
•with  whom  the  suretyship  is  entered  into  ;  he  can  be  called  the 
JH  of  him  who  gives  bail,  so  much  the  more  as  the  reception  of  the 
bail  supposes  that  both  are  well  known  to  each  other.  Here  also 
Fleischer  rightly  translates  :  apud  alterum  (sc.  creditor  em  pro  de 
bit  ore). 

Ver.  19  He  loveth  sin  who  loveth  strife  ; 

He  who  maketh  high  his  doors  seeketh  destruction. 

A  synthetic  distich  (vid.  p.  10).  Bottcher  finds  the  reason  of  the 
pairing  of  these  two  lines  in  the  relationship  between  a  mouth  and 
a  door  (cf.  Mic.  vii.  5,  Ta  >inn2).  Hitzig  goes  further,  and  sup 
poses  that  1%  figuratively  expresses  what  boastfulness  brings  upon 
itself.  Against  Geier,  Schultens,  and  others,  who  understand 
tons  directly  of  the  mouth,  he  rightly  remarks  that  H3  iTItfn  is  not 
heard  of,  and  that  nQ  T^n  would  be  used  instead.  But  the  two 
lines  harmonize,  without  this  interchangeable  reference  of  05  and 
ostiwn.  Zanksucht  [quarrelsomeness]  and  Prunksucht  [ostenta 
tion]  are  related  as  the  symptoms  of  selfishness.  But  both  bear 


CHAP.  XVII.  20,  21.  307 

their  sentence  in  themselves.  He  who  has  pleasure  in  quarrelling 
has  pleasure  in  evil,  for  he  commits  himself  to  the  way  of  great 
sinning,  and  draws  others  along  with  him  ;  and  he  who  cannot 
have  the  door  of  his  house  high  enough  and  splendid  enough,  pre 
pares  thereby  for  himself,  against  his  will,  the  destruction  of  his 
house.  An  old  Hebrew  proverb  says,  pDBJV  J'333  pDiyn  f>3,  adifi- 
candi  nimis  studiosus  ad  mendicitatem  redigitur.  Both  parts  of  this 
verse  refer  to  one  and  the  same  individual,  for  the  insanum  cedi- 
ficandi  studium  goes  only  too  often  hand  in  hand  with  unjust  and 
heartless  litigation. 

Ver.  20  He  that  is  of  a  false  heart  findeth  no  good ; 

And  he  that  goeth  astray  with  his  tongue  falleth  into  evil. 

Regarding  3?"^,  vid.  xi.  20.  In  the  parallel  member,  WtS^a  ^SHi 
is  he  who  twists  or  winds  (vid.  at  ii.  12)  with  his  tongue,  going 
about  concealing  and  falsifying  the  truth.  The  phrase  :jan:i  (the 
connecting  form  before  a  word  with  a  prep.)  is  syntactically 
possible,  but  the  Masora  designates  the  word,  in  contradistinction 
to  Tjanjlj  pointed  with  Pathach,  Lev.  xiii.  16,  with  flb  as  unicum, 
thus  requires  t[&n\  as  is  also  found  in  Codd.  The  contrast  of  njn 
is  here  HID,  also  neut.,  as  xiii.  21,  cf.  xvi.  20,  and  jn,  xiii.  17. 

The  first  three  parts  of  the  old  Solomonic  Book  of  Proverbs 
(  (1)  x.  1-xii.  28 ;  (2)  xiii.  1-xv.  19  ;  (3)  xv.  20-xvii.  20)  are  now 
followed  by  the  fourth  part.  We  recognise  it  as  striking  the  same 
keynote  as  x.  1.  In  xvii.  21  it  resounds  once  more,  here  com 
mencing  a  part ;  there,  x.  1,  beginning  the  second  group  of  pro 
verbs.  The  first  closes,  as  it  begins,  with  a  proverb  of  the  fool. 

Ver.  21  He  that  begetteth  a  fool,  it  is  to  his  sorrow ; 
And  the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no  joy. 

It  is  admissible  to  supply  n^|,  developing  itself  from  1^,  before 
ft  riJinp  (vid.  regarding  this  passive  formation,  at  x.  1,  cf.  xiv.  13), 
as  at  Isa.  Ixvi.  3,  n-?^P  (Fl. :  in  mcerorem  sibi  genuit  h.  e.  idea 
videtur  gennisse  ut  sibi  mcerorem  crearet) ;  but  not  less  admissible  is 
it  to  interpret  17  nnrp  as  a  noun -clause  corresponding  to  the 

TOb^-frO"!  (thus  to  be  written  with  MakkepJi):  it  brings  grief  to  him. 
According  as  one  understands  this  as  an  expectation,  or  as  a  con 
sequence,  IT1,  as  at  xxiii.  24,  is  rendered  either  qui  gignit  or  gui 
genuit.  With  733,  seldom  occurring  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  (onlv 
here  and  at  ver.  7),  ^D3,  occurring  not  unfrequently,  is  inter 
changed.  Schultens  rightly  defines  the  latter  etymologtcally : 


3G8 


THE  BOOK  OF  PDOVERBS. 


marcidus  h.  e.  qui  ad  virtutem,  pietatem,  vigorem  omnem  r/fcc  spii  i- 
tualis  medullitus  emarcuit ;  and  the  former:  elumlis  et  tnollitie  sey- 
nitieve  fractus,  the  intellectually  heavy  and  sluggish  (cf.  Arab. 
kasal,  laziness  ;  kasldn,  the  lazy).1 

Ver.  22  A  joyful  heart  bringeth  good  recovery ; 

And  a  broken  spirit  drieth  the  bones. 

The  heart  is  the  centre  of  the  individual  life,  and  the  condition 
and  the  tone  of  the  heart  communicates  itself  to  this  life,  even 
to  its  outermost  circumference  ;  the  spirit  is  the  power  of  self- 
consciousness  which,  according  as  it  is  lifted  up  or  broken,  also 
lifts  up  or  breaks  down  the  condition  of  the  body  (Psyclwl.  p. 
199),  vid.  the  similar  contrasted  phrases  n»fc>  ni?  and  nx3;j  nn,  xv. 
13.  The  aTr.  Xey.  nna  (here  and  there  in  Codd.  incorrectly 
written  nrra)  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Arab,  jihat,  which  does 
not  mean  sight,  but  direction,  and  is  formed  from  icjah  (whence 
wajdhj  sight),  like  rny,  congregation,  from  *ljn  (1JP).  The  Syr., 
Targ.  (perhaps  also  Symmachus :  ayaOvvei  r)\iKiav ;  Jerome : 
(Btatem  floridam  facit ;  Luther:  makes  the  life  lustig  [cheerful]) 
translate  it  by  body;  but  for  this  rna  (n»ti)  is  used,  and  that  is  a 
word  of  an  entirely  different  root  from  nna.  To  what  verb  this 
refers  is  shown  by  Hos.  v.  13  :  "to  D2O  fin^T^  and  healed  not 
for  you  her  ulcerous  wound.  liTID  is  the  compress,  i.e.  the  bandage 
closing  up  the  ulcer,  then  also  the  ulcer-wound  itself ;  and  nna  is 
the  contrary  of  n?J?,  e.g.  Jer.  viii.  22  ;  it  means  the  removing  of  the 
bandage  and  the  healing  of  the  wound.  This  is  confirmed  by  the 
Syr.  gho,  which  in  like  manner  is  construed  with  min,  and  means 
to  be  delivered  from  something  (vid.  Bernstein's  Lex.  Syr.  to 
Kirsch's  Chrestomathie).  The  Aethiop.  quadriliteral  gdhgtih,  to 
hinder,  to  cause  to  cease,  corresponds  to  the  causative  Syr.  agahish. 
Accordingly  nna  means  to  be  in  the  condition  of  abatement,  miti 
gation,  healing;  and  nna  (as  synonym  of  nn^  Neh.  iii.  19,  with 
which  Parchon  combines  it),  levamen,  levatio,  in  the  sense  of  bodily 
healing  (LXX.  eve/crew  Troiet;  Venet.,  after  Kimchi,  ayaOvvd 

1  Nbldeke's  assertion  (Art.  Orion  in  Schenkel's  Bibel- Lexicon)  that  the  Arab. 
kasal  corresponds  to  the  Hebr.  ^3  proceeds  from  the  twofold  supposition, 
that  the  meaning  to  be  lazy  underlies  the  meaning  to  totter  (vid.  also  Dietrich 
in  Gesenius'  Heb.  Worterbuch),  and  that  the  Hebr.  D  must  correspond  with  the 
Arab.  ^>.  The  former  supposition  is  untenable,  the  latter  is  far  removed  (cf. 
2-<7-  NEG  and  kursi,  1QD  and  sifr,  }3D?D  and  minki-ii).  The  verb  ^3  Aram. 

...  .....  I  ....  -     T> 

ppr-l    is  unknown  in  the  Arab. 


CHAP.  XVII.  23,  24.  3G9 

v}  ;  and  nna  Ttp'n  (cf.  xv.  2)  denotes,  to  bring  good  im 
provement,  to  advance  powerfully  the  recovery.  Schultens  com 
pares  the  Arab,  jahy,  nitescere,  disserenari,  as  Menahem  has  done 
™?,  but  this  word  is  one  of  the  few  words  which  are  explained 
exclusively  from  the  Syriac  (and  JEthiop.).  Dna  (here  and  at 
xxv.  15)  is  the  word  interchanging  with  DVJ?,  xv.  30,  xvi.  24. 
Ver.  23  Bribery  from  the  bosom  the  godless  receiveth, 

To  pervert  the  ways  of  justice. 

Regarding  intr,  vid.  xvii.  8.  The  idea  of  this  word,  as  well  as  the 
clause  containing  the  purpose,  demand  for  the  yen  a  hiVh  judicial 
or  administrative  post.  The  bosom,  pn  (p'n),  Js?  as"  xvi.  23,  that  of 
the  clothing.  From  the  bosom,  pn»,  where  it  was  kept  concealed, 
the  gift  is  brought  forth,  and  is  given  into  the  bosom,  pna,  xxi. 
14,  of  him  whose  favour  is  to  be  obtained—  an  event  taking  place 
under  four  eyes,  which  purposely  withdraws  itself  from  the  obser 
vation  of  any  third  person.  Since  this  is  done  to  give  to  the 
course  of  justice  a  direction  contrary  to  rectitude,  the  giver  of  the 
bribe  has  not  right  on  his  side  ;  and,  under  the  circumstances,  the 
favourable  decision  which  he  purchases  may  be  at  once  the  un 
righteous  sentence  of  a  pnx,  accusing  him,  or  accused  bv  him, 

.  .  .        ff  J 

xvin.  5. 

Ver.  24  The  understanding  has  his  attention  toward  wisdom  ; 

But  the  eyes  of  a  fool  are  on  the  end  of  the  earth. 
Many  interpreters  explain,  as  Euchel  : 

"  The  understanding  finds  wisdom  everywhere  ; 

The  eyes  of  the  fool  seek  it  at  the  end  of  the  world." 

Ewald  refers  to  Deut.  xxx.  11-14  as  an  unfolding  of  the  same 
thought.  But  although  it  may  be  said  of  the  fool  (vid.  on  the 
contrary,  xv.  14)  that  he  seeks  wisdom,  only  not  at  the  right  place, 
as  at  xiv.  6,  of  the  mocker  that  he  seeks  wisdom  but  iu'vain,  yet 
here  the  order  of  the  words,  as  well  as  the  expression,  lead  us  to 
another  thought  :  before  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  (^3'™,  as 
Gen.  xxxiii.  18,  1  Sam.  ii.  11,  and  frequently  in  the  phrase  n«-U 
'n  \>B-nN,  e.g.  I  Sam.  i.  22)  wisdom  lies  as  his  aim,  his  object,  the 
end  after  which  he  strives  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  eyes  of  the  fool, 
without  keeping  that  one  necessary  thing  in  view,  wander  in  alia 
omnia,  and  roam  about  what  is  far  off,  without  having  any  fixed 
object.  The  fool  is  everywhere  with  his  thoughts,  except  where 
lie  ought  to  be.  Leaving  out  of  view  that  which  lies  nearest,  he 
loses  himself  in  aliena.  The  understanding  has  an  ever  present 


VOL.  i. 


2  A 


370 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 


theme  in  wisdom,  which  arrests  his  attention,  and  on  which  he  con 
centrates  himself;  but  the  fool  flutters  about  fantastically  from  one 
tiling  to  another,  and  that  which  is  to  him  precisely  of  least  import 
ance  interests  him  the  most. 

The  series  of  proverbs,  ver.  25-xviii.  2,  begins  and  closes  in  the 
same  way  as  the  preceding,  and  only  ver.  26  stands  by  itself  without 
apparent  connection. 

Ver.  25.  This  verse  begins  connecting  itself  with  ver.  21 : 
A  grief  to  his  father  is  a  foolish  son, 
And  a  bitter  woe  for  her  that  bare  him. 

The  air.  \ey.  1»»  is  formed  from  "no  (to  be  bitter,  properly  harsh), 
as  D3E  from  DD3.  The  Syr.  and  Targ.  change  the  subst.  into  parti 
ciples;  some  codd.  also  have  "i»»  (after  the  forms  ^no,  HDD,  -JSD 
jn»),  but  as  may  be  expected  in  25a,  D'JDO.  The  dat.  obj.  instead 
of  the  accus.  may  be  possible;  the  verse  immediately  following 
furnishes  a  sufficient  example  of  this. 

Ver.  26  Also  to  inflict  punishment  on  the  righteous  is  not  good  ; 

This,  that  one  overthrows  the  noble  on  account  of  his  rectitude. 
Does  the  D3  [also]  refer  to  a  connection  from  which  the  proverb  is 
separated  ?  or  is  it  tacitly  supposed  that  there  are  many  kinds  of 
worthless  men  in  the  world,  and  that  one  from  among  them  is 
brought  forward?  or  is  it  meant,  that  to  lay  upon  the  righteous  a 
pecuniary  punishment  is  also  not  good?  None  of  all  these.  The 
proverb  must  have  a  meaning  complete  in  itself;  and  if  pecuniary 
punishment  and  corporeal  punishment  were  regarded  as  opposed  to 
one  another,  266  would  then  have  begun  with  '3  f)K  (quanta  magis 
percutere  ingenuos).  Here  it  is  with  DJ  as  at  xx.  11,  and  as  with  "5JK 
at  lla,  and  PI  at  xiii.  10 :  according  to  the  sense,  it  belongs  not  to 
the  word  next  following,  but  to  P^ ;  and  BW  (whence  inf.  85>MJ|,  as 
xxi.  11,  with  the  a  in  J?,  cf.  also  Tax,  xi.  10,  for  ihx)  means  here  not 
specially  to  inflict  a  pecuniary  fine,  but  generally  to  punish,  for,  as 
in  mulctare,  the  meaning  is  generalized,  elsewhere  with  the  accus., 
Deut.  xxii.  19,  here  to  give  to  any  one  to  undergo  punishment. 
The  ruler  is  the  servant  of  God,  who  has  to  preserve  rectitude,  et? 
opyrjv  ru>  TO  fca/cov  Trpaa-crovri  (Rom.  xiii.  14).  It  is  not  good 
when  he  makes  his  power  to  punish  to  be  felt  by  the  innocent  as 
well  as  by  the  guilty. 

In  266,  instead  of  nian,  the  proverb  is  continued  with  fito^; 
3ta"|6,  which  is  to  be  supplied,  takes  the  inf.  alone  when  it  pre 
cedes,  and  the  inf.  with  *?  when  it  follows,  xviii.  5,  xxviii.  21, 


CHAP.  XVII.  27.  371 

xxi.  9  (but  cf.  xxi.  19).     ni3H  is  the  usual  word  for  punishment 
by  scourging,  D.nit.  xxv.  1-3,  cf.  2  Cor.  xi.  24,  N.  T.  paariyow, 
Sepetv,  Rabb.  H13D,  strokes,  or  n^pbo  from  n$,  vapnlure,  to  receive 
stripes.    D'ana  are  here  those  noble  in  disposition.    The  idea  of  an: 
fluctuates  between  generosus  in  an  outward  and  in  a  moral  sense, 
wherefore  Wy,  or  rather  "wH^,  is  added;  for  the  old  editions' 
correct  MSS.,  and  ^.  also  Soncin.  1488,  present  fy  (vid.  Norzi)! 
Hitzig  incorrectly  explains  this,  "against  what  is  due"  (IB*,  as 
xi.  24) ;   also  Ps.  xciv.  20,  ph"^  does  not  mean  Ka-rh  Trpoardy- 
/iaro?  (Symmachus),  but  eVt  irpoardy^an  (LXX.  and  Theod.),  on 
the  ground  of  right  =prcetextu  juris  (Vatabl.).    Thus  r^y  means 
here  neither  against  nor  beyond  what  is  due,  but:  on  the  ground  of 
honourable  conduct,  making  this  (of  course  mistakenly)  a  lawful 
title  to  punishment ;   Aquila,  e-rrl  €v0VTvjTi,  cf.  Matt.  v.  10,  eWz/ 
SiKaiowvw.     Besides,  for  by  after  nan,  the  causal  signification  lies 
nearest  Num.  xxii.  32,  cf.  Isa.  i.  5  (no^y,  on  account  of  anything). 
If  the  power  of  punishment  is  abused  to  the  punishing  of  the 
righteous,  yea,  even  to  the  corporeal  chastisement  of  the  noble,  and 
their  straight,  i.e.  conscientious,   firm,   open  conduct,  is  made  a 
crime  against  them,  that  is  not  good— it  is  perversion  of  the  idea  of 
justice,  and  an  iniquity  which  challenges  the  penal  rectitude  of  the 
Most  High  (Eccles.  v.  7  [8]). 

Ver.  27  He  that  keepeth  his  words  to  himself  hath  knowledge, 

And  the  cool  of  temper  is  a  man  of  understanding 

The  first  line  here  is  a  variation  of  x.  196.  The  phrase  njTT  JTP 
(here  and  at  Dan.  i.  4)  means  to  possess  knowledge  (novisse)- 
more  frequently  it  is  ru-a  JTP,  e.g.  iv.  1,  where  J?T  has  the  inchoative 
sense  of  noscere.  In  27 'b  the  Keri  is  nm^.  Jerome  translates 
it  pretiosi  spirittts,  the  Venet.  Tt/uo?  TO  irvev/ia.  Rashi  glosses  lp> 
here,  as  at  1  Sam.  iii.  1,  by  JTOD  (thus  to  be  read  after  codcl.), 
retentus  spiritu ;  most  interpreters  remark  that  the  spirit  here  comes 
into  view  as  expressing  itself  in  words.  It  is  scarcely  correct  to 
say  that  Dnan  ijr  could  designate  one  who  is  sparing  in  his  words, 
but  nn-iiv  iSj  according  to  the  fundamental  conception  of  the 
verb  -IJ5J,  grams  spiritu  (Schultens),  of  a  dignified,  composed  spirit ; 
it  is  a  quiet  seriousness  proceeding  from  high  conscientiousness, 
and  maintaining  itself  in  self-control,  whiclTis  designated  by  this 
word.  But  the  Chetlnb  nmj^  presents  almost  the  same  descrip 
tion  of  character,  "ij?  from  TJi?  (of  the  same  root  as  np')  means 
to  be  firm,  unmoveable,  Kaprepov  elvai,  hence  to  be  congealed, 


372  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

frozen,  cold  (of.  frigus  with  rigere,  rigor),  figuratively  to  be  cold 
blooded,  passionless,  quiet,  composed  (FJ.)  ;  cf.  post-bibl.  rni  rnp 
(Arab,  kurrat  'ain),  cooling  =  refreshing,  avdtyvgis  (Acts  iii.  20).1 
Whether  we  read  "ip11  or  *ip,  in  any  case  we  are  not  to  translate 
rarus  spiritu,  which,  apart  from  the  impossibility  of  the  expression, 
makes  276  almost  a  tautological  repetition  of  the  thought  of  27a. 
The  first  line  recommends  bridling  of  the  tongue,  in  contrast  to 
inconsiderate  and  untimely  talk  ;  the  second  line  recommends  cold 
ness,  i.e.  equanimity  of  spirit,  in  contrast  to  passionate  heat. 
Ver.  28  continues  the  same  theme,  the  value  of  silence  : 

Even  a  fool,  when  he  keeps  silence,  is  counted  wise  ; 
When  he  shutteth  his  mouth,  discreet. 

The  subj.  as  well  as  the  pred.  of  the  first  line  avail  for  the  second. 
DEN,  obturare,  occludere,  usually  of  closing  the  ear,  is  here  trans 
ferred  to  the  mouth.  The  Hiph.  ^IpfJ  means  mntum  agere  (cf. 
Arab,  khrs,  mutum  esse),  from  cnn,  which,  like  Kaxpos,  passes  from 
the  meaning  surdus  to  that  of  mutus  (Fl.).  The  words  of  Job 
xiii.  5,  and  also  those  of  Alexander  :  si  tacuisses  sapiens  mansisses, 
are  applicable  to  fools.  An  Arab,  proverb  says,  "  silence  is  the 
covering  of  the  stupid."  In  the  epigrammatical  hexameter, 


<7!a.^  Tlf  «T«0£fTO£  <ppOIHf*6ITetTO{    SffTl 

the  word  ciwnwv  has  the  very  same  syntactical  position  as  these 
two  participles.2 


1  " 


He  has  made  my  eye  glowing"  (asMm,  cf.  pntjO  is  in  Arab,  equivalent  to 
"  he  has  deeply  troubled  me."     The  eye  of  the  benevolent  is  larid,  and  in  the 
Semitic  manner  of  expression,  with  deep  psychological  significance,  it  is  said 
that  the  tears  of  sorrow  are  hot,  but  those  of  joy  cold. 
2  Cf.  C.  Schulze's  Die  UU.  Spricliworler  (18GO),  p.  CO  f. 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Complete  Critical  and  Exegetical  Apparatus  on  the  Old  Testament. 


KEIL    AND    DEL/TZSCH'S 

COMMENTARIES  ON  AND  INTRODUCTION  TO 

"THE    OLD    TESTAMENT.  T 


THE  above  series  (published  in  CLARK'S  Foreign  Theological  Library)  is  now 
completed  in  27  Volumes,  and,  in  compliance  with  numerous  requests, 
Messrs.  CLARK  will  supply  it  at  the  Subscription  price,  in  COMPLETE  SETS  (only), 
of  £7,  2s. 

Separate  volumes  may  be  had  at  the  non-subscription  price  of  10s.  6d.  each. 

So  complete  a  Critical  and  Exegetical  Apparatus  on  the  Old  Testament  is 
not  elsewhere  to  be  found  in  the  English  language,  and  at  the  present  time, 
when  the  study  of  the  Old  Testament  is  more  widely  extended  than  perhaps 
ever  before,  it  is  believed  this  offer  will  be  duly  appreciated. 

The  '  Keil  and  Delitzsch  '  series  is  so  well  known  that  little  need  be  said 
regarding  it,  but  the  Publishers  may  refer  to  the  following  opinions  during  the 
currency  of  its  publications. 

'  This  series  is  one  of  great  importance  to  the  biblical  scholar,  and  as  regards  its  general 
execution,  it  leaves  little  or  nothing  to  be  desired.' — Edinburgh  Review. 

'  We  have  often  expressed  our  opinion  of  Dr.  Delitzsch's  great  merits  as  a  commentator, 
and,  in  particular,  of  his  portion  of  the  admirable  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament, 
written  by  himself  and  Dr.  Keil,  that  we  need  only  now  congratulate  our  readers  on  the 
completion  of  the  entire  work.' — Church  Bells. 

'A  more  valuable  commentary  for  the  "theological  students  and  scholars,"  for  whom 
it  is  exclusively  intended,  than  the  one  contained  in.  these  volumes,  does  not  exist  in 
English.'- — Methodist  Recorder. 

'The  authors  are  among  the  most  accomplished  of  living  Hebraists,  and  Delitzsch  is, 
in  addition,  a  man  of  fine  historical  imagination,  and  of  clear  spiritual  vision.'— Baptist 
Magazine. 

'  A  more  important  contribution  than  this  series  of  commentaries  has,  we  think,  never 
been  presented  to  English  theological  students.' — Rock. 

'Very  high  merit,  for  thorough  Hebrew  scholarship,  and  for  keen  critical  sagacity 
belongs  to  these  Old  Testament  Commentaries.  ^No  scholar  will  willingly  dispense 
with  them.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'  The  very  valuable  Keil  and  Delitzsch  series  of  Commentaries.' —  Wesleyan  Methodist, 
Magazine. 

'From  a  pretty  careful  study  of  his  commentaries  we  have  come  to  tho  conclusion 
that  for  painstaking  fidelity,  extensive  and  thorough  knowledge,  and  capacity  to  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  the  writer  he  is  busy  with,  there  are  few  compieutators  so  competent 
as  Keil.' — Daily  Review. 

1  In  Delitzsch's  work  we  find  the  same  industrious  scholarship  which  is  of  acknow 
ledged  worth,  and  the  same  conscientious  exegesis  which  is  always  worthy.  No  book 
could  be  treated  with  more  pains  than  by  this  writer,  and  none  could  be  examined  more 
thoroughly — every  phrase,  every  word,  every  syllable  showing  the  utmost  interest  and 
research  of  the  commentator.' — Scotsman. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


SELECTION    FROM 

ANTE-NICENE    LIBRARY 


AND 


ST.    AUGUSTINE'S    WORKS. 


THE    Ante-Nicene  Library  being  now  completed  in   24  volumes,  and   the 
St.  Augustine  Series  being  also  complete  (with  the  exception  of  the  '  LIFE  ') 
in  15  volumes,  Messrs.  CLARK  will,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Foreign  Theological 
Library,  give  a  Selection  of  20  Volumes  from  both  of  those  series  at  the  Sub 
scription  Price  of  FIVE  GUINEAS  (or  a  larger  number  at  same  proportion). 

In  Twenty-four  Handsome  8vo  Volumes,   Subscription  Price  £6,  6s., 


Christian 


A    COLLECTION    OF    ALL    THE    WORKS     OF     TEE    FATHERS    OF     THE 
CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  PRIOR  TO  THE  COUNCIL  OF  NICJEA. 

EDITED  BY  THE 

KEV.  ALEXANDER  ROBERTS,  D.D.,  AND  JAMES  DONALDSON,  LL.D. 


CONTENTS. 


Apocryphal  Gospels,  Acts,  and  Revelation?. 
1  Vol. 

Clementine    Homilies;    Apostolical    Con 
stitutions.     1  Vol. 

Arnobius.     1  Vol. 

Dioiiysius ;       Gregory 
Syrian  Fragments. 

Lactantius.     2  Vols. 

Early  Liturgies  and  remaining  Fragments. 
1  Vol. 


Thaumaturgus  ; 
1  Vol. 


Apostolic  Fathers,  etc.     1  Vol. 
Justin  Martyr ;  Athenagoras.     1  Vol. 
Tatian  ;  Tbeophilns  ;  the  Clementine  Re 
cognitions.     1  Vol. 
Clement  of  Alexandria.     2  Vols. 
Irenajus  and  J 1  ippolytus.     3  Vols. 
Tertullian  against  Marcion.     1  Vol. 
Cyprian.     2  Vols. 
Origen.     2  vols. 
Tertullian.     3  Vols. 
Methodius;   Alexander  of  Lycopolis,  etc. 

1  Vol. 

Any  Volume  may  be  had  separately,  price  10s.  6d..— with  the  exception  of  ORIGEN 
Vol.  II.,  12s. ;  and  the  EARLY  LITUKGIES,  9s. 

In  Fifteen  Volumes,  demy  8vo,  Subscription  Price  £3,  19s., 

0f 

EDITED  BY  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 


CONTENTS. 


The  '  City  of  God.'    2  Vols. 

Writings  in  connection  with  the  Donatist 
Controversy.  1  Vol. 

The  Anti-Pelagian  Works  of  St.  Augus 
tine.  3  Vols. 

Letters.    2  Vols. 

Treatises  against  Faustus  the  ManichEeaii. 
IVol. 


The  Harmony  of  the  Evangelists,  and  the 

Sermon  on  the  Mount.     1  Vol. 
On  the  Trinity.     1  Vol. 
Commentary  on  John.     2  Vols. 
On    Christian    Doctino,    Enchiridion,    on 

Catechizing,   and   on   Faith   and   the 

Creed.     1  Vol. 
Confessions.      With    Copious    Notes    by 

Rev.  J.  G.  PILKINGTON.    1  Vol. 


Each  Volume  is  sold  separately  at  10s.  fid. 


T.  and  T.  Clark 's  Publications. 


MEYER'S 

Commentary  on  the  New  Testament. 

ClishstS^  -a  lmpoSrtant  service  to 

The  Subscription  ia  21s.  for  Four  Volumes,  Demy  8vo,  payable  in  advance. 

Each  Volume  will  be  sold  separately  at  (on  an  average}  10*.  GJ.  to  Non-Subscribers. 

CRITICAL  AND   EXEGETICAL 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

By     Dr.      H.     A.     W.     MEYER, 

OBERCONSISTORIALRATH,  HANNOVER. 

In  order  to  secure  perfect  accuracy,  the  Publishers  have  placed  the  whole 
work  under  the  editorial  care  of  Eev.  Dr.  DICKSON,  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the 
University  of  Glasgow;  Kev.  Dr.  CROMBIE,  Professor  of  Biblical  Criticism.  St. 
Marys  College,  St.  Andrews;  and  Eev.  Dr.  STEWART,  Professor  of  Biblical 
Criticism,  University  of  Glasgow. 

The  following  are  now  ready  :  — 

1st  Year—  Romans,  Two  Volumes. 
Galatians,  One  Volume. 
St.  John's  Gospel,  Vol.  I. 

2d  Year—  St.  John's  Gospel,  Vol.  II. 

Philippians  and  Colossians,  One  Volume. 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Vol.  I. 
Corinthians,  Vol.  I. 

3d.  Year—  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Vol.  II. 

St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  Two  Volumes. 
Corinthians,  Vol.  II. 

4th  Year—  Mark  and  Luke,  Two  Volumes. 

Ephesians  and  Philemon,  One  Volume. 
Thessalonians.     (Dr.  Liinemann.) 


•  ^-s'  as  written  ly  Meyer  himself,  is  completed  by  the  publication  of  Ephesians 
with  Philemon  in  one  volume.     But  to  this  the  Publishers  have  added  Thessalonians  by 
Dr.  Lunemann,  in  one  volume,  which  completes  four  years'  Subscriptions,  or  16  volumes. 
In  addition  to  this,  the  Publishers  propose  to  complete  the  New  Testament  (with  perhaps 
the  exception  of  Revelatwn).     Subscribers  need  not,  however,  take  those  volumes  unless  they 

- 


'  I  need  hardly  add  that  the  last  edition  of  the  accurate,  perspicuous,  and  learned  com 
mentary  of  Dr.  Meyer  has  been  most  carefully  consulted  throughout  ;  and  I  must  again 
as  in  the  preface  to  the  Galatians,  avow  my  great  obligations  to  the  acumen  and  scholar 
ship  of  the  learned  editor.'—  BISHOP  ELLICOTT  in  Preface  to  his  '  Commentary  on  Ephesians.  ' 
1  he  ablest  grammatical  exegete  of  the  age.'—  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D. 

_'  In  accuracy  of  scholarship  and  freedom  from  prejudice,  he  is  equalled  by  few  — 
Literary  Churchman. 

'  We  have  only  to  repeat  that  it  remains,  of  its  own  kind,  the  very  best  Commentary 
of  the  New  Testament  which  we  possess.'-  Church  Bells. 

'No  exegetical  work  is  on  the  whole  more  valuable,  or  stands  in  higher  public  esteem. 
As  a  critic  he  is  candid  and  cautious;  exact  to  minuteness  in  philology;  a  master  of  the 
grammatical  and  historical  method  of  interpretation.'—  Princeton  Review. 


4  T.  arid  T.  C larks  Piiblications. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  5s., 

MESSIANIC    PROPHECIES. 
ILectures, 

BY     PROFESSOR     DELITZSCH. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  MANUSCRIPT 

BY    PROFESSOR    S.    I.    CURTISS. 


Just  published,  in  crown  8vo,  price  Is.  6d., 

NOTES    ON    GENESIS; 

OR, 

CHRIST    AND    HIS    CHURCH    AMONG    THE 
PATRIARCHS. 

BY    REV.    N.    KEYMER,    M.A., 

VICAR  OF  HEADON,  NOTTS. 

WITH  A  PRELIMINARY  NOTICE  BY  THE  BISHOP  OF  LINCOLN. 


Just  published,  in  crown  8vo,  price  4s.  6d., 

THE    CHRIST. 

Stefan  2Lectures, 

BY      ERNEST      N  A  V  I  L  L  E, 

AUTHOR  OF  '  THE  PROBLEM  OF  EVIL,'  ETC. 

TRANSLATED    BY    THE    EEV.    T.    J.    DESPRES. 


In  the  Press, 

THE    TRUTH    OF    SCRIPTURE, 

IN  CONNECTION  WITH 

REVELATION,   INSPIRATION,   AND    THE    CANON. 
BY  REV.  PROF.  J.  J.  GIVEN,  MAGEE  COLLEGE. 

Just  published,  price  15s.  nett, 
SUPPLEMENTAL  VOLUME  TO  LAME'S  COMMENTARY, 

THE  APOCRYPHA  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

WITH  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTIONS,  A  REVISED  TRANSLATION, 
AND  NOTES  CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY, 

BY  REV.  E.  C.  BISSELL,  D.D. 


